IT is a noble and just advan∣tage,
that the things subje∣cted
to Understanding have
of those which are objec∣ted
to Sense, that the one
sort are but momentary,
and merely taking; the
other impressing, and la∣sting:
Else the Glory of all these Solemnities had
perished like a Blaze, and gone out, in the Be∣holders
eyes. So short-lived are the Bodies of all
Things, in comparison of their Souls. And,
though Bodies oft-times have the ill luck to be
sensually preferred, they find afterwards, the good
fortune (when Souls live) to be utterly forgotten.
This it is hath made the most royal Princes, and
greatest Persons, (who are commonly the Persona∣ters
of these Actions) not only studious of Riches,
and Magnificence in the outward Celebration, or
Show; (which rightly becomes them) but curi∣os
after the most high, and hearty Inventions, to
furnish the inward parts: (and those grounded up∣on
Antiquity, and solide Learnings) which, though
their Voice be taught to sound to present Occasi∣once,
their Sense, or doth, or should always lay
hold on more removed Mysteries. And, howsoe∣ver
some may squeamishly cry out, that all End∣for
of Learning, and Sharpness in these transitory
Devises especially, where it steppes beyond their
little, or (let me not wrong 'hem) no Brain at all
is superfluous; I am contented, these fastidious
Stomachs should leave my full Tables, and enjoy
at home, their clean empty Trenchers, fittest for
such airy Tastes: where perhaps a few Italian Herbs,
picked up, &amp; made into a Salad, may find sweeter
acceptance, than al, the most norishing, and sound
Meates of the world.
For these Men's palates, let not me answer, O
Muses. It is not my fault, if I fill them out Nectar,
and they run to Metheglin.
Vaticana bibant, si delectentur.
All the courtesy I can doe them, is to cry, again;
Praetereant, si quid non facet ad stomachum.
As I will, from the thought of them, to my bet∣la
Subject.
ON the Night of the Masques (which were two,
One of Men, the Other of Women) the Scene
being drawn, there was first discovered an Altar;
upon which was inscribed, in Letters of Gold.
To this Altar entered five Pages, attired in white,
bearing five Tapers of Virgin Wax; Behind
them, One representing a Bridegroom: His hair
short, and bound with party-coloured ribbons,
and gold twist: His Garments purple, and white.
On the other hand, entered HYMEN (the God of
Marriage) in a saffron-coloured Robe, his vnder-Vestures
white, his Sockes yellow, a yellow Veil
of silk on his left arm, his Head crowned with
Roses, and Marioram, in his right hand a Torch
of Pine tree.
After him a Youth, attired in white, bearing
another Light, of white Thorne; under his arm, a
little wicker-Flasket, shut: Behind him two Others,
in white, the one bearing a Distaff, the other a
Spindle. Betwixt these a Personated Bride, suppor∣ted,
her hair flowing, and loose, sprinkled with
grey; on her head a Gyrland of Roses, like a Tur∣ret;
her Garments white: and, on her back, a Wea∣theirs
Fleece hanging down: Her Zone, or Girdle
about her waste of white wool, fastened with the
Herculean Knot.
In the midst went the Auspices; after them,
two that sung, in several coloured silks. Of which,
One bore the Water, the Other the Fire: Last of
all the Musicians, diversely attired, all crowned
with Roses; and, with this Song began.
BId all profane away;
None here may stay
To view our Mysteries,
But, who themselves have been,
Or will, in Time, be seen
The selfsame Sacrifice.
For UNION, Mistress of these Rites,
Will be observed with Eyes,
As simple as her Nights.
Fly then, all profane, away,
Fly far off, as hath the Day;
Night her Cortine doth display,
And this is HYMENS Holiday.
The Song being ended, HYMEN presented him
self foremost; and, after some sign of Admiration,
began to speak.
what more than usual Light
(Throughout the Place extended)
Makes IVNO'S Fane so bright!
Is there some greater Deity descended?
Orraigne, on earth, those Powers
So rich, as with their beams
Grace UNION more than or's;
And bound her Influence, in their happier streams?
Tic so: This same is he,
The King, and Priest of Peace!
And that his Empress, she,
That sits so crowned with her own increase!
O you, whose better Blisses,
Have proved the strict embrace
Of UNION, with chaste kisses,
And seen it flow so in your happy Race;
That know, how well it binds
The fighting Seeds of Things,
Wins Natures, Sexes, Minds,
And every discord in true Musique brings:
Sit now propitious Aids,
To Rites, so duly prized;
And view two Noble Maids,
Of different Sex, to UNION sacrificed.
In honour of that blessed Estate,
Which all Good Minds should celebrate.
Here out of a Microcosm, or Globe (figuring
Man) with a kind of contentious Musique, issued
forth the first Masque, of eight Men, whose Names
in order, as they were then Marshalled, by Cou∣ples,
I have Heraldry enough to set down.
1 L. WILLOVGHBY.
2 LO. WALDEN.
3 Sir IAMES HAY.
4 Ear. of MONGOMERY.
Sir THOMAS HOVVARD.
Sir THOMAS SOMERSET.
Ear. of ARVNDELL.
Sir IOHN ASHLY.
These represented the four Humours, &amp; four
Affections, all gloriously attired, distinguished only,
by their several Ensigns, and Colours; And, dan∣cing
out on the Stage, in their return, at the end
of their Dance, drew all their swords, offered to
encompass the Altar, and disturb the Ceremonies.
at which HYMEN troubled, spake,
SAve, save the Virgins; Keep your hal•owed Lights
Untouched: And with their flame defend our Rites.
The four vntempred Humours are broke out:
And, with their wild Affections, go about
To ravish all Religion. If there be
A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Body,
Or little World of Man, from whence these came,
Look forth, and with thy bright and numerous flame
Instruct their Darkness, make them know, and see,
In wronging these, they have rebelled against thee.
Hereat, REASON seated in the top of the Globe
(as in the brain, or highest part of Man) figured
in a venerable Personage, her hair white, and tray∣ling
to her waste, crowned with Lights, her Gar∣mints
blew, and semined with Star•es, girded un∣to
her with a white Bend, filled with Arithmetical
Figures, in one hand bearing a Lamp, in the o∣there
a bright Sword, descended, and spake.
Forbear your rude attempt; what Ignorance
Could yield you so profane, as to advance
One thought in Act, against these Mysteries?
Are VNION'S Orgies of so slender price?
She that makes Souls, with Bodies, mix in Love,
Contracts the World in one, and therein JOVE;
Is Spring, and End of all Things yet, most strange!
Her self nor suffers Spring, nor End, nor Change.
No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
For none but Humours and Affections would
Have dared so rash a venture. You will say
It was your Zeal, that gave your powers the sway;
And urge the masked, and disguised pretence
Of saving Blood, and succ'ring Innocence?
So want of Knowledge, still, begets jars,
When humorous Earthlings will control the Stars.
Inform your selves, with safer Reverence,
To these mysterious Rites, whose mystic sense
REASON (which all things but it self) confounds)
Shall clear unto you, from th'authentique grounds.
At this, the Humours &amp; Affections sheathed their
swords, and retired amazed to the sides of the
Stage, while HYMEN began to rank the Persons,
and order the Ceremonies: And REASON prose∣ded
to speak.
THe Pair, which doe each other side,
Though (yet) some space doth them divide,
This happy Night must both make one
Blessed Sacrifice, to UNION.
Nor is this Altar hut a Sign
Of one more soft, and more divine
The Genial Bed, where HYMEN keeps
The solemn Orgies, void of sleeps:
And wildest CUPID, waking, hovers
With adoration twixt the Lovers.
The Dead of white, and blooming Thorne,
In token of increase is borne:
As also, with the ominous Light,
To fright all Malice from the Night.
Like are the Fire, and Water set;
That, even as Moisture, mixed with Heate,
Helps every Natural Birth, to life;
So, for their Race, join Man, and Wife.
The blushing Veyle shows shamefastness
Th'ingenuous Virgin should profess
At meeting with the Man: Her Hair
That flows so liberal, and so fair,
Is shed with grey, to intimate
She entered to a Matrons state.
For which those Utensils are borne.
And, that she should not Labour scorn,
Her self a Snowy Fleece doth wear,
And these her Rock and Spindle bear,
To show, that Nothing, which is good,
Gives check unto the highest blood.
The Zone of wool about her waste,
Which, in contrary Circles cast,
Doth meet in one strong knot, that binds,
Tells you, so should all Married Minds.
And lastly, these five Waxen Lights
Imply Perfection in the Rites;
For Five the special Number is,
Whence halow'd UNION claims her bliss.
As being all the Sum, that grows
From the united strengths, of those
Which Male, and Female Numbers wee
Do stile, and are First Two, and Three.
Which, joined thus, you cannot sever
In aequall parts, but One will ever
Remain as common; so we see
The binding-force of Unity:
For which alone, the peace-full Gods
In Number, always, love the odds;
And even parts as much despise,
Since out of them all Discords rise.
Here, the upper part of the Scene, which was all
of Clouds, and made artificially to swell, and
ride like the Rack, began to open; and, the
Ayre clearing, in the top thereof was discove∣red
 IVNO, sitting in a Throne, supported by two
beautiful Peacocks, her attire rich, and like a
 Queen, a white Diadem on her head, from
whence descended a Veyle, and that bound with
a Fascia of several coloured silks, set with all sorts
of Jewels, and raised in the top with Lilies, and
Roses; In her right hand she held a Sceptre, in the
other a Timbrell, at her golden feet the Hide of
a Lion was placed: Round about her sate the Spy∣rites
of the ayre, in several colours, making Mu∣sique,
Above her the Region of Fire, with a conti∣nuall
Motion, was seen to whirl circularly, and
IVPITER standing in the Top (figuring the Hey∣ven)
brandishing his Thunder: Beneath her the
Rainbow, IRIS, and, on the two sides eight La∣dies,
attired richly, and alike in the most celestial
colours, who represented her Powers, as she is the
 Governess of Marriage, and made the second
Masque. All which, upon the discovery, REASON
made narration of.
ANd see, where IVNO, whose great Name
Is VNIO, in the Anagram,
Displays her glistening State, and Chair,
As she enlightened all the Ayre!
Hark how the charming Tunes doe beat
In sacred Consorts bout her seat!
And lo! to grace what these intend,
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
Eight of her Noblest Powers descend,
Which are instilled her Faculties,
That govern nuptial Mysteries;
And wear those Masques before their faces,
Lest, dazzling Mortals with their graces
As they approach them, all Mankind
Should be, like CUPID, stricken blind.
These ORDER waits for, on the ground,
To keep, that you should not confound
Their measured steppes, which only move
About the harmonious sphere of LOVE.
The names of the eight Ladies, as they were after
ordered (to the most conspicuous show) in their
Dances, by the rule of their statures; were the
Co. of MONGOMERY.
Mi. CI. SACKVILE.
La. DOR. HASTINGS.
Co. of BEDFORD.
La. KNOLLS.
La. BERKLEY.
La. BLANCH SOMERSET.
Co. of RVTLAND.
Their Descent was made in two great Clouds,
that put forth themselves severally, and (with one
measure of time) were seen to stoup, &amp; fall gent∣lie
down upon the Earth. The manner of their Ha∣bites,
came after some Statues of IVNO, no less ai∣rye,
than glorious. The dressings of their Heads,
rare; so likewise of their Feet: and all full of splen∣dor,
sovereignty, and riches. Whilst they were
descending, this Song was sung at the Altar.
THese, these are they,
Whom Humour and Affection must obey;
Who come to deck the genial Bower,
And bring, with them, the grateful Hour
That crowns such Meetings, and excites
The married Pair to fresh Delights:
As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Oths, &amp; Vows,
Soft Whisperings, Embraces, all the Joys,
And melting Toys,
That chaster LOVE allows.
CHO. Hast, hast, for HESPERVS his head down bows.
The Song ended, they danced forth in Pairs,
and each Pair with a varied and noble grace; to
a rare and full Musique of twelve Lutes: led on by
ORDER, the Servant of REASON, who was, there,
rather a Person of Ceremony, than Use. His vnder-Garment
was blew, his upper white, and painted
full of Arithmetical, and Geometrical Figures; his
Hair, and Beard long, a Star on his forehead,
and in his hand a Geometrical Staff: To whom,
after the Dance, REASON spake.
COnvey them, ORDER, to their places,
And rank them so, in several traces,
As they may set their mixed Powers
Unto the Musique of the Hours;
And THESE, by joining with them, know
In better temper how to flow:
Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
Report the virtues of the Dames.
First CVRIS comes to deck the Brides fair Tress.
Care of the ointments VNXIA doth profess.
 IVGA, her office to make One of Twain:
 GAMELIA sees that they should so remain.
Fair ITERDVCA leads the Bride her way;
And DOMIDVCA home her steppes doth stay:
 CINXIA the Maid, quit of her Zone defends;
 TELIA (for HYMEN) perfects all, and ends.
By this time, the Ladies were paired with the
Men, and the whole Sixteen ranked forth, in or∣der,
to dance: &amp; were with this Song provoked.
NOw, now begin to set
Your spirits in active heate;
And, since your Hands are met,
Instruct your nimble Feet,
In motions swift, and meet,
The happy ground to beat:
Whilst all this Roof doth ring,
And each discording String,
With every varied Voice,
In UNION doth rei•ice.
Here, they danced forth a most neat and cu∣rios
Measure, full of Subtlety and Device; which
was so excellently performed, as it seemed to take
away that Spirit from the Invention, which the
Invention gave to it: and left it doubtful, whether
the Forms flowed more perfectly from the Au∣thors
brain, or their feet. The Strains were all
notably different, some of them formed into Let∣ters,
very signifying to the Name of the Brid∣groom•,
and ended in manner of a Chain, lin∣king
hands: To which, this was spoken.
Such was the Golden Chain let down from Hey∣ven;
And not those Links more even,
Then these: so sweetly tempered, so combined
By UNION, and refined.
Here no Contention, Envy, Grief, Deceit,
Fear, Jealousy have weight;
But all is Peace, and Love, and Faith, and Bliss:
What Harmony like this?
The Gall, behind the Altar quite is thrown;
This Sacrifice hath none.
Now no Affections rage, nor Humours swell;
But all composed dwell.
O IVNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, IVNO! who
Can merit with you two?
Without your presence, VENVS can doe nought,
Save what with shame is bought:
No Father can himself a Parent show,
Nor any House with prosperous Issue grow.
O then! What Deities will dare
With HYMEN, or with IVNO to compare?
The speech being ended, they dissolved: and all
took forth other Persons, (Men, and Women,)
to dance other Measures, Galliards, and Corranto's;
the whilst this Song importuned them to a fit Re∣membrance
of the Time.
Think, yet, how Night doth wast,
How much of Time is past,
What more then winged hast
Your selves would take,
If you were but to taste
The joy, the Night doth cast
(O might it ever last)
On this bright Virgin, and her happy Make.
Their Dances yet lasting, they were the se∣cond
time importuned, by Speech.
SSee, see! the bright Italian Star,
That lights Lovers to their War,
Complains, that you her influence loose;
While thus the Night-sports you abuse.
THe longing Bridegroom, in the Porch,
Shows you again, the bated Torch;
And thrice hath IVNO mixed her Ayre
With Fire, to summon your repair.
SEe, now she clean withdraws her Light;
And (as you should) gives place to Night:
That spreads her broad, and blackest wing
Upon the world, and comes to bring
A thousand severall-colour'd Loves,
Some like Sparrows, some like Doves,
That hop about the Nuptiall-Roome,
And fluttering there (against you come)
Warm the chaste Bower, which CYPRIA strowes,
With many a Lily, many a Rose.
HAste therefore, haste, and call, Away:
The gentle Night is pressed to pay
The usury of long Delights,
She owes to these protracted Rites.
At this (the whole Scene being drawn again,
and all covered with Clouds, as a Night,) they
left off their entermixed Dances, and returned to
their first Places; where, as they were but begin∣ing
to move, this Song, the third time, urged them.
O Know to end, as to begin:
A Minutes loss, in Love, is sin.
These Humours will the Night out wear
In their own Pastimes here;
You doe our Rites much wrong,
In seeking to Prolong
These outward Pleasures:
The Night hath other Treasures
Then these (though long concea'ld)
Ere day, to be revealed.
Then, know to end, as to begin;
A Minutes loss, in Love, is sin.
Here they danced their last Dances, full of ex∣cellent
delight and change, and, in their latter
strain, fell into a fair Orb, or Circle; REASON stan∣ding
in the midst, and speaking.
HEre stay, and let your Sports be crowned:
The perfect'st Figure is the Round.
Nor fell you in it by adventer,
When REASON was your Guide, and Center.
This, this that beauteous Ceston is
of Lovers many-coulor'd Bliss.
Come HYMEN, make an inner Ring,
And let the Sacrificers sing;
Cheer up the faint, and trembling Bride,
That quakes to touch his Bridegroom's side:
Tell her, what IVNO is to JOVE,
The same shall she be to her Love;
His Wife: which we doe rather measure
 A Name of Dignity, then Pleasure.
Up Youths, hold up your Lights in ayre,
And shake abroad their flaming hair.
Now move united, and, in Gate,
As you (in pairs) doe front the State,
With grateful Honours, thank his Grace
That hath so glorified the Place:
And as, in Circle, you depart
Linked hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
May all those Bodies still remain
Whom he, (with so much sacred pain)
No less hath bound within his Realms
Then they are with the OCEANS streams.
Long may his UNION find increase
As hee, to ours, hath deigned his peace.
With this, to a soft strain of Musique, they
paced once about, in their Ring, every Pair ma∣king
their Honours, as they came before the State:
and then dissolving, went down in Couples, led
on by HYMEN, the Bride, and Auspices following,
as to the Nupti•ll Bower. After them, the Mu∣sitians
with this Song, of which, then, only one
Staff was sung; but because I made it both in
Form, and Matter to aemulate that kind of
Poem, which was called Epithalamium, and (by
the Ancients) used to be song, when the Bride
was led into her Chamber, I have here set it down
whole: and doe heartily forgive their ignorance
whom it chances not to please. Hoping, that No∣mo
doctus me iubeat Thalassionem verbis decor non
Thalassionis.
GLad Time is at his point arrived,
For which Loves hopes were so long-liv'd.
Lead HYMEN, lead away;
And let no Object stay,
Nor Banquets, (but sweet kisses)
The Turtles from their Blisses.
 Tic CUPID calls to arm;
And this his last Alarm.
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
Shrink not, soft VIRGIN, you will love,
Anon, what you so fear to prove.
This is no killing War,
To which you pressed are;
But fair and gentle strife
Which Lovers call their Life.
Tic CUPID cries to Arm;
And this his last Alarm.
Help Youths, and Virgins, help to sing
The Prize, which HYMEN here doth bring,
And did so lately rap
From forth the Mothers lap,
To place her by that side
Where she must long abide.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
See, HESPERVS is yet in view!
What Star can so deserve of you?
Whose light doth still adorn
Your Bride, that ere the Morn,
Shall far more perfect bee,
And rise as bright as Hee;
When (like to him) her Name
Is changed, but not her Flame.
Hast, tender Lady, and adventer;
The cove•os House would have you enter,
That it might wealthy bee,
And you, her Mistress see:
Hast your own good to meet;
And lift your golden feet
Above the Threshold, high,
With prosperous Augury.
Now, Youths, let go your pretty arms;
The Place within chant's other charms.
Whole showers of Roses flow;
And Violets seem to grow,
Strewed in the Chamber there,
As VENVS Mead it were.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
Good Matrons, that so well are known
To aged Husbands of your own,
Place you our Bride to night;
And snatch away the Light:
That she not hide it dead
Beneath her Spouse's Bed;
Nor he reserve the same
To help the funeral Flame.
So, now you may admit him in;
The Act he covets, is no Sin,
But chaste, and holy Love,
Which HYMEN doth approve:
Without whose hallowing Fires
All Aims are base Desires.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This Night is HYMEN's all.
N•w, free from Vulgar Spite, or Noise,
May you enjoy your mutual joys;
Now, You no Fear controls,
But Lips may mingle Souls;
And soft Embraces bind,
To each, the others Mind:
Which may no Power untie,
Till One, or both must die.
And, look, before you yield to slumber,
That your Delights be drawn past number;
"Joys, got with strife, increase.
A••ect no sleepy peace;
But keep the Brides fair eyes
Awake, with her own Cries,
Which are but Mayden-feares:
And Kisses dry such tears.
Then, Coin them, twixt your Lips so sweet,
And let not Cockles closer meet;
Nor may your Murmuring Loves
Be drowned by CYPRESS Doves:
Let Ivy not so bind
As when your Arms are twined:
That you may Both, ever Day,
Rise perfect every way.
And, IVNO, whose great Powers protect
The Marriage-Bed, with good effect
The Labour of this Night
Bless thou, for future Light;
And, Thou, thy happy charge,
Glad GENIVS, enlarge:
That they may Both, ever Day,
Rise perfect every way.
And VENVS, Thou, with timely seed
(Which may their after-Comforts breed)
Inform the gentle Womb;
Nor, let it prove a Tomb:
But, ever ten Moons be wasted,
The Birth, by CYNTHIA hasted.
So may they Both, ever Day,
Rise perfect every Way.
And, when the Babe to light is shown,
Let it be, like each Parent, known;
Much of the Fathers Face,
More of the Mothers Grace:
And either Grand-Sires Spirit,
And Fame let it inherit.
That Men may bless the Embraces,
That joined two such Races.
Cease Youths, and Virgins, you have done;
Shut fast the Door: And, as They soon
To their Perfection hast,
So may their ardors last.
So eiders strength out-live
All loss that Age can give:
And, though full Years be told,
Their Forms grow slowly old.
HItherto extended the first Nights Solemnity,
whose Grace in the Exequution left not
where to add unto it, with wishing: I mean,
(nor doe I court them) in those, that sustained the
Nobler parts. Such was the exquisite Performance,
as (beside the Pomp, Splendour, or what wee may
call Apparelling of such Presentiments) that alone
(had all else been absent) was of power to sir∣prize
with Delight, and steal away the Spectators
from themselves. Nor was there wanting what∣soever
might give to the Furniture, or Comple∣meant:
either in riches, or strangeness of the Ha∣bites,
delicacy of Dances, Magnificence of the
Scene, or divine Rapture of Musique. Only the
Envy was, that it lasted not still, or (now it is past)
cannot by Imagination, much less Description,
be recovered to a part of that Spirit, it had in the
gliding by.
Yet, that I may not utterly defraud the Reader
of his Hope, I am drawn to give it those brief
touches, which may leave behind some shadow of
what it was: And first of the Attires.
That, of the Lords, had part of it (for the fa∣shion)
taken from the Antique Greek Statue; mix∣ed
with some Modern Additions: which made
it both graceful, and strange. On their Heads
they wore Persick Crowns, that were with Scrolls
of Gold-plate turned outward; and wreathed about
with a Carnation and Silver Net-lawne: The one
End of which hung carelessly on the left shoulder,
the other was tricked up before in several degrees
of folds, between the Plates, and set with rich
Jewels, and great Pearl. Their Bodies were of
Carnation cloth of silver, richly wrought, and cut
to express the Naked, in manner of the Greek Tho∣rex;
girt under the Breasts, with a broad Belt of
Cloth of Gold, embroidered, and fastened before
with Jewels: Their Labells were of White Cloth
of silver, laced, and wrought curiously between,
suitable to the upper half of their Sleeves; whose
nether parts, with their Bases, were of Watchet
Cloth of Silver, chev'rond all over with Lace.
Their Mantels were of several coloured silks, di∣stinguishing
their Qualities, as they were coupled
in pairs; The first, Sky colour; The second, Pearl
colour; The third, Flame colour; The fourth, Taw∣no;
And these cut in leaves, which were subtly
tacked up, and embroidered with Oo's, and between
every rank of Leaves, a broad silver Lace. They
were fastened on the right shoulder, and fell Com∣pass
down the back in gracious folds, and were
again tied with a round Knot, to the fastening of
their Swords. Upon their legs they wore Silver
Greaves, answering in work to their Labells; and
these were their Accoutrements.
The Ladies Attire was wholly new, for the In∣vention,
and full of Glory; as having in it the most
true impression of a Celestial Figure: The upper
part of White Cloth of Silver, wrought with IV∣NOES
Birds and Fruicts; A loose under garment,
full-gather'd, of Carnation, strip't with Silver, and
parted with a Golden Zone; Beneath that, an o∣there
flowing Garment, of Watchet Cloth of Sell∣ver,
laced with Gold: Through all which, though
they were round, and swelling, there yet appeared
some touch of their delicate Lineaments, preserving
the sweetness of Proportion, and expressing it
self beyond expression. The Attire of their Heads,
did answer, if not exceed; their Hair being care∣leslie
(but yet with more art, then if more affected)
bound under the circle of a rare, and rich Coronet,
adorned with all variety, and choice of Jewels;
from the top of which, flowed a trasparent Veil
down to the ground; whose verge, returning
up, was fastened to either side in most sprightly
Manner. Their shoes were Azure, and Gold, set
with Rubies, and Diamonds; so were all their
Garments: and every part abounding in Orna∣meant.
No less to be admired, for the Grace, and
Greatness, was the whole Machine of the Specta∣cle,
from whence they came: the first part of which
was a 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, or Globe, filled with Coun∣treys,
and those gilded; where the Sea was •x∣pressed,
heightened with silver waives. This stood,
or rather hung, (for no Excel was seen to sup∣port
it) and turning softly, discovered the first
Masque, (as we have before, but too runningly
declared) which was of the Men, sitting in fair
Composition, within a Mine of several Metals: To
which, the Lights were so placed, as no one was
seen; but seemed, as if onel• REASON, with the
splendour of her Crown, illumined the whole
Grot.
On the sides of this (which began the other
part) were placed two great Statues, fayn'd of
Gold, one of Atlas, the other of Hercules, in varied
postures, bearing up the Clouds, which were of
Relive, embossed, and tralucent, as Naturals: To
these, a Cortine of painted Clouds joined,
which reached to the vpmost Roof of the Hall;
and suddenly opening, revealed the three Regions
of Ayre: In the highest of which, sate IVNO, in a
glorious Throne of Gold, circled with Comets, and
fiery Meteors, engendered in that hot and dry Regi∣on;
her Feet reaching to the lowest, where was
made a Rainbow, and within it, Musicians seated,
figuring Airy Spirits, their habits various, and re∣sembling
the several colours, caused in that part
of the Ayre by reflection. The midst was all of dark
and condensed Clouds, as being the proper
Place where Rain, Hail, and other watery Mete∣ors
are made; out of which two concave Clouds,
from the rest, thrust forth themselves (in nature
of those Nimbi, wherein, by Homer, Virgil, &amp;c. the
Gods are feigned to descend) and these carried the
eight Ladies, over the heads of the two Terms;
who (as the Engine moved) seemed also to bow
themselves (by virtue of their shadows) and dis∣charge
their shoulders of their glorious burden:
when, having set them on the Earth, both they,
and the Clouds gathered themselves up again,
with some rapture of the Beholders.
But that, which (as above in place, so in the beu∣tie)
was most taking in the Spectacle, was the Sphere
of Fire; in the top of all, encompassing the Ayre,
and imitated with such art, and industry, as the
Spectators might discern the Motion (all the time
the Shows lasted) without any Moover: and, that
so swift, as no Eye could distinguish any Colour
of the Light, but might form to it self five hun∣dred
several hues, out of the tralucent Body of
the Ayre, objected betwixt it, and them.
And this was crowned with a statue of IVPITER,
the Thunderer.
The Design, and Act of all which, together with
the Device of their Habits, belongs properly to the
Merit, and Reputation of Moister YNYGO IONES;
whom I take modest occasion, in this fit place, to
remember, lest his own worth might accuse
me of an ignorant neglect from my silence.
And here, that no mans Deservings complain of
injustice (though I should have done it timelier, I
acknowledge) I doe for honours sake, and the
pledge of our Friendship, name Ma. ALPHONSO
FERABOSCO, a Man, planted by himself, in that
divine Sphere; &amp; mastering all the spirits of Musique:
To whose judicial Care, and as absolute Perfor∣mance,
were committed all those Difficulties both
of Song, and otherwise. Wherein, what his Merit
made to the Soul of our Invention, would ask to
be expressed in Tunes, no less ravishing then his.
V•rtuous friend, take well this abrupt testimony,
and think whose it is: It cannot be Flattery, in
me, who never did it to Great ones; and less then
Love, and Truth it is not, where it is done out of
Knowledge.
The Dances were both made, and taught by
Moister THOMAS GILES; and cannot bee more
approved, then they did themselves: Nor doe I
want the will, but the skill to commend such Sub∣tilties;
of which the Sphere, wherein they were
acted, is best able to judge.
What was my part, the Faults here, as well as
the Virtues must speak.
Muter dominum nec potest Liber notus.
ON the next Night, whose Solemnity was of
Barriers, (all mention of the former, being vt∣terly
remo'vd, and taken away) there appeared, at
the lower end of the Hall, a Mist made of delicate
perfumes; out of which (a Battle being sounded
under the Stage) did seem to break forth two
Ladies, the one representing TRVTH, the other
OPINION: but both so alike attired, as they could
by no Note, be distinguished. The colour of their
Garments were blew, their Socks White; They
were crowned with wreathes of Palm, and in
their hands, each of them sustained a Palm-bough.
These, after the Mist was vanished, began to exa∣mine
each other curiously with their eyes, and ap∣proching
the State, the one expostulated the o∣there
in this manner.
WHo art thou, thus that imitat'st my Grace,
In Steppes, in Habit, and resembled Face?
Grave Time, and Industry my Parents are;
My Name is TRVTH, who through these sounds of War
(Which figure the wise Minds discursive fight)
In Mists by Nature wrapped, salute the Light.
I am that TRVTH, thou some illusive Spright;
Whom to my likeness, the black Sorceress Night
Hath of these dry, and empty fumes created.
Best Herald of thine own Birth, well related:
Put me and mine to proof of words, and facts,
In any Question this fair Hour exacts.
I challenge thee, and fit this Time of Love,
With this Position, which TRVTH comes to prove;
That the most honoured state of Man and Wife,
Doth far exceed th'insociate Virgin-Life.
I take the adverse part; and she that best
Defends her side, be TRVTH by all confessed.
It is confirmed. With what an equal brow
To TRVTH, OPINION'S confident! and how,
Like TRVTH, her Habit shows to sensual Eyes!
But whosoe're thou be, in this disguise,
Clear TRVTH, anon, shall strip thee to the heart;
And show how mere Fantastical thou art.
Know then, the first Production of Things,
Required Two; from mere One nothing springs:
Without that knot, the Theme thou gloriest in,
(Th'vnprofitable Virgin) had not bin.
The Golden Tree of Marriage began
In Paradise, and bore the fruit of Man;
On whose sweet branches Angels sate, and sung,
And from whose firm root all Society sprung.
LOVE (whose strong Virtue wrapped Heavens soul in Earth,
And made a Woman glory in his Birth
In Marriage, opens his inflamed Breast;
And, lest in him Nature should stifled rest,
His genial fire about the world he darts;
Which Lips with Lips combines, and Hearts with Hearts.
Marriage LOVES Object is; at whose bright eyes
He lights his Torches, and call's them his Skies.
For her, he wings his shoulders; and doth fly
To her white bosom, as his Sanctuary:
In which no lustful Finger can profane him,
Nor any Earth, with black Eclipses wane him.
She makes him smile in sorrows, and doth stand
Twixt him, and all wants, with her silver hand.
In her soft Lockes, his tender Feet are tied;
And in his Fetters he takes worthy pride.
And as Geometricians have approved
That Lines, and Superficies are not moved
By their own forces, but doe follow still.
Their Bodies motions; so the selfe-lov'd Will
Of Man, or Woman should not rule in them,
But each with other wear the Anademe.
Mirrors, though decked with Diamants, are noght worth,
If the like Forms of Things they set not forth;
So Men, or Women are worth Nothing, neither,
If eiders Eyes and Hearts present not either.
Untouched Virginity, Laugh out; to see
Freedom in Fetters placed, and vrg'd' against thee.
What Griefs lie groaning on the Nuptial Bed?
What dull Satiety? In what sheets of Lead
Tumble, and toss the restless Married Pair,
Each, oft, offended with the Others air?
From whence springs all-devouring Avarice,
But from the Cares, which out of Wedlock rise?
And, where there is in Lifes best-tempred Fires
And End, set in it self to all desires,
A settled Quiet, Freedom never checked,
How far are Married Lives from this effect?
 EVRIPVS, that bears Ships, in all their pride,
Against roughest Winds, with violence of his Tide,
And ebbes, and flows, seven times in every day,
Toils not more turbulent, or fierce then they.
And thē, what Rules Husbands praescribe their Wives!
In their Eyes Circles, they must bound their Lives.
The Moon, when farthest from the Sun she shines,
Is most refulgent; nearest, most declines:
But your poor Wives far off must never rome,
But wast their Beauties, near their Lords, at home:
And when their Lords range out, at home must hide
(Like to begged Monopolies) all their Pride.
When their Lords list to feed a serious Fit
They must be serious; when to show their Wit
In lests, and Laughter, they must laugh, and jest;
When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
And to their Wives Men give such narrow scopes,
As if they meant to make them walk on Ropes:
No Tumblers bide more peril of their Necks
In all their Tricks; Then Wives in Husbands Checks.
Where Virgins, in their sweet, and peaceful State
Have all things perfect; spin their own free Fate;
Depend on no proud Second; are their own
Center, and Circle; Now, and always One.
To whose Example, we doe still hear named
One God, one Nature, and but one World framed,
One Sun, one Moon, one Element of Fire,
So, of the Rest; One King, that doth inspire
Soul, to all Bodies, in this royal Sphere:
And where is Marriage more declared, then there?
Is there a Band more strict, then that doth tie
The Soul, and Body in such unity?
Subjects to Sovereigns? doth one Mind display
In th'ones Obedience, and the others Sway?
Believe it, Marriage suffers no compare,
When both Estates are valued, as they are.
The Virgin were a strange, and stubborn Thing,
Would longer stay a Virgin, then to bring
Her self fit use, and profit in a Make.
How she doth err! and the whole Heaven mistake!
Loo•e how a Flower, that close in Closes grows,
Hid from rude Cattle, bruised with no Ploughs,
Which the Ayre doth stroke, Sun strengthen, Showers
It many Youths, &amp; many Maids desire; (shoot higher,
The same, when cropped by cruel hand is withered,
No Youths at all, No Maidens have desired:
So a Virgin, while vutouch'd she doth remain,
Is dear to hers; but when with Bodies stain
Her chaster Flower is lost, she leaves to appear
Or sweet to Young Men, or to Maidens dear.
That Conquest then may crown me in this War,
Virgins, O Virgins fly from HYMEN far.
Virgins, O Virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield,
For as a lone Vine, in a naked Field,
Never extols her branches, never bears
Ripe Grapes, but with a headlong heaviness wears
Her tender body, and her highest sproote
Is quickly levelled with his fading root;
By whom no Husband-men, no Youths will dwell;
But if, by fortune, she be married well
To th Elm, her Husband, many Husband-men,
And many Youths inhabit by her, then:
So whilst a Virgin doth, vntouch't, abide
All unmannered, she grows old, with his pride;
But when to equal Wedlock, in fit Time,
Her Fortune, and Endeavour lets her clime
Dear to h•r Love, and Parents, she is held.
Virgins, O Virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield.
These are but words; hast thou a Knight will try
(By stroke of Arms) the simple Verity?
To that high proof I would have dared thee.
Isle strait fetch Champions for the Brides and Me.
The like will I do for Virginity.
HEre, they both descended the Hall, where at
the lower end, a March being sounded with
Drums and Phifes, there entered (led forth by
the Earl of Nottingham, who was Lord high Con∣stable
for that night, and the Earl of Worc'ster,
Earl Marshall) sixteen Knights, Armed, with
Pikes, and Swords; their Plumes, and Colours,
Carnation and White, all richly accoutred, and ma∣king
their Honours to the State, as they marched by
in Pairs, were all ranked on one side of the Hall.
They placed, Sixteen others alike accoutred for
Riches, and Arms, only that their Colours were
varied to Watchet, and White; were by the same
Earls led up, and passing in like manner, by the
State, placed on the opposite side. Whose Names
(as they were given to me, both in Order, and Or∣thographie)
were these.
Duke of LENNOX.
Lo. EFFINGHAM.
Lo. WALDEN,
Lo. MOVE••EAGLE.
Sir THO. SOME•SET.
Sir CHAR HOVVARD.
Sir IOHN GRAY.
Sir THO MOVNSON.
Sir IOHN LEIGH.
Sir ROB. MAVNSELL.
Sir EDVV. HOVVARD.
Sir HEN GOODYERE.
Sir ROGER DALISON.
Sir FRAN. HOVVARD.
Sir LEVV. MAVNSELL.
Mr. GVNTE••T.
Earl of SVSSEX.
Lo. WILLOV••BY.
Lo▪ G•RRARD.
Sir. ROB. CAR•Y.
Sir WHOLE. CRVMVVEL.
Sir WILL. HERBERT.
Sir ROB. DR•VVRY.
Sir WI. WOODHOVSE.
Sir CAREY REYNOLDS.
Sir RIC. HOVGHTON.
Sir WILL. CONSTA•L•.
Sir THO. GERARD,
Sir ROB. KYLLEGREVV.
Sir THO BADGER.
Sir THO. DVTTON.
Mr. DIG BY.
By this time, the Bar being brought up,
TRVTH proceeded.
Now join; and if his varied Trial fail,
To make my Truth in Wedlocks praise prevail,
I will retire, and in more power appear;
To cease this strife, and make our Question clear.
Whereat OPINION insulting, followed her with
this speech.
I, Doe: it were not safe thou should abide:
This speaks thy Name, with shame to quit thy side.
Here the Champions on both sides addressed
themselves for fight, first Single; after Three to
Three: and performed it with that alacrity, and
vigour, as if MARS himself had been to triumph
before VENVS, &amp; invented a new Musique. When,
on a sudden, (the last Six having scarcely ended) a
striking Light seemed to fill all the Hall, and out of
it 〈◊〉 Angel or Messenger of Glory appearing.
PRinces, attend a tale of height, and wonder.
TRVTH is descended in a second Thunder,
And now will greet you, with ludiciall state,
To grace the Nuptial part in this debate;
And end with reconciled hands these wars.
Upon her head she wears a Crown of Stars,
Through which her ore•ned Hair waves to her wast,
By which believing Mortals hold her fast,
And in those golden Chords are carried even
Till with her breath she blows them up to Heaven.
She wears a Robe enchased with Eagles Eyes,
To signify her sight in Mysteries;
Upon each shoulder sits a milk white Dove,
And at her feet doe witty Serpents move:
Her spacious Arms doe reach from East to West,
And you may see her Heart shine through her breast.
Her right hand holds a Sun with burning Rays,
Her left a curious bunch of golden Kayes,
With which Heaven Gates she locked, and displays.
A Crystal Mirror hangs at her breast,
By which men's Consciences are searched, and dressed:
On her Coach wheels Hypocrisy lies racked;
And squint-eyd Slander, with Vaine-Glory backed
Her bright Eyes burn to dust: in which shines Fate.
An Angel ushers his triumphant Gate,
Whilst with her fingers Fans of Stars she twists,
And with them beats back Error, clad in mists.
Eternal Unity behind her shines
That Fire, and Water, Earth, and Ayre combines.
Her voice is like a Trumpet loud, and shrill,
Which bids all sounds in Earth, and Heaven be still.
And see! descended from her Chariot now,
In this related Pomp she visits you.
Honour to all, that Honour Nuptials.
To whose fair Lot, in •ustice, now it falls,
That this my Counterfeit be here disclosed,
Who, for Virginity hath her self opposed.
Nor, though my Brightness doe undo her Charms,
Let these her Knights think, that their equal Arms
Are wronged therein; "For Valor wins applause
"That dares, but to maint aine the weaker Cause.
And Princes, see, tic mere OPINION,
That in TRVTH'S forced Robe, for TRVTH hath gone!
Her gaudy Colours, pieced, with many Folds,
Show what vncer tainties she ever holds:
Vanish Adult'rate TRVTH, and never dare
With proud Maids praise, to press where Nuptials are.
And Champions, since you see the Truth I held,
To Sacred HYMEN, reconciled, yield:
Nor, (so to ye•lt,) think it the least Despite
"It is a Conquest to submit to Right.
This Royal Judge of our Contention
Will prop, I know, what I have under gone;
To whose right Sacred Highness Iresigne
Low, at his feet, this Starry Crown of mine,
To show his Rule, and Judgment is divine;
These Doves to him I consecrate withal,
To note his Innocence, without spot, or gall;
These Serpents, for his Wisdom▪ and these Rays,
To show his piercing Splendour; These bright Keys,
Designing Power to op the ported Skies,
And speak their Glory•s to his Subjects Eyes.
Lastly, this Heart, with which all Hearts be true:
And TRVTH in him make Treason ever rue.
With This, they were led forth, hand in hand,
reconciled, as in Triumph: and thus the Solemn∣ties
ended.

GEntlemen, Inductions are out of date, and a Prologue in Verse is as stale, as a black Velvet Cloak, and a Bay Garland: There∣fore you shall have it plain Prose thus: If there be any amongst you, that come to hear lascivious Scenes, let them depart: for I doe pronounce this, to the utter discomfort of all two penny Gallery men, you shall have no bawdry in it: or if there bee any lurking amongst you in corners, with Table books, who have some hope to find fit matter to feed his — malice on, let them clasp them up, and slink away, or stay and be converted. For he that made this Play, means to please Auditors so, as hee may bee an Auditor him∣self hereafter, and not purchase them with the dear loss of his ears: I dare not call it Comedy, or Tra∣giddy; it is perfectly neither: A Play it is, which was meant to make you laugh, how it will please you, is not written in my part: For though you should like it to day, perhaps your selves know not how you should dis∣gest it to morrow: Some things in it you may meet with, which are out of the common Road: a Duke there is, and the Scene lies in Italy, as those two
things lightly wee never miss. But you shall not find in it the ordinary and overworn trade of jesting at Lords and Courtiers, and Citizens, without taxation of any particular or new vice by them found out, but at the persons of them: such, he that made this, thinks vile; and for his own part vows, That hee did never think, but that a Lord borne might bee a wise man, and a Cour∣tier an honest man.
Tic now the sweetest time for sleep, the night is scarce spent; Arrigo, what's a clock?
Past four.
Is it so much, and yet the morn not up?
See yōder where the shamfac'd maidē comes
Into our sight, how gently doth she slide,
Hiding her chaste cheeks, like a modest Bride,
With a red veil of blushes; as is she,
Even such all modest virtuous women be.
Why thinks your Lordship I am up so soon?
About some weighty State plot.
And what thinks your knighthood of it?
I doe think, to cure some strange corruptions in the common wealth.
You're well conceited of your selves, to think
I choose you out to bear me company
In such affairs and business of state:
But am not I a pattern for all Princes,
That break my soft sleep for my subjects good?
Am I not careful? very provident?
Your grace is careful.
Very provident.
Nay knew you how my serious working plots,
Concern the whole estates of all my subjects,
I and their lives; then Lucio thou would swear,
I were a loving Prince.
I think your grace intends to walk the pub∣lique streets disguised, to see the streets disorders.
It is not so.
You secretly will cross some other states, that doe conspire against you.
Weightier far:
You are my friends, and you shall have the cause;
I break my sleeps thus soon to see a wench.
You're wondrous careful for your subjects good.
You are a very loving Prince in deed.
This care I take for them, when their dull eyes,
Are closed with heavy slumbers.
Then you rise to see your wenches?
What Millaine beauty hath the power, to charm her Sovereigns eyes, and break his sleeps?
Sister to Count Vaelore: She's a maid
Would make a Prince, forget his throne and state,
And lowly kneel to her: the general fate
Of all mortality, is hers to give;
As she disposes, so we die and live.
My Lord, the day grow's clear, the Court will rise.
We stay too long, is the the Vmbranoes head as wee commanded, sent to the sad Gondarino, our general?
Tic sent.
But stay, where shines that light?
Tic in the chamber of Lazarello.
Lazarello? what is he?
A Courtier my Lord, and one that I wonder your grace knows not: for he hath followed your Court, and your last predecessors, from place to place, any time this seven year, as faithfully as your Spits and your Drip∣ping-pans have done, and almost as greasely.
O we know him as we have heard: he keeps a calendar of all the famous dishes of meat, that have bin in the Court, ever since our great Grandfathers time; and when he can thrust in at no Table, hee makes his meat of that.
The very same my Lord.
A Courtier call thou him?
Believe me Lucio, there be many such
About our Court, respected, as they think,
Even by our self; with thee I will be plain:
We Princes do use, to prefer many for nothing, and to take particular and free knowledge, almost in the nature of ac∣quaintance of many; whom we do use only for our plea∣sures, and do give largely to numbers; more out of polli∣cy, to be thought liberal, and by that means to make the people strive to deserve our love; then to reward any par∣ticular desert of theirs, to whom we give: and doo suffer our selves to here Flatterers, more for recreation
Then for love of it, though we seldom hate it:
And yet we know all these, and when we please,
Can touch the wheel, and turn their names about.
I wonder they that know their states so well, should fancy such base slaves.
Thou wondrest Lucio,
Dost not thou think, if thou were Duke of Millaine,
Thou should be flattered?
I know my Lord, I would not.
Why so I thought till I was Duke, I thought I should have left me no more Flatterers, then there are now plaine-dealers; and yet for all this my resolution, I am most palpably flattered: the poor man may loath cove∣tousnes &amp; flattery; but Fortune will alter the mind whē the wind turns: there may be well a little conflict, but it will drive the billows before it.
Arrigo it grow's late, for see fair Thetis hath undone the bares
To Phebus team; and his vnriual'd light,
Hath chased the mornings modest blush away:
Now must we to our love, bright Paphian Queen;
Thou Cytherean gods, that delights
In stirring glances, and art still thy self,
More toying then thy team of Sparrows bee;
Thou laughing Errecina O inspire
Her heart with love, or lessen my desire.
Go run, search, pry in every nook and Angle of the kitchens, larders, and pasteries, know what meate's boiled, baked, roast, stewed, fri'de, or soused, at this din∣ner to be served directly, or indirectly, to every several ta∣ble in the Court, be gone.
I run, but not so fast, as your mouth will doe up∣on the stroke of eleven.
What an excellent thing did God bestow upon man, when he did give him a good stomach? what un∣bounded graces there are powered upon them, that have the continual command of the very best of these bless∣sings? Tic an excellent thing to bee a Prince, hee is served with such admirable variety of fare; such innumerable choice of delicates, his tables are full fraught with most nourishing food, &amp; his cupbords heavy laden with rich wines; his Court is still filled with most pleasing vary∣ties: In the Summer, his palace is full of greene geese; and in Winter, it swarmeth woodcockes,
O thou Goddess of plenty
Fill me this day with some rare delicates,
And I will every year most constantly,
As this day celebrate a sumptuous feast,
If thou wilt send me victuals in thine honour;
And to it shall be bidden for thy sake,
Even al the valiant stomachs in the Court:
All short-cloak'd Knights, &amp; al crosse-garter'd gentlemē;
All pump and pantofle, foot-cloth riders;
With all the swarming generation
Of long stocks, short pained hose, &amp; huge stuffed dublets:
All these shall eat, and which is more then yet
Hath ere been seen, they shall be satisfied.
I wonder my Ambassador returns not!
Here I am Moister.
And welcome:
Never did that sweet Virgin in her smock,
Fair cheeked Andromeda, when to the rock
Her ivory limbs were chained, and straight before
A huge Sea monster, tumbling to the shore,
To have devoured her, with more longing sight
Expect the coming of some hardy Knight,
That might have quel'd his pride, and set her free,
Then I with longing sight have looked for thee.
Your Perseus is come Master, that will destroy him,
The very comfort of whole presence shuts
The monster hunger from your yelping guts
Brief boy, brief, discourse the service of each se∣uerall Table compendiously.
Here is a Bill of all Sir.
Give it me. A Bill of all the several services this day appointed for every Table in the Court:
I, this is it on which my hopes rely;
Within this paper all my joys are closed:
Boy open it, and read it with reverence.
For the Captain of the Guards Table, three chynes of Beef, and two jolls of Sturgeon.
A portly service, but gross, gross, proceed to the Dukes own Table, dear boy to the Dukes own Table.
For the Dukes own Table, the head of an Vmbrana
Is it possible! can Heaven bee so propitious to the Duke?
Yes, Isle assure you Sir, it is possible, Heaven is so propitious to him.
Why then he is the richest Prince alive:
He were the wealthiest Monarch in all Europe,
Had he no other Territories, Dominions, Provinces, Seats,
Nor Palaces, but only that Vmbranaes head.
It is very fresh and sweet sir, the fish was taken but this night, &amp; the head as a rare novelty appointed by spe∣ciall cōmandement for the dukes own Table, this dinner.
If poor unworthy I may come to eat Of this most sacred dish, I here do vow (If that blind huswife Fortune will bestow But means on me) to keep a sumptuous house, A board groaning under the heavy burden of the beasts that chews the cud, and the Foul that cutteth the ayre: I shall not like the table of a country Justice, be∣sprinkled over with all manner of cheap Sallets, sliced Beef, Giblets, and Pettitoes, to fill up room, nor should there stand any great, cumbersome, uncut up pies at the nether end filled with moss and stones, partly to make a show with, and partly to keep the lower mess from ea∣ting, nor shall my meat come in sneaking like the Cittie-seruice, one dish a quarter of an hour after one another gone, as if they had appointed to meet there, and had mi∣stooke the hour, nor should it like the new Court service come in, in hast, as if it fine would be gone again, all courses at once, like a hunting breakfast, but I would have my several courses, and my dishes well filed, my first course should bee brought in after the ancient manner, by a score of old bleere-ey'de Serving-men, in long blew coats, (marry they shall buy silk, facing, and buttons themselves) but that's by the way.
Moister the time call's on, will you be walking.
Follow boy, follow, my guts were half an hour since in the privy kitchen.
Faith brother I must needs go yonder.
And in faith sister what will you do yonder.
I know the Lady Honoria will be glad to see me.
Glad to see you, faith the Lady Honoria cares for you as she doth for all other young Ladies, shoe's glad to
see you, and will show you the privy Garden, and tel you how many gowns the Duchess had: Marry if you have ever an old uncle, that would be a Lord, or ever a kins∣man that hath done a murder, or committed a robbery, and will give good store of money to procure his par∣don, then the Lady Honoria will be glad to see you.
I, but they say one shall see fine fights at the Court.
Isle tell you what you shall see, you shall see ma∣ny faces of mans making, for you shall find very few as God left them: and you shall see many legs too; a∣amongst the rest you shall behold one pair, the feet of which, were in times past sockelesse, but are now through the change of time (that alters all things) very strangely become the legs of a Knight and a Courtier: another pair you shall see, that were heir apparent legs to a Glover, these legs hope shortly to bee honourable; when they pass by they will bow, and the mouth to these legs, will seem to offer you some Courtship; it will swear, but it will lye, hear it not.
Why, and are not these fine sights?
Sister, in seriousness you yet are young And fair, a fair young maid and apt.
Apt?
Exceeding apt, apt to be drawn to.
To what?
To that you should not be, it is no dispraise,
She is not bad that hath desire to ill,
But she that hath no power to rule that will:
For there you shall be wood in other kinds
Then yet your years have known, the chiefest men
Will seem to throw themselves
As vassailes at your service, kiss your hand,
Prepare you banquets, masks, shows, all enticements
That wit and lust together can devise,
To draw a Lady from the state of grace
To an old Lady widows Gallery;
And they will praise your virtues, beware that,
The only way to turn a woman whore,
Is to commend her chastity: you'll go?
I would go, if it were but only to show you, that I could be there, and be moved with none of these tricks.
Your servants are ready?
An hour since
Well, if you come off clear from this hot service,
Your praise shall be the greater. Farewell Sister.
Farewell Brother.
Once more, if you stay in the presence till candle∣light, keep on the foreside of the Curtain; &amp; do you hear, take heed of the old Bawd, in the cloth of Tissue-sleeues, and the knit Mittens. Farewell Sister.
Now am I idle, I would I had bin a Scholar, that I might a studied now: the punishment of meaner men is, they have too much to doe; our only misery is, that without company we know not what to doe; I must take some of the common courses of our Nobility; which is thu•: if I can find no company that likes me, pluck off my Hat∣band, throw an old Cloak over my face, and as if I would not bee known, walk hastily through the streets, till I be discovered; then there goes Count such a one, says one; there goes Count such a one, says another: Look how fast he goes, says a third; there's some great matters in hand questionless, says a fourth; when all my busi∣ness is to have them say so: this hath been used; or if I can find any company, Isle after dinner to the Stage, to see a Play; where, when I first enter, you shall have a murmur in the house, every one that does not know, cries, what Noble man is that; all the Gallants on the Stage rise, veil to me, kiss their hand, offer me their places: then I pick out some one, whom I please to grace among the rest, take his seat, use it, throw my cloak over my face, and laugh at him: the poor gentle∣man imagines himself most highly graced, thinks all the
Auditors esteem him one of my bosom friends, and in right special regard with me. But here comes a Gentle∣man, that I hope will make me better sport, then either street and stage fooleries.
This man loves to eat good meat, always provided hee do not pay for it himself: he goes by the name of the Hun∣garie Courtier; marry, because I think that name will not sufficiently distinguish him, for no doubt hee hath more fellows there, his name is Lazarello, he is none of these same ordinary eaters, that will devour three breakfasts, &amp; as many dinners, without any prejudice to their beavers, drinkings or suppers; but he hath a more courtly kind of hunger, and doth hunt more after novelty, then plenty, Isle ouer-heare him.
O thou most itching kindly appetite,
Which every creature in his stomach feels;
O leave, leave yet at last thus to torment me.
Three several Sallets have I sacrificed,
Bedewed with precious oil and vinegar
Already to appease thy greedy wrath. Boy.
Sir.
Will the Count speak with me.
One of his Gentlemen is gone to inform him of your coming Sir.
There is no way left for me to compass this Fish head, but by being presently made known to the Duke.
That will be hard Sir.
When I have tasted of this sacred dish,
Then shall my bones rest in my fathers tomb
In peace, then shall I dye most willingly,
And as a dish be served to satisfy
Deaths hunger, and I will be buried thus:
My Beer shall be a charger borne by four,
The coffin where I lye, a powdering tubbe,
Bestrewed with Lattice, and cool sallet herbs,
My winding sheet of Tanseyes, the black guard
Shall be my solemn mourners, and in stead
Of ceremonies, wholesome burial prayers:
A printed dirge in rhyme, shall bury me
In stead of tears, let them pour Capon sauce
Upon my hearse, and salt in stead of dust,
Manchets for stones, for other glorious shields
Give me a Voyder, and aboue my hearse
For a Trutch sword, my naked knife stuck up.
Master, the Count is here.
Where? my Lord I do beseech you.
You're very welcome sir, I pray you stand up, you shall dine with me.
I do beseech your Lordship by the love I still have borne to your honourable house.
Sir, what need all this? you shall dine with me, I pray rise.
Perhaps your Lordship takes me for one of these same fellows, that do as it were respect victuals.
O sir, by no means.
Your Lordship he's often promised, that when∣soever I should affect greatness, your own hand should help to raise me.
And so much still assure your self of.
And though I must confess, I have ever shunned popularity by the example of others, yet I do now feel my self a little ambitious, your Lordship is great, and though young, yet a privy Counsellor.
I pray you sir leap into the matter, what would you have me doe for you?
I would entreat your Lordship to make me known to the Duke.
When sir?
Suddenly my Lord, I would have you present me unto him this morning.
It shall be done, but for what virtues, would you have him take notice of you?
Your Lordship shall know that presently. It is pity of this fellow, he is of good wit, &amp; sufficient un∣derstāding,
whē he is not troubled with this greedy worm.
Faith, you may entreat him to take notice of me for any thing; for being an excellent Farrier, for playing well at Span-counter, or sticking knives in walls, for be∣ing impudent, or for nothing; why may not I bee a Fauo∣rite on the sudden, I see nothing against it.
Not so sir, I know you have not the face to bee a favourite on the sudden.
Why thē you shall present me as a gētlemā well qua∣lified, or one extraordinary seen in divers strāge mysteries.
In what Sir? as howe?
Marry as thus—
Yonders my old Spirit, that hath haunted me daily, ever since I was a privy Counsellor, I must be rid of him, I pray you stay there, I am a little buisie, I will speak with you presently.
You shall bring me in, and after a little other talk, taking me by the hand, you shall utter these words to the Duke: May it please your grace, to take note of a gentleman, well read, deeply learned, and thoroughly grounded in the hidden knowledge of all Sallets and pothearbs whatsoever.
Twill be rare, if you will walk before Sir, I will overtake you instantly.
Your Lordships ever.
This fellow is a kind of Informer, one that lives in Alehouses, and Taverns, and because hee perceives some worthy men in this land, with much labour &amp; great expense, to have discovered things dangerously hanging over the State; hee thinks to discover as much out of the talk of drunkards in Taphouses: hee brings me inform∣tions, picked out of broken words, in men's common talk, which with his malicious misapplication, hee hopes will seem dangerous, hee doth besides bring me the names of all the young Gentlemen in the City, that use Ordinaries, or Taverns, talking (to my thinking) only as the freedom of their youth teach thē, without any
further ends; for dangerous and seditious spirits, he is be∣sides an arrant whore-master, as any is in Millaine, of a lay man. I will not meddle with the Clergy, he is parcel Lawyer, &amp; in my conscience much of their religion, I must put upon him some piece of service; come hither Sir, what have you to do with me?
Little my Lord, I only come to know how your Lordship would employ me.
Observed you that gentleman, that parted from me but now.
I saw him now my Lord.
I was sending for your, I have talked with this mā, and I doe find him dangerous.
Is your Lordship in earnest?
Hark you sir, there may perhaps be some within care-shot.
Sirrha will you venture your life, the Duke hath sent the fish head to my lord?
Sir if he have not, kill me, do what you will with me.
How uncertain is the state of all mortal things? I have these Crosses from my Cradle, from my very Cra∣dl, in so much that I doe begin to grow desperate: For∣tune I do despise thee, do thy worst; yet when I do better gather my self together, I do find it is rather the part of a wise man, to prevent the storms of Fortune by stirring, then to suffer them by standing still, to power themselves upon his naked body. I will about it.
Who's within there?
Let this Gentleman out at the back door, forget not my instructions, if you find any thing dangerous; trouble not your self, to find out me, but carry your informations to the Lord Lucio, he is a man grave and well experienced in these businesses.
Your Lordships Servant.
Will it please your worship walk?
Sir I was coming, I will ouer-take you.
I will attend you over against the Lord Gonderi∣noes house.
You shall not attend there long.
Thither must I to see my loves face, the chaste fire∣gin head
Of a dear Fish, yet pure and vnderflowred,
Not known of man, no bred rough country hand,
Hath once touched thee, no Panders withered paw,
Nor an vn-napkind Lawyers greasy fist,
Hath once slubberd thee: no Ladies supple hand,
Washed o'er with urine, hath yet seized on thee
With her two nimble talents: no Court hand,
Whom his own natural filth, or change of air,
Hath bedecked with scabs, hath mart thy whiter grace:
O let it be thought lawful then for me,
To crop the flower of thy virginity.
This day I am for fools, I am all theirs,
Though like to our young wanton cockerd heirs,
Who doe affect those men aboue the rest,
In whose base company they still are best:
I doe not with much labour strive to be
The wisest ever in the company:
But for a fool, our wisdom oft amends,
As enemies doe teach vs more then friends.
My Lord:
Ha.
Here's one hath brought you a present.
From whom, from a woman? if it be from a wo∣man, bid him carry it back, and tell her shoe's a whore: what is it?
A Fish head my Lord.
What Fish head?
I did not ask that my lord.
W•ence co•es it?
From the Court.
O it is a Cods-head.
No my Lord, it is some strange head, it comes from the Duke.
Let it be carried to my Mercer, I doe owe him money for silks, stop his mouth with that.
Was there ever any man that hated his wife after death but I? and for her sake all women, women that were created only for the preservation of little dogs.
My Lord, the Counts sister being overtaken in the streets, with a great haile-storme, is light at your gate, and desires Rome till the storm be overpassed.
Is she a woman?
I my Lord I think so.
I have none for her then: bid her get her gone, tel her she is not welcome.
My Lord, she is now coming up.
She shall not come up, tell her any thing, tell her I have but one great room in my house, and I am now in it at the close stool.
Shoe's here my Lord.
O impudence of women, I can keep dogs out of my house, or I can defend my house against thieves, but I cannot keep out women.
Now Madam, what hath your Ladyship to say to me?
My Lord, I was bold to crave the help of your house against the storm.
Your Ladyships boldness in coming, will bee impudence in staying, for you are most unwelcome.
Oh my Lord!
Doe you laugh, by the hate I bear to you, tic true.
You're merry my Lord.
Let me laugh to death if I bee, or can bee whilst thou art here, or lives, or any of thy sex.
I commend your Lordship.
Doe you commend me? why doe you commend me? I give you no such cause: thou art a filthy impudent whore; a woman, a very woman.
Ha, ha, ha.
Begot when thy father was drunk.
Your Lordship hath a good wit.
How? what have I good wit?
Come my Lord, I have heard before of your Lordships merry vain in jesting against our Sex, which I being desirous to hear, made me rather choose your Lordships house, then any other, but I know I am well∣come.
Let me not live if you be: me thinks it doth not become you, to come to my house, being a strāger to you. I have no woman in my house, to entertain you, nor to show you your chamber; why should you come to me? I have no Galleries, nor banqueting houses, nor bawdy pictures to show your Ladyship.
Believe me, this your Lordships plains makes me think my self more welcome, then if you had sworn by all the pretty Court oaths that are, I had been well∣comer then your soul to your body.
Now shoe's in talking, treason will get her out, I durst sooner undertake to talk an Intelligencer out of the room, and speak more then he durst hear, than talk a woman out of my company.
My Lord, the Duke being in the streets, and the storm continuing, is entered your gate, and now com∣ming up.
The Duke! now I know your arrant Madame; you have plots and private meetings in hand: why do you choose my house, are you ashamed to go too't in the old coupling place, though it be less suspicious here; for no Christian will suspect a woman to be in my house, yet you may doe it cleanlier there, for there is a care had of those businesses; and wheresoever you remove, your great
maintainer and you shall have your lodgings directly op∣posit, it is but putting on your night-gowne, and your slippers; madame, you understand me?
Before I would not understand him, but now he speaks riddles to me indeed.
T'was a strange haile-storme.
T'was exceeding strange.
Good morrow to your grace.
Good morrow Gondarino.
Justice great Prince.
Why should you beg for justice, I never did you wrong; whats the offender?
A woman.
O I know your ancient quarrel against that sex; but what heinous crime hath she committed?
She hath gone abroad.
What? it cannot be.
She hath done it.
How? I never heard of any woman that did so before.
If she have not laid by that modesty
That should attend a virgin, and quite void
Of shame, hath left the house where she was borne,
As they should never doe; let me endure
The pains that she should suffer.
Hath she so? which is the woman?
This, this.
How Arrigo? Lucio?
I then it is a plot, no Prince alive
Shall force me make my house, a brothel house;
Not for the sins, but for the women's sake,
I will not have her in my doors so long:
Will they make my house as bawdy as their own are?
Is it not Oriana?
It is.
Sister to Count Valour?
The very same.
She that I love?
She that you love.
I doe suspect.
So doe I.
This fellow to be but a counterfeit,
One that doth seem to loath all woman kind,
To hate himself, because he hath some part
Of woman in him; seems not to endure
To see, or to bee seen of any woman,
Only, because he knows it is their nature
To wish to taste that which is most forbidden:
And with this show, he may the better compass
(And with far less suspicion) his base ends.
Upon my life it is so.
And I doe know,
Before his slain wife gave him that offence,
He was the greatest servant to that sex,
That ever was; what doth this Lady here
with him alone? why should he rail at her to me?
Because your grace might not suspect.
T'was so: I doe love her straingely;
I would fine know the truth: counsel me.
It falls out better then we could expect Sir, that we should find the Duke and my Lord Gondarino toge∣there, both which you desire to be acquainted with.
T'was very happy: Boy, go down into the kitchen, &amp; see if you can spy that same; I am now in some hope: I have me thinks a kind of fever upon me,
A certain gloominess within me, doubting as it were, betwixt two passions; there is no young maid, upon her wedding night, when her husband sets first foot in the bed, blushes, and looks pale again, oftner then I doe now. There is no Poet acquainted with more shakings &amp;
••akinges, towards the latter end of this new play, when hoe's in that case, that he stands peeping betwixt the cur∣taines, so fearfully, that a bottle of Ale cannot be opened, but he thinks some body hisses, then I am at this instant.
Are they in consultatiō, if they be, either my young Duke hath gotten some bastard, and is persuading my knight yonder, to father the child, and marry the wench, or else some Cock-pit is to be built.
My Lord? what noble mann's that?
His name is Lucio, tic hee that was made a Lord at the request of some of his friends for his wives sake, he af∣fects to bee a great States-man, and thinks it consists in night caps, and jewels, and tooth-pikes?
And whats that other?
A Knight Sir, that pleases the Duke to favour, &amp; to raise to some extraordinary fortunes, hee can make as good men as himself, every day in the week and doth—
For what was he raised.
Truly Sir, I am not able to say directly, for what; but for wearing of red breeches as I take it, hes a brave man, hee will spend three Knighthoods at a Supper without trumpets.
My Lord isle talk with him, for I have a friend, that would gladly receive the humour.
If he have the itch of Knighthood upon him, let him repair to that Physician, he will cure him: but I will give you a note; is your friend fat or lean?
Something fat.
T'will be the worse for him.
I hope thats not material.
Very much, for there is an imposte set upon Knighthoods, and your friend shall pay a Noble in the pound.
I do not like examinations,
We shall find out the truth more easily,
Some other way less noted, and that course,
Should not be used, till we bee sure to prove
Some thing directly, for when they perceive
Themselves suspected, they will then provide
More warily to answer.
Doth she know your Grace doth love her.
She hath never heard it.
Then thus my Lord;
Whats hee that walks alone so sadly with his hands behind him?
The Lord of the house, he that you desire to be acquainted with, hee doth hate women for the same cause that I love them.
Whats that?
For that which Apes want: you perceive me Sir?
And is hee sad, can hee be sad, that hath so rich a gem under his roof, as that which I do follow? What young Ladies that?
Which: Have I mine eye sight perfect, Tic my sister, did I say the Duke had a bastard? what should she make here with him, and his Council; she hath no pa∣pers in her hand, to petition to them, she hath never a husband in prison, whose release she might sue for: Thats a fine trick for a wench; to get her husband clapped up, that she may more freely, &amp; with less suspicion, visit the private studies of men in authority. Now I do discover their consultatiō, yon fellow is a Pander without al salua∣tion; But let me not condemn her too rashly, without weighing the matter; shees a young Lady, She went forth early this morning with a waiting woman, and a Page, or so: This is no garden house, in my conscience she went forth with no dishonest intent; for she did not pretend going to any sermon in the further end of the City: Neither went she to see any odd old Gentle∣woman, that mourns for the death of her husband, or the loss of her friend, and must have young Ladies come to comfort her: Those are the damnable Bawds, It was no set meeting certainly: for there was no wafer-wo∣man
with her, these three days, on my knowledge: Isle talk with her: Good more•ow my Lord.
You're welcome Sir: her's her brother come now to doe a kind office for his sister, is it not strange?
I am glad to meet you here Sister.
I thank you good Brother: and if you doubt of of the cause of my coming, I can Satisfy you.
No faith, I dare trust thee, I doe suspect thou art honest, for it is so rare a thing to bee honest amongst you, that some one man in an age, may perhaps suspect some two women to be honest, but never believe it verily.
Let your return be sudden.
Unsuspected by them.
It shall, so shall I best perceive they• Love, if there be any, Farewell.
Let me entreat your grace to stay a little,
To know a Gentleman, to whom your self
Is much beholding, he hath made the sport
For your whole Court these 8. years, on my knowledge.
His name?
Lazarello.
I heard of him this morning, which is he?
Lazarello, pluck up thy Spirits, thy fort•nes are now raising, the Duke calls for thee, and thou shalt be ac∣quainted with him.
He's going away, and I must of necessity stay here, upon business.
Tic all one, thou shalt know him first.
Stay a little, if hee should offer to take me away with him, and by that means I should loose that I seek for; but if he should, I will not go with him.
Lazarello the Duke stays, wilt thou loose this op∣portunitie?
How must I speak to him?
It was well thought of: you must not talk to him, as you do to an ordinary man, honest plain sense; but you must wind about him: for example, if hee should ask
you what a clock it is, you must not say; if it please your grace, tic nine, but thus; thrice three a clock, so please my Sovereign, or thus; look how many muses there doth dwell,
Upon the sweet banks of the learned Well;
And just so many strokes the clock hath struck,
And so forth, and you must now &amp; then enter into a de•scription.
I hope I shall doe it.
Come: May it please your grace to take note of a gentleman, well seen, deeply read, &amp; thoroughly groū∣ded in the hidden knowledge of all sallets and pothearbs whatsoever.
I shall desire to know him more inwardly.
I kiss the Oxe-hide of your Graces foot.
Very well: will your grace question him a little?
How old are you?
Full eight and twenty several Almanacs
Hath been compiled, all for several years,
Since first I drew this breath, four prentiships
Have I most truly served in this world:
And eight and twenty times hath Phoebus carre
Run out his yearly course since.
I understand you Sir.
How like an ignorant Poet he talks.
You are eight and twenty year old? what time of the day doe you hold it to be?
About the time that mortals whet their knives
On thresholds, on their shoe soles, and on stayres:
Now bread is grating, and the testy cooke
Hath much to doe now, now the Tables all.
It is almost dinner time?
Your grace doth apprehend me very rightly.
Your grace shall find him in your further cōferēce Grave, wise, courtly, &amp; scholar like, vnderstādingly read In the necessities of the life of man. He knows that man is mortal by his birth; He knows that men must dye, and therefore live;
He knows that man must live, and therefore eat,
 And if it shall please your grace, to accompany your self with him, I doubt not, but that hee will at the least, make good my commendations.
Attend vs Lazarello, we doe want
Men of such Action, as we have received you
Reported from your honourable friend.
Good my Lord stand betwixt me and my over∣throw, you know I am ti'd here, and may not depart, my gracious Lord, so weighty are the business of mine own, which at this time doe call upon me, that I will rather choose to die, then to neglect them.
Nay you shall well perceive, besides the virtues that I have already informed you off, he hath a stomach, which will stoop to no Prince alive.
Sir at your best leisure, I shall thy•st to s•e you.
And I shall hunger for it.
Till then farewell all.
Long life attend your Grace.
I doe not taste this sport, Arrigo, Lucio.
We doe attend.
His grace is gone, and hath left his Helen with me, I am no Pander for him, neither can I bee won with the hope of gain, or the itching desire of tasting my Lords lechery to him, to keep her at (my house) or bring her in disguise, to his bed Chamber.
The twynes of Adders, and of Scorpions
About my naked breast, will seem to me
More tickling then those clasps, which men adore;
The lustful, dull, ill spirited embraces
Of women; the much praised Amazons,
Knowing their own infirmities so well,
Made of themselves a people, and what men
They take amongst them, they condemn to die,
Perceiving that their folly made them fit
To live no longer, that would willingly
Come in the worthless presence of a woman.
I will attend, and see what my young Lord will doe with his sister.
My Lord; the fish head is gone again.
Whither.
I know whither my Lord.
Keep it from Lazarello: Sister shall I confer with you in private, to know the cause of the Dukes coming hither, I know he makes you acquainted with his business of State.
He satisfy you brother, for I see you are jealous of me.
Now there shall bee some course taken for her convey••ce.
Lazarello, thou art happy, thy carriage hath begot love, and that love hath brought forth fruits, thou art here in the company of a man honourable, that will help thee to taste of the bounties of the Sea, &amp; when thou hast so done, thou shalt retire thy self unto the Court, &amp; there taste of the delicates of the earth, and be great in the eyes of thy Sovereign: now no more shalt thou need to scramble for thy meat, nor remove thy stomach with the Court; but thy credit shall command thy hearts desire, and all novelties shall be sent as presents unto thee.
Good Sister, when you see your own time, will you return home.
Yes brother, and not before.
I will grow popular in this State, &amp; overthrow the fortunes of a number, that live by extortion.
Lazarello, bestir thy self nimbly and suddenly, and here me with patience. to hear.
Let me not fall from my self; speak I am bound
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear the fish head is gone, and we know not whither.
I will not curse, nor swear, nor rage, nor rail,
Nor with contempteous tongue, accuse my Fate;
Though I might justly do it, nor will I
Wish my self vncreated for this evil:
Shall I entreat your Lordship to be seen
A little longer in the company
Of a man crossed by Fortune.
I hate to leave my friend in his extremities.
It is noble in you, then I take your hand,
And do protest, I do not follow this
For any malice, or for private ends,
But with a love, as gentle and as chaste,
As that a brother to his sister bears:
And if I see this fish head yet unknown,
The last words that my dying father spake,
Before his eye-strings brake, shall not of me
So often be remembered, as our meeting,
Fortune attend me, as my ends are just,
Full of pure love, and free from servile lust.
Farewell my Lord, I was entreated to inuit your Lordship to a Ladies vpsitting.
O my ears, why Madame, will not you follow your brother, you are waited for by great mē, heel bring you to him.
I'm very well my Lord, you do mistake me, if you think I affect greater company then your self.
What madness possesses thee, that thou can imagine me a fit man to entertain Ladies; I tell thee, I do use to tear their hair, to kick them, and to twindge their noses, if they be not careful in avoiding me.
Your Lordship may descant upon your own be∣hauior as please you, but I protest, so sweet and courtly it appears in my eye, that I mean not to leave you yet.
I shall grow rough.
A rough carriage is best in a man, Isle dine with you my Lord.
Why I will starve thee, thou shalt have nothing.
I have heard of your Lordships nothing, Isle put that to the venture.
Well, thou shalt have meat, Isle send it to thee.
Isle keep no state my Lord, neither doe I morn, Isle dine with you.
Is such a thing as this allowed to live:
What power hath let thee loose upon the earth
To plague vs for our sins? out of my doors.
I would your Lordship did but see how well
This fury doth become you, it doth show
So near the life, as it were natural.
O thou damned woman, I will fly the vengeance
That hangs aboue thee, follow if thou dare.
I must not leave this fellow, I will torment him to madness,
To teach his passions against kind to move,
The more he hates, the more Isle seem to love.
Sir, what may be done by art shall be done,
I wear not this black cloak for nothing.
Perform this, help me to this great heir by lear∣ning, and you shall want no black cloaks, taffaties, silk∣grogerams, satins &amp; veluets are mine, they shall be yours; perform what you have promised, &amp; you shall make me a lover of Sciences, I will study the learned languages, &amp; keep my shop-booke in Latin.
Trouble me not now, I will not fail you within this hour at your shop.
Let Art have her course.
It is well spoken, Madonna.
Hast thou brought me any customers.
No.
What the devil dost thou in black.
As all solemn professors of settled courses, doe co∣for my knavery with it: will you marry a citizen, reason∣nobly rich, and unreasonably foolish, silks in his shop, money in his purse, and no wit in his head?
Out upon him, I could have bin otherwise then so, there was a Knight swore hee would have had me, if I would have lent him but forty shillings to have redeemed his cloak, to go to Church in.
Then your waistcoat waiter shall have him, cal herin?
Francessina?
Anon?
Get you to the Church, and shrive your self,
For you shall be richly married anon.
And get you after her, I will work upon my city∣zen whilst he is warm, I must nor suffer him to consult with his neighbours, the openest fools are hardly couse∣ned, if they once grow jealous.
Save me ye better powers, let me not fall
Between the loose embraces of a woman:
Heaven, if my sins be ripe grown to a head,
And must attend your vengeance: I beg not to divert my fate,
Or to reprive a while thy punishment
Only I crave, and hear me equal heavens,
Let not your furious rod, that must afflict me,
Be that imperfect piece of nature,
That art makes up, woman, unsatiate woman.
Had we not knowing souls, at first infused
To teach a difference, twixt extremes and goods?
Were we not made ourselves, free, vnconfin'd
Commanders of our own affections:
And can it be, that this most perfect creature,
This image of his maker, well squared man,
Should leave the handfast, that he had of grace,
To fall into a women's easy arms.
Now Venus be my speed, inspire me with all the several subtle temptations, that thou hast already given, or hast in store hereafter to bestow upon our sex: grant that I may apply that Physic that is most apt to work upon him: whether he will soonest bee moved with wan∣tonnes, singing, dancing, or being passionate, with scorn, or with sad and serious looks, cunningly mingled with sighs, with smiling, lisping, kissing the hand, and making short curses; or with whatsoever other nimble power, he may bee caught: doe thou infuse into me, and when I have him, I will sacrifice him up to thee.
It comes again; new apparitions,
And tempting spirits: Stand and reveal thy self,
Tell why thou follow me? I fear thee
As I fear the place thou came from: Hell.
My Lord, I am a woman, and such a one—
That I hate truly, thou had better bin a devil. women.
Why my vnpatient Lord?
Devils were once good, there they excelled you
Can ye be so uneasy, can ye freeze, and
Such a summers heat so ready
To dissolve, nay gentle Lord, turn not away in scorn,
Nor hold me less fair then I am: look on these checks,
They have yet enough of nature, true complexion,
If to be red and white, a forehead hie,
An easy melting lip, a speaking eye,
And such a tongue, whose language takes the ear
Of strict religion, and men most austere:
If these may hope to please, look here.
This woman with entreaty wo'd show all,
Lady there lies your way, I pray ye farewell.
You're yet to harsh, to dissonant.
Ther's no true music in your words, my Lord.
What shall I give thee to be gone?
Hears ta, and tha wants lodging, take my house, tic big e∣nough, tic shine own, t'will hold five lecherous Lords, &amp; their lackeys without discovery: ther's stoues and bathing tubbs.
Dear Lord: you're too wild.
Shat have a Doctor too, thou shat, about six and twenty, tic a pleasing age; or I can help thee to a handsome usher: or if thou lack'ft a page, isle give thee one, prithee keep house, and leave me.
I doe confess I am to easy, too much woman,
Not coy enough to take affection,
Yet I can frown and nip a passion
Even in the bud: I can say
Men please their present heats; Then please to leave vs.
I can hold off, and by my Chimmick power
Draw Sonnets, from the melting lovers brain.
Aims, and Elegies: yet to you my Lord
My Love, my better self, I put these off,
Doing that office, not befits our sex,
Entreat a man to love;
Are ye not yet relenting, ha'ye blood and Spirit
In those veins, ye are no Image, though ye bee as hard.
As marble, sure ye have no liver, if ye had,
'T would send a lively and desiring heate
To every member; is not this miserable,
A thing so truly formed, shaped out by Symmetry,
Has all the organs that belong to man,
And working to, yet to show all these
Like dead motions moving, upon wires,
Then good my Lord, leave off what you have been,
And freely be what you were first intended for: a man.
Thou art a precious piece of sly damnation,
I will be deasfe, I will locke up my ears,
Tempt me not, I will not love; if I doe,
Then isle hate you.
Let me be nointed with honey, and turned into the Sun,
To be stung to death with horse-flies,
Heart thou, thou breeder, here isle sit,
And in despite of thee I will say nothing.
Let me with your fair patience, sit beside you?
Madam, Lady, tempter, tongue, woman, ayre,
Look to me, I shall kick; I say again,
Look to me I shall kick.
I cannot think your better knowledge can use a woman so uncivilly.
I cannot think, I shall become a coxcomb,
To have my hare curled, by an idle finger,
My cheeks turn Tabers, and be plaid upon,
Mine eyes looked babies in, &amp; my nose blowd to my hand, mind
I say again I shall kick, sure I shall.
Tic but your outside that you show: I know your
Never was guilty of so great a weakness,
Or could the tongues of all men joined together
Possess me with a thought of your dislike
My weakness were aboue a women's, to fall off
From my affection, for one crack of thunder,
O wo'd you could love my Lord.
I wot thou would sit still, and say nothing: what mad-man let thee loose to do more mischief then a dozen whirlwinds, keep thy hands: in thy muff, and warm the idle worms in thy fingers ends will ye bee doing still, will no entreating serve ye, no lawful warning, I must remove and leave your Ladyship; nay never hope to stay me, for I will run, from that Smooth, Smiling, witching, Cozening, Tempting, Damning face of thine, as far as I can find any land, where I will put my self into a daily course of Curses for thee, and all thy Family.
Nay good my Lord sit still, isle promise peace
And fouled mine Arms up, let but mine eye discourse,
Or let my voice set to some pleasing corde, sound out
The sullen strains of my neglected love.
Sing till thou crack thy treble string in pieces,
And when thou hast done, put up thy pipes and walk,
Doe any thing, sit still and tempt me not.
I had rather sing at doors for bread, then sing to this fellow, but for hate: if this should be told in the Court, that I begin to woe Lords, what a troop of the untrust no∣bilitie should I have at my lodging tomorrow morning.
Come sleep, and with thy sweet deceiving,
Lock me in delight a while,
Let some pleasing Dreams beguile
All my fancies that from thence,
I may feel an influence,
All my powers of care bereaving.
Though but a shadow, but a sliding,
Let me know some little Joy,
We that suffer long annoy
Are contented with a thought
Through an idle fancy wrought
O let my joys, have some abiding.
Have you done your wassail, tic a handsome drowsy ditty isle assure ye, now I had as leeue here a Carte cry, when her tail is cut off, as hear these lemon∣tations, these lousy loue-layes, these beway laments, you think you have caught me Lady, you think I melt now, like a dish of May butter, and run, all into brine, and passion, yes, yes, I am taken, look how I cross my arms, look pale, and dwindle, and wooed cry, but for spoiling my face, we must part, nay we will avoid all Cere∣money, no kissing Lady, I desire to know your Ladyship no more; death of my soul the Duke.
God keep your Lordship.
From thee and all thy sex.
Isle be the Clarke and cry Amen,
Your Lordships ever assured enemy Oriana.
All the days good, attend your Lordship.
We thank you Gonderino, is it possible,
Can belief lay hold on such a miracle,
To see thee, one that hath cloystred up all passion,
Turned wilful votary, and forsworn, converse with wo∣men
in company and fair discoure, with the best beauty of Myllaine?
Tic true, and if your Grace that hath the sway
Of the whole State, will suffer this lewd sex,
These women, to pursew vs to our homes,
Not to be pried, nor to be railed away,
But they will woe, and dance, and sing,
And in a manner, looser then they are
By nature (which should seem impossible)
To throw their arms, on our unwilling necks.
No more, I can see through your visor, dissemble it no more,
Doe not I know thou hast used all Art,
To work upon the poor simplicity
Of this young Maid, that yet hath known none ill?
Think that damnation will fright those that woo
From oaths, and lies? but yet I think her chaste,
And will from thee, before thou shalt apply
Stronger temptations, bear her hence with me.
My Lord, I speak not this to gain new grace,
But howsoever you esteem my words,
My love and duty will not suffer me
To see you favour such a prostitute,
And I stand by dumb; without Rack, Torture,
Or Strappado, Isle vnrippe my self,
I doe confess I was in company, with that pleasing piece of frailty, that we call woman; I doe confess after along and tedious siege, I yielded.
Forward.
Faith my Lord to come quickly to the point, the woman you saw with me is a whore; an arrant whore.
Was she not Count Valores Sister?
Yes, that Count Valores Sister in nought.
Thou dare not say so.
Not, if it be distasting to your Lordship, but give me freedom, &amp; I dare maintain, she he's embraced this body, and grown to it as close, as the hot youthful vine to the elm.
Twice have I seen her with thee twice my thoughts were prompted by mine eye, to hold thy strictness false and imposterous: is this your mewing up, your strict re∣tirement, your bitterness and gaul against that sex: have I not heard thee say, thou would sooner meet the Basilisks dead doing eye, then meet a woman for an object: look it be true you tell me, or by our countries Saint your head goes off: if thou prove a whore, no women's face shall ever move me more.
So, so, it is as it should be, are women grown so mankind? Must they be wooing, I have a plot shall blow her up, she flies, she mounts, Isle teach her Ladyship to dare my fury, I will be known and feared, and more truly hated of women then an Eunuch.
Shees here again, good gaul be patient, for I must dis∣semble.
Now my cold frosty Lord, my woman Hater, you that have sworn an everlasting hate to all our sex: by my troth good Lord, and as I am yet a maid, my thought it was excellent sport to hear your honour swear out an Al∣phabet, chafe nobly like a General, kick like a resty jade and make ill faces: Did your good Honour think I was in love? where did I first begin to take that heat? from those two radiant eyes, that piercing sight? oh they were lovely, if the balls stood right; and there's a leg made out of a dainty staff, Where the Gods be thanked, there is calfe enough.
Pardon him Lady that is now a convertite,
Your beauty like a Saint hath wrought this wonder.
A lass, he's it been prick't at the heart, is the stomach come down, will it rail no more at women, and call 'em Devils, she Cattes, and Gob∣blins.
Hee that shall marry thee, had better spend the poor remainder of his days in a Dung-barge, for two pence a week, and find himself:
Down again Spleen, I prithee down again, shall I find favour Lady? shall at length my true unfeigned pene∣tence get pardon for my harsh unseasoned follies? I am no more an Atheist, no, I doe acknowledge, that dread powerful Deity, and his all quickening heats, burn in my breast: oh be not as I was, hard, unrelenting; but as I am, be partner of my Fires.
Sure we shall have store of Larks, the Skies will not hold up long, I should have looked as soon for frost in the dog days, or an other Inundation, as hoped this strange conversion aboue miracle: let me look upon your Lordship; is your name Gondarino, are you Millaines General, that great Bug-beare bloodie-bones, at whose very name all women, from the Lady to the Laundress, shake like a cold fit.
Good patience help me, this Fever will enrage my blood again: Madam I am that man; I am even hee, that once did owe vnreconciled hate to you, and all that bear the name of woman: I am the man, that wronged your honour to the Duke, I am hee that said you were un∣chaste, and prostitute; yet I am he, that dare deny all this.
Your big Nobility is very merry.
Lady tic true that I have wronged you thus,
And my Contrition is as true as that,
Yet have I found a means to make all good again,
I doe beseech your beauty, not for my self,
My merits are yet in conception,
But for your honours safety, and my zeal
Retire a while, whilst I unsay my self unto the Duke,
And cast out that evil Spirit, I have possessed him with,
I have a house conveniently private.
Lord, thou hast wronged my innocence, but thy confession hath gained thee faith.
By the true honest service, that I owe those eyes, strangely,
My meaning is as spotless as my faith.
The Duke doubt mine honour? a may judge
Twill not be long, before isle be enlarged again.
A day or two.
Mine own servants shall attend me.
Your Ladyships command is good.
Look you be true.
EIse let me lose the hopes my soul aspires to: I will be a scourge to all females in my life, and after my death, the name of Gondarino shall be terrible to the mighty women of the earth; they shall shake at my name, and at the sound of it, their knees shall knock together; and they shall run into Nunneries, for they and I are beyond all hope irreconcilable: for if I could endure an ear with a hole in it, or a pleated locke, or a bare-headed Coachman, that sits like a sign, where great Ladies are to bee sold within; agreement betwixt vs, were not to bee despaired of; if I could bee but brought to endure to see women, I would have them come all once a week and kiss me, where Witches doe the devil in token of homage: I must not live here, I will to the Court, and there pursue my plot; when it hath took, women shall stand in awe, but of my look.
There take your standing, be close and vigilāt, here will I set my self, and let him look to his language, a shall know the Duke he's more ears in Court than two.
Isle quote him to a tittle, let him speak wisely, and plainly, and as hidden as a can, or I shall crush him, a shall not scope characters, though a speak Babel, I shall crush him: we have a Fortune by this service hanging over vs, that within this year or two, I hope we shall be called to be examiners, wear politic gowns guarded with cop∣per lace, making great faces full of fear and office, our labours may deserve this.
I hope it shall: why he's not many men bin raised from this worming trade, first to gain good access to great men, then to have commissions out for search, and
lastly, to be worthily named at a great Arraignment: yes, &amp; why not we? they that endeavour well deserve their Fee. Close, close, a comes: mark well, and all goes well.
Farewell my hopes, my Anchor now is broken,
Farewell my quondam joys, of which no token
Is now remaining, such is the sad mischance,
Where Lady Fortune leads the slippry dance.
Yet at the length, let me this favour have,
Give me my wishes, or a wished grave.
The gods defend so brave and valiant maw,
Should slip into the never satiate jawe
Of black Despair; no, thou shalt live and know
Thy full desires, hunger thy ancient foe,
Shall be subdued, those guts that daily tumble
Through ayre and appetite, shall cease to rumble:
And thou shalt now at length obtain thy dish,
That noble part, the sweet head of a fish.
Then am I greater then the Duke.
There, there's a notable piece of treason, greater then the Duke, mark that.
But how, or where, or when this shall bee com∣pas'd, is yet out of my reach.
I am so truly miserable, that might I be now knocked ath' head, with all my heart I would forgive a dog killer.
Yet doe I see through this confusednes some lit∣tle comfort.
The plot my Lord, as ever you cam of a womā discover.
Plots, dangerous plots, I will deserve by this most liberally.
It is from my head again.
O that it would stand me, that I might fight, or have some venture for it, that I might be turned loose, to try my Fortune amongst the whole fry in a College, or an Inn of Court, or scrāble with the prisoners in the dun∣geon; nay were it set down in the outer court,
And all the Guard about it in a ring,
With their knives drawn, which were a dismal sight,
And after twenty leisurely were told,
I to be let loose, only in my shirt,
To try the valour, how much of the spoil,
I would recover from the enemies mouths:
I would accept the challenge.
Let it go: hast not thou been held
To have some wit in the Court, and to make fine jests
Upon country people in progress time, and
Wilt thou loose this opinion, for the cold head of a Fish?
I say, let it go: Isle help thee to as good a dish of meat.
God let me not live, if I doe not wonder
Men should talk so profanely:
But it is not in the power of loose words,
Of any vain or misbelieving man,
To make me dare to wrong thy purity,
Show me but any Lady in the Court,
That hath so full an eye, so sweet a breath,
So soft and white a flesh: this doth not lie
In almond gloves, nor ever hath bin washed
In artificial bathes; no traveller
That hath brought doctor home with him, hath dared
With all his waters, powders, Fucusses,
To make thy lovely corpse sophisticate.
I have it, tic now infused, be comforted.
Can there be that little hope yet left in nature? shall I once more erect up Trophies? shall I enjoy the sight of my dear Saint, and bless my palate with the best of creatures, ah good my Lord, by whom I breath again, shall I receive this being?
Sir, I have found by certain calculation, and set∣led revolution of the stars, the Fish is sent by the Lord Gondarino to his Mercer, now tic a growing hope to know where tic.
O tic far aboue the good of women, the Pathicke cannot yield more pleasing titillation.
But how to compass it, search, east about, and
bang your brains, Lazarello, thou art to dull and heavy to deserve a blessing.
My Lord, I will not be idle; now Lazarello, think, think, think.
Yonders my Informer
And his fellow with table books, they nod at me
Upon my life, they have poor Lazarello that beats
His brains about no such weighty matter, in for
Treason before this—
My Lord, what doe you think, if I should shave my self, Put on midwives apparel, come in with a hand-kercher, And beg a piece for a great bellied womā, or a sick child?
Good, very good.
Or corrupt the waiting prentice to betray the re∣uersion.
Ther's another point in's plot, corrupt with mo∣ney to betray: sure it is some Fort a means: mark, have a care.
And it were the bare vinegar it is eaten with, it would in some sort satisfy nature: but might I once at∣taine the dish it self, though I cut out my means through swords and fire, through poison, through any thing that may make good my hopes.
Thanks to the gods, and our officiousness, the plots discovered, fire, steel, and poison, burn the Palace, kill the Duke, and poison his privy Counsel.
To the mercers, let me see: how if before we can attain the means, to make up our acquaintāce, the fish be eaten?
If it be eaten, here a stāds, that is the most dejected, most unfortunate, miserable, accursed, forsaken slave, this Province yields: I will not sure outlive it, no I will die bravely, and like a Roman; and after death, amidst the E∣lizian shades, Isle meet my love again.
I will die bravely, like a Roman: have a care, mark that: when he hath done all, he will kill himself.
Will no thing ease your appetite but this?
No could the sea throw up his vastness,
And offer free his best inhabitants: it were not so much as a bare temptation to me.
If you could be drawn to affect Beef, Venison, or Foul, two•lt be far the better.
I doe beseech your Lord•hips patience,
I doe confess that in this heat of blood,
I have contemned all dull and grosser meats,
But I protest, I doe honour a Chine of beef,
I doe reverence a loin of veale,
But good my Lord, give me leave a little to adore this:
But my good Lord, would your Lordship under colour
of taking up some silks, go to the Mercers, I would in
all humility attend your honour, where we may be invited,
if Fortune stand propitious.
Sir you shall work me as you please.
Let it be suddenly, I doe beseech your Lordship, it is now upon the point of dinner time.
I am all yours.
Come let vs confer, Inprimis a saith like a blasphemous villain, he is greater thē the Duke, this pepers him, &amp; there were nothing else.
Then a was naming plots; did ye not hear?
Yes but a fell from that, unto discovery, to cor∣rupt by money, and so attain.
I, I, a meant some Fort, or Syttadell the Duke hath, his very face betrayed his meaning, O hee is a very subtle and a dangerous knave, but if a deal a Gods name we shall worm him.
But now comes the Stroke, the fatal blow, Fire, sword, &amp; Poison, O Canibal, thou bloody Canibal.
What had become of this poor state, had not we been?
Faith it had lain buried in •his own ashes; had not a greater hand been in it.
But note the Rascals resolution, after th'acts done, because a wo'd avoid al fear of torture, and cousin the Law, a wo'd kill himself? was there ever the like danger, brought to light in this age? sure we shall merit much, we shall be able to keep two men a piece, &amp; a two hand sword
between vs, we will live in favour of the State, betray our ten or twelve treasons a week, and the people shall fear vs: come, to the Lord Lucio, the Sun shall not go down till a be hanged.
Look to my shop, &amp; if there come ever a School∣ler in black, let him speak with me, we that are shop-kee∣pers in good trade, are so pestered, that we can scarce pick out an hour for our mornings meditation: &amp; howsoever we are all accounted dull, and common jesting stocks, for your gallants; there are some of vs, doe not deserve it: for for my own part, I doe begin to bee given to my book, I love a scholar with my heart; for questionless there are marvelous things to bee done by Art: why sir, some of thē will tel you what is become of horses, &amp; silver spones, &amp; will make wenches dance naked to their beds: I am yet unmarried, and because some of our neighbours are said to be Cuckolds, I will never marry without the consent of some of these scholars, that know what will cōe of it.
Are you busy sir?
Never to you sir, nor to any of your coat. Sir is there any thing to bee done by Art, concerning the great heir we talked on?
Will she, will she? she shall come running into my house at the farther corner, in Sa. Marks street, be∣twixt three and four.
Betwixt three and four? shoe's brave in clothes; is she not?
O rich! rich! where should I get clothes to dress her in? help me invention: Sir, that her running through the street, may be less noted, my Art more shown, and your fear to speak with her less, she shall come in a white wastcote, And—
What shall she?
And perhaps torn stockings, she hath left her old wont else.
Sir my Lord Gonde. hath sent you a rare fish head.
It comes right, all things suit right with me, since I
began to love scholars, you shall have it home with you, against she come: carry it to this Gentleman's house.
The fair white house at the farther Corner at S. Marks street, make hast, I must leave you too Sir. I have two hours to study; buy a new Axidens, &amp; ply your book, and you shall want nothing, that all the scholars in the Town can doe for you.
Heaven prosper both our studdies, what a dull slave was I, before I fell in love with this learning? not worthy to tread upon the earth, and what fresh hopes it •ath put into me? I doe hope within this twelve month, to be able by Art, to serve the Court with silks, and not undo my self; to trust knights, and yet get in my money again; to keep my wife brave, and yet she keep no by∣die else, so.
Your Lordship is most honourably welcome, in regard of your Nobility, but most especially in regard of your scholarship: did your Lordship come openly?
Sir this cloak keeps me private, besides no man will suspect me to bee in the company of this Gen∣tleman, with whom, I will desire you to bee acquainted, he may prove a good customer to you.
For plain silks and veluets.
Are you scholasticall?
Something addicted to the Muses.
I hope they will not dispute.
You have no skill in the black Art?
Sir yonders a Gentleman, enquires hastily for Count Valour.
For me? what is he?
One of your followers my Lord I think.
Let him come in.
Shall I talk with you in private Sir?
CountCome to the Court, your business calls you thither,
I will go, farewell Sir, isle see your silks some other time: Farewell
Lazarillo.
Will not your Lordship take a piece of Beef with me?
Sir I have greater business then eating; I will leave this gentlemā with you.
No, no, no, no: now doe I feel that strained strug∣ling within me, that I think I could prophecy.
The Gentleman is meditating.
Hunger, valour, Love, ambition, are alike plea∣sing, and let our Philosophers say what they will, are one kind of heat, only hunger is the safest, ambition is apt to fall; Love and valour are not free from dangers, only hunger, begotten of some old limber Courtier, in pan'd hose, and nursed by an Attorneys wife, now so thryuen, that he need not fear to be of the great Turks guard: is so free from al quarrels, and dangers, so full of hopes, joys, and ticklings, that my life is not so dear to me, as his acquaintance.
Sir, the fish head is gone.
Then be thou henceforth dumb, with thy ill by∣ding voice
Farewell Millaine, fare well noble Duke,
Farewell my fellow Courtiers all, with whom,
I have of yore made many a scrambling meal
In corners, behind Arasses, on stairs,
And in the action often times have spoiled,
Our Dublets and our hose, with liquid stuff:
Farewell you lusty archers of the Guard,
To whom I now doe give the bucklers up,
And never more with any of your coat
Will eat for wagers, now you happy be,
When this shall light upon you, think on me:
You Sewers, carvers, ushers of the Court
Surnamed gentle, for your fair demean,
Here I doe take of you my last farewell,
May you stand stiffly in your proper places,
And execute your offices aright.
Farewell you maidens, with your mother eke,
Farewell you courtly Chaplains that be there,
All good attend you, may you never more
Marry your Patrons Ladies wayting-woman,
But may you raised bee; by this my fall
May Lazarillo suffer for you all.
Sir, I was harkening to you.
I will hear nothing; I will break my knife, the ensign of my former happy state, knock out my teeth, have them hung at a Barbers, and enter into Religion.
Why Sir, I think, I know whether it is gon.
See the rashness of man in his nature; whither? whither? I doe unsay •• that I have said, go on, go on: Boy, I humble my self and follow thee; Farewell sir.
Not so Sir, you shall take a piece of Beef with me.
I cannot stay.
By my fey, but you shall Sir; in regard of your love to learning, and your skill in the black Art.
I do hate learning, and I have no skill in the black Art; I would I had.
Why your desire is sufficient to me, you shall stay.
The most horrible, and detested curses that can be imagined; light upon all the professors of that Art; may they be drunk, &amp; when they go to cōjure, &amp; reel in the Circle, may the Spirits by them raised, tear am in pieces, and hang their quarters on old broken walls, and Steeple tops.
This speech of yours, shows you to have some skill in the Science, wherefore in civility, I may not suffer you to depart empty.
My stomach is up, I cannot endure it, I will fight in this quarrel, as soon as for my Prince. Room, make way:
Hunger commands, my valour must obey.
Is the Duke private?
He is alone, but I think your Lordship may en∣la.
Who's with the Duke?
The Count is new gone in, but the Duke will come forth, before you can be weary of waiting.
I will attend him here.
I must wait without the door.
Doth he hope to clear his sister, she will come no more to my house, to laugh at me: I have sent her to a habitation, where when she shall be seen, it will set a gloss upon her name; yet upon my soul I have bestowed her amongst the purest hearted creatures of her sex, and the freest from dissimulation; for their deeds are all alike, on∣lie they dare speak, what the rest think: the women of this age, if there bee any degrees of comparison amongst their sex, are worse then those of former times; for I have read of women, of that truth, spirit, and constancy, that were they now living, I should endure to see them: But I fear the writers of the time, belied them, for how familiar a thing is it with the Poets of our age, to extol their whores, which they call mistresses, with heavenly praises? but I thank their furies, and their crazed brains, beyond belief: nay how many that would fine seem serious, have dedicated grave works to ladies tooth-lesse, hollow eyed, their hair shedding, purple faced, their nails appa∣rantly coming off; and the bridges of their noses bro∣ken down; and have called thē the choice handy works of nature, the patterns of perfection, and the wondermēt of women. Our women begin to swarm like Bees in Summer: as I came hither, there was no pair of stairs, no entry, no lobby, but was pestered with them: me thinks there might bee some course taken to destroy them.
I doe accept your money, walk here, and when the Duke comes out, you shall have fit opportunity to
deliver your petition to him.
I thank you heartily, I pray you who's he that walks there?
A Lord, and a Soldier, one in good favour with the Duke; if you could get him to deliver your Petition—
What do you say Sir?
If you could get him to deliver your petition for you, or to second you, it were sure.
I hope I shall live to requite your kindness.
You have already.
May it please your Lordship—
No, No.
To consider the estate—
No.
Of a poor oppressed Country Gentlewoman.
No, it doth not please my Lordship.
First and foremost, I have had great injury, then I have been brought up to the Town three times.
A pox on him, that brought thee to the Town.
I thank your good Lordship heartily; though I cannot hear well, I know it grieves you; and here wee have been delayed, and sent down again, and fetched up again, and sent down again, to my great charge: And now at last they have fetched me up, and five of my daughters—
Enough to damn five worlds.
Handsome young women, though I say it, they are all without, if it please your Lordship, Isle call them in.
Five women! how many of my senses should I have left me then? call in five Devils first.
No, I will rather walk with thee alone,
And hear thy tedious tale of injury,
And give thee answers; whisper in thine ear,
And make thee understand; through thy French-hood:
And all this with tame patience.
I see your Lordship does believe, that they are without, and I perceive you are much moved at our in∣jury: her's a paper will tell you more.
A way.
It may bee you had rather here me tell it viva voce, as they say.
O no, no, no, no, I have heard it before.
Then you have heard of enough injury, for a poor Gentlewoman to receive.
Never, never, but that it troubles my conscience, to wish any good to those women; I could afford them to bee valiant, and able, that it might be no disgrace for a Soldier to beat them.
I hope your Lordship will deliver my petition to his grace, and yoo may tell him withal—
What, I will deliver any thing against my self, to be rid on thee.
That yesterday, about three a clock, in the after noon, I met my adversary.
Give me thy paper, he can abide no long tales.
It is very short my Lord, and I demanding of him —
Isle tell him that shall serve thy turn.
How?
Isle tell him that shall serve thy turn, be gone: man never doth remember how great his offences are, till hee doe meet with one of you, that plagues him for them: why should women only aboue all other creatures that were created for the benefit of mā, have the use of speech? or why should any deed of theirs, done by their fleshly ap∣petites, be disgraceful to their owners? nay, why should not an act done by any beast I keep, against my consent, disparage me as much as that of theirs?
Here's some few Angels for your Lordship.
Again? yet more torments?
Indeed you shall have them.
Keep off.
A small gratuit for your kindness.
Hold away.
Why then I thank your Lordship, Isle gather thē up
again, and Isle bee sworn, it is the first money, that was refused, since I came to the court.
What can she devise to say more?
Truly I would have willingly parted with them to your Lordship.
I believe it, I believe it.
But since it is thus—
More yet.
I will attend without, and expect an answer.
Doe, begone, and thou shalt expect, and have any thing, thou shalt have thy answer from him; and he were best to give thee a good one at first, for thy deaf impor∣tunitie, will conquer him too, in the end.
God bless your Lordship, &amp; all that favour poor distressed country gentlewoman.
All the diseases of man, light upon them that doe, and upon me when I doe; a week of such days, would ei∣there make me stark mad, or tame me: yonder other wo∣man that I have sure enough, shall answer for thy sins: dare they incense me still, I will make them fear as much to be ignorant of me and my moods, as men are to bee ignorant of the law they live under. Who's there? My blood grew cold, I began to fear my Suitors return; tic the Duke.
I know her chaste, though she be young &amp; free,
And is not of that forced behaviour
That many others are, and that this Lord,
Out of the boundless malice to the sex,
Hath thrown this scandal on her.
Fortune, befriended me against my will, with this good old country gentlewomā; I beseech your grace, to view favourably the petition of a wrōged gentlewomā.
What Gondarino, are you become a petitioner for your enemies?
My Lord, they are no enemies of mine, I confess the better to cover my deeds, which sometimes were loose
enough, I pretended it, as it is wisdom, to keep close our incontinence; but since you have discovered me, I will no more put on that visor, but will as freely open all my thoughts to you, as to my Confessor.
What say you to this?
He that confesses, he did once dissemble,
Isle never trust his words, can you imagine
A maid, whose beauty could not suffer her
To live thus long vntempted, by the noblest,
Richest, and cunningest masters in that Art,
And yet hath ever held a fair repute;
Could in one morning, and by him be brought,
To forget all her virtue, and turn whore?
I would I had some other talk in hand,
Then to accuse a sister to her brother;
Nor doe I mean it for a public scandal,
Unless by urging me, you make it so.
I will read this at better leisure: Gondarino, where is the Lady?
At his house.
No, she is departed thence.
Whither?
Urge it not thus, or let me be excused,
If what I speak betray her chastity,
And both increase my sorrow, and your own.
Fear me not so, if she deserve the fame
Which she hath gotten, I would have it published,
Brand her my self, and whip her through the city:
I wish those of my blood that doe offend,
Should be more strictly punished, then my foes.
Let it be proved.
Gondarino, thou shalt prove it, or suffer worse then she should doe.
Then pardon me, if I betray the faults
Of one, I love more dearly then my self,
Since opening hers, I shall betray mine own:
But I will bring you, where she now intends
Not to be virtuous: pride and wantonness,
That are true friends indeed, though no in show,
Have entered on her heart, there she doth bath,
And sleek her hair, and practise cunning looks,
To entertain me with; and hath her thoughts
As full of lust, as ever you did think
Them full of modesty.
Gondarino, lead on, we'll follow thee.
Here hope I to meet my citizen, and here hopes he to meet his scholar; I am sure I am grave enough, to his eyes, and knave enough to deceive him: I am believed to conjure, raise storms, and devils, by whose power I can doe wonders; let him believe so still, belief hurts no man: I have an honest black cloak, for my knave∣rye, and a General pardon for his foolery, from this present day, till the day of his Breaking. First not a mise∣rye, and the greatest of our age, to see a handsome, young, fair enough, and well mounted wench, humble her self, in an old stammel petticoat, standing possessed of no more fringe then the street can allow her: her upper parts so poor and wanting, that ye may see her bones through her bodies: shoes she would have, if her captain were come over, and is content the while to devote her self to antiēt slippers. These premises well cōsidered, gentlemē will move, they make me melt I promise ye, they stir me much; and were it not for my smooth, soft, silken City∣zen, I would quit this transitory trade, get me an euerla∣sting robe, fear up my conscience, and turn Sergeant. But here a comes, is mine as good as prize: Sir Pandarus be my speed, ye are most fitly met sir.
And you as well encountered, what of this heir?
hath your books been propitious?
Sir, it is done, shees come, she is in my house, make your self apt for Courtship, stroke up your stockings, loose not an inch of your legs goodness; I am sure ye wear sockes.
There your books fail ye Sir, in truth I wear no sockes.
I would ye had Sir, it were the sweeter grace for your legs; get on your gloves, are they perfumed?
A pretty wash Isle assure you.
Twill serve: your offers must be full of bounty, veluets to furnish a gown, silks for petticoats and fore∣parts, shag for linings; forget not some pretty jewel to fa∣sten, after some little complement: if she deny this curt∣sie, double your bounties, be not wanting in abundance, fullness of gifts, linked with a pleasing tongue, will win an Anchorite. Sir, ye are my friend, and friend to all that professes good letters; I must not use this office else, it fits not for a scholar, and a gentleman: those stoc∣kings are of Naples, they are silk?
Ye are again beside your text; sir, they are a the best of wool, and they cleeped jersey.
Sure they are very dear?
Nine shillings, by my love to learning.
Pardon my judgment, wee scholars use no other objects, but their books.
There is one thing entombed in that grave breast, that makes me equally admire it with your scholarship.
Sir, but that in modesty I am bound not to affect mine own commendation, I would inquire it of you?
Sure you are very honest, and yet ye have a kind of modest fear to show it: doe not deny it, that face of yours, is a worthy learned modest face.
Sir, I can blush.
Virtue and Grace are always paird together: but I will leave to stir your blood Sir, and now to our business.
Forget not my instructions.
I apprehend ye Sir, I will gather my self together, with my best phrases, and so I shall discourse in some sort takingly.
This was well worded Sir, and like a Scholar.
The Muses favour me as my intents are virtuous; Sir ye shall be my tutor, tic never to late Sir to love lear∣ning: when I can once speak true latin —
What do you intend Sir?
Marry I will then beggar all your Bawdy writers, and undertake at the peril of my own invention, all Pageants, poesies for Chimneys, Speeches for the Dukes entertainment, whenever and whatsoever; nay I will build at mine own charge, an Hospital, to which shall retyer, all diseased opinions, all broken Poets, all Prose-men that are fallen from small sense, to mere let∣ters; and it shall be lawful, for a Lawyer, if he bee a civil man, though a have undone others &amp; himself by the lan∣gauge; to retire to this poor life, and learn to be honest.
Sir ye are very good, and very charitable: ye are a true pattern for the City Sir.
Sir, I do know sufficiently their shop-bookes can∣not save them, there is a further end—
Oh: Sir much may be done by manescript.
I do confess it Sir, provided still they be canoni∣coll, and have some worthy hands set to um for probate∣on: but we forget our selves.
Sir enter when you please, and all good language tip your tongue.
All that love learning pray for my good success.
Boy, where abouts are we?
Sir by all tokens this is the house, bawdy I am sure by the broken windows, the fish head is within, if ye dare
venture, here you may surprise it.
The misery of man may fitly bee compared to a Didapper, who when she is under water past our sight, and indeed can seem no more to vs, rises again, shakes but her self, and is the same she was; so is it still with trance∣sitorie man, this day: oh but an hour since, &amp; I was mighty, mighty in knowledge, mighty in my hopes, migh∣tie in blessed means, and was so truly happy, that I durst a said, live Lazarello, and be satisfied: but now—
Sir ye are yet a flote and may recover, be not your own wrack, here lies the harbour, go in and ride at ease.
Boy I am received to be a Gentleman, a Court∣er, and a man of Action, modest, and wise, and bee it spo∣ken with thy reverence Child, abounding vertous; and would thou have a man of these choice habits, covet the cover of a bawdy house? yet if I go not in, I am but—
But what Sir?
Dust boy, but dust, and my soul unsatisfied shall haunt the keepers of my blessed Saint, and I will appear.
An Ass to all men; Sir these are no means, to stay your appetite, you must resolve to enter.
Were not the house subject to Martial law—
If that be all, Sir ye may enter, for ye can know no∣thing here, that the Court is ignorant of, only the more eyes shall look upon ye, for there they wink one at a∣nothers faults.
If I doe not,
Then ye must beat fairly back again, fall to your physical mess of porridge, &amp; the twice sacked cares of a Capon, Fortune may favour you so much, to send the bread to it: but its a mere venture, and money may bee put out upon it.
I will go in and live; pretend some love to the gentlewoman, screw my self in affectiō, &amp; so be satisfied.
This fly is caught, is masht already, I will suck him, and lay him by.
Muffle your self in your cloak by any means, it is a received thing among gallants, to walk to their lea∣cherie, as though they had the rheum, it was well you brought not your horse.
Why boy?
Faith Sir tic the fashion of our gentry, to have their horses wait at door like men, while the beasts their my∣sters, are within at rack &amp; mainger, it would have disco∣uered much.
I will lay by these habits, forms, and grave res∣pects of what I am, and bee my self; only my appetite, my fire, my soul, my being, my dear appetite shall go along with me, armed with whose strength, I fear les will attempt the greatest danger dare oppose my fury: I am resolved where ever that thou art, most sacred dish, hid from vnhollowed eyes, to find thee out.
Be thou in hell, raped by Proserpina,
To be a Rival in black Plutoes love:
Or moves thou in the heavens, a form divine:
Lashing the lazy Spheres:
Or if thou be returned to thy first being,
Thy mother Sea, there will I seek thee forth,
Earth, Ayre, nor Fire,
Nor the black shades below, shall bar my sight,
So daring is my powerful appetite.
Sir, you may save this long voyage, and take a shorter cut, you have forgot your self, the fish head's here, your own imaginations have made you mad.
Term it a jealous few•ie good my boy.
Faith Sir term it what you will, you must use o∣there terms ere you can get it.
The looks of my sweet love are fair, Fresh and feeding as the Ayre.
Sir, you forget your self.
Was never seen so rare a head, Of any Fish alive or dead.
Good Sir remember, this is the house Sir.
Cursed be he that dare not venture.
Pity your self sir, and leave this fury.
For such a prize, and so I enter.
Dun's in the mire, get out again how a can: My honest gallant, Isle show you one trick more Then ere the fool your father dreamd of yet. Madonna Iulia?
What news my sweet rogue, my dear sins broker, what? good news?
There is a kind of ignorant thing, much like a Courtier, now gone in.
Is a gallant?
A shines not very gloriously, nor does a wear one skin perfumed to keep the tother sweet; his coat is not in or, nor does the world run yet on wheels with him; is rich enough, and has a small thing follows him, like to a boat tied to a tall ships tail: give him entertain∣meant, be light and flashing like a Meteor, hug him about the neck, give him a kiss, and lisping cry, good Sir; and is thine own, as fast as a were tied to thine arms, by In∣dentures.
I dare doe more then this, if a bee a the true Court cut; Isle take him out a lesson worth the learning: but wee are but their Apes; whats he worth?
Be he rich, or poor, if he will take thee with him, thou moist use thy trade free from Constables, and Mar∣shells: who hath bin here since I went out?
There is a gentlewoman sent hither by a Lord, shoe's a piece of dainty stuff my rogue, smooth, and soft, as new Satin; she was never gumb'd yet boy, nor fret∣ted.
Where lies she?
She lies aboue, towards the street, not to be spoke with, but by the Lord that sent her, or some from him, we have in charge from his servants.
Peace, a comes out again upon discovery; up with all your canvas, hale him in; and when thou hast done, clap him a board bravely, my valiant Pinnace.
Be gone, I shall doe reason with him.
Are you the special beauty of this house?
Sir, you have given it a more special regard by your good language, then these black brows can merit.
Lady you are fair.
Fair sir? I thank ye; all the poor means I have left to be thought grateful, is but a kiss, and ye shall have it Sir.
Ye have a very mooing lip.
Prove it again Sir, it may bee your sense was set too high, &amp; so over wrought it self.
It is still the same: how far may ye hold the time to be spent Lady?
Four a clock sir.
I have not eat to day.
You will have the better stomach to your supper; in the mean time, Isle feed ye with delight.
It is not so good upon am empty stomach: if it might be without the trouble of your house, I would eat?
Sir, we can have a Capon ready.
The day?
It is Friday Sir.
I doe eat little flesh upon these days.
Come sweet, ye shall not think on meat; Isle drow• it with a better appetite.
I feel it work more strangely, I must eat.
It is now too late to send; I say ye shall not think on meat: if ye doe, by this kiss Isle be angry.
I could be far more sprightful, had I eaten, and more lasting.
What will ye have Sir? name but the Fish, my maid shall bring it, if it may be got.
Me thinks your house should not be so vnfurnisht, as not to have some pretty modicum?
It is so now: but could ye stay till supper?
Sure I have offended highly and much, and my in∣flictions make it manifest, I will retire henceforth, and keep my chamber, live privately, and die forgotten.
Sir I must crave your pardō, I had forgot my self; I have a dish of meat within, &amp; it is fish, I think this Duke∣dome holds not a daintier: it is an Vmbranoes head.
Lady, this kiss is yours, and this.
Hoe? within there? cover the board, and set the fish head on it.
Now am I so truly happy, so much aboue all fate and fortune, that I should despise that man, durst say, Re∣member Laz•rello, thou art mortal.
This is the villain, lay hands on him.
Gentlemen, why am I thus entreated? what is the nature of my crime?
Sir, though you have carried it a great while pri∣uatly, and (as you think) well; yet we have seen your Sir, and we doe know thee Lazarello, for a traitor.
The gods defend our Duke.
Amen. Sir, Sir, this cannot save that stiff neck from the halter.
Gentlemen, I am glad you have discovered him, a should not have eaten under my roof for twenty poūds; and surely I did not like him, when a called for Fish.
My friends, will ye let me have that little favour—
Sir, ye shall have law, and nothing else.
To let me stay the eating of a bit or two, for I pro∣test I am yet fasting?
Isle have no traitor come within my house.
Now could I wish my self, I had been Traitor, I have strength enough for to endure it, had I but patience: Man thou art but grass, thou art a bubble, and thou must perish.
Then lead along, I am prepared for all.
Since I have lost my hopes, welcome my fall.
Away sir.
As thou hast hope of man, stay but this dish this two hours, I doubt not but I shall be discharged: by this light I will marry thee.
You shall marry me first then?
I doe contract my self unto thee now, before these gentlemen.
Isle preserve it till you be hanged, or quited.
Thanks, thanks.
Away, away, you shall thank her at the gallows.
Adieu, adieu.
If he live, Isle have him; if he be hanged, there's no loss in it.
Hast thou provided one to bear my letter to my brother?
I have enquired, but they of the house will suffer no letter nor message to bee carried from you, but such as the Lord Gondarino shall bee acquainted with: Truly Ma∣dam, I suspect the house to be no better then it should be.
What doest thou doubt?
Faith, I am loath to tell it Madam.
Out with it, it is not true modesty to fear to speak that thou doest think.
I think it be one of these same bawdy houses.
It is no matter wench, wee are warm in it; keep thou thy mind pure, and upon my word, that name will doe thee no hurt: I cannot force my self yet to fear any thing; when I do get out, Isle have another encounter with my Woman Hater. Here will I sit, I may get sight of some of my friends, it must needs be a comfort to them to see me here.
Are wee all sufficiently disguised? for this house where she attends me, is not to bee visited in our own shapes.
We are not our selves.
I know the house to be sinful enough, yet I have bin heretofore, and durst now, but for discovering of you, appear here in my own likeness.
Whore's Lucio?
My Lord, he said, the affairs of the Common∣wealth, would not suffer him to attend always.
Some great ones questionless that hee will han∣dl.
Come, let vs enter?
See how Fortune strives, to revenge my quarrel upon these women, shoe's in the window, were it not to undo her, I should not look upon her.
Lead vs. Gondarino.
Stay, since you force me to display my shame,
Look there, and you my Lord, know you that face?
It is she?
It is.
It is she, whose greatest virtue ever was
Dissimulation, she that still hath strove
More to sin cunningly then to avoid it:
She that hath ever sought to be accounted
Most virtuous, when she did deserve most scandal:
It is she that itches now, and in the height
Of her intemperate thoughts, with greedy eyes
Expects my coming to allay her lust:
Leave her, forget shoe's thy sister.
Stay, stay.
I am as full of this, as thou can be,
The memory of this will easily
Hereafter stay my loose and wandering thoughts
From any woman.
This will not down with me, I dare not trust this fellow.
Leave her here, that only shall be her punish∣meant, never to be fetched from hence; but let her use her trade to get her living.
Stay, good my Lord, I do believe all this, as great men as I have had known whores to their sisters, &amp; have laughed at it, I would fine hear how she talks, since she grew thus light: will your grace make him show himself to her, as if hee were now come to satisfy her longing? whilst we unseen of her, ouer-heare her wantonness, let's make our best of it now we shall have good mirth.
Doe it Gondarino.
I must; fortune assist me but this once.
Here we shall stand unseen, and near enough.
Madame, Oriana.
Whose that? O! my Lord?
Shall I come up?
O you are merry, shall I come down?
It is better there.
What is the confession of the lye you made to the Duke, which I scarce believe yet you had impudence y∣nough to do? did not gain you so much faith with me, as that I was willing to be at your Lo. bestowing, till you had recovered my credit, and confessed your self a liar, as you pretended to do? I confess I began to fear you, and desired to be out of your house, but your own followers forced me hither.
It is well suspected, dissemble still, for there are some may hear vs.
More tricks yet, my Lord? what house this is I know not, I only know my self, it were a great conquest if you could fasten a scandal upon me: 'fayth my Lord, give me leave to write to my brother?
Come down.
Come down.
If it please your grace there's a back door.
Come meet vs there then?
It seems you are acquainted with the house.
I have bin in it.
She saw you, and dissembled.
Sir, we shall know that better.
Bring me unto her, if I prove her not
To be a strumpet, let me be contemned
Of all her sex.
Now whilst the young Duke follows his delights,
We that do mean to practise in the State,
Must pick our times, and set our faces in,
And nod our heads, as it may prove most fit
For the maine good of the dear Commonwealth:
Whose within there?
My Lord?
Secretary, fetch the gown I use to read petitions in, and the standish I answer French Letters with, and call in the gentleman that attends:
Little know they that do not deal in State,
How many things there are to be observed,
Which seem but little; yet by one of vs
(Whose brains do wind about the Commonwealth)
Neglected, cracks our credits utterly.
Sir, but that I do presume upon your secrecy,
I would not have appeared to you thus ignorantly attired without a tooth-picke in a ribbon, or a ring in my band∣strings.
Your Lordship sent for me?
I did: Sir your long practise in the state under a great man hath led you to much experience.
My Lord.
Suffer not your modesty to excuse it, in short and in private I desire your direction, I take my study already to be furnished after a grave and wise method.
What will this Lord do?
My book-strings are suitable &amp; of a reaching colour.
How's this?
My Standish of Wood strange and sweet, and my fore-flap hangs in the right place, and as near Machiauels, as can be gathered by tradition.
Are there such men as will say nothing abroad. and play the fools in their lodgings? this Lord must be followed: and hath your Lordship some new made words to scatter in your speeches in public, to gain note, that the hearers may carry them away, and dispute of them at dinner?
I have Sir: and besides my several gowns and caps agreeable to my several occasions.
It is well, and you have learned to write a bad hand, that the Readers may take pains for it.
Yes sir: and I give out I have the palsy.
Good, it were better though, if you had it, your Lo. hath a Secretary, that can write fair, when you purpose to be understood.
Faith sir I have one, there he stands, he hath bin my secretary this 7. years, but he hath forgotten to write.
If he can make a writing face, it is not amiss, so he keep his own counsel: your Lo. hath no hope of the gout?
Vh, little sir, since the pain in my right foot left me.
Twill be some scandal to your wisdom, though I see your Lo. knows enough in public business.
I am not employed (though to my desert) in occa∣zion foreign, nor frequented for matters domestic.
Not frequented? what course takes your Lordship?
The readiest way, my door stands wide, my Secre∣tarry knows I am not denied to any.
In this (give me leave) your Lordship is out of the way: make a back door to let out Intelligencers; seem to be ever busy, and put your door under keepers, and you shall have a troop of clients sweating to come at you.
I have a backdoor already, I will henceforth be bu∣sie, secretary run and keep the door.
This will fetch am?
I hope so.
My Lord, there are some require access to you a∣bout weighty affairs of state.
All ready.
I told you so.
How weighty is the business.
Treason my Lord.
Sir, my debts to you for this are great.
I will leave your Lordship now.
Sir my death must be sudden, if I requite you not; at the back door good Sir.
I will be your Lordships intelligencer for once.
My Lord.
Let'am in, and say I am at my study.
Where is your Lord?
At his study, but he will have you brought in.
Why Gentlemen, what will you charge me withal?
Treason, horrible treason, I hope to have the leading of thee to prison, and prick thee on 'ith arse with a halberd: to have him heng'd that salutes thee, and call all those in question, that spit not upon thee.
My thread is spun, yet might I but call for this dish of meat at the gallous, in stead of a Psalm, it were to be endured: the Curtain opens, now my end draws on.
Gentlemen I am not empty of weighty occasi∣once at this time; I pray you your business.
My Lord, I think wee have discovered one of the most blodie Traitors, that ever the world held.
Signior Lazarillo, I am glad ye'are one of this disco∣very, give me your hand.
My Lord that is the Traitor.
Keep him off, I would not for my whole estate have touched him.
My Lord.
Peace Sir, I know the devil is at your tongues end, to furnish you with speeches? what are the particulars?
you charge him with.
We have conferred our notes, &amp; have extracted that, which we will justify upon our oaths.
That he would bee greater then the Duke, that he had cast plots for this, and meant to corrupt some to betray him, that he would burn the City, kill the Duke, and poison the privy Council; and lastly kill himself. Though thou deserve justly to bee hanged, with silence yet I allow thee to speak, be short.
My Lord, so many my greatest wish succeed,
So may I live, and compass what I seek,
As I had never treason in my thoughts,
Nor ever did conspire the overthrow
Of any creatures, but of brutish beasts,
Fowls, Fishes, and such other human food
As is provided for the good of man,
If stealing Custards, Tarts, and Florentines
By some late Statute be created treason;
How many fellow Courtiers can I bring,
Whose long attendance, and experience,
Hath made them deeper in the plot then I.
Peace, such hath ever been the clemency of my gracious moister the Duke, in all his proceedings, that I had thought, and thought I had thought rightly; that malice would long ere this, have hid her self in her den, and have turned her own sting against her own heart: but I well now perceive; that so forward is the deposit∣on of a depraved nature; that it doth not only seek re∣avenge, where it hath received injuries; but many times thirst after their destruction, where it hath met with been∣fits.
But my good Lord—
Lets gag him.
Peace again, but many times thirst after distructi∣on, where it hath met with benefits; there I left: Such, &amp; no better are the business, that we have now in hand.
Hoe's excellently spoken.
He will wind a Tratour I warrant him.
But surely me thinks, setting aside the touch of Conscience, and all other inward convulsions.
He will be hanged, I know by that word.
Your Lordship may consider—
Hold thy peace: thou can not answer this speech: no Tratour can answer it: but because you can∣not answer this speech; I take it you have confessed the Treason.
The Count Valour was the first that discovered him, and can witness it, but hee left the matter to your Lordships grave consideration.
I thank his Lordship, carry him away speedily to the Duke.
Now Lazarillo thou are tumbled down
The hill of Fortune, with a violent arm;
All plagues that can be, Famine, and the sword
Will light upon thee, black despair will boyle
In thy despairing breast, no comfort by,
Thy Friends far off, thy enemies are no.
Away with him, Isle follow you, look you pine∣on him, and take his money from hurt, least he swallow a shilling and kill himself.
Get then on before.
Now Gondarino, what can you put on now
That may again deceive vs,
Have ye more strange illusions, yet more mists,
Through which the weak eye may beled to error:
What can ye say that may doe satisfaction
Both for her wronged honour, and your ill?
All I can say or may is said already,
She is unchaste, or else I have no knowledge,
I doe not breath, nor have the use of sense.
Dare ye be yet so wilful, ignorant,
Of your own nakedness, did not your servants
In mine own hearing confess
They brought her to that house, we found her in;
Almost by force: and with a great distrust
Of some ensuing hazard.
He that hath begun so worthily,
It fits not with his resolution
To leave of thus: my Lord I know these are but idle proves.
What says your Lordship to them?
Count, I dare yet pronounce again, thy Sister is not honest.
You are your self my Lord, I like your setel'dnes.
Count thou art young, and unexperienced, in the dark hidden ways of women. Thou dare affirm with confidence a Lady of fifteen may be a maid.
Sir if it were not so, I have a Sister would set near my heart.
Let her sit near her shame, it better fits her: call back the blood that made our stream in nearness, and turn the Currant to a better use, it is too much mud∣ded, I doe grieve to know it.
Dare thou make up again, dare to turn face, knowing wee know thee, hast thou not been discovered openly: did not our ears hear her deny thy courtings? did we not see her blush with modest anger, to be so over∣taken by a trick; can ye deny this Lord?
Had not your Grace, and her kind brother
Been within level of her eye,
You should have had a hotter volley from her
More full of blood and fire, ready to leap the window, where she stood.
So truly sensual is her appetite,
Sir, Sir, these are but words and tricks, give me the proof.
What need a better proof then your Lordship, I am sure ye have lain with her my Lord.
I have confessed it Sir.
I dare not give thee credit without witness.
Doe's your Grace think, wee carry seconds, with vs, to search vs, and see fair play: your Grace hath been ill tutored in the business; but if you hope to try her truly, and satisfy your self what frailty is, give he the Test: doe not remember Count she is your Sister; nor let my Lord the Duke believe she is fair; but put her too'it without hope or pity, then ye shall see that golden form fly off, that all eyes wonder at for pure and fixed, and under it, base blushing copper; met∣tall not worth the meanest honour: you shall behold her then my Lord Transparent, look through her heart, and view the spirits how they leap, and tell me then, I did belie the Lady.
It shall be done: come Gondarino bear vs company,
We doe believe thee she shall die, and thou shalt see it.
How now my friends, whom have ye guarded hither.
So please your Grace wee have discovered a a villain and a Traitor: the Lord Lucio hath examined him, and sent him to your Grace for Judgment.
My Lord, I dare absoule him from all sin of Treason: I know his most ambitions is but a dish of meat; which a'hath hunted, with so true a sent, that hee deserves the Collar, not the Halter.
Why do they bring him thus boūd up? the poor man had more need of some warm meat, to comfort his cold stomach.
Your grace shall have the cause hereafter, when when you may laugh more freely. But these are called Informers: men that live by Treason; as Rat-chatchers do by poison.
•••lt there were no heavier prodigies hung over vs, then this poor fellow, I durst redeem all perils ready to power thēselues upon this state, with a cold Custard.
Your grace might do it, without dāger toy our persō.
My Lord, if ever I intended Treason against your person, or the state, unless it were by wishing from your Table, some dish of meat; which I must needs con∣fesse, was not a subjects part: or coveting by stealth, supp• from those noble bottles, that no mouth keeping allege∣ance true, should dare to taste: I must confess with more then covetous eyes, I have bee held those dear concealed dishes, that have been brought in, by cunning equipage, to waite upon your graces palate: I do confess out of this present heat, I have had stratagems, &amp; ambuscadoes: but God be thanked they have never took.
Count, this business is your own; when you have done, repair to vs.
I will attend your grace: Lazarello, you are at li∣bertie, be your own man again; and if ye can be moister of your wishes, I wish it may be so.
I humbly thank your Lordship: I must bee un∣mannerly, I have some present business, once more I hearti∣lie thank your Lordship.
Now even a word or two to you, and so farewell; you think you have deserved much of this state, by this dis∣couerie: y' are a slavish people, grown subject to the com∣mon course of all men. How much unhappy were that noble spirit, could work by such baser gains? what mi∣sery would not a knowing man put on, with willingness, ere he see him self grown fat and full fed, by fall of those you rise by? I do discharge ye my attendance; our health∣full state needs no such Leeches to suck out her blood.
I do beseech your Lordship.
Good my L.
Go learn to be more honest, whē I see you work your means from honest industry,
I will be willing to accept your labours:
Till then I will keep back my promised favours:
Here comes an other remnant of folly:
I must dispatch him too. Now Lord Lucio, what business bring you hither?
Faith Sir, I am discovering what will become of that notable piece of Treason, intended by that varlet La∣zarello; I have sent him to the Duke for judgment.
Sir you have performed the part of a most care∣full states-man, and let me say it to your face, Sir of a Fa∣there to this state: I would wish you to retire, and ensconce your self in study: for such is your daily labour, and our fear, that the loss of an hour may breed our overthrow.
Sir I will be cōmaunded by your judgement, and though I find it a trouble scant to be waded through, by these weak years, yet for the dear care of the Com∣mon-wealth, I will bruise my brains, and cōfine my self to much vexation.
Go, and may thou knock down Treason like an Ox.
Amen.
Have I spoke thus much in the honour of learning? learned the names of the seuē liberal Sciences, before my marriage; &amp; since, have in hast written Epistles congratula∣rye, to the •9. Muses: &amp; is she proved a whore &amp; a Beggar?
Tic true, you are not now to be taught, that no man can be learned of a sudden; let not your first project dis∣courage you, what you have lost in this, you may get again in Alcumie.
Fear not husband, I hope to make as good a wife, as the best of your neighbours have, and as honest.
I will go home; good sir do not publish this, as lōg as it run's amōgst our selves; it is good honest mirth: you'll come hōe to supper; I mean to have al her friends &amp; mine as ill as it goes. 
Do wisely sir, &amp; bid your own friēds, your whole wealth will scarce feast all hers, neither is it for your cadet, to walk the streets, with a woman so noted, get you home, and provide her clothes: let her come an hour hēce with an hād-basket &amp; shift her self, she'll serve to sit at the upper end of the Table, &amp; drink to your customers.
Art is just, and will make me a mends.
No doubt Sir.
The chief note of a Scholar you say, is to go∣uerne his passions; wherefore I do take all patiently; in sign of which my most dear wife, I do kiss thee: make hast home after me, I shall be in my Study.
Go, a vaunt, my new City dame, send me what you promised me for consideration; and may thou prove a Lady.
Thou shalt have it, his silks shall fly foe• it.
How sweets a calm after a tempest, what is there now that can stand betwixt me and felicity? I have gon through all my crosses constātly; have confoūd∣ed my enemies, and know where to have my longings sa∣tisfied; I have my way before me, there is the door, and I may freely walk into my delights. knock Boy.
Who's their?
Madonna my love, not guilty, not guilty, open the door.
Art thou come sweet heart?
Yes to thy soft embraces, and the rest of my over∣flowing blisses; come let vs in and swim in our delights: a short grace as we go, and so to meat.
Nay my dear love, you must bear with me in this; we will to the Church first.
Shall I be sure of it then.
By my love you shall.
I am content, for I do now wish to hold off long∣er, to whet my appetite, and doe desire to meet with more troubles, so I might conquer them.
And as a holy lover that hath spent
The tedious night, with many asigh and tears;
Whilst he pursued his wench: and hath observed
The smiles, and frowns, not daring to displease;
When at last, hath with his service won
Her yielding heart; that she begins to dote
Upon him, and can hold not longer out,
But hangs about his neck, and woes him more
Then ever he desired her love before:
Then begins to flatter his desert,
And growing wanton, needs will cast her off;
Try her, pick quarrels, to breed fresh delight,
And to increase his pleasing appetite.
Come Mouse, will you walk?
I pray thee let me bee delivered of the joy I am so big with; I doe feel that high heat within me, that I begin to doubt whether I be mortal?
How I contemn my fellows in the Court,
With whom I did but yesterday converse,
And in a lower and an humbler key
Did walk, and meditate on grosser meates:
There are they still poor rogues, shaking their chops,
And sneaking after cheeses, and doe run
Headlong in chase of every jacke of Beer
That crosses them, in hope of some repast,
That it will bring them to; whilst I am here,
The happiest wight, that ever set his tooth
To a dear novelty: approach my love,
Come let's go to knit the true loves knot,
That never can be broken.
That is to marry a whore.
When that is done, then will we taste the gift,
Which Fates have sent, my fortunes up to lift.
When that is done, you'll begin to repent, upon a full stomach; but I see, it is but a form in destiny, not to be altered.
Sir, what may be the currant of your business, that thus you single out your time and place?
Madame, the business now imposed upon me, concerns you nearly; I wish some worser man might finish it.
Why are ye changed so? are ye not well sir?
Yes madam, I am well, wo'd you were so.
Why sir? I feel my self in perfect health.
And yet ye cannot live long, madam.
Why good Arrigo?
Why, ye must die.
I know I must, but yet my fate calls not upon me.
It does; this hand the Duke commands shall give you death.
Heaven, and the powers divine, guard well the innocent.
Lady, your prayers may doe your soul some good,
That sure your body cannot merit by'vm:
You must prepare to die.
What's my offence? what have these years com∣meted,
That may be dangerous to the Duke or State?
Have I conspired by poison? have I given up
My honour to some loose unsettled blood
That may give action to my plots?
Dear sir, let me not die ignorant of my faults?
Ye shall not.
Then Lady, you must know, you are held dishonest;
The Duke, your brother, and your friends in court,
With too much grief condemn ye: though to me,
The fault deserves not to be paid with death.
Who is my accuser?
Lord Gondarino.
Arrigo, take these words, and bear them to the Duke,
It is the last petition I shall ask thee:
Tell him the child, this present hour brought forth
To see the world, he's not a soul more pure, more white,
More virgin then I have. Tell him Lord Gondarinoes
Plot, I suffer for, and willingly: tel him it had bin a greater
honour, to have saved then killed: but I have done: strike,
I am armed for heaven. Why stay you? is there any hope?
I would not strike.
Have you the power to save?
With hazard of my life, if it should be known?
You will not venture that?
I will: Lady, there is that means yet to escape your death, if you can wisely apprehend it.
Ye dare not be so kind?
I dare, and will, if you dare but deserve it.
If I should slight my life, I were too blame.
Then madam, this is the means, or else you die: I love you.
I shall believe it, if you save my life.
And you must lie with me.
I dare not buy my life so.
Come ye must resolve, say yea or no.
Then no; nay look not ruggedly upon me,
I am made up too strong, to fear such looks.
Come, doe your Butchers part: before I would win life,
with the dear loss of honour, I dare find means to free my self.
Speak, will ye yield?
Villain, I will not; murderer doe thy worst, thy base unnoble thoughts dare prompt thee to; I am aboue thee slave.
Will thou not be drawn to yield by fair pursue∣sions?
No nor by—
Peace, know your doom then; your Ladyship must remēber, you are not now at home, where you dare jest at all that come about you: but you are fallen under my mercy, which shall be small: if thou refuse to yield, hear what I have sworn unto my self; I will enjoy thee, though it between the parting of thy soul and body. Yield yet and live.
Isle guard the one, let heavens guard the tother.
Are ye so resolute then? Duk. frō aboue. Hold, hold, I say.
What have I? yet more terror to my tragedy?
Lady, the scene of blood is done; ye are now as free from scandal, as from death.
Thou woman which were borne to teach vert••
Fair, sweet, and modest maid forgive my thoughts,
My trespass was my love. Seize Gondarino, let him 〈◊〉 dooms.
I doe begin in a little to love this woman; I could in∣dure her already twelve miles off.
Sister, I am glad you have brought your honour off so fairly, without loss: you have done a work aboue your sex, the Duke admires it; give him fair encounter.
Best of all comforts; may I take this hand, and call it mine?
I am your Graces handmaid.
Would ye had sed my self: might it not be so Lady?
Sister, say I: I know ye can afford it.
My Lord, I am your subject, you may command me, provided still, your thoughts be fair and good.
Here, I am yours; and when I cease to be so,
Let heaven forget me: thus I make it good.
My Lord, I am no more mine own.
So: this bargain was well driven.
Duke, thou hast sold away thy self to all pard∣tion; thou art this present hour becoming cuckold: me thinks I see thy gaul grate through thy veins, and jea∣lousy seize thee with her talents: I know that women's nose must be cut off, she cannot scope it.
Sir, we have punishment for you.
I doe beseech your Lordship, for the wrongs this mā¦hath done me, let me pronounce his punishment.
Lady, I give to you, he is your own.
I doe beseech your grace, let me be banished with al the speed that may be.
Stay still, you shall attend her sentence.
Lord Gondarino, you have wronged me highly, yet since it sprung from no peculiar hate to me, but from a general dislike unto all women, you shall thus suffer for it; Arrigo, call in some Ladies to assist vs: will your Grace take your State?
My Lord I doe beseech your Grace for any pu∣nishment saving this woman, let me bee sent upon disco∣very of some Island, I doe desire but a small Gundele, with ten Holland Cheeses, and isle undertake it.
Sir ye must bee content, will ye sit down? nay doe it willingly. Arrigo tie his arms close to the chair, I dare not trust his patience.
Mai'st thou be quickly old and painted; mai'st thou dote upon some sturdy Yeoman of the wood-yarde, and he be honest; mai'st thou be bared the lawful lechery of thy Coach for want of Instruments; and last, bee thy womb vnopen'd.
This fellow hath a pretty gaul.
My Lord, I hope to see him purged ere a part.
Your Ladyships are welcome: I must desire your helps, though you are no Physicians, to doe a strange cure upon this Gentleman.
In what we can assist ye Madam, ye may com∣maund vs.
Now do I fit like a Conjurer within my circle, and these the Devils that are raised about me, I will pray that they may have no power upon me.
Ladies fall off in couples, then with a soft still march with low demeanours, charge this Gentleman: isle be your leader.
Let me be quartered Duke quickly, I can endure it: these women, long for mans flesh, let them have it.
Count, have you ever seen so strange a passion? what would this fellow doe, if a should find himself in bed with a young Lady?
Faith my Lord, if a could get a knife, sure a wo'd cut her throat, or else a wo'd doe as Hercules did by Lies, swing out her soul: has the true hate of a womā in him.
Low with your curseyes Ladies.
Come not too near me, I have a breath will poi∣son ye, my lungs are rotten, and my stomach raw; I
am given much to belching: hold off, as you love sweet aires; Ladies by your first nights pleasure, I conjure you, as you wo'd have your husbands proper men, strong backs, and little legs, as you would have um hate your waiting women.
Sir we must court ye till wee have obtained some little favour from those gracious eyes, tic but a kiss a piece.
I pronounce perdition to ye all; ye are a parcel of that damned Crew, that fell down with Lucifer, and here ye stayed on earth, to plague poor men; vanish, a∣uaunt, I am fortified against your charms; heaven grant me breath and patience.
Shall we not kiss then?
No, fear my lips with hot irons first, or stitch them up like a Ferrets: O that this brunt were over.
Come, come, little rogue, thou art too maidenly by my troth, I think I must box thee, till thou be boulder; the more bold, the more welcome: I pre thee kiss me, be not afraid?
If there bee any here, that yet have so much of the fool left in them, as to love their Mothers, let them look on her, and loath them too.
What a slovenly little villain art thou, why dost thou not stroke up thy hair? I think thou ne'er comb'st it: I must have it lie in better order; so, so, so, let me see thy hands, are they washed?
I would they were loose for thy sake.
She tortures him admirably.
The best that ever was.
Alas how cold they are poor golls, why dost thee not get thee a musse?
Madam, her's an old Country gentlewoman at the door, that came nodding up for Justice, she was with the Lord Gondarino to day, and would now again come? to the speech of him; she says.
Let her in, for sports sake, let her in.
Mercy O Duke, I doe appeal to thee: plan•
Cannons there, and discharge them against my breast ra∣there: nay first, let this she fury sit still where she do's, and with her nimble fingers stroke my hair, play with my fingers ends, or anything, until my panting heart have broken my breast.
You must abide her censure.
I see her come, vnbutton me, for she will speak.
Where is hee Sir?
Save me, I hear her.
There he is in state, to give you audience.
How doe's your good Lordship?
Sick of the spleen.
How?
Sick.
Will you chew a Nutmeg, you shall not re∣fuse it, tic very comfortable.
Nay now thou art come, I know it is the Devils Jubilee, hell is broke loose:
My Lord, If ever I have done you service,
Or have deserved a favour of your Grace,
Let me be turned upon some present Action,
Where I may sooner die, then languish thus;
Your Grace hath her petition, grant it her, and ease me now at last.
No Sir, you must endure.
For my petition; I hope your Lordship hath remembered me.
Faith I begin to pity him, Arrigo take her off, bear her away; say her petition is granted.
Whether doe you draw me Sir? I know it is not my Lords pleasure I should be thus used, before my bu∣sins be dispatched?
You shall know more of that without.
Unbind him Ladies, but before he go, this hee shall promise; for the love I bear to our own sex, I would have them still hated by thee, and enjoin thee as a pu∣nishmēt,
never herafter willingly to come in the presence or fight of any woman, nor never to seek wrongfully the public disgrace of any.
Tic that I would have sworn, and doe: when I meddle with them, for their good, or their bad; may Time call back this day again, and when I come in their companies, may I catch the pox, by their breath, and have no other pleasure for it.
Ye are too merciful.
My Lord, I showed my sex the better.
All is ouer-blowne Sister, you're like to have a fair night of it, and a Prince in your arms: lets go my Lord.
Thus through the doubtful Streams of Joy and True love doth wade, and finds at last relief.

Captain, Regent, Principal,
What shall I call thee?
The Noble spark of bounty;
The life-bloud of Society.
Call me your Forecast, you whore∣sons, when you come drunk out of a Ta∣uerne, it is I must cast your plots into form still; tic I must ma∣nag the Prank, or Isle not give a louse for the proceeding: I must let fly my civil fortunes, turn wilde-braine, lay my wits vpo'th Tenters, you raskals, to maintain a company of vile∣loins, whom I love in my very soul and conscience.
A ha, our little forecast.
Hang you, you have bewitched me among you, I was as well given till I fell to be wicked, my Grandsire had hope of me, I went all in black, swore but a Sundays, never came home drunk, but upon fasting nights to cleanse my sto∣macke; sl'id now I'm quite altered, blown into light co∣lours, let out oaths by the minute, sit up late till it bee early, drink drunk till I am sober, sink down dead in a Ta∣uerne, and rise in a Tabacco-shop: her's a transformation: I was wont yet to pity the simple, and leave i'm some money: sl'id, now I gull i'm without conscience; I go without order, swear without number, gull without mercy, &amp; drink without measure.
I deny the last, for if you drink ne'er so much, you drink within measure.
How prove you that sir?
Because the drawers never fill their pots.
Masle that was well found out all drunkards may lawfully say, they drink within measure by that trick, dna now I'm put in the mind of a trick can you keep your coun∣tenance villains? yet I am a fool to ask that, for how can they keep their countenance that have lost their credits?
I warrant you for blushing Captain.
I easily believe that Ancient, for thou lost thy co∣lours once; Nay faith as for blushing, I think ther's grace little enough amongst you all, tic lent in your cheeks, the flag's down; well, your blushing face I suspect not, nor in∣deed greatly your laughing-face, unless you had more mo∣ney in your purses: then thus compendiously now, you all know the possibilities of my hereafter fortunes, and the humour of my frolic Grandsire Sir Bounteous Progress; whose death makes all possible to me: I shall have all, when he he's nothing; but now he he's all, I shall have nothing: I think one mind runs through a million of i'm; they love to keep vs sober all the while the're alive, that when the're dead we may drink to their healths; they cannot a∣bide to see vs merry all the while the're aboue ground; and that makes so many laugh at their fathers funerals: I know my Grandsire has his Will in a Box, and has bequeathed all to me, when he can carry nothing away; but stood I in need of poor ten pounds now, by his will I should hang my selte ever I should get it, ther's no such word in his Will I war∣rant you, nor no such thought in his mind.
You may build upon that Captain.
Then since hee he's no will to doe me good as long as he lives; by mine own will, Isle doe my self good before he dies, and now I arrive at the purpose. You are not ignorant I'm sure, you true and necessary implements of mischief; first, that my Grandsier Sir Bounteous Progress is a Knight of thousands, and therefore no Knight since one
thousand six hundred: next, that he keeps a house like his name Bounteous, open for all comers: thirdly and lastly, that hee stands much upon the glory of his complement, variety of entertainment, together with the largeness of his Kitchen, longitude of his Buttery, and fecundity of his Larder, and thinks himself never happier then when some stiff L. or great Countess alights, to make light his dishes: these being well mixed together may give my project better encourage∣meant, and make my purpose spring forth more fortunate: to be short, and cut off a great deal of dirty way; Isle down to my Grandsire like a L.
How Captain?
A French ruff, a thin beard, and a strong per∣fume will do it: I can hire blew coats for you all by West∣minster clock, and that colour will be soonest believed.
But prithee Captain?
Push, I reach past your fadomes; you desire crowns.
From the crown of our head, to the sole of our foot bully.
Why carry your selves but probably, and carry away enough with your selves.
Why there spoke a Roman Captain, M. Penitent Brothel.
Sweet M. Folly-wit..
Heir's a mad brain a'th first, whose pranks scorn to have presidents; to be second to any; or walk beneath any: mad∣caps inventions, has plaid more tricks then the cards can allow a man, and of the last stamp too, hating imitation, a fellow, whose only glory is to be prime of the company; to be sure of which, he maintains all the rest: hoe's the Karion, and they the Kites that gorge upon him.
But why in others doe I check wilde passions,
And retain deadly follies in my self?
I tax his youth of common received riot,
Times Comic flashes, and the fruits of blood;
And in my self sooth up adulterous motions,
And such an appetite that I know dams me,
Yet willingly embrace it, love to Harebraines wife,
Over whose hours and pleasures her sick husband
With a fantastic but deserved suspect,
Bestows his serious time in watch and ward;
And therefore I'm constrained to use the means
Of one that knows no mean, a Courtesan,
One poison for another, whom her husband
Without suspicion innocently admits
Into her company, who with tried art
Corrupts and loosens her most constant powers,
Making his jealousy more then half a wittoll,
Before his face plotting his own abuse,
To which himself gives aim.
Whilst the broad arrow with the forked head
Misses his brow but narrowly; see here she comes,
The close Courtesan, whose mother is her bawd.
Master Penitent Brothel.
My little pretty Lady gull-man, the news, the comfort?
You're the fortunate man sir, Knight a'th holland skirt: there wants but opportunity and shoe's wax of your own fashioning, she had wrought her self into the form of your love before my art set finger to her.
Did our affections meet? our thoughts keep time?
So it should seem by the music, the only jar is in the grumbling base viol her husband.
Oh his waking suspicion!
Sigh not M. Penitent, trust the managing of the bu∣sins with me, tic for my credit now to see it well finished: if I do you no good sir, you shall give me no money sir.
I am arrived at the Court of conscience; A Curti∣zan! O admirable times! honesty is removed to the Com∣mon place. Farewell Lady.
How now daughter?
What news mother?
A token from thy keeper.
Oh from sir Bounteous Progress: hoe's my kee∣per in deed, but ther's many a piece of venison stolen that my keeper wots not on; theres no park kept so warily, but loo∣ses flesh one time or other; and no woman kept so privately, but may watch advantage to make the best of her pleasure: and in common reason one keeper cannot be enough for so proud a park as a woman.
Hold thee there girl.
Fear not me mother.
Every part of the world shoots up daily into more subtlety: the very spider weaues her caules with more art and cunning, to entrap the fly.
The shallow ploughman can distinguish now,
Twixt simple truth and a dissembling brow.
Your base mechanic fellow can spy out
A weakness in a L. and learns to flout.
How dost behoove vs then that live by slight,
To have our wits wound up to their stretched height?
Fifteen times thou know I have sold thy may denhead,
To make up a dowry for thy marriage, and yet
Theres may denhead enough for old sir Bounteous still,
Heel be all his life time about it yet, and bee as far to seek when he has done.
The sums that I have told upon thy pillow!
I shall once see those golden days again:
Tho fifteen, all thy may den heads are not gone:
The Italian is not served yet, nor the French:
The British men come for a dozen at once,
They engross all the market, Tut my girl,
Tic nothing but a politic conveyance;
A sincere carriage, a religious eyebrow
That throws their charms over the worldlings senses;
And when thou spiest a fool that truly pities
The false springs of thine eyes,
And honourably dotes upon thy love,
If he be rich, set him by for a husband;
Be wisely tempered and learn this my wench
Who gets the opinion for a virtuous name
May sin at pleasure, and ne'er think of shame:
Mother I am too deep a Scholar grown To learn my first rules now.
T'will be thy own, I say no more; peace, hark, remove thy self, oh, the two elder Brothers.
A fair hour sweet Lady.
Good morrow gentlemen, Master Inesse, and M. Possibility.
Wher's the little sweet Lady your daughter?
Even at her book sir.
So religious?
Tic no new motion sir, sh'as took it from an in∣fant.
May we deserve a sight of her, Lady?
Upon that condition you will promise me gentle∣men, to avoid all profane talk, wanton complements, un∣decent phrases, and lascivious courtings▪ (which I know my daughter will sooner die then endure,) I am contented your suits shall be granted.
Not a bawdy syllable I protest.
Syllable was plac'st there, for indeed your one silla∣bless are your bawdiest words, prick that down.
She may make nightwork ont, it was well recovered, Hee Cats and Courtesans strowle most in the night, Her friend may be received and conveyed forth, nightly, He be at charge for watch and ward, for watch &amp; ward in faith, and here they come.
Give your worship good even.
Welcome my friends, I must deserve your dili∣gence in an employment serious: the troth is, there is a cun∣ning plot laid, but happily discovered, to rob my house: the night uncertain when, but fixed within the circle of this month: nor do's this villainy consist in numbers:
Or many partners, only some one
Shall in the form of my familiar friend,
Be received privately into my house,
By some perfidious servant of mine own,
Addressed fit for the practise.
O abominable!
If you be faithful watchmen, show your goodness, And with these Angels shore up your eye-lids: Let me not be purloind, purloind indeed; the merry Greeks conceive me: there is a Gem I would not loose, Kept by the Italian under locke and key: we English men are careless creatures: well, I have said enough.
And we will do enough sir.
Why well said, watch me a good turn now, so, so, so,
Rise villainy with the Lark, why tic prevented,
Or steal't by with the leather winged Bat:
The evening cannot save it, peace; Oh Lady Gulman, my wives only company! welcome; and how do's the virtuous Matron, that good old Gentlewoman thy mother? I per∣swade my self, if modesty be in the world she has part on it: a woman of an excellent carriage all her life time, in Court, Ci∣tie, and Country.
Sha's always carried it well in those places sir; witness three bastards a piece: how do's your sweet bed∣fellow sir? you see I'm her boldest visitant.
And welcome sweet Virgin, the only company∣on, my soul wishes for her; I left her within at her Lute, pre∣thee give her good counsel.
Alas, she needs none sir.
Yet, yet, yet, a little of thy instructions will not come amiss to her.
Isle bestow my labour sir.
Doe, labour her prithee; I have conveyed away all her wanton Pamphlets, as Hero and Lender, Venus and Atones, oh two lushious mary-bone pies for a young mar∣ried wife, here, here, prithee take the resolution, and read to her a little.
Sha's set up her resolution already sir.
True, true, and this will confirm it the more, ther's a chapter of Hell, tic good to read this cold weather, terrify her, terrify her; go, read to her the horrible pun∣ishments for itching wantonness, the pains allotted for adul∣terie; tell her her thoughts, her very dreams are answerable, say so; rip up the life of a Curtiza, &amp; show how loath some tic.
The gentleman would persuade me in time to dis∣grace my self, and speak ill of mine own function.
This is the course I take, Isle teach the married man
A new selected strain, I admit none
But this pure virgin to her company,
Puh, that's enough; Isle keep her to her stint,
Isle put her to her pension,
She gets but her allowance, thats bare-one,
Few women but have that beside their own,
Ha, ha, ha, nay Isle put her hard toote.
Fine would I meet the gentleman.
Push, fine would you meet him, why, you doe not take the course.
How earnestly she labours her, like a good hole∣some sister of the family, she will prevail I hope.
Is that the means?
What is the means? I would as gladly to enjoy his sight, embrace it as the—
Shall I have hearing? listen?
She's round with her in faith.
When husbands in their ranck'st suspicions dwell,
Then tic our best Art to dissemble well,
Put but these notes in use, that Isle direct you,
Heal curse himself that ere he did suspect you,
Perhaps she will solicit you, as in trial
To visit such and such, still gived denial,
Let no persuasions sway you, they are but fetches
Set to betray you, Jealousies, slights and reaches,
Seem in his sight to endure the sight of no man,
Put by all kisses, till you kiss in common,
Neglect all entertain, if he bring in
Strangers, keep you your chamber, be not seen;
If he chance steal upon you, let him find,
Some book lie open against an unchaste mind,
And cotted Scriptures, tho for your own pleasure,
You read some stirring pamphlet, and convey it
Under your Skirt, the fittest place to lay it,
This is the course my wench to enjoy thy wishes,
Here you perform best, when you most neglect,
The way to daunt, is to outuie suspect,
Manage these principles but with Art and life,
Welcome all Nations, you're an honest wife.
She puts it home in faith, even to the quick
From her Elaborate action I reach that,
I must requite this maid, faith Im'e forgetful.
Here Lady, convey my hart unto him in this Jewel,
Against you see me next you shall perceive
I have profited, in the mean season tel him
I am a prisoner yet, a'th masters side,
My husbands jealousy, that masters him, as he doth master me,
And as a keeper that locks prisoners up,
Is himself prisoned under his own key,
Even so my husband in restraining me,
with the same ward bars his own liberty.
Isle tell him how you wish it, and Isle wear
My wits to the third pile, but all shall clear.
I owe you more then thanks, but that I hope
My husband will requite you.
Think you so Lady? he he's small reason for it.
What done so soon? away, too't again, too't a∣gain, good wench too't again, leave her not so, where left you. come.
Faith I am weary sir.
I cannot draw her from her strict opinion.
With all the arguments that sense can frame.
No; let me come, Fie wife, you must consent; what opinion i'st, let's hear?
Fondly and wilfully she retains that thought, That every sin is damned.
Oh fie, fie, wife! Pea, pea, pea, pea, how have you lost your time? for shame be converted: theres a diabalocall opinion indeed; then you may think that usury were damned: you're a fine merchant in faith; or bribery? you know the law well; or sloth? would some of the Clergy heard you in faith; or pride? you come at Court; or gluttony? you're not worcester∣thie to dine at an Aldermans table:
Your only deadly sin's Adultery,
That villainous ringworm, women's worst requital,
Tic only lechery thats damned to'th pit-hole;
Ah, that's an arch-offence, believe it squall,
All sins are venial but venereal.
I'ue said enough to her.
And she will be ruled by you.
Fah.
Isle pawn my credit ont; come hither Lady,
I will not altogether rest ungrateful,
Here, wear this Ruby for thy pains and counsel.
It is not so much worth sir, I am a very ill coun∣sellor truly.
Goo too I say.
You're too blame in faith sir, I shall ne'er deserve it.
Thou hast don't already: farewell sweet Virgin, prithee let's see thee oftner.
Such gifts will soon entreat me.
Wife, as thou love the quiet of my breast,
Embrace her counsel, yield to her advices;
Thou wilt find comfort in i'm in the end;
Thou'lt feel an alteration, prithee think on it:
Mine eyes can scarce refrain.
Keep in your dew sir, least when you would, you want it.
I'ue pound my credit on it, ah did thou know, The sweet fruit once, thoud'st never let it go.
Tic that I strive to get.
And still do so.
You have bin too much like your name Sir Boun∣teous.
Oh not so, good Knights, not so, you know my humour; most welcome good Sir Andro Pelcut, Sir Aquitaino Colewort, most welcome.
Thanks good Sir Bounteous.
Oh, cry your worship heartily mercy Sir.
How now linen stockings, and threescore mile a day; whose footman art thou?
Pray can your worship tell me, Ho, ho, ho, if my L. be come in yet.
Thy L! what L?
My L. Owe-much sir.
My L. Owe-much! I have heard much speech of that L. he has great acquaintance in the City; that L. has bin much followed.
And is still sir; he wants no company when hoe's in London: hoe's free of the Mercers, and theres none of i'm all dare cross him.
And they did, he would turn over a new leaf with i'm; he would make i'm all weary on it in the end: much fine rumour have I heard of that L. yet had I never the fortune to set eye upon him; art sure he will alight here Footman? I am afraid you're mistook.
Thinks your worship so sir? by your leave sir.
Puh; passion of me, Footman, why Pumps I
say come back.
Do's your worship call?
Come hither I say, I am but afraid on it, would it might happen so well, how dost know? did hee name the house with the great turret a'th top?
No saith did he not sir.
Come hither I say, did hee speak of a cloth a gold chamber?
Not one word by my troth sir.
Come again you lousy seven mile an hour?
I beseech your worship detain me not.
Was there no talk of a fair pair of Orgaines, a great guilt candlestick, and a pair of silver snuffers?
It were sin to belie my Lord, I heard no such words sir.
A pox confine thee, come again, puh,
Your worship will undo me sir.
Was there no speech of a long dining room, a huge kitchen, large meat, and a broad dresser board?
I have a greater maw to that indeed, an't please your worship.
Whom did he name?
Why one Sir Bounteous Progress.
Ah, a, a, I am that Sir Bounteous you progressiue round-about Rascal.
Laughs, puh—
I knew I should have him in the end, ther's not a Lord will mis me I thank their good honours, tic a fortune laid upon me, they can sent out their best entertainment, I have a kind of complemental gift given me aboue ordinary country Knights, and how soon, tic smelt out I warrant ye, ther's not one Knight in the Sheer able to entertain a Lord in the kue, or a Lady in the nick like me, like me, ther's a kind of grace belongs too't, a kind of Art which naturally slips from me, I know not on it I promise you, tic gon before Im'e aware on it, cuds me I forget my self, where—
Do's your worship call?
Run sirrah, cal in my chief gentleman in the chain of gold, expedite; and how do's my good Lord? I never saw him before in my life, a cup of bastard for this footman.
My Lord has trauaild this five year sir.
Trauaild this five year? how many children has he? some bastard I say.
No bastard an't please your worship.
A cup of Sack to strengthen his wit, the foot∣mans a fool; oh, come hither master Gunwater, come hither, send presently to master Pheasant for one of his hens, ther's Partridge in the house.
And Wild-duck an't please your worship.
And Woodcock an't please thy worship.
And Woodcock an't please your worship, I had thought to have spoke before you.
Remember the Pheasant, down with some Plo∣for, clap down six Woodcocks, my loue's coming; now sir.
Ant please your worship ther's a Lord and his foal∣lowers newly alighted.
Dispath I say, dispatch, why wher's my music? hoe's come indeed.
Footman.
My Lord.
Run swiftly with my cōmendations to S. Jasper Topas We'll ride and visit him in the morning say.
Your Lordships charge shall be effected.
That Courtly comely form, should present to me Sir Bounteous Progress.
You've found me out my Lord, I cannot hide my self, Your honour in most spatiously welcome.
In this forgive me Sir, that being a stranger to your houses,
And you, I make my way so bold, and presume
Rather upon your kindness then your knowledge,
Only your bounteous disposition.
Fame hath diuulgd, and is to me well known.
Nay, and your Lordship know my disposition, you know me better then they that know my person; your honour is so much the welcomer for that.
Thanks good sir Bounteous.
Pray pardon me, it has been often my ambition my L. both in respect of your honourable presence, and the prodigal fame that keeps even stroke with your vnboun∣ded worthiness;
To have wished your Lordship, where your Lordship is
A noble guest in this unworthy seat:
Your Lordship ne'er heard my Organs.
Heard of i'm sir Bounteous, but never heard i'm.
The're but double guilt my L. some hundred and fifty pound wilt fit your Lordship with such another pair.
Indeed sir Bounteous?
O my L. I have a present suit to you.
To me sir Bounteous, and you could ne'er speak at fitter time? for I'm here present to grant you.
Your Lordship has been a traveller.
Some five year sir.
I have a Grandchild my L. I love him; and when I die Isle doe somewhat for him: Isle tel your honour the worst of him, a wilde lad he has been.
So we have been all sir.
So we have been all indeed my L. I thank your Lorships assistance; some comic pranks he has bin guilty of; but Isle pawn my credit for him, an honest trusty by∣some.
And thats worth all sir.
And thats worth all indeed my L. for hes like to have all when I die; imberbis Iuuenis, his chin has no more prickles yet then a midwives: theres great hope of his wit his haire's so long a coming; shall I be bold with your ho∣nor, to prefer this aforesaid Ganimed to hold a plate under your Lordships cup?
You wrong both his worth, and your bounty, and you cal that boldness; Sir I have heard much good of that young Gentleman.
Nay he has a good wit in faith my L.
He has carried himself always generously.
Are you advised of that my L.? he has carried ma∣ny things cleanly: Isle show your Lordship my Will, I keep it aboue in an Out landish box; the whoreson boy must have all: I love him, yet he shall ne'er find it as long as I live.
Well sir, for your sake, and his own deserving, Isle reserve a place for him nearest to my secrets.
I understand your good Lordship, you'll make him your Secretary: my music, give my L. a taste of his welcome.
So, how like you our Airs my Lord? are they choice?
The're seldom matched believe it.
The Consort of mine own household.
Ye sir.
The Musicians are in Ordinary, yet no ordina∣rye Musicians: your Lordship shall hear my Organs now.
Oh I beseech you sir Bounteous.
My Organist.
Come my L. how do's your honour relish my Organ?
A very proud Ayre in faith sir.
Oh, how can't choose, a Walloon plays upon i'm, and a Welshman blows wind in their breech.
You must pardon vs my L. hasty cates, your honour
has had even a hunting meal on it; and now I am like to bring your Lordship to as mean a lodging, a hard Down bed in faith my L. poor Cambric sheets, and a cloth a Tissue Canopy, the Curtains indeed were wrought in Ve∣nice, with the story of the Prodigal child in silk and gold, only the Swine are left out my L. for spoiling the curtains.
To was well prevented sir.
Silken rest, harmonious slumbers, and venetiall dreams to your Lordship.
The like to kind Sir Bounteous.
Fie, not to me my L. I'm old, past dreaming of such vanities.
Old men should dream best.
Their dreams indeed my L. you've gi'nt vs: to¦morrow your Lordship shall see my Cocks, my Fish-ponds, my Park, my Champion grounds; I keep Champers in my house can show your Lordship some pleasure.
Sir Bounteous you even whelm me with delights.
Once again a musical night to your honour; Isle trouble your Lordship no more.
Good rest sir Bounteous; so, come, the vizards, where be the masking suits?
In your Lordships Portmanteau.
Peace Lieutenant.
I had rather have war, Captain.
Puh, the plot's ripe; come, to our business lad, Tho guilt condemns, tic gilt must make vs glad.
Nay, and you be at your distinctions Captain, Isle follow behind no longer.
Get you before then, and whelm your nose with your vizard, go.
Now Grandsire, you that hold me at hard meat,
And keep me out at the Dags end, Isle fit you;
Under his Lordships leave, all must be mine
He and his Will confesses, what I take then
Is but a borrowing of so much before hand;
Isle pay him again when he dies, in so many blacks,
Isle have the Church hung round with a noble a yard,
Or requite him in Scutchions, let him trap me
In gold, and Isle lap him in lead; quid pro quo: I
Must look none of his Angels in the face forsooth,
Until his face be not worth looking on; Tut lads,
Let Sires and Grandsires keep vs low, we must
Live when the're flesh, as well as when the're dust.
Go, sirrah, run presently to M. Penitent Brothel; you know his lodging, knock him up, I know he cannot sleep for sighing; tell him I'ue happily bethought a mean,
To make his purpose prosper in each limb,
Which only rests to be approved by him:
Make hast, I know he thirsts for it.
Within. Oh.
Hark, the're at their business.
Thieves, thieves.
Gag that gaping rascal, tho he be my Grandsires chief Gentleman in the chain of gold, Isle have no pity of him; how now lads?
Al's sure and safe, on with your vizard sir; the ser∣uants are all bound.
There's one care past then, come follow me lads, Isle lead you now to'th point, and top of all your fortunes; yo'n lodging is my Grandsires.
So, so, lead on, on.
Her's a Captain worth the following, and a wit worth a mans love and admiring!
Oh gentlemen, and you be kind gentlemen, what countrymen are you?
Linconsheere men Sir.
I am glad of that in faith.
And why should you be glad of that?
Oh, the honestest thieves of all come out of Lin∣consheere; the kindest naturde Gentlemen; the'le rob a man with conscience: they have a feeling of what they go about, and will steal with tears in their eyes: ah pitiful gentle∣men.
Push, Money, money, we come for money.
Is that all you come for? Ah what a beast was I to put out my money tother day: alas good gentlemen, what shift shall I make for you? pray come again another time.
Tut, tut sir, money.
Oh not so loud sir, you're too shrill a Gentle∣man; I have a L. lies in my house, I would not for the world his honour should be disquieted.
Who my L. Owemuch? we have took order with him before hand, he lies bound in his bed and al his followers.
Who my L? bound my L? Alas what did you mean to bind my L? he could keep his bed well enough without binding: you've undone me i'nt already, you need rob me no farther.
Which is the Key, come?
Ah I perceive now, you're no true Linconsheere spirits; you come rather out of Bedforesheere, we cannot lie quiet in our beds for you: so, take enough my Masters; spur a free horse, my name's sir Bounteous, a merry world in faith; what Knight but I keep open house at midnight? well, there should be a conscience, if one could hit vppon't.
Away now, cease upon him, bind him.
Is this your Court of equity? why should I be bound for mine own money? but come, come, bind me, I have need on it; I have been too liberal to night, keep in my hands: nay, as hard as you list; I am too good to bear my L. company, you have watched your time my Masters; I was Knighted at Westminster, but many of these nights will make me a Knight of Windsor; you've deserved so well my
Masters; I bid you all to dinner to morrow, I would I might have your companies in faith, I desire no more.
Oh ho sir!
Pray meddle not with my Organs, to put i'm out of tune.
Oh no, hears better music sir.
Ah pox feast you.
Dispatch with him, away; so, thank you good Grandsire; this was bounteously done of him in faith; it came somewhat hard from him at first; for indeed nothing comes stiff from an old man but money: and he may well stand upon that, when he has nothing else to stand upon: whore's our Portmanteau?
Here Bully-Captaine.
In with the purchase, t'will lie safe enough there vnder's nose I warrant you: what, is all sure?
Ell's sure Captain.
You know what follows now, one villainy binds his fellows; go, we must be all bound for our own secure∣ties raskals, there's no dallying' vppo'th point; you conceit me: there is a L. to be found bound in the morning, and al his followers, can you pick out that L. now?
O admirable spirit!
You ne'er plot for your safeties, so your wants be satisfied.
But if we bind one another, how shall the last man be bound?
Pox on it, Isle have the footman scope.
Thats I, I thank you sir.
The Footman of all other will be supposed to scope, for he comes in no bed all night; but lies in's clothes, to be first ready in the morning: the horse and he lies in litter to∣gether; that's the right fashion of your bonny Footman: and his freedom will make the better for our purpose; for we must have one in the morning to unbind the Knight, that we may have our sport within our selves: we now arrive at the most ticklish point, to rob, and take our ease, to be thieves and
lie by it, looker to it lads, it concerns every mans gullet; Isle not have the jest spoiled, that's certain, tho it hazard a wind∣pipe: Isle either go like a L. as I came, or be hanged like a these as I am; and that's my resolution.
Troth a match Captain, of all hands.
Oh M. Penitent Brothel!
What is it sweet Lady Gulman, that so seazes on thee with rapture and admiration?
A thought, a trick, to make you sir especially happy, and yet I my self a saver by it.
I would embrace that Lady with such courage, I would not leave you on the loosing hand.
I will give trust to you sir, the cause then why I raised you from your bed so soon; wherein I know sighs would not let you sleep, thus understand it: You love that woman (M. Harebraines wife) Which no invented means can crown with freedom, For your desires and her own wish, but this, Which in my slumbers did present it self.
I'm covetous Lady.
you know her husband lingering in suspect, Lockes her from all society, but mine.
Most true.
I only am admitted, yet hitherto That he's done you no real happiness; by my admittance I cannot perform that deed, that should please you, You know: wherefore thus I'ue conuaid'd it, Isle counterfeit a fit of violent sickness.
Good.
Nay tic not so good by my faith, but to doe you good.
And in that sense I called it, but take me with you Lady; would it be probable enough to have a sickness so suddenly violent?
Puh, all the world knows women are soon down;
we can be sick when we have a mind to it, catch an ague with the wind of our fans, surfeit upon the rump of a Lark, and bestow ten pound in physic upon it; we're likest our selves when we're down: tic the easiest Art and cunning for our sect to counterfeit sick, that are always full of sits when we are well; for since we were made for a weak imperfect cry∣ture, we can sit that best that we are made for: I thus transla∣ted, and your self slipped into the form of a Physician.
I a Physician Lady, talk not on it I beseech you, I shall shame the whole College.
Tutman, any guacksaluing terms will serve for this purpose; for I am pitifully hinted with a brace of elder brothers, new perfumde in the first of their fortunes, and I shall see how forward their purses will be to the pleasing of my palate, and restoring of my health; lay on load enough upon i'm, and spare i'm not, for the're good plump fleshly Asses, and may well enough bear it: let gold, Ambre, and dissolved Pearl, be common ingrediences, and that you can∣not compose a cullisse without i'm: put but this cunningly in practise, it shall bee both a sufficient recompense for all my pains in your love, and the ready means to make Mistress Harebraine; way, by the visiting of me to your mutual desi∣red company.
I Applaud thee, kiss thee, and will constantly em∣brace it.
Ho, Gunwater!
Singlestone!
Ienkin, wa, ha, ho.
Ewen!
Simcod!
Footman! whew—
Oh good your worship, let me help your good old worship.
Ah poor honest footman, how did thou scope this massacre?
Even by miracle, and lying in my clothes sir.
I think so, I would I had lain in my clothes to Footman, so I had escaped i'm; I could have but rise like a beg∣ger then, and so I do now, till more money come in; but no∣thing afflicts me so much, my poor Geometrical Footman, as that the barbarous villains should lay violence upon my L. Ah, the binding of my L. cuts my heart in two pieces; so, so, tic well, I thank thee, run to thy fellows, undo i'm, un∣do i'm, undo i'm.
Alas, if my L. should miscarry, the're unbound al∣ready sir; they have no occupation but sleep, feed, and fart. 
If I be not ashamed to look my L in the face, I'm a Sarassen my L.
Who's that?
One may see hee has been scard, a pox on i'm for their labours.
Singlestone!
Singlestone? Isle ne'er answer to that in faith.
Suchman-
Suchman? nor that neither in faith; I am not brought so low, tho I be old.
Who's that in the chamber?
Good morrow my L. tic I.
Sir Bounteous good morrow, I would give you my hand sir, but I cannot come at it; is this the courtesy a'th coun∣try sir Bounteous?
Your Lordship grieves me more then al my loss; Tic the vnnatural'st sight that can be found, To see a noble gentleman hard-bound.
Trust me, I thought you had been better be∣loved sir Bounteous; but I see you have enemies sir, and your friends fare the worse for em: I like your talk better then your lodging; I ne'er lay harder in a bed of Down; I have had a mad nights rest on it: can you not gesle what they should be Sir Bounteous?
Faith Lincolneshire men my Lord.
How? fie, fie, believe it not sir, these lie not far off I warrant you.
Think you so my Lord?
I'll be burnt &amp; they doe, some that use to your house sir, and are familiar with all the couneiances.
This is the commodity of keeping open house my Lord, that makes so many shut their doors about dinner time.
They were resolute villains, I made my self known to i'm, told i'm what I was; gave i'm my honora∣ble word not to disclose i'm.
O saucy unmannerly villains!
And think you the slaves would trust me upon my word?
They would not?
Forsooth no, I must pardon i'm, they told me Lords promises were mortal, and commonly die within half an hour after they are spoken; they were but gristles, and not one amongst a hundred come to any full groth, or per∣fection, and therefore tho I were a L. I must enter into bond.
Insupportable Rascals.
Troth Im'e of that mind Sir Bounteous you fared the worse for my coming hither.
Ah good my Lord, but Im'e sure your Lordship fared the worse.
Pray pity not me sir.
Is not your honour sore about the brawn of the arm? a murren meet i'm, I feel it.
About this place Sir Bounteous?
You feel as it were a twinge my Lord?
I, ee'n a twinge, you say right.
A pox discover i'm, that twinge I feel too.
But that which disturbs me most Sir Bounteous lies here.
True, about the wrist, a kind of Tumid numnes.
You say true Sir.
The Reason of that my Lord is, the pulses had no play.
Mass so I gest it.
A mischief swell i'm, for I feel that to.
Sli'd her's a house haunted indeed.
A word with you sir.
How now Singlestone?
Im'e sorry my Lord your Lordship has lost.
Pup, pup, pup, pup, pup.
What have I lost? speak?
A good nights sleep say.
Speak, what have I lost I say?
A good nights sleep my Lord, nothing else. Curtains drawn
That's true, my cloth's come.
My Lords cloth's, his honor's rising.
Hist, well said, come hither, what he's my Lord lost, tell me, speak softly?
His Lordship must know that Sir.
Hush, prithee tell me.
T'will doe you no pleasure to know it Sir.
Yet again? I desire it I say.
Since your worship will needs know it, they have stolen away a jewel in a blew silk rebind of a hundred pound price, beside some hundred pounds in fair Spur-Royals.
That's some two hundred it'h total.
Your worship's much about it Sir.
Come follow me, Isle make that whole again in so much money, let not my Lord know on it.
Oh pardon me Sir Bounteous, that were a dishonour to my Lord, should it come to his ear, I should hazard my undoing by' it.
How should it come to his ear? if you be my Lords chief man about him, I hope you do not use to speak, unless you be paid for it, and I had rather give you a Council∣lors double Fee to hold your peace, come, go too, follow me I say.
There will be scarce time to tell it sir, my Lord will away instantly.
His honour shall stay dinner by his leaue', I'll prevail with him so far; and now I remember a lest; I bad the whoreson thieves to dinner last night, I would I might have their companies, a pox poison i'm.
Faith and you are like to have no other guess Sir Bounteous, if you have none but vs, I'll give you that gift in faith.
YOu see bold guests Master Hareb.
You're kindly welcome to my house; good Master Inesse, and Master Possibility.
That's our presumption Sir.
Raf?
Here Sir.
Call down your mistress to welcome these two Gentlemen my friends.
I shall Sir.
I will observe her carriage, and watch The slippery reuolotions of her eye, Isle lie in waite for every glance she gives, And poyze her words it'h balance of suspect, If she but swag shoe's gon, either on this hand Over familiar, or this, too neglectful, It do's behove her carry her self even.
But master Hareb.
True, I hear you sir; wa'st you said?
I have not spoke it yet Sir.
Right, so I say.
Is it not strange, that in so short a time, my little
Lady Gulman should be so violently handled?
Oh, sickness has no mercy sir,
It neither pities Ladies lip, nor eye,
It crops the Rose out of the Virgins cheek,
And so deslowres her that was ne'er deslorw'd,
Fools then are maids to locke from men that treasure,
Which death will pluck, and never yield i'm pleasure;
Ah gentlemen, tho I shadow it, that sweet Virgins sickness
griues me not lightly, she was my wives only delight and
company;
Did you not hear her gentlemen, it'h midst
Of her extremest sit, still how she called upon my wife,
Remembered still my wife, sweet mistress Harebraine,
When she sent for me, a one side of her bed stood the Phisiti∣an,
the Scrivener on the other, two horrible objects, but,
mere opposites in the course of their lives, for the Scrivener
binds folks, and the Physician makes them loose.
But not loose of their bonds Sir?
No by my faith sir, I say not so, if the Physician could make i'm loose of their bonds, ther's many a one would take Physic, that dares not now for poisoning, but as I was telling of you, her Will was fashioning, Wherein I found her best and richest Jewel, Given as a Legacy unto my wife, When I read that, I could not refrain weeping, well of all other, my wife he's most reason to visit her, if she have any good nature in her, she'll show it there, now sir wher's your mistress?
She desires you, and the gentlemen your friends, to hold her excused, sha's a fit of an Ague now upon her, which begins to shake her
Where do's it shake her most?
All over her body Sir.
Shake all her body? it is a saucy fit, Im'e jealous of that Ague, pray walk in gentlemen, Isle see you instantly.
Now they are absent sir, tic no such thing.
What?
My mistress has her health Sir,
But tic her suit, she may confine her self
From sight of all men, but your own dear self Sir,
For since the sickness of that modest Virgin
Her only company, she delights in none;
No; visit her again, commend me to her, Tell her they are gon, and only I my self Walk here to exchange a word or two with her.
Isle tell her so sir.
Fool that I am, and madman, beast! what worse?
Suspicious over a creature that deserves
The best opinion, and the purest thought,
Watchful over her that is her watch her self,
To doubt her ways, that looks too narrowly
Into her own defects; I, foolish-fearefull
Have often rudely, out of giddy flames
Bard her those objects which she shuns her self,
Thrice I'ue had proof of her most constant temper,
Come I at unawares by stealth upon her,
I find her cercled in with Divine Writs
Of heavenly meditations; here and there
Chapters with leaves tuckt up, which when I see
They either tax pride or adultery,
Ah let me curse my self, that could be jealous
Of her whose mind no sin can make rebellious.
And here the unmatched comes, now wife in faith they are gon,
Push, see how fearful tic, will you not credit me?
They are gon in faith, why, think you Isle betray you? come, come, thy delight and mine, thy only virtuous friend, thy sweet instructresse is violently taken, grievous sick, and which is worse, she mends not.
Her friends are sorry for that Sir.
She calls still upon thee, poor soul, remembers thee still, thy name whirls in her breath, wher's mistress Hare∣brain says she?
Alas good soul,
She made me weep thrice, sh'as put thee in a jewel
in her Will.
Eee'n tot'h last gasp a kind soul.
Take my man, go, visit her.
Pray pardon me sir, alas my visitation cannot help her.
Oh yet the kindness of a thing wife; still she holds the same rare temper; take my man I say.
I would not take your man sir, tho I did purpose going.
No? thy reason?
The worlds condition is it self so wild Sir,
Tic apt to judge the worst, of those deserve not,
Tic an ill-thinking age, and do's apply
All to the form of it own Luxury,
This censure flies from one, that, from another,
That man's her Squire, says he; her Pimp, the tother,
Shoe's of the stamp, a third, fourth, I ha known her:
Iu'e heard this, not without a burning cheek:
Then our attires are taxed, our very gate
Is called in question, where a husbands presence
Scatters such thoughts, or makes i'm sink for fear
Into the hearts that breed i'm, nay surely if I went Sir,
I would entreat your company.
Mine? prithee wife, I have been there alreadle.
That's all one; although you bring me but to'th door Sir, I would entreat no farther.
Thu'rt such a wife; why I will bring thee thither then, but not go up I swear.
In faith you shall not, I doe not desire it sir.
Why then content.
Give me your hand you will doe so Sir.
Why ther's my lip I will.
Why then I go Sir.
With me or no man, incomparable such a woman. 
Lady?
Ha, what news?
Ther's one Sir Bounteous Progress newly alighted from his footecloth, and his Mare waits at door, as the fashi∣on is.
Sli'd, it is the knight that privately maintains me, a little short-olde. spiny Gentleman, in a great doublet.
The same, I know i'm.
Hoe's my sole Revenue, meat, drink, and ray∣meant; my good Physician work upon him, Im'e weak.
Enough.
Why, where bee these Ladies? these plump soft delicate creatures? ha?
Who would you visit sir?
Visit, who? what are you with the plague in your mouth?
A Physician sir.
Then you are a loose-liuer Sir, I have put you to your purgation.
But you need none, you're purged in a worse fashiō,
Ah, Sir Bounteous.
How now? what art thou?
Sweet Sir Bounteous.
Pashion of me, what an alteration's here? Rosa∣monte sick old Harry? her's a sight able to make an old man shrink, I was lusty when I came in, but I am down now in faith, mortality, yea? this puts me in mind of a hole seven foot deep, my grave, my grave, my grave, hist, master Doctor a word sir, hark, tic not the Plague? first?
The Plague Sir, no?
Good.
He ne'er asks whether it bee the Pox or no, and of the twain that had been more likely.
How now my wench? how dost?
Huh, weak Knigh, huh.
She says true, hoe's a weak Knight indeed.
Where do's it hold thee most, wench?
All parts alike Sir.
She says true still, for it holds her in none.
Hark in thine ear, you're breeding of young bones, I am afraid I have got thee with child in faith.
I fear that much sir.
Oh, oh, if it should, a young Progress when al's done.
You have done your good will Sir.
I see by her, tic nothing but a surfeit of Venus in faith, and tho I bee old, I have gin't her, but since I had the power to make thee sick, Isle have the purse to make thee whole, that's certain; master Doctor.
Sir.
Lets hear I pray, what i'st you minister to her?
Marry Sir, some precious cordial, some costly refocillation, a composure comfortable and restorative.
I, I, that, that, that.
No poorer ingrediences then the liquor of Cur∣rall, clear Amber, or Succinum, Unicorns horn six grains, Magisterium, Perlarum one scruple.
Ah.
Ossis de Corde Cerui half a scruple, Aurum Pot∣bile or his tincture.
Very precious Sir.
All which being finely contunded, and mixed in a stone or glass mortar, with the spirit of Diamber.
Nay pray be patient Sir.
That's impossible, I cannot bee Patient and a Physician too Sir.
Oh, cry you mercy, that's true Sir.
All which aforesaid.
I, there you left Sir.
When it is almost exsiccate or dry, I add there∣to olei Succini, olei Masi, &amp; Sinamoni.
So Sir, olei Masi, that same oil of Maze is a great comfort to both the Counters.
And has been of a long time Sir.
Well, bee of good cheer wench, ther's gold for
thee; huh, let her want for nothing M. Doctor, a poor kinse∣woman of mine, nature binds me to have a care of her; there I gulled you M. Doctor: gather up a good spirit wench, the fit will away, tic but a surfeit of gristles: ha, ha, I have sitted her; an old Knight and a cock a'th game still, I have not spurs for nothing I see.
No by my faith, the're hatched, they cost you an Angel sir.
Look to her good M. Doctor, let her want no∣thing, I'ue given her enough already, Ha, ha, ha.
So, is he gone?
Hoe's like himself gon.
Heir's somewhat to set up with; how soon he took occasion to slip into his own flattery, soothing his own defects; he only fears he has done that deed, which I ne'er feared to come from him in my life, this purchase came un∣looked for.
H'ist, the pair of sons and heirs.
Oh, the're welcome, they bring money.
M. Doctor.
I come to you Gentleman.
How do's she now?
Faith much after one fashion sir.
There's hope of life sir.
I see no signs of death of her.
That's some comfort; will she take any thing yet?
Yes, yes, yes, she'll take still: sh'as a kind of fa∣cility in taking: how comes your band bloody sir?
You may see I met with a scab sir.
Diverse genera Scabierum, as Pliny reports, there arediners kind of Scabs.
Pray lets hear i'm sir.
An itching scab, that is your harlot; a sore scab, your usurer; a running, your promooter; a broad scab, your intelligencer; but a white scab, that's a scald knave and a
Pander: but to speak truth, the only scabs wee are now a days troubled withal, are new officers.
Why now you come to mine sir, for Isle be sworn one of them was very busy about my head this morning, and he should be a scab by that, for they are ambitious and covet the head.
Why you saw I derived him sir?
You Physicians are mad Gentlemen.
We Physicians see the most sights of any men li∣uing, you're Astronomers look upward into'th air, we look downward into'th body, and indeed wee have power up∣ward and downward.
That you have in faith sir.
Lady, how cheer you now?
The same woman still, huh.
That's not good.
Little alteration, Fie, fie, you have been to lavish Gentlemen.
Puh, talk not of that Lady, thy health's worth a mil∣lion; here M. Doctor, spare for no cost.
Look what you find there sir.
What doe you mean gentlemen, put up, put up, you see I'm down and cannot strive with you, I would rule you else; you have me at advantage, but if ever I live, I will requite it deeply.
Tut an't come to that once, we'll requite our selves well enough.
Mist. Harebrain, Lady, is setting forth to visit you too.
Ho, huh.
There struck the munit that brings forth the birth of all my joys and wishes; but see the jar now, how shall I rid these from her?
Pray gentleman, stay not aboue an hour from my sight.
S'foot we are not going Lady.
Subtly brought about, yett' will not doe, the'le stick by it; a word with you gentlemen.
What says M. Doctor?
She wants but settling of her sense with rest, one hours sleep gentlemen would set all parts in tune.
He says true in faith.
Get her to sleep M. Doctor, we'll both sit here and watch by her.
Hells Angels watch you, no Art can prevail with i'm; what with the thought of joys, and sight of crosses, my wits are at Hercules pillars, non plus ultra.
M. Doctor, M. Doctor?
Here Lady.
Your physic works, lend me your hand.
Farewell sweet Lady.
Adieu M. Doctor.
So.
Let me admire thee,
The wit of man, wanes and decreases soon,
But women's wit is ever at full moon.
There shot a star from heaven,
I dare not yet behold my happiness.
The splendour is so glotious and so piercing.
Mistress Harebraine, give my wit thanks hereafter, your wishes are in sight, your opportunity spacious.
Will you but hear a word from me?
Whooh—
My husband himself brought me to'th door, walks below for my return; jealousy is prick-eard, and will hear the waging of a hair.
Pish, y' are a faint-liuer, trust your self with your pleasure, and me with your security, go.
The fulness of my wish.
Of my desire.
Beyond this sphere I never will aspire.
Isle listen, now the flesh draws no her end,
At such a time women exchange their secrets,
And ransack the close corners of their hearts;
What many years hath whelmed, this hour imparts.
Pray sit down, there's a low stool, good Mistress Harebraine, this was kindly done; huh give me your hand; huh, alas how cold you are: even so is your husband, that worthy wise Gentleman; as comfortable a man to woman in my case, as ever trod—huh—shoe leather, love him, honour him, stick by him, hee lets you want nothing, that's fit for a woman; and to be sure on it, he will see himself that you want it not.
And so I doe in faith, tic right my humour.
You live a Ladies life with him, go where you will, ride when you will, and do what you will.
Not so, not so neither, shoe's better looked to.
I know you doe, you need not tell me that; it were ee'n pity of your life in faith, if ever you should wrong such an innocent gentleman; fie Mistress Harebraine, what doe you mean? come you to discomfort me? nothing but weeping with you?
Shoe's weeping, it is made her weep, my wife shows her good nature already.
Still, still weeping? huff, huff, huff, why how now woman? hey, hy, hy, for shame leave; suh, suh, she cannot an∣swear me for snobbing.
All this do's her good, beshrew my heart and I pi∣tie her, let her shed tears till morning; Isle stay for her, she shall have enough on it by my good will; Isle not be her hen∣derance.
O no, lay your hand here Mistress Harebraine: I there, Oh there, there lies my pain good gentlewoman: sore? Oh I, I can scarce endure your hand vppon't.
Poor soul, how shoe's tormented.
Yes, yes, I eat a Cullisse an hour since.
There's some comfort in that yet, she may scope it.
Oh it lies about my heart much.
I'm sorry for that in faith, she'll hardly scope it.
Bound, no, no, I'd a very comfortable stool this morning.
I'm glad of that in faith, that's a good sign, I smell, she'll scope it now.
Will you be going then?
Fall back, shoe's coming.
Thanks good Mistress Harebraine, welcome sweet Mistress Harebraine, pray commend me to the good gentleman your husband.
I could do that my self now.
And to my uncle Winchcombe, and to my Aunt Lipsalue, and to my cousin Falsetop, and to my cousin Lickit, and to my cousin Horseman, and to all my good cousins in Clearken well, and Saint Ionises.
At three days end my husband takes a journey.
Oh thence I derive a second meeting.
May it prosper still, Till then I rest a captive to his will: Once again health, rest, and strength to thee sweet Lady: farewell, you witty squall; good M. Doctor have a care to her body if yous stand her friend, I know you can doe her good.
Take pity of your waiter, go: farewell sweet Mistress Harebraine.
Welcome sweet wife, alight upon my lip, never was hour spent better.
Why, were you within the hearing sir?
I that I was in faith, to my great comfort; I deceiud
you there wife, ha, ha;
I doe entreat thee, nay conjure thee wife
Upon my love, or what can more be said?
Oftner to visit this sick virtuous maid.
Be not so fierce, your will shall be obaide.
Why then I see thou love me.
Art of Ladies.
When plots are ee'n past hope, and hang their head,
Set with a women's hand, they thrive and spread.
Wast not well managed, you necessary mischiefs? did the plot want either life or Art?
Tw's so well Captain, I would you could make such another Musse at all adventures.
Dost call it a Musse? I am sure my Grandsire ne'er got his money worse in his life, then I got it from him, if ever he did cozen the simple; why I was borne to revenge their quarrel; if ever oppress the widow? I, a fatherless child have done as much for him; and so tic through the world ei∣there in jest or earnest, let the usurer look for it, for craft re∣coils in the end, like an overcharged musket, and maims the very hand that puts fire too't; there needs no more but a Usurers own blow to strike him from hence to hell, twil set him forward with a vengeance; but here lay the jest whore∣sons, my Grandsire thinking in his conscience that wee had not robed him enough over night, must needs pity me it'h morning, and give me the rest.
Two hundred pounds in fair Rose-Nobles I protest.
Push, I knew he could not sleep quietly till he had paid me for robing of him too, tic his humour, &amp; the humour of most of your rich men in the course of their lives; for you know, they always feast those mouths that are least nedie, and give them more, that have too much already; and what call you that, but robing of themselves a Courtlier way; Oh.
Cuds me, how now Captain?
A cold fit that comes over my memory, and has a shrode pull at my fortunes.
What's that Sir?
Is it for certain, Lieutenant, that my Grandsire keeps an uncertain creature, a Queen?
I that's too true Sir.
So much the more preposterous for me, I shall
hop shorter by that trick; she carries away the thirds at least;
twill prove en-tayld land I am afraid when al's done, in faith
nay, I have known a vicious-old-thought-acting Father,
Dimbed only in his dreams, thirsting for game,
(When his best parts hung down their heads for shame,)
For his blancht harlot dispossess his son,
And make the pox his heir, two's gravely done:
How had thou first knowledge on it Lieutenant?
Faith from discourse, yet all the policy That I could use, I could not get her name.
Dull slave that ne'er coldest spy it.
But the māner of her coming was described to me.
How is the manner prithee?
Marry sir she comes, most commonly coached.
Most commonly coached indeed, for coaches are as common now adays, as some that ride in i'm, she comes most commonly coached.
True, there I left sir, guarded with some leash of Pimps.
Beside the coachman?
Right sir, then alighting, shoe's privately received by master Gunwater.
That's my Grandsires chief Gentleman it'h chain of gold, that hee should live to bee a Pander, and yet look upon his chain and his velvet jacket
Then is your Grandsire rounded it'h ear, the key given after the Italian fashion, backward, she closly conveyed into his closet, there remaining, till either opportunity smile upon his credit, or hee send down some hot caudle to take order in his performance.
Peace, tic mine own in faith, I haa'te.
How now Sir?
Thanks, thanks to any spirit, That mingled it amongst my inventions.
Why master Folly-wit?
Captain?
Give me scope and hear me,
I have begot that means which will both furnish me,
And make that queen walk under his conceit.
That were double happiness, to put thy self into money and her out of favour.
And all at one dealing?
S'foot I long to see that hand plaid,
And thou shalt see it quickly in faith; nay tic in grain, I warrant it hold colour: Lieutenant, step behind yo'n hanging; if I mistook not at my entrance, there hangs the lower part of a gentlewoman's gown, with a mask and a chinclout; bring all this way: Nay, but do it cunningly now, tic a friends house, and I'd vfe it so, ther's a taste for you.
But prithee what wilt thou doe with a Gentlewo∣mans lower part?
Why use it.
You've answered me indeed in that, I can demand no farther.
Well said Lieutenant.
What will you do now sir?
Come, come, thou shalt see a woman quickly made up here.
But that's against kind Captain, for they are al∣ways long a making ready.
And is not most they doe against kind I prithee? to lie with their Horse-keeper, is not that against kind? to wear half moons made of another hair, is not that against kind? to drink down a man, she that should set him up, pray is not that monstrously against kind now? nay over with it Lieutenant, over with it, ever while you live put a women's clothes over her head: Cupped plays best at blind-man buff.
You shall have your will maintenance, I love mad tricks as well as you for your heart sir; but what shift will you make for upper bodies Captain?
I see now you're an Ass, why I'm ready.
Ready?
Why the Doublet serves as well as the best, and is
most in fashion, weere all Male tot'h middle, mankind from the Beaver to'th Bum, tic an Amazonian time, you shall have women shortly tread their husbands; I should have a couple of Locks behind, prithee Lieutenant find em out for me, and wind 'em about my hatband, nay you shall see, weal be in fa∣shion to a hair, and become all with probability, the most musty-visage Critic shall not except against me.
Nay isle give thee thy due behind thy back, thou art as mad a piece of Clay—
Clay! dost call thy Captain Clay? indeed clay was made to stop holes, he says true; did not I tell you rascals you should see a woman quickly made up?
Isle swear for it Captain.
Come, come, my mask and my chin-cloute—Come into'th Court.
Nay they were both 'ith Court long ago sir.
Let me see, where shall I choose two or three for Pimps now? but I cannot choose amiss amongst you all, thats the best; well, as I am a Queen, you were best have a care of me, and guard me sure, I give you warning before hand, tic a monckie taylde-Age. Life, you shall go ny to have half a dozen blithe fellows surprise me cowardly, carry me away with a pair of owers, and put in at Putney.
We should laugh at that in faith.
Or shoot in vppo'th coast of Cue.
Two notable fit landing places for Lechers, P. and C. Putney and Cue.
Well, say you have fair warning on it, the hair about the hat is as good as a flag vppo'th pole at a common Play∣house to wast company, and a chin-cloute is of that powerful a traction I can tell you, twill draw more Linen toot?
Fear not vs Captain, there's none here but can fight for a whore as well as some Innes a Court-man?
Why then set forward; and as you scorn two shilling brothel, twelve penny Panderism, and such base bribes, guard me from bonny Scribs, and bony Scribes.
Hang 'em, pensions, and alowancces, four pence half penny a meal, hang 'em.
Ha? read that place again,—Adultery
Draws the Divorce twixt heaven and the soul!
Accursed man that standst diuors't from heaven,
Thou wretched unthrift, that hast played away
Thy Eternal portion at a minutes game,
To please the flesh, hast blotted out thy name:
Where were thy nobler meditations busied?
That they durst trust this body with it self,
This natural drunkard that undoes vs all,
And makes our shame apparent in our fall.
Then let my blood pay fort, and vex and boyle,
My soul I know would never grieve tot'h death,
The Eternal spirit that feeds her with his breath:
Nay I that knew the price of life and sin,
What Crown is kept for continence, what for lust?
The end of man, and glory of that end
As endless as the giver:
To dote on weakness, slime, corruption, woman?
What is she, took asunder from her clothes?
Being ready, she consists of hundred pieces,
Much like your German cloak, and ne'er allied
Both are so nice, they cannot go for pride.
Beside a greater fault, but too well known,
Theyle strike to ten, when they should stop at one;
Within these three days the next meeting's fixed,
If I meet then, hell and my soul be mixed.
My lodging I know constantly, she not knows,
Sins hate is the best gift that sin bestows:
Isle ne'er embrace her more,—never—better witness, never.
What at a stand? the fitter for my company?
Celestial soldiers guard me,-
How now man? Lase did the quickness of my presence fright thee?
Shield me you ministers of faith and grace.
Leave, leave, are you not ashamed to use such words to a woman?
You are a Devil.
A devil? feel, feel man, has a devil flesh and bone?
I do conjure thee by that dreadful power—
The man has a delight to make me tremble;
Are these the fruits of thy adventurous Love?
Was I enticed for this? to be soon rejected?
Come, what has changed thee so, Delight;
Away.
Remember.
Leave my sight.
Have I this meeting wrought with cunning.
Which when I com̄e I find thee shunning?
Rowze thy amorous thoughts and twine me,
All my interest I resign thee:
Shall we let slip this mutual hour,
Comes so seldom in her power?
Wher's thy lip, thy clip, thy fathom?
Had women such loves. would it not mad 'em?
Art a man? or dost abuse one?
A Love! and know not how to vse-one?
Come, isle teach thee—
Do not follow.
Once so firm and now so hollow?
When was place and season sweeter?
Thy bliss in sight and dare not meet her?
Wher's thy courage youth and vigour?
Loves best pleased, whent's seard with rigour:
Ceare me then with veins most cheerful,
Women love no flesh that's fearful;
Tic but a sit, come Drinck't away,
And dance and sing, and kiss and play—Fa le
La, le la, Fa le la, le la la; Fa le la, fa la le
La le la.
Torment me not.
Fa le la, fa le la, fa la la, loh.
Fury.
Fa le la, fa le la, fa la la loh.
Devil! I do conjure thee once again,
By that soule-quaking thunder to depart,
And leave this chamber, freed from thy damned Art.
Stamps—
It he's prevailed—Oh my sin-shaking Sinews! what should I think? Jasper, why Jasper.
Sir! how now? what has disturbed you sir.
A sit, a qualm, —is mistress Hargraue gone?
Who sir? mistress Hargraue?
Is she gone I say?
Gone? why she was never here yet.
No!
Why no sir.
Art sure ont.
Sure ont? if I be sure I breathe, and am my self?
I like it not; —where kepst thou?
It'h next room sir.
Why she struck by thee man.
Your make one mad sir, that a gentlewoman should steal by me and I not hear her, sfoote, one may hear the rustling of their bums almost an hour before we see 'em.
I will be satisfied,—although to hazard,
What though her husband meet me? I am honest;
When men's intones are wicked, their guilt haunts em,
But when they're just, they're armed, and nothing daunts 'em.
What strange humour call you this? he dreams of women and both his eyes broad open!
Why how now master Gumwater? what's the news with your hast?
I have a thing to tell your worship —
Why prithee tell me, speak man.
Your worship shall pardon me, I have better bringing up then so.
How sir?
Tic a thing made fit for your Ear sir —
Oh—o—o—cry you mercy, now I begin to taste you,— is she come?
Shoe's come sir?
Recovered, well and sound again?
That's to be feared sir.
Why sir?
She wears a Linen cloth about her Jaw,
Ha, ha, haw,—why that's the fashion you whoreson Gumwater.
The fashion sir? live I so long time to see that a fashion, which rather was an Emblem of dispraise, It was suspected much in Mounsiers days.
I, I, in those days, that was a queasy time, our age is better hardened now, and put oftner in the fire, we are tried what we are: tut, the Pox is as natural now, as an Ague in the Spring time, we seldom take physic without it; here, take this key, you knew what duties belong too't, go,—give or∣der for a Cullize, let there be a good fire made it'h matted chamber, do you hear sir?—
I know my office sir.
An old mans venery is very chargeable my ma∣sters, there much cooquery belongs too't.
Come Lady, you know where you are now?
Yes, good master Gumwater.
This is the old closet you know.
I remember it well sir.
There stands a Casket, I would my yearly revenue were but worth the wealth thats locked int Lady; yet I have fife∣tie pound a year wench.
Beside your apparel sir?
Yes faith have I.
But then you reckon your chain sir.
No by my troth doe I not, neither: faith and you con∣cider me rightly sweet Lady, you might admit a choice gen∣tleman into your service.
Oh, pray away sir.
Push come, come, you do but hinder your fortunes in faith, I have the command of all the house, I can tell you, no∣thing comes intot'h kitchen, but comes through my hands.
Pray do not handle me sir.
Faith you're too nice Lady: and as for my secrecy you know I have vowed it often to you.
Vowed it? no, no, you men are fickle,—
Fickle?—sfoote bind me Lady —
Why I bind you by virtue of this chain to meet me to morrow at the Flowredeluce yonder, between Nine and Ten.
And if I do not Lady let me lose it, thy love and my best fortunes?
Why now isle try you, go too.
Farewell sweet Lady.
Welcome sweet cockscomb; by my faith a good in∣duction, I perceive by his overworn phrase, and his action to∣ward the middle region still there has bin some saucy nibbling motion, and no doubt the cunning queen waited but for her prey, and I think tic better bestowed upon me for his souls health;—and his bodies too; isle teach the slave to be so bold yet, as once to offer to vault into his masters saddle in faith: Now Casket, by your leave, I have seen your outside oft, but
thats no proof. Some have fair outsides that are nothing worth: ha? —now by my faith a gentlewoman of very good parts, Diamond, Ruby, Sapphire, Onix cum prolo Silexque; if I doe not wonder how the queen escaped tempting, I'm an Hermophrodite, sure she could lack nothing, but the Devil to point too't, and I wonder that he should be missing; well, tic better as it is, this is the fruit of old-grunting-venerie. Grandsire, you may thank your Drab for this; oh fie, in your crinckling days Grandsire, keep a Courtesan to hinder your Grandchild, tic against Nature in faith, and I hope you'll be weary ont: Now to my villains that lurk close below: Who keeps a Harlot tell him this from me, He needs nor these, disease, nor enemy.
Ah sirrah, me think I feel my self well tosted, bombasted, rubbed and refreshed; but in faith I cannot forget to think how soon sickness has altered her—to my taste, I gave her a kiss at bottom of the stayres, and byth mass me thought her breath had much ado to be sweet, like a thing compoun∣ded me thought of wine, Beer, and Tobacco, I smelt much Pudding in it. It may be but my fancy, or her physic: For this I know, her health gave such content, The fault rests in her sickness, or my sent. How dost thou now sweet girl, what well recovered? Sickness quite gone, ha? speak—ha? wench? Frank Gulman, why body of me, whats here? my Casket wide open, broke open, my Jewels stolen—why Gumwater—
Anon anon sir.
Come hither Gumwater.
That were small manners sir in faith, isle find a time anon your worship's busy yet.
Why Gumwater?
Foe nay then you'll make me blush in faith sir.—
Whore's this Creature?
What creature first you'd have sir?
The worst that ever breathes.
Thats a wild Bore sir.
That's a wild whore sir;—where did thou leave her Rascal?
Who? your Recreation sir.
My Execration sir.
Where I was wont, in your worships closet.
A pox engross her, it appears too true, See you this Casket sir.
My chain, my chain, my chain, my one and only chain.
Thou runst to much purpose now, Gumwater, ye? Is not a Queen enough to answer for, but she must join a thief too't, a theeuing Queen, Nay I have done with her in faith, tic a sign sh'as been sick a late, for shoe's a great deal worse then she was, by my troth I would have paund my life upon it, did she want anything? was she not supply de?
Nay and liberally, for thats an olds mans sin,
Weal feast our Lechery, though we starve our kin.
Is not my name Sir Bounteous, am I not expressed there?
Ah fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, but I perceive
Tho she have never so complete a friend,
a strumpets love will have a wast in the end,
and distaste the vessel: I can hardly bear this;
But say I should complain, perhaps she has pound 'em,
Sfoote the Judges will but laugh at it, and bid her borrow
more money of em, make the old fellow pay for's lechery,
thats all the mends I get, I have seen the same Cafe tried at
Newbery the last Sizes.
Well, things must slip and sleep, I will dissemble it,
because my credit shall not loose her lustre,
But whilst I live, isle neither love nor trust her.
I ha done, I ha done, I ha done with her in faith.
Who's that knocks?
A friend.
Whats your will sir?
Is master Hargraue at home?
No, newly gone from it sir.
Whore's the gentlewoman his wife?
My mistress is within sir.
When came she in I pray?
Who my mistress? she was not out these two days to my knowledge.
No? trust me Id thought I'd seen her, I would request a word with her.
Isle tell her sir.
I thank you—It likes me worse and worse.—
Why how now sir? it was desperately aduenturd, I little looked for you until the morrow.
No? why what made you at my chamber then even now?
I at your chamber?
Puh—dissemble not, come, come, you were there.
By my life you wrong me sir.
What?
Firsty' are not ignorant what watch keeps o'er me, And for your chamber, as I live I knew not.
Burst into sorrow then, and greases extremes, Whilst I beat on this flesh.
What first disturbs you sir?—
Then was the devil in your likeness there.
Ha?
The very Devil assumed thee formally,
That face, that voice, that gesture, that attire,
Even as it sits on thee, not a pleate altered,
That Beaver band, the colour of that Periwig,
The Farthingale abone the Nauill, all;
As if the fashion were his own invention,
Mercy defend me.
To beguile me more.
The cunning Succubus told me that meeting
Was wrought a purpose by much wit and Art,
Wept to me, laid my vows before me, urged me,
Gave me the private marks of all our Love,
Wood me in wanton and effeminate rimes,
And sung and danced about me like a Fairy,
And had not worthier cogitations blessed me,
Thy form and his enchantments had possessed me.
What shall become of me my own thoughts doom me.
Be honest; then the Devil will ne'er assume thee,
He has no pleasure in that shape to abide,
Where these two sisters reign not, lust of pride;
He as much trembles at a constant mind
As looser flesh at him,—be not dismayed:
Spring souls for joy, his policies are betrayed;
Forgive me mistress Hargraue, on whose soul
The guilt hangs double,
My lust and thy enticement: both I challenge,
And therefore of due vengeance it appeared
To none but me to whom both sins inhered;
What knows the lecher when he clips his whore
Whether it be the Devil his parts adore:
They're both so like, that in our Natural sense,
I could discern no change nor difference.
No marvel then times should so stretch and turn
None for Religion, all for pleasure burn.
Hot zeal into hot lust is now transformed,
Grace into painting, charity into clothes,
Faith into false hair, and put off as often,
Theres nothing but our virtue knows a mean,
He that kept open house now keeps a Queen.
He will keep open still, that he commends,
And there he keeps a table for his friends:
And she consumes more then her Sire could hoard,
Being more common then his house or board:
Live honest, and live happy, keep thy vows,
Shees part a Virgin whom but one man knows:
Embrace thy husband, and beside him none,
Having but one heart, give it but to one.
I vow it on my knees, with tears true bred
No man shall ever wrong my husbands bed.
Rise, I'm thy friend for ever.
And I thine
For ever and ever,—Let me embrace thee sir, whom I will
love, even next unto my soul, and thats my wife,
Two dear Rare Iems this hour presents me with,
A wife thats modest, and a friend thats right,
Idle suspect and fear, now take your flight.
A happy inward peace crown both your joys
Thanks aboue utterance to you, —now? the news?
Sir Bounteous Progress sir,
Invites you and my mistress to a feast,
On Tuesday next; his man attends without—
Return both with our willingness and thanks.
I will entreat you sir, to be my guest.
Who I sir.
Faith you shall.
Well, isle break strife.
A friend's so rare, isle sooner part from life.
What so coy, so strict, come, come.
Pray change your opinion sir, I am not for that use.
Will you but hear me?
I shall hear that I would not.
Sfoote this is strange, I'ue seldom seen a wench Stand upon stricter points, life she will not endure to be cour∣ted, do's she ere think to prosper? Isle ne'er believe that Tree can bring forth fruit, that never bears a blossom, Court∣ships a blossom, and often brings forth fruit in forty weeks; It were a mad part in me, now to turn over: if ever there were
any hope on it, tic at this instant, shall I be madder now then ever I have been? 'ime in the way in faith.
Mans never at hie height of madness full,
Until he love and prove a women's gull;
I doe protest in earnest I ne'er knew
At which end to begin to affect a woman,
Till this bewitching minute, I ne'er saw
Face worth my object, till mine eye met hers, I should laugh and I were caught in faith, Isle see her again thats certain, what Ere comes ont, by your favour Ladies.
You're welcome sir.
Know you the young gentlewoman that went in lately?
I have best cause to know her, 'ime her mother sir.
Oh in good time, I like the gentlewoman well, a pre∣tie contrived beauty,
I, nature has done her part sir.
But she has one uncomely quality.
Whats that sir?
Sfoote she's afraid of a man.
A lass, impute that to her bashful spirit, she's fear∣full of her honour.
Of her honour? slid 'ime sure I cannot get her my∣den head with breathing upon her, nor can she loose her ho∣nor in her tongue.
True, and I have often told her so, but what would you have of a foolish virgin sir, a wilful virgin, I tell you sir, I need not have been in that solitary estate that I am, had she had grace and boldness to have put her self forward, always timorsome, always backward, ah that same peevish honour of hers, has undone her and me both good gentlemā: the suitors, the jewels, the ioynters that has been offered her, wee had been made women for ever, but what was her fa∣shion? she could not endure the sight of a man for sooth, but run and hole her self presently, so choice of her honour, I am persuaded, when ere she has husband, she will even be a presi∣dent for all married wives, how to direct their actions, and their lives.
Have you not so much power with her, to commād her presence.
You shall see straight what I can doe sir.
Would I might be hanged, if my love do not stretch to her deeper and deeper, those bashful maiden humours take me prisoner when their comes a restraint ont upon flesh, wee are always most greedy vppont, &amp; that makes your merchāts wife oftentimes pay so dear for a monthfull: give me a wo∣man as she was made at first, simple of her self, without So∣phistication, like this wench, I cannot abide them when they have tricks, set speeches &amp; Artful entertainments, you shall have some so impudently aspected, they will outcry the fore∣head of a man, make him blush first, &amp; talk him into silence, &amp; this is counted manly in a woman, it may hold so, sure wo∣manly it is not, no, If ere I love, or any thing move me,
T will be a women's simple modesty.
Pray let me go, why mother what doe you mean? I beseech you mother? is this your conquest now? great glory tic to overcome a pore and silly virgin.
The wonder of our time sits in that brow,
I ne'er beheld a perfect man till now.
Thou childish thing, more bashful then thour't wise,
Why dost thou turn aside, and drown thine eyes?
Look fearful fool, theres no tēptation ne'er thee,
Art not ashamed that any flesh should fear thee,
Why I durst pawn my life the gentleman means no other but honest and pure love to thee, how say you sir?
By my faith not I Lady.
Hark you there? what think you now forsooth? what
grieves your honour now?
Or what lascivious breath intends to rear
Against that maiden Organ your chaste care?
Are you resolved now better of men's harts?
Their faiths and their affections, with you none,
Or at most, few whose tongues and minds are one.
Repent you now of your opinion past,
Men love as purely as you can be chaste: to her your self sir,
The ways broke before you, you have the easier passage,
Fear not, come; erect thy happy graces in thy look;
I am no curious wooer, but infaith
I love thee honourably.
How mean you that sir?
Sfoot as one loves a woman for a wife,
Has the gentleman answered you, trow?
I do confess it truly to you both,
My estate is yet but sickly, but I'ue a Grandsire
Will make me Lord of thousands at his death.
I know your Grandsire well; she knows him bet∣la.
Why then you know no fiction; my state then will be a long days journey above the wast wench.
Nay daughter he says true.
And thou shalt often measure it in thy coach,
And with the wheels tract make a griddle for it.
Ah twill be a merry journey.
What first a match, if it be clap hands &amp; lips;
Tic done, ther's witness on it.
Why then mother I salute you.
Thanks sweet son;—Son Folliwit, come hither, if I might counsel thee, weal even take her while the good moods upon her, send for a Priest, and clapped up within this hour.
By my troth agreed mother.
Nor do's her wealth consist all in her flesh,
Tho beauty be enough wealth for a woman,
She brings a Dowry of three hundred pound with her.
Sfoote that will serve till my Grandsire dyes I warrant you, heel drop away at fall a'th leaf, if ever he reach to all Hollantide isle be hanged.
O yes son, hes a lusty old gentleman.
Ah pox, hoe's given to women; he keeps a queen at this present.
Fie.
Do not tell my wife ont.
That were needless in faith.
He makes a great feast upon the leauenth of this month, tuesday next, and you shall see Players there,—I have one trick more to put upon him; my wife and your self shall go thither before as my guests, and prove his entertainment, Isle meet you there at night, the jest will be here, that feast which he makes will, unknown to him serve fitly for our wed∣ding dinner, we shall be royally furnished, and get some charges by it.
An excellent course (in faith) and a thrifty, why son, me thinks you begin to thrive before you're married.
We shall thrive one day wench, and clep enough? Between our hopes theres but a Grandsires puff.
So girl, here was a bird well caught.
If ever, here: but what fo'rs Grandsire, twill scarce please him well.
Who covets fruit, ne'er cares from whence it fell,
Thou'st wedded youth and strength, and wealth will fall:
Last thourt made honest.
And thats worth 'em all.
Have a care blew-coates; bestir your self Ma∣ster Gumwater, cast an eye intoth kitchen, ore∣look the knaves a little, every lack has his friend to day, this cousin and that cousin puts in for a dish of meat, a man knows not till he make a feast how many varlets he feeds, acquaintances swarm in every corner, like flies at Barthol∣mewtide that come up with drouers, sfoot I think they smell my kitchen seven mile about master Shortrod and his sweet bedfellow, yare very copiously welcome.
Sir, here is an especial dear friend of ours, we were bold to make his way to your table.
Thanks for that boldness ever, good Master
Shortrod, is this your friend sir?
Both my wives friend and mine sir.
Why then compendeously sir,—yare welcome.
In Octauo I thank you sir.
Excellently retorted in faith, hes welcome for's wit; I have my sorts of salutes, and know how to place em Court∣lie; walk in sweet gentlemen, walk in, theres a good fire it'h Hall, you shall have my sweet company instantly.
I good sir Bounteous
You shall indeed gentlemen; how now, what news brings thee in stumbling now?
There are certain Players come to town sir, and de∣sire to interlude before your worship.
Players? by the mass they are welcome, the'yle grace my entertainment well, but for certain players there thou lie boy; they were never more uncertain in their lives, now up &amp; now down, they know not when to play, where to play, nor what to play, not when to play for fearful fools, where to play for Puritan fools, nor what to play for critical fools—go call em in,—how fitly the whorsons come vpo'th feast, troth I was even wishing for em,—oh welcome, welcome my friends.
The month of May delights not in her flowers, More then we joy in that sweet sight of yours.
Well acted a my credit, I perceive hes your best Actor.
He has greatest share sir; and may live of himself sir.
What what? put on your hat sir, pray put on; go too, wealth must be respected, let those that have least feathers stand bare; and whose men are you I pray? nay keep on your hat still.
We serve my Lord Owemuch sir.
My L. Owemuch, by my troth the welcomst men alive give me all your hands at once, that honourable gentleman? hee lay at my house in a robbery once, and took all quietly, went away cheerfully. I made a very good feast for him; I never saw a man of honour bear things brauelier away, serve my L. Owe∣much? welcome in faith: some Bastard for my Lords Players,— where be you boys?
They come along with the Waggon sir.
Good, good, and which is your Politician a∣amongst you? now in faith he that works out Restraints, makes best legs at Court and has a suit made of purpose, for the companies business, which is he, come▪ be not afraid of him.
I am he sir.
Art thou he? give me thy hand, hark in thine ear, thou row lest too fast to gather so much moss as thy fell∣low there, champ upon that, ah, and what play shall we have my masters?
A pleasant witty Comedy sir.
I, I, I, a Comedy in any case, that I and my guests may laugh a little, whats the name out?
Tic called the Slip.
The Slip? By my troth a pretty name, and a glib one: go all and slip intoot, as fast as you can cover a table for the players. First take heed of a Lurcher, hee cu•s deep, hee will eat up all from you. Some Shirry for my Lords players there. Sir, why this will be a True feast, a right Meter supper, a play and all, more lights—I called for light, here come in two are light enough for a whole house in faith. Dare the thief look me in the face? O impudent times! go too, dissem∣ble it.
Bless you sir Bounteous.
O welcome, welcome, Thief, Queen, and Bawd, welcome all three.
Nay hears but two on's sir.
A my troth, I took her for a couple, I'd have sworn there had been two faces there.
Not all under one hood sir.
Yes faith would I, to see mine eyes bear double.
He make it hold sir, my daughter is a couple, She was married yesterday. Sir Boun. Buzz.
Nay to no buzzard neither, a right Hake When ere you know him.
Away, he cannot be but a Rascal▪ walk in walk in, bold guests, that come vnfent for—post, I perceive how
my Jewels went now, to grace her marriage.
Would you with me sir?
Ey, how hoped it wench, you put the slip upon me,
Not three nights since? I name it gently to you,
I term it neither Pilfer, Cheat, nor Shark.
Y'ear past my reach.
I'm old and past your reach, very good; but you will not deny this I trust.
With a safe conscience, sir.
Ye? give me thy hand, fare thee well, I have done with her.
Give me your hand, sir, you ne'er yet begun with me.
Whew, whew? O audacious age.
She denies me and all, when on her fingers,
I spied the Ruby sit, that do's betray her,
And blushes for her fact, well theres a time sor't,
For al's too little now for entertainment.
Feast, mirth, I harmony, and the play to boot.
A Jovial Season. How now, are you ready?
Even upon readiness sir.
Keep you your hat on.
I have a suit to your worship.
Oh cry you mercy, then you must stand bare.
We could do all to the life of action sir, both for the credit of your worships house, and the grace of our Comedy.
Cuds me, what else sir?
And for some defects (as the custom is) we would be bold to require your worships assistance.
Why with all my heart, what first you want? speak.
One's a chain for a Justices hat sir.
Why here, here, here, here whoreson, will this serve your turn?
What else lack you?
We should use a ring with a stone int.
Nay whoop, I have given too many rings already, talk no more of rings I pray you, here, here, here, make this
Jewel serve for once.
Oh this will serve sir.
What have you all now?
All now sir—one y time is brought in the middle of the play, and I would desire your worships watch time.
My watch, with all my heart, only give time a charge that he be not fiddling with it.
You shall ne'er see that sir.
Well now you are furnish sir, make haste away.
Ee'n as fast as i can sir,—Isle set my fellows going first, they must have time and leisure, or they are dull else. He stay and speak a prologue, yet o'retake i'm, I cannot have conscience in faith to go away and speak ne'er a word to i'm, my Grādsire has given me three shares here, sure Isle do some∣what for i'm.
More lights, more stools, sit sit, the play begins.
Have you players here Sir Bounteous?
We have i'm for you sir, fine nimble Comedians, proper actors most of them.
Whose men I pray you sir?
Oh▪ there's their credit sir, they serve an honourable popular Gentleman, eclipped my Lord Ow-much.
My Lord Ow-much, he was in Ireland lately.
O you ne'er knew any of the name but were great travellers,
How is the Comedy called, Sir Bounteous?
Mary sir, the Slip.
The Slip?
I, and here the prologue begins to slip in vpon's.
Tic so indeed Sir Boun.
We sing of wand•ing knights, what them betide,
Who nor in one place, nor one thing abide,
They're here now, &amp; anon no scouts can reach em
Being every man well horsed like a bold Beecham,
The Play which we present, no fault shall mere
But one, you'll say tic short, weal say tic sweet:
Tic given much to dumb shows, which some praise,
And like the Term, delights much in delays.
So to conclude, and give the name her due,
The play being called the Slip, I vanish too.
Excellently well acted and a nimble conceit.
The Prologues pretty in faith.
And went off well.
I thats the grace of all, when they go away well, ah-
A my troth and I were not married, I could find in my heart to fall in love with that Player now, and send for him to a supper; I know some in the town that have done as much, and there took such a good conceit of their parts into'th two-penny room, that the Actors have bin found ith morning in a less compass then their Stage, tho it were ne'er so full of gen∣tlemen.
But, passion of me, where be these knaves, will they not come away, me thinks they stay very long.
Oh you must bear a little sir, they have many shifts to run into.
Shifts call you em, they're horrible long things.
A pox of such fortune the plots betrayed:
All will come out, yonder they come taken upon suspicion, and brought back by a Constable, I was accursed to hold so∣ciety with such Cockscombs, whats to be done? I shall be shamde for ever, my wife here and al, ah pox—by light happi∣lie thought upon, the chain▪ Invention stick to me this once, and fail me ever hereafter: so, so,—
Life I say, where be these Players, oh are you come, troth its time, I was even sending for you.
How moodily he walks, what plays he trow?
A, Justice upon my credit, I know by the chain there.
Unfortunate Justice.
Ah—a—a—
In thy kin unfortunate.
Here comes thy Nephew now upon suspicion,
Brought by a Constable before thee, his wild associates with him,
But so disguised, none knows him but my self,
Twice have I set him free from officers sangs,
And for his sake, his fellows: let him look too't:
My conscience will permit but one wink more.
Ye shall we take Justice winking.
For this time I have be thought a means to work thy
freedom, tho hazarding my self; should the Law cease him,
Being kin to me, twould blenush much my name, No;
I'd rather lean to danger, then to shame.
A very exploit Justice.
Thank you good neighbours, let me alone with em now.
Sfoote whose yonder?
Dare he sit there?
2. Follywit.
3. Captain—puh—
How now Constable what news with thee?
May it please your worship sir,—here are a company of auspicious fellows.
To me; puh—turn to'th Justice you whoreson hob∣by horse, this is some new player now, they put all their fools to the Constables part still.
Whats the matter Constable, whats the matter?
I have nothing to say to your worship—they were all riding a horseback ant please your worship
Yet again: a pox of all Isles still, they could not ride a foot unless it were in a bawdy house.
The Oftler told me they were all unstable fellows sir.
Why sure the fellow's drunk.
We spied that weakness in him long ago sir, your worship must bear with him, the mans much oreseene, only in respect of his office wee obeyed him, both to appear con∣formable to law, and clear of all offence: for I protest sir,
he found vs but a horse back:
What he did?
As I have a soul, thats all, and all he can lay to vs.
In faith, you were not all riding away then.
S'foot, being a horseback sir, that must needs follow.
Why true sir.
Well said Justice, he helps his kinseman well.
Why Sir, do you use to bring Gentlemen before vs for riding away, what will you have em stand still when they're up, like Smug vpo'th white horse yonder? are your wits steeped? He make you an example for all dizzy Constables, how they abuse justice, here bind him tot his chair.
Ha, bind him hoe?
If you want cords, use garters.
Help, help, Gentlemen.
As fast as we can sir.
Thieves, thieves.
A gag will help all this, keep less noisē you knave.
Oh help, rescue the Constable — oh, O.
Ho, ho, ho, ho.
Why la you who lets you now?
You may ride quietly, Isle see you to,
Take horse my self. I have nothing else to doe.
Oh,—oh—oh—
Ha, ha ha, by my troth the maddest piece of In∣stice gentlemen, that ever was committed.
He be sworn for the madness on it sir.
I am deceived, if this prove not a merry Comedy and a witty.
A lass poor Constable, his mouth's open, and ne'er a wife word.
Faith he speaks now even as many as he has done, he seems wisest when he gapes and says nothing, ha ha;— he turns and tells his tale to me like an ass, what have I to do with their riding away, they may ride for me, thou whoreson Cockscomb th•n; nay thou art well enough served in faith,
But what follows all this while sir, me thinks some should pass by before this time, &amp; pity the Constable.
Byth mass and you say true sir,—go sirrah, step in, I think they have forgot themselves, call the knaves away they are in a wood I believe.—
I, I, I.
Hank, the Constable says I, they're in a wood,— ha, ha,—
He thinks long of the time sir Bounteous.
How now? when come they?
A lass an't please your worship, ther's not one of them to be found sir.
How?
What says the fellow?
Neither horse nor man sir.
Body of me thou least.
Not a hair of either sir.
How now sir Bounteous.
Cheated and defeated, vngag that rascal, Isle hang him for's fellows, Isle make him bring em out.
Did not I tell your worship this before, brought em before you for suspected persons, Hayd em at towns end up∣on warning given, made signs that my very iaw bone aches, your worship would not hear me, called me Asle, saving your worships presence laughed at me.
Ha?
I begin to taste it.
Give me leave, give me leave, why art not thou the Constable it'h Comedy?
Ith comedy? why I am the constable in the common wealth sir.
I am gulled in faith, I am gulled, when wast thou chose?
On thursday last sir.
A pox go wit'ht, ther't goes.
I seldom heard Jest match it.
Nor I in faith.
Gentlemen shall I entreat a courtesy?
What first sir?
Do not laugh at me seven year hence.
Wee should betray and laugh at our own folly then, for of my troth none here but was deceiud int.
Faith thats some comfort yet, ha, ha, it was feately carried, troth I commend their wits, before our faces, make vs asses while we sit still, and only laugh at our selves.
Faith they were some counterfeit rogues sir.
Why they confess so much them selves, they said theyd play the slip, they should be men of their words, I hope the Justice will have more conscience in faith, then to cary a∣way a chain of a hundred mark of that fashion.
What sir?
I by my troth sir, besides a jewel, and a jewels fell∣lowe, a good fair watch that hung about my neck sir.
Sfoote what did you mean sir?
Me thinks my Lord Owemuches players should not scorn me so in faith they will come and bring all again I know, push they will in faith, but a jest certainly.
Pray Grandsire give me your blessing?
Who? Son Folliwit?
This shows like kneeling after the play, I praying for my Lord Owemuch and his good Countess, our honou∣rabble Lady and mistress.
Rise richer by a blessing, thou art welcome.
Thanks good grandsire, I was bold to bring those gentlemen my friends.
Their all welcome, salute you that side, &amp; isle well∣come this side. Sir to begin with you.
Master Follywit.
I am glad tic our fortune so happily to meet sir.
Nay then you know me not sir.
Sweet Mistress Harebraine.
You cannot be too bold sir.
Our marriage known?
Not a word yet.
The better.
Faith son would you had come sooner with these
gentlemen.
Why Grandsire?
We had a play here.
A play sir, no.
Yes faith, a pox a'th Author.
Bless vs all, why were they such wild ones sir?
I am sure villainous ones sir.
Some rawe-simple fools.
Nay bith mass these were enough for the euish knaves.
What sir?
Which way came you gentlemen, you could not choose but meet em.
We met a company with hampers after em.
Oh those were they, those were they, a pox ham∣per em.
Bless vs all again.
They have hamperd me finely sirrah.
Howe sir.
How sir, I lent the rascals properties to furnish out their play, a chain, a jewel, and a watch, &amp; they watched their time, and rid quite away with em.
Are they such creatures.
Hark, hark gentlemen, by this light the watch rings alarm in his pocket, theirs my watch come again, or the very Cousin German toot, whose first, whose first? by the mass tic he, hast thou one son? prithee bestow it upon thy Grandsire, I now look for mine again in faith, nay come with a good will or not at all. Isle give thee a better thing a piece, a piece gentlemen.
Great or small,
At once I have drawn chain, jewel, watch &amp; all.
By my faith you have a fortunate hand sir.
Nay all to come at once.
A vengeance of this soolecy.
Have I scope the Constable to be brought in by the watch?
O destiny, have I married a Thief mother?
Comfort thy self, thou art before hand with him daughter.
Why son, why gentlemen, how long have you bin my Lord Ow-much his servants in faith?
Faith Grandsire, shall I be true to you?
I think tic time, thoust been a these already.
I knowing the day of your feast, &amp; the natural incline∣tion you have to pleasure and pastime, presumde upon your patience for a jest as well to prolong your days as—
Whoop, why then you took my chain along with you to prolong my days did you?
Not so neither sir &amp; that you may be seriously assured of my herafter stablenesse of life, I have took another course.
What?
Took a wife.
A wife? sfoot, what is she for a fool would marry thee a madman? when was the wedding kept in Bedlam?
Shees both a gentlewoman and a virgin.
Stop there, stop there, would I might see her.
You have your wish, shees here.
Ah, ha, ha, ha, this makes amends for all.
How now?
Captain do you hear? is she your wife in earnest?
How then?
Nothing but pity you sir.
Speak son first true?
Can you gull vs, and let a queen gull you.
Ha.
What I have bin is past, be that forgiven,
And have a soul true both to thee and heaven.
First come about, tricks are repaid I see.
The best is sirrah you pledge none but me
And since I drink the top, take her and hark,
I spice the bottom with a thousand mark.
By my troth, she is as good a cup of Nectar, as a∣my
Bachelor needs to sip at.
Tut give me gold, it makes amends for vice,
Maids without coin, are candles without spice.
Come gentlemen toth feast, let not time waste,
We have pleased our ear, now let vs please our taste
Who lives by cunning mark it, his fates cast,
When he has gulled all, then is himself the last.

Boy?
Here sit!
Lay by my conscience, give me my Gown,
That weed is for the country,
We must be civil now, and match out Evil,
Who first made Civil, black; he pleased the Devil;
So; now know I where I am, me thinks already
I grasp best part of the Autumnian blessing
In my contentious fathom, my hand's free,
From wronger and from wronged I have fee,
And what by sweat from the rough earth they draw,
Is to enrich this silver harvest, Law,
And so through wealthy variance, and fat brawl,
The Barn is made but Steward to the Hall;
Come they up thick enough?
Oh like hops and harlots sir!
Why dost thou couple them?
Oh very aptly, for as the hop well boiled will make
a man not stand upon his legs: so the harlot in time will
leave a man no legs to stand upon!
Such another and bee my heir, I have no Child,
Yet have I wealth would redeem beggary,
I think it be a curse both here and foreign,
Where bags are fruitful'st, there the womb's most barren,
The poor he's all our children, we their wealth;
Shall I be prodigal when my life cools,
Make those my heirs whom I have beggared; Fools?
It would be wondrous; rather beggar more,
Thou shalt have heirs enough, thou keep a whore,
And here comes kindred too with no mean purses,
Yet strive to be still blessed with Clients curses.
What subtlety have we here? a fellow
Shrugging for lifes kind benefits, shift and heate,
Crept up in 3. Terms, wrapped in silk and silver,
So well appointed too with Page and Pander,
It was a happy gale that blew him hither.
And like Asses use such men,
When their load's off, turn i'm to graze again.
And may our wish have full effect,
Many a suite, and much neglect.
And as it hath been often found,
Let the Clients cups come round.
Help your poor kinsmen when you ha got i'm.
You may drink deep, leave vs the bottom;
Or when there is a lamb fallen in,
Take you the lamb, leave vs the skin.
Your duty and regard hath moved vs,
Never till now wee thought you loved vs,
Take comfort from our words, and make no doubt,
You shall have suites come sixteen times about.
We humbly thank the patron of our hopes.
With what a vassal—appetite they Gnaw,
On our reversions; and are proud,
Coldly to taste our meates, which eight returns
Serve in to vs as courses;
One day our writs like wilde-fowle fly abroad,
And then return over Cities, Towns, and Hills,
With Clients like dried straws between their bills;
And it is no few birds pick to build their Nests,
Nor no small money that keeps Drabs and Feasts!
But Gentlemen, to spread my self open unto you, in chea∣per
Terms I salute you, for ours have but sixpenny fees all
the year long, yet wee dispatch you in two hours, with∣out
demur; your Suites hang not long here after Candles be
lighted: Why we call this play by such a dear and charge∣able
Title, Michaelmas Term? Know it consents happi∣lye
to our purpose, tho perhaps faintly to the interpretati∣on
of many; for he that expects any great quarrels in Law
to bee handled here, will be fondly deceived, this only pre∣scents
those familiar accidents, which happened in Town in
the circumference of those six weeks, whereof Michael∣mas
Term is Lord: Sat sapienti, I hope there's no fools
in the house!
What Master Rerrage?
Master Salewood▪ Exceedingly well met in Town,
comes your Father up this Term?
Why he was here three days before the Exchequer
gapte.
Fie, such an early Termer?
Hoe's not to bee spoke withal, I dare not ask him
blessing, till the last of November.
And how looks thy little venturing Cousin?
Faith like a Lute that he's all the strings broke, no
body will meddle with her.
Fie, there are Doctors enough in Town will string
her again, and make her sound as sweet as ere she did, is
she not married yet?
She as no luck, some may better steal a horse than
others look on. I have known a virgin of five bastards
wedded, faith when ell's donne we must bee fine to marry
her into the North I'm afraid.
But will she pass so think you?
Puh, any thing that is warm enough is good y∣nough
for them; so it come in the likeness, tho the Devil
be in it, the'ile venture the fearing.
They're worthy spirits in faith, heard you the
News?
Not yet.
Mistress Difficult is fallen a widow.
Say true, is Master Difficult the Lawyer dead?
Easily dead sir.
Pray when died hee?
What a question's that? when should a Lawyer dye
but in the vacation, hee he's no leisure to die in the Term∣time,
beside the Noise there would fetch him again.
Knew you the nature of his disease.
Faith some say he dyed of an old grief he had, that
the vacation was fourteen weeks long.
And very likely. I knew it would kill him at last, it is
troubled him a long time, hee was one of those that would
fine have brought in the heresy of a fifth Term, often cry∣ing
with a loud voice, oh why should we loose Bartholomew
week?
He savours, stop your Nose, no more of him.
Young moister Easy, let me salute you sir, when
came you?
I have but Inned my horse since master Cockstone.
You seldom visit London master Easy,
But now your Fathers dead tic your only course,
Here's gallants of all sizes, of all lasts,
Here you may fit your foot, make choice of those
Whom your affection may rejoice in:
You have easily possessed me I am free,
Let those live hinds that know not liberty.
Master Rerrage?
Good master Salewood, I am proud of your society.
What gentleman might that bee?
One master Essay, he has good •nd in Essex,
a fair free-brested Gentleman, somewhat too open,
bad in man, worse in woman,
the Gentrye-fault at first, he is yet fresh
and wants the City powdering, but what news?
I'st yet a match twixt master Qomodoes the rich Drapers
daughter and your self.
Faith sir, I am wildly riuald!
Wildly? by whom.
One Andrew Lethe crept to a little warmth, and
now so proud that he forgets all storms, one that ne'er wore
apparel, but like ditches it was cast before hee had it, now
shines bright in rich embroderies, him master Quomodo af∣fects,
the daughter him, the mother only me, I rest most
doubtful, my side being wookest.
Yet the mothers side
being surer than the Fathers, it may prove,
men plead for money best, women for love.
Slid master Quomodo?
How then, afraid of a woollen draper.
He warned me his house, and I hate hee should see
me abroad!
Oh my 2. spirits Shortyard and Falselight, you that
have so enriched me, I have industry for you both?
Then doe you please vs best sir.
Wealthy employment.
You make me icth sir.
You Falselight as I have directed you.
I am nimble.
Go, make my course commodities, look, seek,
with subtle art beguile the honest eye, be near to my trap∣window,
cunning Falselight.
I never failed it yet.
I know thou did not;
But now to thee my true and secret Shortyard,
Whom I dare trustee'n with my wife,
Thou ne'er did mistress harm, but master, good,
There are too few of thy name Gentlemen,
And that we feel, but Citizens abundance,
I have a task for thee my pregnant spirit,
To exercise thy pointed wits upon.
Give it me, for I thirst.
Thine care shall drink it,
Know then I have not spent this long Vacation
Only for pleasures sake, give me the man
Who out of recreation culls advantage,
Dives into seasons, never walks, but thinks,
No•ides, but plots, my journey was toward Essex.
Most true?
Where I have seen what I desire.
A woman?
Puh; a woman, yet beneath her, that which she
often treads on. Yet commands her land, fair neat
Land.
What is the mark you shoot at.
Why the fairest to cleave the heir in twain, I
mean his Title to murder his estate, stifle his
right in some some detested prison, there are
means and ways enough to hook in Gentry, be∣sides
our deadly enmity which thus stands
they are busy about our wives, We about their
Lands.
Your revenge is more glorious,
To be a cuckold is but for one life,
When land remains to you, your heir, or wife!
Ah sirrah, doe we stinge'm, this fresh gallant rode
newly up before me!
I beseech his name.
Young master Easy.
Easy? It may fall right.
I have enquired his haunt, stay, ha, I that, it is, thats
he, thats he!
Happily!
Observe, take surely note of him, hoe's fresh and free
shift thy self speedily into the shape of gallon∣try,
Isle swell thy purse with angels, keep foot
by foot with him, out-dare his expenses, flat∣la,
dice, and brothel to him, give him a sweet
taste of Sensuality, train him to every wasteful sin,
that he may quickly need health, but especially
money, ravish him with a dame or two, bee his
bawd for once, Isle bee thine for ever, drink
drunk with him, creep into bed to him, kiss
him and undo him, my sweet spirit.
Let your care dwell in me soon shall it shine,
What subtlety is in man, that is not mine.
O my most cheerful spirit, go, dispatch,
Gentry is the chief fish we Tradesmen catch.
What's here?
Oh, they are bills for Chambers.
Against Saint Andrews, at a Painters house, ther's
a fair chamber ready furnished to bee let, the house
not only endowed with a new fashion fore-part,
but which is more convenient for a Gentleman,
with a very provident backe-doore.
Why here's virtue still; I like that thing that's noses∣sary,
as well as pleasant.
What news in yonder paper.
Ha? seek you for news, there's for you!
Whose tic? in the name of the black Angels, An∣dro
Gruel.
No, Andro Lethe!
Lethe?
Has forgot his fathers name, poor Walter Gruel that
begot him, fed him, and brought him up.
Not hither.
No; it was from his thoughts, hee brought him up
below.
But do's he pass for Lethe.
Amongst strange eyes
that no more know him, then he knows him∣self,
thats nothing now, for master Andro Lethe,
a gentleman of most received parts, forgetfulness,
Lust, Impudence, and Falsehood, and one especi∣all
Courtly quality; to wit, no wit at all, I am his
Rival for Quomodoes daughter, but hee knows
it not.
Has spied vs ore his paper.
Oh thats a warning to make our duties ready.
Salute him, hang him.
Puh, wish his health a while, heel be laid shortly,
let him gorge Venison for a time, our doctors will bring him
to dry mutton; seem respective to make his pride swell like
a Toad with dew.
Master Lethe!
Sweet master Lethe.
Gentlemen your pardon, I remember you not.
Why we supped with you last night sir!
Oh cry you mercy, it is so long ago,
I had quite forgot you, I must be forgiven,
Acquaintance, dear society, suites and things,
Do so flow to me; that had I not the better memory!
Twould be a wonder I should know my self,
Esteem is made of such a dizzy mettle;
I have received of many gifts ore night
Whom I have forgot ere morning, meeting the men,
I wished em to remember me again,
They doo so: then if I forget again,
I know what helped before, that will help then,
This is my course, for memory I have been told
Twenty preserves, the best I find is gold;
Ey truly! are you not knights yet, Gentlemen.
Not yet!
No, that must bee looked into, tic your own salt,
I have some store of Venison, where shall we devour it,
Gentlemen?
The horn were a fit place.
For Venison, fit,
The horn having chaste it,
At the horn—weal Rime to that.—
Taste it.
Wast it.
Cast it.
Thats the true rime indeed, wee hunt our Venison
twice I tell you, first out a'th park, next out a'th Belly.
First dogs take pains to make it fit for men,
Then men take payne to make it fit for dogs.
Right.
Why this is kindness, a kind Gallant, you,
And love to give the dogs more than their due,
We shall attend you sir.
I pray doo so.
The horn.
Easily remembered that you know!
But now unto my present business, the Daughter yields, and
Quomodo consents, only my mistress Quomodo, her mother
without regard runs full against me, and sticks hard! Is there
no law for a woman that will run upon a man at her own peril.
Why should not she consent, knowing my state, my sudden for∣tunes,
I can command a custard, and other bakemeats, death of
sturgeon, I could keep house with nothing, what friends have I?
how wellam I beloved, ee'n quite throughout the scullery, not con∣sent?
tic ee'n as I have writ, Isle be hanged, and she love me not
herself &amp; wold rather preserve me, as a private friend to her own
pleasures, than any way advance her daughter upon me to beguile
herself, then how have I relieved her in that point, let me per∣use
this letter. Good mistress Quomodo, or rather as I hope ere
the Term end, mother Quomodo, since only your consent keeps
a aloof off and hinders the copulation of your daughter, what may I
think, but that it is a mere affection in you, doting upon some
small inferior virtue of mine, to draw me in upon your self, if the
case stand so, I have comfort for you: for this you may well assure
your self, that by the marriage of your daughter I have the better
means and opportunity to your self, and without the least suspi∣tion.
This is mooing stuff, and that works best with a City∣zens
wife, but who shall I get to convey this now: my Page I ha¦lent
forth, my Pander I have employed about the country, to look
out some third sister, or entice some discontented Gentlewoman
from her husband, whōe the laying out of my appetite shall main∣taine,
nay Isle deal like an honourable Gentleman, Isle bee kind
to women, that which I gather in the day, Isle put into their purses at
night, you shall have no cause to rail at me, no faith, Isle keep
you in good fashion Ladies, no meaner men then knights shall ran∣some
home your gowns, and recover your smocks, Isle not dally
with you—some poor widow woman would come as a necessa∣rye
bawd now: and see where fitly comes—my mother! curse off
poverty do's she come up to shame me, to betray my birth, and cast
soil upon my new Suite, let her pass me, Isle take no notice of her,
Scurvy—murray—Carsey!
By your leave and like your worship.
Then I must proudly venture it; to me good wo∣man.
I beseech one word with your worship.
Prethe be brief then.
Pray can your worship tell me any tidings of one
Andro Gruel, a poor son of mine own.
I know a gallant Gentleman of the name, one mas∣la
Andro Gruel and well received amongst Ladies.
That not he then!
Hee is no Gentleman that I mean.
Good woman if he be a Gruel, hoe's a Gentleman
in the mornings: thats a Gentleman a'th first, you cannot tel me
No truly, his father was an honest upright Tooth-drawer.
O my teeth.
An't please your worship, I have made a fore jour∣ney
out, all this vacant time, to come up and see my son
Andro, poor Walter Gruel his Father has laid his life, and
left me a lone woman, I have not one husband in all the
world, therefore my coming up is for relief an't like your
worship, hoping that my son Andro is in some place about
the Kitchen.
Kitchen, puh, fah.
Or a serving-man to some Kinght of worship.
Oh let me not endure her! Know you not me
good woman?
Alas, an't pleease your worship, I never saw such
a glorious suite since the hour I was •ersend.
Good, she knows me not, my glory do's disquire me,
Beside my poorer name being drenched in Lethe,
Sheele hardly understand me, what a fresh ayre can doo!
I may employ her as a private drudge,
To pass my letters and secure my lust,
And ne'er be noted mine, to shame my blood,
And drop my staining birth upon my raiment, faith good
woman you will hardly get to the speech of master Andro,
I tell you.
No?
Marry hang him, and like your Worship, I have known the
day when no body card to speak to him!
You must take heed how you speak ill of him now I
cantell you; hoe's so employed.
Employed for what?
For his behaviour, wisdom, and other virtues.
His virtues? no tic well known, his father was too
poor a man to bring him up to any virtues; hee can scarce
write and read.
Hoe's the better regarded for that amongst Court∣ers,
for thats but a needy quality!
If it be so, then heel be great shortly, for he has no
good parts about him.
Well good woman, or mother, or what you will.
Alack the day, I know your worship scorns to cal
me mother: tic not a thing fit for your worship indeed, such
a simple old woman as I am.
In pity of thy long journey, there's six-pence British:
tend upon me, I have business for you.
Isle waite upon your Worship.
Two pole off at least.
I am a clean old woman, an't like your Worship.
It goes not by cleannes here good woman, if you
were fowler, so you were braver, you might come nearer.
Nay and that be the fashion, I hope I shall
get it shortly, there's no woman so old but she may learn;
and as an old Lady delights in a young Page or monckey, so
there are young Courtiers will be hungry upon an old wo∣man,
I warrant you.
Come, leave your puling and sighing.
Beshrew you now, why did you entice me from my father
Why? to thy better advancement, would thou a pretty
beautiful—Juice squall, live in a poor thrumbd house in the cun∣try
in such servile—habiliments, and may well pass for a gentle∣woman
in the City, do's not 5 hundred do so think thou, and with
worse faces, oh, now in these latter days, the Devil reigning tic
an age for cloven creatures? but why sad now? yet indeed tic the
fashion of any Courtesan to be sea-sicke in the first Voyage, but at
next she proclaims open wars, like a beaten soldier: why Nor∣thampton-shire
Lass dost dream of virginity now? remember a
loose-bodied Gown wench, &amp; let it go, wires, &amp; tyres, bents and
bums, felts and falls, thou that shalt deceive the world, that Gentle∣women
indeed shall not be known from others; I have a master
to whom I must prefer thee, after the aforesaid decking, Lethe
by name, a man of one most admired property, he can both love thee
and for thy better advancement be thy Pander himself, an ex∣lent
spark of humility.
Well heaven forgive you, you train me up too't.
Why I doe acknowledge it, and I think I doe you
a pleasure in it.
And if I should prove a harlot now, I should be
bound to curse you.
Bound? nay and you prove a harlot, you'll be loose enough.
If I had not a desire to go like a gentlewoman, you
should be hanged, ere you should get me too't I warrant you.
Nay thats certain, nor a 1000. more of you, I know,
you are all chaste enough, till one thing or other tempt you•
deny a Satin gown and you dare now?
You know I have no power to do it, and that
makes you so wilful: for what woman is there such a beast
that will deny any thing that is good.
True they will not, most dissembler.
No, and she bear a brave mind she will not I
warrant you.
Why, therefore take heart, faint not at all,
Women ne'er rise, but when they fall,
Let a man break, hoe's gone, blown up,
A women's breaking sets her up,
Virginity is no City—Trade,
You're out a'th Freedom, when you're a maid,
Down with the lattis tic but thin,
Let courser beauties work within:
Whom the light mocks, thou art fair and fresh,
The gilded flies, will light upon thy flesh.
Beshrew your sweet enchantments, you have wun.
How easily soft women are undone:
So farewell wholesome weeds where treasure pants,
And welcome silks, where lies disease and wants:
Come wench, now flow thy Fortunes in to bless thee,
Isle bring thee where thou shalt be taught to dress thee!
Oh as soon as may be, I am in a swone till I bee a
gentlewoman, and you know what flesh is mans meat, tell
it be dressed.
Most certain, no more a woman.
Gentlemen I ha sworn Isle change the room: dice?
You see I'm patient gentlemen▪
I, the fiends in it, you're patient, you put up all. Devils.
Come set me gentlemen!
An Essexgenrleman sir.
An unfortunate one sir.
Indeed sir.
Hes second to my bosom.
Isle give you that comfort then sir, you must not want
money as long as you are in town sir.
No sir?
I am bound in my love to him to see you furnished, and
in that comfort I recover my salute again sir.
Then I desire to be more dear unto you.
I rather study to be dear unto you—boy, fill some
wine.—I knew not what fair impressier I received, at first,
but I began to affect your society very speedily.
I count my self the happier.
To master Alsup sir, to whose remembrance, I could love to drink till I were past remembrance.
I shall keep Christmas with him sit, where your
health shall likewise undoubtedly be remembered, and there∣upon
I pledge you:—I would sue for your name sir.
Your suite shall end in one Term sir: my name is
Blastfield.
Kind moister Blastfield, your dearer acquaintance.
Nay come, will ye draw in Gentlemen? set me:
Faith I'm scattered.
Sir, you shall not give out so meanly of your self
in my company for a Million: make Such privy to your dis∣grace?
you're a Gentleman of fair fortunes; keep me your re∣putation;
set 'em all, there's crowns foe you.
Sir you bind me infinitely in these courtesies.
You must always have a care of your Reputation
here in Town moister Easy, although you ride down with no∣thing,
it skils not.
I'm glad you tell me that yet, then In,e indifferent.
Well, come: who throws? I set all these.
Why, well said.
This same moister Lethe here begins to undo vs again.
Ah sir, I came not hither but to win.
And then you'll leave vs, thats your fashion.
Hoe's base that visits not his friends:
But hoe's more base taht carries out his winnings.
None will doe so but those have base beginnings
It is a thing in use and ever was,
I pass this time.
I wonder you should pass.
And that you're suffered.
Tut, the Dice are ours,
Then wonder not at those that have most pours▪
The Devil and his Angels.
Are these they?
Welcome dear Angels, where you're cursed ne'er stay.
Heere's luck.
Lets search him Gentlemen, I think he wears a smock:
I knew the time, he wore not half a shirt, just like a Pee.
No, how did he for the Rest?
Faith he compounded with a couple of Napkins at
Barnet, and so trus'd up the lower parts.
It was a pretty shift in faith.
But moister Lethe he's forgot that too.
A mischief on it to loose all: I could—
Nay but good Ma Easy, do not do your self that tiran∣no
I beseech you, I must not ha you alter your body now for
the Purge of a little money: you undo me and you doe.
It was al I brought up with me, I protest master Blast∣sealed,
all my rent till next quarter.
Pox of money, talk not on it I beseech you, what said
I to you? Mass I am out of cash my self too,—Boy.
Anon sir.
Run presently to master Gum the Mercer, and will him
to tell out two or three hundred pound for me, or more ac∣cording
as he is furnished: Isle visit him ith morning say.
It shall be said sir.
Doe you hear boy?
Yes sir.
If master Gum bee not sufficiently ready, call upon
master Profit the Goldsmith.
It shall be done sir.
Boy.
I know I was not sent yet now is the time.
Let them both rest till another occasion: you shall not
need to run so far at this time, take one near hand go to Ma.
Quomodo the Draper, and will him to furnish me instantly.
Now I go sir.
It seems you're well known master Blastfield, and your
credit very spacious here ith City.
Master Easy, let a man bear himself portly, the whore∣sons
will creep to him a'th their bellies, and their wives a'th
their backs: ther's a kind of bold grace expected through∣out
all the parts of a Gentleman: then for your obseruances,
a man must not so much as spit but within line and fashion.
I tell you what I ha done: sometimes I carry my water all Lone∣don
over, only to deliver it proudly at the Standard, and do
I pass altogether unnoted think you? No, a man can no
sooner peep out his head, but ther's a bow bent at him out of
some watch tower, or other.
So readily sir.
Push, you know a bowe's quickly ready, tho a Gun
belong a charging, and will shoot five times to his once,
Come, you shall bear your self Jovially: take heed of
setting your looks to your losses, but rather smile upon
your ill luck, and inuit 'em to morrow to another break∣fast
of Bones.
Nay isle forswear dicing.
What? peace? I am ashamed to hear you: will you
cease in the first loss, show me one Gentleman that ere
did it? Fie vppon't I must use you to company I perceive,
your be spoiled else: forswear Dice? I would your friends
heard you in faith.
Nay I was but in jest sir.
I hope so, what would Gentlemen say of you?
there goes a Gull that keeps his money, I would not have
such a report go on you, for the World as long as you are
in my company. Why man fortune alters in a Minute, I
ha known those have recovered so much in an hour, their
purses were never sick after.
Oh worse then consumption of the Liver! consump∣tion
of the patrimony.
How now? mark their humours master Easy.
Forgive me, my post•itie, yet vngotten.
Thats a penitent Maudlin Decor.
Few know the sweets that the plain life allows.
Wild son that surfeits of his fathers brows.
Laugh at him master Easy.
Ha, ha ha.
Isle bee damned and these bee not the bones of some
queen that cozened me in her life, and now consumes me
after her death.
Thats the true-wicked-blasphemous, and soul-shud∣dering
Decor, that will curse you all service time, &amp; attribute
his ill luck always to one Drab or other.
Dick, Hell-gill: the hapie News.
I have her for you sir.
Peace, what is she?
Young, beautiful and plump.—a delicate piece of sin.
Of what parentage?
Oh a Gentlewoman of a great house.
Fie, fie.
She newly came out of a Barn; yet too good for a
Tooth-drawers son.
Is she wife or maid?
That which is dantiest, Maid
Id rather she would been a wife.
A wife sir, why?
Oh Adultery is a great deal sweeter in my mind.
Diseases gnaw thy bones.
I think she has deserved to be a wife sir.
That will move well.
Her firstlinge shall be mine.
Swine look but for the husks, the meat be thine.
How now Boy?
Moister Quomodo takes your worships greeting ex∣ceeding
kindly, and in his commendations returns this an∣swear,
that your worship shall not be so apt to receive it, as hee
willing to lend it.
Why, we thank him in faith.
Troth, and you ha reason to thank him sir, t'was a very friendly answer.
Push, a Gentleman that keeps his days even here ith City
(as I my self watch to doe) shall have many of those answers
in a tweluemonth, moister Easy.
I promise you sir I admire your carriage, and begin to hold a more reverend respect of you.
Not so I beseech you, I give my friends leave to bee
inward with me,—will you walk Gentlemen?
Wee're for you.
Present her with this Jewel my first token.
There are certain Country-men without enquiring
for moister Rerage, and moister Salewood.
Tenants!
Thou reuiu'st vs Rascal.
When's our next meeting Gentlemen?
To morrow night,
This Gentleman, by me invites you all,
Do you not Moister Easy?
Freely sir.
We doe embrace your love—a pure fresh Gull
Thus make you men at parting dutiful,
And rest beholding to you, tic the slight
To be remembered, when you're out of sight.
A pretty virtue.
Where shall I seek her now?—oh if she knew
The Dangers that attend on women's lives,
She would rather lodge under a poor thatched Roof
Then under carved feelings: she was my joy,
And all content that I received from life,
My dear and only Daughter:
What says the Note she left, let me again
With stayeder grief peruse it—Father? wonder not at my
so sudden departure, without your leave or knowledge,
thus under pardon I excuse it, had you had knowledge of
it, I know you would have sought to restrain it, and hinder
me from what I have long desired, being now happily pre∣ferr'd
to a Gentleman's service in London; about Holborn,
if you please to send, you may hear well of me—
As false as she is disobedient,
Iy'e made larger inquiry, left no place
(Where Gentry keeps) unsought, yet cannot hear,
Which drives me most into a shameful fear:
Woe worth the infected cause that makes me visit
This man-deuouring City—where I spent
My vnshapen youth, to be my ages curse,
And surfeited away my name and state,
In swinish Riots, that now being sober,
I doe awake, a Beggar,—I may hate her.
Whose youth voids wine, his age is cursed with water,
Oh heavens! I know the price of ill, too well,
What, the confusions are in whom they dwell,
And how soon Maids are to their Ruins won
One minute, and aeternally undone:
So in mine may it: may it not be thus?—
Though she be poor, her honours precious,
May be my present form, and her found fear,
May chase her from me, if her eye should getme,
And therefore as my love and wants advise.
Isle serve until I find her in disguise.
Such is my care to fright her from base evils
I leave calm state to live amongst you, devils.
Were these fit words think you to be sent to any
Citizens wise, to enjoy the Daughter, and love the mother
too for a need? I would foulye scorn that man, that should
love me only for a need I tell you: and here the Knave
writes again, that by the marriage of my Daughter, a has the
better means and opportunity to my self, hee lies in his
Throat like a villain, he has no opportunity of me, for all
that, tic for his betters to have opportunity of me, and that
he shall well know—a base proud knave—a has forgot
how he came up, &amp; brought two of his country men to give
their words to my husband for a suit of greene Karsey, a has
forgot all this, and how does hee appear to me, when his
white Satin suttes on, but like a Magot crept out of a Nut∣shell,
a fair body and a foul neck, those parts that are co∣uered
of him, looks indifferent well, because we cannot see
i'm else for all his cleansing, pruning and paring, hoe's not
worthy a Brokers Daughter, and so tell him.
I will indeed forsooth.
And as for my Child, I hope sheele bee ruled in
Time, though she be foolish yet &amp; not be carried away with
a cast of Manchets, a Bottle of wine, or a Custard, and so
I pray certify him.
He doe your errant effectually.
Art thou his Ant—or his—
Alas—I am a poor drudge of his.
Faith and thou were his Mother, he would make thee
his drudge I warrant him.
Marry out upon him, sir reverence of your mistress∣ship
Heir's somewhat for thy pains, fare thee well.
Tic more then he gave me since I came to him.
How now, what prating have we hear? whispers,
dumshowes? why Tomazin, goo too—my shop is not alto∣gether
so dark as some of my neighbours, where a man may
be made Cuckold at one end, while hoe's measuring with
his yard at tother.
Only commendations sent from Moister Lethe
your worshipful Son in law that should be.
Oh, &amp; that you like not▪ he that can make vs rich in
custom, strong in friends, happy in suites, bring vs into all the
romes a sundays, from the leads to the seller, pop vs in with
Venison till wee crack again, &amp; send home the rest in an ho∣norable
Napkin—this man you like not forsooth?
But I like him father.
My blessing go with thy li∣king
A number of our Citizens hold our credit by it to come
home drunk, and say wee ha been at Court: then how much
more credit i'st to be drunk there indeed?
Tut, thy Mothers a fool—pray whats Moister Re∣rage
whom you plead for so?
Why, first he is a Gentleman.
I, hoe's often first a Gentleman that's last a beggar.
My father tells you true, what should I do with a gentle∣man,
I know not which way to lye with him.
Tic truetoo—thou know beside, we undo Gen∣tlemen
daily
That makes so few of i'm marry with our Daugh∣ters,
unless it be one green foot or other▪ next, M. Rerage has
land &amp; living, tother but his walk in the street, &amp; his snatch∣ing
diet, hoe's able to entertain you in a fair house of his
own, tother in some nook or corner, or place vs behind the
cloth like a company of Pup•s: at his house you shall bee
served curiously, sit down &amp; eat your meat with leisure,
there we must be glad to take it standing, &amp; without either
salt, cloth, or trencher, and say we are befriended too.
Oh, that gives a Citizen a better appetite then his
Garden.
So say I Father, me thinks it does me most good whē
I take it standing, I know not how all women's minds are:
Faith I think they are al of thy mind for that thing,
how now Falslight?
I have descried my fellow Short-yard, alias Blastfield, at
hand with the Gentleman.
Oh my sweet Short-yard!—Daughter, get you up
to your Virginals: by your leave Mistress Quomodo.
Why I hope I may sitith shop, may I not?
That you may, and welcome sweet hony-thye,
but not at this season, there's a Buck to be struck.
Well, since i'm so expressly forbidden, isle watch a∣above
ith gallery, but isle see your knavery.
Be you prepared as I tell you.
You near feared me:
Oh that sweet, neat, comely, proper, delicate par∣cell
of land, like a fine Gentlewoman ith waste: not so great
as pretty, pretty: the Trees in Summer whistling, the sell∣for
waters by the Banks harmoniously gliding, I should
have been a Scholar, an excellent place for a student: fit for
my Son that lately commenced at Cambridge, whom now
I have placed at Innes of Court: Thus wee that seldom get
Lands honestly, must leave our heirs to inherit our knave∣rye:
but whist, one turn about my shop and meet with
i'm.
Is this it sir?
I, let me see, this is it: sign of three Knaves, tic it•
Doe you hear sir, what lack you Gentlemen? see
good Kersies or broad clothes here, I pray come near
—Moister Blastfield?
I thought you would know me anon.
You're exceeding welcome to Town sir, your worcester∣ship
must pardon me, tic always misty weather in our shops
here: we are a Nation the Sun •ere shines upon,—Came
this Gentleman with you?
O salute him fairly, hoe's a kind Gentleman, a ve∣rye
in ward of mine.
Then I cry you mercy sir, you're especially welcome.
I return you thanks sir.
But how shall I doe for you now Moister Blastfield?
Why whats the matter?
It is my greatest affliction at this instant, I am not a∣ble
to furnish you.
How moister Quomodo, pray say not so, sl'ud you
undo me then.
Upon my Religion Moister Blastfield, bonds lye
forfeit in my hands, I expect the receipt of a thousand eve∣rye
hour, and cannot yet set eye of a penny.
That's strange me thinks.
Tic mine own pity that plots against me Moister
Blastfield, they know I have no conscience to take the for fe∣ture,
and that makes em so bold with my mercy.
I am sorry for this.
Never the less, if I might entreat your delay but the
age of three days to express my sorrow now, I would dou∣ble
the sum, and supply you with four or five hundred.
Let me see,—three days.
I good sir, and it may be possible.
Doe you hear Moister Blastfield,
Ha?
You know i'ue already invited all the Gallants to
sup with me to night.
That's true in faith.
T will be my everlasting shame, if I have no money to
maintain my bounty.
I ne'er thought upon that—I looked still when
that should come from him, wee have strictly examined
our expenses, it must not be three days Moister Quo∣modo.
No the• 'me afraid twill be my grief sir.
Moister Blastfield, isle tell you what you may doe
now.
What good sweet bedfellow.
Send to Master Goome, or Master Profit, the Mer∣cer
and Goldsmith.
Mass that was well remembered of thee—I per∣ceyue
the Trout will bee a little troublesome ere hee bee
caught—Boy. 〈…〉 Boy▪ Here sir.
Run to Master Goome, or Master Profit, and car∣rye
my present occasion of money to em.
I run sir.
Me thinks Moister Blastfield, you might easily at∣taine
to the satisfaction of 3. days, heir's a Gentleman your
friend I dare say will see you sufficiently possessed till then.
Not I sir, by no means: master Blastfield knows I'm
further in want then himself, my hope rests all upon him, it
stands upon the loss of my credit to Night, if I walk with∣out
money.
Why moister Quomodo, what a fruitless Motion
have you put forth, you might well• assure your self this gen∣tleman
had it not if I wanted it: why our purses are brothers
we desire but equal fortunes: in a word w'are man and wife,
they can but lie together, and so doe we.
As ne'er as can be in faith.
And to say truth, tic more for the continuing of this
Gentleman's credit in Town then any incitement from mine
own want only, that I cou•t to be so immediately furnish•—
you shall hear him confess as much himself.
Tic most certain master Quomodo.
Oh here comes the Boy now: How now Boy, what
says moister Goome, or master Profit?
Sir, thei'r both walk forth this frosty morning to
Brainford, to see a Nurse-childe.
A Bastard be it, spite and shame.
Nay, never vex your self sweet master Blastfield.
Bewitched I think.
Doe you hear sir? you can persuade with him.
A little sir.
Rather then he should be altogether destitute, or be
too much a vexation to himself, he shall take up a common∣ditty
of cloth of me tell him.
Why la! by my troth to was kindly spoken.
Two hundred pounds worth upon my Religion say.
So disastrously.
Nay, moister Blastfield, you doe not hear what ma∣ster
Quomodo said since, like an honest true Citizen in faith:
rather then you should grow diseasde upon it, you shall take
up a commodity of two hundred pounds •orth of cloth.
The mealie Moth consume it, would hee home turn
Peddler now? what should I doe with cloth?
Hoe's a very wilful Gentleman at this Time in faith:
he knows as well what to doe with it, as I my self Iwis:
ther's no Merchant in Town but will be greedy upon it, and
pay down money vpo'th nail, the'l dispatch it over to Mid∣dle-borrow
presently, and raise double commodity by ex∣change,
if not, you know tic Tearme-time, and Michaelmas
Term too, the Drapers harvest, for footcloaths, riding suts,
walking suits, chamber gowns, and hall gowns.
Nay, Isle say that, it comes in as fit a time as can be.
Nay take me with you again ere you go sir, I offer him
no trash 〈◊〉 him, but present money, say, where I know some
Gentlemen in town ha been glad, and are glad at this time,
to take up commodities in Hawks hoods, and browne paper.
Oh horrible, are there such fool•s in town?
I offer him no trash tell him, upon my Religion you
may say,—Now my sweet Shortyand,—now the hungry
fish begins to nibble: one end of the worm is in his mouth
in faith.
Why stand I here (as late our graceless Dames
That found no eyes) to see that Gentleman
Al•ue in state and cred•• 〈◊〉
Help to rip up himself do's all he can,
Why am I wife to him that is no man?
I suffer in that Gentleman's confusion.
Nay be persuaded in that master Blastfield tic ready
money at, the 〈◊〉 beside, the 〈◊〉 and all
falls in as pa• as can be 〈◊〉 help it.
Well Moister Easy, none but you could have per∣swaded
me to that, come, would you would dispatch then
Moister Quomodo, whore's this cloth?
Full and whole within, all of this piece of my Religi∣on
Moister Blastfield, feel it, nay feel it and spare not, Gentle∣men!
your fingers and your judgment.
Clothe's good.
By my trow•h exceeding good cloth, a good wale it is,
Falslight.
I'm near out 'athe shop sir.
Go, call in a Porter presently to carry away the cloth
with the Star mark, whither will you please to have it car∣riot
Moister Blastfield?
Faith to Moister Beggar-land, hoe's the only Mar∣chant
now: or his Brother Moister Stilliard-downe, there's
little difference.
You've happened upon the money men sir, they and
some of their Brethren I can tell you, will not stick to offer
thirty thousand pound to be cursed still, great monied men,
their stocks lye in the Poores throats: but you'll see me
sufficiently discharged Moister Blastfield ere you depart.
You have always found me righteous in that.
Falslight.
Sir.
You may bring a Scrivener along with you.
Isle remember that sir.
Have you sent for a Citizen Moister Blastfield.
No faith not yet—Boy!
What must you doe with a Citizen sir?
A custom they're bound to alate by the default of∣will
debtors, no Citizen must lend money without two bee
bound in the bond, the second Man enters but for custom
sake.
No, and must hee needs be a Citizen?
Byth mass stay, isle learn that Moister Quomodo!
Sir.
Must the second party that enters into bond only for
fashions sake needs be a Citizen? what say you to this Gen∣tleman
for one?
A lass sir, you know hoe's a mere stranger to me, I
neither am sure of his going or abiding, hee may Inn here
to Night, and ride away to morrow, (although I grant the
chief burden lies upon you) yet wee are bound to make
choice of those we know sir.
Why hoe's a Gentleman of a pretty living sir.
It may be so: yet under both your pardons I'd ra∣there
have a Citizen.
I hope you will not disparadge me so? tic well known
I have three hundred pound a year in Essex,
Well said, to him thy self, take him up roundly.
And how doubtfully so ere you account of me, I
doe not think but I might make my bond pass for a hun∣dred
pound'ith City.
What alone sir?
Alone sir: who says so? perhaps id send down for
a Tenant or too.
I, that's another case sir.
Another case let it be then.
Nay, grow not into anger sir.
Not take me into a Bond, as good as you shall good
man Goose-cap.
Well Moister Blastfield, because I will not disgrace the
Gentleman, i'm content for once, but we must not make
a practise on it.
No sir, now you would you shall not.
Cuds me, i'm undone, hoe's gone again.
The Nets broke.
Hold there dear Gentleman.
Deny me that small courtesy? s'foot a very Jew will
not deny it me.
Now must I catch him warily.
A jest indeed, not take me into a Bond quo they.
Moister Easy—Mark my words, if it stood not
upon the eternal loss of thy credit against Supper—
Mass that's true.
The pawning of thy horse for his own Vittailes.
Right in faith.
And thy utter dissolution amongst Gentlemen for
e••er.
Pox on it.
Quomodo should hang, rot, stink.
Sweet boy in faith.
Drop Dam.
Excellent Shortyard.
I forgot all this: what meant I to •wagger before I had
money in my purse? how do's moister Quomodo? is the Bond
ready?
Oh sir.
Come we must be friends, heir's my hand.
Give it the Scrivener: here he comes.
Good day Moister Quomodo, good morrow Gen∣tlemen.
We must require a little aid from your pen, good
master Dustbox.
What be the Gentlemen's names that are bound sir?
Master Iohn Blastfield Esquireith wilde of Kent, and
what doe they call your bed f•llowes name?
Moister Richard Easy: you may easily hit on it.
Master Richard Easy of Essex Gentleman, both
bound to Ephestian Quomodo Citizen and Draper of Lone∣don:
the sum two hundred pound. What Time doe you
take master Blastfield for the payment?
I never pass my Month you know.
I know it sir.
October sixteenth to day, sixteenth of November say.
Is it your custom to return so soon sir?
I never miss you.
I am come for the rest of the same price master Quo∣modo.
Star-marke, this is it, are all the rest gone?
Thei'r all at Master Stilyard downs by this time.
How the poor raskall's all in a froth?
Push, their ordained to sweat for Gentlemen,—
Porters backs and women's bellies bear up the world.
Tic true in faith, they bear men and money, and that's
the world.
Ye'aue found it sir.
I'm ready to your hands Gentlemen.
Come Master Easy.
I beseech you sir.
It shall be yours I say.
Nay pray master Blastfield.
I will not in faith.
What doe you mean sir?
I should show little bringing up, to take the way of a
stranger.
By my troth you doe your self wrong tho moister
Blastfield.
Not a whit sir.
But to avoid strife, you shall have your will of me for
once.
Let it be so I pray.
Now I begin to set one foot upon the land, me
thinks I am felling of Trees already, wee shall have some
Essex Loggs yet to keep Christmas with, and that's a
comfort.
Now is he quarting out the Executioner.
Strides over him: with his own blood he writes:
I am no Dame that can endure such sights.
So his right wing is cut, will not fly far
Past the two City hazards, Poultry, and Woodstreete.
How like you my Roman hand in faith?
Exceeding well sir, but that you rest too much upon
your R. and make your ease too little.
Isle mend that presently.
Nay tic done now, past mending: you both deliver
this to moister Quomodo as your deed?
We doe sir.
I thank you Gentlemen,
Would the Coin would come away now, we have
deserved for it
By your leave a little Gentlemen.
How now? what's the matter? speak?
As fast as I can sir—All the clothes come back a•
gen.
How?
What's the news?
The passage to Middle borrow is stopped, and there∣fore
neither Moister Still yard-downe, nor Moister Beggar∣land,
nor any other Merchāt will deliver present money up∣pon't.
Why what hard luck have you Gentlemen?
Why Moister Blastfield?
Pish—
You're so discontented too presently, a man cannot tell
how to speak to you?
Why what would you say?
We must make some what on it now sir.
I where? how? the best is it lies all upon my neck,
Moister Quomodo, can you help me to any money fort? speak
Troth Moister Blastfield, since my self is so vnfur∣nisht,
I know not the means how, there's one 'ith street
a new setter up, if any lay out money vppon't twill be he.
His name:
Master Item—but you know we cannot give but
greatly to your loss, because we gain and live by it.
Sfoo't will he give any thing.
I, stand upon that.
Will he give any thing?—the Brokers will give no∣thing?
to no purpose.
Falslight.
Over your head sir.
Desire Moister Item to come presently and look
vppo'th cloth.
I will sir.
What if hee should offer but a hundred pound?
If he want twenty on it lets take it.
Say you so?
Moister Quomodo we will have four or five hundred
pound for you of his own within three or four days.
Tic true, he said so indeed.
Is That your wife moister Quomodo?
That's she, little Tomazin?
Under your leave sir, isle show my self a Gentle∣man.
Doe, and welcome Moister Easy.
I have commission for what I doe Lady from your
Husband.
You may have a stronger commission for the next,
an't please you, that's from my self.
You teach me the best law Lady.
Beshrew my blood, a proper, springfull, and a sweet
Gentleman.
My Son: Simon Quomodo? heere's more work for
you Moister Easy, you must salute him too, for hoe's like to
be heir of thy land I can tell thee.
Vim, vitam, sprin{que} salutem.
He shows you there he was a Cambridge man sir, but
now hoe's a Templer, he's he not good grace to make a Law∣yer?
A very good grace to make a Lawyer.
For indeed he he's no grace at all.
Some gave me counsel to make him a Divine.
Fie, fie.
But some of our livery think it an unfit thing, that
our own Sons should tell vs of our vices: others, to make
him a Physician, but then being my heir, i'm afraid hee
would make me away: now a Lawyer thei'r all willing too,
because tic good for our trade and increases, the number of
Cloath-gownes, and indeed tic the fittest for a Citizens
Son, for our word is, what doe ye lack? and their word is
what doe you give.
Exceeding proper.
Moister Item welcome.
I have seen the cloth sir.
Very well.
I am but a young setter up, the uttermost I dare vent∣ture
upon it is three-score pound.
What?
If it be for me, so, I am for it: if not, you have your doth
and I have my money.
Nay, pray moister Blastfield refuse not his kind offer.
A bargain then moister Item, clap hands—hoe's
finely cheated: come, let's all to the next Tavern and see the
money paid.
A match.
I follow you Gentlemen, take my Son along with
you.
Now to my keys: ••me Moister Item, hee must fetch the
money, first have I caught him in a bond for two hundred
pound, and my two hundred pounds worth a doath again
for three-score pound: admire me all you studyents at Innes
for cousinage.
You talk of an alteration, heir's the thing it self,
what base birth does not raiment make glorious? and what
glorious births do not •eggs make infamous? why should
not a woman confess what she is now? fince the finest are but
deluding shadows, begot between Tyr••omen and Tay∣lors?
for instance, behold their Parents.
Say what you will, this wire becomes you best, how say
you Taylor?
I promise you tic a wire would draw me from my
work seven days a week.
Why doe you work a sundays Taylor?
Hardest of al a Sundaie, because we are most for∣bidden
Troth and so doe most of vs women, the better
day the better deed we think.
Excellēt exceeding in faith, a narrow card wire sets out
a cheek so fat and so full, and if you be ruled by me, you shall
wear your hair still like a Mock-face behind, tic such an
Italian world, many men know not Before from Behind.
How like you the sitting of this gown now Mistress
Comings?
It sits at marvelous good Ease, and comely descry∣tion.
Who would think now this fine Sophisticated squall
came out of the Bosom of a Barn, and the loins of a Hay∣tosser.
Out you saucy pestiferous Pander, I scorn that y∣faith.
Excellent, already the true phrase and stile of a strum∣pet,
stay, a little more of the red, and then I take my leave of
your Cheek for four &amp; twenty hours—Doe you not
think it impossible that her own Father should know her
now, if he saw her?
Why I think no less, how can he know me, when
I scarce know my self.
Tic right.
But so well you lay waite for a man for me.
I protest I have bestowed much labour about it, and
in fit Time, good news I hope.
1 Iu'e found one yet at last, in whose
preferment I hope to reap credit.
Is that the fellow?
1 Lady it is.
Art thou willing to serve me fellow?
So please you, he that he's not the heart to serve such
a Mistress as your beautiful self, deserves to be honoured for
a fool, or Knighted for a Coward.
There's to many of them already.
It were sin then to raise the number.
Well, weal try both our likings for a month, and
then either proceed, or let fall the suite.
Be it as you have spoke, but tic my hope
A longer Term.
No truly, our Term ends once a month, wee
should get more then the Lawyers, for they have but four
Terms a year, and wee have twelve, &amp; that makes i'm run
so fast to vs in the Vacation.
A mistress of of a choice beauty, amongst such imper∣fact
creatures I ha not seen a perfecter: I should have reck∣oned
the fortunes of my Daughter amongst the happiest,
had she lighted into such a service, whereas now I rest doubt
full, whom or where she serves.
There's for your bodily advice Taylor, and theres
for your head-counsell, and I discharge you both till to more∣row
morning again.
At which time our neatest Attendance.
I pray have an especial care howsoever you stand or
lye, that nothing fall upon your hair to batter your
wire.
I warrant you for that—which Gown becomes
me best now, the purple Satin or this?
If my opinion might rule over you—
Come gallants, isle bring you to a Beauty shall struck
your eyes into your hearts, what you see you shall desire, yet
never enjoy.
And that's a Villainous torment.
And is she but your vnderput Moister Lethe?
No more of my credit, and a Gentlewoman of a great
house, Noble parentage, unmatchable Education, my plain
Pung. I may, grace her with the name of a Courtesan, a Back∣slider,
a Prostitution, or such a Toy, but when all comes •o al
tic but a plain Pung, look you Gentlemen, that's she, be∣hold
her.
Oh my beloved strayer! I consume in thy absence.
La you now—you shall not say isle be proud to
you Gentlemen, I give you leave to salute her▪ I me afraid of
nothing now, but that sheele utterly disgrace i'm, turn tail
to i'm, and place their kisses behind her, no by my faith, she
deceives me, by my troth sha's kissed am both with her lips: I
thank you for that music masters, sli'd they both court her
at once, and see if she ha not the wit to stand still and let i'm:
I think if two men were brewde into one, there is that wo∣man
would drink i'm up both.
A Cockscomb, he a Courtier.
He says he he's a place there.
So he's the Fool a better place then he, and can come
where he dare not show his head.
Nay, he are you me Gentlemen.
I protest you were the last man we spoke on, we're a
little busy yet, pray stay there a while, weal come to you
presently.
This is good in faith, endure this and be a slave fore∣for,
since you neither savour of good breeding nor bringing
up, Isle slice your hamstrings but isle make you show man∣nearly—pox
on you, leave courting, I ha not the heart
to hurt an Englishman in faith, or else—
What else?
Prithee lets be merry, nothing else—here, fetch
some wine.
Let my Servant go for it.
Yours, which is he?
This sir, but I scarce like my Mistress now: the loins
can ne'er be safe where the Flies be so busy—
Wit by experience bought foils wit at School:
Who proves a deeper knave then a Spent fool,
I am gone for your worships wine sir.
Sir, you put up too much indignity, bring company
to cut your own throat, the fire is not yet so hot, that you
need two Screens before it, tic but new kindled yet, if
it were rise to a flame, I could not blame you thē to put others
before you but alas all the heate yet is comfortable a cher∣richer,
not a defacer.
Prethe let i'm alone, theile bee ashamed o•t anon I
trow, if they have any grace in 'em.
Id fine have him quarrel, fight, and be assuredly
kilt, that I might beg his place: for there's ne'er a one void
yet.
You'll make him mad anon.
Tic to that end.
Yet at last, Moister Quomodo is as firm as his promise.
Did I not tell you still he would.
Let me see, I am seven hundred pound in bond now
to the Rascal.
Nay you're no less Moister Blastfield, look too't, by
my troth, I must needs confess sir, you ha been vncommon∣lie
kind to me, since I ha been in Town, but moister Alsup
shall know on it.
That's my Ambition sir.
I beseech you sir.
Stay, this is Lethes haunt, see, we have caught him.
Moister Blastfield and Moister Easy, you're kind
Gentlemen both.
Is that the beauty you famde so?
The same.
Who be those so industrious about her?
Rerage and Salewood: •le tell you the vnmannerlyest
trick of i'm, that ever you heard in your life.
Prithee whats that?
I •nuyfed i'm hither to look upon her, brought i'm
along with me, gave i'm leave to salute her in kindness, what
doe they but most saucily fall in love with her, very
impudently court her for themselves, and like two crafty
Attorneys, finding a hole in my lease, go about to defeat
me of my right.
Ha they so little conscience?
The most vnciuilst part that you have seen, I know
theile be sorry for it when they have done, for ther's no man
but gives a sigh after his sin of women, I know it by my
self.
You parcel of a rude, saucy and unmannerly nation.
One good thing in him, heel tell i'm ont
roundly.
Cannot a Gentleman purchase a little fire to thaw
his appetite by, but must you that have been daily singed
in the flame, be as greedy to beguile him on it? how can it ap∣pear
in you but maliciously, and that you go about to en∣gross
hell to your selves? he auen forbid, that you should not
suffer a stranger to come in, the Devil himself is not so un∣mannerly,
I doe not think but some of them rather will be
wise enough to beg▪ Offices there before you, and keep
you out, marry all the spite will bee they cannot sell i'm a∣gen.
Come, are you not to blame—not to give place?—
To vs I mean—
A worse and a worse disgrace.
Nay Gentlemen, you wrong vs both then, stand from
me, I protest isle draw my silver Bodkin upon you.
Clubs, clubs,—Gentlemen stand upon your
Guard.
A Gentlewoman must swagger a little now and then
I perceive, there would bee no civility in her Chamber else,
though it be my hard fortune to have my keeper there a cow∣art,
the thing that's kept is a Gentlewoman borne.
And to conclude a Coward, infallible of your side,
why doe you think in faith I took you to be a Coward? doe I
think you'll turn your back to any man living? you'll be
whipped first.
And then indeed she turns her back to some man
living.
But that man shows himself a Knave, for he dares
not show his own face when hee does it, for some of the
common Counsel in Henry the eights days thought it mo∣destie
at that time, that one Vizard should look upon a∣another.
It was honestly considered of i'm in faith.
How now? what piece of stuff comes here?
Now some good news yet to recover my Repute,
and grace me in this company; Gentlemen, are we friends
among our selves?
Vinited.
Then here comes Ravish to confirm our Amity—
Wag▪ tail, salute •hem all they are friends.
Then saving my quarrel to you all.
Toe's all
Now be shrove your hearts, and you doe not.
To sweet Moister Lethe.
Let it flow this way dear Moister Blastfield, Gentle∣men
to you all.
This Re•each wine is like the scowring-sticke to a
gun, it makes the Barrel clear: it he's an excellent virtue, it
keeps all the Sinckes in man and women's body sweet in
June and July, and to say truth, if Ditches were not cast once
a year, and Drabs once a Month, there would be no abiding
in the City.
Gentlemen, isle make you privy to a letter I sent.
A letter comes well after privy, it makes amends.
There's one Quomodo▪ a Drapers Daughter in town
whom for her happy portion I wealthily affect.
And not for love? this makes for me his Rival, bear
witness.
The Father does elect me for the man,
The Daughter says the same.
Are you not well?
Yes all but for the mother, shoe's my sickness.
Byr'lady and the Mother is a pestilent, wilful, trouble∣some
sickness I can tell you, if she light upon you handsome∣lye.
I find it so: she for a stranger pleads:
Whose name I ha not learned.
And en now he called me by it.
Now as my letter told her, since only her consent
kept aloof of, what might I think on it, but that she mere∣lie
dooted upon me herself.
Very assuredly.
This makes still for you.
Did you let it go so in faith?
You may believe it sir, now what says her answer?
I, her answer.
She says you're a base proud knave, and like your
worship.
How?
Nay, hear out his answer, or there's no goodness in
you.
You ha forgot she says in what pickle your worship
came up, and brought two of your friends to give their
words for a suit of greene Kersye.
Drudge, peace, or—
Show your self a Gentleman, she had the patience to
read your letter which was as bad as this can be, what will
she think on it, not hear her answer? speak, good his
drudge.
And as for his Daughter, she hopes sheele be ruled
by her in time, and not be carried away with a cast of Man∣chets,
a bottle of Wine, and a Custard, which once made her
Daughter sick, because you came by it with a bad consci∣ence.
Gentlemen, i'm all in a sweat.
That's very wholesome for your body, nay you must
keep in your arms.
Then she demanded of me whether I was your worcester∣ships
Ant or no?
Out, out, out, Gru. Alas said I, I am a
poor drudge of his.
Faith and thou were his Mother (quoth she) heed make thee
his Dru dge I warrant him—
Marry out upon him (quoth I) an't like your worship.
Horror, horror, i'm smothered, let me go, torment
me not.
And you love me, lets follow him Gentlemen.
Agreed.
I count a hundred pound well spent to pursue a good
jest Moister Easy.
By my troth I begin to bear that mind too.
Well said in faith, hang money-good jests are worth
silver at all times.
They are worth gold Moister Blastfield.
Doe you deceive me so? are you toward marriage y∣faith
Master Lethe it shall go hard but isle forbid the Banes,
isle send a messēger into your bones, another into your purse
but isle do it.
Thou fair and wicked Creature, steeped in Art,
Beauteous and fresh, the soul the foulest part.
A common Filth, is like a House possessed,
Where if not spoiled, you'll come out afraid at least,
This service likes not me, though I rest poor,
I hate the basest use to screen a whore.
The human stroke ne'er made him, hee that can
Be Bawd to Woman, never leapt from man.
Some monster won his Mother,
I wished my poor child hither, doubled wrong,
A month and such, a mistress were too long,
Yet here a while in others lives isle see,
How former follies, did appear in me.
Boy.
Anon sir.
Where left you Moister Blastfield your moister, say you?
An hour since I left him in Paules sir—but
you'll not find him the same man again next time you meet
him.
Methinks I have no being without his company
tic so full of kindness and delight, I hold him to be the one∣lie
Companion in earth.
I, as Companions go now adays that help to spend
a mans money.
So full of nimble wit, various discourse, praegnant ap∣prehension,
and vncommon entertainment, hee might keep
Company with any Lord for his grace.
I, with any Lord that were past it.
And such a good free hearted honest, affable kind of
Gentleman: Come Boy a heaviness will possess me till I see
him.
But you'll find your self heavier then, by a seven
hundred pound weight,—Alas poor Birds that cannot
keep the sweet Country, where they sly at pleasure, but
must needs come to London to have their wings clipped, and
are fine to go hopping home again.
So, No man is so impudent to deny that—
Spirits can change their shapes, and soonest of all into
Sergeants: because they are Cousin Germans to spirits, for
there's but two kind of arrests till Doomsday, the Devil
for the soul, the Sergeant for the body, but afterword the de∣will
arrests body and soul Sergeant &amp; all, if they be knaves
still, and deserve it▪ now my yeoman •aslight.
I Attend you good Serjant Shortyard.
No more moister Blastfield now—poor Easy har∣dly
be set.
But how if he should go to prison, weere in a mad
state then, being not Sergeants.
Never let•• come near thy belee•e that heel take pri∣son,
or stand out in law, knowing the debt to be due, but still
expect the presence of Moister Blastfield, kind M. Blast∣field,
worshipful M Blastfield—and at the last—
Moister Shortyard, moister Falslight.
The Boy: a warning-piece,—see where he comes.
Is not in paules.
He is not far off sure sir.
When was his hovre say thou?
Two sir.
Why two he's struck.
No sir, they are now a striking.
Moister Richard Easy of Essex we arrest you.
Ha?
Alas a Surgeon, hoe's hurt ith shoulder.
Deliver your weapons quietly sir.
Why what's the matter?
You're arrested at the suite of M. Quomodo.
Moister Quomodo?
How strange you make it, you're a landed Gentleman
sir, I knew tic but a trisse, a bond of seven hundred pound.
La, I know you had mistook, you should arrest
One Moister Blastfield, tic his bond, his debt.
Is not your name there?
True, for fashions sake.
Why and tic for fashions sake that we arrest you.
Nay, &amp; it be no more, I yield to that: I know Moister
Blastfield will see me take no injury as long as i'm in town,
for Moister Alsups sake.
Whose that Sir?
An honest Gentleman in Essex.
Oh, In Essex! I thought you had been in London,
where now your business lies, honesty from Essex will be a
great while a coming sir, you should look out an honest
pair of Citizens.
Alas sir, I know not where to find i'm.
No, there's enough in Town.
I know not one by my troth, I am a mere stranger for
these parts, Moister Quomodo is all, and the honestest that
I know.
To him then lets set forward:—Yeoman Spider∣man,
cast eye about for Moister Blastfield.
Boy—Alas the poor boy was frighted away at
first.
Can you blame him sir—we that daily fray away
Knight's, may fright away Boys I hope.
Ha? have they him say thou?
As sure as—
The land's mine, thats sure enough boy.
Let me advance thee knave, and give thee a kiss,
My pl•t's so firm I dare it now to miss.
Now shall I be diuulgde a landed man,
Throughout the livery:—one points, another whispers,
A third frets inwardly: let him fret and hang,
Especially his envy I shall have,
That would be fine, yet cannot be a knave,
Like an old leather girt in furde Gown,
Whose mind stands stiff but his performance down.
Now come my golden days in:—whither is the worcester∣shipfull
master Quomodo, and his fair Bedfellow rid forth,
To his land in Essex? whence comes those goodly load of
Logs? from his land in Essex? where grows this pleasant
fruit, says one Citizens wife in the row; at moister Quo∣modos
Orchard in Essex; oh, oh, do's it so, I thank you for
that good news in faith.
Here they come with him sir.
Grant me patience in my joys, that being so great
I run not mad with 'em.
Bless moister Quomodo.
How now Sergeants? who ha you brought me here,
master Easy?
Why la you now Sergeants, did I not tell you you mi∣stooke?
Did you not hear me say. I had rather ha had master
Blastfield, the more sufficient man a great deal?
Very true sir,—but this Gentleman lighting into
our hands first—
Why did you so sir?
Wee thought good to make use of that opportunity,
and hold him fast.
You did well in that I must needs say, for your own
securities, but it was not my mind master Easy to have you
first, you must needs think so.
I dare swear that master Quomodo.
But since you are come to me, I have no reason to re∣fuse
you, I should show little manners in that sir.
But I hope you spake not in that sense sir, to impose
the bond upon me.
By my troth that's my meaning sir, you shall find
me an honest man, you see I mean what I say, is not the
day past, the money vntendred, you'd ha me live upright∣lie
moister Easy?
Why sir, you know moister Blastfield is the man.
Why sir, I know master Blastfield is the man, but is
he any more then one man? two entered into bond to me, or
I'm foully coozn'd.
You know my entrance was but for fashion sake.
Why, isle a gre to you, you'll grant tic the fashion like∣wise
when the Bond's due to have the money paid again.
So we told him sir, and that it lay in your worships
courtesy to arrest which you please.
Marie do's it sir, these fellows know the law,—
beside, you offred yourself into Bond to me you know, when
I had no stomach to you, now beshrew your heart for your
labour, I might ha had a good substantial Citizen, that
would ha paid the sum roundly, although I think you suffice∣ent
enough for seven hundred pound, beside the forfeiture,
I would be loath to disgrace you so much before Sergeants.
If you would has patience sir, I doe not think but
master Blasefield is at Carriers to receive the money.
He will prove the honester man then, &amp; you the bet∣la
discharged, I wonder he should break with me, t'was no∣for
his practise, you must not bee angry with me now, tho
you were somewhat hot when you entered into Bond, you
may easily go in angrily, but you cannot come out so.
No, the Devils in it for that.
Do you here sir, a my troth we pity you, ha you a∣ny
store of Crowns about you?
Faith a poor store, yet they shall be at their service
that will strive to doe me good,—we were both drunk last
night, and •eer thought upon the bond.
I must tell you this, you have fell in to the hands of a
most merciless devourer, the very gul athe city, should you
offer him money, Goods or lands now, he would rather have your
body in prison, hoe's a such a nature. Eas. Prison w'are un∣don
then.
Hoe's a such a nature, look?—Let him owe any man
a spite• what's his course: he will lend him money to day, a
purpose to rest him tomorrow.
Defend me?
Has at least sixteen at this instant proceeded in both
the Counters: some batchler, some masters, some doctors of
captivity of 20. years standing and he desires nothing more
then imprisonment.
Would Ma. Blastfield would come away.
I, then things would not bee as they are—what
will you say to vs if wee procure you two substantial subsi∣die
Citizens to bail you spite on's heart, and set you at li∣bertie
to find out moister Blastfield.
Sergeant! here, take all, isle be dear to you, doe but
perform it.
Much.
Enough sweet Sergeant, I hope I understand thee.
I love to prevent the malice of such a rascal, perhaps
you might find moister Blastfield to night.
Why, we lie together man, there's the jest on it.
Fie.—and you'll seek to secure your bail, because
they will be two Citizens of good account, you must doe
that for your credit sake.
Isle be bound to save them harmless.
A pox on him, you cut his throat then,—no words.
What's it you require me moister Quomodo?
You know that before this time I hope sir, present
money, or present imprisonment.
I told you so.
We ne'er had money of you.
You had commodities, an't please you
Well, may I not crave so much liberty vpō my word,
to seek out moister Blastfield?
Yes, and you would not laugh at me: wee are some∣times
Gulls to Gentlemen▪ I thank 'em; but Gentlemen are
never Gulls to vs, I commend 'em.
Under your leave master Quomodo, the Gentleman
craves the furtherance of an hour, and it sorts well with our
occasion at this time, having a little urgent business at Guild∣hall,
at which minute weal return, and see what agreement
is made.
Nay take him along with you Sergeant.
I'm undone then.
Hoe's your prisoner; and being safe in your house at
your own disposing, you cannot deny him such a request:
beside, he hath a little faith in Ma. Blastfields coming sir.
Let me not be too long delayed I charge you.
Not an hour in faith sir.
O moister Easy, of all men living I never dream▪
you would ha done me this injury: make me would my cre∣dite,
fail in my commodities, ring my state into suspicion:
for the breaking of your day to me, has broken my day to
others.
You tell me of that still, which is no fault of mine ma∣ster
Quomodo.
Oh whats a man but his honesty master Easy, and
thats a fault amongst most of vs all,—Mark but this note,
Isle give you good counsel now,—as often as you give
your name to a bond, you must think you christen a child, and
take the charge on it too: for as the one, the bigger it grows
the more cost it requires: so the other the longer it lies, the
more charges it puts you too, only heir's the difference a
child must bee broke, and a bond must not, the more you
break children, the more you keep 'em under: but the more
you break bonds, the more theyle leap in your face, and
therefore, to conclude, I would never undertake to bee Gos∣sip
to that bond which I would not see well brought up.
Say you so sir?—Isle think upon your counsel
hereafter for it.
Ah fool, thou shouldest near ha tasted such wit
but that I know tic too late.
The more I grieve:
To put all this into the compass of a little hoop Ring
Make this account, come better days or worse,
So many bonds abroad, so many boys at nurse.
A good medicine for a short memory:—but since,
you have entered so far, whose children are desperate depts
I pray?
Faith they are like the of-springs of stolen lust, put to
the hospital, their fathers are not to be found, they are either
too far abroad, or too close within, and thus for your memo∣ries
sake.
The desperate Debtor hence derives his name,
One that has neither money, land nor fame,
All that he makes, prove Bastards, and not Bonds,
But such as yours, at first are horn• to lands.
But all that I beget hereafter •le so one disinherit
Moister Quomodo.
In the mean time hears a shrewd knave will disin∣herit
you.
Well, to put you out of all doubt Moister Quomodo,
isle not trust to your courtesy, I ha sent for bail.
How? you've co•z•ed me there y•aith.
Since the worst comes to the worst, I have those friends
'ith City, I hope that will not suffer me to lye for seven
hundred pound.
And you told me you had no friends here at all,
how should a man trust you now?
That was but to try your Courtesy M. Quomodo.
How vncōscionably he gulls himself—they must
be wealthy subsidie-men sir, at least forty pound 'ith
Kings Books I can tell you, that doe such a feat for you.
Here they come what so ere they are.
Byr'lady Aldermans Deputies, I am very sorry for
you sir, I cannot refuse such men.
Are you the Gentleman in distress?
None more then my self sir.
Hee speaks truer then he thinks, for if he knew,
The hearts that owe those faces—a dark shop's good for
somewhat.
That was all sir.
And that's enough, for by that meanes' you
have made your self •able to the Bond, as well as that Base∣field
Blastfield sir.
Oh 〈◊〉 •ou mercy tic Blastfield indeed.
But under both your worships favours I know where
to find him presently.
That's all your refuge.
News, good news Master Easy.
What boy?
Moister Blastfield •y moister ha• received a tho 〈◊〉
pound, and will be at his lodging at supper.
Happy• news, hear you that Moister
Quomodo?
Tic enough for you to hear that, you're the fortunate
man sir.
Not now I beseech your good worships.
Gentleman, what's your to•her name?
Easy.
O Moister Easy—I would we could rather plea∣sure
you otherwise Moister Easy, you should soon perceive
it, isle speak a proud word we have pitied more Gentlemen
in distress, then any two Citizens within the freedom—
but to be bail to sea•en hundred pound action, is a matter
of shroud weight.
Isle be bound to secure you.
Tut, what's your bond sir?
Body, goods, and Lands, immediately before Ma∣ster
Quomodo.
Shall we venture once again, that have been so of∣ten
undone by Gentlemen?
I have no great stomach too't, it will appear in vs
more pity then wisdom.
Why should you say so sir?
I like the Gentleman's face well, hee doe's not look as
if he would deceive vs.
O not I sir.
Come weal make a desperate voyage once again,
weal try his honesty, and take his single bond, of body
Goods and Lands.
I dearly thank you sir.
Moister Quomodo?
Your worships.
We have took a Course to set your prison∣ner
free.
Your worships are good bail you content me.
Come then, and be a witness to a Re•ullisance.
With all my heart sir.
Moister Easy, you must have an especial care now
to find out that Blastfield.
I shall have him at my lodging sir.
The 〈◊〉 will 〈…〉 you selse, Moister
Quomodo will come upon vt, and 〈◊〉 you.
I know that sir.
Well since I see you have such a good mind to bee ho∣nest
•e lea•e some greater 〈…〉 sweat with you to
find him my self.
H•are then my mis•rye ends 〈…〉
A strangers kindness oft exceeds a friends.
Thou art deceive•d thy misery but begins,
"To beguile goodness, is the coare of sins.
My love is such unto •hee, that I die
As often as thou drink up 〈◊〉▪
Yet have no means to warn thee from it, for hee
"That sows in Craft, doe's rape in Jealousy.
Now the letters made up and all, it wants but the
print of a s•ale, and away it goes to Moister Quomodo: An∣drew
Le•he is well whipped in it, his name stands in a white
sheet here, and do•s penance for him.
You have shame enough against him, if that be good.
First as a contempt of that reverend Ceremony, hee
has in hand, to wit, marriage.
Why doe you say to wit marriage, when you know
theres none will marry that's wise.
Had it not more need then, to have wit to put too't if
it be grown to a •olly?
Y'•ue •un, isle giue't you.
Tic no thanks now,—but as I was saying: as a
soul contempt to that sacred ceremony, hee most audaci∣ouslye
keeps a Drab in town, and to be free from the inter∣ruption
of blew Beadles, and other bawdy Officers, hee most
politically lodges her in a Constables house.
That's a pretty point in faith.
And so the wa•ch that should fe•ch her out▪ are her
chiefest guard to keepeher in.
It must needs be for look how the Constable plays
his Conscience, the watch-men will follow the suite.
Why well then.
All night from me hoe's hurt, hoe's made away.
Where shall we seek him now? you lead me fair
•aunt's sir.
Pray keep a little patience sir, I shall find him at last
you shall see.
A Citizen of my e•se and substance to walk so long
a foot.
You should ha had my horse but that he he's eaten out
his head sir.
How would you had me hold him by the tail sir then?
Manners forbid, tic no part of my meaning sir,—oh
heere's Moister Rerage, and Moister Salewood, now we shall
hear of him presently:—Gntlemen both.
Moister Easy, how fare you sir?
Very well in health, did you see Moister Blastfield
this morning?
I was about to move it to you.
We were all three in a mind then.
I ha not set eye on him these two days.
I wonder he keeps so long from vs in faith.
I began to be sick.
Why, what's the matter?
Nothing in troth, but a great desire I had to have
seen him.
I wōder you should miss on it lately, you're his bedfelow
I lay alone to night in faith,—I doe not know how, O
here comes master Lethe, he can dispatch me: Master Lethe!
What's your name sir?—O cry you mercy master
Easy.
When parted you from moister Blastfield sir?
Blastfield's an Ass, I have sought him these two
days to beat him.
Your self all alone sir?
I, and three more.—
I am glad, I am where I am then, I perceive it was time
of all hands.
Content in faith, let's trace him.
What? have you found him yet? neither? what's to be
done now? isle venture my body no further for any Gentle∣mans
pleasure, I know not how soon I may be called upon,
and now to ouer-heate my self.—
Ime undone.
This is you that slept with him, you can make fools
of vs, but isle turn you over to Quomodo fort.
Good sir.
Isle prevent mine own danger.
I beseech you sir.
Tho I love Gentlemen well, I doe not mean to bee
undone for 'em.
Pray sir, let me request you sir, sweet sir, I beseech
you sir.
Made fools of vs! not to be found!
What, what?
Do not undo me quite tho Ma Quomodo.
You're very welcome, master Easy, I ha nothing to say
to you, isle not touch you, you may go when you please,—
I have good bail here I thank their worships.
What shall I say, or whom shall I beseech▪
Gentlemen, S'lid they were borne to undo vs I think,
but for my part, Isle make an oath before moister Qomodo
here, ne'er to doe Gentlemen good while I live.
Isle not be long behind you.
Away; if you had any grace in you, you would bee a∣shamed
to look vs ith face, iwis I wonder with what brow
you can come amongst vs, I should seek my fortunes fa•re
enough if I were you, and neither return to Essex, to bee a
shame to my predecessors, nor remain about London, to be
a mock to my successors.
Subtle Shortyard!
Here are his lands forfeited to vs master Quomodo,
and to avoid the inconscionable trouble of law, all the assi•∣•ance
he made to vs, we willingly resign to you.
What shall I doe with Rubbish, give me money:
Tic for your worships to have land, that keep great houses,
I should be hoisted.
But master Quomodo, if you would but conceive it
aright, the land would fall fitter to you then to vs.
Curtzing about my land.
You have a towardly son and heir as we hear.
I must needs say, he is a Templer indeed.
We have neither posterity in Town nor hope for
any abroad; we have wives, but the marks have been out
of their mouths these twenty years, and as it appears, they
did little good when they were in: wee could not stand a∣bout
it sir, to g•t riches and children too▪ tic more then one
man can doe. And I am of those Citizens minds that say,
let our wi•es make shift for children and they will, they get
none of vs; and I cannot think, but he that has both much
wealth and many children, has had more helps coming in
then himself.
I am not a Bow wide of your mind sir.—
And for the thirsty and covetous hopes I have in my son
and heir Simon Qmomodo, that hee will never trust his land
in Wax and Parchment as many Gentlemen have done be∣fore
him.
Al y-blow for me.
I will honestly discharge you, and recevue it in due
form and order of law, to strengthen it for ever to my son
and h•ire, that he may undoubtedly enter vppon't without
the let or molestation of any man, at his or our pleasure
whenever.
Tic so assured unto you.
Why then moister Base you're a freeman sir, you may
deal in what you please, and go whether you will. Why To∣mizzen,
moister Easy is dome from Essex, bid him welcome
in a cup of small Bear.
Not only wild, but in it tyrannous.
If it please you sir, you know the house, you
may visit vs often▪ and dine with vs once a quarter.
Confusion light on you, your wealth and heir,
Worm gnaw your conscience, as the Moth your ware,
I am not the first heir that robed, or begged.
Excellent excellent, sweet Spirits.
Landed moister Quomodo.
Delicate shortyard, commodious Falslight,
Hug and away, shift, shift.
Tic slight, not strength that gives the greatest lift.
Now my desires are full—for this time,
Men may have Cormorant wishes, but alas
A little thing three hundred pound a year,
Suffices nature, keeps life and soul together,
Isle have 'em l•pt immediately.
I long to warm my self by the wood,—A fine jour∣ney
in the Whitsun-holy days •in faith, to ride down with
a number of Citizens, and their wives, some upon pillions,
some upon S•de saddles, I, and little Tomazin ith middle our
some and heir S•m Quomodo in a peach colour Taffeta Eec∣k•t,
some horse•• length, or a long •art before vs, there will be
a fine show on's I can tell you, where we Citizens will laugh,
and lie down ge• all our wives with child against a bank and
get up again, •stay, ha •ast thou that wit in faith twil▪ be ad∣mirable,
to see how the very thought of greene fields puts a
man into sweet inventions. I will presently possess Simon
Quomodo of all the land, I have a toy and isle do it: and be∣cau•e
I see before mine eyes that most of our heirs prove no∣torious
Rioters after our deaths, and that cousinage in the
father wheels about to folly in the son, our posterity
commonly foiled at the same weapon, at which we plaide
rarely. And being the world• beaten word, what's got o∣for
the Devils back, (that's by knavery) must be spent un∣der
his belly, (that's by lechery) being awake in these know∣ings,
why should not I oppose 'em now, and break desti∣no
of her custom, preventing that by policy, which with∣out
it must needs be Destiny? and I have took the course,
I will forthwith sicken, call for my keys, make my Will,
and dispose of all, give my son this blessing, that hee trust
no man, keep his hand from a queen, and a Scrivener, live
in his fathers faith, and doe good to no body: then will I be∣gin
to rave like a fellow of a wide conscience, and for all the
world counterfeit to the life, that which I know I shall do
when I die, take on for my gold, my lands, and my wry∣tings,
grow worse and worse, call upon the Devil, and so
make an end▪ by this time I have indented with a couple of
searchers, who to uphold my device shall fray them out a'th
Chamber with report of sickness, and so la, I start up, and
recover again: for in this business I will trust, no not my spy∣ritz
Falslight &amp; shortyard, but in disguise note the condition
of al, how pitiful my wife takes my death, which will appear
by November in her eye, and the fall of the leaf inhere body,
but especially by the cost she bestows vpō my funeral, there
shall I try her love and regard, my daughters marrying to
my will &amp; liking, and my sons affection after my dispo∣sing:
for to cōclude▪ I am as jealous of this land as of my wife,
to know what would become of it after my decease.
Tho I be poor, tic my glory to live honest.
I prithee doe not leave me.
To be bawd.
Hell has not such an office,
I thought at first your mind had been preserved,
In virtue and in modesty of blood,
that such a face had not been made to please the unsettled Ap∣petites
of several men,
Those eyes turned up through prayer, not through lust,
But you are wicked, and my thoughts unjust.
Why thou art an unreasonable fellow in faith, doe
not al Trades live by their ware, and yet called honest Livers?
doe they not thrive best, when they utter most, and make it
away by the great? is not hole-sale the chiefest merchandise?
doe you think some Merchants could keep their wives so
brave but for their hole-sale? you're foully deceived and you
think so.
You are so glewde to punishent and shame,
Your words ee'n deserve whipping—to bear the ha∣bit
of a Gentlewoman, and be in mind so distant.
Why you fool you, are not Gentlewomen Sinners?
and there's no coragious Sinner amongst vs, but was a Gen∣tlewoman
by the Mothers side I warrant you: besides, wee
are not always bound to think those our fathers that marry
our Mothers, but those that lye with our Mothers, and they
may be Gentlemen borne &amp; born again for ought we know,
you know.
True: corruption may well be Generatious first,
Wee're bad by nature, but by custom worst.
Oh my Husband.
My Father, O my Father.
My sweet Moister, dead!
Run boy, bid 'em ring out, hoe's dead, hoe's g•no.
Then is as arrant a knave gone, as ere was called upon.
The happiest good that ever Shortyard felt,
I want to be expressed, my mirth is such,
To bee struck now even when his joys were hye,
Men only kiss their knaveries, and so dye,
Iu'e often marked it.
Hee was a famous Coozner while he lived,
And now his Son shall reap it, isle ha the lands,
Let him Study law after, tic no labour
to undo him for ever: but for Easy,
Only good confidence did make him foolish,
And not the lack of Sense, that was not it,
Tic worldly craft beats down a Scholars wit,
For this our Son and heir now, hee
From his conception was entailed an Ass,
And hee he's kept it well, twenty five years now,
Then the sleights art will do it, the lands lye fair,
No Sin to beggar a deceivers heir.
Here Wenefride, here, here, here, I have al∣ways
found thee secret.
You shall always find me so Mistress.
Take this letter and this Ring.
Yes forsooth.
Oh how all the parts about me shake,—enquire
for one Moister Easy at his old lodging 'ith the Blackfry∣ers,
I will indeed forsooth.
Tell him the party that sent him a hundred pound
tother day to cōfort his heart, he's likewise sent him this Let∣la
and this Ring, which has that virtue to recover him again
for ever say—name no body Winifride.
Not so much as you forsooth.
Good Girl, thou shalt have a mourning Gown at
the burial of mine honesty.
And isle effect your will a my Fidelity.
I doe account my self the happiest Widow that
ever counterfeited weeping, in that I have the leisure now,
both to doe that Gentleman good, and doe my self a plea∣sure,
but I must seem like a hanging Moon little waterish
a while.
I entertain both thee and thy Device,
Twill put i'm both to shame.
That is my hope sir,
Especially that strumpet.
Save you sweet widow,
I suffer for your heaviness.
O Moister Rerage, I have lost the dearest husband
that ever woman did enjoy.
You must have patience yet.
Oh talk not to me of patience and you love me,
good Moister Rerage.
Yet if all tongues go right, hee did not use you so well
as a man mought.
Nay, that's true indeed Moister Rerage, he ne'er used
me so well as a woman might have been used, that's certain
in troth ta's been our greatest falling out sir, and though it
be the part of a widow, to show her self a woman for her
Husbands death, yet when I remember al his unkindness,
I cannot weep a stroke in faith Moister Rerage, and there∣fore
wisely did a great widow in this land, comfort up
another, go too Lady (quoth she) leave blubbering, thou
think upon thy husbands good parts when thou shed
tears, doe but remember how often hee he's lain from thee,
and how many naughty slippery turns he has done thee, &amp;
thou wilt ne'er weep for him I warrant thee—you would
not think how that counsel he's wrought with me Moister
Rerage, I could not despond another tear now, and you
would give me ne'er so much.
Why I count you the wiser Widow, it shows you
have wisdom, when you can check your passion, for
mine own part, I have no sense to sorrow for his death,
whose life was the only Rub to my affection.
Troth and so it was to mine, but take courage now,
your'e a Landed Gentleman, &amp; my Daughter is seven hun∣dred
pound strong to join with you.
But Lethe lyes'ith way.
Let him lye still,
You shall tread ore him or isle fail in will.
Sweet widow.
What a beloude man did I live? my Servants gall their
fingers with ringing, my wives cheeks smart with weeping,
stand in every corner, you may take water in my house—
but am not I a wise fool now? what if my wife should take
my death so to heart, that she should sicken vppon't, nay
swone, nay dye? when did I hear of a woman doe so, let me
see,—Now I remember me, I think it was before my
Time; yes, I have heard of those wives that have wept, and
s•bt, and swooned—marry I never heard but they recovered
again, that's a cōfort la, that's a comfort, &amp; I hope so will mine
—peace, tic ne'er upon the time, I see, here comes the
worshipful livery, I have the Hospital Boys, I perceive little
Tomazin will bestow cost of me,—Isle listen to the com∣mon
censure now, how the world tongues me when my •are
lies lowe.
Who Quomodo? merely enriched by shifts,
And cousnages, believe it.
I see the world is very loath to praise me,
Tic Roly friends with me, I cannot blame it,
For what I have done, has been to vex and shame it.
Here comes my Son, the hope, the landed heir,
Ont whose rare thrift, will say men's tongues you lye,
Isle keep by law what was got craftily.
Me thinks I hear him say so:
He does salute the livery with good grace,
And solemn Gesture—
oh my young Worshipful M. you have parted from
a dear Father, a wise and proui-dent father.
Art thou grown an Ass now?
Such an honest Father—
Prithee Beadle leave thy lying, I am scarce able to
endure thee in faith, what honesty did thou ere know by my
Father speak, rule your tongue Beadle least I make you
prove it, and then I know what will become of you, tic
the scurvy est thing in the earth to belie the dead so, and hoe's
a beastly Son and heir that will stand by, and hear his fa∣there
belied to his face, hee will ne'er prosper I warrant him,
Troth if I be not ashamed to go to Church with him, I would
I might be hanged, I fear such filthy Tales go on him, oh
if I had known hee had been such a lewd fellow in his life
hee should ne'er have kept me company.
Oh—o—o!
But I am glad hoe's gone, tho it were long first, Short∣yard
and I will revel it in faith, I have made him my Rentga∣therer
already.
Hee shall bee speedily disinherited, hee gettes not a
foot, not the Crown of a Mole-hill, isle sooner make a cour∣tier
my heir for teaching my wife tricks then thee,
my most neglectful Son? Oh now the coarse, I shall obe∣serve
yet farther.
O my most modest, virtuous and remembering wife,
she shall have all when I dye, she shall have all.
Moister Easy? tic, oh what shift shall I make now?
oh—
Sweet wife she sownes, isle let her alone, isle have no
mercy at this time, isle not see her, isle follow the coarse.
The Devil grind thy Bones, thou co•sning Ras∣cal.
Give her a little more ayre, tilt up her head, comfort
thy self good widow, doe not fall like a Beast for a hus∣band,
there's more then wee can well tell where to put i'm,
good soul.
Oh, I shall be well anon.
Fie, you have no patience in faith, I have buried four
Husbands, and never offered i'm such abuse.
Cousin, how doe you?
Sorry to see you ill Couze.
The worst is past I hope.
I hope so to.
Lend me your hand sweet Couze I have troubled you
No trouble indeed forsooth—Good Cousin have
a care of her, comfort her up as much as you can, and all little
enough I warrant ye.
My most sweet love.
My life is not so dear.
I have always pitied you.
You've shown it here.
And given the desperate hope?
Delay not now, you've understood my love, I have
a priest ready, this is the fittest season, no eye offends vs,
Let this kiss
Restore thee to more wealth, me to more bliss.
The Angels have provided for me.
I have not Scope enough within my breast,
To keep my joys contained: I'm Quomodoes
heir: the Lands assurances, and all are mine
(I have tripped his Sons heals up) aboue the ground,
His father left him: had I not encouragement?
Do not I know what proves the Fathers pray?
The Son ne'er looks on it, but it melts away.
Doe not I know the wealth that's got by fraud?
Slaue's share it like the retches of a Bawd.
Why tic a curse unquenchable, ne'er cools.
Knaves still commit their consciences to fools:
And they betray who o'wde em, hears all the bonds,
All Easies writings, let me see:
Now my desires wear crowns.
My joys exceed,
Man is near healthful, till his follies bleed.
Oh, behold the Villain, who in all those shapes
Confounded your estate.
That slave, that villain.
So many Acres of good meadow—
Rascal.
I hear you sir.
Rogue, Shortyard, Blastfield, Sergeant, Deputy, cousner
Hold, hold.
I thirst the execution of his ears.
Hate you that office,
Isle strip him bare for punishment and shame.
Why doe but hear me sir, you will not think what I
have done for you.
Given his Son my Lands.
Why look you, tic not so, your not told true,
I have Coosned him again merely for you,
Merely for you sir, it was my meaning then
That you should wed her, and have all again.
A my troth its true sir: look you then here sir, you shall
not miss a little scroll sir, pray sir, let not the City know
me for a knave, there be richer men would envy my prefer∣meant
if I should be known before i'm.
Villain, my hate to more revenge is drawn,
When slaves are found, tic their base Art to fawn,
Within there—.
How now? fresh warders.
This is the other, bind him fast, have I found you
Moister Blastfield.
This is the fruit of Craft,
Like him that shoots up hye, looks for the shaft
And finds it in his fore-head, so does hit
The Arrow of our fate, wit destroys wit:
The head the bodies bane, and his own bears,
You have Corn enough, you need not reap mine ears,
Sweet Moister Blastfield.
I loath his voice, away.
What happiness was here, but are you sure you have all?
I hope so my sweet wife.
What difference there is in Husbands, not only
in one thing, but in all.
Hears good deeds and bad deeds, the writings that
keep my lands to me, and the bonds that gave it away from
me.
These my good deeds shall to more safety turn,
And these my bad have their deserts and burn.
Isle see thee again presently, read there.
Did he want all, who would not love his care?
What a wife hast thou Ephestian—Quomodo, so lo∣uing
so mindful of her duty not only seen to weep but
known to swone, I knew a Widow about Saint Antlings so
forgetful of his first Husband, that she married again with∣in
the tweluemonth, nay some byr'lady within the month:
there were sights to be seen, had they my wives true sorrows
seven nor seven years would draw i'm to the stake, I
would most tradesmen had such a wife as I, they hope they
have, wee must all hope the best: thus in her honour.
A modest wife is such a Jewel,
Every Gold-smith cannot show it:
He that's honest, and not cruel,
Is the likeliest man to owe it.
And that's I, I made it by my self, and coming to her as a
Beadle for my reward this morning, isle see how she takes
my death next her heart.
Now Beadle.
Bless your mistrisships eyes from too many tears,
Although you have lost a wise and worshipful Gentleman.
You come for your due Beadle, here 'ith house.
Most certain, the Hospital money and mine own
poor forty pence.
I must crave a discharge from you Beadle.
Call your man, isle heartily see my hand to a Memo∣randum.
You deal the truel yer.
Good wench still.
George, here is the Beadle come for his money, draw
a Memorandum that he has received all his due he can claim
here ith house after this funeral.
What politic directions she gives him, all to secure
her self, tic time in faith now to pity her, isle discover my self
to her ere I go, but came it off with some lively jest now, that
were admirable: I have it? after the memorandum is written
and all, isle set my own name too't Ephestian Quomodo,
sheele start, sheele wonder how Ephest▪ Quomodo came the
there that was buried yesterday: you're beset little Quomodo.
Ninteene, twenty five pound, 1, 2, 3, &amp; 4. d.
So, we shall have good sport, when tic read:
How now Lady, paying away money so fast?
The Beadles due here sir
Whose? tic Easy, what makes Easy in my house,
Hee is not my wives over seer I hope:
Whats here?
He makes me sweat.
Memorandum that I have received of Richard Easy,
all my due I can claim here in the house▪ or any hereafter for
me: In witness whereof, I have set to mine own hand,
Ephestian Qommodo.
What have I done? was I mad?
Ephestian Quomodo.
I, well, what then sir? get you out of my house,
First you moister Prodigal had land, away.
What is the Beadle drunk or mad?
Where are my men to thrust him out a doors.
Not so good Tomazin not so.
This fellow must be whipped.
Thank you good wife.
I can no longer bear him.
Nay sweet husband.
Husband I me undone, beggard, couzend, confoun∣ded
for ever: married already? will it please you know me
now mistress Harlot, and master Horner, who am I now?
Oh, hoe's as like my tother husband as can be.
Isle have judgment, isle bring you before a Judge, you
shall feel wife whether my flesh be dead or no, isle tickle you
in faith, in faith.
The Judge that heel solicit knows me well.
Lets on then, and our grievances first tell.
Here they come.
O where.
Hart of shame, vpō my wedding morning so disgraced▪
Have you so little conscience Officers,
You will not take a bribe?
Master Lethe we may lie together lawfully hereafter,
for we are coupled together before people ynow in faith.
There goes the strumpet.
Pardon my wilful blindness and enjoy me.
For now the difference appears too plain,
Betwixt a base slave and a true Gentleman.
I doe embrace thee in the best of love,
How soon affections fail, how soon they prove.
His cousnages are odious, he the plaintiff,
Not only framed deceitful in his life,
But so to mock his funeral.
Most just.
The Livery all assembled, mourning weeds,
Throughout his house even down to his last seruāt
The Herald richly hired to lend him Arms,
Faind from his Ancestors, which I dare swear knew no
other Arms but those they laboured with,
All preparations furnished, nothing wanted
Save that which was the cause of all, his death,
If he be living.
It was an impious part.
We are not certain yet it is himself,
But some false spirit that assumes his shape,
And seeks still to deceive me.
Oh are you come? my Lord? their here, good morrow
Tomazin.
Now what are you?
I am Quomodo my Lord, &amp; this my wife,
Those my two men, that are bound wrongfully.
How are we sure you're he?
Oh you cannot miss my Lord.
Isle try you.
Are you the man that lived the famous cousner?
O no my Lord.
Did you deceive this Gentleman of his right,
And laid Nets ore his land?
Not I my Lord.
Then you're not Quomodo but a counterfeit,
Lay hands on him, and bear him to the whip.
Stay, stay a little I pray, now I remember me my Lord,
I cozened him indeed, tic wondrous true.
Then I dare swear this is no counterfeit.
Let all doubts cease this man is Quomodo.
Why la you now, you would not believe this, I am
found what I am.
But setting these thy odious shifts apart,
Why did that thought profane, enter thy breast,
To mock the world with thy supposed death?
Conceive you not that my Lord? a policy.
So.
For having gotten the lands I thirsted still,
To know what fate would follow 'em.
Being ill got.
Your Lorpship apprehends me.
I think I shall anon.
And thereupon,
I out of policy possessed my son,
Which since I have found lewd, and now intend
To disinherit him for ever,
Not only this was in my death set down,
But thereby a firm trial of my wife,
Her constant sorrows, her remembering virtues,
All which are Dews, the shine of a next morning 'dries 'em
up all I see it.
Did you profess wise cousinage, and would dare
To put a woman to her two days choice,
When of a minute do's it?
Less, a moment
The twinkling of an eye, a glimpse, scarce something do's it,
Your Lordship yet will grant she is my wife.
O heaven!
After some penance, and the Deues of law
I must acknowledge that.
I scarce like
Those Deues of law.
My Lord, although the law too gently lot his wife,
The wealth he left behind he cannot challenge.
How?
Behold his hand against it.
He do's devise all means to make me mad, that I
may no more lie with my wife in perfect memory, I know it
b•t•et the lands will maintain me in my wits: the land
will doe so much for me.
In witness whereof I have set to mine own hand,
Eph•stian Quomodo.
Tic firm enough your own sir.
A jest my Lord, I did I knew not what.
It should seem so, deceit is her own foe
Craftily gets, and childishly lets go.
But yet the lands are his.
I, warrant ye.
No my good Lord, the lands know the right heir,
I am their master once more.
Have you the lands?
Yes truly I praise heaven.
Is this good dealing? are there such consciences a∣broad,
how? which way could he come by 'em?
My Lord isle quickly resolve you that it comes to me
This cousner whom too long I called my patron,
To my thought dying, and the fool his son
Possessed of all, which my brain partly sweat for,
I held it my best virtue, by a plot
To get from him what for him was ill got.
O beastly Shortyard!
When no sooner mine,
But I was glad more quickly to resign.
Craft once discovered shows her abject line.
He hits me every where, for craft once known,
Do's teach fools wit, leaves the deceiver none.
My deeds have cleft me, cleft me.
Room there.
A little yet to raise my spirit.
Here moister Lethe comes to wed my Daughter.
That's all the joy is left me: ha? who's this?
What crimes have those brought forth?
The shame of lust,
Most viciously on this his wedding morning,
This man was ceased in shame with that bold Strumpet.
Why, tic she he means to matrye.
No in truth.
In truth you doe.
Who for his wife his Harlot doth prefer,
Good reason tic, that he should martie her.
I crave it on my knees, such was his vow at first,
Isle say so too
And work out mine own safety,
Such was his vow at first, indeed my Lord,
How ere his mood has changed him?
O wild slave!
He says it true my Lord,
Rest content,
He shall both marry and taste punishment.
Oh intolerable!
I beseech your good Lordship if I must have an outward pu∣nishment,
let me not marry an inward, whose lastes will ne'er
out, but grow worse and worse: I have a wife stays for
me this morning with seven hundred pound in her purse,
let me be speedily whipped and be gone, I beseech your Lord∣ship.
Hee speaks no truth my Lord, behold the Virgin,
Wife to a well esteemed Gentleman,
Loathing the Sin he follows.
I was betrayed, yes faith.
His own Mother my Lord,
Which hee confessed through ignorance, and disdain,
His name so changed to abuse the world and her.
Marry a Hailot, why not? tic an honest mans fortune,
I pray did not one of my Coūtriemen marry my Sister? why
well then, if none should be married but those that are honest
where should a man seek a wife after Christmas? I pity that
Gentleman, that has nine Daughters to bestow, and seven
of i'm Seeded already, they will be good stuff by that time,
I doe beseech your Lordship to remove the punishment, I
am content to marry her.
There's no removing of your punishment.
O good my Lord.
Unless one here assembled
Whom you have most unnaturally a bust, beget your par∣don.
Who should that be?
Or who would doote, that has been so abused?
A troublesome penance—sir.
Knave in your face, leave your mocking, Andrew,
marry your Queen and be quiet.
Moister Easy.
I'm sorry you take such a bad course sir.
Moister Quomodo.
Enquire my right name again next time, now go
your ways like an Ass as you came.
Mass I forget my mother all this while,
Isle make her do it at first, pray mother your blessing for
once.
Call me Mother? out, I defy thee slave.
Call me slave as much as you will, but doe not shame
me now, let the world know you are my Mother.
Let me not have this Villain put upon me I beseech
your Lordship.
Hoe's justly cursed, she loathes to know him now,
Whom he before did as much loath to know,
Wilt thou believe me woman?
That's soon done.
Then know him for a Villain, tic thy Son,
Art thou Andrew my wicked Son Andrew?
You would not believe me Mother.
How art thou changed?
Is this suit fit for thee? a Tooth-drawers Son,
this country has ee'ne spoiled thee since thou came heather,
thy manners better then thy clothes, but now whole cloa∣these
and ragged manners, it may well be said that truth goes
naked, for when thou had scarce a shirt thou had more
truth about thee.
Thou art thine own affliction Quomodo:
Shortyard we banish, tic our pleasure.
Hence forth no woman shall complain for measure.
And that all Error from our works may stand,
We banish Falslight evermore the land.

IN Troy there lies the Scene From Isles of Greece
The Princes Orgillous, their high blood chafed
Have to the Port of Athens sent their ships
Fraught with the ministers and instruments
Of cruel War: Sixty and nine that wore
Their Crownets, Regal, from the Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia, and their vow is made
To ransack Troy, within whose strong emures
The ravished Helen, Menelaus Queen,
With wanton Paris sleeps, and that's the Quarrel.
To Tenedos they come,
And the deepe-drawing Bark do there disgorge
Their warlike frautage: now on Dardan Plains
The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave Pavilions. Priams six-gated City,
Dardan and Timbria, Helias, Chetas, Trojan,
And Antenonidus with massy Staples
And corresponsive and fulfilling Bolts
Stir up the Sons of Troy.
Now Expectation tickling skittish spirits,
On one and other side, Trojan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard▪ And hither am J come,
A Prologue armed, but not in confidence
Of Authors pen, or Actors voice; but suited
In like conditions, as our Argument;
To tell you (fair Beholders) that our Play
Leaps ore the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle: starting thence away,
To what may be digested in a Play:
Like, or find fault, do as your pleasures are,
Now good, or bad, it is but the chance of War.
CAll here my Varlet, Isle unarm again.
Why should I war without the walls of Troy
That find such cruel battle here within?
Each Trojan that is master of his heart,
Let him to field, Troylus alas hath none.
Will this gear ne'er be mended?
The Greeks are strong, &amp; skilful to their strength,
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness Valiant:
But I am weaker then a women's tear;
Tamer then sleep, fonder then ignorance;
Less valiant then the Virgin in the night,
And skilless as vnpractis'd Infancy.
Well, I have told you enough of this: For my part, Isle not meddle nor make no farther. Hee that will have a Cake out of the Wheat, must needs tarry the grinding.
Have I not tarried?
I the grinding; but you must tarry the bolting.
Have I not tarried?
I the bolting; but you must tarry the leau'ing.
Still have I tarried.
I, to the leauening: but hears yet in the word hereafter, the Kneading, the making of the Cake, the heating of the Oven, and the Baking; nay, you must stay the cooling too, or you may chance to burn your lips.
Patience her self, what Goddess ere she be,
Doth lesser blench at sufferance, then I doe:
At Priams Royal Table doe I sit;
And when fair Crossed comes into my thoughts,
So (Traitor) then she comes, when she is thence.
Well:
She looked yesternight fairer, then ever I saw her look,
Or any woman else.
I was about to tell thee, when my heart,
As wedged with a sigh, would rive in twain,
Least Hector, or my Father should perceive me:
I have (as when the Sun doth light a-scorne)
Buried this sigh, in wrinkle of a smile:
But sorrow, that is couched in seeming gladness,
Is like that mirth, Fate turns to sudden sadness.
And her hair were not somewhat darker then Helens, well go too, there were no more comparison be∣tweene the Women. But for my part she is my Kinswo∣man, I would not (as they term it) praise it, but I wold some-body had heard her talk yesterday as I did: I will not dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit, but—
Oh Pandarus! I tell thee Pandarus;
When I doe tell thee, there my hopes lye drowned:
Reply not in how many Fadomes deep
They lye entrenched. I tell thee, I am mad
In Cressids love. Thou answer she is Fair,
Pour in the open Ulcer of my heart,
Her Eyes, her Hair, her Cheek, her Gate, her Voice,
Handle in thy discourse. O that her Hand
(In whose comparison, all whites are Ink)
Writing their own reproach; to whose soft seizure,
The Cignets Down is harsh, and spirit of Sense
Hard as the palm of Plough-man. This thou tel'st me;
As true thou tel'st me, when I say I love her:
But saying thus, instead of Oil and Balm,
Thou lai'st in every gash that love hath given me,
The Knife that made it.
I speak no more then truth.
Thou dost not speak so much.
Faith, Isle not meddle in it: Let her be as she is, if she be fair, it is the better for her: and she be not, she he's the mends in her own hands.
Good Pandarus: How now Pandarus?
I have had my Labour for my travel, ill thought on of her, and ill thought on of you: Gone between and between, but small thanks for my labour.
What art thou angry Pandarus? what with me?
Because she's Kin to me, therefore shoe's not so fair as Helen, and she were not kin to me, she would be as fair on Friday, as Helen is on Sunday. But what care I? I care not and she were a blackamoor, it is all one to me.
Say I she is not fair?
I doe not care whether you doe or no. Shoe's a Fool to stay behind her Father: Let her to the Greeks, and so Isle tell her the next time I see her: for my part, Isle meddle nor make no more in the matter.
Pandarus?
Not I.
Sweet Pandarus.
Pray you speak no more to me, I will leave all as I found it, and there an end.
Peace you ungracious Clamours, peace rude sounds,
Fools on both sides, Helen must needs be fair,
When with your blood you daily paint her thus.
I cannot fight upon this Argument:
It is too starved a subject for my Sword,
But Pandarus: O Gods! How do you plague me?
I cannot come to Crossed but by Pander,
And he's as teachy to be wooed to woe,
As she is stubborn, chaste, against all suite.
Tell me Apollo for thy Daphnes Love
What Crossed is, what Pander, and what we:
Her bed is India, there she lies, a Pearl▪
Between our Ilium, and where she recides
Let it be called the wild and wandering flood,
Our self the Merchant, and this sailing Pander,
Our doubtful hope, our convoy and our Bark.
How now Prince Troylus?
Wherefore not a field?
Because not there; this women's answer sorts.
For womanish it is to be from thence:
What news Aeneas from the field to day?
That Paris is returned home, and hurt.
By whom Aeneas?
Troylus by Menelaus.
Let Paris bleed, it is but a scar to scorn,
Paris is gored with Menelaus horn.
Hark what good sport is out of Town to day.
Better at home, if would I might were may:
But to the sport abroad, are you bound thither?
In all swift hast.
Come go wee then together.
Who were those went by?
Queen Hecuba, and Helen.
And whether go they?
Up to the Eastern Tower,
Whose height commands as subject all the veil,
To see the battle: Hector whose patience,
Is as a Virtue fixed, to day was moved:
He chides Andromache and struck his Armourer,
And like as there were husbandry in War
Before the Sun rose, hee was harnessed lyte,
And to the field goo's he; where every flower
Did as a Prophet weep what it foresaw,
In Hectors wrath.
What was his cause of anger?
The noise goo's this;
There is among the Greeks,
A Lord of Trojan blood, Nephew to Hector,
They call him Aiax.
Good; and what of him?
They say he is a very man per se and stands alone.
So do all men, unless they are drunk, sick, or have no legs.
This man Lady, hath robed many beasts of their particular additions, he is as valiant as the Lyon, churlish as the Bear, slow as the Elephant: a man into whom nature hath so crowded humours, that his valour is crushed into folly, his folly sauced with discretion: there is no man hath a virtue, that he hath not a glimpse of, nor a∣ny man an attained, but he carries some stain of it. He is melancholy without cause, and merry against the hair, hee hath the joints of every thing, but every thing so out of joint, that hee is a gouty Briareus, many hands and no use; or purblinded Argus, all eyes and no sight.
But how should this man that makes me smile, make Hector angry?
They say he yesterday cop'd Hector in the bat∣tell and stroke him down, the disdained &amp; shame where∣of, hath ever since kept Hector fasting and waking.
Who comes here?
Madam your Uncle Pandarus.
Hectors a gallant man.
As may be in the world Lady.
What's that? what's that?
Good morrow Uncle Pandarus.
Good morrow Cozen Crossed: what do you talk of? good morrow Alexander: how do you Cozen? when were you at Illium?
This morning Uncle.
What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector armed and gon ere yea came to Illium? Helen was not up? was she?
Hector was gone but Helen was not up?
E'ene so; Hector was stirring early.
That were we talking of, and of his anger.
Was he angry?
So he says here.
True he was so; I know the cause too, heel lay about him to day I can tell them that▪ and there's Troylus will not come far behind him, let them take heed of Troylus; I can tell them that too.
What is he angry too?
Who Troylus?
Troylus is the better man of the two.
Oh Iupiter; there's no comparison.
What not between Troylus and Hector? do you know a man if you see him?
I, if I ever saw him before and knew him.
Well I say Troylus is Troylus.
Then you say as I say,
For I am sure he is not Hector.
No not Hector is not Troylus in some degrees.
It is just, to each of them he is himself.
Himself? alas poor Troylus I would he were.
So he is.
Condition I had gone barefoot to India.
He is not Hector.
Himself? no? hoe's not himself, would a were himself: well, the Gods are aboue, time must friend or end: well Troylus well, I would my heart were in her by∣die; no, Hector is not a better man then Troylus.
Excuse me.
He is elder.
Pardon me, pardon me.
The others not come too't, you shall tell me ano∣there tale when the others come too't: Hector shall not have his will this year.
He shall not need it if he have his own.
Nor his qualities.
No matter.
Nor his beauty.
It would not become him, his own's better.
You have no judgment Niece; Helen her self swore the other day, that Troylus for a browne favour (for so it is I must confess) not browne neither.
No, but browne.
Faith to say truth, browne and not browne.
To say the truth, true and not true.
She praised his complexion aboue Paris.
Why Paris hath colour enough.
So, he has.
Then Troylus should have too much, if she prasi'd him aboue, his complexion is higher then his, he having
colour enough, and the other higher, is too flaming a praise for a good complexion, I had as lieve Hellens gol∣den tongue had commended Troylus for a copper nose.
I swear to you,
I think Helen loves him better then Paris.
Then shoe's a merry Greek indeed.
Nay I am sure she does, she came to him the other day into the compassed window, and you know he has not past three or four hairs on his chin.
Indeed a Tipsters Arithmetic may soon bring his particulars therein, to a total.
Why he is very young, and yet will he within three pound lift as much as his brother Hector.
Is he is so young a man, and so old a lefter?
But to prove to you that Helen loves him, she came and puts me her white hand to his cloven chin.
Iuno have mercy, how came it cloven?
Why, you know it is dimpled,
I think his smiling becomes him better then any man in all Phrigia.
Oh he smiles valiantly.
Dooes hee not?
Oh yes, and it were a clow'd in Autumn.
Why go to then, but to prove to you that Helen loves Troylus.
Troylus will stand to thee
Proof, if you'll prove it so.
Troylus? why he esteems her no more then I e∣steam an addle egg.
If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle head, you would eat chickens in the shell.
I cannot choose but laugh to think how she tick∣led his chin, indeed she has a maruel's white hand I must needs confess.
Without the rack.
And she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chin.
Alas poor chin? many a wart is richer.
But there was such laughing, Queen Hecuba laughed that her eyes ran ore.
With Milstones.
And Cassandra laughed.
But there was more temperate fire under the pot of her eyes: did her eyes run ore too?
And Hector laughed.
At what was all this laughing?
Marry at the white hair that Helen spied on Troylus chin.
And to had been a greene hair, I should have laughed too.
They laughed not so much at the hair, as at his pretty answer.
What was his answer?
Quoth she, heere's but two and fifty hairs on your chin; and one of them is white.
This is her question.
That's true, make no question of that, two and fifty hairs quoth hee, and one white, that white hair is my Father, and all the rest are his Sons. Iupiter quoth she, which of these hairs is Paris my husband? The for∣ked one quoth he, plucked out and give it him: but there was such laughing, and Helen so blushed, and Paris so chaft, and all the rest so laughed, that it past.
So let it now,
For is has been a great while going by.
Well Cozen,
I told you a thing yesterday, think on it.
So I does.
Isle be sworn it is true, he will weep you and it was a man borne in April.
And Isle spring up in his tears, and it was a nettle against May.
Hark they are coming from the field, shall we stand up here and see them, as they pass toward Illium, good Niece do, sweet Niece Cressida.
At your pleasure.
Here, here, here's an excellent place, here we may see most bravely, Isle tel you them all by their names, as they pass by, but mark Troylus aboue the rest.
Speak not so loud.
That's Aeneas, is not that a brave man, hoe's one of the flowers of Troy I can you, but mark Troylus, you shall see anon.
Who's that?
That's Antenor, he has a shrow'd wit I can tell you, and hoe's a man good enough, hoe's one of th soun∣dest judgment in Troy whosoever, and a proper man of person: when comes Troylus? Isle show you Troylus anon, if hee see me, you shall see him him nod at me.
Will he give you the nod?
You shall see.
If he do, the rich shall have, more.
That's Hector, that, that, look you, that there's a fellow. Go thy way Hector, there's a brave man Niece, O brave Hector! Look how hee looks? there's a coun∣tenance; first not a brave man?
O brave man!
Is a not? It dooes a mans heart good, look you what hacks are on his Helmet, look you yonder, do you see? Look you there? There's no jesting, laying on, tak't off, who ill as they say, there be hacks.
Be those with Swords?
Swords, any thing he cares not, and the devil come to him, it's all one, by Gods lid it dooes ones heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris: look ye yonder Niece, first not a gallant man to, first not? Why this is brave now: who said he came hurt home to day? Hoe's not hurt, why this will do Hellens heart good now, ha? Would I could see Troylus now, you shall Troy∣lus anon.
Whose that?
That's Hellenus, I marvel where Troylus is, that's Helenus, I think he went not forth to day: that's Hell∣lenus.
Can Hellenus fight Uncle?
Hellenus no: yes heel fight indifferent, well, I marvel where Troylus is; hark, do you not haere the people cry Troylus? Hellenus is a Priest.
What sneaking fellow comes yonder?
Where? Yonder? That's Daphobus. It is Troy∣lus! Ther's a man Niece, hem▪ Brave Troylus, the Prince of Chivalry.
Peace, for shame peace.
Mark him, not him: O brave Troylus: look well upon him Niece, look you how his Sword is blou∣died, and his Helm more hacked then Hectors, and how he
looks, and how he goes. O admirable youth! he ne'er saw three and twenty. Go thy way Troylus, go thy way, had I a sister were a Grace, or a daughter a Goddess, hee should take his choice. O admirable man! Paris? Paris is dirt to him, and I warrant, Helen to change, would give money to boot.
Here come more.
Asses, fools, dolts, chafe and bran, chafe and bran; porridge after meat. I could live and dye in the eyes of Troylus. Ne'er look, ne'er look; the Eagles are gon, Crows and Daws, Crows and Daws: I had rather be such a man as Troylus, then Agamemnon, and all Greece.
There is among the Greeks Achilles, a better man then Troylus.
Achilles? a Dray-man, a Porter, a very Camel.
Well, well.
Well, well? Why have you any discretion? have you any eyes? Do you know what a man is? Is not birth, beauty, good-shape, discourse, manhood, learning, gen∣tlenesse, virtue, youth, liberality, and so forth: the Spice, and salt that seasons a man?
I, a minced man, and then to be baked with no Date in the pie, for then the mans dates out.
You are such another woman, one knows not at what ward you lye.
Upon my back, to defend my belly; upon my wit, to defend my wiles; upon my secrecy, to defend mine honesty; my Mask, to defend my beauty, and you to defend all these: and at all these wards I lye at, at a thousand watches.
Say one of your watches.
Nay Isle watch you for that, and that's one of the chiefest of them too: If I cannot ward what I would not have hit, I can watch you for telling how I took the blow, unless it swell past hiding, and then it's past wat∣ching.
You are such another.
Sir, my Lord would instantly speak with you.
Where?
At your own house.
Good Boy tell him I come, I doubt he bee hurt.
Fare ye well good Niece.
Adieu Uncle.
Isle be with you Niece by and by.
To bring Uncle.
I, a token from Troylus.
By the same token, you are a Bawd.
Words, vows, gifts, tears, &amp; loves full sacrifice,
He offers in another enterprise:
But more in Troylus thousand fold I see,
Then in the glass of Pandar's praise may be;
Yet hold I off. Women are Angels wooing,
Things won are done, joys soul lies in the doing:
That she beloved, knows nought, that knows not this;
Men prize the thing vngain'd, more then it is.
That she was never yet, that ever knew
Love got so sweet, as when desire did sue:
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach;
"Achievement, is command; vngain'd, beseech.
That though my hearts Contents firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.
Princes:
What grief hath set the Iaundies on your cheeks?
The ample proposition that hope makes
In all designs, begun on earth below
Fails in the promised largeness: checks and disasters
Grow in the veins of actions highest reared.
As knots by the conflux of meeting sap,
Infect the sound Pine, and diverts his Grain
Tortiue and erant from his course of growth▪
Nor Princes, is it matter new to vs,
That we come short of our suppose so far,
That after seven years siege, yet Troy walls stand,
Sith every action that hath gone before,
Whereof we have Record, Trial did draw
Bias and thwart, not answering the aim:
And that vnbodied figure of the thought
That gaue't surmised shape. Why then (you Princes)
Do you with cheeks abashed, behold our works,
And think them shame, which are (indeed) nought else
But the protractiue trials of great Jove,
To find persistiue constancy in men?
The fineness of which Mettle is not found
In Fortunes love: for then, the Bold and Coward,
The Wise and Fool, the Artist and vn-read,
The hard and soft, seem all affin'd, and kin.
But in the Wind and Tempest of her frown,
Distinction with a loud and powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnows the light away;
And what hath mass, or matter by it self,
Lies rich in Virtue, and vnmingled.
With due Observance of thy godly seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply
Thy latest words.
In the reproof of Chance,
Lies the true proof of men: The Sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble Boats dare sail
Upon her patient breast, making their way
With those of Nobler bulk?
But let the Ruffian Bores once enrage
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold
The strong ribbed Bark through liquid Mountains cut,
Bounding between the two moist Elements
Like Perseus Horse. Whore's then the saucy Boat,
Whose weak vntimber'd sides but even now
Co-riual'd Greatness? Either to harbour fled,
Or made a Toste for Neptune. Even so,
Doth valours show, and valours worth divide
In storms of Fortune.
For, in her ray and brightness,
The Heard hath more annoyance by the Breeze
Then by the Tiger: But, when the splitting wind
Makes flexible the knees of knotted Oaks,
And Flies fled under shade, why then
The thing of Courage,
As roused with rage, with rage doth sympathize,
And with an accent tuned in selfsame key,
Retires to chiding Fortune.
Agamemnon.
Thou great Commander, Nerve, and Bone of Greece,
Heart of our Numbers, soul, and only spirit,
In whom the tempers, and the minds of all
Should be shut up: Hear what Vlysses speaks,
Besides the applause and approbation
The which most mighty for thy place and sway,
And thou most reverend for thy stretcht-out life,
I give to both your speeches: which were such,
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
Should hold up high in Brass: and such again
As venerable Nestor (hatched in Silver)
Should with a bond of ayre, strong as the Axle-tree
In which the Heavens ride, knit all Greeks ears
To his experienced tongue: yet let it please both
(Thou Great, and Wise) to hear Vlysses speak.
Speak Prince of Ithaca, and be it of less expect:
That matter needless of importlesse burden
Divide thy lips; then we are confident
When rank Thersites ops his Masticke jaws,
We shall hear Music, Wit, and Oracle.
Troy yet upon his basis had been down,
And the great Hectors sword had lacked a Master
But for these instances.
The speciality of Rule hath been neglected;
And look how many Grecian Tents do stand
Hollow upon this Plain, so many hollow Factions.
When that the General is not like the Hive,
To whom the Foragers shall all repair,
What Honey is expected? Degree being vizarded,
The unworthiest shows as fairly in the Mask.
The Heavens themselves, the Planets, and this Center,
Observe degree, priority, and place,
Insisture, course, proportion, season, form,
Office, and custom, in all line of Order:
And therefore is the glorious Planet Sol
In noble eminence, enthroned and sphered
Amidst the other, whose med'cinable eye
Corrects the ill Aspects of Planets evil,
And posts like the Commandment of a King,
Sans check, to good and bad. But when the Planets
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
What Plagues, and what portents, what mutiny?
What raging of the Sea? shaking of Earth?
Commotion in the Winds? Frights, changes, horrors,
Divert, and crack, rend and deracinate
The unity, and married calm of States
Quite from their fixture? O, when Degree is shook,
(Which is the Ladder to all high designs)
The enterprise is sick. How could Communities,
Degrees in Schools, and Brother-hoods in Cities,
Peaceful Commerce from dividable shores,
The primogenitiue, and due of Birth,
Prerogative of Age, Crowns, Scepters, Laurels
(But by Degree) stand in Authentic place?
Take but Degree away, vn-tune that string,
And hark what Discord follows: each thing meets
In mere oppugnancie. The bounded Waters,
Should lift their bosoms higher then the Shores,
And make a sop of all this solid Globe:
Strength should be Lord of imbecility,
And the rude Son should strike his Father dead:
Force should be right, or rather, right and wrong,
(Between whose endless jar, Justice recides)
Should loose her names, and so should Justice too.
Then every thing includes it self in Power,
Power into Will, Will into Appetite,
And Appetite (an universal Wolf,
So doubly seconded with Will, and Power)
Must make perforce an universal prey,
And last, eat up himself.
Great Agamemnon:
This Chaos, when Degree is suffocate,
Follows the choking:
And this neglect of Degree, is it
That by a pace goes backward in a purpose
It hath to climb. The Generall's disdained
By him one step below; he, by the next,
That next, by him beneath: so every step
Exampled by the first pace that is sick
Of his Superior, grows to an envious Fever
Of pale, and bloodless Emulation.
And it is this Fever that keeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakness lives, not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Vlysses here discovered
The Fever, whereof all our power is sick.
The Nature of the sickness found (Ʋlysses)
What is the remedy?
The great Achilles, whom Opinion crowns,
The sinew, and the fore-hand of our Host,
Having his ear full of his aerie Fame,
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his Tent
Lies mocking our designs. With him, Patroclus,
Upon a lazy Bed, the liue-long day
Breaks scurrill Jests,
And with ridiculous and awkward action,
(Which Slanderer, he imitation call's)
He Pageants vs. Sometime great Agamemnon,
Thy topless deputation he puts on;
And like a strutting Player, whose conceit
Lies in his Ham-string, and doth think it rich
To hear the wooden Dialogue and sound
Twixt his stretched footing, and the Scaffolage,
Such to be pitied, and ore-rested seeming
He acts thy Greatness in: and when he speaks,
It is like a Chime a mending. With terms vnsquar'd,
Which from the tongue of roaring Typhon dropped,
Would seems Hyperboles. At this fusty stuff,
The large Achilles (on his prest-bed lolling)
From his deep Chest, laughs out a loud applause,
Cries excellent, it is Agamemnon just.
Now play me Nestor; hum, and stroke thy Beard
As he, being dressed to some Oration:
That's done, as near as the extremest ends
Of paralels; as like, as Vulcan and his wife,
Yet god Achilles still cries excellent,
It is Nestor right. Now play him (me) Patroclus,
Arming to answer in a night-Alarme,
And then (forsooth) the faint defects of Age
Must be the Scene of mirth, to cough, and spit,
And with a palsy fumbling on his Gorget,
Shake in and out the Riuet: and at this sport
Sir Valour dies; cries, O enough Patroclus,
Or, give me ribs of Steel, I shall split all
In pleasure of my Spleen. And in this fashion,
All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes,
Seuerals and generals of grace exact,
Achievements, plots, orders, preventions,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truce,
Success or loss, what is, or is not, serves
As stuff for these two, to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation of these twain,
Who (as Vlysses says) Opinion crowns
With an Imperial voice, many are infect:
Aiax is grown selfe-will'd, and bears his head
In such a reyne, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles, and keeps his Tent like him;
Makes factious Feasts, rails on our state of War
Bold as an Oracle, and sets Thersites
A slave, whose Gall coins slanders like a Mint,
To match vs in comparisons with dirt,
To weaken and discredit our exposure,
How rank soever rounded in with danger.
They tax our policy, and call it Cowardice,
Count Wisdom as no member of the War,
Fore-stall prescience, and esteem no act
But that of hand: The still and mental parts,
That do contrive how many hands shall strike
When fitness call them on, and know by measure
Of their observant toil, the Enemies weight,
Why this hath not a singers dignity:
They call this Bed-worke, Mapp'ry, Closset-Warre:
So that the Ram that batters down the wall,
For the great swing and rudeness of his poise,
They place before his hand that made the Engine,
Or those that with the fineness of their souls,
By Reason guide his execution.
Let this be granted, and Achilles horse
Makes many Thetis sons.
What Trumpet? Look Menelaus.
From Troy.
What would you before our Tent?
Is this great Agamemnons Tent, I pray you?
Even this.
May one that is a Herald, and a Prince,
Do a fair message to his Kingly ears?
With surety stronger then Achilles arm,
Before all the Greekish heads, which with one voice
Call Agamemnon Head and General.
Fair leave, and large security. How may
A stranger to those most Imperial looks,
Know them from eyes of other Mortals?
How?
I: I ask, that I might waken reverence,
And on the cheek be ready with a blush
Modest as morning, when she coldly eyes
The youthful Phoebus:
Which is that God in office guiding men?
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
This Trojan scorns vs, or the men of Troy
Are ceremonious Courtiers.
Courtiers as free, as debonair; unarmed,
As bending Angels: that's their Fame, in peace:
But when they would seem Soldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strong joints, true swords, &amp; Ioues accord,
Nothing so full of heart. But peace Aeneas,
Peace Trojan, lay thy finger on thy lips,
The worthiness of praise distains his worth:
If that he praised himself, bring the praise forth.
But what the ripening enemy commends,
That breath Fame blows, that praise sole pure transcēds.
Sir, you of Troy, call you your self Aeneas?
I Greek, that is my name.
What's your affair I pray you?
Sir pardon, it is for Agamemnons cares▪
He hears nought privately
That comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come not to whisper him,
I bring a Trumpet to awake his ear,
To set his sense on the attentive bent,
And then to speak.
Speak frankly as the wind.
It is not Agamemnons sleeping hour;
That thou shalt know Trojan he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.
Trumpet blow loud,
Send thy Brass voice through all these lazy Tents,
And every Greek of mettle, let him know,
What Troy means fairly, shall be spoke aloud.
We have great Agamemnon here in Troy,
A Prince called Hector, Priam is his Father:
Who in this dull and long-continew'd Truce
Is rusty grown. He bad me take a Trumpet,
And to this purpose speak: Kings, Princes, Lords,
If there be one amongst the fairest of Greece,
That holds his Honour higher then his ease,
That seeks his praise, more then he fears his peril,
That knows his Valour, and knows not his fear,
That loves his Mistress more then in confession,
(With truant vows to her own lips he loves)
And dare a vow her Beauty, and her Worth,
In other arms then hers: to him this Challenge.
Hector, in view of Troyans, and of Greeks,
Shall make it good, or do his best to do it.
He hath a Lady, wiser, fairer, truer,
Then ever Greek did compass in his arms,
And will to morrow with his Trumpet call,
Midway between your Tents, and walls of Troy,
To rowze a Grecian that is true in love.
If any come, Hector shall honour him:
If none, he will say in Troy when he retires,
The Grecian Dames are sun-burnt, and not worth
The splinter of a Lance: Even so much.
This shall be told our Lovers Lord Aeneas,
If none of them have soul in such a kind,
We left them all at home: But we are Soldiers,
And may that Soldier a mere recreant prove,
That means not, hath not, or is not in love:
If then one is, or hath, or means to be,
That one meets Hector; if none else, Isle be he.
Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man
When Hectors Grandsire sucked: he is old now,
But if there be not in our Grecian mould,
One Noble man, that hath one spark• of fire
To answer for his Love; tell him from me,
Isle hide my Silver beard in a Gold Beaver,
And in my Vantbrace put this withered brawn,
And meeting him, will tell him, that my Lady
Was fairer then his Grandam, and as chaste
As may be in the world: his youth in flood,
Isle pawn this truth with my three drops of blood.
Now heavens forbid such scarcity of youth.
Amen.
Fair Lord Aeneas,
Let me touch your hand:
To our Pavilion shall I lead you first:
Achilles shall have word of this intent,
So shall each Lord of Greece from Tent to Tent:
Your self shall Feast with vs before you go,
And find the welcome of a Noble Foe.
Nestor.
What says Vlysses?
I have a young conception in my brain,
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.
What is it?
This it is:
Blunt wedges rive hard knots: the seeded Pride
That hath to this maturity blown up
In rank Achilles, must or now be cropped,
Or shedding breed a Nursery of like evil
To ouer-bulke vs all.
Well, and how?
This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
How ever it is spread in general name,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
The purpose is perspicuous even as substance,
Whose grossenesse little characters sum up,
And in the publication make no strain,
But that Achilles, were his brain as barren
As banks of Lybia, though (Apollo knows)
It is dry enough, will with great speed of judgment,
I, with celerity, find Hectors purpose
Pointing on him.
And wake him to the answer, think you?
Yes, it is most meet; who may you else oppose
That can from Hector bring his Honour off,
If not Achilles; though't be a sportful Combat,
Yet in this trial, much opinion dwells.
For here the Troyans taste our dearest repute
With their fin'st Palate: and trust to me Vlysses,
Our imputation shall be oddely poised
In this wilde action. For the success
(Although particular) shall give a scantling
Of good or bad, unto the General:
And in such Indexes, although small pricks
To their subsequent Volumes, there is seen
The baby figure of the Gyant-masse
Of things to come at large. It is supposed,
He that meets Hector, issues from our choice;
And choice being mutual act of all our souls,
Makes Merit her election, and doth boyle
As it were, from forth vs all: a man distilled
Out of our Virtues; who miscarrying,
What heart from hence receives the conquering part
To steel a strong opinion to themselves,
Which entertained, Limbs are in his instruments,
In no less working, then are Swords and Bows
Directiue by the Limbs.
Give pardon to my speech:
Therefore it is meet, Achilles meet not Hector:
Let vs (like Merchants) show our foulest Wares,
And think perchance they'll sell: If not,
The luster of the better yet to show,
Shall show the better. Do not consent,
That ever Hector and Achilles meet:
For both our Honour, and our Shame in this,
Are dogged with two strange Followers.
I see them not with my old eyes: what are they?
What glory our Achilles shares from Hector,
(Were he not proud) we all should wear with him:
But he already is too insolent,
And we were better parch in Africa Sun,
Then in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes
Should he scope Hector fair. If he were foiled,
Why then we did our maine opinion crush
In taint of our best man. No, make a Lott'ry,
And by device let blockish Aiax draw
The sort to sight with Hector: Among our selves,
Give him allowance as the worthier man,
For that will physic the great Myrmidon
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall
His Crest, that prouder then blew Iris bends.
If the dull brainless Aiax come safe off,
We'll dress him up in voices: if he fail,
Yet go we under our opinion still,
That we have better men. But hit or miss,
Our proiects life this shape of sense assumes,
Aiax employed, plucks down Achilles Plumes.
Now Vlysses, I begin to relish thy advice,
And I will give a taste of it forthwith
To Agamemnon, go we to him straight:
Two Cures shall tame each other, Pride alone
Must tar the Mastiffs on, as it were their bone.
Thersites?
Agamemnon, how if he had Biles (full) all over generally.
Thersites?
And those Boils did run, say so; did not the General run, were not that a botchy core?
Dog.
Then there would come some matter from him:
I see none now.
Thou Bitch-Wolfes-Sonne, can you not hear?
Feel then.
The plague of Greece upon thee thou Mongrel beef-witted Lord.
Speak then you whinid'st leaven speak, I will beat thee into handsomeness.
I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness: but I think thy Horse will sooner con an Oration, then you learn a prayer without book: Thou can strike, can thou? A red Murren of th thy Jade tricks.
Toads stool, learn me the Proclamation.
Doest thou think I have no sense thou strik'st me thus?
The Proclamation.
Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think.
Do not Porpentine, do not; my fingers itch.
I would thou did itch from head to foot, and I had the scratching of thee, I would make thee the loath∣som'st scab in Greece.
I say the Proclamation.
Thou grumble &amp; railest every hour on A∣chilles, and thou art as full of envy at his greatness, as Cer∣berus is at Proserpina's beauty. I, that thou bark at him.
Mistress Thersites.
Thou should strike him.
Coblofe.
He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, as a Sailor breaks a biscuit.
You whoreson Cur.
Do, do.
Thou stool for a Witch.
I, do, do, thou sodden-witted Lord: thou hast no more brain then I have in mine elbows: An Asinico may tutor thee. Thou scurvy valiant Ass, thou art here but to thresh Troyans, and thou art bought and sold a∣mong those of any wit, like a Barbarian slave. If thou use to beat me, I will begin at thy heel and tel what thou art by inches, thou thing of no bowels thou.
You dog.
You scurvy Lord.
You Cur.
Mars his Idiot: do rudeness, do Camel, do, do.
Why how now Aiax? wherefore do you this?
How now Thersites? what's the matter man?
You see him there, do you?
I, what's the matter.
Nay look upon him.
So I do: what's the matter?
Nay but regard him well.
Well, why I do so.
But yet you look not well upon him: for who some ever you take him to be, he is Aiax.
I know that fool.
I, but that fool knows not himself.
Therefore I bear thee.
Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he utters: his evasions have ears thus long. I have bobbed his Brain more then he has beat my bones: I will buy nine Spar∣rows for a penny, and his Piamater is not worth the ninth part of a Sparrow. This Lord (Achilles) Aiax who wears his wit in his belly, and his guts in his head, Isle tell you what I say of him.
What?
I say this Aiax—
Nay good Aiax.
Has not so much wit.
Nay, I must hold you.
As will stop the eye of Helens Needle, for whom he comes to fight.
Peace fool.
I would have peace and quietness, but the fool will not: He there, that he, look you there.
O thou damned Cur, I shall—
Will you set your wit to a Fools.
No I warrant you, for a fools will shame it.
Good words Thersites.
What's the quarrel?
I bad thee vile Owl, go learn me the tenure of the Proclamation, and he rails upon me.
I serve thee not.
Well, go too, go too.
I serve here voluntary.
Your last service was sufferance, it was not vo∣luntary, no man is beaten voluntary: Aiax was here the voluntary▪ and you as under an Impress.
E'neso, a great deal of your wit too lies in your sinews, or else there be Liars Hector shall have a great catch, if he knock out either of your brains, he were as good crack a fusty nut with no kernel.
What with me to Thersites?
There's Vlysses, and old Nestor, whose Wit was mouldy ere their Grandsires had nails on their toes, yoke you like draft-Oxen, and make you plough up the war.
What? what?
Yes good sooth, to Achilles, to Aiax, to—
I shall cut out your tongue.
It is no matter, I shall speak as much as thou afterwards.
No more words Thersites.
I will hold my peace when Achilles Brooch bids me, shall I?
There's for you Patroclus.
I will see you hanged like Clotpoles ere I come any more to your Tents; I will keep where there is wit stirring, and leave the faction of fools.
A good riddance.
Marry this Sin is proclaimed through al our host,
That Hector by the sift hour of the Sun,
Will with a Trumpet, twixt our Tents and Troy
To morrow morning call some Knight to Arms,
That hath a stomach▪ and such a one that dare
Maintain I know not what: it is trash. Farewell.
Farewell? who shall answer him?
I know not, it is put to Lottry: otherwise
He knew his man.
O meaning you, I will go learn more of it.
After so many hours, lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks,
Deliver Helen, and all damage else
(As honour, loss of time, travail, expense,
Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is consumed
In hot digestion of this cormorant War)
Shall be stroke off. Hector, what say you too't.
Though no man lesser fears the Greeks then I,
As far as touches my particular: yet dread Priam,
There is no Lady of more softer bowels,
More sponge, to suck in the sense of Fear,
More ready to cry out, who knows what follows
Then Hector is: the wound of peace is surety,
Surety secure: but modest Doubt is called
The Beacon of the wise: the tent that searches
To the bottom of the worst. Let Helen go,
Since the first sword was drawn about this question,
Every tithe soul amongst many thousand dismiss,
Hath bin as dear as Helen: I mean of ours:
If we have lost so many tenths of ours
To guard a thing not ours, nor worth to vs
(Had it our name) the value of one ten;
What merit's in that reason which denies
The yielding of her up.
Fie, fie, my Brother;
Weigh you the worth and honour of a King
(So great as our dread Father) in a Scale
Of common Ounces? Will you with Counters sum
The past proportion of his infinite,
And buckle in a waste most fathomless,
With spans and inches so diminutive,
As fears and reasons? Fie for godly shame?
No marvel though you bite so sharp at reasons,
You are so empty of them, should not our Father
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons,
Because your speech hath none that tells him so.
You are for dreams &amp; slumbers brother Priest
You fur your gloves with reason: here are your reasons
You know an enemy intends you harm,
You know, a sword employed is perilous,
And reason flies the object of all harm.
Who marvels then when Helenus beholds
A Grecian and his sword, if he do set
The very wings of reason to his heals:
Or like a Star disorb'd. Nay, if we talk of Reason,
And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove,
Let's shut our gates and sleep: Manhood and Honour
Should have hard hearts, wold they but fat their thoughts
With this crammed reason: reason and respect,
Makes Livers pale▪ and lustyhood deject.
Brother, she is not worth
What she doth cost the holding.
What's aught, but as it is valued?
But value dwells not in particular will,
It holds his estimate and dignity
As well, wherein it is precious of it self,
As in the prizer: It is made Idolatry,
To make the service greater then the God,
And the will dotes that is inclinable
To what infectiously it self affects,
Without some image of the affected merit.
I take to day a Wife, and my election
Is led on in the conduct of my Will;
My Will kindled by mine eyes and ears,
Two traded Pilots twixt the dangerous shores
Of Will, and Judgment. How may I avoid
(Although my will distaste what it elected)
The Wife I chose, there can be no evasion
To blench from this, and to stand firm by honour.
We turn not back the Silks upon the Merchant
When we have spoiled them; nor the remainder Viands
We do not throw in vnrespectiue same,
Because we now are full. It was thought meet
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks;
Your breath of full consent bellied his Sails,
The Seas and Winds (old Wranglers) took a Truce,
And did him service; he touched the Ports desired,
And for an old Aunt whom the Greeks held Captive,
He brought a Grecian Queen, whose youth &amp; freshness
Wrinkles Apolloes, and makes stale the morning.
Why keep we her? the Gracious keep our Aunt:
Is she worth keeping? Why she is a Pearl,
Whose price hath launched aboue a thousand Ships,
And turned Crowned Kings to Merchants.
If you'll avouch, it was wisdom Paris went,
(As you must needs, for you all cried, Go, go:)
If you'll confess, he brought home Noble prize,
(As you must needs) for you all clapped your hands,
And cried inestimable; why do you now
The issue of your proper Wisdoms rate,
And do a deed that Fortune never did?
Beggar the estimation which you prized,
Richer then Sea and Land? O Theft most base!
That we have stolen what we do fear to keep.
But Thieves unworthy of a thing so stolen,
That in their Country did them that disgrace,
We fear to warrant in our Native place.
Cry Troyans, cry.
What noise? what shriek is this?
It is our mad sister, I do know her voice.
Cry Troyans.
It is Cassandra.
Cry Troyans cry; lend me ten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with Prophetic tears.
Peace sister, peace.
Virgins, and Boys; mid-age &amp; wrinkled old,
Soft infancy, that nothing can but cry,
Add to my clamour: let vs pay betimes
A moity of that mass of moan to come.
Cry Troyans cry, practise your eyes with tears,
Troy must not be, nor goodly Illion stand,
Our fire-brand Brother Paris burns vs all.
Cry Troyans cry, a Helen and a woe;
Cry, cry, Troy burns, or else let Helen go.
Now youthful Troylus, do not these hie strains
Of divination in our Sister, work
Some touches of remorse? Or is your blood
So madly hot, that no discourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause,
Can qualify the same?
Why Brother Hector,
We may not think the justness of each act
Such, and no other then event doth form it,
Not once deject the courage of our minds;
Because Cassandra's mad, her brainsick raptures
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel,
Which hath our several Honours all engaged
To make it gracious. For my private part,
I am no more touched, then all Priams sons,
And love forbid there should be done amongst vs
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen,
To fight for, and maintain.
Else might the world convince of levity,
As well my vnder-takings as your counsels:
But I attest the gods, your full consent
Gave wings to my propension, and cut off
All fears attending on so dire a project.
For what (alas) can these my single arms?
What propugnation is in one mans valour
To stand the push and enmity of those
This quarrel would excite? Yet I protest,
Were I alone to pass the difficulties,
And had as ample power, as I have will,
Paris should ne'er retract what he hath done,
Nor faint in the pursuit.
Paris, you speak
Like one besotted on your sweet delights;
You have the Honey still, but these the Gall,
So to be valiant, is no praise at all.
Sir, I propose not merely to my self,
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it:
But I would have the soil of her fair Rape
Wiped off in honourable keeping her.
What Treason were it to the ransacked Queen,
Disgrace to your great words, and shame to me,
Now to deliver her possession up
On terms of base compulsion? Can it be,
That so degenerate a strain as this,
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
There's not the meanest spirit on our party,
Without a heart to dare, or sword to draw,
When Helen is defended: nor none so Noble,
Whose life were ill bestowed, or death vnfam'd,
Where Helen is the subject. Then (I say)
Well may we fight for her, whom we know well,
The worlds large spaces cannot parallel.
Paris and Troylus, you have both said well:
And on the cause and question now in hand,
Have gloz'd, but superficially; not much
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
Unfit to hear Moral Philosophy.
The Reasons you allege▪ do more conduce
To the hot passion of distemp'red blood,
Then to make up a free determination
Twixt right and wrong: For pleasure, and revenge,
Have ears more deaf then Adders, to the voice
Of any true decision. Nature craves
All dues be rendered to their Owners: now
What nearer debt in all humanity,
Then Wife is to the Husband? If this law
Of Nature be corrupted through affection,
And that great minds of partial indulgence,
To their benumbed wills resist the same,
There is a Law in each well-ordred Nation,
To curb those raging appetites that are
Most disobedient and refracturie.
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's King
(As it is known she is) these Moral Laws
Of Nature, and of Nation, speak aloud
To have her back returned. Thus to persist
In doing wrong, extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy. Hectors opinion
Is this in way of truth: yet ne'er the less,
My sprightly brethren, I propend to you
In resolution to keep Helen still;
For it is a cause that hath no mean dependence,
Upon our joint and several dignities.
Why? there you touched the life of our design:
Were it not glory that we more affected,
Then the performance of our heaving spleens,
I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood,
Spent more in her defence. But worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honour and renown,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
And fame in time to come canonise vs.
For I presume brave Hector would not loose
So rich advantage of a promised glory,
As smiles upon the fore-head of this action,
For the wide worlds revenue.
I am yours,
You valiant off-spring of great Priamus,
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst
The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks,
Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits,
I was advertised, their Great general slept,
Whilst emulation in the army crept:
This I presume will wake him.
How now Thersites? what lost in the Labyrinth of thy fury? shall the Elephant Aiax carry it thus? he beats me, and I rail at him: O worthy satisfaction, would it were otherwise: that I could beat him, whilst he railed at me: Sfoote, Isle learn to conjure and raise Devils, but Isle see some issue of my spiteful execrations. Then ther's Achilles, a rare Enginer. If Troy be not taken till these two undermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of them∣selves. O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus, forget that thou art Jove the King of gods: and Mercury, loose all the Serpentine craft of thy Caduceus, if thou take not that little little less then little wit from them that they have, which short-arm'd ignorance it self knows, is so abundant scarce, it will not in circumvention deliver a Fly from a Spider, without drawing the massy Irons and cutting the web: after this, the vengeance on the whole Camp, or rather the bone-ach, for that me thinks is the curse dependant on those that war for a placket. I have said my prayers and devil, envy, say Amen: What ho? my Lord Achilles?
Who's there? Thersites. Good Thersites come in and rail.
If I could have remembered a guilt counterfeit, thou would not have slipped out of my contemplation, but it is no matter, thy self upon thy self. The common curse of mankind, folly and ignorance be thine in great revenue; heaven bless thee from a Tutor, and Discipline come not near thee. Let thy blood be thy direction till thy death, then if she that lays thee out says thou art a fair coarse, Isle be sworn and sworn upon it she never shrouded any but Lasers, Amen. Wher's Achilles?
What art thou devout? wast thou in a prayer?
I, the heavens hear me.
Who's there?
Thersites, my Lord.
Where, where, art thou come? why my cheese, my digestion, why hast thou not served thy self into my Table, so many meals? Come, what's Agamemnon?
Thy Commander Achilles, then tell me Patro∣clus, what's Achilles?
Thy Lord Thersites: then tell me I pray thee, what's thy self?
Thy knower Patroclus: then tell me Patroclus, what art thou?
Thou moist tell that know.
O tell, tell.
Isle decline the whole question: Agamemnon com∣mands Achilles, Achilles is my Lord, I am Patroclus know∣er, and Patroclus is a fool.
You rascal.
Peace fool, I have not done.
He is a privileged man, proceed Thersites.
Agamemnon is a fool, Achilles is a fool, There∣sites is a fool, and as aforesaid, Patroclus is a fool.
Derive this? come?
Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command A∣chilles, Achilles is a fool to be commanded of Agamemon, Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool: and Patroclus is a fool positive.
Why am I a fool?
Make that demand to the Creator, it suffices me thou art. Look you, who comes here?
Patroclus, Isle speak with no body: come in with me Thersites.
Here is such patchery, such juggling, and such knavery: all the argument is a Cuckold and a Whore, a good quarrel to draw emulations, factions, and bleed to death upon: Now the dry Suppeago on the Subject, and War and Lechery confound all.
Where is Achilles?
Within his Tent, but ill disposed my Lord.
Let it be known to him that we are here:
He sent out Messengers, and we lay by
Our appertainments, visiting of him:
Let him be told of, so perchance he think
We dare not move the question of our place,
Or know not what we are.
I shall so say to him.
We saw him at the opening of his Tent,
He is not sick.
Yes, Lyon sick, sick of proud heart; you may call it Melancholy if will favour the man, but by my head, it is pride; but why, why, let him show vs the cause? A word my Lord.
What moves Aiax thus to bay at him?
Achillis hath inveigled his Fool from him.
Who, Thersites?
He.
Then will Aiax lack matter, if he have lost his Argument.
No, you see he is his argument that has his argue∣meant Achilles.
All the better, their fraction is more our wish then their faction; but it was a strong counsel that a Fool could disunite.
The amity that wisdom knits, not folly may easily untie.
Here comes Patroclus.
No Achilles with him?
The Elephant hath joints, but none for courtesy:
His leg are legs for necessity, not for slight.
Achilles bids me say he is much sorry:
If any thing more then your sport and pleasure,
Did move your greatness, and this noble State,
To call upon him; he hopes it is no other,
But for your health, and your digestion sake;
An after Dinners breath.
Hear you Patroclus:
We are too well acquainted with these answers:
But his evasion winged thus swift with scorn,
Cannot outflye our apprehensions.
Much attribute he hath, and much the reason,
Why we ascribe it to him, yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously of his own part beheld,
Doe in our eyes, begin to loose their gloss;
Yea, and like fair Fruit in an vnholdsome dish,
Are like to rot untasted: go and tell him,
We came to speak with him; and you shall not sin,
If you doe say, we think him over proud,
And under honest; in selfe-assumption greater
Then in the note of judgment: &amp; worthier then himself
Here tends the savage strangeness he puts on,
Disguise the holy strength of their command:
And under write in an observing kind
His humorous predominance, yea watch
His pettish lines, his abc, his flows, as if
The passage and whole carriage of this action
Rode on his tide. Go tell him this, and add,
That if he ouerhold his price so much,
Weal none of him; but let him, like an Engine
Not portable, lye under this report.
Bring action hither, this cannot go to war:
A stirring Dwarf, we doe allowance give,
Before a sleeping Giant: tell him so.
I shall, and bring his answer presently.
In second voice weal not be satisfied,
We come to speak with him, Ʋlisses enter you.
What is he more then another?
No more then what he thinks he is.
Is he so much, doe you not think, he thinks himself a better man then I am?
No question.
Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is?
No, Noble Aiax, you are as strong, as valiant, as wise, no less noble, much more gentle, and altogether more tractable
Why should a man be proud? How doth pride grow? I know not what it is.
Your mind is the clearer Aiax, and your virtues the fairer; he that is proud, eats up himself; Pride is his own Glass, his own trumpet, his own Chronicle, and what ever praises it self but in the deed, devours the deed in the praise.
I do hate a proud man, as I hate the engendering of Toads.
Yet •e •os himself: Is it not strange?
Achilles will not to the field to morrow.
What's his excuse?
He doth rely on none,
But carries on the stream of his dispose,
Without observance or respect of any,
In will peculiar, and in self admission.
Why, will he not upon our fair request,
Vntent his person, and share the ayre with vs?
Things small as nothing, for requests sake only
He makes important; possessed he is with greatness,
And speaks not to himself, but with a pride
That quarrels at selfe-breath. Imagined wroth
Holds in his blood such swollen and hot discourse,
That twixt his mental and his active parts,
Kingdom'd Achilles in commotion rages,
And batters against it self; what should I say?
He is so plaguy proud, that the death tokens of it,
Cry no recovery.
Let Aiax go to him.
Dear Lord, go you and greet him in his Tent;
It is said he holds you well, and will be led
At your request a little from himself.
O Agamemnon, let it not be so.
Weal consecrate the steps that Aiax makes,
When they go from Achilles; shall the proud Lord,
That bastes his arrogance with his own seam,
And never suffers matter of the world,
Enter his thoughts: save such as doe revolve
And ruminate himself. Shall he be worshipped,
Of that we hold an Idol, more then hee?
No, this thrice worthy and right valiant Lord,
Must not so staule his Palm, nobly acquired,
Nor by my will assubingate his merit,
As amply titled as Achilles is: by going to Achilles,
That were to enlard his fat already, pride,
And add more Coals to Cancer, when he burns
With entertaining great Hiperion.
This L. go to him? Iupiter forbid,
And say in thunder, Achilles go to him.
O this is well, he rubs the vein of him.
And how his silence drinks up this applause.
If I go to him, with my armed fist, Isle posh him ore the face.
O no, you shall not go.
And a be proud with me, isle phase his pride: let me go to him.
Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.
A paltry insolent fellow.
How he describes himself.
Can he not be sociable?
The Raven chides blackness.
Isle let his humours blood.
He will be the Physician that should be the pa∣tient.
And all men were a my mind.
Wit would be out of fashion.
A should not bear it so, a should eat Swords first: shall pride carry it?
And it would, you'd carry half.
A would have ten shares.
I will knead him, Isle make him supple, hoe's not yet through warm.
Force him with praises, pour in, pour in: his am∣bition is dry.
My L. you feed too much on this dislike.
Our noble General, doe not doe so.
You must prepare to fight without Achilles.
Why, it is this naming of him doth him harm.
Here is a man, but it is before his face,
I will be silent.
Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous, as Achilles is.
Know the whole world, he is as valiant.
A whoreson dog, that shall palter thus with vs, would he were a Trojan.
What a vice were it in Aiax now—
If he were proud.
Or covetous of praise.
I, or surely borne.
Or strange, or self affected.
Thank the heavens L. thou art of sweet composure;
Praise him that got thee, she that gave thee suck:
Fame by thy Tutor, and thy parts of nature
Thrice famed beyond, beyond all erudition;
But he that disciplined thy arms to fight,
Let Mars divide Eternity in twain,
And give him half, and for thy vigour,
Bull-bearing Milo: his addition yield
To sinewy Aiax: I will not praise thy wisdom,
Which like a bourne, a pale, a shore confines
Thy spacious and dilated parts; here's Nestor
Instructed by the Antiquary times:
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise.
But pardon Father Nestor, were your days
As greene as Aiax, and your brain so tempered,
You should not have the eminence of him,
But be as Aiax.
Shall I call you Father?
I my good Son.
Be ruled by him Lord Aiax.
There is no tarrying here, the Hart Achilles
Keeps thicker: please it our General,
To call together all his state of war,
Fresh Kings are come to Troy; to morrow
We must with all our maine of power stand fast:
And here's a Lord, come Knights from East to West,
And cull their flower, Aiax shall cope the best.
Go we to Counsel, let Achilles sleep;
Light Botes may sail swift, though greater bulks draw deep.
Friend, you, pray you a word: Doe not you foal∣low the young Lord Paris?
I sir, when he goes before me.
You depend upon him I mean?
Sir, I doe depend upon the Lord.
You depend upon a noble Gentleman: I must needs praise him.
The Lord be praised.
You know me, doe you not?
Faith sir, superficially.
Friend know me better, I am the Lord Pandarus.
I hope I shall know your honour better.
I doe desire it.
You are in the state of Grace?
Grace, not so friend, honour and Lordship are my title: What Musique is this?
I doe but partly know sir: it is Music in parts.
Know you the Musicians.
Wholly sir.
Who play they to?
To the hearers sir.
At whose pleasure friend?
At mine sir, and theirs that love Music.
Command, I mean friend.
Who shall I command sir?
Friend, we understand not one another: I am too courtly, and thou art too cunning. At whose request doe these men play?
That's too't indeed sir: marry sir, at the request of Paris my L. who's there in person; with him the more∣tall Venus, the heart blood of beauty, loves invisible soul.
Who? my Cousin Cressida.
No sir, Helen, could you not find out that by her attributes?
It should seem fellow, that thou hast not seen the Lady Cressida. I come to speak with Paris from the Prince Troylus: I will make a complemental assault upon him, for my business seethes.
Sodden business, there's a stewed phrase indeed.
Fair be to you my Lord, and to all this fair com∣pany: fair desires in all fair measure fairly guide them, especially to you fair Queen, fair thoughts be your fair pillow.
Dear L. you are full of fair words.
You speak your fair pleasure sweet Queen: fair Prince, here is good broken Music.
You have broke it cozen: and by my life you shall make it whole again, you shall piece it out with a piece of your performance. Nel, he is full of harmony.
Truly Lady no.
O sir.
Rude in sooth, in good sooth very rude.
Well said my Lord: well, you say so in fits.
I have business to my Lord, dear Queen: my Lord will you vouchsafe me a word.
Nay, this shall not hedge vs out, weal hear you sing certainly.
Well, sweet Queen you are pleasant with me, but, marry thus my Lord, my dear Lord, and most estee∣med friend your brother Troylus.
My Lord Pandarus, honey sweet Lord.
Go too sweet Queen, go to.
Commends himself most affectionately to you.
You shall not bob vs out of our melody:
If you doe, our melancholy upon your head.
Sweet Queen, sweet Queen, that's a sweet Queen I faith—
And to make a sweet Lady sad, is a sower offence.
Nay, that shall not serve your turn, that shall it not in truth la. Nay, I care not for such words, no, no. And my Lord he desires you, that if the King call for him at Supper, you will make his excuse.
My Lord Pandarus?
What says my sweet Queen, my very, very sweet Queen?
What exploit's in hand, where sups he to night?
Nay but my Lord?
What says my swear Queen? my cozen will fall out with you.
You must not know where he sups.
With my disposer Cressida.
No, no; no such matter, you are wide, come your disposer is sick.
Well, Isle make excuse.
I good my Lord: why should you say Cressida? no, your poor disposer's sick.
I spy.
You spy, what doe you spy: come, give me an
Instrument now sweet Queen.
Why this is kindly done?
My Niece is horrible in love with a thing you have sweet Queen.
She shall have it my Lord, if it be not my Lord Paris.
Hee? no, sheele none of him, they two are twain.
Falling in after falling out, may make them three.
Come, come, Isle hear no more of this, Isle sing you a song now.
I, I, prithee now: by my troth sweet Lord thou hast a fine fore-head.
I you may, you may.
Let thy song be love: this love will undo vs al.
Oh Cupped Cupped▪ Cupped.
Love? I that it shall in faith.
I, good now love, love, no thing but love.
In good troth it begins so.
Love, love, nothing but love, still more:
For O loves Bow,
Shoots Buck and Doe:
The Shaft confounds not that it wounds,
But tickles still the sore:
These Lovers cry, oh ho they dye;
Yet that which seems the wound to kill,
Doth turn oh ho, to ha ha he:
So dying love lives still,
O ho a while, but ha ha ha,
O ho groans out for ha ha ha—hey ho.
In love in faith to the very tip of the nose.
He eats nothing but doves love, and that breeds hot blood, and hot blood begets hot thoughts, and hot thoughts beget hot deeds, and hot deeds is love.
Is this the generation of love? Hot blood, hot thoughts, and hot deeds, why they are Vipers, is Love a generation of Vipers?
Sweet Lord whose a field to day?
Hector, Deiphoebus, Helenus, Anthenor, and all the gallantry of Troy. I would fine have armed to day, but my Nil would not have it so.
How chance my brother Troylus went not?
He hangs the lip at something; you know all Lord Pandarus?
Not I honey sweet Queen: I long to hear how they sped to day:
You'll remember your brothers excuse?
To a hair.
Farewell sweet Queen.
Commend me to your Niece.
I will sweet Queen.
They're come from field: let vs to Priams Hall
To greet the Warriors. Sweet Helen, I must woe you,
To help unarm our Hector: his stubborn Buckles,
With these your white enchanting fingers touched,
Shall more obey then to the edge of Steel,
Or force of Greekish sinews: you shall doe more
Then all the Island Kings, disarm great Hector.
Twill make vs proud to be his servant Paris:
Yea what he shall receive of vs in duty,
Gives vs more palm in beauty then we have:
Yea ouershines our self.
Sweet aboue thought I love thee.
How now, whore's thy Moister, at my Cousin Cressidas?
No sir, he stays for you to conduct him thither.
O here he comes: How now, how now?
Sir walk off.
Have you seen my Cousin?
No Pandarus: I stalk about her door
Like a strange soul upon the Stigian banks
Staying for waftage. O be thou my Charon,
And give me swift transportance to those fields,
Where I may wallow in the Lily beds
Proposed for the deserver. O gentle Pandarus,
From Cupids shoulder pluck his painted wings,
And fly with me to Crossed.
Walk here in the Orchard, Isle bring her straight.
I am giddy; expectation whirls me round,
The imaginary relish is so sweet,
That it enchants my sense: what will it be
When that the watery palates taste indeed
Loves thrice reputed Nectar? Death I fear me
Sounding destruction, or some joy too fine,
Too subtle, potent, and too sharpe in sweetness,
For the capacity of my ruder powers;
I fear it much, and I doe fear besides,
That I shall loose distinction in my joys,
As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps
The enemy flying.
Shoe's making her ready, sheele come straight; you must be witty now, she does so blush, &amp; fetches her wind so short, as if she were afraid with a sprite: Isle fetch her; it is the prettiest villain, she fetches her breath so short as a new tan Sparrow.
Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom:
My heart beats thicker then a feauorous pulse,
And all my powers doe their bestowing loose,
Like vass•lage at unawares encountering
The eye of Majesty.
Come, come, what need you blush?
Shames a baby; here she is now, swear the oaths now to her, that you have sworn to me. What are you gone a∣gain, you must be watched ere you be made tame, must you? come your ways, come your ways, and you draw backward weal put you in th fills: why doe you not speak to her? Come draw this curtain, &amp; let's see your picture. Alas the day, how loath you are to offend day light? and it were dark you'd close sooner: So, so▪ rub on, and kiss the mistress; how now, a kiss in fee-farme? build there Carpenter, the ayre is sweet. Nay, you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you. The Falcon, as the Tercell, for all the Ducks ith River: go too▪ go too.
You have bereft me of all words Lady.
Words pay no debts; give her deeds: but sheele bereave you of the deeds too, if she call your activity in question: what billing again? here's in witness where∣of the Parties interchangeably. Come in, come in, Isle go get a fire?
Will you walk in my Lord?
O Cressida, how often have I wished me thus?
Wished my Lord? the gods grant? O my Lord.
What should they grant? what makes this pret∣tie abruption: what too curious dreg espies my sweet La∣die in the fountain of our love?
More dregs then water, if my ears have eyes.
Fears make devils of Cherubins, they never see truly.
Blind fear, that seeing reason leads, finds safe footing, then blind reason, stumbling without fear: to fear the worst, oft cures the worse.
Oh let my Lady apprehend no fear,
In all Cupids Pageant there is presented no monster.
Not nothing monstrous neither?
Nothing but our undertakings, when we vow to weep seas, live in fire, eat rocks, tame Tigers; think∣ing it harder for our Mistress to devise imposition enough, then for vs to undergo any difficulty imposed. This is the monstruositie in love Lady, that the will is in∣finite, and the execution confined; that the desire is bound∣less, and the act a slave to limit.
They say all Lovers swear more performance then they are able, and yet reserve an ability that they never perform: vowing more then the perfection of ten; and discharging less then the tenth part of one. They that have the voice of Lyons, and the act of Hares: are they not Monsters?
Are there such? such are not we: Praise vs as we are tasted, allow vs as we prove: our head shall go bare till merit crown it: no perfection in reversion shall have a praise in present: wee will not name desert before his birth, and being borne his addition shall be humble: few words to fair faith. Troylus shall be such to Crossed, as what envy can say worst, shall be a mock for his truth; and what truth can speak truest, not truer then Troy∣lus.
Will you walk in my Lord?
What blushing still? have you not done talking yet?
Well Uncle, what folly I commit, I dedicate to you.
I thank you for that: if my Lord get a Boy of you, you'll give him me: be true to my Lord, if he flinch, chide me for it.
You know now your hostages: your Uncles word and my firm faith.
Nay, Isle give my word for her too: our kindred though they be long ere they are wooed, they are con∣stant being won: they are Burs I can tell you, they'll stick where they are thrown.
Boldness comes to me now, and brings me heart: Prince Troylus, I have loved you night and day, for many weary months.
Why was my Crossed then so hard to win?
Hard to seem won: but I was won my Lord
With the first glance; that ever pardon me,
If I confess much you will play the tyrant:
I love you now, but not till now so much
But I might moister it; in faith I lye:
My thoughts were like unbridled children grow
Too head-strong for their mother: see we fools,
Why have I blabbed: who shall be true to vs
When we are so unsecret to our selves?
But though I loved you well, I wood you not,
And yet good faith I wished my self a man;
Or that we women had men's privilege
Of speaking first. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
The thing I shall repent: see, see, your silence
Coming in dumbness, from my weakness draws
My soul of counsel from me. Stop my mouth.
And shall, albeit sweet Music issues thence.
Pretty in faith.
My Lord, I doe beseech you pardon me,
It was not my purpose thus to beg a kiss:
I am ashamed; O Heavens, what have I done!
For this time will I take my leave my Lord.
Your leave sweet Crossed?
Leave: and you take leave till to morrow more∣ning.
Pray you content you.
What offends you Lady?
Sir, mine own company.
You cannot shun your self.
Let me go and try:
I have a kind of self recides with you:
But an unkind self, that it self will leave,
To be another fool. Where is my wit?
I would be gone: I speak I know not what.
Well know they what they speak, that speaks so wisely.
Perchance my Lord, I show more craft then love,
And fell so roundly to a large confession,
To Angle for your thoughts: but you are wise,
Or else you love not: for to be wise and love,
Exceeds mans might, that dwells with gods aboue.
O that I thought it could be in a woman:
As if it can, I will presume in you,
To feed for aye her lamp and flames of love.
To keep her constancy in plight and youth,
Out-liuing beauties outward, with a mind
That doth renew swifter then blood decays:
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me,
That my integrity and truth to you,
Might be affronted with the match and weight
Of such a winnowed puriritie in love:
How were I then vp-lifted! but alas,
I am as true, as truths simplicity,
And simpler then the infancy of truth.
In that Isle war with you.
O virtuous fight,
When right with right wars who shall be most right:
True swains in love, shall in the world to come
Approve their truths by Troylus, when their rimes,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare;
Wants similes, truth tired with iteration,
As true as steel, as plantage to the Moon:
As Sun to day: as Turtle to her mate:
As Iron to Adamant: as Earth to the Center:
Yet after all comparisons of truth,
(As truths authentic author to be cited)
As true as Troylus, shall crown up the Verse,
And sanctify the numbers.
Prophet may you be:
If I be false, or swerve a hair from truth,
When time is old and hath forgot it self:
When water drops have worn the Stones of Troy;
And blind oblivion swallowed Cities up;
And mighty States characterless are grated
To dusty nothing; yet let memory,
From false to false, among false Maids in love,
Upbraid my falsehood, when they'aue said as false,
As Air, as Water, as Wind, as sandy earth;
As Fox to Lamb; as Wolf to Heifers Calfe;
Pard to the Hind, or Stepdame to her Son;
Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood,
As false as Crossed.
Go too, a bargain made: seal it, seal it, Isle be the witness here I hold your hand: here my Cousins, fever you prove false one to another, since I have taken such pains to bring you together, let all pitiful goers between be called to the worlds end after my name: call them all Panders; let all constant men be Troylusses, all false women Cressids, and all brokers between, Panders: say, Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Whereupon I will show you a Chamber, which bed, be∣cause it shall not speak of your pretty encounters, press it to death: away.
And Cupped grant all tong-tide Maidens here,
Bed, Chamber, and Pander, to provide this gear.
Now Princes for the service I have done you,
The advantage of the time promps me aloud,
To call for recompense: appear it to your mind,
That through the sight I bear in things to love,
I have abandoned Troy, left my possession,
Incurred a Traitors name, exposed my self,
From certain and possessed conveniences,
To doubtful fortunes, sequestering from me all
That time, acquaintance, custom and condition,
Made tame, and most familiar to my nature:
And here to doe you service am become,
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted.
I doe beseech you, as in way of taste,
To give me now a little benefit:
Out of those many registered in promise,
Which you say, live to come in my behalf.
What would thou of vs Trojan? make demand?
You have a Trojan prisoner, called Anthenor,
Yesterday took: Troy holds him very dear,
Oft have you (often have you, thanks therefore)
Desired my Crossed in right great exchange.
Whom Troy hath still denied: but this Anthenor,
I know is such a wrest in their affairs;
That their negotiations all must slack,
Wanting his manage: and they will almost,
Give vs a Prince of blood, a Son of Priam,
In change of him. Let him be sent great Princes,
And he shall buy my Daughter: and her presence,
Shall quite strike off all service I have done,
In most accepted pain.
Let Diomedes bear him,
And bring vs Crossed hither: Calcas shall have
What he requests of vs: good Diomed
Furnish you fairly for this interchange;
Withal bring word, if Hector will to morrow
Be answered in his challenge. Aiax is ready.
This shall I undertake, and it is a burden
Which I am proud to bear.
Achilles stands in th entrance of his Tent;
Please it our General to pass strangely by him,
As if he were forgot: and Princes all,
Lay negligent and loose regard upon him;
I will come last, it is like heel question me,
Why such vnpla•sieve eyes are bent? why turned on him?
If so, I have derision medicinable,
To use between your strangeness and his pride,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink;
It may doe good, pride hath no other glass
To show it self, but pride: for supple knees,
Feed arrogance, and are the proud mans fees.
Weal execute your purpose, and put on
A form of strangeness as we pass along,
So doe each Lord, and either greet him not,
Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more,
Then if not looked on. I will lead the way.
What comes the General to speak with me?
You know my mind, Isle fight no more against Troy.
What says Achilles, would he ought with vs?
Would you my Lord ought with the General?
No.
Nothing my Lord.
The better.
Good day, good day.
How doe you? how doe you?
What, do's the Cuckold scorn me?
How now Patroclus?
Good morrow Aiax?
Ha.
Good morrow.
I, and good next day too.
What mean these fellows? know they not Achilles?
They pass by strangely: they were used to bend
To send their smiles before them to Achilles:
To come as humbly as they used to creep to holy Altars.
What am I poor of late?
It is certain, greatness once fallen out with fortune,
Must fall out with men too: what the declined is,
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others,
As feel in his own fall: for men like butter-flies,
Show not their mealie wings, but to the Summer:
And not a man for being simply man,
Hath any honour; but honoured for those honours
That are without him; as place, riches, and favour,
Prizes of accident, as oft as merit:
Which when they fall, as being slippery standers;
The love that leand on them as slippery too,
Doth one pluck down another, and together
Dye in the fall. But it is not so with me;
Fortune and I are friends, I doe enjoy
At ample point, all that I did possess,
Save these men's looks: who do me thinks find out
Something not worth in me such rich beholding,
As they have often given. Here is Ʋlisses,
Isle interrupt his reading: how now Vlisses?
Now great Thetis Son.
What are you reading?
A strange fellow here
Writes me, that man, how dearly ever parted,
How much in having, or without, or in,
Cannot make boast to have that which he hath;
Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection:
As when his virtues shining upon others,
Heate them, and they retort that heate again
To the first giver.
This is not strange Vlisses:
The beauty that is borne here in the face,
The bearer knows not, but commends it self,
Not going from it self: but eye to eye opposed
Salutes each other with each others form:
For speculation turns not to it self,
Till it hath travailed, and is married there
Where it may see it self: this is not strange at all.
I doe not strain it at the position,
It is familiar; but at the Authors drift,
Who in his circumstance, expressly proves
That no may is the Lord of any thing,
(Though in and of him there is much consisting,)
Till he communicate his parts to others:
Nor doth he of himself know them for ought,
Till he behold them formed in the applause,
Where they are extended: who like an arch reuerb'rate
The voice again; or like a gate of steel,
Fronting the Sun, receives and renders back
His figure, and his heate. I was much rapt in this,
And apprehended here immediately:
The unknown Aiax;
Heavens what a man is there? a very Horse,
That has he knows not what. Nature, what things there are.
Most abject in regard, and dear in use.
What things again most dear in the esteem,
And poor in worth: now shall we see to morrow,
An act that very chance doth throw upon him?
Aiax renowned? O heavens, what some men doe,
While some men leave to doe!
How some men creep in skittish fortunes hall,
Whiles others play the Idiots in her eyes:
How one man eats into another pride,
While pride is feasting in his wantonness
To see these Grecian Lords; why, even already,
They clap the lubber Aiax on the shoulder,
As if his foot were on brave Hectors breast,
And great Troy shrinking.
I doe believe it:
For they past by me, as my sers doe by beggars,
Neither gave to me good word, nor look:
What are my deeds forgot?
Time hath (my Lord) a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion:
A great sized monster of ingratitudes:
Those scraps are good deeds past,
Which are devoured as fast as they are made,
Forgot as soon as done: perseverance, dear my Lord,
Keeps honour bright, to have done, is to hang
Quite out of fashion, like a rusty male,
In monumental mockrie: take the instant way,
For honour travels in a straight so narrow,
Where one but goes a breast, keep then the path:
For emulation hath a thousand Sons,
That one by one pursue; if you give way,
Or hedge aside from the direct forth right;
Like to an entered Tide, they all rush by,
And leave you hindmost:
Or like a gallant Horse fallen in first rank,
Lye there for pavement to the abject, near
Ore-run and trampled on: then what they doe in present,
Though less then yours in past, must ore-top yours:
For time is like a fashionable Host,
That slightly shakes his parting Guest by the hand;
And with his arms out-stretcht, as he would fly,
Grasps in the commer: the welcome ever smiles,
And farewells goes out sighing: O let not virtue seek
Remuneration for the thing it was: for beauty, wit,
High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service,
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all
To envious and calumniating time:
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin:
That all with one consent praise new borne gauds,
Though they are made and moulded of things past,
And go to dust, that is a little guilt,
More laud then guilt ore dusted.
The present eye praises the pres•ned object:
Then marvel not thou great and complete man,
That all the Greeks begin to worship Aiax;
Since things in motion begin to catch the eye,
Then what not sty•s: the cry went out on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou would not entomb thy self alive,
And case thy reputation in thy Tent;
Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late,
Made emulous missions amongst the gods themselves,
And drove great Mars to faction.
Of this my privacy,
I have strong reasons.
But against your privacy
The reasons are more potent and heroical:
It is known Achilles, that you are in love
With one of Priams daughters.
Ha? known?
Is that a wonder?
The providence that's in a watchful State,
Knows almost every grain of Plutoes gold;
Finds bottom in the vncomprehensiue deeps;
Keeps place with thought; and almost like the gods,
Doe thoughts vnuaile in their dumb cradles:
There is a mystery (with whom relation
Durst never meddle) in the soul of State;
Which hath an operation more divine,
Then breath or pen can give expressure to:
All the commerce that you have had with Troy,
As perfectly is ours, as yours, my Lord.
And better would it fit Achilles much,
To throw down Hector then Polixena.
But it must grieve young Pirhus now at home,
When fame shall in her Hand sound her trump;
And all the Greekish Girls shall tripping sing,
Great Hectors sister did Achilles win;
But our great Aiax bravely beat down him.
Farewell my Lord: I as your lover speak;
The fool slides ore the Ice that you should break.
To this effect Achilles have I moved you;
A woman impudent and mannish grown,
Is not more loathed, then an effeminate man,
In time of action: I stand condemned for this;
They think my little stomach to the war,
And your great love to me, restrains you thus:
Sweet, rouse your self; and the weak wanton Cupped
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fouled,
And like a dew drop from the Lyons mane,
Be shook to airy ayre.
Shall Aiax fight with Hector?
I, and perhaps receive much honour by him.
I see my reputation is at stake,
My fame is shroudly gored.
O then beware:
Those wounds heal ill, that men doe give themselves:
Omission to doe what is necessary,
Seals a commission to a blank of danger,
And danger like an ague subtly taints
Even then when we sit idly in the sun.
Go call Thersites hither sweet Patroclus,
Isle send the fool to Aiax, and desire him
To inuit the Trojan Lords after the Combat
To see vs here unarmed: I have a women's longing,
An appetite that I am sick withal,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace;
To talk with him, and to behold his visage,
Even to my full of view. A labour saved.
A wonder.
What?
Aiax goes up and down the field, asking for himself.
How so?
Hee must fight singly to morrow with Hector, and is so prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling, that he raves in saying nothing.
How can that be?
Why he stalks up and down like a Peacock, a stride and a stand: ruminates like an hostess, that hath no Arithmetic but her brain to set down her recko∣ning: bites his lip with a politic regard, as who should say, there were wit in his head and twoo'd out; and so there is: but it lies as coldly in him, as fire in a flint, which will not show without knocking. The mans un∣done for ever; for if Hector break not his neck in the com∣bat, heel break't himself in vaine-glory. He knows not me: I said, good morrow Aiax; And he replies, thanks Agamemnon, What think you of this man, that takes me for the General? Hoe's grown a very land-fish, languagelesse, a monster: a plague of o∣pinion, a man may wear it on both sides like a leather Jerkin.
Thou must be my Ambassador to him Thersites.
Who, I: why▪ heel answer no body: he pro∣fesses not answering; speaking is for beggars: he wears his tongue in's arms: I will put on his presence; let Pa∣troclus make his demands to me, you shall see the Page∣ant of Aiax.
To him Patroclus; tell him, I humbly desire the valiant Aiax, to inuit the most valorous Hector, to come unarmed to my Tent, and to procure safe conduct for his person, of the magnanimous and most illustrious, six or feauen times honoured Captain, General of the Grecian Army Agamemnon, &amp;c. doe this.
Jove bless great Aiax.
Hum.
I come from the worthy Achilles.
Ha?
Who most humbly desires you to inuit Hector to his Tent.
Hum.
And to procure safe conduct from Agamemnon.
Agamemnon?
I my Lord.
Ha?
What say you too't.
God buy you with all my heart.
Your anfwer sir.
If to morrow be a fair day, by eleven a clock it will go one way or other; howsoever, he shall pay for me ere he has me.
Your answer sir.
Fare you well withal my heart.
Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?
No, but he's out a tune thus: what music will be in him when Hector has knocked out his brains, I know not: but I am sure none, unless the Fiddler Apollo get his sinews to make catlings on.
Come, thou shalt bear a Letter to him straight.
Let me carry another to his Horse; for that's the more capable creature.
My mind is troubled like a Fountain stirred,
And I my self see not the bottom of it.
Would the Fountain of your mind were clear again, that I might water an Ass at it: I had rather be a Tick in a Sheep, then such a valiant ignorance.
See hoe, who is that there?
It is the Lord Aeneas.
Is the Prince there in person?
Had I so good occasion to lye long
As you Prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business,
Should rob my bed-mate of my company.
That's my mind too: good morrow Lord Aeneas.
A valiant Greek Aeneas, take his hand,
Witness the process of your speech within;
You told how Diomed, in a whole week by days
Did haunt you in the Field.
Health to you valiant sir,
During all question of the gentle truce:
But when I meet you armed, as black defiance,
As hey•t can think, or courage execute.
The one and other Diomed embraces,
Our bloods are now in calm; and so long health:
But when contention, and occasion meets,
By Jove, Isle play the hunter for thy life,
With all my force, pursuit and policy.
And thou shalt hunt a Lyon that will fly
With his face backward, in human gentleness:
Welcome to Troy; now by Anchises life,
Welcome indeed: by Venus hand I swear,
No man alive can love in such a sort,
The thing he means to kill, more excellently,
We sympathise. Jove let Aeneas live
(If to my sword his fate be not the glory)
A thousand complete courses of the Sun,
But in mine emulous honour let him dye:
With every joint a wound, and that to morrow.
We know each other well.
We doe, and long to know each other worse.
This is the most, despightful'st gentle greeting;
The noblest hateful love, that ere I heard of.
What business Lord so early?
I was sent for to the King; but why, I know not.
His purpose meets you; it was to bring this Greek
To Calcha's house; and there to render him,
For the enfreed Anthenor, the fair Crossed:
Lets have your company; or if you please,
Haste there before vs. I constantly doe think
(Or rather call my thought a certain knowledge)
My brother Troylus lodges there to night.
Rouse him, and give him note of our approach,
With the whole quality whereof, I fear
We shall be much unwelcome.
That I assure you:
Troylus had rather Troy were borne to Greece,
Then Crossed borne from Troy.
There is no help:
The bitter disposition of the time will have it so.
On Lord, weal follow you.
Good morrow all.
And tell me noble Diomed; faith tell me true,
Even in the soul of sound good fellowship,
Who in your thoughts merits fair Helen most?
My self, or Menelaus?
Both alike.
He merits well to have her, that doth seek her,
Not making any scruple of her soylure,
With such a hell of pain, and world of charge.
And you as well to keep her, that defend her,
Not pelleting the taste of her dishonour,
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends:
He like a puling Cuckold, would drink up
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece:
You like a lecher, out of whorish loins.
Are pleased to breed out your inheritors:
Both merits poised, each weighs no less nor more,
But he as he, which heavier for a whore.
You are too bitter to your country-woman.
Shoe's bitter to her country: hear me Paris,
For every false drop in her bawdy veins,
A Gracious life hath sunk: for every scruple
Of her contaminated carrion weight,
A Trojan hath been slain. Since she could speak,
She hath not given so many good words breath,
As for her, Greeks and Troians suffered death.
Fair Diomed, you doe as chapman doe,
Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy:
But we in silence hold this virtue well;
Weal not commend, what we intend to sell.
Here lies our way.
Dear trouble not your self: the morn is cold.
Then sweet my Lord, Isle call mine Uncle down;
He shall vnbolt the Gates.
Trouble him not:
To bed, to bed: sleep kill those pretty eyes,
And give as soft attachment to thy senses,
As Infants empty of all thought.
Good morrow then.
I prithee now to bed.
Are you a weary of me?
O Cressida! but that the busy day
Waked by the Lark, hath roused the ribald Crows,
And dreaming night will hide our eyes no longer:
I would not from thee.
Night hath been too brief.
Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays,
As hideously as hell; but flies the grasps of love,
With wings more momentary, swift then thought:
You will catch cold, and curse me.
Prithee tarry, you men will never tarry;
O foolish Crossed, I might have still held off,
And then you would have tarried. Hark, ther's one up?
What's all the doors open here?
It is your Uncle.
A pestilence on him: now will he be mocking:
I shall have such a life.
How now, how now? how go maiden-heads?
Hear you Maid: wher's my cozin Crossed?
Go hang your self, you naughty mocking Uncle:
You bring me to doo—and then you flout me too.
To do what? to do what? let her say what:
What have I brought you to doe?
Come, come, beshrew your heart: you'll ne'er be good, nor suffer others.
Ha, ha: alas poor wretch: a poor Chipochia, hast not slept to night? would he not (a naughty man) let it sleep: a bug-beare take him.
Did not I tell you? would he were knocked in the head. Who's that at door? good Uncle go and see.
My Lord, come you again into my Chamber:
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.
Ha, ha.
Come you are deceived, I think of no such thing.
How earnestly they knock: pray you come in.
I would not for half Troy have you seen here.
Who's there? what's the matter? will you beat down the door? How now, what's the matter?
Good morrow Lord, good morrow.
Who's there my Lord Aeneas? by my troth I knew you not: what news with you so early?
Is not Prince Troylus here?
Here? what should he doe here?
Come he is here, my Lord, doe not deny him:
It doth import him much to speak with me.
Is he here say you? it is more then I know, Isle be sworn: For my own part I came in late: what should he doe here?
Who, nay then: Come, come, you'll doe him wrong, ere y' are ware: you'll be so true to him, to be false to him: Doe not you know of him, but yet go fetch him hither, go.
How now, what's the matter?
My Lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash: there is at hand,
Paris your brother, and Deiphoebus,
The Grecian Diomed, and our Anthenor
Delivered to vs, and for him forth-with,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
We must give up to Diomeds hand
The Lady Cressida.
Is it concluded so?
By Priam, and the general state of Troy,
They are at hand, and ready to effect it.
How my achievements mock me;
I will go meet them: and my Lord Aeneas,
We met by chance; you did not find me here.
Good, good, my Lord, the secrets of nature
Have not more gift in taciturnity.
Is it possible? no sooner got but lost: the devil take Anthenor; the young Prince will go mad: a plague upon Anthenor; I would they had brok's neck.
How now? what's the matter? who was here?
Ah, ha!
Why sigh you so profoundly? wher's my Lord? gone? tell me sweet Uncle, what's the matter?
Would I were as deep under the earth as I am aboue.
O the gods! what's the matter?
Prithee get thee in: would thou had ne'er been borne; I knew thou would be his death. O poor Gen∣tleman: a plague upon Anthenor.
Good Uncle I beseech you, on my knees, I be∣seech you what's the matter?
Thou must be gone wench, thou must be gone; thou art changed for Anthenor: thou must to thy Father, and be gone from Troylus: twill be his death: twill be his bain, he cannot bear it▪
O you immortal gods! I will not go.
Thou must.
I will not Uncle: I have forgot my Father:
I know no touch of consanguinity:
No kin, no love, no blood, no soul, so near me,
As the sweet Troylus: O you gods divine!
Make Cressids name the very crown of falsehood!
If ever she leave Troylus: time, orce and death,
Do to this body what extremity you can;
But the strong base and building of my love,
Is as the very Center of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. I will go in and weep.
Doe, doe.
Tear my bright heir, and scratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice with sobs, and break my heart
With sounding Troylus. I will not go from Troy.
It is great morning, and the hour prefixed
Of her delivery to this valiant Greek
Comes fast upon: good my brother Troylus,
Tell you the Lady what she is to doe,
And hast her to the purpose.
Walk into her house:
Isle bring her to the Grecian presently;
And to his hand, when I deliver her,
Think it an Altar, and thy brother Troylus
A Priest, there offering to it his heart.
I know what it is to love,
And would, as I shall pity, I could help.
Please you walk in, my Lords.
Be moderate, be moderate.
Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief is fine, full perfect that I taste,
And no less in a sense as strong
As that which causes it. How can I moderate it?
If I could temporise with my affection,
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate,
The like alaiment could I give my grief:
My love admits no qualifying cross;
No more my grief, in such a precious loss.
Here, here, here, he comes, a sweet duck.
O Troylus, Troylus!
What a pair of spectacles is here? let me em∣brace too: oh hart, as the goodly saying is; O heart, hey∣uie heart, why sighest thou without breaking? where he answers again; because thou can not ease thy smart by friendship, nor by speaking: there was never a truer rime; let vs cast away nothing, for we may live to have need of such a Verse: we see it, we see it: how now Lambs?
Crossed: I love thee in so strange a purity;
That the blessed gods, as angry with my fancy,
More bright in zeal, then the devotion which
Cold lips blow to their Deities: take thee from me.
Have the gods envy?
I, I, I, I, it is too plain a case.
And is it true, that I must go from Troy?
A hateful truth.
What, and from Troylus too?
From Troy, and Troylus.
First possible?
And suddenly, where injury of chance
Puts back leaue-taking, iustles roughly by
All time of pause; rudely beguiles our lips
Of all reioyndure: forcibly prevents
Our locked embrasures; strangles our dear vows,
Even in the birth of our own laboring breath.
We two, that with so many thousand sighs
Did buy each other, must poorly sell our selves,
With the rude brevity and discharge of our
Injurious time; now with a robbers haste
Crams his rich thievery up, he knows not how.
As many farwels as be stars in heaven,
With distinct breath, and consigned kisses to them,
He fumbles up into a loose adieu;
And scants vs with a single famished kiss,
Distasting with the salt of broken tears.
My Lord, is the Lady ready?
Hark, you are called: some say the genius so
Cries, come to him that instantly must dye.
Bid them have patience: she shall come anon.
Where are my tears? rain, to lay this wind, or my heart will be blown up by the root.
I must then to the Gracious?
No remedy.
A woeful Crossed amongst the merry Greeks.
When shall we see again?
Here me my love: be thou but true of heart.
I true? how now? what wicked deem is this?
Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from vs:
I speak not, be thou true, as fearing thee:
For I will throw my Glove to death himself,
That there's no maculation in thy heart:
But be thou true, say I, to fashion in
My sequent protestation: be thou true,
And I will see thee.
O you shall be exposed, my Lord to dangers
As infinite, as imminent: but Isle be true.
And Isle grow friend with danger;
Wear this Sleeve.
And you this Glove.
When shall I see you?
I will corrupt the Grecian Sentinels,
To give thee nightly visitation.
But yet be true.
O heavens: be true again?
Hear why I speak it; Love:
The Grecian youths are full of quality,
Their loving well composed, with gift of nature,
Flawing and swelling ore with Arts and exercise:
How novelties may move, and parts with person.
Alas, a kind of godly jealousy;
Which I beseech you call a virtuous sin:
Makes me afraid.
O heavens, you love me not!
Dye I a villain then:
In this I doe not call your faith in question
So mainly as my merit: I cannot sing,
Nor heel the high Lauolt; nor sweeten talk;
Nor play at subtle games; fair virtues all;
To which the Gracious are most prompt and pregnant:
But I can tell that in each grace of these,
There lurks a still and dumb-discoursiue devil,
That tempts most cunningly: but be not tempted.
Doe you think I will:
No, but something may be done that we will not:
And sometimes we are devils to our selves,
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
Presuming on their changefull potency.
Nay, good my Lord?
Come kiss, and let vs part.
Brother Troylus?
Good brother come you hither,
And bring Aeneas and the Grecian with you.
My Lord, will you be true?
Who I? alas it is my vice, my fault:
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
I, with great truth, catch mere simplicity;
Whilst some with cunning guild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness I doe wear mine bare:
Fear not my truth; the moral of my wit
Is plain and true, ther's all the reach of it.
Welcome sir Diomed, here is the Lady
Which for Antenor, we deliver you.
At the port (Lord) Isle give her to thy hand,
And by the way possess thee what she is.
Entreat her fair; and by my soul, fair Greek,
If ere thou stand at mercy of my Sword,
Name Crossed, and thy life shall be as safe
As Priam is in Illion?
Fair Lady Crossed,
So please you save the thanks this Prince expects:
The lustre in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
Pleads your fair visage, and to Diomed
You shall be mistress, and command him wholly.
Grecian, thou dost not use me courteously,
To shame the seal of my petition towards,
I praising her. I tell thee Lord of Greece:
She is as far high soaring o'er thy praises,
As thou unworthy to be called her servant:
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge:
For by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
(Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard)
Isle cut thy throat.
Oh be not moved Prince Troylus;
Let me be privileged by my place and message,
To be a speaker free? when I am hence,
Isle answer to my lust: and know my Lord;
Isle nothing doe on charge: to her own worth
She shall be prized: but that you say, be it so;
Isle speak it in my spirit and honour, no.
Come to the Port. Isle tell thee Diomed,
This brave, shall oft make thee to hide thy head:
Lady, give me your hand, and as we walk,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk.
Hark, Hectors Trumpet.
How have we spent this morning
The Prince must think me tardy and remiss,
That swore to ride before him in the field.
It is Troylus fault: come, come, to field with him.
Let vs make ready straight.
Yea, with a Bridegrooms fresh alacrity
Let vs address to tend on Hectors heals:
The glory of our Troy doth this day lye
On his fair worth, and single Chivalry.
Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,
Anticipating time. With starting courage,
Give with thy Trumpet a loud note to Troy
Thou dreadful Aiax, that the appalled air
May pierce the head of the great Combatant,
And hale him hither.
Thou, Trumpet, ther's my purse;
Now crack thy lungs, and split thy brazen pipe:
Blow villain, till thy sphered Bias cheek
Out-swell the colic of puffed Aquilon:
Come, stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout blood:
Thou blow for Hector.
No Trumpet answers.
It is but early days.
Is not young Diomed with Calcas daughter?
It is he, I ken the manner of his gate,
He rises on the toe: that spirit of his
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
Is this the Lady Crossed?
Even she.
Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet Lady.
Our General doth salute you with a kiss.
Yet is the kindness but particular; it were bet∣la she were kissed in general.
And very courtly counsel: Isle begin. So much for Nestor.
Isle take that winter from your lips fair Lady Achilles bids you welcome.
I had good argument for kissing once.
But that's no argument for kissing now;
For thus popped Paris in his hardiment.
Oh deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns,
For which we loose our heads, to gild his horns.
The first was Menelaus kiss, this mine:
Patroclus kisses you.
Oh this is trim.
Paris and I kiss evermore for him.
Isle have my kiss sir: Lady by your leave.
In kissing doe you render, or receive.
Both take and give.
Isle make my match to live,
The kiss you take is better then you give: therefore no kiss.
Isle give you boot, Isle give you three for one.
You are an odd man, give even, or give none.
An odd man Lady, every man is odd.
No, Paris is not; for you know it is true,
That you are odd, and he is even with you.
You fillip me a' the head.
No, Isle be sworn.
It were no match, your nail against his horn:
May I sweet Lady beg a kiss of you?
You may.
I doe desire it.
Why beg then?
Why then for Venus sake, give me a kiss:
When Helen is a maid again, and his—
I am your debtor, claim it when it is due.
Neuer's my day, and then a kiss of you.
Lady a word, Isle bring you to your Father.
A woman of quick sense.
Fie, fie, upon her:
Ther's a language in her eye, her cheek, her lip;
Nay, her foot speaks, her wanton spirits look out
At every joint, and motive of her body:
Oh these encounterers so glib of tongue,
That give a coasting welcome ete it comes;
And wide vnclaspe the tables of their thoughts,
To every tickling reader: set them down,
For sluttish spoils of opportunity;
And daughters of the game.
The Troians Trumpet.
Yonder comes the troop.
Hail all you state of Greece: what shall be done
To him that victory commands? or doe you purpose,
A victor shall be known: will you the Knights
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other▪ or shall be divided
By any voice, or order of the field: Hector bad ask?
Which way would Hector have it?
He cares not, heel obey conditions.
It is done like Hector, but securely done,
A little proudly, and great deal disprizing
The Knight opposed.
If not Achilles sir, what is your name?
If not Achilles, nothing.
Therefore Achilles: but what ere, know this.
In the extremity of great and little:
Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector;
The one almost as infinite as all;
The other blank as nothing: weigh him well:
And that which looks like pride, is courtesy:
This Aiax is half made of Hectors blood;
In love whereof, half Hector stays at home:
Half heart, half hand, half Hector, comes to seek
This blended Knight, half Trojan, and half Greek.
A maiden battle then? O I perceive you.
Here is sir, Diomed: go gentle Knight,
Stand by our Aiax: as you and Lord Aeneas
Consent upon the order of their fight,
So be it: either to the uttermost,
Or else a breach: the Combatants being kin,
Half stints their strife, before their strokes begin.
They are opposed already.
What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy?
The youngest Son of Priam;
A true Knight; they call him Troylus;
Not yet mature, yet matchless, firm of word,
Speaking in deeds, and deedless in his tongue;
Not soon provoked, nor being provoked, soon calmed;
His heart and hand both open, and both free:
For what he has, he gives; what thinks, he shows;
Yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impair thought with breath:
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous;
For Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender objects; but he, in heate of action,
Is more vindictive then jealous love.
They call him Troylus; and on him erect,
A second hope, as fairly built as Hector.
Thus says Aeneas, one that knows the youth,
Even to his inches: and with private soul,
Did in great Illion thus translate him to me.
They are in action.
Now Aiax hold thine own.
Hector, thou sleep, awake thee.
His blows are well disposed there Aiax.
You must no more.
Princes enough, so please you.
I am not warm yet, let vs fight again.
As Hector pleases.
Why then will I no more:
Thou art great Lord, my Fathers sisters Son;
A cousin german to great Priams seed:
The obligation of our blood forbids
A gorie emulation twixt vs twain:
Were thy commixion, Greek and Trojan so,
That thou coldest say, this hand is Grecian all,
And this is Trojan: the sinews of this Leg,
All Greek, and this all Troy: my Mothers blood
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
Bounds in my fathers: by Jove multipotent,
Thou should not bear from me a Greekish member
Wherein my sword had not impressure made
Of our rank feud: but the just gods gainsay,
That any drop thou borrowed from thy mother,
My sacred Aunt, should by my mortal Sword
Be drained. Let me embrace thee Aiax:
By him that thunders, thou hast lusty Arms;
Hector would have them fall upon him thus.
Cozen, all honour to thee.
I thank thee Hector:
Thou art too gentle, and too free a man:
I came to kill thee Cozen, and bear hence
A great addition, earned in thy death.
Not Neoptolymus so mirable,
On whose bright crest, fame with her loudest (O yes)
Cries, This is he; coldest promise to himself,
A thought of added honour, torn from Hector.
There is expectance here from both the sides,
What further you will doe?
Weal answer it:
The issue is embrace: Aiax, farewell.
If I might in entreaties find success,
As seld I have the chance; I would desire
My famous Cousin to our Grecian Tents.
It is Agamemnons wish, and great Achilles
Doth long to see unarmed the valiant Hector.
Aeneas, call my brother Troylus to me:
And signify this loving interview
To the expecters of our Trojan part:
Desire them home. Give me thy hand, my Cousin:
I will go eat with thee, and see your Knights.
Great Agamemnon comes to meet vs here.
The worthiest of them, tell me name by name:
But for Achilles, mine own searching eyes
Shall find him by his large and portly size.
Worthy of Arms: as welcome as to one▪
That would be rid of such an enemy.
But that's no welcome: understand more clear
What's past, and what's to come, is strewed with husks
And formelesse ruin of oblivion:
But in this extant moment, faith and troth,
Strained purely from all hollow bias drawing:
Bids thee with most divine integrity.
From heart of very heart, great Hector welcome.
I thank thee most imperious Agamemnon.
My well-fam'd Lord of Troy, no less to you.
Let me confirm my Princely brothers greeting,
You brace of warlike Brothers, welcome hither.
Who must we answer?
The Noble Menelaus.
O, you my Lord, by Mars his gauntlet thanks,
Mock not, that I affect the vntraded Oath,
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus Glove
Shoe's well, but bad me not commend her to you.
Name her not now sir, she's a deadly Theme.
O pardon, I offend.
I have (thou gallant Trojan) seen thee oft
Labouring for destiny, make cruel way
Through ranks of Greekish youth: and I have seen thee
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian Steed,
And seen thee scorning forfeits and subduments,
When thou hast hung thy advanced sword in the ayre,
Not letting it decline, on the declined:
That I have said unto my standers by,
Lo Iupiter is yonder, dealing life.
And I have seen thee pause, and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greeks have hemmed thee in,
Like an Olympian wrestling. This have I seen,
But this thy countenance (still locked in steel)
I never saw till now. I knew thy Grandsire,
And once fought with him; he was a Soldier good,
But by great Mars, the Captain of vs all,
Never like thee. Let an old man embrace thee,
And (worthy Warrior) welcome to our Tents.
It is the old Nestor.
Let me embrace thee good old Chronicle,
That hast so long walked hand in hand with time:
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.
I would my arms could match thee in contention
As they contend with thee in curtsy.
I would they could.
Ha? by this white beard I'd fight with thee to morrow. Well, welcome, welcome: I have seen the time.
I wonder now, how yonder City stands,
When we have here her Base and pillar by vs.
I know your favour Lord Vlysses well.
Ah sir, there's many a Greek and Trojan dead,
Since first I saw your self, and Diomed
In Illion, on your Greekish Embassy.
Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue,
My prophecy is but half his journey yet;
For yonder walls that pertly front your Town,
Yond Towers, whose wanton tops do bus the clouds,
Must kiss their own feet.
I must not believe you:
There they stand yet: and modestly I think,
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost
A drop of Grecian blood: the end crowns all,
And that old common Arbitrator, Time,
Will one day end it.
So to him we leave it.
Most gentle, and most valiant Hector, welcome;
After the General, I beseech you next
To Feast with me, and see me at my Tent.
I shall forestall thee Lord Vlysses, thou:
Now Hector I have fed mine eyes on thee,
I have with exact view perused thee Hector,
And quoted joint by joint.
Is this Achilles?
I am Achilles.
Stand fair I prithee, let me look on thee.
Behold thy fill.
Nay, I have done already.
Thou art to brief, I will the second time,
As I would buy thee, view thee, limb by limb.
O like a Book of sport thou'lt read me ore:
But there's more in me then thou understand.
Why doest thou so oppress me with thine eye?
Tell me you Heavens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him? Whether there, or there, or there,
That I may give the local wound a name,
And make distinct the very breach, where-out
Hectors great spirit fl•w. Answer me heavens.
It would discredit the blessed Gods, proud man,
To answer such a question: Stand again;
Think thou to catch my life so pleasantly,
As to prenominate in nice conjecture
Where thou wilt hit me dead?
I tell thee yea.
Were thou the Oracle to tell me so,
I'd not believe thee: henceforth guard thee well,
For Isle not kill thee there, nor there, nor there,
But by the forge that stythied Mars his helm,
Isle kill thee every where, yea, ore and ore.
You wisest Gracious, pardon me this brag,
His insolence draws folly from my lips,
But Isle endeavour deeds to match these words,
Or may I never—
Do not chafe thee Cousin:
And you Achilles, let these threats alone
Till accident, or purpose bring you too't.
You may every day enough of Hector.
If you have stomach. The general state I fear,
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.
I pray you let vs see you in the field,
We have had pelting Wars since you refused
The Gracious cause.
Dost thou entreat me Hector?
To morrow do I meet thee fell as death,
To night, all Friends.
Thy hand upon that match.
First, all you Peers of Greece go to my Tent,
There in the full connive you: Afterwards,
As Hectors leisure, and your bounties shall
Concur together, severally entreat him.
Beat loud the Taborins, let the Trumpets blow,
That this great Soldier may his welcome know.
My Lord Ʋlysses, tell me I beseech you,
In what place of the Field doth Calchas keep?
At Menelaus Tent, most Princely Troylus,
There Diomed doth feast with him to night,
Who neither looks on heaven, nor on earth,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view
On the fair Crossed.
Shall I (sweet Lord) be bound to thee so much,
After we part from Agamemnons Tent,
To bring me thither?
You shall command me sir:
As gentle tell me, of what Honour was
This Cressida in Troy, had she no Lover there
That wails her absence?
O sir, to such as boasting show their scars,
A mock is due: will you walk on my Lord?
She was beloved, she loved; she is, and doth;
But still sweet Love is food for Fortunes tooth.
Isle heat his blood with Greekish wine to night,
Which with my Scimitar Isle cool to morrow:
Patroclus, let vs Feast him to the hight.
Here comes Thersites.
How now, thou core of Envy?
Thou crusty batch of Nature, what's the news?
Why thou picture of what thou seem, &amp; I doll of Ideot-worshippers, here's a Letter for thee.
From whence, Fragment?
Why thou full dish of Fool, from Troy.
Who keeps the Tent now?
The Surgeons box, or the Patients wound.
Well said adversity, and what need these tricks?
Prithee be silent boy, I profit not by thy talk, thou art thought to be Achilles male Varlot.
Male Varlot you Rogue? What's that?
Why his masculine Whore. Now the rotten diseases of the South, guts-griping Ruptures, Catarres, Loads a gravel in the back, Lethargies, cold Palsies, and the like, take and take again, such prepostrous disco∣ries.
Why thou damnable box of envy thou, what mean thou to curse thus?
Do I curse thee?
Why no, you ruinous But, you whoreson indi∣stinguishable Cur.
No? why art thou then exasperate, thou idle, immaterial skein of Slayed silk; thou greene Sarcenet flap for a sore eye, thou tassel of a Prodigals purse thou:
Ah how the poor world is pestered with such water-flies, diminutives of Nature.
Out gall.
Finch Egg.
My sweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite
From my great purpose in to morrows battle:
Here is a Letter from Queen Hecuba,
A token from her daughter, my fair Love,
Both taxing me, and gaging me to keep
An Oath that I have sworn. I will not break it,
Fall Greeks, fail Fame, Honour or go, or stay,
My mayor vow lies here; this Isle obey:
Come, come Thersites, help to trim my Tent,
This night in banqueting must all be spent.
Away Patroclus.
With too much blood, and too little Brain, these two may run mad: but if with too much brain, and too little blood, they do, Isle be a curer of madmen. Heere's Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough, and one that loves Quails, but he has not so much Brain as eare-wax; and the goodly transformation of Iupiter there his Brother, the Bull, the primatiue Statue, and oblique memorial of Cuckolds, a thrifty shooing-horne in a chain, hanging at his Brothers leg, to what form but that he is, should wit larded with malice, and malice forced with wit, turn him too: to an Ass were nothing; hee is both Ass and Ox; to an Ox were nothing, hee is both Ox and Ass: to be a Dog, a Mule, a Cat, a Fitchew, a Toad, a Li∣zard, an Owl, a Puttock, or a Herring without a Roe, I would not care: but to be Menelaus, I would conspire against Destiny. Ask me not what I would be, if I were not Thersites: sot I care not to bee the louse of a Laser, so I were not Menelaus. Hoy-day, spirits and fires.
We go wrong, we go wrong.
No yonder'tis, there where we see the light.
I trouble you.
No, not a whit.
Here comes himself to guide you?
Welcome brave Hector, welcome Princes all.
So now fair Prince of Troy, I bid goodnight,
Aiax commands the guard to tend on you.
Thanks, and goodnight to the Greeks general.
Goodnight my Lord.
Goodnight sweet Lord Menelaus.
Sweet draught: sweet quoth-a? sweet sink, sweet sure.
Goodnight and welcome, both at once, to those that go, or tarry.
Goodnight.
Old Nestor tarries, and you too Diomed,
Keep Hector company an hour, or two.
I cannot Lord, I have important business,
The tide whereof is now, goodnight great Hector.
Give me your hand.
Follow his Torch, he goes to Chalcas Tent,
Isle keep you company.
Sweet sir, you honour me.
And so good night.
Come, come, enter my Tent.
That same Diomed's a false-hearted Rogue, a most unjust Knave; I will no more trust him when hee leers, then I will a Serpent when he hisses: he will spend his mouth &amp; promise, like Brabler the Hound; but when he performs, Astronomers foretell it, that it is prodigy∣os, there will come some change; the Sun borrows of the Moon when Diomed keeps his word. I will ra∣there leave to see Hector, then not to dog him: they say, he keeps a Trojan Drab, and uses the Traitor Chalcas his Tent. Isle after—Nothing but Lechery? All incontinent Varlets.
What are you up here ho? speak?
Who calls?
Diomed, Chalcas (I think) wher's you Daughter?
She comes to you.
Stand where the Torch may not discover vs.
Crossed comes forth to him.
How now my charge?
Now my sweet guardian: hark a word with you.
Yea, so familiar?
She will sing any man at first sight.
And any man may find her, if he can take her life: she's noted.
Will you remember?
Remember? yes.
Nay, but doe then; and let your mind be cou∣pled with your words.
What should she remember?
List?
Sweet honey Greek, tempt me no more to folly.
Roguery.
Nay then.
Isle tell you what.
Foe, foe, come tell a pin, you are a forsworn.—
In faith I cannot: what would you have me do?
A juggling trick, to be secretly open.
What did you swear you would bestow on me?
I prithee do not hold me to mine oath,
Bid me doe not any thing but that sweet Greek.
Good night.
Hold, patience.
How now Trojan?
Diomed.
No, no, good night: Isle be your fool no more.
Thy better must.
Hark one word in your ear.
O plague and madness!
You are moved Prince, let vs depart I pray you,
Lest your displeasure should enlarge it self
To wrathful terms: this place is dangerous;
The time right deadly: I beseech you go.
Behold, I pray you.
Nay, good my Lord go off:
You flow to great distraction; come my Lord?
I pray thee stay?
You have not patience, come.
I pray you stay? by hell and hell torments,
I will not speak a word.
And so good night.
Nay, but you part in anger.
Doth that grieve thee? O withered truth!
Why, how now Lord?
By Jove I will be patient.
Guardian? why Greek?
Foe, foe, adieu, you palter,
In faith I doe not: come hither once again.
You shake my Lord at something; will you go? you will break out.
She strokes his cheek.
Come, come.
Nay stay, by Jove I will not speak a word.
There is between my will, and all offences,
A guard of patience; stay a little while.
How the devil Luxury with his fat rump and potato finger, tickles these together: fry lechery, fry.
But will you then?
In faith I will lo; never trust me else.
Give me some token for the surety of it.
Isle fetch you one.
You have sworn patience.
Fear me not sweet Lord.
I will not be my self, nor have cognition
Of what I feel: I am all patience.
Now the pledge, now, now, now.
Here Diomed, keep this Sleeve.
O beauty! where is thy Faith?
My Lord.
I will be patient, outwardly I will.
You look upon that Sleeve? behold it well:
He loved me: O false wench: giue't me again.
Whose was it?
It is no matter now I have it again.
I will not meet with you to morrow night:
I prithee Diomed visit me no more.
Now she sharpens: well said Whetstone.
I shall have it.
What, this?
I that.
O all you gods! O pretty, pretty pledge;
Thy Moister now lies thinking in his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my Glove,
And gives memorial dainty kisses to it;
As I kiss thee.
Nay, doe not snatch it from me.
He that takes that, rakes my heart withal.
I had your heart before, this follows it.
I did swear patience.
You shall not have it Diomed; faith you shall not:
Isle give you something else.
I will have this: whose was it?
It is no matter.
Come tell me whose it was?
It was one that loved me better then you will.
But now you have it, take it.
Whose was it?
By all Diana• waiting women yond:
And by her self, I will not tell you whose.
To morrow will I wear it on my Helm,
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.
Were thou the devil, and wor'st it on thy horn.
It should be challenged.
Well, well, it is done, it is past; and yet it is not:
I will not keep my word.
Why then farewell,
Thou never shalt mock Diomed again.
You shall not go: one cannot speak a word,
But it strait starts you.
I doe not like this fooling.
Nor I by Pluto: but that that likes not me, plea∣ses me best.
What shall I come? the hour.
I, come: O Jove! doe, come: I shall be plagued.
Farewell till then.
Good night: I prithee come:
Troylus farewell; one eye yet looks on thee;
But with my heart, the other eye, doth see.
Ah poor our sex; this fault in vs I find:
The error of our eye, directs our mind.
What error leads, must err: O then conclude,
Minds swayed by eyes, are full of turpitude.
A proof of strength she could not publish more;
Unless she say, my mind is now turned whore.
Al's done my Lord.
It is.
Why stay we then?
To make a recordation to my soul
Of every syllable that here was spoke:
But if I tell how these two did coast;
Shall I not lye, in publishing a truth?
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart:
An esperance so obstinately strong,
That doth invert that test of eyes and ears;
As if those organs had deceptious functions,
Created only to calumniate.
Was Cressed here?
I cannot conjure Trojan.
She was not sure.
Most sure she was.
Why my negation hath no taste of madness?
Nor mine my Lord: Crossed was here but now.
Let it not be believed for womanhood:
Think we had mothers; doe not give advantage
To stubborn Critics, apt without a theme
For deprivation, to square the general sex
By Cressids rule. Rather think this not Crossed.
What hath she done Prince, that can soil our mothers?
Nothing at all, unless that this were she.
Will he swagger himself out on's own eyes?
This she? no, this is Diomids Crossed•:
If beauty have a soul, this is not she:
If souls guide vows; if vows are sanctimony;
If sanctimony be the gods delight:
If there be rule in unity it self,
This is not she: O madness of discourse
That cause sets up, with, and against thy self
By foul authority: where reason can revolt
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason,
Without revolt. This is, and is not Crossed:
Within my soul, there doth conduce a fight
Of this strange nature, that a thing inseperate,
Divides more wider then the sky and earth:
And yet the spacious breadth of this division▪
Admits no Orifex for a point as subtle,
As Ariachnes broken woof to enter:
Instance, O instance! strong as Plutoes gates:
Crossed is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven;
Instance, O instance, strong as heaven it self:
The bonds of heaven are slipped, dissolved, and loosed,
And with another knot five finger tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love:
The fragments, scraps, the bits, and greazie relics,
Of her ore-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed
May worthy Troylus be half attached
With that which here his passion doth express?
I Greek: and that shall be divulged well
In Characters, as red as Mars his heart
Inflamed with Ʋenus: never did young man fancy
With so eternal, and so fixed a soul.
Hark Greek: as much I doe Cressida love;
So much by weight, hate I her Diomed,
That Sleeve is mine, that heel bear in his Helm:
Were it a Cask composed by Vulcans skill,
My Sword should bite it: Not the dreadful spout,
Which Shipmen doe the Hurricano call,
Constring'd in mass by the almighty Fen,
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptunes ear
In his descent; then shall my prompted sword,
Falling on Diomed.
Heel tickle it for his concupie.
O Crossed! O false Crossed! false, false, false:
Let all untruths stand by thy stained name,
And theyle seem glorious.
O contain your self:
Your passion draws ears hither.
I have been seeking you this hour my Lord:
Hector by this is arming him in Troy.
Aiax your Guard, stays to conduct you home.
Have with you Prince: my courteous Lord adieu:
Farewell revolted fair: and Diomed,
Stand fast, and wear a Castle on thy head.
Isle bring you to the Gates.
Accept distracted thanks.
Would I could meet that rogue Diomed, I would croak like a Raven: I would bode, I would bode: Patroclus will give me any thing for the intelligence of this whore: the Parrot will not doe more for an Almond, then he for a commodious drab: Lechery, lechery, still wars and lechery, nothing else holds fashion. A burning devil take them.
When was my Lord so much ungently tempered,
To stop his ears against admonishment?
Unarm, unarm, and doe not fight to day.
You train me to offend you: get you gone.
By the everlasting gods, Isle go.
My dreams will sure prove ominous to the day.
No more I say.
Where is my brother Hector?
Here sister, armed, and bloody in intent:
Consort with me in loud and dear petition:
Pursue we him on knees: for I have dreamt
Of bloody turbulence; and this whole night
Hath nothing been but shapes, and forms of slaughter.
O, it is true.
Ho? bid my Trumpet sound.
No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother.
Begone I say: the gods have heard me swear.
The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows;
They are polluted offerings, more abhord
Then spotted Livers in the sacrifice.
O be persuaded, doe not count it holy,
To hurt by being just; it is as lawful:
For we would count give much to as violent thefts,
And rob in the behalf of charity.
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow;
But vows to every purpose must not hold:
Vnatme sweet Hector.
Hold you still I say;
Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate:
Life every man holds dear, but the dear man
Holds honour far more precious, dear, then life.
How now young man? mean thou to fight to day?
Cassandra, call my father to persuade.
No faith young Troylus; doffe thy harness youth:
I am to day in the vain of Chivalry:
Let grow thy Sinews till their knots be strong;
And tempt nor yet the brushes of the war.
Unarm thee, go; and doubt thou not brave boy,
Isle stand to day, for thee, and me, and Troy.
Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you;
Which better fits a Lyon, then a man.
What vice is that? good Troylus chide me for it.
When many times the captive Grecian false,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair Sword:
You bid them rise, and live.
O it is fair play.
Fools play, by heaven Hector.
How now? how now?
For the love of all the gods
Let's leave the Hermit Pity with our Mothers;
And when we have our Armours buckled on,
The venomed vengeance ride upon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work, reine them from ruth.
Fie savage, fie.
Hector, then it is wars.
Troylus, I would not have you fight to day.
Who should with-hold me?
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars,
Beckoning with fiery truncheon my retire;
Not Priamus, and Hecuba on knees;
Their eyes ore-galled with recourse of tears;
Nor you my brother, with your true sword drawn
Opposed to hinder me, should stop my way:
But by my ruin.
Lay hold upon him Priam, hold him fast:
He is thy crutch; now if thou loose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Fall all together.
Come Hector, come, go back:
Thy wife hath dreamt: thy mother hath had visions;
Cassandra doth foresee; and I my self,
Am like a Prophet suddenly en•apt, to tell thee that this day is ominous:
Therefore come back.
Aeneas is a field,
And I do stand engaged to many Greeks,
Even in the faith of valour, to appear
This morning to them.
I, but thou shalt not go,
I must not break my faith:
You know me dutiful, therefore dear sir,
Let me not shame respect; but give me leave
To take that course by your consent and voice,
Which you doe here forbid me, Royal Priam.
O Priam, yield not to him.
Doe not dear father.
Andromache I am offended with you:
Upon the love you bear me, get you in.
This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl,
Makes all these bodements.
O farewell, dear Hector:
Look how thou die; look how thy eye turns pale:
Look how thy wounds doth bleed at many vents:
Hark how Troy roars; how Hecuba cries out;
How poor Andromache shrils her dolor forth;
Behold distraction, frenzy, and amazement,
Like witless Antiques one another meet,
And all cry Hector, Hectors dead: O Hector!
Away, away.
Farewell: yes, soft: Hector I take my leave;
Thou dost thy self, and all our Troy deceive.
You are amazed, my Liege, at her exclaim:
Go in and cheer the Town, weal forth and fight:
Doe deeds of praise, and tell you them at night.
Farewell: the gods with safety stand about thee.
They are at it, hark: proud Diomed, believe
I come to loose my arm, or win my sleeve.
Doe you hear my Lord? do you hear?
What now?
Here's a Letter come from yond poor girl.
Let me read.
A whoreson tisicke, a whoreson rascally tisicke, so troubles me; and the foolish fortune of this girl, and what one thing, what another, that I shall leave you one of th's days: and I have a rheum in mine eyes too; and such an ache in my bones; that unless a man were cursed, I cannot tell what to think on it. What says she there?
Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart;
The effect doth operate another way.
Go wind to wind, there turn and change together:
My love with words and errors still she feeds;
But edifies another with her deeds.
Why, but hear you?
Hence brother lackey; ignomy and shame
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name.
Now they are clapper-clawing one another, Isle go look on: that dissembling abominable varlet Dio∣mede, has got that same scurvy, doting, foolish young knaves Sleeve of Troy, there in his Helm: I would fine see them meet; that, that same young Trojan ass, that loves the whore there, might send that Greekish whore-mai∣sterly villain, with the Sleeve, back to the dissembling luxurious drab, of a sleeveless errant. Of the tother side, the policy of those crafty swearing rascals; that stole old Mouse-eaten dry cheese, Nestor: and that same dog-foxe Vlisses is not proved worth a Black-berry. They set me up in policy, that mongrel cur Aiax, against that dog of as bad a kind, Achilles. And now is the cur Aiax prouder then the cur Achilles, and will not arm to day. Whereupon, the Gracious began to proclaim barbarism; and policy grows into an ill opinion.
Soft, here comes Sleeve, and the other.
Fly not: for should thou take the River Styx,
I would swim after.
Thou dost miscall retire:
I doe not fly; but advantageous care
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude:
Have at thee?
Hold thy whore Grecian: now for thy whore Trojan: Now the Sleeve, now the Sleeve.
What art thou Greek? art thou for Hectors match?
Art thou of blood, and honour?
No, no: I am a rascal: a scurvy railing knave: a very filthy rogue.
I doe believe thee, live.
God a mercy, that thou wilt believe me; but a plague break thy neck—for frighting me: what's be∣come of the winching rogues? I think they have swallowed one another. I would laugh at that mira∣cle—yet in a sort, lechery ears it self: Isle seek them.
Go, go, my servant, take thou Troylus Horse;
Present the fair Steed to my Lady Crossed:
Fellow, commend my service to her beauty;
Tell her, I have chastised the amorous Trojan.
And am her Knight by proof.
I go my Lord.
Renew, renew, the fierce Polidamus
Hath beat down Menon: bastard Margarelon
Hath Doreus prisoner.
And stands Calossus-wise waving his beam,
Upon the poshed courses of the Kings:
Epistropus and Cedus, Polixines is slain;
Amphimacus, and Thous deadly hurt;
Patroclus tan or slain, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised; the dreadful Sagittary
Appals our numbers, haste we Diomed
To re-enforcement, or we perish all.
Coo bear Patroclus body to Achilles,
And bid the snaile-pac'd Aiax arm for shame;
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his Horse,
And there lacks work: ano• he's there a foot,
And there they fly or dye, like scaled skulls,
Before the belching Whale; then is he yonder,
And there the straying Greeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him, like the mowers swath;
Here, there, and every where, he leaves and takes;
Dexterity so obeying appetite,
That what he will, he does, and does so much,
That proof is called impossibility.
Oh, courage, courage Princes: great Achilles
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance;
Patroclus wounds have roused his drowsy blood,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons,
That noselesse, handles, hacked and chipt, come to him;
Crying on Hector. Aiax hath lost a friend,
And foams at mouth, and he is armed, and at it:
Roaring for Troylus; who hath done to day.
Mad and fantastic execution;
Engaging and redeeming of himself,
With such a careless force, and forceless care,
As if that luck in very spite of cunning, bad him win all.
Troylus, thou coward Troylus.
I, there, there.
So, so, we draw together.
Where is this Hector?
Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face:
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry.
Hector, wher's Hector? I will none but Hector.
Troylus, thou coward Troylus, show thy head.
Troylus, I say, wher's Troylus?
What would thou?
I would correct him.
Were I the General,
Thou should have my office,
Ere that correction: Troylus I say, what Troylus?
Oh traitor Diomed!
Turn thy false face thou traitor,
And pay thy life thou owe me for my horse.
Ha, art thou there?
Isle fight with him alone, stand Diomed.
He is my prize, I will not look upon.
Come both you coging Greeks, have at you both.
Yea Troylus? O well fought my youngest Brother.
Now doe I see thee; have at thee Hector.
Pause if thou wilt.
I doe disdain thy courtesy, proud Trojan;
Be happy that my arms are out of use:
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shalt hear of me again:
Till when, go seek thy fortune.
Fare thee well:
I would have been much more a fresher man,
Had I expected thee: how now my Brother?
Aiax hath tan Aeneas; shall it be?
No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven,
He shall not carry him: Isle be tan too,
Or bring him off: Fate hear me what I say;
I wreak nor, though thou end my life to day.
Stand, stand, thou Greek,
Thou art a goodly mark:
No? wilt thou not? I like thy armour well,
Isle frush it, and unlock the rivets all,
But Isle be moister of it: wilt thou not beast abide?
Why then fly on, Isle hunt thee for thy hide.
Come here about me you my Myrmidons:
Mark what I say; attend me where I wheel:
Strike not a stroke, but keep your selves in breath;
And when I have the bloody Hector found,
Impale him with your weapons round about:
In fellest manner execute your arm.
Follow me sirs, and my proceedings eye;
It is decreed, Hector the great must dye.
The Cuckold and the Cuckold maker are at it: now bull, now dog, lowe; Paris lowe; now my dou∣ble hen'd sparrow; lowe Paris, lowe; the bull has the game: ware horns ho?
Turn slave and fight.
What art thou?
A Bastard Son of Priams.
I am a Bastard too, I love Bastards, I am a Ba∣stard begot, Bastard instructed, Bastard in mind, Bastard in valour, in every thing illegitimate: one Bear will not bite another, and wherefore should one Bastard? take heed, the quarrel's most ominous to vs: if the Son of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts judgment: farewell Bastard.
The devil take thee coward.
Most putrefied core so fair without:
Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life.
Now is my days work done; Isle take good breath:
Rest Sword, thou hast thy fill of blood and death.
Look Hector how the Sun begins to set;
How ugly night comes breathing at his heals,
Even with the veil and darking of the Sun.
To close the day up, Hectors life is done.
I am unarmed, forgo this vantage Greek.
Strike fellows, strike, this is the man I seek.
So Illion fall thou: now Troy sink down;
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.
On Myrmidons, cry you all a maine,
Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain.
Hark, a retreat upon our Grecian part.
The Trojan Trumpets sounds the like my Lord.
The dragon wing of night ore-spreds the earth
And stickler-like the Armies separates
My half supped Sword, that frankly would have fed,
Pleased with this dainty bed; thus goes to bed.
Come, tie his body to my horses tail;
Along the field, I will the Trojan trail.
Hark, hark, what shout is that?
Peace Drums.
Achilles, Achilles, Hector's slain, Achilles.
The bruit is, Hector's slain, and by Achilles.
If it be so, yet bragless let it be:
Great Hector was a man as good as he.
March patiently along; let one be sent
To pray Achilles see vs at our Tent.
If in his death the gods have vs befriended,
Great Troy is ours, and our sharpe wars are ended.
Stand hoe, yet are we masters of the field,
Never go home; here starve we out the night.
Hector is slain.
Hector? the gods forbid.
Hoe's dead: and at the murderers Horses tail,
In beastly sort, dragged through the shameful Field▪
Frown on you heavens, effect your rage with speed:
Sit gods upon your throanes, and smile at Troy.
I say at once, let your brief plagues be mercy,
And linger not our sure destructions on.
My Lord, you doe discomfort all the Host.
You understand me not, that tell me so:
I doe not speak of flight, of fear, of death,
But dare all imminence that gods and men,
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone:
Who shall tell Priam so? or Hecuba?
Let him that will a screechoule aye be called,
Go in to Troy, and say there, Hector's dead:
There is a word will Priam turn to stone;
Make wels, and Niobes of the maids and wives;
Cool statues of the youth: and in a word,
Scarre Troy out of it self. But march away,
Hector is dead: there is no more to say.
Stay yet: you vile abominable Tents,
Thus proudly pitch upon our Phrygian plains:
Let Titan rise as early as he dare,
Isle through, and through you; &amp; thou great sized coward:
No space of Earth shall sunder our two hates,
Isle haunt thee, like a wicked conscience still,
That moulds goblins swift as frenzies thoughts.
Strike a free march to Troy, with comfort go:
Hope of revenge, shall hide our inward woe.
But hear you? hear you?
Hence broker, lackey, •gnomy, and shame
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name.
A goodly medcine for mine eking bones: oh world, world, world! thus is the poor agent disp•sde: Oh trai∣tours and bawds; how earnestly are you set aworke, and how ill requited? why should our endeavour be so desired, and the performance so loathed? What Verse for it? what instance for it? let me see.
Full merrily the humble Bee-doth sing,
Till he hath lost his honey, and his sting.
And being once subdued in armed tail,
Sweet honey, and sweet notes together fail.
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted clothes;
As many as be here of Panders hall,
Your eyes half out, weep out at Pandar's fall:
Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans;
Though not for me yet for your eking bones:
Brethren and sisters of the hold-dore trade,
Some two months hence, my will shall here be made:
It should be now, but that my fear is this:
Some galled Goose of Winchester would hiss:
Till then, Isle sweat, and seek about for eases;
And at that time be queath you my diseases.

GOod day Sir.
I am glad you're well.
I have not seen you long, how goes the World?
It wears sir, as it grows.
I that's well known:
But what particular Rarity? What strange,
Which manifold record not matches: see
Magic of Bounty, all these spirits thy power
Hath conjured to attend.
I know the Merchant.
I know them both: the others a Jeweller.
O it is a worthy Lord.
Nay that's most fixed.
A most incomparable man, breathed as it were,
To an vntyreable and continuate goodness:
He passes.
I have a Jewel here.
O pray let's see it. For the Lord Timon, sir?
If he will touch the estimate. But for that—
When we for recompense have praised the wild,
It staines the glory in that happy Verse,
Which aptly sings the good.
It is a good form.
And rich: here is a Water look ye.
You are rapt sir, in some work, some Dedica∣tion to the great Lord.
A thing slipped idly from me.
Our Poesy is as a Gown, which uses
From whence it is nourished: the fire in the Flint
Shows not, till it be struck: our gentle flame
Provokes it self, and like the currant flies
Each bound it chases. What have you there?
A Picture sir: when comes your Book forth?
Upon the heals of my presentment sir.
Let's see your piece.
It is a good Piece.
So it is, this comes off well, and excellent.
Indifferent.
Admirable: How this grace
Speaks his own standing: what a mental power
This eye shoots forth? How big imagination
Moves in this Lip, to the dumbness of the gesture,
One might interpret.
It is a pretty mocking of the life:
Here is a touch: Is it good?
I will say of it,
It Tutors Nature, Artificial strife
Lives in these toutches, livelier then life.
How this Lord is followed.
The Senators of Athens, happy men.
Look more.
You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors,
I have in this rough work, shaped out a man
Whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug
With amplest entertainment: My free drift
Halts not particularly, but moves it self
In a wide Sea of wax, no leuell'd malice
Infects one comma in the course I hold,
But flies an Eagle flight, bold, and forth on,
Leaving no Tract behind.
How shall I understand you?
I will vnboult to you.
You see how all Conditions, how all Minds,
As well of glib and slippery Creatures, as
Of Grave and austere quality, tender down
Their services to Lord Timon: his large Fortune,
Upon his good and gracious Nature hanging,
Subdues and properties to his love and tendance
All sorts of hearts; yea, from the glasse-fac'd Flatterer
To Apemantus, that few things loves• better
Then to abhor himself; even hee drops down
The knee before him, and returns in peace
Most rich in Timons nod.
I saw them speak together.
Sir, I have upon a high and pleasant hill
Feigned Fortune to be throned.
The Base of the Mount
Is ranked with all deserts, all kind of Natures
That labour on the bosom of this Sphere,
To propagate their states; amongst them all,
Whose eyes are on this Sovereign Lady fixed,
One do I personate of Lord Timons frame,
Whom Fortune with her Ivory hand wafts to her,
Whose present grace, to present slaves and servants
Translates his Rivals.
It is conceived, to scope
This Throne, this Fortune, and this Hill me thinks
With one man beckoned from the rest below,
Bowing his head against the steepy Mount
To climb his happiness, would be well expressed
In our Condition.
Nay Sir, but hear me on:
All those which were his Fellows but of late,
Some better then his value; on the moment
Follow his strides, his Lobbies fill with tendance,
Rain Sacrificial whisperings in his ear,
Make Sacred even his stirrup, and through him
Drink the free Ayre.
I marry, what of these?
When Fortune in her shift and change of mood
Spurns down her late beloved; all his Dependants
Which laboured after him to the Mountains top,
Even on their knees and hand, let him sit down,
Not one accompanying his declining foot.
Tic common:
A thousand moral Paintings I can show,
That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortunes,
More pregnantly then words. Yet you do well,
To show Lord Timon, that mean eyes have seen
The foot aboue the head.
Imprisoned is he, say you?
I my good Lord, five Talents is his debt,
His means most short, his Creditors most strait:
Your Honourable Letter he desires
To those have shut him up, which failing,
Periods his comfort.
Noble Ventidius well:
I am not of that Feather, to shake off
My Friend when he must need me. I do know him
A Gentleman, that well deserves a help,
Which he shall have. Isle pay the debt, and free him.
Your Lordship ever binds him.
Commend me to him, I will send his ransom,
And being enfranchised bid him come to me;
It is not enough to help the Feeble up,
But to support him after. Fare you well.
All happiness to your Honour.
Lord Timon, hear me speak.
Freely good Father.
Thou hast a Servant named Lucilius.
I have so: What of him?
Most Noble Timon, call the man before thee.
Attends he here, or no? Lucillius.
Here at your Lordships service.
This Fellow here, L. Timon, this thy Creature,
By night frequents my house. I am a man
That from my first have been inclined to thrift,
And my estate deserves an Heir more raised,
Then one which holds a Trencher.
Well: what further?
One only Daughter have I, no Kin else,
On whom I may confer what I have got:
The Maid is fair, a' the youngest for a Bride,
And I have bred her at my dearest cost
In Qualities of the best. This man of thine
Attempts her love: I prithee (Noble Lord)
Join with me to forbid him her resort,
My self have spoke in vain.
The man is honest.
Therefore he will be Timon,
His honesty rewards him in it self,
It must not bear my Daughter.
Does she love him?
She is young and apt:
Our own precedent passions do instruct vs
What leuities in youth.
Love you the Maid?
I my good Lord, and she accepts of it.
If in her Marriage my consent be missing,
I call the Gods to witness, I will choose
Mine heir from forth the Beggars of the world,
And dispossess her all.
How shall she be endowed,
If she be mated with an equal Husband?
Three Talents on the present; in future, all.
This Gentleman of mine
Hath served me long:
To build his Fortune, I will strain a little,
For it is a Bond in men. Give him thy Daughter,
What you bestow, in him Isle counterpoise,
And make him weigh with her.
Most Noble Lord,
Pawn me to this your Honour, she is his.
My hand to thee,
Mine Honour on my promise.
Humbly I thank your Lordship, never may
That state or Fortune fall into my keeping,
Which is not owed to you.
Vouchsafe my Labour,
And long live your Lordship.
I thank you, you shall hear from me anon:
Go not away. What have you there, my Friend?
A piece of Painting, which I do beseech
Your Lordship to accept.
Painting is welcome.
The Painting is almost the Natural man:
For since Dishonour Traffickes with mans Nature,
He is but out-side: These Pencilled Figures are
Even such as they give out. I like your work,
And you shall find I like it; Waite attendance
Till you hear further from me.
The Gods preserve ye.
Well fare you Gentleman: give me your hand.
We must needs dine together: sir your Jewel
Hath suffered under praise.
What my Lord, dispraise?
A mere society of Commendations,
If I should pay you for it as it is extolled,
It would vnclew me quite.
My Lord, it is rated
As those which sell would give: but you well know,
Things of like value differing in the Owners,
Are prized by their Masters. Believe dear Lord,
You mend the Jewel by the wearing it.
Well mocked.
No my good Lord, he speaks ye common tongue
Which all men speak with him.
Look who comes here, will you be chid?
We'll bear with your Lordship.
He will spare none.
Good morrow to thee,
Gentle Apermantus.
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow.
When thou art Timons dog, and these Knaves honest.
Why dost thou call them Knaves, thou know them not?
Are they not Athenians?
Yes.
Then I repent not.
You know me, Apemantus?
Thou know I do, I called thee by thy name.
Thou art proud Apemantus?
Of nothing so much, as that I am not like Timon
Whether art going?
To knock out an honest Athenians brains.
That's a deed thou't dye for.
Right, if doing nothing be death by the Law.
How lik'st thou this picture Apemantus?
The best▪ for the innocence.
Wrought he not well that painted it.
He wrought better that made the Painter, and yet he's but a filthy piece of work.
Y' are a Dog.
Thy Mothers of my generation: what's she, if I be a Dog?
Wilt dine with me Apemantus?
No: I eat not Lords.
And thou should, thoud'st anger Ladies.
O they eat Lords;
So they come by great bellies.
That's a lascivious apprehension.
So, thou apprehend it,
Take it for thy labour.
How dost thou like this Jewel, Apemantus?
Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cast a man a Do it.
What dost thou think it is worth?
Not worth my thinking.
How now Poet?
How now Philosopher?
Thou lie.
Art not one?
Yes.
Then I lye not.
Art not a Poet?
Yes.
Then thou lie:
Look in thy last work, where thou hast fegin'd him a worthy Fellow.
That's not feigned, he is so.
Yes he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy labour. He that loves to be flattered, is worthy of th flat∣terer. Heavens, that I were a Lord.
What would do then Apemantus?
Even as Apemantus does now, hate a Lord with my heart.
What thy self?
I.
Wherefore?
That I had no angry wit to be a Lord.
Art not thou a Merchant?
I Apemantus.
Traffic confound thee, if the Gods will not.
If Traffic do it, the Gods do it.
Traffickes thy God, &amp; thy God confound thee.
What Trumpets that?
It is Alcibiades, and some twenty Horse
All of Companionship.
Pray entertain them, give them guide to vs.
You must needs dine with me: go not you hence
Till I have thanked you: when dinners done
Show me this piece▪ I am joyful of your sights.
Most welcome Sir.
So, so; their Aches contract, and starve your supple joints: that there should bee small love amongst these sweet Knaves, and all this Courtesy. The strain of mans bred out into Baboon and Monkey.
Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed
Most hungerly on your sight.
Right welcome Sir:
Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time
In different pleasures.
Pray you let vs in.
What time a day is it Apemantus?
Time to be honest.
That time serves still.
The most accursed thou that still omitst it.
Thou art going to Lord Timons Feast.
I, to see meat fill Knaves, and Wine heat fools.
Farthee well, farthee well.
Thou art a Fool to bid me farewell twice.
Why Apemantus?
Should have kept one to thy self, for I mean to give thee none.
Hang thy self.
No I will do nothing at thy bidding:
Make thy requests to thy Friend.
Away unpeaceable Dog,
Or Isle spurn thee hence.
I will fly like a dog, the heals a' the Ass.
Hoe's opposite to humanity.
Comes shall we in,
And •aste Lord Timons bounty: he out-goes
The very heart of kindness.
He powers it out: Plutus the God of Gold
Is but his Steward: no mead but he repays
Seven-fold aboue it self: No gift to him,
But breeds the giver a return: exceeding
All use of quittance.
The Noblest mind he carries,
That ever governed man.
Long may he live in Fortunes. Shall we in?
Isle keep you Company.
Most honoured Timon,
It hath pleased the Gods to remember my Fathers age,
And call him to long peace:
He is gone happy and has left me rich:
Then, as in grateful Virtue I am bound
To your free heart, I do return those Talents
Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
I derived liberty.
O by no means,
Honest Ventigius: You mistake my love,
I gave it freely ever, and ther's none
Can truly say he gives, if he receives:
If our betters play at that game, we must not dare
To imitate them: faults that are rich are fair.
A Noble spirit.
Nay my Lords, Ceremony was but deuis'd at first
To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
Recanting goodness, sorry ere it is shown:
But where there is true friendship, there needs none,
Pray sit, more welcome are ye to my Fortunes,
Then my Fortunes to me.
My Lord, we always have confessed it.
Ho ho, confessed it? Handg'd it? Have you not?
O Apermantus, you are welcome.
No: You shall not make me welcome:
I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
Fie, the art a churl, ye' have got a humour there
Does not become a man, it is much too blame:
They say my Lords, Irafuror braves est,
But yond man is very angry.
Go, let him have a Table by himself:
For he does neither affect company,
Nor is he fit for it indeed.
Let me stay at thine peril Timon,
I come to observe, I give thee warning on it.
I take no heed of thee: The art an Athenian, therefore welcome: I my self would have no power, prithee let my meat make thee silent.
I scorn thy meat, it would choke me: for I should ne'er flatter thee. Oh you Gods! What a number of men eats Timon, and he sees 'em not? It grieves me to see so many dip there meat in one mans blood, and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.
I wonder men dare trust themselves with men.
Me thinks they should enuite them without knives,
Good for there meat, and safer for their lives.
There's much example for it, the fellow that sits next him, now parts bread with him, pledges the breath of him in a divided draught: is the readiest man to kill him, 'Tas been▪ proved, if I were a huge man I should fear to drink at meals, least they should spy my wind-pipes dangerous notes, great men should drink with harness on their throats.
My Lord in heart: and let the health go round.
Let it flow this way my good Lord.
Flow this way? A brave fellow. He keeps his tides well, those healths will make thee and thy state look ill, Timon.
Heere's that which is too weak to be a sinner,
Honest water, which ne'er left man in the mire:
This and my food are equals, there's no odds,
Feasts are to proud to give thanks to the Gods.
Immortal Gods, I crave no pelf,
I pray for no man but my self,
Grant I may never prove so fond,
To trust man on his Oath or Bond.
Or a Harlot for her weeping,
Or a Dog that seems asleeping,
Or a keeper with my freedom,
Or my friends if I should need 'em.
Amen.
So fall too't:
Richmen sin, and I eat root.
Much good dich thy good heart, Apermantus
Captain, Alcibiades, your hearts in the field now.
My heart is ever at your service, my Lord.
You had rather be at a breakfast of Enemies, then a dinner of Friends.
So they were bleeding new my Lord, there's no meat like 'em, I could wish my best friend at such a Feast.
Would all those Flatterers were thine Enemies then, that then thou might kill 'em: &amp; bid me to 'em.
Might we but have that happiness my Lord, that you would once use our hearts, whereby we might express some part of our zeals, we should think our selves for ever perfect.
Oh no doubt my good Friends, but the Gods themselves have provided that I shall have much help from you: how had you been my Friends else. Why have you that charitable title from thousands? Did not you chiefly belong to my heart? I have told more of you to my self, then you can with modesty speak in your own behalf. And thus far I confirm you. Oh you Gods (think I,) what need we have any Friends; if we should ne'er have need of' em? They were the most needless Creatures living; should we ne'er have use for 'em? And would most resemble sweet Instruments hung up in Cases, that keeps there sounds to them∣selves. Why I have often wished my self poorer, that I might come nearer to you: we are borne to do been∣fits. And what better or properer can we call our own, then the richer of our Friends? Oh what a precious com∣fort it is, to have so many like Brothers commanding one another Fortunes. Oh joys, even made away er't can be borne: mine eyes cannot hold out wate•me thinks▪ to forget their Faults. I drink to you.
Thou weep to make them drink, Timon.
Joy had the like conception in our eyes,
And at that instant, like a babe sprung up.
Ho, ho: I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
I promise you my Lord you moved me much.
Much.
What means that Trump? How now?
Please you my Lord, there are certain Ladies
Most desirous of admittance.
Ladies? what are their wills?
There comes with them a fore-runner my Lord, which bears that office, to signify their pleasures.
I pray let them be admitted.
Hail to thee worthy Timon and to all that of his Bounties taste: the five best Sencesa cknowledge thee their Patron, and come freely to gratulate thy plentiou• bosom.
There taste, touch all pleased from thy Table rise:
They only now come but to Feast thine eyes.
They are wecome all, let 'em have kind admit∣tance. Music make their welcome.
You see my Lord, how ample y' are beloved.
Hoyday,
What a sweep of vanity comes this way.
They dance? They are mad women,
Like Madness is the glory of this life,
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
We make our selves Fools, to disport our selves,
And spend our Flatteries, to drink those men,
Upon whose Age we void it up again
With poisonous Spite and Envy.
Who lives, that's not depraved, or depraves;
Who dyes, that bears not one spurn to their graves
Of their Friends gift:
I should fear, those that dance before me now,
Would one day stamp upon me: 'Tas been done,
Men shut their doors against a setting Sun.
You have done our pleasures
Much grace (fair Ladies)
Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
Which was not half so beautiful, and kind:
You have added worth vntoo't, and luster,
And entertained me with mine own device.
I am to thank you for it.
My Lord you take vs even at the best.
Faith for the worst is filthy, and would not hold taking, I doubt me.
Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you,
Please you to dispose your selves.
Most thankfully, my Lord.
Flauius.
My Lord.
The little Casket bring me hither.
Yes, my Lord. More Jewels yet?
There is no crossing him in's humour,
Else I should tell him well, y faith I should;
When ell's spent, hee'ld be crossed then, and he could:
It is pity Bounty had not eyes behind,
That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.
Where be our men?
Here my Lord, in readiness.
Our Horses.
O my Friends:
I have one word to say to you: Look you, my good L.
I must entreat you honour me so much,
As to advance this Jewel, accept it, and wear it,
Kind my Lord.
I am so far already in your gifts.
So are we all.
My Lord, there are certain Nobles of the Senate newly alighted, and come to visit you.
They are fairly welcome.
I beseech your Honour, vouchsafe me a word, it does concern you near.
Near? why then another time Isle hear thee.
I prithee let's be provided to show them entertainment.
I scarce know how.
May it please your Honour, Lord Lucius•
(Out of his free love) hath presented to you
Four Milke-white Horses, trapt in Silver.
I shall accept them fairly: let the Presents
Be worthily entertained.
How now? What news?
Please you my Lord, that honourable Gentle∣man Lord Lucullus, entreats your company to morrow, to hunt with him, and he's sent your Honour two brace of Grey-hounds.
Isle hunt with him,
And let them be received, not without fair Reward.
What will this come to?
He commands vs to provide, and give great gifts, and all out of an empty Coffer:
Nor will he know his Purse, or yield me this,
To show him what a Beggar his heart is,
Being of no power to make his wishes good.
His promises fly so beyond his state,
That what he speaks is all in debt, he owes for every word:
He is so kind, that he now pays interest for it;
His Land's put to their Books. Well, would I were
Gently put out of Office, before I were forced out:
Happier is he that has no friend to feed,
Then such that do even Enemies exceed.
I bleed inwardly for my Lord.
You do your selves much wrong,
You bate too much of your own merits.
Here my Lord, a trifle of our Love.
With more then common thanks
I will receive it.
O he's the very soul of Bounty.
And now I remember my Lord, you gave good words the other day of a Bay Courser I rod on. Tic yours because you liked it.
Oh, I beseech you pardon me, my Lord, in that.
You may take my word my Lord: I know no man can justly praise, but what he does affect. I weigh my Friends affection with mine own: Isle tell you true, Isle call to you.
O none so welcome.
I take all, and your several visitations
So kind to heart, it is not enough to give:
Me thinks, I could deal Kingdoms to my Friends,
And ne'er be weary. Alcibiades,
Thou art a Soldier, therefore seldom rich,
It comes in Charity to thee: for all thy living
Is mong'st the dead: and all the Lands thou hast
Lye in a pitched field.
I, defiled Land, my Lord.
We are so virtuously bound.
And so am I to you.
So infinitely endeared.
All to you. Lights, more Lights.
The best of Happiness, Honour, and Fortunes
Keep with you Lord Timon.
Ready for his Friends.
What a coils here, serving of beckes, and iut∣ting out of bums. I doubt whether their Legs be worth the sums that are given for 'em.
Friendships full of dregs,
Me thinks false hearts, should never have sound legs.
Thus honest Fools lay out their wealth on Curtsies.
Now Apermantus (if thou were not sullen)
I would be good to thee.
No, Isle nothing; for if I should be bribed too, there would be none left to rail vponthee, and then thou would sin the faster. Thou giu'st so long Timon (I fear me) thou wilt give away thy self in paper shortly. What needs these Feasts, pomps, and Vaine-glories?
Nay, and you begin to rail on Society once, I am sworn not to give regard to you. Farewell, &amp; come with better Music.
So: Thou wilt not hear me now, thou shalt not then. Isle locke thy heaven from thee:
Oh that men's ears should be
To Counsel deaf, but not to Flattery.
And late five thousand: to Varro and to Isidore
He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum,
Which makes it five and twenty. Still in motion
Of raging waste? It cannot hold, it will not.
If I want Gold, steal but a beggars Dog,
And give it Timon, why the Dog coins Gold.
If I would sell my Horse, and buy twenty more
Better then he; why give my Horse to Timon.
Ask nothing, give it him, it Foals me straight
And able Horses: No Porter at his gate,
But rather one that smiles, and still invites
All that pass by. It cannot hold, no reason
Can sound his state in safety. Caphis hoe,
Caphis I say.
Here sir, what is your pleasure.
Get on your cloak, &amp; hast you to Lord Timon,
Importune him for my Monies, be not ceased
With slight denial; nor then silenced, when
Commend me to your Master, and the Cap
Plays in the right hand, thus: but tell him,
My Uses cry to me; I must serve my turn
Out of mine own, his days and times are past,
And my reliances on his frosted dates
Have smite my credit. I love, and honour him,
But must not break my back, to heal his finger.
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
Must not be tossed and turned to me in words,
But find supply immediate. Get you gone,
Put on a most importunate aspect,
A visage of demand: for I do fear
When every Feather sticks in his own wing,
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
Which flashes now a Phoenix, get you gone.
I go sir.
I go sir?
Take the Bonds along with you,
And have the dates in. Come.
I will Sir.
Go.
No care, no stop, so senseless of expense,
That he will neither know how to maintain it,
Nor cease his flow of Riot. Takes no account
How things go from him, nor resume no care
Of what is to continue: never mind,
Was to be so unwise, to be so kind.
What shall be done, he will not hear, till feel:
I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
Fie, fie, fie, fie.
Good even Varro: what, you come for money?
Is it not your business too?
It is, and yours too, Isidore?
It is so.
Would we were all discharged.
I fear it,
Here comes the Lord.
So soon as dinners done, we'll forth again
My Alcibiades. With me, what is your will?
My Lord, here is a note of certain dues.
Dues? whence are you?
Of Athens here, my Lord.
Go to my Steward.
Please it your Lordship, he hath put me off
To the succession of new days this month:
My Master is awaked by great Occasion,
To call upon his own, and humbly prays you,
That with your other Noble parts, you'll suite,
In giving him his right.
Mine honest Friend,
I prithee but repair to me next morning.
Nay, good my Lord.
Contain thy self, good Friend.
One Varroes servant, my good Lord.
From Isidore, he humbly prays your speedy pay∣meant.
If you did know my Lord, my Masters wants.
It was due on forfeiture my Lord, six weeks, and past.
Your Steward puts me off my Lord, and I
Am sent expressly to your Lordship.
Give me breath:
I do beseech you good my Lords keep on,
Isle waite upon you instantly. Come hither: pray you
How goes the world, that I am thus encountered
With clamorous demands of debt, broken Bonds,
And the detention of long since due debts
Against my Honour?
Please you Gentlemen,
The time is vnagreeable to this business:
Your importunacy cease, till after dinner,
That I may make his Lordship understand
Wherefore you are not paid.
Do so my Friends, see them well entertained.
Pray draw near.
Stay, stay, here comes the Fool with Apeman∣tus, let's ha some sport with 'em.
Hang him, he will abuse vs.
A plague upon him dog.
How dost Fool?
Dost Dialogue with thy shadow?
I speak not to thee.
No it is to thy self. Come away.
There's the Fool hangs on your back already.
No thou stand single, the art not on him yet.
Whore's the Fool now?
He last asked the question. Poor Rogues, and Usurers men, Bawds between Gold and want.
What are we Apemantus?
Asses.
Why?
That you ask me what you are, &amp; do not know your selves. Speak to 'em Fool.
How do you Gentlemen?
Gramercies good Fool:
How does your Mistress?
She's even setting on water to scaled such Chic∣kens as you are. Would we could see you at Corinth.
Good, Gramercy.
Look you, here comes my Masters Page.
Why how now Captain? what do you in this wise Company.
How dost thou Apermantus?
Would I had a Rod in my mouth, that I might answer thee profitably.
Prithee Apemantus read me the superscripti∣on of these Letters, I know not which is which.
Can not read?
No.
There will little Learning dye then that day thou art hanged. This is to Lord Timon, this to Alcibiades. Go thou was it borne a Bastard, and thou't dye a Bawd.
Thou was it whelped a Dog, and thou shalt famish a Dogs death.
Answer not, I am gone.
Even so thou out-runst Grace,
Fool I will go with you to Lord Timons.
Will you leave me there?
If Timon stay at home.
You three serve three Usurers?
I would they served vs.
So would I:
As good a trick as ever Hangman served Thief.
Are you three Usurers men?
I Fool.
I think no Usurer, but he's a Fool to his Ser∣uant. My Mistress is one, and I am her Fool: when men come to borrow of your Masters, they approach sadly, and go away merry: but they enter my Masters house merrily, and go away sadly. The reason of this?
I could render one.
Do it then, that we may account thee a Whore∣master, and a Knave, which notwithstanding thou shalt be no less esteemed.
What is a Whoremaster Fool?
A Fool in good clothes, and something like thee. It is a spirit, sometime to appears like a Lord, some∣time like a Lawyer, sometime like a Philosopher, with two stones more then's artificial one. Hee is very often like a Knight; and generally, in all shapes that man goes up and down in, from fourscore to thirteen, this spirit walks in.
Thou art not altogether a Fool.
Nor thou altogether a Wise man,
As much foolery as I have, so much wit thou lack.
That answer might have become Apemantus.
Aside, aside, here comes Lord Timon.
Come with me (Fool) come.
I do not always follow Lover, elder Brother, and Woman, sometime the Philosopher.
Pray you walk en eere,
Isle speak with you anon.
You make me marvel wherefore ere this time
Had you not fully laid my state before me,
That I might so have rated my expense
As I had leave of means.
You would not hear me:
At many leisures I propose.
Go too:
Perchance some single vantages you took,
When my indisposition put you back,
And that unaptness made your minister
Thus to excuse your self.
O my good Lord,
At many times I brought in my accounts,
Laid them before you, you would throw them off,
And say you sound them in mine honesty,
When for some trifling present you have bid me
Return so much, I have shook my head, and wept:
Yea against the Authority of manners, prayed you
To hold your hand more close: I did endure
Not seldom, nor no flight checks, when I have
Prompted you in the ebb of your estate,
And your great flow of debts; my loved Lord,
Though you hear now (too late) yet nowes a time,
The greatest of your having, lacks a half,
To pay your present debts.
Let all my Land be sold.
It is all engaged, some forfeited and gone,
And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
Of present dues; the future comes apace:
What shall defend the interim, and at length
How goes our reck'ning?
To Lacedemon did my Land extend.
O my good Lord, the world is but a word,
Were it all yours, to give it in a breath,
How quickly were it gone.
You tell me true.
If you suspect my Husbandry or Falsehood,
Call me before the exactest Auditors,
And set me on the proof. So the Gods bless me,
When all our Offices have been oppressed
With riotous Feeders, when our Vaults have wept
With drunken spilth of Wine; when every room
Hath blazed with Lights, and braid with Minstrelsy,
I have retired me to a wasteful cock,
And set mine eyes at flow.
Prithee no more.
Heavens have I said the bounty of this Lord:
How many prodigal bits have Slaves and Peasants
This night englutted: who is not Timons,
What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is L. Timons:
Great Timon, Noble, Worthy, Royal Timon:
Ah, when the means are gone, that buy this praise,
The breath is gone, whereof this praise is made:
Feast won, fast lost; one cloud of Winter showers,
These flies are couched.
Come sermon me no further.
No villainous bounty yet hath past my heart;
Unwisely, not ignobly have I given.
Why dost thou weep, can thou the conscience lack,
To think I shall lack friends: secure thy heart,
If I would broach the vessels of my love,
And try the argument of hearts, by borrowing,
Men, and men's fortunes could I frankly use
As I can bid thee speak.
Assurance bless your thoughts.
And in some sort these wants of mine are crowned,
That I account them blessings. For by these
Shall I try Friends. You shall perceive
How you mistake my Fortunes:
I am wealthy in my Friends.
Within there, Flauius, Seruilius?
My Lord, my Lord.
I will dispatch you severally.
You to Lord Lucius, to Lord Lucullus you, I hunted with his Honour to day; you to Sempronius; commend me to their loves; and I am proud say, that my occasions have found time to use 'em toward a supply of money: let the request be fifty Talents.
As you have said, my Lord.
Lord Lucius and Lucullus? Humh.
Go you sir to the Senators;
Of whom, even to the States best health; I have
Deserved this Hearing: bid 'em send of the instant
A thousand Talents to me.
I have been bold
(For that I knew it the most general way)
To them, to use your Signet, and your Name,
But they do shake their heads, and I am here
No richer in return.
Is it true? Can't be?
They answer in a joint and corporate voice,
That now they are at fall, want Treature cannot
Do what they would, are sorry: you are Honourable,
But yet they could have wished, they know not,
Something hath been amiss; a Noble Nature
May catch a wrench; would all were well; tic pity,
And so intending other serious matters,
After distasteful looks; and these hard Fractions
With certain halfe-caps, and cold moving nods,
They froze me into Silence.
You Gods reward them:
Prithee man look cheerely. These old Fellows
Have their ingratitude in them Hereditary:
Their blood is caked, it is cold, it seldom flows,
It is lack of kindly warmth, they are not kind;
And Nature, as it grows again toward earth,
Is fashioned for the journey, dull and heavy.
Go to Ʋentiddius (prithee be not sad,
Thou art true, and honest; Ingeniously I speak,
No blame belongs to thee:) Ventiddius lately
Buried his Father, by whose death hoe's stepped
Into a great estate: When he was poor,
Imprisoned, and in scarcity of Friends,
I cleared him with five Talents: Greet him from me,
Bid him suppose, some good necessity
Touches his Friend, which craves to be remembered
With those five Talents; that had, giue't these Fellows
To whom it is instant due. Neu'r speak, or think,
That Timons fortunes among his Friends can sink.
I would I could not think it:
That thought is Bounties Foe;
Being free it self, it thinks all others so.
I have told my Lord of you, he is coming down to you.
I thank you Sir.
Heere's my Lord.
One of Lord Timons men? A Gift I warrant. Why this hits right: I dreamt of a Silver Basin &amp; Ewre to night. Flaminius, honest Flaminius, you are very re∣spectiuely welcome sir. Fill me some Wine. And how does that Honourable, Complete, Free-hearted Gentle∣man of Athens, thy very bountiful good Lord and May∣ster?
His health is well sir.
I am right glad that his health is well sir: and what hast thou there under thy Cloak, pretty Flaminius?
Faith, nothing but an empty box Sir, which in my Lords behal• I come to entreat your Honour to sup∣ply: who having great and instant occasion to use fifty Talents, hath sent to your Lordship to furnish him: no∣thing doubting your present assistance therein.
La, la, la, la: Nothing doubting says hee? Alas good Lord, a Noble Gentleman it is, if he would not keep so good a house. Many a time and often I ha dined with him, and told him on it, and come again to supper to him of purpose, to have him spend less, and yet he wold em∣brace no counsel, take no warning by my coming, eve∣rye man has his fault, and honesty is his. I ha told him on it, but I could ne'er get him from it.
Please your Lordship, here is the Wine.
Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise.
Heere's to thee.
Your Lordship speaks your pleasure.
I have observed thee always for a towardlie prompt spirit, give thee thy due, and one that knows what belongs to reason; and can use the time well, if the time use thee well. Good parts in thee; get you gone sir∣rah. Draw nearer honest Flaminius. Thy Lords a boun∣tifull Gentleman, but thou art wise, and thou know well enough (although thou come to me) that this is no time to lend money, especially upon bare friendship without security. Here's three Solidares for thee, good Boy wink at me, and say thou saw me not. Fare thee well.
Is it possible the world should so much differ,
And we alive that lived? Fly damned baseness
To him that worships thee.
Ha? Now I see thou art a Fool, and sit for thy Master.
May these add to the number yt may scald thee:
Let molten Coin be thy damnation,
Thou disease of a friend, and not himself:
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,
It turns in less then two nights? O you Gods!
I feel my Masters passion. This Slave unto his Honour,
Has my Lords meat in him:
Why should it thrive, and turn to Nutriment,
When he is turned to poison?
O may Diseases only work upon it:
And when he's sick to death, let not that part of Nature
Which my Lord paid for, be of any power
To expel sickness, but prolong his hour.
Who the Lord Timon? He is my very good friend and an Honourable Gentleman.
We know him for no less, though we are but stran∣gers to him. But I can tell you one thing my Lord, and which I hear from common rumours, now Lord Timons happy hours are done and past, and his estate shrinks from him.
Fie no, doe not believe it: hee cannot want for money.
But believe you this my Lord, that not long ago, one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus, to borrow so many Talents, nay urged extremely for it, and showed
what necessity belonged too't, and yet was denied.
How?
I tell you, denied my Lord.
What a strange case was that? Now before the Gods I am ashamed on it. Denied that honourable man? There was very little Honour showed in it. For my own part, I must needs confess, I have received some small kindnesses from him, as Money, Plate, Jewels, and such like Trifles; nothing comparing to his: yet had hee mi∣stooke him, and sent to me, I should ne'er have denied his Occasion so many Talents.
See, by good hap yonders my Lord, I have sweat to see his Honour. My Honoured Lord.
Seruilius? You are kindly met sir. Farthewell, commend me to thy Honourable virtuous Lord, my ve∣rye exquisite Friend.
May it please your Honour, my Lord hath sent—
Ha? what he's he sent? I am so much endeared to that Lord; hoe's ever sending: how shall I thank him think thou? And what has he sent now?
Has only sent his present Occasion now my Lord: requesting your Lordship to supply his instant use with so many Talents.
I know his Lordship is but merry with me,
He cannot want fifty five hundred Talents.
But in the mean time he wants less my Lord.
If his occasion were not virtuous,
I should not urge it half so faithfully.
Dost thou speak seriously Seruilius?
Upon my soul, it is true Sir.
What a wicked Beast was I to disfurnish my self against such a good time, when I might ha shown my self Honourable? How unluckily it happened, that I should Purchase the day before for a little part, and undo a great deal of Honour? Seruilius▪ now before the Gods I am not able to do (the more beast I say) I was sending to use Lord Timon my self, these Gentlemen can witness; but I would not for the wealth of Athens I had done it now. Commend me bountifully to his good Lordship, and I hope his Honour will conceive the fairest of me, because I have no power to be kind. And tell him this from me, I count it one of my greatest afflictions say, that I cannot pleasure such an Honourable Gentleman. Good Servile∣us, will you befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to him?
Yes sir, I shall.
Isle look you out a good turn Seruilius.
True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed,
And he that's once denied, will hardly speed.
Do you observe this Hostilius?
I, to well.
Why this is the worlds soul,
And just of the same piece
Is every Flatterers sport: who can call him his Friend
That dips in the same dish? For in my knowing
Timon has bin this Lords Father,
And kept his credit with his purse:
Supported his estate, nay Timons money
Has paid his men their wages. He ne'er drinks,
But Timons Silver treads upon his Lip,
And yet, oh see the monstrousness of man,
When he looks out in an ungrateful shape;
He does deny him (in respect of his)
What charitable men afford to Beggars.
Religion groans at it.
For mine own part, I never tasted Timon in my life
Nor came any of his bounties over me,
To mark me for his Friend. Yet I protest,
For his right Noble mind, illustrious Virtue,
And Honourable Carriage,
Had his necessity made use of me,
I would have put my wealth into Donation,
And the best half should have returned to him,
So much I love his heart: But I perceive,
Men must learn now with pity to dispense,
For Policy sits aboue Conscience.
Must he needs trouble me in it? Hum.
Above all others?
He might have tried Lord Lucius, or Lucullus,
And now Ventidgius is wealthy too,
Whom he redeemed from prison. All these
Owes their estates unto him.
My Lord,
They have all bin touched, and found Base-Mettle,
For they have all denied him.
How? Have they denied him?
Has Ventidgius and Lucullus denied him,
And does he send to me? Three? Humh?
It shows but little love, or judgment in him.
Must I be his last Refuge? His Friends (like Physicians)
Thrive, give him over: Must I take the Cure upon me?
Has much disgraced me in it, I'm angry at him,
That might have known my place. I see no sense for it,
But his Occasions might have wooed me first:
For in my conscience, I was the first man
That ere received gift from him.
And does he think so backwardly of me now,
That Isle requite it last? No:
So it may prove an Argument of Laughter
To the rest, and amongst Lords be thought a Fool:
I'd rather then the worth of thrice the sum,
Had sent to me first, but for my minds sake:
I'd such a courage to do him good. But now return,
And with their faint reply, this answer join;
Who bates mine Honour, shall not know my Coin.
Excellent: Your Lordships a goodly Villain: the devil knew not what he did, when hee made man Poli∣tick; he crossed himself by it: and I cannot think, but in the end, the Villainies of man will set him clear. How fairly this Lord strives to appear foul? Takes Virtue∣os Copies to be wicked: like those, that under hot are∣dent zeal, would set whole Realms on fire, of such a na∣ture is his politic love.
This was my Lords best hope, now all are fled
Save only the Gods. Now his Friends are dead,
Doors that were ne'er acquainted with their Wards
Many a bounteous year, must be employed
Now to guard sure their Master:
And this is all a liberal course allows,
Who cannot keep his wealth, must keep his house.
Well met, goodmorrow Titus &amp; Hortensius
The like to you kind Varro.
Lucius, what do we meet together?
I, and I think one business do's command vs all.
For mine is money.
So is theirs, and ours.
And sir Philotus too.
Good day at once.
Welcome good Brother.
What do you think the hour?
Labouring for Nine.
So much?
Is not my Lord seen yet?
Not yet.
I wonder on it, he was wont to shine at seven.
I, but the days are waxed shorter with him:
You must consider, that a Prodigal course
Is like the Suns, but not like his recouerable, I fear:
It is deepest Winter in Lord Timons purse, that is:
One may reach deep enough, and yet find little.
I am of your fear, for that.
Isle show you how to observe a strange event:
Your Lord sends now for Money?
Most true, he doe's.
And he wears Jewels now of Timons gift,
For which I waite for money.
It is against my heart.
Mark how strange it shows,
Timon in this, should pay more then he owes:
And even as if your Lord should wear rich Jewels,
And send for money for 'em.
I'm weary of this Charge,
The Gods can witness:
I know my Lord hath spent of Timons wealth,
And now Ingratitude, makes it worse then stealth.
Yes, mine's three thousand Crowns:
What's yours?
Five thousand mine.
It is much deep, and it should seem by the sum
Your Masters confidence was aboue mine,
Else surely his had equalled.
One of Lord Timons men.
Flaminius? Sir, a word: Pray is my Lord ready to come forth?
No, indeed he is not.
We attend his Lordship: pray signify so much.
I need not tell him that, he knows you are too diligent.
Ha: is not that his Steward muffled so?
He goes away in a Cloud: Call him, call him.
Do you hear, sir?
By your leave, sir.
What do ye ask of me, my Friend.
We waite for certain Money here, sir.
I, if Money were as certain as your waiting,
It were sure enough.
Why then preferred you not your sums and Bills
When your false Masters eat of my Lords meat?
Then they could smile, and fawn upon his debts.
And take down the Interest into their glutt'nous Mawes.
You do your selves but wrong, to stir me up,
Let me pass quietly:
Believe it, my Lord and I have made an end,
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.
I, but this answer will not serve.
If it twill not serve, it is not so base as you,
For you serve Knaves.
How? What does his cashiered Worship mutter?
No matter what, hoe's poor, and that's re∣avenge enough. Who can speak broader, then hee that has no house to put his head in? Such may rail against great buildings.
Oh heere's Seruilius: now wee shall know some answer.
If I might beseech you Gentlemen, to repair some other hour, I should derive much from it. For tak't of my soul, my Lord leanes wondrously to discontent: His comfortable temper has forsook him, he's much out of health, and keeps his Chamber.
Many do keep their Chambers, are not sick:
And if it be so far beyond his health,
Me thinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
And make a clear way to the Gods.
Good Gods.
We cannot take this for answer, sir.
Seruilius help, my Lord, my Lord.
What, are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I bin ever free, and must my house
Be my retentive Enemy? My Gaol?
The place which I have Feasted, does it now
(Like all Mankind) show me an Iron heart?
Put in now Titus.
My Lord, here is my Bill.
Here's mine.
And mine, my Lord.
And ours, my Lord.
All our Bills.
Knock me down with 'em, cleave me to the Girdle.
Alas, my Lord.
Cut my heart in sums.
Mine, fifty Talents.
Tell out my blood.
Five thousand Crowns, my Lord.
Five thousand drops pays that.
What yours? and yours?
My Lord.
My Lord.
Tear me, take me, and the Gods fall upon you.
Faith I perceive our Masters may throw their caps at their money, these debts may well be called despe∣rate ones, for a madman owes 'em.
They have e'ene put my breath from me the slaves. Creditors? Devils.
My dear Lord.
What if it should be so?
My Lord.
Isle have it so. My Steward?
Here my Lord.
So fitly? Go, bid all my Friends again,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius Vllorxa: All,
Isle once more feast the Rascals.
O my Lord, you only speak from your distra∣cted soul; there's not so much left to, furnish out a mo∣derate Table.
Be it not in thy care:
Go I charge thee, inuit them all, let in the tide
Of Knaves once more: my Cooke and Isle provide.
My Lord, you have my voice, too't,
The faults Bloody:
It is necessary he should dye:
Nothing emboldens sin so much, as Mercy.
Most true; the Law shall bruise 'em.
Honour, health, and compassion to the Senate.
Now Captain.
I am an humble Suitor to your Virtues;
For pity is the virtue of the Law,
And none but Tyrants use it cruelly.
It pleases time and Fortune to lye heavy
Upon a Friend of mine, who in hot blood
Hath stepped into the Law: which is past depth
To those that (without heed) do plundge intoo't.
He is a Man (setting his Fate aside) of comely Virtues,
Nor did he soil the fact with Cowardice,
(And Honour in him, which buys out his fault)
But with a Noble Fury, and fair spirit,
Seeing his Reputation touched to death,
He did oppose his Foe:
And with such sober and unnoted passion
He did behoove his anger ere it was spent,
As if he had but proved an Argument.
You undergo too strict a Paradox,
Striving to make an ugly deed look fair:
Your words have took such pains, as if they laboured
To bring Man-slaughter into form, and set Quarrelling
Upon the head of Valour; which indeed
Is Valour mis-begot, and came into the world,
When Sects, and Factions were newly borne.
Hoe's truly Valiant, that can wisely suffer
The worst that man can breath,
And make his Wrongs, his Out-sider,
To wear them like his Raiment, carelessly,
And ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart,
To bring it into danger.
If Wrongs be evils, and enforce vs kill,
What Folly it is, to hazard life for Ill.
My Lord.
You cannot make gross sins look clear,
To revenge is no Valour, but to bear.
My Lords, then under favour, pardon me,
If I speak like a Captain.
Why do fond men expose themselves to Battle,
And not endure all threats? Sleep upon it,
And let the Foes quietly cut their Throats
Without repugnance? If there be
Such Valour in the bearing, what make wee
Abroad? Why then, Women are more valiant
That stay at home, if Bearing carry it:
And the Ass, more Captain then the Lyon?
The fellow laden with Irons, wiser then the Judge?
If Wisdom be in suffering, Oh my Lords,
As you are great, be pitifully Good,
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is sins extremest Gust,
But in defence, by Mercy, it is most just.
To be in Anger, is impiety:
But who is Man, that is not Angry.
Weigh but the Crime with this.
You breath in vain.
In vain?
His service done at Lacedemon, and Bizantium,
Were a sufficient briber for his life.
What's that?
Why say my Lords he's done fair service,
And slain in fight many of your enemies:
How full of valour did he bear himself
In the last Conflict, and made plenteous wounds?
He has made too much plenty with him:
He's a sworn Riotor, he has a sin
That often drowns him, and takes his valour prisoner.
If there were no Foes, that were enough
To overcome him. In that Beastly fury,
He has bin known to commit outrages,
And cherish Factions. It is inferred to vs,
His days are foul, and his drink dangerous.
He dyes.
Hard fate: he might have dyed in war.
My Lords, if not for any parts in him,
Though his right arm might purchase his own time,
And be in debt to none: yet more to move you,
Take my deserts to his, and join 'em both.
And for I know, your reverend Ages love Security,
Isle pawn my Victories, all my Honour to you
Upon his good returns.
If by this Crime, he owes the Law his life,
Why let the War receiue't in valiant gore,
For Law is strict, and War is nothing more.
We are for Law, he dyes, urge it no more
On height of our displeasure: Friend, or Brother,
He forfeits his own blood, that spills another.
Must it be so? It must not bee:
My Lords, I do beseech you know me.
How?
Call me to your remembrances.
What.
I cannot think but your Age has forgot me,
It could not else be, I should prove so base,
To sue and be denied such common Grace.
My wounds ache at you.
Do you dare our anger?
It is in few words, but spacious in effect:
We banish thee for ever.
Banish me?
Banish your dotage, banish usury,
That makes the Senate ugly.
If after two days shine, Athens contain thee,
Attend our weightier Judgment.
And not to swell our Spirit,
He shall be executed presently.
Now the Gods keep you old enough,
That you may live
Only in bone, that none may look on you.
I'm worse then mad: I have kept back their Foes
While they have told their Money, and let out
Their Coin upon large interest. I my self,
Rich only in large hurts. All those, for this?
Is this the Balsam, that the vsuring Senate
Powers into Captains wounds? Banishment.
It comes not ill: I hate not to be banished,
It is a cause worthy my Spleen and Fury,
That I may strike at Athens. Isle cheer up
My discontented Troops, and lay for hearts;
It is Honour with most Lands to be at odds,
Soldiers should brooke as little wrongs as Gods.
The good time of day to you, sir.
I also wish it to you: I think this Honourable Lord did but try vs this other day.
Upon that were my thoughts tyring when wee en∣countred. I hope it is not so low with him as he made it seem in the trial of his several Friends.
It should not be, by the persuasion of his new Fea∣sting.
I should think so. He hath sent me an earnest in∣uiting, which many my near occasions did urge me to put off: but he hath conjured me beyond them, and I must needs appear.
In like manner was I in debt to my importunate bu∣sinesse, but he would not hear my excuse. I am sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my Provision was out.
I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all things go.
Every man hears so: what would hee have borro∣wed of you?
A thousand Pieces.
A thousand Pieces?
What of you?
He sent to me sir—Here he comes.
With all my heart Gentlemen both; and how fare you?
Ever at the best, hearing well of your Lordship.
The Swallow follows not Summer more willing, then we your Lordship.
Nor more willingly leaves Winter, such Sum∣mer Birds are men. Gentlemen, our dinner will not re∣compence this long stay: Feast your ears with the Mu∣sick awhile: If they will fare so harshly of the Trumpets sound: we shall too't presently.
I hope it remains not unkindly with your Lord∣ship, that I returned you an empty Messenger.
O sir, let it not trouble you.
My Noble Lord.
Ah my good Friend, what cheer?
My most Honourable Lord, I am even sick of shame, that when your Lordship this other day sent to me, I was so unfortunate a Beggar.
Think not on it, sir.
If you had sent but two hours before.
Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
Come bring in all together.
All covered Dishes.
Royal Cheer, I warrant you.
Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield it
How do you? What's the news?
Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it?
Alcibiades banished?
It is so, be sure of it.
How? How?
I pray you upon what?
My worthy Friends, will you draw near?
Isle tell you more anon. Here's a Noble feast toward
This is the old man still.
Wilt hold? Wilt hold?
It do's: but time will, and so.
I do conceive.
Each man to his stool, with that spur as hee would to the lip of his Mistress: your diet shall bee in all places alike. Make not a City Feast of it, to let the meat cool, ere we can agree upon the first place. Sit, sit. The Gods require our Thanks.
Uncover Dogs, and lap.
What do's his Lordship mean?
I know not.
May you a better Feast never behold
You knot of Mouth-Friends: Smoke, &amp; lukewarm water
Is your perfection. This is Timons last,
Who stuck and spangled you with Flatteries,
Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces
Your reeking villainy. Live loathed, and long
Most smiling, smooth, detested Parasites,
Courteous Destroyers, affable Wolves, meek Bears:
You Fools of Fortune, Trencher-friends, Times Flies,
Cap and knee-Slaues, vapours, and Minute Jacks.
Of Man and Beast, the infinite Malady
Crust you quite o'er. What dost thou go?
Soft, take thy Physic first; thou too, and thou:
Stay I will lend thee money, borrow none.
What? All in Motion? Henceforth be no Feast,
Whereat a Villaine's not a welcome Guest.
Burn house, sink Athens, henceforth hated be
Of Timon Man, and all Humanity.
How now, my Lords?
Know you the quality of Lord Timons fury?
Push, did you see my Cap?
I have lost my Gown.
He's but a mad Lord, &amp; nought but humours sways him. He gave me a Jewel the other day, and now hee has beat it out of my hat.
Did you see my Jewel?
Did you see my Cap.
Here it is.
Here lies my Gown.
Let's make no stay.
Lord Timons mad.
I feel it upon my bones.
One day he gives vs Diamonds, next day stones.
Let me look back upon thee. O thou Wall
That girdles in those Wolves, dive in the earth,
And fence not Athens. Matrons, turn incontinent,
Obedience fail in Children: Slaves and Fools
Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the Bench,
And minister in their steeds, to general Filths.
Convert of the Instant greene Virginity,
Do it in your Parents eyes. Bankrupts, hold fast
Rather then render back; out with your Knives,
And cut your Trusters throats. Bound Servants, steal,
Large-handed Robbers your grave Masters are,
And pill by Law. Maid, to thy Masters bed,
Thy Mistress is of the Brothel. Some of sixteen,
Pluck the lined Crutch from thy old limping Sire,
With it, beat out his Brains, Piety, and Fear,
Religion to the Gods, Peace, Justice, Truth,
Domestic awe, Night-rest, and Neighbour-hood,
Instruction, Manners, Mysteries, and Trades,
Degrees, Obseruances, Customs, and Laws,
Decline to your confounding contraries.
And yet Confusion live: Plagues incident to men,
Your potent and infectious Feauors, heap
On Athens ripe for stroke. Thou cold Sciatica,
Cripple our Senators, that their limbs may halt
As lamely as their Manners▪ Lust, and Liberty
Creep in the Minds and Marrowes of our youth,
That against the stream of Virtue they may strive,
And drown themselves in Riot. Itches, Blaines,
So we all the Athenian bosoms, and their crop
Be general Leprosy: Breath, infect breath,
That their Society (as their Friendship) may
Be merely poison. Nothing Isle bear from thee
But nakedness, thou detestable Town,
Take thou that too, with multiplying Bannes:
Timon will to the Woods, where he shall find
The unkindest Beast, more kinder then Mankind.
The Gods confound (hear me you good Gods all)
The Athenians both within and out that Wall:
And grant as Timon grows, his hate may grow
To the whole race of Mankind, high and low.
Amen.
Hear you M. Steward, whore's our Master?
Are we undone, cast off, nothing remaining?
Alack my Fellows, what should I say to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous Gods,
I am as poor as you.
Such a House broke?
So Noble a Master fallen, all gone, and not
One Friend to take his Fortune by the arm,
And go along with him.
As we do turn our backs
From our Companion, thrown into his grave,
So his Familiars to his buried Fortunes
Slink all away leave their false vows with him
Like empty purses picked; and his poor self
A dedicated Beggar to the Ayre,
With his disease, of all shunned poverty,
Walks like contempt alone. More of our Fellows.
All broken Implements of a ruined house.
Yet do our hearts wear Timons Livery,
That see I by our Faces: we are Fellows still,
Serving alike in sorrow: Leaked is our Bark,
And we poor Mates, stand on the dying Deck,
Hearing the Surges threat: we must all part
Into this Sea of Ayre.
Good Fellows all,
The latest of my wealth Isle share amongst you.
Where ever we shall meet, for Timons sake,
Let's yet be Fellows. Let's shake our heads, and say
As it were a Knell unto our Masters Fortunes,
We have seen better days. Let each take some:
Nay put out all your hands: Not one word more,
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
Oh the fierce wretchedness that Glory brings vs!
Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
Since Riches point to Misery and Contempt?
Who would be so mocked with Glory, or to live
But in a Dream of Friendship,
To have his pomp, and all what state compounds,
But only painted like his varnished Friends:
Poor honest Lord, brought lowe by his own heart,
Undone by Goodness: Strange unusual blood,
When mans worst sin is, He do's too much Good.
Who then dares to be half so kind again?
For Bounty that makes Gods, do still mar Men.
My dearest Lord, blessed to be most accursed,
Rich only to be wretched; thy great Fortunes
Are made thy chief Afflictions. Alas (kind Lord)
Hoe's flung in Rage from this ungrateful Seat
Of monstrous Friends:
Nor he's he with him to supply his life,
Or that which can command it:
Isle follow and enquire him out.
Isle ever serve his mind, with my best will,
Whilst I have Gold, Isle be his Steward still.
O blessed breeding Sun, draw from the earth
Rotten humidity: below thy Sisters Orb
Infect the ayre. Twined Brothers of one womb,
Whose procreation, residence, and birth,
Scarce is diuidant; touch them with several fortunes,
The greater scorns the lesser. Not Nature
(To whom all sores lay siege) can bear great Fortune
But by contempt of Nature,
Raise me this Beggar, and deny it that Lord,
The Senators shall bear contempt Hereditary,
The Beggar Native Honour.
It is the Pastor Lards, the Brothers sides,
The want that makes him leave: who dares? who dares
In purity of Manhood stand upright
And say, this mans a Flatterer. If one be,
So are they all: for every grize of Fortune
Is smoothed by that below. The Learned pate
Ducks to the Golden Fool. Ell's oblique:
There's nothing level in our cursed Natures
But direct villainy. Therefore be abhorred,
All Feasts, Societies, and Throngs of men.
His semblably, yea himself Timon disdains,
Destruction phang mankind; Earth yield me Roots,
Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
With thy most operant Poison. What is here?
Gold? Yellow, glittering, precious Gold?
No Gods, I am no idle Votarist,
Roots you clear Heavens. Thus much of this will make
Black, white; foul, fair; wrong, right;
Base, Noble; Old, young; Coward, valiant.
Ha you Gods! why this? what this, you Gods? why this
Will lug your Priests and Servants from your sides:
Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads.
This yellow Slave,
Will knit and break Religions, bless the accursed,
Make the hoar Leprosy adored, place Thieves,
And give them Title, knee, and approbation
With Senators on the Bench: This is it
That makes the wappen'd Widow wed again;
She, whom the Spittle-house, and ulcerous sores,
Would cast the gorge at. This Embalms and Spices
To the April day again. Come damned Earth,
Thou common whore of Mankind, that puts odds
Among the rout of Nations, I will make thee
Do thy right Nature.
Ha? A Drum? The art quick,
But yet Isle bury thee: Thou't go (strong Thief)
When Gouty keepers of thee cannot stand:
Nay stay thou out for earnest.
What art thou there? speak.
A Beast as thou art. The Canker gnaw thy hart
For showing me again the eyes of Man.
What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee,
That art thy self a Man?
I am Misantropos, and hate Mankind,
For thy part, I do wish thou were a dog,
That I might love thee something.
I know thee well:
But in thy Fortunes am unlearned, and strange.
I know thee too, and more then that I know thee
I not desire to know. Follow thy Drum,
With mans blood paint the ground Gulls, Gulls:
Religious Cannons, civil Laws are cruel,
Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine,
Hath in her more destruction then thy Sword,
For all her Cherubin look.
Thy lips rot off.
I will not kiss thee, then the rot returns
To thine own lips again.
How came the Noble Timon to this change?
As the Moon do's, by wanting light to give:
But then renew I could not like the Moon,
There were no Suns to borrow of.
Noble Timon, what friendship may I do thee?
None, but to maintain my opinion.
What is it Timon?
Promise me Friendship, but perform none. If thou wilt not promise, the Gods plague thee, for thou art a man: if thou dost perform, confound thee, for thou art a man.
I have heard in some sort of thy Miseries.
Thou saw them when I had prosperity.
I see them now, then was a blessed time.
As thine is now, held with a brace of Harlots.
Is this the Athenian Minion, whom the world Voiced so regardfully?
Art thou Timandra?
Yes.
Be a whore still, they love thee not that use thee, give them diseases, leaving with thee their Lust. Make use of thy salt hours, season the slaves for Tubbs and Bathes, bring down Rose-checkt youth to the Pubfast, and the Diet.
Hang thee Monster.
Pardon him sweet Timandra▪ for his wits
Are drowned and lost in his Calamities.
I have but little Gold of late, brave Timon,
The want whereof, doth daily make revolt
In my penurious Band. I have heard and grieved
How cursed Athens, mindelesse of thy worth,
Forgetting thy great deeds, when Neighbour states
But for thy Sword and Fortune trod upon them.
I prithee beat thy Drum, and get thee gone.
I am thy Friend, and pity thee dear Timon.
How doest thou pity him whom you dost troble,
I had rather be alone.
Why fare thee well:
Here is some Gold for thee.
Keep it, I cannot eat it.
When I have laid proud Athens on a heap.
War thou against Athens.
I Timon, and have cause.
The Gods confound them all in thy Conquest,
And thee after, when thou hast Conquered.
Why me, Timon?
That by killing of Villains
Thou was it borne to conquer my Country.
Put up thy Gold. Go on, hears Gold, go on;
Be as a Planetary plague, when Jove
Will o'er some high-Vic'd City, hang his poison
In the sick ayre: let not thy sword skip one:
Pity not honoured Age for his white Beard,
He is an Usurer. Strike me the counterfeit Matron,
It is her habit only, that is honest,
Her selfe's a Bawd. Let not the Virgins cheek
Make soft thy trenchant Sword: for those Milk paps
That through the window Barn bore at men's eyes,
Are not within the Leaf of pity writ,
But set them down horrible Traitors. Spare not the Babe
Whose dimpled smiles from Fools exhaust their mercy;
Think it a Bastard, whom the Oracle
Hath doubtfully pronounced, the throat shall cut,
And mince it sans remorse. Swear against Objects,
Put Armour on thine ears, and on thine eyes,
Whose proof, nor yells of Mothers, Maids, nor Babes,
Nor sight of Priests in holy Vestments bleeding,
Shall pierce a jot. There's Gold to pay thy Soldiers,
Make large confusion: and thy fury spent,
Confounded be thy self. Speak not, be gone.
Hast thou Gold yet, Isle take the Gold thou go∣uest me, not all thy Counsel.
Dost thou or dost thou not, Heavens curse upon thee.
Give vs some Gold good Timon, hast you more?
Enough to make a Whore forswear her Trade,
And to make Whores, a Bawd. Hold up you Sluts
Your Aprons mountant; you are not Othable,
Although I know you'll swear, terribly swear
Into strong shudders, and to heavenly Agues
The immortal Gods that hear you. Spare your Oaths:
Isle trust to your Conditions, be whores still.
And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
Be strong in Whore, allure him, burn him up,
Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
And be no turne-coats: yet may your pains six months
Be quite contrary, And Thatch
Your poor thin Roofs with burdens of the dead,
(Some that were hanged) no matter:
Wear them, betray with them; Whore still,
Paint till a horse may mire upon your face:
A pox of wrinkles.
Well, more Gold, what then?
Believe it that we'll do any thing for Gold.
Consumptions sow
In hollow bones of man, strike their sharpe shins,
And mar men's spurring. Crack the Lawyers voice,
That he may never more false Title plead,
Nor sound his Quillers shrilly: Hoar the Flamen,
That scold'st against the quality of flesh,
And not believes himself. Down with the Nose,
Down with it flat, take the Bridge quite away
Of him, that his particular to foresee
Smells from the general weal. Make curld'pate Ruffians bald
And let the vnscarr'd Braggarts of the War
Derive some pain from you. Plague all,
That your Activity may defeat and quell
The source of all Erection. There's more Gold.
Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
And ditches grave you all.
More counsel with more Money, bounteous Timon.
More whore, more Mischief first, I have go∣uen you earnest.
Strike up the Drum towards Athens, farewell Timon: if I thrive well, Isle visit thee again.
If I hope well, Isle never see thee more.
I never did thee harm.
Yes, thou spoke well of me.
Call thou that harm?
Men daily find it. Get thee away,
And take thy Beagles with thee.
We but offend him, strike.
That Nature being sick of mans unkindness
Should yet be hungry: Common Mother, thou
Whose womb vnmeasureable, and infinite breast
Teemes and feeds all: whose selfsame Mettle
Whereof thy proud Child (arrogant man) is puffed,
Engenders the black Toad, and Adder blew,
The gilded Newt, and eyeless venomed Worm,
With all the abhorred Births below Crisp Heaven,
Whereon Hyperions quickening fire doth shine:
Yield him, who all the humane Sons do hate,
From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root:
Enseare thy Fertile and Conceptious womb,
Let it no more bring out ungrateful man.
Go great with Tigers, Dragons, Wolves, and Bears,
Teem with new Monsters, whom thy upward face
Hath to the Marbled Mansion all aboue
Never presented. O, a Root, dear thanks:
Dry up thy Marrowes, Vines, and Plough-torne Leas,
Whereof ungrateful man with Licourish draughts
And Morsels Vnctious, greases his pure mind,
That from it all Consideration slips —
More man? Plague, plague.
I was directed hither. Men report,
Thou dost affect my Manners, and dost use them.
It is then, because thou dost not keep a dog
Whom I would imitate. Consumption catch thee.
This is in thee a Nature but infected,
A poor unmanly Melancholy sprung
From change of future. Why this Spade? this place?
This Slaue-like Habit, and these looks of Care?
Thy Flatterers yet wear Silk, drink Wine, lye soft,
Hug their diseased Perfumes, and have forgot
That ever Timon was. Shame not these Woods,
By pa•cing on the cunning of a Carper.
Be thou a Flatterer now, and seek to thrive
By that which he's undone thee; hindge thy knee,
And let his very breath whom thou'lt observe
Blow off thy Cap: praise his most vicious strain,
And call it excellent: thou wast told thus:
Thou gau'st thine ears (like Tipsters, that bad welcome)
To Knaves, and all approachers: It is most just
That thou turn Rascal, had thou wealth again,
Rascals should have it. Do not assume my likeness.
Were I like thee, I'd throw away my self.
Thou hast cast away thy self, being like thy self
A Madman so long, now a Fool: what think
That the bleak ayre, thy boisterous Chamberlain
Will put thy shirt on warm? Will these moist Trees,
That have out-liu'd the Eagle, page thy heals
And skip when thou point out? Will the cold brooke
Candied with Ice, Caudle thy Morning taste
To cure thy o're-nights surfeit? Call the Creatures,
Whose naked Natures live in all the spite
Of wreakful Heaven, whose bare vnhoused Trunks▪
To the conflicting Elements exposed
Answer mere Nature: bid them flatter thee.
O thou shalt find.
A Fool of thee: depart.
I love thee better now, then ere I did.
I hate thee worse.
Why?
Thou flatter misery.
I flatter not, but say thou art a Caitiff.
Why dost thou seek me out?
To vex thee.
Always a Villains Office, or a Fools.
Dost please thy self in it?
I.
What, a Knave too?
If thou did put this sour cold habit on
To castigate thy pride, it were well: but thou
Dost it enforcedly: You would Courtier be again
Were thou not Beggar: willing misery
Out-liues: uncertain pomp, is crowned before:
The one is filling still, never complete:
The other, at high wish: best state Contentlesse,
Hath a distracted and most wretched being,
Worse then the worst, Content.
Thou should desire to dye, being miserable.
Not by his breath, that is more miserable.
Thou art a Slave, whom Fortunes tender arm
With favour never clasped: but bred a Dog.
Had thou like vs from our first swath proceeded,
The sweet degrees that this brief world affords,
To such as may the passive drugs of it
Freely command: thou would have plunged thy self
In general Riot, melted down thy youth
In different beds of Lust, and never learned
The Icy precepts of respect, but followed
The Sugared game before thee. But my self,
Who had the world as my Confectionery,
The mouths, the tongues, the eyes, and hearts of men,
At duty more then I could frame employment;
That numberless upon me stuck, as leaves
Do on the Oak, have with one Winters brush
Fell from their boughs, and left me open, bare,
For every storm that blows. I to bear this,
That never knew but better, is some burden:
Thy Nature, did commence in sufferance, Time
Hath made thee hard in it. Why should you hate Men?
They never flattered thee. What hast thou given?
If thou wilt curse; thy Father (that poor rag)
Must be thy subject; who in spite put stuff
To some shee-Begger, and compounded thee
Poor Rogue, hereditary. Hence, be gone,
If thou had not been borne the worst of men,
Thou had been a Knave and Flatterer.
Art thou proud yet?
I, that I am not thee.
I, that I was no Prodigal.
I, that I am one now.
Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
I'd give thee leave to hang It. Get thee gone:
That the whole life of Athens were in this,
Thus would I eat it.
Here, I will mend thy Feast.
First mend thy company, take away thy self.
So I shall mend mine own, by' the lack of thine
It is not well mended so, it is but botched;
If not, I would it were.
What would thou have to Athens?
Thee thither in a whirlwind: if thou wilt,
Tell them there I have Gold, look, so I have.
Here is no use for Gold.
The best, and truest:
For here it sleeps, and do's no hired harm.
Where lie a nights Timon?
Under that's aboue me.
Where feed thou adays Apemantus?
Where my stomach finds meat, or rather where I eat it.
Would poison were obedient, &amp; knew my mind
Where would thou send it?
To sauce thy dishes.
The middle of Humanity thou never knew, but the extremity of both ends. When thou wast in thy Gilt, and thy Perfume, they mocked thee for too much Curiosity: in thy Rags thou know none, but art de∣spiced for the contrary. There's a meddler for thee, eat it.
On what I hate, I feed not.
Dost hate a Meddler?
I, though it look like thee.
And the had hated Meddlers sooner, you should have loved thy self better now. What man did thou ever know unthrift, that was beloved after his means?
Who without those means thou talk of, did thou ever know beloved?
My self.
I understand thee: thou had some means to keep a Dog.
What things in the world can thou nearest compare to thy Flatterers?
Women nearest, but men: men are the things themselves. What would thou do with the world A∣pemantus, if it lay in thy power?
Give it the Beasts, to be rid of the men.
Would thou have thy self fall in the confu∣zion of men, and remain a Beast with the Beasts.
I Timon.
A beastly Ambition, which the Gods grant thee to attain to. If thou were the Lyon, the Fox would beguile thee▪ if thou were the Lamb, the Fox would eat thee: if thou were the Fox, the Lion would suspect thee, when peradventure thou were accused by the Ass: If thou were the Ass, thy dullness would torment thee; and still thou liu'dst but as a Breakfast to the Wolf. If thou were the Wolf, thy greediness would afflict thee, &amp; oft thou should hazard thy life for thy dinner. Were thou the Unicorn, pride and wrath would confound thee, and make thine own self the conquest of thy fury. Were thou a Bear, thou would be killed by the Horse: were thou a Horse, thou would be seized by the Leo∣pard: were thou a Leopard, thou were Germane to the Lion, and the spots of thy Kindred, were Jurors on thy life. All thy safety were remotion, and thy defence ab∣sense. What Beast coldest thou bee, that were not sub∣jest to a Beast: and what a Beast art thou already, that see not thy loss in transformation.
If thou coldest please me
With speaking to me, thou might
Have hit upon it here.
The Commonwealth of Athens, is become
A Forest of Beasts.
How he's the Ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the City.
Yonder comes a Poet and a Painter:
The plague of Company light upon thee:
I will fear to catch it, and give way.
When I know not what else to do,
Isle see thee again.
When there is nothing living but thee,
Thou shalt be welcome.
I had rather be a Beggars Dog,
Then Apemantus.
Thou art the Cap
Of all the Fools alive.
Would thou were clean enough
To spit upon.
A plague on thee,
Thou art too bad to curse.
All Villains
That do stand by thee, are pure.
There is no Leprosy,
But what thou speak.
If I name thee, Isle beat thee;
But I should infect my hands.
I would my tongue
Could rot them off.
Away thou issue of a mangy dog,
Choler does kill me,
That thou art alive, I swooned to see thee.
Would thou would burst.
Away thou tedious Rogue, I am sorry I shall lose a stone by thee.
Beast.
Slave.
Toad.
Rogue, Rogue, Rogue.
I am sick of this false world, and will love nought
But even the mere necessities upon it:
Then Timon presently prepare thy grave:
Lye where the light Some of the Sea may beat
Thy grave stone daily, make thine Epitaph,
That death in me, at others lives may laugh.
O thou sweet King-killer, and dear divorce
Twixt natural Sun and fire: thou bright defilet
of Himens purest bed, thou valiant Mars,
Thou ever, young, fresh, loved, and delicate wooer,
Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated Snow
That lies on Deans lap.
Thou visible God,
That souldrest close Impossibilities,
And make them kiss; that speak with every Tongue
To every purpose: O thou touch of hearts,
Think thy slaue-man rebels, and by thy virtue
Set them into confounding odds, that Beasts
May have the world in Empire.
Would it were so,
But not till I am dead. Isle say the hast Gold:
Thou wilt be thronged too shortly.
Thronged too?
I.
Thy back I prithee.
Live, and love thy misery.
Long live so, and so dye. I am quit.
Mo things like men,
Eat Timon, and abhor then.
Where should he have this Gold? It is some poor Fragment, some slender Ort of his remainder: the mere want of Gold, and the falling from of his Friends, drove him into this Melancholy.
It is noised
He hath a mass of Treasure.
Let vs make the assay upon him, if he care not for it, he will supply vs easily: if he covetously reserve it, how shall's get it?
True: for he bears it not about him:
It is hid.
Is not this hee?
Where?
It is his description.
He? I know him.
Save thee Timon.
Now Thieves.
Soldiers, not Thieves.
Both too, and women's Sons.
We are not Thieves, but men
That much do want.
Your greatest want is, you want much of meat:
Why should you want? Behold, the Earth hath Roots:
Within this Mile break forth a hundred Springs:
The Oaks bear Mast, the Briers Scarlet Heps,
The bounteous Huswife Nature, on each bush,
Lays her full Mess before you. Want? why Want?
We cannot live on Grass, on Berries, Water,
As Beasts, and Birds, and Fishes.
Nor on the Beasts themselves, the Birds &amp; Fishes,
You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con,
That you are Thieves professed: that you work not
In holier shapes: For there is boundless Theft
In limited Professions. Rascal Thieves
Heere's Gold. Go, suck the subtle blood of the Grape,
Till the high Feauor sees your blood to froth,
And so scope hanging. Trust not the Physician,
His Antidotes are poison, and he slays
More then you Rob: Take wealth, and lives together,
Do Villain do, since you protest to do it.
Like Workmen, Isle example you with Thievery:
The Suns a Thief, and with his great attraction
Robs the vast Sea. The Moons an arrant Thief,
And her pale fire, she snatches from the Sun.
The Sea• a Thief, whose liquid Surge, resolves
The Moon into Salt tears. The Earth's a Thief,
That feeds and breeds by a composture stolen
From general excrement: each thing's a Thief.
The Laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
He's vncheck'd Theft. Love not your selves, away,
Rob one another, there's more Gold, cut throats,
All that you meet are Thieves: to Athens go,
Break open shops, nothing can you steal
But Thieves do loose it: steal less, for this I give you,
And Gold confound you howsoever: Amen.
Has almost charmed me from my Profession, by per∣swading me to it.
It is in the malice of mankind, that he thus advises vs not to have vs thrive in our mystery.
Isle believe him as an Enemy,
And give over my Trade.
Let vs first see peace in Athens, there is no time so miserable, but a man may be true.
Oh you Gods!
Is yon'd despised and ruinous man my Lord?
Full of decay and failing? Oh Monument
And wonder of good deeds, evilly bestowed!
What an alteration of Honour has desperate want made?
What vilder thing upon the earth, then Friends,
Who can bring Noblest minds, to basest ends.
How rarely does it meet with this times guise,
When man was wished to love his Enemies:
Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
Those that would mischief me, then those that doo.
Has caught me in his eye, I will present my honest grief
unto him; and as my Lord, still serve him with my life.
My dearest Master.
Away: what art thou?
Have you forgot me, Sir?
Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men.
Then, if thou grunt'st, the art a man.
I have forgot thee.
An honest poor servant of yours.
Then I know thee not:
I never had honest man about me, I all
I kept were Knaves, to serve in meat to Villains.
The Gods are witness,
Neu'r did poor Steward wear a truer grief
For his undone Lord, then mine eyes for you.
What, dost thou weep?
Come nearer, then I love thee
Because thou art a woman, and disclaim
Flinty mankind: whose eyes do never give,
But thorough Lust and Laughter: pittie's sleeping:
Strange times yt weep with laughing, not with weeping.
I beg of you to know me, good my Lord,
To accept my grief, and whilst this poor wealth lasts,
To entertain me as your Steward still.
Had I a Steward
So true, so just, and now so comfortable?
It almost turns my dangerous Nature wilde.
Let me behold thy face: Surely, this man
Was borne of woman.
Forgive my general, and exceptlesse rashness
You perpetual sober Gods. I do proclaim
One honest man: Mistake me not, but one:
No more I pray, and hoe's a Steward.
How fine would I have hated all mankind,
And thou redeem thy self. But all save thee,
I fell with Curses.
Me thinks thou art more honest now, then wise:
For, by oppressing and betraying me,
Thou might have sooner got another Service:
For many so arrive at second Masters,
Upon their first Lords neck. But tell me true,
(For I must ever doubt, though ne'er so sure)
Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
If not a Vsuring kindness, and as rich men deal Gifts,
Expecting in return twenty for one?
No my most worthy Master, in whose breast
Doubt, and suspect (alas) are placed too late:
You should have feared false times, when you did Feast.
Suspect still comes, where an estate is least.
That which I show, Heaven knows, is merely Love,
Duty, and Zeal, to your unmatched mind;
Care of your Food and Living, and believe it,
My most Honoured Lord,
For any benefit that points to me,
Either in hope, or present, I'd exchange
For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
To requite me, by making rich your self.
Look thee, it is so: thou singly honest man,
Here take: the Gods out of my misery
He's sent thee Treasure. Go, live rich and happy,
But thus conditioned: Thou shalt build from men:
Hate all, curse all, show Charity to none,
But let the famished flesh slide from the Bone,
Ere thou relieve the Beggar. Give to dogs
What thou deny to men. Let Prisons swallow 'em,
Debts wither'em to nothing, be men like blasted woods
And may Diseases like up their false bloods,
And so farewell, and thrive.
O let me stay, and comfort you, my Master.
If thou hat'st Curses
Stay not: fly, whilst thou art blessed and free:
Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.
As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where he abides.
What's to be thought of him?
Does the Rumour hold for true,
That hoe's so full of Gold?
Certain.
Alcibiades reports it: Phrinica and Timandylo
Had Gold of him. He likewise enriched
Poor straggling Soldiers, with great quantity.
It is said, he gave unto his Steward
A mighty sum.
Then this breaking of his,
He's been but a Try for his Friends?
Nothing else:
You shall see him a Palm in Athens again,
And flourish with the highest:
Therefore, it is not amiss, we tender our loves
To him, in this supposed distress of his:
It will show honestly in vs,
And is very likely, to load our purposes
With what they travail for,
If it be a just and true report, that goes
Of his having.
What have you now
To present unto him?
Nothing at this time
But my Visitation: only I will promise him
An excellent Piece.
I must serve him so too;
Tell him of an intent that's coming toward him.
Good as the best.
Promising, is the very Ayre of the Time;
It opens the eyes of Expectation.
Performance, is ever the duller for his act,
And but in the plainer and simpler kind of people,
The deed of Saying is quite out of use.
To Promise, is most Courtly and fashionable;
Performance, is a kind of Will or Testament
Which argues a great sickness in his judgment
That makes it.
Excellent Workman,
Thou can not paint a man so bad
As is thy self.
I am thinking
What I shall say I have provided for him:
It must be a personating of himself:
A Satire against the softness of Prosperity,
With a Discovery of the infinite Flatteries
That follow youth and opulence.
Must thou needs
Stand for a Villain in thine own Work?
Wilt thou whip thine own faults in other men?
Do so, I have Gold for thee.
Nay let's seek him.
Then do we sin against our own estate,
When we may profit meet, and come too late.
True:
When the day serves before blacke-corner'd night;
Find what thou want, by free and offered light.
Come.
Isle meet you at the turn:
What a Gods Gold, that he is worshipped
In a baser Temple, then where Swine feed?
It is thou that rig the Bark, and plow'st the Some,
Settle admired reverence in a Slave,
To thee be worshipped, and thy Saints for aye:
Be crowned with Plagues, that thee alone obey.
Fit I meet them.
Hail worthy Timon.
Our late Noble Master.
Have I once lived
To see two honest men?
Sir:
Having often of your open Bounty tasted,
Hearing you were retired, your Friends fallen off,
Whose thankless Natures (O abhorred Spirits)
Not all the Whips of Heaven, are large enough▪
What, to you,
Whose Starre-like Nobleness gave life and influence
To their whole being? I am rapt, and cannot cover
The monstrous bulk of this Ingratitude
With any size of words.
Let it go,
Naked men may see it the better:
You that are honest, by being what you are,
Make them best seen, and known.
He, and my self
Have travailed in the great shower of your gifts,
And sweetly felt it.
I, you are honest man.
We are hither come
To offer you our service.
Most honest men:
Why how shall I requite you?
Can you eat Roots, and drink cold water, no?
What we can do,
We'll do to do you service.
Y' are honest men,
Y' have heard that I have Gold,
I am sure you have, speak truth, y' are honest men.
So it is said my Noble Lord, but therefore
Came not my Friend, nor I.
Good honest men: Thou draw a counterfeit
Best in all Athens, the art indeed the best,
Thou counterfeit most lively.
So, so, my Lord.
Even so sir as I say. And for thy fiction,
Why thy Verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth,
That thou art even Natural in thine Art.
But for all this (my honest Natured friends)
I must needs say you have a little fault,
Marry it is not monstrous in you, neither wish I
You take much pains to mend.
Beseech your Honour
To make it known to vs.
You'll take it ill.
Most thankfully, my Lord.
Will you indeed?
Doubt it not worthy Lord.
There's never a one of you but trusts a Knave,
That mightily deceives you.
Do we, my Lord?
I, and you hear him cog,
See him dissemble,
Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
Keep in your bosom, yet remain assured
That he's a made-vp-Villaine.
I know none such, my Lord.
Nor I.
Look you,
I love you well, Isle give you Gold
Rid me these Villains from your companies;
Hang them, or stab them, drown them in a draught,
Confound them by some course, and come to me,
Isle give you Gold enough.
Name them my Lord, let's know them.
You that way, and you this:
But two in Company:
Each man a part, all single, and alone,
Yet an arch Villain keeps him company:
If where thou art, two Villains shall not be,
Come not near him. If thou would not recide
But where one Villain is, then him abandon.
Hence, pack, there's Gold, you came for Gold ye slaves:
You have work for me; there's payment, hence,
You are an Alcumist, make Gold of that:
Out Rascal dogs.
It is vain that you would speak with Timon:
For he is set so only to himself,
That nothing but himself, which looks like man,
Is friendly with him.
Bring vs to his Cave.
It is our part and promise to the Athenians
To speak with Timon.
At all times alike
Men are not still the same: it was Time and Griefs
That framed him thus. Time with his fairer hand,
Offering the Fortunes of his former days,
The former man may make him: bring vs to him
And chanced it as it may.
Here is his Cave:
Peace and content be here. Lord Timon, Timon,
Look out, and speak to Friends: The Athenians
By two of their most reverend Senate greet thee:
Speak to them Noble Timon.
Thou Sun that comforts burn,
Speak and be hanged:
For each true word, a blister, and each false
Be as a Cantherizing to the root of the Tongue,
Consuming it with speaking.
Worthy Timon.
Of none but such as you,
And you of Timon.
The Senators of Athens, greet thee Timon.
I thank them,
And would send them back the plague,
Could I but catch it for them.
O forget
What we are sorry for our selves in thee:
The Senators, with one consent of love,
Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought
On special Dignities, which vacant lye
For thy best use and wearing.
They confess
Toward thee, forgetfulness too general gross;
Which now the public Body, which doth seldom
Play the re-canter, feeling in it self
A lack of Timons aid, hath since withal
Of it own fall, restraining aid to Timon,
And send forth vs, to make their sorrowed render,
Together, with a recompense more fruitful
Then their offence can weigh down by the Dram,
I even such heaps and sums of Love and Wealth,
As shall to thee blot out, what wrongs were theirs,
And write in thee the figures of their love,
Eu• to read them thine.
You witch me in it;
Surprise me to the very brink of tears;
Lend me a Fools heart, and a women's eyes,
And Isle be weep these comforts, worthy Senators.
Therefore so please thee to return with vs,
And of our Athens, thine and ours to take
The Captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
Allowed with absolute power, and thy good name
Live with Authority: so soon we shall drive back
Of Alcibiades the approaches wild,
Who like a Bore too savage, doth root up
His Countries peace.
And shakes his threatening Sword
Against the walls of Athens.
Therefore Timon.
Well sir, I will: therefore I will sir thus:
If Alcibiades kill my Countrymen,
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
That Timon cares not. But if he sack fair Athens,
And take our goodly aged men by' the Beards,
Giving our holy Virgins to the stain
Of contumelious, beastly, mad-brain'd war:
Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it,
In pity of our aged, and our youth,
I cannot choose but tell him that I care not,
And let him tak't at worst: For their Knives care not,
While you have throats to answer. For my self,
There's not a whittle, in the unruly Camp,
But I do prize it at my love, before
The reuerends Throat in Athens. So I leave you
To the protection of the prosperous Gods,
As Thieves to Keepers.
Stay not, ell's in vain.
Why I was writing of my Epitaph,
It will be seen to morrow. My long sickness
Of Health, and Living, now begins to mend,
And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still,
Be Alcibiades your plague; you his,
And last so long enough.
We speak in vain.
But yet I love my Country, and am not
One that rejoices in the common wrack,
As common bruit doth put it.
That's well spoke.
Commend me to my loving Countrymen.
These words become your lips as they pass tho∣row them.
And enter in our ears, like great Triumphers
In their applauding gates.
Commend me to them,
And tell them, that to ease them of their griefs,
Their fears of Hostile strokes, their Aches losses,
Their pangs of Love, with other incident throws
That Natures fragile Vessel doth sustain
In lifes uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them,
Isle teach them to prevent wilde Alcibiades wrath.
I like this well, he will return again.
I have a Tree which grows here in my Close,
That mine own use invites me to cut down,
And shortly must I fell it. Tell my Friends,
Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree,
From high to low throughout, that who so please
To stop Affliction, let him take his haste;
Come hither ere my Tree hath felt the Axe,
And hang himself. I pray you do my greeting.
Trouble him no further, thus you still shall Find him.
Come not to me again, but say to Athens,
Timon hath made his everlasting Mansion
Upon the Beached Verge of the salt Flood,
Who once a day with his embossed Froth▪
The turbulent Surge shall cover; thither come,
And let my gravestone be your Oracle:
Lips, let four words go by, and Language end:
What is amiss, Plague and Infection mend.
Graves only be men's works, and Death their gain;
Sun, hide thy Beams, Timon hath done his Reign.
His discontents are unremoveably coupled to Na∣ture.
Our hope in him is dead: let vs return,
And strain what other means is left unto vs
In our dear peril.
It requires swift foot.
Thou hast painfully discovered: are his Files
As full as thy report?
I have spoke the least.
Besides his expedition promises present approach.
We stand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.
I met a Currier, one mine ancient Friend,
Whom though in general part we were opposed,
Yet our old love made a particular force,
And made vs speak like Friends. This man was riding
From Alcibiades to Timons Cave,
With Letters of entreaty, which imported
His Fellowship in the cause against your City,
In part for his sake moved.
Here come our Brothers.
No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect,
The Enemies Drum is heard, and fearful scouring
Doth choke the ayre with dust: In, and prepare,
Ours is the fall I fear, our Foes the Snare.
By all description this should be the place.
Whose here? Speak hoe. No answer? What is this?
Tymon is dead, who hath out-stretcht his span,
Some Beast read this; There do's not live a Man.
Dead sure, and this his Grave, what's on this Tomb,
I cannot read: the Character Isle take with wax,
Our Captain hath in every Figure skill;
An aged Interpreter, though young in days:
Before proud Athens hoe's set down by this,
Whose fall the mark of his Ambition is.
Sound to this Coward, and lascivious Town,
Our terrible approach.
Till now you have gone on, and filled the time
With all Licentious measure, making your wills
The scope of Justice. Till now, my self and such
As slept within the shadow of your power
Have wandered with our traversed Arms, and breathed
Our sufferance vainly: Now the time is flush,
When crouching Marrow in the bearer strong
Cries (of it self) no more; Now breathless wrong,
Shall sit and pant in your great Chairs of ease,
And purse Insolence shall break his wind
With fear and horrid flight.
Noble, and young;
When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
Ere thou had power, or we had cause of fear,
We sent to thee, to give thy rages Balm,
To wipe out our Ingratitude, with Loves
Aboue their quantity.
So did we woo
Transformed Timon, to our Cities love
By humble Message, and by promised means:
We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
The common stroke of war.
These walls of ours,
Were not erected by rheir hands, from whom
You have received your grief: Nor are they such,
That these great Towers, Trophies, &amp; Schools should fall
For private faults in them.
Nor are they living
Who were the motives that you first went out,
(Shame that they wanted, cunning in excess)
Hath broke their hearts. March, Noble Lord,
Into our City with thy Banners spread,
By decimation and a tythed death;
If thy Revenges hunger for that Food
Which Nature loathes, take thou the destined tenth,
And by the hazard of the spotted dye,
Let dye the spotted.
All have not offended:
For those that were, it is not square to take
On those that are, Revenge: Crimes, like Lands
Are not inherited, then dear Countryman,
Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage,
Spare thy Athenian Cradle, and those Kin
Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall
With those that have offended, like a Shepherd,
Approach the Fold, and cull the infected forth,
But kill not altogether.
What thou wilt,
Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile,
Then hew too't, with thy Sword.
Set but thy foot
Against our rampyr'd gates, and they shall op:
So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,
To say thou't enter Friendly.
Throw thy Glove,
Or any Token of thine Honour else,
That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress,
And not as our Confusion: All thy Powers
Shall make their harbour in our Town, till wee
Have sealed thy full desire.
Then there's my Glove,
Defend and open your uncharged Ports,
Those Enemies of Timons, and mine own
Whom you your selves shall set out for reproof,
Fall and no more; and to atone your fears
With my more Noble meaning, not a man
Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream
Of Regular Justice in your Cities bounds,
But shall be remedied to your public Laws
At heaviest answer.
It is most Nobly spoken.
Descend, and keep your words.
My Noble General, Timon is dead,
Entombed upon the very hem of the Sea,
And on his Gravestone, this Insculpture which
With wax I brought away: whose soft Impression
Interprets for my poor ignorance.
Here lies a wretched Coarse, of wretched Soul bereft,
Seek not my name: A Plague consume you, wicked Caitiffs left:
Here lye I Timon, who alive, all living men did hate,
Pass by, and curse thy fill, but pass and stay not here thy gate.
These well express in thee thy latter spirits:
Though thou abhorred in vs our humane griefs.
Scornd'st our Brains flow, and those our droplets, which
From niggard Nature fall; yet Rich Conceit
Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
On thy low Grave, on faults forgiven. Dead
Is Noble Timon, of whose Memory
Hereafter more. Bring me into your City,
And I will use the Olive, with my Sword:
Make war breed peace; make peace stint war, make each
Prescribe to other, as each others Leach.
Let our Drums strike.

SIrrah Raph, my young Mistress is in such a pit∣tifull passionate humour for the long absence of her love,
Why can you blame her, why, apples han∣ging longer on the tree then when they are ripe, makes so many fallings. viz Mad wenches because they are not gathered in time, are fine to drop of them selves, and then tic Common you know for e∣very man to take em up.
Mass thou says true, Tic common indeed, but sirah, is neither our young moister returned, nor our fellow Sam come from London?
Neither of either, as the Puritan bawd says.
Slit I hear Sam, Sam's come, her's Tarry, come, in faith now my nose itches for news
and so doe's mine elbow.
Sam calls within, where are you there?
Boy look you walk my horse with discretion, I have rid him simply, I warrant his skin sticks to his back with very heate, if a should catch cold &amp; get the Cough of the Lunges I were well served, were I not? What Raph and Oliuer.
Honest fellow Sam welcome in faith, what tricks hast thou brought from London.
You see I am hanged after the truest fashion, three hats, and two glasses, bobbing upon em, two rebato wires upon my breast, a capcase by my side, a brush at my back, an Almanac in my pocket, &amp; three bal∣lats in my Codpeece, nay I am the true picture of a Common serving-man.
Isle swear thou art, Thou moist set up when thou wilt, Ther's many a one begins with less I can tel thee that proves a rich man ere he dyes, but whats the news from London Sam.
I thats well sed, whats the news from Lone∣don Sirrah.
My young mistress keeps such a puling for his love.
Why? the more fool she, I, the more ninny hammer she.
Why Sam why?
Why hes married to another Long ago▪
I faith ye I est.
Why, did you not know that till now? why, hes married, beats his wife, and has two or three children by her: for you must note that any woman bears the more when she is beaten.
I thats true for she bears the blows.
Sirrah Sam, I would not for two years wages, my young mistress knew so much, shed run upon the left hand of her wit, and ne'er be here own woman again.
And I think she was blessed in her Cradle, that he never came in her bed, why hee has consumed al, pound his lands, and made his university brother stand in wax for him, Theirs a fine phrase for a scriue∣ner, puh he owes more then his skins worth.
Is it possible.
Nay Isle tell you moreover he calls his wife whore as familiarly as one would cal Mal &amp; Dol, and his i will∣drone bastards as naturally as can bee, but what have we here, I thought it was somewhat pulled down my breeches: I quite forgot my two potingsticks, these came from London, now any thing is good heer that comes from London.
I, far fetched you know:
But speak in your conscience in faith, have not we as good potingsticks ith Country as need to be put ith fire, The mind of a thing is all, The mind of a thing's all, and as thou said even now, far fetched is the best things for Ladies.
I, and for waiting gentle women to.
But Ralph, what, is our beer sower this thunder?
No no it holds countenance yet.
Why then follow me, Isle teach you the finest humour to be drunk in, I learned it at London last week.
I faith lets hear it, lets hear it.
The bravest humour, twold do a man good to
bee drunk in it, they call it knighting in London, when they drink upon their knees.
Faith that's excellent.
Come follow me, Isle give you all the degrees ont in order.
What will become of vs? all will away,
my husband never ceases in expense,
Both to consume his credit and his house?
And tic set down by heavens just decree,
That Riots child must needs be beggary,
Are these the virtues that his youth did promise,
Dice, and voluptuous meetings, midnight Revels,
Taking his bed with surfeits. Ill beseeming
The ancient honour of his hows and name:
And this not all: but that which kills me most,
When he recounts his Losses and false fortunes,
The weakness of his state so much dejected,
Not as a man repentant: but half mad:
His fortunes cannot answer his expense:
〈◊〉 sits and sullenly lockes up his Arms,
Forgetting heaven looks downward, which makes him
Appear so dreadful, that he frights my heart,
Walks heavily, as if his soul were earth:
Not penitent for those his sins are past:
But vexed, his money cannot make them last.
A fearful melancholy ungodly sorrow.
Oh yonder he comes, now in despite of ills
Isle speak to him, and I will hear him speak,
And do my best to drive it from his heart.
Pox oath Last throw, it made
Five hundred Angels vanish from my sight,
Ime damned, Ime damned: the Angels have forsook me
Nay tic certainly true: for he that has no coin
Is damned in this world: hoe's gon, hoe's gon.
Dear husband.
Oh! most punishment of all I have a wife,
I doe entreat you as you love your soul,
Tell me the cause of this your discontent.
A vengeance strip thee naked, thou art cause,
Effect, quality, property▪ thou, thou, thou.
Bad, turned to worse?
both beggary of the soul, as of the body.
And so much unlike him self at first,
As if some vexed spirit
Had got his form upon him.
He comes again:
He says I am the cause, I never yet
Spoke less then words of duty, and of love.
If marriage be honourable, then Cuckolds are honourable, for they cannot be made without marri∣age.
Fool: what meant I to marry to get beggars? now must my eldest son be a knave or nothing, he cannot live vppot'h fool, for he will have no land to maintain him: that mortgage sits like a snaffle upon mine inheritance, and makes me chaw upon Iron. My second son must be a promooter, and my third a thief, or an vnderputter, a slave pander.
Oh beggary, beggary, to what base uses dost thou put a man.
I think the Devil scorns to be a bawd.
He bears himself more proudly, has more care on's credit.
Base slavish abject filthy poverty.
Good sir; by all our vows I doe beseech you,
Show me the true cause of your discontent?
Money, money, money, and thou must supply me.
Alas, I am the lest cause of your discontent,
Yet what is mine, either in rings or Jewels
Use to your own desire, but I beseech you,
As you're a gentleman by many bloods,
Though I my self be out of your respect
Think on the state of these three lovely boys
You have bin father to.
Puh Bastards, bastards, bastards, begot in tricks, begot in tricks.
Heaven knows how those words wrong me? but I may,
••dure these griefs among a thousand more.
O•, call to mind your lands already morgadge,
Your self wound into debts, your hopeful brother,
At the university in bonds for you
Like to be ceasd upon. And
Ha done thou harlot,
Whom though for fashion sake I married,
I never could abide? think thou thy words
Shall kill my pleasures, fall of to thy friends,
Thou and thy bastards beg: I will not bate
A whit in humour? midnight still I love you,
And revel in your Company; Curbed in,
Shall it be said in all societies,
That I broke custom, that I flagd in money,
No, those thy jewels, I will play as freely
As when my state was fullest.
Be it so.
Nay I protest, and take that for an earnest,
I will for ever hold thee in contempt,
And never touch the sheets that cover thee,
But be divorced in bed till thou consent,
Thy dowry shall be sold to give new life
Unto those pleasures which I most affect
Sir doe but turn a gentle eye on me,
And what the law shall give me leave to do
You shall command.
Look it be done, shall I want dust &amp; like a slave
wear nothing in my pockets but my hands
To fill them up with nails.
Oh much against my blood, let it be done,
I was never made to be a looker on:
A bawd to dice? Isle shake the drabs my self
And make em yield, I say look it be done.
I take my leave it shall.
Speedily, speedily, I hate the very hour I chose a wife a trouble trouble, three children like three evils hang upon me, fie, fie, fie, strumpet, &amp; bastards, strum∣pet and bastards.
Still doe those loathsome thoughts Iare on
your tongue.
Your self to stain the honour of your wife,
Nobly descend, those whom men call mad
Endanger others; but hoe's more then mad
That wounds himself, whose own words do pro∣claim
Scandals unjust, to soil his better name:
It is not fit I pray forsake it.
Good sir, let modesty reprove you.
Let honest kindness sway so much with you.
God den, I thank you sir, how do you, adieu,
Ime glad to see you, farewell Instructions, Admoniti∣once.
How now sir what wud you,
Only to certify you sir, that my mistress was met by the way, by thē who were sent for her up to Londō by her honourable uncle, your worships late guardian.
So sir, then she is gon and so may you be:
But let her look that the thing be done she wots of: or hell will stand more pleasāt thē her house at home.
Well or ill met I care not.
No nor I.
I am come with confidence to chide you.
Who me? chide me? do it finely then: let it not move me, for if thou chidst me angry I shall strike.
Strike thine own folly, for it is they
Deserve to be well beaten, we are now in private,
Ther's none but thou and I? you're fond &amp; peevish,
An unclean rioter, thy lands and Credit
Lie now both sick of a consumption
I am sorry for thee: that man spends with shame
That with his retches does consume his name:
And such art thou.
Peace.
No thou shalt hear me further:
Thy fathers and forefathers worthy honours,
Which were our country monuments: our grace,
Follies in thee begin now to deface:
The spring time of thy youth did fairly promise
such a most fruitful summer to thy friends
It scarce can enter into men's beliefs,
Such dearth should hang on thee, wee that see it,
Are sorry to believe it: in thy change,
This voice into all places will be hurled:
thou and the devil has deceived the world.
Isle not endure thee.
but of all the worst:
Thy virtuous wife right honourably allied
Thou hast proclaimed a strumpet.
Nay then I know thee,
Thou art her champion thou, her private friend,
The party you wot on.
Oh ignoble thought.
I am past my patient blood, shall I stand idle
and see my reputation touched to death.
Ta's galde you this, has it.
No monster, I will prove
My thoughts did only tend to virtuous love,
Love of her virtues? there it goes:
Base spirit,
To lay thy hate upon the fruitful
Honour of thine own bed.
Oh,
Woult thou yield it yet?
Sir, Sir, I have not done with you,
I hope nor ne'er shall doe.
Have you got tricks are you in cunning with me.
No plain and right.
He needs no cunning that for truth doth fight.
Hard fortune, am I leveled with the ground?
Now sir you lie at mercy,
I you slave.
Alas that hate should bring vs to our grave:
You see my sword's not thirsty for your life,
I am sorrier for your woonde then your self,
You're of a virtuous house, show virtuous deeds
Tic not your honour, tic your folly bleeds,
Much good has bin expected in your life,
Cancel not all men's hopes, you have a wife
Kind and obedient: heap not wrongful shame
On her your posterity, let only sin be sore,
And by this fall, rise never to fall more▪
And so I leave you.
Has the dog left me then
After his tooth hath left me? oh my hart
Would fine leap after him, revenge I say,
Ime mad to be revenged, my strumpet wife:
It is thy quarrel that rips thus my flesh,
And makes my breast spit blood, but thou shalt bleed:
Vanquished? got down? unable even to speak?
Surely tic want of money makes men weak,
I? it was that orethrew me, It ne'er bin down else.
Faith mistress If it might not bee presumtion
In me to tell you so, for his excuse
You had small reason, knowing his abuse,
I grant I had, but alas,
Why should our faults at home be spread abroad:
Tic grief enough within doors: At first sight
Mine Uncle could run ore his prodigal life
As perfectly, as if his serious eye
Had nombred all his follies:
Knew of his morgadg'd lands, his friends in bonds,
himself withered with debts: And in that minute
Had I added his usage and unkindness,
Twould have confounded every thought of good:
Where now, fathering his riots one his youth,
Which time and tame experience will shake off,
guessing his kindness to me (as I smoothd him
With all the skill I had) though his deserts
Are in form vglier then an vnshapte Bear.
Hoe's reddy to prefer him to some office
And place at Court, A good and sure relief
To al his stooping fortunes twil be a means I hope,
To make new league between vs, and redeem
His virtues with his lands.
I should think so mistress. If he should not now
be kind to you and love you, and cherish you up, I should think the devil himself kept open house in him.
I doubt not but he will now, pre the leave me,
I think I hear him coming.
I am gone.
By this good means I shall preserve my lāds,
And free my husband out of usurers hands:
Now there is no need of sale, my Vncle's kind
I hope, if ought, this will content his mind,
Here comes my husband.
Now, are you come, wher's the money, lets see the money, is the rubbish sold, those wiseakers your lands, why when, the money, where first, powr't down, down with it, down with it, I say powr't oath ground lets see it, lets see it.
Good sir, keep but-in patience and I hope
My words shall like you well, I bring you better
Comfort then the sale of my Dowry.
Ho whats that?
Pray do not fright me sir, but vouchsafe me hey∣•ing, my Uncle glad of your kindness to me &amp; mild usage▪ for so I made it to him? has in pity
of your declining fortunes, provided
A place for you at Court of worth &amp; credit,
which so much ouerioyd me
Out on thee filth, over and ouerioyd.
When Ime in torments?
Thou politic whore, subtler then nine Devils, was this thy journey to Nuncke, to set down the history
of me, of my state and fortunes:
Shall I that Dedicated my self to pleasure, be now confined in service to crouch and stand like an old man ith hams, my hat off, I that never could abide to uncover my head ith Church, base slut, this fruit bears thy complaints.
Oh heaven knows,
That my complaints were praises, and best words
of you, and your estate: only my friends,
Knew of your morgagde Lands, and were possessed
Of every accident before I came.
If thou suspect it but a plot in me
To keep my dowry, or for mine own good
or my poor childrens: (though it suits a mother
To show a natural care in their reliefs,
Yet isle forget my self to calm your blood:
Consume it, as your pleasure counsels you,
And all I wish, even Clemency affords:
give me but comely looks and modest words.
Money whore, money, or Ile-
What the devil? how now? thy hasty news?
May it please you sir.
What? may I not look upon my dagger?
Speak villain, or I will execute the point on thee: quick, short.
Why sir a gentlemā from the University stays below to speak with you.
From the University? so, University
That long word runs through me.
Was ever wife so wretchedly beset,
Had not this news stepped in between, the point
Had offered violence to my breast.
That which some women call great misery
Would show but little here: would scarce be seen
Amongst my miseries: I may Compare
For wretched fortunes with all wives that are,
Nothing will please him; until all benothing.
He calls it slavery to be preferred.
A place of credit, a base servitude.
What shall become of me, and my poor children,
Two here, and one at nurse, my pretty beggars,
I see how ruin with a palsy hand
Begins to shake the ancient seat to dust:
the heavy weight of sorrow, draws my lids
Over my dank eyes: I can scarce see,
Thus grief will last, it wakes and sleeps with me.
Please you draw near sir, you're exceeding well∣come.
Thats my doubt, I fear, I come not to be well∣come.
yes howsoever.
Tic not my fashion Sir to dwell in long circū∣stance, but to be plain, and effectual, therefore to the purpose.
The cause of my setting forth was piteous and la:+mentable, that hopeful young gentleman your bro∣there, whose virtues we all love dearly through your
default, and unnatural negligence lies in bond exe∣cuted for your debt, a prisoner all, his studies amazed his hope struck dead, and the pride of his youth muf∣fled in their dark clouds of oppression.
Hum, um um.
Oh, you have kilt the towardest hope of all our vniuesitie: wherefore without repentance and a∣mends, expect pandorus and sudden Judgements to fall grieuosly upon you, your brother a man who pro∣fitted in his divine Employments might have made
ten thousand souls fit for heaven, now by your care∣less courses caste in prison which you must answer for, and assure your spirit it will come home at length.
Oh god oh.
Wisemen think ill of you, others speak ill of you, no man loves you, nay even those whom ho∣nasty condemns, condemn you: and take this from the virtuous affection I bear your brother, never look for prosperous hour, good thought, quiet sleeps, contented walks, nor anything that makes man perfect till you redeem him, what is your ans••• how will you bestow him, upon desperate mi•••ye, or better hopes? I suffer, till I hear your answer.
Sir you have much wrought with me, I feel you in my soul, you are your arts master. I never had sense till now; your syllables have cleft me Both for your words and pains I thank you: I cannot but acknowledge grievous wrongs done to my bro∣there, mighty, mighty, mighty wrongs. Within there,
Fill me a bowl of wine. Alas poor brother, Bruised with an execution for my sake
A bruise indeed makes many a mortal
Sore till the grave cure em
Sir I begin to you, you've chid your welcome:
I could have wished it better for your sake,
I pledge you sir, to the kind man in prison.
Let it be so?
Now Sir if you so please
To spend but a few minutes in a walk about my grounds below, my man here shall attend you: I doubt not but by that time to be furnished of a sufficient answer, and therein my brother fully satis∣fied.
Good sir in that, the Angels would be pleased, And the worlds murmurs calmed, and I should say I set forth then upon a lucky day.
Oh thou confused man, thy pleasant sins have 〈◊〉 hee thy damnation has beggerd thee, that heaven should say we must not sin, and yet made wo∣men: gives our senses way to find pleasure, which being found confounds vs, why should we know those things so m•ch misuse vs—oh would virtue had been forbidden, wee should then have proved all virtue∣os, for tic our blood to love what we are forbidden, had not drunkenness bin forbidden what man wold
have been fool to a beast, and Zany to a swine to show tricks in the mire, what is there in three dice to make a man draw thrice three thousand acres into the compass of a round little table, &amp; with the gentleman's palsy in the hand shake out his post∣rite, thieves or beggars: tic done, I ha don't in faith: terrible horrible misery.—how well was I left, very well, very well.
My Lands showed like a full moon about me, but now the moon's ith last quarter, waning, waining, And I am mad to think that moon was mine: Mine and my fathers, and my forefathers generate∣once, generations: down goes the hows of vs, down, down; it sincks: Now is the name a beggar, begs in me that name which hundreds of years has made this shire famous: in me, and my posterity runs out.
In my seed five are made miserable besides my self, my riot is now my brothers jailer, my wives sighing, my three boys penury, and mine own con∣fusion:
Why sit my hairs upon my cursed head?
Will not this poison scatter them? oh my brothers
In execution among devils that stretch him: &amp; make
him give. And I in want, not able for to live.
Nor to redeem him,
Divines and dying men may talk of hell,
But in my heart her several torments dwell,
Slavery and misery.
Who in this case would not take up money upon his soul, pawn his salvation, live at interest:
I that did ever in abundance dwell,
for me to want, exceeds the throws of hell.
What ail you father, are you not well, I can∣not scourge my top as long as you stand so: you take up all the room with your wide legs, puh you can∣not make me afraid with this, I fear no vizards, nor bugbears.
Up sir, for heer thou hast no inheritance left.
Oh what will you do father, I am your white boy.
Thou shalt be my red boy, take that.
Oh you hurt me father.
My eldest beggar: thou shalt not live to ask an usurer bread, to cry at a great mans gate, or follow good your honour by a Couch, no, nor your brother 〈◊〉 •harity to brain you.
How shall I learn now my heads broke?
Bleed bleed rather then beg beg?
be not thy names disgrace:
Spurn thou thy fortunes first if they be base:
Come view thy second brother: fates,
My childrens blood shall spin into your faces, you shall see.
How Confidently we scorn beggary?
Sleep sweet babe sorrow makes thy mother sleep,
It boades small good when heaviness falls so deep,
Hush pretty boy thy hopes might have been better,
Tic lost at Dice what ancient honour won,
Hard when the father plays away the Son:
No thing but misery serves in this house.
ruin and desolation oh
Whore, give me that boy,
Oh help, help, out alas, murder murder,
Are you gossiping, prating sturdy queen, Isle
break your clamour with your neck down stairs:
Tumble, tumble, headlong,
So, the surest way to charm a women's tongue
Is break his neck, a politician did it.
Mother, mother, I am kilt mother.
Ha, whose that cried oh me my children:
both, both, both; bloody, bloody.
Strumpet let go the boy, let go the beggar.
Oh my sweet husband,
Filth, harlot.
Oh what will you doe dear husband,
Gin me the bastard,
Your own sweet boy,
There are too many beggars.
Good my husband,
Doest thou prevent me still?
Oh god▪
Have at his hart
Oh my dear boy,
Brat thou shalt not live to shame thy hows,
Oh heaven
And perish now begone,
Ther's whores enough, and want wold make thee one.
Oh Sir what deeds are these?
Base slave my vassal:
Come thou between my fury to question me
Were you the Devil I would hold you sir,
Hold me? presumption, Isle undo thee for it,
Sbloud you have undone vs all sir,
Tug at thy master,
Tug at a Monster.
Have I no power, shall my slave fetter me?
Nay then the Devil wrestles, I am thowne,
Oh villainy now Isle tug thee,
now Isle tear thee,
set quick spurs to my vassal, bruise him,
trample him, so, I think thou wilt not follow me in hast
My horse stands reddy saddled, away, away,
Now to my brat at nurse, my sucking beggar:
Fates, Isle not leave you one to trample one.
How first with you sir me thinks you look of a distracted colour.
Who I sir, tic but your fancy,
Please you walk in Sir, and Isle soon resolve you,
I want one small part to make up the some,
And then my brother shall rest satisfied,
I shall be glad to see it, sir Isle attend you.
Oh I am scarce able to heave up my self:
He has so bruised me with his devilish weight,
And torn my flesh with his bloud-hasty spur
A man before of easy constitution
Till now hells power supplied; to his souls wrong,
Oh how damnation can make weak men strong.
Oh the most piteous deed sir since you came.
A deadly greeting: has he somde up their
To satisfy his brother? heir's an other:
And by the bleeding infants, the dead mother.
Oh oh.
Surgeons, Surgeons, she recovers life
One of his men al faint and bloudied.
Follow, our murderous master has took horse
To kill his child at nurse, oh follow quickly.
I am the readiest, it shall be my charge
To raise the town upon him
Good sir do follow him.
Oh my children.
How is it with my most afflicted Mistress?
Why, do I now recover? why half live?
To see my children bleed before mine eyes.
A sight able to kill a mothers breast
Without an executioner, what art thou māgled too?
I thinking to prevent what his quick mis∣chiefs had so soon acted; came and rushed upon him
We struggled, but a fowler strength then his
Ore threw me with his arms, then did he bruise me
And rent my flesh, and robbed me of my hair
Like a man mad in execution
Made me unfit to rise and follow him.
What is it has beguiled him of all grace?
And stole away humanity from his breast?
To slay his children, purposed to kill his wife,
And spoil his servants.
Please you leave this most accursed place, a surgeon waits within.
Willing to leave it,
Tic guilty of sweet blood, innocent blood,
Murder has took this chamber with full hands,
And will ne'er out as long as the house stands.
Oh stumbling Jade the spain overtake thee,
the fifty diseases stop thee,
Oh, I am sorely bruised, plague founder thee,
Thou runst at ease and pleasure, hart, of chance
to Throw me now within a flight oath Town,
In such plain even ground, sfot, a man may dice up∣on it, and throw away the Meadows, filthy beast.
Follow, follow, follow.
Ha? I hear sounds of men; like hew and cry:
up, up, and struggle to thy horse, make on
Dispatch that little beggar and ell's done.
Here, this way, this way:
At my back? oh,
What fate have I, my limbs deny me go,
My will is bated, beggary claims a part.
Oh could I here reach to the infants heart.
Here, here, yonder, yonder.
Unnatural, flinty, more then barbarous:
The Scithians in their marble hearted fates,
Could not have acted more remorseless deeds
In their relentless natures, then these of thine:
Was this the answer I long waited on,
The satisfaction for thy prisoned brother?
Why, he can have no more on's then our skins,
And some of em want but fleeing.
Great sins have made him impudent:
He has shed so much blood that he cannot 〈◊〉
Away with him, bear him a long to the Justices:
A gentleman of worship dwells at hand,
There shall his deeds be blast:
Why all the better,
My glory tic to have my action known,
I grieve for nothing, but I mist of one:
Ther's little of a father in that grief:
Bear him away.
Endangered so his wife? murdered his i will∣drone?
So the Cry comes.
I am sorry I ere knew him,
That ever he took life and natural being
From such an honoured stock, and fair descent;
Till this black minute without stain or blemish▪
Here come the men.
The serpent of his house? Ime sorry for this time that I am in place of justice.
Please you Sir.
Doe not repeat it twice I know too much, would it had ne'er bin thought on:
Sir I bleed for you.
Your fathers sorrows are alive in me:
What made you show such monstrous cruelty▪ 〈◊〉 a word Sir,
I hane cousumd all, plaid away long acre,
And I thought it the charitablest deed I could doe
To cousin beggary: and knock my house oath head.
Oh in a cooler blood you will repent it.
I repent now, that ones left vnkild,
My brat at nurse. Oh I would full fain have weand him
Well, I doe not think but in to morrows judgment.
The terror will sit closer to your soul,
When the dread thought of death remembers you to further which, take this sad voice from me:
Never was act plaid more unnaturally.
I thank you Sir.
Go lead him to the Jail,
Where justice claims all, there must pity fail.
Come come, away with me.
Sir, you deserve the worship of your place,
Would all did so: in you the law is grace,
It is my wish it should be so,
Ruinous man, the desolation of his hows, the blot
Upon his predecessors honoured name:
That man is nearest shame that is past shame.
I am right against my hows, seat of my Ance∣stors: I hear my wif's alive; but much endangered:
Let me entreat to speak with her
before the prison gripe me.
See heer she comes of her self,
Oh my sweet Husband, my dear distressed husband, now in the hands of unrelenting laws,
My greatest sorrow, my extremest bleeding,
Now my soul bleeds.
How now? kind to me? did I not wound thee, left thee for dead.
Tut far greater wounds did my breast feel,
Unkindness strikes a deeper wound then steel,
You have been still unkind to me:
Faith, and so I think I have:
I did my murders roughly out of hand,
Desperate and sudden, but thou hast deuized
A fine way now to kill me, thou hast ginen mine eyes
Seven woonds a piece; now glides the devil from
me, departes at every joint, heaves up my nails▪
Oh catch him new torments, that were near inuēted,
Bind him one thousand more you blessed Angels
In that pit bottomless, let him not rise
To make men act unnatural tragedies
To spread into a father, and in fury,
Make him his childrens executioners:
Murder his wife, his servants, and who not?
For that man's dark, where heaven is quite forgot.
Oh my repentant husband.
My dear soul, whom I too much have wronged,
For death I die, and for this have I longed.
Thou sholdst not (be assured) for these faults die,
If the law cold forgive as soon as I,
•hat sight is yonder?
Oh our two bleeding boys laid forth upon the threshold.
Heir's weight enough to make a heart-string crack
Oh were it lawful that your pretty souls
Might look from heaven into your fathers eyes,
Then should you see the penitent glasses melt,
And both your murders shoot upon my cheeks,
But you are playing in the Angels laps,
And will not look on me,
Who void of grace, kilt you in beggary.
Oh that I might my wishes now attain,
I should then wish you living were again:
Though I did beg with you, which thing I feared,
Oh it was the enemy my eyes so bleared.
Oh would you could pray heaven me to forgine▪
That will unto my end repentant live.
It makes me even forget all other sorrows
and leave part with this. Come will you go,
Isle kiss the blood I spilt and then I go:
my soul is bloudied, well may my lips be so.
Farewell dear wife, now thou and I must part,
I of thy wrongs repeut me with my heart.
Oh staye thou shalt not go:
That's but in vain, you see it must be so.
Farewell ye bloody ashes of my boys,
My punishments are their eternal joys.
Let every father look into my deeds,
And then their heirs may prosper while mine bleeds.
More wretched am I now in this distress,
then former sorrows made me.
Oh kind wife be comforted,
One joy is yet vnmurdered:
You have a boy at nurse your ioy's in him.
Dearer then all is my poor husbands life:
Heaven give my body strength, which yet is faint
With much expense of blood, and I will kueele,
Sue for his life, number up all my friends,
To plead for pardon my dear husbands life.
Was it in man to wound so kind a creature?
Isle ever praise a woman for thy sake,
I must return with grief my answer's set:
I shall bring news weies heavier then the debt:
Two brothers: one in bond lies overthrown
This, on a deadlier execution.

Duke: royal lecher; go, gray hairdo adultery,
And thou his son as impious steeped as hee:
And thou his bastard true-begott in evil:
And thou his Duchess that will doe with Devil,
Four exlent Characters—O that marrow-lesse age,
Would stuff the hollow Bones with damned desires,
And stead of heate kindle infernal fires,
Within the spend-thrift veins of a dry Duke,
A parcht and iuicelesse luxur. O God! one
That has scarce blood enough to live upon.
And hee to riced it like a son and heir?
O the thought of that
Turns my abused heart-strings into fret.
Thou sallow picture of my poisoned lcue,
My studies ornament, thou shell of Death,
Once the bright face of my betrothed Lady,
When life and beauty naturally filled out
These ragged imperfections;
When two-heauen-pointed Diamonds were set
In those unsightly Rings;—then it was a face
So far beyond the artificial shine
Of any women's bought complexion
That the vprightest man, (if such there be,
That sin but seven times a day) broke custom
And made up eight with looking after her,
Oh she was able to ha made a Usurers son
Melt all his patrimony in a kiss,
And what his father fifty years told
To have consumed, and yet his suit been cold:
But oh accursed Palace!
Thee when thou were appareled in thy flesh,
The old Duke poisoned,
Because thy purer part would not consent
Unto his palsey-lust, for old men lust-full
Do show like young men angry, eager violent,
Out-bid like their limited performances
O ware an old man hot, and vicious
Age as in gold in lust is covetous.
Vengeance thou murders Quit-rent, and whereby
Thou shoust thy self Tenant to Tragedy,
Oh keep thy day, hour, minute, I beseech,
For those thou hast determined: hum: who ere knew
Murder unpaid, faith give Revenge her due
Sha's kept touch hitherto—be merry, merry,
Advance thee, O thou terror to fat folks
To have their Costly three-pilde flesh worn of
As bare as this—for banquets: ease and laughter,
Can make great men as greatness goes by clay,
But wise men little are more great then they?
Still sighing ore deaths vizard.
Brother welcome,
What comfort bring thou? how go things at Court?
In silk and silver brother: never braver.
Puh,
Thou playst upon my meaning prithee say
Has that bald Madam, Opportunity?
Yet thought vpon's, speak are we happy yet?
Thy wrongs and mine are for one scabbard fit.
It may prove happiness?
What first may prove?
Give me to taste.
Give me your hearing then,
You know my place at Court.
I; the Dukes Chamber
But tic a marvel thourt not turned out yet!
Faith I have been shoot at, but it was still my hap
To hold by the Duchess skirt, you guess at that,
Whom such a Coat keeps up can ne'er fall flat,
But to the purpose.
Last evening predecessor unto this,
The Dukes son warily enquird for me,
Whose pleasure I attended: he began,
By policy to open and vnhuske me
About the time and common rumour:
But I had so much wit to keep my thoughts
Up in their built houses, yet afforded him
An idle satifaction without danger,
But the whole aim, and scope of his intent
Ended in this, conjuring me in private,
To seek some strange digested fellow forth:
Of ill-contented nature, either disgracst
In formertimes, or by new grooms displacst,
Since his Step-mothers nuptials, such a blood
A man that were for evil only good;
To give you the true word some base kind Pander?
I reach you, for I know his heate is such,
Were there as many Concubines as Ladies
He would not be contained, he must fly out:
I wonder how ill featured, wild proportiond.
That one should be: if she were made for woman,
Whom at the Insurrection of his lust
He would refuse for once, heart, I think none,
Next to a skull, tho more unsound then one
Each face he meets he strongly dotes upon.
Brother you've truly spoke him?
He knows not you, but Isle swear you know him.
And therefore isle put on that knave for once,
And be a right man then, a man a'th Time,
For to be honest is not to be ith world,
Brother isle be that strange composed fellow.
And isle prefer you brother.
Go too then,
The smallst advantage fattens wronged men
It may point out, occasion, if I meet her,
Isle hold her by the fore-top fast enough;
Or like the French Moil heave up hair and all,
I have a habit that will fit it quaintly,
Here comes our Mother.
And Sister.
We must quoyne.
Women are apt you know to take false money,
But I dare stake my soul for these two creatures
Only excuse excepted that they'll swallow,
Because their sex is easy in belies.
What news from Cour son Carlo?
Faith Mother,
Tic whispered there the Duchess youngest son
Has played a Rape on Lord Antonios wife.
On that religious Lady!
Royal blood: monster he deserves to die,
If Italy had no more hopes but he.
Sister you've sentenced most direct, and true,
The Laws a woman, and would she were you:
Mother I must take leave of you.
Leave for what?
I Intend speedy travail.
That he do's Madam.
Speedy indeed!
For since my worthy fathers funeral,
My life's unnaturally to me, even compelled
As if I hued now when I should be dead.
Indeed he was a worthy Gentleman
Had his estate been fellow to his mind.
The Duke did much deject him.
Much?
To much.
And through disgrace oft smothered in his spirit,
When it would mount, surely I think hee dyed
Of discontent: the Nobleman's consumption.
Most sure he did!
Did he? lack,—you know all
You were his mid-night secretary.
No.
He was to wise to trust me with his thoughts.
In faith then father thou wast wise indeed,
Wives are but made to go to bed and feed.
Come mother, sister: you'll bring me onward brother?
I will.
Isle quickly turn into another.
Duchess it is your youngest son, we're sorry,
His violent Act has even drawn blood of honour
And stained ou• honours,
Thrown inck upon the for-head of our state
Which envious spirits will dip their pens into
After our death; and blot vs in our Tombs.
For that which would seem treason in our lives
Is laughter when we're dead, who dares now whisper
That dares not then speak out, and even proclaim,
With loud words and broad pens our closest shame.
Your grace hath spoke like to your silver years
Full of confirmed gravity;—for what is it to have,
A flattering false insculption on a Tomb:
And in men's hearts reproach, the boweld Corps,
May be seard in, but with free tongue I speak,
The faults of great men through their fearce clothes break,
They do, we're sorry for it, it is our fate,
To live in fear and die to live in hate,
I leave him to your sentence dome him Lords
The fact is great; whilst I sit by and sigh.
My gracious Lord I pray be merciful,
Although his trespass far exceed his years,
Think him to be your own as I am yours,
Call him not son in law: the law I fear
Will fall too soon upon his name and him:
Temper his fault with pity?
Good my Lord.
Then twill not taste so bitter and unpleasant
Upon the Judges palate, for offences
Gilt ore with mercy, show like fairest women,
Good only for their beauties, which washed of: no sin is oug∣lies
Ambitis I beseech your grace,
Be soft and mild, let not Relentless Law,
Look with an iron for-head on our brother.
He yields small comfort yet, hope he shall die,
And if a bastards wish might stand in force,
Would all the court were turn de into a coarse,
No pity yet? must I rise fruitless then,
A wonder in a woman; are my knees,
Of such lowe—mettle—that without Respect—
Let the offender stand forth,
Tic the Dukes pleasure that Impartial Doom,
Shall take first hold of his unclean attempt,
A Rape! why tic the very core of lust,
Double Adultery.
So Sir.
And which was worse,
Committed on the Lord Antonioes wife,
That General honest Lady, confess my Lord!
What moved you toot?
why flesh and blood my Lord.
What should move men unto a woman else,
O do not jest thy doom, trust not an axe
Or sword too far; the Law is a wise serpent
And quickly can beguile thee of thy life,
Tho marriage only has made thee my brother,
I love thee so far, play not with thy Death,
I thank you troth, good admonitions faith,
Ifide the grace now to make use of them,
That Ladies name has spread such a fair wing
Over all Italy; that if our Tongs,
Were sparing toward the Fact, Judgment it self,
Would be condemned and suffer in men's thoughts,
Well then tic done, and it would please me well
Were it to doe again: sure shees a Goddess,
For id no power to see her, and to live,
It falls out true in this for I must die,
Her beauty was ordained to be my scaffold,
And yet my thinks I might be easier ceased,
My fault being sport, let me but die in jest,
This be the sentence,
O kept upon your Tongue, let it not slip,
Death too soon steals out of a Lawyers lip,
Be not so cruell-wise?
Your Grace must pardon vs,
It is but the Justice of the Law.
The Law,
Is grown more subtle then a woman should be.
Now, now he dyes, rid 'em away.
O what it is to have an old-coole Duke,
To bee as slack in tongue, as in performance.
Confirmed, this be the doom irrevocable.
Oh!
Tomorrow early.
Pray be a bed my Lord.
Your Grace much wrongs your self.
No it is that tongue,
Your too much right, dos do vs too much wrong.
Let that offender—
Live, and be in health.
Be on a Scaffold
Hold, hold, my Lord.
Pox ont,
What makes my Dad speak now?
We will defer the judgment till next sitting,
In the mean time let him be kept close prisoner:
Guard bear him hence.
Brother, this makes for thee,
Fear not, weal have a trick to set thee free.
Brother, I will expect it from you both; and in that hope
I rest.
Farewell, be mesry.
Delayed, deferd nay then if judgment have cold blood,
Flattery and bribes will kill it.
About it then my Lords with your best powers,
More serious business calls upon our homes.
Wast ever known step-Dutchesse was so mild,
And calm as I? some now would plot his death,
With easy Doctors, those loose living men,
And make his witherd Grace fall to his Grave,
And keep Church better?
Some second wife would do this, and dispatch
Her double loathd Lord at meat and sleep,
Indeed it is true an old mans twice a child,
Mine cannot speak, one of his single words,
Would quite have freed my youngest dearest son
From death or durance, and have made him walk
With a bold foot upon the thorny law,
Whose Prickles should bow under him, but it is not,
And therefore wedlock faith shall be forgot,
Isle kill him in his fore-head, hate there feed,
That wound is deepest tho it never bleed:
And here comes hee whom my heart points unto,
His bastard son, but my loves true-begot,
Many a wealthy letter have I sent him,
Swelled up with Jewels, and the timorous man
Is yet but coldly kind,
That Iewel's mine that quivers in his ear,
Mocking his Masters chillness and vain fear,
He's spied me now.
Madame? your Grace so private.
My duty on your hand.
Upon my hand sir, troth I think your fear,
To kiss my hand too if my lip stood there,
Witness I would not Madam.
Tic a wonder,
For ceremony he's made many fools,
It is as easy way unto a Duchess,
As to a Hatted-dame, (if her love answer)
But that by timorous honours, pale respects,
Idle degrees of fear, men make their ways
Hard of themselves—what have you thought of me?
Madam I ever think of you, in duty,
Regard and—
Puh, upon my love I mean.
I would it were love, but tuc a fowler name
Then lust; you are my fathers wife, your Grace may guess now,
What I could call it.
Why you are his son but falsely,
Tic a hard question whether he begot thee.
In faith it is true too; Ime an uncertain man,
Of more uncertain woman; may be his groom 'ath stable be∣got
me, you know I know not, hee could ride a horse well, a
shroud suspicion marry—hee was wondrous tall, hee had his
length in faith, for peeping over half shut holy-day windows,
Men would desire him light, when he was a foot,
He made a goodly show under a Pent-house,
And when he rid, his Hat would check the signs, and clatter
Barbers Basins.
Nay set you a horse back once,
You'll ne'er light off.
Indeed I am a beggar.
That's more the sign thou'art Great—but to our love.
Let it stand firm both in thought and mind,
That the Duke was thy Father, as no doubt then
Hee bid fair fort, thy injury is the more,
For had hee cut thee a right Diamond,
Thou had been next set in the Duke-doomes Ring,
When his worn self like Ages easy slave,
Had dropped out of the Collet into the Grave;
What wrong can equal this? can thou be tame
And think vppon't.
No mad and think upon it.
Who would not be revenged of such a father,
Even in the worst way? I would thank that sin,
That could most injury him, and bee in league with it,
Oh what a grief it is, that a man should live
But once ith world, and then to live a Bastard,
The curse a'the womb, the thief of Nature,
Begot against the seventh commandment,
Half damned in the conception, by the justice
Of that vnbribed everlasting law.
Oh Id a hot-backt Devil to my father.
Would not this mad even patience, make blood rough?
Who but an Eunuch would not sin? his bed
By one false minute disinherited.
I, there's the vengeance that my birth was wrapped in,
Isle be revenged for all, now hate begin,
Isle call foul Incest but a Venial sin.
Cold still: in vain then must a Duchess woo?
Madam I blush to say what I will doo.
Thence flew sweet comfort, earnest and farewell.
Oh one incestuous kiss picks open hell.
Faith now old Duke; my vengeance shall reach high,
Isle arm thy brow with women's Heraldry.
Duke, thou did do me wrong, and by thy Act
Adultery is my nature;
Faith if the truth were known, I was begot
After some gluttonous dinner, some stirring dish
Was my first father; when deep healths went round,
And Ladies cheeks were painted red with Wine,
Their tongues as short and nimble as their heals
Uttering words sweet and thick; and when they rise,
Were merrily disposed to fall again,
In such a whispring and with-drawing hour,
When base-male-Bawds kept Sentinel at staire-head
Was I stolen softly; oh—damnation met
The sin of feasts, drunken adultery.
I feel it swell me; my revenge is just,
I was begot in impudent Wine and Lust:
Step-mother I consent to thy desires,
I love thy mischief well, but I hate thee,
And those three Cubs thy sons, wishing confusion
Death and disgrace may be their Epitaphs,
As for my brother the Dukes only son,
Whose birth is more beholding to report
Then mine, and yet perhaps as falsely sown.
(Women must not be trusted with their own)
Isle loose my days upon him hate all I,
Duke on thy brow Isle draw my Bastardy.
For indeed a bastard by nature should make Cuckolds,
Because he is the son of a Cuckold-maker.
What brother? am I far enough from my self?
As if another man had been sent whole
Into the world, and none wist how he came.
It will confirm me bold: the child a th Court,
Let blushes dwelli'th Country impudence!
Thou Goddess of the palace, Mistrs of Mistesses
To whom the costly perfumd-people pray,
Strike thou my fore-head into dauntless Marble;
Mine eyes to steady Sapphires: turn my visage,
And if I must needs glow, let me blush inward
That this immodest season may not spy,
That scholar in my cheeks, fool bashfulness.
That Maid in the old time, whose flush of Grace
Would never suffer her to get good clothes;
Our maids are wiser; and are less ashamed,
Save Grace the bawd I seldom hear Grace named!
Nay brother you reach out a'th Verge now,—Sfoote
the Dukes son, settle your looks.
Pray let me not be doubted.
My Lord—
Hipolito?—be absent leave vs.
My Lord after long search, wary inquiryes
And politic siftings, I made choice of yon fellow,
Whom I guess rare for many deep employments;
This our age swims within him: and if Time
Had so much hair, I should take him for Time,
He is so near kin to this present minute?
Tic enough.
We thank thee: yet words are but great-mens blanckes
Gold tho it be dum do's utter the best thanks.
Your plenteons honour—an exlent fellow my Lord.
So, give vs leave—welcome, bee not far off, we must bee
better acquainted, push, be bold with vs, thy hand:
With all my heart in faith how dost sweet Musk-cat.
When shall we lie together?
Wondrous knave!
Gather him into boldness, Sfoote the slaue's
Already as familiar as an Ague,
And shakes me at his pleasure, friend I can
Forget my self in private, but else where,
I pray do you remember me.
Oh very well sir—I construe my self saucy!
What hast been,
Of what profession.
A bone-setter!
A bone-setter!
A bawd my Lord,
One that sets bones together.
Notable bluntness?
Fit, fit for me, even trained up to my hand
Thou hast been Scrivener to much knavery then.
Fool, to abundance sir; I have been witness
To the surrenders of a thousand virgins,
And not so little,
I have seen Patrimonies washed a pieces
Fruit-feilds turned into bastards,
And in a world of Acres,
Not so much dust due to the heir t'was left too
As would well gravel a petition
Fine villain? troth I like him wondrously
Hes even shaped for my purpose, then thou know
Ith world strange lust.
O Dutch lust! fulsome lust!
Druncken procrearion, which begets, so many drunckards;
Some father dreads not (gone to bed in wine) to slide from
the mother,
And cling the daughter-in-law,
Some Uncles are adulterous with their Nieces,
Brothers with brothers wives, O hour of Incest!
Any kin now next to the Rim ath sister
Is mans meat in these days, and in the morning
When they are up and dressed, and their mask on,
Who can perceive this? save that eternal eye
That see's through flesh and all, well:—If any thing be damned?
It will be twelve a clock at night; that twelve
Will never scope;
It is the Iudas of the hours; wherein,
Honest salvation is betrayed to sin,
In truth it is too? but let this talk glide
It is our blood to err, tho hell gapte load
Ladies know Lucifer fell, yet still are proud!
Now sir? were thou as secret as you're subtle,
And deeply fadomd into all estates
I would embrace thee for a near employment,
And thou should swell in money, and be able
To make lame beggars crouch to thee.
My Lord?
Secret? I ne'er had that disease ath mother
I praise my father: why are men made close?
But to keep thoughts in best, I grant you this
Tell but some woman a secret over night,
Your doctor may find it in the urinal ith morning,
But my Lord.
So, you're confirmed in me
And thus I enter thee.
This Indian devil,
Will quickly enter any man: but a Usurer,
He prevents that, by entering the devil first.
Attend me, I am past my depht in lust
And I must swim or drown, all my desires
Are leveled at a Virgin not far from Court,
To whom I have conveyed by Messenger
Many waxed Lines, full of my neatest spirit,
And jewels that were able to •auish her
Without the help of man; all which and more
She foolish chaste sent back, the messengers,
Receiving frowns for answers.
Possible!
Tic a rare Phoenix who ere she bee,
If your desires be such, she so repugnant,
In troth my Lord id be revenged and marry her.
Push; the dowry of her blood &amp; of her fortunes,
Are both too mean,—good enough to be bad withal
Ime one of that number can defend
Marriage is good: yet rather keep a friend,
Give me my bed by stealth—theres true delight
What breeds a loathing in it, but night by night.
A very fine religion?
Therefore thus,
He trust thee in the business of my heart
Because I see thee well experienc'st
In this Luxurious day wherein we breath,
Go thou, and with a smooth enchanting tongue
Bewitch her ears, and Cousin her of all Grace
Enter upon the portion of her soul,
Her honour, which she calls her chastity
And bring it into expense, for honesty
Is like a stock of money laid to sleep,
Which ne'er so little broke, do's never keep:
You have gent the Tang in faith my Lord
Make known the Lady to me, and my brain,
Shall swell with strange Invention: I will move it
Till I expire with speaking, and drop down
Without a word to save me;—but isle work—
We thank thee, and will raise thee:—receive her name,
it is the only daughter, to Madame Gratiana the late widow
Oh, my sister, my sister?—
Why dost walk aside?
My Lord, I was thinking how I might begin
As thus, oh Lady—or twenty hundred devices,
Her very bodkin will put a man in.
I, or the wagging of her hair.
No, that shall put you in my Lord.
Shall it? why content, dost know the daughter then?
O exlent well by sight.
That was her brother
That did prefer thee to vs.
My Lord I think so,
I knew I had seen him some where—
And therefore prithee let thy heart to him,
Be as a Virgin, close.
Oh me good Lord.
We may laugh at that simple age within him;
Ha, ha, ha.
Himself being made the subtle instrument,
To wind up a good fellow.
That's I my Lord.
That's thou.
To entice and work his sister.
A pure novice?
T'was finely managed.
Gallantly carried;
A prety-perfumde villain.
I'ue bethought me
If she prove chaste still and immovable,
Venture upon the Mother, and with gifts
As I will furnish thee, begin with her.
Oh fie, fie, that's the wrong end my Lord. Tic mere impose∣sible
that a mother by any gifts should become a bawd to her
own Daughter!
Nay then I see you're but a puny in the subtle Mystery of
a woman:—why tic held now no dainty dish: The name
Is so in league with age, that now adays
It do's Eclipse three quarters of a Mother;
Dost so my Lord?
Let me alone then to Eclipse the fourth.
Why well said, come isle furnish thee, but first
swear to be true in all.
True?
Nay but swear!
Swear?—I hope your honour little doubts my faith.
Yet for my humours sake cause I love swearing.
Cause you love swearing, slut I will.
Why enough,
Erelong look to be made of better stuff.
That will do well indeed my Lord.
Attend me?
Oh.
Now let me burst, I'ue eaten Noble poison,
We are made strange fellows, brother, innocent villains,
Wilt not be angry when thou hearst on it, think thou?
In faith thou shalt; swear me to foul my sister.
Sword I durst make a promise of him to thee,
Thou shalt dis-heire him, it shall be thine honour,
And yet now angry froth is down in me,
It would not prove the meanest policy
In this disguise to try the faith of both,
Another might have had the self same office,
Some slave, that would have wrought effectually,
I and perhaps ore-wrought em, therefore I,
Being thought trauayld, will apply my self,
Unto the self same form, forget my nature,
As if no part about me were kin to em,
So touch' em,—tho I durst a most for good,
Venture my lands in heaven upon their good.
Draw nearer Lords and be sad witnesses
Of a fair comely building newly fallen,
Being falsely undermined: violent rape
Has played a glorious act, behold my Lords
A sight that strikes man out of me:
That virtuous Lady
President for wives?
The blush of many women, whose chaste presence,
Would en call shame up to their cheeks,
And make pale wanton sinners have good colours.—
Dead!
Her honour first drunk poison, and her life,
Being fellows in one house did pledge her honour,
O grief of many!
I marked not this before.
A prayer Book the pillow to her cheek,
This was her rich confection, and another
Placed••d in her right hand, with a leaf tuckt up,
Pointing to these words.
Melius virtute more, Quam per Dedecus viuere.
True and effectual it is indeed.
My Lord since you enuite vs to your sorrows,
Lets truly tast'em, that with equal comfort,
As to our selves we may relieve your wrongs,
We have grief too, that yet walks without Tong,
Curaeleues l•quuntur, Majors stupent.
You deal with truth my Lord.
Lend me but your Attentions, and Isle cut
Long grief into short words: last revelling night.
When Torch-light made an artificial noon
About the Court, some Courtiers in the mask,
Putting on better faces then their own,
Being full of fraud and flattery: amongst whom,
The Ducheses youngest son (that moth to honour)
Filled up a Room; and with long lust to eat,
Into my wearing; amongst all the Ladies,
Singled out that dear form; who ever lived,
As cold in Lust as she is now in death;
(Which that step Duchess—Monster knew to well;)
And therefore in the height of all the revels,
When Music was hard loudest, Courtiers busiest,
And Ladies great with laughter;—O Vicious minute!
Unfit but for relation to be spoke of,
Then with a face more impudent then his vizard
He harried her amidst a throng of Panders,
That live upon damnation of both kinds,
And fed the ravenous vulture of his lust,
(O death to think ont) she her honour forest,
Deemed it a nobler dowry for her name,
To die with poison then to live with shame.
A wondrous Lady; of rare fire compact,
Sh'as made her name an Empress by that act,
My Lord what judgment follows the offender?
Faith none my Lord it cools and is deferd,
Delay the doom for rape?
O you must note who tic should die,
The Duchess son, sheele look to be a saver,
Judgment in this age is ne'er kin to favour.
Nay then step forth thou Bribelesse officer;
I bind you all in steel to bind you surely,
Heer let your oths meet, to be kept and paid,
Which else will stick like rust, and shame the blade,
Strengthen my vow, that if at the next sitting,
Judgment speak all in gold, and spare the blood
Of such a serpent, even before their seats,
To let his soul out, which long since was found,
Guilty in heaven.
We swear it and will act it,
Kind Gentlemen, I thank you in minelre,
It were pity?
The ruins of so fair a Monument,
Sold not be dipped in the defacers blood,
Her funeral shall be wealthy, for her name,
Merits a tomb of pearl; my Lord Antonio,
For this time wipe your Lady from your eyes,
No doubt our grief and yours may one day court it,
When we are more familiar with Revenge,
That is my comfort Gentlemen, and I •oy,
In this one happiness aboue the rest,
Which will be called a miralce at last,
That being an old—man id a wife so chaste.
How hardly shall that maiden be beset,
Whose only fortunes, are her constant thoughts,
That has no other childes-part but her honour,
That Keeps her lowe; and empty in estate.
Maids and their honours are like poor beginners,
Were not sin rich there would be fewer sinners;
Why had not virtue a revenue? well,
I know the cause, twold have impoverished hell.
How now Dondolo.
there is one as they say a thing of flesh and
blood, a man I take him by his beard that would very desire∣ously
month to mouth with you.
Whats that?
Show his teeth in your company,
I understand thee not;
Why speak with you Madonna!
Why say so mad-man, and cut of a great deal of dirty
way; had it not been better spoke in ordinary words that one
would speak with me.
Ha, ha, thats as ordinary as two shillings, I would strive
alitlle to show my self in my place, a Gentleman-vsher scorns
to use the Phrase and fancy of a serving-man.
Yours be your one sir, go direct him hither,
I hope some happy tidings from my brother,
That lately trauayld, whom my soul affects.
Here he comes.
Lady the best of wishes to your sex.
Fair skins and new gowns,
Oh they shall thank you sir,
Whence this,
Oh from a dear and worthy friend,
mighty!
From whom?
The Dukes son!
Receive that!
I swore I'd put anger in my hand,
And pass the Virgin limits of my self,
To him that next appeared in that base office,
To be his sins Attorney, bear to him,
That figure of my hate upon thy check
Whilst tic yet hot, and Isle reward thee fort,
Tell him my honour shall have a rich name,
When several harlots shall share his with shame,
Farewell commend me to him in my hate!
It is the sweetest Box,
That ere my nose came ny,
The finest drawne-worke cuff that ere was worn,
Isle love this blow for ever, and this cheek
Shall still hence forward take the wall of this.
Oh Ime a above my tong: most constant sister,
In this thou hast right honourable shown,
Many are called by their honour that have none,
Thou art approved for ever in my thoughts.
It is not in the power of words to taint thee,
And yet for the salvation of my oath,
As my resolve in that point; I will lay,
Hard siege unto my Mother, tho I know,
A Sirens tongue could not bewitch her so.
Mass fitly here she comes, thanks my disguise,
Madame good af•ernoone.
Y' are welcome sir?
The Next of Italy commends him to you,
Our mighty expectation, the Dukes son.
I think my self much honoured, that he pleases,
To tanck me in his thoughts.
So may you Lady:
One that is like to be our sudden Duke,
The Crown gapes for him every tide, and then
Commander ore vs all, do but think on him,
How blessed were they now that could pleasure him
Even with any thing almost.
I, save their honour?
Tut, one would let a little of that go too
And ne'er be seen in it: ne'er be seen it, mark you,
Id wink and let it go—
Marry but I would not.
Marry but I would I hope, I know you would too,
If your that blood now which you gave your daughter,
To her indeed tic, this wheel comes about,
That man that must be all this, perhaps ere morning
(For his white father do's but mold away)
Has long desired your daughter.
Desired?
Nay but he are me,
He desires now that will command hereafter,
There fore be wise, I speak as more a friend
To you then him; Madam, I know you're poor,
And lack the day, there are too many poor Ladies already
Why should you vex the number? tic despised,
Live wealthy, rightly understand the world,
And chide away that foolish—Country girl
Keeps company with your daughter, chastity,
Oh fie, fie, the riches of the world cannot hire a mo∣there
to such a most unnatural task.
No, but a thousand Angels can,
Men have no power, Angels must work you too't,
The world descends into such base-borne evils
That forty Angels can make fourscore devils,
There will be fools still I perceive, still fool.
Would I be poor dejected, scorned of greatness,
Swept from the Palace, and see other daughters
Spring with the dew ath Court, having mine own
So much desired and loved—by the Dukes son,
No, I would raise my state upon her breast
And call her eyes my Tenants, I would count
My yearly maintenance upon her cheeks:
Take Coach upon her lip, and all, her parts
Should keep men after men, and I would ride,
In pleasure upon pleasure:
You took great pains for her, once when it was,
Let her requite it now, tho it be but some
You brought her forth, she may well bring you home,
O heavens! this ouer-comes me?
Not I hope, already?
It is too strong for me, men know that know vs,
We are so weak their words can overthrow vs,
He touched me nearly made my virtues bate
When his tongue struck upon my poor estate.
Ie'en quake to proceed, my spirit turns edge?
I fear me she's vnmotherd, yet isle venture,
That woman is all male, whom none can Enter?
What think you now Lady, speak are you wiser?
What said advancement to you: thus it said!
The daughters f•l lifts up the mothers head:
Did it not Madame? but isle swear it does
In many places, tut, this age fears no man,
Tic no shame to be bad, because tic common.
I that's the comfort on it.
The comfort on it!
I keep the best for last, can these persuade you
To forget heaven—and—
I these are they?
Oh!
That enchant our sex,
These are the means that govern our affections,—that woman
Will not be troubled with the mother long,
That sees the comfortable shine of you,
I blush to think what for your sakes Isle do!
O suffering heaven with thy invisible finger,
En at this Instant turn the precious side
Of both mine eye-balls inward, not to see my self,
Look you sir.
Holla.
Let this thank your pains.
O you're a kind Mad-man;
Isle see how I can move,
Your words will sting,
If she be still chaste Isle ne'er call her mine,
Spoke truer then you meant it,
Daughter Castiza.
Madam,
O shees yonder.
Meet her: troupes of celestial Soldiers guard her heart.
Yon dam has devils enough to take her part,
Madam what makes yon evil offic'd man,
In presence of you;
Why?
He lately brought
Immodest writing sent from the Dukes son
To tempt me to dishonourable Act,
Dishonourable Act?—good honourable fool,
That would be honest cause thou would be so,
Producing no one reason but thy will.
And it is a good report, prettily commended,
But pray by whom; mean people; ignorant people,
The better sort Ime sure cannot abide it,
And by what rule should we square out our lives,
But by our betters actions? oh if thou knew
What it were to loose it, thou would never keep it:
But theres a cold curse laid upon all Maids,
Whilst other clip the Sun they clasp the shades!
Virginity is paradise, locked up.
You cannot come by your selves without fee.
And it was decreed that man should keep the key!
Deny advancement, treasure, the Dukes son,
I cry you mercy. Lady I mistook you,
Pray did you see my Mother; which way went you?
Pray God I have not lost her.
Prettily put by.
Are you as proud to me as coy to him?
Doe you not know me now?
Why are you she?
The worlds so changed, one shape into another,
It is a wise child now that knows her mother?
Most right in faith.
I owe your cheek my hand,
For that presumption now, but Isle forget it,
Come you shall leave those childish hauiours,
And understand your Time, Fortunes flow to you,
What will you be a Girl?
If all feared drowning, that spy waives a shore,
Gold would grow rich, and all the Merchants poor.
It is a pretty saying of a wicked one, but me thinks now
It dos not show so well out of your mouth,
Better in his.
Faith bad enough in both,
Were I in earnest as Isle seem no less?
I wonder Lady your own mothers words,
Cannot be taken, nor stand in full force.
It is honestic you urge; what's honesty?
It is but heavens beggar; and what woman is so foolish to
keep honesty,
And be not able to keep her-selfe? No,
Times are grown wiser and will keep less charge,
A Maid that he has small portion now entends,
To break up house, and live upon her friends
How blessed are you, you have happiness alone,
Others must fall to thousands, you to one,
Sufficient in him-selfe to make your fore-head
Dazzle the world with Jewels, and petitionary people
Start at your presence.
Oh if I were young, I should be ravished.
I to loose your honour.
Slid how can you loose your honour?
To deal with my Lords Grace,
Heel add more honour to it by his Title,
Your Mother will tell you how.
That I will.
O think upon the pleasure of the Palace,
Secured ease and state; the stirring meates,
Ready to move out of the dishes, that even now quicken when their eaten,
Banquets abroad by Torch-light, Musics, sports,
Bare-headed vassailes, that had ne'er the fortune
To keep on their own Hats, but let horns were em,
Nine Coaches waiting—hurry, hurry, hurry.
I to the Devil.
I to the Devil, to the Duke by my faith.
I to the Duke: daughter your scorn to think ath'
Devil and you were there once.
True, for most there are as proud as he for his heart in faith
Who'd sit at home in a neglected room,
Dealing her short-liu'de beauty to the pictures,
That are as vse-lesse as old men, when those
Poorer in face and fortune then her-selfe,
Walk with a hundred Acres on their backs,
Fair Meadows cut into Greene fore-parts—oh
It was the greatest blessing ever happened to women;
When Farmers sons agreed, and met again,
To wash their hands, and come up Gentlemen;
The common-wealth has flourished ever since,
Lands that were meat by the Rod, that labours spared,
Taylors ride down, and measure em by the yard;
Fair trees, those comely fore-tops of the Field,
Are cut to maintain head-tires—much untold,
All thrives but Chastity, she lies a cold,
nay shall I come nearer to you, mark but this:
Why are there so few honest women, but because it is the poorer
profession, that's accounted best, thats best followed, least in
trade, least in fashion, and thats not honesty believe it, and doe
but note the love and dejected price of it:
Loose but a Pearl, we search and cannot brooke it.
But that once gone, who is so mad to look it.
Troth he says true.
False, I defy you both:
I have endured you with an ear of fire,
Your Tongues have struck hot irons on my face;
Mother, come from that poisonous woman there.
Where?
Do you not see her, shoe's too inward then:
Slave perish in thy office: you heavens please,
Hence-forth to make the Mother a disease,
Which first begins with me, yet I'ue out-gon you.
O Angels clap your wings upon the skies,
And give this Virgin Crystal plaudities?
Peevish, coy, foolish, but return this answer,
My Lord shall be most welcome, when his pleasure
Conducts him this way, I will sway mine own,
Women with women can work best alone.
Indeed Isle tell him so;
O more uncivil, more unnatural,
Then those base-titled creatures that look downward,
Why do's not heaven tnrne black, or with a frown
Undo the world—why do's not earth start up,
And strike the sins that tread vppon't—oh;
Were not for gold and women; there would be no damnation,
Hell would look like a Lords Great Kitchen without fire in it;
But it was decreed before the world began,
That they should be the hooks to catch, at man.
I much applaud thy judgment, thou art well read in a
fellow,
And it is the deepest Art to study man;
I know this, which I never learnt in schools,
The world's divided into knaves and fools.
Knave in your face my Lord, behind your back.
And I much thank thee, that thou hast preferred,
A fellow of discourse—well mingled,
And whose brain Time hath second.
True my Lord,
We shall find season once I hope;—O villain!
To make such an unnatural slave of me;—but—
Mass here he comes.
And now shall I have free leave to depart.
Your absence, leave vs.
Are not my thoughts true?
I must remove; but brother you may stay,
Heart, we are both made Bawds a new-found way?
Now, we're an even number? a third mans dangerous,
Especially her brother, say, be free,
Have I a pleasure toward.
Oh my Lord.
Ravish me in thine answer, art thou rare,
Hast thou beguiled her of salvation,
And rubbed hell ore with honey; is she a woman?
In all but in Desire.
Then shoe's in nothing,—I bate in courage now.
The words I brought,
Might well have made indifferent honest, nought,
A right good woman in these days in changed,
Into white money with less labour far,
Many a Maid has turned to Mahomet,
With easier working; I durst undertake
Upon the pawn and forfeit of my life.
With half those words to flat a Puritans wife,
But she is close and good;—yet it is a doubt by this time; oh
the mother, the mother?
I never thought their sex had been a wonder,
Until this minute? what fruit from the Mother?
Now must I blister my soul, be forsworn,
Or shame the woman that received me first,
I will be true, thou liu'st not to proclaim,
Spoke to a dying man, shame he's no shame.
My Lord.
Whose that?
Here is none but I my Lord.
What would thy hast utter?
Comfort.
Welcome.
The Maid being dull, having no mind to travel,
Into unknown lands, what did me I straight,
But set spurs to the Mother; golden spurs,
Will put her to a false gallop in a trice,
First possible that in this.
The Mother should be damned before the daughter?
Oh, that's good manners my Lord, the Mother for her
age must go foremost you know.
Thou'st spoke that true but where comes in this comfort.
In a fine place my Lord—the unnatural mother,
Did with her tong so hard be set her honour,
That the poor fool was struck to silent wonder,
Yet still the maid like an unlighted Taper,
Was cold and chaste, save that her Mothers breath,
Did blow fire on her checks, the girl departed,
But the good ancient Madam half mad, threw me
These promising words, which I took deeply note of;
My Lord shall be most welcome,
Faith I thank her,
When his pleasure conducts him this way.
That shall be soon ifath,
I will sway mine own,
She do's the wiser I commend her fort,
Women with women can work best alone,
By this light and so they can, give 'em their due, men are
not comparable to 'em.
No thats true, for you shall have one woman knit
more in a hour then any man can Rauell again in seven and
twenty year.
Now my desires are happy, Isle make 'em free-men now,
Thou art a precious fellow, faith I love thee,
Be wise and make it thy revenue, beg, leg,
What office could thou be Ambitious for?
Office my Lord marry if I might have my wish I would
have one that was never begged yet,
Nay then thou can have none.
Yes my Lord I could pick out another office yet, nay
and keep a horse and drab vppont,
Prithee good bluntness tell me.
Why I would desire but this my Lord, to have all the
fees behind the Arras; and all the farthingales that fall plump
about twelve a clock at night upon the Rushes.
You're a mad apprehensive knave, dost think to make
any great purchase of that.
Oh tic an unknown thing my Lord, I wonder ta's been
mist so long?
Well, this night isle visit her, and tic till then
A year in my desires-farwell, attend,
Trust me with thy preferment.
My loved Lord;
Oh shall I kill him ath wrong-side now, no!
Sword thou wast never a backbiter yet,
Isle pierce him to his face, he shall die, looking upon me,
Thy veins are swelled with lust, this shall vnfill i'm,
Great men were Gods, if beggars could not kill i'm,
Forgive me heaven, to call my mother wicked,
Oh lessen not my days upon the earth
I cannot honour her, by this I fear me
Her tongue has turned my sister into use.
I was a villain not to be forsworn:
To this our lecherous hope, the Dukes son,
For Lawyers, Merchants, some divines and all,
Count beneficial perjury a sin small,
It shall go hard yet, butile guard her honour
And keep the ports sure?
Brother how goes the world? I would know news of you
But I have news to tell you.
What in the name of knavery?
Knavery faith,
This vicious old Duke's worthily abused
The pen of his bastard writes him Cuckold!
His bastard?
Pray believe it, he and the Duchess,
By night meet in their linen, they have been seen
By staire-foote panders!
Oh sin foul and deep,
Great faults are winckt at when the Duke's a sleep,
See, see, here comes the Spurio.
Monstrous Luxur?
Unbraced: two of his valiant bawds with him.
O There's a wicked whisper; hell is in his care
Stay let's observe his passage—
Oh but are you sure on it.
My Lord most sure on it, for it was spoke by one,
That is most inward with the Dukes sons lust:
That he intends within this hour to steal,
Unto Hippolitoes sister, whose chaste life
The mother has corrupted for his use.
Sweet word, sweet occasion, faith then brother
Isle disinherit you in as short time,
As I was when I was begot in hast:
Isle dam you at your pleasure: precious deed
After your lust, oh twill be fine to bleed,
Come let our passing out be soft &amp; wary.
Mark, there, there, that step, now to the Duchess,
This their second meeting, writes the Duke Cuckold
With new additions, his horns newly revived:
Night! thou that look like sunerall Heralds fees
Torn down betimes ith morning, thou hangst fitly
To Grace those sins that have no grace at all,
Now tic full sea a bed over the world,
Theres juggling of all sides, some that were Maids
Even at Sun set are now perhaps ith Toale-booke,
This woman in immodest thin apparel:
Lets in her friend by water, here a Dame
Cunning, nails lether-hindges to a door,
To avoid proclamation,
Now Cuckolds are a quoyning, apace, apace, apace, apace?
And careful sisters spin that thread ith night,
That does maintain them and their bawds ith day!
You flow well brother?
Puh I'm shallow vet,
Too sparing and too modest, shall I tell thee,
If every trick were told thats dealt by night
There are few here that would not blush out right.
I am of that belief too.
Whose this comes,
The Dukes son up so late,—brother fall back,
And you shall learn, some mischief,—my good Lord.
Piato, why the man I wished for, come,
I do embrace this season for the fittest
To taste of that young Lady?
Heart, and hell.
Damned villain.
I ha no way now to cross it, but to kill him.
Come only thou and I.
My Lord my Lord.
Why dost thou start vs?
Id almost forgot—the bastard!
What of him?
This night, this hour—this minute, now.
What? what?
Shadows the Duchess—
Horrible word.
And like strong poison eats,
Into the Duke your fathers fore-head.
Oh.
He makes horn royal.
Most ignoble slave?
This is the fruit of two beds.
I am mad.
That passage he trod warily:
He did!
And hushed his villains every step he took.
His villains? isle confound them.
Take i'm finely, finely, now.
The Duchess Chamber-doore shall not control me.
Good, happy, swift, there's gunpowder ith Court,
Wilde fire at mid-night, in this heedless fury
He may show violence to cross himself,
Isle follow the Event.
Where is that villain?
Sofly my Lord and you may take i'm twisted.
I care not how!
Oh twill be glorious,
To kill i'm doubled, when their heaped, be soft my Lord.
Away my spleen is not so lazy, thus and thus,
Isle shake their eye-lids op, and with my sword
Shut i'm again for ever;—villain, strumpet—
You upper Guard defend vs.
Treason, treason.
Oh take me not in sleep, I have great sins, I must have days,
Nay months dear son, with penitential heaves,
To lift 'em out, and not to die vncleere,
O thou wilt kill me both in heaven and here.
I am amazed to death.
Nay villain traitor,
Worse then the foulest Epithet, now Isle gripe thee
Ee'n with the Nerues of wrath, and throw thy head
Amongst the Lawyers guard.
How comes the quiet of your Grace disturbed?
This boy that should be my self after me,
Would be my self before me, and in heate
Of that ambition bloodily rushed in
Intending to depose me in my bed?
Duty and naturall-loyalty for-fend.
He called his Father villain; and me strumpet,
A word that I abhor to file my lips with.
That was not so well done Brother?
I am abused—I know ther's no excuse can do me good.
Tic now good policy to be from sight,
His vicious purpose to our sisters honour,
Is crossed beyond our thought.
You little dreamt his Father slept here.
Oh it was far beyond me.
But since it fell so;—without fright-full word,
Would he had kilt him, twould have eased our swords.
Be comforted our Duchess, he shall dye.
Whore's this slaue-pander now? out of mine eye,
Guilty of this abuse.
You're villains, Fablers,
You have knaves chins, and harlots tongues, you lie,
And I will dam you with one meal a day.
O good my Lord!
Sbloud you shall never sup.
O I beseech you sir.
To let my sword—Catch cold so long and miss him.
Troth my Lord—It was his intent to meet there.
Heart hoe's yonder?
Ha? what news here? is the day out ath-socket,
That it is Noon at Mid-night; the Court up,
How comes the Guard so saucy with his elbows?
The Bastard here?
Nay then the truth of my intent shall out,
My Lord and Father hear me.
Bear him hence.
I can with loyalty excuse.
Excuse? to prison with the Villain,
Death shall not long lag after him.
Good in faith, then it is not much amiss,
Brothers, my best release lies on your tongues,
I pray persuade for me.
It is our duties: make your self sure of vs.
Weal sweat in pleading.
And I may live to thank you.
No, thy death shall thank me better.
Hoe's gon: Isle after him,
And know his trespass, seem to bear a part
In all his ills, but with a Puritan heart.
Now brother, let our hate and love be woven
So subtly together, that in speaking one word for his life,
We may make three for his death,
The craftiest pleader gets most gold for breath.
Set on, Isle not be far behind you brother.
First possible a son should bee disobedient as far as
the sword: it is the highest he can go no farther.
My gracious Lord, take pity,—
Pity boys?
Nay weed be loath to move your Grace too much,
Wee know the tre'passe is unpardonable,
Black, wicked, and unnatural,
In a Son, oh Monstrous.
Yet my Lord,
A Dukes soft hand strokes the rough head of law,
And makes it lye smooth.
But my hand shall ne'er doot.
That as you please my Lord.
Wee must needs confess,
Some father would have entered into hate,
So deadly pointed, that before his eyes,
Hee would ha seen the execution sound,
Without corrupted favour?
But my Lord,
Your Grace may live the wonder of all times,
In pardning that offence which never yet
Had face to beg a pardon.
Honey, how's this?
Forgive him good my Lord, hee s your own son,
And I must needs say it was the vildlier done.
Hoe's the next heir—yet this true reason gathers,
None can possess that dispossess their fathers:
Be merciful;—
Here's no Step-mothers-wit,
Isle try 'em both upon their love and hate.
Be merciful—although—
You have prevailed,
My wrath like flaming wax hath spent it self,
I know it was but some peevish Moon in him: go, let him bee releasd.
Sfoote how now Brother?
Your Grace doth please to speak beside your spleen,
I would it were so happy?
Why go, release him.
O my good Lord, I know the fault's too weighty,
And full of general loathing; too inhumaine,
Rather by all men's voices worthy death.
Tic true too; here then, receive this signet, doom shall pass,
Direct it to the Judges, he shall dye
Ere many days, make hast.
All speed that may be,
We could have wished his burden not so sore,
We knew your Grace did but delay before.
Here's Envy with a poor thin cover or't,
Like Scarlet hid in lawn, easily spied through,
This their ambition by the Mothers side,
Is dangerous, and for safety must be purgd,
I will prevent their envies, sure it was
But some mistaken fury in our son,
Which these aspiring boys would climb upon:
He shall bee releasde suddenly.
Good morning to your Grace.
Welcome my Lords.
Our knees shall take away the office of our feet for ever,
Unless your Grace bestow a fathers eye,
Upon the Clouded fortunes of your son,
And in compassionate virtue grant him that,
Which makes even mean men happy; liberty
How seriously their loves and honours woo
For that, which I am about to pray them doo
Which, rise my Lords, your knees sign his release,
We freely pardon him.
We owe your Grace much thanks, and he much duty.
It well becomes that Judge to nod at crimes,
That dos commit greater himself and lives:
I may forgive a disobedient error,
That expect pardon for adultery
And in my old days am a youth in lust:
Many a beauty have I turned to poison
In the denial, covetous of all,
Age hot, is like a Monster to be seen:
My hairs are white, and yet my sins are Greene.
Brother, let my opinion sway you once,
I speak it for the best, to have him die:
Surest and soonest, if the signet come,
Unto the judges hands, why then his doom,
Will be deferd till sittings and Court-daies:
Juries and further,—Faiths are bought and sold,
Oths in these days are but the skin of gold.
In troth tic true too!
Then lets set by the Judges
And fall to the Officers, tic but mistaking
The Duke our fathers meaning, and where he named,
Ere many days, tic but forgetting that
And, have him die in the morning.
Excellent,
Then am I heir—Duke in a minute.
Nay,
And he were once puff out, here is a pin.
Should quickly prick your bladder.
Blast occasion,
He being packed, weal have some trick and wile,
To wind our younger brother out of prison,
That lies in for the Rape, the Ladies dead,
And peoples thoughts will soon be buried.
We may with safety do it, and live and feed,
The Duchesse-sonnes are too proud to bleed,
We are in faith to say true.—come let's not linger
Isle to the Officers, go you before,
And set an edge upon the Executioner.
Let me alone to grind him.
Meet; farewell,
I am next now, Irise just in that place,
Where you're cut of, upon thy Neck kind brother,
The falling of one head, lifts up another.
My Lords? I am so much indebted to your loves,
For this, O this delivery.
But our duties, my Lord, unto the hopes that grow in you,
If ere I live to be my self isle thank you,
O liberty thou sweet and heavenly Dame;
But hell for prison is too mild a name.
Officers? here is the Dukes signet, your firm warrant,
Brings the command of present death a long with it
Unto our brother, the Dukes son; we are sorry,
That we are so unnaturally employed
In such an unkind Office, fitter far
For enemies then brothers.
But you know,
The Dukes command must be obeyed.
It must and shall my Lord—this morning then,
So suddenly?
I alas poore-good-soule,
Hee must break fast betimes, the executioner
Stands ready to put forth his cowardly valour.
Already?
Already ifath, O sir, destruction hies,
And that is least Impudent, soonest dyes,
Troth you say true my Lord we take our leaves,
Our Office shall be sound, weal not delay,
The third part of a minute.
I herein you show.
Your selves good men, and upright officers,
Pray let him die as private as he may,
Doe him that favour, for the gaping people.
Will but trouble him at his prayers,
And make him curse, and swear, and so die black.
Will you be so far Kind?
It shall be done my Lord.
Why we do thank you, if we live to be,
You shall have a better office,
Your good Lordship,
Commend vs to the scaffold in our tears.
Weal weep and doe your commendations,
Fine fools in office!
Things fall our so fit.
So happily, come brother ere next clock,
His head will be made serve a bigger block.
Keeper.
My Lord.
No news lately from our brothers?
Are they unmindful of vs?
My Lord a messenger came newly in and brought this from 'em,
Nothing but paper comforts?
I looked for my delivery before this,
Had they been worth their oths—prithee be from vs.
Now what say you forsooth, speak out I pray,
Letter. Brother be of good cheer,
Slut it begins like a whore with good cheer,
Thou shalt not be long a prisoner.
Not five and thirty year like a banqrout, I think so,
We have thought upon a device to get thee out by a trick!
By a trick, pox a your trick and it be so long a playing.
And so rest comforted, be merry and expect it suddenly!
Be merry, hang merry, draw and quarter merry, Isle be mad.
First not strange that a man should lie in a whole month for a wo∣man,
well, wee shall see how sudden our brothers: will bee in
their promise, I must expect still a trick! I shall not bee long a
prisoner, how now, what news?
Bad news my Lord I am discharged of you.
Slave call thou that bad news, I thank you brothers.
My Lord twill prove so, here come the Officers,
Into whose hands I must commit you.
Ha, Officers what, why?
You must pardon vs my Lord,
Our Office must be sound, here is our warrant
The signet from the Duke, you must straight suffer.
Suffer? isle suffer you to be gon, isle suffer you,
To come no more, what would you have me suffer?
My Lord those words were better changed to prayers,
The times but brief with you, prepare to die.
Sure tic not so.
It is too true my Lord.
I tell you tic not, for the Duke my father,
Defend me till next sitting, and I look
Even every minute threescore times an hour,
For a release, a trick wrought by my brothers.
A trick my Lord? if you expect such comfort,
Your hopes as fruitless as a barren woman:
Your brothers were the unhappy messengers,
That brought this powerful token for your death.
My brothers, no, no.
Tic most true my Lord.
My brothers to bring a warrant for my death
How strange this shows?
There's no delaying time.
Desire i'm hither, call i'm up, my brothers?
They shall deny it to your faces.
My Lord,
They're far enough by this, at least at Court,
And this most strict command they left behind i'm,
When grief swum in their eyes, they showed like brothers,
Brim-full of heavy sorrow: but the Duke
Must have his pleasure.
His pleasure?
These were their last words which my memory bears,
Commend vs to the Scaffold in our tears.
Pox dry their tears, what should I do with tears?
I hate em worse then any Citizens son
Can hate salt water; here came a letter now,
New-bleeding from their Pens, scarce stinted yet,
Would lt been torn in pieces when I tore it,
Look you officious whoresons words of comfort,
Not long a Prisoner.
It says true in that sir, for you must suffer presently.
A villainous Duns, upon the letter knavish exposition,
Look you then here sir: Weal get thee out by a trick says hee.
That may hold too sir, for you know a Trick is com∣monly
four Cards, which was meant by vs four officers.
Worse and worse dealing.
The hour beckons vs,
The heads-man waits, lift up your eyes to heaven.
I thank you faith; good pritty-holsome counsel,
I should look up to heaven as you sedd,
Whilst he behind me cozens me of my head,
I thats the Trick.
You delay too long my Lord.
Stay good Authorities Bastards, since I must
Through Brothers perjury dye, O let me venom
Their souls with curses.
Come tic no time to curse.
Must I bleed then, without respect of sign? well—
My fault was sweet sport, which the world approoues,
I dye for that which every woman loves.
O sweet, delectable, rare, happy, ravishing,
Why what's the matter brother?
O tic able, to make a man spring up, &amp; knock his for-head
Against yon silver seeling.
Pre-thee tell me,
Why may not I partake with you? you vowed once
To give me share to every tragic thought.
Byth' Mass I think I did too,
Then Isle divide it to thee,—the old Duke
Thinking my outward shape, and inward heart
Are cut out of one peace; (for he that prates his secrets,
His heart stands ath out side) hires me by price:
To greet him with a Lady,
In some fit place veiled from the eyes ath Court,
Some darkened blushless Angle, that is guilty
Of his fore-fathers lusts, and great-folkes riots,
To which (I easily to maintain my shape)
Consented, and did wish his impudent grace
To meet her here in this vn-sunned-lodge,
Where-in tic night at noon, and here the rather,
Because unto the torturing of his soul,
The Bastard and the Duchess have appointed
Their meeting too in this luxurious circle,
Which most afflicting sight will kill his eyes
Before we kill the rest of him.
Twill in faith, most dreadfully digested,
I see not how you could have mist me brother.
True, but the violence of my joy forgot it.
I, but whore's that Lady now?
Oh at that word,
I'm lost again, you cannot find me yet
I'm in a throng of happy Apprehensions.
Hoe's suited for a Lady, I have took care
For a delicious lip, a sparkling eye,
You shall be witness brother;
Be ready stand with your hat off.
Troth I wonder what Lady it should be?
Yet tic no wonder, now I think again,
To have a Lady stoop to a Duke, that stoops unto his men,
Tic common to be common, through the world:
And there's more private common shadowing vices,
Then those who are known both by their names and prices
Tic part of my alleagance to stand bare,
To the Dukes Concubine,—and here she comes.
Madame his grace will not be absent long.
Secret? ne'er doubt vs Madame? twill be worth
Three velvet gowns to your Ladyship—known?
Few Ladies respect that? disgrace, a poor thin shell,
Tic the best grace you have to do it well,
Isle save your hand that labour, isle unmask you?
Why brother, brother.
Art thou beguiled now? tut, a Lady can,
At such all hid, beguile a wiser man,
Have I not fitted the old surfetter
With a quaint peace of beauty, age and bare bone
Are ere allied in action; here's an eye,
Able to tempt a greatman—to serve God,
A pretty hanging lip, that has for got now to dissemble
Me thinks this mouth should make a swearer tremble.
A drunckard clasp his teeth, and not undo i'm,
To suffer wet damnation to run through i'm.
Here is a cheek keeps her colour let the wind go whistle,
Spout Rain, we fear thee not, be hot or cold
Alls one with vs; and is not he absurd,
Whose fortunes are upon their faces set,
That fear no other God but wind and wet.
Brother you've spoke that right,
Is this the form that living shone so bright?
The very same,
And now me thinks I cold even chide my self,
For doting on her beauty, tho her death
Shall be revenged after no common action;
Do's the Silke-worme expend her yellow labours
For thee? for thee dos she undo herself?
Are Lord-ships sold to maintain Lady-ships
For the poor benefit of a bewitching minute?
Why dos yon fellow falsify hie-waies
And put his life between the Judges lips,
To refine such a thing keeps horse and men
To beat their valours for her?
Surely wee're all mad people, and they
Whom we think are, are not, we mistake those,
Tic we are mad in sconce, they but in clothes.
Faith and in clothes too we, give vs our due.
Dos every proud and selfe-affecting Dame
Camphor her face for this? an dgrieue her Maker
In sinful baths of milk,—when many an infant starves,
For her superfluous out-side, all for this?
Who now bids twenty pound a night, prepares
Music, perfumes, and sweete-meates, all are hushed,
Thou moist lie chaste now! it were fine me thinks:
To have thee seen at Revels, forgetful feasts,
And unclean Brothels; sure twould fright the sinner
And make him a good coward, put a Reveller,
Out off his Antic amble
And cloy an Epicure with empty dishes?
Here might a scornesull and ambitious woman,
Look through and through her self,—see Ladies, with false forms,
You deceive men, but cannot deceive worms.
Now to my tragic business, look you brother,
I have not fashiond this only—for show
And useless property, no, it shall bear a part
Even in it own Revenge. This very skull,
Whose Mistress the Duke poisoned, with this drug
The mortal curse of the earth; shall be revenged
In the like strain, and kiss his lips to death,
As much as the dumb thing can, he shall feel:
What fails in poison, weal supply in steel.
Brother I do applaud thy constant vengeance,
The quaintness of thy malice aboue thought.
So tic laid on: now come and welcome Duke,
I have her for thee, I protest it brother:
Me thinks she makes almost as fair a sine
As some old gentlewoman in a Periwig?
Hide thy face now for shame, thou had need have a Mask now
Tic vain when beauty flows, but when it fleets
This would become graves better then the streets.
You have my voice in that; hark, the Duke's come.
Peace, let's observe what company he brings,
And how he dos absent i'm, for you know
Heel wish all private,—brother fall you back a little,
With the bony Lady.
That I will.
So, so,—now 9. years vengeance crowd into a minute!
You shall have leave to leave vs, with this charge,
Upon your lives, if we be mist by the Duchess
Or any of the Nobles, to give out,
We're privately rid forth.
Oh happiness!
With some few honourable gentlemen you may say,
You may name those that are away from Court.
Your will and pleasure shall be done my Lord.
Privately rid forth,
He strives to make sure work on it—your good grace?
Piato, well done hast brought her, what Ladyist?
Faith my Lord a Country Lady, a little bashful at first
as most of them are, but after the first kiss my Lord the worst is
past with them, your grace knows now what you have to doo;
sha's some-what a grave look with her—but—
I love that best, conduct her.
Have at all.
In gravest looks the Greatest faults seem less
Give me that sin thats robed in Holiness.
Back with the Torch; brother raise the perfumes.
How sweet can a Duke breath? age has no fault,
Pleasure should meet in a perfumed mist,
Lady sweetly encountered, I came from Court I must bee bold
with you, oh, what's this, oh!
royal villain, white devil;
Oh.
Brother—place the Torch here, that his affrighted eye∣balls
May start into those hollows, Duke; dost know
Yon dreadful vizard, view it well, tic the skull
Of Gloriana, whom thou poysonedst last.
Oh, tas poisoned me.
Did not know that till now?
What are you two?
Villains all three?—the very ragged bone,
Has been sufficiently revenged.
Oh Hippolito? call treason.
Yes my good Lord, treason, treason, treason.
Then I'm betrayed.
Alas poor Lecher in the hands of knaves,
A slavish Duke is baser then his slaves.
My teeth are eaten out.
Had any lest.
I think but few.
Then those that did eat are eaten.
O my tongue.
Your tongue? twill teach you to kiss closer,
Not like a Flobbering Dutchman, you have eyes still:
Look monster, what a Lady hast thou made me,
My once bethrothed wife.
Is it thou villain, nay then—
It is I, it is Vindici, tic I.
And let this comfort thee: our Lord and Father
Fell sick upon the infection of thy frowns,
And dyed in sadness; be that thy hope of life.
Oh?
He had his tongue, yet grief made him die speechless.
Puh, tic but early yet, now isle begin
To stick thy soul with Ulcers, I will make
Thy spirit grievous sore, it shall not rest,
But like some pestilent man toss in thy brest-(mark me duke)
You're a renowned, high, and mighty Cuckold.
Oh!
Thy Bastard, thy bastard rides a hunting in thy brow.
Millions of deaths.
Nay to afflict thee more,
Here in this lodge they meet for damned clips,
Those eyes shall see the in cest of their lips.
Is there a hell besides this, villains?
Villain?
Nay heaven is just, scorns are the hires of scorns,
I ne'er knew yet Adulterer with-out horns.
Once ere they dye it is quited.
Hark the music,
Their banquet is prepared, they're coming—
Oh, kill me not with that sight.
Thou shalt not loose that sight for all thy Duke-doome.
Traitors, murderers?
What? is not thy tongue eaten out yet?
Then weal invent a silence? brother stifle the Torch,
Treason, murder?
Nay faith, weal have you hushed now with thy dagger
Nail down his tongue, and mine shall keep possession
About his heart, if hee but gasp hee dyes,
Wee dread not death to quittance injuries;—Brother,
If he but wink, not brooking the foul object,
Let our two other hands tear up his lids,
And make his eyes like Comets shine through blood,
When the bad bleeds, then is the Tragedy good,
Whist, brother, musick's at our ear, they come.
Had not that kiss a taste of sin it were sweet.
Why there's no pleasure sweet but it is sinful.
True, such a bitter sweetness fate hath given,
Best side to vs, is the worst side to heaven.
Push, come: it is the old Duke thy doubtful Father,
The thought of him rubs heaven in thy way,
But I protest by yonder waxen fire,
Forget him, or isle poison him.
Madam, you urge a thought which ne'er had life,
So deadly doe I loath him for my birth,
That if hee took me haspt within his bed,
I would add murder to adultery,
And with my sword give up his years to death.
Why now you're sociable, lets in and feast,
Lowdst Music sound: pleasure is Banquests guest.
I cannot brooke—
The Brooke is turned to blood.
Thanks to loud Music.
It was our friend indeed,
It is state in Music for a Duke to bleed:
The Duke-dome wants a head, tho yet unknown,
As fast as they peep up, lets cut 'em down.
Was not his execution rarely plotted?
We are the Dukes sons now.
I you may thank my policy for that.
Your policy, for what?
Why wast not my invention brother,
To slip the Judges, and in lesser compass,
Did not I draw the model of his death,
Advising you to sudden officers,
And even extemporal execution.
Heart, it was a thing I thought on too.
You thought ont too, ssoote slander not your thoughts
With glorious untruth, I know it was from you.
Sir I say, it was in my head.
I, like your brains then,
Ne'er to come out as long as you lived.
You'd have the honour on it forsooth, that your wit
Lead him to the scaffold,
Since it is my due,
Isle published, but Isle have it in spite of you.
Me thinks you're much too bold, you should a little
Remember vs brother, next to be honest Duke.
I, it shall be as easy for you to be Duke,
As to be honest, and that's never in faith.
Well, cold he is by this time, and because
Wee're both ambitious, be it our amity,
And let the glory be shard equally.
I am content to that.
This night out younger brother shall out of prison,
I have a trick.
A trick, pre-thee what first?
Weal get him out by a wile.
Pre-thee what wile?
No sir, you shall not know it, till't be done,
For then you'd swear it were yours.
How now, whats he?
One of the officers.
Desired news.
How now my friend?
My Lords, under your pardon, I am allotted
To that desertlesse office, to present you
With the yet bleeding head.
Ha, ha, excellent.
Ell's sure our own: Brother, can weep think thou?
Twould grace our Flattery much; think of some Dame,
Twill teach thee to dissemble.
I have thought,—Now for your self.
Our sorrows are so fluent,
Our eyes ore-flow our tongs, words spoke in tears,
Are like the murmurs of the waters, the sound
Is loudly heard, but cannot be distinguished.
How dyed he pray?
O full of rage and spleen.
He dyed most valiantly then, we're glad to hear it.
We could not woe him once to pray.
He shout himself a Gentleman in that: give him his due.
But in the steed of prayer, he drew forth oaths.
Then did hee pray dear heart,
Although you understood him not.
My Lords,
Even at his last, with pardon bee it spoke,
Hee cursed you both.
Hee cursed vs? lass good soul.
It was not in our powers, but the Dukes pleasure,
Finely dissembled a both-sides, sweet fate,
O happy opportunity.
Now my Lords.
Oh!—
Why doe you shun me Brothers?
You may come nearer now;
The savor of the prison has for-sooke me,
I thank such kind Lords as your selves, Ime free.
Alive!
In health!
Releasd?
We were both ee'n amazed with joy to see it,
I am much to thank you.
Faith we spared no tongue, unto my Lord the Duke.
I know your delivery brother
Had not been half so sudden but for vs.
O how we pleaded.
Most deserving brothers,
In my best studies I will think of it?
O death and vengeance.
Hell and torments.
Slave came thou to delude vs.
Delude you my Lords?
I villain, whore's this head now?
Why here my Lord,
Just after his delivery, you both came
With warrant from the Duke to be-head your brother.
I, our brother, the Dukes son.
The Dukes son my Lord, had his release before you came.
Whose head's that then?
His whom you left command for, your own brothers?
Our brothers? oh furies—
Plagues.
Confusions.
Darkness.
Devils.
Fell it out so accursedly?
So damnedly.
Villain Isle brain thee with it,
O my good Lord!
The Devil ouer-take thee?
O fatal.
O prodigious to our bloods.
Did we dissemble?
Did we make our tears women for thee?
Laugh and rejoice for thee.
Bring warrant for thy death.
Mock off thy head
You had a trick, you had a wile forsooth.
A murren meet 'em, there's none of these wiles that
ever come to good: I see now, there is nothing sure in mortali∣tie,
but mortality, well, no more words shalt be revenged in faith.
Come, throw off clouds now brother, think of vengeance,
And deeper settled hate, sirrah sit fast,
Weal pull down all, but thou shalt down at last.
Hippolito.
My Lord:
Has your good Lordship ought to command me in?
I pre-thee leave vs.
How's this? come and leave vs?
Hippolito.
Your honour—I stand ready for any duteous employment.
Heart, what makst thou here?
A pretty Lordly humour:
He bids me to bee present, to depart; some-thing has stung his honour?
Bee nearer, draw nearer:
Ye'are not so good me thinks, Ime angry with you.
With me my Lord? Ime angry with my self fort.
You did prefer a goodly fellow to me,
It was wittily elected, it was, I thought
Had been a villain, and he proves a Knave?
To me a Knave.
I chose him for the best my Lord,
Tic much my sorrow, if neglect in him, breed discontent in you.
Neglect, it was will: Judge of it,
Firmly to tell of an incredible Act,
Not to be thought, less to be spoken of,
Twixt my Step-mother and the Bastard, oh,
Incestuous sweets between 'em.
Fie my Lord.
I in kind loyalty to my fathers fore-head,
Made this a desperare arm, and in that fury,
Committed treason on the lawful bed,
And with my sword even raced my fathers bosom,
For which I was within a stroke of death.
Alack, Ime sorry; ssoote just upon the stroke,
Iars in my brother, twill be villainous Music.
My honoured Lord.
Away pre-thee forsake vs, hereafter weal not know thee.
Not know me my Lord, your Lordship cannot choose.
Begone I say, thou art a false knave.
Why the easier to be known, my Lord.
Push, I shall prove too bitter with a word,
Make thee a perpetual prisoner,
And lay this yron-age upon thee,
Mum, for theres a doom would make a woman dum,
Missing the bastard next him, the winde's comes about,
Now tic my brothers turn to stay mine to go out.
Has greatly moved me.
Much to blame in faith.
But isle recover, to his ruin: it was told me lately,
I know not whether falsely, that you'd a brother,
Who I, yes my good Lord, I have a brother
How chance the Court near saw him? of what nature?
How does he apply his hours?
Faith to curse Fates,
Who, as he thinks, ordained him to be poor,
Keeps at home full of want and discontent.
There's hope in him, sor discontent and want
Is the best clay to mould, a villain off;
Hippolito, wish him repair to vs,
If there be ought in him to please our blood,
For thy sake weal advance him, and build fair
His meanest fortunes: for it is in vs
To rear up Towers from cottages.
It is so my Lord, he will attend your honour,
But hes a man, in whom much melancholy dwells.
Why the better: bring him to Court.
With willingness and speed,
Whom he cast off even now, must now succeed,
Brother disguise must off,
In thine own shape now, isle prefer thee to him:
How strangely does himself work to undo him.
This fellow will come fitly, he shall kill,
That other slave, that did abuse my spleen,
And made it swell to Treason, I have put
Much of my heart into him, hee must dye.
He that knows great men's secrets and proves slight,
That man ne'er lives to see his Beard turn white:
I he shall speed him: Isle employ thee brother,
Slaves are but Nails, to drive out one another?
Hee being of black condition, suitable
To want and ill content, hope of preferment
Will grind him to an Edge—The Nobles enter.
Good days unto your honour.
My kind Lords, I do return the like,
Saw you my Lord the Duke?
My Lord and Father, is he from Court?
Hes sure from Court,
But where, which way, his pleasure took we know not,
Nor can wee heareont.
Here come those should tell,
Saw you my Lord and Father?
Not since two hours before noon my Lord,
And then he privately rid forth.
Oh hes rod forth.
It was wondrous privately,
Theres none ith Court had any knowledge ont.
His Grace is old, and sudden, tic no treason
To say, the Duke my Father has a humour,
Or such a Toy about him; what in vs
Would appear light, in him seems virtuous.
Tic Oracle my Lord.
So, so, ell's as it should be, you're your self.
How that great-villaine puts me to my shifts.
Hee that did lately, in disguise reject thee;
Shall now thou art thy self, as much respect thee.
Twill be the quainter fallacy; but brother,
Sfoote what use will hee put me to now think thou?
Nay you must pardon me in that, I know not:
Has some employment for you: but what tic
Hee and his Secretary the Devil knows best.
Well I must suite my tongue to his desires,
What colour so ere they be; hoping at last
To pile up all my wishes on his breast,
Faith Brother he himself shows the way.
Now the Duke is dead, the realm is clad in clay:
His death being not yet known, under his name
The people still are governed; well, thou his son
Art not long-liu'd, thou shalt not joy his death:
To kill thee then, I should most honour thee;
For twould stand firm in every mans belief,
Thou'st a kind child, and only died with grief.
You fetch about well, but lets talk in present,
How will you appear in fashion different,
As well as in apparel, to make all things possible:
If you be but once tripped, wee fall for ever.
It is not the least policy to bee doubtful,
You must change tongue:—familiar was your first.
Why Isle bear me in some strain of melancholy,
And string my self with heavy—sounding Wire,
Like such an Instrument, that speaks merry things sadly.
Then tic as I meant,
I gave you out at first in discontent.
Isle turn my self, and then—
Sfoote here he comes: hast thought vppont.
Salute him, fear not me.
Hippolito.
Your Lordship.
What's he yonder?
Tic Vindici, my discontented Brother,
Whom, cording to your will l'aue brought to Court.
Is that thy brother? beshrew me, a good presence,
I wonder he has been from the Court so long?
Come nearer.
Brother, Lord Lussurioso the Duke son.
Be more near to vs, welcome, nearer yet.
How don you? god you god den.
We thank thee?
How strangely such a course-homely salute,
Shows in the Palace, where we greet in fire:
Nimble and desperate tongues, should we name,
God in a salutation, twould near be stood on it,heaven!
Tell me, what has made thee so melancholy.
Why, going to Law.
Why will that make a man melancholy?
Yes, to look long upon inck and black buckrom—I
went me to law in Anno Quadragesimo secundo, and I waded
out of it, in Anno sextagesimo tertio.
What, three and twenty years in law?
I have known those that have been five and fifty and
all about Pullin and Pigs.
May it bee possible such men should breath,
To vex the Terms so much.
Tic food to some my Lord.
There are old men at the present, that are so poisoned
with the affectatiō of law-words, (having had many suites can∣uast,)
that their common talk is nothing but Barbery latin:
they cannot so much as pray, but in law, that their sins may
be removed, with a writ of Error, and their souls fetched up to
heaven, with a siserary.
It seems most strange to me,
Yet all the world meets round in the same bent:
Where the hearts set, there goes the tongues consent,
How dost apply thy studies fellow?
Study why to think how a great rich man lies a dying,
and a poor Cobbler toales the bell for him? how he cannot de∣part
the world, and see the great chest-stand before him, when
hee lies speechless, how hee will point you readily to all the
boxes, and when hee is past all memory, as the gossips guess,
then thinks hee of forffetures and obligations, nay when to all
men's hearings he whurles and rotles in the throat hoe's bus∣sie
threatening his poor Tenants? and this would last me now
some seven years thinking or there abouts? but, I have a
Conceit a coming in picture upon this, I draw it my self,
which in faith la Isle present to your honour, you shall not chose
but like it for your Lordship shall give me nothing for it,
Nay you mistake me then,
For I am published bountiful enough,
Lets taste of your conceit.
In picture my Lord.
I in picture,
Marry this it is—A vsuring Father to be boiling in hell,
and his son and Heir with a Whore dancing over him.
Has par'd him to the quick.
The conceit's pretty in faith,
But tak't upon my life twill ne'er be liked.
No, why Ime sure the whore will be liked well enough.
I if she were out ath picture heed like her then himself.
And as for the son and heir, he shall be an eyefore to
no young Revellers, for hee shall bee drawn in cloth of gold
breeches.
And thou hast put my meaning in the pock,
And can not draw that out, my thought was this, ets
To see the picture of a vsuring father
Boiling in hell, our richmen would ne'er like it,
O true I cry you heartly mercy I hnow the reason, for
some of'em had rather be damned indeed, thē damned in colours.
A parlous melancholy, has wit enough,
To murder any man, and Isle give him means,
I think thou art ill monied;
Money, ho, ho,
Tas been my want so long, tic now my scoff.
Iue en forgot what colour siluers off,
It hits as I could wish,
I get good cloths,
Of those that dread my humour, and for table-roome,
I feed on those that cannot be rid of me,
Somewhat to set thee up withal,
O mine eyes,
How now man.
Almost struck blind,
This bright unusual shine, to me seems proud,
I dare not look till the sun be in a cloud,
I think I shall afecte his melancholy,
How are they now.
The better for you rasking.
You shall be better yet if you but fasten,
Truly on my intent, now yare both present
I will unbrace such a close private villain,
Unto your vengfull swords, the like ne'er heard of,
Who hath disgraced you much and injured vs,
Disgraced vs my Lord?
I Hippolito.
I kept it here till now that both your angers,
Might meet him at once,
Ime covetous,
To know the villain,
You know him that slave Pander,
Piato whom we threatened last
With irons in perpetual prisonment;
All this is I.
First he my Lord?
Isle tell you, you first preferred him to me.
Did you brother.
I did indeed?
And the ingreatfull villain,
To quit that kindness, strongly wrought with me,
Being as you see a likely man for pleasure,
With jewels to corrupt your virgin sister.
Oh villain,
He shall furely die that did it.
I far from thinking any Virgin harm.
Especially knowing her to be as chaste
As that part which scarce suffers to be touched,
The eye would not endure him,
Would you not my Lord,
It was wondrous honourably donne,
But with some five frowns kept him out,
Out slave.
What did me he but in revenge of that,
Went of his own free will to make infirm,
Your sisters honour, whom I honour with my soul,
For chaste respect, and not prevailing there,
(As it was but desperate folly to attempt it,)
In mere spleen, by the way, way lays your mother,
Whose honour being a coward as it seems.
Yielded by little force.
Coward indeed.
He proud of their advantage, (as he thought)
Brought me these news for happy, but I, heaven forgive me for it.
What did your honour.
In rage pushed him from me.
Trampled beneath his throat, spurnd him, and bruised:
Indeed I was too cruel to say troth.
Most Nobly managde.
Has not heaven an ear? Is all the lightning wasted?
If I now were so impatient in a modest cause,
What should you be?
Full mad, he shall not live
To see the Moon change.
He's about the Palace,
Hippolito entice him this way, that thy brother
May take full mark of him.
Heart?—that shall not need my Lord,
I can direct him so far.
Yet for my hates sake,
Go, wind him this way? isle see him bleed my self.
What now brother?
Nay even what you will—you're put to it brother?
An impossible task, Isle swear,
To bring him hither, thats already here.
Thy name, I have forgot it?
Vindice my Lord.
Tic a good name that.
I, a Revenger.
It dos betoken courage, thou should be valiant,
And kill thine enemies.
Thats my hope my Lord.
This slave is one.
Isle doom him.
Then isle praise thee?
Do thou observe me best, and Isle best raise thee.
Indeed, I thank you.
Now Hippolito, whore's the slave Pander?
Your good Lordship,
Would have a loathsome sight of him, much offensive?
Hoe's not in case now to be seen my Lord,
The worst of all the deadly sins is in him:
That beggarly damnation, drunkenness.
Then he's a double-slaue.
It was well conveyed, upon a sudden wit.
What, are you both,
Firmly resolved, isle see him dead my self.
Or else, let not vs live.
You may direct your brother to take note of him.
I shall.
Rise but in this, and you shall never fall.
Your honours Vassayles.
This was wisely carried,
Deep policy in vs, makes fools of such:
Then must a slave die, when he knows too much.
O thou almighty patience, tic my wonder,
That such a fellow, impudent and wicked,
Should not be cloven as he stood:
Or with a secret wind burst open!
Is there no thunder left, or first kept up
In stock for heavier vengeance, there it goes!
Brother we loose our selves?
But I have found it,
Twill hold, tic sure, thanks, thanks to any spirit,
That mingled it amongst my inventions.
What first?
Tic sound, and good, thou shalt partake it,
I'm hired to kill my self.
True.
Prithee mark it,
And the old Duke being dead, but not conveyed,
For he's already mist too, and you know:
Murder will peep out of the closest husk.
Most true?
What say you then to this device,
If we dressed up the body of the Duke.
In that disguise of yours.
You're quick, y' aue reached it.
I like it wondrously.
And being in drink, as you have published him,
To lean him on his elbow, as if sleep had caught him:
Which claims most interest in such sluggy men.
Good yet, but here's a doubt,
Me thought by the Dukes son to kill that pander,
Shall when he is known be thought to kill the Duke.
Neither, O thanks, it is substantial
For that disguise being on him, which I wore,
It will be thought I, which he calls the Pander, did kill the Duke,
&amp; fled away in his apparel, leaving him so disguised, to avoid
swift pursuit.
Firmer, and firmer.
Nay doubt not tic in grain, I warrant it hold colour.
Lets about it.
But by the way too, now I think on it, brother,
Let's conjure that base devil out of our Mother.
Madam, unlock your self, should it be seen,
Your arm would be suspected.
Who its that dares suspect, or this, or these?
May not we deal our favours where we please?
I'm confident, you may.
Sfoot brother hold.
Woult let the Bastard shame vs?
Hold, hold, brother? there's fitter time then now.
Now when I see it.
Tic too much seen already.
Seen and known,
The Nobler she's, the baser is she grown.
If she were bent lasciviously, the fault
Of mighty women, that sleep soft,—O death,
Must she needs choose such an unequal sinner:
To make all worse.
A Bastard, the Dukes Bastard, Shame heaped on shame.
O our disgrace.
Most women have small waste the world through-out,
But there desires are thousand miles about.
Come stay not here, lets after, and prevent,
Or else the isle sin faster then weal repent.
O thou? for whom no name is bad enough.
What means my sons what will you murder me?
Wicked unnatural Parents.
•and of women.
Ohlare sons turned monsters? help.
In vain.
Are you so barbarous to set Iron nipples
Upon the breast that gave you suck.
That breast,
Is turned to Quarled poison.
Cut not your days for it, am not I your mother?
I thou dost usurp that title now by fraud
For in that shell of mother breeds a bawd.
A bawd? O name far oathsomer then hell.
It should be so knew thou thy Office well.
I hate it.
Ah first possible, Thou only, you powers on hie,
That women should dissemble when they die.
Dissemble.
Did not the Dukes son direct
A fellow, of the worlds condition, hither,
That did corrupt all that was good in thee:
Made thee uncivilly forget thy self,
And work our sister to his lust.
Who I,
That had been monstrous? I defy that man:
For any such intent, none lives so pure,
But shall be soiled with slander,—good son believe it not,
Oh I'm in doubt,
Whether I'm my self, or no,
Stay, let me look again upon this face.
Who shall be saved when mothers have no grace.
Twould make one half despair.
I was the man,
Defy me, now? lets see, do it modestly.
O hell unto my soul.
In that disguise, I sent from the Dukes son,
Tried you, and found you base mettell,
As any villain might have donne.
One, no tongue but yours could have bewitched me so.
O nimble in damnation, quick in tune,
There is no devil could strike fire so soon:
I am confuted in a word.
Oh sons, forgive me, to my self isle prove more true,
You that should honour me, I kneel to you.
A mother to give aim to her own daughter.
True brother, how far beyond nature it is,
Tho many Mothers do it.
Nay and you draw tears once, go you to bed,
Wet will make iron blush and change to red:
Brother it rains, twill spoil your dagger, house it.
Tic done.
In faith tic a sweet shower, it dos much good,
The fruitful grounds, and meadows of her soul,
Has been long dry: power down thou blessed dew,
Rise Mother, troth this shower has made you higher.
O you heavens? take this infectious spot out of my soul,
Isle rinse it in seven waters of mine eyes?
Make my tears salt enough to taste of grace,
To weep, is to our sex: naturally given:
But to weep truly thats a gift from heaven?
Nay Isle kiss you now: kiss her brother?
Lets marry her to our souls, wherein's no lust,
And honourably love her.
Let it be.
For honest women are so silt and rare,
Tic good to cherish those poor few that are.
Oh you of easy wax, do but imagine
Now the disease has left you, how leprously
That Office would have clung unto your forehead,
All mothers that had any graceful hue,
Would have worn masks to hide their face at you:
It would have grown to this, at your foul name;
Greene-collour'd maids would have turned red with shame?
And then our sister full of hire, and baseness.
There had been boiling lead again,
The dukes sons great Concubine:
A drab of State, a cloth a silver slut,
To have her train borne up, and her soul trail in the dirt; great.
To be miserably great, rich to be eternally wretched.
O common madness:
Ask but the thriuingst harlot in cold blood,
Shed give the world to make her honour good,
Perhaps you'll say but only to'th Dukes son,
In private; why, she first begins with one,
Who afterword to thousand proves a whore:
Break Ice in one place, it will crack in more.
Most certainly applied?
Oh Brother, you forget our business.
And well remembered, ioye's a subtle elf,
I think man's happiest, when he forgets himself:
Farewell once dried, now holy-watred Mead,
Our hearts wear Feathers, that before wore Lead.
Isle give you this, that one I never knew
Plead better, for, and against the Devil, then you.
You make me proud ont.
Commend vs in all virtue to our Sister.
I for the love of heaven, to that true maid.
With my best words.
Why that was motherly said.
I wonder now what fury did transport me?
I feel good thoughts begin to settle in me.
Oh with what fore-head can I look on her?
Whose honour I'ue so impiously beset,
And here she comes,
Now mother, you have wrought with me so strongly,
That what for my advancement, as to calm
The trouble of your tongue: I am content.
Content, to what?
To do as you have wished me,
To prostitute my breast to the Dukes son:
And put my self to common Usury.
I hope you will not so.
Hope you I will not?
That's not the hope you look to be saved in.
Truth but it is.
Do not deceive your self,
I am, as you even out of Marble wrought,
What would you now, are ye not pleased yet with me,
You shall not wish me to be more lascivious
Then I intend to be.
Strike not me cold,
How often have you charged me on your blessing
To be a cursed woman—when you knew,
Your blessing had no force to make me lewd,
You laid your curse upon me, that did more,
The mothers curse is heavy, where that fights,
Sons set in storm, and daughters loose their lights?
Good child, dear maid, if there be any spark
Of heavenly intellectual fire within thee, oh let my breath,
Revive it to a flame:
Put not all out, with women's wilful follies,
I am recovered of that foul disease
That haunts too many mothers, kind forgive me,
Make me not sick in health?—if then
My words prevailed when they were wickedness,
How much more now when they are just and good?
I wonder what you mean, are not you she
For whose infect persuasions I could scarce
Kneel out my prayers, and had much ado
In three hours reading, to vntwist so much
Of the black serpent, as you wound about me.
Tic unfruitful, held tedious to repeat whats past,
Ime now your present Mother.
Push, now it is too late,
Bethink again, thou know not what thou say.
No, deny advancement, treasure, the Dukes son.
O see, I spoke those words, and now they poison me:
What will the deed do then?
Advancement, true: as high as shame can pitch,
For Treasure; who ere knew a harlot rich?
Or could build by the purchase of her sin,
An hospital to keep their bastards in: The Dukes son,
Oh when women are young Courtiers, they are sure to be old beggars,
To know the miseries most harlots taste,
Thoudst wish thy self unborn, when thou art unchaste.
O mother let me twine about your neck,
And kiss you till my soul melt on your lips,
I did but this to try you.
O speak truth.
Indeed I did not, for no tong has force to alter me from honest
If maidens would, men's words could have no power,
A virgin honour is a crystal Tower.
Which being weak is guarded with good spirits,
Until she basely yields no ill inherits.
O happy child! faith and thy birth hath saved me,
Amongst thousand daughters happiest of all others,
Buy thou a glass for maids and I for mothers.
So, so, he leanes well, take heed you wake him not bro∣there
I warrant you my life for yours.
Thats a good lay, for I must kill my self?
Brother thats I: that sits for me: do you mark it,
And I must stand ready here to make away my self yonder—I
must sit to bee kilt, and stand to kill my self, I could varry it
not so little as thrice over again, tas some eight returns like
Michelmas Term.
Thats enough a conscience.
But sirrah dos the Dukes son come single?
No, there's the hell on it, his faith's too feeble to go alone?
hee brings flesh-flies after him, that will buzz against supper
time, and hum for his coming out.
Ah the fly-flop of vengeance beat 'em to pieces? here
was the sweetest occasion, the fittest hour, to have made my
revenge familiar with him, show him the body of the Duke his
father, and how quaintly he died like a Politician in hugger∣mugger,
made no man acquainted with it, and in Catastrophe
slain him over his fathers breast, and oh I'm mad to loose such a
sweet opportunity.
Nay push, prithee be content! there's no remedy pre∣sent,
may not hereafter times open in as fair faces as this.
They may if they can paint so well?
Come, now to avoid al suspicion, lets forsake this room,
and be going to meet the Dukes son.
Content, I'm for any whether? heart step close, here hee comes?
My honoured Lord?
Oh me; you both present.
Even newly my Lord, just as your Lordship entered now? a∣bout
this place we had notice given hee should bee, but in some
Came your honour private?
Private enough for this: only a few
Attend my coming out.
Death rot those few.
Stay yonder's the slave.
Mass there's the slave indeed my Lord;
Tic a good child, he calls his Father slave.
I, thats the villain, the damned villain: softly,
Tread easy.
Puh, I warrant you my Lord, weal stifle in our breaths.
That will do well:
Base rogue, thou sleep thy last, tic policy,
To have him killed in's sleep, for if he waked
Hee would betray all to them.
But my Lord.
Ha, what say?
Shall we kill him now hes drunk?
I best of all.
Why then hee will ne'er live to be sober?
No matter, let him reel to hell.
But being so full of liquor, I fear hee will put out all the fire,
Thou art a mad breast.
And leave none to warm your Lordships Gols withal;
For he that dyes drunk, falls into hell fire like a Bucket a water,
qush qush.
Come be ready, neck your swords, think of your wrongs
This slave has injured you.
Troth so he has, and he has paid well fort.
Meet with him now.
You'll bear vs out my Lord?
Puh, am I a Lord for nothing think you, quickly, now.
Sa, sa, sa: thumpe, there he lies.
Nimbly done, ha? oh, villains, murderers,
Tic the old Duke my father.
That's a jest.
What stiff and cold already?
O pardon me to call you from your names:
Tic none of your deed,—that villain Piato
Whom you thought now to kill, has murderd him,
And left him thus disguised.
And no unlikely.
O •ascall was he not ashamed,
To put the Duke into a greasy doublet.
He has been cold and stiff who knows, how long?
Marry that do I.
No words I pray, off any thing intended:
Oh my Lord.
I would same have your Lordship think that we have
small reason to prate.
Faith thou say true? isle forth-with send to Court,
For all the Nobles, Bastard, Duchess, all?
How here by miracle wee found him dead,
And in his raiment that foul villain fled.
That will be the best way my Lord, to clear vs all: lets
cast about to be clear.
Ho, Nencio, Sordido, and the rest.
My Lord.
My Lord.
Be witnesses of a strange spectacle:
Choosing for private conference that sad room
We found the Duke my father gealde in blood.
My Lord the Duke—run hiethee Nencio,
Startle the Court by signifying so much.
Thus much by wit a deep Revenger can:
When murders known to be the clearest man
We're fordest off, and with as bold an eye,
Survey his body as the standers by.
My royal father, too basely let blood,
By a malevolent slave.
Hark? he calls thee slave again.
He's lost, he may.
Oh sight, look hither, see, his lips are gnawn with poysō.
How—his lips by the mass they bee.
O villain—O rogue—O slave—O rascal:
O good deceit, he quits him with like terms.
Where.
Which way.
Over what roof hangs this prodigious Comet,
In deadly fire.
Behold, behold my Lords the Duke my fathers murderd
by a vassal, that owes this habit, and here left disguised.
My Lord and husband.
Reverend Majesty.
I have seen these cloths, often attending on him.
That Nobleman, has bin ith Country, for he dos not lie?
Learn of our mother lets dissemble to,
I am glad hoe's vanished; so I hope are you?
I you may take my word fort.
Old Dad, dead?
I, one of his cast sins will send the Fates
Most hearty commendations by his own son,
Isle tug in the new strcame, till strength be done.
Where be those two, that did affirm to vs?
My Lord the Duke was privately rid forth?
O pardon vs my Lords, hee gave that charge
Upon our lives if he were mist at Court,
To answer so; hee rode not any where,
We left him private with that fellow here?
Confirmed.
O heavens, that false charge was his death,
Impudent Beggars, durst you to our face,
Maintain such a false answer? bear him straight to execution.
My Lord?
Urge me no more.
In this the excuse, may be called half the murder?
Yo'ue sentencde well.
Away see it be done.
Could you not stick: see what confession doth?
Who would not lie when men are hanged for truth?
Brother how happy is our vengeance.
Why it hits, past the apprehension of indifferent wits.
My Lord let post horse be sent,
Into all places to entrap the villain,
Post-horse ha ha.
My Lord, we're something bold to know our duty?
Your fathers accidentally departed,
The titles that were due to him, meet you.
Meet me? I'm not at leisure my good Lord,
I'ue many griefs to dispatch out ath way:
Welcome sweet titles,—talk to me my Lords,
Offepulchers, and mighty Emperors bones,
Thats thought for me.
So, one may see by this,
How foreign markets go:
Courtiers have feet ath nines, and tongues ath twellues,
They flatter Dukes and Dukes flatter them-selues.
My Lord it is your shine must comfort vs.
Alas I shine in tears like the Sun in April.
Your now my Lords grace?
My Lords grace? I perceive you'll have it so.
Tic but your own.
Then heavens give me grace to be so?
He prays well for him-selfe.
Madame all sorrows,
Must run their circles into joys, no doubt but time,
Will make the murderer bring forth him-selfe.
He were an Ass then in faith?
In the mean season,
Let vs bethink the latest-funerall honours:
Due to the Dukes cold body,—and withal,
Calling to memory our new happiness,
Spread in his royal son,—Lords Gentlemen,
Prepare for Revels.
Revels.
Time hath seurall falls,
Griefs lift up joys, feasts put down funerals.
Come then my Lords, my favours to you all,
The Duchess is suspected, foully bent,
Isle begin Dukedom with her banishment?
Revels.
I, that's the word, we are firm yet,
Strike one strain more, and then we crown our wit.
Well, have the fairest mark,—(so said the Duke when
he begot me,)
And if I miss his heart or near about,
Then have at any a Bastard scorns to be out.
Not'st thou that Spurio brother.
Yes I note him to our shame.
He shall not live, his hair shall not grow much longer?
in this time of Revels tricks may be set a foot, see thou yon
new Moon, it shall out-liue the new Duke by much, this hand
shall dispossess him, then we're mighty.
A mask is treasons licence, that build upon?
Tic murders best face when a vizard's on.
First so, 'ts very good,
And do you think to be Duke then, kind brother:
Isle see fair play, drop one, and there lies tother.
My Lords; be all of Music, strike old gricfes into other countries
That flow in too much milk, and have faint livers,
Not daring to stab home their discontents:
Let our hid flames break out, as fire, as lightning,
To blast this villainous Dukedom: vexed with sin;
Wind up your souls to their full height again.
How?
Which way?
Any way: our wrongs are such,
We cannot justly be revenge de too much.
You shall have all enough:—Revels are toward,
And those few Nobles that have long suppressed you,
Are busied to the furnishing of a Mask:
And do affect to make a pleasant tail ont,
The Masking suites are fashioning, now comes in
That which must glad vs all—wee to take pattern
Of all those suites, the colour, trimming, fashion,
Even to an vndistinguisht hair almost:
Then entering first, observing the true form,
Within a strain or two we shall find leisure,
To steal our swords out handsomely,
And when they think their pleasure sweet and good,
In midst of all their joys, they shall sigh blood.
Weightily, effectually, 3. before the tother Mockers come.
We're gone, all done and past.
But how for the Dukes guard?
Let that alone,
By one and one their strengths shall be drunk down,
There are five hundred Gentlemen in the action,
That will apply them-selues, and not stand idle.
Oh let vs hug your bosoms.
Come my Lords,
Prepare for deeds, let other times have words.
Many harmonious hours, and choicest pleasures,
Fill up the royal numbers of your years.
My Lords we're pleased to thank you?—tho we know,
Tic but your duty now to wish it so.
That shine makes vs all happy.
His Grace frounes?
Yet we must say he smiles.
I think we must.
That foule-Incontinent Duchess we have banished,
The Bastard shall not live: after these Revels
Isle begin strange ones; hee and the stepsons,
Shall pay their lives for the first subsidies,
We must not frown so soon, else t'ad been now?
My gracious Lord please you prepare for pleasure,
The mask is not far off.
We are for pleasure,
Beshrew thee, what art thou? midst me start?
Thou hast committed treason,—A blazing star.
A blazing star, O where my Lord.
Spy out.
See, see, my Lords, a wondrous-dreadful one.
I am not pleased at that ill-knotted fire,
That bushing-flaring star,—am not I Duke?
It should not quake me now: had it appeared,
Before it, I might then have justly feared,
But yet they say, whom art and learning Weds:
When stars were locks, they threaten great-mens heads,
Is it so? you are read my Lords.
May it please your Grace,
It shows great anger.
That dos not please our Grace.
Yet here's the comfort my Lord, many times.
When it seems most it threatnes fardest off.
Faith and I think so too.
Beside my Lord,
You're gracefully established with the loves
Of all your subjects: and for natural death,
I hope it will be threescore years a coming.
True, no more but threescore years.
Fourscore I hope my Lord:
And fiuescore, I,
But tic my hope my Lord, you shall ne'er die.
Give me thy hand, these others I rebuke,
He that hopes so, is sit for a Duke:
Thou shalt sit next me, take your places Lords,
We're ready now for sports, let 'em set on.
You thing? we shall forget you quite anon!
I hear 'em coming my Lord.
Ah tic well,
Brothers, and Bastard, you dance next in hell?
Mark, Thunder?
Dost know thy kue, thou big-voyc'st crier?
Dukes groans, are thunders watch-words,
So my Lords, You have enough.
Come lets away, no lingering.
Follow, go?
No power is angry when the lustful die,
When thunder-claps, heaven likes the tragedy.
Oh, oh.
Whose groan was that?
Treason, a guard.
How now? all murderd!
Murderd!
And those his Nobles?
Here's a labour saved,
I thought to have sped him, Sbloud how came this.
Then I proclaim my self, now I am Duke.
Thou Duke,! brother thou least.
Slave so dost thou?
Base villain hast thou slain my Lord and Moister.
Pistols, treason, murder, help, guard my Lord the Duke.
Lay hold upon this Traitors?
Oh.
Alas, the Duke is murderd.
And the Nobles.
Surgeons, Surgeons,—heart dos he breath so long.
A piteous tragaedy, able to wake,
An old-mans eyes bloud-shot;
Oh.
Look to my Lord the Duke-a vengeance throttle him.
Confess thou murdrous and vnhollowed man,
Did thou kill all these?
None but the Bastard I,
How came the Duke slain then;
We found him so,
O villain,
Hark.
Those in the mask did murder vs,
Law you now sir.
O marble impudence! will you confess now?
Sloud tic all false,
Away with that foul monster,
Dipped in a Princes blood.
Heart tic a lye,
Let him have bitter execution,
New marrow no I cannot be expressed,
How fairs my Lord the Duke.
Farewell to al,
He that climes highest has the greatest fall,
My tong is out of office.
Ayre Gentlemen, ayre,
Now thoult not prate ont, it was Vindice murdered thee,
Oh.
Murdered thy Father.
Oh.
And I am he-tell no-body, so so, the Dukes departed,
It was a deadly hand that wounded him,
The rest, ambitious who should rule and sway,
After his death were so made all away,
My Lord was unlikely,
Now the hope,
Of Italy lies in your reverend years?
Your hair, will make the silver age again,
When there was fewer but more honest men,
The burdens weighty and will press age down,
May I so rule that heaven nay keep the crown,
The rape of your good Lady has been quited,
With death on death.
Just is the Law aboue
〈1 line〉
〈1 line〉
It was 〈…〉, I not hard of the like,
It was all donne for the best my Lord,
All for your graces good • we may be bold to speak it now,
It was some-what witty carried tho we say it.
It was we two murdered him,
You two?
None else in faith my Lord nay it was well managde,
Lay hands upon those villains.
How? on vs?
Bear 'em two speedy execution,
Heart wast not for your good my Lord?
My good away with 'em such an old man as he,
You that would murder him would murder me,
I•t come about;
Sfoote brother you begun,
May not we set as well as the Dukes son,
Thou hast no conscience, are we not revenged?
Is there one enemy left alive amongst those?
Tic time to die, when we are our selves our foes.
When murders shut deeds close, this curse does seal 'em,
If none disclose' em they them selves reveal 'em!
This murder might have slept in tonglesse brass,
But for our selves, and the world dyed an ass;
Now I remember too, here was Piato.
Brought forth a knavish sentence once, no doubt (said he) but time
Will make the murderer bring forth himself?
Tic well he died, he was a witch,
And now my Lord, since we are in for ever:
This work was ours which else might have been slipped,
And if we list we could have Nobles clipped,
And go for 〈…〉 beggars, but we hate
〈…〉we have enough,
〈…〉 Mother turned our Sister true,
〈◊〉 after a nest of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
How subtly was that murder elosde, bear up,
These tragic bodies, tic a heavy season:
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 their blood may wash away all treason.

what hoe, where are these paltry Players? still poi∣ring in their papers and never perfect? for shame come forth, your Audience stay so long, their eyes wax dim with expectation.
How now my honest Rogue; what play shall wee have here to night?
Sir you may look upon the Title.
What, Spectrum once again? Why noble Cerberus, nothing but patch-pannell stuff, old gally-mawfreies and cotten-candle eloquence? out you bawling bandogge fox∣f•rd slave: you dried stockefish you, out of my sight.
Well tic no matter: Isle set me down and see it, and for fault of a better, Isle supply the plate of a scurvy Prologue.
Spectrum is a looking glass indeed,
Wherein a man a History may read,
Of base conceits and damned roguery:
The very sink of hell-bred villainy.
Why how now humorous George? what as no∣choly as a mantletree?
Will you see any tricks of Leigerdemaine, slight of ha•d, cleanly conveyance, or deceptio visus? what will you see Gentleman to drive you out of these dumps?
Out you soust gurnet, you Woolfist, be gon I say and bid the Players dispatch and come away quickly, and tell their fiery Poet that before I have done with him; Isle make him do penance upon a stage in a Calves skin.
O Lord sir ye are deceived in me, I am no t• •e∣carrier, I am a Juggler.
I have the superficial skill of all the seven liberal sciences at my singers end.
Isle show you a trick of the twelues, and turn him over •he thumbs with a trice.
Isle make him fly swifter then meditation.
Isle show you as many toys as there be minutes in a month, and as many tricks as there be motes in the sun.
Prithee what tricks can thou doe?
Marry sir I will show you a trick of cleanly con∣ueiance.
Hei fortune furim nunquam credo, With a cast of clean con∣ueyance, come aloft Jack for thy masters advantage (hes gone I warrant ye.)
Mas an tic well done, now I see thou can d•e something, hold thee theirs twelve pence for thy labour▪
Go to that barme-froth Poet and to him say,
He quite has lost the Title of his play,
His Calue skin jests from hence are clean exiled,
Thus once you see that Wily is beguiled.
Now kind Spectators, I dare boldly say,
You all are welcome to our Authors play:
Be still a while, and ere we go,
Weal make your eyes with laughter flow.
Let Momus mates judge how they list,
We fear not what they babble:
Nor any paltry Poets pen,
Amongst that rascal rabble.
But time forbids me further speech,
My tongue must stop his race:
My time is come, I must be dumb,
And give the Actors place.
A Heavy purse makes a light heart: O the con∣sideration of this pouch, this pouch!
Why hee that has money, has hearts ease and the world in a string.
O this red chink, and silver coin, it is the con∣solation of the World.
I can sit at home quietly in my chair, and send out my an∣gels by sea, and by land, and bid fly villanes &amp; fetch in ten in the hundred, I and a better penny too. Let me see, I have but two children in al the world to bestow my goods upon, Fortunatus my son &amp; Lily my daughter. For my son, he foal∣lowes the wars, and that which he gets with swaggering, he spends in swaggering: but Isle curb him, his allowance whilst live shall bee small, and so hee shall bee sure not to spend much: And if I die I will leave him a portion, that (if he will be a good husband and follow his fathers steps) shall maintain him like a gentleman: and if he will not, let 〈…〉 follow his own humour till he be weary of it, and so let him go: now for my daughter she is my only joy, &amp; the staff of my age, and I have bestowed good bringing up upon his (byr'lady): why she is even modesty it self, it does me good to look on his. Now if I can harken out some wealthy marriage for his, I have my only desire.
Mas, and well remembered, heir's my neighbour Ploddall hard by, has but one only son, and (let me see) I take it, his Lands are better than five thousand pounds; now if I can make a match between his son and my daughter, and so
join his Land and my money together, O twil be a blessed union. Well Isle in, and get a Scrivener, Isle write, to him about it presently: But stay here come M. Churmes the Lawer, Isle desire him to do so much.
Good morrow M. Gripe.
O good morrow M. Churms.
What says my two debtors, that I lent 200. pound to? will they not pay use and charges of suit?
Faith Sir I doubt they are bankrouts: I would you had your principal.
Nay Isle have all, or Isle imprison their bodies: But M. Churms there is a matter I would fine have you do, but you must be very secret.
O sir fear not that Isle warrant you.
Why then this it is: my neighbour Ploddall here∣by, you know is a man of very fair Land, and hee has but one son, upon whom he means to bestow all that hee has: Now I would make a match between my daughter Lily and him; what think you of it.
Marry I think twould be a good match, but the young man has had very simple bringing up.
〈…〉 what care I for that? so he have lands and living enough, my daughter has bringing up will serve them both. Now I would have you to write me a Letter to good∣man Ploddall concerning this matter, and Isle please you for your pains.
Isle warrant you sir, Isle doe it artificially.
Doe, good M. Churms, but be very secret, I have some business this morning, and therefore Isle leave you a while, and if you will come to dinner to me anon, you shall be very heartily welcome.
Thanks good sir Isle trouble you.
Now it were a good jest if I could cousin the old Churl of his daughter, and get the wench for my self.
Sounds I am as proper a man, as Peter Ploddall: and though his father bee as good a man as mine, yet far fetched and
dear bought is good for Ladies, and I am sure I have been as far as Cales to fetch that I have.
I have been at Cambridge a Scholar, at Cales a Soldier, and now in the Country a Lawyer, and the next degree shall be a Connicatcher:
For Isle go near to cousin old father share-penny of his daughter▪ Isle cast about Isle warrant him;
Isle go dine with him, and write him his Letter,
And then Isle go seek out my kind companion Robin Good∣fellow, and betwixt vs weal make his yield to any thing.
Weal ha the common law oath to hand, and the ciuilllawe oath tother:
Weal toss Lily like a tennis ball.
Ah Tenant, an ill husband (byr'lady): thrice at thy house and never at home?
You know my mind, will you give ten shillings more rent?
I must discharge you else.
Alas Landlord, will you undo me? I •it of a great rent already, and am very poor.
Very poor? yare a very Ass. Lord how my stomach wambles at that same word (very poor)! Father, if you love your son William, never name that same word very poor:
For Isle stand to it, that its pettilasseny to name very poor to a man thats oath top of his marriage.
Why son, art oath top of thy marriage, to whom I prithee?
Marry to pretty Peg, mistress Lilies nurses daugh∣la.
O tic the depressed wench that ever danced after a Taberand pipe.
For she will so heel it, and toe it, and trip it,
O his buttocks will quake like a custard.
Why William, when were you with his?
O Peter does your mouth water at that?
Truly I was never with his, but I know I shall speed.
For tother day she looked on me and laughed, and thats a good sign (ye know): and therefore old silver top, never talk of charging or discharging.
For I tell you I am my fathers heir: and if you discharge me, Isle discharge my pestilence at you. For to let my house before my lease be out, is cut-throatery: and to scrape for more rent is polepennery.
And so fare you well good Grandsire Usury: come father lets be gone.
Well, Isle make the beggarly knaves to pack for this:
Isle have it every cross, income and Rent too.
But stay here comes one: O tic M. Churms.
I hope he brings me some good news.
M. Churms yare well met, I am even almost starved for mo∣ney.
You must take• •••e damnable course with my Tenants: theile •…ay.
Faith •ir, they are grown to bee captious knaves.
But Isle move them with a Habeas corpus.
Doe, good M. Churmes, or use any other ville∣nous course shall please you.
But 〈…〉 •ewes abro••?
•••th little news: but heir's a Letter which M. Gripe desi••• me to deliver you. And though it stand not with my reputatiō, to be a carrier of Letters, yet not know∣ing how much it might concern you, I thought it better something to abase my self, then you should be any ways hindered.
Thanks good sir, and Isle in and read it.
Thus men of reach must look to live,
I cry content, and murder where I kiss,
Gripe takes me for his faithful friend,
Imparts to me the secrets of his heart;
And Ploddall thinks I am as true a friend,
To every enterprise he takes in hand,
As ever breathed under the cope of heaven:
But damme me if they find it so,
All this makes for my avail,
Isle ha the wench my self, or else my wits shall fail.
See how the earth (this fragrant spring) is clad,
And mantled round in sweet Nymph Floras robes.
Here grows the alluring Rose,
Sweet Marigolds, and the lovely Hyacinth:
Come Nurse, gather:
A crown of Roses shall adorn my head,
Isle prank my self with flowers of the prime,
And thus Isle spend away my primrose time.
Ruftie, tuft, are you so frolic?
O that you knew as much as I doe, twould cool you.
Why what know thou Nurse? prithee tell me.
Heavy news in faith mistress,
You must be matched &amp; married to a husband▪ ha, ha, ha, ha, • husband in faith.
A Husband, Nurse? why thats good no••• 〈…〉 be a good one.
A good one quoth? ha, ha, ha, ha: why Wo∣•an I heard your father say, that he would marry you to Peter Ploddall, that Puckefist, that snudge snout, that Cole carrierly Clown. Lord, twould be as good as mea•e and drink to me, to see how the fool would• woo• you.
No, no, my Father did butiest: think 〈…〉 I can stoop so lowe to take a browne▪ bread 〈…〉 a Clown thats brought up at the Cart▪
Cart quoth? I, heel cart you, for 〈…〉 tell how to court you.
Ah Nurse, sweet Sophos is the man,
Whose love is locked in Lilies tender breast,
This hart hath vowed, (if heavens doe not deny,)
My love with his entombed in earth shall lye.
Peace Mistress, stand aside, here comes some body.
Optatis non est spes vlla potiri:
Yet Phoebus send down thy tralucent beams,
Behold the earth that mourns in sad attire,
The flowers at Sophos presence gins to droop,
Whose trickling tears for Lilies loss
Do turn the Plains into a standing Poole:
Sweet Cynthia smile, cheer up the drooping Flowers,
Let Sophos once more see a sunne-shine day,
O let the sacred center of my heart,
I mean fair Lily Natures fairest work,
Be once again the object to mine eyes.
O but I wish in vain, whilst his I wish to see,
His Father he obscures his from my sight,
He pleads my want of wealth,
And says it is a bar in Venus Court.
How hath fond fortune by his fatal doom,
Predestined me to live in haplesse hopes,
Still turning false his fickle wavering wheel!
And Loves fair goddess, with his Circian cup,
Inchanteth so fond Cupids poisoned darts,
That love the only Loadstar of my life,
Doth draw my thoughts into a labyrinth,
But stay:
What do I see, what do mine eyes behold?
(O happy sight) it is fair Lilies face.
Hail heavens bright nymph the period of my grief,
Sole guidresse of my thoughts and author of my joy.
Sweet Sophos welcome to Lily,
Fair Dido Carthaginians beauteous Queen,
Not half so joyful was when as the Trojan Prince,
Enaeas, landed on the sandy shores
Of Carthage confines as thy Lily is,
To see her Sophos here arrived by chance.
And blessed be chance that hath conducted me, unto the place where I might see my dear,
As dear to me as is the dearest life.
Sir, you may see that Fortune is your friend.
Yet Fortune favours fools.
By that conclusion you should not be wi•e.
Foul Fortune sometime smiles on virtue fair.
Tic then to show her mutability:
But since amidst ten thousand frowning threats
Of fickle fortunes thrice inconstant wheel,
She deigns to show one little pleasing smile,
Lets do our best false Fortune to beguile,
And take advantage of her ever changing moods.
See, see, how Tellus spangled mantle smiles,
And birds do chant their rural sugared notes
As ravished with our meetings sweet delights.
Since then there fits for love both time and place:
Let love and liking hand in hand embrace.
Sir the next way to win her love, is to linger her leisure.
I measure my mistress by my lovely self, make a promise to a man, and keep it, I have but one fault, I near made pro∣mise in my life, but I stick to it tooth and nail: Isle pay it home in faith.
If I promise my love a kiss, Isle give him two: marry at first I will make nice, and cry fie, fie, and that will make him come again and again,
Isle make him break his wind with come againes.
But what says Lily to her Sophos love?
Ah Sophos, that fond blind boy,
That wrings these passions from my Sophos hart,
Hath likewise wounded Lily with his dart,
And force perforce I yield the fortress up:
Here Sophos take thy Lilies hand,
And with this hand receive a loyal hart.
High Jove that rules heavens bright Canopy,
Grant to our love, a wished felicity.
As joys the weary Pilgrim by the way,
When Phebus waives unto the western deep,
To summon him to his desired rest:
Or as the poor distressed Mariner,
Long tossed by shipwreck on the foaming waives,
At length beholds the long wished haven,
Although from far, his heart doth dance for joy:
So Loves consent at length my mind hath eased,
My troubled thoughts, by sweet content are pleased.
My father recks not virtue,
But vows to wed me to a man of wealth,
And swears, his gold shall counterpoise his worth;
But Lily scorn's proud Mammon's golden mines,
And better likes of learnings sacred lore,
Then of fond Fortunes glistening mockeries:
But Sophos try thy wits, and use thy utmost skill
To please my father, and compass his good will.
To what fair Lily wills, doth Sophos yield con∣tent,
Yet thats the troublous gulf my silly ship must pass:
But were that venture harder to achieve
Then that of Iason for the golden fleece,
I would effect it for sweet Lilies sake,
Or leave my self as witness of my thoughts.
How say you by that, mistress? heel doe any thing for your sake.
Thanks gentle love.
But least my father should suspect,
Whose jealous head with more than Argus eyes,
Doth measure every gesture that I use,
Isle in and leave you here alone,
Adieu sweet friend until we meet again,
Come Nurse follow me.
Farewell my love, fair fortune be thy guide.
Now Sophos, now bethink thy self
How thou moist win her fathers will to knit this happy knot.
Alas thy state is poor, thy friends are few,
And fear forbids to tell my fates to friend:
Well, Isle try my Fortunes;
And find out some convenient time,
When as her fathers leisure best shall serve
To confer with him about fair Lilies love.
Neighbour Ploddall, and Master Churms, yare welcome to my house.
What news in the Country, neighbour? you are a good husband, you ha done sowing barley I am sure.
Yes sir ant please you, a fortnight since.
Master Churms, what says my debtors? can you get any money of them yet?
Not yet sir, I doubt they are scarce able to pay, You must even forbear them a while, theyle exclaim on you else.
Let them exclaim and hang and starve and beg, let me ha my money.
Here is this good fellow too, Master Churms, I must even put him and his father over into your hands, theyle pay me no Rent.
This good fellow quoth? I scorn that b•••, broking, brabbling, brawling, bastardly, bottlenos'd, b••tle∣browed, bean-bellied name.
Why, Robin Goodfellow is this same cogging, p•rifogging, crackeropes Calue-skin companion:
Put me and my father over to him? old Silver top and you had not put me before my father, I would ha—
What would ha done?
I would have had a snatch at you, that I 〈…〉
What art a dog?
No: if I had been a dog, I would ha snapped of your nose ere this, and so I should have consent the D•… of a Marriebone.
Come, come, let me end this controversy.
Prithee go thy ways in, &amp; bid the boy bring a cup of Sack here for my friends.
Would you have a sack Sir?
A way fool, a cup of Sack to drink.
O I had thought you would have had a sack to have put this lawcracking cogfoystin, in stead of a pair of stocks.
Away fool, get thee in I say.
Into the buttrie you mean?
I prithee doe.
Isle make your hogshead of Sackrue that word.
Neighbour Ploddall, I sent a Letter to you, by Ma∣ster Churms, how like you of the motion?
Marry I like well of the motion: my son I tel you is even all the stay I have: and all my care is, to have him take one that hath something: for as the world goes now, if they have nothing they may beg.
But I doubt hes too simple for your daughter. For I have brought him up hardly, with brown bread, fat bacon, put∣dinges and souse, and (byr'lady) wee think it good fare too.
Tush man, I care not for that, you ha no more i will∣drone: you'll make him your heir, and give hi• •our lands, will you not?
Yes, hes even all I have, I have no body else to bestow it upon.
You say well.
Nay here, you drink before you bargain.
Mas, an tic a good motion: oy, fill some wine.
•ere Neighbour and M. Churms I drink to you.
We thank you Sir.
Lawer wipe clean: do you remember?
Remember, why?
Why since you know when.
Since when?
Why since you were bombasted, that your lubberly legs would not carry your lob cock body;
When you made an infusion of your stinking excrements, in your stalking implements:
O you were plaguy frayd, and foully raide.
Prithee peace Will. Neighbour Ploddall, what say you to this match: shall it go forward?
Sir, that must be as our children like.
For my son, I think I can rule him:
Marry, I doubt your daughter will hardly like of him, for God wot hes very simple.
My daughters mine to command, have I not brought her up to this?
She shall have him: Isle rule the roast for that,
Isle give her pounds and crowns, gold and silver:
Isle way her down in pure angel gold,
Say man, first a match?
Faith, I agree.
But Sir, if you give your daughter so large a dowry, you'll have some part of his land conveyed to her by jointure.
Yes marry that I will:
And weal desire your help for conveyance.
I, good Master Churms, and you shall be very well contented for your pains.
I marry, thats it he looked for all this while.
Sir, I will do the best I can.
But Landlord: I can tell you news in faith,
There is one Sophos, a brave genman, heel wipe your son Peters nose, of Mistress Lily, I can tell you he loves her well.
Nay, I trow:
Yes I know, for I am sure I saw them close toge∣there
at Pupnoddie, in her Closet.
But I am sure she loves not him.
Nay, I dare take it on my death she loves him,
For hes a scholar: and ware scholars, they have tricks for love in faith, for with a little Logic &amp; pitome colloquium theile make a wench do any thing:
Landlord, pray ye be not angry with me, for speaking my conscience.
In good faith, your son Peters a very Clown to him:
Why, hes as fine a man as a wench can see in a summers day.
Well, that shall not serve his turn, Isle cross him, I warrant ye.
I am glad I know it: I have suspected it a great while.
Sophos? why, whats Sophos? a base fellow.
Indeed he has a good wit, and can speak well,
Hes a scholar forsooth: one that has more wit then money,
And I like not that: he may beg for all that.
Scholars? why what are scholars without money?
Faith, even like puddings without suet.
Come, Neighbour, send your son to my house,
For he shall be welcome to me:
And my daughter shall entertain him kindly.
What? I can, and will rule Lily.
Come lets in, Isle discharge Sophos from my house pre∣sently.
A horn plague of this money,
For it causes many horns to bud:
And for money many men are hornd.
For when maids are forced to love where they like not,
It makes them lye where they should not.
Isle be hanged, if ere mistress Lily will ha Peter Ploddall,
I swear by this button cap (do you mark)
And by the round, sound, and profound contents (do you understand)
Of this costly Codpeece, (being a good properman as ye
see) that I could get her as soon as he, my self:
And if I had not a months mind in another place,
I would have a fling at her thats flat:
But I must set a good holiday face ont,
And go a wooeing to pretty Pig: well, Isle too her in faith
While tic in my mind▪ But stay, Isle see how I can woo be∣fore I go: they say, Use makes perfectness:
Look you now, suppose this were Pig,
Now I set my cap oath to side on this fashion (do ye see?) then say I,
Sweet honey, bonny, sugar candy, Pig,
Whose face more fair, then Broke my fathers Cow,
Whose eyes do shinelike bacon rin•,
Whose lips are blew of azure hew,
Whose crooked nose down to her chin doth bow.
For you know I must begin to commend her beauty,
And then I will tell her plainly, that I am in love with her, over my high shoes, and then I will tell her that I do no∣thing of nights but sleep and think on her, and specially of mornings:
And that does make my stomach so rise, that Isle be swo•n, I can turn me three or four bowls of porredgeoner i• a morning before breakfast.
How now sir, what make you here, with all that timber in your neck?
Timber? Sounds, I think he be a witch,
How knew he this were Timber?
Mas Isle speak him fair, and get out once company: for I am afraid on him.
Speak man, what art afraid? what make here?
A poor fellow Sir, ha bin drinking two or three pots of ale at an alehouse, and ha lost my way Sir▪
O, nay then I see thou art a good fellow▪
See thou not Master Churms the Lawer to day?
No Sir, would you speak with him.
I marry would I.
If I see him, Isle tell him you would speak with him.
Nay, prithee stay, who wilt thou tell him would speak with him?
Marry you Sir.
I, who am I?
Faith Sir I know not.
If thou see him, tell him Robin Goodfellow wold speak with him.
O▪ I will Sir.
Mas, the fellow was afraid,
I play the Bugbear wheresoever I come,
And make them al afraid,
But here comes Master Churms.
Fellow Robin, God save you, I have been see∣king for you in every Ale-house, in the Town.
What, Master Churms? Whats the best news a∣broad? tic long since I see you.
Faith little news: but yet I am glad I have met with you.
I have a matter to impart to you, wherein you may stand me in some stead, and make a good benefit to yourself: if we can deal cunningly, twill be worth a double fee to you, (by the Lord.)
A double fee? speakeman, what first?
If it be to betray mine own father, Isle doot for half a fee:
And for cunning let me alone.
Why, then this it is.
Here is Master Gripe hard by, a Client of mine, a man of mighty wealth, who has but one daughter, her Dowry is her weight in gold.
Now Sir, this old penny father would marry her, to one Peter Ploddall, rich Ploddalls son and heir.
Whom though his father means to leave very rich,
Yet hes a very Idiot and Browne bread Clown:
And one I know the wench does deadly hate,
And though their friends have given their full consent,
And both agreed on this unequal match.
Yet I know that Lily will never marry him:
But theres another rival, in his love, one Sophos,
And hes a Scholar,
One whom I think fair Lily dearly loves,
But his Father hates him as he hates a toad,
For hes in want, and Gripe gapes after gold,
And still relies upon the old said Saw;
Si nihil attuleris &amp;c.
And wherein can I doe you good in this?
Marry thus Sir:
I am of late grown passing familiar with M. Gripe,
And for Ploddall he takes me for his second self;
Now Sir, Isle fit my self to the old crummy Churls hue∣morse, and make them believe Isle persuade Lily to marry Peter Ploddall, and so get free access to the wench at my pleasure:
Now oath other side Isle fall in with the Scholar, and him Isle handle cunningly too;
Isle tell him that Lily has acquainted me with his love to him:
And for because his Father much suspects the same,
He mews his up as men do mew their hawks,
And so restrains his from his Sophos sight.
Isle say, because she doth repose more trust,
Of secrecy in me, then in another man,
In curtsy she hath requested me,
To do his kindest greetings to his Love,
An excellent devise, in faith.
I Sir, and by this means, Isle make a very gull of my fine Diogenes.
I shall know his secrets even from the very bottom of his heart:
Nay more Sir, you shall see me deal so cunningly, that he shall make me an instrument to compass his desire;
When God knows I mean nothing less.
Queen dissimular 〈…〉 nescit •i•ere.
Why this will be sport alone,
But what would you have me doe in this action?
Marry as I play with to hand, play you with tother.
Fall you aboard with Peter Ploddall,
Make him believe you'll work miracles,
And that you have a powder will make Lily love him.
Nay what will he not believe, and take all that comes (you know my mind)
And so weal make a gull of the one, and a goose of the o∣there.
And if wee can invent any devise, to bring the scholar in disgrace with his: I doe not doubt but with your help to creep between the bark and the tree, and get Lily my self.
Tush man, I have a devise in my head already to doe that:
But they say his brother Fortunatus loves him dearly.
Tuthees out of the Country,
He follows the drum and the flag.
He may chance to be kilt with a double Canon before hee come home again:
But whats your devise?
Marry Isle do this;
Isle frame an Indictment against Sophos, in manner and form of a Rape, and the next Law day you shall prefer it; that so Lily may loath him,
His Father still deadly hate him,
And the young Gallant his brother utterly forsake him.
But how shall we prove it?
Sounds weal hire some Strumpet or other to be sworn against him.
Now (by the substance of my soul) tic an ex∣cellent devise.
Well, lets in, Isle first try my cunning otherwise, and if all fail, weal try this conclusion.
In faith Marget you must even take your daughter Pig home again,
For sheele not bee ruled by me.
Why Mother? what will she not doe?
Faith she neither did nor does, nor will do any thing:
Send his truth market with eggs: sheele sell them and spend the money,
Set his to make a pudding, sheele put in no suet,
Sheele run out of nights a dancing, and come no more home till day peep:
Bid his come to bed, sheele come when she list.
Ah tic a nasty shame to see his bringing up.
Out you Rogue, you arrant &amp;c.
What know not thy Granam?
I know his to be a teat old fool,
Shees never well, grunting in a corner.
Nay sheele camp (I warrant ye) O she has a tongue.
But Marget even take his home to your Mistress, and there keep his: for He keep his no longer.
Mother pray ye take some pains with his, and keep his a while longer; and if she doe not mend, Isle beat his black and blew, in faith Isle not fail you Minion.
Faith at thy request, Isle take his ho•• 〈…〉 try his a week longer.
Come on huswife please you Granam, and be•• good wench, and you shall ha my blessing.
Come follow vs good Wench.
I, farewell, fair weather after you.
Your blessing quoth? Isle not give a single halpennie foe••▪
Who would live under a Mothers nose &amp; a 〈…〉 •ong▪
A Maid cannot love, or catch a lip clip, or 〈…〉 but heers such tittle tattle, and doe not so, and 〈…〉 and be not so fond, and do not kiss, and do no• 〈…〉
I cannot tell what,
And I must love an I hang fort:
A sweet thing is love
That rules both heart and mind,
There is no comfort in the World
To Women that are kind.
Well Isle not stay with his: stay quoth?
To be yold and iold at, and tumbled, and tumbled, and tossed
and tourn'd as I am by an old Hag,
I will not, no I will not in faith.
But stay, I must put on my smirking looks and smiling countenance.
For here comes one makes bominatiō suit to be my spruce husband.
Lord, that my heart would serve me to speak to his, now she talks of his spruced husband.
Well Isle set a good face ont,
Now Isle clap me as close to his as Iones buttocks of a close stool, and come over his with my rolling, rattling, rum∣bling eloquence.
Sweet Pig, honey Pig, fine Pig, dainty Pig, brave Pig, kind Pig, comely Pig, my nutting, my sweating, my Love, my dove, my honey, my bonnie, my duck, my dear and my deareling:
Grace me with thy pleasant eyes,
And love without delay:
And cast not with thy crabbedlookes
A properman away.
Why William whats the matter?
Whats the matter quoth?
Faith I ha been in a fair taking, for you, a bots on you.
For tother day after I had seen you, presently my belly began to rumble:
Whats the matter, thought I?
With that I bethought my self, and the sweet comport•∣nonce
of that same sweet round face of thine came into my mind:
Out went I, and Isle bee sworn I was so near taken, that I was fine to cut all my points.
And dost hear Pig?
If thou dost not grant me thy good will in the way of mar∣riage;
First and for most Isle run out of my clothes, and then out of my wits for thee.
Nay William I would bee loath you should doe so for me.
Will you look merrily on me and love me then?
Faith I care not greatly if I doe.
Care not greatly if I doe? what an answers that?
If thou wilt say, I Pig take thee William to my spruce husband.
Why so I will, but we must have more company for witnesses first.
That needs not: heers good store of young men &amp; maids here.
Why then heers my hand.
Faith thats honestly spoken: say after me.
I Pig Pudding promise thee William Cricket,
That Isle hold thee for mine own sweet Lily,
While I have an head in mine eye, and a face on my nose, a mouth in my tongue, and all that a woman should have, from the crown of my foot, to the sole of my head,
Isle clasp thee and clip thee, coll thee and kiss thee,
Till I be better then nought, and worse than nothing:
When thou art ready to sleep, Isle be ready to snort:
When thou art in health, Isle be in gladness:
When thou art sick, Isle be ready to die:
When thou art mad, Isle run out of my wits:
And thereupon I strike the good luck,
Well said in faith:
O I could find in my hose to pocket thee in my heart.
Come my heart of gold, lets have a dance at the making
up of this match:
Strike up Tom Piper.
Come Pig Isle take the pains to bring thee homeward,
And at twilight, look for me again.
Come hither my honest friend: M. Churms told me you had a suit to me,
Whats the matter?
Pray ye Sir is your name Robin Goodfellow?
My name is Robin Goodfellow.
Marry Sir I hear yare a very cunning man Sir;
And sirreuerence of your worship Sir, Jam going a woe∣ing to one M. Lily a Gentlewoman here hard by,
Pray ye Sir tel me how I should be have my self, to get his to my wife.
For Sir there is a Scholar about his:
Now if you can tell me, how I should wipe his nose of his,
I would bestow a fee of you.
Let me feet, and thou shalt see what Isle say to thee.
Well, follow my counsel and Isle warrant thee,
Isle give thee a love powder for thy wench,
And a kind of Nux vomica in a potion, shall make his come off in faith.
Shall I trouble you so far to take some pains with me?
I am loath to have the dodge▪
Tush fear not the dodge;
Isle rather put on my flashing red nose, and my flaming face, and come wrapped in a Calue skin and cry by ho:
Isle fray the Scholar I warrant thee.
But first go to his, try what thou can doe,
Perhaps sheele love thee without any further a doe,
But thou must tell his, thou hast a good stock, some 100. or 200. a year, &amp; that will set his hard I warrant thee.
For bith Mas, I was once in good comfort to have consent a Wench:
And wots thou what I told his?
I told his I had a hundred pound land a year, in a place where I have not the breadth of my little finger.
I promised his to infeoffe his in 40. pounds a year of it: &amp; I think of my conscience, if I had had but as good a face as thine,
I should have made his have cursed the time that ever she see me.
And thus must thou doe, crack, and lye, and face,
And thou shalt triumph mightily.
I need not do so, for I may say and say true,
I have lands and living enough for a country fellow.
Byr'lady so had not I, I was fine to overreach as many times I doe.
But now experience has taught me so much craft, that I ex∣cell in cunning.
Well Sir, then Isle be bold to trust your cunning,
And so Isle bid you farewell and go forward,
Isle too his, thats flat.
Do so: and let me hear how you speed.
That I will Sir.
Well, a good beginning makes a good end,
Heers ten groats for doing nothing,
Icon M. Churmes thanks for this,
For this was his devise:
And therefore Isle go seek him out, and give him a quart of wine,
And know of him how he deals with the scholar.
Why? look you Sir, by the Lord I can but wonder at his Father,
He knows you to be a Gentleman of good bringing up▪
And though your wealth be not answerable to h••▪
Yet by heavens I think you are worthy to doe •…∣la
then Lily, yet I know she loves you dearly.
The great Tartarian Emperor Tamor Cham,
Joyed not so much in his imperial Crown,
As Sophos joys in Lilies hop't-for love,
Whose looks would pierce an Adamantine heart,
And make the proud beholders stand at gaze,
To draw Loves picture from his glancing eye.
And I will stretch my wits unto the highest strain
To further Sophos in his wished desires.
Thanks gentle Sir.
But truce a while, here comes his Father,
I must speak a word or two with him.
I heel give you your answer (I warrant ye)
God save you Sir.
O Mr. Sophos: I have longed to speak with you a great while,
I hear, you seek my daughter Lilies love,
I hope you will not seek to dishonest me, nor disgrace my daughter.
No Sir: a man may ask a yea,
A Woman may say nay,
She is in choice to take his choice:
Yet I must confess I love Lily.
Sir I must be plain with you: I like not of your love,
Lilies mine, Isle choose for Lily,
And therefore I would wish you not to frequent my house any more,
Its better for you to ply your book, and seek for some preferment that way, than to seek for a wife before you know how to maintain his.
I am not rich, I am not very poor,
I neither want nor ever shall exceed,
The mean is my content, I live twixt two extremes.
Well, well, I tell ye, I like not ye should come to my house, and presume so proudly to match your poor pedigree with my daughter Lily, and therefore I charge
you to get you off of my ground: and come no more at my house:
I like not this learning without living, I.
He needs must go that the devil drives.
Sic virtus sine Censu languet.
O Ma. Churms, cry you mercy Sir, I saw not you:
I think I have sent the scholar away with a flea in his ear.
I trow heel come no more at my house.
No, for if he doe you may indite him for com∣ming of your ground.
Well, now Isle home, and keep in my daughter,
She shall neither go to him, nor send to him,
Isle watch her (Isle warrant her,)
Before God Master Churms, it is the peeuishest girl, that e∣for I knew in my life, she will not b•••led I doubt.
Pray ye sir, do you endeavour to persuade her to take Peter Ploddall.
I warrant ye, Isle persuade her: fear not.
What sorrow seiseth on my heavy heart?
Consuming care possesses every part:
Heart-sad Eri•••• keeps his mansion Here,
Within the Closure of my woeful breast;
And black despair with Iron S•apter stands,
And guides my thoughts, down to his hateful Cell.
The wanton winds with 〈…〉 murmur bear
My piercing plaints along the de•ert plains,
And woods and groves do echo forth my woes,
The earth below relents in Crystal tears,
When heavens aboue by some malignant cour••
Of fatal stars are authors of my grief.
Fond Love, go hide thy shafts in Follies den,
And let the world forget thy Childish force,
Or else fly, fly, pearce Sophos tender breast,
That he may help to sympathize these plaints
That wring these tears from Lilies weeping eyes.
Why, how now Mistress; what, is it love that makes you weep, and toss and turn so a nights when you are in bed?
Saint Leonard grant you fall not love sick.
I, thats the point, that pierces to the quick,
Would Atropos would cut my vital thread
And so make lavish of my loathed life:
Or gentle heavens would smile with fair aspect,
And so give better fortunes to my love.
Why, first not a plague to be a prisoner to mine own father?
Yes, ants a shame for him to use you so too.
But be of good cheer Mistress: Isle go to Sophos every day Isle bring you tidings and tokens too from him (Isle war∣rant ye,) and if he will send you a kiss or two, Isle bring it, let me alone, I am good at a dead lift.
Marry, I cannot blame you for loving of Sophos.
Why, hes a man as one should picture him in wax.
But Mistress, out vpons, wipe your eyes.
For here comes another wooer.
Mistress Lily, God speed you.
Thats more then we need at this time, for we are doing nothing.
I were as good say a good word as a bad.
But its more wisdom to say nothing at all, then speak to no purpose.
My purpose is to wive you.
And mine, is n•••r to wed you.
Belike, yare in love with some body else.
No, but shees lustily promised:
Hear you: you with long rifle by your side, do you lack a wife?
Call you this a rifle? its a good back •word.
Why, then you with back sword, lets see your back.
Nay, I must speak with Mistress Lily before I go.
What would you with me?
Marry, I have heard very well of you, and so has my father too.
And he has sent me to you a wooing,
And if you have any mind of marriage,
I hope I shall maintain you as well as any husbandman's wife in the Country.
Maintain her with what?
Marry, with my Lands and livings my father has promised me.
I have heard much of your wealth: but I never, knew your manners before now.
Faith, I have no Manors, but a pretty homestall, and we have great store of Oxen, and Horses, and Carts, and Plowes, and household stuff bomination:
And great flocks of sheep, and flocks of Geese, and Ca∣pons, and Hens, and Ducks; O, we have a fine yard of Pullen.
And thank God: here is a fine weather for my fathers Lambs.
I cannot live content in discontent.
For as no music can delight the ears,
Where all the parts of Discords are composed:
So wedlock bands will still consist in jars,
Where in condition theres no sympathy.
Then rest your self contented with this answer,
I cannot love.
Its no matter what you say. For my father told me thus much before I came, that you would be some•… nice at first: but he bad me like you ne'er the worse foe•… for I were the liker to speed.
Then you were best leave of your suit till some o∣there time: and when my leisure serves me to love you, Isle send you word.
Will you? 〈…〉 Isle take my leave of you, and
if I may hear from you, Isle pay the messenger well for his pains.
But stay: Gods death, I had almost forgot my self.
Pray let me kiss your hand ore I go.
Faith Mistress, his mouth runs a water for a kiss: a little would serve his turn belike.
Let him kiss your hand.
Isle not stick for that.
Mistress Lily, God be with you.
Farewell Peter.
Thus Lucre, set in golden Chair of state,
When learning's bid, Stand by, and keeps a aloof:
This greedy humour fits my fathers vain,
Who gapes for nothing but for golden gain.
Mistress take heed you speak nothing that will bear action, for here comes Master Churms the Pet∣tifogger.
Mistress Lily rest you merry,
Whats the reason you and your Nurse walk here all alone?
Because, Sir, wee desire no other company but our own.
Would I were then your own,
That I might keep you company.
O Sir, you and hee that is her own are far a∣sunder.
But if she please, we may be nearer.
That cannot bee: mine own is nearer then my self.
And yet my self, alas, am not mine own:
Thoughts, fears, despairs, ten thousand dreadful dreams:
Those are mine own, and these do keep me company.
Before God, I must confess, your father is too cruel,
To keep you thus sequestered from the world,
To spend your prime of youth thus in obscurity,
And seek to wed you to an Idiot fool
That knows not how to use himself:
Could my deserts but answer my desires,
I swear by Sol fair Phoebus silver eye,
My heart would wish no higher to aspire,
Then to be graced with Lilies love.
By Iesus, I cannot play the dissembler,
And woo my love with courting ambages,
Like one whose love hangs on his smooth tongues end,
But in a word, I tell the sum of my desires,
I love fair Lily.
By her my passions daily are increased,
And I must die, unless by Lilies love they be released.
Why Master Churms, I had thought you had been my fathers great Counsellor in all these actions.
Nay, Damn me if I be:
By heavens, sweet Nymph I am not.
Master Churms, you are one can doe much with her father: and if you love her as you say, persuade him to use her more kindly, and give her liberty to take her choice, for these made marriages prove not well.
I protest I will.
So Lily shall accept thee as her friend:
Mean while, Nurse lets ••:
My long absence I know, will make my father muse.
So Lily shall accept thee as her friend?
Who can but ruminate upon these words?
Would she had said, her love:
But tic no matter: first creep and then go,
Now her friend: the next degree is Lilies love.
Well, Isle persuade her father to let her have a little more li∣bertie.
But soft: Isle none of that neither,
So the Scholar may chance cousin me.
Persuade him to keep her in still:
And before sheele have Peter Ploddall, sheele have any by∣die,
and so I shall be sure that Sophos shall never come at her.
Why Isle warrant ye, sheele be glad to run away with me at length.
Hang him, that has no shifts.
I promised Sophos, to further him in his suite:
But if I do, Isle be pecked to death with hens.
I swore to Gripe, I would persuade Lily, to love Peter Plod∣dall.
But God forgive me, it was the furthest end of my thought.
Tut, whats an other? every man for himself.
Isle shift for one, I warrant ye.
Thus have I past the beating billows of the sea,
By Ethics rocks, and watery Neptunes bounds,
And wafted safe, from Mars his bloody fields
Where trumpets sound Tantara to the fight,
And here arrived for to repose my self,
Upon the borders of my native soil.
Now Fortunatus bend thy happy course,
Unto thy fathers house, to greet thy dearest friends.
And if that still thy aged sire survive
Thy presence will revive his drooping sprites,
And cause his withered cheeks bee sprint with youthful blood,
Where death of late was portrait to the quick.
But soft, who comes here?
I wonder I hear not of Master Churms,
I would fine know how he speeds,
And what success he has in Lilies love:
Well, if he cousin the Scholar of her,
Twould make my worship laugh:
And if he have her, hee may say god a mercy Robin Good∣fellow.
O ware a good head as long as you live.
Why, Master Gripe he casts beyond the moon,
And Churms is the only man, he puts in trust with his daugh¦la, and (Isle warrant) the old Churl would take it upon his salvation, that he will persuade her to marry Peter Ploddall:
But Isle make a fool of Peter Ploddall,
Isle look him ith face and pick his purse,
Whilst Churms cousin him of his wench,
And my old gandsir Holdfast of his daughter.
And if he can do so:
Isle teach him a trick to cousin him of his gold too.
Now for Sophos, let him wear the willow garland,
And play the melancholy Malecontent
And pluck his hat down in his sullen eyes,
And think on Lily, in these desert groves:
Tic enough for him to have her, in his thoughts;
Although he ne'er embrace her in his arms.
But now, theres a fine devise comes in my head,
To scarre the Scholar:
You shall see, Isle make fine sport with him.
They say, that every day he keeps his walk
Amongst these woods and melancholy shades,
And on the bark of every senseless tree
In graves the tenor of his hapless hope.
Now when hes at Venus altar at his Orisons;
Isle put me on my great carnation nose
And wrap me in a rousing Calueskin suite,
And come like some Hob goblin or some devil,
Ascended from the grisly pit of hell:
And like a Scarbabe make him take his legs:
Isle play the devil, I warrant ye.
And if you do: (by this hand) Isle play the conjurer.
Blush Fortunatus, at thy base conceit,
To stand aloof, like one thats in a trance,
And with thine eyes behold that miscreant Imp•▪
(Whose tongue more venom then the serpen•• ••ing
Before thy face thus taunt thy dearest friend•▪
I, thine own father with reproachful terms,
Thy Sister Lily, she is bought and sold,
And learned Sophos, thy thrice vowed friend,
Is made a stale by this base cursed Crew
And damned den of vagrant run agates.
But here in sight of sacred heavens I swear,
By all the sorrows of the Stygian souls,
By Mars his bloody blade and fair Bellonas bowers
I vow, these eyes shall ne'er behold my fathers face,
These feet shall never pass these desert plains:
But Pilgrim like Isle wander in these woods
Until I find out Sophos secret walks,
And sound the depth of all their plotted drifts,
Nor will I cease until these hands revenge
Th'iniurious wrong thats offred to my friend,
Upon the workers of this stratagem.
In faith, in faith, I cannot tell what to doe,
I love, and I love, and I cannot tell who, Out upon this love.
For wat you what? I have suitors comes huddle, twos up∣on twos, and threes upon threes, and what think you troubles me?
I must chat and kiss with all comers, or else no bar∣gain.
A bargain in faith: ha my sweet honey sops how dost thou?
Well I thank you William, now I see y are a man of your word.
A man of my word quoth? why I ne'er broke pro∣mise in my life that I kept.
No William I know you did not,
But I had thought you had forgotten me.
Dost hear Pig? if ere I forget thee,
I pray God I may never remember thee.
Peace here comes my Granam Midnight.
What Pig? what ho? what Pig I say?
what Pig my wench?
Why where art thou trow?
Here Granam, at your elbow.
What make here this twitter light?
I think thart in a dream,
I think the fool haunts thee.
Sounds, fool in your face: fool? O monstrous in∣titulation:
Fool? O disgrace to my person: sounds, fool not me, for I cannot brooke such a cold rasher I can tell you: give me but such an other word, and Isle be thy tooth-drawer even of thy butter tooth, thou toothless trot thou.
Nay William pray ye be not angry, you must bear with old folks,
They be old and testy, hot and hasty: set not your wit against mine William,
For I thought you no harm by my troth.
Well, your good words have something laid my collar.
But Granam shall I be so bold to come to your house now and then to keep Pig company?
I, and beshrowe thy good heart and thou dost not.
Come, and weal have a piece of a barley bagpudding or something,
And thou shalt be very heartily welcome that thou shalt,
And Pig shall bid thee welcome too: pray ye maid bid him welcome and make much on him, for by my vii hes a good proper springold
Granam: if you did but see him dance twoulde doe your heart good:
Lord, twould make any body love him, to see how finely heel foot it.
VVilliam, prithee go home to my house
with vs, and taste a cup of our beer, and learn to know the way, again another time.
Come on Granam, Isle man you home in faith: Come Pig.
Come hither Peter, hold up your head: wheres your cap and leg sir boy, ha?
By your leave master Gripe.
Welcome Peter, give me thy hand: thart welcome; Byr'lady, this a good proper tall fellow, Neighbour? call you him a boy?
A good pretty squat square springold Sir.
Peter, you ha seen my daughter I am sure: how do you like his?
What says she to you?
Faith I like his well, and I have broken my mind to his, and she would say neither I nor no;
But, thank God Sir, we parted good friends,
For she let me kiss his hand and bad Farewell Peter.
And therefore I think I am like enough to speed: how think you Master Churms?
Marry I think so too,
For she did show no token of any dislike of your motion, did she?
No not a whit Sir.
Why, then I warrant ye:
For we hold in our Law, that Item est non apparere &amp; non esse.
Moister Churms, I pray you do so much as call my daughter hither,
I will make her sure here to Peter Ploddall, and Isle desire you to be a witness.
With all my heart Sir.
Before God, neighbour, this same Master Churms is a very good Lawer: for Isle warrant, you cannot speak
any thing, but he has law for it advnguem,
Marry even the more joy on him,
And hes one that I am very much beholding to:
But here comes your daughter.
Father did you send for me?
I wench I did, come hither Lily, give me thy hand.
Mr. Churms, I pray you bear witness,
I here give Lily to P. Ploddall.
How now?
Sheele none she thanks you Sir.
Will she not? why how now I say?
What? you pewling peevish thing, you untoward baggage?
Will you not be ruled by your Father?
Have I tan care to bring you up to this?
And will you do as you list?
Away I say, hang, starve, beg; be gone, pack I say: out of my sight,
Thou ne'er get penny-worth of my goods, for this:
Think ont, I do not use to jest:
Be gon I say; I will not hear thee speak.
I pray you Sir patient your self: shees young.
I hold my life this beggarly Scholar hankers a∣bout his still, makes his so untoward:
But Isle home, Isle set his a harder task:
Isle keep his in, and look to his a little better then I ha done,
Isle make his have little mind of gadding, I warrant his.
Come Neighbour, send your son to my house, for hes welcome thither, and shall be welcome, and Isle make Lily bid him welcome too ere I ha done with his:
Come Peter follow vs.
Why this is excellent, better and better still,
This is beyond expectation:
Why now this gear begins to work,
But beshrew my heart, I was afraid that Lily would have yielded, whē I saw his father take his by the hand &amp; cal me
for a witness, my heart began to quake.
But to say the truth she had little reason to take a Cullian, lugloafe, milksop s•aue;
When she may have a Lawyer, a Gentleman, that stands upon his reputation in the Country:
One whose diminutive defect of Law may compare with his little Learning.
Well: I see that Churmes must be the man must carry Lily when alls done.
How now Master Churmes, what news abroad? Me think you look very spruce: yare very frolic now a late.
What fellow Robin, how goes the squares with you?
Yare waxen very proud alate, you will not know your old friends.
Faith I even came to seek you, to bestow a quart of wine of you.
Thats strange: you were ne'er wont to be so li∣barrel.
Tush man, one good turn asks another: clear gains man, clear gains:
Peter Ploddall shall pay for all: I have gulled him once,
And Isle come over him again and again, I warrant ye.
Faith, Lily has even given him the doff off here, and has made his father almost stark mad.
O all the better: then I shall bee sure of more of his custom.
But what success have you in your suit with his?
Faith all hitherto goes well,
I have made the motion to his,
But as yet we are grown to no conclusion:
But I am in very good hope.
But doe you think you shall get his fathers good will?
Tut, if I get the wench I care not for that:
That will come afterword:
And Isle be sure of something in the mean time.
For I have outlawed a great number of his debtors,
And Isle gather up what money I can amongst them,
And Gripe shall ne'er know of it neither.
I, and of those that are scarce able to pay,
Take the one half and forgive them the other, rather then sit out at all.
Tush let me alone for that:
But sir I have brought the Scholar into a fools Paradise:
Why he has made me his spokesman to M. Lily,
And Gods my Judge I ne'er so much as name him to his.
O bith Mas well remembered,
Isle tell you what I mean to doe,
Isle attire my self fit for the same purpose,
Like to some hellish Hag or damned fiend,
And meet with Sophos wandering in the woods,
O I shall fray him terribly.
I would thou could scarre him out of his wits:
Then should I ha the wench cock sure,
I doubt no body but him.
Well, lets go drink together;
And then Isle go put on my devilish robes,
I mean my Christmas Calves skin suit,
And then walk to the woods,
O Isle terrify him I warranty.
Will heavens still smile at Sophos miseries,
And give no end to my incessant mons?
These Cyprus shades are witness of my woes,
The senseless trees do grieve at my laments,
The levy branches drop sweet Myrrhas tears,
For love did scorn me in my mothers womb,
And sullen Saturn pregnant at my birth,
With all the fatal stars conspired in one,
To frame a haplesse constellation,
Presaging Sophos luckless destiny.
Here, here, doth Sophos turn 〈…〉 restless wheel,
And here lies wrapped in labyrinths of love.
Of his sweet Lilies love whose sole Id•• still▪
Prolongs the haplesse date of Sophos hopeless life:
Ah, said I life? a life far worse then death.
Then death? I then ten thousand deaths.
I daily die, in that I live loves thrall,
They die thrice happy, that once die for all.
Here will I stay my weary wandering steps,
And lay me down upon this solid earth,
The mother of despair and baleful thoughts,
I, this befits my melancholy moods:
Now now me thinks I hear the pretty birds,
With warbling tunes record fair Lilies name,
Whose absence makes warm blood drop from my heart,
And forces watery tears from these my weeping eyes,
Me thinks I hear the silver sounding streams,
With gentle murmur summon me to sleep,
Singing a sweet melodious lullaby:
Here will I take a nap and drown my haplesse hopes,
In the Ocean seas of Never like to speed.
Thus hath Syluanus left his levy bowers,
Drawn by the sound of Echoes sad reports,
That with shrill notes and high resounding voice,
Doth pearce the very Caverns of the earth,
And rings through hills and dales the sad laments
Of virtues loss and Sophos mournful plaints.
Now Morpheus, rouse thee from thy sable den,
Charm all his senses with a slumbering trance,
Whilst old Syluanus send a lovely train
Of Satyrs, Driades, and watery Nymphs,
Out of their bowers to tune their silver strings▪
And with sweet sounding music sing.
Some pleasing Madrigals and Roundelays,
To comfort Sophos in his deep distress.
Satyrs sing, let sorrow keep his Cell,
Let warbling Echoes ring,
And sounding musickeyell
Through hills, through dales, •ad grief and care to kill
In him •ong since alas hath grieved his fill.
Sleep no more, but wake and live content,
Thy grief the Nymphs deplore,
The Sylvan gods lament
To hear, to see thy moan, thy loss thy love:
Thy plaints, to tears, the flinty rocks do moo••.
Grieve not then, the Queen of Love is mi•••,
She sweetly smiles on men▪
When reasons most beguiled:
His looks, his smiles, are kind, are sweet, are 〈…〉
Awake therefore and sleep not still in care.
Love intends, to free thee from 〈…〉
His Nymphs Syluanus sends,
To bid thee live in joy,
In hope, in joy, sweet love delights 〈…〉
Fair love his self will yield 〈…〉
What do I hear? what harmony is this▪
With silver sound that glutted Sophos ears▪
And drives sad passions from his heavy heart,
Presaging some good future hap shall fall,
After these blustering blasts of discontent:
Thanks gentle Nymphs and Satyrs too adieu,
That thus compassionate a loyal lovers woe,
When heavens sit smiling at his dire mishaps.
With weary steps I trace these desert groves
And search to find out Sophos secret walks,
My truest vowed friend and Lilies dearest love.
Soph. What voice is this sounds Lilies sacred name? He rises.
Is it some Satire that hath vew'd his late,
Ands grown in amour'd of his gorgeous hew?
No Satire Sophos; but thy ancient friend,
Whose dearest blood doth rest at thy command.
Hath sorrow lately bleared thy watery eyes,
That thou forgetst the lasting league of love,
Long since was vowed betwixt thy self and me?
Look on me man: I am thy friend.
Sophos. O now I know thee, now thou nam'st my friend:
〈…〉 no friend to whom I dare
unload the burden of my grief,
But only Fortunatus, hes my second self,
〈…〉
How fares my friend? me thinks you look not well:
Your eyes are sunk, your cheeks look pale and wan,
What means this alteration?
My mind sweet friend is like a mastlesse ship,
Thats huld and tossed upon the surging seas,
By Bores bitter blasts and Eoles whistling winds,
On Rocks and sands, far from the wished po••
Whereon my silly ship desires to land,
Fair Lilies love that is the wished haven,
Wherein my wandering mind would take repose,
For want of which my restless thoughts are tossed:
For want of which, all Sophos joys are lost.
Doth Sophos love my sister Lily?
She, she, it is whose love I wish to gain:
Nor need I wish, nor do I love in vain,
My love she doth repay with equal mead:
Tic strange you'll say that Sophos should not speed.
Your love repaid with equal mead?
And yet you languish still in love? tic strange:
Frō whence proceeds your grief? unfold unto your friend▪
A friend may yield relief.
My want of wealth is author of my grief,
Your father says, my state is too, too lowe.
I am no hobby bred; I may not soar so high, as Lilies love:
The lofty Egle will not catch at flies.
When I with Icarus would soar against the Sun
〈…〉 the only fiery Phaeton denies my course,
〈…〉 my waxen wings, when as I soar aloft:
〈…〉 fair Lily up from Sophos sight,
That not so much as paper pleads remorse:
Thrice three times Sol hath slept in Thetis lap,
Since these mine eyes beheld sweet Lilies face.
What greater grief? what other Hell then this?
To be denied to come where my beloved is.
Do you alone love Lily?
Have you no rivals with you in your love?
Yes, only one, and him your father backs,
Tic Peter Ploddall, rich Ploddalls son and heir,
One, whose base rustic rude desert
Unworthy far to win so fair a prize,
Yet means your father for to mart a match,
For golden Lucre with this Corydon
And scorns at virtues lore: hence grows my g•…
I •it be true I hear, there is one Churms▪ beside,
Makes suit to win my sister to his bride.
That cannot be: Churm• it my vowed friend,
Whose tongue relates the tenor of my love▪
To Lilies ears, I have no other 〈…〉
Well, trust him not: the Tiger hides his claws
When oft he doth pretend the greatest guiles.
But stay: here comes Lilies Nurse.
Nurse, what news?
How fares my love?
How fares she quoth? Marry she may fare how she will for you: Neither come to her, nor send to her of a whole fortnight?
Now I swear by my maidenhead, if my husband should have served me so, when hee came a wooing to me: I would never have looked on him with a good face as long as I had lived.
But he was as kind a wretch, as ever laid lips of a woman: He would ha come through windows or doors, or walls, or any thing, but he would have come to me.
Marry, after we had been married a while, his kindness began to slake, for Isle tell you what hee did:
He made me believe, he would go to greene goose fair, and Isle •ee sworn hee took his legs and ran clean a∣way:
And I am afraid you'll prove even such another kind piece to my Mistress: for she sits at home in a corner wee∣ping for you, and Isle be sworn shees ready to die upward for you:
And her father oath tother side, he yoles at her, and ioles at her: and she leads such a life for you it passes, and yoole neither come to her, nor send to her:
Why, she thinks you have forgotten her.
Nay, then let heavens in sorrow end my days
And fatal Fortune never cease to frown,
And heaven and earth, and all conspire to pull me down,
If black oblivion seize upon my heart
Once to estrange my thoughts from Lilies love.
Why Nurse, I am sure that Lily hears from
Once a day at least by Churms the Lawyer,
Who is his only friend.
What, young Master? God bless mine eye sight:
Now by my maidenhead yare welcome home,
I am sure my Mistress will be glad to see you.
But what said you of Master Churms?
Marry, I say hes a well willer to my sister Lily,
And a secret friend to Sophos.
Marry the Devil he is: trust him and hang him. Why, hee cannot speak a good word on him to my old Master, and he does so ruffle before my Mistress with his barbarian eloquence, and strut before her in a pair of Po∣lonian legs, as if hee were gentleman Usher to the great Turk, or the Devil of Dowgate:
And if my Mistress would be ruled by him, Sophos might go sneck up: But he has such a buttermilk face, that shoole never have him.
Can fall•hood lurk in those enticing looks?
And deep dis•…nce lie where truth appears?
Injurious villain to betray his friend.
Sir, do you know the Gentleman?
Faith not well.
Why Sir, hee looks like a red herring at a No∣ble mans table on Easter day, and he speaks nothing but Almond butter and sugar Candy.
Thats excellent.
This worlds the Chaos of confusion:
No world at all but Mass of open wrongs,
Wherein a man, as in a Map man see
The high road way from woe to misery.
Content your self, and leave these passions,
Now do I sound the depth of all their drifts,
The Devils devise and Churms his knavery,
On whom this heart hath vowed to be revenged.
Isle scatter them: the plots already in my head.
Nurse hye thee home, commend me to my sister:
Bid her this night send for Master Churms,
To him she must recount her many griefs,
Exclaim against her fathers hard constraint,
And so cunningly temporise with this cunning Cats•,
That he may think she loves him as her life.
Bid her tell him, that if by any means
He can convey her forth her fathers gate,
Unto a secret friend of hers;
The way to whom lies by this forest •…e.
That none but he shall have her to his bride.
For her departure let her point the time
To morrow night: when Vesper gins to shine,
Here will I be▪ when Lily comes this way
Accompanied with her gentleman Usher,
Whose amorous thoughts do dream on nought but love;
And if this Bastinado hold,
Isle make him leave his wench with Sophos for a pawn:
Let me alone to use him in his kind,
This is the trap which for him I have laid,
Thus craft by cunning once shall be betrayed,
And for the Devil, Isle conjure him:
Good Nurse be gon: bid her not fail,
And for a token, bear to her this Ring
Which well she knows, for when I saw her last
It was her favour, and she gave it me.
And bear her this from me:
And with this ring bid her receive my heart.
My heart? alas, my heart I cannot give,
How should I give her that which is her own?
An your heart be hers, her heart is yours,
And so change is no robbery.
Well, Isle give her your tokens, and tell her what ye say.
Do, good Nurse: but in any case let no• my father know that I am here, until we have effected all our purposes.
Isle warrant you, I will not play with you,
As Master Churms does with Sophos,
I would ha my ears cut from my head first.
Come Sophos, cheer up your selfeman,
Let hope expel these melancholy dumps▪
Mean while, lets in,
Expecting how the events of this devise will fall,
Until to morrow at th'appointed time,
When weal expect the coming of your love.
What, man, Isle work it through the fire,
But you shall have her.
And I will study to deserve this love.
Look on me, and look of Master Churms,
A good proper man:
Marry Master Churms has something a better pair of legs indeed:
But for a sweet face, a fine beard, comely corps,
And a Carousing Codpeece,
All England if it can
Show me such a man,
To win a wench by gis,
To clip, to coll, to kiss
As William Cricket is.
Why, look you now: If I had been such a great long, large,
Lobcockt, loseld lurden, as Master Churms is;
Isle warrant you, I should never have got Pig, as long as
I had lived: for (do you mark) a wench will never love a man that has al his substance in his legs.
But stay: here comes my Landlord,
I must go salute him.
Come hither Peter, when did thou see To∣bin Goodfellow? Hes the man must do the feat.
Faith father, I see him not this two days; but Isle seek him out: for I know heel do the deed, and 〈…〉 were twenty Lilies.
For father hes a very cunning man: for, give him but ten groats, and heel give me a powder, that will make Lily come to bed to me:
And when I have her there: Isle use her well enough.
Will he so? Marry, I will give him forty shil∣lings, if he can do it.
Nay, heel do more then that too,
For heel make himself like a devil; and fray the Scholar that hankers about her, out once wits.
Marry Iesus bless vs: will hee so?
Marry thou shalt have forty shillings to give him, and thy mother shall bestow a hard cheese on him beside.
Landlord, a pox on you, this good morn.
How now fool? what, dost curse me?
How now fool? how now Caterpillar?
Its a sign of Dearth, when such Vermin creep hedges so early of morning.
Sir, Foul manners, do you know to whom you speak?
Indeed Peter, I must confess I want some of your wooing manners, or else I might have tournde my fair bush tail to you instead of your father: and have given you the ill salutation this morning.
Let him alone Peter, Isle temper him well enough.
S•••a, I hear say you must be married shortly,
Isle make you pay a sweet fine for your house, for this.
Ha? sir am not I your Landlord?
Yes, for fault of a better, but you get neither sweet fine, nor sower fine of me.
My masters, I pray you bear witness•
I do discharge him then.
My masters, I pray you bear witness,
My Landlord has given me a general discharge,
Isle be married presently, my fines paid: I have a discharge for it.
Nay prithee stay.
No Isle not stay, Isle go call the clerk,
Isle be cried out upon ith Church presently,
What ho? What Clerk I say? where are you?
Who calls me? what would you with me?
Marry Sir, I would have you to make proclamation, that if any manner of man, oath Town, or oath Country, can lay any claim to Pig Pudding, let him bring word to the Crier, or else William Cricket will wipe his nose of her.
You mean you would be asked ith Church?
I thats it: a bots ont, I cannot hit of these marrying terms yet.
And Isle desire my Landlord here and his son, to be at the Celebrauation of my marriage too:
In faith Peter, you shall cram your guts full of Cheesecakes and Custards there.
And sir Clerk, if thou wilt say Amen stoutly:
In faith my powder beef slave,
Isle have a rump of beef for thee, shall make thy mouth 〈…〉 ••de.
When would you have it done?
Marry even as soon as may be: let me see:
I will be asked ith Church of Sunday at morning prayer, and again at Evening prayer: &amp; the next holiday that comes I will be asked ith forenoon, and married ith afternoon: For (do you mark) I am none of these sneaking fellows that will stand thrumming of Caps, and studying upon a matter, as long as Hunkes with the great head has been a∣bout to show his little wit in the second part of his paltry poetry: but if I begin with wooing, Isle end with wed∣ding.
And therefore good Clerk, let me have it done with all speed: for I promise you, I am very sharpe set.
Faith you may be asked ith Church on Sunday at morning prayer, but Sir Iohn cannot tend to do it at Eve∣ning prayer: For there comes a Company of Players truth Town, on Sunday ith after noon; and Sir Iohn is so good a fellow, that I know heel scarce leave their company, to say Evening prayer.
For (though I say it) hes a very paineful man, and takes so great delight in that faculty, that heel take as great pain a∣bout
building of a Stage or so, as the basestfellow among them.
Nay, if he have so lawful an excuse, I am con∣tent to defer it one day the longer:
And Landlord, I hope, you and your son Peter will make bold with vs, and trouble vs.
Nay William, we would be loath to trouble you: but you shall have our company there.
Faith you shall be very heartily welcome, and wee will have good merry rogues there that will make you laugh till you burst.
Why William, what company doe you mean to have?
Marry, first and for most, there will bee an honest Dutch Cobbler, that will sing (I will no mere to Burgaine go) the best that ever you heard.
What, must a Cobbler be your chief guest? Why hes a basefellow.
A basefellow? you may be ashamed to say so,
For hes an honestfellow, and a goodfellow:
And he begins to carry the very badge of good fellowship upon his nose; that I do not doubt, but in time he will prove as good a Copper companion as Robin Goodfellowe him∣self.
I and hes a tallfellow, and a man of his hands too,
For Isle tel you what: tie him truth Bull-Ring, and for a bag∣pudding, a Custard, a Cheescake, a hogs cheek, or a Calves head, turn any man ith town to him; and if he do not prove himself as tall a man as he, let blind Hugh be∣witch him, and turn his body, into a barrel of strong Ale, and let his nose be the Spigot, his mouth the Fosset, and his tongue a Plugge for the bung hole.
And then there will be Robin Goodfellow, as good a drunken rogue as lives: and Tom Shoemaker; and I hope you will not deny that hes an honest man, for hee was Constable oath Town.
And a number of other honest rascals, which though they
are grown bankroutes and live by the reversion of other men's tables:
Yet (thanks bee to God) they have a penny amongst, at all times at their need.
Nay, if Robin Goodfellow be there, you shall be sure to have our company.
For hes one that we hear very well of;
And my son here has some occasion to use him:
And therefore if we may know when tic, weal make bold to trouble you.
Yes Isle send you word.
Why then farewell, till wee hear from you.
Well Clerk, you'll see this matter bravely performed: let it be done as it should be.
Isle warrant ye, fear it not.
Why then go you to Sir Ihon, and Isle to my wench, and bid his give his Maidenhead warning to prepare itself▪ for the destruction of it is at hand.
How love and fortune both with eager mood,
Like greedy hounds do hunt my tired hart,
Roused forth the thickets of my wonted joys!
And Cupped winds his shrill note bugle horn,
For joy my silly hart so near is spent.
Desire that eager Cur pursues the chase,
And Fortune rides amain unto the fall:
Now sorrow sings, and mourning bears a part,
Playing harsh descant on my yielding heart.
Nurse, what news?
Faith a whole sackefull of news:
You love Sophos and Sophos loves you;
And Peter Ploddall loves you, and you love not him,
And you love not Master Churmes, and he loves you,
And so heers love and no love,
And I love and I love not,
And I cannot tell what:
But of all, and of all, Master Churmes must bee the man you must love.
Nay, first Isle mount me on the winged wind,
And fly for succour to the farthest Inde.
Must I love Master Churmes?
Faith you must and you must not.
As how I pray thee?
Marry I have commendations to you.
From whom?
From your brother Fortunatus.
My brother Fortunatus?
No: from Sophos.
From my Love?
No from neither.
From neither?
Yes from both.
Prithee leave thy foolery, and let me know thy news.
Your brother Fortunatus, and your love, to more∣row night will meet you by the forest side,
There to confer about I know not what:
But tic like, that Sophos will make you of his privy council, before you come again.
Is Fortunatus then returned from the wars?
He is with Sophos every day,
But in any case you must not let your Father know,
For he hath sworn he will not be descried,
Until he have effected your desires:
For he swaggers and swears out of all cry,
That he will venture all,
Both fame and blood, and limb and life,
But Lily shall be Sophos wedded wife.
Alas Nurse, my fathers jealous brain
Doth scarce allow me once a month to go,
Beyond the compass of his watchful eyes,
Nor once affords me any conference,
With any man except with Mr. Churms,
Whose crafty brain beguiles my father so,
That he reposes trust in none but him:
And though he seeks for favour at my hands,
He takes his mark amiss and shoots awry.
For I had rather see the devil himself,
Then Churms the Lawyer:
Therefore how I should meet them by the forest side,
I cannot possibly devise.
And Master Churms must be the man must work the means,
You must this night send for him:
Make him believe you love him mightily,
Tell him you have a secret friend dwells far away beyond the Forest.
To whom if he can secretly convey you from your father,
Tel him you will love him, better then ever God loved him.
And when you come to the place appointed,
Let them alone to discharge the knave of clubs.
And that you must not fail,
Here receive this ring, which Fortunatus sent you for • •o∣ken,
That this is the plot that you must prosecute,
And this from Sophos as his true loves pledge.
This ring my brother sent I know right well,
But this my true love pledge I more esteem
Then all the golden mines the solide earth contains:
And see, in happy time here comes M. Churms:
Now love and fortune both conspire,
And sort their drifts to compass my desire.
M. Churms yare well met, I am glad to see you.
And I as glad to see fair Lily,
As ever Paris was to see his dear,
For whom so many Troianes blood was spilt;
Nor think, I would do less then spend my dearest blood,
To gain fair Lilies love, although by loss of life.
Faith mistress, he speaks like a gentleman:
Let me persuade you,
Be not hard hearted:
Sophos? why whats hee?
If hee had loved you but half so well, he would ha come through stone walls, but he would have come to you ere this.
I must confess, I once loved Sophos well,
But now I cannot love him, whom all the world knows to be a dissembler.
Ere I would wrong my love with one days absence;
I would pass the boiling Hellespont,
As once Lender did for Heroes love,
Or undertake a greater task then that,
Ere I would be disloyal to my Love.
And if that Lily give his free consent
That both our loves may sympathize in one,
My hand, my heart, my love, my life and all,
Shall ever tend on Lilies fair command.
Mr. Churms, me thinks tic strange, you should make such a motion:
Say I should yield, and grant you love;
When most you did expect a sunneshine day,
My fathers will would mar your hoped for hay,
And when you thought to reap the fruits of love,
His hard constraint would blast it in the bloom.
For he so do•es on Peter Ploddals pelf,
That none but he forsooth must be the man,
And I will rather match my self,
Unto a groom of Plutoes grisly den,
Then unto such a silly golden ass.
Bravely resolved in faith.
But to be short:
I have a secret friend that dwells from hence,
Some two days journey, thats the most,
And if you can, as (well I know) you may, convey me thither secretly:
For company I desire no other then your own,
Here take my hand:
That once performed my heart is next.
If on th'aduenture all the dangers lay,
That Europe or the western world affords,
Were it to combat Cerberus himself,
Or scale the brazen walls of Plutoes court;
When as there is so fair a prize proposed,
If I shrink back or leave it unperformed,
Let the World canonise me for a Coward:
Appoint the time and leave the rest to me.
When nights black mantle overspreads the sky,
And days bright lamp is drenched in the west,
To morrow night I think the fittest time,
That silent shade may give our safe convoy,
Unto our wished hopes unseen of living eye.
And at that time I will not fail,
In that or ought may make for our avail.
But what if Sophos should meet you by the for∣rest fide:
And in counter you with his single rapier?
Sophos? a hop of my thumb, a wretch, a wretch.
Should Sophos meet vs there accompanied with some Champion,
With whom it were any credit to encounter,
Were he as stout as Hercules himself,
Then would I buckle with them hand to hand:
And bandy blows as thick as hailestones fall,
And carry Lily away in spite of all their force.
What? love will make Cowards fight:
Much more a man of my resolution.
And on your resolution Isle depend,
Until to morrow at th'appointed time, when I look for you:
till when Isle leave you, and go make preparation for our
journey.
Farewell fair love, until we meet again.
Why so: did I not tel you she would be glad to run away with me at length?
Why this falls out, even as a man would say, Thus I would have it.
But now I must go cast about for some money too,
Let me see: I have outlawed three or four of Gripes deb∣ters.
And I have the bonds in mine own hands:
The sum that is due to him, is some two or three hun∣dred pounds:
Well, Isle to them: if I can get but one half,
Isle deliver them their bonds, and leave the other half to their own consciences; and so I shall be sure to get money to bear charges:
When all fails well fare a good wit.
But soft, no more of that:
Here comes Mr. Gripe,
What Mr. Churms? what alone? how fares your body?
Faith Sir, reasonable well: I am even walking here to take the fresh ayre.
Tic very wholesome this fair weather,
But M. Churms: how like you my daughter?
Can you doe any good on his? will she be ruled yet?
How stands she affected to P. Ploddall?
O very well Sir: I have made his very confor∣mable.
O let me alone to persuade a woman:
I hope you shall see his married within this week at most,
I mean to my self.
Master Churmes. I am so exceedingly beholding to you,
I cannot tell how I shall requite your kindness,
But ith mean time heers a brace of angels for you to drink, for your pains,
This news has even lightened my heart,
O Sir, my neighbour Ploddall is very wealthy.
Come M. Churms, you shall go home with me,
Weal have good cheer &amp; be merry for this, to night, in faith.
Well: let them laugh that win.
Granam, give me but two crowns of red gold,
And Isle give you two pence of white silver,
If Robin the devil be not a water witch.
Marry, Iesus bless vs: why prithee?
Marry Isle tel you why.
Upon the morrow after the blessed new year,
I came trip, trip, trip, over the Market hill,
Holding up my petticoat to the calves of my legs,
To show my fine coloured stockings,
And how finely I could foot it in a pair of new corked shoes, I had bought:
And there I spied this Monsieur Muff, lie gaping up in∣to the skies,
To know how many Maids would be with child in the town all the year after:
O tic a base vexation slave,
How the country talks of the large ribbed varlet!
Marry out upon him: what a Friday faced slave it is!
I think in my conscience, his face never keeps Holiday▪
Why his face can never be at quiet,
He has such a choleric nose,
I durst hasworne by my maiden-head,
(God forgive me that I should take such an oath▪
That if William had had such a nose, I would never halov'd him.
What a talking is here of noses and faces?
Come Pig, wee are toward marriage; let vs talk of that may doe vs good: Granam, what will you give vs toward howse-keeping?
Why William, we are talking of Rob Goodfellow:
What think you of him?
Marry I say he looks like a tankerd bearer,
That dwells in Petticoat lane, at the sign of the Mere∣maid;
And I swear by the blood of my codpiece,
An I were a woman I would lug off his lave ears,
Or run him to death with a spit: and for his face,
I think tic pity there is not a law made,
That it should be felony to name it in any other places,
then in bawdy houses:
But Granam what will you give vs?
Marry I will give Pig a pot and a pan,
Two platters, a dish and a spoon, a dog, and a cat:
I trow sheele prove a good huswife,
And love his husband well too.
If she love me Isle love his, in faith my sweet honey comb, Isle love thee, 〈…〉
We must be asked in Church next Sunday, and weel be mar∣ried presently.
In faith William weal have a merry day ont.
That wee will in faith Pig: weal have a whole noise of fiddlers there:
Come Pig lets hie vs home, weal make a bag-pudding to supper▪
And William shall go and sup with vs.
Come on in faith.
Why how now Sophos, al a mort? still languishing in love?
Will not the presense of thy friend prevail?
Nor hope expel these sullen fits?
Cannot mirth wring, if but a forged smile,
From those sad drooping looks of thine?
Rely on hope, whose hap will lead thee right,
To her, whom thou dost call thy hearts delight;
Look cheerely man: the time is near at hand,
That Hymen mounted on a snow white coach,
Shall tend on Sophos and his lovely bride.
Tic impossible: her Father, man, her father,
Hes al for Peter Ploddall.
Should I but see that Ploddall offer love,
This sword should pearce the peasants breast,
And chase his soul from his accursed corps
By an unwonted way unto the grisly lake.
But now the appointed time is near,
That Churms should come with his supposed love:
Then sit we down under these levy shades
And weight the time of Lilies wished approach.
I: here Isle weight for Lilies wished approach,
More wished to me, then is a calm at seas,
To shipwrecked souls, when great God Neptune frowns.
Though sad despair hath almost drowned my hopes;
Yet would I pass the burning vaults of Orke,
As erst did Hercules to fetch his love,
If I might meet my love upon the strond
And but enjoy her love one minute of an hour.
But stay: what man, or devil, or hellish fiendcomes here,
Transformed in this ugly uncouth shape?
O, peace a while: you shall see good sport a∣none.
Now I am clothed in this hellish shape,
If I could meet with Sophos in these woods,
O, he would take me for the Devil himself,
I should ha good laughing, beside the forty shillings 〈…〉
Ploddall has given me: and if I get no more I am sure of that.
But soft: now I must try my cunning, for here he sits.
The high commander of the damned souls
Great Dis the Duke of Devils and Prince of Limbo Lake,
High Regent of Acheron, Styx and Phloget••
By strict command from Pluto, Hells great Monarch,
And fair Proserpina the Queen of Hell,
By full consent of all the damned Hags
And all the fiends that keep the Stygian plains,
Hath sent me here from depth of under ground,
To summon thee to appear at Plutoes Court.
A man or Devil? or what so ere thou art,
Isle try if blows will drive thee down to hell.
Belike thou art the Devils Paritor,
The basest officer that lives in Hell,
For, such thy words imports thee for to be:
Tic pity you should come so far without a fee.
And because I know money goes lowe with Sophos,
Isle pay you your fees: [Hee beates him,] take that, &amp; that, and that:
O good Sir, I beseech you, Isle do any thing;
Then down to Hell, for sure thou art a Devil.
O hold your hands, I am not a Devil by my troth.
Sounds, dost thou cross me? I say thou art a Devil.
O Lord sir save my life: and Isle say as you say, or any thing else you'll ha me doe.
Then stand up and make a preachment of thy Pedigree, and how at first thou learnd'st this devilish trade: up I say.
O I will Sit:
Although in some places, I bear the title of a scurvy gen∣tleman:
By birth I am a boat writes son of Hull,
My father got me of a refused hag,
Under the old ruins of Boobies barn,
Who as she lived, at length she likewise died,
And for her good deeds went unto the Devil.
But, Hell not wont to harbour such a guest,
Her fellow fiends do daily make complaint
Unto grim Pluto, and his lovely Queen,
Of her unruly missebehauiour:
Entreating that a passport might be drawn
For her to wander till the day of doom,
On earth again to vex the minds of men,
And swore she was the fittest fiend in Hell
To drive men to desperation.
To this intent her passport straight was drawn,
And in a whirl wind forth of Hell she came;
Ore hills she hurls, and scowres along the plains:
The trees flew up bith roots, the earth did quake for fear,
The houses tumble down, she plays the Devil and all:
At length not finding any one so fit
To effect her devilish damned charge as I:
She comes to me, as to her only child,
And me her instrument on earth she made,
And by that means I learned this devilish trade.
O monstrous villainy!
But tell me: whats thy course of life, &amp; how thou shiftest for maintenance in the world?
Faith Sir, I am in a manner a promoter,
Or more fitly termed a promoting knave:
I creep into the presence of great men,
And under colour of their friendships,
Effect such wonders in the world
That babes will curse me, that are yet unborn.
Of the best men, I raise a common fame,
And honest women rob of their good name:
Thus daily tumbling-in comes all my thrift.
That I get best is got but by a shift:
But the chief course of all my life,
Is to set discord betwixt man and wife.
Out upon thee Cannibal,
Dost thou think thou shalt ever come to hey•••▪
I little hope for heaven or heaven 〈…〉
But if in hell doth any place remain,
Of more esteem then is another room,
I hope, as guerdon for my just desert,
To have it for my detestable acts.
Were not, thy tongue condemns thy guilty soul,
I could not think that on this living earth
Did breath a villainy so audacious.
Go get thee gone, and come not in my walk.
For if thou dost, thou come unto thy woe.
The devil himself was never conjured so.
Sure hes no man, but an incarnate devil,
Whose ugly shape betrays his monstrous mind.
And if he be a devil, I am sure hes gone:
But Churms the Lawyer will be here anon,
And with him comes my sister Le••a:
Tic he I am sure you look for.
Nay, she it is that I expect so long.
Then sit we down until we hear more news:
This but a prologue to our play ensewes.
But see where Churms and Lily comes along:
•…lks as stately as the great Baboon.
Sounds, he looks as though his mother were a midwife.
Now gentle Jove, great Monarch of the world,
Grant good success unto my wandering hopes.
Now Phoebus silver eye is drenched in western deep
And Luna gins to show her splendantraies,
And •• the harmless choristers of wood
Do take reprose, save only Philomele:
Whose heavy tunes do evermore record,
With mornefullaies the losses of her love.
Thus far fair love we pass in secret sort,
Beyond the compass of thy fathers bounds,
Whilst he on down-soft bed securely sleeps
And not so much as dreams of our depart▪
The dangers past, now think on nought but love,
Isle be thy dear, be thou my hearts delight:
Nay first, Isle send thy soul to cole black night.
Thou promised love: now seal it with a kiss.
Nay soft Sir, your mark's at the fairest.
For wear her love, and seal it •••• • kiss▪
Upon the burnished splendour 〈…〉 bl•••••▪
Or it shall rip the entrails of thy peasant hart.
Nay, let me do it, thats my part.
You wrong me much to rob me of my love.
Avaunt, base braggart: Lilies mine.
She lately promised love to me.
Peace, Night-Rauen, peace, Ileende this con∣trouersie.
Come Lily, stand between them both,
As equal Judge to end this strife:
Say which of these shall have thee to his wife▪
I can devise no better way then this,
Now choose thy love: and greet him with 〈…〉
My choice is made: and here it is 〈…〉
See here the mirror of true 〈…〉
Whose steadfast love deserves a Princes worth▪
Master Churms are you not well?
I must confess I would have chosen you,
But that I ne'er beheld your legs till now:
Trust me I never looked so low before.
I know you use to look aloft.
Yet not so high as your crown.
What if you had?
Faith I should ha spied but a Calves head.
Sounds, consent of the wench and scoft at too▪
Tic intolerable: and shall I loose her thus?
Hoved mads me, that I brought not my sword and buckle•• with me!
What, are you in your sword &amp; buckler terms▪
Isle put you out of that humour:
There Lily sends you that by me,
And that, to recompense your loves desire:
And that, as payment for your well earned hire.
Go get thee gon, and boast of Lilies love.
Where ere I go Isle leave with her my •••se,
And rail on you with speeches wild▪
A crafty knave was never so beguiled.
Now Sophos hopes have had their lucky haps,
And he enjoys the presence of his love,
My vow's performed, and I am full revenged
Upon this Hell-bred brace of cursed Imps:
Now rests nought but my fathers free consent
To knit the knot that time can ne'er vntwist.
And that, as this, I likewise will perform.
No sooner shall Auroraes pearled dew,
Orespread the mantled earth with silver drops
And Phoebus bless the Orient with a blush,
To chase black night to her deformed Cell,
But Isle repair unto my fathers house,
And never cease with my enticing words,
To work his will to knit this Gordian knot,
Till when Isle leave you to your amorous chat,
Dear friend a dieu, fair sister too farewell,
Betake your selves unto some secret place:
Until you hear from me how things fall out.
We both do wish a fortunate goodnight:
And pray the Gods to guide thy steps aright.
Now come fair Lily, lets betake our selves
Unto a little Hermitage hereby:
And there to live obscured from the world
Till fates and Fortune call vs thence away,
To see the sunshine of our Nuptial day.
See how the twinkling Stars do hide their borrowed shin
As half ashamed their luster so is stained,
By Lilies beauteous eyes that shine more bright,
Then twinkling Stars do in a winters night:
In such a night did Paris win his love.
In such a night, Aenaeas proved unkind.
In such a night did Troilus court his dear.
In such a night, fair Phyllis was betrayed.
Isle prove as true as ever Troylus was.
And I as constant as Penelope.
Then let vs solace, and in loves delight,
And sweet embracings spend the liue-long night.
And whilst love mounts her on her wanton wings,
Let Descant run on Musics silver strings.
Old Tithon must for sake his dear,
The Lark doth chante her cheerful lay:
Aurora smiles with merry cheer,
To welcome in a happy day.
The beasts do skip,
The sweet birds sing:
The wood Nymphs dance,
The Echo••ring.
The hollow caves with joy resounds:
And pleasure every where abounds:
The Graces linking hand in hand,
In love have knit a glorious band.
Hear you Master Goodfellow how have you sped?
Ha you plaid the Devil bravely, and scard the scholar out once wits?
A pox of the Scholar.
Nay hark you: I sent you forty shillings, and you shall have the cheese I promised you too.
A plague of the forty shillings, and the Cheese too.
Hear you, will you give me the powder you told me of?
How you vex me! powder quoth? Sounds I ha been powderd.
Son, I doubthee will prove a crafty knave, and cousin vs of our money:
Weal go to Master Justice and complain on him, and get him whipped out oath Country for a Connicatcher.
I, or have his ears naild to the Pillory: Comes lets go.
Fellow Robin, what news? howe goes the world?
Faith, the world goes I cannot tell how:
How speed you with your wench?
I would the wench were at the Devil:
A plague vpont I never say my prayers, and that makes me have such ill luck.
I think the scholar be haunted with some Demi∣devil.
Why▪ did thou fray him?
Fray him? a vengeance ont▪ all our shifting kna∣uerie's known:
We are counted very vagrants:
Sounds, I am afraid of every officer, for whipping.
We are horribly haunted: our behaviour is so beastly, that we are grown loathsome, our craft gets vs nought but knocks.
What course shall we take now?
Faith • cannot tell• lets even run our Country, for here is no staying for vs.
Faith agreed: lets go into some place where wee are not known, and there set up the art of knavery with the second edition.
Every one tells me I look better then I was wont,
My hearts lightened, my spirits are revived,
Why me thinks I am even young again;
It joys my heart that this same peevish girl my daughter will be ruled at the last yet:
But I shall never be able to make Mr. Churmes amends for the great pains he has taken,
Master, now out vpons, well aday: we are al undone!
Undone? what sudden accident hath chance it?
Speak whats the matter?
Alas that ever I was borne!
My Mistress and Mr. Churms are run away together.
Tic not possible: ne'er tell me. I dare trust Master Churms with a greater matter then that.
Faith you must trust him whether you will or no, for hes gone.
M. Gripe, I was coming to desire that I might have your absence at my wedding: for I hear say you are very liberal grown alate.
For I spake with three or four of your debtors this more∣ning▪
that ought you hundred pounds a piece:
And they told me, that you sent M. Churmes to them and took of some ten pounds,
And of some twenty, and delivered them their bonds,
And bad them pay the rest when they were able.
I am undone: I am robbed: my daughter▪ my money!
Which way are they gone?
Faith Sir, its all to nothing but your daughter and
M. Churms are gone both one way:
Marry your money flies some one ways and some another:
And therefore tic but a folly to make hue and cry after it.
Follow them: make hue and cry after them.
My daughter, my money, alls gone, what shall I doe?
Faith if you will be ruled by me,
Isle tell you what you •••ll doe:
(Mark what I say) for Isle teach you the way to come to heaven, if you stumble not:
Give all you have to the poor,
But one single penny, and with that penny buy you a good strong halter,
And when you ha done so: come to me and Isle tell you what you shall do with it.
Bring me my daughter: that Churms, that villainy,
Isle tear him with my teeth.
Master, nay pray you do not run mad:
Isle tell you good news:
My young Master Fortunatus is come home: and see where he comes.
If thou had said Lily, it had been something.
Thus Fortunatus greetes his Father,
And craves his blessing on his bended knee.
I, heers my son: but Lily sheele not come.
Good Fortunatus rise: wilt thou shed tears,
And help thy father moan?
If so, say I: if not good son be gone.
What moves my father to these v••••th fits?
Faith Sir, hes almost mad: I think he cannot tell you:
And therefore I presuming Sir, that my wit is something better than his, at this time (do you mark Sir?)
Out of the profound circumambulation of my supernatu∣rall wit Sir (do you understand?)
Will tel you the whole superfluity of the matter Sir:
Your sister Leli• Sir you know is a woman,
As another woman is Sir.
Well, and what of that?
Nay nothing Sir, but she fell in love with one So∣phos a very proper wise young man Sir:
Now Sir, your Father would not let his have him, Sir:
But would have married his to one Sir,
That would have fed his with nothing but barley bag put∣dings and fat bacon:
Now Sir to tell you the truth,
The fool ye know has fortune to land:
But M. Lilies mouth doth not hang for that kind of diet.
And how then?
Marry then there was a certain croaking, cog∣ging, pettifogging, buttermilk slave Sir, one Churms Sir, that is the very quintessence of all the knaves in the bunch; And if the best man of all his kin had been but so good as a yeoman mans son:
He should have been a marked knave by letters patents,
And hee Sir comes me sneaking, and cousins them both of their wench, and is run away with his:
And Sir belike hee has consent your father here of a great deal of his money too.
Sir your father did trust him but too much;
But I always thought he would prove a crafty knave.
My trusts betrayed, my joys exiled:
Grief kills his heart, my hopes beguiled,
Whtere golden gain doth blear a fathers eyes,
That precious pearl fetched from Pernassus mount,
Is counted refuse, worse then Bullen brass;
Both joys and hope hang of a silly twine,
That still is subject unto flitting time:
That turns joy into grief, and hope to sad despair,
And ends his days in wretched worldly care.
Were I the richest Monarch under heaven,
And had one daughter thrice as fair,
As was the Grecian Menelaus wife,
Ere I would match his to an untaught swain,
Though one whose wealth exceeded Croesus store,
His self should choose, and I applaud his choice,
Of one more poor then ever Sophos was,
Were his deserts but equal unto his.
If I might speak without offence;
You were to blame to hinder Lilies choice.
As she in Natures graces doth excel:
So doth Minerua grace him full as well.
Now, by cock and pie, you never spoke a truer word in your life, hes a very kind gentleman:
For last time he was at our house he gave me three pence.
O nobly spoken: God send Pig to prove as wise a woman as his Mother, and then we shall be sure to have wise children.
Nay if he be so liberal: old Gransire you shall give him the good-will of your daughter.
She is not mine: I have no daughter now.
That I should say I had, thence comes my grief:
My care of Lily, past a fathers love,
My love of Lily makes my loss the more.
My loss of Lily drowns my heart in woe:
My hearts woe makes this life a living death:
Care, Love, Loss, Hearts-woe, living death,
Join all in one, to stop this vital breath.
Cursed be the time I gaped for golden gain,
I curse the time, I crossed his in his choice.
His choice was virtuous, but my will was base,
I sought to grace his from the Indian Mines,
But she sought honour from the starry Mount:
What frantic fit possessed my foolish brain?
What furious fancy fired so my heart,
To hate fair Virtue and to scorn desert?
Then father give desert his due,
Let Natures graces and fair virtues gifts,
One sympathy and happy consort make,
Twixt Sophos and my sister Lilies love:
Conjoin their hands, whose hearts have long been one,
And so conclude a happy union.
Now tic too late:
What Fates decree, can never be recalled:
His luckless love is fallen to Churms his lot,
And he usurps fair Lilies nuptial bed.
That cannot be: fear of pursuit must needs▪ prolong his nuptial rights.
But if you give your full consent,
That Sophos may enjoy his long wished love,
And have fair Lily to his lovely bride,
Isle follow Churmes what ere betide.
Isle be as swift as is the light foot Roe,
And overtake him ere his journeys end:
And bring fair Lily back unto my friend.
I, heers my hand▪ I do consent,
And think his happy in his happy choice,
Yet half foreiudge my hopes will be deceived.
But Fortunatus: I must needs commend,
Thy constant mind thou bear unto thy friend.
The after ages wondering at the same:
Shall sait's a deed deserving lasting fame.
Then rest you here till I return again,
Isle go to Sophos ere I go along:
And bring him here to keep you company.
Perhaps he hath some skill in hidden arts,
Of Planets course, or secret magic spells,
To know where Lily and that Fox lies hid,
Whose craft so cunningly conveyed his hence.
I: here Isle rest an hour or twain,
Till Fortunatus doe return again.
Faith Sir, this same Churms is a very scurvy Lawer:
For once I put a case to him: and me thought his law was not worth a pudding.
Why what was your case?
Marry Sir, my case was a gooses case:
For my dog wearied my neighbours sow, and the sow died▪
And hee sued you upon wilful murder?
No: but he went to law with me, and would make me either pay for his sow, or hang my dog:
Now Sir to this same Retourner I went.
To beg a pardon for your dog?
No: but to have some o• 〈…〉 for my money,
I gave him his fee, and promised him a goose beside, for h•• counsel.
Now Sir his counsel was to deny all was asked me,
And to crave a longer time to answer,
Though I knew the case was plain;
So Sir I take his counsel: and always when he send to me for his goose, I deny it, and crave a longer time to answer.
And so the case was yours, &amp; the goose was his:
And so it came to be a gooses case.
True: but now we are talking of geese,
See where Pig and my Granam Midnight comes.
Come Pig, bestir your stumps: make thy self smug, wench; thou must be married to morrow:
Lets go seek out thy sweet heart,
To prepare all things in readiness.
Why Granam, look where he is.
Ha my sweet Tralilly, I thought thou could spy me amongst a hundred honest men.
A man may see that love will creep where it cannot go.
Ha my sweet and too sweet: shall I say the tother sweet?
I, say it and spare not.
Nay I will not say it, I will sing it.
Thou art mine own sweet heart▪
From thee Isle never depart:
Thou art my Ciperlillie:
And I thy Trangdidowne dilly,
And sing hey ding a ding ding:
And do the tother thing▪
And when tic done not miss,
To give my wench a kiss:
And then dance can thou not hit it?
Ho brave VVilliam Cricket▪
How like you this Granam▪
Marry gods be•niso• l•••t oath thy good hart, fort:
Ha, that I were you•• again!
〈…〉 I was an old doer at these love songs when I was a 〈…〉
Now by the 〈…〉
the merriest wore in all Womanshire.
Faith, I am none of those that love nothing but Tum dum diddle▪
If he had not been a merry shauer, I would never have had him.
But come my wimble lass, let al these matters pass: And in a bouncing brauation, lets talk of our copulation: What good cheer shall we have to morrow?
Old Grandsire Thickskin, you that sit there as melancholy as a mantletree, what will you give vs toward this merry meeting?
Marry, because you told me a merry gooses case:
Isle bestow a fat goose on ye: and God give you luck.
Marry well said old master: even God give them joy indeed, for by my vii, they are a good sweet young couple.
Granam stand out oath way, for here come gentlefolk will run ore ye else.
Master, here comes your son again▪
Is Fortunatus there?
Welcome Fortunatus▪ wheres Sophos?
Here Sophos is, as much ore-worne with love,
As you with grief for loss of Lily.
And ten times more if it be possible.
The love of Lily is to me more dear,
Then is a kingdom or the richest crown
That ere adorned the temples of a king.
Then welcome Sophos: thrice more welcome now
Then any man on earth to me or mine.
It is not now with me as late it was;
I lowrd at learning, and at virtue spurnd:
But now my heart and mind and all is tournd.
Were Lily here▪ I soon would knit the knot
Twixt her and thee, that time could ne'er vnti•,
Till fatal sisters victory had won,
And that your glass of life were quite 〈…〉
Sounds, I think he be spur-blind. Why, Lily stands
hard by him.
And Lily here falls prostrate on her knee.
And craves a pardon for her late offence.
What Lily, my daughter? stand up wench:
Why now my joy is full:
My heart is lightened of all sad annoy:
Now farewell grief, and welcome home my joy.
Here Sophos, take thy Lilies hand:
Great God of heaven your hearts combine
In virtues lore to raise a happy line.
Now Phaeton hath checked his fiery steeds,
And quenched his burning beams that late were wont
To melt my waxen wings when as I soard aloft:
And lovely Venus smiles with fair aspect
Upon the Spring time of our sacred love;
Thou great commander of the circled Orbs,
Grant, that this league of lasting amity
May lye recorded by Eternity.
Then wished content knit up our Nuptial right:
And future joys our former griefs requite.
Nay an you be good at that, Isle tel you what weal doe.
〈…〉 I must be married to morrow; and if you will, weal go all truth Church together: and so save Sir Iohn a labour.
Agreed.
Then march along, and lets be gon,
To solemnise two marriages in one.
GEntles, all compassed in this circled round,
Whose kind aspects do patronise our sports:
To you Isle bend as low as to the earth,
In all the humble complements of courtesy.
But if there be, (as tic no doubt there is)
In all this round some Cinique censurers,
Whose only skill consists in finding faults,
That have like Midas mighty Asses ears,
Quick judgements that will strike at every stale,
And perhaps such as can make a large discourse
Out of Scoggins jests, or the hundred merry tales:
Marry if you go any further, tic beyond their reading;
To these I say, I scorn to lend a look,
And bid them vanish vapours, and so let them pass.
But to the other sort, that hear with love, and judge with favour,
To them we leave, to censure of our play:
And if they like our plays Catastrophe,
Then let them grace it with a Plaudit.

HOw now gallants, what first? what first?
The Isle of Gulls.
The Isle of Gulls, what should that be?
A play by the name, but come shells quarter our selves?
If some had had the wit to doe so in time, they might ha saude
the hangman a labour. But come boy, furnish vs with stools.
Pardon me sir, my office is to speak a Prologue, not to pro∣uide
you stools.
And you were the Epilogue to sir-
Fie be not incivil: dost hear youth, prethe whats he that dis∣covered
your new found Land, the Isle of Gulls? what is hee?
A mere stranger sir.
A stranger? the better welcome: comes hee East-ward,
West-ward, or North-ward hoe?
None of the three ways I assure you.
Prethe where is he?
Not on his knees in a corner, to Apollo praying that his play
may hold in a good hand at Passadge, not on the stage amongst gal∣lants,
preparing a bespoke Plaudit; but close in his study writing
hard, to get him a handsome suite against Summer.
And where sits his friends? hath he not a prepared company of
gallants, to applaud his jests, and grace out his play.
None I protest: Doe Poets use to bespeak their Auditory.
The best in grace doe, and but for that, some that I know, had
never had their grace in Poetry till this day.
Then must our Author look for a certain disgrace, for he
is altogether vnfurnisht of such a friendly audience.
Then he must lay his trial upon God and good wits. But why
doth he call his play The Isle of Gulls, it begets much expectation.
Not out of any dogged disposition, not that it figures a〈…〉
certain state, or private government: far be that supposition 〈◊〉
the thought of any indifferent Auditor: and the argument being a
little string or Riuolet, drawn frō the full strain of the right worcester∣thy
Gentleman, Sir Phillip Sydneys well known Archadea, con∣firms
it: only a Duke to make trial of certain experiments, re∣tyres
with his retinue into a Nameless desert. Now as well for fashi∣on
sake, as that all those which have to doe in that desert, are gulled in
the reach of their hopes, therefore hee calls it, (and as hee presumes,
not improperly) The Isle of Gulls.
Out a question he hath promised thee some fee, thou plead
so hard for him, but and he be a right Poet hee will never perform
it. But what method observes hee in his play, first any thing Critical?
Are Lawyers fees, and Citizens wives laid open in it: I love to hear
vice anotomizd, &amp; abuse let blood in the moister vain, is there any
great mans life charactred int?
None I protest sir, only in the person of Demotes he express∣ses
to the life the monstrous and deformed shape of vice, as well to
beget a loathing of abuse, as that his villainy may give the greater lu∣ster
to the virtuous dispositions of true-borne gentility.
All thats nothing to me, and there be not Wormwood water
and Coppers int, Isle not like it, should Apollo write it, and Rosius
himself act it.
Fie upon thee, thou art too too Critical: is there any good bau∣dry
int, jests of an ell deep, and a fathom broad, good cuckolding,
may a couple of young-setters up learn to doe well int? Give me a
scene of venery, that will make a men's spirits stand on their typ∣toes,
and die his blood in a deep scarlet, like your Ouids Ars A∣mandi,
there flows the true Spring-head of Poetry, and the very
Crystal fount of Parnassus.
Chaste ears would never endure it sir.
Chaste ears, now deafenes light upon em, what should chaste
ears doe at a play.
Tic strange now, I am of neither a both your opinions, I like
neither railing nor bawdry: no, give me a stately pend history, as
thus, The rugged winds, with rude and ragged ruffs. &amp;c.
Fie vpont, mere Fustian; I had rather hear two good bawdy
jests, then a whole play of such teare-cat thunderclaps.
Alas Gentlemen, how first possible to content you? you will
〈◊〉 railing, and invectives, which our Author neither dares, nor
affects: you bawdy and scurrill jests, which neither becomes his mo∣destie
to write, nor the ear of a generous Auditory to hear: you
must ha swelling comparisons, an• bombast Epithets, which are as
fit for the body of a C•••edie, as Hercules shoe for the foot of a
Pygmey: yet all these we must have, and all in one play; or tic alrea∣die
condemned to the hell of eternal disgrace.
Look toot, if there be not gall int, it shall not pass.
If it be not bawdy, tic impossible to pass.
If it be both Critical and bawdy, if it be not high written, both
your Poet and the house to, loose a friend of me.
Nay I beseech you sir, if you be his friend, stand so to him
still, for he hath too many enemies already, in whose judgements, he
and his labours stand excommunicate, as though unworthy to pre∣sent
themselves in this assembly.
Enemies, nays foot then theres some hope in's play, for Envy
never works but against desert and merit. If hee be envied theres
some worth in him, and Isle see out his play for that only.
Faith and Isle see an act or two out, but I tell you afore-hand I
cannot see it out.
Not see it out? your reason.
Fore God I lay in bed till past three a clock, slept out my din∣ner,
and my stomach will toule to supper before five, therefore you
must pardon me.
Either see it all or none; for tic grown into a custom at
plays, if any one rise (especially of any fashionable sort) about what
serious business soever, the rest thinking it in dislike of the play, tho
he never thinks it, cry mew, by Iesus wild; and leave the poor hart∣less
children to speak their Epilogue to the empty seats.
Why dost think thy audience like a flock of sheep, that one
cannot leap over a hedge, but all the rest will follow, they ha more
of reason in them then so.
Well, Isle sit out the play, and be but to avoid that sheepish im∣putation,
but see it be bawdy, or by this light I and all my friends will hiss.
You should not deal gentleman-like with vs else.
The misery that waits upon the pen
Of the best Writers, judge it gentlemen,
Let them express the very soul of wit,
And want Opinions voice to countnance it,
Tic like the idle buzzing of a fly,
Heard, not regarded: wretched Poetry:
If a write mirth, tic Ribaldry, and mean,
Scorned of chaste ears. If he compose a Scene
Of high writ Poesy, fitting a true stage,
Tic counted fustian: If portick rage
Strike at abuse, or op the vain of sin,
He is straight informed against for libelling.
Neither quick mirth, invective, nor high state,
Can content all: such is the boundless hate
Of a confused Audience: Then we
That scarcely know the rules of Poesy
Cannot scope check. Yet this our comfort is,
The wise will smile to hear the impartial hiss.
We neither brag, nor tremble, faint nor entreat,
Our merits nothing, yet our hopes are great,
Yet this our Author bad me boldly speak,
His play shall pass, let Envy swell and break,
Detraction he scorns, honours the best,
Ta•ti for hate; thus low to all the rest.
Welcome gallants, welcome honoured bloods; the reason that
we have unclothed vs of our princely government in Arcadia, and
have to doe with this private retirement here in this deferred Isle, you
shall find in that shedule, only thus much for public satisfaction:
Tic not strange to you, that the choicest treasure Nature endowed vs
with, is mind up in the veins of my two daughters: howe much
their quiet, and the smooth stream of our government in Arcadia,
was troubled by the impetuous concourse of unruly suitors, is familiar
with your knowledge; this to avoid, I have for my Image there in
my absence appointed my brother, and undertook this private re∣tirement.
Why my lord, are you so covetous of your daughters beauties,
that their perfections shall be a means to hinder their preferment?
Rather to further it fair Queen: they are the only pearls
of our age, and to see them well set in honourable and wel-befitting
Marriage, is our wishes happiness.
To which effect we have sent a general challenge
To all the youthful bloods of Africa,
That whosoever (borne of princely stem)
Dares foot the bosom of this desert Isle,
(The stage where Isle perform this lovers prize)
And by his wit and active policy,
Woo, win, entice, or any way defeat
Me of my charge, my daughters of their harts,
Shall with their loves wear my imperial crown
Wreathe of their conquest.
A prize, a prize, rare work for Fencers.
What coward would not venture a cracked crown for such a booty?
To that intent our Island is fenc't in
By sea and Land, and at each corner built
A Castle for defence, which like great men
Doe ouer-looke Archadea: over which,
We have appointed Captains. More to desire,
Is more then we are willing to discover.
Well then sister, I see we must to hap-hazard for husbands.
God send me one with a good face and I care not.
Love and be thy will, send me one with a fair table in his
forehead, like Time.
Nay, and his face be good, let me alone to trick his fore∣head,
a country-gentlewoman taught me how: But father I wonder
how you dare undertake such a peremptory challenge against all
cōmers, considering you have been so long troubled with an Ague.
An ague? what ague?
Why your quotidian, Demotes the Court surfeit, hee that
dwells in your eye, like a disease in your blood.
And the Presence were not exceeding empty-stomackt, it
would never digest such Almes-basket-scraps, the very fall &amp; gar∣bidge
of gentry; fie upon him, he becomes the great chamber worse
then a Gentleman-vsher with wry legs.
He is the most misshapen suit of gentility that ever the Court
wore.
Had hee not been of my fathers own making, I should
ha condemned his taylor for an exceeding botcher.
If you retain the love of children, or the duty of subjects,
express it in your obedience, we know Demotes loves vs.
As Captains and Courtiers do old widows, for profit
and preferment.
In sign whereof we make him.
Nay, you have bestowed too much of the making of him
up already.
The very making of him up, has stood you in more then the
whole our sides worth.
In my free thoughts you wrong him, therefore to express
our love, and to give the world public note of his loyalty, we cre∣ate
him your Guardian.
How father, my Guardian.
I minion, yours.
Doe you hear father, bid him bespeak Spectacles, for my
fingers have vowed to have a blind match with his eyes.
Well said Haggart, Isle make your proud hart stoop to the
lure of obedience. But come, by this time our challenge is published,
and our gallants wits sweating in the field of Invention, and it be∣houes
vs not to rest vnexercised.
So to our lodge, in the mean time be it known,
Our breath has power to raise, or cast men down.
Now Captain Observation, times bawd, thou that hast
kept the Ages door, whilst vp-start baseness crept into the bed of
greatness, what dost thou think of this change?
That it pleased the Duke, and becomes not subjects to ex∣amin
his actions.
Thats no part of my meaning, yet would I gladly be bet∣la
instructed why the Duke broke up his Court in Archadea, and
removed it into this Island?
I am not Secretary to his thoughts, but the general m∣more
is, that out of the freeness of his spirit, hee hath sent a challenge
to all his neighbor Princes, that who soever (within a twelve month)
can defeat him of his daughters, shall with their loves, enjoy his
dukedom, the garland proposde for the victors.
Your words throw sense into me, and thats the cause the
Island is so surely guarded with watch-towers, over which our selu••
and other Captains have the charge.
And to the end, that not affection, but desert may prove
victor, are the two Ladies so narrowly observed, the one never out a
the eye of her Father, the other continually in the lodge of Demotes,
the Dukes chief director.
If inquisitiveness be not too bold a guest, what doe you
think of Demotes.
As of a little hillock, made great with others ruins.
Your comparison holds, for by report, his avarice has un∣made
many to make him up.
How did he first stumble on the Princes favour?
As some doe upon offices, by fortune and flattery, or as
truth says, the Prince having one day lost his way, wandering in the
woods found this Demotes, affected his discourse, took him along
to the Court, and like great men in love with their own doings,
countenanced his defects, gave him offices, titles, and all the additions
that g•e to the making up of a man worshipful.
I cannot but commend the Duke for raising him, nor
yet praise him, that he proportions not his carriage answerable to
his fortunes.
Your thoughts and mine are twynnes in that: but I hear
the warning bell, some strangers are arrived.
Lets to our office then, and conduct them to Demotes,
whose custom is to spent &amp; hem, whilst his scribe Mayor takes they•
Examinations.
Manasses, how dost like my play at Tennys?
You play well Sir, but you loose still.
Policy Manasses, policy, for when any man upbraids
me with my gettings at Court, I may swear truly I have lost more
then I have got byte.
By the Tennis court I think you have.
If by any Court, tic enough to save mine oath.
But what doe our spruce wetted gallants say of my bounty.
Faith sir according to the proportion of it, little or nothing
they say tic a banckrout, and dares not show his head.
Then let em leave resting at me, though it please the Duke
for some few good parts that he sees in me, to make me his familiar,
I scorn to be public, or every Courtiers companion: but who
comes here?
The Captains of the watch-towers? what news with you.
A couple of peticioners, ant like your worship.
Had I best take their petitions Manasses?
O in any case, though you never peruse em, tic the only
course in request.
Fellows, deliver your petitions to my scribe Mayor, and
dost hear, put em up Manasses, they may be wrongs to vs.
And they be, I hope they be not the first wrongs I have
put up for your worship.
That fellows pocket is like a Tailors hell, it eats up part
of every mans due: tic an Executioner, and makes away more inno∣cent
petitions in one year, then a red-headed hang man cuts ropes
in an age.
Now, what are you sir?
A poor soldier ant like your worship.
Poor soldiers doe not like my worship, they are bad mem∣bers.
Then if they had a woman to their Judge, they should be
sure to be cut off, for they cannot endure bad members in a Com∣mon-wealth.
What are you?
A poor scholar, ant like your worship.
Poor scholars doe not like our worship neither, they rail
against rich Cormorants, they are bad members to.
Cut them off both sir, and make the Land an Eunuch.
Isle take order with em I warrant thee, and I may have my
will, Isle ha neither poor scholar nor soldior about the Court.
The next way to make it the Isle of fools.
Whats he talks of fools there? why how now sir, know
you to whom you speak?
Cry your worship mercy, I had forgot your authority.
But I remember well enough I warrant you, I command
you, in my name and the Dukes, to attend your guard, and you re∣guard
me no more then a careless Lawyer doth an undone client,
but Isle inform: the Duke shall know, out, pack.
Command your slaves sir, we are gentlemen.
Why so I hope are wee sir, and of the best and last edition,
of the Dukes own making.
Cry your authority mercy, will you discharge vs of these passengers?
You are discharged, about your business.
Bad fate, that wrong should set his foot on right,
And true borne Eagles stoop to this base kite.
What an excellent trade it is to be an officer maker, Isle have
more officers, and one shall be to keep scholars and soldiers out
of the Court, for they dare not come in the great Chamber already,
for want of good clothes. But gods me Manasses, go tell the Duke
I must speak with him.
Presently sir, Isle go fetch the head to give the foot a pos∣set:
and my moister had wit to his villainy, he would make an excel∣lent
dish for the hangman.
Right worshipful.
I sir, I know my place is worshipful, I tell thee knave I
could hang thee by my patent, if it were granted once, Isle tell thee
how it runs, It allows me 24 knaves, 6 Kinghts, 10 fools, 13
felons, and 14 traitors by the year, take em howe, why, when, and
where I please.
I doe not think the Duke will ever grant it.
Why not grant it? why should you think he will not grant
it. Such another word &amp; Isle send you to Limbo instanthe.
We thank you good Demotes.
I hope you'll take reasonable bail for our forth-comming.
The case is altered with you since you came out of Archadea.
My honourable friends, Iulio and Aminter, my self and the
best ability of my power, lies at your service.
You see how confidently wee presume upon your Letters
promise, in furthering vs to attain the lovers prize.
The Dukes daughters are your own, and in a word thus
shall you attain em, some 3 days hence I will appoint a hunting, to
which I will invite the Duke &amp; both his daughters: in this hunt will
I upon some sudden occasion divide the train▪ and having singled
out the two Does, I hope you have wit enough to strike.
To strike, how mean you.
As headsmen doe, of with their maiden-heads, or if the
Duke offer resistance, of with his crown to.
That were violence, &amp; clean opposite to the intent of the
challenge.
Come ye are shallow, too't vi et arms, too't, Isle be your se∣cond,
think of the crown, ha my Letters trauaild for you, my wit
wrought for you, and my invention sweat for you, to possess you of
your loves, and seat you in the Dukedom, &amp; come you now with
tic violence, and against the intent of the challenge, I am ashamed to
hear you.
Nay Demotes, and your resolution be so forward, ours shall
ouer-take you, wee doubted least the preferments your Lord hath
heaped upon you, had smothered your affection to vs ward.
That was the father that begot the doubt in vs, you will
appoint the hunt.
Sever the Duke, divide the train, and then.
Wee ha your meaning.
Put it in execution then, but first entertain some new dis∣guise,
as at our next meeting Isle inform you. Adieu, I shall think
long till I see you again.
As a Lawyer doth for his client for a second see. Hears
no Iudas?
Yes, and a damned one to, for hee would betray and sell his
Moister.
Tic common in such base fellows, such Court-spyders,
that weave their webs of flattery in the ears of greatness, if they
can once entangle them in their quaint treachery, they poison em
straight.
They are like unnecessary worms, whō the son of greatness
creates of the gross and slimy multitude, as soon as they recover
strength, they eat into the credit of true borne gentry, undermine
and work out the true nobility, to inroote &amp; establish themselves.
And in the end, like Esops starved snake, having lapped the sweet
milk of greatness, made themselves strong in authority and friends,
they turn their stings of envy into their preservers bosom.
The example lives in this Demotes, who notwithstanding the
Duke hath raised him to that height that hee looks equal with him∣self,
yet for the base hope of uncertain government, hee offers him
to sale, but let his treason live to the last minute.
For my part Isle make that use of him that Physicians do of
poison, use as much of him as serves for mine honest intent, &amp; cast
down the rest, as unfit for any necessary employment.
Let our carriage in this attempt put on no show of violence
either to the Duke, or his daughters.
And let our discourse go so smoothly apparelled, that
it move not the patience of the most tender ear.
About it then, though his intent be base,
Our enterprise shall wear a noble face.
Archadea, thou heaven, within whose sphere
The star that guides my motion is fixed,
I court thy gracious bosom with a kiss
For this admittance: in thine amorous arms
Fair Ʋioletta, fairer then the flower
That christened her, and graced her with that name
Doe play the wanton:
Only her Father like a covetous Churl,
Owner of that vnvalewed Diamond,
Hath made this desert Isle th'vnwilling chest
In which he locks her. But the fair advantage
Of this large challenge, and my stars to friend,
Aided by this disguise, I shall break op
His iron Casket, and enlarge my hope.
This way she went sir, this way.
But I say this way, I would thou should know, we old
Courtiers can hunt a Cony, and put her to the squeak, &amp; make her
cry out like a young married wife of the first night.
For more help, as some of them have done,
But there she is.
Isle upon her presently, dost hear me firra, thou vessall of
infirmity, woman, and by thy out-side little better then one of the
wicked, come hither and show thy self before vs, show thy self be∣fore
Demotes.
Demotes, Lisander then dissemble,
For hoe's the man must work thy entrance.
What art thou, speak.
My mother is the Queen of Amazons,
My self a virgin, married unto Arms
And bold archieuements, who have paced the world
In quest of fair Autioste my sister:
And turning homeward, the inconstant winds
And wrathful Neptune cast me on this shore.
And whats your business now you are landed?
My business is private with the Duke.
The Duke is busy, and shall speak with no body.
I beseech you sir.
Tic no beseeching matter I assure you.
No, never beseech for the matter, for except you could
beseech with the tongue of Angels, tic to no purpose with him.
Tic strange, I have heard thy moister is a very good man
where he takes.
True, where he takes he is, but hee takes nothing of you,
and therefore look for no kindness from him.
Good, and dost thou take after thy moister?
No madam, I take commonly before my moister, for where
he takes, he takes all, and leaves nothing for me to take.
Oh, I feel your meaning.
Let my moister have some feeling of yours, and heel pre∣set
your suit.
Tic not the Dukes pleasure Peticioners should buy their
access.
Else one, tic my masters pleasure, and usual fashion.
And I must maintain the fashion. Worshipful Demotes,
my late shipwreck as you see, hath made a defeat both of my friends
and treasure, notwithstanding, Fortune hath reserved me one Jewel,
which if I might request your worship in love to accept, and be a
means to work my admittance to the Duke, I should become a
true detter to your love.
Well Madam, tho I hate nothing more then a man that
takes bribes, yet pressed by your importunity, and that you tender it
in love, least I might seem too nice to withstand a Ladies favour, Isle
wear it for your sake, and if the Duke be not too busily employed,
work your access.
So doing, you shall perform the office of a dere-bought
friend.
How quickly the tyde's turned, but doe you hear Ma∣dam,
tho I take neither before nor after my Moister, yet take my
counsel, &amp; doe not trust my moister: If you have a suit to the Duke
keep it to your self, for if you trust my moister with it, heel prefer
it for you, but heel begged for himself.
Thats plain coosnage.
Fie no, tic cunning in him, marry twould bee though little
better then coosnage in a country gentleman: but he returns.
Madam, I have been earnest, very earnest with the Duke
for your admittance.
And have you wrought it?
I have, marry you must think I bestowed much labour int.
Tmay be you did.
Tmay be you did: &amp; look a sense like a Apothecaries wife
pounding Colliquintida, have my brains sweat for this.
Why the Jewel is right Demotes, had I but an Ass that
would sweat me such pearl.
An Asle? and sweat such pearl, Isle bar her admittance,
here take your Jewel, the Duke will allow no admittance, &amp; I will
keep you back.
Keep me back, thou could doe no more and I were
a poor mans peticioner.
And Isle doe so much being a rich peticioner.
You cannot sir. You Court spaniel, you unnecessary
mushrump, that in one night art sprung out of the root of greatness,
I have bought my admittance, and Isle hate in dspetto del fato.
I must admit her, these Ladies are so inward with our tricks,
theres no good to be done upon them: well Madam, your admit∣tance
is open, will ye follow.
With all my hart sir, Isle be the blind man and poor peti∣cioner,
and thou shalt play the Court spaniel with the silver bell, &amp;
I cad me into the Presence.
Court spaniel? mum: Isle bosom what I think,
Old Gibs not blind, I see although I wink.
Boy, how dost like me in this attire?
As the audience doe a bad play, scurvily.
Is it not strange a prince should be thus metamorphosed?
Not so strange as the metamorphosis of Aiax and like your grace.
Grace you Aggot: hast not forgot that yet?
No, and yet tic a wonder I ha not, grace being so fildome
used, Ime sure they say none at some Ordinaries, for at sitting down
they cannot intend it for hunger, and at rising up, they are either
drunk, or have such mind a dice, they never remembe••, my Lord
then.
No more Lord, sir.
Indeed there are many already, but is not this strange, that
rich men should forsake their titles? moister then.
Your will sir.
You have left many Countries behind you in seeking your
friend Lisander, and yet you cannot find him.
True sir.
I ha seen much gold lying upon Lombards stalls, and
could never finger penny of it.
Very well.
Nay, it was not well sir.
What conclude you then?
That you were best sit down, and see what you ha got by
your journey.
I have seen a face as beautiful as heaven.
Thats nothing, a prisoner sees the face of heaven it self,
when hee looks but out at the prison-gate, Isle stand root, a man
were as good be hanged, so a meet a handsome hangman, &amp; a strong
rope, as be in love.
Your reason for that.
Mary this sir, hanging is end of all troubles, &amp; love the be∣ginning.
Nay further, I think a Lo•d cannot be saved, for hee is of all religions.
Your proof for that.
This; hee thinks with the Atheist theres no GOD but his
Mistress, with the Infidel no heaven but her smiles, with the papist no
purgatory but her frowns, &amp; with the family of love, hold it law∣full
to lie with her, though she be another mans wife.
So sir, what follows?
Serving men sir, the Moister goes in before his wife, &amp; the
serving-man follows his moister.
Syrra forbear, I must meditate.
As the Usurer before he parts with money, meditate upon
the assurance.
I• Ʋiolettaes presence ha not quenched
The memory of all things but herself,
I should be more familiar with that fate.
I have left my country to seek out my friend.
And I my country and my friend for love.
And in the search of him have lost my self
In the strange Region of a women's eye.
In love, and in Archadea.
As much as heaven transcends the humble earth,
So towers her praise, her face differs as far
From others, as a glo worm from a star.
She is a princess that my soul affects.
And rich.
Half heir unto this Dukedom.
And she were whole heir to the four moral Virtues,
it were nothing: when shall I see the time that men will love for ver∣tu,
or a rich h•ire marry a poor wench without a portion, never I
think.
Had not my friend Lisander.
What of me?
L〈…〉ned in Thrice.
We had never met in love,
His syllables betray him. I arrest you.
At whose suit.
Not at his Tailors in any case, for theres no greater stitch to
a younger brothers conscience, then to pay for a suit of appariell
when tic worn out.
Lisander or his ghost.
Demetrius,
Or some illusiue tenant in his shape.
Unkind, why did thou leave my company?
For that which made the amorous Gods leave heaven,
For love: but why is Demetrius thus disguised?
For that which would make a lackanapes a Monkey, and he
could get it: a tail.
Peace rogue.
Why wag, is thy moister in love?
Faith sir he hath entered his action in Cupids court, &amp; means
to proceed in the suit it should seem.
Why did not take my counsel in thy choice?
Because I feared a chiding, for doubting thine honourable
thoughts would not have consented to my effeminate attempts, I
stole this secret course, and manner of disguise, as best helping to ac∣cesse,
which it hath begot, now what access will bring forth, I com∣mit
to unborn Industry.
It cannot but be prosperous: only the strict observance
of our loves, hinders the passage of our hopes.
Indeed thats not the least hinderance, yet the Duke him∣self,
and my quaint disguise hath removed it out of my way, who
not only takes me for a woman, but hath allowed me for my loves
companion.
Fortune deals kindly with thee, I am as far from access
to my love, as when I was in Thrate.
Demotes is the oystershell that holds thy pearl, our vvits
must fish for him.
Will the Cods head byte?
Like an old Usurer at a young heirs inhe••tance, and I
h'ate ready hooked for him: and he ere he comes, my plot is to prefer•
thee to his service.
Prethe doe, and Isle serve him in his right kind.
Demotes, my love is yours.
Which madam I am as proud of
As a malecontent of a change, or an old Lady of a new fa∣shion.
To be roūd I have a suit to you in the behalf of this woodman
To me sweet blossom, tho I be somewhat strict in mine office,
I cannot be stony to Ladies. Fellow is thy petition drawn?
Petition.
Your only way to move a 〈◊〉 by: Humbly complay∣ning
to your good worship, O tic most pathetic, and indeed with∣out
money, can doe just nothing with authority.
Come hither stripling whose son were thou?
I am not so wise a child as you take me for, I never knew•
my father.
Did not know thy father?
A common fault, his betters forget themselves whē they
grow rich, then blame not him to forget his father.
What was his name?
If I may give credit to my mother, they called him Menal∣chas,
who on his death-bed made me his heir, with this charge, to
seek your worships service, &amp; gave me this gold as a remembrance
to purchase your favour.
Gold him?
Now doth my Moister long more to finger that gold, then
a young girl married to an old man, doth to run her husband?
ashore at Cuckolds haven.
Well, I could doe for this fatherless youth.
As many Executors and Overseers have done, cheat him
of his portion, and then turn him out of doors a begging.
But for I have the guardian ship of the Prince, I dare doe
nothing without the consent of the Duke.
Come come sir, your worship shall not refuse him.
Well then I wo not, but tic for your sake I assure you.
Meaning the gold.
What shall I call thy name?
Dorus ant like your worship.
Ah, good Dorus, be an honest youth Dorus, reverence your
Moister, and love your self: be sure to get under me, and you shall
loose nothing in my service. Madam, the Duke and Duchess expect
you at the hunt, &amp; await your coming at Dianaes oak.
Isle attend them presently, be a good servant Dorus.
Twill be his own another day Madam.
In the mean time let it be yours to lead the way.
My service doth attend you,
As the Pursuivant doth the prisoner for a double fee.
Welcome slave to a slave, a fair presage,
The hope of love sweetens loves vassalage.
Now &amp; Demotes be the mettle he was stamped for, a right
villain.
And he be not, hang him.
Nay he deserves hanging to if he bee: but will you trust him?
Yes as far as I see him, and hee that trusts him further my
trust is he will be deceiud.
Indeed, he that will prove false to his maker, will be true
to no man.
Yes for the present time, like a bawd to him that gives most.
Thats not for love.
Yes of the money: he that looks for other love in this age.
This is the place his Letter speaks of, and here he comes himself.
Why so lo: now is the web of my hopes upon the loombe
of perfection, and in this quech of lashes Aminter and Iulio.
See and see not, all mum, you know your que,
The games your own, if you can hunt it true.
Demotes, were thine ears ever at a more musical banquet?
how the hounds mouths like bells are tuned one under another like
a slothfulness, the speed of the cry out-ran my sense of hearing.
Cross over the Forest to Dianas oak my liedge, &amp; there
your grace advantagde by the height of the ground, shall not only
at pleasure hear, but be eye-witnes of their musical contention.
Thanks good Demotes, be thy directions our wives convoy.
Where is his highness Demotes?
At Atones bower Madam, where he expects your presence
to see the fleshing of a couple of Spartan hounds, in the wasting
blood of the spent Dear.
Thanks good Demotes, mine eyes would not be good
friends with my feet, should they not bring em to that kingly sport.
Sweet Ladies, to save you the expense of much breath▪
which must be laid out in the purchase of the game. I have provided
you this stand, from whence your eyes may be commanders of the
sport: such sport as you little dream of.
We are your loves detters kind Demotes.
As I love virtue I pity these poor beasts,
These Sylvan comoners, to see what tasks
Our covetous Foresters impose upon them,
Who not content with imposed of their breath,
(Poor harts,) pursue them smiling to their death.
It was the end of their creation Madam.
So was the end of ours to live in peace,
And not to tyrannise on harmless beasts,
But Foresters, like Images set forth
The tyranny of greatness without pity,
As they the Dear, so covetous wealth pursues
The trembling state of their inferiors.
And to clasp up the volume of their sins,
They drink their blood, and clothe them with their skins,
Then cease to press poor beasts with tyranny,
You love your lives, think they are loath to die.
You are too tender-harted to be a good huntswoman lady.
And some of you too hard-harted, but leaving this discourse
of hunting, have all our gallantry of Lacedemon and Greece, spent
the vigour of their wits, that not one dares venture.
For our loves sister, you may see the properer women, the
worse luck.
Tush you shall have suitors, fear not madam.
No at any hand sister, for with a fear it comes.
Then Isle fear of purpose, because I would have em come.
And they doe not, they are notable cowards.
Then let em keep away still, for I have vowed my maiden-head
shall never doe homage to the bed of a coward.
Sweet Ladies, will you beguile a minute or two with this
discourse, till I step up to the top of the hill, and make discovery of the game,
Let your return be speedy good Demotes.
Isle put on wings and fly.
Out of the Court, and the whole Country shall have a good
riddance.
So, hee hath put em fair to the stand, lets issue and surprise them,
Be resolute and sudden.
Murder, treason, reskue, help.
Yes much reskewe, much help, much Demotes: why so,
this lest was drawn home close to the head, it cannot choose but cleave
the very white of our hopes, the Dukes wit •to thy tackle good wit,
some sudden sea room, or our stratagem is run a ground.
Tell me Demotes, was not the Dear a prodigal, did he not
spend his breath freely amongst vs?
And his blood too my liege, but did you observe how the
hounds like politicians nosed out the game?
True: &amp; coming to the loss Melampus, but where are our
daughters?
Did you observe that my liege, that Melampus as a true hound
is ever horse cheerd or hollow, yet he kept time to.
Certain Demotes, but where are our daughters man?
Busy my Lord under a brake bush, disputing of the virtue of
sweet water, and ground Ivy.
What cry of treasons that Demotes?
Pray God no danger sets upon my daughters,
Seek out our wife, Isle hast unto their reskue.
And my sword vn-imployd? allegiance: says nay to that
my Liege, I am for the adventure my self, if they bee surprised (I am
a mad man) your grace shall hear more: If not (〈◊〉 the more sor∣rye)
your grace shall hear more to: make peace with your thoughts
till my return, and doubt not their recovery.
Speak, whore's the Duke?
Here my Genitia.
What mean these weapons, are our daughters safe?
As a thief in a 〈…〉ill father, we thank our redeemers.
The more my grief, were you surprised then madam?
Yes saith Demotes.
And how sweet Ladies, and how were you reskewd?
Being surprised, this gallant Amazon
Pressed to their reskew, had you seen what worth
She and this woodman spent in our defence,
Wonder would ha bereft you of all sense.
She raised her sword with such a manly grace,
As had nor her mild sexe-contrould my thoughts,
I could have fallen in love with her high worth.
You over price vs madam, not our this••
But the weak spy〈…〉 of our opposites.
Gave leister to the di〈…〉nes of our worth.
It please your modesty to lesson it.
But it shall still live great in our regard. What woodmans that?
My follower my Liege.
What ere he be, he hath deserved our love.
Fellow be near vs, and for this desert,
Performed against those Traitors to our blood,
Under thy moister we give thee an attendant,
To guard the life and safety of our daughter.
Thank you good father, who ever loose by the bargain, I
ha got me a servant by the match: wot serve me fellow?
In the best I can.
In hart your fellow, though in show your man.
Isle try your du•ious service: I command,
Your knee to kiss the ground, your lip my hand.
Pardon me Madam.
Hears hot love no doubt,
I may command my man, and go without.
Truce to this airy war, these paper bullets
Better become a Closet then a Park,
The Forest music is to hear the hounds
Rend the thin ayre, and with a lusty cry
Awake the drowsy Echo, and confound
Their perfect language in a mingled sound,
Then so the Court, our Forest sport being done,
A second chase o• lovelier sport's begun.
If fortune cross not what our hopes pursue,
Our fears have met their deaths, our loves their due.
Crossed in my hopes, the Ladies reskewd, and the Princes
like cravens beat out of the game-place, my invention must turn
travailer for more stratagems• what &amp; I should discover their plot
to the Duke, attach em for traitors, and beg their lands for my la∣bore;
though they be my friends, it were a pretty parcel of policy.
All things are lawful that doe profit bring,
A wise-mans bow goes with a two-fold string.
Did ever two princes meet such strange changes in their
loves? now we have wrought our admittance, and in a manner got
em into our possessions, ou• hopes like false fires having brought vs
within •en, vanish, and leave vs out of all comfort.
That the duke should dote upon thee for a woman, makes
for our purpose, but that the duchess should be enamourd on thee
for a man, is prepostrous.
Whether my 〈◊〉 sh•wne in the reskue of the Ladies, or
the ardent glances her daughters beauty steals from mine eyes, give
her thoughts encouragement, I know not, but her hopes stand confi∣dent
I am a man, &amp; for that cause am I bard from access.
I way thy co〈…〉rinses by mine own, for tho by the Dukes
allowance I am her privileged attendant, yet such is the deuilishnes
of Demotes, that I cannot joy so much access as to confer with her.
I can compare my lord and his friend to nothing in the world
so fitly as to a couple of water buckets, for whilst hope winds the one
up, despair plunges the other down, whilst I like a Harl•kene in an
Italian comedy, stand making faces at both their follies.
Well, since the shape of our proceeding grows so mon∣strous,
lets cast our inventions in a new mold, and having so firm a
foundation as this disguise to build upon, lets draw the model, and
raise the whole frame of our attempts anew.
Indeed, lovers should be conditiond like tyrants, who ha∣uing
the aim of a crown in 〈…〉 violently over all
lets that intervened their course, and so must we.
And so will wee, my resolutions already bent, &amp; if I shoot
not, the next level I take, 〈…〉 I beseech thee break thy bow about
mine ears, and strike the horns in my forehead, for married men to
hang their caps on.
I have met a means 〈◊〉 my purpose already: Mopsa
Demotes only daughter, is 〈…〉 in love with me, &amp; to her Isle
fine extreme ardor of affection, and make her the shadow under
which Isle court the true substance of my divine Hippolita.
About it then, Isle sweat my invention to death but Isle o∣uertake
thee; but here comes one of my 〈◊〉. I must hear his
importunity, for no reasonable denial will brush him of.
Zehnane.
My Liedge.
My thoughts come like a sail before the wind, swollen big
with news and thine ears the midwife must deliver me of this bur∣then,
my Duchess is sick, hart sick for thee Zelmane.
For me, why my Lord, I am no Rosasolis, nor Aqua mi∣rabilis
to recover sick folks.
Shall I be short with thee? My Laddie's in love with thee.
With me my Lord.
With thee my Lady: her amorous glances are her accusers,
her very looks write Sonnets in thy cōmendations, she carves thee
at board, and cannot sleep for dreaming on thee in bed, shoe's
turned sunne-riser, haunts private walks, &amp; like a disgraced Courtier,
studies the Art of melancholy.
Now alas good Lady.
Nay never pity her, she deserves none, rather lets bend our
endeavours to entangle her more. To see the kindness of Fortune, who
fearing we should be acquainted with solitude in this our 12 month
retirement, hath begot a domestic merriment, and made our own
thoughts actors int, and as bad a Poet as I am, Isle ha one scene int
of mine own invention.
Demotes will storm at that, for he cannot endure Poetry
should be countnanst: but how first my Liege?
Tic ready plotted already, and that the Duchess may not
find thee unprovided when she comes to court thee
Court me, court a woman my Liedge.
Why thats the very happiness of the jest, but in any case
confess thy self a man.
A man my liedge, I ha no colour fort.
Tush Isle furnish thee, say thou art some Prince, no matter
who, &amp; hast to do with this disguise of purpose to court my daugh∣la
Violetta,
Is this scene of your own inventing my liege?
Mine own in faith, and to confirmed the rather, use more oft &amp;
private conference with my daughter, interchange discourse &amp; amo∣rous
dalliance, oh twill set my Duchess affections a flre, to think her
riuald by her daughter, and give vs smooth passage to our love.
How occasion plays the wanton with me. Well my liedge, do
but you work my admittance to your daughter, &amp; Isle bestow al the
art I am worth in courting her, and see, as if Fortune had a hand in
our Comedy, she hath entered the Duchess just at her que, shadow
your self in your Arc, &amp; leave me to give her entertainment.
Forget not to personate some Prince in any case.
Isle warrant you, Isle play the Prince with much art.
This way he went, on this sweet violet bed
Still dwells the print of his enamourd tread,
The depressed flowers have strengthened their sweet
By stealing amorous kisses from his feet.
Absolute Poet, Penelope was a ballet-maker to her.
Oh do not fli• my presence, gentle wanton stay,
What have I found you, faith you run-away
Isle tie a chain about your wast for this,
And make you buy your freedom with a kiss.
Fie madam, this courtesy is more then needs▪
Be not so coy, let not a loving Dame
Find thee less kind then senseless elements,
Thou never walkst, but the enamourd ayre
Like an officious lover bears thy train,
Whilst the cool wind doth with his velvet wing
Fan the thin ayre upon thy sweaty cheek,
Stealing sweet kisses from thy silken lip.
Shield this vain breath, beat at some ladies ear.
But you are none, you are not, come you are not,
Your valour, looks, and gesture show you are not,
Your manly brow, and your commanding eye,
Where war and fortune dwell in majesty,
Your private walks, and varied passions,
Your glances to my daughter, sure you are not,
And my firm love is confident you are not.
There's a lover of a right temper, sheele outface the
name of her sex instantly.
Well madam, sith your observation hath discovered me, upon
promise of your secrecy I confess my self a man.
Good, excellent, how truly she takes my directions.
I knew my judgment could not be deceiud,
Nor durst proud love have done me so much wrong
To cast my thoughts unto a women's eye.
Love durst not, good, good, excellent, what next.
But madam, now I am known to you, what further request you.
Exchange of looks, and freedom of thy bed,
Thy presence, thy embraces, thy kind love,
For which my amorous thoughts have long line sick.
Thank you good wife, nay &amp; a Duchess long to give her
husbands the horning, let it never grieve butchers to doe homage at
Cuekolds haven.
Well madam, to give content to your affections, and in a
strong hope you will mediate my suit to your daughter, sort out but
fit time and opportunity, and moister your desires.
And he were a man now I might be rarely tupt.
Give me thy hand then, with this amorous kiss
I seal thee mine.
And I confirmed with this.
Rare, rare, rare, she's his sealed and delivered in the presence of her husband.
Now least my husband should suspect our love,
Now, what shadow for that now.
Hear a good jest, persuade him you are a woman.
Thats not to doe now madam, for he as confidently believes
and ardently courts me for a woman, as you for a man.
Good, excellent, maintain that humour still,
Seem coy, look nice, and as we women use,
Be mild and proud, embrace, and yet refuse.
Excellent virtues in a woman.
I prethe doe, twill be a scene of mirth
For me to quote his passions and his smiles,
His amorous hauiour, and how his eye
Will beget strange variety of looks.
And shoot em into thine, but the chief sports this
To see an old man with a young man kiss.
To see an old Duchess a young Lady kiss.
Now the plot packs the scenes all comical,
I cannot speak for laughter, to see these women
That would be counted wonders for their wit,
Lay plots to gull themselves, silly conceit,
To take me for a man.
And arm herself
To laugh at me, make jests and scoffs at me,
But sooth her humour, the revenge sheede throw
Upon my head, shall fall on her own brow.
Upon you both, so, so, so, how greedily their inventions like
bugles follows the sent of their own gullery, yet these are no fools,
God forbid, not they: but to the drift, mirth in my warm blood sits,
laughing at this division of their wits.
Wot te believe me sister, I never eat a cherry, but it puts me
in mind of a husband, it kisses my lips with such a harmless pret∣tines.
Now in good deed lo I love em a life to, I think I shall no∣for
ha my belly full on em.
Of what, not of husbands Violetta.
No, of cherries Hipolita, but take heed of em, they be a ver•e
filling meat, and dangerous things for vs maids I can tell you, wee
may surfeit after em presently.
Surfeit after what, a husband?
I and after cherries to Hippolita.
I warrant you sister, an old lady in Lacedemon taught me a
preservative against that.
For the love of cherries what.
Marry this it was, still said she, betwixt every cherry said she,
be sure to crack a stone said she.
Then let me alone, Isle crack a couple a stones betwixt eve∣rye
cherry, rather then surfeit on em.
You must take heed you crack not too many to, for you
may surfeit of the stone as well as of the cherry.
Nay &amp; they be such dangerous things, I have done with em.
So have I to for this time, but sister, is it not a strange kind of
servile liberty that we live in here in Archadea?
For all the world as Englishmen keep their felons, &amp; Itali∣ans
their wines, we never stir abroad without our Jailers.
And for what cause forsooth, only to keep vs frō marriage.
Sure tic either some high content, or extreme discommo∣ditty,
that our father debars vs of it.
By this stone me thinks I long like a woman with child, till
I know the difference betwixt a maid and a wife.
Well, god a mercy of all cursen souls, I was near the
knowledge ont last night I can tell you.
O that I had been with thee I might ha been so to: for
love of marriage how?
Why thus: as I lay slumbering in my bed,
No creature with me but my maidenhead:
Is that a creature?
Some maintain it is.
Got in the eye, conceived in a kiss:
Others whose speech seem near akin to truth
Say tic a passion, bred ith heate of youth,
Some callt a sigh, and some an amorous groan,
All differ in the definition,
But in the allowed opinion of most,
Tic never truly had till it be lost.
But lying thus alone, as maids doe use,
Me thought I dreamt, as maids can hardly choose,
And in my dream me thought it was too much wrong
A pretty maid should lie alone so long:
With that a gallant comes, gallants can doe
Much with young maids,
And with old women to.
He couted me once, and again, and thrice,
Tic virtue to say nay, to be too nice
Agrees not with my humour, yet some say,
We maids wish things, to which we answer nay,
Briefly me thought he stood so long a wooing,
I rather could a wished he had been doing
Some other business, yet at last we greed,
It were strange if earnest suitors should not speed.
In what agreed you?
In our wedding ring,
Time, place, and hour, indeed in every thing:
The day appointed, and each thing in frame,
I thought each hour an age until it came,
Well, come it is, the morning once in sight,
I thought it ten times longer till it was night.
At dinner time me thought I swelled with pride
To be drunk to by name of Mistress bride,
Music spake loud, no delicates were scant,
Yet still me thought another thing did want,
For sure thought I, theres something in a man
That wives love well, hope brides may wish it than.
Long looked for comes at last, to bed we go.
Would I had dreamt I might ha done so to.
My bed-mate turned, and as he would ha spoke
I swe•t with fear, and in that fear I woke,
But seeing my kind bed-fellow was gone,
Lord how it chaft me that I waked so soon,
One minutes dreaming longer, I had tried,
The difference twixt a virgin and a bride.
O twould ha vexed a saint, my blood would burn
To be so near, and miss so good a turn.
And so did mine to I warrant you, nay tho I be but a little
pot, I shall be as soon hot as another.
You should not be my sister else.
Nor my mothers daughter neither.
And in good ear∣nest
we are not fatherd much amiss.
Are you aui•d of that,
and in faith tell me, what think you of your servant Dorus.
As of a sweet Almond in a rugged shell, the sun in a cloud,
or a wealthy diamond in a rock, indeed clean contrary to the world,
he wears the worst side outward, &amp; is much better then he seems:
but what think you of your manly Amazon.
Nay the sport is I know not what to think, Zelmanes humour
would afford project for a pretty Court comedy, my father courts
her for a woman, and as I fear she is, my mother doares upon her
for a man, and as I wish he were, and that with such an ardor of af∣fection,
that I could find in my hart to turn my mother out of the
company, and play the lovers part my self.
How ever man or woman, the jest holds currant in one.
I know not what knavish motion hath had to doe with my
thought, but my mind tells me that your servant Dorus &amp; my Ama∣zon,
are other then they seem: and here he comes.
Why how now madam, Ladies gadding, is this the obe∣audience
of your fathers charge.
Pardon Mistress Miso, it was my doing and the Dukes.
But the Duchess w•l like neither the Dukes doings nor yours
neither in this case I can tell you. The Duke stays your coming &amp;
yet the duchess is very desirous ont, my husbands is in the next Are∣bore
to man you. For you Lady, my presence be your privilege.
Miso should be either a hangman or a Herald, for she never
comes amongst vs, but she quarters our company and arms.
Excellent beauty, &amp; therefore more excellent, because situate
in so fair a creature.
You are a merry man Dorus, but all this
cannot make me think you love me, how say you mother doth he.
Mary let him chose daughter, when I was as thou art.
You were as she is, but faith madam Mopsa, I perceive my ser∣uant
Dorus bears a months mind to you, be not so straight laced to
him. Mop. Straight laced, sgod mend me I am not laced at all, am I
Dorus, no in soth, I go wide op wensday, I never lace my self but
on sondaies, &amp; that for fear I should burst with eating of plum pore∣ridge.
Hip. I mean let fall some comfortable looks on your suitor.
sgod mend me Isle let fall or take up any thing I have to doe
him good.
Why thats kindly said, &amp; Dorus your love is very
ambitious, to climb so hie as the beautiful Mopsa.
O are you avisd of that, twold make a horse break his bridle
to hear how the youth of the village will commend me, oh the pre∣tie
little pincking nyes of Mopsa says one, oh the fine flat lips of
Mopsa says another, and then doe I bridle my head like a malt-horse
thus, set mine arms a kembo thus, wrethe my neck and my body
thus, wink with one eye thus, &amp; spread my peacocks tail as broad
as the proudest minx of em all.
These extraordinary graces must not want admiration, but
whore's your mother.
Speak softly in the Lobby there,
for waking my Ladies foisting hound.
Godsme, my mo∣theirs
stealing of a nap.
Nay, she cannot be said to steal a nap, for the noise she makes
herself would discover her theft: but Dorus sith your fortunes are
poor, you should study to ennoble your deserts, and beget effects
worthy to court and win your Ladies acceptance.
Lass madam, I choose no better moderator then your self,
betwixt me and my unworthy services, suppose your self tho but a
Cuckoo compared with this sweet singing Nitingale, should be sued
to by a prince like me, I mean like me in love, for love in princes &amp;
peasants admits cōparison: suppose Demetrius should in like disguise
court you as I doe, Mopsa, sigh for you, as I doe, for Mopsa, kneel to
you thus, as I doe, to Mopsa, lay down his life to you, as I doe, to
Mopsa, prefer your good before his own, as I protest I do, Mopsaes,
suppose he should show you the known mark of his neck, to assure
you he were Demetrius, as I do this to Mopsa, to witness I am the son
of Menalchas, could your disdain stand out like Mopsaes?
What a kenes necessity sets upon the edge of invention, trust
me Mopsa your servant speaks well, &amp; if he can prove himself the
man he speaks of, and my wishes well hope, Demetrius, you have no
reason to think scorn of him.
Why what should I do ma∣dam,
my mother tells me I must not say as I think.
I am no counsellor, but should Demetrius in like disguise court
me, thus would I embrace him, thus seal my affections with a kiss,
&amp; thus argue: think not Demetrius that the clouds of baseness could
so muffle thee, but that the sun of valour shined throe them long since,
&amp; in regard of thy serviceable duty in concealing, and vnpre•ented
policy in thus making known thy love, sort but out fit opportunity, &amp;
in despite of all guardians strict observance, go where thou wilt, the
worth of Demetrius shall draw Hippolita, this would I vow, and this
will I perform.
And were I Demetrius &amp; you Hippolita, I would deciue Dame∣tas,
outreach Miso, forswear Mopsa, &amp; forsake Archadea to share the
fortunes of divine Hippolita.
And what should I doe then?
I do but speak in the person of Demetrius, &amp; under Hippo∣lita
shadow what I intend to the rare, and never enough wondered at
Mopsa, the black swan of beauty, &amp; madg-howled of admiration.
Do not you flout me Dorus, &amp; you do not, provide a priest
and Isle marry you, and my father and mother shall never know one.
Manasses is the man.
And Isle be the woman, who so
ever say nay toote, little dreams my mother of what wee have done.
Tmay be she did, for she sighed &amp; grond much in her sleep.
Tic well she was so quiet, for she eat peas porridge to break∣fast,
&amp; theyle make me break wind in my sleep like a horse, and see
as the devil will hate she wakes, and here comes my father, no words
and ye love me.
Why god a mercy Dorus, this diligence becomes the ser∣uaunt
of Demotes, and Isle prefer thee fort.
You were worse then the devil else, for they say hee helps his
servants, then you may doe little &amp; you cannot help yours.
Will you break your jests against the bars of you chamber
window, &amp; clear the greene, the duke is coming to bowls, &amp; I
would not for half mine office you should be a rub in the way of his
patience: Daughter and Wife, conduct her to the Lodge. 
And Dorus. make you haste about your business.
I warrant you Sir: be my hopes rightly placed?
You will condemn me for my too much haste.
Why so: this tic to be in authority: Inferior persons,
I and the Princes themselves, fly from my presence, like the chir∣ping
Birds from the sight of the Falcon: my very breath like a
mighty wind blows away inferior Officers (the Court rubbish)
out of my way, and gives me a smooth passage: I am the morning
star, I am seldom seen but about the rising of the Sun: in∣deed
I am never out of the Dukes eye; and here he comes.
Doth our match hold.
Yes, whose part will you take.
Zelmanes.
Soft, that match is yet to make.
Lets cast a choice, the nearest two take one.
My choice is cast, help sweet occasion.
Come, heere's a good.
Well, bettered.
Best of all.
The Duke and I.
The weakest go to the wall.
Isle lead.
Isle follow.
We have both one mind.
In what?
In leaving the old folk behind.
Well jested daughter, and you lead not fair,
The hindmost hound, though old, may catch the hate.
Your last Boule come?
By the faith a me, well led,
Would I might lead you,
Whither?
To my bed.
I am sure you would not?
By this air I would.
I hope you would not hurt me, and you should.
I'd love you sweet.
Sour, so I heard you say.
Accept it then.
Of what acquaintance pray?
Of loves, and mine.
Daughter, your bowl wins one.
None of my Maidenhead Father, I am gone,
The Amazon hath won one.
Yield to that.
The cast I doe.
Your self?
Nay scrape out that.
Whose is it yet?
The Dukes: play smooth and fine,
The smallest help that is, will make your mine.
Me yours?
Your mine, for tho the cast I loose,
I ha won your love.
Much: in my tother house.
Come, the last market this cast is worth all the rest.
The leader as the follower.
Badd's the best,
I win her for ten crowns, and there they be.
I take your lay.
A match twixt you and me.
Isle be your half.
That were unkindly done.
Pardon me mother, Isle bear all or none.
I ha won you Madam.
Me?
I mean your bet.
Then take your winnings, isle not die in debt.
Madam believe me, I am as I protest, a Prince, my name
Lisander.
Look to the Dukes standing Madam.
So I will I warrant you, and to your falling.
Thus clouded as you see, for your love, my soul speaks in
my tongue: I appointed this match at bowls a purpose to ac∣quaint
you with it.
Bar stealing Father; yet and all hit right,
Heir's one would steal a piece of flesh to night.
Dear Madam.
No more words, I have perceived as much in your eye, as
you can express with your tongue, and as far as my mothers ie∣lousy
would give me leave, answered it with kind looks: your
bias stands wrong mother.
Why? It stands towards Zelmanes.
Hath it stood so long?
All the game throe.
Then all your game's bold wrong: furnish you with noses∣saries
befitting an escape, &amp; my will shall be as ready to take wing,
as yours; put in a cast now mother, or the game is gone indeed.
Whose is the throw?
Ours, till the last bowl came.
But that hath wont'em clear, both cast and game.
Our winnings come, a kiss and bate the rest.
What doe you kiss in earnest or in jest?
In earnest in good truth.
Troth, kindly sed,
Take heed you kiss not out your maidenhead.
In jest?
In earnest.
Tic the fashion,
Much in request among our Nation.
To kiss away their maidenheads?
Now and then,
And being gone, to kiss it back again:
For lovers indentures are ne'er fairly drawn,
Until the maidenhead be left in pawn,
As earnest of the match, so mothers sed,
And so will daughters do when Moms be dead.
What? pawn their maidenhead?
Yes, and loose'em too.
And you'll maintain that fashion?
Signeor No.
Lay by this homebred mirth, and prepare your ears to
entertain strangers.
Stranger? why Father, Strangers are as welcome to me,
as mine own Countrymen; if they bring good manners, &amp; civil
humanity in their company: otherwise, they are like foul wea∣there,
come before they be sent for.
Dometas, nay then we shall have news enough; for he
never comes into the Presence, but he brings a whole sack full of
〈…〉es: of news I should say.
Welcome Demotes: what officious fellow is that?
A pure welwiller of your Majesties, &amp; a follower of mine.
O tic Manasses; and he could make Arms as well as he mars
Legs, he would grow in great request for Heraldry: What's
your news?
These Lacedaemonians, Subjects to your Majesty, ha∣uing
a Messadge to deliver to your Majesties instruments of hey∣ring,
commonly eclipt, ears.
How? Hath any one here, clipped ears?
Sweet Feminine, clip off the tail of thy discourse with
the Scissors of attention, as I say, these Lacedaemonians have chosen
me their tongue.
Of a long tongue thou speak very little.
That proves me no woman, for they speak over much.
What grievances oppress them? briefly speak.
Merchandise (my Ledge) through the avarice of purcha∣sing
Officers, is racked with such unmerciful Imposed, that the very
name of Traffic grows odious even to the professor.
Towns so oppressed for want of wonted and natural li∣bertie,
as that the native Inhabitants seem Slaves, &amp; the Foray∣ners
free Denizens.
Offices so bought and sold, that before the purchaser
can be said to be placed in his Office, he is again by his covetous
Patron displaced.
Common Riots, Rapes, and wilful Homicide in great
men's followers, not only, not punished, but in a manner count∣naunced
and applauded.
Indeed since your Majesty left the Land, the whole
body of the Common-wealth runs clean against the bias of
true and pristine government.
And your honourable Brother, like a Ship toste upon the
violent billows of this Insurrection, by vs entreats your May∣sties
Letters of speedy reformation, for fear the whole kingdom
suffer inevitable shipwreck.
Which after short deliberation with our Counsel, your
self shall return. Demotes, reward their travails with 200.
Crowns: in the mean time, let'em taste the best entertainment
of our Court.
Proud Rebels, they shall see that a Dukes frown,
Can at his pleasure, turn Rebellion down:
See them rewar•ed.
Manasses, see the fellows entertained; I must attend of
the Duke.
Boy, see the fellows entertained? I must waite of my lord.
Fellows, be as merry as you may, I must follow my M.
So, heere's Peticioners attendance right; good words,
and short commons: But tic not their entertainment wee come
for. I made a simple shift to get entertainment into the Court,
Well Cupped, pray for our lives, for and we were gone, I
know not where thou would have two such statesmen again.
His Common-wealth could not stand without vs: and
that his Mother knows well enough: and he sends no better suc∣cesse
then we had at our hunting, hee looses a friend of me.
T'will not sink in my thought yet, but that old musty
slave Demotes played the slave with vs.
Would I could prove it once: but since we are again
admitted our Realm, shall wee be idle? somewhat weal doe,
though theyle give vs but small thanks for our labour.
The Duke shall not say his Daughters are so ill beloved,
but weal change a thrust or two with his intent for'em.
T'would put the poor Wenches out of conceit with
themselves, and there should not be some contending for'em.
We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim
deceives not.
We are I faith: Invention could not weave,
A quainter web, Suspicion to deceive.
Come, pass off this grovelling imitation; a Lovers
thoughts must be ambitious, and like the Eagle, scorning the base
ayre where Kites and Crows lie flagging: mount the clear sky
of Invention, &amp; overpeer al hindrances:
The Ladies themselves are willing.
Ready to embark vpō the next tide of occasion whatsoever.
Let me alone to work it then. But here comes my
Boy.
It were more for your credit Sir, and you could say your
man: but men &amp; war were worn out of fashion both in a Sōmer.
I am of thy belief in that, Boy.
Would my Lord were so to, Sir.
Suppose I were Sir what then?
I should (as many upstarts have done) prove rich: for
I believe you would make me your heir.
Is that part of your belief?
A principal point Sir.
Renounce it then, for I believe you'll never besaud by it.
I am sure I cannot loose by it. I believe further, that many
Knights, and some Ladies, were never of Gods making.
Of whose then, wag?
Isle tell you: the Mentors quoine Gold, Gold makes He∣ralds,
Heralds make Nnights, and Knights stamp Ladies.
And what doe Ladies?
They live not idly neither; they make some Knights, and
mar many Gentlemen.
Ladies are good workwoman too, then?
Far better then any Taylor: they'll make you an end
of a suite, especially a Court suite, when all the Taylors in a Coun∣trey
know not how to set a stitch in it.
I am of the belief you are a Knave, Sir.
I had no saith, should I say you were not.
Well, what, a Knave?
In a Knaves belief Sir.
Because in yours?
Do you say it, and Isle swere't, my Lord.
No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.
That coufirmes'em to be good Sir.
Your reason for that, Sir?
Because travellers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.
Goodly ones in deed: but leaving this high-way of cir∣cumstaunce;
I sent you for Manasses.
The learned Scribe attends you.
Will you fall off, Sir?
Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking.
Welcome Manassas: I have present employment for
thee, in which I must borrow
Pardon me Madame, I learned of my Lord, to lend
nothing without security and pawns.
It is not money (Manasses) but counsel and furtherance
that we desire.
Good counsel is worth good money, Madame.
Thou shalt be well considered; there's twenty Crowns
in earnest.
Nay Madame, this hand's like a fellow, it takes every
thing in jest; if you be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady,
now betwixt earnest and jest, if your Will be ready drawn, be∣fore
your friend delivered as your deed, and put me in trust to ex∣acute
it.
Tak't, in a word this honest Shepherd, and thy Lords
daughter Madame Mopsa, are man and wife.
Man, an woman perhaps; but not man and wife: for
though most women have a will to be Ladies, like my Lords wife;
yet every Lady have not wit to be a wife, as my Lords
Daughter. But what good can I doe in this?
O very much: for though they be man and wife by oath
and protestation, the chiefest ceremony of all; namely Mariadge,
is yet unperformed, and hearing that you have tan orders.
That I have: I have tan order for the making away of
a hundred Maidenheads in my time, and not so few: but I am in
in the mind of you now, these two Beagles, Dorus and Mops•,
have run themselves breathless in the chase of love, you would
ha me couple'm up in the leases of Matrimony.
You are in the right.
And you in the wrong, Isle keep your jest, but in
any case take back again your earnest: isle not purchase my
Lords displeasure with your gold.
Thy Lord shall never know it.
Oh sir! though my M. hath but bad eyes, he hath excee∣ding
long ears: and though a Foreigner may play with a City∣zens
wooden Dagger, I would not wish any to jest with a Cour∣tiers
steeld Sword; tic seldom drawn but it draws blood.
Tush man, be not so timorous, my credit shall countenance
thee: bee not an Ass, make use of thy time: thy Masters ser∣vice
is no heritage; the world knows he gettes under the Duke,
thou art a fool, and thou wilt loose under him: there's a hundred
Crowns for thee; tush man, thy betters will strain curtsy
with aleagence for a bribe.
Madam, could you to every one of these Crowns give
me a Kingdom,
What then?
I should ha more ground then half the Kings in Chri∣stendom:
here's my hand, Isle do it: my M. is my M. &amp; I love him;
but my gold's my God, and I honour it: Isle do it; the time &amp; place?
Soon in the evening at Atones Chapel. Art resolute?
As your Adamant: think you t'was fear made me keep
out? no t'was hope of these flattering sweet leapt drabs, I fear to
marry my Ladies daughter? no nor to go to bed with her neither.
Why, I have counterfeited his hand &amp; seal. He has been content
with me, to come nearer to him, at his entertainment of the last
Ambassador, when he was heat with drinking of healths. As I
led him to his Chamber, I nimde his Chain, and drew his Purse,
and next morning persuaded him he lost it in the great Cham∣ber
at the Revels. He puts me in trust with his whole estate: he
buys Manners, I purchase Farms: he builds houses, I pluck
down Churches: he gets of the Duke, and I of the Commons:
he beggars the Court, and I beggar the whole Country.
These are notable knavish courses. What breeding hast had?
Very good breeding Sir: My great Grandfather was a
Rat-catcher, my Grandsier a Hangman, my Father a Promooter,
and my self an Informer.
Thou were a Knave by inheritance.
And by education too: but Bawdy Informations gro∣wing
stale, I gave up my cloak to a Broker, and crept into credit
for a Gown, and of Manasses a penurious Informer, I turned
Copy, &amp; became Manasses, a most, precise, &amp; illiterate expositor.
Were you a Reader then?
And a Writer too Bullie; I set some of my Parishioners
Wives such Copies, as their Husbands might cast their caps
at it, but could never come near.
But and you used such a high and elevate stile, your aunt∣tories
low and humble understandings should never crall ouer't.
Tush I could fashion the body, of my discourse fit to the
ear of my auditor: for to cast Eloquence amongst a company
of Stinctards, is all one as if a man should scatter Pearl amongst
the hoggish animals ecliped Swine: no I had paraphrasticall ad∣monitions
of all sorts; Some against covetous Landlords, and
that would I squirt awongst beggarly Tenants: Some against
Usurers, and that would I throw in at Prison Grates amongst
prodigal Banqeoutes: Some against the pride of the Court,
and that hones the ear of the Citizen: Some against the fraud
of the City, and that's Cake and Cheese to the Country: Some
against Protestants, and that's plumps the lasy Catholic a∣against
Papist and Protestant, and that fattens the rank wetted
Puritand, against Papist, Puritand, and Protestant; and that
tickles the ear of the luxur os Atheist.
Why you never light upon any Atheistes, doe you?
Oh very many.
In the Country perhaps, and the out-skirtes of the city?
In the very bosom of the City: and by your leave,
here and there one in the Court too: But wee fi•t 'em all; for in
deed wee wandering Lights, have (as other tradesmen have)
Commodities of all sorts, and prises.
How doe they come by them?
As many doe by Offices, steal into them ere the Duke
be aware of 'em.
Some buy'em at Booke-sellers stalls; but the best they
bespeak of Poets.
Me thinks Poets of all men, should not edify, they are
so envious.
One to another, to no body else: a proud Poet is for all
the world like a Puncke in request, covetous of many Clients,
when she hath more then she can handsomely play off: You
shall have some Poet (Apolloes Vicar, especially) write you a comic∣call,
Pastoral, Tragical, Musical history in prose, will make
the auditors eyes run a water like so many waterspouts: I had
one of them my self, and your ears be in case, Isle give you a taste
on it; his argument was fet out of the Poem called, The lost
sheep: and thus it is.
Prithee be brief?
Nay peace, and it were in place where you might wake,
the best men in the parish, for commonly they sleep the begin∣ning,
because they love not division: but to the lost Sheep.
Beloud, you must imagine this Sheep was a Sheep, a lost Sheep;
a Sheep out a the way: but my dear flock and loving Sheep,
whom like a careful Shepherd, I have gathered together with
the whistle or pipe, as it were of mine eloquence, into this sold of
peaceful Community; Doe not you stray doe not you fly out,
doe not you wander, doe not you loose your selves; but like
kind Sheep, and valiant Rams: I speak to you the better part
and head of my flock. As I say, you shall see the valiant Rams
turn all their horns together, and oppose themselves against the
Woolfe, the hungry Woolfe, the greedy Woolfe, the Lams-de∣uowring
Woolfe, the Woolfe of all Woolfes, to defend their
Eawes and young ones. Durst you say all your heads together,
and with the horns of your Manhood defend your families, your
own wives, and your neighbours children: Was not this
stinging gear?
A good Sheepish admonition.
The fitter for my Audience: while you live, have a ear
to fit your Audience.
Thou speak like a Christian: prithee what Religion
art of?
How many souer I make use of, Isle answer with Piauano
Orllotto the Italian: I profess the Dukes only.
What's his reason for that?
A very sound reason: for says hee, I came Raw into the
world, and I would not willingly go roasted out, so close up the
stomach of your Discourse with that dry answer, and ivy man
about his business.
You'll be mindful of to morrow-night.
As your Lawyer of the Term, or your Landlord of the
Quarter day.
Why so: the mettle I must forge my plot on, lies a war∣ming
in the furnace of my brain; and I must fashion it Instantly,
for fear it burst the heat. Give my conceit way, for here comes
one must help to proportion it.
How now Demetrius, what wind hath blown up this
storm of melancholy, thy countenance was not wont to be
thus cloudy? Whence proceeds this sudden alteration?
From mine own hard fortune my Lord, that my ill-stard
nativity should continue thus opposite.
Art crossed in a suit at Court? or what's the matter? speak.
Isle acquaint your Honour: I hope no other ear over∣hears
vs, Under Dianaes Ok I found an inscription upon a
stone, which told me, that wealth Aristomeres sometimes brought
into Archa lea, had there under hid a massy sum of treasure.
Under Dianaes Ok? Dorus shall have my daughter
Mopsa: no more words on it, and thou love me Dorus: smother
thy golden hops a day or two; thou shalt have Mopsa, but Isle have
all the Gold, then marie my daughter to some great man, though
he be poor, tic the fashion: Isle be Nobly allied what ere it cost
me: shalt be my Son in law Dorus: have an eye to the Prin∣cesse,
fall close to my daughter Mopsa,
Court her and spare not: now begins the sport,
Kiss her, doe kiss her; thou shalt pay sweetly fort:
I can gull you, know what fair words can doe,
I'm an old Knave, and a young Courtier too.
So, so; how violently he deuowers his bane, and steals
himself into the order of Gullerie: me thinks I see how be∣twixt
hope and fear he sweates in his practise, and like a foolish
dreamer, castes how to lay out his wealth before it comes in.
So much for him: Now to my Lady Beauty his wife; and as the
Devil would ha're, here she comes.
Dorus, how now Dorus' What time a day is it with you?
What time a day so'ert be with me, tic sleeping time
with my Lord, I'am sure of that.
Sleeping time Dorus, what dost thou mean by that?
Nay nothing: he is troubld with a kind of malady called
Iusurectio corns.
How, a dish of Creuices? nay and that be the worst, good
enough: I am glad a falls to Fish, for he was given to Flesh a late
too too bad.
Mass I thought as much, for I saw him go a angling.
I hold my Ladyship to some strumpet.
Life, a jealousy; I think you are a Witch, t'was so indeed.
Nay I thought as much: he was wont to kiss me, and
doe all kindness a man could doe, till he came to the Court; and
now hee will not lie with me forsooth: and why? tic the
Court fashion. He will not love me, and why? tic the Court fa∣shion.
I must not come near him at his down lying, nor his
uprising, ctc. And this be the Court fashion, would I were an ho∣nest
woman of the Country again, be Courtiers who list. I, I,
Dorus, I tell thee in tears, hee hath not done by me, as a Hus∣band
should doe.
Tic nothing to me, I cannot do withal Madam, would
I could.
Yes marie may thou Dorus; thou may, and shalt doe
withal too and thou wilt: but as thou look to enjoy my daugh∣la
Mopsa, acquaint me with the old Foxes starting hole.
That's past my cunning: the old Fox has more holes
then one, to hide's head in: But not to go long about the bush
with you.
No good Dorus, I do not love a man should go long about
my bush: What is she for a woman?
I know not what she is for a woman; marie I fear she's
little better then a Whore for your Husband: hark in your ear;
shoe's Manasses wife.
Manasses wife? marie fire Moister gunner; a Putitane
turned Puncke: Gods my precious. Isle slit her nose, as I am a
Lady will I: is she the party you wot on?
Yes faith Madam, she is the Mare the man rid on.
Isle spoil their sport, saddle my Mule there, have an eye to
the princess: shalt ha my daughter and be but to spite him withal,
faith Fox isle ha you out of your hole, or isle fire you out.
Nay that will doe no good, but for your own good Ma∣dam,
take heed you doe not scold.
Why may not a Lady scold Dorus?
Scold, O in no case, twill mar a Ladies beauty clean,
and make her look as hard favoured at any ordinary woman.
Godamercie for that Dorus, Isle not loose my beauty for
twenty on'em: saddle my Mule, bring me my chopping knife,
Isle gold the lecherous Goat, and mince his Trull, as small as herbs
to the pot. This is not scolding Dorus, is it?
No this is tolerable.
Nay then I care not, saddle my Mule I say, let her pray
God her feeling be good, for as I am a Lady, Isle not leave her an
eel to see withal, and yet I will not scold neither.
Oh take heed of that at any hand, So, so, so: now it be∣gins
to quicken me thinks, I see already how she runs atilt at the
Wenches eyes: calls the maid Baud, the woman Whore, and her
husband Lecher: and when all comes to all, like an Irish Wolf,
she barks at her own shadow; but committing her and her Ass
to their wildgoose chase: now to my sweet hart Mopsa, for she's
all the blocks last in my eye to slumble on: and God bless my
wits, for the fool haunts me.
Dorus, whore's my Father Dorus?
Your Father, Oh my dear Mopsa?
Nay now you flout me?
Flout you? oh the fair heavens, but this ti's for a man
to cast away himself in violence of passion and extremity of sighs
on a piece of beauty, that cares not for him, but it is the tricks
on you all.
Tricks, no as god mend me, and I should not have a hus∣band
till I got him with tricks, I should lead apes in hell: but
faith tell me, dost thou love me Dorus?
Doe I love you quoth ye, It cuts my very heart strings,
doe I love you? why tic the only mark my Inqeuors she or at.
If thou dost not hit the mark, then you're a very bung∣ler:
but where is my Father?
Why I have sent him and your mother out of the way of
purpose, and appointed Manasses to meet vs this evening at Ado∣nis
Chapel in the Amazons apparel, to marry vs: I think this
are signs I love you.
I but you jest, I doubt you will not marry me.
Will you mere me there?
As I am a Virgin I will.
And come with an intent to marry me?
As I hope to be a wife I will.
You must take heed you keep our purpose close,
As I did the loss of my Maidenhead.
Why have you lost it then?
Many a dear day ago, yet I told Nobody on it but my
Mother and our Horsekeeper, and they say I am ne'er the worse
maid for that, and I can keep my own counsel, as I hope I shall;
but will you meet me soon?
Just in the mid-way, as Tilters doe.
Isle go before and stay, but doe not deceive me, and you
doe, Isle show my Fathers Horsekeeper all as God mend me.
So tria sequntur tria, now am I rid of a triumuirie of fools,
and by there absence have won a free accesle to an escape.
If my Lisanders hope prove like to this,
This night shall Crown vs Monarchers of our bl•••e.
No more of these delays sweet Madam, your love
hath broken day oft with my expectance, I dare give it trust no
longer.
I confess it my Liege, and like a spent Dear, not able to
maintain longer flight, I cast my self down breathless at your
loves mercy: yet I beseech your Majesty, let not your eager de∣sires,
practise any present violence upon my yielding chastity:
it was only possession of my love you had in chase, which with
conuenent time &amp; place purchased, I put your grace in full pos∣session
of.
Although thy Breath be never but Musical, yet it never
taught the string of true happiness till now: and to approve thy
heart sets hand to thy word, appoint the time.
Then this present evening (and yet my Virgin blood,
and ashamed to consent to the betraying of my modesty) meet
me at Atones bower, where isle make tender of subdued chastity
to your high Majesty, as my first &amp; most victoriuos conqueror.
By my Imperial Globe, and hope of those Joys, thy
presence shall bring to enrich me with, isle meet thee, and make
thee Queen over the most submiss Captive that ever love took
prisoner.
If you deceive me.
Not except warm life,
Deceive my voice of their innatiue heate.
Then hast slow time, exchange thy leaden sleet,
For Hormes wings till I my fair hopes meet.
But locked once in the arms of my delight,
Cloth all the world in an eternal night.
And steed of morning when the Sun should rise,
They shall see two in my Zelmanes eyes.
So farewell thought I, I have prepared you a Zelmanes
answerable to your expectation.
Then triumph in thy will, and let thy thoughts
Proclaim a lubilee: my teeming hope:
Are now delivered of a gracious birth,
Which I have Christened, opportunity.
Unto whose shrine in honour of this day,
My thoughts shall hold a monthly sacrifice,
Love grant Demetrius, meet the like success,
Our pains are crowned with double happiness.
Only our disguises hold firm, but all other attempts
meet untimely deaths, even in their cradles.
What and wee should acquaint the Ladies with our
intents.
Twould argue a kind of cowardice in out wits, that ha
such suspectles admittance to there presence, as this disguise hath
purchased vs, we should not have that ability of inuenture to en∣tangle'em
in their own security.
Well howsoever, we must not dwell long determi∣ning
for the liberty of stay with Demotes, who out of his covetous
disposition in detaining our reward, allowed vs the eldest day of
our licent abode at Court, is run out.
Tic very true, and for my part, Isle rather go home with
a private repulse, then managing any unlikely attempt, become
sufferer under a public disgrace.
Thats my very thought, yet that our second arrival bee
not altogether empty of employment, lets practise something upon
Demotes, and acquaint the world with his coward baseness; in
which, he not only detracts from his masters bounty, but look
how as Conduit head or master-spring that is poisoned, doth his
best, to enfect the whole body of the court, with the leprosy of
his covetousness.
Theres no action of his begetting can be said to be truly
honourable.
How can they when there Father's a mongrel, the Duke
out of his honourable bounty commanded him to reward our
travails with 200. Crowns: and now after two months atten∣dance,
and enforced delays: In which time an ordinary petitioner
might have spent the vasew of the reward, he packs vs off with
50. Crowns, his excuse being that his master hath forgot vs, and
what he doth, is of his own bounty, as if the Moon should brag
she gave the world light, when al the luster she hath, comes from
the heat of the Sun.
Should his villainies be suffered to prosper, they would
grow to such height, as the Dukes authority should ha much
trouble to prune them.
To prevent which, his majesty shall have private note
of it, knew we in whose trust to conduct it.
Tic an Office very few dare undertake, he is so riveted
to the Dukes good opinion.
Lies there no jar twixt none of the Nobility and him,
what say you Zelmanes?
The gallant, Amazon: you could not ha cast your choice
fitter, for her honourable mind maintains deadly feud against his
base proceedings: and here she comes, attended by Demotes
servant, lets waite on opportunity.
Lisander.
Demetrius.
Lisander and Demetrius, stand close, of my life we are come
to the birth of some notable knavery.
How blows the winds of our hopes?
Fair to the point of our expectlicion, I have made away
the Duke and the Dutch.
How made away them? poisoned them.
with a confection of love, which I have so tempered with fair
promises, as their minds are in loves heaven already: Ʋidelicet in
Atones bower, where this evening I have given em my word to meet
em; but I have so cast it, that Manasses shall meet em in my steed.
Twil be a rare scean of mirth, to hear what costly discourse
the isle bestow upon the fool in thy outside.
Do you hear that.
yes, thank love and my ears, but list the conclusion.
I have cleared the way to Violetta, but what order hast thou
tan, with thy burbolts: Demote, Myso, and amorous Mopso.
shot em away, at three several marks, yet so conveyed it
that in the end they shall all meet at Atones chapel.
This project cannot but bring forth some notable deceit.
My hopes should want of thyer will, and it do not.
Now we have made a smooth passage to our escape, how
shall convey our lover out of the Island.
I have determined of that sir, and better to effect, my boy
this time hast cast such a bait of knavery to the two Captains, Kale∣der
and Philinax, as we may pass without suspicion.
But how for transportation.
I am furnished of that to, you remember the two Lacedemou
intelligencers
Now what of vs.
Hold my life, we shall be put in this scean of gullery.
Oh in any case.
For the love of Cupped do, iniquiris past, lets take our en∣trance,
and pass over the stage like mu•es, to furnish out a show.
And see occasion like a kind wench presents em in the ve∣rye
instant my honest friends welcome, have you not your dispatch
with a letter to Lacedemon.
Madam we have, and stay only to take our leaves of your
Ladyship, and know what service your honour will command.
you have my thanks, for the truth is, I must commit bu∣sinesse
of much import unto your trust, and to prevent much cir∣cumstances
take my word, you are not ignorant of the Kings gene∣rall
challenge.
About his daughters.
you understand me, with these few crowns receive my mind
which is to convey the 2, ladies whom we in these disguises have
won to Lacedemon,
were we but confirmed of your of estates.
wele give your sufficient assurance of that and the princesses
themselves shall confirm it.
we crave no better madam, but shall we not ha yours ho∣nors
company.
No: having brought them aboard, weal make return to
the Duke, to let him understand we stole not our prizes but won
them manfully at the point of wit.
A noble resolution.
His foil will appear the more palpable, and your conquest
the more applausable, where shall we receive the Ladies.
Be that our care, but on your lives be heedful of your safe ties.
More then of our own my lord,
Enough whilst you attend weal to the Duke, and play all
gulls or none.
All Gulls indeed since you had follies whip,
No gulls, to all gulls, fools love fellowship.
Look well to mine Ass there, lord how I sweat with anger;
this sames the house sure, and now like a wise Lady let me count my
hurts, and see how I shall be revenged: it shall be so, isle have em both
carted, and manasses shall go before like a whifler and make way with
his horns, where be these whores: open the door, where be these pan
ders: O that I were not a lady: I could scold like a butter-whore,
whose there a gods name, lord for his mercy is the woman
mad.
yes I thank ye fort: horn mad, wheres your companion
whetes the old lecherous goat my husband, open the door I say.
Iesus for thy mercy sake madam, what do I want.
what do I want, the chief implement a woman should have
I want that as a woman cannot be without, I mean my husband, I
want.
your husband, I saw him not as I am an honest woman.
not as you are an honest, so I think, but as you are an arrant
whore you did, you must have your Creuishes with a pox cannot
City Maunchet and fresh cod-serue your turn, but you must have
Court cake-bread and Creuishes with a vengeance, but come give
me my husband, or isle have him out of the flesh on thee, and yet I
will not scold neither.
Pray Madam ha patience: what should your husband do here
That which he should do at home with his wife, and he were
worth his ears.
Lady I protest I do not know him,
Not know him thou least in every vain ith hart thou lie,
thou know him, and as Adam knew Eve thou know him, hee
hath been as inward with thee, as ever he was with me, he hath by
his own confession he hath, &amp; thou deny it, thou least in thy throat
like a Puritanical whore as thou art, O that I were a butter-whore
for an hour I might scold a little.
Madam they are no honest men that bring these tales to you
Men bring tales to me, I defy thee in thy guts, I defy thee,
men bring tales to me, thou take me to be one of thine own church
dost: they are no honest men that bring tales to thee and ha wives
of their own, and my husbands one of them, go thy ways now.
I beseech you madam do but hear me.
Hear thee, I have heard too much of thee, too too much too
much, wheres my husband, bring forth my husband, isle teach him
to put a difference betwixt Join and my lady I hold him ten pound
ont, and yet I will not scold neither, and I had bin an old hag past tea
ming as his whore is a puritan, it had bid somewhat, but being a wo¦man
of Gods making, and a lady of his own, and wearing mine own
hair which is much in a lady of my standing I can tel you, to use me
thus, flesh and blood cannot induer•, let me come in, open the door
let me come in, O that I were any vile thing in the world but a la∣die
that I might scold a little.
So so, so, take your places, for the same bald pated ok is
the stage, where ye shall see the part of a doting fool performed by
an old man and a young wench,
Do worshipful Demotes,
The same man,
Hath he no fellow acters in his most lamentable, commical, history∣call,
tragical, musical, pastoriall.
None that require any mouthing but his Ass and himself,
marry then he has Signer Mattock, a very sharpe sastyricall humo∣test,
and Mounser le spade, but he goes somewhat more bluntly to
his business, yet heel serve for mutes, and as good as the best to
furnish out the stage.
But dares Dorus being but Dametus servant so abuse his mad
moister thus grossly.
O Lord Sir, their ha ben serving men have done their My∣sters
far greater abuse, yet had their wives concealed it, their ears
should never have bin acquainted with it.
Is that a fashion in request.
Altogether Isle assure you, but obedience Gentleman the sean
begins.
Pray God it be good he stays so long,
Ridiculous enough, and good enough.
So, stand Ass, stand gentle Ass.
What countrymen is his Ass he speaks so familiarly to him.
Ath City breed, marry he picks up his living ath burs and
nettles that grow about the Court gate.
be in readiness good mattock, play thy part sweet spade,
let me see Dianaes ok? I held Dianaes ok divine, true pure gold
honest, Dorus, fortunate Demotes.
An excellent come diane, what life he puts into his part.
So, by thy leave stone, by thy patience honest stone, the very
gravel savours of treasure, this sames the bed chamber of my Lady
Pecunia, and see, see some of her golden hairs, more, more, more
yet divine tree, pure gold, honest Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, soft¦lie,
softly, not to fast, let me not devour my content too greedily
least like a cormorant I take a surfeit ont.
Oh take heed of that moister in any case.
Pure mettle, excellent gold: but let me see now, I shall by
computation have some three millions of them, I some three or
four millions, how shall I employ em to make the most profit of
em.
That would be known indeed.
Isle put out one million to use, after the rate af seven score to
the hundredth: and yet I wnot, no fie, for then you will ha my humour
brought ath stage for a usurer; to prevent with scandalous report,
isle put it into my Scribe-maiors hand, and he shall deal for me.
Theres is a simple cloak to cover his villainy.
Tic a very short one,: and passing slite to hide his knavery.
it cannot chose but be seen through,
An other Million isle lay to bestow in Offices. I will have wealth
or isle rake it out ath kennels else, chimneys ha smoked for already,
and now isle deal upon sea-cole and salt, now, now, now, it comes,
sweet gold, honest Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, divine gold, how,
how, shall I adore thee, O let me do the homage of my knees: now
now, for the tongue of a Poet, tho I hate poetry worse then any
of the seven deadly sins, I could wish my self a Poet for some
hour, to write a Poem in the praise of my divine mistress; and see
the very bed wherein her divinity is lodged: happy, happy, thrice
happy Demotes, now like an oreioid lover, let me open the
sheets of my heavenly mistress, with reverence, so with humble re∣uerence,
and like a blushing lover that puts out the light ere he pre∣sumes
to touch the bed of his love so let me darken the candles of
my body, mine eyes, and first bless my hands with touching, next
enrich mine ears with hearing, and lastly make happy my eyes with
with seeing, and let them convey the joy downinto the bosom of
my thoughts, by degrees, softly by degrees.
Did you ever see Ass make such a ceremonious preparation
be not offended sweet mistress that I presume to touch.
a fools head of your own,
Has a bin at any cost of al this invoke for a coxcomb and a bell.
beshrow my judgment but he desetues it,
And his desert were near so much, he could but bear away
the bell, and so you say he doth:
A coxcomb and a bell, oh indignity: damnable ok•, vile and
evil accuest Dorus, unfortunate Demotes, Diana I tel thee thou art
no honest gods to use a Gentleman thus. What here a writing,
your help good spectacles, lend me your help good spectacles,
some comfortable news good spectacles:
Who hath his hire hath well his labours placed,
Earth thou did seek, and store of earth thou hast.
He that vain hopes pursues for love of pelf,
Shall loose his wits and likely find himself,
Then think thy pains rewarded well,
Thou broughst the fool, bear back the bell:
Of other matters what ensues
Atones bower shall tell the news,
Villainous poetry, I am made a flat fool by poetry,
But though I can do em no further disgrace, my fatal curse,
a Wronged gentleman's fatal curse dwell ever upon them, Diana
Here me, and let my words find gracious acceptance.
Hide your heads, the terrible curse comes like a ston upon you
Rancor, spite, malice, hate, and all disasters,
Strengthen my faith against all portastors.
May their intents tho pure as crystal glasses,
Be counted faults and capital trespasses,
O may their lives and labourd industry,
Though worthy of Apolloes plaud it be
The clearest thought in loyalty excelling
Be by some Dor presented for libelling,
when they have writ a seeing in which their brains,
Have dropped there dearest sweets, and their swollen veins,
Emptied their Cundits of their purest spirit,
As they stand gaping to receive their merit,
In sted of plaudities their chiefest blisses
Let their deserts be crowned with mews and hisses:
Behind each post and at the gallery corners,
Sit empty gulls, slight fools and false informers,
Let some sly Fox out of discreations embers,
Term them the lands unnecessary members,
And like the dear when they have spent their breath,
to make kings sport let them betorne to death,
Even by their friends, twold set my thoughts a twanging
Might I but see one of them go to hanging.
A passing strange curse and no question he has travelled far for
some of the rimes,
He must travail further that finds any rea∣son
int,
No matter for reason theirs rime enough and that be
good.
Some: of it is no better then it should be, or my judge∣meant
deceives me.
Sure he had some reason to make this rime,
and a man could pick it out,
rather then isle be counted inqui∣sitiue,
mine ears shall content themselves with the rimes only, and
leave the reason to the scanning of poets whom it more nearly con∣corns.
But wheres the wag that invited vs to this banquet of
mirth shrunk in the wetting?
it were a rare jest now if whilst the boy kept vs here in expos¦tation
of Demotes gullery his M: had made an escape with the duks
daughters,
that or some knavery else upon my life, I had the
boy in shroud suspicion at the first.
And this his sudden and stolen departure, confirms it cur∣rant
then we are sped, for in suspicions face,
I see some subtle stratagem in chase.
Will your lordship believe me now: nay and I sait your worcester∣ship
may answered, tho I have but a (poor as to say) hole of mine own
I hope the spirits have more denomination over me, then to make
it a common slaughter house of carnality where every jack may
command flesh for his money,
No more words sweet woman I
confess I was in the wrong, there is not the hole the Fox hides his
head in: and therefore for the love of womanhood conceal mine
errors, for howsoever I complaind tic thy forehead oks, thy temples ha
the terrible blow as the say, thy husband is a bad man.
my hus∣band:
I, I, good woman thy husband: he is as I say a fleshly
member and I fear he hath overcome the foolish thing my daugh∣la.
your daughter isle slit her nose by this light and she were ten
ladies, it was not for nothing my husband said he should meet her
this enening at Atones chapel, but and I come to the godspeed ont,
isle tel em ont soundly?
I do good woman tel em ont, &amp; spare
not but in any case do not scold.
Why may not a gentlewoman
scold in a good case:
I know not what a gentlewoman do in a
good case, but a lady must not in any case:
tho I may not scold I may tel em roundly ont I hope,
that may you do law,
and isle not be mealy mouthed I warrant em, will you bear
me company to the chapel madam?
withal my hart mistress, what Dorus hath given me,
isle give my friend, no fool to company.
Farewell bright sun thou lightener of all eyes
thou falst to give a brighter beam to rise.
Each tree and shrub were trammels of thy hair,
But these are wier, for none but kings to wear,
And my rude tongue striving to blaze her forth,
Like a bad art seman doth disgrace her worth,
but hears the place, upon this crystal stream:
Where Citherea did vnyoake her team
Of silver doves, to interchange a kiss
With young Atones shall I meet my bliss:
The gentle minits crowned with crystal flowers,
Loosing there youths, are grown up perfect hours,
To hasten my delight, the bashful moon
that since her dalliance with Endimior,
Durst never walk by day is under sail,
In steed of sheets has spread her silver veil,
Each gliding brooke and every bushy tree
Being tipped with silver were her livery,
And the dim night to grace our amorous wars,
Hath stuck nine spheres full of immortal stars,
Insted of pearls the way on which she treads
Is strawd with Crystal deu and silver beads.
She comes, her feet makes music with the ground,
And the chaste ayre is ravished with the sound,
My soul flies forth to meet her: hell my wife,
Her presence like a murderer drives the life
Out of my pleasure breast, her jealous cie
Envies the heaven of my felicity.
Zelmane, or my husband life or hate.
What makes old Autum out a bed so late,
that snow should go a wooing to the sun
When one •arm kiss works her confusion.
I have the jest, suspicion that keeps
Court in my husbands thoughts, seeing my love,
Elect this walk, hath brought him after him.
She dogs her fure, and she to shake her off
Hath taine some other walk Isle place mine ear
in distance of her will.
Could I but hear the innocent delivery of his breath,
twold be a second jubilee of mirth.
Here comes my love.
your love? Alas poor Duke,
Your forward hopes will meet a barren spring,
My sun appears.
Fie your love speaks to loud,
Your suns eclipsed, your date upon a cloud.
See how his arms like precious phoenix wings,
Spread to embrace me.
Now the Cuckoo sings,
Those amorous arms do make a golden space
To hug a Duke.
But isle fill up the place.
Those fingers tipped with curious porphery,
Staining Pigmalions matchless imagery,
Like amorous twins all of one mother nursed,
Contend in courtesy who should touch me first.
should touch me first: their strife is undertook,
To twine a young bay not a far stooping oak.
Young bay, stale lest, that a dry sapless rind
should hold young thoughts, and a licentious mind,
Were he but gone now.
Were the Duke away,
My hope, had got the better of the day.
This is Atones chapel, I wonder they come not, tho I
bear a little learning about me, and a few good clothes, I wold not
wisham to make Balams ass a me: for though many fools take no
felicity but in wearing good clothes (tho they be none of their own)
I have a further reach in me.
I could ban my stars.
I curse my fate.
That cross me thus.
Make me unfortunate.
Alas good lady, how her pretty feet labour to find me.
that my hopes should meet such black events.
O would the trindly night darken her self.
Would the Moon lose her light,
That in the bosom of some foggy cloud
I might embrace my love.
But night is purblind
To make a Duke a slave.
To make a Duchess
wrestle with amorous passions.
life a spleen
Could my rough breath like a tempestuous wind,
Blow out heavens candles, leave the world stark blind,
That it might either have no eyes to see:
Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me.
Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me.
Who would
ha thought the cold had been so good a musician: howe it plays
upon my chappes, and makes my teeth skip up and down my
mouth like a company of virginal Jacks, but I find small music
in it, and Mopsa should come now I could doe her little good, yet
and she were here, she and I would have about at cob-nut or at che∣ri-pit
or somewhat to keep our selves from idleness, tho she be but
a fool, the bibles good enough to make sport with all in the dark
and that very word hath started her.
whose there Manasses.
yes Mopsa.
plain
I might be madam Mopsa in your mouth, good∣man
&amp;c. whirs Dorus.
why because he will not be said to make too much hast to a
bad bargain, he is not come yet,
not come, a pescod on him, but else one I thought at first he
would make but a fool on me.
would you have him mend Gods wormanship?
But chose him, since he hath build me with an vrchin, isle go
fetch Raph our horskeeper, let him that got the calfe keep the cow
in a knaves name and he will, ha you your book here.
no matter wench, I can dote well enough without book,
Nay and ye can dote well enough your self, I care for neither
of them both, but indeed I love to have a thing well done, for says
my mother, a thing once well done, is twice done, and I am in her
mind for that up and down,
Whose with my Lord the Duke, it cannot be,
Mine eye would not conceal such treachery.
Tic not the Duchess sure, no it is amorous Jove,
that seeing Zelmane passionate for love,
Descends to comfort her, Jove if there be
A powerful Phebus God of poetry,
In dear remembrance of fair Daphnes rape,
to win my love, lend me some stranger shape,
Such as your selves have worn, that when your fame
is sung by poets, they may cote my name,
Sure tic my daughter,
Daughter: how her eye
Cuts out new forms, new shapes of jealousy:
As sure as death tic she, for see they stand
like amorous twins, intwisted hand in hand,
Breast against breast, and that no joy be missing,
To hear discourse, their lips keep time with kissing,
Isle not indurst impatience grow strong,
And tho a prince, tel him he doth thee wrong.
Do prithee do, this sweetens al the rest,
But here would be the elixir of the jest,
if whilst we kept each other at a bay,
A third should come, and bear the hare away.
villainous poetry, unchristian like poetry, I am consent of my gold
by poetry, robbed of my charge by poetry, made an apparent fool
by poetry villainous Ok, accursed Dorus, unfortunate Demotes: whose
there my daughter and with Zelmane? a wel-willer to Dorus, a fa∣uorite
to poetry, and therefore enemy to Demotes, come hither mop
so, a thy fathers blessing come not near her: what Mopsa.
yes, whose there? Dorus.
Confusion a Dorus, I am thy miserable father, did not see Hippolita,
no by my troth not I? Did ye not see Dorus.
Pox of dorus I am undone madam and thou telst me not of Hipolita,
Pox a Hippolita, I am a dumb woman and you can tel me
news of Dorus
I had rather see ten doruses hanged then lose Hippolita,
I had rather see ten fathers damned then lose my sweet dorus,
I shall run mad and I find not Hippolita.
I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus.
Whats here, I shall run mad for Hipolita.
And I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus, I hold my
life we have some comedy in hand, we shall have a full scene, for
here comes more actors.
Assures I am a sinner to God madam, that sames he.
What with a brace of wenches, I faith old broke, have I
tan you in the manner, is this the fruits of your lying alone? is this
your court custom with a wanion, lend me thy knife, tho I had
neither house, nor land to give em, isle bestow a whores make be∣twixt
you and yet I will not scold neither.
What a gudyere ail you mother, are you frampall, know
you not your own daughter.
Mopsa, O insufferable wrong, make thine own natural child
thy bawd,
Hears an excellent pattern for wives to learn to scold by
What mistress Amazon, ha you such a cocking spirit, honest
Women cannot keep their husbands at home for you: tic not for
nothing now I see, that the Duchess looks yellow on you, but isle
tear that painted whores face of yours (by this light) and yet I will
not scold neither.
Madam,
isle mad you with a vengeance.
Touch not the prince.
On your alleagance forbear, what means this outrage, can∣not
our private walks be privileged from your wilde contentious.
how fares the prince.
How cheers my good Zelmane?
Zelmane, no Gods my judge my liege, I am Manasses, mi∣serable
Manasses, your husbands scribe-ma•or madam.
Manasses.
A fool.
My man.
And my dear head, alas sweet love, what make thou heer.
Mary work for the hangman, and the Duke be not the more
merciful.
Theres some deceit in this, Demotes, wheres Hippolita?
I, I, theres some knavery in this: Mopso wheres Hippolita?
doubtless theres some villainy in this, Mepso whirs Hipolita?
Theirs no plain dealing in this, Manasses wheres Dorus?
Answer directly, wheres Hippolita?
Alas madam I know not, whilst I almost melted my self
with digging of gold in Dianaes ok, I left her in my wives charge
And whilst I ran to Manasses, thinking to take my husband
&amp; his wife in the manner, I left Hipolita in my daughters chamber
and whilst I came to Atones chapel to be tossed in my mari∣age
blankets with Dorus, I left my little dog pearl plucking daisies:
Who sent you to Diannes ok to dig gold?
who sent you to take your husband in Manasses house?
dorus.
who sent you to Atones chapel.
dorus:
And who turned you into this shape:
They that I fear have made gulls of vs all, Zelmane, and
dorus:
we are all simply gulled, and see where the Sun scarce
halfeready, skippes from his Eastern bed, smiling at our gullery:
Come wheres this lusty wit-maister.
the keeper of this loue-lottery,
This gallant luventus of fourscore, that like my Lady of the
Lake, displays against al comers.
May a couple of plain wetted princes have a sight of your
prizes:
Where be these Ladies ha? ha your wits had such a skirmish¦ing
that the two maids have lost their heads in the conflict.
Heads, I and bodies to my Lord, and all at one shot, and
which is worse our wits are so scattered with the terrible blow that to
be plain we are scarce our own men again.
then you have had some knock•ng,
so it appears by the story my Lord:
How say y•u my lady, what Whole sings out of that Ivy bush
was your 〈◊〉 knighted in this last action:
I am 〈…〉ch a fool, I love my lord, I am no knight, I am
Manasses, they made a plain fool.
the only were, for the guarded fool is out of request: but
faith my liedge how did your opposites behave themselves, did they
win the Wenches fair at the point?
At the very push of invention, and went off clear untouched,
And could you draw no blood of their wits:
Not a drop.
Nor demetrius neither, nor Manasses?
Neither, to our own disgrace be it spoken, the carriage of
their stratagem deserves applause, and I held it a credit to rest cap∣tiue
to such valiant conquerors?
Why so be, I like a man that will confess his error.
It merits commiseration madam and my liege, not to detract
from our worth: your ear, we two are the parties you wot on.
Ware you the men?
No he was the man, mary I was the woman in the moon,
that made you walk al this last night like the man in the mist, I could
say somewhat to you to Madam as for demetrius &amp; his man let them
stand like fools as they are.
Can it be possible.
No, no, we are gulls, Innocent sots, but lante tanta, the girls are
ours we have won em away to dargison.
Come we have won the conquest, and thats sufficient.
You are a manasses tic not sufficient: aha not Hercules for iole,
Jove, for Danue, Apollo for daphene, pan for Si•no, nay the whole
pack of their piperly godheads could a discharged a stratagem with
more spirit of al merit, an ambling nag and a down a down we have
borne her away to dargison.
It was the most rarest, divinest, Metaphisicalst, piece of invention,
that, what say you my liege.
I give your deserts their full merit you have gotten equality
All the wenches gave you:
Alas what spirits under the moon could have detainder
but know that her cherry red lip, a down, a down.
Trust me but you have deserved high commendation.
Your merit stood of the upper stair of admiration.
Why thou hast a pretty relish of wit, now that can see the
broad ey of my desert at a little hole of demonstration.
your desert save me free, you have done a most (to use your own
phrase) Metaphysical piece of service, but you had some help int
questionless,
I do not think but the ladies had some hand int:
A finger, I confess a finger by the hope of perseverance, a very
little finger.
I thought as much by the making of the jest.
I can∣not
detract from the ladies worth, for I knowem for excellent work
women,
work women fit to make tailors men.
I by my faith do I, nay your best tailors are arrant botchers
to em, you shall have a lady make an end of a suit, a court suit, espe∣cially
when all the tailors in a country know not how to set a stich
int.
Some ordinary suit perhaps.
your best court suits that are, are finished by ladies, I have known
a suit my self lien a making and maring 3, 4, and five year together
and then a lady hath despacht it in a month with a wet finger, such
a finger might the ladies have in your plot.
never wet a finger by this sun.
Then she helped you with one dry jest or other, but and we may
be so bold: faith where are the ladies?
sure enogh I warrant you, some fools now would have kept
em hear and have been gulled on em again, and laughed at age, but
to prevent all danger, we have shipped em home for Lacedemon,
to Lacedemon, your sun of wit shines but dimly in that
methinkes, to whose charge have you trusted em?
to them we durst, nay you must think wee are no fools,
Fools: nay deep wit, and policy forbid.
We had no sooner their surprise, but we had disguise ready,
a ship ready, a couple of lusty friends ready, the Lacedemons intel∣ligencers:
durst you trust such precious jewels in such rusty cas∣kits:
durst, our health, our lives: why they were my tenants, nay
you must think we sifted them, we are no fools in that neither.
If in any thing your wits deserve the babble tic in that,
none but fools wold have committed such inestimable peers
to a couple of strangers:
And in a ship to,
And under sail to.
And vnfurnisht of friends to.
And without shipping to follow em to.
you were no fools in any thing but that, &amp; in that not to flatter,
you express the true shape of folly and merely merit the name of
fools.
What will you say now when these fellows surrender vs
our loves?
Weal discharge you and set their names down for gulls in
your stead.
you know the proverb when the sky false we shall have larks.
And when you can bring proof that we are consent of our
Wenches weal be the woodcocks.
Why then we have once springed a couple of woodcockes.
Doe you know these? Who are the fools now?
Violletta.
My Hippolita:
What a strange change is here:
yes faith gallants you have very strange carding
and you knew al, but I hope you'll offer up your cards and yield the
set lost.
Gulls:
And abused isle loose my life before I loose my honour,
Honour, and life before isle loose my love:
Nay gentlemen we bar all violence, the liberty of our chal∣lenge
was to all alike equally free, and since these by fair play have
won em, it stands with our honour to see them peaceably possessed of
em, then surely take em, for though you wear the breeches give
vs leave to stand a little:
why father first not time that we were sped
Tic a great charge to keep a maidenhead,
Loose it we must and to prevent il course,
Better to giuet then have it stolen perforce,
if you be pleased let envy doe her worst
Spit out her poison or contained and burst?
Welcome to all, to all a kind god night,
They truly live, that live in scorn of spite.

THe Charms of silence through this Square be thrown,
That an vn-vsde Attention (like a Jewel)
May hang at every ear, for wee present
Matter aboue the vulgar Argument:
Yet drawn so lively, that the weakest eye,
(Through those thin veils we hang between your sight,
And this our peace) may reach the mystery:
What in it is most grave, will most delight.
But as in Lantskip, Towns and Woods appear
Small a far off, yet to the Optic sense,
The mind shows them as great as those more near;
So, winged Time that long ago flew hence
You must fetch back, with all those golden years
He stole, and here imagine still hee stands,
Thrusting his silver locke into your hands.
There hold it but two hours, It shall from Graves
Raise up the dead: upon this narrow floor
Swell up an Ocean, (with an Armed Fleet,)
And lay the Dragon at a Doves softfeete.
These Wonders sit and see, sending as guides
Your Judgment, not your passions: passion slides,
When Judgment goes upright: for tho the Muse
(Thats thus inspired) a Novel path does tread,
Shoe's free from foolish boldness, or base dread.
Lo; scorn she scorns and Envies ranckling tooth,
For this is all she does, she wakens Truth.
THat we, in pomp•… peace, in god like splendour,
With adoration of 〈◊〉 dazzled eyes▪
Should breath thus long, and grow so full of days,
Be fruitful as the Vine▪ 〈◊〉 sons and daughters,
(All Emperors, Kings, 〈◊〉 Queens) that (like to Cedars
Uprising from the bre•… 〈◊〉 Lyhanus,
Or Olives nursed up by Jerusalem)
Heightened our glories, whilst we held up them:
That this vast Globe Terrestrial should be cantled,
And almost three parts ours, and that the •…once,
Who suspiration draw out of this air,
With universal Aves, show•…s, and o•…es,
Should vs acknowledge to be head supreme
To this great body (for a world of years:)
Yet now, when we had made our Crown complete,
And closed it strongly with a triple arch,
And had enriched it with those precious jewels
Few Princes •…for see (white hairs) even now
Our greatness hangs in balance, and the stamp
Of our true 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
By wh•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Ask these holy Fathers:
Ask those our out-cast sons: a throne usurped
Our chair is counted, all our titles stolen.
What blasphemy dare speak so?
All our robes,
Your vestments, (reverend, yet pontifical:)
This sword, these keys, (that open kingdoms hearts
To let in sweet obedience) All, but borrowed.
What soul aboue the earth—
Our royal signet,
With which, we, (in a mothers holy love)
Have signed so many pardons, is now counterfeit:
From our mouth flow rivers of blasphemy
And lies; our Babylonian Sinagogues
Are counted Stews, where Fornications
And all uncleanness Sodomiticall,
(Whose leprosy touched vs never) are now daily acted:
Our Image, which (like Roman Caesars) stamped
In gold, through the whole earth did currant pass;
Is now blanched copper, or but gilded brass.
Can yonder roof, thats naild so fast with
Cover a head so impious, and not crack? (stars,
That Sulphur boiling o'er celestial fires,
May drop in whizzing flakes (with scalding vēgeāce)
On such a horrid sin!
No mortal bosom
Is so vnsanctified.
Who i'st bright Empress,
That feeds so ulcerous, and so rank a Spleen?
A woman.
Woman! who?
The Fairy Queen: (nights
Five Summers have scarce drawn their glimmering
Through the Moons silver bow, since the crowned
Of that adored beast, on which we ride, (heads
Were struck and wounded, but so healed again,
The very scars were hid. But now, a mortal,
An unrecoverable blow is taken,
And it must bleed to death.
Heaven cannot suffer it.
Heaven suffers it, and sees it, and gives aim,
Whilst even our Empires heart is cleft in sunder:
That strumpet, that enchantress, (who, in robes
White as is innocence, and with an eye
Able to tempt stern murder to her bed)
Calls her self Truth, has stolen fair Truths attire,
Her crown, her sweet songs, counterfeits her voice,
And by prestigious tricks in sorcery,
He's raised a base impostor like Truths father:
This subtle Courtesan sets up again,
Whom we but late banished, to live in caves,
In rocks and desert mountains.
Fear her not, shoe's but a shadow.
O it is a cunning Spider,
And in her nets so wraps the Fairy Queen,
That she sucks even her breast: Sh'as writ a book,
Which she calls holy Spells.
Weal break those spells.
The poles of heaven must first in sunder break,
For from the Fairy shores this Witch hath driven
All such as are like these (our Sooth-Saiers)
And called false Seers home, that of things past,
Sing wonders, and divine of things to come:
Through whose bewitching tongues run golden chains,
To which ten thousand ears so fast are bound,
As spirits are by spells; that all the Tones
Of harmony, that Babylon can sound,
Are charms to Adders, and no more regarded,
Than are by him that's deaf, the sick mans groans
She, they, Titania, and her Fairy Lords,
Yea even her vassal elves, in public scorn
Defame me, call me Whore of Babylon.
O unheard of profanation!
Give out I am common: that for lust, and hire
I prostitute this body: that to Kings
I quaff full bowls of strong enchanting wines,
To make them dote on me.
Lets hear no more.
And that all Potentates that tread on earth,
With our abominations should be drunk,
And be by vs undone.
Weal hear no more.
You have thrust Furies whips into our hands.
Say but the word, and weal turn home your wrōgs,
In torn and bloody colours.
All her bowers,
Shall like burnt offerings purge away (in fire)
Her lands pollution.
Let's to arms.
Stay: hear me:
Her kingdom wears a girdle wrought of waives,
Set thick with precious stones, that are so charmed,
No rocks are of more force: her Fairies hearts,
Lie in enchanted towers (impregnable)
No e•…gin scales them. Therefore go you three,
Draw all your faces sweetly, let your brows
Be sleekd, your cheeks in dimples, give out smiles,
Your voices string with silver, woo (like lovers)
Swear you have hills of pearl: show her the world,
And say she shall have all, so she will kneel
And doe vs reverence: but if she grow nice,
Dissemble, flatter, stoop to like the dust
She goes upon, and (like to serpents) creep
Upon your bellies, in humility;
And beg she would but with vs join a league,
To wed her land to ours: our blessing, go.
When mines are to be blown up, men dig low.
And so will wee.
Prosper: till this sun set
The beams that from vs shoot, seem tounte•…fet.
This physic cures not me.
Nor me.
Nor vs.
It is not strong of poison, to fetch up
Thats baked within: my gall is overflown,
My blood grown rank and foul: An inflammation
Of rage, and madness so burns up my liver,
That even my heart-strings crack (as in a furnace)
And all my nerues into my eye-balles shrink,
To shoot those bullets, and my brains at once
Against her soul that he's half damned vs: falls
Fetched hie, and near to heaven, light on no ground,
But in hells bottom, take their first rebound.
Such are our falls: we once had mountaine-growth,
With Pines and Cedars.
Now with none of both.
I could be glad to loose the divine office
Of my creation, to be turned into
A dog, so I might like up but her blood,
That thrusts vs from our vineyards.
So could all.
Revenge were milk to vs.
Manna.
And it shall.
But how? wee will not (as the head supreme
Over all nations, counselled) like the dust
The Faierie treads on, nor (like serpents) creep
Upon our bellies in humility:
This were (with Fencers) basely to give ground,
When the first bowt may speed: or to sound parley,
Whilst they within, get swords to cut our throats:
No, weal at one blow strike the heart through.
How?
By poniards.
No.
Poison.
No.
Treason.
Neither.
How (reverend Como) then?
Thus—let's consult—nay you shall hear.
You know that all the springs in Fairy land
Ran once to one head: from that head, to vs:
The mountain and the valley paid vs fruit;
The field her corn, the country felt no heat
But from our fires: Plenty still spread our boards,
And Charity took away. We stepped not forth
But with a god-like adoration
All knees bowed low unto vs: why was this?
Why were our gardens Eden? why our bowers
Built like to those in Paradise? I shall tell you,
It was because the Law most mystical,
Was not made common: therefore was not vile;
It was because in the great Prophets Phones
And hallowed Temples, we were Choristers:
It was because (wise Pilots) we from rocks,
And gulfs infernal, safely set on shore
Men's souls at yonder haven: or (being shipwrecked)
Strong lines forth cast we, suffering none to sink
To that Abisse, which some hold bottomless.
But now our very graves
Cannot save dead men's bones from shame and bruzes.
The monumental marble Vrnes of bodies
(Laid to rest long ago) irreverently
Are turned to troughs of water now for jades:
Vast Charnel-houses, where our fathers heads
Slept on the cold hard pillows of the earth,
Are emptied now, and changed to drinking rooms,
Or vaults for baser office.
What's therefore to be done?
This must be done:
This shall be done: They hunted vs like wolves,
Out of their Fairy forests, whipped vs away
(As vagabonds) mocked vs, and said our fall
Could not be dangerous, because we bore
Our gods upon our backs: now must we whip them,
But wiselier.
How?
Thus: those that fill our rooms,
Hold Beacons in their eyes (blazing with fire
Of a hot-seeming zeal) to watch our entrance,
And to arm all against vs: these we must quench:
They are counted wels of knowledge, poison these wells:
They are the kingdoms music, they the Organs,
Unto whose sound her Anthems now are sung,
Set them but out of tune, alls out of square,
Pull down the Church, and none can it repair,
But he that builds it: this is the faggot band
That binds all fast: vndoo't, undo the land—
Most certain.
You therefore (the best consort of the soul)
Shepherds (whose flocks are men, lambs, Angels,) you
That hold the roof of yon Starre-chamber up,
From dropping down to grind the world to dust,
You shall to Fairy land.
A joyful voyage.
Those that sing there the holy Hymns, as yet
Have not their voices clear, the stream of ceremony
Is scarcely settled, trouble it more: bait hooks
To take some, some to choke: cast out your net
At first, for all the fry: let vs spread sails
To draw unto our shores the Fairy whales.
That Truth, whose standard-bearer Babylon,
And all we are, is not clean driven from thence,
Whither we send you: there sheeliues, but lives
A widow; steps not forth, dares not be seen
During her month of mourning: here we write you
How, and with whom to find her: what she bids,
That doe: your hire's aboue.
We know it well.
And when you see those Fairy fishermen
Row in your streams, when they grow cold in working,
And weary of their own waters, that the sails
(Which stiffly bear them up) flag and hang low,
And that (like reeds, playing with a pair of winds.)
They promise facile pliance, then, then shake
The trees by the root, then'le make the branches blow,
And drop their mellowed fruits, even at your feet,
Gather them they are our own, then is the hour,
To wean those sons of black Apostasy
From her. (their stepdame) and to make them take,
A blessing from our reverend mothers hands,
Be happy go.
Wee shall remember you,
In all our kneelings.
Stay: ere you shift Ayre,
Sprinkle your selves all ore with sacred drops,
Take Periapts, Pentacles, and potent Charms
To conjure down foul fiends, that will be raised
To vex you, tempt you, and betray your blood,
About your necks hang hallowed Amulets,
That may Conserve you from the plagues of Error
Which will strike at you.
Wee obey most holy fathers.
And hear you,
If climbing up to this haught enterprise
The foot slip, and (ith'fal) with death you meet—
O glorious ladder!
A Saints winding sheet,
Farewell: Mount all the engines of your wit
When darts are sent from all parts, some must hit.
There is a fellow to whom, because he dare
Not be a slave to greatness, nor is molded
Of Court dow (flattering) but (should it thunder)
To his father. doing ill, (would speak ill) our Empress,
Hath given this name. (Plain Dealing): this plain dealing
Have I shipped hence, and is long since arrived
Upon the fairy strnod: from him I expect,
Intelligence of all Occurrences,
He for the names sake, shall perhaps be welcome,
Into that Harlots Company (whom the fairies
Think honest, and swear deeply, she is Truth.
That Strumpet by enticement heel bring over,
It came to me in letters (two days since.
That this plain dealing serves the fairy Queen,
And will no more be seen in Babilon.
How no more seen in Babilon, tic but one lost,
If Babilon subscribe to our wise-doome,
She shall lodge Double-Dealing in his room.
Wee thought the fates would have closed up our eyes,
That wee should ne'er have seen this day-starre rise:
How many plots were laid to bar vs hence,
(Even from our Cradle?) but our Innocence
Your wisdom (fairy Peers) and aboue all,
That Arm) that cannot let a white soul fall,
Hath held vs up, and lifted vs thus hie,
Even when the Arrows did most thickly fly:
Of that bad woman, (Babilons proud Queen,
Who yet (we hear) swells with Inuenomed Spleen.
Whose poison, shall (like Arrows shot upright)
When forth it bursts, to her own downfall light.
Truth be my witness (whom we have employed,
To purge our Air that has with plagues destroyed
Great numbers, shutting them in darksome shades)
I seek no fall of hers, my Spirit wades,
In Clearer streams; her blood I would not shed,
to gain that triple wreath that binds her head,
Tho mine she would let forth, I know not why,
Only through rank lust after Sovereignty.
Enough it is for me, if with a hand,
(Unstained and vn-ambitious) fairy Land
I Crown with Oliue-branches: all those wounds,
Whose goary mouths but lately stained our •…ounds,
Bleed yet in me: for when great  Elfiline
(Our grandsire) filled this throne, your bowers did shine
With fire-red steel, and not with Fairies eyes,
You heard no music then, but shrieks and cries,
Then armed Urchins, and stern household Elves,
Their fatal pointed swords turned on themselves.
But when the royal Elfiline sat crowned,
These civil woes in their own depth lay drowned.
He to immortal shades being gone,
(Fems minion) great King  Oberon
Titaniaes royal father, lively springs,
Whose Court was like a camp of none but Kings.
From this great conquering Monarchs glorious stem,
Three (in direct line) wore his Diadem:
 A King first, then a pair of  Queens, of whom,
She that was held a downe-cast, by Fates doom,
Sits now aboue their hopes: her maiden hand,
Shall with a silken thread guide Fairy land.
And may she guide it,
Even till stooping time
Cut for her (down) long years that she may climb
(With ease) the highest hill old age goes o'er,
Or till her Fairy subjects (that adore
Her birth-day as their being) shall complain,
They are weary of a peaceful, golden reign.
Which, that they never shall, your stately towers
Shall keep their ancient beauty: and your bowers
(Which late) like profaned Temples empty stood,
The tops defaced by fire, the sloores by blood,)
Shall be filled full of Choristers to sing
Sweet heavenly songs, like birds before the Spring:
The flowers we set, and the fruits by vs sown,
Shall cheer as well the stranger as our own.
We may to strange shores once our selves be driven,
For who can tell under what point of heaven
His grave shall open? neither shall our oaks,
Trophies of reverend Age, fall by our strokes,
Nor shall the brier, or haw thorne (growing under)
Fear them, but fly to them, to get from thunder,
And to be safe from foreign wild-fire balls,
Weal build about our waters wooden walls.
On which weal spend for you our latest lives.
Fairies I thank you all, Stay who comes here?
Parthenophill, a Fairy Peer.
Parthenophill.
Bright Empress, Queen of maids
To vs your Lords, amidst your Fairy shades:
Three Princes (so themselves they style) are come,
From whence, they'll vs not learn, and doe entreat
Fair, and a free access.
What is their business?
The splendour of your glories, which a far
Shines (as they say, and justly say) as brightly
As here at hand, hither them draws, protesting
All faith and service to you, and requesting
That they the tribute of their loves may pay,
At your most sacred feet.
Allow them entrance.
They in a Fairy mask, the argument
Of this their duty, gladly would present.
As best them please.
Your painted cheeks being off, your own discovers,
You are no Fairies.
No: but wounded lovers.
How! lovers! what! would you deflower my bed,
And strike off a poor maiden-head?
We know you not: what are you? and from whence?
The  land of whom the sun so enamoured is,
He lends them his complexion, gives me birth,
The Indian and his gold are both my slaves,
Upon my sword (as on the Excel tree)
A world of kingdoms move: and yet I write
Non sufficit. that lusty son of Jove
That twelve times showed himself more then a man,
Reared up two pillars for me, on whose Capitals
I stand (Colossus-like) striding ore seas,
And with my head knock at the roof of Heaven:
Hence come I, this I am, (O most divine)
All that I am is yours, be you but mine.
The country  at whose breast, hundreds of Kings
Have royally bin fed, is nurse to me:
The god of grapes is mine, whose bounteous hand
In clusters deals his gifts to every land:
My Empire bears for greatness, policy,
State, skill in Arts and Arms, sole sovereignty
Of this Globe universal. All her Princes
Are warriors borne: whose battles to be told,
Would make the hearers soldiers: it is a land
Of breath so sweet, and of aspect so fair,
That to behold her, and to conquer her,
(In amorous combats,) great king Oberon,
Your awful father, oft he's thither come,
Like to a bridegroom, or a Reveller,
And gone again in goodly triumphs home.
From hence I spring, (fairest and most divine)
All that this is, is yours, be you but mine.
Be you but mine, and doubly will I treble
Their glories, and their greatness: like to thunder
My voice far off, shakes kingdoms; whilst mine own
Stands on Seven (b) hills, whose towers, and pinnacles,
And ren•…rend Monuments, hold in them such worth,
And are so sacred, Emperors and Kings
(Like barefoot pilgrims) at her feet doe fall,
Bowing to her treble crown imperial.
The language which she speaks, goes through the world,
To prove that all the world should stoop to her,
And (save your self) they doe; you think you leave
A rich inheritance, if to your sons,
Ou•… fluent tongue you leave, (nor need they more)
Who speak and spend it well, cannot be poor:
On many nations necks, a foot to •…t,
If it be glorious, then may you be great.
We are all pleased, so please you be the bride,
Of three, we care not which two be denied.
For we are brethren, and those sacred breasts
From whence we draw our nourishment, would run
Nectar to you (sweet as the food of life:)
Our aged mother twenty times an hour,
Would breath her wholesome kisses on your cheek,
And from her own cup you should drink that wine
Which none but Princes taste, to make you look
With cheerful countenance.
You have a  son,
Rebellious, wild, ungrateful, poor, and yet
Apollo from his own head cuts golden lockes,
To have them grow on his: his harp is his,
The darts he shoots are his: the winged messenger
That runs on all the errands of the gods,
Teaches him swiftness•… he will outstrip the winds:
This child of yours is (by adoption)
Our mothers now, her blessing he receives;
And tho (as men did in the golden Age)
He live in the open fields, hiding his head
In dampish caves, and woods, (sometimes for fear,)
Yet doe we succour him. This your lost sheep,
We home again will bring, to your own fold,
Humbly to graze upon your Faierie plains,
Provided, that you sow them with such seed,
On which your whole land wholesomely may feed.
We know you now: O what a deal of pains
Would you (as others of this wing have taken)
To be in Faierie land called Sovereigns?
Thanks for it: rashly nothing must we doe:
When kingdoms marry, heaven it self stands by
To give the bride: Princes in tying such bands,
Should use a thousand heads, ten thousand hands:
For that one Act gives like an ingenuous wheel
Motion to all, sets all the State a going,
And winds it up to height, or hurls it down,
The least blast turns the scale, where lies a crown:
VVeele therefore take advice. If these think fit
We should be yours, you ours, we sign to it:
Your counsel Fairy Lords: Fideli speak.
Would you (my royal mistress) have those crystal
Fair, double-leaued doors, where light comes forth
To cheer the world, never to open more?
Would you have all your slūbers turned to dreams,
Frightful and broken? would you see your Lords
(In stead of sitting at your Council boards)
Locking their grave, white, reverend heads in steel?
If so, you cannot for all Fairy land
Find men to fit you better.
Florimell,
Breathes there in you Fidelies spirit?
No Lady.
No nor in any breast that's soūd: true Coūceller,
Already you speak music: you are strung
With golden chords; Angels guide on your tongue.
These potent, politic, and twin-borne States,
Would to their mitred fortunes tie our fates:
Our Fairy groves are greene, our temples stand
Like goodly watch-towers, wafting passengers
From rocks, t'arriue them in the Holy land:
Peace (here) eats fruits, which her own hād hath sown,
Your lambs with lyons play: about your throne,
The Palm, the Laurel, and the abundant Vine
Grow up, and with your roses doe entwine.
But if these gripe your Sceptre once,
What then?
Vultures are not more ravenous thā these men,
Confusion, tyranny, uproars will shake all,
Tigers, &amp; wolves, and bears, will fill your seat,
In nothing (but in misery) you'll be great:
Those black and poisonous waters that bore down
In their rough torrent, Fairy towns and towers,
And drowned our fields in Marian•…es days,
Will (in a merciless inundation)
Cover all again: red Seas will flow again:
The Devil will roar again: if these you love,
Be (as the Serpent,) wise then, tho a Dove.
This hee that speaks in music?
Are you all,
Of this opinion Lords?
All, all.
Lets hence.
When close plots fail, use open violence.
Stay: Princes are free-borne, &amp; have free wills,
Their are to vs, as valleys are to hills,
We may, be concealed by them, not controlled:
Our words our Law.
Bright Sovereign.
You're too bold.
I knew the fort would yield.
Attend.
Shees ours.
You would Combine a League, which these would break.
A League!
Holy.
Honourable.
Nay hear me speak,
You court me for my love, you I embrace
As maids doe Suitors, with a smiling face
as you doe me: receive our answer then:—
I cannot love you:—what! such hardy men
And fly for one repulse? I mean as yet;
As yet I'mnot at leisure: But I swear
Even by my birth-day, by the crown I wear,
By those sweet waters, which into vs power
Health, that no sickness taints, by that blessed flower
Upon whose roseal stalk our peace does grow,
I swear I will my love on you bestow,
When one day comes, which now to you Isle name.
The time! O blessed time!
Balm to our sorrow.
Name that most happy hour.
May be tomorrow:
Mark else and judge whether it may or no:
When Lambs of ours, are kilt by wolves of yours,
Yet no blood sucked: when Heaven two Suns endures:
When Souls that rest in vnder-groundes,
Hear Anthems sung, and praise the sounds:
When drops of water are so spilt,
That they can wash out murders guilt:
When Surgeons long since dead and gone,
Can cure our wounds, being called upon:
When from yon towers I hear one cry,
You may kill Princes lawfully:
When a Court has no Parasite,
When truth speaks false, and falsehood right:
When Conscience goes in cloth of gold,
When Offices are given; not sold:
When merchants wives hate costly clothes,
When ther's no lies in tradsmens oaths:
When Farmers by dear years do leeze,
And Lawyers swear to take no fees:
(And that I hope will never, never bee)
But then (and not till then) I swear,
Shall your bewitching Charms sleep in mine ear.
Away.
Derided to our faces!
Baffuld!
Made fools!
This must not be.
It shall not be.
Revenge:
Fly to our Empres bosom, there suck treason,
Sedition, Heresies confederacies,
The violation of al sacred leagues.
The combination of all leagues unjust,
The dispensation for sacramental oaths,
And when ye'are swollen with their, return again,
And let their poison rain down here in showers:
Whole herds of bulls laden with hallowed curses,
With Interdictions, excommunications,
And with unbinding Subjects fealties,
And with large patents to kill Kings and Queens
Drive roaring hither, that upon their horns
This Empire may be tossed.
She shall bee torn,
Even joint from joint: to have her baited well,
(If we cannot) wee will vn-kennell hell:
Will not you home with vs?
No: here Isle lurk,
And in a Doue-like shape raven upon Doves:
Isle suck allegiance from the common breast,
Poison the Courtier with ambitious drugs,
Throw bane into the cups where learning drinks,
Isle be a Saint, a Fury, Angel, Devil,
Over Seas, on this side Seas; Devils foreigners,
With Devils within hell freedom•…, Devils in Vaults.
And with Church Devil, be it your souls health,
To drink down Babylonian Stratagems.
And to forge three-forkt thunderbolts at home,
Whilst I melt Sulphur here: If the sweet bane
I lay bee swallowed, oh! a Kingdom bursts,
But if the poisoned hook be spied, then levy
Eighty eight Legions, a•…d take open arms,
The Guidon shall be mine, Isle bear the Standard.
Twi'll be a glorious war.
Farewell.
Bee gon, then one.
Who cleans a Realms head, needs more swords
These evil Spirits are vexed, &amp; tho they vanished
Like hideous dreams, yet have they left behind them,
Throbs, and heart▪ achings, in the general bosom,
As ominous bodings. Fairy Lack eyes.—
Here.
Fly Sir throug the Ayre and never rest
(On pain to be into an vrchin turned)
Till thou hast fixed upon the highest gates,
Of our greatest Cities Thei's a warning piece. Away.
Their to the Spirits that our waters keep,
Charge thē that none roused there, but those whose nets,
Are cast out of our Fairy gundolets. Away.
Their to the keepers of those royal woods
Where Lyons, Panthers, and the kingly herds
Feed in one company; that if wild Boars,
Mad Bulls, or raving Bears, break in for prey,
Hoping to make our groves their wilderness,
Ours may like soldiers bid thē battle. Fly.
Their to the Shepherds on our Fairy downs
To warn them not to sleep, but with sweet Lays
And Jolly pipings drive into fat pastures
Their goodly flocks: VVolues are abroad say, Fly.
Place Providence, (because she has quick eye:
And is the best at kenning) in our Navy,
Courage shall wait on her.
No: shees most fit 
To go with vs.
Let her in Counsel •…it.
T is said: and least they break into our walks
And kill our fairie-dear, or change themselves
Into the shape of Fawns, being indeed foxes,
Range all the forest danger to prevent,
Foresight, beats storms back, when most Imminent.
Away then.
Wise Pilots? firmest pillars? how it agrees,
When Princes heads sleep on their counsels knees:
Deep rooted is a state, and grows up hie,
When Providence, Zeal, and Integrity
Husband it well: Their fathers twill be said
(One day) make me a granda•…e of a maid.
Mean time my farewell to such gaudy lures
As here, were thrown up t'haue me quite ore-thrown,
I charge you maids, entertain no desires,
So irreligious and vnsanctified:
Oh, they ha snakes sleeky tongues, but hearts more rugged
Then i•… the Russian Bear: our Fairy bowers
Would turn to Arabian deserts, if such flowers,
(Mortal as killing Hemlock) here should grow,
Which to prevent, Isle have you vow.
We vow
By the white balls in bright Titaniaes eyes,
We their enchantments scorn.
It does suffice:
To bind it sure, Strew all your meads with charms,
Which if they doe no good, shall doe no harm.
Here comes your new sworn servant.
Now Sir, where have you bin?
Where have I bin? I have bin in the bravest prison—
What prison? a brave prison? Can there be a brave prison?
All your fine men live and die there, it's the Knights ward, and therefore mustneeds bee brave: some call it an Ordi∣nary, but I say tic a prison, for most of our gallants that are ser∣ued every day with woodcockes there, lie there in a manner up∣on Execution: they dare not peep out of doors for fear of Sergeants.
What are those Sergeants?
Doe not you know (mistress) what Sergeants are? a nūber of your courtiers are dear in their acquaintāce: why they are certain men-mid wives, that never bring people to bed, but when they are sore in labour, that no body else can deliver them.
Are there such places in our kingdom, as Ordinaries,
what is the true fashion of them, whats their order?
They are out of all true fashion: they keep no order.
Where about in Fairy land stand they?
In your great city: and here's the picture of your Or∣denariate.
When Master Painter please we shall have it: come Sir.
Your gallants drink here right worshipfully, eat most impudently, dice most swearingly, swear most damnably, quar∣rell most desperately, and put up most cowardly. Suppose I were a young country gentleman, and that I were to come in (like an ass) among 'em, new cast into the bonds of satin.
What then?
Mary then doe all the gyltrapiers turn their Tobacco faces in the room upon me, and they puff, they gape on a fresh man like so many stale Oysters at a full tide: then is there no salt to throw upon them, and to make them leave gaping, but this; to cast off his cloak, having good clothes underneath, sin∣glee out some in the room worse accoustred then himself, with him to walk boldly up and down strutting, laugh aloud at a∣ny thing, talk aloud of nothing, so they make a noise, it is no matter.
You are grown sir an observer since you came out of Babylon.
Troth mistress, I left villains and knaves there, &amp; find knaves &amp; fools here: for your Ordinary is your Isle of Gulles, your ship of fools, your hospital of incurable madmen: it is the field where your captain and brave man is called to the lastrec∣koning, and is overthrown horse and foot: it is the only school to make an honest man a knave: for Intelligencers may hear e∣nough there, to set twenty a begging oflands: it is the strangest Chesse-board in the world.
Why?
Because in some games at Chess, knights are better then pawns, but here a good pawn is better then a knight.
Afford our shores such wonders?
Wonders? why this one little Cocke-pit, (for none come into it, but those that have spurs) is able to show all the follies of your kingdom, in a few Apes of the kingdom.
Have we not in our Land Physicians
To purge these red impostumes?
Troth yes mistress; but I am Plain dealing, and must speak truth, thou hast many Physicians, some of thē sound men, but a number of them more sick at heart, then a whole parish full of Patients: let them cure themselves first, &amp; then they may better know how to heal others: then have you other fellows that take upon them to be Surgeons, and by letting out the cor∣ruption of a State, and they let it out Isle be sworn; for some of them in places as big as this, and before a thousand people, rip up the bowels of vice in such a beastly manner, that (like women at an Execution, that can endure to see men quartred alive) the
beholders learn more villainy then they knew before: others likewise there be of this consort last named, that are like Beadles bribed, they whip, but draw no blood, and of these I have made a Rime.
Let's hear it.
Those that doe jerk these times, are butlike fleas;
They bite the skin, but leap from the disease.
Isle have you Sir (because you have an eye so sharp∣lie pointed) to look through and through that our great City, and like death, to spare the lives of none, whose conscience you find sickly and going.
If I give you the copy of the Cities countenance, Isle not flatter the face, as painters do; but show al the wrinkles of it.
Doe so, you shall no more to Babylon,
But live with vs, and be our Officer.
Have I any kindred in your Court? is there any one of my name an officer? if there bee, part vs; because it will not bee good, to have two of the Plain-dealings in one office, they'll bee beggars if they doe.
No Sir, we'll provide you shall not want
Whilst vs you serve. Go learn where T•…uth doth lie.
Nay, nay, I have heard of her, she dwells (they say) at the sign of the Holy Lamb.
VVee built her up a lodging at our cost,
To have her labour in our Vineyards:
For till she came, no Vines could please our taste,
But of her fining Set your hand to hers,
Live with her in one house, fetch from our Court
Maintenance to serve you all: t'will be to her
A comfort to have you stilby her sides,
She he's such pretty and delightful songs,
That you will count your forestlabour light,
And time well spent only to hear her sing.
A way loose no more minutes.
Not a minute: Isle set more watches then a clockmaker.
VVhats yonder man that kneels?
Tic  Paridel
Our doctor?
The most wretched in your land.
the most in soul dejected; the most base,
And most vnseruiceable weed, unless
You by your heavenly Influence change his vileness
Into a virtual habit fit for use.
Oh: we remember it; you are condemned?
To Death.
Deservedly.
You had your hand
Not coloured with his blood.
No dearest Lady
Upon my vowed Loyalty.
The law, hath fastened on me only for attempt,
It was no actual nor commenced violence
That brought death with it, but intent of ill.
We would not save them, that delight to kill,
For so we wound our selves: blood wrongly spilt
Who pardons, hath a share in half the guilt.
You struck, our laws not hard, yet what the edge
Of Justice could take from you, mercy gives you
(Yourlife.) You have it signed, rise.
May yon Clouds
Muster themselves in Armies, to confound
Him that shall wish you dead, hurt, or vncrownd.
To run in debt thus basely for a life,
To spend which, had been glory! O most vile!
The good I reap from this superfluous grace,
Is but to make my self like Casars horse,
To kneel whilst he gets up: my back must bear
Till the chine crack, yet still a servile fear
Must lay more loads on me, and press me down.
When Princes give life, they so bind men to'em,
That trusting them with too much, they vndo'em.
Who then but I, from steps so low would rise?
Great fortunes (eanrd thus) are great Slaueries:
Snatched from the common hangmans hands for this?
To have my mind feel torture! now I see,
When good days come, (the Gods so seldom give them;)
That tho we have them, yet we scarce believe them.
Heart how art thou confined? and bard of room,
Thart quick enough, yet lives within a tomb.
His name.
 Campeius: Deeply learned.
We hear so:
But with it hear (from some whom we have weighed
For judgment and experience) that he caries:
A soul within him framed of a thousand wheeles'
Yet not one steady.
It may be the rumour
That thus spreads over him, flows out of hate.
Believe vs no: of his, and tothers fate,
The threedes are too unlike, to have that woven.
To gain her crown Isle not kneel thus.
Besides
The harvest which he seeks is reaped already:
We have bestowed it.
Here then dies our suit.
Now shall you try with what impatience
That bay tree will endure a little fire,
My Lord, my Lord,
Such swelling spirits hid with humble looks,
Are kingdoms poisons, hung on golden hooks,
I hope heel prove none such.
Such men oft prove.
Valleys that let in rivers to confound
The hills aboue them, tho themselves lie drounde,
My Lord, I like not calm and cunning seas
That to have great ships taken or distressed,
Suffer base galleys to creep ore their breast,
Let course harts wear course skins: you know our will.
Which (as a doom divine) I shall fulfil.
Thrown down, or raised?
All hopes (for this) are gone,
ome planet stands in opposition.
Vmh: So.
Now Doctor Paridell.
An humble suite,
I am grown bold finding so free a giver,
Where beggars once take alms, they look for it ever.
You ha been sworn our servant long.
Ten years. (uing)
And we should wrong you; since you take vs go
To let you go with life, that should want living,
What is it we can grant you.
I ha been by two great Fairies in your land,
(Oppressed I dare not say) but so beaten down,
And sunk so low now with my last disgrace,
That all my happy thoughts lie in the dust,
Ashamed to look up yet: most humbly therefore
Beg I your gracious leave that I may vary,
This native Air for Foreign.
Oh you would travel,
You may, you have our leave: Challenge our hand.
Storms are at Sea, when it is calm at land.
The Sea-God hath upon your maiden shores,
(On Dolphins backs that pity men distressed)
In safety setta people that implores,
The Sovereign mercy flowing from your breast.
What people are they?
Neighbours: tic the nation,
With whom our Faries interchange commerce,
And by negotiation grown so like vs,
That half of them are Fairies: the other half
Are hurtful Spirits, that with sulphurous breath
Blast their corn fields, deface their temples, cloth
their towns in mourning, poison hallowed founts,
And make their goodliest Cities stand (like tombs)
Full of dead bodies, or (like palaces,
From whence the Lords are gone) all desolate.
They have but 17. danghters young and fair,
Vowed to live vestalls, and to know the touch
Of any forced or unreverend hand.
Yet Lust and Avarice (to get their dowers)
Lay barbarous siege against their chastity,
Threaten to ravish them, to make their bodies
The temp•…es of polution, or their beds,
Graves where their honours shall lie buried,
They pray to have their virgins wait on you,
That you would be their mother, and their nurse,
Their Guardian and their Governor; when Princes
Have their lives giuen'em, fine and golden threads
Are drawn and spun (for them) by the good fates,
That they may lift up others in low states.
Else let our self decline; give them our presence:
In misery all nations should be kin,
And lend a brothers hand, usher them in.
Stood here my foes (distressed) thus would I grieve them▪
Not how they ha bin, but how I might relieve them.
Your good deeds (matchless Fayrie) like the Sun,
(Rising but only in this poyn•… of heaven,
Spread through the world, So that a Prince (made wretched,
By his unhappy father, that lies slain
By barbarous swords, and in his goary wounds,
Drowns all the hopes of his posterity)
Hither, is like an orphan come (from far)
To get relief and remedy against those,
That would defeat him of his portion.
Pity a•…d we had talk before you came,
She hath not taken yet her hand from ours,
Nor shall she part, until those higher powers
Behold that Prince: good works are theirs, not ou'rs;
Go: bid him trust his misery in our hands,
Great trees I see do fall, when the shrub stands.
Stands my beard right? the gown I must look grave,
White hairs like silver clouds a privilege have,
Not to be searched, or be suspected foul:
Make away those 2. turn coats. Suite me next
Like to a Satin devil (bravely) fly
Your sails shape: be here immediately.
So: excellent: a subtle masque: alls fit,
This very cap makes my head swell with wit.
Amongst soldiers, I have plaid the soldier,
Bin mutinous, raild at the State, cursed peace:
They walk with crosse-armes, gaping for a day,
Have vnder-shorde their eie-lids (like trap windows.)
To keep them open, and with yawning ears,
Lie listening on flock bolsters, till rebellion
Beat up her drum: this lards me fat with laughter,
Their swords are drawn half way, &amp; all those throats
That are to bleed are marked: and all those doors,
Where civil Massacres, murders (died in grain)
Spoil, riflings, and sweet ravishments shall enter,
Have tokens stamped on them (to make 'em known)
More dreadful then the Bills that preach the plague▪
From them, with oiled hams (lapped in servile blew)
I stole, and filed out wine of Babylon,
To live things (made of clods) poor country sots,
And drunk they are: whole shires with it do reel,
Poisons run smooth, because men sweetness feel.
Now to my schoolmen, Learnings fort is strong,
But poorly manned, and cannot hold outlong
When golden bullets batter.—Yonders one—
You're a poor scholar?
Yes.
What read you?
A book.
So learned, yet so young?
Ye may see Sir.
You feed some discontent?
Perhaps I ha cause.
What troubles you?
You trouble me: pray leave me.
Put your self, and your grief into my hands.
Say ye?
Put your self &amp; your grief into my hands.
Are you a Doctor? your hands Sir, pray why?
You know me no•….
Do you know your self? your business▪
Are you a scholar?
Judge of that by these. (•…ool▪
Oh Sir, I have seen many heads under such
That scarce had brains to line it: if you're a scholar,
Me thinks you should know manners, by your leave
Pray lea•…e your name behind you. Sir.
Name, Campeius.
Campeius! vmh: Campeius? a lucky planet
strikes out this hour: Campeius Babylon,
His name hath in her tables: on his forehead,
Our Queen hath set her mark: it is a mould
Fit to cast mischief in none sooner rent
A Church in two, then Scholars discontent.
I must not loose this Martines nest,—once more
You're happily met.
This bur still hang on me!
And you Sir.
Tell me pray, did you never tast-I'me bold-did you
Those clear &amp; redolent fountains that do norish, nee'r taste
In viue and fresh humidity those plants
That grow on tother side (our opposites)
Those that to vs here, are the Antipodes,
Clean against vs in grounds-you feel me-say
Ne'er drunk you of that nectar.
Never.
Never!
I wish you had, I gather from your eyes,
What your disease is, I h•… bin your self,
This was Campeius once (thō not so learned)
For I was bred (as you) in Fairy Land,
A Country! well▪ but tic our country: and so,
Good to breed beggars: She starves Arts▪ fa•…ts fools,
She sets up drinking rooms, &amp; pulls down schools.
So Sir.
No more but so Sir? this discourse
Not to be searched, or be suspected foul:
Make away those 2. turn coats. Suite me next
Like to a Satin devil (bravely) fly
Your sails shape: be here immediately.
So: excellent: a subtle masque: alls fit,
This very cap makes my head swell with wit.
Amongst soldiers, I have plaid the soldier,
Bin mutinous, raild at the State, cursed peace:
They walk with crosse-armes, gaping for a day,
Have vnder-shorde their eie-lids (like trap windows.)
To keep them open, and with yawning ears,
Lie listening on flock bolsters, till rebellion
Beat up her drum: this lards me fat with laughter,
Their swords are drawn half way, &amp; all those throats
That are to bleed are marked: and all those doors,
Where civil Massacres, murders (died in grain)
Spoil, riflings, and sweet ravishments shall enter,
Have tokens stamped on them (to make'em known)
More dreadful then the Bills that preach the plague▪
From them, with oiled hams (lapped in servile blew)
I stole, and filed out wine of Babylon,
To live things (made of clods) poor country sots,
And drunk they are: whole shires with it do reel,
Poisons run smooth, because men sweetness feel.
Now to my schoolmen, Learnings fort is strong,
But poorly manned, and cannot hold out long
When golden bullets batter.—Yonders one—
You're a poor scholar?
Yes.
What read you?
A book.
So learned, yet so young?
Ye may see Sir.
You feed some discontent?
Perhaps I ha cause.
What troubles you?
You trouble me: pray leave me.
Put your self, and your grief into my hands.
Say ye?
Put your self &amp; your grief into my hands.
Are you a Doctor? your hands Sir, pray why?
You know me not.
Do you know your self? your business▪
Are you a scholar?
Judge of that by these. (•…ool▪
Oh Sir, I have seen many heads under such
That scarce had brains to line it: if you're a scholar,
Me thinks you should know manners, by your leave
Pray lea•…e your name behind you. Sir.
Name, Campeius.
Campeius▪ vmh: Campeius? a lucky planet
strikes out this hour: Campeius Babyl•…,
His name hath in her tables: on his forehead,
Our Queen hath set her mark: it is a mould
Fit to cast mischief in▪ none sooner rent
A Church in two, then Scholars discontent.
I must not loose this Martines nest,—once more
You're happily met.
This bur still hang on m•…▪
And you Sir.
Tell me pray, did you never tast-I'me bold-did you
Those clear &amp; redolent fountains that do norish, nee'r taste
In viue and fresh humidity those p•…ants
That grow on tother side (our opposites).
Those that to vs here, are th'Antipodes,
Clean against vs in grounds-you feel me-say
Ne'er drunk you of t•…at 〈◊〉.
Never.
Never!
I wish you had, I gather from your eyes,
What your disease is▪ I •…a bin your self,
This was Campeius once (tho not so learned)
For I was bred (as you) in Fairy Land,
A Country! well, but tic our country: and so,
Good to breed beggars▪ She starves Arts: •…arts fools,
She sets up drinking rooms, &amp; pulls down schools.
So Sir.
No more but lo Si•… this discoure
Palates not you.
Yes.
Nothing hath passed me
Ihope, against my country, or the State,
That any you can take hold of.
If they could,
Tic but mine I, to your no.
You're to sour:
Unmellowed: you stand here in the shade,
Out of the warmth of those blessed ripening beams,—
Go to—I grieve that such a blossom—(raised,
Sir, I know you not this thing which you have
Affrights me: scholars of weak temper need
To fear (as they on Sunbankes lie to read)
Adders in the highest grass: these leaves but turned,
Like willow sticks hard rubbed may kindle fire,
Cities with sparks as small have oft been burned.
Doe you take me for a hangman?
I would be loath,
For any harsh tune that my tongue may warble,
To have the instrument vnstrung.
You shall not:
Welfare unto you.
And to you. A word Sir:
Bred in this country?
Yes.
I am no bird
To break mine own nest down: what •…ight soever
Your words make through this ayre (tho it be troubled)
Mine ear Sir, is no reaching Fowling piece
What passes through it, kills: you may proceed,
Perhaps you would wound that, I wish should bleed.
You have th'aduantage now,
I put the longest weapon into your hands▪
It shall guard you:
You draw me by this line: let's private walk.
This paths vnbruz'd: go on Sir.
Sir I love you.
The Dragons that keep learnings golden tree▪
As you now have, I fought with, conquered them,
Got to the highest bough, eat of the fruit,
And gathered of the seauen-sold le•…ues of Art,
What I desire•…'d; and yet for all the Moon•…s
That I have seen wax old, and pi•…for anger,
I had outwatched them: and for all the candles
I wasted out on long, and frozen nights,
To thaw them into day; I filled my head
With books, butscarcecould filmy mouth with •…read,
I had the Muses smile, but monies frown,
And never could get out of such a gown.
How did you change your star 3
By changing Air:
The god of waives washed of my poverty,
I sought out a new sun beyond the seas,
Whose beams begat me gold.
O me dull ass▪
I am nailed down by wilfullbeggerie,
Yet feel not where it enters: like a horse
My hooves are par'd to 'th quick) even till they ble•…
To make me run from hence, yet this Tortoise shell,
(My country) lies so heavy on my back•…,
Pressing my worth down, that I slowly creep▪
Through base and slimy ways.
Country▪
She hangs
Her own brats at her back, to teach them beg,
And in her lap sets strangers.
Yet your country.
I was not borne to this, not schooled to this,
My parents spent not wealth on motto this,
I will not stay here long.
Doe not.
Being hence,
Isle write in gall and poison against my •…rs
This Fairy land, for 〈◊〉 rewarding merit:
If ever I come back Isle be a Cal•…rope
To prick my countries feet, that tread on me.
O shoe's unkind, hard hearted▪
In disputation
I dare for latin, hebrew, and the greek,
Challenge an university; yet, (O evil hap!)
Three learned languages cannot set a nap.
Upon this thred-bare gown: how is Art cursed?
She he's the sweetest limbs, and goes the worst:
Like common Fiddlers, drawing down others meat
With lickorish tunes, whilst they on scraps do eat.
Shake then these servile fetters off.
But how?
Play the mules part, now thou hast sucked a dam
Dry and vnholsome, kick her sides.
Her heart—her very heart—
Would it were dried to dust, to strew upon
Th'inuenomed paper upon which Isle write.
Know you the Court of Babylon?
I have read,
How great it is, how glorious, and would venture
A soul to get but thither.
Get then thither; you venture none, but save a soul going thither:
The Queen of Babylon rides on a beast,
That carries up seven heads.
Rare.
Each head crow'nd.
O admirable!
She with her own hand
Will fill thee wine out of a golden bowl.
There's Angels to conduct thee. Get to sea,
Steal o'er, behold, here's one to waft thee hence,
Take leave of none, tell none, you are made, farewell.
Thus to meet heaven, who would not wade through hell?
To flea off this hypocrisy, tic time,
Least worn too long, the Foxes skin be known:
In our dissembling now we must be brave,
Make me a courtier come; Asses I see,
In nothing but in trappings, different be
From foote-cloth nags, on which gay fellows ride,
Save that such gallants gallop in more pride.
Away. Stow under hatches that light stuff:
Tic to be worn in Babylon.
At this grove,
And much about this hour, a slave well moulded,
In profound, learned villainy, gave oath
To meet me: Art thou come! Can thy black Art
This wonder bring to pass?
See, it is done.
Ti•…s. picture right.
This virgin wax,
Bury I will in slimy putrid ground,
Where it may peece-meale rot: As this consumes,
So shall she pine, and (after languor) die.
These pins shall stick like daggers to her heart,
And eating through her breast, turnethere to gripings
Cramp-like Conv•…ns, •…g up her nerues,
As into this they eat.
Thou art famed for even,
If these thy holy labours well succeed,
Statues of molten brass shall rear thy name,
The Babylonian Empress shall thee honour.
And (for this) each day shalt thou go in chains.
Where wilt thou bury it?
On this d•…ghill.
Good:
And bind it down with most effectual charms,
That whosoever with unhallowed hands,
Shall dare to take it hence, may rave and die.
Leave me.
Farewell and prosper: be blind you skies,
You look on things unlawful with sore eyes.
Who sets those tunes to mock•… vs? Stay them.
Peace.
Peace there.
No more: your music must be dombe.
When those Celestial bodies that doe move,
Within the sacred Spheres of Princes bosoms
Go out of order, tic as if you Regiment,
Wear all in uproar: heaven should then be vexed,
Me thinks such indignation should resemble,
Dreadful eclipses, that portend dire plagues
To nations, fall to Empires, death to Kings,
To Cities devastation, to the world,
That universal hot calamity
Of the last horror. But our royal blood,
Beats in our veins like seas struggling for bounds,
A•…tna, burns in vs: bearded Comets shoot
Their vengeance through our eyes: our breath is lightning,
Thunder our voice; yet, as the idle Cannon,
Strikes at the Aires Invulnerable breast)
Our darts are phillip'd back in mockery,
Wanting the points to wound.
Too near the heart,
(Most royal Empress) these distempers fit,
So please you, weal again assail her beauty
In varied shapes, and work on sutler Charms,
Again loves poisoned arrows weal let she.
No: proud spirits once denying, still deny.
Then be your self, (a woman) change those over tur•…s
You made to her of an unusual peace,
To an vnusde defiance: give your revenge,
A full and swelling sail, as from your greatness
You took, in •…yling to her: you have been
Too cold in punishment, too soft in •…hiding,
And like a mother (cause her years are greene)
Have winck't at Errors, hoping time, or council,
O•…her own guilt (seeing how she goes awry,)
Would streigtenall.—you find the contrary.
What follows▪
Sharp chastisement, leave the Mother
And be the steptdame; wanton her no more
On your Indulgent knee, sign no more pardons
To her Off-fallings and her flyings out,
But let it be a meritorious Act:
Make it a ladder for the soul to climb,
Lift from the hindges all the gates of heaven;
To make way for him that shall kill her.
Good.
Give him an office in you Star•…chamber,
Or else a Saints place and Canonise him;
So Sanctify the arm that takes her life,
That silly souls may go on pilgrimage,
Only to kiss the Instrument (that strikes)
As a most reverent relic.
Be it so.
In that one word she expires
Her fayrie Lords
(That play the Pilots now, and steer her kingdom
In foulest weather) as white bearded corn
Bows his proud head before th'imperiall winds,
Shall soly grovelling (here) when that day comes.
And that it shall come fates thēselues prepare.
True, but old Lyons hardly fall into the snare.
Is not the good and politic Satyran
(Our leagued brother, and your vassal sworn)
Even now (this very minute) sucking close
Their fairest bosoms▪ if his train•… take well:
They have strange workings (down-wards) into hell.
That Satiran is this hand: his brains a forge
Still working for vs, he's the true set clock
By which we go, and of our hours doth keep
The numbered strokes, when wily bound in sleep.
Besides such voluntaries as will serve
Under your holy colours and forsake
The Fairy standard, all such fugitives
Whose hearts are Babyloni•…ed: all the Mu•…ers
All the dimbed Crew, that would for gold tear off
The devils beard: All scholars that doe eat
The bread of sorrow, want, and discontent,
Wise Satryan takes up, presses, apparels, (woues,
Their backs like Innocent Lambs, their minds like
Rubs over their tongues with poison, which they spot
Against their own anointed; their own Country,
Their very parent. And thus shippes'em hither.
To make em yours.
To use.
Only to employ them
As Bees whilst they have stings, &amp; bring thighs laden
With honey, hive them, when they are droanes, destroy them.
The earnest which he gives you (adored Empress,)
Are three fit engines for vs.
Are they wrought?
They are: and waite in Court your utmost pleasure,
Out of your Cup made wee them drunk with wines,
To sound their hearts, which they with such devotion
Received down, that even whilst Bacchus, swam
From lip to lip, in mid•…st of taking healths,
They took their own damnation, if their blood
(As those grapes) streamed not forth, to effect your good.
Let vs behold these fireworks, that must run
Upon shortlines of life: yet will Wee use them,
Like instruments of music play on them,
A while for pleasure, and then hang them by,
Who Princes can upbraid, tic good they die.
For as in building sumptuous palaces,
We climb by base and slender scaffoldings,
Till wee have raised the Frame: and that being done,
(To grace the work) we take the Scaffolds down,
So must we these: we know they love vs not,
But Swallow-like when their own summers past,
Here seek for heat: or like flight Trailers,
(Swollen with vaine-glory, or with lust to see,)
They come to observe fashions and not me.
As Trailers use them then, till they be gone,
Look Cheerfully; backs turn•…d, no more thought upon.
What are they that fly hither (to our bosom)
But such as hang the wing, such as want nests;
Such as have no sound feathers; birds: so poor,
They scarce are worth the killing: with the Lark
(The morning's fawlkner) so they may mount hie,
Care not how base and low their risings be?
What are they but lean hungry Crows that tyre
Upon the mangled quarters of a Realm?
And on the house-tops of Nobility
(If there they can but sit) like fatal Ravens,
Or Skrich-Owles croake their false and hoarsely bode,
Nothing but scaffolds and unhallowed graves?
Fitter for vs: yet sit they here like doves.
True: like corrupted Churchmē they are doves,
That have eat carrion: home weal therefore send
These busie-working Spiders to the walls
Of their own country, when their venomous bags
(Which they shall stuff with scandales, libels, treasons)
Are full and upon bursting: let them there
Weave in their politic looms nets to catch flies;
To vs they are but Apothecary drugs,
Which we will take as Physical pills, not food:
Use them as lancets to let others blood,
That have foul bodies, care not whom you wound,
Nor what parts you cut off, to keep this sound.
Here come they.
Welcome: rise, and rise up high
In honours and our favour: you have thrust
Your arms into our confers, have you not?
Yes sacred Empress.
And into our own,
Have rayned down showers of gold.
You shall deserve it:
You see what Ocean can replenish you,
Be you but duteous tributary streams:
But is your temper right? are not the edges
Of your sharpe spirits rebated? are you ours?
Doe not your hearts sink down yet? will you on?
Stood deathith' way.
Stood hell.
Nobly resolved:
But listen to vs, and observe our counsel:
Back must we send you to the Fairy Land,
Danger goes with you; here's your-safetie: listen.
Choose winds to sail by; if the way ward seas
Grow stormy, hover, keep aloof: if fears,
Shipwrecks, and death lie tumbling on the waives,
And will not off, then on: be venturous,
Conquests hard got are sweet and glorious.
Being landed, if suspicion cast on you
Her narrow eyes, turn your selves then to Moles,
Work under ground, and undermine your country,
Tho you cast earth up but a hand full high,
To make her stumble: if that bloud-hound hunt you,
(That long-ear'd Inquisition) take the thickets,
Climb up to Hay-mowes, live like birds, and eat
The vndeflowred corn: in hollow trees
Take such provision as the Ant can make:
Fly with the Batt under the eeues of night,
And shift your nests: or like to Ancresses,
Close up your selves in artificial walls:
Or if you walk abroad, be wrapped in clouds,
Have change of hairs, of cie-brows, halt with soldiers,
Be shaven and be old women, take all shapes
To escape taking: But if the ayre be clear,
Fly to the Court, and underneath the wings
Of the Eagle, Falcon, or some great bird hover,
Oaks and large Beech-trees many beasts doe cover.
He that first sings a Dirge tun de to the death
Of that my only foe the Fairy Queen,
Shall be my love, and (clad in purple) ride
Upon that scarlet-coloured beast that bears
Seven Kingdoms on seven heads.
If all the Spells.
That wit, or eloquenee, or arts can set:
If all the sleights that bookmen use in schools
Be pow•…efull in such happiness, it is mine.
What physic can I dare only to grow
(But as I merit shall) up in your eye.
Weal erect ladders for you strong and high,
That you shall climb to starry dignity.
We take our leave dread Empress.
Fare you well:
Our benediction go along with you—
Our malediction and your souls confusion
Like shivered towers fall on your hickelesse heads,
And wedge you into earth low as the deep
Where are the damned, if our world you fire,
Since desperately you'll ride and dare aspire.
But is this all? shall we thus bend our sinews
Only to empty quivers, and to shoot
Whole sheafs of forked arrows at the Sun,
Yet never hit him?
And the mark so fair!
Nay, which is more, suppose that al these torrēts
Which from your sea of Greatness, you (for your part)
And all those straggling floods which we have driven
With full and stiff winds to the Fairy Stronds,
Should all break in at once, and in a deluge
Of Innovation, rough rebellion, factions,
Of massacres, and pale destruction
Swallow the kingdom up, and that the blood
Even of Titania's heart should in deep crimson
Dye all these waters: what of this? what share
Is yours? what land shall you recover?
All.
All!
I, all:
Between the Transuersaries that doe run
Upon this cross staff, a dull eye may find
In what degree we are, and of what height
Your self (our brightest Ariad•…e) is,
Being underneath that Tropic: as those jewels
Of night and day are by alternate course
VVorne in Heavens fore-head,
So when Deaths Winter comes,
And shortens all those beams of Majesty,
Which in this oblique and Zodiacal Sphere
Move with Titania now, shall loose their heat,
Where must the next Sun rise but here? from whence
Shall Fairy land get warmth? merely from hence.
Let but the taper of her life burn out,
We have such torches ready in her land
To catch fire from each other, that the flames
Shall make the frighted people think earth burns,
And being dazzled with our Copes of Stars,
We shall their temples hallow with such ease,
As it were in solemn gay procession.
Some lyne sea cards, that know not the seas taste,
Nor scarce the colour: by your charms I gather
You have seen Fairy land—but in a Map:
Can tell how't stands: but if you giue't a fall,
You must get bigger bones: for let me whisper
This to your ear; though you bait hooks with gold,
Ten thousand may be nibbling, when none bites,
And those you take for Angels, you'll find Sprites.
Say that Titania were now drawing short breath,
(As that's the Cone and Button that together
Clasps all our hopes) out of her ashes may
A second  Phoenix rise, of larger wing,
Of stronger talent, of more dreadful beak,
Who swooping through the ayre, may with his beating
So well command the winds, that all those trees
Where sit birds of our hatching (now fled thither)
Will tremble, &amp; (through fear struck dead) to earth,
Throw those that sit and sing there, or in flocks
Drive them from thence, yea and perhaps his talent
May be so bonie and so large of gripe,
That it may shake all Babilon.
All Babylon!
Your pardon: but who'le swear this may not be?
How the prevention?
Thus; to fell down their Q. is but one stroke;
Our axe must cleave the kingdom, that's the Oak.
The manner.
Easy: whilst our thunderbolts
Are anuiling abroad, call Satyran home,
He in his fathom metes vast Argoziet,
Huge Galeasses, and such wooden Castles,
As by enchantment of the waters move:
To his, marry yours and ours; and of them all
Create a brave Armado, such a Fleet,
That may break Neptunes back to carry it:
Such for variety, number, puissance,
As may fetch all the Fairy Land in turfs,
To make a greene for you to walk upon
In Babilon.
Invincible! go on.
Now when the volley of those murdering shot
That are to play first on Titaniaes breast,
And (yet) lean on their rests, go off and kill her,
So that the very Aluerado given,
Sounds the least hope of conquest; then, then show
Your warlike Pageants dancing on the waives,
Yours is the Land, the Nation are your slaves.
Counsel from Heaven!
None this shall overwhelm:
Brave voyage! Rig out ships, and fetch a Realm.
You arrive on a blessed shore. The freight you bring
Is good: it will be bought up of vs all
With our dear bloods: be constant, doe not warp
In this your zeal to Babilon.
Grave Palmio,
To you I have unloaded even my soul,
The wings frō home that brought me had sick feathers,
Some you have pulled off: my own country grass
Was to my feet sharpe needels (stuck upright)
I tread on downe-beds now.
But are your countrymen
(I mean those that in thought with vs feast richly)
Fed with the course bread of affliction still?
Still father Palmio still, and to relieve them
I dare doe what I told you.
Noble valour!
So that I might but read on yonder scrolls,
A warrant writ under the seal of Heaven,
To justify the Act.
You have my hand,
And shall have more. You're reconciled (Son?)
Yes.
Who did confess you?
Father Anniball.
But did the Nuntio Campeggio
Present your letters, and your vowed service
At Babylon.
He did: I sued out warrant
For passage safely thither: and from grave Com•…
(One of the capital Columns of the state)
This I received.
He sends you here good welcome;
It is strong; why went you not?
I like it not:
There wants a convoy of some better words,
Which hourly I expect: upon a Sea
So dangerous, so full of rocks, so narrow,
(Albeit the venture holy and of honour)
I would not gladly sail, without direction
Of noble Pilots, home I would not come
Basely, but like a glorious voyager.
Yea, you do well; the Nuntio Raggazoni!
Not know him?
Certes no.
Come, you shall meet:
Monsignor, here's a Gentleman desires
To have your arms about him.—
Willingly.
He undertakes an action full of merit,
Sans promise or reward, to cure all those
Through Fairy land, that are diseased within,
And he will do it, by letting one vein blood.
Shoots he at highest?
Yes.
Draw home, and give
Your arrows compass, that until they fall
Full on the head, none see them: you do well:
My hands are yours: good speed.—
Campeggio?
Now shall you hear some news.
I doe assure you,
The Mistress of vs all, hath on this paper
Breathed you a blessing: your devotion
Is recommended highly, and to nourish
The flames new kindled in you, here's more fuel,
Licence to go and come, in verbo imperatrieis per omnes Jurisdictions Babilonicas abc{que} impedimento.
Good: would it had come sooner.
Why?
It is general,
Exceeding absolute and peremptory.
It gives me my full sail: but by deep vows,
I am to travel lower, yet if season
Beat me not back, I will to Babylon,
What rubs so ever I meet in letters still,
Isle kiss her sacred hand.
You change not bias.
Oh good sir, yonder is the goal I run for!
Lend me your speeches both.
Yonder comes one of your own country.
Oh I know him Sir.
Walk in this college class but some few minutes,
Isle send or bring to you a Gentleman,
Next neighbour to your country: an Albanois—
The man I told you of.
Thanks Sir.
Met happily, I looked for you.
Dear countryman the parley we late held
About the land that bred vs, as how order
Was robed of ceremony (the rich robe of order)
How Truth was freckled, spotted, nay made leprous:
How Justice—
Come, no more.
Even now (as then)
You ward blows off from her, that at all weapons
Strikes at your head: but I repent we drew not
That dialogue out to length, it was so sweet. (man
At hours more opportune we shall: but country-
I heard of late the music of my soul,
And you the instrument are made that sounds it:
Tic given me, that your self hath sealed to heaven
A bond of your devotion, to go forth
As champion of vs all, in that good quarrel,
That hath cost many lives.
What need we use
Circumgyrations, and such wheelings? Sir,
Believe it, to recover our sick Nurse
Id kill the noblest foster-child she keeps.
I know what bird you mean, &amp; whō you hate,
But let him stand to fall: no sir, the Dear
Which we all hope you'll strike, is even the pride
And glory of the Forest: So, or not?
My vows are flown up, and it must be done,
So this may be but settled.
Do you stagger?
All winds are not yet laid.
Have you looked out
•…or skilful coasters, that know all the sounds,
The flats, and quick sands, and can safely land you
Out of all touch of danger?
I have met many,
And like a consort they hold several tunes—
But make they music?
Faith a little jarring:
Sometimes a string or so: yet reverend Palmio,
And Anniball a Codreto keep the stream
In which I swim: the Nuntio Ragazzoni
Plies me with wholesome physic; so the Nuntio,
My honoured Friend Campeggio makes it clear,
That it is lawful.
Where at stick you then?
At a small rock, (a dispensation.)
You cannot want for hands to help you for▪
In such a noble work your friends are near; (ward:
Dear Countryman, my sword, my state, and honour,
Are for your use, go on; and let no heate
thaw your strong resolution, I shall see you,
Before you take to Sea.
You shall.
My duty.
This is the worthy Gentleman, to whom
I wish your love endeared: we have some conference.
Borne Sir in Fairy Land?
No marry Sir-An Albanois,
Then for proximity
Of Countries, let vs interchange acquaintance,
I wished for your embraces, for your name
Is crowned with titles of integrity,
Judgment and Learning: let me upon their Bases
Erect a pillar, by which Babylon,
And all we may be strengthened.
I pray be apert and plain.
Then thus Sir; by the way of Argument
I would a question put, to taste your censure,
Because I doe not soundly relish it.
Propone it Sir, Isle solve it as I can.
Suppose that in the field there were an Army,
Comixed of half your kinsfolk, friends, and lovers,
The other half sworn foes, (all countrymen;)
And that the leader of them were your father,
And that this leading father were so partial,
That to preserve that half which loves you not,
Ye would loose that which loves you: &amp; that to take
This Captains life away, might bring this good,
Of two sides to make one, and save much blood:
Would not you doe it.
Vmh: ya're full of Ambage:
I answer as my spirits lead me, thus,
I would not doe it.
Why Sir.
Because I hold, Quote non omninò Licit.
Come, Come, I know (without al commenting)
This text you understand: way the utility,
That goes with it: the health it gives to thousands;
The sap it spreads through brāches which now wither:
The restoration—
Sir I see to'th bottom,
Of this deep well you dive in: I doe arm you,
In this strong fight, just with the self same weapons
Which I would wear to guard me, and those are
My readings and belief settled by reading,
And this I find-Quod non sunt faciēda mala, vt ve•…iant 〈◊〉
For good; (how great soever) must be don,
no ill how small soever.
Tic no evil.
To bar out so great ill, with so great good.
All good must not be done, but only that-Quod benè &amp; legitimè fieri potest: For Sir I know, that Deus magic amat aduerbia quam nominee. Queen in actionibus magic et Placent Benè &amp; legitimè quàm bonum. Ita vt nullum bonum Liceat sacere, nisi ben•… &amp; legi•…ime fieri potest. Quote in hoc Casu fieri non potest.
Yet (with your favour) several learned men,
Are clean from your opinion and doe hold, Quòd licit.
Those learned men perhaps may hold it fit,
That to save many, they to one mans danger,
(Referring all to the depth inscrutable)
May allow of a particular; on no warrant
That they can show me written, but being stirred,
With a human compassion to men's lives:
And less you revelation have divine,
That bids you do, doe not; Thus you have mine.
What so hard at it.
We have done: the time,
Doe's pull me from your sweet society,
You will to Babylon.
I cannot tell;
Whether I doe or no, you shall have notice,
How this great work goes forward; strengthen me,
With all your comforts, and commend my service
To the most glorious throne: if I get over,
There lands black vengeance on the Fairy shore.
If prayers can doe it shall.
But how shall I know, thou art the right truth;
Because I am not painted.
Nay if thou hast no better colour then that, ther's no truth in thee, for Im'e sure your fairest wenches are free of the painters.
Besides I am not gorgeous in attire,
But simple, plain and homely; in mine eyes,
Doves sit, not Sparrows: on my modest cheeks,
No witching smiles doe dwell: upon my tongue
No unchaste language lies: my Skins not spotted
With foul disease, as is that common harlot,
That baseborne truth, that lives in Babylon.
Why? is she spotted?
All over, with strange ugliness, all over,
Then she has got the pox, and lying at my host Gryn∣cums, since I left her company: how soever it be thou and I will live honest together in one house, because my court mistress will have it so: I have been a Travailer a great while, plain dea∣ling hath leapt from country to country, till he had scarce a pair of soales to carry him.
Why? in what Countries have you been?
In more then I had mind to stay in; I have been amongst the Turks too, the Turks made as much of poor plain dea∣ling, as those whom we call Christians.
What man is that great Turk? I never saw him:
Nor ever shalt: why the great Turk is a very little fell∣low; I have seen a scurvy little bad paltry Christian, has been taken for the greatest Turk there.
Where had you bin, when now you met with me.
Looking up and down for thy self: and yet I lie too, now I remember, I was in the city: our mistress would needs have me go thither, to see fashions: I could make an excellent Taylor for Ladies and gentlemen, and fools, for I have seen more fashions there, then a picture drawer makes scurvy faces, the first two years of his trade: its the maddest circle to conjure in, that ever raised spirit.
Tell me good kinsman, what in the city saw you?
What did I see? why Isle tell the cozen; I saw no more conscience in most of your rich men, then in Tavern faggots: nor no more soberness in poor men, then in Tavern spiggots: I see that citizens fine wives undo their husbands (by their pride) within a year after they are married; and within half a year after they be widows, knights undo them: they'll give a 100. pound to be dubbed ladies, and to ride in a coach, when they have scarce another hundred pound left to keep the horses. But cozē Truth, I met in one street a number of men in gowns, with papers in their hands, what are all those?
Oh! they are the sons of Justice; they are those.
That beat the kingdom level, keep it smooth
And without rubs: they are the poor mans captain,
The rich mans soldier, and called Lawyers.
Lawyers? doest know any of them?
A few.
I wondered what they were, I asked one of them if they were going to foot-ball, yes said he, doe you not see those coun∣trey fellows, we are against them; and who do you think shall win, said I, oh said he, the gowns, the gowns.
Follow me Truth; Plain dealing follow me.
He charges like a Constable; come, wee are his watch: follow me? Is our Time mad?
O brave mad Time.
See there's the Cave, where that Hy•…na lurks,
That counterfeits thy voice, and calls forth men
To their destruction.
How full of the small pox she is, what ails she to stamp thus? is the whore mad? how now? Yea do you rise before Dooms day; father Time, what conduit-pipes are these, that break out of the earth thus?
The conduit-heads of treason, which convey
Conspiracies, scandals, &amp; civil discord,
Massacres, poisonings, wrackes of faith and fealty
Through Fairies hearts, to turn them into elves:
See Truth, see son, the snake slips off his skin,
A scholar makes a ruffian.
Now must that ruffian cuff the scholar, if I were as he.
And see, that shape which erst showed reverend,
And wo•…e, the outward badge of sanctity,
Is clothed in garments of hypocrisy.
See, see, father, he he's a jack in a box: whats that?
A wild beast, a mad bull, a bull that roars,
To fright allegiance from true subjects bosoms;
That Bull must bellow, at the Flamins gate:
His gate, that tends the flocks of all those sheep,
That graze in the first pasture of the land,
Being all enclosed: that bull will on his back
Bear all.
Whither? whither?
To hell: tic said to heaven
That will but sit him, till with hoof or horn,
He gore the anointed Fairy.
Such Bulls have I seen sent out of Babylon, to run at people: I should once have rid upon one of thē, but he that begged my office, broke his neck by the bargain, and saved me a la∣bore: whats he with the sword, a master of the noble Science?
A noble villain: see, he pulls down heaven
With imprecations, if that blade he sheath not,
In our sweet mistress breast. (villain?
O rogue! what good clothes hee wears, and yet is a
I, doe: clap hands upon it, that poisoned glove,
Shall strike thee dead to death, with the strong sent
Of thy discovered treason.
Whats that horse-courser with the bridle?
A slave, that since he dares not touch her head,
Would work upon her hand:—laugh and conspire;
The higher villains climb, they fall the higher.
Stay father, now the Army comes forward: she takes down the flag, belike their play is done; what will she bear the colours? thou hast colour enough in thy face already, thou need no more: did ye ever see a more lousy band? there's but two rapiers in the whole regiment: now they muster, now they double their files: mark how their hands juggle, and lay about; this is the maine battle: O well flourished Ancient! the day is their's; see, now they soūd retreat: whither march they now?
To death; their falls, thus Time and Truth proclaim,
They shall like leaues-drop from the Tree of shame.
Lets follow them.
To the gallows? not I; what doe we know, but this freckled face queen, may be a witch.
She is so; shoe's that damned sorceress,
That keeps the enchanted towers of Babylon.
This is the Truth, that did bewitch thee once.
Is this speckled toad she? She was then in mine eye,
The goodliest woman that ever wore fore part of Satin:
To see what these female creatures are, when they deal with 2. or 3. Nations; how quickly they were carbu•…les &amp; rich stones? now she is more ugly then a bawd.
She looked so then; fairness it self doth cloth her
In men's eyes, till they see me, and then they loath her.
Loose no more minutes, come, lets follow them.
With hue and cry, now I know her: this villainous drab is bawd, now I remember, to the Whore of Babylon; and weal no∣for leave her, till she be carted: her face is full of those red pim∣ples with drinking Aquauite, the common drink of all bawds: come.
What comes this paper for?
Your hand.
The cause?
The Moon that from your beams did borrow light,
Hath from her silver bow shot pitchy clouds
T'ecclipse your brightness: heaven took your part,
And her surprised; A jury of bright stars,
Have her unworthy found to shine again:
Your Fairies therefore on their knees entreat,
She may be pulled out from the firmament,
Where she was placed to glitter.
Must we then,
Strike those whom we have loved? albeit the children,
Whom we have nourished at our princely breast,
Set daggers to it, we could be content
To chide, not beat them (might we use our will,)
Our hand was made to save, but not to kill.
You must not (cause hoe's noble) spare his blood.
We should not, for hoe's noble that is good.
The fall of one, like multitudes on ye,
Makes all the rest, (of footing) be more nice:
But if by venturing on that glassy floor
Too far, he sinks, and yet rise with no more harm,
Ten thousand to like danger it doth arm:
All mercy in a Prince, makes vile the state,
All justice makes even cowards desperate.
In neither of these seas, spread we our sails,
But are the impartial beam between both scales;
Yet if we needs must bow, we would incline
To that where mercy lies, that scale's divine:
But so to save were our own breast to wound,
Nay (which is more) our peoples: for their good,
We must the Surgeon play, and let out blood.
Every Peers birth sticks a new star in heaven,
But falling by Luciseran insolence,
With him a Constellation drops from thence.
Give me his Axe—how soon the blow is given? writes
Witness: so little we in blood delight,
That doing this work, we wish we could not write.
Let's walk my Lords. Florimel?
Madame.
Stay:
Not one armed man amongst vs? you might now
Be all old-beaten soldiers: truth I thank ye;
If I were now a jewel worth the stealing,
Two thieves might bind you all.
With much ado.
I marry I commend yon gentleman.
Pray Sir come near, look you hoe's well provided
For all rough wethers: Sir, you way be proud,
That you can give arms better than these Lords,
I thank you yet, that if a storm should fall,
We could make you our shelter. A good sword?
This would go through stich; had I heart to kill
I'd wish no better weapon; but our days
Of quarrelling are past; Shall we put up Sir,
We ha put up wrongs ere now, but this is right,
Nay we are not falling yet,
It did vs good
To see how your Majestic presence dawnted
The silly gentleman.
The silly gentleman!
He knew not how to stand, nor what to speak,
The silly gentleman? know you him Lords?
Where is hee?
Gotten hence poor wretch with shame.
That wretch hath sworn to kill me with that
How? (sword,
The traitor.
Locke the Court gates.
Guard her person.
You guard it well. Alack! when lovers woo,
An extreme joy and fear, them so apall,
That over much love, shows no love at all.
Zeal sometimes-ouer-does her part-It's right—
When the frais done, Cowards cry whirs the Flight. Pension•…s. Florimell
The wolfs in his own snare: O damned slave!
I had like to ha made his heart my poniards grave.
How got you to this knowledge?—blessed heaven!
It came unto me strangely: from a window,
Mine eyes took mark of him; that he would shoot
Two's told me, and I tried if he durst do it.
Is Ropus here, our Doctor?
Gracious Lady.
You have a lucky hand since you were ours,
It quickens our taste well; fill vs of that
You last did minister: a draught, no more,
And give it fire, even Doctor how thou wilt.
I made a new extraction, you shall never
Relish the like.
Why, shall that be my last?
Oh my dear Mistress!
Go, go, I dare swear thou love my very heart.
This scaly Serpent
Is thrown (as he deserves) upon the Sword
Of Justice; and to make these tidings twins,
I bring this happy news, Campeius,
(A Snake that in my bosom once I warmed:)
The man for whom—.
Oh, wee remember him.
This Owl, that did not love your sacred light,
Stole over the Seas by darkness, and was held
In Babilon a bird of noble flight:
They tourn'd him to a Goshawk, fether'd him
Armed him with talents, &amp; then gave him bells,
And hither charged him fly, he did: and soared
O'er all your goodliest woods, and thickest groves,
Enticing birds that had the skill in song,
To learn harsh notes: and those that failed in voice,
He taught to peck the tender blossoms off,
To spoil the levy trees, and with sharpe bills
To mangle all the Golden ears of corn.
But now hoe's tan'e.
Good shepherds ought not care,
How many foxes fall into the Snare.
Your civil Doctor, Doctor Par•…
Casts Anchor on your shores again, being freighted
With a good venture, which he says, your self
Must only have the sight of.
Bring him hither:
Lord Florimell, pray call Fideli to vs.
Sure it is too hot.
On rogue!
Set it to cool,
Hell and damnation, Devils,
What's that?
The damned'st treason! Dog: you whoreson dog;
O blessed maid: let not the toad come near her:
What's this? If it be his brewing, touch it not—
For it is a drench to kill the strongest Devil,
That's Drunk all day with brimstone: come suck, Weasel,
Suck your own teat, you—pray;
Thou art preserved.
From what? From whom?
Look to that Glister-pipe:
One crown doe's serve thy turn, but heere's a thief,
That must have 50000. crowns to steal
Thy life: Here it is in black and white—thy life,
Sir thou Urinal, Tynoco, Game,
Entered, and Ibarra, names of Devils,
Or names to fetch up Devils: thou know these Scar-crowes.
Oh me! O mercy, mercy! I confess.
Well said, thou shalt be hanged then.
Have we for this
Heaped favours on thee.
Heap halters on him: call the Guard: out polecat:
He smells, thy conscience stincks Doctor go purge
Thy soul, for it is diseased. Away with Ropus.
Away with him: foh.
Here my tale but out.
Ther's too muchout already.
Oh me accursed! and most miserable.
Goodness 〈◊〉! is my blood so sweet,
That they would pay so dear for it
To suck Lambs,
What would not Wolves doe, he that this paper writ,
Had never meaning we should finger it.
Our a mercy makes them cruel, hunt out these Leopards:
Their own spots will betray them: they build caves
Even in our parks: to them, him; and the rest,
Let death be sent, but sent in such a shape,
As may not be too frightful. Alack! what glory
Is it to buffet wretches bound in gives?
The debt is dearly paid that's paid with lives
Oh! leave vs all.
More Doctors! if this doe
As well as tother, best to hang him too.
Florimell! Stay,
But give vs liberty.
This is the blessed day for which (through want
Of those bright rays that sparkle from your eyes)
My frozen soul hath languished Goddess complete,
If you, a wretch so mean, will bid to speak,
I shall vnclaspe a book whose very first line,
(Being not well pointed) is my doom to death:
But if your sacred judgment (on the Margin,)
Control all wresting comments, All your subjects
Will fold me in their bosoms.
Give your mind.
A Pilgrim have I been on foreign shores,
(Your gracious hand allowed it) in my wandering,
With Monsters I encountered of strange shape,
Some that sucked poison up, and spent it forth,
Upon your land: some, that shot forked stings,
At your most God-like person: all were Giants,
Fighting against the heaven of your blessed reign:
With these (oh pardon me!) with these I held
A politic league, the lines of all their treasons,
(Drawn from one damned circle) met in me,
My heart became the Center, and the point
Was this—I dare not tell it.
Speak?
To kill you.
How durst you (being our subject) wade so far?
Your ear of mercy. I became a sponge
To drink up all their mischief, and lay drowned
In their infected waters, (with much loathing,)
Only that I before you might wring out
This their corruption, and my self make clear.
And now (immortal maid) i'm not unlike
A casket wherein papers stuffed with danger,
Have close been locked, but those tan out, the chest
Serves to good use, so may my loyal breast:
For from their flinty hearts what sparks I got,
Were but to fire themselves.
I praise your plot,
You make vs now your debtor, but a day
Will come, when we shall pay. My Lord, we want your Arm.
Vmh! I fear—
Doctor, weal have (Sir) other Dialogues.
O shallow fool, thou hast thy self undone,
Shees hardened and thou melted at one sun.
Our eyes have lusted for you, and your presence
Comes as the light to day, showers to the spring,
Or health to sick men.
Thanks most reverend Fathers.
Our blood ran all to water, yea our souls
Strove all (at once) t'expire, (when it was blown
Hither from Faiery land, that all the darts
Which ours here, and your arm delivered there,
Fell either short, or lighted upon ice)
Lest you had lost blood in the enterprise.
No, I wear stronger Armour: gamester-like
I saw the dogs brought forth; and set them on,
Till the Devil parted them; but plucked off none,
I kept aloose out of the reach of paws:
Better to fight with Lions then with laws.
What drums are these?
Music of heaven.
The dancers revel in steel.
These march to fill our Fleet.
From whence weal match with proud victorious feet,
And walk on Fayeries hearts, their beaten ways
With their own heads weal pave, whilst ours with baize,
And oak (the conquering soldiers wreath) we crown:
These hooks, or none, must pull their Cities down,
Invasion is the fire: See, See, in the Ayre
Angels hang beckoning vs to make more haste,
Vengeance deferd grows weak, and runs to waste.
Whats this?—
Ere we take ship, we must to Court.
A •…ay.
In thunder: tic the soldiers sport.
It is the Imperial pleasure, decree, peremptory edict, and dreadful command (upon pain of a curse to be denounced upon him that is disobedient) from her who hath power given her to make the backs of stubborn Kings her foote-stooles, and Em∣perours her vassales: the mother of Nations; the triple-crowned head of the world; the purple-rider of the glorious beast; the most high, most supreme, and most adored Empress of Babilon; that no Captain Generals of Armies, Generals of Squadrons, Admirals, Colonels, Captains, or any other Officers of her magnificent, in∣comparable, formidable, and invincible Armada, which is orday∣ned to swallow up the kingdom of Faiery, shall presume to set one foot on ship-bo•…d, till her sacred hand hath blessed the enterprise by sealing them all on the forehead, and by bowing their knees be∣fore the Beast. Sound, go on.
Feels the base earth our weight? first common Air
We suck in and respire? doe servile clouds,
(Whose azu•…e wings spread over graves and tombs)
Our glorious body circumvolue? •…are night
Cast her black nets into days crystal streams,
To draw up darkness on our golden beams:
And vs t'ecclipse, why is not Babilon
In a contorted chair made all of stars,
Wound up by wheels as high, nay above the thrones
Supernal, which with Ioues own seat stand even,
That we might ride here as the Queen of heaven.
And with a spurn from our controlling foot,
That should like thunder shake th'etheriall floor,
Of life and heaven them both ot once bereave,
That thither up dare clime without our leave.
You doe: you ride there now this is your Sphere,
Earth is all one with heaven when you are here.
Yet ther's a hell on earth or if nothell,
Devils there are or worse then Devils, that roar only at you.
At vs? what, dare they roar?
Your pardon, and isle tell it.
Tell: We fear, no spots, the orb we shine in is so clear.
Thus then: the Faiery Adders hiss: they call you
The superstitious Harlot: purple whore:
The whore that rides on the rose-coloured beast:
The great whore, that on many waters sits,
Which they call many Nations: whilst their Kings,
Are slaves to sate your lust, and that their blood,
(When with them you have done) serves as a flood,
For you to drink or swim in.
O profane!
Go on: the searching small wounds is no pain.
These cowards thus when your back's turned (that strike)
Follow theirblowe and swear, that where you claim,
Supremacy monarchal over Kings,
Tic but your tyrannous pride, and not your due.
But what your selves give, what have we from you?
You say we are your mother, and if so,
Must not sons kneel? they pay but what they owe.
They say the robes of purple which you wear,
Your scarlet veils, and mantles are not given you
As types of honour and regality,
But dyed so deep with blood upon them spilt,
And that (all over) you're with red murder gilt:
The drink even in that golden cup, they swear
Is wine sophisticated, that does run
Low on the lees of error, which in taste,
Is sweet and like the neat and wholesome juice
Of the true grape, but tic rank poison down.
Have we not all it tasted?
Nay, utter all.
Out of their lips you see flows nought but gall.
What can my breath doe more, to blast your cheeks,
And leave them glowing as red gads of steel?
My tongue's already blistred sounding this,
Yet must I whisper to your sacred ear:
That on your brow (they say) is writ a name
In letters mystical, which they interpret
Confusion, by great Babylon they mean.
The City of Confusion.
View our forehead?
Where are we printed with such Characters?
Point out these marks: Which of you all can lay
A finger on that Moil that marks our face?
They say you can throw mists before our eyes,
To make vs think you fair.
Damned blasphemies.
You shall with rods of iron scourge these treasons.
The Mace is in your hand, grind them to dust.
And let your blows be sound.
For they are just.
Lets hear with what load throats our thunder speaks,
Repeat our vengeance o'er, which to beat Kings
Must now fly o'er the seas with linen wings.
Our Galleons, Galeasses, Zebras, Galleys,
Ships, Pynaces, Pataches, huge Carvils,
For number, rib and belly are so great,
That should they want a Sea near Faiery land
Of depth to bear them up, they in their wombs
Might swim with a sea thither: here are briefs
Of your imperial Armies.
Read them load:
Thunder ner'e speaks, but the voice cracks a cloud.
In the first Squadron twelve great Galleons:
Float like twelve mooing Castles: Zebras two.
Habilimented gloriously for war,
With Soldiers, Seamen, shot, and ordinance:
This Squadron stout Medyna does command:
Who of the maine is Captain General.
The second Squadron brave Ricalde leads,
Being Admiral to fouretene Galleons.
Floras de Ualdes guides, the third, the fourth
Follows the silken streamers of the haughty
Pedro de Velds that▪ tried warrior.
Oquendo in the fifth front cries a Charge.
Bretandona brings up the Leuantines
With his sixth Squadron: Gomes de Medyna
Waftes up the seventh like the God of war,
The eighth obeys Mendoza: and the ninth
Fierce Vgo de Montada: all these Squadrons,
For vessel, numbered are one hundred thirty,
The sight of Soldiers, Mariners, and Slaves
Twenty nine thousand, eight hundred thirty three.
Pieces of brass for battery these,
Six hundred thirty: add to these Galleons
Twenty Carvils, and Saluees ten: which make
The whole Armada, eightscore lusty sail.
Add to all these your Generals of Armies,
Your Captains, Ensign bearers, (which in role,
Are eightscore and eleven) the Voluntaries,
With officers and servants, then the Regiments
That are in pay: to these, all men of orders,
All ministers of justice: and to these
Supplies of forces that must second vs,
And last that host of stars which from the Moon
Will fall to guide vs on: these totald up,
You shall a hundred thousand swords behold
Brandish't at once, whose—stands
Men will seem borne with weapons in their hands.
Go: cut the fault some with your mooned keels,
And let our Galleons feel even child-birth pangs,
Till their great bellies be delivered
On the soft Faiery shores: captive their Queen,
That we may thus take oft her crown, whilst she
Kneels to these glorious wonders, or be trampled
To death for her contempt: burn, b•…tter, kill,
Blow up, pull down, ruin all, let not white hairs,
Nor red cheeks blunt your wrath, snatch babes from breasts,
And when they cry for milk, let them suck blood,
Turn all their fields to lakes of gellyed gore,
That Sea-men one day sailing by the land
May say, there Faiery kingdom once did stand.
They shall.
Ti•… done already.
To be sure
You all are ours, bow and adore the beast;
On whom we ride.
We fall beneath his feet.
Be blessed, obedience is in sons most sweet,
O strange, to you he stoops as you before him,
Humility, he bows whilst you adore him:
To kindle lusty fires in all your blood,
A health to all, and as our cup goes round,
Draw near, weal mark you for our chosen flock,
Who builds on hearts confirmed, builds on a rock:
The seal of heaven! who on their foreheads wear it,
We choose for counsel: on their hands who bear it,
We mark for Action: Here, a health to all.
Brave health! to pledge it, see Kings prostrate fall▪
On: All: On▪
Sing war thy loud and loftiest notes.
We win; our ships meet none but fisher-boates.
What if I show you a foundation,
Firm as earths fixed Center? a strong warrant,
To strike the head off, an In unction
That bids me do it: A dispensation
For what I doe: A pardon signed, that gives
Indulgence 〈◊〉, and full remission
(For any criminal breach of the highest Law)
After it is done: nay more, a voice as clear
As that of Angels, which proclaims the act,
Good, honourable, meritorious,
Lawful, and pious, what if I show you this?
Come, come, you cannot, then let riotous heirs
beg patents to kill fathers: grant but this
Murder may be a fair Monopoly,
And Princes stabbed by Acts of parliament:
Who i'st dare that thing meritorious call,
Which feindes themselves count diabolical?
Your coldness makes me wonder: why should you
run up to'th neck, from drowning to save her,
That treads upon your head; your throat, to sink you?
Say you should wound me; should I (in revenge)
Murder my self? for what can be the close
But death, dishonour; yea, damnation
To an act so base▪ nay so impossible.
Impossible; the parting of the ayre,
Is not more easy: look upon the Court,
Through narrow sights, and shees the fairest ma•…ke,
And soonest hit of any: like the Turk
She walks not with a Ianisarie—Guard,
Nor (as the Russiā with fowle-big-boand slaves,
Strutting on each side with the slicing Axe,
Like to a pair of hangmen: no, alas:
Her Courts of Guard are Ladies, &amp; sometimes)
Shoe's in the garden with as small a train,
As is the Sun in heaven: and our Access,
May then as easy be as that of Clients,
To Lawyers out of term—time.
Grant all this:
Nay, say the blow were given: how would you scope?
Oh sir, by water.—
I but.—
Nay, good cozen.—
You leap as short at safety, as at star: s
By water: why the gates will all be locked,
Waiters you must haue-none.
Hear me.
Hear me,
You must not have a man, and if you kill
With powder, ayre betrays you.
Powder! no sir, my dagge shall be my dagger•…
Good sweet Cozen mark but how smooth
My paths are: look you sir.
I have thought upon a course.
Nay, nay, hear mine,
You are my mark, suppose you are my mark,
My level is thus lowe, but ever I rise,
My hand's got up thus hie: the dear being struck,
The heard that stand about so frighted are,
I shall have leave to scope, as does a pirate,
Who having made a shot through one more strong,
All in that ship run to make good the breach,
Whilst the other sails away. How like you this?
As I like paper harness.
Ha, well, pause then:
This bow shall stand unbent, and not an arrow
Be shot at her until we take our aim
In S. Iagoes park; a rare, rare Altar!
The fitt'st to sacrifice her blood upon:
It shall be there: in S. Iagoes park:
Ha cos! it shall be there: in the mean time,
We may keep followers (nine or ten a piece)
Without suspicion: numbers may work wonders;
The storm being sudden too: for were the guard
A hundred strong about her, look you sir,
All of vs well appointed—Case of dags
To each man, see you? you shoot there, we here,
Unless some spirits put the bullets by,
Ther's no escape for her: say the dags fail,
Then to our swords.—Come, ther's no mettle in you.
No mettle in me? would your wars were honest,
I quickly would find Armour: what's the goad
So sharpe, that makes you wildely thus to run
Upon your certain ruin?
Goad? sharp poniards,
Why should I spare her blood?
She gave you yours.
To ha tan'e it had bin tyranny, her own lips
Confessed I struck her laws not hard: I ha spent
My youth, and means in serving her: what reap I?
Wounds (discontents) what gives she me? good words
(Sweet meates that rot the eater:) why, last day
I did but beg of her the maistership
Of Santa Cataryna, it was denied me.
She keeps you to a better.
I tush, thats not all:
My bonds are yonder sealed; And she must fall.
Well cos, isle hence.
When shall I see you?
Ho.
Soon: very soon: sooner than you expect,
Let me but breath, and what I mean to doe,
I shall resolve you.
Fare you well,
Ad•…e.—
News; thundering news sweet Lady: Envy, Ambition,
Theft sactilegious, and base treason, lay
Their heads and hands together, at one pull
To heave you from your throne: that mannish woman-Diuell,
That lustful bloody Queen of Babylon,
Hath (as we gather ripe intelligence)
Rigd an A•…d fleet, which even now beats the waives,
Boasting to make their wombs our Cities graves.
Let it come on: our General leads aboue them,
Earth-quakes may kingdoms move, but not remove them, Fideli.
He yonder, he that plays the fiend at sea,
The little Captain that's made all of fire,
Swears (Flemming-like) by twenty thousand Devils,
If our tongues walk thus, and our feet stand still,
So many huge ships near our coasts are come,
An Oyster-boate of ours will scarce find room.
He swears the winds have got the sails with child,
With such big bellies, all the linen's gone,
To find them linen and in Babylon,
That ther's not one rag left,
Why swells this fleet?
Thus they give out, that you sent forth a Drake,
Which from their rivers beat their water-fowle,
Tore silver feathers from their fairest Swans,
And plucked the Halcions wings that rove at sea,
And made their wilde-duckes underwater dive,
So long, that some never came up alive.
This Sea-pie Babylon, her bug Bear calls,
For when her bastards cry, let the nurse cry
But this, the Drake comes, they hush presently,
For him thei'le cudgel vs: will you ha the troth?
That scarlet-whore is thirsty and no blood,
But yours, and ours (sweet maid) can doe her good.
That drake shall out again: to counsel Lords.
Come, come, short counsel: better get long swords.
Good Lady dread not you, what ere befall.
Weel'e die first, yours is the last funeral: away, away, away.
Posts, posts, cal messengers, posts with al speed.
How? fear? why should white bosoms.
Fear a Tyrants Arm?
Tyrants may kill vs, but not doe vs harm.
Are we your prisoners that you guard vs thus?
Stay, And you too, we are alone: when last
We entertained your speech (as we remember)
Close trains and dangerous you did discover
To fire which you were pried.
I was.
And yielded.
Albeit it were against our life.
Most true:—my reasons.—
We forget them not: at that time
Here was but one, (true) but one counsellor,
Who stood aloof, heard nothing; and though abloud
Of courser veins then ours, would have been stirred
Into a sea tempestuous to boyle up,
And drown the Pilot that durst sail so far,
Yet of our princely grace (tho it was not sit,
Nor stood with wisdom) did we silence it.
These heaped favours, notwithstanding (Doctor)
Tic in our ear: the hammers lie not still,
But that new clubs of iron are forging now,
To bruise our bones, and that your self doe know,
The very Anvil where they work.
I.
Hear vs, because tic thought some of those worser spirits,
And most malignant that at midnight rise
To blast our Faiery circles by the Moon,
Are your Familiars.
Madam.
Sir anon.
Thee therefore I conjure (if not by faith,
Oathed allegiance, nor thy conscience,
Perhaps this ranckling ulcerated them)
Yet by thy hopes of bliss, tell, and tell true,
Who i'st must let vs blood?
O unhappy man;
That thou should breathe thus long: mirror of women,
I open now my breast even to the heart,
My very soul pants on my lips: none, none,
I know of none.
Well; none: rise and take heed,
They are no common drops when Princes bleed.
What hour is this? does not my larum strike?
This watch goes false.
This watch goes true.
Ell's nought.—what hour is this?
Thy last hour, O heavens, further
The work you have begun: where art thou heart?
Oh we see it: Doctor wind up the wheel, tic down,
Tic down.
How no•… what struck •…hee down? thy looks are wildes
Why was thine armed hand reared to his height?
What black work art thou doing?
Of damnation upon my self;
How?
Your words have split my heart in thousand shiners,
Here, here that sticks which I fear will not out
Better to die than live suspected. Had not your bright eyes
Turned back upon me, I had long ere this
Lain at your feet a bloody sacrifice.
Stained Altars please not vs: why doest thou weep?
Thou make my good thoughts of thee now decline,
Who loves not his own blood, will ne'er spare mine,
Why doest thou weep?
When on your face I look,
Me thinks I see those Virtues drawn alive
Which did in Elfilyne the seventh survive,
(Your fathers father, and your grandfather,)
And then that you should take me for a serpent
Gnawing the branches of that glorious tree,
The grief melts even my soul, O pardon me.
Contract thy spirits together, be composed;
Take a full man into thee, for behold
All these black clouds we clear: look up, tic day,
The sun shines on thee still: weel'e read: away—
O machlesse; im'e all poison, and yet she.
Tutnes all to goodness by wise tempering me.
If thou prou'st copper—well; this makes vs strong
As towers of slint, All traitors are but waives,
That beat at rocks, their own blows dig their graves.
For not doing am I damde: how are my spirits
Haled, tortured, and grown wilde? on leaves eternal
Vows have I writ so deep, so bound them up,
So texted them in characters capital,
I cannot race them but I blot my name
Out of the book of sense: mine oath stands filed
On your court-roles, Then keep it, up to heave 〈◊〉
Thy ladder's but thus hie: courage, to kill
Ten men I should not freeze thus: yet her murder
Cannot be named bloud-shed, for her Faieries
Are all of faith, and fealty assoyled
The balm that her anointed is washed off,
Her crown is now not hers; upon the pain
Of a black c•…se, no more must I obey her,
I climb to heaven by this, climb then and slay her.
Atyrants strange, but just end!
Ran mad for sloop, and died Princes that plunge
Their souls in rank and godless appetites
Must seek no rest but in the arms of Sprites.
Nothing to read? that (if my nerues should shrink
And make mine arm revolt) I might have colour
To usurp this walk of hers: whats this? see, see
An Angel th•…sts this iron into my hand,
My warrant signed from Babylon to kill her,
Endorsed, the last will of Paridell.
 Le concede sua Benediction, plenaria indulgenza,
E•… remission dit•…tti li peccati—tutti li peccati—
All, all my sins are paid off, paying this,
Tic done, tic done, All you blessed powers I charm,
Now, now, knit all your sinews to this arm.
You haproou'd your self a loyal gentleman.
The hand of Angels guide vs: Shees not here,
The Queen's kilt; treason: Wenches, raise the Court.
Walk several ways first.
Ways; shees murdered: treason.
Treason; asword. What traitor dare? who? where?
A guard the damned serpent, see, lurks here.
Sure hears some nest they breed in paw him fast,
This Woolfe, this Yet (mark, he swells red with poison,)
This learned knave is swam to murder thee.
I defy any man that speaks it.
Ho:—defy this 〈◊〉, •…est ge•…,
Defy him, he shall spit•… 〈◊〉,
Thy beard scald 〈◊〉,
And doest thou be•…y 〈◊〉 Sui•… thou so?
And will sea•… 〈◊〉 with blood.
My no against 〈◊〉; My 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 good.
Better, his yeas go •…ked, 〈◊〉 noes
Very well aloe•… off, 〈◊〉, t•…h 〈◊〉
And here is his naked true•….
Again.
Oh me;—new nothing l•… your mercy me can save.
It must not: pri•… that would safely live,
May grieve at traitor•… falls but not foe•…me.
Let him be so•…nniond to the b•…re of sh•…e.
Tic welcome, a black life, 〈◊〉 bla•… fame,
Away with him.
Now to the business,
We have one foot.
I, I, look to the head.
The hangman cures those members.
What is done?
This (sacred Lady:) we •…ll either hand
Have raised an Army both by •…a and land.
Your goodly ships bear the most royal freight,
That the world owes (true hearts) their wōbes are full,
Of noble spirits, each man in his face
Shows a Kings dan•…ing look, the soldiers stand
So thickly on the deck, so brave•… •…seemed,
(The Silken streamers wa•…lng or•… their heads)
That (seeing them) you would•…dge tu•…e pentecost,
And that the jolly youngsters of your towns,
Had flocked together in gay multitudes,
For May-games, and for summer merriments,
They look so •…ely: in such •…de mom
So many Faieries never dwelt at once,
Never so many men wea•… borne so soon,
The drum that gave the call, could not be heard
For jostling armours: ever the call was done,
It was so ri•…gd about with groves of pikes,
That when they brake on both sides to give way,
The beating of the drum w•…s thunder•… noise,
Whilst coats of steel clasht so on coats of steel,
Helmets on helmets that they struck out fire,
Which showed like lightning, or those flames that fly
From the huge Cyclops-hammer, when they sweat
To forge Ioues thunder: And in such a heate
With quickness rush they armed forth, captains swore,
Harness was sure the clothes they daily wore.
Men faster came to fight then to a feast.
Nay, women sued to vs they might be pressed.
Old grandams that on crutches bear up age,
Full nimbly buckled Armours on their sons,
And when it was on, she clapped him on his back,
And spake thus, run my boy, fight till you are dead,
Thy blood can never be more bravely shed.
How are the numbers you have levied?
What your sea-forces are, this brief doth speak.
We have raised double walls to fence your land.
The one the body of a standing Camp,
Whose tents by this are pitched in Berry,
On the shores point▪ to bar the foe from footing.
Over that Camp at Berry  we create
Your Florimell Lieutenant General;
The other is to guard your royal person.
Whose charge is yours: the sea Fideli, yours.
The standing camp of horsemen and of foot,
These numbers fill▪ Lances 253. Horsemen 769.
Footmen 22000. The moving Army, which attends on you,
Is thus made up: of horsemen &amp; of foot, Lancers 481.
Light horse-men 1421. Footmen 34050.
We do not raise our hopes on points of spears,
A handful is an host, in a good fight,
Lambs may beat Lions in a war not right.
The General of all armies be our leader,
Be full of courage Lore•… 〈◊〉 •…'re in year•….
For this be sure weal not out-liue our peers.
Weal al live, but will first have them b•…'th ca•…s.
Go on, your conduct be the prosperous hand,
Make you the sea good, weal not loose the land.
Your Queen will to the field, It shall be said,
Once soldiers to their Captain had a Maid.
You sweat well in this harvest.
Nay, when we come to bind up the who•…e of Babilon•…
Punckes and Pynaces in sheaves, weal sweat worse.
Have you bestowed the other hands?
I have.
Incorporate this to you then •…is the mandate
Of your Liefetenant General. You fight
In your great Faieries quarrel, and Truths right,
Stand therefore •…oo't.
I will have no wounds on my shoulders, I scorn to run,
Or to cry out of warlike kybes in the heel.
Go (thou most God-like maid) &amp; buckle on
The brest-plates fetched from thine own Armoury,
Let every soldier wear one, on each leader
Bestow a guiding-staffe, and a strong shield
That may as faithful be to his good sword
As thou art to his heart: head all the spears
With gold of Angell-proofe. Sit like a dove
Upon the Horsmans helm, and on his face
Fan with thy silver wings sweet victory,
Go, beat thy drum, that men may know thy ma•…ch,
Spread thine own colours (Truth) so let them shine,
Soldiers may swear thei'le follow none but thine.
I fly, swift as the winged wings.
Today is workiday with me for all I have my best clothes
On, what doe you set me to?
Go thou and sweep th•… buses from the camp. (clean,
Conscience has left no b•…mes big enough to doe that
Then purge the •…ants of all infectious aires.
Yonder's one infection new broke out, if it be not 〈◊〉
From running, will choke vs all.
Name it, isle minister the remedy.
Time may do it, this tic: A Broker and his wife that dropped out of the Hangmans budget but last day; are now eating in•… 〈◊〉 Camp, and are victual•…rs to it: their very Cannes have hoop•…s of gold lace now, that banged Captains Jerkins all over but yester∣day: 15. Lief tenants have eaten up their buff Jerkins with cheese and mustard: Nay this vile aine of fourscore ith hundred has set up three Armourers shops with ha•…ness caps, and pewter coats, that are •…de clean out with Ale: the Rogue lies every night upon as many feathers which grew in soldiers ha•…s, as will vndooe four hundred Schoolemasters to hire them for their boys to go a feasting,
Breed such disorders amongst the soldiers?
They swarm like •…lice: nay his wife tickels it too, for three Musketeers came but to drink Tobacco in her cabin, and she fired their flaskes and tuch-boxes.
Go 〈◊〉 the Camp of these, and al like these.
If any soldier swear isle cashier him too.
You will scarce leave two in the Army then.
What shall I doe with those Pyoners yonder?
You know the ground, lead them to cast up trenches. Away.
They are by this time leading one another, for when I left them, I left them all casting, isle now go see what it comes to.
Isle fly hence to the fleet of Babylon.
And from their tacklings and their maine-m•…st tons▪
Time shall shoot vengeance through his by•… of steel,
Wedge like to split their Navy to the keel.
Isle cut their Princes down as blades of grass,
As this glass, so the Babylonian power,
The higher shall run out to fill the lower.
The sulphurous 〈◊〉 belch•…th on our ships,
Cut Cables, or the whole fleet drowns in 〈◊〉
Holla.
Of Babilon.
What 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 fire?
The Devils•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Wher's 〈◊〉
Close under hat•… dr•… no•… she•… his head.
Da•…ation on •…ch 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Ricalde?
Who?
Our Ad•…iral the Adm•…all of 〈◊〉 Navy▪ 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Our stowte and brave •…alde keeps •…bed.
All po•…os fire him out; P•…dro de Vald•…
Having about him 50. Canon•… throe•…es,
Stretch wide to bark is boarded, taken.
Taken?
Without resistance: 〈◊〉 sunk,
Oquendo burnt, Monca•…a drowned, or 〈◊〉,
The ship of all our medica•…ants is lost.
Dogs eat our medicaments, such are our wound•…
We more shall Sextons need than Surgeons.
What course is best?
The best to get the day▪
Is to •…oise sails up, and away.
Away, away, hoes sails up and away.
A world of men and wealth lost in one day.
Shoot, shoot, they answer▪ brave•… m•…re Linstocks: shoot:
This stratage•… dropped down from 〈◊〉 in fi•….
Board, board, hoise more sail•… up▪ th•…y fly, shoot, Shoot.
We never held a royal Court till now:
(Warriors) would 〈◊〉 no•… 〈◊〉 •…st glorious,
To have Embassado•… to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Our 〈◊〉 of state▪ a dru•… for 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Ruffling about vs, heads 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in glo•…
Of bright reflecting st•…le: for 〈◊〉
(Treading soft 〈◊〉) 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Trust me, I like the •…all life 〈◊〉 w•…ll,
I could change Cou•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Tic a brave life: Me thinks it best beco•…
A Prince to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
My fellow soldier: I dare swear youl'e fight,
To the last man, your Captain being in fight.
To the last least mans little finger.
What 〈◊〉 through all your blood your bre•…th inspire•…
For that we come not: no breast here wants fires.
It was kin•…ed in their cradles, strength, courage, zeal,
Meet in each bosom like a three-fold flood,
We come with yours to venture our own blood.
For you and we are fellows; thus appears it,
The soldier keeps the crown on, the prince wears it.
Of all men you we hold the most most dear,
But for a soldier I had not been here.
Doe not their guns offend you?
How? we are tried,
wh'im'e borne a soldier by the fathers side.
The Cannon (thunders Zany) plays to vs,
Soft musikes tunes, and more melodious:
And me more rarely like, because all these,
That now can speak the language of sterne war,
Could not speak swords, or guns, nay scarce could go,
Nay were not borne, but like to new sown grain
Lay hid in the mold, when we went to be crowned,
Tho now they are tall corn fields, covering the ground.
Room, room, news, news, the youngest news that ever was brought forth amongst men at Arms: a woman (sweet mistress) is brought to bed of a man child it'h Camp: a boy that looks as if he would shoot off already: the bed they have swad∣led him in, is the piece of an old torn Ancient: his blankets are two soldiers Mandilions: his cradle is the hollow backe-peece of a rusty Armour: his head lies in a Murren thats quilted to keep him warm, the first thing that ever he laid hold on, was a trun∣cheon, on which a Captain leand to look upon him, he will bee a warrior I warrant. A Can of beer is set to his mouth already, yet I doubt he will prove but a victualer to the Camp: A notable fat double-chind bulchin.
A child borne in ou•… Camp! go give him fame,
Let him be Berry called, by the Camps name.
Thats his name then: Berry, in steed of a Mid•…▪ Cap∣taine shall bear him to the Po•…ned, and if there 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to follow it, they shall 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 who would sweat thus to get 〈◊〉 for another 〈◊〉 child? 〈◊〉 fa∣theirs themselves are go•… so sometimes, farewell 〈◊〉.
With roses vs you crown, your self with palm,
Had we al wounds, your words are sovereign balm.
Are those clouds sperst that strove to dim our light?
And driven into the 〈◊〉 caves of night.
Our hands be hey•…'d up for it.
Therers good cause,
We'are bown'd to doe so by the higher laws,
Those roaring Whales came with devouring wombs▪
To swallow up your kingdoms: foolish he•…▪
When half of them scarce knew where it did stand,
Under what Zenith, did they share your land.
At dice they plaid for 〈◊〉, at each cast▪
A Knight at least was lost: what doe you set?
This Knight cries one (and names him) no, a Lord
Or none, tic done, he throws and sweeps the board,
His hat is fall of Lords vpto the brim,
The sea threw next at all, won all and him,
Would you these Gamesters see now?
See now? where?
Thei'le scarce see vs, the last sight cost so dear,
Bid you me do it, tic done, Time takes such pride,
To waite on •…ou, heel lackey by your-side.
Those days of their Arrival, battle, flight,
And ignominious shipwrecks (like l•…t Arrows,)
Are out of reach: of them the world receives
But what Times book shows turning back the leaves,
But if you'll see this Concubine of Kings,
In her majestic madness with her sons,
That hour is now but numbering out in sand,
These minutes are not yet run through Times hand,
For you and for your 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 delight
〈1 line〉,
I 〈◊〉 be a glory•… 〈◊〉,
Unseen you shall 〈◊〉 see and hear these 〈◊〉
On the greene Mount of Truth 〈◊〉 the Army move,
And meet you in the vale of 〈◊〉,
Your captives are sent thither: quick 〈◊〉 thought
You shall 〈◊〉: 〈◊〉 upon my active wings,
Time at one inst•…t sees all Courts of King•….
Hence: sting me not: you're Scorpions to my breast,
Diseases to my blood: he dies that speaks.
You're mad.
You're mad.
ô falls not heaven!
Be silent:
Be damned for your speech: as you're for Act,
You are all black and close conspirators
In our disgrace.
You lie▪
O horrible?
You Rave yet know not why,
Thou say ell's lost.
Drowned, burnt, split upon rocks, cast over board,
Throats cut by K•…nes, whose hairs like else-loekes hang,
One of those sha•…ock-eaters at one break fast,
Slit fourscore wezand pipes of ours,
Of yours:
Oquendo burnt, Pieme•…telli Slain,
Pedro de Velds tan,
Could dwarfs beat Giants?
In one day fell 〈◊〉: Galleous 15.
Drowned at the same time; or which was worser taken,
The same day made 1000. prisoners.
Yet not a cherry stone of theirs was sunk.
〈1 page〉

