WIthdraw, we must have private confe∣rinse
With our dear husband.
What would thou wife?
Be what I am not, make thee greater far
Then thou canstay me to be.
Why I am Tarquin.
And I am Tullia what of that?
What Diapasons more in Tarquins name
Then in a Subjects? or what's Tullia
More in the sound, then to become the name
Of a poor Maid or waiting Gentlewoman?
I am a princess both by birth and thoughts,
Yet al's but Tullia, theres no resonance
In a bare stile: my title bears no breadth,
Nor hath it any state, oh me, i'm sick!
Sick Lady?
Sick at heart.
Why my sweet Tullia?
To be a Queen I long, long and am sick
With ardency, my hot appetite's afire,
Till my swollen fervor be delivered
Of that great Title Queen, my heart's al royal,
Not to be circumscribed in servile bounds,
While there's a King that rules the P•…res of Rome.
Tarquin makes legs and Tullia courtesies lowe,
Bows at each nod, and must not near the state
Without obey sance, oh! I hate this awe, my proud heart can∣not brooke it.
He are me wife.
I am no wife of Tarquini if not King:
Oh had God made me man, I would have mounted
Aboue the base tribunals of the earth,
Up to the clouds, for pompeous sovereignty,
Thou art a man, oh bear my royal mind,
Mount heaven and see if T•…llia lag behind,
There is no earth in me, I am all fire,
Were Ta•…queen so, then should we both aspire.
Oh Tullia, though my body taste of dullness,
My soul is winged: lo I soar as high as thine,
But note what flags our wings! forty five years
The King thy father hath protected Room.
That makes for vs: the people covet change,
Even the best things in time grow tedious.
T'would seem v nnaturall in thee my Tullia,
The reverend King, thy Father to depose:
A kingdoms quest, makes Sons and Fathers foes.
And but by Seruius fall we cannot climb,
The balm that must anoint vs is his blood.
Lets lave our brows th•…n in that crimson flood,
We must be bold and dreadlesse, who aspires,
Mounts by the lives of Fathers, Sons, and Sires.
And so must I, since for a kingdoms love,
Thou can despise a Father for a Crown:
Tarquin shall mount Seruius be tumbled down
For he usurps my state, and first deposde,
My father in my swathed Infancy,
For which he shall be countant to his end.
I have sounded all the Peires and Senators,
and though unknown to thee my Tullia,
They al embrace my faction, and so they,
Love change of state, and new King to obey.
Now is my Tarquin, worthy Tullias grace
Since in my arms, I thus a King embrace.
The King should meet this day in Parliament,
With all the Senates and Estates of Rome:
His place will I assume, and there proclaim,
All our decrees in Royal Tarquins name.
May it please thee Noble Tarquin to attend
The King this day within the high Capitol?
Attend?
We intend this day to see the Capitol,
You knew our father good Lucretius?
I did my Lord.
Was not I his Son?
The Queen my Mother was of royal thoughts
and heart pure, as vnb•…emisht Innocence.
Why asks my Lord?
Sons should succeed their fathers, but anon
You shall hear more, high time that we were gone.
Theres moral sure in this, Valerius,
Hears model, yea, and matter too to breed
Strange meditations in the provident brains
Of our grave Fathers: some strange project lives
This day in Cradle thats but newly borne.
No doubt Colatin•… no doubt hee•…es a giddy world, it Reels, it hath got the staggers, the common-wealth is sick of an ague, of which nothing can cure her but some vi∣olent and •…ddaine affrightment.
The wife of Tarquin would be a Queen, nay on my life she is with child till she be so.
and lunges to be brought to bed of a Kingdom, I divine we shall see some •…uffling to day in the Capitol.
If •…here be any difference among the Princes and Senate, whose faction will Vale•…juice follow?
Oh Collatin•…! I am a true Citizen and in this I will best show my self to be one, to take part with the stronger. If Se•…juice ore-come, I am Liegeman to Serutus, &amp; if Ta•…queen subdue, I am for Viue Tarquinius.
Val•…juice, no more, this talk does but keep vs from the sight of this solemnity: by this the Princes are entering the Capitol: come, we must attend.
This place is not for fools, this parliament
assembles not the strains of Idiotism:
Only the grave and wisest of the land:
Important are the affairs wee have inhand.
Hence with that mom.
Brutus forbear the presence.
For bear the presence, why pra'y?
None are admitted to this grave concourse,
But wise men: nay good Brutus.
You'll have an empty parliament then.
Here is no room for fools.
Then what makst thou here, or he or he? oh Iupiter? if this command be kept strictly, wee shall have empty benches: get you home you that are here, for here will be nothing to doe this day: a general concourse of wise-men•… tw'as never seen since the first Chaos. Tarquin if the general rule have no exceptiōs, thou wilt have an empty Consistory.
Brutus, you trouble vs.
How powerful am I you renowned Deities, that am able to trouble her that troubles a whole Empire? fools ex∣empted, &amp; women admitted! laugh Democritus, but have you nothing to say to Madmen?
Madmen have here no place.
Then out a doors with Tarquin: whats hee that may sit in a calm Valley, and will choose to repose in a tempest∣os mountain, but a madm•…n? that may live in tranquilous pleasures, and will seek out a kingdomes-cares, but a mad∣man? who would seek innovation in a common-wealth in public, or be overruled by a cursed wife in private, but a fool or a mad-man? give me thy hand Tarquins shall we two be dis∣mist together from the Capitol?
Restrain his folly.
Drive the frantic hence.
Nay Brutus.
Good Brutus.
Nay soft, soft good blood of the Tarquins, lets have a few cold words first, and I am gone in an instant: I claim the privilege of the nobility of Rome, and by that privy∣ledge my seat in the Capitol. I am a Lord by birth, my place is as free in the Capitol as Horatius thine, or thine Lucretius. Thine Sextus, Arnus thine, or any here: I am a Lord and ba∣nish al the Lords frō the presence, &amp; you'll have few to wait upon the King but Gentlemen: nay I am easily persuaded then, hands off, since you will not have my company you shall have my room:
My room indeed, for what I seem to be,
Brutus is not, but borne great Room to fr•…e.
The state is full of D•…opsie, and swollen big
With windy vapors, which my sword must pierce,
To purge th'infected blood: bred by the pride
Of these infested bloods, nay now I go.
Behold I vanish, since tic Tarquins mind,
One small fool goes, but great fools leaves behind Exit.
Tic pity one so generously derived
Should be deprived: his best induements thus,
And want the true directions of the soul.
To leave these dilatory trifles, Lords,
Now to the public business of the Land,
Lords take your several places.
Not great Tarquin, before the King assume his regal throne
Whose coming we attend.
Hoe's come already.
The King?
The King:
Seruius.
Tarquinius:
Seruius is King.
It was by power divine,
The Throne that long since hee usurped is mine.
Here we enthroane our selves Cathedral state,
Long since detained vs, justly we resume,
Then let our friends, and such as love vs, cry
Live Tarquin and enjoy this sovereignty.
Live Tarquin and enjoy this sovereignty.
The King himself with such considerate Peers
As stoutly embrace his faction, being informde
Of Tarquins usurpation, armed comes,
Near to the entrance of the Capitol.
No man give placethe that dares to arise
And doe him reverence, we his love despise.
Traitor.
Usurper.
Descend.
Sit still.
In Tarquins name, Rooms great imperial monarch
I charge thee Tarquin disinthrone thy self.
and throw thee at our feet, prostrate for mercy.
Spoke like a King.
In Tarquins name, now Romes imperial Monarch,
We charge thee Seruius make free resignation,
Of that arched wreath, thou hast usurped so long.
Words worth an Empire.
Shall this be brooked my Sovereign?
Dismount the Traitor.
Touch him he that dares.
Dares:
Dares?
Strumpet, no child of mine.
Dotard, and not my father.
Kneel to thy King?
Submit thou to thy Queen.
Insufferable treason! with bright steel
Lop down these interponents, that withstand
The passage to our throne.
That Cocles dares.
We with our steel, guard Tarquin and this chair.
A Seruius.
A Tarquin.
Now are we King, indeed our awe is builded
Upon this royal base, and slaughtered body
Of a dead King? we by his ruin rise
To a Monarchal Throne.
We have our longing.
My fathers death gives me a second life,
Match better thē the first, my birth was servitude
But this new breath of reign is large and free,
Welcome my second life of Sovereignty.
I have a Daughter, but I hope of mettle,
Subject to better temperature: should my Lucrece,
Be of this pride, thief hands should sacrifice
Her blood unto the Gods that dwell below,
Theabortiue brat should not out live my spleen,
But Lucrece is my Daughter, this my Queen.
Tear off the crown, that yet impales the Temples
Of our usurping Father: quickly Lords,
And in the face of his yet bleeding wounds,
Lets vs receive our honours.
The same breath
Gives our state life, that was the Usurpers death.
Here then by heavens hand we invest our selves:
Musique, whose loftiest tunes grace Princes crowned,
Unto our Noble coronation sound.
Whom doth Valerius to our state present?
Two valiant Romans, this Horatius Cocles,
This Gent. called Mutius Sceu•…la,
Who whilst King Seruius wore the Diadem,
Up held his sway and Prince-dome by their loves:
But he being fa•…no, since all the Peers of Rome
Applaud King Tarquin in his sovereignty,
They with like suffrage greet your coronation.
This hand alyde unto the Roman Crown,
Whom never fear dejected or cast low,
Lays his victorious sword at Tarquins feet,
And prostrates with his sword, allegiance.
King Seruius life we loved, but he expired
Great Tarquins life, is in our hearts desired.
Why? whilst he rules with Justice and integrity,
Shall with our dreadles hands, our hearts command,
Even with the best employment of our lives,
Since fortune lifts thee, we submit to fate,
Our selves are vassailes to the Roman state.
Your rooms were empty in our train of friends,
Which we rejoice to see so well supplied:
Receive our grace, live in our clement favours,
In whose submission our young glory grows
To his ripe height: fall in our friendly train,
And strengthen with your loves our Infant reign.
We live for Tarquin.
And to thee alone, whilst Justice keeps thy Sword &amp; thou thy Throne.
Then are you ours, and now conduct vs straight,
In triumph through the populous streets of Rome,
To the Kings Palace our majestic seat:
Your hearts though freely proffered we entreat.
What block is that we tread on?
Tic the body
Of your deceased Father Madam, Queen
Your shoe is crimsend with his vital blood.
No matter, let his mangled body lye,
and with his base confederates strew the streets,
That in disgrace, of his usurped pride,
We ore his trunk may in our Chariot ride:
For mounted like a Queen, twould doe me good
To wash my Coach-nailes in my fathers blood.
Heir's a good Child.
Rem ove it, we command, and bear his carcass to the funeral pile
Where after this direction, let it have
His solemn and due obsequies, fair Tullia,
Thy hate to him grows from thy love to vs.
Thou show thy self in this unnatural strife,
an unkind Daughter, but alouing wife.
But on unto our Palace this blessed day,
A Kings increase, grows by a Kings decay.
Murder the King, a high and capital treason.
Those Giants that wagde war against the Gods,
For which ore-whelmed Mountains hurled by Jove,
To scatter them, and give timeless Graves,
Was not more cruel then this butchery.
This slaughter made by Tarquin, but the Queen,
A woman, fie, fie, did not this she parricide.
ad to her fathers wounds: and when his body
Lay all besmeared and stained in the blood royal,
Did not this Monster, this infernate hag
Make her unwilling, Charioteer drive on,
and with his shod wheels crush her Fathers bones,
Break his crazed scull, and dash his brains
Upon the pavements, whilst she hold the rains?
The affrighted Sun, at this abhorred object,
Put on a mask of blood, and yet she blushed not,
Jove art thou just, hast thou reward for piety?
and for offence no vengeance? or can punish
Felons, and pardon Traitors, chastise murdrers,
and wink at parricides? If thou be worthy
as well we know thou art, to fill the Throne
Of all eternity, then with that hand
That flings the trisalitie thunder, let the pride
Of these our Irreligious monarkisers
Be crowned in blood: this makes poor Brutus mad,
To see sin frolic•…, and the virtuous sad.
Soft, hears Brutus, let vs acquaint him with the news.
Content, now Cousin Brutus:
Who I your kinsman? though I be of the blood of the Tarquins, yet no cousin, gentle princes.
And why so B•…tus, scorn you our all yance?
No, I was cousin to the Tarquins, when they were subjects, but dare claim no kindred, as they are sovereigns: Brutus is not so mad though he be merry, but hee hath wit enough to keep his head on his shoulders.
Why doe you my Lord thus loose your hours, and neither profess war nor domestic profit? the first might beget you love, the other ri•…ches.
Because I would live: have I not answered you be∣cause I would live? fools and Mad-men are no rubes in the way of Usurpers: the firmament can brook but one Sun, and for my part I must not shine: I had rather live an obscure black, then appear a fair white to be shot at, the end of all 〈◊〉, I would 〈◊〉 Ser•…juice bin a shrub, the wind had not shook him, or a mad-man hee had not perished: I covet no more wit nor employment then as much as will keep life and soul together, I would but live.
You are to •…atyricall cousin Brutus, but to the pur∣pose: the King dreamt a strange ominous dream last night, and to be resolved of the event, my brother Sextus and I must to the Oracle.
And because we would bee well accompained, wee have got leave of the King that you Brutus shall associate vs, for our purpose is to make a merry journey on it.
So you'll carry me along with you to be your fool, &amp; make you merry.
Not our fool, but—
To make you merry: I shall, nay, I will make you merry, or tickle you till you laugh, the Oracle; isle go to bee resolved some doubts private to my self: nay Princes, I am so much endeerd both to your loves and companies, that you shall not have the power to be rid of me, what limits have we for our journey?
Five days: no more.
I shall 〈◊〉 me to your preparation, but one thing more, goes Colatine along?
Collatine is troubled with the common disease of all new married men, hoe's sick of the wife, his excuse is forsooth that Lucrece will not let him go, but you having neither wife nor wit to hold you, I hope will not disappoint vs.
Had I both, you should prevail with me above no∣there.
We shall expect you.
Horatius Cocles, a and Mutius Sceuola are not en∣gadge in this expedition,
No they attend the King, farewell.
Lucretius stays at home to, and Val•…rius.
The Palace cannot spare them,
None but we three?
We three.
We three, well five days hence.
You have the time, farewell.
The time I hope for, cannot be conscribde,
Within so short alimit, Rome and I
Are not so happy, what's the reason then
Heaven spares his rod so long? Mercury tell me:
I hat'e: the fruit of pride is yet but greene,
Not mellow, though it grows apace, it comes not
To his full height: Jove oft delays his vengeance,
That when it haps t'may prove more terrible.
Despair not Brutus then but let thy country
And thee take this last comfort after all,
Pride when thy fruit is ripe must rot and fall.
But to the Oracle.
I would I were no Roman.
Cocles why?
I am discontented &amp; dare not speak my thoughts,
What, shall I speak them for you?
Mutius doe.
Tarquin is proud.
Thou hast them.
Tyrannous.
True.
Insufferable lofty.
Thou hast hit me.
And shall I tell thee what I proph•…sie
Or his succeeding rule?
No lle dooe't for thee, Tarquins ability will in the weal,
Beget a weak unable impotence:
His strength, make Rome and our dominions weak,
His soaring high make vs to flag our wings,
And fly close by the earth, his golden feathers,,
Are of such Vastness that they spread like sails,
And so be calm vs that we have not ayre,
Able to raise our plumes, to taste the pleasures of our own Elements.
We are one heart, our thoughts &amp; our desires are suitable.
Since he was King he bears him like a God,
His wife like Pallas or the wife of •…ove,
Will not be parleyed without sacrifice,
And homage sole due to the deities.
What hast with good Lucretius,
Hast small speed,
I had an earnest suit unto the King,
About some business that concerns the weal
Of Rome and vs, twi'•… not be listened to,
He has took evppon him such ambiticus state,
That he abandons conference with his Piers,
Or if he chance to hear our tongus so much,
As but to hear their summons he despises,
The intent of all our speeches, our advises,
And counsel: thinking his own judgment only,
To be approved in matters military,
And in affairs domestic we are but shouts,
And fellows of no parts, viols vnstrung,
Our notes to harsh to strike in princes •…ares,
Great Jove amend it,
Whither will you my Lord?
No matter where if frō the court, I'll home to Collatin•…,
And to my daughter Lucre•…ce; home breeds safety,
Dangers begot in Court, a life retierd
Must please me now perforce: then noble Ss•…la,
And you my dear Horatius, farewell both,
Where industry is scorned lets welcome sloth.
Nay good Lucretius do not leave vs thus,
See here comes Collatine, but wheres Valerius
How does he taste these times.
Not giddily like Brutus, passionately
Like old Lucretius with his tear swollen eyes, Not laughing like
Nor bluntly like Horatius Cocles here,
He has usurped a stranger garb of humour,
Distinct from these in natures every way.
How is he relished can his eyes forbear,
In this strange state to shed a passionate tear,
Can he forbear to laugh with Sceuola,
At that which passionate weeping cannot mend.
Nay can his thought shape ought but melancholy
To see these dangerous passages of state,
How is he tempered noble Collatine?
Strangely, he is all song, hes ditty all,
Note that, Valerius hath given up the Court
And weand himself from the kings consistory
In which his sweet harmonious tongue grew harsh,
Whether it be that he is discontent
Yet would not so appear before the king
Or whether in applause of these new Edicts.
Which so distaste the people, or what cause,
I know not but now hoe's all musical.
Unto the counsel chamber he goes singing,
And whilst the king his wilful edicts makes,
In which nones tongue is powerful save the kings.
Hoe's in a corner, relishing strange aires.
Conclusively he's frō a toward hopeful gentleman
Transeshapt to a mere balleter, none knowing
〈…〉 this transitation.
See where he comes. Morrow Valerius.
Morrow my Lord,
Valor. When Tarquin first in Court began,
And was approved King:
Some men for sodden joy g•…n weep,
And I for sorrow sing.
Ha, ha, how long has my Valerius
Put on his strain of mirth, or whats the cause?
Valor. Let humour change and spare not,
Since Tarquins proud I care not:
His fair words so bewitch my delight,
That I dote on his sight.
Now all is gone new desires embracing,
And my deserts disgracing.
Upon my life he's either mad or loue-sicke,
Oh can Valerius, but so late a states-man,
Of whom the public weal deserved so well
Tune out his age in songs and Cansonets,
Whose voice should thunder conusell in the ears
Of Tarquin, and proud Tullia? think Valerius
What that proud woman Tullia is, twill put thee
Quite out of tune.
Valor. Now what is love I pray thee tell,
It is the fountain and the well,
Where pleasure and repentance dwell,
It is perhaps the sensing b•…ll,
That rings all in to heaven or hell:
And this is love, and this is love, as I hear tell.
Now what is love I pray you show,
A thing that creeps and cannot go:
A prise that passes to and fro,
A thing for me, a thing, for more,
And he that proves shall find it so,
And this is love, and this 〈◊〉, sweet friends 〈◊〉
Valerius I shall quickly change thy cheer,
And make thy passionate eyes lament with mine,
Think how that worthy Prince our kinsman King
Was butchered in the marble capitol.
Shall Ser•…juice Tullius unregarded die
Alone of thee, whom all the Romaine Ladies,
Even yet with teare-swolne eyes, and sorrowful souls
Compassionate, as well he merited;
To these lamenting dames what can thou sing?
Whose grief through all the Romaine Temples ring.
Valor. Lament Ladies lament
Lament the Roman land,
The King is 〈◊〉 hent,
Was doughty on his hand,
Weal gangn ito the Kirk,
His dead corpse wele embrace,
And when we sea ha dea•…
We 〈◊〉 will cry alas. Feel la lero la
Tararara ron tar &amp;c.
This music mads me, I all mirth despise.
To hear him sing draws rivers from his eyes.
It pleases me, for since the Court is harsh,
And looks as kaunce on soldiers, lets be merry,
Court Ladies, sing, drink, dance, and every man
Get him a mistress, coach it in the Country,
And taste the sweets of it, what thinks Valerius,
Of Sceuolous last council?
Valor. Why since we soldiers cannot prove,
And grief it is to vs therefore,
Let every man get him a love,
To trim her up, and fight no more.
That we may taste of lovers bliss,
Be merry and bl•…h, embrace and kiss,
That Ladies may say, some more of this,
That Ladies may say, some more of this.
See where he comes. Morrow Valerius.
Morrow my Lord.
Valor. When Tarquin first in Court began,
And w•…s approved King:
Some men for sodden joy began weep,
And I for sorrow sing.
Ha, ha, how long has my Valerius
Put on his strain of mirth, or whats the cause?
Valor. Let humour change and spare not,
Since Tarquins proud I care not:
His fair words so bewitch my delight,
That I dote on his sight.
Now all is gone new desires embracing,
And my deserts disgracing.
Upon my life he's either mad or loue-sicke,
Oh can Valerius, but so late a states-man,
Of whom the public weal deserved so well
Tune out his age in songs and Cansonets,
Whose voice should thunder conusell in the ears
Of Tarquin, and proud Tullia? think Valerius
What that proud woman Tullia is, twill put thee
Quite out of tune.
Valor. Now what is love I pray thee tell,
It is the fountain and the well,
Where pleasure and repentance dwell,
It is perhaps the sa•…sing bell,
That rings all in to heaven or bell:
And this is love, and this is love, as I hear tell.
Now what is love I pray you show,
A thing that creeps and cannot go:
A prise that passes to and fro,
A thing for me, a thing for more,
And he that proves shall find it so,
And this is love, and this is love, sweet friends 〈◊〉
Valerius I shall quickly change thy cheer,
And make thy passionate eyes lament with mine,
Think how that worthy Prince our kinsman King
Was butchered in the marble capitol.
Shall Seruius Tullius unregarded die
Alone of thee, whom all the Romaine Ladies,
Even yet with teare-swolne eyes, and sorrowful souls
Compassionate, as well he merited;
To these lamenting dames what can thou sing?
Whose grief through all the Romaine Temples ring.
Valor. Lament Ladies lament
Lament the Roman land,
The King is fra thee hent,
Was doughty on his hand,
Weal gangn ito the Kirk,
His dead corpse wele embrace,
And when we sea ha dea•…
We 〈◊〉 will cry alas. Feel la lero la
Tararara ron tar &amp;c.
This music mads me, I all mirth despise.
To hear him sing draws rivers from his eyes.
It pleases me, for since the Court is harsh,
And looks as kaunce on soldiers, lets be merry,
Court Ladies, sing, drink, dance, and every man
Get him a mistress, coach it in the Country,
And taste the sweets of it, what thinks Valerius,
Of Sceuolous last council?
Valor. Why since we soldiers cannot prove,
And grief it is to vs therefore,
Let every man get him a love,
To trim her up, and fight no more.
That we may taste of lovers bliss,
Be merry and ble•…h, embrace and kiss,
That Ladies may say, some more of this,
That Ladies may say, some more of this.
Since C•…urt and Country both grow proud,
And safety you delight to hear,
Wee in the Country will vs shroud,
Where lives to please both eye and ear:
The Nightingale sings Jug, Jug, Jug,
The little Lamb leaps after his dug,
And the pretty milke-maids they look so s•…ug,
And the pretty milke-maids, &amp;c.
Come Sceuola, shall we go and beetle?
Isle in to weep.
But I my gall to grate.
Isle laugh at time, till it will change our Fate.
Thou art not what thou seem, Lord Sceuola,
Thy heart mourns in thee, though thy visage smile,
And so doe's thy soul weep, Valerius,
Although thy habit sing, for these new humours
Are but put on for safety, and to arm them
Against the pride of Tarquin, from whose danger,
None great in love, in counsel or opinion
Can be kept safe: this makes me lose my hours
At home with Lucrece, and abandon court.
Fortune I embrace thee, that thou hast assisted me in finding my master, the Gods of good Rome keep my Lord and master out of all bad company.
Sir the news with you.
Would you ha Court news, Camp news, City news or Country news, or would you know whats the news at home?
Let me know all the news.
The news at Court is, that a small leg and a silk sto•…kin are in fashion for your Lord: And the water that god Mercury makes is in request with your Lady. The heaviness of the kings wine makes many a light head, and the emptiness of his dishes many full bellies, eating &amp; drinking was never more
in use; you shall find the baddest legs in boots, and the worst faces in masks. They keep their old stomachs still, the kings good Cook hath the most wrong: for that which was wont to be private only to him, is now usurped among all the other officers: for now every man in his place to the prejudice of the master Cooke, makes bold to like his own fingers.
The news in the Camp.
The greatest news in the camp is, that there is no news at all, for being no camp at all, how can there be any tidings from it?
Then for the Camp.
The Senators are rich, their wives fair, credit grows cheap and traffic dear, for you ha many that are broke, the poorest man that is, may take up what he will, so he will be but bound to a post, till he pay the debt: There was one Courtier, lay with twelve men's wives in the suburbs, and pressing further to make one more cuckold within the walls, and being taken with the manner, had nothing to say for himself, but this, he that made twelve made thirteen.
Now Sir for the Country.
There is no news there but at the Ale-house, ther's the most receipt, and is it not strange my Lord, that so many men love ale that know not what ale is.
Why, what is ale?
Why ale is a kind of juice, made of the precious grain cal∣led Malt: &amp; what is Malt? Malt's MALT. and what is MALT M much, A ale, L little, T thrift, all is, much ale's, little thrist.
Only the news at home, and I have done.
My lady must needs speak with you about earnest business, that concerns her nearly, and I was sent in all hast to entreat your Lordship to come away,
And coldest thou not have told me Lucrece stay,
And I stand tri•…ing here fellow away.
I Mary sir, the way into her were a way worth following, and thats the reason that so many serving-men that are fami∣liar with their mistresses, have lost the name of Servitors,
and are now called their Masters followers. Rest you mer∣rye.
O thou sacred God inspire
The Priests, and with celestial fire
Shot from thy beams, crown our desire,
That we may follow.
In these thy true and hallowde measures,
The utmost of thy heavenly treasures
According to the thoughts and pleasures
Of great Apollo.
Our hearts with inflammations burn
Great Tarquin and his people morn
Till from thy Temple we return
With some glad tidings.
Then tell vs, shall great Rome be blessed
And royal Tarquin live in rest,
That gives his high Ennobled breast
To thy safe guiding?
Then Rome her ancient honours wins
When she is purgd from Tullius sins.
Gramercies Phoebus for these spells,
〈◊〉 alone alone excels.
Tullia perhaps sind in our gransiers death
And hath not yet by reconcilement made
Atone with 〈◊〉, at whose shrine we kneel.
Yet gentle Priest let vs thus far prevail,
To know if Tarquins seed shall govern Rome
And by succession claim the Koiall wrath.
Behold me younger of the Tarquins Race
This elder Aruns both the sons of Tullia.
This Iunius Brutus though a mad-man yet,
Of the high blood of Tarquins.
Sextus peace. Tell vs O thou that shin'st so bright
From whom the world receives his light,
Whose absence is perpetual night,
whose praises ring.
Is it with heavens applause decreed,
When Tarquins soul from earth is freed
That noble Sextus shall succeed
In Rome as king.
I Oracle hast thou lost thy tongue?
Tempt him again fair Priest,
If not as king, let Delphian Phoebus yet
Thus much resolve me who shall govern Rome,
Or of vs three, bear greatest pre-eminence.
Sextus I will, yet sacred Phoebus we entreat,
Which of these three shall be great
Which largest power and state replete
by the heavens doom.
Phoebus thy thoughts no longer smother.
He that first shall kiss his mother
Shall be powerful and no other
Of you three in Kome.
Shall kiss his mother.
Mother earth to thee an humble kiss I tender.
What means Brutus?
The blood of the slaughtered sacrifice made this flora as slippry as the place where Tarquin treads, tic glassy and as smooth as ice: I was proud to hear the Oracle so gracious to the blood of the Tarquins and so I fell.
Nothing but so, then to the Oracle.
I charge thee Aruns, Iunus Brutus thee,
To keep the sacred doom of the Oracle
From all our train, lest when the younger lad
Our brother now at home sits dandled
Upon fair Tulliaes lap, this understanding
May kiss our beauteous M•…there and succeed.
Let the charge go round,
It shall go hard but Isle prevent you Sextus.
I fear not the madman Brutus, &amp; for Aruns let me alone to buckle with him, I'll bee the first at my mothers lips for a kingdom.
If the mad-man had not been before you Sextus, if O∣racles be Oracles, their phrases are mystical, they speak still in
clouds: had he meant a natural mother he would ha spoke it by circumference.
Tull•…a, if ever thy lips were pleasing to me, let it be at my return from the Oracle.
If a kiss will make me a king, Tullia I will spring to thee, though through the blood of Sextus.
Earth I acknowledge no mother but thee, accept me as thy son, and I shall shine as bright in Rome as Apollo himself in his temple at Delphos.
Our superstitions ended, sacred Priest,
Since we have had free answer from the Gods,
To whose fair altars we ha done due right
And hallowed them with presents acceptable,
Lets now return, treading these holy measures,
With which we entered great Apolloes temple.
Now Phoebus let thy sweet tuned organs sound,
Whose spherelike music must direct our feet
Upon the marble pavement: after this
VVee le gain a kingdom by a mothers kiss.
Attend vs with your persons, but your ears
Be deaf unto our counsels.
Further yet.
Now Tuilia what must be concluded next?
The kingdom you have got by policy
You must maintain by pride.
Good Tullia.
Those that were late of the Kings faction
Cut off for fear they prove rebellious.
Better.
Since you gain nothing by the popular love,
Maintain by fear your princedome.
Excellent, thou art our Oracle, and save from thee
We will admit no counsel, we obtained
Our state by cunning, t'must be kept by strength.
And such as cannot love, weal teach to fear,
To encourage which upon a better judgment,
Andto strike greater terror to the world.
I ha forbid thy fathers funeral.
No matter.
All capital causes are by vs discussed,
Traversed and executed without counsel.
We challenge too by our prerogative,
The goods of such as strive against our state,
The freest citizens without attained,
Arraign or judgment we to exile doom,
The poorer are our drudges, rich our pray,
And such as dare not strive our rule eobey.
Kings are as Gods, and divine scepters bear,
The Gods command for mortal tribute fear.
But royal Lord, we that despise their love,
Must seek some means how to maintain this awe
By forrenie leagues, &amp; by our strength abroad,
Shall we that are degreed aboue our people,
Whom heaven hath made our vassals reign with them?
No kings aboue the rest tribunald hie
Should with no meaner, then with kings ally:
For this we to Ma•…lives Tusculan
The Latin King ha given in marriage
Our royal daughter: now his peoples ours,
The neighbour princes are subdued by arms:
And whom we could not conquer by constraint
Them ha we sought to win by curtsy,
Kings that are proud, yet would secure their own,
By love abroad, shall purchase fear at home.
We are secure, then yet our greatest strength
Isin our children: how dare treason look?
Vs in the face, having issue, barren princes
Breed danger in their singularity
Having none to succeed, their claim dies with them:
But when in topping on three T•…rquins more,
Like Hydras heads grow to revenge his death,
It terrifies black treason.
Tullia's wise, and apprehensive, were our pri•…ely sons
Sextus and Aruns back returned safe,
With an applausiue answer of the Gods,
From th'oracle, our state were able then,
Being Gods our selves, to scorn the hate of men.
Wher's Tullia?
Whore's our mother?
Yonder princes at Counsel with the king.
Our sons returned.
Royal mother.
Renowned Queen.
I love her best, therefore will Sextus do his duty first.
Being eldest in my birth i'll not be youngest
In zeal to Tullia.
Too't lads.
Mother a kiss.
Though last in birth, let me be first in love.
A kiss fair mother.
Shall I lose my right?
Aruns Shall down were Aruns twice my brother
If he presume fore me to kiss my mother.
I Sextus, think this kiss to be a crown, thus wold we tug fort.
Aruns thou must down.
Restrain them Lords.
Nay to it boys, ô tic brave, they tug for shadows, I the sub∣stance have.
Through armed gates, and thousand swords il'e break
To show my duty let my valour speak.
Oh heavens ye have dissolved me.
Here I stand, what I ha done to answer with this hand.
Oh all you Del•…ian Gods look down and see,
How for these wrongs I will revenged be.
Curb in the proud boys fury: let vs know
From whence this discord rises.
From our love, how happy are we in our issue now,
When as our sons! even with their bloods cōtend,
To exceed in duty we accept your zeal,
This your superlative degree of kindness
So much prevails with vs, that to the king
We engage our own dear love twixt his incensement,
And your presumption, you are pardond both.
And Sextus though you failed in your first proffer,
We do not yet esteem you least in love, ascend &amp; touch our lips
Thank you, no.
Then to thy knee we will descend thus low,
Nay now it shall not need: how great's my heart!
In Tarquins crown thou hast now lost thy part.
No kissing now Tarquin, great Queen adieu:
Aruns On earth we ha no foe but you.
What means this their unnatural enmity?
hate borne from love.
Resolve vs then, how did the Gods accept
Or sacrifice, how are they pleased with vs.
How long will they applaud our souerai gnty?
Shall I tell the king.
Do Cousin, with the process of your journey.
I will. We went from hither, when we went from he•…e arrived thither when we landed there, made an end of our prai∣ers when we had done our Orisons, when thus quoth 〈◊〉, Tarquin shall be happy whilst he is blessed, govern while he reigns, wake when he sleeps not, sleep when he wakes not, quaff when he drinks, eat when he feeds, gape when his •…outh opens, live till he die, and die when he can live no lone∣ger. So Phoebus commends him to you.
Mad Brutus still, Son Aruns What say you.
That the great Gods to whom the potent king
Of this large Empire, sacrificed by vs.
Applaud your reign, commend your sovereignty:
And by a general Synod grant to Tarquin,
Long days, fair hopes, Majestic government.
Adding withal, that to depose the late king, which in
others, had bin arch treason, in Tarquin was honour: what in
Brutus had been usurpation, in Tarquin was lawful succession
and for Tullia, though it be parricide for a child to kill her father,
in Tullia it was charity by death.
To rid him of all his calamities, Phoebus himself, said she, was a good child, and shall not I say as he says, to tread upon her fa∣theirs skull, sparkle his brains upon her chariot wheel,
And wear the sacred tincture of his blood
Upon the servile shoe? but more then this,
After his death deny him the due claim
Of all mortality, a funeral,
An earthen sepulchre: this this, quoth the Oracle,
Save Tullia none would doe.
Brutus no more, lest with our surpassed eyes of wrath &amp; fury
We look into the humour; were not madness
And folly to thy words a privilege
Even in thy last reproof of our proceedings
Thou had pronounc•… thy death.
If Tullia will send Brutus abroad for news, and after at his return not endure the telling of it; let Tullia either get closer ears, or get for Brutus a stricter tongue. God boy.
Elastic madness, pardon him, not spleen,
Nor is it hate, but frenzy, we are pleased
To hear the Gods propitious at our prayers.
But wluthers Sextus gone? resolve vs Cecles,
We saw thee in his parting follow him.
I heard him say, he would straight take his horse
Unto the warlike Gabines enemies.
To Rome and you save them we have no opposites.
And dares the boy, confederate with our foes?
Attend vs Lords, we must new battles wage,
And with brght arms confront the proud boys rage.
Had I as many souls as drops of blood
In this branched veins, as many lives as stars
Stuck in yond azare roof, and were to die
More deaths then I see wasted weary minutes
To grow to this, Id hazard all, and more,
To purchase freedom to this bondag'd Rome.
I'm vexed to see this virgin conquers wear shackles in my fight.
Oh would my tears would rid great Rome of these pro∣digious fears.
What weeping ripe Lucretiu•… possible now Lords, La∣dies, friends, fellows, young mad•…ap, gallāts &amp; old courtly ruf∣fins, al subjects under one tirāny, &amp; therefore should be partners of one &amp; the same unanimity. Shall we go single our selves by two &amp; two, &amp; go talk treason then tic but his yea, and my nay, if we be cal d to question: Or shells go use some violent bustling to break through this thorny servitude, or shall we every man go sit like a man in desperation, and with Lucretius weep at Romes misery: now am I for all things, any thing or nothing, I can laugh with Sceuola, weep with this good old man, sing oh •…one •…one with Valerius, fret with Horatius Cocles, be mad like my self, neutrize with Collatine. Say what shal's do?
fret.
Sing.
Weep.
Laugh.
Rather lets all be mad that Tarquin still reigns, Romes still sad.
You are madmen all that yield so much topassion.
You lay your selves too open to your enemies,
That would be glad to pry into your deeds.
And catch advantage to ensnare our lives.
The kings fear like a shadow dogs you still,
Nor can you walk without it: I commend
Valerius most, and noble Sceuola
That what they cannot mend, seem not to mind,
By my consent lets all wear out our hours
In harmless sports, hake, hunt, game, sing, drink
So shall we seem offenseles &amp; live safe.
In dangers bloody jaws where being humorous dance
Cloudy and curiously inquisitive.
Into the kings proceedings there armed fear
May search into vs, call our deeds to question,
And so prevent all future expectation:
Of wished amendment let vs stay the time,
Till heaven have made them ripe for just revenge,
When opportunity is offred vs.
And then strike home, till then do what you please:
No discontented thought my mind shall cease.
I am of Collatines mind. Now Valerius sing vs a bawdy song. and makes merry, nay it shall be so.
Brutus shall pardon me.
The time that should have been seriously spent in the State house, I ha learnt securely to spend in a winching house, and now I prosesse my self any thing but a States-man.
the more thy vanity.
The less thy honour.
The more his safety, and the less his fear.
We ha been mad Lords long, now let vs be merry Lords, Horatins maugree thy m•…lancholy, and Lucretius in spite of thy sorrow, Isle have a song a subject for the ditty.
Great Tarquins pride, and Tulliaes cruelty.
Dangerous, no.
The tyrannies of the Court, &amp; the •…assalage of the City.
Neither shall I give the subject.
Do, &amp; let it be of all the pretty wenches in the Suburbs of Rome.
It shall, it shall, shall it Valerius?
Any thing, according tomy poor acquaintance, &amp; little conuersance.
Nay you shall stay Horatius, Lucretius so shall you, he removes himself from the love of Brutus, that shrinks from my side till we have had a song of all the pretty suburbians: sit round, when Valerius?
Valor. Shall I woe the lovely Molly,
Shoe's so fair, so fat, so jolly,
But she has a trick of folly,
T herefore 〈◊〉 ha none of Molly. No no no, no no no.
Isle have none of Molly no no no.
Oh the cherry lips of Nelly,
They are red and soft as jolly,
But too well she loves her belly,
therefore isle have none of Nelly. No no &amp;c.
What say you to bonny Betty,
Hayou seen a lass to pretty?
But her body is so sweaty,
Therefore isle 〈◊〉 none of Bety. No no no, &amp;c.
When I dolly with my Dolly,
She is full of melancho 〈◊〉.
Oh that wench is postile•…t holy,
Therefore isle have none of Dolly. No no no, &amp;c.
I could fancy lovely Nanny,
But she has the loves of many,
Yet her self she loves not any,
Therefore isle have none of Nanny, No no no, &amp;c.
In a flax-shop I spied Ratchel,
Where she her flax and tow did h•…chel,
But her cheeks hang like a satchel.
Therefore isle ha none of Ratchel. No no no, &amp;c.
In a corner I met Biddy,
Her heals were light her •…ead was giddy,
She fell down and somewhat did I,
Therefore isle have none of Biddy. No no no, &amp;c.
The rest weal hear within: what offence is there in this Lucretius, what hurt's in this Horatius? Is it not better to sing with our heads on then weep with our heads off, I ne'er took Collatin•… for a politician till now. Come Valerius, weal run o∣for all the wenches of Rome, even from the community of las∣ciuious Flora to the chastity of divine Lucrece, come good Horat.
A Chair.
A chair for my Lady, Mrs. Mirable do you not hear my Mrs call.
Come near sir, be less officious.
In duty, and use more attention,
Nay gentlewoman we exempt not you
From our discourse, but you must afford an ear
As well as he, to what we ha to say.
I still remain your handmaid.
Sir I ha seen you oft familiar
With this my Maid and waiting gentlewoman.
As casting amorous glances, wanton looks,
And pretty beckes, savouring incontinence.
I let you know you are not for my service
Unless you grow more civil.
Indeed madam for my own part I wish Mrs Mirable well as one fellow seruāt ought to wish to another, but to say that e∣for I •…long any sheep eyes in her face, how say you mistress Mirable did I ever offer it?
Nay mistress I ha seen you answer him
With gracious looks and some uncivil smiles,
Retorting eyes, and giving his demeanour
Such welcome as becomes not modesty.
Know henceforth there shall no lascivious phrase,
Suspicious look or shadow of incontinence
Be entertained by any that attend on Roman Lucrece.
Madam I.
Excuse it not for my premeditable thought
Speaks nothing out of rashness, nor vain hear say.
But what my own experience testifies:
Against you both let then this mild reproof
Forewarn you of the like, my reputation
Which is held precious in the eyes of Rome,
Shall be no shelter totheleast intent
Of looseness, leave all familiarity:
And quite renounce acquaintance, or I here discharge you both my service.
For my own part madam, as I am a true Roman by nature, though no Roman by my nose, I never spent the least lip labour on mistress Mirable never so much as glanced, never used any winking or pinking, never nodded at her, no not so much as when I was asleep never asked her the questiō so much as whats her name, if you can bring any man womā or child, that can say so much behind my back; As for he did but kiss her, for he did but kiss her and so let her go, let my Lord Callatine in stead of plucking my coat, pluck my skin over my ears &amp; turn me away naked, that wheresoever I shall come I may be held a raw serving-man hereafter.
Sir you know our mind.
If ever I knew what bolongs to these cases, or yet know what they mean, if ever I used any plain dealing, or were ever worth such a jewel, would I might die a beggar, if ever I were so far read in my grammar, as to know what an Interiection is, or a conjunction copulatiue, would I might never have good of my 〈1 line〉: why do you think madam, I have no more care of my self being but a stripling then to go to it at these years, flesh and blood cannot endure it, I shall even spoil
one of the best faces in Rome with crying at your unkindness.
I ha done, see if you can spy your Lord rerurning from the Court, and give me notice what strangers he brings home with him.
Yes Isle go, but see kind man he saves me a labour.
Fair Lucrece, I ha brought these Lords from Court
To feast with thee, sir prepare vs dinner.
My Lord is welcome, so are all his friends, the news at Court Lords?
Madam strange news: Prince Sextus by the enemies of Rome
Was nobly used and made their General,
Twice hath he met his father in the field,
And foiled him by the warlike Gabines aid:
But how hath he rewarded that brave Nation,
That in his great disgrace supported him?
Isle tell you Madam, he since the last battle
Sent to his father a close messenger
To be received to grace, withal demanding
What he should doe with those his enemies:
Great Tarquin from his son receives this news,
Being walking in his Garden, when the messenger
Importunde him for answer, the proud king
Lops with his wand the heads of poppies off,
And says no more, with this uncertain answer
The messenger to Sextus back returns.
who questions of his fathers words, looks, gesture,
He tells him what the haughty speechless King
Did to the heads of poppies, which bold Sextus
Straight apprehends, cuts off the great men's heads,
And having lest the Gabines without Governors,
Flies to his father, and this day is welcomed
For this his traitorous service, by the King
With all due solemn honours to the Court.
Curtefie strangely requited, this none but the son of Tarquin would ever have enterprised.
I like it, I applaud it, this will come to somewhat in the end, when heaven has cast up his account, some of them will be called to a hard reckoning.
Leave all to heaven.
My Lords, the best plumporedge in all Rome cools for your honours dinner is piping hot vpō the table: &amp; if you make not the more hast, you are like to have but cold cheer, the cook hath done his part, &amp; ther's not a dish vpō the dresser but he has made smoke for you, if you have good stomachs, and come not in while the meat is hot, you'll make hunger and cold meet to∣gether.
My man's a Rhetorician I can tell you,
And this conceit is fluent. Enter Lords,
You must be Lucrece guests, and she is scant
In nothing: for such princes must not want.
My Lord Valerius, I have even a suit to your honour, I ha not the power to part from you, without a relish, a note, a tone, we must get an a•…re betwixt vs.
Thy meaning.
Nothing but this, Iohn for the king, has bin in many ballads, Iohn for the king down din•…, Iohn for the king, has eaten many sall•…ts Iohn for the king sings hey ho.
Thou would have a song, would thou not?
And be everlastingly bound to your honour, I am now forsaking the world and the Devil, and somewhat leaning to∣wards the flesh, if you could but teach me how to choose a wench fit for my stature and complexion, I should rest yours in all good offices.
Isle do that for thee, what's thy name?
My name sir is Pomp.
Well then attend,
Pomp I will show thee the way to know
A 〈◊〉 dapper wench
First see her all bare, let her skin be rare,
And be 〈◊〉 with no part of the french:
Let her 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 clear, and her brow severe,
Her cie-browes thin and fine:
But if she be a punk, and love to be drunk,
Then keep her still from the wine.
Let her stature be mean, &amp; her body clean
Thou can not choose but like her.
But see she ha good clothes, with a fair Roman •…ose,
For thats the sign of a striker.
Let her legs be small, but not v•…d to sprall,
Her tongue not too loud nor cocket,
Let her arms be strong and her fingers long.
But not used to dive in a pocket.
Let her body be long and her back be strong,
With a soft lip that entangles,
With 〈◊〉 ivory breast, and her hair well dr•…st
Without goldlace or spangles.
Let her foot be small, clean legedd withal,
Her apparel not too gaudy:
And one that hath not bin, in no house of sin,
Nor place that hath been ba•…die.
But gods me I am trifling here with thee, &amp; dinner cools of the table, &amp; I am called to my attendance, oh my sweet Lord Va∣lerius.
Next king Porsenna, whom we tender dearly,
Welcome young Sextus, thou hast to our yoke,
Suppressed the neck of a proud nation
The warlike Gains, enemies to Rome.
It was my duty royal Emperor,
The duty of a subject and a son.
We at our mothers intercession likewise,
Are now atoned with Aruns, whō we here receive into our bosom
This is done like a kind brother and a natural son.
We interchange a royal heart with Sextus &amp; graft vs in your love.
Now king Porsenna, welcome once more, to Tarquin and to Rome.
We are proud of your alliance, and Rome is ours,
And we are Romes, this our religious league,
Shall be carved firm in characters of brass,
And live for ever to succeeding times.
It shall P•…rsenna, now this leagues established,
We will proceed in our determinde wars
To bring the neighbor Nations under vs.
Our purpose is to make young Sextus General
Of all our army, who hath proved his fortunes
And found them full of favour, weal begin
With strong Art, ha you given in charge
To assemble all our Captains, &amp; take muster of our strōg army?
That business is dispatcht.
Wee ha likewise sent for all our best commanders to take charge
According to their merit, Lord Valerius,
Lord Brutus, Cocles, Mutius, Sceuola,
And Collatine to make due preparation of such a gallant siege.
This day you shall set forward, Sextus go,
And let vs see your army march along
Before this King and vs, that we may view
The puissance of our host prepared already,
To lay high reared Art waste and lowe.
I shall my liege.
Aruns associate him.
Arrival with my brother in his honours.
Porsenna shall be hold the strength of Rome,
And body of the Camp under the charge
Of two brave Princes to lay hostile siege
Against the strongest city that withstands
The all commanding Tarquin.
Tic an object, to please Porsennaes Eye. Soft March.
The host is now upon his march,
You from this place may see,
The pride of all the Romaine chivalry.
This sight's more pleasing to Porsennaes 〈◊〉,
Then all our rich Attalia pompous feasts,
Or sumptuous Revels, we are borne a soldier:
And in our manage sucked the milk of war.
Should any strange fate lower upon this army,
Or that the merciless gulf of confusion
Should swallow them, we at our proper charge,
And from our native confines vow supply
Of men and Arms to make these numbers full.
You are our Royal brother, and in you
Tarquin is powerful and maintains his awe.
The like Porsenna may command of Rome.
But we have in your fresh varieties
Feasted too much, and kept our self too long
From our stone seat, our prosperous return
Hath bin expected by our Lords and Pieres.
The business of our wars thus forwarded,
We ha best leisure for our entertainment,
Which now shall want no due solemnity.
It hath bin beyond both expectation
And merit, but in sight of heaven I swear
If ever royal Tarquin shall demand
Use of our love, tic ready stor'de for you,
Even in our Kingly breast.
The like we vow, to King Porsenna, we will yet a little
Enlarge your royal welcome with Rareties,
Such as Rome yields: that done before we part
Of two remote dominions make one heart.
Set forwards then, our sons wage war abroad,
To make vspeace at home, we are of our self
Without suppo•…ance, we all fate defy,
Aidlesse, and of our self we stand thus hy.
Stand, who goes there?
A friend.
Stir not, for if thou dost Isle brooch thee straight upon the pike, The word.
Porsenna.
Pass, stay, who walks the round to night,
The General, or any of his Captains?
Horatius hath the charge, the other Chieftens
Rest in the Generals tent, theres no commander
Of any note but revel with the Prince:
And I among the rest am charged to attend
Upon their Rouse.
Pass freely, I this night must stand,
Twixt them and danger, the time of night.
The clock last told eleven.
The powers celestial, that ha took Rome in charge protect it still.
Again good night, thus must poor Soldiers do,
Whilst their commanders are with dainties fed,
They sleep on Down, the earth must be our bed.
Sit round the enemy is pounded fast
In their own folds, the walls made to oppugn,
Hostile incursions become a prison
To keep them fast for excution;
Ther's no eruption to be feared.
What shells do? come a health to the Generals health, &amp; Valerius that sits the most civilly shall begin it, I cannot talk till my blood be mingled with this blood of grapes: Fill, for Vale∣rius thou should drink well, for thou hast been in the Ger∣man wars, if thou loust me drink vpse freeze.
Nay since Brutus has spoke the word, the first health shall be imposed on you Valerius, and if ever you have bin germanic•…d let it be after the Dutch fashion.
The General may command.
He may, why else is he called the Commander?
We will entreat Valerius.
Since you will needs enforce a hie-German health, look well to your heads, for I come upon you with this dutch Tassa∣kerr, if you were of a more noble science then you are, it will go near to break your heads round.
O Morke gyff men 〈◊〉 man,
Skerry merry vip,
O morke gyff men 〈◊〉 man
Skerry merry vip.
O morke gyff men 〈◊〉 man,
that tic die scene long o drieuan can;
Skerry merry vip, and skerry merry vip,
and skerry merry runke 〈◊〉 bunk•….
Ede hoore was a haie dedle down
Deal drunk a:
Skerry merry runk, ede bunk, ede •…oor was drunk a
O daughter yeis ein alto klein
Skerry merry vip,
O daughter yeis ein alto klein,
Skerry merry vip,
O daughter yeis ein alto klein,
Ye molten slop, ein year a leene
Skerry merry vip, and skerry merry vip
And skerry merry runk ede bunk
Ede hoore was a bay dedle down
Dedle drunk a:
Skerry merry, runk ede bunk ede hoor was drunk a.
Gramercies Valerius, came this hie-German health as double as his double double ruff, i'd pledge it.
Were it in Lubeckes or double double beer their own natural, liquor i'd pledge it, were it as deep as his ruff, let the health go round about the board as his band goes round about his neck, I am no more afraid of this dutch fauchiō, thē I should be of the heathenish invention.
I must entreat you spare me, for my brain brookes not the fumes of wine, their vaporous strength offends me much.
I would have none spare me, for isle spare none, Colla∣tine will pledge no health unless it be to his Lucrece.
What's Lucrece but a woman, and what are women?
But tortures and disturbance unto men.
If they be foul they are odious, and if fair,
They are like rich vessels full of poysnous drugs,
Or like black serpents armed with golden scales,
For my own part, they shall not trouble me.
Sex•… sit fast, for I proclaim my self a women's chā∣peon, and shall unhorse thee else.
For my own part, Ime a marred man, and Isle speak to my wife to thank thee Brutus.
I have a wife too, and I think, the most virtuous Lady in the world.
I cannot say but that I have a good wife too, &amp; I love her: but if she were in heaven, beshrew me if I would wish her so much hurt as to desire her cōpany upon ear•…h again yet vpō my honour, though she be not very fair, she is exceeding honest.
Nay the less beauty the less temptation to despoil her honesty.
I should be angry with him that should make question of her honour.
And I angry with thee if thou should not maintain her honour.
If you compare the virtues of your wives, let me step in for mine.
I should wrong my Lucrece not to stand for her.
Ha, ha, all captens, and stand upon the honesty of your
wives, first possible think you, that women of young spirit and full age
Of fluent wit, that can both sing and dance,
Read, write, such as feed well and taste choice cates,
That straight dissolve to purity of blo•…d.
That keep the veins full, and inflame the appetite,
Making the spirit able, strong and prone,
Can such as these their husbands being away
Employed in foreign sieges or elsewhere,
Deny such as importune them at home?
Tell me that flax will not be touched with fire,
Nor they be won to what they most desire.
Shall I end this controversy in a word?
Do good Brutus.
I hold some holy but some apt to fin,
Some tractable, but some that none can win,
Such as are virtuous, Gold nor wealth can move,
Some vicious of themselves are prone to love.
Some Grapes are sweet and in the Gardens grow,
Others vnprunde, turn wild neglected so.
The purest oar contains both Gold and dross,
The one all gain, the other nought but loss.
The one disgrace, reproach and scandal tai•…ts,
The other angels and sweet featured saints.
Such is my virtuous Lucrece.
Yet for her virtue not comparable to the wife of Are•…ns.
And why may not mine be rāckt with the most virtuous?
I would put in for a lot, but 1000 to one I shall draw but a blank.
I should not show I loved my wife, not to take her part in her absence, I hold her inferior to none.
Save mine.
No not to her.
Oh this were a brave•… controversy for a Jury of women to arbitrate.
Isle hazard all my fortunes on the virtues
Of divine Lucrece, shall we try them thus?
It is now dead of night, lets mount our steeds,
Within this two hours we may reach to Rome,
And to our houses all come vnpreparde,
And unexpected by our hy praisd wines,
She of them al that we find best employed,
Devoted and most huswife exercised,
Let her be held most virtuous, and her husband
Win by the wager a good horse and armour.
A hand on that.
Here is a helping hand to that bargain.
But Shall we to horse without circumstance?
Sceuola will be mounted with the first.
Then moūt Cleuall, Brutus this night take you the charge of the army, Isle see the trial of this wager, it would do me good to see some of them find their wives in the arms of their lovers, they are so confident in their virtues, Brutus weal interchange good night, within be thou, but as provident ore the army as we (if our horses fail not) expeditious in our journey, horse, horse, horse.
But one hour more &amp; you shall all to rest,
Now that your Lord is absent from this house,
And that the Masters eye is from his charge,
We must be careful and with providence
Guide his domestic business, we ha now
Given ore all feasting and leaud revelling,
Which ill becomes the house whose Lo: is absent,
We banish all excess till his return,
In fear of whom my soul doth daily morn.
Madam so please you to repose your self
Within your Chamber leave vs to our tasks,
We will not loiter though you take your rest.
Not so, you shall not ouerwatch your selves
Longer then I wake with you: for it fits
Good huswifes when their husbands are frō home,
To ey their servants labours and in care,
And the true manage of his household state,
Earliest to rise, and to be up most late.
Since all his business he commits to me,
Isle be his faithful steward till the camp
Dissolve and he return, thus wives should doe,
In absence of their Lords be husband too.
Madam the L. 〈◊〉 his mā was thrice for you here to have entreated you home to supper, he says his L. takes it unkindly he could not have your company.
To please a loving husband, Isle offend
The love and patience of my dearest friend,
Me thinks his purpose was unreasonable
To draw me in my husbands absence forth
To feast and banquet, twould have ill becomd me,
To ha left the charge of such a spacious house, without both L. &amp; Mistress,
I am opiniond thus, wives should not stray,
Out of their doors their husbāds being away: L. 〈◊〉 shall ex∣cuse me.
Pray Madam set me right into my work,
Being abroad I may forget the charge.
Imposde me by my L. or be compelled
To stay out late, which were my husband here,
Might be without distaste, but he from hence,
Which late a broad, there can no excuse dispense.
Here take your work again, a while proceed,
And then to bed, for whilst you sow, Isle read.
I would have hazarded all my hopes, my wife had not been so late a revelling.
Nor mine at this time of night a gamboling.
They wear so much cork under their heals, they cānot choose but love to caper.
Nothing does me good, but that if my wife were watching all theirs were wantoning, and if I halost, none can brag of their winnings.
Now Collatine to yours, either Lucrece must bee better employed then the rest, or you content to have her virtues ranked with the rest.
I am pleased.
Soft, soft, lets steal upon her as upon the rest, lest having some watchword at our arrival, we may give her notice to be bet∣la prepared, nay by your leave Coll•…tine, weel limit you no ad∣uātage.
See Lords, thus Lucrece revels with her maids, In stead of Riot quaffing &amp; the practise of hy laualties to the ra∣uishing sound of chambring musique, she like a good huswife Is teaching of her husband sundry chares. Lucrece.
My L. &amp; husband welcome, 10 times welcome,
Is it to see your L•…crece you thus late
Ha with your persons so hazard left the camp,
And trusted to the danger of a night so dark, and full of horror?
Lords ell's lost.
By Jove Isle buy my wife a wheel and make her spin for this trick.
If I make not mine learn to live by the prick of her no∣dl for this, I me no Rome•….
Sweet wife salute these Lords, thy continence
Hath won thy husbād a Barbarian horse, &amp; a rich cote of arms.
O pardon me, the joy to see my Lord,
Took from me all respect of their degrees,
The richest entertainment lives with vs,
According to the hour and the provision
Of a poor wife in the absence of her husband:
We prostrate to you howsoever mean,
We thus excusde Lord Collatin: away.
We neither feast, dance, quaff, riot nor play.
If one woman among so many bad, may be found good, If a white wench may prove a black swan, it is Lucrece her beau∣tie hath relation to her virtue, and her virtue correspondence to her beauty, and in both she is fellowlesse.
Lords will you yield the wager?
Stay, the wager was as well which of our wives was fairest too, it stretched as well to their beauty as to their conti∣nonce, who shall judge that?
That can none of vs, because we are all parties, let Prince Sextus determine it who hath bin with vs, and bin an ey witness of their beauties.
Agreed.
I am pleased with the censure of P. Sextus.
So are wee all.
I commit my Lucre•… wholly to the censure of Sextus.
And Sex•…us commits him wholly to the dispose of Lucre.
I love the Lady and her grace desire,
Nor can my love wrong what my thought admire.
Aruns, no question but your wife is chaste,
And thrifty, but this Lady knows no wast.
Val•…rius, yours is modest something fair,
Her Grace and beauty are without compare,
Thine 〈◊〉 well disposed and of good feature,
But the world yields not so divine a creature.
〈◊〉, thine a smug lass and gre•…t well.
But amongst all bright Lucrece doth excel.
Then our impartial harts judging eyes,
This verdict 〈◊〉 fair Lucrece wins the prise
Then Lords you are indebted to me a horse and armour.
We yee'd it.
Will you taste such welcome Lords, as a poor unprovided house can yield?
Gramercy Lucrece, no we must this night sleep by Are∣dea walls.
I but my Lords, I hope my Collatine will not so leave his Lucrece.
He must, we have but idled from the Camp, to try a mer∣rye wager about their wives, and tic the hazard of the kings dis∣pleasure, should any man be missing from his charge: the powers that govern Rome make divine Luc. for ever happy, goodnight.
Will not my husband repose this night with vs?
Lucrece shall pardon him, we ha took our leaves of our wives, nor shall Collatine be before vs, though our Ladies in o∣there things come behind you.
I must beswaid: the joys and the delights of many thou∣sand nights meet all in one to make my Lucre•…ce happy.
I am bound to your strict will, to each goodnight.
To horse, to horse, Lucrece we cannot rest,
Till our hot lust imbosome in thy breast.
With no unkindness we should our Lords upbraid,
Husbands and Kings must always be obaid.
Nothing save the high business of the slate,
And the charge given him at Arts siege,
Could ha made Collatine so much digress
From the affection that he bears his wife.
But subjects must excuse when kings claim power.
But leaving this before the charm of sleep,
Cease with his downy wings: upon my eyes,
I must go take account among my servants
Of their days task, we must not cherish sloth,
No covetous thought makes me thus provident,
But to shun idleness, which wise men say,
Begets rank lust, and virtue beats away.
Return to Rome now we are in the mid way to the Cāp?
My Lords tic business that concerns my life,
To morrow if we live weal visit thee.
Will Sextus enjoin me to accompany him?
Or me?
Nor you, nor any, tic important business
And serious occurrences that call me,
Perhaps Lords Isle commend you to your wives.
Coslatine shall I doe you any service to your Lucrece?
Only commend me.
What, no private token to purchase our kind welcome?
Would Royal Sextus would but honour me to bear her a slight token.
What?
This Ring.
As I am Royal I will feet delivered.
This Ring to Lucrece shall my love convey,
And in this gift thou dost thy bed be•…ray.
To morrow we shall meet, this night sweet fate,
May I prove welcome though a guest ingrate.
Hes for the city, we for the camp, the night makes the way tedious and melancholy, prithee Valeri•…s a merry song to beguile 〈◊〉.
Valor. There was a young man and a maid fell in love,
Terry dairy ding, terry dairy ding, tery tery 〈◊〉.
To get her good will he often did,
Terry dairy ding, terry dairy ding, langtido dill•….
Theres many will say, and most will allow, terry dairy, &amp;c.
Theirs nothing so good as a terry dairy dairy dairy, &amp;c.
I would wish all maids before the•… be sick, terrie derie, &amp;c.
To enquire for a young man that has a good terrie dairy, &amp;c.
Good Valeri•…s, this has brought vs even to the skirts of the camp, enter Lords.
This ring, my Lord, hath opt our gates to you,
For though I know you for a royal Prince,
My sovereigns son, and friend to Collatine:
Without that key you had not entered here.
More lights, and see a banquet strait provided,
My love to my dear husband shall appear,
In the kind welcome that I give his friend.
Not loue-sicke, but love lunatike, loue-mad,
I am all fire, impatience, and my blood
Boils on my heart, with loose and sensual thoughts.
A chair for the Prince, may it please your highness sit.
Madam, with you.
It will become the wife of Collatine to waite upon your trencher.
You shall sit, behind vs at the camp we left our state,
We are but your guest, indeed you shall not waite,
Her modesty hath such strong power ore me,
And such a reverence hath fate given her brow,
That it appears a kind ofblasphemy,
To have any wanton word harsh in her ears,
I cannot woe, and yet I love above measure,
Tic force, not suite, must purchase this rich treasure.
Your highness cannot taste such homely cates.
Indeed I cannot feed, but on thy face,
Thou art the banquet th•…t my thoughts embrace.
Knew you, my Lord, what free and zealous welcome
We tender you, your highness would presume
Upon your entertainment, oft, I many times
I have heard my husband speak of Sextus worth,
Extol your worth, praise your perfection,
I dote upon your valour, and your friendship prise next his Lu∣crece.
Oh impious lust, in all things base, respectless &amp; unjust,
Thy virtue, grace and fame I must enjoy,
Though in the purchase I all Rome destroy.
Madame, if I be welcome, as your virtue bids me presume I am,
Carouse to me a health unto your husband.
A women's draught my Lord to Collatine.
Nay, you must drink off all.
Your grace must pardon the tender weakness of a wo∣mans brain.
It is to Collatine.
Me thinks twould ill become the modesty
Of any Roman Lady to carouse,
And drown her virtues in the juice of grapes.
How can I show my love to my husband,
To do his wife such wrong, by too much wine
I might neglect the charge of this great house,
Left soly to my keep, else my example
Might in my servants breed encouragement
So to offend, both which were pardonlesse,
Else to your grace I might neglect my duty,
And slack obeisance to so great a guest:
All which being accidental unto wine,
Oh let me not so wrong my Collatine.
We excuse you, her imperfections like a torrent
With violence breaks upon me, and at once
Invert and swallow all thats good in me.
Preposterous fates, what mischiefs you involve
Upon a captive Prince left to the fury
Of all grand mischief, hath the grandam world
Yet smothered such a strange abortive wonder,
That from her virtues should arise my sin:
I am worse then whats most ill, deprived all reason,
My hart all fiery lust, my soul all treason.
My Lord, I fear your health, your changing brow
Hath shown so much disturbance, noble Sextus,
Hath not your venturous travel from the camp,
Nor the moist rawness of these humorous night impairde your health?
Divinest Lucrece no. I cannot eat.
To rest then, a rank of torches there, attend the Prince.
Madam, I doubt I am a guest this night
Too troublesome, and I offend your rest.
This ring speaks for me, that next Collatine you are to me most welcome, yet my Lord, thus much presume, without this from his hand, Sextu•… this night could not have entered here, no, not the king himself, my dor•…s the day time to my friends are frēe, But in the night the obdure gates are less kind,
Without this ring they cā no entrāce find. Lights for the Prince.
A kiss and so godnight, nay for your rings sake deny not that
Jove give your Highness soft and sweet repose.
And thee the like, repose with 〈◊〉 content,
My vows are fixed, my thoughts on mischief bent.
Tic late, so many stars shine in this room,
By reason of this great and princely guest,
The world might call our modesty in question,
To revel thus our husband at the Camp,
Hast and to •…est, save in the Princes chamber,
Let not a light appear, my hart's all sadness,
Jove unto thy protection I commit
My chastity and honour to thy keep,
My waking soul I give whilst my thoughts sleep,
Soft, soft, not to loud, imagine we were now going on the ropes with eggs at our heals, he that hath but a creeking shoe, I wold he had a creek in his neck, tread not to hard for disturbing Prince Sextus.
I wonder the P. would ha none of vs stay in his chamber &amp; help him to bed.
What an ass art thou to wonder, there may be many causes thou know the Prince is a soldier, &amp; soldiers many times want shift, who can say whether he have a clean shirt on or no? for any thing that we know he hath used staves aker a late, or hath tan a medcin to kill the itch, whats that to vs, we did our duty to 〈◊〉 our service.
And what should we enter farther into his thoughts, 〈◊〉 shells to bed? Ime as drowsy as a doremouse, &amp; my head's as 〈◊〉 as though I had a nightcap of lead on:
And my eyes begin to glow themselves together, I was till supper was done altoge•… 〈◊〉 your repast, and now after supper I am only for your repose. I think for the two virtues of eating and sleeping, there's never a Roman spirit under the cope, can put me down.
For shame what a coniu•…ing and catter-walling keep you here, that my Lady cannot sleep: you shall have her call by and by, and send you all to bed with a witness.
Sweet mistress Myrable, we are going.
You are too load: •…ome, every man dispose him to his rest and isle to mine.
〈◊〉 with your Torches sir.
Come then, and every man sneak into his k•…nnell
Night be as secret as thou art close, as close
as thou art black and dark, thou ominou. Q•…en
Of Tenebrouse filence, make this fatal hour,
as true to Rape as thou hast made it kind
To murder and harsh mischief: Cintheamaske thy cheek,
And all you sparkling Elemental fires,
Choke up your beauties in prodigious fogs,
Or be extinct in some thick •…aparous cloud,
Least you behold my practise: I am bound
Upon a black adventure, on a deed
That must wound virtue, and make beauty bleed.
Pause Sextus, and before thou runst thy self
Into this violent danger, weigh thy sin,
Thou art yet free, beloved, graced in the Camp,
Of great opinion and undoubted hope,
Romes da•…ling in the universal grace,
Both of the field, and senate: were these fortunes
To make thee great in both, back yet, thy fame
Is free from hazard, and thy stile from shame.
Of fate, thou hast usurped such power over man,
That where thou pl•…dst thy will, no mortal can.
On then, black mischief hurry me the way.
My self I must destroy, her life betray,
The state of King and Subject, the displeasure
Of Prince and people, the revenge of noble,
And the contempt of base, the incurdveng•…nce
Of my wronged kinsman Colatine, the Treason
A Against diuin'st Lucrece: all these total curses
Foreseen not feared upon me Sextus meet,
To make my days harsh•…so so this might be sweet
No jar of clock no ominous hateful howl
Of any starting Hound, no horse to•…gh breathed from the
Of any drowsy Groom, wakes this charmed silence, entrails discovered in her bed
and starts this general silence forward still, Lucre.
To make thy lust live, all thy virtues kill.
Here, here, behold! beneath these Curtains lies,
That bright enchantress that hath daz•…d my eyes.
Oh who but Sextus could commit such waste?
On one so fair, so kind, so truly chaste?
Or like a ravisher thus rudely stand,
To offend this face, this brow, this lip, this hand?
Or at such fatal hours, these revels keep,
With thought once to defile thy innocent sleep,
Save in this breast, such thoughts could find no place,
Or pay with treason her kind hospital grace:
But I am lust-burnt, all bent on what's bad,
That which should calm good thoughts makes Tarquin
mad. Madam, Lucresse?
Whose that? oh me! beshrew you.
Sweet, tic I.
What I?
Make room.
My Husband Colatine
Thy husband's at the Camp.
Here is no room for any man save him.
Grant me that grace.
What are you?
Tarquin and thy friend, and must enjoy thee.
Heaven such sins defend.
Why doe you tremble Lady? cease this fear,
I am alone, there's no suspicious 〈◊〉,
That can bewray this deed: nay start not sweet.
Dream I, or am I full awake? oh no!
I know I dream to see Prince Tarquin so.
Sweet Lord awake me, rid me from this terror,
I know you for a Prince, a Gentleman,
Royal and honest, one that loves my Lord.
And would not wrack a women's chastity,
For Romes imperial Diadem, oh then
Pardon this dream, for being awake I know,
Prince Sextus, Romes great hope, would not for shame
Provoke his own wrath, or despoil my fame.
I'm bent on both, my thoughts are all on fire,
Choose thee, thou must embrace death, and desire,
Yet doe I love thee, wilt thou accept it?
No.
If not thy love, thou must enjoy thy 〈◊〉,
where fair means cannot, force shall make my way:
By Jove I must enjoy thee.
Sweet Lord stay.
I'm all impatience, violence and rage,
And save thy bed, nought cā this fire 〈…〉
No, I cannot.
Tell me why?
Hate me, and in that hate first let me dye.
By •…ove isle force thee.
By a God you swear to doe a de•…else d•…de: sweet Lord forbea•…
By the same Jove I swear that made this soul,
Never to yield unto an act so foul. Help, help.
These cushens first shall stop thy breath,
If thou but shreekest: hark how isle frame thy death.
The death: I care not, so I keep vnstain•…,
The vnceaz'd honour I have yet maintained.
Thou can keep neither, for if thou but 〈◊〉,
Or le•…st the least harsh noise Jar in my ear,
Isle broach thee on my steel: that done, strait murder
One of thy basest Grooms, and lay you both
Grasped arm in arm, on thy adulterate bed.
Then call in witness of that mechall 〈◊〉,
So shalt thou die: thy 〈…〉,
Thy name be odious, thy suspected body
Denied all funeral rites, and loving Colatin•…
Shall hate thee even in death: then save all this,
and to thy fortunes add another friend,
Give thy fears comfort, and these torments end.
Isle die first, and yet hear me: oh as you're noble•…,
If all your gracious and best generous thoughts
Be not exiled your heart, pi•…tie, oh pity
The Virtues of a woman: mar not that
Cannot be made again: this once defiled,
Not all the Ocean waives can purify,
Or wash my stain away, you seek to
That which the radiant splender of the Sun
Cannot make bright again: behold my tears!
Oh think them pearled drops, distilled from the heart
Of soul chaste Lucrece: think them Orators,
To plead the cause of absent Colatine, your friend and kinsman.
Tush, I am obdure.
Then make my name pure: keep my body pure:
Oh Prince of Princes, doe but weigh your sin,
Think how much I shall loose how small you win.
I loose my honour of my name and blood,
Lost, Romes imperial Crown cannot make good.
You win the worlds shame, &amp; all good men's hate,
Oh who would pleasure, buy at such dear rate?
Nor can you t•…arm it pleasure: for what's sweet,
Where force &amp; hate, jar and contention meet?
Weigh but for what tic that you urge me still,
To gain a women's love against her will?
You'll but repent such wrong done a chaste wife,
and think that labour's not worth all your strife.
Curse your hotlust, &amp; say you have wronged your friends,
But all the world cannot make me amends.
I took you for a friend, wrong not my trust,
But let these chaste terms quench your fiery lust.
No, those moist tears, contending with my fire,
Q•…inch not my heate, but make•… it climb more higher:
Isle drag thee hence.
Oh!
If thou raise these cries, lodged in thy flaughtered
arm•… some base Groom dies,
And Rome that hath thy name admired so long,
Shall blot thy death with scandal from my tongue.
Jove guard my innocence.
Lucrece, thar't mine
In spite of Jove &amp; all the powers divine.
What's a clock trow? my Lord bad me be early rea∣die with his Gelding, for he would ride betimes in the more∣ning: now had I rather be up an hour before my time then a minute after, for my Lord will bee so infinitely eangrie if I but over sleep my self a moment, that I had better bee out of my life then in his displeasure: but foft, some of my Lord Colatines menlye in the next chamber, I care not if I call them up, for it grows towards day: what Pompy, Pompy.
Who is that cal's?
Tic I.
Whose that, my Lord Sextus his man? what a pox make you up before day?
I would have the key of the Gate to come at my Lords horse in the stable.
I wold my Lord Sextus &amp; you were both in the hay∣loft, for Pompy can take none of his natural rest amongst you, here is 〈◊〉 Ostl•…r, rise &amp; give my horse another peck of hay.
Nay good Pompy help me to the Key of the stable.
Well, Pompy was borne to doe Rome good, in being so kind to the young Princes Gelding, but if for my kind∣ness in giving him Peas and Oats, hee should kick me, I should scarce say god a mer•…ie horse: but come, isle go with thee to the stable.
Nay, weep not sweet, what's done is pastrecall,
Call not thy name in question, by this sorrow
Which yet is without blemish, what hath past
Is hid from the worlds eye, and only private
Twixt vs•…fair Lucrece, pull not on my head,
The wrath of Rome if I have done thee wrong,
Love was the cause, thy fame is without blot,
And thou in Sextus hast a true friend got,
Nay sweet look up, thou only hast my hart,
I must be gone Lucrece a kiss and part.
Oh!
No? peevish dame farewell, then be the bruter
Of thy own shame, which Tarquin would conceals
I am armed against all can come, let mischief frown,
With all his terror are•…d with ominous fates,
To all their spleens a welcome Isle afford,
With this bold hart, strong hand, and my good sword.
What so early Valor. and your voice not up yet? thou wast wont to be my Lark and raise me with thy early notes.
I was never so hard set yet my Lord, but I had ever a fit of mirth for my friend.
Prithee let's hear it then whilst we may, for I divine thy musique and my madness are both short lived, we shall have somewhat else to doe ere long, we hope Valerius.
Jove send it.
Horatius, Me thinks our wars go not well forward,
Horatius we have greater Enemies to bustle with then the
Ardeans if we durst but front them Horatius.
Would it were come to fronting.
Then we married men should have the advantage of the bachelors Horatius, especially such as have revelling wives, those that can caper in the City, while their husb•…ds are in the Camp, Collat why are you so 〈◊〉? the thought of this should not trouble you, having a Luc. to your bedfellow.
My Lord I know no cause of discontent, yet can not I be merry.
I should be frolic if my brother were but returned to the Camp, and in good time behold Prince Sextus.
Health to our general.
Thank you.
Will you survey your forces, &amp; give order for a present assault, your soldiers long to be tugging with the Ardeās.
No.
Have you seen Lucretia my Lord, how fares she?
Well, Isle to my Tent.
Why how now whats the matter brother?
Thank you, No, well, Isle to my Tent, get thee to thy Tent &amp; a coward go with thee, if thou hast no more spirit to a speedy encounter.
Shall I go after him and know the cause of his dis∣content?
Or I my Lord?
Neither, to pursue a fool in his humour? is the next way to make him more humorous, Isle not be guilty of his folly, Thank you! no, before I wish him health again when he is sick of the sullens, may I dye, not like a Roman, bu a run∣agate.
Perhaps hoe's not well.
Well, then let him be ill.
The news with this hasty post?
Did nobody see my Lord Colatine? oh, my Lady commends her to you, heir's a letter.
Give it me.
Fie vppon't, never was poor Pompy so ouer-la∣board as I have bin, I think I have spurt my horse such a question, that hoe's scarce able to wighee or wag his tail for an answer, but my Lady bad me spare for no horse flesh, and I think I have made him run his race.
Cousin Colatine the news at Rome?
Nothing but what you all may well partake: read here my Lord.
Dear Lord, if ever thou wilt see thy Lucrece,
Choose of the friends which thou effect best,
And all important business set apart,
Repair to Room: commend me to Lord Brutus,
Valerius Mutius, &amp; Horatius,
Say I entreat their presence, where my Father
Lucretius shall attend them, farewell sweet,
Th•…affairs are great, then doe not fail to meet.
Isle thither as I live,
I 〈◊〉 I dye,
To Room wi•…h expedi•…ious wings weel'e fly.
The news, the news, if it have any s•…ape
Of•…oddness, if some prod•…go have chanced,
That may beget revenge, Isle cease to chafe,
Vex, martyr, grieve, to•…ture, torment my self,
And tune my hue•…our to strange strains of mirth:
My soul divines some happiness, speak, speak:
I know thou hast some news that will create me
Merry and musical, for I would laugh,
Be new transhapt, I prithee sing Valerius that I may ayre
with thee.
First tell vs what's the project of thy massage?
My Lords, the princely Sextus has been at home, but what he hath done, I may partly mistrust, but cannot al∣together resolve you: besides, my Lady swore me, that whatsoever I suspected I should say nothing.
If thou wilt not say thy mind, I prithee sing thy mind, and then thou moist save thine oath.
Indeed I was not sworn to that, I may either laugh out my news or sing am, and so save my oath to my Lady.
Howe's all at Rome, that with such sad presage,
Distu•…bed Colatine, and noble Brutus
Are hurried from the Camp with Scenola?
And we with expedition amongst the rest,
Are charged to Rome? speak, what did Sextus there with thy fair mistress?
Did he take fair Lucrece by the 〈◊〉 man?
Toe man.
I man.
Ha, ha, ha, ha man.
And further did he strine to go man?
〈◊〉 man.
I man.
Ha, ha, ha man, hafa derry derry derry down a, hey fa derry dino.
Did he take fair Lucrece by the heel man?
Heel man.
I man.
 Ha ha ha ha man.
And did he further strive to feel man?
Feel man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man, hey fadery, &amp;c.
Did he take the Lady by the shin man?
Shin man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man.
Further too would he have 〈◊〉 man?
Bin man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man. Hey fadery. &amp;c.
Did he take the Lady by the knee man?
Knee man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man.
Further then that would he be man.
Bee man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man. hey fa derie, &amp;c.
Did he take the Lady by the thigh man?
Thigh man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man.
And now he came it somewhat ny man.
Ny man
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man, Hey fa dairy, &amp;c.
But did he doe the tother thing man?
Thing man?
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man.
And at the same had he a fling man.
Fling man.
I man.
Ha ha ha ha man, hey fadery, &amp;c.
Lucrece and her maid.
Mirable.
Madam.
Is not my father old Lucrecius come yet?
Not yet.
Nor any from the Camp?
Neither madam.
Go, be gone, and leave me to the truest grief of heart
That ever entr•…d any Matrons breast. Oh!
Why weep you Lady? alas why doe you stain
Your modest cheeks with these offensive tears?
Nothing, nay nothing: oh you powerful Gods,
That should have Angels guardent on your throne,
To protect innocence and chastity! oh why
Suffer you such inhumane massacre
On harmless virtue? wherefore take you charge,
On sinless souls to see them wounded thus:
With Rape or Violence? forgive white innocence,
Armour of proof against sin: or by oppression
Kill Virtue quite, &amp; guerdon base transgression?
Is it my far•… aboue all other women?
Or is my sin more heinous then the rest,
That amongst thousands, millions, infinites,
I, only I, should to this shame 〈◊〉 borne,
To be a stain to women, natu•…es scorn? oh!
What ails you Madam, troth you make me weep
To see you shed salt tears: what hath oppressed you?
Why is your chamber hung with mourning black?
Your habit sable, and your eyes thus swollen
With ominous tears: alas what troubles you?
I am not, thou did deceive thy self,
I did not weep, theres nothing troubles me,
But wherefore dost thou blush?
Madam not I.
Indeed thou did, and in that blush my guilt thou did betray
How came thou by the notice of my sin?
What sin?
My blot, my scandal and my shame:
Oh Tarquin! thou my honour did betray,
Disgrace•…no time, no age 〈◊〉 wipe away, oh!
Sweet Lady cheer your self, isle fetch my Viol
And see if I can sing you fast a sleep,
A little rest would wear away this passion.
Doe what thou wilt, I can command no more,
Being no more a woman, I am now
Devote to death, and an inhabitant
Of the other world: these eyes must ever weep,
Till fate hath closed them with eternal sleep.
Brutus!
Lucretius!
Father!
Lucrece!
Collatine!
How cheer you Madam? how first with you cousin?
Why is your eye deject and drowned in sorrow?
Why is this funeral black, and ornaments
Ofwiddow-hood? resolve me cousin Lucrece.
How fare you Lady?
What's the matter girl?
Why how i'st with you Lucrece, tell me sweet?
Why dost thou hide thy face? &amp; with thy hand
Darken those eyes that were my Suns ofioy,
To make my pleasures flourish in the Spring?
Oh me!
Whence are these sig hes and tears?
How grows this passion?
Speak Lady you are h•…med in with your friends,
〈◊〉 in a pale of safety, and 〈◊〉
and cirkled in a fortress of your kindred,
Let not those drops fall fruitless to the ground,
Nor let your sighs ad to the senseless wind.
Speak, who hath wrong you?
Ere I speak my woe,
Swear you'll revenge poor Lucrece on her 〈◊〉.
Be his head arched with gold.
Behis hand are•…d with an imperial Sceptre.
Be he great as Tarquin throand in an imperial seat
Be he no morethen mortal, he shall feel
The vengeful edge of this victorious steel.
Then seat you Lords, whilst I expose my wrong.
Father, dear husband, and my kinsmen, Lords
Hear me, I am dishonoured and disgraced,
My reputation mangled, my renown
disparaged, but my body, oh my body
What Lucrece?
Stained, polluted and defiled.
Strange steps are found in my adulterate bed,
And though my thoughts be white as innocence,
Yet is my body soiled with lust burned sin,
And by a stranger I am strumpeted,
Ravished, enforced, and am no more to rank among the To∣man Matrons.
Yet cheer you Lady, and restrain these tears,
If you were forced, the sin concerns not you,
A woman's born but with a women's strength: who was the Ravisher?
I, name him Lady, our love to you shall only thus ap∣pear
In the revenge that we will take on him.
I hope so Lords, t'was Sextus the Kings Son.
How? Sextus Tarquin!
That unprincely Prince, who guest-wise entered with my husbands Ring,
This Ring, oh Collatine! this Ring you sent
Is cause of all my woe, your discontent.
I feasted him, then lodged him, and bestowed
The choicest welcome, but in dead of night,
My Traitorous guest came armed unto my bed,
Frighted my silent sleep, threatend, and praide
For entertainment: •…despised both.
Which hearing his sharpe pointed Scimitar,
The Tyrant bent against my naked breast,
Alas, I begged my death, but note his tyranny,
He brought with him a torment worse then death
For having murdered me, he swore to kill,
One of my basest Grooms and lodge him dead
In my dead arms: then call in testimony
Of my adultery, to make me hated
Even in my death, of husband, father, friends,
Of Rome and all the world: this, this, oh Princes, Ravished and kilt me at once,
Yet cōfort Lady, I quit thy guilt, for what could
Lucrece doe more then a woman? had thou did polluted,
By this base scandal, thou had wronged thy fame,
And hinderd vs of a most just revenge.
What shall we doe Lords?
Lay your resolute hands upon the sword of Brutus,
Vow &amp; swear, as you hope meed for merit from the Gods
Or fear reward for sin, from devils below:
As you are Romans, and esteem your fame
More then your lives all hum•…rous toys set off,
Of matting, singing, smilings, and what else,
Receive your native valour, be your selves,
And join with Brutus in the just revenge
Of this chaste ravished Lady, swear
We doe.
Then with your humours here my grief ends too,
My stain I thus wipe off, call in my sighs,
and in the hope of this revenge, forbear
Even to my death to fall one passionate tear.
Yet Lords, that you may crown my innocence,
With our best thoughts, that you may henceforth know,
We are the same in heart we seem in show.
and though I quit my soul of all such sin, The Lords whisper
Isle not debar my body punishment:
Let all the world, learn of a Roman dame,
To prise her life less then her honoured fame.
Lucrece?
Wife.
Lady.
She hath slain herself.
Oh see yet Lords if there be hope of life
Shees dead, then turn your funeral tears to fire and indignation, let vs now redeem Our misspent time, and over take our sloth With hostile expedition, this great Lords, This bloody knife, on which her chaste blood flower, Shall not from Brutus till some strange revenge fall on the heads of Tarquins.
Nowe's the time to call their pride to count,
Brutus lead on, Weal follow thee to their confusion.
By 〈◊〉 we will, the sprightful youth of Rome,
Tricked up in plumed harness, shall attend
The march of Brutus, whom wee here create our genrall a∣against the Tarquins.
Bee it so.
We embrace it: now to stir the wrath of Rome,
You, Colla in and good Lucretius,
With eyes yet drowned in tears, bear that chaste body
Into the market place: that horrid object,
Shall kindle them with a most just revenge.
To see the father and the husband morn
Ore this chaste dame, that have so well deserved
Of Rome and them, then to infer the pride,
The wrongs and the perpetual tyranny
Of all the Tarquins, Se•…Wuius, Tullius death,
and his unnatural usage by that Monster
Tullia the Queen all these shall well concur in a combined revenge
Lucrece, thy death weal morn in glittering arms
and plumed casks: some bear that reverend load,
Unto the forum where our force shall meet
To set upon the pallas, and expel
This viperous brood from Rome: I know the people
Will gladly embrace our fortunes: Sc•…uola,
Go you and muster powers in Brutus name.
Valerius, you assist him instantly,
and to the missed people freely speak the cause of this con∣course
We go.
And you dear Lord, whose speechless grief is bound∣les,
Turn all your tears with ours, to wrath and rage,
The hearts of all the Tarquins shall weep blood
Upon the funeral Hearse, with whose chaste body,
Honour your arms, and to th'assembled people,
Disclose her innocent wounds: Gramercies Lords,
That universal shout tells me their words
are gracious with the people, and their troops
are ready imbat•…elide and expect but vs,
To lead their troops, Jove give our fortunes speed,
Weal murder, murder, and base rape shall bleed.
Even thus far Tyrant have we dogd thy stepes,
Frighting thy frighted fear with horrid steel.
Lodge in the safety of Porsennaes arms
Now Traitor Brutes we dare front thy pride.
Porsenna tha•…t unworthy of a sceptre,
To shelter pride, lust, rape, and tyranny,
In that proud Prince and his confederate sons.
Traitors to heaven, to Tarquin, Room and vs,
Treason to Kings, doth stretch even to the Gods,
And those high Gods that take great Rome in charge,
shall punish your rebellion.
Oh Devil! Sextus speak not thou of Gods,
Not cast those false and fained eyes to heaven,
Whose rape the furies must torment 〈◊〉, of Lucre: Lucrect:
Her chaste blood sul cries for vengeance to the Other∣all deities
Oh two's a foul deed Sextus,
And thy shame shall be eternal, and outline her fame,
Say Sextus loved her, was she not a woman,
I, and perhaps was willing to beforc'd,
Must you being private subject•… dare to 〈◊〉
Wars loud alarm against your potent King?
Brutus therein thou dost forget thy self, And wrongst the glory of thine Ances•…ors, staining thy blood with Treason.
Tuscan know the Consul Brutus is their powerful foe.
Ali Tarquin. Consul?
I consul, and the powerful hand of Rome
Grasps his imperial sword: the name of King
The tyrant Tarquins have made odious
Unto this nation: and the general knee,
Of this our warlike people, now lowe bends
To royal Brutus where the kings name ends.
Now Sextus whore's the Oracle, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
My Mother earth it plainly did foretell,
My noble virtues should thy sin exceed,
Brutus should sway, &amp; lust-burnt Tarquin bleed
Now shall the blood of Seruius fall, as heavy as a huge mountain on your Tyrant heads, orewhelming all your glory.
Tullias guilt shall be by vs revenged, that in her pride,
In blood paternal, her rough coach-wheeles did.
Your Tirannies,
Pride,
And my Lucrece fate, shall al be swalowd in this hostile hate.
Oh Romulus, thou that fiirst reared yon walls,
In sight of which we stand in thy soft bosom,
Is hanged the nest in which the Tarquins build,
Which in the branches of thy lofty spires,
Tarquin shall perch, or where he once hath 〈◊〉.
His high built airy shall be drowned in blood,
alarm then, Brutus by heaven I vow,
My sword shall prove thou ne'er wast mad till now.
Sextus, my madness with your lives expires,
Thy sensual eyes are fixed upon that wall,
Thou ne'er shalt enter, Room confines you all.
A chargethen.
Jove and Tarquin.
but we, cry a Brutus.
Lucrece, force and victory.
Thou Jovial hand hold up thy sceptre high
And let not justice be oppressed with pride,
Oh you Senators leave not Room and vs,
Grasped in the purple hands of death and ruin, the Tarquins have the best.
Yet stand, my foot is fixed upon this bridge.
Tyber, thy arched streams shall be changed crimso, with
Roman blood, before I trudge form hence.
Brutus retire, for if thou enter Rome,
We are all lost, stand not on valour now,
But save thy people, lets survive this day
To try the fortunes of another field.
Break down the bridge, lest the pursuing enemy
Enter with vs and take the spoil of Rome.
Then brooked behind me, for by heaven Isle grow,
And root my foot as deep as to the center, before I leave this passage.
Come you're mad.
The foe comes on and we in trifling here hazard our self and people.
Save them all, to make Rome stand, Horatius here will fall.
We would not lose thee, do not breast thy self
Amongst thousands if thou frontst them thou art winged,
With million swords and darts, and we behind
Must break the bridge of Tiber to save Rome,
Before thee infinits case on thy face,
And menace death, the raging streams of Tiber are at thy back to swallow thee.
Retire to make Rome live, tic death that I desire.
Then farewell dead Horatius, think in vs
The universal arm of potent Rome
Takes his last leave of thee in this embrace.
Farewell.
Farewell.
These arches all must down to interdict their passage the town.
Soft Tarquin, see a bulwark to this bridge.
You first must pass, the man that enters here
Must make his passage through Horatius breast,
See with this target do I buckle Rome,
And with this sword defy the pussāt army of two great king.
One man to face an host,
Charge soldiers, of full forty thousan Romans,
Theres but one daring hand against your host,
To keep you from the sack or spoil of Rome, charge, charge.
Oh cowards, slaves, and vassals what not enter?
Was it for this you placed my regiment
Upon a hill, to be the sad spectator
Of such a general cowardice? Tarquin, Aruns,
Porsenna, soldiers, pass, Horatius quickly,
And they behind him will deuolue the bridge
And raging Tyber that's impossible,
Your host must swim before you conquer Rome.
Yet stand Horatius, bear but one brunt more
The arched brunt shall sink upon his piles.
And in his fall lift up thy real me to heaven
Yet enter.
Dear Horatius, yet stand, &amp; save a milliō by one powerful hand
Charge charge, charge.
Degenerate slaves, the bridge is fallen, Romes lost.
Valor. Horatius thou art stronger then their Hostess,
Thy strength is virtue, theirs are idle boastes.
Now save thy self and leap into the waives.
Porsenna, Tarquin, now wade past your depths,
And enter Rome, I seele my body sink
Beneath my ponderous weight, Rome is preserved,
And now farewell: for he that follows me
Must search the bottom of this raging stream•…,
Fame with thy golden wings, renown my crest,
And Tiber take me on thy silver breast.
Hoe's leapt off from the bridge and drowned himself.
You are deceived his spirits soars too hie
To be choked in with the base element
Of water, lo he swims armed as he was,
Whilst all the army have discharged their arrows.
Of which the shield upon his back stick full.
And hark the suit of all the multitude.
Now welcomes him a land, Horatius fame
Hath chekt our armies with a general shame;
But come, to morrows fortune must restore,
This scandal, which I of the Gods implore,
Then we must find another time fair prince,
To scourge these people, and revenge your wrongs.
For this night isle betake me to my tent
And we to ours, to morrow we will renown
Our army with the spoil of a Rich-towne.
Our secretary.
My Lord.
Command lights and torches in our tents.
And let a Guard ingirt our safety round,
Whilst we debate, of military business: come sit and lets consult.
Horatius, famous for defending Rome.
But we ha done nought worthy 〈◊〉.
Nor of a Roman, I in this disguise
Have past the army &amp; the puissant guard
Of king Porsen•…a; this should be his tent
And in good time, now fate direct my strength
Against a king to free great Rome at length.
Oh I am slain, treason, treason.
Villain what hast thou done?
Why slain the king.
What king?
Porsenna.
Porsenna lives to see thee tortured,
With plagues more devilish then the plague of hell.
Oh too rash M•…tius, hast thou mist thy aim?
And thou base hand that did direct my poniard
Against a peasants breast, behold thy error
Thus I will punish, I will give thee freely
Unto the fire, nor will I wear a limb,
That with such 〈◊〉 shall offend his Lord.
What will the madman doe•…
Porsenna so punish my hand thus, for not killing thee.
Three hundred noble lads beside my self
Have vowed to all the Gods that Patron Rome,
Thy ruin for supporting tyranny;
And though I fai•…e, expect yet every hour,
When some strange fate thy fortunes will devour.
Stay Roman, we admire thy constancy,
And scorn of fortune, go return to Rome,
We give thee life, and say the King Porsenna,
Whose life thou seek st is this honourable,
Pass freely, guard him to the walls of Rome,
And were we not so much ingadge to Tarquin,
We would not lift a hand against that nation that breeds such noble spirits.
Well I go, and for revenge take life even of my foe.
Conduct him safely, what 300 Gallants
Sworn to our death, and all resolved like him!
We must be provident, to morrows fortune
Weal prove for Tarquin, if they fail our hopes,
Peace shall be made with Rome, but first our secretary,
Shall have his due rights of funeral, then our shield
We must address next sor to morrows field.
By thee we are consul, &amp; still govern Rome,
Which but for thee, had bin dispoild and tan,
Made a confused heap of men and stones,
Swimming in blood and slaughter, dere Horatius
Thy noble picture shall be carved in brass,
And fixed 〈◊〉 thy perpetual memory in our high capitol.
Great consul thanks, but leaving thislets march out of the city.
And once more bid them battle on the plains.
This day my soul divines we shall live free
From all the furious Tarquins: but wheres Scenola? we se not him to day.
Here Lords behold me handles as you see,
The cause I mist P•…rsonna in his tent,
And in his stead kilt but his secretary.
The missed King when he beheld me punish
My rash mistake, with loss of my right hand
Vnbegd and almost scorned he gave me life,
Which I had then refused, but in desire to avenge fair Lucrece
Rape.
Dear Sc•…nola thou hast exceeded vs in our resolve,
But will the Tarquins give vs present battle?
That may ye hear, the skirmish is begun already twixt the horse.
Then noble consul lead our main battle on.
Oh Jove this day balance our cause, and let the innocēt blood
Of Rape stained Lucrece crown with death and horror
The heads of all the Tarquins, see this day
In her cause do we consecrate our lives,
And in defence of Justice now march on:
I hear their martial musique, be our shock
As terrible as are the meeting clouds
That break in thunder, yet our hopes are fair,
And this rough charge shall all our hopes repair.
Yet grow our lofty plumes vnflagd with blood,
And yet sweet pleasure wantons in the air, how goes the battle Aruns?
Tic even balanced, I interchanged with Brutus hand to hand, a dangerous encounter both are wounded, &amp; had not the rude press divided vs, one had dropped down to earth.
It was bravely fought, I saw the King your father free his person from thousand Romans that begirt his state, where fly∣ing arrows thick as atoms hung about his ears.
I hope a glorious day, come Tuskan king, lets on thē.
Aruns stay that sword that late did drink the consuls blood
Must with his keen phange tire upon my flesh, or this on •…in.
It spared the consuls life to end thy days in a more glorious strife.
I stand against thee Tuscan.
I for thee.
Where ere I find a Tarquin, hes for me.
Alarm, Enter Tarquin with an arrow in his breast, Tu•…in with him, pursued by Collatine, Lucretius, Sceuola.
Fair Tullia leave me, save thy life by flight,
Since mine is desperate, behold I am wounded
Even to the death, there stays within my tent
A winged Jennet, mount his back and fly,
Live to revenge my death since I must die.
Had I the heart to tread upon the bulk
Of my dead father, and to see him slaughtered,
Only for love of Tarquin and a crown,
And shall I fear death more then loss of both?
No this is Tulliaes fame, rather then fly
From Tarquin, amongst a thousand swords sheel die.
Hew them to pieces both.
My Tullia save, and ore my caitiue head those meteors wave.
Let Tullia yield then.
Yield me cuckold no mercy, I scorn let me the danger know.
Upon them then.
Lets bring them to their fate,
And let them perish in the peoples hate.
Fear not, Isle back thee husband.
But for thee, sweet were the hand that this charged soul could free.
Life I deeps, let noble Sext•…s stand
To avenge our death, even till these vitals end,
Scorning my own, this life will I defend.
And Isle sweet Tarquin to my power guard thine,
Come on you slaves and make this earth divine.
Aruns this crimsin favour for thy sake,
Isle wear upon my forehead maskt with blood
Till all the moisturise in the Tarquins veins
Be spilt upon the earth and leave thy body
As dry as the parcht summer, burnt and scorched with the canicu∣lar stars.
Aruns lies dead by this bright sword thats here about his head.
And see great consul, where the pride of Rome lies sunk and fallen.
Besides him lies the queen mangled and hewd amongst the Roman soldièrs.
Lift up their slaughtered bodies, help to rear them a∣against this hill in view of all the camp, This sight will be a terror to the so, and make them yield or fly.
But wheres the ravisher, injurious Sextus that we see not him?
Through broken spears, cracked swords, vnboweld steeds
Flaude armours, mangled limbs, and battered casks,
Knee deep in blood, I ha pierced the Roman host to be my fa∣theirs rescue.
Tic too late, his mounting prid's sunk in the peoples hate.
My father, mother, brother, fortune now,
I do defy thee, I expose my self,
To horrid danger, safety I despise,
I dare the worst of peril I am bound.
On till this pile of flesh be all one wound,
Begirt him Lord, this is the Ravisher.
Theres no revenge for Lucrece till he fall.
Cease Sextus then.
Sextus defies you all, yet will you give me language ere I 〈◊〉:
Say on.
Tic not for mercy, for I scorn that life
Thats given by any, and the more to ad
To your immense unmeasurable hate,
I was the spur unto my fathers 〈◊〉,
It was I that awde the Princes of the Land,
That made thee Brutus mad, these discontents,
I ravished the chaste Lucrece, Sextus I,
The daughter and thy wife, Brutus thy cousin.
Elide indeed to all, it was for my Rape,
Her constant hand ripped up her innocent breast, it was Sextus did all this.
Which isle revenge.
Leave that to me.
Old as I am isle do it.
I have one hand yet left, of strength enough to kill a ra∣u•…sher.
Come all at once, I all: yet hear me Brutus, thou art Ho∣n•…rabble.
And my words tend to thee: my father did
By many hands, whats he amongst you can challenge
The least I smallest honour in his death?
If I be kilt amongst this hostile •…hrong
The poorest snaky soldier well may claim
As much renown in royal Sextus death,
As Brutus, thou, or thou Horatius.
I am to die, and more then die I cannot,
Rob not your selves of Honour in my death.
When the two mightiest spirits of Greece and Troy
Tugde for the mast•…ie, Hector and Achilles,
Had pu•…ssant Hector by Achilles hand,
Did in a single monomachie Achilles,
Had 〈◊〉 the •…orthie, but being slain by odds,
The 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 had as much honour
As saint Achilles in the Troians death.
Had thou not done a deed so execrable,
That Gods and men abhor, id love thee Sextus,
And hug thee for this chalēge breathed so freely:
Behold, I stand for Rome as General,
Thou of the Tarquins dost alone survive,
The head of all these garboils the chife actor
Of that black sin which we chastise by arms.
〈◊〉 Romans with your bright swords be our lists
And ring vs in none dare to offend the Prince
By the least touch lest he incur our wrath:
This honour do your Consul, that his hand
may puny•…h this arch mischief, that the times
Succeeding may of Brutus thus much •…ell,
By him pride, lust, and all the Tarquins fell.
To ravish Lucrece cuckold Collatine:
And spill the chicest blood that ever ran,
In any matrons veins, repents me not
So much as to ha wronged a gentleman
So noble as the Consul in this strife.
Brutus be bold, thou fightst with one scorns life.
And thou with one that less then his renown
Priseth his blood or Romes imperial crown
Sextus stand fair, much honour shall I win•…
To revenge Lucre•…, and chastise thy sin.
I repent nothing, may I live or die,
Though my blood fall, my spirit shall mount on hie.
Both slain: oh noble Brutus this thy fam•…
To after ages shall survive, thy body
Shall have a fair &amp; gorgeous Sepulchre:
For whom the matrons shall in funeral black
Morn twelve 〈◊〉 moons, thou that first governed Rome,
And swayed the people by a consuls name.
These bodies of the Tarquins weal commit
Unto the funeral pile: you Collatine
Shall succeed Brutus, in the consuls place.
Whom wi•…h this Laurel wreath we here relate
Such is the peoples voice, accept it then.
We do, and may our power so just appear
Rome may have peace, both with our love &amp; fear.
But soft, what march is this?
The 〈◊〉 king, seeing the 〈◊〉 slain.
Thus armed and battelled offers peace to Rome.
To confirm which, we will give you present hostage
If you deny, we will stand upon our guard,
And by the force of arms, maintain our own
After so much effusion and large wast
Of Roman blood the name of peace is welcome,
Since of the 〈◊〉 none remain in Rome.
And 〈◊〉 rape is now revenged at full.
It were good to entertain 〈◊〉 league.
〈◊〉 we embrace whose royal presence.
Shall grace the Consul to the funeral pile.
March on to Rome, Jove 〈◊〉 our guard and guide,
That hath in vs veng'd Rape and punished pride.

GRacious spectators doe not here expect,
Visions of pleasure, amorous discourse:
Our subject is of blood and Tragedy,
Murder, foul Incest, and Hypocrisy.
Behold the Strumpet of proud Babylon,
Her Cup with fornication foaming full
Of Gods high wrath and vengeance for that evil,
Which was imposd upon her by the Devil.
SEnt from the Crystal Palace of true Fame,
And bright Starre-Chamber of eternal souls,
Severed from Angels fellowship awhile,
To dwell with mortal bodies here on earth:
I Francis Guicciardine a Florentine,
Am by the powerful and commanding Muse,
(Which bears domination in our souls)
Sent down to let you see the Tragedy,
Of Roderigo Borgia lately Pope,
Called the sixth Alexander, with his son
Proud Caesar: to present unto your eyes,
Their faithless, fearless, and ambitious lives:
And first by what ungodly means and Art,
Hee did attain the Triple-Diadem,
This vision offered to your eyes declares.
At one door betwixt two other Cardinals, Roderigo in his pur∣ple habit close in conference with them, one of which hee guides to a Tent, where a Table is furnished with divers bags of money, which that Cardinal bears away: and to another Tent the other Card∣nil, where hee delivers him a great quantity of rich 〈◊〉 ••∣braces, with joining of hands. 
〈◊〉 •ome from an other place a Moncke with a magical book and 〈◊〉 in private whispering with Roderick, whom the Monk draws to a chair on midst of th• Stage which hee circleth, and before i• an•there Circle, into which (after semblance of reading with 〈◊〉) p•ear exhalations of lightning an• 〈◊〉 smoke in 〈◊〉 wh•roof a dive•l in most ugly sha•e from which Roderigo tur•e•h his ••ce, hee being conjured •own after more thunder and •ire, as•ends anot•er devil like a Sergeant with a mace under h•s girdle: Roderigo disliketh. Hee descends: after more thunder and •earefull fire, ascend in r•bes ponti•icall with a triple Crown on his head, and Cross keys in his ha•d: a dive•ll him ensuing in •lack robes like a pronotary, a cornerd Cap on his head, a box of Lancets at his ger•le, a little piece of fine parchment in his hand, who being brought unto Alexander, hee willingly receives him; to whom hee delivers the writing, which seeming to read, pre∣sentl• the Pronotary strippeth up Alexanders sleeve and lets his arm blood in a saucer, and having taken a piece from the Prono∣tarry subscribeth to the parchment; delivers it: the remainder of the blou•, the other devil seems to sup up; and from him dis∣to•bed is put the rich Cap the Tunicle, and the triple Crown set upon Alexanders head, the Crosse-keyes delivered into his hands; and withal a magical book: this donne with thunder and light∣ning the devil d•scend: Alexander advances himself, and departs.
Thus first with golden bribes he did corrupt
The purple conclave: then by devilish art
Satan transfigured like a Pronotarie
To him makes offer of the triple Crown
For certain years agreed betwixt them two.
The life of action shall express the rest.
Renowned Lodowik our warlike Cousin,
Auspiciously encountered on the skirts
Of Pie•mont, we greet you joyfully.
Thrice and forever most renowned Charles,
A •aithfull tongue from an unfeigned heart
As a just harold full of ••uth and honour
On the behalf of forlorn •tale
Needing and craving a• your Princely hands,
The patronage and true protection
Of such a Potent and victorious King
Humbly salutes your royal Majesty.
The ship of which some-time well guided state,
Is through tempestuous times malignity
By worthless Pilots, foolish Governors
Mutually factious, like to sink through Schism
Into the bottom of the black abisme
Through th'imposition of nec•ssity.
Do not! oh do not then (most Christian Charles)
Do not forsake his holding up his hands
For succour to your royal Clemency:
His sails are rent, mastes spent and rudder brooke
And under water such wide open leaks
As under water soon will make her sink.
Having been bilg'd upon so many shelves,
So torn, so rotten and so long vnrig'd,
And playing with the waives to and again
As one not governed with help of he••e.
One then whom nature in his vows to God▪
Hath tied to tender her forlorn estate
With eyes fore-seeing and compassionate▪
Retenders her to your high Majesty,
A Christian Prince so wise so valiant:
Undoubted heir unto the Crown of Naples,
By lawful right of that great house of Aniou:
Of which your grace is well known lawful heir,
By th'issues of that Charles the first, that first
Of the blood royal of the Crown of France,
Obtained that Kingdom ages many past.
These reasons wear with Lodowik Sforza moved,
To move your Majesty with martial force
To pass these mountains to possess your own.
March then most Christian and renowned Prince,
Advance thy lily standard potent King:
And since all skandalls are removed and cleared,
Strike up your cheerful drums and march along
In Gods name; with good auspices of Saint Denys,
I know you doubt not mine integrity:
Can more gross error rest in policy.
Then first to raise a turbulent sharpe storm,
And unadvisedly to leave defence
To doubtful chance and possibilities.
To broach strong poison is too dangerous,
And not be certain of the present virtue
Which is contained in his Antidote.
Wilde fire permitted without limit burns,
Even to consume them that first kindled it:
I did advise you, I inducted you,
And Lodowike, which brought you on with honour,
Will bring you of with triumph and renown.
Embrace me Cousin Sforza: by the souls
Of my forefathers I rejoice as much
In thy dear friendship and wise industry,
As in the more parteof my patrimony:
Courage together let vs share all one,
In life, in death, in purchase or in none.
〈…〉 are fornmate for Daubigny,
〈…〉 how that the Colonises,
(Although Alfonso did accord with them,)
Declared have them-selues for France and vs,
Without dissembling or hypocrisy.
Why this was it I did expect great Charles,
Our armies and our friends have been long sown,
The ground well ploughed, the blade is full come up,
And doubt not we shall have a joyful harvest.
Cousin Montpansier
March with your regiments to Pontremolt.
Expect vs, or from vs directions,
To meet our forces, when wee come near Florence,
There shall you find the Swiss with their Artillery,
Newly by sea brought unto Spetia,
Come Cousin march we cheerfully together,
Fair is the way, fair fortune, and fair whether,
Nay such profane and monstrous Sodomy,
Such obscure Incest and Adultery,
Such odious Avarice and perfidy,
Such vinolence and bruti•h gluttony,
So barren of sincere integrity.
In whom there is no shame nor verity,
Faith nor religion, but mere cruelty?
Immoderate ambition, guilfull treachery,
Such profanation and Apostasy▪
And in all falsehood such dexterity.
As heavens detest, and men on earth distaster
Such impious sacrilege, such adulation:
Of all good men such detestation.
Such Magic skill, such devilish incantation.
Apparantfigures of damned reprobation.
As in all thoughts is thought abomination▪
Time will out-strip vs; for the morning star,
Portends the mounting of fair Phoebus Carre.
Hast we, for danger drawn on by delay,
Admits no time •o tarry till clear day.
Fix on your Papers, these for Alexander
And his ambitious Caesar: set on yours.
Hale reverent Pasquill I doll of verity, 
Accept these sacri•ices which we bring.
These be sin offerings figuring foul vice.
Oh glorious guitar of the golden Spheres,
And thou that from thy precious lyric strings
Makes Gods and men in heaven and earth to dance
With sacred touch of sweetest harmony:
Pity these times, by whose malignity,
We loose our grace, and thou thy dignity.
High Muse, which meanwhile virtues patronized,
In whose eternal rolls of memory
The famous acts of Princes were comprised
By force of euer-liuing History:
What shall wee doe to call thee back again?
True Chronicler of all immortal glory,
When here with mortal men nought is deuis'd,
But how all stories with foul vice to stain:
So that alas thy gracious Oratory,
Which with mere truth and virtue sympathised,
Is silent; and wee Poets now with pain,
(Which in Castalian Fountains dipped our quills)
Are forced of men's impiety to plain;
And well thou wot•t, wrought against our wills,
In rugged verse, vile matters to contain:
And herein lurks the worst of mortal ills,
That Rome (which should be Virtues Paradise)
Bare of all good, is wilderness of vice.
How luculent and more conspicuous
Even then the sun, in clearest Majesty,
His vehement and more then hellish thirst
Soaring to perch upon the spire of honour
Displ••es his bastard wings: and in that nest
Where princely Falcons, or Ioues kingly Birds,
Should hatch their young ones, plants his ravenous Harpies,
His graceless•, impious, and disastrous sons,
Even in the sovereign Chair of domination.
But chiefly one, that devilish Cardinal,
Proud Caesar, farst, with fierce impiety:
His Oracle and instrument of shame
In all nefarious plots and practises,
Is now become as wicked as himself:
But hast we now, least any should suspect vs.
Much conference with Pasquill may detect vs.
Dio viguarda Signior illustrissimo: whether in such hast my noble Lord thus early?
Signior Barbarossa in happy time well encountered, for I have some business this morning with my brother the Duke of Candy, wherein I would both use your counsel and coun∣tenance.
My good Lord Viselli, the countenance of your devoted poor friend, is of less value then his counsel, yet both of very small validity: such as they be, with his life and best fortunes he sincerely sacrifices all to your service.
Pardon me dear sir no service more then reciprocal, and in due parity betwixt vs, and since wee be so near it, let vs not pass Pasquill without an Aue: what scandalous hyerogli∣phickes have wee here?
A. S. P. M.
Auaritia, Superbia, Perfidy, Militia,
Alexander, Sextus, Pontifex, Maximus.
Against my Lord the Popes holiness such blasphemous impu∣dence, such intolerable bitterness! M. P. S. A. These are the same letters with the first begin∣ning at the last, Magnum Petrum Sequitur Antichristus. Phy Diabolo, our blessed Alexander (being Saint Peeters successor) this devilish libeller calls Antichrist.
Pause there my Lord a little, some-what here concerns my Lord the Cardinal Borgia.
Read it good Barbarossa.
Alexander Caesarem suum Galero et purpura donauit vt menstruoso spiritus sui veneno, vniuersum simul conclave suffocaret.
Oh most intolerable abomination?
Alexander adopted his son Caesar into the fellow∣ship of Cardinals, that he with the monstrous poison of his breath might choke the whole Conclave.
By the blessed alter of Saint Peeter this villainy surpasses patience.
My Lord here's a long libel.
Read it good Barbarossa: more mischief of my wife nay read it.
Quid mirum? Romae facta est Lucretia Thais,
Vnica Alexandri filia, sponsa nurus.
The same in effect inseueth.
Welcome good Post from Rome tell vs some news,
Lucrece is turned Thayis of the stews:
In whom her father Alexander saw,
His only daughter, wife, and daughter in law,
Shall I read on my Lord? here is much more.
Nay read out all, it is but of a whore.
Francisco di Gonsaga was the first,
That married Lucrece Alexanders daughter,
And yet the Pope those bains of bridal burst,
And made of marriage sacrament a laughter,
His reason was because that fellow poor,
Lacked maintenance for such a noble whore.
Malignant aspect of ungracious stars,
Why have you pointed at my miseries?
Have patience good my Lord and here the rest,
Patienza per force, but this wounds to th'quick.
Iohn Sforza now Lord Maerques of Pescare,
Was second husband to this jolly dame,
Of natures faculties he being bare,
In like state with his predecessor came,
〈◊〉 he, when he should have writ his mind,
Paper well might; but pen or ink none find.
Oh villamies of monstrous people,
Fashions and times deformed and unseasonable,
Yet my Lord a little have patience in your own cause
Malice perform thy worst least coming late,
I with anticipation cross that fate. Read it, toot man.
Gismond Viselli, nobly descended,
Is for his shameful match much discommended.
For never was the shameless Fuluia,
Nor Lais noted for so many wooers,
Nor that unchaste profuse Sempronia.
A common dealer with so many dooers,
So proud, so faithless, and so void of shame,
As is new brodell bride Lucretia,
Take to thee Gismond both the scorn and shame,
And live long •jealous of Lucretia.
With pushing horns keep out all comers in,
For now thy mortal miseries begin.
Mortal miseries? but we are all mortal,
Fortune I scorn thy malice, and thy meed,
Keep them up safe that I may show them to his holiness,
Is this the licence which our city Rome
Hath given to beastly Bardes, and satirists,
Ribbaldly Rimesters, and malicious curs,
To leave no state of Church nor secular,
Free from their ordure, and polution.
Good Barbarossa bear me Company:
Exile and Punishment for such base poets,
And str•pes with weary scourges were too little.
Which breathing here in Rome, and taking grace▪
From the fair Sunne-shine of this hemisphere,
Contaminate that ayre with their vile breath.
Obumbrating this light by which they live,
If these were truth: this times impiety,
May soon sink down under the deity. 
With what expense of money plate and jewels
This Meter is attained my Coffers witness:
But Astaroth my covenant with thee
Made for this soul more precious then all treasure,
Afflicts my conscience, O but Alexander
Thy conscience is no conscience; if a conscience,
It is a •coprouse and polluted conscience.
But what? a coward for thy conscience?
The devil is witness with me when I sealed it
And cauterised this conscience now scard up
To banish out faith, hope and charity;
Using the name of Christian as a stale
For Arcane plots and intricate designs
That all my misty machinations
And Counsels held with black Tartarian fiends
Were for the glorious sunne-shine of my sons;
That they might mount in equal parallel
With golden majesty like Saturnes son
To dart down fire and thunder on their foes.
That, that was it, which I so much desired
To see my sons through all the world admired,
In spite of grace, conscience, and Acharon
I will rejoice and triumph in my Charter.
Sedebis Romae Papa, sum in foelicitate tui et
Filiorum vine; 11. et 7. dies 8. post moriere.
Proviso quote nunquam te signs tremende
Crucis signo.
Was • di•ill provides in his covenant
I should not cross my self at any time;
I never was so ceremonious.
Well this rich Meter thought it cost me dear
Sh•ll make me live in pomp whilst I live here.
Holla Bernardo?
Call hither my two sons the Duke of Candy and the
Cardinal of Valence.
Happy those sons whom fathers love so well
That for their sakes they dare adventure hell.
Come my dear sons the comfort of my life
Yours is this earthly glory which I hold.
Cannot the spacious bounds of Italy
Divided equally contain you both?
From France and Switzerland I will begin
With Naples and those Towns in Peadmont
And all the signories in Lombardy
From Porto di Volane to Sauona
And Genes on the otherside of Italy
Upon the Mediterranean towards Greece;
Allotted Candy for his patrimony.
And in Romania from Pontremoli
And Prato to fair Florence; and from thence
In Tuskany within the River Narre
And fruitful Arno those sweet Provinces
Even to Mont Alto, Naples, Policastro
And Petrasilia in Calabria
The furthest home of Italy for Caesar.
Gain double strength with your united loves
Love one another boys you shall be Kings:
Fortune hath been auspicious at my birth
And will continue gracious to mine end.
Castor and Pollux would not live in Heaven
Vnlesses they might be stellified together,
You for a little-turfe of earth contend
When they together shine the welkin clears:
And gentle gales bear fourth the winged fails,
But when they shine a part they threaten storms
And hiddeous tempests to the Mariners
Castor would not be called but Pollux Castor
And Castor Castors Pollux: so my Candy
Be 〈◊〉 Candy, Caesa•, Candies Caesar,
With perfect love, dear boys love one another
So 〈◊〉 shall be s••engt•en•d by his brother.
M•s• blessed reverend and renowned father,
Th• lou• by n•ture to my brother Candy,
〈◊〉 me some-times in plainer sort
To clee•• my conscience issuing from pure love,
It is mere love which moos these passions,
When I do cons •or advise your good.
I know dear brother when your counsel tends
Unto my good it issues from pure love.
As when I tax your princely conscience
Like an vnpitted penitentiary,
Brother with reverence of his Holiness
You• •oared is too much spiced with honesty.
I and I fear me he will •end it so,
Your brother Caesar tells you very true:
You must not be so ceremonious
Of oaths and honesty, Princes of this world
Are not p•ickt in the books of conscience,
You may not break your promise for a world:
Learn this one lesson look ye mark it well,
It is not always needful to keep promise,
For Princes (forced by mere necessity
To pass their faithful promises) again
Forced by the same necessity to break promise.
And for your more instructions learn these rules!
If any Cedar, in your forest spread,
And ouer-pee•e your branches with his top,
Provide •n axe to cut him at the root,
Suborn informers or by snares entrap
That King of Flies within the Spiders Web;
Or else ensnare him in the Lions toils.
What though the multitude applaud his fame:
Because the vulgar have wide open ears
Mutter amongst them and possess their hearts
That his designments wrought against the state
By which yea wound him with a public hate.
So let him perish, yet seem pitiful
Cherish the weakness of his stock and race
As if alone he merited disgrace.
Suffer your Court to morn his funerals,
But burn a bone-fire for him in your Chamber.
Caesar delivers Oracles of true•h.
Tic well said Caesar, yet attend a little,
And bind them like rich bracelets on thine arms
Or as a precious jewel at thine ear.
Suppose two factious Princes both thy friends
Ambitious both, and both competitors,
Advance in hostile arms against each other
Join with the strongest to confound the weak
But let your wars foundation touch his Crown,
Your nearest Charity concerns your self;
Else let him perish; yet seem charitable.
As if you were merely composed of virtue:
Believe me Candy things are as they seem,
Not what they be themselves; all is opinion:
And all this world is but opinion.
Look what large distance is twixt Heaven and Earth,
So many leagues twixt wealth and honesty:
And they that live puling upon the fruits
Of honest consciences; starve on the Common.
Caesar can tell thee this in ample sort.
And Caesar love him, love him heartily;
Though mildness do possess thy brother Cand•e,
It is a gentle vice, vicining virtue.
Under correction of your Holiness,
Those wars which virtue leu•es against v•ce,
Are only known to some particulars
Which have them written in their consciences.
Those are the same they seem and in such wars
Your son shall make remonstrance of his valour,
And so become true Champion of the Church.
It is the precious Ornament of Princes
To be strong hearted, proud, and valiant,
But well attempted with callidity,
Brother with reverence of his holiness
(Whose sacred words like blessed Oracles
Have pointed at your prudence) Caesar would
Have given the like advise: but (in conclusion)
Undoubtedly to work out thy confusion.
Upon my blessing follow Caesars counsel;
It tends to thy glory.
Most blessed Lord,
Ambassadors from Ferdinand of Naples
Arrived here attend your holiness.
This is a welcome messenger for Godfrey,
To make a marriage with the Lady Sans:
And Can•y for so much as this requires
A ioyfu•l entertainment; take that honour
And bid him welcome with due complements.
Show courteous, language laudable apporte;
Let them be feasted in more sumpteous sort
Then ordinary messengers of state:
Observe his speeches, fathom his designs;
And for I know thy nature tractable,
And full of curtsy: show curtsy
And good entreaty to them: Gentle Candy
Now show thy sell•e a politician;
I need not give thee large instructions;
For that I know thee wise▪ and honourable
Greet them from vs: Caesar shall at a turn
Give correspondence to thy curtsy:
I as well sits with my state and honour
Within these ten days will admit them hearing:
Mean while learn out by lore of policy
The substance of their motions, that we may
Be better arm•d to give them resolution.
Your holiness in this shall see my skill,
To do you service, 
Caesar now to thee.
This task upon thy shoulders only leanes;
I rest upon thee Caesar: were it not
That thou must second it, or first it rather
I durst not trust such things of consequence,
To feeble spirits: therefore from our stables
Six Persian Coursers armed and furnished
With rich Caparisons of gold and Pearl,
With six rich Complete Armours for they• saddles,
And such a Cabinet of precious Jewels
As we shall choose within to morrow morning
Present from vs in token of our love.
Let for no cost in sumptuous banqueting,
Believe me Caesar some-times at a banquet,
More ground is got then at a bloody battle.
Worm out their humours, fathom their delights,
If they delight in that which Naples covets,
Fine, witty, loue-sick, brave, and beautiful,
Eloquent, glancing, full of fantasies.
Such Sugar hearted Sirens, or such Commits,
As shine in our imperial state of Rome,
True pick-locks in close wards of policy,
Present them with the Paragons of Rome:
And spare not for a Million in expense,,
So long as here they keep their residence.
Caes•r in such a case will prooe true Caesar,
Wise, frank, and honourable.
I doubt it not:
And Caesar, (as thou dost embrace my love,
More then the world besides) accomplish this,
And wee shall Caesar with high blessings bliss, 
By this time is my fair Lucretia,
Befitted for a business of blood,
Nearly concerning her estate and mine. 
Lucretia cast off all servile fear,
Revenge t•y se••e upon thy jealous husband
T••t 〈…〉 thine honour, wronged thy bed:
F••re not; w•th resolution act his death:
L•• 〈…〉 •ace in policies
〈…〉 now prove Caesars Sister,
〈…〉 ••y s•ratagems as hee:
〈…〉 •aue found examples in all times.
〈…〉 thou m•lt •he 〈◊〉 c•ll to mind,
〈…〉 wrath f•ll fury,
〈…〉 indeous 〈◊〉:
〈…〉 •••there of her only son,
A 〈…〉 Dau•hters (all but one)
〈◊〉 i• one night, their husbands sleeping slew.
My 〈◊〉 as •used as theirs, my heart as resolute,
My hands as ready. G•smond I come,
Ha•lt on with fury •o revenge these wrongs
And love imp••son'd with thy jealousy,
I have de•iced such a cu•ious s•are,
As 〈…〉 never yet deuis'd,
To gre•pe h•s arms v•able to res•st,
D•aths i•s•ruments enclosed in these hands.
You 〈◊〉 Dau•h•ers of gum Erebus,
Which spit out avenge••ce from your vip•os heirs,
Inf••e a three-〈◊〉 g•• in these arms;
I•••ble 〈…〉 •r•ng indurate heart,
To consummate the pl•• o• my revenge.
Here comes the sn••ect of my Tragedy.
W•at my Lucretia walking alone?
Th••e solitary •assions should bewray
Some discontentment, and those gracious eyes
Seem to be mooned with anger, not with love:
Tell me Lucretia, may thy Gismond know?
Demaundst th•u the cause miutious Gismond?
When like a reduce (shut up from •he world)
I live close prisoner to thy jealousy?
The Esperian Dragons kept not with more watch,
The golden •ruit then thou my fatal beauty:
Thou would exclude me from the s•light of Sun,
But that his beams break t•rough some ••cu•sies
Thou woul•st d•bar•e me ••om the common ayre,
〈◊〉 that against my will I •uk it in,
A•d breat• it out in sealding sighs again:
Were I in N•xos 〈◊〉 no no•se is hey•d
But N•m••es •age 〈◊〉 ••ghts but ruthelesse rocks.
Or in t•e Libi•n •eser•s or ex•hanged
This Hemisph••e o• Rome for 〈◊〉 Int••odes,
We•e •ot so g••••os as to dwell in Rome,
Ba•••h'd 〈…〉 and conference •f friends.
〈◊〉 t•ou my ie•lous•e? may blame thy beauty,
And love im•••son'd in those amo•os looks:
•ea•e the 〈◊〉 of•ect•o•s on thy face,
Least he more wondering at thy precious eyes,
Then any Nymphs wh•ch he most hono•ed,
Shou•d bear thee to some other Paradise,
And •obe me, silly man, of this worlds joy.
I •ear the winds least amorous Jove in them,
(Envying such precious nature among•t men)
With extreme passion hence should hurry thee.
Oh love is full of fea•e all things I fear,
By which I m•light be frustrate of thy love.
Scoffst thou me Gis•and wi•h continual taunts?
Oh God of heavens, shall • both suffer shame
And scorn, with such despised captivity.
Here in the presence of the powers in Heaven,
I doe not speak •n scorn, but in mere love:
And further Lucrese, (of thy clemency,
For love, and b•aunt▪ both are rich in bounty)
F•rgiue me what is past, and I will swear,
Never to vex thee with more ie•lousy.
Thou will• so s•ear thy self: Gismond come hither?
Sit down and answer me this question. 
When I bestowed on thee this diamond
A Iewe•l once held precious as my life;
And w•th it ca•t away my self on thee
Did t•ou not promi•e to ma•ntaine mine honour,
〈◊〉 in word nor deed to give suspect
O ••y 〈◊〉 and hast th•u not since then
In 〈◊〉 of my no••es• Noble friends
〈…〉 a 〈◊〉 for my lightness•?
〈…〉 his mo•y up
So 〈…〉 and sight of them?
Wh•• 〈◊〉 thou did bestow this Diamond
I •ad a 〈◊〉 lustre in mine eye:
And wa• 〈◊〉 o• virtue, when I vowed
To ma•ntaine that, which was impossible:
B•t 〈◊〉 that time this stone hath had a s•awe,
〈◊〉 within t•e ring, his foil grown dim,
The ve•tu vani••• and the lust lost.
I can no longer brooke these base rebukes.
These 〈◊〉 riddles and close libellings
Oh help I am strangled.
Peace w•etched villain, then reciue this quickly:
Or by the living powers of heaven isle kill thee.
Take pen and ink: tic not to make thy will;
For if then wilt subscribe, I will not kill.
Tic but to clear those scandals of my shame,
With which thy jealousy did me defame.
So now that part is played, what follows now?
Thou Ribald, Cuckcold Rascal, Libeller,
Porn•cious Leche• void of a•l performance;
Per•u•ious Coxcomb, •whole, now for those wrongs
Which no great spirit could well tolerate
Come I, with mortal vengeance on thy soul.
Take this for sclandring of his Holiness
My blessed father and my brother Caesar
With incest: this take for my brother Candy:
And this for Noble Sphorza whom thou wrongest;
And since the time is short I will be short:
For locking up of me, calling me whore,
Setting asp•alls tending at my tail;
Take this and this &amp; this to make amends. 
And put thee from thy pains;
Now will my father Alexander say
That I did take the best and safest way,
And Caesar will app•ove it with his heart,
That Lucrere hath performed a cunning part.
If others ask who Gismonde kilt or why
It was himself repenting jealousy. 
Holla within there?
Why •allows?
Here my Lord.
What is my Lord Viselli stirring yet?
My Lord the Pope expects him and the ambassadors
Of Naples crave his company. 
My Lord I have not seen him yet this morning.
Is not your Lady Lucrce stir•ing yet?
No my good Lord I think she be not yet come from her chamber, her custom is not to be seen so soon.
Tic well, t•s well, let her take case in gods name,
But make hast call up my Lord thy moister honest fellow.
Wi•h patience of your Lordship I will speak:
For three days space I did find in my Lord
Passionate motions, and strange melancholy
'T may be his solitude hath drawn him forth,
I will first look the garden and the galleries.
Do my good friend I will expect thee in this parlour here?
Fellow come ba•ke, come back, fellow come back:
Y•ur Lo•d 〈◊〉 mu•t•red here call up your Lady;
Call i• your •allow se•uants. D•h anta Cross.
〈…〉 g•asped in his fatal •and
〈…〉 •ome violence, wrought on himself:
〈…〉 much vio•ate her self?
〈…〉 •ought by bloody Borgi•es race?
〈…〉 t•e 〈◊〉 hyp•chrisie,
Juice•••e 〈…〉 ••me and in•eru•able
Re••ale••t, o• 〈◊〉 it in thy me•cy.
Where 〈◊〉 •y Lord? my dea•• L••d?
Fai•y Lady.
Approach no• near this ••th•ull s•e•tackle;
Approach not near th•s spe•ac•e o• bl•ud,
This •u•hfull spect•cle of bl•ud and death,
Lease sudden• horror of these bleeding wounds
Wound thy d•stracted sp•ritz to pale death.
When• honour or what mo•tall spectacle.
Upon such sudden hath astonished me?
Oh my dear Lord: Vessel• speak to me:
Oh most disastrous accident and hour;
Ay me most wretched and unfortunate,
My dearest▪ 〈◊〉 the treasu•e of my life,
The sweetest parade•e of my best hopes,
Is murth•ed•i••k• out the murderers
Leave not vnsear•cht a corner n•r a Crony:
Locke up the •otes there least that homicide
Escape vs in t•i• passion —
Hau• patience Lady
Heavens will reveal t•e murder do•bt it not.
Ah Noble Barbaro••a much I fea•e
Now with t•es eyes I see the murderer,
S•aind wi•• the guilt of nature; •h my Lord
You l•ttle kn•w that these w••ke w•mans ha•ds
Twice •issued have the v•whole••e o• his;
From killing of himself before this time:
Oh f•e upon the devil, and melancholy;
Which leave me desolate a forlorn widow.
Madam these papers will bewray some matter.
Oh might I find an other murderer.
Th•se do contain some matter read them Lady.
My hey•t swollen up with sorrow, lends no light
Unto mine eyes, nor force unto my tongue
To see one letter, or to read one word,
I pray you read it good Lord Barbarossa.
I Gismond de Viselli through desperate grief conceived in iea∣lousy (which I bare against my Lady Lucrecia) having found out by much trial, and examine•ion her faithfulness and inno∣cency, make this my protestation as the last piacular oblation to her for those wrongs that with mine own unfortunate hands I have ended my li•e, desring her and all others to forgive me, and pray for me, subscribed with mine own hand, a•d sealed with my seal. 
Oh Lord of heavens have pardon on his soul.
This is his hand and seal, speak now my Lord:
Did not I soon disclose the murderer?
Told I not that the mur•herer was present?
Ah never never shall I live to see. 
Comfort you self dear Lady God will send succour
Your hue•band hath paid dearly for these wrongs.
Give me my Lord again, death shall not have him,
Come my dear G•smond▪ come aga•no my joy:
Delay me not least I prevent thy lo•e
I cannot brooke delay's, L•crece shall follow.
Tempt not Gods justice Lady, fall to prayer,
Help, in the take your Lord out of her sight.
Oh my dear friends that see my miseries,
I you beseech in dea•est tenderness
Bring in the body of my dearest Lord;
That I before my death may (with these eyes)
Behold him honoured in his obsequies.
And I will bear these papers to his Holiness,
Whose sorrow will exceed for Gismonds death. 
Thus foul suspicion, fear and jealousy
Of shame, dishonour, and his wives hot lust,
Hath seized upon Vessel; whose revenge,
Was to restrain Lucrece from Company▪
But swelling pride, and lust, both limitless,
Answered his loving fear and shame with death.
Attend the sequel. Now successively
(After such warlike preparations,
So many firm hopes found in Italy)
King Charles with fifteen hundred men at arms,
Three thousand Archers, with six thousand Swiss.
French men, and Gascons twice as many more,
With martial measures, over Piemont
Treads a long march after his drums and fife,
With Melons force, and now his trumpets hard,
Unto the gates of Rome give fresh alarms,
Unto the Pope, who stirs up in arms,
Castillian take five hundred harguebusse,
Two hundred Arbalastes, and fortify,
Upon the tower of Saint Sebastian,
Affronting that port where proud Charles should enter,
Called Santa Maria di Pop•lo.
Our soldiers ready be with match in cock,
T'attend this service, and our scurriers,
Are now returned having descried King Charles,
Hi• ensigns and his Cornets proudly mand,
With plumed regiments, and troops of horse,
Marching in glory to the gates of Rome.
Bravely bring on your companies bold hearts,
Gaspar de Foes are those two Basilisks,
Al•eddy mounted on their carriages?
They bee.
We make you moister of our Ordinance, 
And on the Turret of Saint Adrian.
Plant six more Cannon, and four Culuerings,
Four Lizards, and eight Sacres, with all speed,
Take Gunners with you to the Citadel,
Powder and shot, with Ladles for their charge,
See none be wanting; set them to their task.
Have a good care your Pyoners work hard,
To further your fortifications. 
Pleases your Holiness to give me leave,
It fitteth well with our own purposes,
To give Charles entrance, and without restraint,
Least he by rigour should usurp that leave,
Which to resist were vain and dangerous.
Believe me Father we must temporise.
Besides you see how the Calabrian Duke,
Out of the Port of Saint Sebastian,
Not one hour past, hath issued and left Rome.
Now though you do suspect, conceal all doubts:
For you shall find this sure and commonly,
Dangers accompany suspicion,
We will embrace that course, but with your leave,
In Castle Angelo Capitulate:
Standing (as best befits vs) on our guard.
Tic time your Holiness took to your guard,
For Potent Charles (like one that conquers)
Armed at all pieces, in his plumed cask,
And with a Lance resting upon his thigh,
Already with his forces hath possessed
The suberbs, and is now come to the gates.
We are resolved: Gasper de foes take heed,
On pain of death no soldier be so bold
As to dischardge one piece or arbalast,
Before th'alarme being given from them,
Wee with a culuering from Castle Angelo,
Proclaim hostility: troop on a pace,
Take we what fortune peace or war affords,
The worst of resolution is with swords.
Thus far with much applause in joyful march,
With good success and hopeful augury,
We marched have within the walls of Rome,
Not little wondering that his Holiness,
Doth give such slender welcome to our troops.
Your majesty may well perceive how fear,
And jealous judgment of a wounded conscience,
Works hard in Alexander.
And how foxe-like.
(Holding neutrality the surest guard)
He coops himself in Castle Angelo.
Pleases your maistie to give a summons,
Unto the Castle for some parlance,
Upon such articles as were set down,
Come we will touch him, summon forth a parley.
What office bear you marching on those walls,
We made no summons to confer with you.
Most Christian prince pleases your mightiness,
I am Castillian of Saint Angelo, Under his Holiness.
To bid defiance to our forces?
No most gracious Lord.
But to salute you from his Holiness.
What is he sick?
Not very well disposed,
S. Pe. ad vine. Nor ever was, nor will be well disposed.
An other summons for his Holiness, 
Most Christian Charles, here I salute your grace,
Bidding you peaceably welcome to Rome,
If you bring peace along with you to Rome.
In filial Love I thank your Holiness,
We little thought it our most holy father,
That our alegeance to the Church of Rome,
Which we with all our predecessors tendered,
Should have enforced you to take sanctuary.
Son Charles know then we took not to this place,
In fear as to some refuge or hassle:
But for as much as news were brought in post,
That you with all your forces did approach.
Armed and in hostile manner to this City,
The Conclave thought it fit tendering the safety,
Of holy Church, and sacred privilege,
To know your meaning first, and then with pomp,
To make your welcome in Saint Peters palace,
In the best fashion with due ceremonies.
Know then most holy father what we would,
Having in tedious marched from France thus far,
Past with our forces God still guiding vs,
(As we be deeply bound by laws of nature.
And reason to work surely for our right)
We left no busy doubts, nor obstacles,
Which might prevent vs in our just impress,
Hence was it that we did Capitulate,
So strictly with the crafty Florentines,
Whom we well knew favoured Alphonsoes part.
And this made Ve•ice join in league with vs.
Yet having notice that your Holiness.
Both with Alphonso (that usurps my Crown)
And his son Ferdinand drew deeper in
Upon considerations of more weight;
We thought it good to take France in our way.
And there to crave some certain Cautions
Of your indifference to his just title
Had in the Crown of Naples: therefore first
We do require (if you these parties tender,
(As your late letters did import) yield up
In Caution of your good intent to France;
This Castle which you now retain against vs.
Why Lodowick? the weathercock is turned,
The wind stands fair, but how long will that hold?
So may we put in hazard our whole Church
The dear estate of Christ's flock militant
And bring confusion unto Christendom.
So may you seize upon the Churches rights,
If that we should refer all to your trust.
This is Saint Peters bulwark; for my part
Here I will die ere I surrender it.
Now find I true which cōmon bruit proclaimed
Of your bad meanings and hypochrisie:
But I refer your conscience to that Judge
Whom (if my conscience harbour any thought
To wrong the Church of God, in any thing)
I call in justice to revenge on me.
Renowned Charles, suppose we should surrender▪
How may we be secured that you will
Restore it, after your impress at Naples.
The faith and honour of a Christian King.
Your faith &amp; honour? stay most Christian Charles
Men will not yield up Castles upon words
Unless their states, and lives grow desperate.
Why make we longer parley with this Pope
Whose false-hood is so much that neither oath,
Nor honesty can purchase place with him.
Who never yet in cause of con•equence
Ha•h k•pt his promise.
Tell vs, will ye grant?
What should we grant most Christian King of France
And tell me truly (were it your own case)
Whether you would (on such slight promises)
Accord to such uneven conditions?
We did not think our royal promises
Had been so slightly censured in your heart:
But since we find your infidelities
We must requite it with extremity,
Cousin Mountpanseir.
My Lord.
Forthwith cause ten brass pieces with their shot
And powder to be drawn out of Saint Marks;
Such as you find most fit for battery.
You will not here vs now, we speak so low:
Standing aloft you proudly scorn inferiors;
Weal send our minds, written in fiery notes.
Give doubtful answers, bee not peremptory
Least through your heate, his rage exsaperate.
Offer unto him on his Princely word,
The strength of Terracina for a pledge.
Victorious Cha•les, such is my trust and love
That neither fear of force nor violence
Could any ways induce me to suspect you.
Hence came it that the ports of Rome were opened
(At our behests) to give you guestning.
Accept vs therefore with our promises,
Which we shall under hand and seal confirm
Not any way to Cross your action.
If you will yield up Castle Angelo
Resolve vs presently without delays?
Because it is Saint Peeters Citadel
The conclave is in doubt to make surrender.
You will not yield then?
We cannot, nor wee will not yield it up.
Why then a parley with our ordinance.
What come ye to make pillage of the Church,
Which held you dear as her chief Champion?
For bear your violence in the name of God:
Fearing the scourge, and thunder from aboue,
Ou• offers are both just and reasonable.
Pieces which are of more valid•tie
We mean to tender to your Majesty.
What are those pieces you would tender vs.
To render presently the Citadels
Of Terracina, Cinita Vecchia, and Spoleto.
And we receive them very •hankfully.
S. P ad vine. Our voices of the cōclaue pass, that Charles
Shall be possessed of Castle Angelo.
And if your meaning with your words accord
We dare engage our souls for resurrender.
Your souls? foh foh they stink in sight of God &amp; man,
Your souls? why they be sold to Lucifer,
Your consciences are of so large a last
That you would sell Saint Peters Patrimony,
As Esau did his heritage for broth.
Thou most prophaine &amp; impious Moabite;
So full of vices and abominable,
No Pope but Lucifer in Peters Chair.
Renowned Charles pull down this Antichrist;
Advance some worthy father in his place.
Your fame sha•l live with all posterities
Who from a wicked Bishops tyranny
Enfranchised the Church of God misguided;
Even as (in this worlds worthy memories)
The names of Pippin and King Charlemain
Your predecessors, were eternized
For helping good Popes, Saints of Holy life,
O•t of ungodly persecutions.
A Pope by nature full of fraud, and pride;
Ambitious, auaritious, shameless, devilish,
And that and which your experience testifies)
One that with mortal malice hates the French:
By whom this reconciliation made
Was more in fear and hard necessity
Then faithful inclination, or good will.
Iscraiot, reprobate apostate,
I charge thee to desist and make submission
With penance to the Mother Church of Rome
On pain of everlasting reprobation.
Blasphemous exorsist, here are no devils
Which thou can conjure, with thy devilish spirit.
We charge thee render up that triple Crown
Which most ungodly man thou dost usurp.
Those robes pontifical which thou prophanest,
Saint Peters Chair wherein (like Antichrist)
Thou doest advance thy self thou man of sin.
Saint Peeter doth make challenge to those keys,
Which (in those hands defiled with blood and bribes)
Thou like a profane deputy dost hold.
That sword (with which thou sholdst strike Antichrist)
Thou like proud Antichrist converted hast
Upon the members of Christ's chosen flock;
Saint Paule demands his sword, Peter his keys:
Forbear your blasphemies, what know ye not
Christ's Vicar general chosen on earth?
Have not I power to bind and loose men's sins,
And souls, on earth, in hell, and purgatory?
Come take Saint Peters Chair proud heretiks;
Here take this triple Crown, oh you would take it:
But he, that made it, did not for you make it.
Ascanio thou would have these Golden keys;
Here take them with my vengeance on thy head, 
And Pseudo Paulus would have Saint Paules sword,
Ordained for his desolation.
Son Charles (since we capitulato with you)
Me thinks you should not suffer these t'affront vs.
Forbear your idle velletations,
Ang•ing and rubbing up the festered scars
O• wrath inveterate, and mortal quarrels,
We come not here to foster factions,
All are in one accorded, all are friends.
But yet most Holy-Father, let me crave,
Two favours more, both very reasonable;
First that you pardon both these Cardinals,
And other Barons which partake with me.
Then that the brother of great Baiaset,
That fled from Rhodes to France, and last to Rome,
With the protection of Pope Innocent
Called Gemen Ottoman, may be delivered
Into my hands, when after-time shall serve
For my best vantage in those holy wars,
Which we pretend against the Turks here-after.
The sun shall never set upon my wrath;
That Oily Lamp of blessed Charity
Shall not extinguish in my zealous heart:
He that knows all, knows this I cannot falter
With any brother, all are faithful friends:
Be but submissive, mild, and penitent,
And all is past, as all had been well meant.
Now touching Gemen Ottoman, son Charles,
When you shall undertake those godly wars,
I will deliver him as willingly
As you demand: and with a cheerful heart,
Praising your godly zeal on Christs behalf,
And praying for your good success in war.
I thank your Holiness.
These quarrels are as happily determined
As we could wish: call for an Actuary,
And let a Charter Bipartite be drawn
Betwixt you: to confirm this amity.
And now most blessed Father I beseech,
That I may show the duty which belongs
Unto this place, and see Apostolic.
We will regreete your presence presently.
Son Charles, your welcome is as acceptable,
As ever was Kings presence into Rome:
To morrow we will with the power of heaven,
Together celebrate a solemn Mass:
After the Senior, Bishop, Cardinal,
You must take place: and as our custom is,
Shall give vs water when we celebrate:
This done, we will bestow some time in pleasures.
Here leave we Charles with pompous ceremonies,
Feasting within the Vatican at Rome:
From thence to Naples, where the peoples hatred
Conceived against the former Kings, made way
For him, without resistance to the crown.
This done, he marches back again for France,
And Ferdinand doth repossess his state.
Mean while King Charles sick of an Apoplexy,
Dyes at Ambois: the Duke of Orleans,
Lewis the twelfth conjointly knitting force,
Doth march in arms with Ferdinand of Spain,
These regain Naples and divide that realm,
But this breeds mortal war betwixt them both,
The wily Pope dissembles at all hands,
These quell only concerns him and Caesar.
Brother Phillippo what avails it,
When our state lost the Fauintines compounded,
That I should hold both life and liberty,
Withal revenues of my proper state,
When as my life within the Court of Rome,
Is much more loathsome to my soul then death,
And liberty more grief then servitude.
I rather choose within the river Tiber
To drown my self, or from Tarpeyan hill,
My vexed body to precipitate,
Then to subject my body to the shame
Of such wild brutish and unkindly lust.
He that with fire and Brimstone did consume
Sodomy and other Cities round about.
Deliver vs from this soule-slaying sin.
To which our bodies are made prostitute,
Dear salutations from my Lord the Pope,
I recommend unto your excellence,
With semblably remembrance of his love,
To you my Lord Phillippo,
Good Barnardo.
My duty bound unto his Holiness,
Return in payment from his Captive servant.
Ingenious Prince, I bring a friendly message
Of tender kindness, which I must impart:
This Ruby from our Holy-fathers finger,
(In p••uate token of his faithful love)
〈1 line〉
And there-withall, desires of your love,
To have with him some private conference.
I was now going to our Ladies mass,
In Saint Iohn Laterans; where my ghostly father
Attends me for my confession.
But thank his Holiness on my behalf,
In all due reverence and humility.
Tell him I mean—so soon as I return, 
To come according to my bounden duty. 
My case is desperate, what shall I doe?
Phillippo, was there ever any man
Hunted with such unsatisfied rage?
What hath he sent again to visit you?
To visit me, nay to dishonour me,
Behold this Ruby sent from his own finger,
Which as a Bawd inuiteth me to shame.
Actor? what Actor? my delight my joy,
My star, my triumph, my sweet fantasy,
My more then son, my love, my Concubine,
Let me behold those bright Stars my joys treasure,
Those glorious well attempred tender cheeks;
That specious for-head like a lane of Lilies:
That seemly Nose loves chariot triumphant,
Breathing Panchaian Odors to my senses,
That gracious mouth, betwixt whose crimosin pillo•
Venus and Cupped sleeping kiss together.
That chin, the ball vowed to the Queen of beauty,
Now budding ready to bring forth love blossoms,
Actor Manfredi turn thee to my love,
Come hither Actor we must talk aboue.
Betrayed? a slave to sin? what shall I say?
Most Holy father.
Doe not me forget:
I am thy brother, and thy dearest friend,
〈1 line〉
In •iper years is pure and permanent,
Grounded on judgment, flowing from pure love:
Whereas the love lightning from young desire,
Fickle and feeble will not long hold fire,
It is so violent it will not last.
They are blessed whose lovers love when youth is past.
To call you friend were too familiar,
To call you brother sorts not with our years:
To call you Father doth import some fear,
Due to that age your Holiness doth bear.
Tell me not of mine age and Holiness,
Thy sight suffices me to make me young:
Neither upbraid me with my sanctimony,
Love is the purest essence from •above,
And to thy soul I would affix my love.
Come hither then and rest with me to night,
Give me •ruition of those amorous pits,
Where blinded Cupped close in ambush sits:
Who with his Arrow (when thou laughed at Venus)
Shot through thy smiling cheeks, and did enchain vs.
Thy Chamber with Ambrosiall odors breaths,
New loves and true loves unto them that entreats,
And furious M•rs made mild his Falchion sheatheth
At thy delicious aspect: see thy Chamber:
The walls are made of Roses, roof of Lilies,
Be not ashamed to mount and venture it,
Here Cupids Alter, and fair Venus hill is.
Thy bed is made with spice and Calamus,
With Sinamond and Spicnard, Arabic,
With Opobelsam and rich gums of Aegipt,
Music Angelical of strings and voices.
With sundry birds in sugared simphony,
Where whistling Wood-nimphes, and the pleasant choice is
Of Antique action mixed with harmony,
Attend thy joyous entrance to this Chamber.
Is it possible that the Devil can be so sweet a dissembler?
Yes and play the pleasant part of a conceited Any•re•,
〈…〉 the shape of a bright Angel.
Now my sweet friend the joys of love doth mutter
Thy mind too bashful is, speak tongue loves utter,
Thy Corrall gums cud loves pure quintessence,
And thou thy self fair boy loves purest essence.
Oh blessed heavens let Satan tempt no longer,
His force is powerful yet thy strenght much stronger,
He that with guileful baits gilded untruth,
So seeks to blast the blossom of my youth.
Delicious fruits divine Confections,
Of herbs, roots, flowers of sundry fashions.
Preseruatiues drawn from the rich Elixir,
Of finest gould pure pearl and precious stones,
Provided for thy divine appetite,
Wines of more price (made by th'industrious art,
Insacred distillations) then that Nectar,
Which Hebe bare, when Jove did most affect her.
Satan false god of lies, and flattery;
How palpable is this gross villain?
What wilt thou come Manfredi to my Chamber,
And bless me with thy precious breath of Amber.
After our ladies Mass I will return.
Dear God what furies in his soul doe burn?
After the Celebration of the Mass,
I come my Lord. 
Come then, and let that pass, 
Holla Barnardo?
All business for this night I will adiourne,
Give good attendance that at his return▪
Actor may come to me for my sick heart,
Till Actor with his beauty full embrace,
Doe bless my body wounded with his dart,
Can find no rest, love hath it in hot chase.
Wilt thou perform it faithfully?
What I? will I live to eat, to drink, to sleep?
Wilt thou perform it valiantly?
Will I eat to drink, will I drink to sleep, will I sleep to live?
Will thou be secret, and conceal my plot?
My name is Frescobaldi, as for my pedigree,
My mother was of consanguinity▪ with the Princess
Of Perugia: my father of the noble family of the Odd,
Florentine both: I my self
Brought up a Page under Rayner King of Sicily,
Have served against the Turks and Saracens,
Where at Vienna (with my single Pike,
Armed in a Mali Briggandine of Naples,
And with an old-Fox which I kept in store,
A monument of Mars when I depart)
I did unhorse three Turkie Janissaries.
Then (in the wars of Ferdinand the King)
This Hipp was shot through with a Crocodile,
But that it were too tedious I could show you:
Under the King of Romaines I was cut,
Just from this shoulder to the very pap:
And yet by fortunes of the war am here,
I thank God, and my Surgeon▪ all fix, trillill▪
I fought at Malta when the town was girt
With Sergeants heads, and bul-beggers of Turkie:
And by my plot (niming below the rampire)
We gave th'obgoblings leave to scale our walls,
And being mounted all upon that place:
I with my Lint-stock gave fire to the train,
And sent them capering up to Capricornus.
Which when the wise Astronomers of Greece,
Prodigiously discovered from a far.
They thought those Turcaes fiery meteors.
Which with their Pikes were pushing in the clouds,
The learned Bookmen writ strange Almanacs,
Of signs, and apparitions in the ayre:
And by these honours (if I prove a blab)
Then call me villain, varlet, coward, skabbe.
Then tell me Frescobaldi
Where I may send to thee 〈◊〉 time shall serve.
Faith for the most part my mansion is in Ciuitauechiae nella strada di san lorenzo, ne'er the conduict at a good old La∣dies house, la dōna sempronia at sign of the glister pipe, where if you chance to fail of me. Within three houses more at sign of the frying-panne you may command me, at all hours in the fore-noone.
Well gramercy • rescobaldi I will take the note of those houses in my tables.
But be sure and ready when opportunity calls upon you.
May it please your most reverend grace (without of∣fence to your Lordship) to deliver me the parties name upon whom I should perform this Tragedy. For I may parcase catch him in a gilder my self before you are aware; and moylie mufle up his maistership, with the garotta, or stiletto, perchance the ponya•d or pistol, such as I warrant you shall serve his turn.
Be it sufficient thou shalt know hereafter,
My business and affairs are very great:
One word more, and adieu.
Secret as mid-night, sure as the sun, quick as the waters
Why? so said brave Frescobaldi like a man of some reason∣lution farewell remember the watchword—do not fail.
My business and affairs are very great my gracious Lord, one word more with your grace my good Lord, and so I kiss your foot. 
It was not ingratitude, neither forgetfulness in me Fres∣cobaldi: Here take this and remember me.
I encounter your munificence with my love, and your love with my service, my love and service with your money.
Patron mio multo honorato,
More for your love then your money,
And yet your grace well knows, clothes must be wrought, wea∣pons must be bought; and Taverns must be sought, and all brave exploits must be done, as they should be done bravely.
But that I keep my secret to my self;
I would not use this slave for any gold:
Yet when I trust him he shall not deceive me. 
Now skelder ye scounderels, skelder you maggot∣mūgers, you pompiós; you wood-wormes, you magatapipicoes, I am for you, now Frescobaldi, call thy wits together, let me 〈◊〉 see what a clock it is: very near eight, and almost breakfast time at a cleauen, this very night must I stand Perdue for this bloody service. I know my place and hour; I must confess and perchance be hanged, I have in the Burdelliaes and in other such houses of natural recreation and agility, received three or four score broken pates in my time: and some bastinadoes for crossing courting spicy-spirited inamoratoes in their humours. Besides I was the first that from the Swiss quarter, in the reign of king Ferdinand brought up in his army the fashions of bow∣sing and to using Greek and Spanish wines by the flagon, with that old stinckard Henrico Baglioni, sometime Alferoes to Capi∣tanco Piccolomini &amp; my self; I remember likewise at Terracinae I broke a glass (containing some quart of Robollia) upon the face of Capitanco Francisco Boccansacchia a very sufficient soul∣dier in that service, and to my knowledge a tall trencherman: howbeit from the teeth down-ward as base a mottled coward as ever was coined out of the sooty side of a copper kettle; so he was: well I will second my Lord in any slaughter for his wages, and if any man will give me better hiers (when I have served the Cardinals turn) I will present my pistol upon his sacred per∣son afterword for charities sake: well, now to the drinking school, then to the fence school, and lastly to the vaulting school, to my Lady Sempronia.
This was an act of such strange consequence,
As never yet was heard, a man found dead
Within a private chamber of his house;
When all his servants stirred: not one of them
That could give evidence of what befell
But that he killed himself. Cos impossibile.
I was the first that found him in his blood;
Then warm from slaughter: such a ruthful sight
As yet I tremble to remember it.
It is impossible (after a search)
No •••anger found within Vis•llies doers,
But that some servant of his family
Should have sure notice how the murder was.
It was his own hand sure.
I cannot think it.
The gentleman was honest, full of sport,
And well affected.
Pardon me my Lord,
My Lady Lucrece told it in great grief
She twice before had rescued his life.
Go too, go too.
Besides my Noble Lord.
Papers both writ, and sealed with his hand
Were found about him t•stifying this.
Good Barbarossa pray my sister Lucrece,
Here to encounter me with her good company:
Somewhat I would in private talk with her.
My Lord I will. 
High God be merciful.
Thou that doest know the secrets of al hearts,
If Lucrece (as my father doth suspect)
Was privy to this murder of my life
I can learn all she knows.
But yet I will not either suspect, or urge her were it true
Being indeed a violation of brother-hood &amp; common hume∣nity
She makes towards me—sister how fairs it with you?
As with a dead Corse in a Sepulchre
Cold▪ lifeless, comfortless, oppressed with sorrow.
Nor since my joy did leave me desolate
Ever could I brooke well this open ayre
But still lamenting and disconsolate
Kept up in Chamber, mourning for my Lord.
What order took you for his funeral?
He that alive was shrined in my breast,
Now dead lives yet entombed in my thoughts,
There is a model of it in my closet.
Perform it decently with diligence.
Brother me thinks the ayre is cold and raw,
And as you please let vs confer within.
Gladly dear sister with what hast you may,
And I desire you noble Barbarosa
To meet vs at my Chamber after supper.
My brother Caesar hath appointed with me
Some business, and I crave your company.
Thanks my good Lord: but matters of much moment,
I have at that time with my Lord Caraffa;
And I must speak this night with my Lord Caesar.
Tell him I will attend by nine of clock.
I will my good Lord.
Farewell Barbarossa.
Joy to you both. 
My trembling liver throbs, my cold hearts heavy;
My mind disturbed and I know not why
But all as he will, heavens aboue for me. 
This is the black night, this the fatal hand:
These are the bloody weapons which must be
Witness and actors of this Tragedy.
Now Frescobaldi play thy masters prize:
Here is a rich purse crammed with red crusadoes
Which doth inspire me with a martial spirit,
Now could I combat with the devil to night.
First did I wash my liver, lungs, and heart.
In Cretin wines and head strong Malues•e
(Such as would make a coward fight with Mars)
Then least I should with any weapons drawn
Be driven to danger of mine enemy;
I practised my martial fe•cts of fence:
As for example if with arms unsheathed,
I were to kill this conduct here I come. 
He makes a thrust, I with a swift passado,
Make quick avoidance, and with this stoccado
(Although he fence with all his finest force)
Bared of his body thrust him in the throat.
G••rd•re•i •en, segue•ri honorenoli.
Suppose this conduict or my duellist,
Should falsify the foin upon me thus.
Here will I take him, turning down this hand.
Il punto verso indrizzato, thus.
Admit he force me with his ambroccado
Here I deceive then, with this passado
And come upon him in the speeding place.
what Mandragon or salvage Ascapart,
what Pantaconger or Pantagruell
Art thou that fight with thy fathers soul
Or with some subtle apparitions.
Which no man can behold with mortal eyes
Or art thou ravished with bedlamy
Fighting with figments and vain fantasies
Chimeras ot black spirits of the night.
Come not within 9. furlongs of this place.
My name is Rubosongal the grimm ghost
Of Bembocamber king of Calicute.
And here for this night I keep centrenell
For Muscopateron great king of flies;
Great grandfier of ten thousand hecatombes.
I Conjure thee foul fiend of Acheron
By puissant Hoblecock and Bristletoe,
By Windicaper Monti-boggl•by.
Polipotmos and the dreadful names
of Mulli-sacke and Hermocotterock.
By Petrouidemi, by the dogged spirits
Of Bacchus which Canary land inherits.
By purple Elegant the bloody giant.
And leaden headed hollock pure and pliant.
By B•rrha Martia and by Sydrack sweet
Who did with matthew Glynne in combat meet.
And by this awful cross upon my blade
Of which black cures and hedghogges are afraid.
And by this fox which stinks of Pagan blood,
Dost thou walk there for mischief or for good.
Brave man whose spirit is approved well,
(As most approved panders truly tell)
Under g•even hedges, under Cobblers stalls,
In portal, porches, under bettered walls,
W•each day; by night keeps watch-full sentinel
To go•ze the pleasures of fair Claribell
Profane arch patriarch of Pancridge steeple,
The bauldy beaken of ungodly people.
With ot•er ma•la which I might allege
To the Grand Captain of Collman-hedge,
Marching foul Amazonian trulls in troupes
Whose •anthornes are still lighted in their Poupes.
Some without kerchiefs, others with torn smocks;
Certain imboch'd with piles, and some with poxes.
Others with rotten shoes and stockings rent
With carrine in each ditch keep parliament.
In petticotes all patched and wast-coate torn,
And wandering with some rag bless every thorne.
Which with their Targets never make retire,
From any breach till they their foomen fire.
Rebating the stiff points of their keen blades
Till a•l their champions masculine prove lades.
To thee saith Fresceba•di case thy steel
Least thou the rigour of my few•ie feel.
And yet I love thee for thy martial grace,
Thine in all service: shake hands and embrace.
A pox upon thy coward fistes foul knave,
And yet I love thee rogue: ask rogue and have.
Come and embrace: tic bli•h when malte-men meet,
And drink till they have lost both head and feet.
And drivelling sleep on every stall and bench
With every man a knee in his hand and in his Can a pretty wench
But Frescobaldi my brave Bodigonero,
Varlet of velvet, my moccado villain,
Old heart of durance, my stripped canuase shoulders,
And my Perpetuana pander tell me;
Tell me what humours Cataplasmatick,
Excited have thy Bacchick fantasies:
To draw that triumphant swerlidildido,
Upon some spirit of the Buttery,
This was no barm spirit of the bottle,
It was a bloody spirit of the battle:
And if I lye, call me thy Wimble-cock.
A mouldy jest, well I will answer thee:
I coni•re thee by Negro Luciaes name,
By Dol Pattenti, by the subtle shape,
Of Nina Baliker, by the cunning fleights
Of Vini Clerilicks with his fair sprights:
By Mega Court, with Merge Marichalus,
That in Turnuliball doth keep an Ale-house:
By Nan Riuehomo that hot stigmatised,
Now bedded wi•h th'Ita•ian Vitraillist,
W•each in the fiery Phlegitonian flames,
Did work strange vitriol dildidoes for Dames,
Her spirits have no power to touch this strand.
Till they transported from Lambechia land,
By Charon Ferriman of Black Auerne,
Fall Anchor at the Stilliard Tavern,
And by Tartarean Plutoes Heben bowl,
Why did thou combat with thy Fathers soul?
Learned Magician skilled in hidden Arts,
As well in prior as posterior parts,
I see thou kennist the secrets of all sorts,
Of sharpe s•ringues and salacious sports:
Venerall Buboes, Tubers Ulcerous,
And Iames Defisticanckers venomous.
Doubtless Don Vigo then his vigour poured
Into thy brains, when he thy bottle scoured.
Noble Henrilico question no further,
My meditations are of blood and murder,
I •easted have too long, prithee be gone.
Henrico Baglioni (by this sword)
I am to morrow to perform a duel,
And practising in this nights melancholy,
How to dispatch it with a brave stoccadoe.
Here I did make a proof, prithee good-night,
Trouble me now no more: early to morrow,
Isle march unto the sign oath frying-panne,
And take thee timely with thy points untrust,
To drink a flagon of greek wine with thee.
Goodnight my noble Rillibilb•by,
Thou shalt be welcome in the darkest midnight. 
Now to my watchword it is quite forgot, oh
Col nunolo la Pioggia: think upon it.
This is mine hour appointed this the place,
Here will I stand close till tha'llatum call,
What first a clock boy now?
My gracious Lord,
By Sistoes horologe tic struck eleven.
A fit hour for our purpose noble brother,
But hath La Bella formiana note•e,
Of our approach to night.
Oh doubt it not, villain put out that torch, 
Being disguised we will not be descried,
Depart you to my lodging presently,
Pain of thy life not one word that thou saw vs. 
Tic very dark, good brother go before,
You know the streets best.
Oh keep your way; you cannot lightly fall,
But if you doe.
How then.
You shall be supported.
My heart begins to throb, my soul misdoubts,
I fear some treachery A che me fido, guarda me Dio,
On in Gods name.
Give me your hand brother, fie doe not faint.
Caesar I can scarce go,
A sudden qualm hath seized upon my spirits.
Tut brother forward with alacrity,
My life for yours you'll be at ease anon,
Tic a foul business let vs retire,
And seek some other season for our sports,
I am ashamed thou should be general,
To lead those forces that fight for the Church,
And here show such faint hearted cowardice.
Are you d•spos;d to quarrel in the streets,
Neither the time nor place serves instantly;
To call you to some audit for these words.
Abortive Coward borne before thy time, 
I will not brooke thy foolish insolence.
Col nuuolo la pioggia.
Dear God revenge my wrongs, receive my soul.
Let him receive thy soul when he thinks good,
Isle take an order for thy burial.
Help Frescobaldi let vs heave him over,
That he may fall into the river Tiber,
Come to the bridge with him.
Be what he will the villaine's ponderous,
Hath he some gould about him shall I take it?
Take it were there a million of ducats,
Thou hast done bravely Frescobal•i,
Stretch thee, streth out thine arms fear that he
Fall not upon the arches.
Isle wash him doubt you not of a new fashion.
I think thou never had thy Christendom,
Follow for Company prenitious villain.
Hold hold, Coxwounds my Lord hold,
The devil go with you both for company.
Now Caesar Muster up thy wits together.
Summon thy senses and advance thy self,
Ware and Earth have interposed their bodies,
Betwixt the worlds bright eye and this black murder.
Sweet silent nig•t (go•rded with secret stars)
Keep silence, and co•••ale this Tragedy;
Satur•e is lord ascendant •f this hour,
Propitious patron of assess•ates
O• murt•ers, Paracides, and massacres:
Lord of my birth, auspicious to my life,
This is my •erst degree to d•mination.
Who can, or (if they could) who dare suspect,
How Caesar Borgia kilt his brother Candy?
This is infall•b•e, that many crimes
Lurk underneath the robes of Holiness:
And underneath my Purple tunicle
This fact concealed is: Ascanio Sforza
Shall strangely (by some wily policies)
Be brought •nto suspect for Candies death.
Sister Lucretia thou must follow next:
My fathers shame and mine, ends in thee.
Now show thy self true Caesar; Caesar shall
Either live Caesar like, or not at all.
Death and blood only lengthen out our Scoene.
These be the visible and speaking shows,
That bring vice into detestation,
Unnatural murders▪ cursed poisonings,
Horrible exorcism, and Invocation,
In them examine the reward of sin.
What follows, view with gentle patience.
Fore-god it is Candy, it is Candy I know it is Candy,
Where is that traitorous homicide? where is hee?
I cannot see him: hee shall not scope me so▪
I must and will find him, though he we•• invisible,
Appear appear; not yet; ha and Candy murdered too,
Let me look forth.
Oh, oh, very good very good: well I perfectly peceiue.
By this descention of Arctophilax,
What time of night it is, sorrow give place;
Revenge in blood and fiery sacrifice,
Commands: nature now prevents her current: yield,
Let vs adore the second eye of heaven, 
Bright Armatas increases she, is not combust.
O sacred season for nocturnal Ceremonies.
This ioyeous quarter is in Casmaran. ha.
What hour of night first? why tic Solemn, twelve a cloak,
What are our angels this quarter?
Gargatel Tariel Gauiel.
How goodly these augurize fair auspices of truth,
Now mounts bright Athaman in his golden ascention,
Direct in opposition with our hemisphere, 
And now there hour with them is Aetalon:
Bernardo bring hither thy white robes of sanctity,
Hast thou Coals ready burnt bring in my Thurible,
And sense about this sanctified place,
For here Festatiui must have her honour.
Candy my son is murdered, Candy my son,
Candy my son is murdered: I will raise
All the great devils to show the murderer,
Even as thou lou'dst my son hast and dispatch,
Hast and dispatch it as thou love my soul.
Tic not yet yawn by three quarters of an hour,
What are our Angels of this night? Michael, Dardael, Huratipel
In a triumphant carre of burning gold,
Crowned with a circlet of black hebeny,
And with a mace of Jet King Verse rides.
Attended with his ministers of state, Andas and Cynaball.
Fit dismal times for our solemnities.
Put on my robes give me my Pentacle,
Cense well Barnardo: bring me some fire in an earthen vessel
Now must I labour like a colliers horse.
My precious best approved and trusty servant,
Hence in all hast be-take thee to thy beads,
Whi•st these dark works of horror are in hand,
Red Sand•ll is my •umigation.
I conjure thee by these aforesaid names,
That thou receive no phantasmatike illusions.
What would great Alexander have with vs,
That from our fiery region millions of leagues,
Beneath the sulphuro•s bottom of Abisse,
Where Mammon tells his ever tried gould,
Thou call me from strong business of high state,
From sure subuersions and mutations
Of mighty Monarchs, Emperors, and Kings,
From plotting bloody fields and massacres,
Triumphant treasons and assassinates.
Whats thy demand?
I charge thee by the four recited names,
And by the dreadful title of great Phaa.
By which all creatures are sure sealed up,
By which the prince of darkness and all powers,
In earth and hell doe tremble and fall down,
Show me the shape of that condemned man,
Which murdered my son the duke of Candy.
Keep a firm station stir not for thy life,
Expect a messenger of trust stand fast,
Sent from the foggy lake of fearful styx.
Am I commanded by that puissant monarch,
Which rides triumphing in a chariot,
On misty black clouds mixed with quenchless fire,
Through vnquoth corners in dark paths of death,
To doe what thou demandest.
Then by the dreadful names of Amioram,
Titepand Sadai show me that damned child of reprobation.
Which this night murdered the duke of Candy.
Keep a firm station stir not for thy life,
Hold, hold, hold, hold; per todos santos now no more,
Caesar hath killed a brother and a father.
What would thou more shall I descend?
Show me the person by whose impious hand,
Gismond Viselli, was done to death?
Keep a firm station stir not for thy life.
Out, out, no more no more, my soul dissolves.
Say, say what would thou more? descend,
Beldachiensis, Berolanensis, Helioren, discende, descend•, iubeo, mando▪ impero.
Devil this•death with thunder. &amp;c.
Out out alas Bernardo I am wounded,
With grisly wounds and deep incurable.
Comfort your self in Gods name blessed father.
S•e long as no wounds of the body bleed.
The cureless wounds I mean are of my body
Wounds both of my soul and body: but Bernardo
This is my comfort in calamity
Some shall pack after them for company
Whats a clock?
Ve•y near six by Saint Peters bell
Hast thee, then pass thee to my Apothecary, bid him provide those drugs I spoke for yesterday, and bear them in all hast to Dominico Giglio take you those letters with you which are here, bid him deliver them Lodowick Sforzaes name her lustful Paramour; make hast and see that he dispatch it quickly, deliver him a purse from me for a token cramd with two hundred ducats, bid him bee secret as he loves his life, hast and begone.
Actor shall follow, I must have his Lands
This thorne must be cut of being but tender
Then cut it soon whilst it is young and slender,
Least growing great it prick thee to the bone
My lust importunes it and he shall die,
Sons, Nephews, Daughters, Concubines, shall die.
My conscience is turned mercies enemy,
He that would rise to riches and renown
Must not regard though he pull millions down.
Where is his Holiness? where is my father?
Alas your Son is slain; your hapless Son,
My noble brother out alas, alas
Is murdered: in tender passion
Let curious search and inquisition
Be made through Rome to find the murderers:
I fear that Traitrous Iudas Cardinal
Ass••io Sforza with his complecies:
I wi•• not hold fraternity with him:
An• 〈◊〉 behold my meaning blessed father:
〈◊〉 gain these robes, take here this hat,
And in these arms which I have bucled on
I do forswear al offices of Church,
Until I be revenged for his death.
A foul red vengeance over hangs his head
Whose heart indurate or whose devilish brain,
Could execute conceive or meditate
So foul a murder of an Innocent.
Caraffa with Bentiuoli give leave
Some-what I would in private have with Caesar.
Caesar dissemble not for that were vain 
Whence come thou.
Directly from my Chamber.
Where did thou here this news.
Fishers which found his body brought the news.
Then he was droun'd Caesar was he not?
It seems he was.
What by some Fisher.
How should I know that.
Sure by some subtle Fisher that laid nets
For Candies life and honour: but say truly,
Was it thy brother.
Are not you my father?
Ah that I never had been any father,
But speak again, man speak the truth and fear not:
Who slew thy brother Candy this last night,
Who trained him forth who walked along with him.
Am I the keeper of my brothers person.
Execrable Cain; perfidious Homicide,
Apparent villain what can thou design?
Which I would know that thou can hide from me.
A plague upon your devils you deal with them,
That watch more narrowly to catch your soul
Then he which sought my brother Candies death,
You know that Satan is the lord of lies
A false accuser and desembler,
Tell your false liers they be lying Devils.
Caesar no more, Caesar no more, thou know.
What know I?
That I know, dissemble not.
Suppose you know, suppose in wrath &amp; fury
I killed my brother; can we mend it now?
He was not fashioned for these busy times:
He rests in peace, our peace rests in our swords.
Caesar thou dost unkindly vex my soul,
With rubbing up my secret miseries:
Incurred by seeking to lift up thy head.
Pull me not down good father with your conscience:
Your conscience, father of my conscience is.
My conscience is as like your conscience,
As it were printed with the selfsame stamp.
I know my sins are burdenous, and bear them,
Your sins more heinous, yet your robes conceal them.
Out wicked and nefarious homicide.
Upbraid me not, for if that Lamp burn dim,
Which should give light to men in darkest night;
How can they choose but must in shadows err,
That follow the blind-glimering thereof:
Doth this one petty fault appear so grievous?
Which if you well consider is no fault;
He was an honest man, and fit for heaven:
Whilst he lived here he breathed in misery;
And would have been enlarged: I •et him free,
Now if I may compare your state with his,
Or your condition with my quality,
Have you not sold your self unto the Devil,
To be promoted to the Papacy:
Have you not sold the livings of the Church?
Are not your coffers crammed with beastly bribes,
With foul extortion, and base Usury?
Have ye not (since your inauguration)
Poisoned and done to death six Cardinals;
In devilish avarice to get their goods?
Have you not (which is most abominable)
Committed incest with your only daughter;
And made me sin with her for company,
That both might reign in hell for company?
Did you not take of Georgio Bucciardo
One hundred thousand Ducats from the Turk,
To kill his brother Gemen Ottamon?
Have you not kept the Pearl of Italy,
Actor Manfred• that young virtuous Prince,
In beastly lust, and filthy Sodomy.
Blasting the blossom of his toward youth?
Have you not now given order for the death
Of my dear Sister, whom your passions cause
To kill her latter husband Di Viselli,
And robbed the noble Earl of his new spouse,
Only to cloak your vile impiety,
Caesar the Devil hath bin thy Schole-maister.
I pass your secret counsel with the devil,
Your Avarice, ambition, perfidy,
Your bloody plots, inhumane cruelty,
Why then upbraid ye me with Candies death?
A bastard of our house, degenerate,
In whom no spark or spiracle of honour,
Appeared to raise the race of Borgia.
But had I been Lieutenant of your forces,
This arm had conquered all Romania,
France before this had trembled, Spain had stooped,
The Romaine Emperor had faun'd upon vs.
King Charles had been restraind, Frederick expulsd,
And Naples had been made our heritage.
A triple joy succeeds a single grief,
I have engaged all to make Caesar great,
Caesar it suits with thy grace and glory,
To cloak my vices, I will pardon thine,
Let one of vs excuse an others crimes,
And for this bloody fact so lately done.
As thou did cunningly begin proceed,
To lay the guilt or imputation
On them whose death may doe thee benefit:
And never was my soul better contented,
Then that our woes are with rich hopes prevented.
Now stands Romania subject to my sword.
Imola furl, Camerine, and Vrbine
Shall have the first charge, if I there succeed,
Have forward farther with a better speed,
Caesar o nullo written in my guydon,
When with my troops victoriously I ride on.
Holla Bernardo, call in Caraffa with Bentiuoly:
Ay now now now, my precious boy, my Caesar,
Prosecute as thou hast begun,
With Art, look sullaine and demure,
Hold down thy head, like one swollen up with sorrow,
They come, they come, say that those arms were put on,
In revenge of Candies death.
The sovereign medicine of things past cure,
Is for to bear with patience and forget,
Caesar hath vowed revenge for Candies death,
And in regard of Caesars piety,
I make him general in his brothers place.
And never shall I sheath this sword in peace
Till it have wrought upon the murderer.
Happy success accompany my Lord,
And in your battles give you victory.
Is order taken for his funerals.
Bentiuoli take you no thought for that,
That is the greatest care, which troubles me.
Come on my Lords, we will advise within,
For I must have your counsels in my grief. 
Kind Lodowike had thou presented me,
With Persian clothes of gold or Tinsilry,
With rich Arabian Odors, precious stones,
Or what brave women hold in highest price,
Could not have been so gracious as this tincture,
Which I more value then my richest jewels,
Oh Motticilla.
Bring me some mixtures and my dressing boxes,
This night I purpose privately to sup
With my Lord Cardinal of Capua.
Bring me some blanching water in this bowl. 
Here I perceive a little riueling
Aboue my for-head but I wimple it
Either with jewels or a lock of hair,
And yet it is as white as the pure snow:
O God when that sweet Marks Mantoua,
Did in Ferrari feast my Lord and me,
What rich comparisons and similes,
He with ingenious fantasy deuis'd,
Doting upon the whiteness of my brows?
As that betwixt them stood the chair of state,
Composed of Ivory for the Paphian Queen:
Sitting in comfort after amorous conquest.
And kissed my for-head twenty thousand times.
Oft have I wished the colour of this hair
More bright, and not of such a Spanish dye,
And yet the Duke of Bourbon on his knees,
As the divinest favour of this world,
Did beg one lock to make a Bracelet,
For which few hairs he garnished my head
With Jewels worth six thousand crowns at least.
My beaming eyes yet full of Majesty,
Dart love, and give bright luster to the glass,
As when the sun beams touch a Diamond.
The Prince of Salerne solemnly did swear,
These eyes were quivers which such shafts did bear
That were so sharpe, and had such fiery touch,
As Cupids Arrows never had so much,
The Rosie Garden of these amorous cheeks,
My nose the gracious forte of conquering love,
Breathing attractive odors to those lovers
That languish and are vanquished with desi•e,
Gonzaga calls it the silver perch,
Where Venus turtles mutual pleasure search.
Sweet mouth the •uby port to Paradise
Of my worlds pleasure from whence issue forth,
Many fa•se brags, bold sallies, sweet supplies,
A chin the matchless fabric of fair nature,
A neck two breasts upon whose cherry nipples.
So many sweet solcions Cupped sucked,
Give me some blanching water in this boule,
Wash my face Motticilla with this cloth,
So tic well now will I try these colours.
Give me that oil of Talc,
Take sa•snet Motticilla smooth my forehead.
I must delay this colour is it carnation right.
Oh the true tincture of a damask rose,
What is it excellent.
Most full of life.
And madame thats a precious liniment,
As ever I beheld to smooth the brows.
I will correct these arches with this mullet,
Pluck not to hard, believe me Motticilla,
You pluck to hard.
I feel a foul stink in my nostrils,
Some stink is vehement a•d hurts my brain,
My cheeks both burn and sting give me my glass.
Out out for shame I see the blood it self,
Dispersed and inflamed, give me some water.
My brains intoxicate my face is scalded.
Hence with the glass: cool cool my face, rank poison,
Is ministered to bring me to my death,
I feel the venom boiling in my veins.
Ah me dear Lady; what strange leoprosie?
The more I wash the more spreads on your face.
Send to my father; call physicians in, 
Oh Candy where art thou my comforter,
Dead and entombed; Lucrece must follow thee,
I burn I burn, oh where is my dear Lord.
My brains are seard up with some fatal fire.
Dear Lady cheer your self, be not dismayed,
His Holiness in hast hath sent relief:
His own Physician to recomfort you.
For our dear Ladies passion bring some water to cool my thy•st.
Madam you may not drink,
Till you receive this one preservative.
A foul unsavoury loathsome stink chokes up
My vital senses and a boiling heat
suppes up the lively spirit in my lungs.
This poison spreads and is incurable,
Madame receive one precious antidote.
What have I caught you Sforza,
Who painted my fair face with these foul •pots,
You see them in my soul deformed blots,
Deliver me from that murdered man,
He comes to stab my soul I wounded him,
Oh Gismond Gismond hide those bleeding wounds,
My soul bleeds drops of sorrow for thy sake;
Look not so wrathful I am penitent.
Love and remorse did harbour in thine hart,
What doest thou beckon to me I will come,
And follow thee through millions of woes.
Sweet Lady will you take a little rest,
It will refresh your spirits instantly.
No rest until I see my Lord again.
Dear Lady doe you love your life, take rest,
From the pure burning coals of true contrition.
Me thinks I see the lively counterfeit,
Of catiue Cressed in her misery,
Ingenderd out of his disloyalty,
Ah Moticilla whom I trained up
In cunning sleights and snares of filthiness,
Forgive me for that sin; live and repent.
Oh God forgive me for my sins are great,
And if his goodness lend my life some space,
I will with penance call on him for grace,
And spend the remnant of my life in prayer.
I can no more, death summons my soul,
Open thy bosom father Abraham,
Merciful father let thy mercy pass
Extend thy mercy where no mercy was.
Merciful father for thy sons dear merit
Pardon my sinful soul receive my spirit. 
Now is her soul at rest tic very strange,
As well the cause as manner of her death,
I have been studied in Hipocrates,
In books of Gallon and old Auecine,
Observed the cures of divers learned doctors,
In France in Spain and higher Germany,
Yet never met with such an accicent,
Bear in her body I will in all hast,
Bring woeful news unto saint Peeters Palace,
His Holiness will grievously lament. 
Fellows in arms after our victories,
Had in the first front of our happy war,
With men of hardy resolution,
Now must we bend our forces against Surly,
Where that proud Amazonian Katherine,
Dares defiance in the face of war,
And yet our hopes are sure, all passage clear,
And she before I lodge this restless head,
Shall bear the bondage of this victory•.
These proud presuming spirits of vain women,
Whose bloodless wounds are only bloody words,
〈◊〉 without reason, fight without resistance,
But on the face of grimm devouring War,
With frowning fore-head menacing his force,
They fall down on their backs as Venus did,
When Mars beheld her with a Soldiers face,
Nay we must fight: I know the puissant spirit
Of warlike Kate the pride of Italy,
Sforzaes brave sister and old Riarioes widow,
Excellent valour, and deep policy
Must win it, if we purchase at her hands.
And yet we be before-hand with the Lady,
Having surprised her treasure and her sons,
As they were making their escape for Florence:
What shall we try renowned general?
And search her resolution.
Shall wee? doubt you not,
Nay though the walls of Surly were of steel,
These pledges should make passage for our powers,
And what? shall we stoop for those twenty Ensigns,
Which this last night have entered their Ports,
Nay were they ten to one within those walls,
Caesar (that carries Fortune in his Standard)
Would make them give ground &amp; subject them-selues.
Speak then at once renowned general,
Shall we go Soldier-like to work at first?
Shall we salute her with our Cannon?
What? no Barbarossa not without a parley,
Fore-God I love her, and admire her valour,
And till we find her words prove empty squibs,
We give her all the noble rights of war,
Summon a parley. 
What have wee Pallas come upon these walls,
To bring confusion of our companies:
Doth proud Penthesilea live again,
Which some-time raging in the Fields of blood,
Made passage with her angry sword through millions.
I tell thee C•sar son of Alexander
A book befits thee better then a blade:
Percase in scorn thou wilt reply the like,
A distaff fits me better then a pike.
Know Caesar had I now so many lives
As here are stones or hairs upon your beards,
I would forgo them al before this honour,
Which my dear Lord Riario did leave me,
The pledge of my dear love his Childrens patrimony.
Speak in a milder key renowned Kate.
I love you well and all brave Sforzaes race
Yet you must yield there is no remedy,
It is the Churches right and I must have it.
Me thinks a pulpit were more fit for thee,
But did thou ever read Saint Gregory:
That he which hunts for authority,
Himself should govern direct and know well;
He did a deed of danger that advanced thee,
For proud ambition violates all right.
Be not so bitter Kate a friend entreats you,
But if entreaties will not, look upon me:
Here stands C•sar, the sharpe scourge of Surly
And were your fort fenced with as many men,
As it is girt with stones Caesar would have it.
Subdue them and make pillage of their goods
And in resistance seal it with their bloods.
What are your weapons sheathed in your throats?
Is every word a sword then shake hands Caesar:
Venture no few•there and we will be friends
But if your words have accents in keen swords,
And end in blood, then Caesar look on me:
I with defiance turn swords in your throats,
You shall not thrust that imputation
Upon our fex, for I will fight it ou•
So long as I can stand upon these walls.
You would repent it, if you knew the worst,
Consider Kate be well advised first.
Caesar at one word to discharge my conscience,
Were there a Cannon there to be dischardg'd
Upon this fruitful womb the nurse of Children,
And I sure piece mell to be torn withal,
If I would not surrender up this forte
Your Cannon shot should plow these bowels up,
That vow to God and my dear husband made:
I never will infringe with perfidy:
I know thee bloody Caesar: the dishonour,
In yielding up thy reverend purple robes
Which should protect widows and Orphans rights,
Appears well in taking unjust arms,
To wrong the Widows and the Fatherless
Either fight Caesar or forsake the field,
Persuade thy self alive I will not yield.
Then I will show you what wars destiny,
Prognosticates, bring forth her ransom hither
If nature be not quite extinguished
These pledges shall enfranchise you from war
I brought them to this purpose; that in them,
You with your friends might live in liberty.
Never but with advantages dear Lord.
Monster of misery what think thou C•sar
That I will yield mine honour for their safety?
Be not deceived thou hast surprised my Children,
Riarioes riches left in my tuition
And borne out of these bowels; but dear boys,
Courage your selves I will defend your honours:
I tell thee C•sar these my boys are taught
To bear with patience fates inevitable
These carry Sforzaes spirit and their fathers;
I dare gage life and ask them they will choose,
To lack their lives before they loose their honours.
Caesar in this hath offered like himself,
He proffered to preserve your town vntouch't:
Your goods, your wives, your lives, your liberties:
But mark what fruits thy bitterness brings forth,
To make thine hard heart infamous for ever,
Before thy face these boys shall loose their lives
If thou surrender no• without more pa•lee.
Bloody 〈◊〉 I defy thy malice,
I spit defiance in thy cowards face.
Traitor to God and man had thou been Caesar,
Ins•sting on high terms of worth and honour
Thou woul•st consider that their blood is Noble,
Thou would consider that they be but children,
Thou would consider that thou art a warrior
And that such noble blood spilt with dishonour
And tram'd in with insidious treachery,
By God nor man in heaven nor earth below
Can be forgotten or abolished.
Brave general you parley with a woman,
Whose heart is obstinate, whose hands are freeble,
Seems in vain and over tedious.
Speak at a word cannon is my next parley,
You will not ye•d your state to save their lives.
I will not Caesar.
Cut of both their heads.
Let vs entreat our mother noble general,
For to deliver up the state of Surly
And will you save our lives then.
Good Captain do not kill vs.
If she will yield the state your lives are safe.
Good mother for my fathers sake that's dead,
And for mine Uncle sake part of your bowels
And for our own sakes yield your selves and save vs.
Good sweet mother save vs.
Poor boys, in heart unlike Riarioes race,
Or Sforzaes warlike linnage by the mother
Know what it is die with liberty,
And live with ignominious servitude.
If you your lives buy with the loss of states
It were of all extremities the vilest
But in extremity to die resolved
Preserving state and reputation:
Is said to dye within the bed of honour,
This is an honour for Riarioes children,
And for my part, it never shall be said,
That Katherine being strong upon his guard,
Having good forces able to defend,
In brutish feat should give away your states,
I rather will obtrude my self unarmed,
And meet the thickest ranks that enter breach,
To be tossed up upon their soldiers pikes,
Sooner I will set all the town on fire,
And with my soldiers sacrifice my self,
Rather then render up your heritage,
Oh bravely spoken warlike Amaze•n.
Mother we scorn death in respect of honour
Let him perform his worst, we fear him not,
Courage sweet brother, think upon my father,
I will dye first, be not afraid of death.
Why then you are resolved to dye?
I to dye Caesar.
Bring hither both their heads.
Gods blessing rest with you my dearest sons
And if I loose your states, my life shall follow,
Nothing but violence shall force it from vs,
Ere long this quarrel twixt vs will stand even:
Farewell dear boys, till we three meet in heaven.
Ah dear Mother, sweet mother, good Uncle Inlio save our lives.
Away with him.
Let me before I dye, but kiss my mother.
What would thou run again into my womb?
If thou we•t here thou should be Posthumus,
And ripped out of my sides with soldiers swords,
Before I would yield up thine heritage.
Come brother let vs bravely dye together.
I tell thee when that these have lost their heads,
I will make sack and pillage of your state,
Man, women, Orphans, all put to the sword,
This hath your obstinacy wrought in vs,
Carry them hence, bring hither both their heads. 
And then a charge upon this valiant Lady,
Thy• 〈◊〉, this proud Semeramis,
Wh•se valou• B•rbar•ssa by these heavens,
Is very wonderful and glo•ious.
Had he more force, what would this tyrant do?
A cha•ge a charge.
F•r Gods sake charge, a charge let vs to sight.
A spy•it full of vengeance, wra•h, and spite,
Assau•t, assault, ch•rge noble hearts a charge.
Courageous Kate, you that would throw defiance
Into the face and throat of fate and Caesar,
Such are the fruits of pride and wilfulness.
Have I performed my word? are you surprised?
Is not your life and living in my power?
Now that my sons first by insidious means,
Bereaved of their lives, and their states lost,
The date of my calamities is out,
Go forward with thy tyranny, strike Caesar,
And take away the Mother with her sons:
This done, recount what is thy victory.
A woman with two children vanquished,
A prize befitting the renown of Caesar.
Come hither Katherine wonder of thy sex,
The grace of all Italian woman-hood:
Caesar shall never prove dishonourable,
Behold thy children living in my Tent.
Oh mother, mother, are you come, wee be not dead.
Good mother, thank the Captain, we live yet,
They gave vs spices, wines, and bad vs welcome,
I pray you thank them.
Oh but your lands and honours are both lost,
Had not an honourable death been better:
Then thus to loose your states and liuely-hoods.
Heroike soldier, whose deceit is honour.
Thou that hast unexpected saved the lives
Of my two children, I submit them here
Thy captives, for their ransom what is fit.
I freely pardon •hese two boys their ransom,
Lady behold thy treasure in my Tent,
Had I not won this town, this had thou lost,
See Soldiers that her Jewels be reserved
For her own service, now the quarrel ends.
But noble Caesar well entreat our people,
They be men valiant, civil, obedient,
If you their Magistrates entreat them well.
Take you the charge of Surly, Barbarossa,
Entreat the people well, do not restrain them,
We freely pardon all of them their ransoms,
So much as is in vs, we pardon all,
Use them as Citizens of Rome in favour,
Other instructions you shall have here-after:
Till then regard your charge and so farewell.
Lady, your self, with your two little babes,
I will take order shall be sent to Rome,
Be not dismayed, you shall bee well entreated,
You shall want nothing fitting your estates,
March with vs on our way for Capua.
Bring in that Opium, and bowl of Wine,
Here I must act a Trage-comoedie,
Bernardo is it well confected and prepared?
According to my conference with Rotsi.
He sent it as your Holiness may see,
Safe sealed up
Fill me that bowl of wine,
Tic a drowsy medicine, do not taste it my Lord,
Thou hast ben taster to me, many times,
Begin Bernardo.
My Lord I slept too much the last night and I dare not,
It holds good colour hold here Bernardo,
Give good attendance, bring them to their rest,
Then give me notice at my study door.
One set was past before I parted from them,
And by this time they be well heated.
Sir be diligent and serviceable in this,
Even as thou love thy moister. 
Fear me not?
Were •t not that my conscience hath been fired,
With flames of purgatory by this Pope,
I never could endure such villainy,
The best is he doth pardon all my sins. 
This set was strangely lost I durst have wagerd,
An hundred ducats after the first chase.
You think you play well, but believe me brother,
You cannot take pains not observe a ball,
With that dexterity which appertains.
Holla within there if I take no pains,
My wastcote well can witness for I sweat. 
Barber bring in some linen for my Lords
Bring me some wine for I am very thirsty
I listend for that string and he hath touched it.
Wilt please your Lordship sit on this low chair?
Rub my head first then comb it,
Fill me some wine Bernardo,
Good my Lord cool your self a little,
Give me wine and let it be thy labour good Barnardo
To call for music. 
Brother in this cup I commend the loves,
Of all true Fauentines our trusty friends,
Hoping ere long to live again with them.
I thank you brother, if our father Pope.
Perform his promise we'shall soon return.
This wine was good yet tastes of the cask,
It hath a musty relish.
Lets here this music,
Holla within there.
My Lord.
I think it good after this little rubbing to repose my body
I am some what heavy.
I know the cause,
And what Bernardo.
Marry with much motion of your bodies my Lords,
You must not be so vehement in play.
I knew a noble French man at Anchona,
Twenty years since at tennis took his death.
With over heating of him self in play.
More music there.
My Lords are both a sleep music depart.
And leave them to their ease; alas sweet boys,
Is it not pity that these noble branches,
So sweetly knit in one, should never wake?
I that am hard of heart sigh for their sake,
My Lord. 
What news man?
Both fast a sleep.
And both upon one bed?
Ti• done.
And chamber voided?
All is performed my Lord.
My blessing rest upon thee my Benardo.
Depart now with those letters I delivered,
To be conveyed to •lore•ce leave me here.
Sl••p• both secure upon your fatal bed,
Now •hat •he God of silence Morpheus,
Hath with his 〈◊〉 to• black horn sealed up,
Your languid eye lids laden with pale death,
Sleep until you draw your latest breath,
Poor ha•meles boys strangers to sin and evil,
Oh were my soul as innocent as yours!
This office is of highest consequence,
In friendsh•p for I consider it,
I sent you from a million of sorrows,
Into the flowery fields of Paradise.
Their to go habit in the groves of mettle,
To feed on Manna and to drink pure Nectar,
A cup of everlasting happiness.
Where such sweet music vn-con-ceiueable,
Shall entertain your senses in sweet comfort,
As the delight thereof shall never die
Actor what Actor speak awake Phillippo,
Both fast a sleep. 
Now Roderick betake thee to thy task,
What? peace Actor begins to talk I will attend.
Fair gracious Angel of eternal light,
Which reachest out that hand of happiness.
Hailing my spirit to that triumphant throne,
Of endless comfort I adore thy grace.
 Oh golden light of never setting Sun,
Hark brother Actor hark my soul is rapt,
Into the joys of heaven with harmony.
Doe they not sleep? are they not yet a sleep?
Be not their senses yet locked up in sleep.
Actor awake awake, awake Philippo.
All safe and sure, oh this was but a dream,
Their Genius hath fore told them of their end,
And joyfully they doe shake hands with death.
Come out here now you Cleopatraes birds.
Fed fat and plump with proud Egiptian slime,
Of seven mouthed Nylus but now turned lean:
Take your repast upon these Princely paps.
Now Ptolemies wife is highly magnified,
Ensigning these fair princely twins their death,
And you my lovely boys competitors,
With Cleopatra share in death and fate.
Now Charon stays his boat upon the strond,
And with a rugged for head full of wrath'
He thrusts a million from the shore of Styx,
To give you waftage to the Elision fields,
I see their colours change and death sits heavy.
On their fair foreheads with his leaden mace.
My birds are glutted with this sacrifice.
What now proud worms? how tastes you princes blood.
The slaves be plump and round in to your nests,
Is there no token of the serpents draught,
All clear and safe well now fair boys good-night.
Bernardo, Bernardo, the feat is done,
Use thy discretion as I did de•ect. 
Tic done in deed alas they both be dead:
Now must I follow my directions,
Holla within there. 
What news Bernardo?
Alas my Lord ill news,
But that his Holiness is fast a sleep,
And this day stirred not from his bed-chamber
I would have brought him to this woeful sight:
Prince Actor with Phillippo was at Tennis,
And being ouer-heated at their game,
Drinking so suddenly upon that heate,
With much sweet Wine did surfeit instantly,
And here alas lye dead upon this bed.
Alas it is a ruthful spectacle,
Two princely boys of noble disposition,
Endued with honourable gifts of virtue.
Of gracious favour, wise, and liberal.
Phaenzaes hope: Bernardo bear them in,
His Holiness will much bemoan their fate.
My Lord, my Lord, I do not like of this.
Peace man, no more do I, but bear with patience.
It is suspicious but we may not talk,
Come let vs in, oh God!
Oh God what times are these. 
After the bloody Duke Valentinoys
Had conquered Surly, with the warlike Lady,
By wily force he took in Capua,
Then through insidious sleights and treacheries,
He did surprise the state of Camerine,
Where he captived Iulio di Varana,
With his two sons all which he strangled,
With semblably tyranny proud Coesar,
On terms of trust meets with the Duke Grain,
And Vital•ozzo with the prince of Fermo:
Whom he betrayed at Sinigaglia,
Bereaving them both of their states and lives,
He conquers Vrbin; and with violence,
Performs strange and hiddeous outrages.
By this time with his forces back to Rome,
Caesar is marching; what betided there,
Ends in the subject of this Tragedy.
Now that by cunning force and policy,
All the free states and cities o• Romania
Subjected are unto the Church of Rome.
And that our pikes and swords in blood and slaughter,
Are stained and sheathed quiet in our scaberds,
Our blood and wounds stanch'd and bound up in scarfs,
Let vs for this could season of the year,
Rest vs and cheer our selves till the next spring.
And then march forward with alacrity.
Brave Barbarossa take these soldiers,
Unto some quarter where by sound of drum,
According to their muster give them pay,
Let them be satisfied and so discharged.
Fellows in arms faithful and valiant,
I thank you for your pains and honesties,
In token of our good heart to your service,
Wee give each common soldier more then pay,
Two ducats: and all other officers.
According to their place redoubled,
With many thanks for your exceeding valour,
Assuring you that in these wars with vs,
Caesar shall make you Captains of your spoils,
And so doth he commend you to your ease.
A Caesar a Caesar God save Caesar.
Sir come hither you must wait on me.
My good Lord Cardinal and Bentiuoli,
Much thanks and dear acceptance of your loves,
I lovingly return for your great pains.
His Holiness gave vs in serious charge,
To give you greeting and withal prepares
A sumpteous •east for that solemnity.
To which he doth inuit the Cardinals
With other Lords yo•r favourers in Rome.
Humbly commend my duty to my father
Tell him this night I purpose to be with him,
Tell him I live in health and touching these,
I pray you certify his Holiness,
I will have special care: and so my Lords
For a small season I will• take my leave.
We do congratulate your safe return.
Come hither Baglioni speak sincerely,
Know thou Brandino Rotsi th'apothecary.
What I my gracious Lord? know I my self?
How should I know that sir?
May it please your highness he serves his Holiness.
He did indeed sometime and for his villainies,
Is wort•ely ca•t of; but tell me sir:
Thou dost rememb•r how for breach of arms
When thou did stab a certain lance-prizado:
I pardoned thee t•y life.
True my good Lord I very well remember,
He was a lousy villain, marry was he,
And if he lived yet such is my stomach,
That were he chopped in mammockes I could eat him:
But for that honour in a soldiers word
He spend my life to do your highness service.
Hast thou thy piece then ready.
Oh my good Lord lies fix, sound as a bell,
With all my warlike furniture beside
Good flask and touch-box, a Valentia blade
A slavish dagger, powder of Rhemes and bullets
Here they been.
Sometime this after-•oone within the park,
Next, to the Vatican, Ratsie will be:
And as I know thee stout and resolute,
Be•tow a bullet on him as he posseth;
Few words; if any man attach thee for it,
By my protection thou shalt be enlarged.
And if I do not my good Lord damme me for it
I have an old grudge at him cole black cur,
He sha•l have two steel bullets strongly charged
Nay but here me my Lord?
Isle tell you what,
By this •rue fox of steel
I had as good a spaniel for the water,
As ever hunted duck: and this true villain
Because my dog did eat up a pannado
Within his house; what did that Spanish rogue?
What did he think you my Lord?
Marry very fair an• instantly
Poison•d my •paniell with Rosa-solis,
A pox on him micher, faith isle pay him his old fippence for it now.
Take this to buy thee clothes my trusty servant,
Nay tic gold be not afraid of it.
Afraid my Lord
Were it a tempest in a shower of gold
I would endure it and adore you for it.
Then Baglion fit thee, to thy furniture,
Watc• in a corner close beyond some tree:
And when the deed is done repair to me:
Say that thy piece went off against thy will,
Keep a light match in cock, wear flask and touch-box:
And take a murren with thee so fare-well;
Thus must I dive deep in a villains nature,
And thus must save a villain •rome the gallows
To play my parts in others purposes.
The man w•ome I to benefit would choose,
I must in matters of more moment use:
Or else I will not benefit a man,
A•d cut him of in s•que'l if I can.
Here me, but my good Lord mark my words well,
If old Henrilico s••in• in this service
Cass•ir him, call him whip-stock, let him perish,
For want of S•a•each wines, and maluasie.
Then fail not my true servant finely, closely. 
No more, but by this cross,
Why now this Noble Caesars like himself,
Hath fitted me with service: if the world,
Had sought out somewhat to content a man,
Nothing could better please old Billion
Then to kill a rascal, coward, cur,
A Spanish squirt-vp, a black poysning toad.
I like this trading better then the wars
For there I serve for two ducats a month,
And not a duck egg richer when I march
And in continual hazard of my life
For which percase my piece kills twenty persons:
Now shall I march in purse with many ducats,
For one hours service but to kill one man,
Free from all danger of mine enemy,
I will about it and take up my stand. 
Thus doth one hideous act succeed an other,
Until the mouth of mischief be made up:
Now must I train my fellow to his death,
A deed of •uch and I did swear the same,
Not only for the secrecy thereof.
But to conceal a matter of more we•light,
Of greater moment and high cruelty:
When any d•ed of murder must be done,
To serve his Holiness, call for Bernardo.
He must be prince•pall or accessory
To serve all purposes; for gold or pardon,
The Pope gives both; and I can take them both:
Gold can make hard the soft•t conscience,
And mine is hardened by the practise of it.
Holla Signeor Bandino.
Who calls without there? what my good fellow Bernardo?
Very welcome: what news with you?
My Lord hath sent me for the things he spake of.
Here they be very strong and sufficiently compounded
According to directions from his Holiness,
And special warrant under his privy signet
I tried them on three men condemned to death:
For rapine and vile murder: but the first
Within less then one quarter of an hour,
Puffed up, grew leprous and his heart strings broke;
Then did I give al•ay the second time,
The second prisoner died within three hours
I did the third time mitigate, a little,
And saw when it was ministered the third man,
Who did within eight hours swell, rage and die.
Well have you done your part, set down your bottels,
And read this letter from the Duke Valentinoys,
Well said brave Pincoginger, by mine honour
Before I do this service lie there piece.
For I must have a saying to those bottels, 
True stingo stingo by mine honour. Oh that mine old friend and Boccadillio Fre•cobaldi Wear hear alive again to taste of this other bottle, Well I will venture upon it, that I may drink one hey•th To Fr•scebaldi I will encounter with this stout He•∣torean, Greek.
Were Meleager here that slew the boor.
Like a Boracchio armed all in sack,
Or stout Achilles in a pewter coat.
Or old Oscar•cus a•med in a wicker lyrkin,
Or Priamus armed with a leather Jacket,
Lined and embossed with Elegant and Hollock
By forch of arms and Mars his valiant hand,
I would encounter them whilst I could stand.
The •laues are buisie reading their paphlagonian papers,
I must have a •eyeing to y•u sir I must; though,
You be provided for his Holiness own mouth; I will be,
Bold to be the Popes ta•la by his leave.
Now trusty Troylus, base los manos.
Let him alone it is the Dukes pleasure,
That if he will taste he shall be suffered,
And therefore I was commanded to set them down,
In presence of such a fellow whom for his sauciness,
I have pepered.
Oh tic a perilous villeine if you knew him so well as I, believe me he would pepper you for it if he understood so much, peace man he hath broken up the bottle let him drink.
Nay let him drink and burst, for believe me I •as inform•d before of such a •allow; for whom I was comman∣ded to lay bate; oh notable villeine, how he seals death.
This is a Noble nipster •faith, so so. 
Back again to kennel slave.
He hath his full wages dout not Bernardo, to serve him till he die, seem not to respect him in any case doe I pray you.
Nay but doe not you respect him, least he doubt you suspect him.
Oh doubt you not, doubt you not, I will never look, let vs
turn our talk. Tell his Holiness tic well compounded and composed of all those drugs mentioned in your letter, give the Duke right humble thanks for his token, and with all reave∣rinse kiss his excellent hand.
And by this signet you are to deluiuer me the bottles.
Have a care of them and deliver them.
Farewell fellow Rotsi.
Adieu Bernardo.
Now doe not I pity this Spanish villain because hee consented to the poisoning of this soldier, but for that I am innocent.
What is the wild goose fallen? have at you Sir, might a poor soldier speak half a score words to your venomous worship and according to your accustomed surlinesse have no rep•yall: I believe you sir, your words are not offenciue in any sort I must confess. Now thou infectious slave, thou compicti∣os Rascal, thou confectionery villeine: where is you sublimatum now sir? where is your Ratsbanatum now? now where are your poisoned pu•lets in stued-broth? where bee they? you never dreamed of a poisoned ballet, did you go too? now Signor curri∣gantino will I romage in the worm eaten keel of your rotten hulk•: passion of my soul what papers are these. Foh powder, powder foh, whats here I marry sir I like this well, a•e you so purse sir, this may serve to stop a gap in my neighbours hedge, what is this you show me with a s•am to you, yea and moister of the small ordinance to, this Basilic hath been often moun∣ted where there hath been hot and dangerous service in the Isle of Iapan, hold passion of me my guts, out upon• thee thou hast poisoned me with thy stinking breath or with thy villonous powders out alas alas what sire commotions I feel in my body griping fretting and suming, a plague on your
bottle ale with a vengeance, I am peppered there is no reme∣die in all these extreme agonies! must draw this villeine fur∣there: and throw him into a ditch, Deh veleno dell Diabolo, fare∣well farewell my old Shurcordillio Frescobldi▪ farewell Madam Sempronia, for in conscience I am guilty of mine own death oh the pangs of hell and purgatory; come you lousy Rascal I will bury thee with carrion in the next ditch.
Have you delivered to the bottleman,
The fatal wine.
I I gave charge to Bernardo,
Having them safely sealed with mine own signet,
That when feasting I do call for wine,
He shall break up the seals and fill that out,
For the two Cardinals Cornetto and Modina.
Tic well, now if our plot prove right,
Thou shalt be moister of much wealth to night,
Dying in estate all comes to my share,
Caraffa loves a sallet passing well,
And I have fitted one to serve his turn,
Their gould will make thy soldiers fight in blood,
And wing thy victories with good success.
Let vs no longer entertain the time,
By this the Cardinals expect our presence.
On with auspicious steps triumphant Caesar.
And entertain them in brave jollity.
Have spetiall care you that have these in charge.
That these two sealed bottels be not stirred,
Until his Holiness call for that wine
Fear not I will attend it as my life.
Martial your selves here sworne-men and there
Church-men.
Here sit we swordmen to defend the Church.
My Lords give answer in sincerity,
Hath not my Caesar fought well for the Church?
That hath so soon subjected in her right.
Imola, Surly, Camerino, Capua,
Vrbine, Faenza▪ Sinegaglia.
Brave Caesar I must bossed of it in presence,
That I Christ's vicar of his Church on earth,
Have such a son which issued fuom my loins,
That being vicar of the Churches wars.
Hath in revolution of one year,
Done more then all the generals have done,
In honour of our Church for forty years,
Your Holiness with all your Cardinals,
Your barons and indeed all christendom
Are bound to give God thanks for such a Prince.
And him great honour for his fortitude.
Your excellence did in a blessed hour.
Surrende• up your Holy robe• a•• hat,
Be taking 〈…〉 and a•mes,
By which• you m•light enlarge our liberties.
〈◊〉 my Lord and see we have all of vs good cause to rejoice, 〈◊〉 I had been with your excellence at Capua, I would h•d one boat with them as old as I am.
You might my Lord have had your choice of Ladies,
B••••full p•is•ners to be •ent to Rome•.
I marry my Lord some what might have been said to this gear to die•• 〈◊〉, but tra•seant cum ceteris erroribus, would to GOD I wear as young as when I was a Scholar in Padua, faith then I could have swingd a sword and a buckler, and I did that then will being but a spring all of 24. years which be talked of in Padua these 40. years I warrant it faith my Lord were I so lusty now I would go with you to the weirs this next spring thats flat, will you eat any sallet my Lord, faith here are excellent herbs if you love them.
They be my Lord too cold for my stomach, wilt please you my Lord to drink a cup of old Greek wine with it, bring me some wine here.
Bring me some wine here I will drink a Joy to Caesar and this Noble company.
Some wine for his Holiness own mouth, Bernardo.
C•sar your self are master of this •east,
I drink a good success and victory,
To Caesar and great happiness to all.
Happy success and fortune to you all.
Hold Caesar; stay for wee are poisoned,
My Lord it is all of.
Then art thou qu•te undone.
Some villainous conspiracy lies hid
Within this company, and this pernicious villain
Hath practised with the•; go with thy soul to hell,
I feel the raging of i•.
Away my Lord Modina come away,
Thy• tra••e was laid of purpose •or our lives.
Our re•uge and defence is from aboue,
Let Satan work, he never shall prevail.
How doth my gracious Lord.
Oh very •ec • bring me preseruatiues,
I think I have •s good a• any man. 
My Lord •entiu•gli take here my keys,
You know my study, search my Cabinet,
There shall you find a little Crystal Phial,
Wrapped up in Sarcenet bring i• hither straight,
I feel Vesonus raging in my guts. 
Here C•sar taste some of this precious water,
Against all plague, poison, and pestilence
A present help: I bought it of a Jew,
Borne and brought up in Galily.
My Lord it is too sorceable and hot.
The flames of Mongibell consume my liver,
Bring me to some repose.
Comfort your self my Lord.
C•sar take rest,
Send for Physicians, all my fear remains
That Caesar shall miscarry.
And all my grief that both.
Noble Bentiuogli with-draw we both,
Unto my Chamber, I am very sick. 
Belchar, Belchar, Belchar;
Verse, Verse, Verse,
Astaroth, Astaroth, Astaroth.
Let Orcus Erebus and Acheron,
And all those Ghosts which haunt the pitchy vaults
Of cole black hags in Cimerian shades
Muster themselves in numbers numberless,
To dance about the Ghost of Alexander.
Our fiery region void of all religion,
And devilish order by necessity,
Compelled requires his present policy.
That fatal wine which for his Cardinals,
He destined I took out of the place:
And placed his own wine for those Cardinals.
The date of his damnation is at hand.
Be ready then for I the first will bear,
As swist as wirl-winde his black soul to Styx.
And I with poysned toads will stop his mouth,
Whose heart was never satisfied with lust.
And I with snakes and stinging Scorpions
Will scourge him for his pride and insolence.
And I with force of fiends will hall his limbs,
And pull them till he stretch an ashore length.
And for his avarice I will fill his paunch,
With store of molten gold and boiling lead.
Then let vs for his sake a horne-pipe tread.
You talk of penance and of penitence,
Compunction with contrition and remission
For all my sins; I pray you think of yours
You vex your selves too much I cannot thank you,
Have patience sirs; oh tic a goodly exorcism
Quem penitet peccasse paene est innocence
Give leave, give leave, come hither when I call
Either mere fools or good physicians all.
Nay leave me good my lords, fine would I meditate,
Leave me I pray you.
We leave our prayers with your Holiness,
Call upon God, think of his endless bounty.
Pray for your selves, troble not me with prayers,
I pray you troble not your selves with praying.
solves. What is repentance? have I not forgotten?
Why repentance is a spiritual martiredome,
Which mortifies sins and heales the soul:
Having been wounded with the spirits sword
This sword Gods book: that book by me profain'd
And by which book of God my soul is damned,
I damned undoubtedly.
Oh wretched Alexander, slave of sin
And of damnation; what is he that can
Deliver thy poor soul? oh none but he
That when thou did renounce him cast of thee,
Repentance is in vain, mercy too late,
Oh why should miserable mortal man,
Whose languishing breath lives in his nostrils
Vex and torment himself with daily travel
To scrape up heaps of gold to gape for honours?
What were the conquests of great Alexander:
Of Cirrus, Ca•us Caesar? what were it
To be possessed of this vniuerse
And leave it all behind him in a moment?
Might some one man attain that happiness
Which our first Adam had •n Paradise,
Before he did preuaricate? why then
It were a work oflasting worthiness
To rip the bowels of our mother Ops
For treasure; and to conquer all the world,
Because eternity would promise it,
Out, out al•s my pains, my guts, my liver
And yet I fear it not though in secu•ity
Once more I will with powerful exorcisms,
Invoke those Angels of eternal darkness
To show me now the manner of death.
What dost thou start foul child of reprobation
Vain are thy crosses, vain all exorcisms,
Those be no fruits of faith but mere hypocrisy:
Sign te sign temeré me tangis &amp; angis
Rome tibi subito motibus ibit amor.
Rome Which once was thy gorgeous concubine
Hath now forsaken thee: now doth she find,
Thy falsehood which did her adulterate
What dost thou tremble slave of sin and hell?
I exorcise thee foul malignant spirit
In the names of, of, of —
Of what? foul mouth, polluted soul?
Corrupted slesh; God hath forsak•n •hee,
Thy date expired it, thy power determined.
Dissolve dissolve, break, break, black soul dissolve,
And poison all this hem so here wi•h sin.
Thy death and dissolution stand at door,
Resolve now to dissolve, thy soul is ours.
Proud Lucifer Traitor, to great Iehouah,
Father of lies my time is not expired
I will not do that violence to God,
Taking that which is his from him
To be bestowed on his great enemy.
Thou that hast thrown those graces in his face,
How can thou think upon salvation?
Think that you are damned. I will declare it plainly.
Seven years are yet to come, I look for them.
Examine thy soul with this counterpart.
Behold it? is it not for eight years &amp; 8 days?
Thou fool examine in Arithmetic,
Numbers without distinction placed thus.
Annos with the figure 11. signifying eleven years, &amp; the figure,
Seven applied to Dies importing seven days.
How? how? how? how? howes that?
Deh quella militia del Diabolo: Deh quello veleno del inferuno.
And for what stands this figure then?
Why for eighteen this figure stands for octauo referred unto di• last before, signifying th'eight day after, so that Annos vndicem without distinction signifying eleven years; and this figure seven added to days; and that octauo post, importing the eight day following, moriere, thou shalt die. I mean thy body with thy soul in respect of Heaven.
Thus many days hast thou continued Pope,
And this is thy last day designed by fate.
Thou can not mock me with thy Sophistry,
M• soul is more divine and cannot perish.
Thy soul foul beast is like a Monstrous cloth,
•oluted with unpardonable sins.
Know then malignant Angel of confusion,
My soul is a divine light first created
In liknesse lively formed to the word,
Which word was God, that God the cause of causes,
My soul is substance of the living God,
Stamped with the seal of heaven, whose Character
Is his eternal word, at which hell trembles.
And what of that? thou therein hast no part,
I do confess•e thy soul was first ordained
To good: but by free-will to sin thou slave,
Hast sold that soul from happiness to hell.
Mark yet what I can answer for this soul.
Mighty Iehouah most exuperant,
Two creatures made in feature like himself,
The world and man: world reasonable and immortal,
Man reasonable, but dissoluble and mortal,
And therefore man was called Microcosmus,
The little world, and second tip of God,
Containing those high faculties and functions,
And elements which are within the world.
Man then that d••h participate with all,
Through operation, conversation, and simbolisation,
With matter in the subject properly,
With th'elements in body quadrifarie,
With growing plants in virtue vegitatiue
In sense with beasts; with heavens by th'influence
Of the superior spirits into th'inferiour
In wisdom and capacity with Angels,
With Eloym in that great continent,
Is without doubt preserved by that God,
Finding all things contained in himself.
Answer me vain Philosopher to this,
Thou that hast planted man in this perfection,
Not looking on thy detestable soul,
Which first like a pure leaf of whitest Lily,
Clear from all blemish was bestowed by God,
And thou foul beast did shamefully polute it.
Is it not one of human faculties,
To propose for your selves the best you can,
Where other creatures carried with blind force,
Make them-selues bond slaves to the present time.
The scope of mans creation was to glorify
The most all potent maker of all things,
The Alpha and Omega of all bounty.
But he that wilfully betrays this soul,
That precious Jewel wherein God delights,
Dishonours God and doth deprive himself,
Of all salvation and beatitude.
Rest with this answer, that my soul is Gods
Whose habitacle is prepared in heaven.
First it doth know God being figured
According to that Image of himself,
And then the world whose lively shape it bears,
And to conclude the soul of man knows all,
Because with all things it doth simbolize,
For in this Man there is a mind intelligent,
A quickening word and a celestial spirit,
That like a lightning every way diffused,
All things which are made by the mighty power,
Unites, moves, and replenishes.
These things should have been thought upon before,
The summum bonum which lives in the soul,
Is an eternal pleasure to behold,
And have fruition of the mighty power.
Which thou did never see, nor can en•oy.
Pause yet a little, let me meditate, 
Mercy, mercy, mercy; arise arise: up, up, up: fie, fie: no, no? stir stubburne, stony, stiff indurate heart not yet, up. why, what? wilt thou not foul traitor? to my soul? not yet?
Arise, arise, advance heart clogged with sin,
Oppressed with damnation: up advance yet.
Wilt thou not stir stiff heart? what am I damned?
Yet a little, yet a little, oh yet: not yet? alas.
High God of heavens and earth if thou bear love,
Unto the soul of •infull man show mercy,
Me•cy good Lord, oh mercy, mercy, mercy.
Oh save my soul out of the Lyons paws,
My darling from the den of black damnation,
My soul, my dove, cover with silver wings,
Her down and plumage make of fine tried gould,
Help, help, help, aboue▪ stir, stir, stupidity.
He charms in Dauids words with Iudas spirit,
It will not, no it will not, yet alas, no, no, no? is that my sentence to damnation?
I am undone, undone.
He shall despair, vassal of sin and hell,
Provide thy self in black despair to dwell.
I tell thee I cannot be resolved,
To dwell in darkness break black soul dissolve,
And poison all this Hemisphere with sin,
And if I may not reach that happiness,
Since for my sons sake I my self inthral'd,
Tell me shall Caesar die this death with me?
Caesar; his youth and strength of blood drives out
This fat all poison and shall live a while.
Oh show me then the manner of his death,
Attend it time grows short all fear is past.
What means that ghastly shadow which came first?
By that which represents Lucretia,
Leprous and poisoned is thy death declared,
By poison which now struggles with thy spirits,
And by that other which sets out to thee,
The murder of thy son the Duke of Candy,
Prefigured is the death of thy son Caesar,
Thou for the poisoning of thy daughter poisoned:
He for the murdering of his brother murdered.
Thus God is only just.
The Devil cannot deny it.
Man only false.
Learn miserable wretched mortal men,
By this example of a sinful soul,
What are the fruits of pride and Avarice,
Of cruel Empire and impiety,
Of profanation and Apostasy,
Of brutish l•st falsehood, and perfidy,
Of deep dissembling and hypocrisy,
Learn wicked worldlings, learn, learn, learn by me
To save your souls, though I condemned be.
Here comes a fatal message, I must hence. 
My robes, my robes; he robs me of my robes,
Bring me my robes, or take away my life,
My robes, my life, my soul and all is gone.
From the pale horror of eternal fire,
Am I sent with the wagon of black Di•,
To guide thy spirit to the gates of death,
Therefore I summon thee to come with speed,
For horizons now stand thee not instead.
Horror and horror, fear ensues fear,
Torment with torments is Encompassed:
Despair upon despair, damnation
Upon damnati••, hell and cons•ence,
Mu•t•er lust a•arice impiety,
Va••e pr•ph•nation and apo•tacie,
Rage and distraction t•ranize: away,
Away proud Lucifer, away.
away, away. 
Holla, holla, holla, come, come, come, what, when, where when, why, deaf, strike, dead, alive, oh alas, oh alas, always bur∣ning, always f•eezing, always living, tormented, never ending, never, never, never mending, out, out, out, out, why, why, when∣there whether, thither.
Thither, thither, thither.
What is he dead?
Dead, and in such a fashion,
As much affrights my spirits to remember,
Thunder and fearful lightning at his death,
Out cries of horror and extremity.
Cause all your bells to ring my lords of Rome,
Rome is redeemed from a wicked Pope.
God hath beheld vs with his eyes of mercy,
His name be glorified, join all in prayer,
And give him praise that took away your shame.
Go your procession, sing your letinies,
A•• let your Churches through with multitudes,
Banquets and bonfiers through the City make.
In sign our Church is freed from infamy,
Even as his spirit was inflate with pride,
Behold his body puffed up with poison,
His corps shall be conveyed to saint Peeters,
Open for all beholders, that they may
See the reward of sin, amend and pray.
Th'omnipotent great guitar of all powers,
(Whose essence is pure grace, and heavenly love,
As he with glory crowns heroic actions,
Bearing a taste of his eternal virtue)
So semblably doth he with terror strike,
In heavy vengeance sins detestable:
As in this tragike mirror to your eyes,
Our scene did represent in Alexander,
Flagicious Caesar his ambitious son,
Reserved for more calamities to come,
After he was imprisoned by the Church,
Escaped into the kingdom of Navarre,
Unto King Iohn then brother to his wife:
Where in an ambush at Viano slain,
•used Nemesis repaid his treachery.
Heroic and benevolent spectators,
Your gracious ears, and curious observations,
Iuditious censures, and sweet clemency,
Have thus addressed our Tragic Theater,
T'exchange contentment, •or benignity:
Humbly devoted to your good desires.
For some delight, cause of discourse for others,
For all example, and for none offence,
Your favours are a royal recompense.
Which when our lofty Muses shall perceive,
Then in more pompous and triumphant state,
Your eyes with glory shall the deed receive
Of mighty Monarchs, Kings, and change of fate.
By me those persons which our Scene presented,
Kiss all your hands, and wish you well contented.

NOw, luck yet send vs, and a little wit
Will serve, to make our play hit;
(According to the palates of the season)
Here is ri'me, not empty of reason:
This we were bid to credit, from our Poet,
Whose true scope, if you would know it,
In all his poems, still, hath been this measure,
To mix profit, with your pleasure;
And not as some (whose throats their envy failing)
Cry hoarsely, all he writes, is railing:
And, when his plays come forth, think they can flout them,
With saying, he was a year about them.
To these there needs no lie, but this his creature,
Which was, two months since, no feature;
And, though he dares give them five lives to mend it,
It is known, five weeks fully penned it:
From his own hand, without a co-adiutor,
Novice, iourney-man, or tutor.
Yet, thus much I can give you, as a token
Of his plays worth, no eggs are broken;
Nor quaking custards with fierce teeth affrighted,
Wherewith your rout are so delighted;
Nor hales he in a gull, old ends reciting,
To stop gaps in his loose writing;
With such a deal of monstrous, and forced action:
As might make Bet'lem a faction:
Nor made have his play, for jests, stolen from each table,
But makes jests, to fit his fable.
And, so presents quick comoedie, rosined,
As best Critics have designed,
The laws of time, place, persons he obserueth,
From no needful rule he swerueth.
All gall, and coppresse, from his ink, he drayneth,
Only, a little salt remains;
Wherewith, he'll rub your cheeks, till (red with laughter)
They shall look fresh, a week after.
GOod morning to the day; and, next, my gold:
Open the shrine, that I may see my saint.
Hail the worlds soul, and mine. More glad then is
The teeming earth, to see the long'd-for sun
Peep through the horns of the celestial ram,
Am I, to view thy splendour, darkening his:
That, lying here, amongst my other hoards,
Show like a flame, by night; or like the day
Struck out of chaos, when all darkness fled
Unto the center. O, thou son of SOL,
(But brighter then thy father) let me kiss,
With adoration, thee, and every relic
Of sacred treasure, in this blessed room.
Well did wise Poets, by thy glorious name,
Title that age, which they would have the best;
Thou being the best of things: and far transcending
All stile of joy, in children, parents, friends,
Or any other waking dream on earth.
Thy looks, when they to VENVS did ascribe,
They should have given her twenty thousand CUPIDS;
Such are thy beauties, and our loves! Dear saint,
Riches, the dumb god, that giu'st all men tongues:
That can doe nought, and yet make men doe all things;
The price of souls; even hell, with thee to boot,
Is made worth heaven! Thou art virtue, fame,
Honour, and all things else! Who can get thee,
He shall be noble, valiant, honest, wise—
And what he will, sir. Riches are in fortune
A greater good, then wisdom is in nature.
True, my beloved MOSS. Yet, I glory
More in the cunning purchase of my wealth,
Then in the glad possession; since I gain
No common way: I use no trade, no venture;
I wound no earth with ploughshares; fat no beasts
To feed the shambles; have no mills for iron,
Oil, corn, or men, to grind 'hem into poulder;
I blow no subtle glass; expose no ships
To threatenings of the furrow-faced sea;
I turn no moneys, in the public bank;
Nor usury private—
No, sir, nor devour
Soft prodigals. You shall have some will swallow
A melting heir, as glibly, as your Dutch
Will pills of butter, and ne'er purge for it;
Tear forth the fathers of poor families
Out of their beds, and coffin them, alive,
In some kind, clasping prison, where their bones
May be forth-comming, when the flesh is rotten:
But, your sweet nature doth abhor these courses;
You loathe, the widows, or the orphans tears
Should wash your pavements; or their piteous cries
Ring in your roofs; and beat the air, for vengeance.—
Right, MOSS, I doe loathe it.
And besides, sir,
You are not like the thresher, that doth stand
With a huge flail, watching a heap of corn,
And, hungry, dares not taste the smallest grain,
But feeds on mallowes, and such bitter herbs;
Nor like the merchant, who hath filled his vaults
With Romagnia, and rich Condition wines,
Yet drinks the lees of Lombards vinegar:
You will not lie in straw, whilst moths, and worms
Feed on your sumptuous hangings, and soft beds.
You know the use of riches, and dare give, now,
From that bright heap, to me, your poor observe•r,
Or to your dwarf, or your hermaphrodite,
Your eunuch, or what other houshold-trifle
Your pleasure allows maint'nance.—
Hold thee, MOSS,
Take, of my hand; thou strik'st on truth, in all:
And they are envious, term thee parasite.
Call forth my dwarf, my eunuch, and my fool,
And let 'hem make me sport. What should I doe,
But cocker up my genius, and live free
To all delights, my fortune calls me to?
I have no wife, no parent, child, allie,
To give my substance to; but whom I make,
Must be my heir: and this makes men observe me.
This draws new clients, daily, to my house,
Women, and men, of every sex, and age,
That bring me presents, send me plate, coin, jewels,
With hope, that when I die, (which they expect
Each greedy minute) it shall then return,
Ten-fold, upon them; whilst some, covetous
Aboue the rest, seek to engross me, whole,
And counter work, the one, unto the other,
Contend in gifts, as they would seem, in love:
All which I suffer, playing with their hopes,
And am content to coin 'hem into profit,
And look upon their kindness, and take more,
And look on that; still bearing them in hand,
Letting the cherry knock against their lips,
And, draw it, by their mouths, and back again. How now!
NOw, room, for fresh gamsters, who doe will you to know,
They doe bring you neither play, nor University show;
And therefore doe entreat you, that whatsoever they rehearse,
May not fare a whit the worse, for the false pace of the verse.
If you wonder at this, you will wonder more, ere we pass,
For know, here is enclosed the Soul of PYTHAGORAS,
That juggler divine, as hereafter shall follow;
Which Soul (fast, and loose, sir) came first from APOLLO,
And was breathed into AETHALIDES, MERCVRIVS his son,
Where it had the gift to remember all that ever was done.
From thence it fled forth, and made quick transmigration
To goldy-lockt EVPHORBVS, who was killed, in good fashion,
At the siege of old Troy, by the Cuckold of Sparta.
HERMOTIMVS was next (I find it, in my charta)
To whom it did pass, where no sooner it was missing,
But with one PYRRHVS, of Delos, it learned to go a fishing:
And thence, did it enter the Sophist of Greece.
From PYTHAGORE, she went into a beautiful piece,
Hight ASPASIA, the meretrix; and the next toss of her
Was, again, of a whore, she became a Philosopher,
CRATES the Cynic: (as it self doth relate it)
Since, Kings, Knights, and Beggars, Knaves, Lords and Fools gat it,
Besides, ox, and ass, cammell, mule, goat, and broke,
In all which it hath spoke, as in the Cobblers cock.
But I come not here, to discourse of that matter,
Or his one, two, or three, or his great oath, by quitter,
His musics, his trigon, his golden thigh,
Or his telling how elements shift: but I
Would ask, how of late, thou hast suffered translation,
And shifted thy coat, in these days of reformation?
Like one of the reformed, a Fool, as you see,
Counting all old doctrine heresy.
But not on thine own forbid meates hast thou ventured?
On fish, when first, a carthusian I entered.
Why, then thy dogmaticall silence hath left thee?
Of that an obstreperous Lawyer bereft me.
O wonderful change! when Sir Lawyer forsook thee,
For PYTHAGORE'S sake, what body then took thee?
A good dull moil.
And how! by that means,
Thou were brought to allow of the eating of beans?
Yes.
But, from the moil, into whom did thou pass?
Into a very strange beast, by some writers called an ass,
By others, a precise, pure, illuminate brother,
Of those devour flesh, and sometimes one another:
And will drop you forth a libel, or a sanctified lie,
Betwixt every spoonful of a natiuitie-pie.
Now quit thee, for heaven, of that profane nation;
And gently, report thy next transmigration.
To the same that I am.
A creature of delight?
And (what is more then a Fool) an hermaphrodite?
Now• pray thee, sweet Soul, in all thy variation,
Which body would thou choose, to take up thy station?
Troth, this I am in, even here would I tarry.
Because here, the delight of each sex thou can vary?
Alas, those pleasures be stale, and forsaken;
No, it is your Fool, wherewith I am so taken,
The only one creature, that I can call blessed:
For all other forms I have proved most distressed.
Spoke true, as thou were in PYTHAGORAS still.
This learned opinion we celebrate will,
Fellow eunuch (as behooves vs) with all our wit, and art,
To dignify that, whereof our selves are so great, and special a part.
Now very, very pretty: MOSS, this
Was thy invention?
If it please my patron,
Not else.
It doth, good MOSS.
Then it was, sir.
Fools, they are the only nation
Worth men's envy, or admiration;
Free from care, or sorrow-taking,
Selves, and others merry-making:
All they speak, or doe, is sterling.
Your Fool, he is your great mans dearling,
And your ladies sport, and pleasure;
Tongue, and babble are his treasure.
Even his face begets laughter,
And he speaks truth, free from slaughter;
Hoe's the grace of every feast,
And, sometimes, the chiefest guest:
Hath his trencher, and his stool,
When wit waits upon the fool.
O, who would not bee
Hee, hee, hee?
Who's that? away, look MOSS.
Fool, begone,
It is signior VOLTORE, the Advocate,
I know him, by his knock.
Fetch me my gown,
My furs and night-caps; say, my couch is changing:
And let him entertain himself, awhile,
Without in the gallery. Now, now, my clients
Begin their visitation! vulture, kite,
Raven, and gor-crow, all my birds of prey,
That think me turning carcass, now they come:
I am not for 'hem yet. How now? the news?
A piece of plate, sir.
Of what bigness?
Huge,
Massy, and antique, with your name inscribed,
And arm•s engraven.
Good! and not a fox
Stretched on the earth, with fine delusiue sleights,
Mocking a gaping crow? ha, MOSS?
Sharpe, sir.
Give me my furs. Why dost thou laugh so, man?
I cannot choose, sir, when I apprehend
What thoughts he has (without) now, as he wa•kes:
That this might be the last gift, he should give;
That this would fetch you; if you dyed to day,
And gave him all, what he should be to morrow;
What large return would come of all his venters;
How he should worshipped be, and reverenced;
Ride, with his furs, and foot-clothes; waited on
By herds of fools, and clients; have clear way
Made for his moil, as lettered as himself;
Be called the great, and learned Advocate:
And then concludes, there's nought impossible.
Yes, to be learned, MOSS.
O, no: rich
Implies it. Hood an ass, with reverend purple,
So you can hide his two ambitious ears,
And, he shall pass for a cathedral Doctor.
My caps, my caps, good MOSS, fetch him in.
Stay, sir, your ointment for your eyes.
That's true;
Dispatch, dispatch: I long to have possession
Of my new present.
That, and thousands more,
I hope, to see you lord of.
Thanks, kind MOSS.
And that, when I am lost in blended dust,
And hundred such, as I am, in succession—
Nay, that were too much, MOSS.
You shall live,
Still, to delude these harpies.
Loving MOSS,
It is well, my pillow now, and let him enter.
Now, my feigned cough, my physic, and my gout,
My apoplexy, palsy, and catarrhes,
Help, with your forced functions, this my posture,
Wherein, this three year, I have milked their hopes.
He comes, I hear him (vh, vh, vh, vh) Ô.
YOu still are, what you were, sir. Only you
(Of all the rest) are he, commands his love:
And you doe wisely, to preserve it, thus,
With early visitation, and kind notes
Of your good meaning to him, which, I know,
Cannot but come most grateful. Patron, sir.
Here's signior VOLTORE is come—
What say you?
Sir, signior VOLTORE is come, this morning,
To visit you.
I thank him.
And hath brought
A piece of antique plate, bought of S. MARK,
With which he here presents you.
He is welcome.
Pray him, to come more often.
Yes.
What says he?
He thanks you, and desires you see him often.
MOSS.
My patron?
Bring him near, where is he?
I long to feel his hand.
The plate is here, sir.
How fare you, sir?
I thank you, signior VOLTORE.
Where is the plate? mine eyes are bad.
I'm sorry,
To see you still thus weak.
That he is not weaker.
You are too munificent.
No, sir, would to heaven,
I could as well give health to you, as that plate.
You give, sir, what you can. I thank you. Your love
Hath taste in this, and shall not be unanswered.
I pray you see me often.
Yes, I shall, sir.
Be not far from me.
Doe you observe that, sir?
Harken unto me, still: It will concern you.
You are a happy man, sir, know your good.
I cannot now last long—
You are his heir, sir.
Am I?)
I feel me going, (vh, vh, vh, vh.)
I am sailing to my port, (vh, vh, vh, vh?)
And I am glad, I am so near my haven.
Alas, kind gentleman, well, we must all go—
But, MOSS—
Age will conquer.
'Pray thee hear me.
Am I inscribed his heir, for certain?
Are you?
I doe beseech you, sir, you will vouchsafe
To write me, in your family. All my hopes,
Depend upon your worship. I am lost,
Except the rising sun doe shine on me.
It shall both shine, and warm thee, MOSS.
Sir.
I am a man, that have not done your love
All the worst offices: here I wear your keys,
See all your coffers, and your caskets locked,
Keep the poor inuentorie of your jewels,
Your plate, and monies, am your steward, sir,
Husband your goods here.
But am I sole heir?
Without a partner, sir, confirmed this morning;
The wax is warm yet, and the ink scarce dry
Upon the parchment.
Happy, happy, me!
By what good chance, sweet MOSS?
Your desert, sir;
I know no second cause.
Thy modesty
Is loath to know it; well, we shall requite it.
He ever liked your course, sir, that first took him.
I, oft, have heard him say, how he admired
Men of your large profession, that could speak
To every cause, and things mere contraries,
Till they were hoarse again, yet all be law;
That, with most quick agility, could turn,
And re-turne; make knots, and undo them;
Give forked counsel; take provoking gold
On either hand, and put it up: these men,
He knew, would thrive, with their humility.
And (for his part) he thought, he should be blessed
To have his heir of such a suffering spirit,
So wise, so grave, of so perplexed a tongue,
And loud withal, that would not wag, nor scarce
Lie still, without a fee; when every word
Your worship but lets fall, is a cecchine!
Who's that? one knocks, I would not have you seen, sir.
And yet—pretend you came, and went in haste;
I'll fashion an excuse. And, gentle sir,
When you doe come to swim, in golden lard,
Up to the arms, in honey, that your chin
Is borne up stiff, with fatness of the flood,
Think on your vassal; but remember me:
I have not been your worst of clients.
MOSS—
When will you have your inuentorie brought, sir?
Or see a copy of the will? (anon)
I'll bring 'hem to you, sir. Away, be gone,
Put business in your face.
Excellent, MOSS!
Come hither, let me kiss thee.
Keep you still, sir.
Here is CORBACCIO.
Set the plate away,
The vulture's gone, and the old rauen's come.
BEtake you, to your silence, and your sleep:
Stand there, and multiply. Now, shall wee see
A wretch, who is (indeed) more impotent,
Then this can fine to be; yet hopes to hop
Over his grave. Signior CORBACCIO!
Yo' are very welcome, sir.
How do's your patron?
Troth, as he did, sir, no amends.
What? mends he?
No, sir: he is rather worse.
That's well. Where is he?
Upon his couch, sir, newly fallen asleep.
Do's he sleep well?
No wink, sir, all this night,
Nor yesterday, but slumbers.
Good! He should take
Some counsel of physicians: I have brought him
An opiate here, from mine own Doctor—
He will not hear of drugs.
Why? I my self
Stood by, while 't was made; saw all th'ingredients:
And know, it cannot but most gently work.
My life for his, it is but to make him sleep.
I, his last sleep, if he would take it.
Sir,
He he's no faith in physic.
'Say you? 'say you?
He he's no faith in physic: he do's think,
Most of your Doctors are the greater danger,
And worse disease, to escape. I often have
Heard him protest, that your physician
Should never be his heir.
Not I his heir?
Not your physician, sir.
O, no, no, no,
I doe not mean it.
No, sir, nor their fees
He cannot brooke: he says, they flay a man,
Before they kill him.
Right, I doe conceive you.
And then, they doe it by experiment;
For which the law not only doth absolve 'hem,
But gives them great reward: and, he is loath
To hire his death, so.
It is true, they kill,
With as much licence, as a judge.
Nay, more;
For he but kills, sir, where the law condemns,
And these can kill him, too.
I, or me:
Or any man. How do's his apoplexy?
Is that strong on him, still?
Most violent.
His speech is broken, and his eyes are set,
His face drawn longer, then 't was wont—
How? how?
Stronger, then he was wont?
No, sir: his face
Drawn longer, then 't was wont.
O, good.
His mouth
Is ever gaping, and his eye-lids hang.
Good.
A freezing numnesse stiffens all his joints,
And makes the colour of his flesh like lead.
It is good.
His pulse beats slow, and dull.
Good symptoms, still.
And, from his brain—
Ha? how? not from his brain?
Yes, sir, and from his brain—
I conceive you, good.)
Flows a cold sweat, with a continual rheum,
Forth the resolved corners of his eyes.
Is it possible? yet I am better, ha!
How do's he, with the swimming of his head?
O, sir, it is past, the scotomy; he, now,
Hath lost his feeling, and hath left to snort:
You hardly can perceive him, that he breathes.
Excellent, excellent, sure I shall out-last him:
This makes me young again, a score of years.
I was a coming for you, sir.
Has he made his will?
What has he given me?
No, sir.
Nothing? ha?
He has not made his will, sir.
Oh, oh, oh.
What then did VOLTORE, the Lawyer, here?
He smelt a carcass, sir, when he but heard
My master was about his testament;
(As I did urge him to it, for your good—)
He came unto him, did he? I thought so.
Yes, and presented him this piece of plate.
To be his heir?
I doe not know, sir.
True,
I know it too.
By your own scale, sir.
Well,
I shall prevent him, yet. See, MOSS, look,
Here, I have brought a bag of bright cecchines,
Will quite weigh down his plate.
Yea, mary, sir!
This is true physic, this your sacred medicine,
No talk of opiates, to this great elixir.
It is aurum palpabile, if not potabile.
It shall be ministered to him, in his bowl?
I, doe, doe, doe.
Most blessed cordial!
This will recover him.
Yes, doe, doe, doe.
I think, it were not best, sir.
What?
To re∣cover him.
O, no, no, no; by no means.
Why, sir, this
Will work some strange effect, if he but feel it.
It is true, therefore forbear, I'll take my venture:
Give me't again.
At no hand, pardon me;
You shall not doe your self that wrong, sir. I
Will so advise you, you shall have it all.
How?
All, sir, it is your right, your own; no man
Can claim a part: it is yours, without a rival,
Decreed by destiny.
How? how, good MOSS?
I'll tell you, sir. This fit he shall recover—
I doe conceive you.
And, on first advantage
Of his gained sense, will I re-importune him
Unto the making of his testament:
And show him this.
Good, good.
It is better yet,
If you will hear, sir.
Yes, with all my heart.
Now, would I counsel you, make home with speed;
There, frame a will: whereto you shall inscribe
My master your sole heir.
And disinherit
My son?
O, sir, the better: for that colour
Shall make it much more taking.
O, but colour?
This will, sir, you shall send it unto me.
Now, when I come to enforce (as I will doe)
Your cares, your watchings, and your many prayers,
Your more then many gifts, your this days present,
And, last, produce your will; where (without thought,
Or least regard, unto your proper issue,
A son so brave, and highly meriting)
The stream of your diverted love hath thrown you
Upon my master, and made him your heir:
He cannot be so stupid, or stone dead,
But, out of conscience, and mere gratitude—
He must pronounce me, his?
It is true.
This plot
Did I think on before.
I doe believe it.
Doe you not believe it?
Yes, sir.
Mine own project.
Which when he hath done, sir—
Published me his heir?
And you so certain, to survive him—
I.
Being so lusty a man—
It is true.
Yes, sir—
I thought on that too. See, how he should be
The very organ, to express my thoughts!
You have not only done your self a good—
But multiplied it on my son?
It is right, sir.
Still, my invention.
'Lasse sir, heaven knows,
It hath been all my study, all my care,
(I'eene grow grey withal) how to work things—
I doe conceive, sweet MOSS.
You are he,
For whom I labour, here.
I, doe, doe, doe:
I'll straight about it.
Rooke go with you, raven.
I know thee honest.
You doe lie, sir—
And—
Your knowledge is no better then your ears, sir.
I doe not doubt, to be a father to thee.
Nor I, to gull my brother of his blessing.
I may have my youth restored to me, why not?
Your worship is a precious ass—
What say thou?
I doe desire your worship, to make haste, sir.
It is done, it is done, I go.
O, I shall burst;
Let out my sides, let out my sides—
Contain
Your flux of laughter, sir: you know, this hope
Is such a bait, it covers any hook.
O, but thy working, and thy placing it!
I cannot hold; good rascal, let me kiss thee:
I never knew thee, in so rare a humour.
Alas, sir, I but doe, as I am taught;
Follow your grave instructions; give 'hem words;
Power oil into their ears: and send them hence.
It is true, it is true. What a rare punishment
Is avarice, to it self?
I, with our help, sir.
So many cares, so many maladies,
So many fears attending on old age,
Yea, death so often called on, as no wish
Can be more frequent with 'hem, their limbs faint,
Their senses dull, their seeing, hearing, going,
All dead before them; yea, their very teeth,
Their instruments of eating, failing them:
Yet this is reckoned life! Nay, here was one,
Is now gone home, that wishes to live longer!
Feels not his gout, nor palsy, fains himself
Younger, by scores of years, flatters his age,
With confident belying it, hopes he may
With charms, like AESON, have his youth restored:
And with these thoughts so battens, as if fate
Would be as easily cheated on, as he,
And all turns air! Who's that, there, now? a third?
Close, to your couch again: I hear his voice.
It is CORVINO, our spruce Merchant.
Dead.
Another bout, sir, with your eyes. Who's there?
SIgnior CORVINO! come most wished for! O,
How happy were you, if you knew it, now!
Why? what? wherein?
The tardy hour is come, sir.
He is not dead?
Not dead, sir, but as good;
He knows no man.
How shall I doe, then?
Why, sir?
I have brought him, here, a pearl.
Perhaps, he has
So much remembrance left, as to know you, sir;
He still calls on you, nothing but your name
Is in his mouth: Is your pearl orient, sir?
Venice was never owner of the like.
Signior COR∣VINO.
Hark.
Signior COR∣VINO.
'He calls you, step and give it him. H'is here, sir,
And he has brought you a rich pearl.
How doe you, sir?
Tell him, it doubles the twelfe care.
Sir,
He cannot understand, his hearing's gone;
And yet it comforts him, to see you—
Say,
I have a diamant for him, too.
Best show it, sir,
Put it into his hand; it is only there
He apprehends: he has his feeling, yet.
See, how he grasps it!
'Lasse, good gentleman!
How pitiful the sight is!
Tut, forget, sir.
The weeping of an heir should still be laughter,
Under a visor.
Why? am I his heir?
Sir, I am sworn, I may not show the will,
Till he be dead: But, here has been CORBACCIO,
Here has been VOLTORE, here were others too,
I cannot number 'hem, they were so many,
All gaping here for legacies; but I,
Taking the vantage of his naming you,
(Signior CORVINO, Signior CORVINO) took
Paper, and pen, and ink, and there I asked him,
Whom he would have his heir? CORVINO. Who
Should be executor? CORVINO. And,
To any question, he was silent too,
I still interpreted the nods, he made
(Through weakness) for consent: and sent home th'others,
Nothing bequeathed them, but to cry, and curse.
O, my dear MOSS. Do's he not perceive vs?
No more then a blind harper. He knows no man,
No face of friend, nor name of any servant,
Who't was that fed him last, or gave him drink:
Not those, he hath begotten, or brought up
Can he remember.
Has he children?
Bastards,
Some dozen, or more, that he begot on beggars,
Gipseys, and Jaws, and black-moores, when he was drunk.
Knew you not that, sir? It is the common fable.
The Dwarf, the Fool, the Eunuch are all his;
H'is the true father of his family,
In all, save me: but he has given 'hem nothing.
That's well, that's well. Art sure he does not hear vs?
Sure, sir? why, look you, credit your own sense.
The pox approach, and add to your diseases,
If it would send you hence the sooner, sir.
For, your incontinence, it hath deserved it
Thoroughly, and thoroughly, and the plague to boot.
(You may come near, sir) would you would once close
Those filthy eyes of yours, that slow with slime,
Like two frog-pits; and those same hanging cheeks,
Covered with hide, in stead of skin: (nay, help, sir)
That look like frozen dish-clouts, set on end.
Or, like an old smoked wall, on which the rain
Ran down in streakes.
Excellent, sir, speak out;
You may be louder yet: a culuering,
Discharged in his ear, would hardly bore it.
His nose is like a common sour, still running.
It is good! and, what his mouth?
A very draught.
O, stop it up—
By no means.
'Pray you let me.
Faith, I could stifle him, rarely, with a pillow,
As well, as any woman, that should keep him.
Doe as you will, but I'll be gone.
Be so;
It is your presence makes him last so long.
I pray you, use no violence.
No, sir? why?
Why should you be thus scrupulous? pray you, sir.
Nay, at your discretion.
Well, good sir, be gone.
I will not trouble him now, to take my pearl?
Puh, nor your diamant. What a needless care
Is this afflicts you? Is not all, here, yours?
Am not I here? whom you have made? your creature?
That owe my being to you?
Grateful MOSS!
Thou art my friend, my fellow, my companion,
My partner, and shalt share in all my fortunes.
Excepting one.
What's that?
Your gallant wife, sir.
Now, is he gone: we had no other means,
To shoot him hence, but this.
My divine MOSS!
Thou hast to day out-gone thy self. Who's there?
I will be troubled with no more. Prepare
Me music, dances, banquets, all delights;
The Turk is not more sensual, in his pleasures,
Then will VOLPONE. Let me see, a pearl?
A diamant? plate? cecchines? good mornings purchase;
Why, this is better then rob churches, yet:
Or fat, by eating (once a mon'th) a man.
Who is it?
The beauteous lady WOVLD-BEE, sir.
Wife, to the English Knight, Sir POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE,
(This is the stile, sir, is directed me)
Hath sent to know, how you have slept to night,
And if you would be visited.
Not, now.
Some three hours, hence—
I told the Squire, so much.
When I am high with mirth, and wine: then, then.
Before heaven, I wonder at the desperate valor
Of the bold English, that they dare let loose
Their wives, to all encounters!
Sir, this knight
Had not his name for nothing, he is politic,
And knows, how ere his wife affect strange aires,
She hath not yet the face, to be dishonest.
But, had she signior CORVINO'S wives face—
Has she so rare a face?
O, sir, the wonder,
The blazing star of Italy! a wench
Of the first year! a beauty, ripe, as harvest!
Whose skin is whiter then a swan, all over!
Then silver, snow, or lilies! a soft lip,
Would tempt you to eternity of kissing!
And flesh, that melts, in the touch, to blood!
Bright as your gold! and lovely, as your gold!
Why had not I known this, before?
Alas, sir.
My self, but yesterday, discovered it.
How might I see her?
O, not possible;
Shoe's kept as warily, as is your gold:
Never do's come abroad, never takes ayre,
But at a window. All her looks are sweet,
As the first grapes, or cherries: and are watched
As near, as they are.
I must see her—
Sir.
There is a guard, of ten spies thick, upon her;
All his whole household: each of which is set
Upon his fellow, and have all their charge,
When he goes out, when he comes in, examined.
I will go see her, though but at her window.
In some disguise, then.
That is true. I must
Maintain mine own shape, still, the same: we'll think.
SIr, to a wise man, all the world's his soil.
It is not Italy, nor France, nor Europe,
That must bound me, if my fates call me forth.
Yet, I protest, it is no salt desire
Of seeing countries, shifting a religion,
Nor any dis-affection to the state
Where I was bred (and, unto which I owe
My dearest plots) hath brought me out; much less,
That idle, antique, stale, grey-headed project
Of knowing men's minds, and manners, with VLYSSES:
But, a peculiar humour of my wives,
Laid for this height of Venice, to observe,
To quote, to learn the language, and so forth—
I hope you travel, sir, with license?
Yes.
I dare the safelier converse— How long, sir,
Since you left England?
Seven weeks.
So lately!
You haven't been with my lord Ambassador?
Not yet, sir.
Pray you, what news, sir, vents our climate?
I heard, last night, a most strange thing reported
By some of my lords followers, and I long
To hear, how't will be seconded!
What was it, sir?
Mary, sir, of a raven, that should build
In a ship royal of the Kings.
This fellow
Do's he gull me, trow? or is gulled? your name, sir?
My name is POLITIQVE WOVLD-BEE.
O, that speaks him.
A Knight, sir?
A poor knight, sir.
Your lady
Lies here, in Venice, for intelligence
Of tyres and fashions, and behaviour,
Among the courtesans? the fine lady WOVLD-BEE?
Yes, sir, the spider, and the bee, oft-times,
Suck from one flower.
Good sir POLITIQVE!
I cry you mercy; I have heard much of you:
It is true, sir of your raven.
On your knowledge?
Yes, and your lyons whelping, in the Tower.
Another whelp!
Another, sir.
Now, heaven!
What prodigies be these? The fires at Berwike!
And the new star! these things concurring, strange!
And full of omen! Saw you those meteors?
I did, sir.
Fearful! Pray you sir, confirm me,
Were there three porcpisces seen, aboue the bridge,
As they give out?
Six, and and a sturgeon, sir.
I am astonished!
Nay, sir, be not so;
Isle tell you a greater prodigy, then these—
What should these things portend!
The very day
(Let me be sure) that I put forth from London,
There was a whale discovered, in the river,
As high as Woolwich, that had waited there
(Few know how many mon'ths) for the subversion
Of the Stode-Fleet.
Is it possible? Believe it,
It was either sent from Spain, or the Arch-dukes!
SPINOLA'S whale, upon my life, my credit!
Will they not leave these proiects? Worthy sir,
Some other news.
Faith, STONE, the fool, is dead;
And they doe lack a tauerne-foole, extremely.
Is MASS' STONE dead!
H'is dead, sir, why? I hope
You thought him not immortal? O, this Knight
(Where he well known) would be a precious thing
To fit our English stage: He that should write
But such a fellow, should be thought to fine
Extremely, if not maliciously.
STONE dead!
Dead. Lord! how deeply, sir, you apprehend it?
He was no kinsman to you?
That I know of.
Well! that same fellow was an unknown fool.
And yet you knew him, it seems?
I did so. Sir,
I knew him one of the most dangerous heads
Living within the state, and so I held him.
Indeed, sir?
While he lived, in action.
He has received weekly intelligence,
Upon my knowledge, out of the low Countries,
(For all parts of the world) in cabages;
And those dispensed, again, to Ambassadors,
In oranges, musk-melons, apricots,
Lemons, pome-citrons, and such like: sometimes,
In Colchester-oysters, and your Selsey-cockles.
You make me wonder!
Sir, upon my knowledge.
Nay, I have observed him, at your public ordinary,
Take his advertisement, from a traveller
(A concealed states-man) in a trencher of meat:
And, instantly, before the meal was done,
Convey an answer in a tooth-pick.
Strange!
How could this be, sir?
Why, the meat was cut
So like his character, and so laid, as he
Must easily read the cipher.
I have heard,
He could not read, sir.
So, it was given out,
(In polity) by those, that did employ him:
But he could read, and had your languages,
And to it, as sound a noddle—
I have heard, sir,
That your Bab'ouns were spies; and that they were
A kind of subtle nation, near to China.
I, I, your Mamuluchi. Faith, they had
Their hand in a French plot, or two; but they
Were so extremely given to women, as
They made discovery of all: yet I
Had my advises here (on wensday last)
From one of their own coat, they were returned,
Made their relations (as the fashion is)
And now stand fair, for fresh employment.
'Hart!
This, sir POLL. will be ignorant of nothing.
It seems, sir, you know all?
Not all, sir. But,
I have some general notions; I doe love
To note, and to observe: though I live out,
Free from the active torrent, yet I'd mark
The currents, and the passages of things,
For mine own private use; and know the ebbes,
And flows of state.
Believe it, sir, I hold
My self, in no small tie, unto my fortunes,
For casting me thus luckily, upon you;
Whose knowledge (if your bounty equal it)
May doe me great assistance, in instruction
For my behaviour, and my bearing, which
Is yet so rude, and raw—
Why? came you forth
Empty of rules, for travail?
Faith, I had
Some common ones, from out that vulgar grammar,
Which he, that cried Italian to me, taught me.
Why, this it is, that spoils all our brave bloods;
Trusting our hopeful gentry unto pedants:
Fellows of out-side, and mere bark. You seem
To be a gentleman, of ingenuous race—
I not profess it, but my fate hath been
To be, where I have been consulted with,
In this high kind, touching some great men's sons,
Persons of blood, and honour—
Who be these, sir?
Under that window, there't must be. The same.
Fellows, to mount a bank! Did your instructor
In the dear tongues, never discourse to you
Of the Italian mountebanks?
Yes, sir.
Why,
Here shall you see one.
They are quack-saluers,
Fellows, that live by venting oils, and drugs?
Was that the character he gave you of them?
As I remember.
Pity his ignorance.
They are the onely-knowing men of Europe!
Great general scholars, excellent physicians,
Most admired states-men, professed favourites,
And cabinet-counsellors, to the greatest princes!
The only languag'd-men, of all the world!
And, I have heard, they are most lewd impostors;
Made all of terms, and shreds; no less belyers
Of great-mens favours, then their own vile med'cines;
Which they will utter, upon monstrous oaths:
Selling that drug, for two pence, ere they part,
Which they have valued at twelve crowns, before.
Sir, calumnies are answered best with silence:
Your self shall judge. Who is it mounts, my friends?
SCOTO of Mantua, sir.
Is it he? nay, then
I'll proudly promise, sir, you shall behold
Another man, then has been phant'sied to you.
I wonder, yet, that he should mount his bank
Here, in this nook, that has been wont t'appeare
In face of the piazza! Here, he comes.
Mount, Zany.
Follow, follow, follow, follow, follow.
See how the people follow him! h'is a man
May write 10000 crowns, in bank, here. Note,
Mark but his gesture: I doe use to observe
The state he keeps, in getting up!
It is worth it, sir.
Most noble gent: and my worthy patrons, it may seem strange, that I, your SCOTO MANTVANO, who was ever wont to fix my bank in face of the public piazza, near the shelter of the portico, to the procuratia, should, now (after eight months absence, from this illustrous city of Venice) humbly re∣tire my self, into an obscure nook of the piazza.
Did not I, now, object the same?
Peace, sir.
Let me tell you: I am not (as your Lombard proverb saith) cold on my feet; or content to part with my commodities at a cheaper rate, then I accusto∣med: look not for it. Nor, that the calumnious reports of that impudent detra∣ctor, and shame to our profession, (ALESSANDRO BVTTONE, I mean) who gave out, in public, I was condemned a' Sforzato to the galleys, for poyso∣ning the Cardinal BIMBO'S—Cooke, hath at all attached, much less dejected me. No, no, worthy gent. (to tell you true) I cannot endure, to see the rabble of these ground Ciarlitani, that spread their cloaks on the pavement, as if they meant to do feats of activity, and then come in, lamely, with their mouldy tales out of BOCCACIO, like stale TABARINE, the Fabulist: some of them discoursing their travels, and of their tedious captivity in the Turks galleys, when indeed (were the truth known) they were the Christians galleys, where very temperate∣lie, they eat bread, and drunk water, as a wholesome penance (enjoined them by their Confessors) for base pilferies.
Note but his bearing, and contempt of these.
These turdy-facy-nasty-paty-lousy-farticall rogues, with one poor groats-worth of vn-prepar'd antimony, finely wrapped up in seuerall' scartoc∣cios, are able, very well, to kill their twenty a week, and play; yet, these meagre starved spirits, who have half stopped the organs of their minds with earthy oppila∣tions, want not their favourers among your shrivelled, sallad-eating artisans: who are overjoyed, that they may have their halfe-pe'rth of physic, though it purge 'hem into another world, 'tmakes no matter.
Excellent! have you heard better language, sir?
Well, let'hem go. And gentlemen, honourable gentlemen, know, that for this time, our bank, being thus removed from the clamours of the cana∣glee, shall be the scene of pleasure and delight: For, I have nothing to sell, little, or nothing to sell.
I told you, sir, his end.
You did so, sir.
I protest, I, and my six servants, are not able to make of this precious liquor, so fast, as it is fetched away from my lodging, by gentlemen of your city; strangers of the terra-ferma; worshipful merchants; I, and senators too: who, ever since my arrival, have detained me to their uses, by their splendidous libera∣lites. And worthily. For, what avails your rich man to have his magazines stuffed with moscadelli, or of the purest grape, when his physicians prescribe him (on pain of death) to drink nothing but water, costed with anise-seeds? O, health! health! the blessing of the rich! the riches of the poor! who can buy thee at too dear a rate, since there is no enjoying this world, without thee? Be not then so sparing of your purses, honourable gentlemen, as to abridge the natural course of life—
You see his end?
I, is it not good?
For, when a humid flux, or catarrh, by the mutability of air, falls from your head, into an arm, or shoulder, or any other part; take you a ducats, or your cecchine of gold, and apply to the place affected: see, what good effect it can work. No, no, it is this blessed vnguento, this rare extraction, that hath only
power to disperse all malignant humours, that proceed, either of hot, cold, moist, or windy causes—
I would he had put in dry to.
'Pray you, observe.
To fortify the most indigest, and crude stomach, I, were it of one, that (through extreme weakness) vomited blood, applying only a warm napkin to the place, after the unction, and fricassee; for the vertigine, in the head, putting but a drop into your nostrils, likewise, behind the ears; a most sovereign, and approved remedy: the mal-caduco, cramps, conuulsions, paralysies, epi∣lepsies, tremor-cordia, retyred-nerues, ill vapours of the spleen, stoppings of the liver, the stone, the strangury, hernia ventosa, iliaca passio; stops a disenteria, immediately; eases the torsion of the small guts; and cures me∣lancolia hypocondriaca, being taken and applied, according to my printed re∣ceipt. For, this is the physician, this the medicine; this counsels, this cures; this gives the direction, this works the effect: and (in sum) both together may bee termed an abstract of the theorick, and practick in the Aesculapian art. Twill cost you eight crowns. And, ZAN FRITADA, 'pray thee sing a verse, ex∣tempore, in honour of it.
How doe you like him, sir?
Most strangely, I!
Is not his language rare?
But Alchemy
I never heard the like: or BROVGHTONS books.
HAd old HIPPOCRATES, or GALEN,
(That to their books put med'cines all in)
But known this secret, they had never
(Of which they will be guilty ever)
Been murderers of so much paper,
Or wasted many a hurtles taper:
No Indian drug had ere been famed,
Tobacco, sassafras not named;
No yet, of guacum one small stick, sir,
Nor RAYMVND LVLLIES great elixir.
No, had been known the Danish GONSWART.
Or PARACELSVS, with his long-sword.
All this, yet, will not doe, eight crowns is high.
No more. Gentlemen, if I had but time to discourse to you the miracu∣lous effects of this my oil, surnamed oglio del SCOTO; with the count-lesse catalogue of those I have cured of th'aforesaid, and many more diseases; the pat∣tents and privileges of all the Princes, and commonwealths of Christendom; or but the depositions of those that appeared on my part, before the signiory of the Sanitâ, and most learned college of physicians; where I was authorized, upon notice taken of the admirable virtues of my medicaments, and mine own excel∣lency, in matter of rare, and unknown secrets, not only to disperse them pub∣liquely in this famous city, but in all the territories, that happily joy under the
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
government of the most pious and magnificent states of Italy. But may some other gallant fellow say, O, there be divers, that make profession to have as good, and as experimented receipts, as yours: Indeed, very many have assayed, like apes in imitation of that, which is really and essentially in me, to make of this oil; bestowed great cost in furnaces, stills, alembeks, continual fires, and prepare∣tion of the ingredients, (as indeed there goes to it six hundred several simples, be∣sides, some quantity of humane fat, for the conglutination, which we buy of the anatomists) but, when these practitioners come to the last decoction, blow, blow, puff, puff, and all flies in fumo: ha, ha, ha. Poor wretches! I rather pit∣tie their folly, and indiscretion, then their loss of time, and money; for those may be recovered by industry: but to bee a fool borne, is a disease incurable. For my self, I always from my youth have endeavoured to get the rarest secrets, and book them; either in exchange, or for money: I spared nor cost, nor labour, where any thing was worthy to bee learned. And gentlemen, honourable gen∣tlemen, I will undertake (by virtue of chemical art) out of the honourable hat, that covers your head, to extract the four elements; that is to say, the fire, ayre, water, and earth, and return you your felt without burn, or stain. For, whilst others have been at the balloo, I have been at my book: and am now past the craggy paths of study, and come to the flowery plains of honour, and re∣putation.
I doe assure you, sir, that is his aim.
But, to our price.
And that withal, sir POL.
You all know (honourable gentlemen) I never valued this ampule, or vial, at less then eight crowns, but for this time, I am content, to be deprived of it for six; six crowns is the price; and less in curtsy, I know you cannot offer me: take it, or leave it, howsoever, both it, and I, am at your service. I ask you not, as the value of the thing, for then I should demand of you a thousand crowns, so the Cardinals MONTALTO, FERNESE, the great duke of Tusca∣ny, my gossip, with divers other princes have given me, but I despise money: only to show my affection to you, honourable gentlemen, and your illustrous state here, I have neglected the messages of these princes, mine own offices, framed my journey hither, only to present you with the fruits of my travels. Tune your voi∣ces once more to the touch of your instruments, and give the honourable assembly some delightful recreation.
What monstrous, and most painful circumstance
Is here, to get some three, or four gazets!
Some three-pence, in the whole, for that twill come to.
YOu that would last long, list to my song,
Make no more coil, but buy of this oil.
Would you be ever fair? and young?
Stout of teeth? and strong of tongue?
Tart of palate? quick of ear?
Sharpe of sight? of nostril clear?
Moist of hand? and light of foot?
(Or I will come nearer to it)
Would you live free from all diseases?
Doe the act, your mistress pleases;
Yet fright all aches from your bones?
Here's a med'cine, for the nones.
Well, I am in a humour (at this time) to make a present of the small quantity my coffer contains: to the rich, in curtsy, and to the poor, for Gods sake. Wherefore, now mark; I asked you six crowns; and six crowns, at o∣there times, you have paid me; you shall not give me six crowns, nor five, nor four, nor three, nor two, nor one; nor half a ducats; no, nor a muccinigo: six—pence it will cost you, or six hundred pound—expect no lower price, for by the banner of my front, I will not bate a bagatine, that I will have, only, a pledge of your loves, to carry something from amongst you, to show, I am not contemned by you. Therefore, now, toss your handkerchiefs, cheerfully, cheerfully; and be advertised, that the first heroic spirit, that deigns to grace me, with a hand∣kerchief, I will give it a little remembrance of something, beside, shall please it better, then if I had presented it with a double pistolet.
Will you be that heroic spark, sir POL?
O, see! the window has prevented you.
Lady, I kiss your bounty: and, for this timely grace, you have done your poor SCOTO of Mantua, I will return you, over and aboue my oil, a secret, of that high, and inestimable nature, shall make you for ever enamoured on that minute, wherein your eye first descended on so mean, (yet not altogether to be despised) an object. Here is a poulder, concealed in this paper, of which, if I should speak to the worth, nine thousand volumes were but as one page, that page as a line, that line as a word: so short is this pilgrimage of man (which some call life) to the expressing of it. Would I reflect on the price? why, the whole world were but as an empire, that empire as a province, that province as a bank, that bank as a private purse, to the purchase of it. I will, only, tell you; It is the poulder, that made VENVS a goddess (given her by APOLLO) that kept her perpetually young, cleared her wrinkles, firmed her gummes, filled her skin, coloured her hair; from her, derived to HELEN, and at the sack of Troy (unfortunate∣lie) lost: till now, in this our age, it was as happily recovered, by a studious Anti∣quarie, out of some ruins of Asia, who sent a moiety of it, to the court of France (but much sophisticated) wherewith the ladies there, now, colour their hair. The rest (at this present) remains with me; extracted, to a quintessence: so that, where ever it but touches, in youth it perpetually preserves, in age restores the complexion; seat's your teeth, did they dance like virginal jacks, firm as a wall; makes them white, as ivory, that were black, as—
Spite of the devil, and my shame! come down, here;
Come down: no house but mine to make your scene?
Signior FLAMINIO, will you down, sir? down?
What is my wife your FRANCISCINA? sir?
No windores on the whole piazza, here,
To make your properties, but mine? but mine?
Hart! ere to morrow, I shall be new christened,
And called the PANTALOON di besogniosi,
About the town.
What should this mean, sir POL?
Some trick of state, believe it. I will home.
It may be some design, on you.
I know not.
I'll stand upon my guard.
It is your best, sir.
This three weeks, all my advises, all my letters,
They have been intercepted.
Indeed, sir?
Best have a care.
Nay, so I will.
This knight,
I may not lose him, for my mirth, till night.
O, I am wounded.
Where, sir?
Not without;
Those blows were nothing: I could bear them ever.
But angry CUPID, bolting from her eyes,
Hath shot himself into me, like a flame;
Where, now, he flings about his burning heat,
As in a fornace, an ambitious fire,
Whose vent is stopped. The fight is all within me.
I cannot live, except thou help me, MOSS;
My liver melts, and I, without the hope
Of some soft air, from her refreshing breath,
Am but a heap of cinders.
'Lasse, good sir!
Would you had never seen her.
Nay, would thou
Had never told me of her.
Sir, it is true;
I doe confess, I was unfortunate,
And you unhappy: but I'am bound in conscience,
No less then duty, to effect my best
To your release of torment, and I will, sir.
Dear MOSS, shall I hope?
Sir, more then dear,
I will not bid you to despair of ought,
Within a humane compass.
O, there spoke
My better Angel. MOSS, take my keys,
Gold, plate, and jewels, ell's at thy devotion;
Employ them, how thou wilt; nay, coin me, too:
So thou, in this, but crown my longings. MOSS?
Use but your patience.
So I have.
I doubt not
To bring success to your desires.
Nay, then,
I not repent me of my late disguise.
If you can horn him, sir, you need not.
True:
Besides, I never meant him for my heir.
Is not the colour of my beard, and eye-browes,
To make me known?
No jot.
I did it well.
So well, would I could follow you in mine,
With half the happiness; and, yet, I would
Escape your epilogue.
But, were they gulled
With a belief, that I was SCOTO?
Sir,
SCOTO himself could hardly have distinguished!
I have not time to flatter you, now, we'll part:
And, as I prosper, so applaud my art.
DEath of mine honour, with the cities fool?
A juggling, tooth-drawing, prating mountebank?
And, at a public window? where whilst he,
With his strained action, and his dole of faces,
To his drug-lecture draws your itching ears,
A crew of old, vn-marri'd, noted lechers,
Stood leering up, like Satyrs: and you smile,
Most graciously! and fan your favours forth,
To give your hot spectators satisfaction!
What, was your mountebank their call? their whistle?
Or were you' enamoured on his copper rings?
His saffron jewel, with the toade-stone in it?
Or his embroidered suit, with the cope-stitch,
Made of a herse-cloth? or his old tilt-feather?
Or his starched beard? well! you shall have him, yes.
He shall come home, and minister unto you
The fricassee, for the mother. Or, let me see,
I think, you' had rather mount? would you not mount?
Why, if you'll mount, you may; yes truly, you may:
And so, you may be seen, down to th'foot.
Get you a citterne, lady vanity,
And be a dealer, with the virtuous man;
Make one: I'll but protest my self a cuckold,
And save your dowry. I am a Dutchman, I!
For, if you thought me an Italian,
You would be damned, ere you did this, you whore:
Thou'ldst tremble, to imagine, that the murder
Of father, mother, brother, all thy race,
Should follow, as the subject of my justice!
Good sir, have patience!
What coul'dst thou propose
Less to thy self, then, in this heat of wrath,
And stung with my dishonour, I should strike
This steel unto thee, with as many stabs,
As thou were gazed upon with goatish eyes?
Alas sir, be appeased! I could not think
My being at the window should more, now,
Move your impatience, then at other times.
No? not to seek, and entertain a parley,
With a known knave? before a multitude?
You were an actor, with your handkerchief!
Which he, most sweetly, kissed in the receipt,
And might (no doubt) return it, with a letter,
And point the place, where you might meet: your sisters,
Your mothers, or your aunts might serve the turn.
Why, dear sir, when doe I make these excuses?
Or ever stir, abroad, but to the church?
And that, so seldom—
Well, it shall be less;
And thy restraint, before, was liberty,
To what I now decree: and therefore, mark me.
First, I will have this bawdy light damned up;
And, till 't be done, some two, or three yards off,
I'll chalk a line: o'er which, if thou but chance
To set thy desperate foot; more hell, more horror,
More wilde, remorseless rage shall seize on thee,
Then on a conjurer, that, had heedless left
His circles safety, ere his devil was laid.
Then, here's a locke, which I will hang upon thee;
And, now I think on it, I will keep thee backe-wards;
Thy lodging shall be backe-wards; thy walks back-wards;
Thy prospect-all be backe-wards; and no pleasure,
That thou shalt know but backe-wards: Nay, since you force
My honest nature, know, it is your own
Being too open, makes me use you thus.
Since you will not contain your subtle nostrils
In a sweet room, but they must snuff the ayre
Of rank, and sweaty passengers—One knocks.
Away, and be not seen, pain of thy life;
Not look toward the window: if thou dost—
(Nay stay, hear this) let me not prosper, whore,
But I will make thee an anatomy,
Dissect thee mine own self, and read a lecture
Upon thee, to the city, and in public.
Away. Who's there?
It is signior MOSS, sir.
LEt him come in, his master's dead: There's yet
Some good, to help the bad. My MOSS, welcome,
I guess your news.
I fear you cannot, sir.
Is it not his death?
Rather the contrary.
Not his recovery?
Yes, sir,
I am cursed,
I am bewitched, my crosses meet to vex me.
How? how? how? how?
Why, sir, with SCOTO'S oil!
CORBACCIO, and VOLTORE brought of it,
Whilst I was busy in an inner room—
Death! that damned mountebank! but, for the law,
Now, I could kill the rascal: 't cannot be,
His oil should have that virtue. Have not I
Known him a common rogue, come fiddling in
To th'osteria, with a tumbling whore,
And, when he he's done all his forced tricks, been glad
Of a poor spoonful of dead wine, with flies in it?
It cannot be. All his ingredients
Area sheep gall, a roasted bitches marrow,
Some few sod earewigs, pounded caterpillars,
A little capons grease, and fasting spittle:
I know 'hem, to a dram.
I know not, sir,
But some on it, there they powered into his ears,
Some in his nostrils, and recovered him;
Applying but the fricassee.
POX of that fricassee.
And since, to seem the more officious,
And flattering of his health, there, they have had
(At extreme fees) the college of physicians
Consulting on him, how they might restore him;
Where, one would have a cataplasme of spices,
Another, a flayd ape clapped to his breast,
A third would ha'it a dog, a fourth an oil
With wild cats skins: at last, they all resolved
That, to preserve him, was no other means,
But some young woman must be straight sought out,
Lusty, and full of juice, to sleep by him;
And, to this service (most unhappily,
And most unwillingly) am I now employed,
Which, here, I thought to pre-acquaint you with,
For your advice, since it concerns you most,
Because, I would not doe that thing might cross
Your ends, on whom I have my whole dependence, sir:
Yet, if I doe it not, they may delat
My slackness to my patron, work me out
Of his opinion; and there, all your hopes,
Venters, or whatsoever, are all frustrate.
I doe but tell you, sir. Besides, they are all
Now striving, who shall first present him. Therefore—
I could entreat you, briefly, conclude some-what:
Prevent 'hem if you can.
Death to my hopes!
This is my villainous fortune! Best to hire
Some common courtesan?
I, I thought on that, sir.
But they are all so subtle, full of art,
And age again doting, and flexible,
So as—I cannot tell—we may perchance
Light on a queen, may cheat vs all.
It is true.
No, no: it must be one, that he's no tricks, sir,
Some simple thing, a creature, made unto it;
Some wench you may command. Have you no kinswoman?
Gods so—Think, think, think, think, think, think, think, sir.
One of the Doctors offered, there, his daughter.
How!
Yes, signior LVPO, the physician,
His daughter?
And a virgin, sir. Why? Alas
He knows the state of's body, what it is;
That nought can warm his blood, sir, but a fever;
Nor any incantation raise his spirit:
A long forgetfulness hath seized that part.
Besides, sir, who shall know it? some one, or two—
I pray thee give me leave. If any man
But I had had this luck—The thing in it self,
I know, is nothing—Wherefore should not I
As well command my blood, and my affections,
As this dull Doctor? In the point of honour,
The cases are all one, of wife, and daughter.
I hear him coming.
She shall do it: It is done.
Slight, if this Doctor, who is not engaged,
Unless 't be for his counsel (which is nothing)
Offer his daughter, what should I, that am
So deeply in? I will prevent him: wretch!
Covetous wretch! MOSS, I have determined.
How, sir?
We'll make all sure. The party, you wot of,
Shall be mine own wife, MOSS.
Sir. The thing,
(But that I would not seem to counsel you)
I should have motioned to you, at the first:
And, make your count, you have cut all their throats.
Why! it is directly taking a possession!
And, in his next fit, we may let him go.
It is but to pull the pillow, from his head,
And he is throttled: 't had been done, before,
But for your scrupulous doubts.
I, a plague on it,
My conscience fools my wit. Well, I'll be brief,
And so be thou, lest they should be before vs;
Go home, prepare him, tell him, with what zeal,
And willingness, I doe it: swear it was,
On the first hearing (as thou moist doe, truly)
Mine own free motion.
Sir, I warrant you,
I'll so possess him with it, that the rest
Of his starved clients shall be banished, all;
And only you received. But come not, sir,
Until I send, for I have some-thing else
To ripen, for your good (you must not know it)
But doe not you forget to send, now.
Fear not.
WHere are you, wife? my CELIA? wife? what, blubbering?
Come, dry those tears. I think, thou though me in earnest?
Ha? by this light, I talked so but to try thee.
Me thinks, the lightness of the occasion
Should have confirmed thee. Come, I am not jealous.
No?
Faith, I am not, I, nor never was:
It is a poor, unprofitable humour.
Doe not I know, if women have a will,
They'll doe against all the watches, of the world?
And that the fiercest spies, are tamed with gold?
Tut, I am confident in thee, thou shalt see it:
And see, I'll give thee cause too, to believe it.
Come, kiss me. Go, and make thee ready straight,
In all thy best attire, thy choicest jewels,
Put 'hem all on, and, with 'hem, thy best looks:
We are invited to a solemn feast,
At old VOLPONE'S, where it shall appear
How far I am free, from jealousy, or fear.
I Fear, I shall begin to grow in love
With my dear self, and my most prosperous parts,
They doe so spring, and burgeon; I can feel
A whimsy in my blood: (I know not how)
Success hath made me wanton. I could skip
Out of my skin, now, like a subtle snake,
I am so limber. O! Your Parasite
Is a most precious thing, dropped from aboue,
Not bred amongst clods, and clot-poules, here on earth.
I muse, the mystery was not made a science,
It is so liberally professed! almost
All the wise world is little else, in nature,
But Parasites, or Sub-parasites. And, yet,
I mean not those, that have your bare towne-arte,
To know, who's fit to feed 'hem; have no house,
No family, no care, and therefore mould
Tales for men's ears, to bait that sense; or get
Kitchin-inuention, and some stale receipts
To please the belly, and the groin; nor those,
With their court-dog-tricks, that can fawn, and fleer,
Make their revenue out of legs, and faces,
Echo my-Lord, and lick away a mouth:
But your fine, elegant rascal, that can rise,
And stoop (almost together) like an arrow;
Shoot through the air, as nimbly as a star;
Turn short, as doth a swallow; and be here,
And there, and here, and yonder, all at once;
Present to any humour, all occasion;
And change a visor, swifter, then a thought!
This is the creature, had the art borne with him;
Toils not to learn it, but doth practise it
Out of most excellent nature: and such sparks,
Are the true Parasites, others but their Zant's.
WHo's this? BONARIO? old CORBACCIO's son?
The person I was bound to seek. Fair sir,
You are happ'ly met.
That cannot be, by thee.
Why, sir?
Nay 'pray thee know thy way, &amp; leave me:
I would be loath to inter-change discourse,
With such a mate, as thou art.
Courteous sir,
Scorn not my poverty.
Not I, by heaven:
But thou shalt give me leave to hate thy baseness.
Baseness?
I, answer me, is not thy sloth
Sufficient argument? thy flattery?
Thy means of feeding?
Heaven, be good to me.
These imputations are too common, sir,
And eas'ly stuck on virtue, when shoe's poor;
You are unequal to me, and how ere
Your sentence may be righteous, yet you are not,
That ere you know me, thus, proceed in censure:
St. MARK bear witness against you, it is inhumane.
What? do's he weep? the sign is soft, and good!
I doe repent me, that I was so harsh.
It is true, that, swayed by strong necessity,
I am enforced to eat my careful bread
With too much obsequy; it is true, beside,
That I am fine to spin mine own poor raiment,
Out of my mere observance, being not borne
To a free fortune: but that I have done
Base offices, in rending friends asunder,
Dividing families, betraying counsels,
Whispering false lies, or mining men with praises,
Trained their credulity with perjuries,
Corrupted chastity, or am in love
With mine own tender ease, but would not rather
Prove the most rugged, and laborious course,
That might redeem my present estimation;
Let me here perish, in all hope of goodness.
This cannot be a personated passion!
I was to blame, so to mistake thy nature;
'Pray thee forgive me: and speak out thy business.
Sir, it concerns you; and though I may seem,
At first, to make a maine offence, in manners,
And in my gratitude, unto my master,
Yet, for the pure love, which I bear all right,
And hatred of the wrong, I must reveal it.
This very hour, your father is in purpose
To disinherit you—
How!
And thrust you forth,
As a mere stranger to his blood; it is true, sir:
The work no way engages me, but, as
I claim an interest in the general state
Of goodness, and true virtue, which I hear
T'abound in you: and, for which mere respect,
Without a second aim, sir, I have done it.
This tale hath lost thee much of the late trust,
Thou had with me; it is impossible:
I know not how to lend it any thought,
My father should be so unnatural.
It is a confidence, that well becomes
Your piety; and formed (no doubt) it is,
From your own simple innocence: which makes
Your wrong more monstrous, and abhorred. But, sir,
I now, will tell you more. This very minute,
It is, or will be doing: And, if you
Shall be but pleased to go with me, I'll bring you,
(I dare not say where you shall see, but) where
Your ear shall be a witness of the deed;
Hear your self written bastard: and professed
The common issue of the earth.
I'm mazed!
Sir, if I doe it not, draw your just sword,
And score your vengeance, on my front, and face;
Mark me your villain: You have too much wrong,
And I doe suffer for you, sir. My heart
Weeps blood, in anguish—
Lead. I follow thee.
MOSS stays long, me thinks. Bring forth your sports
And help, to make the wretched time more sweet.
Dwarf, Fool, and Eunuch, well met here we be.
A question it were now, whether of vs three,
Being all the known delicates of a rich man,
In pleasing him, claim the precedence can?
I claim for my self.
And, so doth the fool.
It is foolish indeed: let me set you both to school.
First, for your dwarf, hoe's little, and witty,
And every thing, as it is little, is pretty;
Else why doe men say to a creature of my shape,
So soon as they see him, it's a pretty little ape?
And, why a pretty ape? but for pleasing imitation
Of greater men's action, in a ridiculous fashion.
Beside, this feat body of mine doth not crave
Half the meat, drink, and cloth, one of your bulks will have.
Admit, your fools face be the mother of laughter,
Yet, for his brain, it must always come after:
And, though that doe feed him, it's a pitiful case,
His body is beholding to such a bad face.
Who's there? my couch, away, look, NANO, see:
Give me my caps, first—go, enquire. Now, CUPID
Send it be MOSS, and with fair return.
It is the beauteous madam—
WOVLD-BE—is it?
The same.
Now, torment on me; squire her in:
For she will enter, or dwell here for ever.
Nay, quickly, that my fit were past. I fear
A second hell too, that my loathing this
Will quite expel my appetite to the other:
Would she were taking, now, her tedious leave.
Lord, how it threats me, what I am to suffer!
I Thank you, good sir. 'Pray you signify
Unto your patron, I am here. This band
Shows not my neck enough (I trouble you, sir,
Let me request you, bid one of my women
Come hither to me) in good faith, I, am dressed
Most favourably, to day, it is no matter,
It is well enough. Look, see, these petulant things!
How they have done this!
I do feel the fever
Entering, in at mine ears; Ô, for a charm,
To fright it hence.
Come nearer: is this curl
In his right place? or this? why is this higher
Then all the rest? you have not washed your eyes, yet?
Or do they not stand even i'your head?
Whore's your fellow? call her.
NOW, St. MARK
Deliver vs: anon, she'll beat her women,
Because her nose is red.
I pray you, view
This tire, forsooth: are all things apt, or no?
One hair a little, here, stick out, forsooth.
Do's 't so forsooth? and where was your dear sight
When it did so, forsooth? what now? bird-ey'd?
And you, too? 'pray you both approach, and mend it.
Now (by that light) I muse, yo'are not ashamed!
I, that have preached these things, so oft, unto you,
Read you the principles, argued all the grounds,
Disputed every fitness, every grace,
Called you to counsel of so frequent dressings—
More carefully, then of your fame, or honour)
Made you acquainted, what an ample dowry
The knowledge of these things would be unto you,
Able, alone, to get you noble husbands
At your return: and you, thus, to neglect it?
Besides, you seeing what a curious nation
Th'Italians are, what will they say of me?
The English lady cannot dress her self;
Here's a fine imputation, to our country!
Well, go your ways, and stay, in the next room.
This fucus was too course too, it's no matter.
Good-sir, you'll giue'hem entertainment?
The storm comes toward me.
How do's my VOLP?
Troubled with noise, I cannot sleep; I dreamt
That a strange fury entered, now, my house,
And, with the dreadful tempest of her breath,
Did cleave my roof asunder.
Believe me, and I
Had the most fearful dream, could I remember't—
Out on my fate; I have given her the occasion
How to torment me: she will tell me hers.
Me thought, the golden mediocrity
Polite, and delicate—
O, if you doe love me,
No more; I sweat, and suffer, at the mention
Of any dream: feel, how I tremble yet.
Alas, good soul! the passion of the heart.
Seed-pearle were good now, boiled with syrup of apples,
Tincture of gold, and corrall, citron-pills,
Your elicampane root, mirobalanes —
Ay me, I have tan a grasse-hopper by the wing.
Burnt silk, and amber, you have muscatel
Good in the house—
You will not drink, and part?
No, fear not that. I doubt, we shall not get
Some english saffron (half a dram would serve)
Your sixteen cloves, a little musk, dri'd mints.
Buglosse, and barley-meale—
Shoe's in again,
Before I fayn'd diseases, now I have one.
And these applied, with a right scarlet-cloth—
Another flood of words! a very torrent!
Shall I, sir, make you a poultice?
No, no, no;
I'am very well: you need prescribe no more.
I have, a little, studied physic; but, now,
I'am all for musique: save, in the fore-noones,
An hour, or two, for painting. I would have
A lady, indeed, t'haue all, letters, and arts,
Be able to discourse, to write, to paint,
But principal (as PLATO holds) your musique
(And, so do's wise PYTHAGORAS, I take it)
Is your true rapture; when there is consent
In face, in voice, and clothes: and is, indeed,
Our sexes chiefest ornament.
The Poet,
As old in time, as PLATO, and as knowing,
Soy's that your highest female grace is silence.
Which o'your Poets? PETRARCH? or TESCO? or DANTE?
GVERRINI? ARIOSTO? ARETINE?
CIECO di Hadria? I have read them all.
Is every thing a cause, to my destruction?
I think, I ha'two or three of'hem, about me.
The sun, the sea will sooner, both, stand still,
Then her eternal tongue! nothing can scope it.
Here's PASTOR FIDO—
Profess obstinate silence,
That's, now, my safest.
All our English writers,
I mean such, as are happy in th'Italian,
Will deign to steal out of this author, mainly;
Almost as much, as from MONTAGNIE:
He has so modern, and facile a vein,
Fitting the time, and catching the court-eare.
Your PETRARCH is more passionate, yet he,
In days of sonetting, trusted 'hem, with much:
DANTE is hard, and few can understand him.
But, for a desperate wit, there's ARETINE!
Only, his pictures are a little obscene—
You mark me not?
Alas, my mind's perturbed.
Why, in such cases, we must cure our selves,
Make use of our philosophy—
O'y me.
And, as we find our passions doe rebel,
Encounter 'hem with reason; or divert 'hem,
By giving scope unto some other humour
Of lesser danger: as, in politic bodies,
There's nothing, more, doth overwhelm the judgment,
And clouds the understanding, then too much
Settling, and fixing, and (is it were) subsiding
Upon one object. For the incorporating
Of these same outward things, into that part,
Which we call mental, leaves some certain faeces,
That stop the organs, and, as PLATO says,
Assassinates our knowledge.
Now, the spirit
Of patience help me.
Come, in faith, I must
Visit you more, a days; and make you well:
Laugh, and be lusty.
My good angel save me.
There was but one sole man, in all the world,
With whom I ere could sympathize; and he
Would lie you often, three, four hours together,
To hear me speak: and be (sometime) so raped,
As he would answer me, quite from the purpose,
Like you, and you are like him, just. I'll discourse
(And 't be but only, sir, to bring you asleep
How we did spend our time, and loves, together,
For some six years.
Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh.
For we were coaetanci, and brought up—
Some power, some fate, some fortune rescue me.
GOd save you, Madam.
Good sir.
MOSS? welcome,
Welcome to my redemption.
Why, sir?
Oh,
Rid me of this my torture, quickly, there;
My Madam, with the everlasting voice:
The bells, in time of pestilence, ne'er made
Like noise, or were in that perpetual motion;
The cock-pit comes not near it. All my house,
But now, steamed like a bath, with her thick breath.
A lawyer could not have been heard; nor scarce
Another woman, such a hail of words
She has let fall. For hells sake, rid her hence.
Has she presented?
O, I doe not care,
I'll take her absence, upon any price,
With any loss.
Madam—
I have brought your patron
A toy, a cap here, of mine own work—
It is well,
I had forgot to tell you, I saw your Knight,
Where you'd little think it—
Where?
Mary,
Where yet, if you make haste, you may apprehend him,
Rowing upon the water in a gondola,
With the most cunning courtesan, of Venice.
Is it true?
Pursue 'hem, and believe your eyes:
Leave me, to make your gift. I knew, 't would take.
For lightly, they that use themselves most licence,
Are still most jealous.
MOSS, hearty thanks,
For thy quick fiction, and delivery of me.
Now, to my hopes, what say thou?
But doe you hear, sir?—
Again; I fear a paroxisme.
Which way
Rowed they together?
Toward the rialto.
I pray you lend me your dwarf.
I pray you, take him.
Your hopes, sir, are like happy blossoms, fair,
And promise timely fruit, if you will stay
But the maturing; keep you, at your couch,
CORBACCIO will arrive straight, with the will:
When he is gone, isle tell you more.
My blood,
My spirits are returned; I am alive:
And like your wanton gam'ster, at primero,
Whose thought had whispered to him, not go less,
Methinkes I lie, and draw—for an encounter.
SIr, here concealed, you may hear all. But 'pray you
Have patience, sir; the semi's your father, knocks:
I am compelled, to leave you.
Do so. Yet,
Cannot my thought imagine this a truth.
DEath on me! you are come too soon, what meant you?
Did not I say, I would send?
Yes, but I feared
You might forget it, and then they prevent vs.
Prevent? did ere man haste so, sor his horns?
A courtier would not ply it so, for a place.
Well, now there's no helping it, stay here;
Isle presently return.
Where are you, CELIA?
You know not wherefore I have brought you hither?
Not well, except you told me.
Now, I will:
Hark hither.
Sir, your father hath sent word,
It will be half an hour, ere he come;
And therefore, if you please to walk, the while,
Into that gallery—at the upper end,
There are some books, to entertain the time:
And isle take care, no man shall come unto you, sir.
Yes, I will stay there, I doe doubt this fellow.
There, he is far enough; he can hear nothing:
And, for his father, I can keep him off.
Nay, now, there is no starting back; and therefore,
Resolve upon it: I have so decreed.
It must be done. Nor, would I moue't before,
Because I would avoid all shifts and tricks,
That might deny me.
Sir, let me beseech you,
Affect not these strange trials; if you doubt
My chastity, why locke me up, for ever:
Make me the heir of darkness. Let me live,
Where I may please your fears, if not your trust.
Believe it, I have no such humour, I.
All that I speak, I mean; yet I am not mad:
Not horne-mad, see you? Go too, show your self
Obedient, and a wife.
O heaven!
I say it,
Do so.
Was this the train?
I'haue told you reasons;
What the physicians have set down; how much,
It may concern me; what my engagements are;
My means; and the necessity of those means,
For my recovery: wherefore, it you bee
Loyal, and mine, be won, respect my venture.
Before your honour?
Honour? tut, a breath;
There's no such thing, in nature: a mere term
Invented to awe fools. What is my gold
The worse, for touching? clothes, for being looked on?
Why, this 's no more. An old, decrepit wretch,
That he's no sense, no sinew; takes his meat
With others fingers; only knows to gape,
When you doe scald his gummes; a voice; a shadow;
And, what can this man hurt you?
Lord! what spirit
Is this hath entered him?
And for your fame,
That's such a Jig; as if I would go tell it,
Cry it, on the piazza! who shall know it?
But hee, that cannot speak it; and this fellow,
Whose lips are in my pocket: save your self,
If you'll proclaime't, you may. I know no other,
Should come to know it.
Are heaven, and saints then nothing?
Will they be blind, or stupid?
How?
Good Sir,
Be jealous still, aemulate them; and think
What hate they burn with, toward every sin.
I grant you: if I thought it were a sin,
I would not urge you. Should I offer this
To some young Frenchman, or hot Tuscane blood,
That had read ARETINE, conned all his printes,
Knew every quirk within lusts labyrinth,
And were professed critique, in lechery;
And I would look upon him, and applaud him,
This were a sin: but here, it is contrary,
A pious work, mere charity, for physic,
And honest polity, to assure mine own.
O heaven! can thou suffer such a change?
Thou art mine honour, MOSS, and my pride;
My joy, my tickling, my delight! go, bring 'hem.
Please you draw near, sir.
Come on, what—
You will not be rebellious? by that light—
Sir, signior CORVINO, here, is come to see you.
Oh.
And hearing of the consultation had,
So lately, for your health, is come to offer,
Or rather, sir, to prostitute—
Thanks, sweet MOSS.
Freely, vn-ask'd, or vn-intreated—
Well.
(As the true, fervent instance of his love)
His own most fair and proper wife; the beauty,
Only of price, in Venice—
It is well urged.
To be your comfortresse, and to preserve you.
Alas, I am past already! 'pray you, thank 'him,
For his good care, and promptness, but for that,
It is a vain labour, even to fight, against heaven;
Applying fire to a stone: (vh, vh, vh, vh.)
Making a dead leaf grow again. I take
His wishes gently, though; and, you may tell him,
What In have done for him: mary; my state is hopeless!
Will him, to pray for me; and t'vse his fortune,
With reverence, when he comes to it.
Do you hear, sir?
Go to him, with your wife.
Heart of my father!
Wilt thou persist thus? come, I pray thee, come.
Thou see it is nothing. CELIA. By this hand,
I shall grow violent. Come, do it, I say.
Sir, kill me, rather: I will take down poison,
Eat burning coals, doe any thing—
Be damned.
(Heart) I will drag thee hence, home, by the hair;
Cry thee a strumpet, through the streets; rip up
Thy mouth, unto thine ears; and slit thy nose,
Like a raw rotchet—Do not tempt me, come.
Yield, I am loath— (Death) I will buy some slave,
Whom I will kill, and bind thee to him, alive;
And at my window, hang you forth: devising
Some monstrous crime, which I, in capital letters,
Will eat into thy flesh, with aqua-fortis,
And burning cor'siues, on this stubborn breast.
Now, by the blood, thou hast incensed, isle do it.
Sir, what you please, you may, I am your martyr.
Be not thus obstinate. I have not deserved it:
Think, who it is, entreats you. 'Pray thee, sweet;
(Good faith) thou shalt have jewels, gowns, attires,
What thou wilt think, and ask. Do, but, go kiss him.
Or touch him, but. For my sake. At my suit.
This once. No? not? I shall remember this.
Will you disgrace me, thus? do' you thirst my'vndoing?
Nay, gentle lady, be advised.
No, no.
She has watched her time. God's precious, this is skiruy;
It is very skiruie: and you are—
Nay, good, sir.
An errant locust, by heaven, a locust. Whore,
Crocodile, that hast thy thy tears prepared,
Expecting, how thou'lt bid 'hem flow.
Nay, 'Pray you, sir,
She will consider.
Would my life would serve
To satisfy.
(S'death) if she would but speak to him,
And save my reputation, it were somewhat;
But, spitefully to affect my utter ruin.
I, now you' have put your fortune, in her hands.
Why i'faith, it is her modesty, I must quit her;
If you were absent, she would be more coming;
I know it: and dare undertake for her.
What woman can, before her husband? 'pray you,
Let vs depart, and leave her, here.
Sweet CELIA,
Thou may redeem all, yet; I'll say no more:
If not, esteem your self as lost. Nay, stay there.
O god, and his good angels! whether, whether.
Is shame fled humane breasts? that with such ease,
Men dare put off your honours, and their own?
Is that, which ever was a cause of life,
Now placed beneath the basest circumstance?
And modesty an exile made, for money?
I, in CORVINO, and such earth-fed minds,
That never tasted the true heaven of love.
Assure thee, CELIA, he that would sell thee,
Only for hope of gain, and that uncertain,
He would have sold his part of paradise
For ready money, had he met a cope-man.
Why art thou mazed, to see me thus revived?
Rather applaud thy beauties miracle;
It is thy great work: that hath, not now alone,
But sundry times, raised me, in several shapes,
And, but this morning, like a mountebank,
To see thee at thy window. I, before
I would have left my practice, for thy love,
In varying figures, I would have contended
With the blue PROTEVS, or the horned Flood.
Now, art thou welcome.
Sir!
Nay, fly me not.
Nor, let thy false imagination
That I was bedrid, make thee think, I am so:
Thou shalt not find it. I am, now, as fresh,
As hot, as high, and in as jovial plight,
As when (in that so celebrated scene,
At recitation of our comoedie,
For entertainment of the great VALOYS)
I acted young ANTINOVS; and attracted
The eyes, and ears of all the ladies, present,
To admire each graceful gesture, note, and footing.
COme, my CELIA, let vs prove,
While we can, the sports of love;
Time will not be ours, for ever,
He, at length, our good will sever;
Spend not then his gifts, in vain.
Suns, that set, may rise again:
But if, once, we lose this light,
It is with vs perpetual night.
Why should wee defer our joys?
Fame, and rumour are but toys.
Cannot we delude the eyes
Of a few poor houshold-spies?
Or his easier ears beguile,
Thus removed, by our wile?
It is no sin, loves fruits to steal;
But the sweet thefts to reveal:
To be taken, to be seen,
These have crimes accounted been.
Some serene blast me, or dire lightning strike
This my offending face.
Why droopes my CELIA?
Thou hast in place of a base husband, found
A worthy lover: use thy fortune well,
With secrecy, and pleasure. See, behold,
What thou art queen of; not in expectation,
As I feed others: but possessed, and crowned.
See, here, a rope of pearl; and each, more orient
Then that the brave Egyptian queen caroused:
Dissolve, and drink 'hem. See, a carbuncle,
May put out both the eyes of our St. MARK;
A diamant, would have bought LOLLY PAVLINA,
When she came in, like star-light hid with jewels,
That were the spoils of provinces; take these,
And wear, and loose 'hem: yet remains an eare-ring
To purchase them again, and this whole state.
A gem, but worth a private patrimony,
Is nothing: we will eat such at a meal.
The heads of parrots, tongues of nightingales,
The brains of peacoks, and of ostriches
Shall be our food: and, could we get the phoenix,
(Though nature lost her kind) she were our dish.
Good sir, these things might move a mind affected
With such delights; but I, whose innocence
Is all I can think wealthy, or worth th'enioying,
And which once lost, I have nought to loose beyond it,
Cannot be taken with these sensual baits:
If you have conscience—
It is the beggars virtue,
If thou hast wisdom, hear me, CELIA.
Thy bathes shall be the juice of iuly-flowres,
Spirit of roses, and of violets,
The milk of unicorns, and panthers breath
Gathered in bags, and mixed with cretin wines.
Our drink shall be prepared gold, and amber;
Which we will take, until my roof whirl round
With the vertigo: and my dwarf shall dance,
My eunuch sing, my fool make up the antique.
Whilst, we, in changed shapes, act OVIDS tales,
Thou, like EVROPA now, and I like JOVE,
Then I like MARS, and thou like ERYCINE,
So, of the rest, till we have quite run through
And wearied all the fables of the gods.
Then will I have thee in more modern forms,
Attired like some sprightly dame of France,
Brave Tuscan lady, or proud Spanish beauty;
Sometimes, unto the Persian Sophies wife;
Or the grand-Signiors mistress; and, for change,
To one of our most art-full courtesans,
Or some quick Negro, or cold Russian;
And I will meet thee, in as many shapes:
Where we may, so, transfuse our wandering souls,
Out at our lips, and score up sums of pleasures,
That the curious shall not know,
How to tell them, as they slow;
And the envious, when they find
What their number is, be pind.
If you have ears that will be pierced; or eyes,
That can be opened; a heart, may be touched;
Or any part, that yet sounds man, about you:
If you have touch of holy saints, or heaven,
Do me the grace, to let me scope. If not,
Be bountiful, and kill me. You doe know,
I am a creature, hither ill betrayed,
By one, whose shame I would forget it were,
If you will deign me neither of these graces,
Yet feed your wrath, sir, rather then your lust;
(It is a vice, comes nearer manliness)
And punish that unhappy crime of nature,
Which you miscall my beauty: flay my face,
Or poison it, with ointments, for seducing
Your blood to this rebellion. Rub these hands,
With what may cause an eating leprosy,
E'ene to my bones, and marrow: any thing,
That may disfavour me, save in my honour.
And I will kneel to you, pray for you, pay down
A thousand hourly vows, sir, for your health,
Report, and think you virtuous—
Think me cold,
Frozen, and impotent, and so report me?
That I had NESTOR'S hernia, thou would think.
I doe degenerate, and abuse my nation,
To play with opportunity, thus long:
I should have done the act, and then have parlee'd.
Yield, or Isle force thee.
O! just God.
In vain—
Forbear, foul ravisher, libidinous swine,
Free the forced lady, or thou dy'st, impostor.
But that I am loath to snatch thy punishment
Out of the hand of justice, thou should, yet,
Be made the timely sacrifice of vengeance,
Before this altar, and this dross, thy idol.
Lady, let's quit the place, it is the den
Of villainy; fear nought, you have a guard:
And he, ere long, shall meet his just reward.
Fall on me, roof, and bury me in ruin,
Become my grave, that were my shelter. O!
I am vn-masqu'd, vn-spirited, vn-done,
Betrayed to beggary, to infamy—
WHere shall I run, most wretched shame of men,
To beat out my vn-luckie brains?
Here, here.
What! dost thou bleed?
O, that his wel-driu'n sword
Had been so courteous to have cleft me down,
Unto the nauill; ere I lived to see
My life, my hopes, my spirits, my patron, all
Thus desperately engaged, by my error.
Woe, on thy fortune.
And my follies, sir.
The hast made me miserable.
And my self, sir.
Who would have thought, he would have harken'd, so?
What shall we do?
I know not, if my heart
Could expiate the mischance, Il'd pluck it out.
Will you be pleased to hang me? or cut my throat?
And i'll requite you, sir. Let's die like Romans,
Since wee have lived, like Gracious.
Hark, who's there?
I hear some footing, officers, the Saffi,
Come to apprehend vs! I doe feel the brand
Hissing already, at my fore-head: now,
Mine ears are boring.
To your couch, sir, you
Make that place good, how ever. Guilty men
Suspect, what they deserve still. Signior CORBACCIO!
WHy! how now? MOSS!
O, undone, amazed, sir.
Your son (I know not, by what accident)
Acquainted with your purpose to my patron,
Touching your will, and making him your heir;
Entered our house with violence, his sword drawn,
Sought for you, called you wretch, unnatural,
Vowed he would kill you.
Me?
Yes, and my patron.
•This act, shall disinherit him indeed:
Here is the will.
It is well, sir.
Right and well.
Be you as careful now, for me.
My life, sir,
Is not more tendered, I am only yours.
How do's he? will he die shortly, think thou?
I fear.
He'll out-last May.
To day?
No, last-out May, sir.
Could thou not give him a dram?
O, by no means, sir.
Nay, I'll not bid you.
This is a knave, I see.
How, signior VOLTORE! did he hear me?
Parasite.
Who's that? O, sir, most timely welcome—
Scarce,
To the discovery of your tricks, I fear.
You are his, only? and mine, also? are you not?
Who? I, sir!
You, sir. What device is this
About a will?
A plot for you, sir.
Come,
Put not your foist's upon me, I shall sent 'hem.
Did you not hear it?
Yes, I hear, CORBACCIO
Hath made your patron, there, his heir.
It is true,
By my device, drawn to it by my plot,
With hope—
Your patron should reciprocate?
And, you have promised?
For your good, I did, sir.
Nay more, I told his son, brought, hid him here,
Where he might hear his father pass the deed;
Being persuaded to it, by this thought, sir,
That the unnaturalness, first, of the act,
And then, his fathers oft disclaiming in him,
(Which I did mean t'helpe on) would sure enrage him
To doe some violence upon his parent.
On which the law should take sufficient hold,
And you be stated in a double hope:
Truth be my comfort, and my conscience,
My only aim was, to dig you a fortune
Out of these two, old rotten sepulchers—
I cry thee mercy, MOSS.)
Worth your patience,
And your great merit, sir. And, see the change!
Why? what success?
Most haplesse! you must help, sir.
Whilst we expected th'old raven, in comes
CORVINO'S wife, sent hither, by her husband—
What, with a present?
No, sir, on visitation:
(I'll tell you how, anon) and, staying long,
The youth, he grows impatient, rushes forth,
Seizes the lady, wound's me, makes her swear
(Or he would murder her, that was his vow)
T'affirme my patron to have done her rape:
Which how unlike it is, you see! and, hence,
With that pretext, hoe's gone, t'accuse his father;
Defame my patron; defeat you—
Whore's her husband?
Let him be sent for, straight.
Sir, I'll go fetch him.
Bring him, to the Scrutineo.
Sir, I will.
This must be stopped.
O, you do nobly, sir.
Alas, it was laboured all, sir, for your good;
Nor, was there want of counsel, in the plot:
But fortune can, at any time, orethrow
The proiects of a hundred learned clerks, sir.
What's that?
Wilt please you sir, to go along?
Patron, go in, and pray for our success.
Need makes devotion: heaven your labour bless.
I Told you, sir, it was a plot: you see
What observation is. You mentioned me,
For some instructions: I will tell you, sir,
(Since we are met, here in this height of Venice)
Some few particulars, I have set down,
Only for this meridian; fit to be known
Of your crude traveller, and they are these.
I will not touch, sir, at your phrase, or clothes,
For they are old.
Sir, I have better.
Pardon
I meant, as they are theames.
O, sir, proceed:
I'll slander you no more of wit, good sir.
First, for your garb, it must be grave, and serious;
Very reserved, and locked; not tell a secret,
On any terms, not to your father; scarce
A fable, but with caution; make sure choice
Both of your company, and discourse; beware,
You never spake a truth—
How!
Not to strangers,
For those be they you must converse with, most;
Others I would not know, sir, but, at distance,
So as I still might be a fauer, in 'hem:
You shall have tricks, else, past upon you, hourly.
And then, for your religion, profess none;
But wonder, at the diversity of all;
And, for your part, protest, were there no other
But simply the laws of the land, you could content you:
NIC: MACHIAVEL, and monsieur BODINE, both,
Were of this mind. Then, must you learn the use,
And handling of your silver fork, at meals;
The mettle of your glass: (these are maine matters,
With your Italian) and to know the hour,
When you must eat your melons, and your figs.
Is that a point of state, too?
Here it is.
For your Venetian, if he see a man
Preposterous, in the least, he has him straight;
He has: he strippes him. I'll acquaint you, sir,
I now have lived here (it is some fourteen months)
Within the first week, of my landing here,
All took me for a citizen of Venice:
I knew the forms, so well—
And nothing else.
I had read CONTARENE, took me a house,
Dealt with my Jaws, to furnish it with movables—
Well, if I could but find one man, one man,
To mine own heart, whom I durst trust, I would—
What? what, sir?
Make him rich; make him a fortune:
He should not think, again. I would command it.
As how?
With certain proiects, that I have:
Which, I may not discover.
If I had
But one to wager with, I would lay odds, now,
He tells me, instantly.
One is, (and that
I care not greatly, who knows) to serve the state
Of Venice, with red herrings, for three years,
And at a certain rate, from Rotterdam,
Where I have correspondence. There's a letter,
Sent me from one of the States, and to that purpose;
He cannot write his name, but that's his mark.
He is a chandler?
No, a cheesemonger.
There are some other too, with whom I treat,
About the same negotiation;
And, I will undertake it: For it is thus,
I'll do it with ease, In have cast it all. Your hoigh
Carries but three men in her, and a boy;
And she shall make me three returns, a year:
So, if there come but one of three, I save,
If two, I can defalke. But, this is now,
If my mayne project fail.
Then, you have others?
I should be loath to draw the subtle ayre
Of such a place, without my thousand aims.
Isle not dissemble, sir, where ere I come,
I love to be considerative; and, it is true,
I have, at my free hours, thought upon
Some certain goods, unto the state of Venice,
Which I doe call my cautions: and, sir, which
I mean (in hope of pension) to propound
To the great council, then unto the forty,
So to the ten. My means are made already—
By whom?
Sir, one, that though his place b'obscure,
Yet, he can sway, and they will hear him. H'is
A commandadore.
What, a common sergeant?
Sir, such, as they are, put it in their mouths,
What they should say, sometimes: as well as greater.
I think I have my notes, to show you —
Good, sir,
But, you shall swear unto me, on your gentry,
Not to anticipate—
I, sir?
Nor reveal
A circumstance—My paper is not with me.
O, but, you can remember, sir.
My first is,
Concerning tinder-boxes. You must know,
No family is, here, without it's box.
Now sir, it being so portable a thing,
Put case, that you, or I were ill affected
Unto the state; sir, with it in our pockets,
Might not I go into the arsenal?
Or you? come out again? and none the wiser?
Except your self, sir.
Go too, then. I, therefore,
Advertise to the state, how fit it were,
That none, but such as were known patriots,
Sound lovers of their country, should be suffered
T'enioy them in their houses: and, even those,
Sealed, at some office, and, at such a bigness,
As might not lurk in pockets.
Admirable!
My next is, how t'enquire, and be resolved,
By present demonstration, whether a ship,
Newly arrived from Soría, or from
Any suspected part of all the leuant,
Be guilty of the plague: And, where they use,
To lie out forty, fifty days, sometimes,
About the Lazaretto, for their trial;
Isle save that charge, and loss unto the merchant,
And, in an hour, clear the doubt.
Indeed, sir?
Or—I will loose my labour.
'My faith, that's much.
Nay, sir, conceive me. Twill cost me, in onions,
Some thirty liu'res—
Which is one pound sterling.
Beside my water-workes: for this I doe, sir.
First, I bring in your ship, twixt two brickwalles;
(But those the state shall venture) on the one
I strain me a fair tarre-paulin; and, in that,
I stick my onions, cut in halfes: the other
Is full of loope-holes, out at which, I thrust
The noses of my bellows; and, those bellows
I keep, with water-workes, in perpetual motion,
(Which is the easi'st matter of a hundred)
Now, sir, your onion, which doth naturally
Attract the infection, and your bellows, blowing
The ayre upon him, will show (instantly)
By his changed colour, if there be contagion,
Or else, remain as fair, as at the first.
Now it is known, it is nothing.
You are right, sir.
I would, I had my note.
Faith, so would I:
But, you have done well, for once, sir.
Were I false,
Or would be made so, I could show you reasons,
How I could sell this state, now, to the Turk;
Spite of their galleis, or their —
Pray you, sir POLL.
I have 'hem not, about me.
That I feared.
They' are there, sir?
No, this is my diary,
Wherein I note my actions of the day.
'Pray you, let's see, sir. What is here? notandum,
A rat had gnawn my spurre-lethers; notwithstanding,
I put on new, and did go forth: but, first,
I threw three beans over the threshold. Item,
I went, and bought two tooth-pickes, whereof one
I burst, immediately, in a discourse
With a dutch merchant, about region del stato.
From him I went, and paid a moccinigo,
For piecing my silk stockings; by the way,
I cheapened sprats: and at St. MARKS, I vrin'd.
Faith these are politic notes!
Sir, I do slip
No action of my life, thus, but I quote it.
Believe me it is wise!
Nay, sir, read forth.
WHere should this loose knight be, trow? sure, h'is housed.
Why, then he's fast.
I, he plays both, with me:
I pray you, stay. This heate will doe more harm
To my complexion, then his heart is worth.
(I do not care to hinder, but to take him)
How it comes of!
My master's yonder.
Where?
With a young gentleman.
That semi's the party!
In mans apparel. 'Pray you, sir, iog my knight:
I will be tender to his reputation,
How ever he demerit.
My lady!
Where?
It is she indeed, sir, you shall know her. She is,
Were she not mine, a lady of that merit,
For fashion, and behaviour; and, for beauty
I durst compare—
It seems, you are not jealous,
That dare commend her.
Nay, and for discourse—
Being your wife, she cannot miss that.
Madame,
Here is a gentleman, 'pray you, use him, fairly,
He seems a youth, but he is —
None?
Yes, one
Has put his face, as soon, into the world—
You mean, as early? but to day?
How's this!
Why in this habit, sir, you apprehend me.
Well, master WOVLD-BEE, this doth not become you;
I had thought, the odour, sir, of your good name,
Had been more precious to you; that you would not
Have done this dire massacre, on your honour;
One of your gravity, and rank, besides!
But, knights, I see, care little for the oath
They make to ladies: chiefly, their own ladies.
Now, by my spurs (the symbol of my knight-hood)
Lord! how his brain is humbled, for an oath)
I reach you not.
Right, sir, your polity
May bear it through, thus. Sir, a word with you.
I would be loath, to contest publicly,
With any gentlewoman; or to seem
Froward, or violent (as the courtier says)
It comes too near rusticity, in a lady,
Which I would shun, by all means: and, how-euer
I may deserve from master WOVLD-BEE, yet,
T'haue one fair gentlewoman, thus, be made
Th'vnkind instrument, to wrong another,
And one she knows not, I, and to persevere;
In my poor judgment, is not warranted
From being a solecism in our sex,
If not in manners.
How is this!
Sweet madame,
Come nearer to your aim.
Mary, and will, sir.
Since you provoke me, with your impudence,
And laughter of your light land-siren, here,
Your SPORVS, your hermaphrodite—
What's here?
Poetique fury, and historic storms!
The gentleman, believe it, is of worth,
And of our nation.
I, your white-Friers nation?
Come, I blush for you, master WOVLD-BEE, I;
And am ashamed, you should have no more forehead,
Then, thus, to be the patron, or St. GEORGE
To a lewd harlot, a base fricatrice,
A female devil, in a male out-side.
Nay,
And you be such a one! I must bid adieu
To your delights. The case appears too liquid.
I, you may carryit clear, with your state-face!
But, for your carnival concupiscence,
Who here is fled for liberty of conscience,
From furious persecution of the Marshall,
Her will I disc'ple.
This is fine, i'faith!
And do you use this, often? is this part
Of your wits exercise, against you have occasion?
Madam—
Go to, sir.
Do you hear me, lady?
Why, if your knight have set you to beg shirts,
Or to inuit me home, you might have done it
A nearer way, by far.
This cannot work you,
Out of my snare.
Why? am I in it, then?
Indeed, your husband told me, you were fair,
And so you are; only your nose inclines
(That side, that's next the sun) to the queene-apple.
This cannot be endured, by any patience.
WHat's the matter, madame?
If the Senate
Right not my quest, in this; I will protest 'hem,
To all the world, no aristocracy.
What is the injury, lady?
Why, the callet,
You told me of, here I have tan disguised.
Who? this? what means your ladyship? the creature
I mentioned to you, is apprehended, now,
Before the Senate, you shall see her—
Where?
I'll bring you to her. This young gentleman
I saw him land, this morning, at the port.
Is it possible! how has my judgment wandered!
Sir, I must, blushing, say to you, I have erred:
And plead your pardon.
What! more changes, yet?
I hope, yo' have not the malice to remember
A gentlewoman's passion. If you stay,
In Venice, here, please you to use me, sir—
Will you go, madame?
'Pray you, sir, use me. In faith,
The more you see me, the more I shall conceive,
You have forgot our quarrel.
This is rare!
Sir POLITIQV• WOVLD-BEE? no, sir POLITIQVE bawd!
To bring me, th••• acquainted with his wife!
Well, wise sir POL: since you have practised, thus,
Upon my freshman-ship, I'll try your salt-head,
What proof it is against a counter-plot.
WEll, now you know the carriage of the business,
Your constancy is all, that is required
Unto the safety of it.
Is the lie
Safely conveyed amongst vs? is that sure?
Knows every man his burden?
Yes.
Then, shrink not.
But, knows the Advocate the truth?
O, sir,
By no means. I deuis'd a formal tale,
That salu'd your reputation. But, be valiant, sir.
I fear no one, but him; that, this his pleading
Should make him stand for a co-heire—
Co-halter.
Hang him: we will but use his tongue, his noise,
As we doe croakers, here.
I, what shall he do?
When we have done, you mean?
Yes.
Why, we'll think,
Sell him for mummy. hoe's half dust already.
Do not you smile, to see this buffalo,
How he doth sport it with his head? — In should
If all were well, and past. Sir, only you
Are he, that shall enjoy the crop of all,
And these not know for whom they toil.
I, peace.
But you shall eat it. Much! Worshipful sir,
MERCVRY sit upon your thundering tongue,
Or the French HERCVLES, and make your language
As conquering as his club, to beat along,
(As with a tempest) flat, our adversaries:
But, much more, yours, sir.
Here they come, have done.
I have another witness, if you need, sir,
I can produce.
Who is it?
Sir, I have her.
THe like of this the Senate never heard of.
'Twil come most strange to them, when we report it.
The gentlewoman has been ever held
Of vn-reproued name.
So, the young man.
The more unnatural part that of his father.
More of the husband.
I not know to give
His act a name, it is so monstrous!
But the impostor, he is a thing created
T'exceed example!
And all after times!
I never heard a true voluptuary
Described, but him.
Appear yet those were cited?
All, but the old magnifico, VOLPONE.
Why is not hee here?
Please your father-hoods,
Here is his Advocate. Himselfe's, so weak,
So feeble—
What are you?
His parasite,
His knave, his pander: I beseech the court,
He may be forced to come, that your grave eyes
May bear strong witness of his strange impostures.
Upon my faith, and credit, with your virtues,
He is not able to endure the ayre.
Bring him, how ever.
We will see him.
Fetch him.
Your father-hoods fit pleasures be obeyed,
But sure, the sight will rather move your pities,
Then indignation; may it please the court,
In the mean time, he may be heard in me:
I know this place most void of prejudice,
And therefore crave it, since we have no reason
To fear our truth should hurt our cause.
Speak free.
Then know, most honoured fathers, I must now
Discover, to your strangely' abused ears,
The most prodigious, and most frontlesse piece
Of solid impudence, and treachery,
That ever vicious nature yet brought forth
To shame the state of Venice. This lewd woman
(That wants no artificial looks, or tears,
To help the visor, she has now put on)
Hath long been known a close adulteress,
To that lascivious youth there; not suspected,
I say, but known; and taken, in the act;
With him; and by this man, the easy husband,
Pardoned: whose timeless bounty makes him, now,
Stand here, the most unhappy, innocent person,
That ever mans own goodness made accused.
For these, not knowing how to owe a gift
Of that dear grace, but with their shame; being placed
So' aboue all powers of their gratitude,
Began to hate the benefit: and, in place
Of thanks, devise t'extirpe the memory
Of such an act. Wherein, I pray your father-hoods,
To observe the malice, yea, the rage of creatures
Discovered in their evils; and what heart
Such take, even, from their crimes. But that, anon,
Will more appear. This gentleman, the father,
Hearing of this foul fact, with many others,
Which daily struck at his too-tender ears,
And, grieved in nothing more, then that he could not
Preserve him self a parent (his sons ills
Growing to that strange flood) at last decreed
To dis-inherit him.
These be strange turns!
The young mans fame was ever fair, and honest.
So much more full of danger is his vice,
That can beguile so, under shade of virtue.
But as I said (my honoured sires) his father
Having this settled purpose, (by what means
To him betrayed, we know not) and this day
Appointed for the deed; that parricide,
(I cannot stile him better) by confederacy
Preparing this his paramour to be there,
Entered VOLPONE'S house (who was the man
Your father-hoods must understand, designed
For the inheritance) there, sought his father:
But, with what purpose sought he him, my lords?
(I tremble to pronounce it, that a son
Unto a father, and to such a father
Should have so foul, felonious intent)
It was, to murder him. When, being prevented
By his more happy absence, what then did he?
Not check his wicked thoughts; no, now new deeds:
(Mischief doth ever end, where it begins)
An act of horror, fathers! he dragged forth
The aged gentleman, that had there lien, bed-red,
Three years, and more, out off his innocent couch,
Naked, upon the floor, there left him; wounded
His servant in the face; and, with this strumpet
The stale to his forged practise, who was glad
To be so active, (I shall here desire
Your father-hoods to note but my collections,
As most remarkable) thought, at once, to stop
His fathers ends; discredit his free choice,
In the old gentleman; redeem themselves,
By laying infamy upon this man,
To whom, with blushing, they should owe their lives.
What proofs have you of this?
Most honoured fathers,
I humbly crave, there be no credit given
To this mans mercenary tongue.
Forbear.
His soul moves in his fee.
O, sir.
This fell∣low,
For six sols more, would plead against his maker.
You do forget your self.
Nay, nay, grave fathers,
Let him have scope: can any man imagine
That he will spare' his accuser, that would not
Have spared his parent?
Well, produce your proofs.
I would I could forget, I were a creature.
Signior CORBACCIO.
What is he?
The father.
Has he had an oath?
Yes.
What must I do now?
Your testimony's craved.
Speak to the knave?
I'll have my mouth, first, stopped with earth; my heart
Abhors his knowledge: I disclaim in him.
But, for what cause?
The mere portent of nature.
He is an utter stranger, to my loins.
Have they made you to this!
I will not hear thee,
Monster of men, swine, goat, wolf, parricide,
Speak not, thou viper.
Sir, I will sit down,
And rather wish my innocence should suffer,
Then I resist the authority of a father.
Signior CORVINO.
This is strange!
Who's this?
The husband.
Is he sworn?
He is.
Speak then.
This woman (please your father-hoods) is a whore,
Of most hot exercise, more then a partridge,
Upon record—
No more.
Neighs, like a jennet.
Preserve the honour of the court.
I shall,
And modesty of your most reverend ears.
And, yet, I hope that I may say, these eyes
Have seen her glued unto that piece of cedar;
That fine well-timber'd gallant: and that, here,
The letters may be read, thorough the horn,
That make the story perfect.
Excellent! sir.
There is no shame in this, now, is there?
None.
Or if I said, I hoped that she were onward
To her damnation, if there be a hell
Greater then whore, and woman; a good catholic
May make the doubt.
His grief hath made him frantic.
Remove him, hence.
Look to the woman.
Prettily feigned! again!
Stand from about her.
Give her the ayre.
What can you say?
My wound Rare!
(May it please your wisdoms) speaks for me, received
In aid of my good patron, when he mist
His sought-for father, when that well-taught dame
Had her eve given her, to cry out a rape.
O, most laid impudence! Fathers—
Sir, be silent,
You had your hearing free, so must they theirs.
I do begin to doubt the imposture here.
This woman, has too many moods.
Grave fathers,
She is a creature, of a most professed,
And prostituted lewdness.
Most impetuous!
Unsatisfied, grave fathers!
May her feignings
Not take your wisdoms: but, this day, she baited
A stranger, a grave knight, with her loose eyes,
And more lascivious kisses. This man saw 'hem
Together, on the water, in a gondola.
Here is the lady her self, that saw 'hem too,
Without; who, then, had in the open streets
Pursued them, but for saving her knights honour.
Produce that lady.
Let her come.
These things,
They strike, with wonder!
I am turned a stone!
BEe resolute, madame.
I, this same is she.
Out, thou chameleon harlot; now, thine eyes
Vie tears with the hyena: dare thou look
Upon my wronged face? I cry your pardons.
I fear, I have (forgettingly) transgressed
Against the dignity of the court—
No, madame.
And been exorbitant—
You have not, lady.
These proofs are strong.
Surely, I had no purpose:
To scandalise your honours, or my sexes.
We do believe it.
Surely, you may believe it.
Madame, we do.
Indeed, you may; my breeding
Is not so course—
We know it.
To offend
With pertinacy—
Lady.
Such a presence:
No, surely.
We well think it.
You may think it.
Let her overcome. What witnesses have you,
To make good your report?
Our consciences.
And heaven, that never fails the innocent.
These are no testimonies.
Not in your courts,
Where multitude, and clamour ouercomes.
Nay, then you do wax insolent.
Here, here,
The testimony comes, that will convince,
And put to utter dumbness their bold tongues.
See here, grave fathers, here's the ravisher,
The rider on men's wives, the great impostor,
The grand voluptuary! do you not think,
These limbs should affect venery? or these eyes
Covet a concubine? 'pray you, mark these hands.
Are they not fit to stroke a ladies breasts?
Perhaps, he doth dissemble?
So he do's.
Would you have him tortured?
I would have him proved.
Best try him, then, with goades, or burning Irons;
Put him to the strappado: I have heard,
The rack hath cured the gout, faith, give it him,
And help him of a malady, be courteous.
I'll undertake, before these honoured fathers,
He shall have, yet, as many left diseases,
As she has known adulterers, or thou strumpets.
O, my most equal hearers, if these deeds,
Acts, of this bold, and most exorbitant strain,
May pass with sufferance, what one citizen,
But owes the forfeit of his life, yea fame,
To him that dares traduce him? which of you
Are safe, my honoured fathers? I would ask
(With leave of your grave father-hoods) if their plot
Have any face, or colour like to truth?
Or if, unto the dullest nostril, here,
It smell not rank, and most abhorred slander?
I crave your care of this good gentleman,
Whose life is much endangered, by their fable;
And, as for them, I will conclude with this,
That vicious persons when they are hot, and fleshed
In impious acts, their constancy abounds:
Damned deeds are done with greatest confidence.
Take 'hem to custody, and sever them.
It is pity, two such prodigies should live.
Let the old gentleman be returned, with care:
I'am sorry, our credulity wronged him.
These are two creatures!
I have an earthquake in me!
Their shame (even in their cradles) fled their faces.
You' have done a worthy service to the state, sir,
In their discovery.
You shall hear, ere night,
What punishment the court decrees upon 'hem.
We thank your fatherhoods. How like you it?
Rare.
I'd have your tongue, sir, tipped with gold, for this;
I'd have you be the heir to the whole city;
The earth I'd have want men, ere you want living:
They'are bound to erect your statue, in St. MARKS.
Signior CORVINO, I would have you go,
And show your self, that you have conquered.
Yes.
It was much better, that you should profess
Your self a cuckold, thus, then that the other
Should have been proved.
Nay, I considered that:
Now, it is her fault.
Then, it had been yours.
True, I doe doubt this Advocate, still.
I'faith,
You need not, I dare ease you of that care.
I trust thee, MOSS.
As your own soul, sir.
MOSS.
Now for your business, sir.
How? have you business?
Yes, yours, sir.
O, none else?
None else, not I.
Be careful then.
Rest you, with both your eyes, sir.
Dispatch it.
Instantly.
And look, that all,
What-euer, be put in, jewels, plate, monies,
Household-stuff, bedding, cortines.
Cortine-rings, sir,
Only, the Advocates see must be deducted.
I'll pay him, now: you'll be too prodigal.
Sir, I must tender it.
Two cecchines is well?
No, six, sir.
It is too much.
He talked a great while,
You must consider that, sir.
Well, there's three—
I'll give it him.
Doe so, and there's for thee.
Bountiful bones! What horrid strange offence
Did he commit against nature, in his youth,
Worthy this age? you see, sir, how I work
Unto your ends; take you no notice.
No,
I'll leave you.
All, is yours; the devil, and all:
Good Advocate. Madame, I'll bring you home.
No, I'll go see your patron.
That you shall not:
I'll tell you, why. My purpose is, to urge
My patron to reform his will; and, for
The zeal you' have shew'n to day, whereas before
You were but third, or, fourth, you shall be now
Put in the first: which would appear as begged,
If you were present. Therefore—
You shall sway me.
WEll, I am here; and all this brunt is past:
I ne'er was in dislike with my disguise,
Till this fled moment; here, it was good, in private,
But, in your public, Cave, whilst I breathe.
Before god, my left leg 'gan to have the cramp;
And I apprehended, straight, some power had struck me
With a dead palsy: well, I must be merry,
And shake it off. A many of these fears
Would put me into some villainous disease,
Should they come thick upon me: I'll prevent 'hem.
Give me a boule of lusty wine, to fright
This humour from my heart; (hum, hum, hum)
It is almost gone, already: I shall conquer.
Any device, now, of rare, ingenious knavery,
That would possess me with a violent laughter,
Would make me up, again! So, so, so, so.
This heate is life; it is blood, by this time: MOSS!
HOw now, sir? do's the day look clear again?
Are we recovered? and wrought out of error,
Into our way? to see our path, before vs?
Is our trade free, once more?
Exquisite MOSS!
Was it not carried learnedly?
And stoutly.
Good wits are greatest in extremities.
It were a folly, beyond thought, to trust
Any grand act unto a cowardly spirit:
You are not taken with it, enough, me thinks?
O, more, then if I had enjoyed the wench:
The pleasure of all womankind's not like it.
Why, now you speak, sir. We must, here be •ixt;
Here, we must rest; this is our master-peece:
We cannot think, to go beyond this.
True,
Thou 'hast played thy prise, my precious MOSS.
Nay, sir,
To gull the court—
And, quite divert the torrent,
Upon the innocent.
Yes, and to make
So rare a musique out of discords—
Right.
That, yet, to me's the strangest! how the hast borne it!
That these (being so divided amongst themselves)
Should not sent some-what, or in me, or thee,
Or doubt their own side.
True, they will not see it.
Too much light blinds 'hem, I think. Each of'hem
Is so possessed, and stuffed with his own hopes,
That any thing, unto the contrary,
Never so true, or never so apparent,
Never so palpable, they will resist it—
Like a temptation of the devil.
Right, sir.
Merchants may talk of trade, and your great signiors
Of land, that yields well; but if Italy
Have any glebe, more fruitful, then these fellows,
I am deceived. Did not your Advocate rare?
O (my most honoured fathers, my grave fathers,
Under correction of your father-hoods,
What face of truth is, here? If these strange deeds
May pass, most honoured fathers—) I had much a doe
To forbear laughing.
'T seemed to me, you sweat, sir.
In troth, I did a little.
But confess, sir,
Were you not daunted?
In good faith, I was
A little in a mist; but not dejected:
Never, but still my self.
I think it, sir
Now (so truth help me) I must needs say this, sir.
And, out of conscience, for your advocate:
Have has taken pains, in faith, sir, and deserved,
(In my poor judgment, I speak it, under favour,
Not to contrary you, sir) very richly—
Well—to be cozened.
'Troth, and I think so too,
By that I heard him, in the latter end.
O, but before, sir; had you heard him, first,
Draw it to certain heads, then aggravate,
Then use his vehement figures—I looked still,
When he would shift a shirt; and, doing this
Out of pure love, no hope of gain—
It is right.
I cannot answer him, MOSS, as I would,
Not yet; but for thy sake, at thy entreaty,
I will begin, even now, to vex 'hem all:
This very instant.
Good, sir.
Call the dwarf,
And eunuch, forth.
CASTRONE, NANO.
Here.
Shall we have a jig, now?
What you please, sir.
Go,
Straight give out, about the streets, you two,
That I am dead; doe it with constancy,
Sadly, doe you hear? impute it to the grief
Of this late slander.
What doe you mean, sir?
O,
I shall have, instantly, my vulture, crow,
Raven, come flying hither (on the news)
To peck for carrion, my shee-wolfe, and all,
Greedy, and full of expectation—
And then to have it ravished from their mouths?
It is true, I will have thee put on a gown,
And take upon thee, as thou were mine heir;
Show 'hem a will: open that chest, and reach
Forth one of those, that has the blanks. I'll straight
Put in thy name.
It will be rare, sir.
I,
When they e'enegape, and find themselves deluded—
Yes.
And thou use them skiruily. Dispatch,
Get on thy gown.
But, what, sir, if they ask
After the body?
Say, it was corrupted.
I'll say, it stunk, sir; and was fine to have it
Coffined up instantly, and sent away.
Any thing, what thou wilt. Hold, here's my will.
Get thee a cap, a count-booke, pen and ink,
Papers before thee; sit, as thou were taking
An inuentory of parcels: I'll get up,
Behind the cortine, on a stool, and harken;
Sometime, peep over; see, how they doe look;
With what degrees, their blood doth leave their faces!
O, twill afford me a rare meal of laughter.
Your Advocate will turn stark dull, upon it.
It will take off his oratories edge.
But your Clarissimo, old round-backe, he
Will crumpe you, like a hog-louse, with the touch.
And what CORVINO?
O, sir, look for him,
To morrow morning, with a rope, and a dagger,
To visit all the streets; he must run mad.
My Lady too, that came into the court,
To bear false witness, for your worship—
Yes,
And kissed me before the fathers; when my face
Flowed all with oils.
And sweat, sir. Why, your gold
Is such another med'cine, it dries up
All those offensive savours! It transforms
The most deformed, and restores 'hem lovely,
As it were the strange poetical girdle. JOVE
Could not invent, to himself, a shroud more subtle,
To pass ACRISIVS guards. It is the thing
Makes all the world her grace, her youth, her beauty.
I think, she loves me.
Who? the lady, sir?
Shoe's jealous of you.
Dost thou say so?
Hark,
There's some already.
Look.
It is the vulture:
He has the quickest sent.
I'll to my place,
Thou, to thy posture.
I am set.
But, MOSS,
Play the artificer now, torture 'hem, rarely.
HOw now, my MOSS?
Turkie carpets, nine—
Taking an inuentory? that is well.
Two suits of bedding, tissew—
Whore's the will?
Let me read that, the while.
So, set me down:
And get you home.
Is he come, now, to trouble vs?
Of cloth of gold, two more—
Is it done, MOSS?
Of several valets, eight—
I like his care.
Dost thou not hear?
Ha? is the hour come, MOSS?
I, now, they muster.
What do's the advocate here?
Or this CORBACCIO?
What do these here?
MOSS?
Is his thread spun?
Eight chests of linen—
O,
My sine dame WOVLD-BEE, too!
MOSS, the will,
That I may show it these, and rid 'hem hence.
Six chests of diaper, four of damask—There.
Is that the will?
Down-beds, and bolsters—
Rare!
Be busy still. Now, they begin to flutter:
They never think of me. Look, see, see, see!
How their swift eyes run over the long deed,
Unto the name, and to the legacies,
What is bequeathed them, there—
Ten suits of hangings—
I, i'their garters, MOSS. Now, their hopes
Are at the gasp.
MOSS the heir!
What's that?
My advocate is dumb, look to my merchant,
Hee has heard of some strange storm, a ship is lost,
He faints: my lady will swoon. Old glazen-eyes,
He hath not reached his despair, yet.
All these
Are out of hope, In am sure the man.
But, MOSS—
Two cabinets—
Is this in earnest?
One
Of ebony.—
Or, do you but delude me?
The other, mother of pearl—I am very busy.
Good faith, it is a fortune thrown upon me —
Item, one salt of agate — not my seeking.
Do you hear, sir?
A perfumed box—'pray you forbear,
You see I am troubled—made of an onyx—
How!
Tomorrow, or next day, I shall be at leisure,
To talk with you all.
Is this my large hopes issue?
Sir, I must have a fairer answer.
Madame!
Mary, and shall: 'pray you, fairly quit my house.
Nay, raise no tempest with your looks; but, hark you:
Remember, what your ladyship offred me,
To put you in, an heir; go to, think on it.
And what you said, even your best madams did
For maintenance, and, why not you? enough.
Go home, and use the poor sir POL, your knight, well;
For fear I tell some riddles: go, be melancholic.
O, my fine devil!
MOSS, 'pray you a word.
Lord! will not you take your dispatch hence, yet?
Me thinks (of all) you should have been th'example.
Why should you stay, here? with what thought? what promise?
Hear you, doe not you know, I know you an ass?
And, that you would, most fine, have been a wittoll,
If fortune would have let you? that you are
A declared cuckold, on good terms? this pearl,
You'll say, was yours? right: this diamant?
I'll not deny it, but thank you. Much here, else?
It may be so. Why, think that these good works
May help to hide you bad: I'll not betray you,
Although you be but extraordinary,
And have it only in title, it suffices.
Go home, be melancholic too, or mad.
Rare, MOSS! how his villainy becomes him!
Certain, he doth delude all these, for me.
MOSS, the heir?
O, his four eyes have found it!
In am cozened, cheated, by a parasite-slaue;
Harlot, t'hast gul'd me.
Yes, sir. Stop your mouth,
Or I shall draw the only tooth, is left.
Are not you he, that filthy covetous wretch,
Wi•h the three legs, that here, in hope of prey,
Have, any time this three year, snuffed about,
With your most grovelling nose; and would have hired
Me to the pois'ning of my patron? sir?
Are not you he, that have, to day, in court,
Professed the dis-inheriting of your son?
Perjured your self? Go home, and die, and stink;
If you but croake a syllable, all comes out:
Away and call your porters, go, go, stink.
Excellent varlet!
Now, my faithful MOSS,
I find thy constancy.
Sir?
Sincere.
A table
Of porphiry—I mar'le, you'll be thus troublesome.
Nay, leave off now, they are gone.
Why? who are you?
What? who did send for you? O'cry you mercy,
Reverend sir! good faith, I am grieved for you,
That any chance of mine should thus defeat
Your (I must needs say) most deserving travels:
But, I protest, sir it was cast upon me,
And I could, almost, wish to be without it,
But, that the will of the dead, must be observed.
Mary, my joy is, that you need it not,
You have a gift, sir, (thank your education)
Will never let you want, while there are men,
And malice, to breed causes. Would I had
But half the like, for all my fortune, sir.
If I have any suites (as I doe hope,
Things being so easy, and direct, I shall not)
I will make bold with your obstreperous aide,
(Conceive me) for your fee, sir. In mean time,
You, that have so much law, I know have the conscience,
Not to be covetous of what is mine.
Good sir, I thank you for my plate: twill help
To set up a young man. Good faith, you look
As you were cos•iue; best go home, and purge, sir.
Bid him, eat lettuce well: my witty mischief,
Let me embrace thee. O, that I could now
Transform thee to a VENVS— MOSS, go,
Straight, take my habit of Clarissimo;
And walk the streets; be seen, torment 'hem more:
We must pursew, as well as plot. Who would
Have lost this feast?
I doubt it will loose them.
O, my recovery shall recover all.
That I could now but think on some disguise,
To meet 'hem in: and ask 'hem questions.
How I would vex 'hem still, at every turn?
Sir, I can fit you.
Can thou?
Yes, I know
One of the Commandatori, sir, so like you,
Him will I straight make drunk, and bring you his habit.
A rare disguise, and answering thy brain!
O, I will be a sharpe disease unto 'hem.
Sir, you must look for curses—
Till they burst;
The Fox fares ever best, when he is cursed.
AM I enough disguised?
I warrant you.
All my ambition is to fright him, only.
If you could ship him away, it were excellent.
To Zant, or to Alepo?
Yes, and have his
Adventures put in the book of voyages,
And his gulled story registered, for truth?
Well, gentlemen, when I am in, a while,
And that you think vs warm in our discourse,
Know your approaches.
Trust it to our care.
Save you, fair lady. Is sir POLL. within?
I do not know, sir.
'Pray you, say unto him,
Here is a merchant, upon earnest business,
Desires to speak with him.
I will see, sir.
'Pray you.
I see, the family is all female, here.
He sai's, sir, he has weighty affairs of state,
That now require him whole, some other time
You may possess him.
'Pray you say again,
If those require him whole, these will exact him▪
Whereof I bring him tidings. What might be
His grave affair of state, now? how, to make
Bolognian sausages, here, in Venice, sparing
One o'th'ingredients.
Sir, he sai's, he knows
By your word, tidings, that you are no states-man,
And therefore, wills you stay.
Sweet, 'pray you return him,
I have not read so many proclamations,
And studied them, for words, as he has done,
But— Here he deigns to come.
Sir, I must crave
Your courteous pardon. There hath chanced (to day)
Unkind disaster, twixt my lady, and me:
And I was penning my apology
To give her satifaction, as you came, now.
Sir, I am grieved, I bring you worse disaster;
The gentleman, you met at the port, to day,
That told you, he was newly arrived—
I, was
A fugitive punk?
No, sir, a spy, set on you:
And, he has made relation to the Senate,
That you professed to him, to have a plot,
To sell the state of Venice, to the Turk.
O me!
For which, warrants are signed by this time▪
To apprehend you, and to search your study,
For papers—
Alas, sir. I have none, but notes,
Drawn out of play-bookes—
All the better, sir.
And some essays. What shall I doe?
Sir, best
Convey your self into a sugar-chest,
Or, if you could lie round, a frail were rare:
And I could send you, aboard.
Sir, I but talked so,
For discourse sake, merely.
Hark, they are there.
I am a wretch, a wretch.
What, will you doe, sir?
Ha you ne'er a curren-but to leap into?
They'll put you to the rack, you must be sudden.
Sir, I have an engine—
Sir POLITIQVE WOVLD-BE?
Where is he?)
That I have thought upon, before time.
What is it?
(I shall ne'er endure the torture.)
Mary, it is, sir, of a tortoyse-shell,
Fitted, for these extremities: 'pray you sir, help me.
Here, In have a place, sir, to put back my legs,
(Please you to lay it on, sir) with this cap,
And my black gloves, I'll lye, sir, like a tortoise,
Till they are gone.
And, call you this an engine?
Mine own device— good sir, bid my wives women
To burn my papers.
Whore's he hid?
We must,
And will, sure, find him.
Which is his study?
What
Are you, sir?
I'am a merchant, that came here
To look upon this tortoise.
How?
St. MARK!
What beast is this?
It is a fish.
Come out, here.
Nay, you may strike him, sir, and tread upon him:
He will bear a cart.
What, to run over him?
Yes.
Let's jump, upon him.
Can he not go?
He creeps, sir.
Let's see him creep.
No, good sir, you will hurt him.
(Heart) I'll see him creep; or prick his guts.
Come out, here.
'Pray you sir, (creep a little)
Forth.
Yet further.
Good sir, (creep)
We'll see his legs.
Gods so, he has garters!
I, and gloves!
Is this
Your fearful tortoise?
Now, sir POLL. we are even;
For your next project, I shall be prepared:
I am sorry, for the funeral of your notes, sir.
It were a rare motion, to be seen in Fleet-street!
I, in the term.
Or Smithfield, in the fair.
Me thinks, tic but a melancholic sight!
Farewell, most politic tortoise.
Whore's my lady?
Knows she of this?
I know not, sir.
Enquire.
O, I shall be the fable of all feasts;
The freight of the gazette; ship-boyes tale;
And, which is worst, even talk for ordinaries.
My lady's come most melancholic, home,
And soy's, sir, she will straight to sea, for physic.
And I, to shun, this place, and clime for ever;
Creeping, with house, on back: and think it well,
To shrink my poor head, in my politic shell.
AM I then like him?
O, sir, you are he:
No man can sever you.
Good.
But, what am I?
Before heaven, a brave Clarissimo, thou become it!
Pity, thou were not borne one.
If I hold
My made one, twill be well.
I'll go, and see
What news, first, at the court.
Doe so. My FOX
Is out on his hole, and, ere he shall re-enter,
I'll make him languish, in his borrowed case,
Except he come to composition, with me:
ANDROGINO, CASTRONE, NANO.
Here.
Go, recreate your selves, abroad; go, sport:
So, now I have the keys, and am possessed.
Since he will, needs, be dead, before his time,
I'll bury him, or gain by him. I'am his heir:
And so will keep me, till he share at least.
To cousin him of all, were but a cheat
Well placed; no man would construe it a sin:
Let his sport pay for it, this is called the FOXE-trap.
THey say, the court is set.
We must maintain
Our first tale good, for both our reputations.
Why? mine's no tale: my son would, there, have kilt me.
That's true, I had forgot: mine is, I am sure.
But, for your will, sir.
I, I'll come upon him,
For that, hereafter, now his Patron's dead.
Signior CORVINO! and CORBACCIO! sir,
Much joy unto you.
Of what?
The sudden good,
Dropped down upon you—
Where?
(And, none knows (how)
From old VOLPONE, sir.
Out, errant knave.
Let not your too much wealth, sir, make your furious.
Away, thou varlet.
Why sir?
Dost thou mock me?
You mock the world, sir, did you not change wills?
Out, harlot.
O! belike you are the man,
Signior CORVINO? faith, you carry it well;
You grow not mad withal: I love your spirit.
You are not ouer-leauen'd, with your fortune.
You should have some would swell, now like a wine-fat,
With such an Autumn— Did he gi'you all, sir?
Avoid, you rascal.
Troth, your wife has shew'ne
Her self a very woman: but, you are well,
You need not care, you have a good estate,
To bear it out, sir, better by this chance.
Except CORBACCIO have a share?
Hence, varlet.
You will not be a' known, sir: why it is wise.
Thus doe all gam'sters, at all games, dissemble.
No man will seem to win. Here, comes my vulture,
Heaving his beak up in the ayre, and snuffing.
OVt-stript thus, by a parasite? a slave?
Would run on errands? and make legs, for crumbs?
Well, what I'll do—
The court stays for you worship.
I eêne rejoice, sir, at your worships happiness,
And that it fell into so learned hands,
That understand the fingering.—
What doe you mean?
I mean to be a suitor to your worship,
For the small tenement, out of reparations;
That, at the end of your long row of houses,
By the piscaria: it was, in VOLPONE'S time,
Your predecessor, ere he grew diseased,
A handsome, pretty, customed, bawdy-house,
As any was in Venice (none dispraised)
But fell with him; his body, and that house
Decayed, together.
Come, sir, leave your prating.
Why, if your worship give me but your hand,
That I may have the refusal; I have done.
It is a mere toy, to you, sir; candle rents:
As your learned worship knows—
What doe I know?
Mary no end of your wealth, sir, god decrease it.
Mistaking knave! what, mock thou my mis-fortune?
His blessing on your heart, sir, would it were more.
(Now, to my first, again; at the next corner.)
SEe, in our habit! see the impudent varlet!
That I could shoot mine eyes at him, like gun-stones.
But, is this true, sir, of the parasite?
Again, t'afflict vs? monster?
In good faith, sir,
I'am heartily grieved, a beard of your grave length
Should be so ouer-reach'd. I never brooked
That parasites hair, me thought his nose should cousin:
There still was somewhat, in his look, did promise
The bane of a Clarissimo.
Knave—
Me thinks,
Yet you, that are so traded in the world,
A witty merchant, the fine bird, CORVINO,
That have such moral emblems on your name,
Should not have sung you shame; and dropped your cheese:
To let the FOX laugh at your emptiness.
Sirrah, you think, the privilege of the place,
And your red saucy cap, that seems (to me)
Nailed to your iolt-head, with those two cecchines,
Can warrant your abuses; come you, hither:
You shall perceive, sir, I dare beat you. Approach.
No haste, sir, I doe know your valor, well:
Since you durst publish what you are, sir.
Tarry,
I'd speak, with you.
Sir, sir, another time —
Nay, now.
O god, sir! I were a wise man,
Would stand the fury of a distracted cuckold.
What! come again?
Upon 'hem, MOSS; save me,
The ayre's infected, where he breathes.
Lets fly him.
Excellent Basilisk! turn upon the vulture.
well, flesh-fly, it is summer with you, now;
Your winter will come on.
Good Advocate,
'Pray thee, not rail, nor threaten out of place, thus;
Thou'lt make a solecism (as madame says.)
Get you a biggen, more: your brain breaks loose.
Well, sir.
Would you have me beat the insolent slave?
Throw dirt, upon his first good clothes?
This same
Is, doubtless, some familiar!
Sir, the court
In troth, stays for you. I am mad, a mule,
That never read IVSTINIAN, should get up,
And ride an Advocate. Had you no quirk,
To avoid gulag, sir, by such a creature?
I hope you doe but jest; he has not done it:
This's but confederacy, to blind the rest.
You are the heir?
A strange, officious,
Trouble-some knave! thou dost torment me.
I know—
It cannot be, sir, that you should be cozened;
It is not within the wit of man, to doe it:
You are so wise, so prudent, and, it is fit,
That wealth, and wisdom still, should go together.
ARe all the parties, here?
All, but the Advocate.
And, here he comes.
Then bring 'hem forth to sentence.
O, my most honoured fathers, let your mercy
Once win upon your justice, to forgive—
I am distracted—
What will he doe, now?)
O,
I know not which t'addresse my self to, first,
Whether your father-hoods, or these innocents—
Will he betray himself?)
Whom, equally,
I have abused, out of most covetous ends—
The man is mad?
What's that!
He is possessed.)
For which; now struck in conscience, here I prostrate
My self, at your offended feet, for pardon.
Arise.
O heaven, how just thou art!
I'am caught
I'mine own noose—
Be constant, sir, nought now
Can help, but impudence.
Speak forward.
Silence.
It is not passion in me, reverend fathers,
But only conscience, conscience my good sires,
That makes me, now, tell truth. That parasite,
That knave hath been the instrument of all.
Where is that knave? fetch him.
I go.
Grave fathers,
This man's distracted; he confessed it, now:
For, hoping to be old VOLPONE'S heir,
Who now is dead —
How?
Is VOLPONE dead?
Dead since, grave fathers—
O, sure vengeance!
Stay,
Then, he was no deceiver?
O, no, none:
The parasite, grave fathers.
He do's speak,
Out of mere envy, because the seruant's made
The thing, he gaped for; please your father-hoods,
This is the truth: though, I'll not justify
The other, but he may be some-deale faulty.
I, to your hopes, as well as mine, CORVINO:
But I'll use modesty. Pleases your wisdoms
To view these certain notes, and but confer them;
As I hope favour, they shall speak clear truth.
The devil he's entered him!
Or bides in you.
We have done ill, by a public officer,
To send for him, if he be heir.
For whom?
Him, that they call the parasite.
It is true;
He is a man, of great estate, now left.
Go you, and learn his name; and say, the court
Entreats his presence, here; but, to the clearing
Of some few doubts.
This semi's a labyrinth!
Stand you unto your first report?
My state,
My life, my fame—
(Where is it?)
Are at the stake.
Is yours so too?
The Aduocate's a knave:
And has a forked tongue—
(Speak to the point.)
So is the parasite, too.
This is confusion.
I doe beseech your father-hoods, read but those;
And credit nothing, the false spirit hath writ:
It cannot be, but he is possessed, grave fathers.
TO make a snare, for mine own neck! and run
My head into it, wilfully! with laughter!
When I had newly escaped, was free, and clear!
Out of mere wantonness! Ô, the dull devil
Was in this brain of mine, when I deuis'd it;
And MOSS gave it second: he must now
Help to •ear up this vein, or we bleed dead.
How now! who let you loose? whither go you, now?
What? to buy ginger-bread? or to drown kitlings?
Sir, master MOSS called vs out of doors,
And bid vs all go play, and took the keys.
Yes.
Did master MOSS take the keys? why, so!
I am farther, in. These are my fine conceits!
I must be merry, with a mischief to me!
What a vile wretch was I, that could not bear
My fortune soberly? I must have my crotchets?
And my conundrums! well, go you, and seek him:
His meaning may be truer, then my fear.
Bid him, he straight come to me, to the court;
Thither will I, and, if 't be possible,
Vn-screw my advocate, upon new hopes:
When I provoked him, then I lost my self.
THese things can ne'er be reconciled. He, here,
Professes, that the gentleman was wronged;
And that the gentlewoman was brought thither,
Forced by her husband: and there left.
Most true.
How ready is heaven to those, that pray!
But, that
VOLPONE would have ravished her, he holds
Utterly false; knowing his impotence.
Grave fathers, he is possessed; again, I say,
Possessed: nay, if there be possession,
And obsession, he has both.
Here comes our officer.
The parasite will straight be, here, grave fathers.
You might invent some other name, sir varlet.
Did not the notary meet him?
Not that I know.
His coming will clear all.
Yet it is misty.
May it please your father hoods—
Sir, the parasite
Willed me to tell you, that his master lives;
That you are still the man; your hopes the same;
And this was, only a jest—
How?
Sir, to try
If you were, firm, and how you stood affected.
Art' sure he lives?
Doe I live, sir?
O me!
I was to violent.
Sir, you may redeem it,
They said, you were possessed; fall down, and seem so:
I'll help to make it good. God bless the man!
(Stop your wind hard, and swell) see, see, see, see!
He vomits crooked pins! his eyes are set,
Like a dead hares, hung in a poulters shop!
His mouth's running away! doe you see, signior?
Now, it is in his belly.
I, the devil!)
Now, in his throat.
I, I perceive it plain.)
Twill out, t'will out; stand clear. See, where it flies!
In shape of a blew toad, with a battes wings!
Doe not you see it, sir?
What? I think I doe.
It is too manifest.
Look! he comes t'himselfe!
Where am I?
Take good heart, the worst is past, sir.
You are dis-possest.
What accident is this?
Sudden, and full of wonder!
If he were.
Possessed, as it appears, all this is nothing.
He has been, often, subject to these fits,
Show him that writing, do you know it, sir?
Deny it, sir, forswear it, know it not.
Yes, I doe know it well, it is my hand:
But all, that it contains, is false.
O practise!
What maze is this!
Is he not guilty, then,
Whom you, there, name the parasite?
Grave fathers,
No more then, his good patron, old VOLPONE.
Why, he is dead?
O no, my honoured fathers.
He lives—
How! lives?
Lives.
This is subtler, yet!
You said, he was dead?
Never.
You said so?
I heard so.
Here comes the gentleman make him way.
A stool.
A proper man! and were VOLPONE dead,
A fit match for my daughter.
Give him way.
MOSS, I was a'most lost, the Advocate
Had betrayed all; but, now, it is recovered:
Al's of the hinge again—say, I am living.
What busy knave is this! most reverend fathers,
I sooner, had attended your grave pleasures,
But that my order, for the funeral
Of my dear patron did require me—
(MOSS!)
Whom I intend to bury, like a gentleman.
I, quick, and cousin me of all.
Still stranger!
More intricate!
And come about again!
It is a match, my daughter is bestowed.
(Will you gi'me half?
First, I'll be hanged.
I know,
Your voice is good, cry not so lowd')
Demand
The Advocate. Sir, did not you affirm,
VOLPONE was alive?
Yes, and he is;
This gent'man told me so, (thou shalt have half.)
Whose drunkard is this same? speak some, that know him:
I never saw his face. (I cannot now
Afford it you so cheap.
No?)
What say you?
The officer told me.
I did, grave fathers,
And will maintain, he lives, with mine own life.
And, that this creature told me. (I was borne,
With all good stars my enemies.)
Most grave fathers,
If such an insolence, as this, must pass
Upon me, I am silent: it was not this,
For which you sent, I hope.
Take him away.
MOSS.)
Let him be whipped.
Wilt thou betray me?
Cousin me?)
And taught to bear himself
Toward a person of his rank.
Away.
I humbly thank your father-hoods.
Soft, soft: whipped?
And loose all that I have? if I confess,
It cannot be much more.
Sir, are you married?
They'll be allied, anon; I must be resolute:
The FOX shall, here, uncase.
Patron.)
Nay, now,
My ruins shall not come alone; your match
I'll hinder sure: my substance shall not glow you,
Nor screw you, into a family.
Why, patron!)
I am VOLPONE, and this is my knave;
This, his own knave; this, auarices fool;
This, a Chimera of withal, fool, and knave;
And, reverend fathers, since we all can hope
Nought, but a sentence, let's not now despair it.
You hear me brief.
May it please your father-hoods—
silence.
The knot is now undone, by miracle!
Nothing can be more clear.
Or can more prove
These innocent.
Give 'hem their liberty.
Heaven could not, long, let such gross crimes be hid.
If this be held the high way to get riches,
May I be poor.
This 's not the gain, but torment.
These possess wealth, as sick men possess fevers,
Which, trulyer may be said to possess them.
Disroabe that parasite.
Most honoured fathers.
Can you plead ought to stay the course of justice?
If you can, speak.
We beg favour,
And mercy.
You hurt your innocence, suing for the guilty.
Stand forth; and, first, the parasite. You appear
To have been the chiefest minister, if not plotter,
In all these lewd impostures; and now, lastly,
Have, with your impudence, abused the court,
And habit of a gentleman of Venice,
Being a fellow of no birth, or blood:
For which, our sentence is, first thou be whipped;
Then live perpetual prisoner in our galleys.
I thank you, for him.
Ban• to thy wooluish nature.
Deliver him to the Saffi. Thou, VOLPONE,
By blood, and rank a gentleman, can not fall
Under like censure; but our judgment on thee
Is, that thy substance all be straight confiscate
To the hospital, of the Incurabili:
And, since the most was gotten by imposture,
By faining lame, gout, palsy, and such diseases,
Thou art to lie in prison, cramped with irons,
Till thou be sick, and lame indeed. Remove him.
This is called mortifying of a FOX.
Thou VOLTORE, to take away the scandal
Thou hast given all worthy men, of thy profession,
Art banished from their fellowship, and our state.
CORBACCIO, bring him near. We here possess
Thy son, of all thy state; and confine thee
To the monastery of Senator Spirito:
Where, since thou knew not how to live well here,
Thou shalt be learned to die well.
Ha! what said he?
You shall know anon, sir.
Thou CORVINO, shalt
Be straight embarked from thine own house, and rowed
Round about Venice, through the grand canal,
Wearing a cap, with fair, long asses ears,
In stead of horns: and, so to mount (a paper
Pined on thy breast) to the berlino —
Yes,
And, have mine eyes beat out with stinking fish,
Bruised fruit, and rotten eggs—It is well. I'am glad,
I shall not see my shame, yet.
And to expiate
Thy wrongs done to thy wife, thou art to send her
Home, to her father, with her dowry trebled:
And these are all your judgements.
Honoured fathers.)
Which may not be revoked. Now, you begin,
When crimes are done, and past, and to be punished,
To think what your crimes are: away with them.
Let all, that see these vices thus rewarded,
Take heart, and love to study'hem. Mischiefs feed
Like beasts, till they be fat, and then they bleed.
THe seasoning of a play is the applause.
Now, though the FOX be punished by the laws,
He, yet, doth hope there is no suffering due,
For any fact, which he hath done against you;
If there be, sensure him: here he, doubtful, stands.
If not, fare jovially, and clap your hands.

FRom all that's near the Court, from all
that's great
Within the compass of the Citty-wals,
We now have brought our Scene.
Hold your peace good-man boy.
What do you mean sir?
That you have no good meaning: This seven years
there hath been plays at this house, I have observed it,
you have still girds at Citizens; and now you call your play,
The London Merchant. Down with your Title boy, down
with your Title.
Are you a member of the noble City?
I am.
And a Free-man?
Yea, and a Grocer.
So Grocer, then by your sweet favour, we intend
no abuse to the City.
No sir, yes sir, if you were not resolved to play the
Jacks, what need you study for new subjects, purposely to a∣buse
your betters? why could not you be contented, as well
as others, with the legend of Whittington, or the life &amp; death
of sir Thomas Gresham? with the building of the Royal Ex∣change?
or the story of Queen Eleanor, with the rearing of
London bridge upon wool-sackes?
You seem to bee an understanding man: what
would you have vs do sir?
Why present something notably in honour of the
Commons of the City.
Why what doe you say to the life and death of fat
Drake, or the repairing of Fleet-priuies?
I do not like that, but I will have a Citizen, and hee
shall be of my own trade.
Oh you should have told vs your mind a month
since, our play is ready to begin now.
It is all one for that, I will have a Grocer, and he shall
do admirable things.
What will you have him do?
Marry I will have him—
Husband, husband.
Peace mistress.
Hold thy peace Raf, I know what I do I warrant tee.
Husband, husband.
What say thou cunny?
Let him kill a Lyon with a pestle husband, let him
kill a Lyon with a pestle.
So he shall, ll'e have him kill a Lyon with a pestle.
Husband, shall I come up husband?
I cunny. Raf help your mistress this way: pray gen∣tlemen
make her a little room, I pray you sir lend me your
hand to help up my wife: I thank you sir. So.
By your leave Gentlemen all, Im'e something trow∣blossom,
Im'e a strāger here, I was ne'er at one of these plays
as they say, before; but I should have seen Iane Shore once,
and my husband hath promised me any time this Twelvemonth
to carry me to the Bold Beauchams, but in truth he
did not, I pray you bear with me.
Boy, let my wife and I have a couple stools, and
then begin, and let the Grocer do rare things.
But sir, we have never a boy to play him, every
one hath a part already.
Husband, husband, for Gods sake let Raf play
him, beshrew me if I do not think hee will go beyond
them all.
Well remembered wife, come up Raf: Il'e tell you
Gentlemen, let them but lend him a suit of reparrell, and no∣cessaries,
and by Gad, if any of them all blow wind in the
tail on him, Il'e be hanged.
I pray you youth let him have a suit of reparrell,
Il'e be sworn Gentlemen, my husband tells you true, hee
will act you sometimes at our house, that all the neighbours
cry out on him: hee will fetch you up a couraging part so
in the garret, that we are all as feared I warrant you, that wee
quake again: we'll fear our chlidren with him if they bee
never so unruly, do but cry, Raf comes, Raf comes to them,
and they'll be as quiet as Lambs. Hold up thy head Raf,
show the Gentlemen what thou can doe, speak a huf∣fing
part, I warrant you the Gentlemen will accept of it.
Do Raf, do.
By heaven me thinks it were an easy leap
To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac'd Moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the sea,
Where never fathom line touched any ground,
And pluck up drowned honour from the lake of hell.
How say you Gentlemen, is it not as I told you?
Nay Gentlemen, hee hath played before, my husband
says, Musidorus before the Wardens of our Company.
I, and hee should have played Ieronimo with a Shoe∣maker
for a wager.
He shall have a suite of apparel if he will go in.
In Raf, in Raf, and set out the Grocery in their kind,
if thou love me.
I warrant our Raf will look finely when hoe's
dressed.
But what will you have it called?
The Grocers honour.
Me thinks The Knight of the burning Pestle were better.
Il'e be sworn husband, thats as good a name as can be.
Let it be so, begin, begin, my wife and I will sit down.
I pray you do.
What stately mucsike have you? you have shawmes.
Shawnes? no.
No? Im'e a thief if my mind did not give me so. Raf
plays a stately part, and he must needs have shawnes: Il'e
be at the charge of them my self, rather then we'll be with∣out
them.
So you are like to be.
Why and so I will be: ther's two shillings, let's have
the waits of South-warke, they are as rare fellows as any
are in England; and that will fetch them all over the water
with a vengeance, as if they were mad.
You shall have them: will you sit down then?
I, come wife.
Sit you merry all Gentlemen, Im'e bold to sit a∣amongst
you for my ease.
From all that's near the Court, from all that's great.
Within the compass of the Citty-walles,
We now have brought our Scene: fly far from hence
All private taxes, immodest phrases,
What ere may but show like vicious:
For wicked mirth never true pleasure brings,
But honest minds are pleased with honest things.
Thus much for that we do: but for Refs part
You must answer for your self.
Take you no care for Raf, he will discharge himself I
warrant you.
I faith Gentlemen Il'e give my word for Raf.
Sirrah, Il'e make you know you are my Prentice,
And whom my charitable love redeemed
Even from the fall of fortune, gave thee heate
And growth, to be what now thou art, new cast thee,
Adding the trust of all I have at home,
In foreign Staples, or upon the Sea
To thy direction, ti'de the good opinions
Both of my self and friends to thy endeavours,
So fair were thy beginnings, but with these,
As I remember, you had never charge,
To love your Masters daughter, and even then,
When I had found a wealthy husband for her,
I take it, sir, you had not; but how ever,
I'll break the neck of that commission,
And make you know you are but a Merchants Factor.
Sir, I do liberally confess I am yours,
Bound, both by love and duty, to your service;
In which, my labour hath been all my profit;
I have not lost in bargain, nor delighted
To wear your honest gains upon my back,
Nor have I given a pension to my blood,
Or lavishly in play consumed your stock.
These, and the miseries that do attend them,
I dare, with innocence, proclaim are strangers
To all my temperate actions; for your daughter,
If there be any love, to my deservings,
Borne by her virtuous self, I cannot stop it?
Nor, am I able to refrain her wishes.
She's private to her self and best of knowledge,
Whom she'll make so happy as to sigh for.
Besides, I cannot think you mean to match her,
Unto a fellow of so lame a presence,
One that hath little left of Nature in him.
It is very well sir, I can tell your wisdom
How all this shall bee cured.
Your care becomes you.
And thus it must be sir, I here discharge you
My house and service, take your liberty,
And when I want a son I'll send for you.
These be the fair rewards of them that love.
O you that live in freedom never prove
The travel of a mind led by desire.
Why, how now friend, struck with my fathers thun∣der?
Struck and struck dead unless the remedy
Be full of speed and virtue; I am now,
What I expected long, no more your fathers.
But mine.
But yours, and only yours I am,
That's all I have to keep me from the Statute,
You dare be constant still.
O fear me not,
In this I dare be better then a woman.
Nor shall his anger, nor his offers move me,
Were they both equal to a Princes power.
You know my rival?
Yes and love him dearly
Even as I love an ague, or foul weather,
I prithee Jasper fear him not.
O no,
I do not mean to do him so much kindness,
But to our own desires, you know the plot
We both agreed on.
Yes, and will perform
My part exactly.
I desire no more,
Fare-well, and keep my heart, it is yours.
I take it,
He must do miracles makes me forsake it.
Fie upon am little infidels, what a matters here
now? well, I'll be hanged for a halfe-penny, if there be not
some abomination knavery in this Play, well, let'em look
toot, Raf must come, and if there be any tricks a brewing,—
Let'em brew and bake too husband, a Gods name,
Raf will find all out I warrant you, and they were older then
they are, I pray my pretty youth is Raf ready.
He will be presently.
Now I pray you make my commendations unto
him, and withal carry him this stick of Licoras, tell him his
Mistress sent it him, and bid him bite a piece, twill open his
pipes the better, say.
Come sir, shoe's yours, upon my faith she's yours
You have my hand, for other idle lets
Between your hopes and her, thus, with a wind
They are scattered and no more: my wanton Prentice,
That like a bladder, blew himself with love,
I have let out, and sent him to discover
New Masters yet unknown.
I thank you sir,
Indeed I thank you sir, and ere I stir
It shall bee known, how ever you do deem,
I am of gentle blood and gentle seem.
O sir, I know it certain.
Sir my friend,
Although, as Writers say, all things have end,
And that we call a pudding, hath his two
O let it not seem strange I pray to you,
If in this bloody simile, I put
My love, more endless, then frail things or gut.
Husband, I prithee sweet lamb tell me one thing,
But tell me truly: stay youths I beseech you, till I question
my husband.
What is it mouse?
Sirrah, did thou ever see a prettier child? how it
behaves it self, I warrant ye, and speaks, and looks, and
perts up the head? I pray you brother, with your favour, were
you never none of M. Monkesters scholars?
Chicken, I prithee heartily contain thy self, the
childer are pretty childer, but when Raf comes, Lamb.
I when Raf comes conny; well my youth, you may proceed
Well sir, you know my love, and rest, I hope,
Assured of my consent, get but my daughters,
And wed her when you please; you must be bold,
And clap in close unto her, come, I know
You have language good enough to win a wench.
A whoreson tyrant has ben an old stringer in's days I
warrant him.
I take your gentle offer and withal
Yield love again for love reciprocal.
What Luce within there.
Called you sir?
I did.
Give entertainment to this Gentleman
And see you bee not froward: to her sir,
My presence will but bee an eye-soare to you.
Fair Mistress Luce, how do you, are you well?
Give me your hand and then I pray you tell,
How doth your little sister, and your brother?
And whether you love me or any other.
Sir, these are quickly answered.
So they are.
Where women are not cruel: but how far
Is it now distant from this place we are in,
Unto that blessed place your fathers warren.
What makes you think of that sir?
Even that face
For stealing Rabbits meanwhile in that place,
God Cupped, or the Keeper, I know not whether
Unto my cost and charges brought you thither,
And there began.
Your game sir.
Let no game,
Or any thing that tends to the same.
Bee evermore remembered, thou fair killer
For whom I sate me down and brake my Tiller.
There's a kind Gentleman, I warrant you, when
will you do as much for me George?
Beshrew me sir, I am sorry for your losses,
But as the proverb says, I cannot cry,
I would you had not seen me.
So would I.
Unless you had more maw to do me good.
Why, cannot this strange passion be withstood,
Send for a Constable and raise the Town.
O no, my valiant love will batter down
Millions of Constables, and put to flight,
Even that great watch of Mid-summer day at night.
Beshrew me sir, it were good I yielded then,
Weak women cannot hope, where valiant men
Have no resistance.
Yield then, I am full
Of pity, though I say it, and can pull
Out of my pocket, thus, a pair of gloves,
Look Lucy, look, the dogs tooth, nor the Doves
Are not so white as these; and sweet they bee,
And whipped about with silk, as you may see.
If you desire the price, suit from your eye,
A beam to this place, and you shall espy
F. S. which is to say, my sweetest honey,
They cost me three and two pence, or no money.
Well sir, I take them kindly, and I thank you,
What would you more?
Nothing.
Why then fare-well.
Nor so, nor so, for Lady I must tell,
Before we part, for what we met together,
God grant me time, and patience, and fair weather.
Speak and declare your mind in terms so brief.
I shall, then first and foremost for relief
I call to you, I if that you can afford it,
I care not at what price, for on my word, it
Shall be repaid again, although it cost me
More then I'll speak of now, for love hath tossed me,
In furious blanket like a Tennis ball,
And now I rise aloft, and now I fall.
Alas good Gentleman, alas the day.
I thank you heartily, and as I say,
Thus do I still continue without rest,
In the morning like a man, at night a beast,
Roaring and bellowing mine own disquiet,
That much I fear, forsaking of my diet,
Will bring me presently to that quandary,
I shall bid all adieu:
Now by S. Mary
That were great pity.
So it were beshrew me,
Then ease me lusty Luce, and pity show me.
Why sir, you know my will is nothing worth
Without my fathers grant, get his consent,
And then you may with assurance try me.
The Worshipful your sire will not deny me.
For I have asked him, and he hath replied,
Sweet Moister Humfrey, Luce shall be thy Bride.
Sweet Moister Humfrey then I am content.
And so am I intrude.
Yet take me with you,
There is another clause must be annexed,
And this it is, I swore and will perform it;
No man shall ever joy me as his wife
But he that stole me hence, if you dare venture
I am yours; you need not fear, my father loves you,
If not farewell for ever.
Stay Nymph, stay,
I have a double Gelding culored bay,
Sprung by his father from Barbarian kind,
Another for my self, though somewhat blind,
Yet true as trusty tree.
I am satisfied,
And so I give my hand, our course must lie
Through Waltham Forest, where I have a friend
Will entertain vs, so fare-well sir Humfrey,
And think upon your business.
Though I die,
I am resolved to venture life and limb,
For one so young, so fair, so kind, so trim.
By my faith and troth George, and as I am virtue∣os,
it is even the kindest young man that ever trod on shoe
leather, well, go thy ways if thou hast her not, it is not thy
fault faith.
I prithee mouse be patient, a shall have her, or i'll
make some'em smoke for it.
That's my good lamb George, fie, this stinking
Tobacco kills men, would there were none in England, now I
pray Gentlemen, what good does this stinking Tobacco? do
you nothing, I warrant you make chimneys a your faces: o
husband, husband, now, now, there's Raf, there's Raf.
Peace fool, let Raf alone, hark you Raf; doe not
strain your self too much at the first, peace, begin Raf.
Then Palmerin and Trineus snatching their Lances
from their Dwarses, and clasping their Helmets galloped a∣maine
after the Giant, and Palmerin having gotten a sight of
him, came posting amain, saying: Stay traitorous thief, for
thou moist not so carry away her, that is worth the greatest
Lord in the world, and with these words gave him a blow on
the shoulder, that he stroke him besides his Elephant, and
Trineus coming to the Knight that had Agricola behind
him, set him soon besides his horse, with his neck broken
in the fall, so that the Princess getting out of the throng,
between joy and grief said; all happy Knight, the mirrout
of all such as follow Arms, now may I bee well assured of
the love thou bear me, I wonder why the Kings doe not
raise an army of fourteen or fifteen hundred thousand
men, as big as the Army that the Prince of Portigo brought
against Rocicler, &amp; destroy these Giants, they do much hurt
to wandering Damsels, that go in quest of their Knights.
Faith husband and Raf says true, for they say the
King of Portugal cannot sit at his meat, but the Giants &amp;
the Ettins will come and snatch it from him,
Hold thy tongue, on Raf.
And certainly those Knights are much to be com∣mended,
who neglecting their possessions, wander with a
Squire and a Dwarf through the Deserts to relieve poor
Ladies.
I by my faith are they Raf, let 'em say what they
will, they are indeed, our Knights neglect their possessions
well enough, but they do not the rest.
There are no such courteous and fair well spoken
Knights in this age, they will call one the son of a whore,
that Palmerin of England, would have called fair sir; and
one that Rosicler would have called right beauteous Damsel,
they will call damned bitch.
I'll besworn will they Raf, they have called me
so an hundred times about a scurvy pipe of Tobacco.
But what brave spirit could be content to sit in his
shop with a flappet of wood and a blew apron before him
selling Methridatum and Dragons water to visited houses, that
might pursue feats of Arms, &amp; through his noble achieve∣mints
procure such a famous history to be written of his
heroic prowess.
Well said Raf, some more of those words Raf.
They go finely by my troth.
Why should not I then pursue this course, both
for the credit of my self and our Company, for amongst
all the worthy books of Achievements I doe not call
to mind that I yet read of a Grocer Errant, I will be the
said Knight, have you heard of any, that hath wandered
unfurnished of his Squire and Dwarf, my elder Prentice
Tim shall be my trusty Squire, and little George my Dwarf,
Hence my blew Aporne, yet in remembrance of my former
Trade, upon my shiled shall be purtraide, a burning Pestle,
and I will be called the Knight oath burning Pestle.
Nay, I dare swear thou wilt not forget thy old
Trade, thou were ever meek.
Anon.
My beloved Squire, &amp; George my Dwarf, I charge
you that from hence-forth you never call me by any other
name, but the Right Courteous and Valiant Knight of the bur∣ning
Pestle, and that you never call any female by the name of
a woman or wench, but fair Lady, if she have her desires,
if not distressed Damsel, that you call all Forests &amp; Heaths
Deserts, and all horses Palfries.
This is very fine, faith, do the Gentlemen like Raf,
think you, husband?
I, I warrant thee, the Players would give all the
shoes in their shop for him.
My beloved Squire Tim, stand out, admit this were
a Desert, and over it a Knight errant pricking, and I should
bid you inquire of his intents, what would you say?
Sir, my Moister sent me, to know whether your are
riding?
No, thus; fair sir, the Right Courteous and Valiant
Knight of the burning Pestle, commanded me to enquire, upon
what adventure your are bound, whether to relieve some di∣stressed
Damsels, or otherwise.
Whoresome blockhead cannot remember.
I'faith, &amp; Raf told him on it before, all the Gentlemen
heard him, did he not Gentlemen, did not Raf tel him on it?
Right Courteous and Valiant Knight of the burning
Pestle, here is a distressed Damsel, to have a half penny-worth
of pepper.
That's a good boy, see, the little boy can hit it, by
my troth it's a fine child.
Relieve her with all courteous language, now
shut up shop, no more my Prentice, but my trusty
Squire and Dwarf, I must be speak my shield and arming-pestle.
Go thy ways Raf, as Im'e a true man, thou art the
best on 'em all.
Raf, Raf.
What say you mistress?
I prithee come again quickly sweet Raf.
By and by.
Give thee my blessing? No, Il'e ner'e give
thee my blessing, Il'e see thee hanged first; it shall ner'e bee
said I gave thee my blessing, you are thy fathers own son,
of the right blood of the Merri-thoughts, I may curse the
time that ever I knew thy father, he hath spent all his own,
and mine too, and when I tell him of it, he laughs and dan∣ces,
and sings, and cries, A merry heart lives long-a. And
thou art a wast-thrift, and art run away from thy moister,
that loved thee well, and art come to me, and I have laid up a
little for my younger son Michael, and thou think to be∣zell
that, but thou shalt never be able to do it. Come hither
Michael, come Michael, down on thy knees, thou shalt
have my blessing.
I pray you mother pray to God to bless me.
God bless thee: but Jasper shall never have
my blessing, he shall be hanged first, shall hee not Michael?
how say thou?
Yes forsooth mother and grace of God.
That's a good boy.
I faith it's a fine spoken child.
Mother, though you forget a parents love,
I must preserve the duty of a child.
I ran not from my moister, nor return
To have your stock maintain my Idleness.
Ungracious child I warrant him, hark how hee
chops logic with his mother: thou had best tell her she
lies, do tell her she lies.
If hee were my son, I would hang him up by the
heals, and flea him, and salt him, whoore-sonne halter∣sack.
My coming only is to beg your love,
Which I must ever, though I never gain it,
And howsoever you esteem of me,
There is no drop of blood hid in these veins,
But I remember well belongs to you
That brought me forth, and would be glad for you
To rip them all again, and let it out.
I faith I had sorrow enough for thee (God
knows) but Il'e hamper thee well enough: get thee in
thou vagabond, get thee in, and learn of thy brother Mi∣chael.
Nose, nose, jolly red nose, and who gave
thee this jolly red nose?
Hark, my husband hoe's singing and hoiting,
And Im'e fine to cark and care, and all little enough.
Husband, Charles, Charles Merithought.
Nutmegs and Ginger, Cinnamon and Cloves,
And they gave me this jolly red Nose.
If you would consider your state, you would
have little lust to sing, I-wisse.
It should never bee considered while it were an
estate, if I thought it would spoil my singing.
But how wilt thou do Charles, thou art an old
man, and thou can not work, and thou hast not forty shil∣lings
left, and thou eatest good meat, and drinkest good
drink, and laugh?
And will do.
But how wilt thou'come by it Charles?
How? why how have I done hitherto this forty
years? I never came into my dining room, but at eleven &amp;
six a clock, I found excellent meat and drink a'th table, my
clothes were never worn out, but next morning a Taylor
brought me a new suit; and without question it will be so e∣for:
use makes perfectness. If all should fail, it is but a little
straining my self extraordinary, &amp; laugh my self to death.
It's a foolish old man this: is not he George?
Yes Cunny.
Give me a penny in the purse while I live George.
I by Lady cunnie, hold thee there.
Well Charles, you promised to provide for Ease∣per,
and I have laid up for Michael, I pray you pay Jasper his
portion, hoe's come home, and hee shall not consume Mi∣chaels
stock: he says his moister turned him away, but I pro∣mise
you truly, I think he ran away.
No indeed mistress Merrithought, though he bee a
notable gallows, yet Il'e assure you his moister did turn
him away, even in this place it was I'faith within this half
hour, about his daughter, my husband was by.
Hang him rogue, he served him well enough: love
his masters daughter! by my troth Cunnie if there were a
thousand boys, thou would spoil them all with taking
their parts, let his mother alone with him.
I George, but yet truth is truth.
Where is Jasper, hoe's welcome how ever,
call him in, hee shall have his portion, is he merry?
I foul chiue him, he is too merry. Jasper,
Michael.
Welcome Jasper, though thou runst away,
welcome, God bless thee: it is thy mothers mind thou
should receive thy portion; thou hast been abroad, and
I hope hast learned experience enough to govern it, thou
art of sufficient years, hold thy hand: one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine, there's ten shillings for thee,
thrust thy self into the world with that, and take some
settled course, if fortune cross thee, thou hast a retiring
place, come home to me, I have twenty shillings left, bee
a good husband, that is, wear ordinary clothes, eat the
best meat, and drink the best drink, bee merry, and
give to the poor, and believe me, thou hast no end of thy
goods.
Long may you live free from all thought of ill,
And long have cause to be thus merry still.
But father?
No more words Jasper, get thee gone, thou
hast my blessing, thy fathers spirit upon thee. Farewell Ease∣per,
but yet or ere you part (oh cruel!) kiss me, kiss me
sweating, mine own dear jewel: So, now begone; no
words.
So Michael, now get thee gone too.
Yes forsooth mother, but Il'e have my fathers bless∣sing
first.
No Michael, it is now matter for his blessing,
thou hast my blessing, begone; Il'e fetch my money &amp; jew∣else,
and follow thee: Il'e stay no longer with him I warrant
thee, truly Charles Il'e begone too.
What you will not.
Yes indeed will I.
Hey ho, fare-well Nan, Il'e never trust wench
more again, if I can.
You shall not think (when all your own
is gone) to spend that I have been scraping up for Mi∣chael.
Farewell good wife, I expect it not; all I have
to doe in this world, is to bee merry: which I shall, if the
ground be not taken from me: and if it be,
When earth and seas from me are rest,
The skies aloft for me are left.
Il'e be sworn hoe's a merry old Gentleman for all
that. Hark, hark husband, hark, fiddles, fiddles; now sure∣lie
they go finely. They say, it is present death for these fiddlers
to tune their Rebeckes before the great Turks grace, is it
not George? But look, look, here's a youth dances: now
good youth do a turnea'th toe, sweet heart, I'faith Isle have
Raf come and do some of his Gambols; he will ride the wild
mare Gentlemen, it would do your hearts good to see him. I
thank you kind youth, pray bid Raf come.
Peace Cunnie. Sirrah, you scurvy boy, bid the plai∣ers
send Raf, or by Gods—and they do not, Il'e tear
some of their periwigs beside their heads: this is all Riff
Raffe.
And how faith? how goes it now son Humphrey?
Right worshipful, and my beloved friend
And father dear, this matters at an end.
It is well, it should be so, Im'e glad the girl
Is found so tractable.
Nay she must whirl
From hence, and you must wink: for so I say,
The storietels, to morrow before day.
George, dost thou think in thy conscience now'twil
be a match? tell me but what thou think sweet rogue, thou
see the poor Gentleman (dear heart) how it labours and
throbs I warrant you, to be at rest: Il'e go move the father
fort.
No, no, I prithee sit still hony-suckle, thoul't spoil all,
if he deny him, Il'e bring half a dozē good fellows my self,
&amp; in the shutting of an evening knocked up, &amp; ther's an end.
Il'e bus thee for that i'faith boy; well George, well,
you have been a wag in your days I warrant you: but God
forgive you, and I do with all my heart.
How was it son? you told me that to morrow
Before day break, you must convey her hence.
I must, I must, and thus it is agreed,
Your daughter rides upon a browne-bay steed,
I on a sorrel, which I bought of Brian,
The honest Host of the red roaring Lion
In Waltham situate: then if you may
Consent in seemly sort, lest by delay,
The fatal sisters come and do the office,
And then you'll sing another song.
Alas
Why should you be thus full of grief to me?
That do as willing as your self agree
To any thing so it be good and fair,
Then steal her when you will, if such a pleasure
Content you both, I'll sleep and never see it,
To make your joys more full, but tell me why
You may not here perform your marriage?
Gods blessing a thy soul old man, i'faith thou art
loath to part true hearts, I see, a has her George, &amp; I'm as glad
on it, well, go thy ways Humphrey, for a fair spoken man, I
believe thou hast not thy fellow within the walls of London,
&amp; I should say the Suburbs too, I should not lie, why dost
not rejoice with me George?
If I could but see Raph again, I were as merry as mine Host i'faith.
The cause you seem to ask, I thus declare,
Help me ô Muses nine, your daughter swear
A foolish oath, the more it was the pity,
Yet none but my self within this City,
Shall dare to say so, but a bold defiance
Shall meet him, were he of the noble Science.
And yet she swear, and yet why did she swear?
Truly I cannot tell, unless it were
For her own ease, for sure sometimes an oath,
Being sworn thereafter is like cordial broth.
And this it was she swore, never to marry,
But such a one, whose mighty arm could carry
(As meaning me, for I am such a one)
Her bodily away through stick and stone,
Till both of vs arrive, at her request,
Some ten miles off, in the wilde Waltham Forest.
If this be all, you shall not need to fear
Any denial in your love, proceed,
I'll neither follow, nor repent the deed.
Good-night, twenty good-nights, &amp; twenty more.
And 20 more good-nights, that makes three-score.
Come Michael, art thou not weary boy?
No for-sooth mother not I.
Where be we now child?
Indeed for-sooth mother I cannot tell, unless we
be at Mile-end, is not all the world Mile-end, Mother?
No Michael, not al the world boy, but I can assure
thee Michael, Mile-end is a goodly matter, there has been
a pitch-field my child between the naughty Spaniels and the
English-men, and the Spaniels ran away Michael, and the Eng∣lish-men
followed, my neighbour Coxstone was there boy, and
killed them all with a birding piece.
Mother forsooth.
What says my white boy?
Shall not my father go with vs too?
No Michael, let thy father go snicke-vp, he shall
never come between a pair of sheets with me again, while
he lives, let him stay at home &amp; sing for his supper boy, come
child sit down, and I'll show my boy fine knacks indeed,
look here Michael, here's a Ring, and here's Brush, &amp; here's
a Bracelet, and here's two Rings more, and here's money and
gold bi'th eye my boy.
Shall I have all this mother?
I Michael thou shalt have all Michael.
How lik'st thou this wench?
I cannot tell, I would have Raph, George; I'll see no
more elseindeed-law, &amp; I pray you let the youths understand
so much by word of mouth, for I tell you truly, I'm afraid
a my boy, come, come George, let's be merry and wise, the
child's a father-lesse child, and say they should put him into
a straight pair of Gaskins, it were worse then knot-grasse,
he would never grow after it.
Here's Raph, here's Raph.
How do you Raph? you are welcome Raph, as I may
say, it's a good boy, hold up thy head, and be not afraid, we
are thy friends Raph, the Gentlemen will praise thee Raph, if
thou plaist thy part with audacity, begin Raph a Gods name.
My trusty Squire unlace my Helm, give me my
hat, where are we, or what Desert may this be?
Mirror of Knight-hood, this is, as I take it, the
perilous Waltham down, In whose bottom stands the
enchanted Valley.
O Michael, we are betrayed, we are betrayed here
be Giants, fly boy, fly boy, fly.
Lace on my helm again: what noise is this?
A gentle Lady flying? the embrace
Of some discourteous knight, I will relieve her.
Go squire, and say, the Knight that wears this pestle,
In honour of all Ladies, swears revenge
Upon that recreant coward that pursues her.
Go comfort her, and that same gentle squire
That bears her company.
I go brave Knight.
My trusty Dwarf and friend, reach me my shield,
And hold it while I swear: First by my knight-hood,
Then by the soul of Amadis de Gaul,
My famous Ancestor, then by my sword,
The beauteous Brionella girt about me,
By this bright burning pestle of mine honour,
The living Trophy, and by all respect
Due to distressed Damsels, here I vow
Never to end the quest of this fair Lady,
And that forsaken squire, till by my valour
I gain their liberty.
Heaven bless the Knight
That thus relieves poor errant Gentlewomen.
I marry Raf, this has some savour in it, I would see
the proudest of them all offer to carry his books after him.
But George, I will not have him go away so soon, I shall bee
sick if he go away, that I shall; Call Raf again George, call
Raf again, I prithee sweet heart let him come fight before
me, and let's ha some drums, and some trumpets, and let him
kill all that comes near him, and thou love me George.
Peace a little bird, hee shall kill them all and they
were twenty more on 'em then there are.
Now Fortune, if thou be not only ill,
Show me thy better face, and bring about
Thy desperate wheel, that I may clime at length
And stand, this is our place of meeting,
If love have any constancy. Oh age!
Where only wealthy men are counted happy:
How shall I please thee? how deserve thy smiles?
When I am only rich in misery?
My fathers blessing, and this little coin
Is my inheritance, a strong revenue,
From earth thou art, and to the earth I give thee,
There grow and multiply, whilst fresher air,
Breeds me a fresher fortune, how, illusion!
What hath the Devil coined himself before me?
It is mettle good, it rings well, I am waking,
And taking too I hope, now Gods dear blessing
Upon his heart that left it here, it is mine,
These pearls, I take it, were not left for swine.
I do not like that this unthrifty youth should em∣basil
away the money; the poor Gentlewoman his mother
will have a heavy heart for it God knows.
And reason good, sweet heart.
But let him go, I'll tell Raph a tale in's ear shall
fetch him again with a Wanion I warrant him, if hee bee
aboue ground, and besides George, here are a number of
sufficient Gentlemen can witness, and my self, and your
self, and the Musicians, if we be called in question, but here
comes Raph, George, thou shalt here him speak, an he were
an Emperall.
Comes not sir Squire again?
Right courteous Knight,
Your Squire doth come and with him comes the Lady,
For and the Squire of Damsels as I take it.
Madam if any service or deuoire
Of a poor errant Knight may right your wrongs,
Command it, I am pressed to give you succour,
For to that holy end I bear my Armour,
Alas sir, I am a poor Gentlewoman, and I
have lost my money in this forest.
Desert, you would say Lady, and not lost
Whilst I have sword and lance, dry up your tears
Which ill befits the beauty of that face:
And tell the story, if I may request it,
Of your disastrous fortune.
Out alas, I left a thousand pound, a thousand
pound, even all the money I had laid up for this youth, upon
the sight of your Maistership, you looked so grim, and as I
may say it, saving your presence, more like a Giant then a
mortal man.
I am as you are Lady, so are they
All mortal, but why weeps this gentle Squire.
Has hee not cause to weep doe you think,
when he hath lost his inheritance?
Young hope of valour, weep not, I am here
That will confound thy foe and pay it dear
Upon his coward head, that dares deny,
Distressed Squires and Ladies equity.
I have but one horse, on which shall ride
This Lady fair behind me, and before
This courteous Squire, fortune will give vs more
Upon our next adventure; fairly speed
Beside vs Squire and Dwarf to do vs need.
Did not I tell you Nel what your man would doe?
by the saith of my body wench, for clean action and good
delivery they may all cast their caps at him.
And so they may i'faith, for I dare speak it boldly,
the twelve Companies of London cannot match him, timber
for timber, well George, and hee be not inveigled by some of
these paltry Players, I ha much marvel, but George wee ha
done our parts if the boy have any grace to be thankful.
Yes I warrant thee duckling.
Good Mistress Luce how ever I in fault am
For your lame horse; you're welcome unto VValtham.
But which way now to go or what to say
I know not truly till it be broad day.
O fear not Moister Humphrey, I am guide
For this place good enough.
Then up and ride,
Or if it please you walk for your repose,
Or sit, or if you will go pluck a rose:
Either of which shall be indifferent,
To your good friend and Humphrey, whose consent
Is so entangled ever to your will,
As the poor harmless horse is to the Mill.
Faith and you say the word we will even sit down
And take a nap.
It is better in the Town,
Where we may nap together, for believe me
To sleep without a snatch would mickle grieve me.
You're merry Moister Humphrey.
So I am,
And have been ever merry from my Dam.
Your nurse had the less labour.
Faith it may bee,
Unless it were by chance I did beray me.
Luce dear friend Luce.
Here Jasper.
You are mine.
If it be so, my friend, you use me fine,
What do you think I am?
An arrant noddy
A word of obloquy, now by Gods body,
I'll tell thy moister for I know thee well.
Nay, and you be so forward for to tell,
Take that, and that, and tell him sir I gave it,
And say I paid you well.
O sir I have it,
And do confess the paiement, pray be quiet.
Go, get to your night-cap and the diet,
To cure your beaten bones.
Alas poor Humphrey
Get thee some wholesome broth with sage and comfrie:
A little oil of Roses and a feather,
To noint thy back withal.
When I came hither,
Would I had gone to Paris with Iohn Dorrie.
Fare-well my pretty Nump, I am very sorry
I cannot bear thee company.
Fare-well,
The Devils Dam was ne'er so banged in hell.
This young Jasper will prove me another Things, a
my conscience and he may be suffered; George, dost not see
George how a swaggers, and flies at the very heads a folks as
he were a Dragō; well if I do not do his lesson for wronging
the poor Gentleman, I am no true woman, his friends that
brought him up might have been better occupied, I wis,
then ha taught him these figures, hoe's even in the high-way
to the gallows, God bless him.
You're too bitter, conny, the young man may do well
enough for all this.
Come hither Moister Humfrey, has hee hurt you?
now beshrew his fingers for it, here sweet heart, here's some
greene ginger for thee, now beshrew my heart but a has pep∣per-nel
in's head, as big as a pullets egg, alas sweet lamb,
how thy Tempels beat; take the peace on him sweet heart,
take the peace on him.
No, no, you talk like a foolish woman, I'll ha Raph
fight with him, and swing him up welfauourdlie, sirrah boy
come hither, let Raph come in and fight with Jasper.
I, and beat him well, he's an unhappy boy.
Sir you must pardon vs, the plot of our Play lies
contrary, and twill hazard the spoiling of our Play.
Plot me no plots, I'll ha Raph come out, I'll make
your house too hot for you else.
Why sir he shall, but if any thing fall out of order,
the Gentlemen must pardon vs.
Go your ways good-man boy, I'll hold him a pen∣no
hee shall have his bellie-full of fighting now, ho here
comes Raph, no more.
What Knight is that Squire, ask him if he keep
The passage, bound by love of Lady fair,
Or else but prickant.
Sir I am no Knight,
But a poor Gentleman, that this same night,
Had stolen from me on yonder Greene,
My lovely wife, and suffered to be seen
Yet extant on my shoulders such a greeting,
That whilst I live, I shall think of that meeting.
I Raph hee beat him unmercifully, Raph, and thou
spar'st him Raph I would thou were hanged.
No more, wife no more.
Where is the caitiff wretch hath done this deed.
Lady your pardon, that I may proceed
Upon the quest of this injurious Knight.
And thou fair Squire repute me not the worse,
In leaving the great venture of the purse,
And the rich casket till some better leisure,
Here comes the Broker hath purloined my treasure.
Go, Squire, and tell him I am here,
An Errant Knight at Arms, to crave delivery
Of that fair Lady to her own Knights arms.
If he deny, bid him take choice of ground,
And so defy him.
From the Knight that bears
The golden Pestle, I defy thee Knight.
Unless thou make fair restitution.
Of that bright Lady.
Tell the Knight that sent thee
Hee is an Ass, and I will keep the wench
And knock his Head-peece.
Knight, thou art but dead,
If thou thou recall not thy discourteous terms.
Breake's pate Raph, breake's pate Raph, soundly.
Come Knight, I am ready for you, now your Pestel
Shall try what temper, sir, your Mortars off
With that he stood upright in his stirrups,
And gave the Knight of the Calue-skinne such a knock,
That he forsook his horse and down he fell,
And then he leaped upon him and plucking of his Helmet.
Nay, and my noble Knight be down so soon,
Though I can scarcely go I needs must run.
Run Raph, run Raph, run for thy life boy,
Jasper comes, Jasper comes.
Come Luce, we must have other Arms for you,
Humphery and Golden Pestle both adieu.
Sure the devil, God bless vs, is in this Springald,
why George, did ever see such a fire-drake, I am afraid my
boie's miscarried, if he be, though hee were Moister Mery-thoughts
son a thousand times, if there bee any Law in
England I'll make some of them smart for it.
No, no, I have found out the matter sweete-heart,
Jasper is enchanted, as sure as we are here, he is enchanted, he
could no more have stood in Raph's hands, then I can stand
in my Lord Majors, I'll have a ring to discover all enchant∣mints,
and Raph shall beat him yet: be no more vexed for
it shall be so.
O husband heere's Raph again, stay Raph let me
speak with thee, how dost thou Raph? art thou not shrod∣lie
hurt? the soul great Lungeis laid unmercifully on thee,
there's some suger-candy for thee, proceed, thou shalt have
another bout with him.
If Raph had him at the Fencing-schoole, if hee did
not make a puppy of him, and drive him up and down the
school he should ne'er come in my shop more.
Truly Moister Knight of the Burning Pestle I
am weary.
Indeed law mother and I am very hungry.
Take comfort gentle Dame, and you fair Squire,
For in this Desert there must needs be placed,
Many strong Castles, held by courteous Knights,
And till I bring you safe to one of those,
Is wear by this my Order ne'er to leave you.
Well said Raph, George, Raph was ever comfort∣ble,
was he not?
Yes Duck.
I shall ne'er forget him, when wee had lost our
child, you know, it was strayed almost, alone, to Puddle-wharfe
and the Criers were abroad for it, and there it had drowned
it self but for a Sculler, Raph was the most comfortablest to
me: peace Mistress, says he, let it go, I'll get you another as
good, did he not George? did he not say so?
Yes indeed did he mouse.
I would we had a mess of Pottage, and a pot
of drink, Squire, and were going to bed.
Why we are at Waltham Towns end, and that's
the Bell Inn.
Take courage valiant Knight, Damsel, &amp; Squire
I have discovered, not a stones cast off,
An ancient Castle held by the old Knight
Of the most holy order of the Bell,
Who gives to all Knights errant entertain:
There plenty is of food, and all prepared,
By the white hands of his own Lady dear.
He hath three Squires that welcome all his Guests.
The first high Chamberlino, who will see
Our beds prepared, and bring vs snowy sheets,
Where never foote-man stretched his buttered Hams.
The second hight Tastero, who will see
Our pots full filled and no froth therein.
The third a gentle Squire Ostlero hight,
Who will our Palfries slick with wisps of straw,
And in the Manger put them Oats enough,
And never grease their teeth with candle snuff.
That same Dwarfe's a pretty boy, but the Squire's
a grout-nole.
Knock at the Gates my Squire with stately
lance.
Who's there, you're welcome Gentlemen, will you
see a room?
Right courteous and valiant Knight of the burning Pestle,
This is the Squire Tapstero.
Fair Squire Tapstero, I a wandering Knight,
Hight of the burning Pestle, in the quest
Of this fair Ladies Casket, and wrought purse,
Loosing my self in this vast Wilderness
Am to this Castle well by fortune brought,
Where hearing of the goodly entertain
Your Knight of holy Order of the Bell
Gives to all Damsels, and all errant Knights,
I thought to knock, and now am bold to enter.
An't please you see a chamber, you are very
welcome.
George I would have something done, and I can∣not
tell what it is.
What is it Nel?
Why George, shall Raph beat no body again? pre∣thee
sweete-heart let him.
So he shall Nel, and if I join with him, we'll
knock them all.
O George here's moister Humphery again now, that
lost Mistress Luce, and Mistress Lucies father, Moister Hum∣phery
will do some-bodies errant I warrant him.
Father, it's true, in arms I ne'er shall clasp her,
For she is stolen away by your man Jasper.
I thought he would tell him.
Unhappy that I am to loose my child,
Now I begin to think on Iaspers words,
Who oft hath urged to me thy foolishness,
Why did thou let her go? thou loust her not,
That would bring home thy life, and not bring her.
Father forgive me, shall I tell you true,
Look on my shoulders they are black and blew.
Whilst too and fro fair Luce and I were winding,
Hee came and basted me with a hedge binding.
Get men and horses straight, we will be there
Within this hour, you know the place again.
I know the place, where he my loins did swaddle,
I'll get six horses, and to each a saddle.
Mean time I'll go talk with Iaspers father.
George, what wilt thou lay with me now, that
Moister Humphery has not Mistress Luce yet, speak George,
what wilt thou lay with me?
No Nel, I warrant thee Jasper is at Puckeridge with
her, by this.
Nay George, you must consider Mistress Lucies
feet are tender, and, besides, it is dark, and I promise you
tuely, I doe not see how hee should get out of Wa•••im
forest with her yet.
Nay Cunny, what wilt thou lay with me that Raph
has her not yet.
I will not lay against Raph honey, because I have
not spoken with him, but look George, peace, here comes
the merry old Gentleman again.
When it was grown to dark midnight,
And all were fast asleep,
In came Margarets grimely Ghost,
And stood at VVilliams feet.
I have money, and meat and drink before hand, till to
morrow at noon, why should I be sad? me thinks I have
half a dozen Jovial spirits within me, I am three merry
men, and three merry men, To what end should any man be
sad in this world? give me a man that when hee goes to han∣ging
cries, troule the black bowl to me: and a woman
that will sing a cath in her Travel. I have seen a man come
by my door, with a serious face, in a black cloak, without a
hat-band, carrying his head as if hee looked for pins in the
street, I have looked out of my window half a year after,
and have spied that mans head upon London-bridge: it is vile,
never trust a Tailor that does not sing at his work, his mind
is of nothing but filching.
Mark this George, tic worth noting: Godfrry my
Tailor, you know, never sings, and hee had fourteen
yards to make this Gown, and I'll be sworn Mistress Pen∣nistone
the Drapers wife had one made with twelve.
It is mirth that fills the veins with blood,
More then wine, or sleep, or food.
Let each man keep his heart at ease,
No man dies of that disease.
He that would his body keep
From diseases, must not weep,
But who ever laughs and sings,
Never he his body brings
Into fevers, gouts, or rhumes,
Or lingringly his longs consumes:
Or meets with aches in the bone,
Or Catharhes, or griping stone:
But contented lives for aye,
The more he laughs, the more he may.
Look George, how say thou by this George? is it not
a fine old man? Now Gods blessing a'thy sweet lips. When
wilt thou be so merry George? Faith thou art the frowningst
little thing when thou art angry, in a Country.
Peace Coney, thou shalt see him taken down too I
warrant thee; here's Lucas father come now.
As you came from Walsingham, frō that holy land,
there met you not with my tru-loue by the way as you came
Oh Moister Merri-thought! my daughter's gone.
This mirth becomes you not, my daughters gone.
Why an if she be, what care I?
Or let her come or go, or tarry.
Mock not my misery, it is your son,
Whom I have made my own, when all forsook him,
Has stolen my only joy, my child away.
He set her on a milk-white steed, &amp; himself vpō a gray,
He never turned his face again, but he bore her quite away.
Unworthy of the kindness I have shown
To thee, and thine: too late I well perceive
Thou art consenting to my daughters loss.
Your daughter, what a stur's here wee yer daugh∣la?
Let her go, think no more on her, but sing loud. If
both my sons were on the gallows, I would sing, down, down,
down: they fall down, and arise they never shall.
Oh might I behold her once again,
And she once more embrace her aged sire.
Fie, how scurvily this goes: and she once more
embrace her aged sire? you'll make a dog on her, will ye?
she cares much for her aged sire I warrant you.
She cares cares not for her daddy, nor she cares not for her
mommy,
For she is, she is, she is, she is my Lord of Low-gaues Lassie.
For this thy scorn, I will pursue
That son of thine to death.
Do, and when you ha kilt him,
Give him flowers i'now Palmer: give him flowers i'now,
Give him red, and white, and blew, greene, and yellow.
Il'e fetch my daughter.
Il'e hear no more a your daughter, it spoils
my mirth.
I say Il'e fetch my daughter.
Was never man for Ladies sake, down, down,
Tormented as I poor sir Guy? de derry down,
For Lucies sake, that Lady bright, down, down,
As ever men beheld with eye? de derry down.
Il'e be revenged by heaven.
How dost thou like this George?
Why this is well coney: but if Raph were hot once,
thou should see more.
The Fiddlers go again husband.
I Nil, but this is scurvy music: I gave the whore∣son
gallows money, and I think hee has not got me the
waits of South-warke, if I hear him not anon, Il'e twinge
him by the ears. You Musicians, play Baloo.
No good George, lets ha Lachrimae.
Why this is it cony.
It's all the better George: now sweet lamb, what
story is that painted upon the cloth? the confutation of Saint
Paul?
No lamb, that's Raph and Lucrece.
Raph and Lucrece? which Raph? our Raph?
No mouse, that was a Tartarian.
A Tartarian? well, I'wood the fiddlers had done, that
wee might see our Raph again.
Come my dear dear, though we have lost our way,
We have not lost our selves: are you not weary
With this nights wandering, broken from your rest?
And frighted with the terror that attends
The darkness of these wilde unpeopled place?
No my best friend, I cannot either fear,
Or entertain a weary thought, whilst you
(The end of all my full desires) stand by me.
Let them that loose their hopes, and live to languish
Amongst the number of forsaken lovers,
Tell the long weary steps, and number time,
Start at a shadow, and shrink up their blood,
Whilst I (possessed with all content and quiet)
Thus take my pretty love, and thus embrace him.
You have caught me Luce, so fast, that whilst I live
I shall become your faithful prisoner,
And were these chains for ever. Come sit down,
And rest your body, too too delicate
For these disturbances; so, will you sleep?
Come, do not be more able then you are,
I know you are not skilful in these watches:
For women are no soldiers; be not nice,
But take it, sleep I say.
I cannot sleep,
Indeed I cannot friend.
Why then we'll sing,
And try how that will work upon our senses.
Il'e sing, or say, or any thing but sleep.
Come little Mer-maid, rob me of my heart
With that enchanting voice.
You mock me Jasper.
Tell me (dearest) what is love?
It is a lightning from aboue,
It is an arrow, it is a fire,
It is a boy they call desire.
It is a smile
Doth beguile
The poor hearts of men that prove.
Tell me more, are women true?
Some love change, and so do you.
Are they fair, and never kind?
Yes, when men turn with the wind.
Are they froward?
Ever toward,
Those that love, to love a new.
Dissemble it no more, I see the God
Of heavy sleep, lay on his heavy mace
Upon your eye-lids.
I am very heavy.
Sleep, sleep, &amp; quiet rest crown thy sweet thoughts:
Keep from her fair blood, distempers, startings,
Horrors, and fearful shapes: let all her dreams
Be joys, and chaste delights, embraces, wishes,
And such new pleasures, as the ravished soul
Gives to the senses. So, my charms have took.
Keep her you powers divine, whilst I contemplate
Upon the wealth and beauty of her mind.
She is only fair, and constant: only kind,
And only to thee Jasper. Oh my joys!
Whither will you transport me? let not fullness
Of my poor buried hopes, come up together,
And ouer-charge my spirits: I am weak
Some say (how ever ill) the sea and women
Are governed by the Moon, both ebb and flow,
Both full of changes: yet to them that know,
And truly judge, these but opinions are,
And heresies to bring on pleasing war
Between our tempers, that without these were
Both void of ater-loue, and present fear.
Which are the best of Cupped. Oh thou child!
Bred from despair, I dare not entertain thee,
Having a love without the faults of women,
And greater in her perfect goods then men:
Which to make good, and please my self the stronger,
Though certainly I am certain of her love,
Il'e try her, that the world and memory
May sing to after times, her constancy.
Luce, Luce, awake.
Why do you fright me, friend,
With those distempered looks? what makes your sword
Drawn in your hand? who hath offended you?
I pre'chee Jasper sleep, thou art wilde with watching.
Come make your way to heaven, and bid the world
(With all the villainies that stick upon it)
Fare-well; you're for another life.
Oh Jasper!
How have my tender years committed evil,
(Especially against the man I love)
Thus to be cropped untimely?
Foolish girl,
Can thou imagine I could love his daughter,
That flung me from my fortune into nothing?
Discharged me his service, shut the doors
Upon my poverty, and scorned my prayers,
Sending me, like a boat without a mast,
To sink or swine? Come, by this hand you dye,
I must have life and blood to satisfy
Your fathers wrongs.
Away George, away, raise the watch at Ludgate, and
bring a Mittimus from the Justice for this desperate villain.
Now I charge you Gentlemen, see the Kings peace kept. O
my heart what a varlet's this to offer man-slaughter upon the
harmless Gntlewoman?
I warrant thee (sweet heart) we'll have him ham∣pered.
Oh Jasper! be not cruel,
If thou wilt kill me, mile and do it quickly.
And let not many deaths appear before me.
I am a woman made of fear and love,
A weak, weak woman, kill not with thy eyes,
They shoot me through and through. Strike I am ready,
And dying still I love thee.
Where abouts.
No more of this, now to my self again.
There, there he stands with sword like martial knight
Drawn in his hand, therefore beware the fight
You that be wise: for were I good sir Beuis,
I would not stay his coming, by your leaves.
Sirrah, restore my daughter.
Sirrah, no.
Upon him then.
So, down with him, down with him, down with
him: cut him in the leg boys, cut him in the leg.
Come your ways Minion, Il'e provide a Cage
For you, your grown so tame. Horse her away.
Truly Ime glad your forces have the day.
They are gone, and I am hurt, my love is lost,
Never to get again. Oh me unhappy!
Bleed, bleed, and dye, I cannot: Oh my folly!
Thou hast betrayed me. Hope where art thou fled?
Tell me if thou be any where remaining.
Shall I but see my love again? Oh no!
She will not deign to look upon her butcher,
Nor is it fit she should; yet I must venture.
Oh chance, or fortune, or what ere thou art
That men adore for powerful, hear my cry,
And let me loving, live; or loosing, die.
Is a gone George?
I cony.
Marie and let him go (sweet heart,) by the faith a
my body a has put me into such a fright, that I tremble (as
they say) as it were an Aspen leaf: look a my little singer
George, how it shakes: now i truth every member of my by∣die
is the worse for it.
Come, hug in mine arms sweet mouse, hee shall
not fright thee any more: alas mine own dear heart, how
it quivers.
O Raf, how dost thou Raf? how hast thou slept to
night? has the knight used thee well?
Peace Nil, let Raf alone.
Moister, the reckoning is not paid.
Right courteous knight, who for the orders sake
Which thou hast tan, hang out the holy bell,
As I this flaming pestle bear about,
We render thanks to your puissant self,
Your beauteous Lady, and your gentle Squires,
For thus refreshing of our wearied limbs,
Stiffened with hard achievements in wilde desert.
Sir, there is twelve shillings to pay.
Thou merry Squire Tapstero, thanks to thee,
For comforting our souls with double Jug,
And if adventurous fortune prick thee forth,
Thou Jovial Squire, to follow feats of arms,
Take heed thou tender every Ladies cause,
Every truery true Knight, and every damsel fair fair;
But spill the blood of treacherous Saracens,
And false enchanters, that with magic spells,
Have done to death full many a noble Knight.
Thou valiant Knight of the burning Pestle, give ear
to me, there is twelve shillings to pay, and as I am a true
Knight, I will not bate a penny.
George, I pray thee tell me, must Raf pay twelve shil∣lings
now?
No Nil, no, nothing but the old Knight is merry
with Raf.
O is it nothing else? Raf will be as merry as he.
Sir Knight, this mirth of yours becomes you well,
But to requite this liberal courtesy,
If any of your Squires will follow arms,
Hee shall receive from my heroic hand
A Knight-hood, by the virtue of this Pestle.
Fair Knight I thank you for noble offer,
Therefore gentle Knight,
Twelve shillings you must pay, or I must cap you.
Look George, did not I tell thee as much, the Knight
of the Bell is in earnest, Raph shall not bee beholding to him,
give him his money George, and let him go snickvp.
Cap Raph? no; holdy our hand sir Knight of the Bell, theres
your money, have you any thing to say to Raph now? Cap Raph?
I would you should know it, Raph has friends that
will not suffer him to be capt for ten times so much, and tea
times to the end of that, now take thy course Raph.
Come Michael, thou &amp; I will go home to thy father,
he hath enough left to keep vs a day or two, and we will set fell∣lows
abroad to cry our Purse &amp; our Casket, Shalwe Michael?
I, I pray Mother, intrude my feet are full of
chilblains with travelling.
Faith and those chilblanes are a foul trouble, Mi∣stress
Merie-thought when your youth comes home let him
rub all the soles of his feet, and the heals, and his ankles,
with a mouse skin, or if none of your people can catch a
mouse, when hee goes to bed, let him roll his feet in the
warm embers, and I warrant you hee shall be well, and you
may make him put his fingers between his toes &amp; smell to
them, it's very sovereign for his head if he be costive.
Moister Knight of the burning Pestle, my son
Michael and I, bid you farewell, I thank your Worship hear∣tily
for your kindness.
Fare-well fair Lady and your tender Squire,
If, pricking through these Deserts, I do hear
Of any traitorous Knight who through his guile,
Hath light upon your Casket and your Purse,
I will despoil him of them and restore them.
I thank your Worship.
Dwarf bear my shield, Squire elevate my lance,
And now fare-well you Knight of holy Bell.
I, I Raph, all is paid.
But yet before I go, speak worthy Knight,
If ought you do of sad adventures know,
Where errant Knights may through his prowess win,
Eternal fame and free some gentle souls,
From endless bonds of steel and lingering pain.
Sirrah go to Nick the Barber, and bid him prepare
himself, as I told you before, quickly.
I am gone sir.
Sir Knight, this wilderness affords none
But the great venture, where full many a Knight
Hath tried his prowess and come off with shame,
And where I would not have you loose your life,
Against no man, but furious fiend of hell.
Speak on sir Knight, tell what he is, and where,
For here I vow upon my blazing badge,
Never to blaze a day in quietness;
But bread and water will I only eat,
And the greene herb and rock shall be my couch,
Till I have quilt that man, or beast, or fiend,
That works such damage to all Errant Knights.
Not far from hence, near to a craggy cliff,
At the North end of this distressed Town,
There doth stand a lowly house
Ruggedly builded, and in it a Cave,
In which an ugly Giant now doth won,
Yelped Barbaroso: in his hand
He shakes a naked lance of purest steel,
With sleeves turned up, and him before he wears,
A motley garment, to preserve his clothes
From blood of those Knights which he massacres,
And Ladies Gent: without his door doth hang
A copper balon, on a piickant spear:
At which, no sooner gentle Knights can knock,
But the shrill sound, fierce Barbaroso hears,
And rushing forth, bings in the errant Knight,
And sets him down in an enchanted chair.
Then with an Engine which he hath prepared,
With forty teeth, he claws his courtly crown,
Next makes him wink, and underneath his chin,
Hee plants a brazen piece of mighty board,
And knocks his bullets round about his cheeks,
Whilst with his fingers, and an instrument
With which he snaps his hair off, he doth fill
The wretches ears with a most hideous noise.
Thus every Knight Aduenturer he doth trim,
And now no creature dares encounter him.
In Gods name, I will fight him, kind sir,
Go but before me to this dismal Cave,
Where this huge Giant Barbaroso dwells,
And by that virtue that brave Rosicleere,
That damned brood of ugly Giants slew,
And Palmerin Frannarco overthrew:
I doubt not but to curb this Traitor foul,
And to the Devil send his guilty soul.
Brave sprighted Knight, thus far I will perform.
This your request, I'll bring you with in sight
Of this most loathsome place, inhabited
By a more loathsome man: but dare not stay,
For his maine force soopes all he sees away.
Saint George set on before, march Squire and page.
George, dost think Raph will confound the Giant?
I hold my cap to a farthing hee does: why Nel I saw
him wrestle with the great Dutch-man and hurl him.
Faith and that Ducth-man was a goodly man, if
all things were answerable to his bigness, and yet they say
there was a Scotsh-man higher then hee, and that they two
and a Knight met, and saw one another for nothing, but of
all the sights that ever were in London, since I was married,
me thinks the little child that was so fair grown about
the members was the prettiest, that, and the Hermophrodite.
Nay by your leave Nel, Niniuy was better.
Niniuie, O that was the story of Ione and the Wall,
was it not George?
Yes lam.
Look George, here comes Mistress Merry-thought
again, and I would have Raph come and fight with
the Giant, I tell you true, I long to see it.
Good Mistress Merry-thought be gone, I pray you
for my sake, I pray you forbear a little, you shall have aunt∣ence
presently, I have a little business.
Mastresse Merry-thought if it please you to refrain
your passiō a little, till Raph have dispatch the Giant out of the
way we shalthink our selves much bound to you, I thank you
good Mistress Merry-thought.
Boy, come hither, send away Raph and this whore-sonne
Giant quickly.
In good faith sir we cannot, you'll utterly spoil our
Play, and make it to be hist, and it cost money, you will not
suffer vs to go on with our plot, I pray Gentlemen rule him.
Let him come now and dispatch this, and I'll trow∣ble
you no more.
Will you give me your hand of that?
Give him thy hand George, do, and I'll kiss him, I
warrant thee the youth means plainly.
I'll send him to you presently.
I thank you little youth, feth the child hath a
sweet breath George, but I think it bee troubled with the
worms, Carduus Benedictus and Mares milk were the only
thing in the world for it, O Raph's here George, God send thee
good luck Raph.
Puissant Knight yonder his Mansion is,
Lo where the spear and Copper Basin are,
Behold that string on which hangs many a tooth,
Drawn from the gentle iaw of wandering Knights,
I dare not stay to sound, hee will appear.
O faint not heart, Susan my Lady dear,
The Cobblers Maid in Milke-streete, for whose sake,
I take these Arms, O let the thought of thee,
Carry thy Knight through all adventurous deeds,
And in the honour of thy beauteous self,
May I destroy this monster Barbaroso,
Knock Squire upon the Basin till it break.
With the shrill strokes, or till the Giant speak.
O George, the Giant, the Giant, now Raph for thy life.
What fond unknowing wight is this? that dares
So rudely knock at Barbarossa's Cell,
Where no man comes but leaves his fleece behind?
I, traitorous Caitiff, who am sent by fate
To punish all the sad enormities
Thou hast committed against Ladies Gent
And errant Knights, traitor to God and men:
Prepare thy self, this is the dismal hour
Appointed for thee, to give strict account
Of all thy beastly treacherous villainies.
Foole-hardy Knight, full soon thou shalt aby
This fond reproach, thy body will I bang,
And lo upon that string thy teeth shall hang:
Prepare thy self, for dead soon shalt thou bee,
Saint George for me.
Gargantua for me.
To him, Raph to him, hold up the Giant, set out thy
leg before Raph.
Falsify a blow Raph, falsify a blow, the Giant lies
open on the left side.
Beare't off, beare't of still; there boy, O Raphe's al∣most
down, Raph's almost down.
Susan inspire me, now have up again.
Up, up, up, up, up, so Raph, down with him, down
with him Raph.
Fetch him ore the hip boy.
There boy, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, Raph.
No Raph get all out of him first.
Presumptuous man, see to what desperate end
Thy treachery hath brought thee, the just Gods,
Who never prosper those that do despise them,
For all the villainies which thou hast done
To Knights and Ladies, now have paid thee home
By my stiff arm, a Knight adventurous,
But say vile wretch, before I send thy soul
To sad Auernus whether it must go,
What captives holdst thou in thy sable cave.
Go in and free them all, thou hast the day.
Go Squire &amp; Dwarf, search in this dreadful Cave
And free the wretched prisoners from their bonds.
I crave for mercy, as thou art a Knight,
And scornst to spill the blood of those that beg.
Thou showdst no mercy, nor shalt thou have any,
Prepare thy self for thou shalt surely die.
Behold brave Knight here is one prisoner,
Whom this wilde man hath used as you see.
This is the first wise word I heard the Squire speak.
Speak what thou art, and how thou hast been used,
That that I may give condign punishment,
I am a Knight that took my journey post
North-ward from London, and in courteous wise,
This Giant trained me to his loathsome den,
Under pretence of killing of the itch,
And all my body with a powder strewed,
That smarts and stings, and cut away my beard,
And my curled lockes wherein were ribands ti'de,
And with a water washed my tender eyes,
Whilst up and down about me still he skipped,
Whose virtue is, that till mine eyes be wiped
With a dry cloth, for this my foul disgrace,
I shall not dare to look a dog in the face.
Alas poor Knight, relieve him Raph, relieve poor
Knights whilst you live.
My trusty Squire convey him to the Town,
Where he may find relief, adieu fair Knight,
Puissant Knight of the burning Pestle hight,
See here another wretch, whom this foul beast
Hath scorched and scored in this inhumaine wise.
Speak me thy name and eke thy place of birth,
And what hath been thy usage in this Cave.
I am a Knight, Sir Pocke-hole is my name,
And by my birth I am a Londoner
Free by my Copy, but my Ancestors
Were French-men all, and riding hard this way,
Upon a trotting horse, my bones did ache,
And I faint Knight to ease my weary limbs,
Light at this Cave, when straight this furious fiend,
With sharpest instrument of purest steel,
Did cut the gristle of my Nose away,
And in the place this velvet plaster stands,
Relieve me gentle Knight out of his hands.
Good Raph relieve sir Pocke-hole and send him
away, for, intrude, his breath stinks,
Convey him straight after the other Knight,
Sir Pocke-hole fare you well.
Kind sir good-night.
Deliver vs.
Deliver vs.
Hark George, what a woeful cry there is, I think
some woman lies in there.
Deliver vs.
Deliver vs.
What ghastly noise is this? speak Barbarose,
Or by this blazing steel thy head goes off.
Prisoners of mine whom I in diet keep,
Send lower down into the Cave,
And in a Tub that's heated smoking hot,
There may they find them and deliver them,
Run Squire and Dwarf, deliver them with speed.
But will not Raph kill this Giant, surely I am afraid
if hee let him go he will do as much hurt, as ever he did.
Not so mouse neither, if hee could convert
him.
I George if hee could convert him, but a Giant is
not so soon converted as one of vs ordinary people: there's
a pretty tale of a Witch, that had the devils mark about her,
God bless vs, that had a Giant to her son, that was called
Lob-lie-by-the-fire, did never here it George?
Peace Nel, here comes the prisoners.
Here be these pined wretches, manful Knight,
That for these six weeks have not seen a wight.
Deliver what you are, and how you came
To this sad Cave, and what your usage was?
I am an Errant Knight that followed Arms,
With spear and shield, and in my tender years
I stricken was with Cupids fiery shaft,
And fell in love with this my Lady dear,
And stole her from her friends in Turne-bull-streete,
And bore her up and down from Town to Town,
Where we did eat and drink and Music hear,
Till at the length, at this unhappy Town
Wee did arrive, and coming to this Cave
This beast vs caught and put vs in a Tub,
Where we this two months sweat, and should have done
Another Month if you had not relieved vs.
This bread and water hath our diet been,
Together with a rib cut from a neck
Of burned Mutton, hard hath been our fare,
Release vs from this ugly Giants snare.
This hath been all the food we have received,
But only twice a day for novelty,
He gave a spoonful of this hearty broth,
To each of vs, through this same slender quill.
From this infernal monster you shall go,
That uses Knights and gentle Ladies so,
Convey them hence.
Cony, I can tell thee the Gentlemen like Raf.
I George, I see it well enough. Gentlemen I thank
you all heartily for gracing my man Raf, and I promise you
you shall see him oftner.
Mercy great knight, I do recant my ill,
And henceforth never gentle blood will spill.
I give thee mercy, but yet shalt thou swear
Upon my burning pestle, to perform
Thy promise vtterd.
I swear and kiss.
Depart then, and amend.
Come squire and dwarf, the Sun grows towards his set,
and we have many more adventures yet.
Now Raf is in this humour, I know hee would ha
beaten all the boys in the house if they had been set on
him.
I George, but it is well as it is, I warrant you the
Gentlemen do consider what it is to overthrow a giant: but
look George, here comes mistress Merri-thought and her
son Michael; now you are welcome mistress Merry
thought, now Raf has done you may go on.
Mick my boy?
I forsooth mother.
Be merry Mick we are at home now; where I
warrant you, you shall find the house flung out at the win∣dowes:
Hark, hey dogs, hey, this is the old world I'faith
with my husband, if I get in among 'em, Isle play em such a
lesson, that they shall have little list to come scraping hi∣there,
again. Why moister Merri-thought, husband, Charles
Merri-thought.
If you will sing and dance, and laugh,
and hollow, and laugh again, and then cry there boys,
there: why then
One, two, three, and four,
We shall be merry within this hour.
Why Charles, doe you not know your
own natural wife? I say, open the door, and turn me out
those mangy companions; it is more then time that they were
fellow and fellow like with you: you are a Gentleman
Charles, and an old man, and father of two children; and I
my self (though I say it) by my mothers side, Niece to a
worshipful Gentleman, and a Conductor, ha has been
three times in his Majesties service at Chester, and is now
the fourth time, God bless him, and his charge upon his
journey.
Go from my window, love, go;
Go from my window my dear,
The wind and the rain will drive you back again,
You cannot he lodged here.
Hark you Mistress Merrithought, you that walk upon ad∣uentures,
and forsake your husband, because hee sings with
never a penny in his purse; What shall I think my self the
worse? Faith no, Il'e be merry.
You come not here, heir's none but lads of mettle, lives
of a hundred years, and upwards, care never drunk their
bloods, nor want made 'em warble.
Hey-ho, my heart is heavy.
Why Mr. Merrithought, what am I that you
should laugh me to scorn thus abruptly? am I not your fell∣low-feeler
(as we may say) in all our miseries? your comfor∣la
in health and sickness? have I not brought you I will∣drone?
are they not like you Charles? look upon thine own
Image hard-hearted man; and yet for all this—
Begone, begone, my Iuggy, my puggy, be∣gone
my love, my dear.
The weather is warm, twill do thee no harm, thou can
not be lodged here.
Be merry boys, some light music, and more wine.
He's not in earnest, I hope George, is he?
What if he be, sweet heart?
Marie if hee be George, Isle make bold to tell him
hoe's an Ingrant old man, to use his bed-fellow so scurvily.
What how does he use her honey?
Marie come up sir sauce-box, I think you'll take his
part, will you not? Lord how hot you are grown: you are
a fine man an you had a fine dog, it becomes you sweetly.
Nay prithee Nil chide not: for as I am an honest
man, and a true Christian Grocer, I doe not like his do∣ings.
I cry you mercy then George; you know we are all
frail, and full of infirmities. Dee hear Mr. Merri-thought,
may I crave a word with you?
Strike up lively lads.
I had not thought in truth, Mr. Merrithought, that a
man of your age and discretion (as I may say) being a Gen∣tleman,
and therefore known by your gentle conditions,
could have used so little respect to the weakness of his wife:
for your wife is your own flesh, the staff of your age, your
yoke-fellow, with whose help you draw through the mire
of this transitory world: Nay, she's your own rib. And
again—
I come not hither for thee to teach,
I have no pulpit for thee to preach,
I would thou had kissed me under the breech,
As thou art a Lady gay.
Marie with a vengeance.
I am heartily sorry for the poor gentlewoman: but if I were
thy wife, I'faith gray-beard, I'faith—
I prithee sweet hunny-suckle, be content.
Give me such words that am a gentlewoman borne,
hang him hoary rascal. Get me some drink George, I am
almost molten with fretting: now beshrew his knaves heart
for it.
Play me a light Laualto: come, bee frolic, fill
the good fellows wine.
Why Mr. Merrithought, are you disposed to
make me wait here: you'll open I hope, Il'e fetch them that
shall open else.
Good woman if you will sing Il'e give you some∣thing,
if not-
You are no love for me Margret, I am no love for you.
Come aloft Boys, aloft.
Now a Churls fart in your teeth sir: Come
Mick, we'll not trouble him, a shall not ding vs in the teeth
with his bread and his broth: that he shall not: come boy, Il'e
provide for thee, I warrant thee: we'll go to moister Ven∣terwels
the Merchant, Il'e get his letter to mine Host of the
Bell in Waltham, there Il'e place thee with the Tipster; will
not that doe well for thee Mick? and let me alone for that
old Cuckoldly knave your father, Il'e use him in his kind,
I warrant ye.
Come George, wher's the beer?
Here love.
This old fornicating fellow will not out of my mind
yet; Gentlemen, Il'e begin to you all, and I desire more of
your acquaintance, with all my heart. Fill the Gentlemen
some beer George.
Look George, the little boy's come again, me
thinks he looks something like the prince of Orange in his
long stocking, if hee had a little harness about his neck.
George I will have him dance Fading; Fading is a fine Jig
Il'e assure you Gentlemen: begin brother, now a capers
sweet heart, now a turn a'th toe, and then tumble: cannot
you tumble youth?
No indeed forsooth:
Nor eat fire?
Neither.
Why then I thank you heartily, there's two pence
to buy you points withal.
There boy, deliver this: but do it well. Hast thou
provided me four lusty fellows?
Able to carry me? and art thou perfect
In all thy business?
Sir, you need not fear,
I have my lesson here, and cannot miss it:
The men are ready for you, and what else
Pertains to this employment.
There my boy,
Take it, but buy no land.
Faith sir it were rare
To see so young a purchaser: I fly,
And on my wings carry your destiny.
Go, and be happy. Now my latest hope
Forsake me not, but fling thy Anchor out,
And let it hold: stand fixed thou rolling stone,
Till I enjoy my dearest: hear me all
You powers that rule in men celestial.
Go thy ways, thou art as crooked a sprig as ever
grew in London; I warrant him he will come to some naughty
end or other: for his looks say no less: Besides, his father
(you know George) is none of the best, you heard him take
me up like a flirt Gill, and sing bawdy songs upon me: but
I faith if I live George—
Let me alone sweet-heart, I have a trick in my head
shall lodge him in the Arches for one year, and make him
sing Peocani, ever I leave him, and yet hee shall never know
who hurt him neither.
Do my good George, do.
What shall we have Raf do now boy?
You shall have what you will sir.
Why so sir, go and fetch me him then, and let the So∣phy
of Persia come and christen him a child.
Believe me sir, that will not doe so well, it is stale, it
has been had before at the red Bull.
George let Raf travel over great hills, &amp; let him be ve∣rye
weary, and come to the King of Cracouia's house, covered
with velvet, and there let the Kings daughter stand in her
window all in beaten gold, combing her golden locks with
a comb of Ivory, and let her spy Raf, and fall in love with
him, and come down to him, and carry him into her fathers
house, and then let Raf talk with her.
Well said Nil, it shall be so: boy let's have it done quickly.
Sir, if you will imagine all this to be done already,
you shall hear them talk together: but wee cannot pre∣sent
a house covered with black velvet, and a Lady in bea∣ten
gold.
Sir boy, lets have it as you can then.
Besides it will show ill-fauouredly to haue'a Gro∣cers
prentice to court a kings daughter.
Will it so sir? you are well read in Histories: I pray
you what was sir Dagonet? was not he prentice to a Grocer
in London? read the play of the Four Prentices of London,
where they toss their pikes so: I pray you fetch him in sir,
fetch him in.
It shall be done, it is not our fault gentlemen.
Now we shall see fine doings I warrant tee George.
O here they come; how prettily the king of Cracuioa's daugh∣la
is dressed.
I Nil, it is the fashion of that country, I warrant tee.
Welcome sir Knight unto my fathers Court.
King of Moldauia, unto me Pompiona
His daughter dear: but sure you do not like
Your entertainment, that will stay with vs
No longer but a night.
Damsel right fair,
I am on many sad adventures bound,
That call me forth into the wilderness:
Besides, my horses back is something galled,
Which will enforce me ride a sober pace.
But many thanks (fair Lady) be to you,
For using errant Knight with courtesy.
But say (brave knight) what is your name &amp; birth?
My name is Raf, I am an English man,
As true as steel, a hearty Englishman,
And prentice to a Grocer in the strond,
By deed Indent, of which I have one part:
But Fortune calling me to follow Arms,
On me this holy order I did take,
Of Burning pestle, which in all men's eyes,
I bear, confounding Ladies enemies.
Oft have I heard of your brave country-men,
And fertile soil, and store of wholesome food:
My Father oft will tell me of a drink
In England found, and Nipitato called.
Which drives all the sorrow from your hearts.
Lady it is true, you need not lay your lips
To better Nipitato then there is.
And of a wildfowl he will often speak,
Which poudred beef and mustard called is:
For there have been great wars twixt vs and you,
But truly Raf, it was not long of me.
Tell me then Raf, could you contented be,
To wear a Ladies favour in your shield?
I am a knight of religious order,
And will not wear a favour of a Ladies
That trusts in Antichrist, and false traditions.
Well said Raf, convert her if thou can.
Besides, I have a Lady of my own
In merry England, for whose virtuous sake
I took these Arms, and Susan is her name,
A Cobblers maid in Milke-street, whom I vow
Ne'er to forsake, whilst life and Pestle last.
Happy that Cobbling dame, who ere she be,
That for her own (dear Raf) hath gotten thee.
Unhappy I, that ne'er shall see the day
To see thee more, that bear my heart away.
Lady fare-well, I needs must take my leave.
Hard-harted Raf, that Ladies dost deceive.
Hark thee Raf, there's money for thee; give
something in the King of Cracouia's house, be not beholding
to him.
Lady before I go, I must remember
Your fathers Officers, who truth to tell,
Have been about me very diligent.
Hold up thy snowy hand thou princely maid,
There's twelve pence for your fathers Chamberlain,
And another shilling for his Cooke,
For by my troth the Goose was roasted well.
And twelue-pence for your fathers horse-keeper,
For nointing my horse back; and for his butter
There is another shilling. To the maid
That washed my boot-hose, there's an English great;
And two pence to the boy that wiped my boots:
And last, fair Lady, there is for your self
Three pence to buy you pins at Bumbo fair.
Full many thanks, and I will keep them safe
Till all the heads be off, for thy sake Raf.
Advance my Squire and Dwarf, I cannot stay.
Thou kilst my heart in parting thus away.
I commend Raf yet that hee will not stoop to a
Craconian, there's properer women in London then any are
there Ewes. But here comes Moister Humphrey and his love
again now George.
I cony, peace.
Go get you up, I will not be entreated.
And gossip mine, Il'e keep you sure hereafter
From gadding out again with boys and unthrifts,
Come, they are women's tears, I know your fashion.
Go sirrah, locke her in, and keep the key,
Safe as you love your life. Now my son Humfrey,
You may both rest assured of my love
In this, and reap your own desire.
I see this love you speak of, through your daughter,
Although the hole be little; and hereafter
Will yield the like in all I may, or can,
Fitting a Christian, and a gentleman.
I do believe you (my good son) and thank you:
For it were an impudence to think you flattered.
It were indeed, but shall I tell you why,
I have been beaten twice about the lye.
Well son, no more of complement, my daughter
Is yours again; appoint the time, and take her,
We will have no stealing for it, I my self
And some few of our friends will see you married.
I would you would i'saith, for be it known
I ever was afraid to lie alone.
Some three days hence then.
Three days, let me see,
It is some-what of the most, yet I agree,
Because I mean against the appointed day,
To visit all my friends in new array.
Sir, there's a Gentlewoman without would speak
with your Worship.
What is she?
Sir I asked her not.
Bid her come in.
Peace be to your Worship, I come as a poor
Suitor to you sir, in the behalf of this child.
Are you not wife to Merrie-thought?
Yes truly, would I had ne'er seen his eels, ha has
undone me and himself and his children, &amp; there he lives at
home &amp; sings, &amp; hoights, &amp; Revels among his drunken cō∣pinions,
but, I warrant you, where to get a penny to put bread
in his mouth, he knows not: and therefore if it like your
Worship, I would entreat your letter, to the honest Host
of the Bell in VValtham, that I may place my child under
the protection of his Tipster, in some settled course of life.
I'm glad the heavens have heard my prayers: thy husband
When I was ripe in sorrows laughed at me,
Thy son like an unthankful wretch, I having
Redeemed him from his fall and made him mine,
To show his love again, first stole my daughter,
Then wronged this Gentleman, and last of all,
Gave me that grief, had almost brought me down
Unto my grave, had not a stronger hand
Relieved my sorrows, go, and weep, as I did
And be unpitied, for I here profess
An everlasting hate to all thy name.
Will you so sir, how say you by that? come
Mick, let him keep his wind to cool his Porrage, we will
go to thy Nurses Mick, she knits silk stockings boy, and
we will knit too boy, and bee beholding to none of them
all.
Sir, I take it you are the Moister of this house.
How then boy?
Then to your self sir comes this letter.
From whom my pretty Boy?
From him that was your servant, but no more
Shall that name ever be, for hee is dead,
Grief of your purchased anger broke his heart,
I saw him die, and from his hand received
This paper, with a charge to bring it hither,
Read it, and satisfy your self in all.
Sir, that I have wronged your love, I must confess, in
which I have purchased to my self, besides mine own undoing, the
ill opinion of my friends, let not your anger, good sir, out live me, but
suffer me to rest in peace with your forgiveness; let my body (if a
dying man may so much prevails with you) bee brought to your
daughter, that she may truly know my hate flames are now buried,
and, withal, receive a testimony of the zeal I bore her virtue: fare∣well
for ever, and be ever happy. Jasper.
Gods hand is great in this, I do for give him,
Yet I am glad he's quiet, where I hope
He will not bite again: boy bring the body
And let him have his will, if that be all.
It is here without sir.
So sir, if you please
You may conduct it in, I do not fear it.
I'll be your Usher boy, for though I say it,
He owed me something once, and well did pay it.
If there be any punishment inflicted
Upon the miserable, more then yet I feel,
Let it together cease me, and at once
Press down my soul, I cannot bear the pain
Of these delaying tortures: thou than art
The end of all, and the sweet rest of all;
Come, come ô death, bring me to thy peace,
And blot out all the memory I nourish
Both of my father and my cruel friend.
O wretched maid still living to be wretched,
To be a say to fortune in her changes,
And grow to number times and woes together,
How happy had I been, if being borne
My grave had been my cradle?
By your leave
Young Mistress, here's a boy hath brought a coffin,
What a would say I know not, but your father
Charged me to give you notice, here they come.
For me I hoped it is come, and it is most welcome.
Fair Mistress let me not add greater grief
To that great store you have already; Jasper
That whilst he lived was yours, now dead,
And here enclosed, commanded me to bring
His body hither, and to crave a tear
From those fair eyes, though he deserved not pity,
To deck his funeral, for so he bid me
Tell her for whom he died.
He shall have many:
Good friends depart a little, whilst I take
My leave of this dead man, that once I loved:
Hold, yet a little, life and then I give thee
To thy first heavenly being; O my friend!
Hast thou deceived me thus, and got before me?
I shall not long bee after, but believe me,
Thou were too cruel Jasper against thy self,
In punishing the fault, I could have pardoned,
With so untimely death; thou did not wrong me,
But ever were it most kind, most true, most loving;
And I the most unkind, most false, most cruel.
Did thou but ask a tear? Il'e give thee all,
Even all my eyes can power down, all my sigh's
And all my self, before thou goosed from me
There are but sparing rites: But if thy soul
Be yet about this place, and can behold
And see what I prepare to deck thee with,
It shall go up, borne on the wings of peace
And satisfied: first will I sing thy dirge,
Then kiss thy pale lips, and then die my self,
And fill one Coffin and one grave together.
Come you whose loves are dead,
And whiles I sing
Weep and wring
Every hand and every head,
Bind with Cypress and sad Ewe,
Ribands black, and candles blew,
For him that was of men most true.
Come with heavy mourning,
And on his grave
Let him have
Sacrifice of sighs and groaning,
Let him have fair flowers enough,
White and purple, greene and yellow,
For him that was of men most true.
Thou sable cloth, sed cover of my joys
I lift thee up, and thus I meet with death.
And thus you meet the living
Save me heaven.
Nay do not fly me fair, I am no spirit,
Look better on me, do you know me yet?
O thou dear shadow of my friend.
Dear substance,
I swear I am no shadow, feel my hand,
It is the same it was, I am your Jasper,
Your Jasper that's yet living, and yet loving,
Pardon my rash attempt, my foolish proof
I put in practise of your constancy,
For sooner should my sword have drunk my blood,
And set my soul at liberty, then drawn
The least drop from that body; for which boldness
Doom me to any thing: if death I take it
And willingly.
This death I'll give you for it,
So, now I am satisfied: you are no spirit,
But my own truest, truest, truest friend,
Why doe you come thus to me.
First to see you,
Then to convey you hence.
It cannot bee,
For I am locked up here and watched at all hours,
That it is impossible for me to scope.
Nothing more possible, within this coffin
Do you convey your self, let me alone,
I have the wits of twenty men about me,
Only I crave the shelter of your Closet
A little, and then fear me not; creep in
That they may presently convey you hence:
Fear nothing dearest love, Il'e be your second,
Lie close, so, all goes well yet; Boy.
At hand sir.
Convey away the Coffin, and be wary.
It is done already.
Now must I go conjure.
Boy, Boy.
Your servant sir.
Do me this kindness Boy, hold here's a crown:
Before thou bury the body of this fellow, carry it to his
old merry father, and salute him from me, and bid him sing,
he hath cause.
I will sir.
And then bring me word what tune he is in,
and have another crown: but do it truly.
I have fitted him a bargain, now, will vex him.
God bless your VVorships health sir.
Fare-well boy.
Ah old Merry-thought, art thou there again, let's
here some of thy songs.
Who can sing a merrier noate,
Then he that cannot change a great?
Not a Denier left, and yet my heart leaps, I do wonder
yet, as old as I am, that any man will follow a Trade, or
serve, that may sing and laugh, and walk the streets, my
wife and both my sons are I know not where, I have no∣thing
left, nor know I how to come by meat to supper, yet
am I merry still; for I know I shall find it upon the Table at
six a clock, therefore hang Thought.
I would not be a Scruigman to carry the cloke-bag still,
Nor would I be a Fawleconer the greedy Hawlkes to fill.
But I would be in a good house, &amp; have a good Moister too.
But I would eat &amp; drink of the best, &amp; no work would I do.
This is it that keeps life and soul together, mirth, this
is the Philosophers stone that they write so much on, that
keeps a man ever young.
Sir, they say they know all your money is gone, and
they will trust you for no more drink.
Will they not? let am choose, the best is I have
mirth at home, and need not send abroad for that, let them
keep their drink to themselves.
For Iillian of Berry she dwells on a Hill,
And she hath good Beer and Ale to sell.
And of good fellows she thinks no ill,
And thither will we go now, now, now, now, and thither
Will wee go now.
And when you have made a little stay,
You need not ask what is to pay,
But kiss your Hostess and go your way, And thither, &amp;c.
Sir, I can get no bread for supper.
Hang bread and supper, let's preserve our mirth,
and we shall never feel hunger, I'll warrant you, let's have
a Càtch, boy follow me, come sing this Catch.
Ho, ho, no body at home, meat, nor drink, nor money ha wee
none, fill the pot Eedy, never more need I.
So boys enough, follow me, let's change our
place and we shall laugh afresh.
Let him go George, a shall not have any count∣nonce
from vs, nor a good word from any in the Company, if
I may strike stroke in it.
No more a shannot love; but Nel I will have Raph
doe a very notable matter now, to the eternal honour
and glory of all Grocers, sirrah you there boy, can none of
you hear?
Sir, your pleasure.
Let Raph come out on May-day in the morning and
speak upon a Conduit with all his Scarfs about him, and his
feathers and his rings and his knacks.
Why sir you do not think of our plot, what will be∣come
of that then?
Why sir, I care not what become on it, I'll have him
come out, or I'll fetch him out my self, I'll have some∣thing
done in honour of the City, besides, he hath been long
enough upon Adventures, bring him out quickly, or if I
come in amongst you—
Well sir hee shall come out, but if our play miscar∣rye,
sir you are like to pay for it.
Bring him away then.
This will bebraue i'faith, George shall not he dance
the morris too for the credit of the Strand.
No sweet heart it will bee too much for the boy,
ô there he is Nel, hoe's reasonable well in reparell, but hee
has not rings enough.
London, to thee I do present the merry Month of May
Let each true Subject be content to hear me what I say:
For from the top of Conduit head, as plainly may appear,
I will both tell my name to you and wherefore I came here.
My name is Raph, by due descent, though not ignoble I,
Yet far inferior to the Flock of gracious Grocery.
And by the Common-councell, of my fellows in the Strand,
With gilded Staff, and crossed Scarf, the May-lord here I stand.
Rejoice, ô English hearts, rejoice, rejoice ô Lovers dear,
Rejoice ô City, Town, and Country, rejoice eke every Shire;
For now the fragrant Flowers do spring and sprout in seemly sort,
The little Birds do sit and sing, the Lambs do make fine sport.
And now the Birchen Tree doth bud that makes the School boy cry
The Morris rings while Hobby-horse doth foot it feateously:
The Lords and Ladies now abroad for their disport and play,
Do kiss sometimes upon the Grass, and sometimes in the Hey.
Now Butter with a leaf of Sage is good to Purge the blood,
Fly Venus and Phlebotomy for they are neither good.
Now little fish on tender stone, begin to cast their bellies,
And sluggish snails, that erst were mute, do creep out of their shelies
The rumbling Rivers now do warm for little boys to padle,
The sturdy Steed, now goes to grass, and up they hang his saddle.
The heavy Hart, the bellowing Buck, the Rascal and the Pricket,
Are now among the Yeomans Peas, and leave the fearful thicket.
And be like them, ô you, I say, of this same noble Town,
And lift aloft your velvet heads, and slipping of your gown:
With bells on legs, and napkins clean unto your shoulders tide,
With Scarfs &amp; Garters as you please, &amp; Hey for our Town cried
March out and show your willing minds by twenty and by twenty,
To Hogsdon or to Newington, where Ale and Cakes are plenty:
And let it ne'er be said, for shame, that we the youths of London,
Lay thrumming of our Caps at home, and left our custom undone.
Up then, I say, both young and old, both man and maid a Maying
With Drums and Guns that bounce aloud, &amp; merry Taber playing.
Which to prolong, God save our King, and send his Country peace
And root out Treason from the Land, and so, my friends I cease.
I will have no great store of company at the wed∣ding,
a couple of neighbours and their wives, and wee will
have a Capon in stewed broth, with marrow, and a good
piece of beef, stuck with rose-mary.
Forbear thy pains fond man, it is too late.
Heaven bless me: Jasper?
I, I am his Ghost
Whom thou hast injured for his constant love:
Fond worldly wretch, who dost not understand
In death that true hearts cannot parted be.
First know thy daughter is quite borne away,
On wings of Angels, through the liquid air,
To far out of thy reach, and never more
Shalt thou behold her face: But she and I
Will in another world enjoy our loves,
Where neither fathers anger, poverty,
Nor any cross that troubles earthly men
Shall make vs sever our united hearts.
And never shalt thou sit, or be alone
In any place, but I will visit thee
With ghastly looks, and put into thy mind
The great offences which thou did to me.
When thou art at thy Table with thy friends
Merry in heart, and filled with swelling wine,
Il'e come in midst of all thy pride and mirth,
Invisible to all men but thy self,
And whisper such a sad tale in thine ear,
Shall make thee let the Cup fall from thy hand,
And stand as mute and pale as Death it self.
Forgive me Jasper; Oh! what might I doe?
Tell me, to satisfy thy troubled Ghost?
There is no means, too late thou think of this.
But tell me what were best for me to doe?
Repent thy deed, and satisfy my father,
And beat fond Humphrey out of thy doors,
Look George, his very Ghost would have folks
beaten.
Father, my bride is gone, fair mistress Luce,
My solo's the fount of vengeance, mischiefs sluice.
Hence fool out of my sight, with thy fond passion
Thou hast undone me.
Hold my father dear,
For Luce thy daughters sake, that had no peer.
Thy father fool? there's some blows more, begone.
Jasper, I hope thy Ghost bee well appeased,
To see thy will performed, now will I go
To satisfy thy father for thy wrongs.
What shall I doe? I have been beaten twice,
And mistress Luce is gone? help me device:
Since my true-loue is gone, I never more,
Whilst I do live, upon the sky will pore;
But in the dark will wear out my shooe-soles
In passion, in Saint Faiths Church under Paules.
George call Raf hither, if you love me call Raf hi∣there,
I have the bravest thing for him to do George; prithee
call him quickly.
Raf, Why Raf boy.
Here sir.
Come hither Raf, come to thy mistress boy.
Raf I would have thee call all the youths together
in battle-ray, with drums, and guns, and flags, and march to
Mile end in pompous fashion, and there exhort your Souldi∣ers
to be merry and wise, and to keep their beards from bur∣ning
Raf, and then skirmish, and let your flags fly, and
cry kill, kill, kill: my husband shall lend you his Jerkin Raf,
and there's a scarf; for the rest, the house shall furnish you,
and we'll pay for it: doe it bravely Raf, and think before
whom you perform, and what person you represent.
I warrant you mistress if I do it not for the honour
of the City, and the credit of my moister, let me never hope
for freedom.
It is well spoken I faith; go thy ways, thou art a
spark indeed.
Raf, Raf, double your files bravely Raf.
I warrant you sir.
Let him look narrowly to his service, I shall take
him else, I was there my self a pike-man once in the hottest
of the day, wench; had my feather shot sheer away, the
fringe of my pike burnt off with powder, my pate broken
with a scouring-sticke, and yet I thank God I am here.
Hark George the drums.
Ran, tan, tan, tan; ran, tan: O wench an thou had
but seen little Ned of Algate, drum Ned, how hee made it
roar again, and laid on like a tyrant: and then stroke softly
till the ward came up, and then thundered again, and toge∣there
we go: sa, sa, sa, bounce quoth the guns: courage my
hearts, quoth the Captains: Saint George, quoth the pike∣men;
and withal here they lay, and there they lay: And yet
for all this I am here wench.
Be thankful for it George, for indeed it is wonder∣full.
March fair my hearts, Lieutenant beat the rear
up: Ancient, let your colours fly; but have a great care of
the Butchers hooks at white-Chappell, they have been
the death of many a fair Ancient. Open your files that I
may take a view both of your persons and munition: Serge∣ant
call a muster.
A stand, William Hamerton peuterer.
Here Captain.
A Corslet, and a spanish pike; it is well, can you
shake it with a terror?
I hope so Captain.
Charge upon me, it is with the weakest: put more
strength William Hammerton, more strength: as you were a∣gain.
Proceed Sergeant.
George Greene-goose, Poulterer?
Here.
Let me see your piece neighbour Greene-goose, when
was she shot in?
And like you moister Captain, I made a shot even
now, partly to scour her, and partly for audacity.
It should seem so certainly, for her breath is yet
inflamed: besides, there is a maine fault in the touch-hole,
it runs, and stinks; and I tell you moreover, and be∣leeue
it: Ten such touch-holes would breed the pox in the
Army. Get you a feather, neighbour, get you a feather, sweet
oil, and paper, and your piece may do well enough yet.
Whore's your powder?
Here.
What in a paper? As I am a Soldier, and Gentle∣man,
it craves a Martial Court: you ought to dye for it.
Whore's your horn? answer me to that.
An't like you sir, I was oblivious.
It likes me not you should bee so; it is a shame for
you, and a scandal to all our neighbours, being a man of
worth and estimation, to leave your horn behind you: I
am afraid twill breed example. But let me tell you no more
on it; stand, till I view you all. What's become of the nose of
your flask?
Indeed law Captain, it was blown away
with powder.
Put on a new one at the Cities charge. Wheres the
stone of this piece?
The Drummer took it out to light To∣basso.
It is a fault my friend, put it in again: You want a
Nose, and you a Stone; Sergeant, take a note on it, for I
mean to stop it in the pay. Remove and march, soft and
fair Gentlemen, soft and fair: double your files, as you
were, faces about. Now you with the sodden face, keep in
there: look to your match sirrah, it will be in your fellows
flask anon. So, make a crescent now, advance your pikes,
stand and give ear. Gentlemen, Countrymen, Friends,
and my fellow-Souldiers, I have brought you this day from
the Shops of Security, and the Counters of Content, to mea∣sure
out in these furious fields, Honour by the ell; and pro∣wesse
by the pound: Let it not, ô let it not, I say, bee told
hereafter, the noble issue of this City fainted: but bear your
selves in this fair action, like men, valiant men, and free∣men;
Fear not the face of the enemy, nor the noise of the
guns: for believe me brethren, the rude rumbling of a Brew∣ers
Carre is far more terrible, of which you have a daily
experience: Neither let the stink of powder offend you,
since a more valiant stink is nightly with you. To a recall∣ued
mind, his home is every where: I speak not this
to take away the hope of your return; for you shall see
(I do not doubt it) and that very shortly, your loving wives
again, and your sweet children, whose care doth bear you
company in baskets. Remember then whose cause you have
in hand, and like a sort of true-borne Scauingers, scour me
this famous Realm of enemies. I have no more to say but
this: Stand to your tacklings lads, and show to the world you
can as well brandish a sword, as shake an apron. Saint George
and on my hearts.
It was well done Raf, Il'e send thee a cold Capon a
field, and a bottle of March-beere; and it may be, come my
self to see thee.
Nil, the boy has deceived me much, I did not think
it had been in him: he has performed such a matter wench,
that if I live, next year Il'e have him Captain of the Gally∣foist,
or Il'e want my will.
Yet I thank God, I break not a rinkle more then
I had, not a stoop boys: Care live with Cats, I defy thee,
my heart is as sound as an Ok; and though I want drink
to wet my whistle, I can sing:
Come no more there boys, come no more there:
For we shall never whilst we live, come any more there.
God save you sir.
It's a brave boy: can thou sing?
Yes sir, I can sing, but it is not so necessary at this
time.
Sing wee, and chant it, whilst love doth
grant it.
Sir, sir, if you knew what I have brought you, you
would have little list to sing.
O the Mimon round, full long long I have thee
sought,
And now I have thee found, &amp; what hast thou here brought?
A Coffin sir, and your dead son Jasper in it.
Dead? why fare-well he:
Thou wast a bonny boy, and I did love thee.
Then I pray you sir do so still.
Iaspers ghost? thou art welcome from Stygian lake
so soon,
Declare to me what wondrous things in Pluto's court are
done.
By my troth sir, I ne'er came there, tic too hot for me sir.
A merry ghost, a very merry ghost.
And where is your true-loue? ô where is yours?
Marie look you sir.
Ah ha! Art thou good at that I faith?
With hey trixie terlery-whiskin, the world it runs on
wheels,
When the young mans—up goes the maidens heals.
What Mr. Merri-thought, will you not let's in?
what do you think shall become of vs?
What voice is that that calls at our door?
You know me well enough, I am sure I have not
been such a stranger to you.
And some they whistled, and some they sung, Hey
down, down: and some did loudly say, ever as the Lord Bar∣nets
horn blew, away Musgraue, away.
You will not have vs starve here, will you Mr.
Merri-thought?
Nay good sir be persuaded, she is my mother: if her
offences have been great against you, let your own love
remember she is yours, and so forgive her.
Good Mr. Merri-thought let me entreat you, I will
not be denied.
Why Mr. Merri-thought, will you be a vexed thing still?
Woman I take you to my love again, but you
shall sing before you enter: therefore dispatch your song,
and so come in.
Well, you must have your will when al's done.
Mick what song can thou sing boy?
I can sing none forsooth, but a Ladies daughter of
Paris properly.
Song. It was, a Ladies daaghter, &amp;c.
Come, you're welcome home again.
If such danger be in playing, and jest must to earnest turn,
You shall go no more a maying.
Are you within sir, Moister Merri-thought?
It is my masters voice, good sir go hold him in talk
whilst we convey our selves into some inward room.
What are you? are you merry? you must bee very
merry if you enter.
I am sir.
Sing then.
Nay good sir open to me.
Sing, I say, or by the merry heart you come not in.
Well sir, Il'e sing.
Fortune my Fee, &amp;c.
You are welcome sir, you are welcome, you see
your entertainment, pray you bee merry.
O Mr. Merri-thought, I am come to ask you
Forgiveness for the wrongs I offered you,
And your most virtuous son, they're infinite,
Yet my contrition shall be more then they.
I do confess my hardness broke his heart,
For which, just heaven hath given me punishment
More then my age can carry, his wandering spirit
Not yet at rest, pursues me every where,
Crying, I'll haunt thee for thy cruelty.
My daughter she is gone, I know not how,
Taken invisible, and whether living,
Or in grave, it is yet uncertain to me.
O Moister Merry-thought, these are the weights,
Will sink me to my grave, forgive me sir.
Why sir, I do forgive you, and be merry,
And if the wag, in's life time, plaid the knave,
Can you forgive him too?
Withal my heart sir.
Speak it again, and heartily.
I do sir,
Now by my soul I do.
With that came out his Paramour,
She was as white as the Lilly flower,
Hey troule trollie lolly.
With that came out her own dear Knight,
He was as true as ever did fight. &amp;c.
Sir, if you will forgive ham, clap their hands together,
there's no more to be sad in the matter.
I do, I do.
I do not like this, peace boys, hear me one of you,
every bodies part is come to an end but Raphes, and hoe's
left out.
It is long of your self sir, wee have nothing to doe
with his part.
Raph come away, make on him as you have done of
the rest, boys come.
Now good husband let him come out and die.
He shall Nel, Raph come away quickly and die boy.
Twill be very unfit he should die sir, upon no occa∣zion,
and in a Comedy too.
Take you no care of that sir boy, is not his part at
an end, think you, when he's dead? come away Raph.
When I was mortal, this my costive corps
Did lap up Figs and Raisons in the Strand,
Where sitting I espied a lovely Dame,
Whose Moister wrought with Lingell and with All,
And under ground he vampied many a boot,
Straight did her love prick forth me, tender sprig
To follow feats of Arms in warlike wise,
Through VValtham Desert, where I did perform
Many achievements, and did lay on ground
Huge Barbaroso that insulting Giant,
And all his Captives soon set at liberty.
Then honour pricked me from my native soil,
Into Meldauia, where I gained the love
Of Pompiana his beloved daughter:
But yet proved constant to the black thum'd maid
Susan, and scorned Pompianaes love:
Yet liberal I was and gave her pins,
And money for her fathers Officers.
I then returned home, and thrust my self
In action, and by all men chosen was
Lord of the May, where I did flourish it,
With Skarfes and Rings, and Posy in my hand,
After this action, I preferred was,
And chosen City Captain at Mile-end,
With hat and feather and with leading staff,
And trained my men and brought them all off clear,
Save one man that berai'd him with the noise.
But all these things I Raph did undertake,
Only for my beloved Susans sake.
Then coming home, and sitting in my Shop
With Apron blew, death came unto my Stall
To cheapen Aqua-vitae, but ere I
Could take the bottle down, and fill a taste,
Death caught a pound of Pepper in his hand,
And sprinkled all my face and body ore,
And in an instant vanished away.
It is a pretty fiction i'faith.
Then took I up my Bow and Shaft in hand,
And walked into Moore-fields to cool my self,
But there grim cruel death met me again,
And shot this forked arrow through my head,
And now I faint, therefore be warned by me,
My fellows every one of forked heads.
Fare-well all you good boys in merry London,
Ne'er shall we more upon Shroue-tuesday meet
And pluck down houses of iniquity.
My pain increases, I shall never more
Hold open, whilst another pumps both legs,
Nor daube a Satin gown with rotten eggs:
Set up a stake, ô never more I shall,
I die, fly, fly my soul to Grocers Hall. oh, oh, oh, &amp;c.
Well said Raph, doe your obeisance to the Gentle∣men
and go your ways, well said Raph.
Me thinks all we, thus kindly and unexpectedly
reconciled should not depart without a song.
A good motion.
Strike up then.
Better Music ne'er was known,
Then a quire of hearts in one.
Let each other that hath been,
Troubled with the gall or spleen:
Learn of vs to keep his brow,
Smooth and plain as ours are now.
Sing though before the hour of dying
He shall rise and then be crying.
Hey ho, it is nought but mirth.
That keeps the body from the earth.
Come Nel, shall we go, the Plays done.
Nay by my faith George, I have more manners then
so, I'll speak to these Gentlemen first: I thank you all
Gentlemen, for your patience and countenane to Raph, a
poor fatherless child, and if I might see you at my house, it
should go hard, but I would have a pottle of wine and a pipe
of Tobacco for you, for truly I hope you do like the youth,
but I would bee glad to know the truth: I refer it to your
own discretions, whether you will applaud him or no, for
I will wink, and whilst you shall do what you will, I thank
you with all my heart, God give you good night; come
George.

WHat should we doe in this Countesses dark hole?
She's sullenly retired, as the Turtle:
Every day has been a black day with her since her husband dyed, and what should wee unruly members make here?
As melancholy night masques up heavens face,
So doth the Euening-starre present her self
Unto the careful Shepherds gladsome eyes,
By which unto the fold he leads his flock.
Zounds what a sheepish beginning is here? it is said true, Love is simple; and it may well hold, and thou art a simple lover.
See how yond Star like beauty in a cloud,
Illumines darkness, and beguiles the Moon
Of all her glory in the firmament.
Well said man in the Moon. Was ever such Astro∣nomers? Marry I fear none of these will fall into the right Ditch.
Madame.
Ha Anna, what are my doors unbarred?
Isle assure you the way into your Ladyship is open.
And God defend that any profane hand
Should offer sacrilege to such a Saint.
Lovely Isabella, by this duteous kiss,
That draws part of my Soul along with it,
Had I but thought my rude intrusion
Had waked the Doue-like spleen harboured within you,
Life and my first borne should not satisfy
Such a transgression, worthy of a check,
But that Immortals wink at my offence,
Makes me presume more boldly: I am come
To raise you from this so infernal sadness.
My Lord of Cypress, doe not mock my grief:
Tears are as due a Tribute to the dead,
As fear to God, and duty unto Kings.
Love to the Just, or hate unto the Wicked.
Surcease.
Believe it is a wrong unto the Gods:
They sail against the wind that wail the dead.
And since his heart hath wrestled with deaths pangs,
From whose sterne Cave none tracts a backward path.
Leave to lament this necessary change,
And thank the Gods, for they can give as good.
I wail his loss! Sink him ten cubits deeper,
I may not fear his resurrection:
I will be sworn upon the holy Writ
I morn thus fervent cause, he died no sooner:
Hee buried me alive,
And mued me up like Cretin Dedalus,
And with wall-ey'd Jealousy kept me from hope
Of any waxen wings to fly to pleasure.
But now his soul her Argos eyes hath clo'sd,
And I am free as ayre. You of my sex,
In the first flow of youth use you the sweets
Due to your proper beauties, ere the ebb
And long wane of unwelcome change shall come.
Fair women play: she's chaste whom none will have.
Here is a man of a most mild aspect,
Temperate, effeminate, and worthy love,
One that with burning ardor hath pursued me:
A donatiue he hath of every God;
Apollo gave him lockes, Jove his high front,
The God of Eloquence his flowing speech,
The feminine Deities strewn all their bounties
And beauty on his face: that eye was Iuno's,
Those lips were his that won the golden Ball,
That virgin-blush Diana's: here they meet,
As in a sacred Synod. My Lords, I must entreat
A while your wished forbearance.
We obey you Lady.
My Lord, with you I have some conference.
I pray my Lord, doe you woo every Lady
In this phrase you doe me?
Fairest, till now,
Love was an Infant in my Oratory.
And kiss thus too?
I nee'r was so kissed, leave thus to please,
Flames into flames, seas thou pour into seas.
Pray frown my Lord, let me see how many wives
You'll have. Heigh-ho, you'll bury me I see.
In the Swans down, and tomb thee in mine arms.
Then folks shall pray in vain to send me rest.
Away, you're such another meddling Lord.
By heaven my loue's as chaste as thou art fair,
And both exceed comparison: by this kiss,
That crowns me Monarch of another world
Superior to the first, fair, thou shalt see
As unto heaven, my love so unto thee.
Alas poor creatures, when we are once of the falling hand,
A man may easily come over vs.
It is as hard for vs to hide our love,
As to shut sin from the Creators eyes.
I faith my Lord, I had a Months mind unto you,
As tedious as a full rip'd Maidenhead.
And Count of Cypress, think my love as pure,
As the first opening of the blooms in May;
Your virtues man; nay, let me not blush to say so:
And see for your sake thus I leave to sorrow.
Begin this subtle conjuration with me,
And as this Taper, due unto the dead,
I here extinguish, so my late dead Lord
I put out ever from my memory,
That his remembrance may not wrong our love.
As bold-faced women when they wed another,
Banquet their husbands with their dead loves heads.
And as I sacrifice this to his Ghost,
With this expire all corrupt thoughts of youth,
That fame-insatiate Devil Jealousy,
And all the sparks that may bring unto flame,
Hate betwixt man and wife or breed defame.
Marry Amen, I say: Madame, are you that were in for all day, now come to be in for all night? How now Count Arsena?
Faith Signior not unlike the condemned malefactor,
That hears his judgment openly pronounced;
But I ascribe to Fate, Joy swell your love,
Cypress, and Willow grace my drooping crest.
We doe entend our Hymeneal rights
With the next rising Sun. Count Cypress,
Next to our Bride, the welcomst to our feast.
Saneta Maria, what think thou of this change?
A Players passion Isle believe hereafter,
And in a Tragic Scene weep for old Priam,
When fell revenging Pirrhus with supposed
And artificial wounds mangles his breast,
And think it a more worthy act to me,
Then trust a female mourning ore her love:
Nought that is done of woman shall me please,
Natures step-children rather her desire.
Learn of a well composed Epigram,
A women's love, and thus it was sung unto vs:
The Tapers that stood on her husbands hearse,
Isabell' aduances to a second bed:
Is it not wondrous strange for to rehearse
She should so soon forget her husband dead;
One hour? for if the husbands life once fade,
Both love and husband in one grave are laid.
But we forget our selves, I am for the marriage
Of Signior Claridiana, and the fine Mris. Abigall.
I for his arch-foes wedding Signior Rogero, and the spruce Mris. Thais: but see, the solemn rites are en∣ded, and from their several Temples they are come.
A quarrel on my life.
Good my Lord detain me not, I will tilt at him.
Remember, Sir, this is your wedding day,
And that triumph belongs only to your wife.
If you be noble let me cut off his head.
Remember of the other side, you have a maiden-head of your own to cut off.
Isle make my marriage day like to the bloody bridal Alcides by the fiery Centaurs had.
Husband, dear Husband!
Away with these catterwallers.
Come on sir.
Thou son of a Jew.
Alas poor wench, thy husband's circumcised.
Begot when thy fathers face was toward th'East,
To show that thou would prove a Caterpillar:
His Mossies shall not save thee from me,
Isle send thee to him in collops.
O fry not in choler so Sir.
Mountebank with thy Pedantic action,
Rimatrix, Buglors, Rhimocers.
Gentlemen, I conjure you
By the virtues of men.
Shall any broken Quacksaluers Bastard oppose him to me in my Nuptials? No, but Isle show him better mettle then ere the Gallemawfrey his father used. Thou scum of his melting pots, that were christened in a Crusoile, with Mercuries water, to show thou would prove a stinging As∣pis; for all thou spitst is Aqua fortis, and thy breath is a com∣pound of poisons stillatory: if I get within thee, had thou the scaly hyde of a Crocodile, as thou art partly of his na∣ture, I would leave thee as bare as an Anatomy at the second viewing.
Thou Jew, of the Tribe of Gad, that sure, there were none here but thou and I, would teach me the Art of breathing, thou would run like a Dromedary.
Thou that art the tal'st man of Christendom; when thou art alone, if thou dost maintain this to my face, Isle make thee skip like an Ounce.
Nay, good sir, be you still.
Let the Quacksaluers son be still:
His father was still, and still, and still again.
By the Almighty Isle study Necromancy but Isle be revenged.
Gentlemen, leave these dissentions,
Signior Rogero, you are a man of worth.
True, all the City points at him for a Knave.
You are of like reputation Signior Claridiana:
The hatred twixt your Grandsires first began,
Impute it to the folly of that age.
These your dissentions may erect a faction,
Like to the Capulets and Montagues.
Put it to equal arbitration, choose your friends,
The Senators will thinke'em happy in it.
Isle ne'er embrace the smoke of a Furnace, the quintes∣sense of mineral or simples, or as I may say more learnedly, nor the spirit of Quickesiluer.
Nor I such a Centaur, half a man, half an Ass, and all a Jew.
Nay, then wee will be Constables, and force a quiet:
Gentlemen, keepe'em asunder, and help to perswade'em.
Well Ladies, your Husbands behaue'em as lustily on their wedding days, as ere I heard any. Nay Lady widow, you and I must have a falling: you're of Signior Mizaldus faction, and I am your vowed enemy, from the bodkin to the pincase. Hark in your ear.
Well Thais, O you're a cunning carver: we two that any time these fourteen years have called sisters, brought and bred up together: that have told one another all our wanton dreams, talked all night-long of young man, and spent many an idle hour, fasted upon the stones on S. Agnes night together, practised all the petulant amorousness that delights young Maids, yet have you concealed not only the marriage, but the man: and well you might deceive me, for Isle be sworn you never dreamed of him, and it stands against all reason you should enjoy him you never dreamed of.
Is not all this the same in you? Did you ever mani∣fest your Sweet-harts nose, that I might nose him by it? come∣ded his calfe, or his neather-lip? apparent signs that you were not in love or wisely covered it. Have you ever said, such a man goes upright, or has a better gate then any of the rest, as indeed, since he is proved a Magnifico, I thought thou would have put it into my hands what ere'thad been.
Well wench, wee have cross fates: our Husbands such inveterate foes, and we such entire friends, but the best is we are neighbours, and our back Arbors may afford visitation freely: prithee let vs maintain our familiarity still whatsoever thy hus∣band doe unto thee, as I am afraid he will cross it in the nick.
Faith, you little one, If I please him in one thing, he shall please me in all, that's certain. Who shall I have to keep my counsel if I miss thee? who shall teach me to use the bridle, when the reins are in mine own hand? what to long for? when to take Physic? where to be melancholy? why, we two are one another grounds, without which would be no Music.
Well said wench, and the Pricke-song wee use shall be our husbands.
I will long for Swines-flesh of the first child.
Wilt'ou little Jew? And I to kiss thy husband
Upon the least belly-ake. This will mad'em.
I kiss thee wench for that, and with it confirm our friendship.
By these sweet lips Widow.
Good my Lord learn to swear by rote:
Your birth and fortune makes my brain suppose,
That like a man heated with wines and lust,
She that is next your object is your mate,
Till the foul water have quenched out the fire.
You the Dukes kinsman, tell me, I am young,
Fair, rich, and virtuous; I my self will flatter
My self, till you are gone, that are more fair,
More rich, more virtuous, and more debonair:
All which are ladders to an higher reach:
Who drinks a puddle that may taste a spring?
Who kiss a Subject that may hug a King?
Yes, the Cammell always drinks in puddle water,
And as for huggings read Antiquities.
Faith, Madame, Isle board thee one of these days.
I, but ne'er bed me my Lord: my vow is firm
Since God hath called me to this noble state,
Much to my grief, of virtuous Widow-hood,
No man shall ever come within my gates.
Wilt thou ram up thy porch-hold? O widow, I perceive
You're ignorant of the Lovers ledger demane.
There is a fellow that by Magic will assist
To murder Princes invisible, I can command his spirit.
Or what say you to a fine scaling Ladder of ropes?
I can tell you, I am a mad wag-halter:
But by the virtue I see seated in you,
And by the worthy fame is blazond of you,
By little Cupped, that is mighty named,
And can command my looser follies down,
I love, and must enjoy▪ yet with such limits,
As one that knows enforced marriage
To be the Furies sister. Think of me.
Ha, ha, ha.
How now Lady, does the toy take you, as they say?
No, my Lord, nor doe we take your toy, as they say. This is a childes birth, that must not be delivered before a man, Though your Lordship might be a Mid-wife for your chin.
Some bawdy riddle is it not? you long til't be night.
No, my Lord, women's longing comes after their mar∣riage night. Sister, see you be constant now.
Why, dost think Isle make my Husband a Cuckold? O here they come.
Signior Rogero, are you yet qualified?
Yes: does any man think Isle go like a sheep to the slaughter? Hands off my Lord, your Lordship may chance come under my hands: If you doe, I shall show my self a Citizen, and revenge basely.
I think if I were receiving the holy Sacrament
His sight would make me gnash my teeth terribly:
But there's the beauty without parallel,
In whom the Graces and the Virtues meet:
In her aspect mild Honour sits and smiles:
And who looks there, were it the savage Bear,
But would derive new nature from her eyes.
But to be reconciled simply for him,
Were mankind to be lost again, Id let it,
And a new heap of stones should stock the world.
In heaven and earth this power beauty hath,
It inflames Temp'rance, and temp'rates Wrath:
What ere thou art, mine art thou wise or chaste:
I shall set hard upon thy marriage vow,
And write revenge high in thy Husbands brow,
In a strange Character. You may begin sir.
Signior Claridiana, I hope Signior Rogero
Thus employed me about a good office,
It were worthy Cicerces tongue, a famous Oration now?
But friendship that is mutually embraced of the Gods,
And is Ioues Usher to each sacred Sinod,
Without the which hee could not reign in heaven,
That ouer-goes my admiration shall not vnder-goe my censure.
These hot flames of rage, that else will be
As fire midst your nuptial Jollity,
Burning the edge off from the present Joy,
And keep you wake to terror.
I have not yet swallowed the Rhimatrix nor the Ono∣centaur, the Rimocheros was monstrous.
Sir, be you of the more flexible nature, and confess an error.
I must, the Gods of love command,
And that bright Star, her eye, that guides my fate.
Signior Rogero, joy then Signior Rogero.
Signior, sir, O Devil.
Good Husband show your self a temperate man,
Your mother was a woman I dare swear;
No Tiger got you, nor no Bear was rival
In your conception: you seem like the issue
The Painters limb leaping from Envies mouth,
That devours all hee meets.
Had the last, or the least Syllable
Of this more then immortal eloquence,
Commenced to me when rage had been so high
Within my blood, that it ore-topt my soul,
Like to the Lyon when he hears the sound
Of Dean's Bowe-string in some shady wood,
I should have couched my lowly limb on earth,
And held my silence a proud sacrifice.
Slave, I will fight with thee at any odds,
Or name an instrument fit for destruction,
That ne'er was made to make away a man,
Isle meet thee on the ridges of the Alps,
Or some inhospitable wilderness,
Stark naked, at push-of-pike, or keen Curt'laxe,
At Turkish Sickle, Babylonian Saw,
The ancient Hooks of great Cadwalleder,
Or any other heathen invention.
O God bless the man.
Counsel him good my Lord.
Our tongues are weary, and he desperate,
He does refuse to hear: What shall we doe?
I am not mad, I can hear, I can see, I can feel,
But a wise rage in man, wrongs past compare,
Should be well nourished as his virtues are:
Id have it known unto each valiant spirit.
He wrongs no man that to himself does right.
Catzo I ha'done, Signior Rogero, I ha'done.
By heaven this voluntary reconciliation made
Freely, and of it self, argues unfeigned
And virtuous knot of love. So sirs embrace.
Sir, by the conscience of a Catholic man,
And by our mother Church that binds
And doth atone in amity with God,
The souls of men, that they with men be one,
I tread into the center all the thoughts
Of ill in me, toward you, and memory
Of what from you might ought disparage me,
Wishing unfeignedly it may sink low,
And as untimely births want power to grow.
Christianly said: Signior what would you have more?
And so I swear, you're honest Onocentaure.
Nay see now, fie upon your turbulent spirit,
Did he do it in this form?
If you think not this sufficient, you shall command
me to be reconciled in another form, as a Rhimatrix or a Ri∣mocheros.
S'blood, what will you doe?
Well, give me your hands first, I am friends with you i'faith: thereupon I embrace you, kiss your Wife, and God give vs joy.
You mean me and my husband.
You take the meaning better then the speech, Lady.
The like wish I, but ne'er can be the like,
And therefore wish I thee.
By this bright light that is derived from thee.
So sir, you make me a very light creature.
But that thou art a blessed Angel, sent
Down from the Gods t'attone mortal men,
I would have thought deeds beyond all men's thoughts,
And executed more upon his corps:
Oh let him thank the beauty of this eye,
And not his resolute sword or destiny.
What say thou Mizaldus, come applaud this Jubilee,
A day these hundred years before not truly known,
To these divided factions.
No nor this day had it been falsely borne,
But that I mean to sound it with his horn.
I liked the former jar better: then they showed like men and Soldiers; now like Cowards and Lechers.
Well said Mizaldus: thou art like the Base Viol in a Consort, let the other Instrument wish and delight in your high∣est sense, thou art still grumbling.
Nay, sweet receive it,
And in it my heart:
And when thou read a moving syllable
Think that my soul was Secretary to it.
It is your love, and not the odious wish
Of my revenge, in stiling him a Cuckold,
Makes me presume thus far: then read it fair,
My passion's ample as your beauties are.
Well sir, we will not stick with you.
And Gentlemen, since it hath hoped so fortunately,
I doe entreat wee may all meet to morrow,
In some Heroic Masque, to grace the Nuptials
Of the most noble Countess of Sweuia.
Who does the young Count marry?
O sir, who but the very heir of all her sex,
That bears the Palm of beauty from'em all:
Others compared to her, show like faint Stars
To the full Moon of wonder in her face:
The Lady Isabella, the late Widow
To the deceased and noble Vicount Hermut.
Law you there, widow, there's one of the last edition,
Whose Husband yet retains in his cold trunk
Some little airing of his noble guest,
Yet she a fresh Bride as the month of May.
Well my Lord, I am none of these,
That have my second Husband bespoke,
My door shall be a testimony of it.
And but these noble Marriages incite me,
My much abstracted presence should have showed it.
If you come to me, hark in your ear my Lord,
Look your Ladder of ropes be strong,
For I shall tie you to your Tackling.
Gentlemen, your answer to the Masque.
Your Honour leads, we'll follow.
Signior Claridiana.
I attend you sir.
You'll be constant.
Aboue the Adamant the Goats blood shall not break me,
Yet shallow fools, and plainer moral men,
That understand not what they undertake,
Fall in their own snares, or come short of vengeance,
No, let the Sun view with an open face,
And afterword shrink in his blushing cheeks,
Ashamed, and cursing of the fixed decree,
That makes his light bawd to the crimes of men,
When I have ended what I now devise.
Appolloes Oracle shall swear me wise,
Strumpet his wife, branch my false-seeming friend,
And make him foster what my hate begot,
A bastard, that when age and sickness seize him,
Shall be a cor'siue to his griping heart:
Isle write to her, for what her modesty
Will not permit, nor my adulterate forcing,
That blushless Herald shall not fear to tell:
Rogero shall know yet that his foe's a man,
And what is more, a true Italian.
MY grave Lord Cardinal, we congratulate,
And zealously doe entertain your love:
That from your high and divine contemplation,
You have vouchsafed to consummate a day
Due to our Nuptials: O, may this knot you knit,
This individual Gordiant grasp of hands,
In sight of God so fairly intermixed,
Never be severed, as heaven smiles at it,
By all the Darts shot by infernal Jove,
Angels of grace Amen, Amen, say to it.
Fair Lady Widow, and my worthy Mistress,
Doe you keep silence for a wager?
Doe you ask a woman that question my Lord,
When she inforcedly pursues what she's forbidden?
I think if I had been tied to silence,
I should have been worthy the Cucking-stoole ere this time.
You shall not be my Orator (Lady) that pleads thus for your self.
My Lord, the Masquers are at hand.
Give them kind entertainment. Some worthy friends of mine, my Lord, unknown to me, too lavish of their loves, Bring their own welcome in a solemn Masque.
I am glad there's Noble-men in the Masque
With our Husbands to ouer-rule them,
They had shamed vs all else.
Why? for why, I pray?
Why? marry they had come in with some City show else, Hired a few Tinsel coats at the Vizard-makers, which would ha'made them look, for all world, like Bakers in their linen bases, and mealy vizzards, new come from bolting. I saw a show once at the Marriage of a Magnificero's daughter, presented by Time: which Time was an old bald thing; a servant, it was the best man; hee was a Dyer, and came in likeness of the Rainbow in all manner of colours, to show his Art, but the Rainbow smelt of urine, so wee were all afraid the property was changed, and looked for a shower. Then came in after him, one that (it seemed) feared no colours, a Grocer that had trimmed up himself handsomely: hee was Justice, and showed reasons why. And I think this Grocer, I mean this Justice, had borrowed a weather-beaten Balance from some Justice of a Conduit, both which
Scales were replenished with the choice of his Ware, And the more liberally to show his nature, He gave every woman in the room her handful.
O great act of Justice! well, and my Husband come cleanly off with this, hee shall ne'er betray his weakness more, but confess himself a Citizen hereafter, and acknowledge their wit, for alas they come short.
Good my Lord, be my expositer.
The Sun setting, a man pointing at it:
The Motto, Senso 〈…〉 Calarem:
Fair Bride, some servant of yours, that here imitates
To have felt the heate of Love bred in your brightness,
But setting thus from him, by marriage,
He only here acknowledges your power,
And must expect beams of a morrow Sun.
Lord Bridegroom, will you interpret me?
A sable Shield: the word, Vidua spes.
What the forlorn hope, in black, despairing?
Lady Lentulus, is this the badge of all your Suitors?
I by my troth my Lord, if they come to me.
I could give it another interpretation. Me thinks this Lover has learned, of women, to deal by contraries: if so, then here he says, the Widow is his only hope.
No: good my Lord, let the first stand.
Inquire of him, and heel resolve the doubt.
What's here? a Ship sailing nigh her haven?
With good ware belike: it is well ballast.
O, your this device smells of the Merchant. What's your ships name, I pray? The forlorn Hope?
No: The Merchant Royal.
And why not Aduenturer?
You see no likelihood of that: would it not fine be in the haven? The word, Vt tangerem Portum.
Marry, for ought I know, God grant it. What's there?
Mine's an Azure shield: marry what else; I should tell thee more then I understand; but the word is,
Aut precio, aut precibus.
I, I, some Common-counsell device.
Fair widow, how like you this change?
I changed too lately to like any.
O your husband! you wear his memory like a Deaths-head.
For heavens love think of me as of the man
Whose dancing days you see are not yet done.
Yet you sink apace sir.
The fault's in my Vpholsterer, Lady.
Thou shalt as soon find Truth telling a lye,
Virtue a Bawd, Honesty a Courtier,
As me turned recreant to thy least design:
Love makes me speak, and hee makes love divine.
Would Love could make you so: but it is his guise
To let vs surfeit ere hee op our eyes.
You grasp my hand too hard in faith, fair sir,
Not as you grasp my hart, unwilling wanton.
Were but my breast bare and Anatomized,
Thou should behold there how thou tortur'st it:
And as Appeals limbed the Queen of Love,
In her right hand grasping a heart in flames,
So may I thee, fairer, but crueler.
Well sir, your visor gives you colour for what you say.
Grace me to wear this favour, it is a Gem
That veils to your eyes, though not to th'Eagles,
And in exchange give me one word of comfort.
I marry: I like this wooer well:
He will wen's pleasure out of the stones.
Change is no robbery: yet in this change
Thou rob'st me of my hart, sure Cupid's here,
Disguised like a pretty Torch-bearer,
And makes his brand a Torch, that with more slight
He may entrap weak women: here the sparks
Fly as in Etna from his Fathers Anvil.
O powerful Boy! my heart's on fire, and unto mine eyes
The raging flames ascend, like to two Beacons,
Summoning my strongest powers, but all too late,
The Conqueror already ops the gate.
I will not ask his name.
You dare put it into my hands.
Zounds, doe you think I will not?
Then thus, to morrow (you'll be secret, servant.)
All that I doe, Isle doe in secret.
My husband goes to Mawrano to renew the Farm he has.
Well, what time goes the Iakes-farmer?
He shall not be long out, but you shall put in, I warrant you. Have a care that you stand just in the nick about six a clock in the evening; my Maid shall conduct you up, to save
mine honour you must come up darkling, and to avoid suspicion.
Zounds, hudwinck'd, and if you'll open all sweet Lady.
But if you fail to do it.
The Sun shall fail the day first.
Tie this ring fast, you may be sure to know.
You'll brag of this, now you have brought me to the bay.
Pox o'this Masque: would it were done, I might
To my Apothecaries for some stirring meates.
Me thinks sir, you should blush even through your visor,
I have scarce patience to dance out the rest.
The worse my fate that plowes a marble quarry:
Primaleon yet thy Image was more kind,
Although thy love not half so true as mine.
Dance they that list, I sail against the wind.
Nay sir, betray not your infirmities,
You'll make my Husband jealous by and by;
We will think of you, and that presently.
The Spheres ne'er danced unto a better tune.
Sound Music there.
It was Music that he spake.
Gallants I thank you, and Begin a health to your Mistresses.
Fair thanks sir Bridegroom.
He speaks not to this pledge, has he no Mistress?
Would I might chose one for him: but't may be
Hee doth adore a brighter Star then wee.
Sit Ladies sit, you have had standing long.
Bless the man: sprit'ly and nobly done.
What, is your Ladyship hurt?
O no, an easy fall.
Was I not deep enough, thou God of lust,
But I must further wade? I am his now,
As sure as Iuno's Ioues, Hymen take flight,
And see not me, it is not my wedding night.
The Brides departed, discontent it seems.
We'll after her. Gallants, vnmasque I pray,
And taste a homely banquet we entreat.
Candid Ernigos I beseech thee.
Come Widow, Isle be bold to put you in.
My Lord will you have a sociate?
Good gentlemen if I have any interest in you,
Let me depart unknown, it is a disgrace
Of an eternal memory.
What the fall my Lord, as common a thing as can be, the stiffest man in Italy may fall between a women's legs.
Would I had changed places with you my Lord, would it had been my hap.
What Cuckold laid his horns in my way?
Signior Claridiana, you were by the Lady when I fell,
Doe you think I hurt her?
You could not her, my Lord, between the legs.
What vvas't I fell withal?
A cross point my Lord.
Crosse-point indeed: well if you love me, let me hence unknown,
The silence yours, the disgrace mine own.
Sir, if Wine were Nectar Isle begin a health,
To her that were most gracious in your eye,
Yet deign, as simply it is the gift of Bacchus,
To give her pledge that drinks: this God of Wine
Cannot inflame me more to appetite,
Though he be co-supreme with mighty Love,
Then thy fair shape.
Zounds she comes to deride me.
That kiss shall serve
To be a pledge although my lips should starve.
No trick to get that visor from his face?
I will steal hence, and so conceal disgrace.
Sir, have you left nought behind?
Yes, Lady but the Fates will not permit
(As Iems once lost are seldom or never found)
I should convey it with me. Sweet Good-night.
She bends to me: there's my fall again.
He's gone, that lightning that a while doth strike
Our eyes with amazed brightness, and on a sudden
Leaves vs in prisoned darkness. Lust thou art hie,
My smiles may well come from the Sky.
Anna, Anna.
Madame, did you call?
Follow yond stranger, prithee learn his name:
Wee may hereafter thank him. How I dote?
Is hee not a God
That can command what other men would win
With the hard'st advantage? I must have him,
Or shadow-like follow his fleeting steps.
Were I as Daphne, and he followed chase,
Though I rejected young Appolloes love,
And like a Dream beguile his wandering steps,
Should he pursue me through the neighbouring grove,
Each Cowslip stalk should trip a willing fall,
Till hee were mine, who till then am his thrall:
Nor will I blush, since worthy is my chance.
It is said that Venus with a Satire slept,
And how much short came she of my fair aim?
Then Queen of Love a president Isle be,
To teach fair women learn to love of me.
Speak Music, what's his name.
Madame, It was the worthy Count Massino.
Blessed be thy tongue: the worthy Count indeed,
The worthiest of the Worthies. Trusty Anna,
Hast thou packed up those Monies, Plate, and Jewels
I gave direction for?
Yes, Madame, I have trust up them, that many
A proper man has been trust up for.
I thank thee, take the wings of night,
Beloved Secretary, and post with them to Sweuia,
There furnish up some stately Palace
Worthy to entertain the King of Love:
Prepare it for my coming and my Loves,
Ere Phoebus Steeds once more vnharnest be,
Or ere he sport with his beloved Thetis,
The siluer-footed Goddess of the Sea,
Wee will set forward. Fly like the Northern wind,
Or swifter, Anna, fleet like to my mind.
I am just of your mind Madame, I am gone.
So to the house of Death the mourner goes,
That is bereft of what his soul desired,
As I to bed, I to my nuptial bed,
The heaven on earth: so to thought slaughters went
The pale Andromeda bedewed with tears,
When every minute she expected gripes of a fell monster,
And in vain bewailed the act of her creation.
Sullen Night that look with sunk eyes on my nuptial bed,
With ne'er a Star that smiles upon the end,
Mend thy slack pace, and lend the malecontent,
The hoping lover, and the wishing Bride
Beams that too long thou shadowest: or if not
In spite of thy fixed front when my loathed Mate
Shall struggle in due pleasure for his right,
Isle think it my love, and die in that delight.
Thais, you're an early riser.
I have that to show will make your hair stand an-end.
Well Lady, and I have that to show you will bring your courage down. What would you say, and I would name a party saw your Husband court, kiss, nay almost go through for the hole?
How, how, what would I say? nay, by this light, what would I not doe? If ever Amazon fought better, or more at the face then Isle doe, let me never be thought a new married wife. Come vnmasque her: it is some admirable creature, whose beau∣tie you need not paint. I warrant you, it is done to your hand.
Would any woman but I▪ be abused to her face?
Prithee read the contents: Know thou the Character?
It is my Husbands hand, and a Loue-Letter: But for the contents I find none in it. Has the lustful monster, All back and belly-steru'd me thus? What defect does he see in me? Isle be sworn wench, I am of as pliant and yielding body
to him, even which way hee will, hee may turn me as hee list himself. What? and dedicate to thee: I marry, here's a stile so high, as a man cannot help a Dog o'er it. He was wont to write to me in the City phrase, My good Abigall: here's Astonishment of nature, unparalleled excelency, and most unequal rarity of creation: Three such words will turn any honest woman in the world whore: for a woman is never won till she know not what to answer; and beshrew me if I understand any of these: you are the party I perceive, and here's a white sheet, that your hus∣band has promised me to do penance in: you must not think to dance the shaking of the sheets alone though there be not such rare phrases in it, tic more to the matter; a legible hand, but for the dash, or the (hee) and (as): short bawdy Parenthesis as ever you saw, to the purpose: hee has not left out a prick I warrant you, wherein he has promised to doe me any good, but the Law's in mine own hand.
I ever thought by his red beard hee would prove a Iudas, here am I bought and sold; hee makes much of me in∣deed. Well wench, we were best wisely in time seek for preuen∣tion, I should be loath to take drink and die on it, as I am afraid I shall that hee will lye with thee.
To be short sweet hart, Isle be true to thee, though a liar to my Husband: I have signed your Husbands bill like a Wood cock as hee is held, persuaded him (since nought but my love can assuage his violent passions) hee should enjoy, like a private friend, the pleasures of my bed: I told him my Hus∣band was to go to Mawrano to day, to renew a Farm hee has, and in the mean time hee might be tenant at will, to use mine: this false fire has so took with him, that he's ravished before hee come. I have had stones on him all red: dost know this:
I, too well, it blushes for his Mr.
Now my Husband will be hawking about thee anon,
And thou can meet him closely.
By my faith I would be loath in the dark, and hee knew me.
I mean thus: the same occasion will serve him too, they are birds of a feather, and will fly together, I warrant
thee wench, appoint him to come: say that thy Husband's gone for Mawrano, and tell me anon if thou made not his heart-bloud spring, for joy, in his face.
I conceive you not all this while.
Then you are a barren woman, and no marvel if thy Husband love thee not: the hour for both to come is six, a dark time fit for purblind lovers; and with cleanly conveyance by the niglers our maids, they shall be translated into our Bed∣chambers.
Your Husband into mine, and mine into yours.
But you mean they shall come in at the backe-dores.
Who, our Husbands? nay, and they come not in at the fore-dores, there will be no pleasure in it. But we two will climb over our garden-Pales, and come in that way, (the chastest that are in Venice will stray for a good turn) and thus vvittily will wee be bestowed, you into my house to your husband, and I into your house to my husband, and I warrant thee before a month come to an end, they'll crack louder of this nights-lodging, then the Bed-steads.
All is if our Maids keep secret.
Mine is a Maid Isle besworn, she has kept her secrets hitherto.
Troth, and I never had any Sea-captaine borded in my house.
Go to then: and the better to avoid suspicion,
Thus wee must insist, they must come up darkling, recreate themselves with their delight an hour or two, and after a mil∣lion of kisses, or so.
But is my husband content to come darkling?
What not to save mine honour? hee that will run through fire, as hee has professed, will by the heate of his love, grope in the dark. I warrant him he shall save mine honour.
I am afraid my voice will discover me.
Why then, you're best say nothing, and take it thus quietly when your husband comes.
I, but you know a woman cannot choose but speak in these cases.
Bite in your neather-lip, and I warrant you,
Or make as if you were vvhiffing Tobacco;
Or puich like me. Gods-so, I hear thy Husband.
Farewell vvise-woman.
Now gins my vengeance mount high in my lust:
It is a rare creature, she'll do it i'faith;
And I am armed at all points▪ A rare whiblin,
To be revenged, and yet gain pleasure in it,
One height aboue revenge: yet what a slave am I,
Are there not younger Brothers enough, but we must
Branch one another? oh but mine's revenge,
And who on that does dream
Must be a Tyrant ever in extreme.
O my Wife Thais get my Breakfast ready,
I must into the Country to a Farm I have
Some two miles off, and, as I think,
Shall not come home to night. Iaques, Iaques,
Get my Vessel ready to row me down the River.
Prithee make haste Sweet girl.
So, there's one fool shipped away: are your crosse-points discovered? Get your Breake-fast ready!
By this light Isle tie you to hard fare:
I have been too sparing of that you prodigally offer
Voluntary to another: well you shall be a tame fool hereafter.
The finest light is when we first defraud;
Husband to night it is I must lie abroad.
Here, take this Letter, bear it to the Count:
But Boy, first tell me; think thou I am in love?
Madame, I cannot tell.
Can thou not tell? Dost thou not see my face?
Is not the face the Index of the mind?
And can thou not distinguish Love by that?
No Madame.
Then take this Letter and deliver it
Unto the worthy Count. No, fie upon him,
Come back again: tell me, why should thou think
That semi's a Loue-letter?
I doe not think so Madame.
I know thou dost: for thou dost ever use
To hold the wrong opinion. Tell me true,
Dost thou not think that Letter is of Love?
If you would have me think so Madame, yes.
What dost thou think thy Lady is so fond?
Give me the Letter, thy self shall see it.
Yet I should tear it in the breaking op,
And make him lay a wrongful charge on thee;
And say thou brok'st it open by the way;
And saw what heinous things I charge him with:
But it is all one, the Letter is not of love,
Therefore deliver it unto himself,
And tell him hoe's deceived, I doe not love him.
But if he think so bid him come to me,
And Isle confute him straight; Isle show him reasons,
Isle show him plainly why I cannot love him.
And if he hap to read it in thy hearing,
Or chance to tell thee that the words were sweet,
Doe not thou then disclose my lewd intent,
Under those Siren words, and how I mean
To use him when I have him at my will:
For then thou wilt destroy the plot that's laid,
And make him fear to yield when I doe wish
Only to have him yield; for when I have him,
None but my self shall know how I will use him.
Be gone, why stayest thou? yet return again.
I Madame.
Why dost thou come again? I bad thee go.
If I say, Go, never return again.
My blood, like to a troubled Ocean,
Cuffed with the Winds, uncertain where to rest,
Buts at the utmost share of every limb.
My Husband's not the man I would have had:
O my new thoughts to this brave sprightly Lord,
Was fixed to that hid fire Lovers feel:
Where was my mind before, that refined judgment,
That represents rare objects to our passions?
Or did my lust beguile me of my sense?
Making me feast upon such dangerous cates,
For present want, that needs must breed a surfeit:
How was I shipwrecked? yet Isabella think
Thy Husband is a noble Gentleman, young, wise,
And rich: think what Fate follows thee,
And nought but lust doth blind thy worthy love:
I will desist. O no, it may not be.
Even as a head-strong Courser bears away
His Rider, vainly striving him to stay.
Or as a sudden gale thrusts into Sea
The Hauen-touching Bark, now near the lea:
So wavering Cupped brings me back again,
And purple Love resumes his Darts again:
Here of themselves, thy shafts come as if shot:
Better then I thy quiver knows 'em not
Madame: the Count.
So fell the Trojan wanderer on the Greek,
And bore away his ravished prize to Troy:
For such a beauty, brighter then his Dana.
Jove should (me thinks) now come himself again▪
Lovely Isabella, I confess me mortal:
Not worthy to serve thee in thought, I swear,
Yet shall not this same ouer-flow of favour
Diminish my vowed duty to your beauty.
Your love, my Lord, I blushingly proclaim it,
Hath power to draw me through a wilderness,
Were it armed with Furies, as with furious Beasts.
Boy, bid our Train be ready, we'll to horse.
My Lord, I should say something, but I blush,
Courting is not befitting to our sex.
Isle teach you how to woo,
Say you have loved me long,
And tell me that a women's feeble tongue
Was never tuned unto a wooing-string;
Yet formy sake you will forget your sex,
And court my Love with strained Immodesty,
Then bid me make you happy with a kiss.
Sir, though women doe not woo, yet for your sake,
I am content to leave that civil custom,
And pray you kiss me.
Now use some unexpected vmbages,
To draw me further into Vulcanise Net.
You love not me so well as I love you.
Fair Lady, but I doe.
Then show your love.
Why in this kiss I show it, and in my vowed service,
This wooing shall suffice, it is easier far
To make the current of a siluer-brooke
Convert his flowing backward to his Spring,
Then turn a woman wooer. There's no cause
Can turn the settled course of Natures Laws.
My Lord, will you pursue the plot?
The Letter gives direction here for Pauie.
To horse, to horse: thus once Eridace,
With looks regardiant, did the Thracian gaze,
And lost his gift, while he desired the sight.
But wiser I, lead by more powerful charm;
Id see the world win thee from out mine arm.
Zounds, is the Huritano coming? Claridiana what's the
matter?
The Countess of Sweuia has new taken horse.
Fly Phoebus, fly, the hour is six a clock.
Whither is she going Signior?
Even as Jove went to meet his simile.
To the Devil I think.
You know not wherefore?
To say sooth I doe not.
So in immortal wise shall I arrive.
At the Gallows. What in a passion Signior?
Zounds, doe not hold me sir:
Beauteous Thais, I am all thine wholly.
The staff is now advancing for the Rest,
And when I tilt, Mizaldus aware thy Crest.
What's here? the capering Cods-head tilting in the air?
The Gods send her no Horse, a poor old age.
Eternal woe, and sickness lasting rage.
My Lord, you may yet o'er-take'em.
Furies supply that place, for I will not: no,
She that can forsake me when pleasure's in the full,
Fresh and vntir'd, what would she on the least barren coldness?
I warrant you she has already got
Her Brauoes, and her Ruffians: the meanest whore
Will have one buckler, but your great ones more.
The shores of Sicilie retains not such a Monster,
Though to Galley-slaues they daily prostitute.
To let the Nuptial Tapers give light to her new lust,
Who would have thought it?
She that could no more forsake my company,
Then can the day forsake the glorious presence of the Sun.
When I was absent, then her galled eyes
Would have shed April showers, and out-wept
The clouds in that same o'er-passionate mood:
When they drowned all the world, yet now forsakes me:
Women your eyes shed glances like the Sun:
Now shines your brightness, now your light is done.
On the sweetest Flowers you shine, it is but by chance,
And on the basest Weed you'll waste a glance.
Your beams once lost can never more be found:
Unless we waite until your course run round,
(And take you at fist hand.) Since I cannot
Enjoy the noble title of a man,
But after-ages, as our virtues are
Buried whilst we are living, will sound out
My infamy, and her degenerate shame;
Yet in my life Isle smother't if I may,
And, like a dead man, to the world bequeath
These houses of vanity, Mils, and Lands.
Take what you will, I will not keep among you Servants,
And welcome some religious Monastery,
A true sworn Beads-man Isle hereafter be,
And wake the morning cock with holy prayers.
Good my Lord: noble Master.
Dissuade me not, my will shall be my King;
I thank thee Wife, a fair change thou hast given,
I leave thy lust to woo the Love of Heaven.
This is conversion, is it not? as good as might have been,
He turns religious upon his Wives turning Courtesan.
This is just like some of our gallant Prodigals,
When they have consumed their Patrimonies wrongfully,
They turn Capuchins for devotion,
NIght like a solemn Mourner frowns on earth,
Envying that Day should force her doffe her robes,
Or Phoebus chase away her Melancholy.
Heavens eyes look faintly through her sable masque,
And silver Cynthia hies her in her Sphere,
Scorning to grace black nights solemnity.
Be vnpropitious Night to villain thoughts,
But let thy Diamonds shine on virtuous love:
This is the lower house of high-built heaven,
Where my chaste Phoebe sits, enthroned among thoughts
So purely good, brings her to heaven on earth.
Such power hath souls in contemplation.
Sing boy (though night yet) like the mornings Lark:
A soul that's clear is light, though heaven be dark.
Who speaks in Music to vs?
Sweet, it is I. Boy, leave me, and to bed.
I thank you for your Music: now good-night.
Leave not the World yet, Queen of Chastity,
Keep promise with thy Love Endimion▪
And let me meet thee there on Litmus top.
It is I whose virtuous hopes are firmly fixed
On the fruition of thy chaste vowed love.
My Lord, your honour made me promise your ascent into my house, since my vow barred my doors,
By some wits engine, made for theft and lust:
Yet for your Honour, and my humble fame,
Check your bloods passions, and return dear Lord:
Suspicion is a Dog that still doth bite.
Without a cause, this act gives food to Envy;
Swollen big, it bursts, and poisons our clear flames.
Envy is stinglesse when she looks on thee.
Envy is blind, my Lord, and cannot see.
If you break promise, fair, you break my hart.
Then come. Yet stay. Ascend. Yet let vs part.
I fear, yet know not what I fear:
Your Loue's precious, yet mine Honor's dear.
If I doe stain thy Honour with foul lust,
May Thunder strike me, to show Jove is just.
Then come my Lord, on earth your vow is given.
This aide Isle lend you.
Thus I mount my heaven.
Receive me sweet.
O me unhappy wretch.
How fares your Honour? speak Fate-crost Lord.
If life retain his seat within you, speak;
Else like that Section Dame, that saw her Love,
Cast by the frowning billows, on the sands,
And lean death swollen big with the Hellespont,
In bleak Lenders body, like his Love,
Come I to thee, one grave shall serve vs both.
Stay miracle of women, yet I breathe,
Though death be entered in this Tower of flesh,
Hee is not conqueror, my heart stands out,
And yields to thee, scorning his tyranny.
My doors are vowed shut, and I cannot help you.
Your wounds are mortal, wounded is mine Honour,
If there the Towne-guard find you. Unhappy Dame,
Relief is perjured, my vow kept, shame.
What hellish Destiny did twist my fate?
Rest cease thine eye-lids; be not passionate:
Sweet sleep secure, Isle remove my self.
That Viper Envy shall not spot thy fame:
Isle take that poison with me, my souls rest,
For like a Serpent, Isle creep on my breast.
Thou more then man, loue-wounded: joy and grief fight in my blood. Thy wounds and constancy
Are both so strong none can have victory.
Darken the world, earths-Queene, get thee to bed;
The earth is light while those two Stars are spread:
Their splendour will betray me to men's eyes.
Veil thy bright face: for if thou longer stay,
Phoebus will rise to thee, and make night day.
To part and leave you hurt my soul doth fear.
To part from hence I cannot, you being there.
We'll move together, then Fate Love controls,
And as we part so bodies part from souls.
Mine is the earth, thine the refined fire:
I am mortal, thou divine, then soul mount higher.
Why then take comfort sweet, Isle see'ou to morrow.
My wounds are nothing, thy loss breeds my sorrow.
See now'tis dark.
Support your Master, legs, a little further:
Faint not bold heart with anguish of my wound:
Try further yet, can blood weigh down my soul?
Desire is vain without ability.
Thus false a Monarch, if Fate push at him.
Come on my hearts, we are the Cities security, Isle give you your charge, and then like Courtiers every man spy out: let no man in my company be afraid to speak to a Cloak lined with Velvet, nor tremble at the sound of a jingling Spur.
May I never be counted a cock of the game, if I fear Spurs: but be gelded like a Capon for the preserving of my voice.
Isle have none of my Band refrain to search a venereal house, though his Wives sister be a lodger there: nor take two shillings of the Bawd to save the Gentlemen's credits that are aloft: and so like voluntary Panders leave them, to the shame of all Halbardiers.
Nay, for the Wenches, we'll tickle them, that's flat.
If you meet a Sheuoiliero, that's in the gross phrase, a Knight, that swaggers in the street, and being taken, has no mo∣ney in his Purse to pay for his fees; it shall be a part of your duty to entreat me to let him go.
O marvelous his there such Sheuoiliers?
Some 200. that's the least, that are reueal'd.
What groan is that? bring a light. Who lies there?
It is the Lord Mendosa, kinsman to our Duke.
Speak good my Lord, relate your dire mischance:
Life like a fearful servant flies his Master,
Art must atone them, or'th' whole man is lost.
Convey him to a Surgeons, then return:
No place shall be unsearched until we find
The truth of this mischance. Make haste again.
Whose house is this stands open? in, and search.
What guests that house contains, and bring them forth.
This Noble-mans misfortune stirs my quiet,
And fills my soul with fearful fantasies.
But Isle unwind this Labyrinth of doubt,
Else industry shall lose part of it selfes labour.
Who have we there? Signiors cannot you tell vs
How our Princes kinsman came wounded to the death
Nigh to your houses.
Hey-day; crosse-ruffe at midnight. Is it Christmas?
You go a gaming to your neighbours house.
Dost make a Mummer of me Oxe-head?
Make answer Gentlemen, it doth concern you.
Oxe-head will bear an action; Isle hawed Law; Isle not be yoked. Bear witness Gentlemen, he calls me Oxe-head.
Doe you hear sir?
Very well, very well, take Law and hang thy self, I care not. Had she no other but that good face to dote upon? Id rather she had dealt with a dangerous French-man, then with such a Pagan.
Are you mad? answer my demand.
I am as good a Christian as thy self,
Though my Wife have now new christened me.
Are you deaf, you make no answer?
Would I had had the circumcising of thee Jew, Id have
Cut short your Cuckold-maker, I would in faith, I would in faith.
Away with them to prison; they'll answer better there.
Not to fast Gentlemen: vvhat's our crime?
Murder of the Dukes kinsman, Signior Mendosa.
Nothing else? we did it, we did it, we did it.
Take heed Gentlemen what you confess.
Isle confess any thing since I am made a fool by a knave.
Isle be hanged like an innocent, that's flat.
Isle not see my shame. Hemp in stead of a Quacksaluer, you shall put out mine eyes, and my head shall be bought to make Incke-hornes of.
You doe confess the murder?
Sir, it is true,
Done by a faithless Christian and a Jew.
To prison with them, wee will hear no further,
The tongue betrays the heart of guilty murder.
Welcome to Pay sweet, and may this kiss
Chase Melancholy from thy company:
Speak my souls joy, how fare you after travail.
Like one that escapes dangers on the Seas,
Yet trembles with cold fears being safe on land,
With bare imagination of what's past.
Fear keep with cowards, aire-stars cannot move.
Fear in this kind, my Lord, doth sweeten love.
To think fear joy (dear) I cannot conjecture.
Feare's sire to fervency,
Which makes loves sweet prone Nectar:
Trembling desire, fear, hope, and doubtful leisure,
Distill from love the Quintessence of pleasure.
Madame, I yield to you; Fear keeps with Love,
My Oratory is too weak against you:
You have the ground of knowledge, wise experience,
Which makes your argument invincible.
You are Times Scholar, and can flatter weakness.
Custom allows it, and we plainly see
Princes and women maintain flattery.
Anna, go see my Jewels and my Trunks
Be aptly placed in their several rooms.
My Lord, know you this Gallant? it is a complete Gentleman.
I doe; it is Count Gniaca, my endeared friend.
Welcome to Pauie, welcome fairest Lady:
Your sight dear friend, is lifes restorative;
This day's the period of long-wish'd content,
More welcome to me then day to the world,
Night to the wearied, or gold to a Miser;
Such joy feels Friendship in Society.
A rare shaped man: compare them both together,
Our loves are friendly twins, both at a birth;
The joy you taste, that joy doe I conceive,
This day's the Jubilee of my desire.
He's fairer then he was when first I saw him.
This little time makes him more excellent.
Relate some news. Hark you, what Lady's that▪
Be open breasted, so will I to thee.
Error did blind him that paints Love blind;
For my Love plainly judges difference:
Love is clear sighted, and with Eagles eyes,
Vndazeled, looks upon bright Sunne-beam'd beauty:
Nature did rob her self, when she made him.
Blushing to see her work excel her self▪
Tic shape makes mankind femelacie.
Forgive me Rogero, it is my Fate
To love thy friend, and quit thy love with hate.
I must enjoy him, let hope thy passions smother:
Faith cannot cool blood; Isle clip him, were it my brother.
Such is the heate of my sincere affection,
Hell nor earth can keep love in subjection.
I crave your Honours pardon my Ignorance
Of what you were, may gain a courteous pardon.
There needs no pardon, where there's no offence;
His tongue strikes Music ravishing my sense:
I must be sudden, else desire confounds me.
What sport affords this Climate for delight?
We'll hawk and hunt to day, as for to morrow
Variety shall feed variety.
Dissimulation women's armour is,
Aide love belief, and female constancy.
Oh, I am sick my Lord, kind Rogero help me.
Forsend it heaven, Madame sit; how fare you?
My lives best comfort speak, O speak sweet Saint.
Fetch Art to keep life, run my Love, I faint:
My vital breath runs coldly through my veins,
I see lean Death with eyes imaginary,
Stand fearfully before me: here my end
A wife inconstant, yet thy loving friend.
As swift as thought, fly I to wish thee aide.
Thus innocence by craft is soon betrayed.
My Lord Gniaca, it is your Art must heal me,
I am loue-sicke for your love; love, love, for loving:
I blush for speaking truth; fair Sir believe me,
Beneath the Moon nought but your frown can grieve me.
Lady, by heaven, me thinks, this fit is strange.
Count not my love light for this sudden change:
By Cupids Bow I swear, and will avow,
I never knew true perfect love till now.
Wrong not your self, me, and your dearest friend,
Your love is violent, and soon will end.
Love is not Love unless Love doth persevere,
That love is perfect love, that loves for ever.
Such love is mine, believe it vvell-shap'd youth,
Though women use to lye, yet I speak truth.
Give sentence for my life or speedy death:
Can you affect me?
I should belie my thoughts to give denial,
But then to friendship I must turn disloyal:
I will not wrong my friend, let that suffice.
Isle be a miracle, for love a woman dyes,
Hold madame, these are soul killing passions.
Id rather wrong my friend then you your self.
Love me, or else by Jove death's but delayed:
My vow is fixed in heaven, fear shall not move me,
My life is death with tortures 'lesse you love me.
Give me some respite, and I will resolve you.
My heart denies it.
My blood is violent, now or else never,
Love me, and like loves Queen Isle fall before thee,
Enticing dalliance from thee with my smiles,
And steal thy heart with my delicious kisses.
Isle study Art in love, that in a rupture
Thy soul shall taste pleasures excelling nature.
Love me, both Art and nature in large recompense,
Shall be profuse in ravishing thy sense.
You have prevailed, I am yours from all the world,
Thy wit and beauty have entranced my soul:
I long for dalliance, my blood burns like fire,
Hells pain on earth is to delay desire.
I kiss thee for that breath, this day you hunt;
In midst of all your sports leave you Rogero,
Return to me whose life rests in thy sight,
Where pleasure shall make Nectar our delight.
I condescend to what thy will implores me;
He that but now neglected thee, adores thee:
But see here comes my friend, fear makes him tremble.
Women are witless that cannot dissemble:
Now I am sick again: whore's my Lord Rogero?
His love and my health's vanished both together.
Wrong not thy friend, dear friend, in thy extremes,
Here's a profound Hipocrates, my dear,
To minister to thee the spirit of health.
Your sight to me, my Lord, excels all Physic;
I am better far (my Love) then when you left me:
Your friend was comfortable to me at the last.
It was but a fit, my Lord, and now it is past.
Are all things ready sir?
Yes Madame, the house is fit.
Desire in women is the life of wit.
O partner, I am with child of laughter, and none but you can be my Mid-wife: was there ever such a game at Noddy?
Our Husbands think they are fore-men of the Jury, they hold the Heretic point of Predestination, and sure they are borne to be hanged.
They are like to prove men of judgment, but not for killing of him that's yet alive, and well recovered.
As soon as my man saw the Watch come up,
All his spirit was down.
But though they have made vs good sport in speech,
They did hinder vs of good sport in action.
O wench, imagination is strong in pleasure.
That's true: for the opinion my Good-man had of enjoying you, made him doe wonders.
Why should weak man, that is so soon satisfied, desire variety?
Their answer is, to feed on Pheasants continually would breed a loathing.
Then if we seek for strange flesh that have sto∣makes at will, it is pardonable.
I, if men had any feeling of it, but they judge vs by themselves.
Well, we will bring them to the Gallows, and then, like kind virgins, beg their lives, and after live at our plea∣sures, and this bridle shall still reyne them.
Faith, if we were disposed, we might seem as safe,
As if we had the broad seal to warrant it:
But that nights work will stick by me this forty weeks.
Come, shall we go visit the discontented Lady Lentulus?
Whom the Lord Mendosa has confessed to his Surgeon,
He would have robed? I thought great men would but
Have robed the poor, yet he the rich.
He thought that the richer purchase, though with the worse conscience: but vvee'll to comfort her, and then go hear our Husbands lamentations. They say mine has compiled an ungodly volume of Satyrs against women, and calls his book The Snarl.
But he's in hope his book will save him.
God defend that it should, or any that snarl in that fashion.
Well wench, if I could be metamorphosed into thy shape,
I should have my husband pliant to me in his life,
And soon rid of him: for being weary with his continual mo∣tion,
He'de dye of a consumption.
Make much of him, for all our wanton prize,
Follow the Proverb, Merry be and wise.
Time that deuour'st all mortality,
Run swiftly these few hours,
And bring Gniaca on thy aged shoulders,
That I may clip the rarest model of creation.
Doe this gentle Time
And I will curl thine aged silver locke,
And dally with thee in delicious pleasure.
Medea-like I will renew thy youth;
But if thy frozen steps delay my love,
Isle poison thee with murder, curse thy paths,
And make thee know a time of infamy.
Anna, give watch▪ and bring me certain notice
When Count Gniaca doth approach my house.
Madame I go.
I am kept for pleasure, though I never taste it.
For it is the ushers office still to cover
His Ladies private meetings with her Lover.
Desire, thou quenchless flame that burn'st our souls,
Cease to torment me;
The dew of pleasure shall put out thy fire,
And quite consume thee with satierie.
Lust shall be cooled with lust, wherein Isle prove,
The life of love is only saved by love.
Madame, hoe's coming▪
Thou blessed Mercury,
Prepare a banquet fit to please the Gods;
Let Sphaere-like Music breathe delicious tones
Into our mortal ears; perfume the house
With odoriferous scents, sweeter then Myrrh,
Or all the Spices in Panchaia:
His sight and touching wee will recreate,
That his five Senses shall be fiue-fold happy.
His breath like Roses casts out sweet perfume;
Time now with pleasure shall it self consume.
How like Atones in his hunting weeds,
Looks this same Goddess tempter?
And art thou come? this kiss entrance thy soul.
Gods I doe not envy you; for know this
Way's here on earth complete, excels you bliss:
Isle not change this nights pleasure with you all.
Thou creature made by Love, composed of pleasure,
That make true use of thy creation,
In thee both wit and beauty's resident;
Delightful pleasure, vnpeer'd excellence.
This is the fate fixed fast unto thy birth,
That thou alone should be mans heaven on earth:
If I alone may but enjoy thy love,
Isle not change earthly joy to be heavens Jove:
For though that women haters now are common,
They all shall know earths joy consists in woman.
My love was dotage till I loved thee;
For thy soul truly tastes our petulance,
Conditious Lover, Cupids Intelligencer,
That makes man understand what pleasure is:
These are fit attributes unto thy knowledge;
For women's beauty o'er men bear that rule.
Our power commands the rich, the wise, the fool.
Though scorn grows big in man in growth &amp; stature,
Yet women are the rarest works in nature.
I doe confess the truth, and must admire
That women can command rare mans desire.
Cease admiration, sit to Cupids feast,
The preparation to Papheon dalliance,
Harmonious Music breathe thy silver Airs,
To stir up appetite to Venus banquet,
That breath of pleasure that entrances souls,
Making that instant happiness a heaven,
In the true taste of loves deliciousness.
Thy words are able to stir cold desire,
Into his flesh that lies emtomb'd in Ice,
Having lost the feeling use of warmth in blood,
Then how much more in me, whose youthful veins,
Like a proud River, ouer-flow their bounds?
Pleasures Ambrosia, or loves nourisher,
I long for privacy; come, let vs in,
It is custom, and not reason makes love sin.
Isle lead the way to Venus Paradise,
Where thou shalt taste that fruit that made man wise.
Sing notes of pleasure to elate our blood:
Why should heaven frown on joys that doe vs good?
I come Isabella keeper of loves treasure,
To force thy blood to lust, and ravish pleasure.
Still I am thy captive, yet thy thoughts are free:
To be Loves bond-man is true liberty.
I have swam in seas of pleasure without ground,
Venturous desire past depth it self hath drowned.
Such skill has beauties Art in a true lover,
That dead desire to life it can recover.
Thus beauty our desire can soon advance,
Then straight again kill it with dalliance.
Divinest women, your enchanting breaths
Give Lovers many lifes and many deaths.
May thy desire to me for ever last,
Not dye by surfeit on my delicates:
And as I tie this Jewel about thy neck,
So may I tie thy constant love to mine,
Never to seek weaking variety,
That greedy curse of mans and women's hell,
Where nought but shame and loathed diseases dwell.
You counsel well, dear, learn it then;
For change is given more to you then men.
My faith to thee, like rocks, shall never move,
The Sun shall change his course ere I my love.
Madame, the Count Rogero knocks.
Dear Love into my chamber, till I send
My hate from sight.
Lust makes me wrong my friend.
Anna, stand here, and entertain Lord Rogero.
I from my window straight will give him answer.
The Serpents wit to woman rest in me,
By that man fell, then why not he by me?
Feigned sighs and tears dropped from a women's eye,
Blinds man of reason, strikes his knowledge dumb:
Wit arms a woman, Count Rogero come.
My office still is under: yet in time
Ushers prove Masters, degrees makes vs climb.
Who knocks? is it you my noble Lord?
Came my friend hither, Count Gniaca?
No, my good Lord.
Whore's my Isabella?
In her Chamber.
Good: Isle visit her.
The chamber's locked my Lord: she will be private.
Locked against me, my saucy malapert?
Be patient good my Lord: she'll give you answer.
Isabella life of love, speak, it is I that calls.
I must desire your Lordship pardon me.
Lordship? what's this? Isabella, art thou blind?
My Lord, my lust was blind, but now my solo's clear sighted,
And sees the spots that did corrupt my flesh:
Those tokens sent from hell, brought by desire,
The messenger of everlasting death.
My Lady's in her Pulpit, now she'll preach.
Is not thy Lady mad? in verity I always
Took her for a Puritan, and now she shows it.
Mock not Repentance. Profanation
Brings mortals laughing to damnation.
Believe it Lord, Isabella's ill past life,
Like gold refined, shall make a perfect Wife.
I stand on firm ground now, before on Ice;
We know not virtue till wee taste of vice.
Doe you hear dissimulation, woman sinner?
Leave my house good my Lord, and for my part,
I look for a most wished reconciliation
Betwixt my self and my most wronged Husband.
Tempt not contrition then religious Lord.
Indeed I was one of your family once:
But doe not I know these are but braine-trickes:
And where the Devil has the Fee-simple, he will keep possession.
And will you halt before me that your self has made a cripple?
Nay, then you wrong me: and disdained Lord,
I paid thee for thy pleasures vendible.
Whose mercenary flesh I bought with coin,
I will divulge thy baseness, 'lesse with speed
Thou leave my house and my society.
Already turned apostate, but now all pure,
Now damned your faith is, and loves endure
Like dew upon the grass, when pleasures Sun
Shines on your virtues, all your virtue's done.
Isle leave thy house and thee, go get thee in,
Thou gaudy child of pride, and nurse of sin.
Rail not on me my Lord; for if you doe,
My hot desire of vengeance shall strike wonder;
Revenge in woman false like dreadful thunder.
Your Lordship will command me no further service?
I thank thee for thy watchful service past;
Thy vsher-like attendance on the Stairs,
Being true signs of thy Humility.
I hope I did discharge my place with care.
Ushers should have much wit, but little hair;
Thou hast of both sufficient: prithee leave me,
If thou hast an honest Lady, commend me to her,
But she is none.
Farewell thou private strumpet worse then common.
Man were on earth an Angel but for woman,
That seven-fold branch of hell from them doth grow,
Pride, Lust, and Murder, they raise from below,
With all their fellow sins. Women were made
Of blood, without souls: when their beauties fade,
And their lust's past, avarice or bawdry
Makes them still loved: then they buy venery,
Bribing damnation, and hire brothel slaves.
Shame's their executors, Infamy their graves.
Your painting will wipe off, which Art did hide,
And show your ugly shape in spite of pride.
Farewell Isabella poor in soul and fame,
I leave thee rich in nothing but in shame.
Then soulelesse women know, whose faiths are hollow,
Your lust being quenched, a bloody act must follow.
IVstice that makes Princes like the Gods, draws vs unto the Se∣nate,
That with unpartial balance wee may poise
The crimes and innocence of all offenders,
Our presence can chase bribery from Laws:
He best can judge, that hears himself the cause.
True mighty Duke, it best becomes our places,
To have our light from you the Son of Virtue,
Subject Authority, for gain, love or fear
Oft quits the guilty, and condemns the clear.
The Land and people's mine, the crimes being known,
I must redress my subjects wrong's, mine own.
Call for the two suspected for the murder
Of Mendosa, our endered kinsman. These voluntary murderers
That confess the Murder of him that is yet alive.
We'll sport with serious Justice for a while,
In show we'll frown on them that make vs smile.
Bring forth the Prisoners we may hear their answers.
Stand forth you Vipers, that have sucked blood,
And lopped a branch sprung from a royal tree:
What can you answer to escape tortures?
We have confessed the fact my Lord, to God and man,
Our ghostly father, and that worthy Captain:
We beg not life but favourable death.
On what ground sprung your hate to him we loved?
Upon that curse laid on Venecians jealousy. Wee thought he being a Courtier, would have made vs Magni∣ficoes of the right stamp, and have plaid at Primero in the presence, with gold of the City brought from our Indies.
Nay more, my Lord, we feared that your kinsman for a mess of Sonnets, would have given the plot of vs and our wives, to some needy Poet, and for sport and profit brought vs in some Venician Comedy upon the Stage.
Our Justice dwells with mercy; be not desperate.
His Highness fine would save your lives if you would see it.
All the Law in Venice shall not save me, I will not be saved.
Fear not, I have a trick to bring vs to hanging in spite of the Law.
Why now I see thou love me; thou hast confirmed
Thy friendship for ever to me by these words.
Why, I should never hear Lantern and candle called for,
But I should think it was for me and my Wife.
Isle hang for that, forget not thy trick.
Vpon'em with thy trick, I long for sentence.
Will you appeal for mercy to the Duke?
Kill not thy Justice Duke, to save our lives:
We have deserved death.
Make not vs presidents for after wrongs,
I will receive punishment for my sins,
It shall be a means to lift me towards heaven.
Let's have our desert; we crave no favour.
Take them asunder, grave Justice makes vs mirth,
That man is soulelesse that ne'er sins on earth.
Signior Mizaldus, relate the weapon you killed him with, and the manner.
My Lord, your lustful kinsman, I can title him no bet∣la, came sneaking to my house like a Promoter to spy flesh in the Lent: now I having a Venecian spirit, watched my time, and with my Rapier run him through, knowing all pains are but trifles to the horn of a Citizen.
Take him aside. Signior Claridiana, what weapon had you for this bloody act? what dart used Death?
My Lord, I brained him with a leaver my neighbour lent me, and he stood by and cried strike home old boy.
With several Instruments. Bring them face to face.
With what killed you our Nephew?
With a Rapier Liege.
Tic a lye,
I killed him with a leaver, and thou stood'st by.
Dost think to save me &amp; hang thy self? no I scorn it; is this the trick thou said thou had: I killed him Duke.
Hee only gave consent: it was I that did it.
Thou hast always been cross to me and wilt be to my death. Have I taken all this pains to bring thee to hanging, and dost thou slip now?
We shall never agree in a tale till we come to the gallows, then we shall jump.
Isle show you a crosse-point, if you cross me thus,
When thou shalt not see it.
Isle make a wry mouth at that, or it shall cost me a fall: It is thy pride to be hanged alone, because thou scorn my com∣pany: but it shall be known I am as good a man as thy self, and in these actions will keep company with thy betters Jew.
Monster.
Dog-killer.
Fencer.
Part them, part'em.
Hang vs, and quarter vs, we shall ne'er be parted till then.
You doe confess the murder done by both.
But that I would not have the slave laugh at me,
And count me a coward, I have a very good mind to live,
But I am resolute: it is but a turn. I doe confess.
So doe I,
Pronounce our doom, wee are prepared to dye.
We sentence you to hang till you be dead:
Since you were men eminent in place and worth,
We give a Christian burial to you both,
Not in one grave together we beseech you, wee shall ne'er agree.
He scorns my company, till the day of Judgment,
Isle not hang with him.
You hang together, that shall make you friends,
An everlasting hatred death soon ends:
To prison with them till the day of death;
Kings words like Fate, must never change their breath.
You malice-monger, Isle be hanged before thee,
And't be but to vex thee.
Isle doe you as good a turn or the hangman, &amp; shall fall out▪
Now to our kinsman, shame to royal blood,
Bring him before vs.
Theft in a Prince is sacrilege to honour
It is virtues scandal, death of Royalty,
I blush to see my shame; Nephew sit down
Justice that smiles on those on him must frown,
Speak freely Captain, where found you him wounded?
Between the widows house &amp; these cross neighbours,
Besides an Artificial ladder made of ropes
Was fastened to her window which he confessed
He brought to rob her of Jewels and coin.
My knowledge yields no further circumstance.
Thou know too much, would I were past all know∣ledge,
I might forget my grief springs from my shame,
Thou monster of my blood, answer in brief
To these Assertions made against thy life.
Is thy soul guilty of so base a fact?
I doe confess I did intend to rob her.
In the attempt I fell and hurt my self
Laws thunder is but death, I dread it not,
So my Lentulus honour be preserved
From black suspicion of a lustful night.
Thy head's thy forfeit for thy harts offence,
Thy bloods prerogative may claim that favour,
Thy person then to death doomb'd by just laws▪
Thy death is infamous, but worse the cause.
O heavens that I was borne to be hates slave,
The food of Rumour, that deuour's my fame;
I am called Insatiat Countess lusts paramour
A glorious Devil, and the noble whore,
I am sick, vexed, and tormented, O revenge.
On whom would my Isabella be revenged?
Upon a Viper, that does get mine honour,
I will not name him till I be revenged,
See, her's the Libels are divulged against me,
An everlasting scandal to my name.
And thus the villen writes in my disgrace.
Who loves Isabella the insatiate,
Needs Atlas back for to content her lust,
That wandering Strumpet, and chaste wedlockes hate,
That renders truth: deceit for loyal trust,
That sacrilegious thief to Himens rights,
Making her lust her God, heaven her delights.
Swell not proud heart, Isle quench thy grief in blood,
Desire in woman cannot be withstood.
Isle be thy champion sweet against all the world,
Name but the villain that defames thee thus.
Dare thy hand execute, whom my tongue condemns,
Then art thou truly valiant, mine for ever,
But if thou fain'st, hate must our true love sever.
By my dead fathers soul, my mothers virtues,
And by my knight hood and gentility; Isle be revenged
On all the Authors of your Obloquy: Name him.
Rogero.
Ha.
What does his name affright thee coward Lord?
Be mad Isabella, curse on thy revenge,
This Lord was knighted for his fathers worth,
Not for his own.
Farewell thou perjured man, Isle leave you all,
You all conspire to work mine honours fall.
Stay my Isabella, were he my fathers son,
Composed of me, he dies,
Delight still keep with thee: go in.
Thou art just:
Revenge to me is sweeter now then lust.
What mean you Nobles, will you kill each other?
Hold.
Thou shame to friendship, what intends thy hate?
Love Arms my hand, makes my soul valiant,
Isabellas wrongs now sits upon my sword,
To fall more heavy to thy cowards head,
Then thunderbolts upon Ioues rifted Oaks:
Deny thy scandal, or defend thy life.
What? hath thy faith and and reason left thee both?
That thou art only flesh without a soul:
Hast thou no feeling of thy self and me?
Blind rage that will not let thee see thy self.
I come not to dispute but execute:
And thus comes death.
And thus I break thy dart, her's at thy whores face.
It is mist: here's at thy heart, stay, let vs breath.
Let reason govern rage, yet let vs leave,
Although most wrong be mine, I can forgive:
In this attempt, thy shame will ever live.
Thou hast wronged the Phoenix of all women rarest,
She that's most wise, most loving, chaste and fairest.
Thou dotest upon a devil, not a woman,
That he's bewitched thee with her Sorcery,
And drowned thy soul in lady faculties,
Her useless lust has benumbed thy knowledge,
Thy intelectuall powers, oblivion smothers,
That thou art nothing but forgetfulness.
What's this to my Isabella, my sins mine own,
Her faults were none, until thou made 'em known.
Leave her, and leave thy shame where first thou found it;
Else live a bond slave to diseased lust,
Devoured in her gulfe-like appetite
And infamy shall write thy Epitaph,
Thy memory leaves nothing but thy crimes,
A scandal to thy name in future times.
Put up your weapon, I dare here you further,
Insatiat lust is Sire still to murder.
Believe it friend, if her heart blood were vexed,
Though you kill me, new pleasure makes you next:
She loved me dearer, then she loves you now,
She'll ne'er be faithful, has twice broke her vow.
This curse pursues female Adultery,
They'll swim through blood for sins variety:
Their pleasure like a sea groundless and wide,
A women's lust was never satisfied.
Fear whispers in my breast, I have a soul
That blushes red, for tending bloody facts,
Forgive me friend, if I can be forgiven,
Thy counsel is the path leads me to heaven.
I doe embrace thy reconciled love.
That death or danger, now shall ne'er remove,
Go tell thy Insaciate Countess Anna,
We have escaped the snares of her false Love,
Vowing for ever to abandon her.
You have heard our Resolution, pray be gone.
My office ever rested at your pleasure,
I was the Indian, yet you had the treasure.
My faction often sweates, and oft takes cold,
Then gilde true diligence o'er with gold.
Thy speech deseru's it there's gold,
Be honest now, and not loves Noddy,
Turned up and plaid on whilst thou keep the stock,
Prethe formally let's ha thy absence.
Lords farewell,
Tic Whores and Panders, that makes earth like hell.
Now I am got out of lusts Labyrinth,
I will to Venice, for a certain time,
To recreate my much abused spirits▪
And then revisit Pani and my friend,
Isle bring you on your way but must return;
Lust is like Aetna, and will ever burn.
Yet now desire is quenched flamed once in height:
Till man knows hell, he never has firm faith.
Out scritch-Owle messenger of my revenges death
Thou dost belie Guiaca it is not so.
Upon mine honesty they are united.
Thy honesty? thou vassal to my pleasure take that
Dare thou control me, when I say no?
Art not my footestoole, did not I create thee?
And made thee gentle, being borne a beggar:
Thou hast been my women's Pander for a crown,
And dost thou stand upon thy honesty?
I am, what you please Madame. Yet it is so.
Slave, I will slit thy tongue, less thou say no.
No, no, no Madame.
I have my humour, though they now be false,
Faint-hearted coward get thee from my sight,
When villain? hast, and come not ne'er me.
Madame: I run, her sight like death doth fear me.
Perfidious cowards, stain of Nobility,
Venecians, and be reconciled with words:
O that I had Guiaca once more here,
Within this prison, made of flesh and bone,
I'd not trust Thunder with my fell revenge,
But mine own hands, should doe the dire exploit,
And fame should Chronicle a women's acts▪
My rage respects the persons not the facts.
There place and words hath power to defame me,
Mean hate is stinglesse, and does only name me:
I not regard it, it is high blood that swells,
Give me revenge, and damn me into hells,
A gallant Spaniard, I will hear him speak,
Grief must be speechless, ere the heart can break.
Lieutenant let good Discipline be used
In quartering of our Troops within the City,
Not separated into many streets,
That shows weak love, but not sound policy.
Division in small numbers makes all weak,
Forces united are the nerues of war,
Mother and nurse of observation.
Whose rare ingenious spright, fills all the world
By looking on it self with piercing eyes,
Will look through strangers imbecilities:
Therefore be careful.
All shall be ordered fitting your command,
For these three gifts which makes a Soldier rare,
Is love and duty with a valiant care.
What rarety of women feeds my sight,
And leads my senses in a maze of wonder?
Bellona, thou were my mistress till I saw that shape
But now my sword, Isle consecrate to her,
Leave Mars and become Cupids Martialist,
Beauty can turn the rugged face of war,
And make him smile upon delightful peace,
Courting her smoothly like a femallist,
I grow a slave unto my potent love,
Whose power change hearts, make our fate remove.
Revenge not, Pleasure now ore-rules my blood,
Rage shall drown faint love in a crimson flood,
And were he caught, I'd make him murders hand.
Me thinks it were joy to die at her command,
Isle speak to hear her speech, whose powerful breath,
Is able to infuse life into death.
He comes to speak: hoe's mine, by love he is mine.
Lady, think bold intrusion courtesy,
Tic but imagination alters them,
Then it is your thoughts, not I, that doe offend.
Sir, your intrusion yet's but courtesy,
Unless your future humour alter it.
Why then Divinest woman, know my soul
Is dedicated to thy shrine of beauty,
To pray for mercy, and repent the wrongs
Done against love, and female purity.
Thou abstract drawn from natures empty store-house,
I am thy slave, command my sword, my heart
The soul is tried best by the bodies smart.
You are a stranger to this land and me,
What madness first for me to trust you then?
To cousin women is a trade amongst men,
Smooth promises faint passions with a lye,
Deceives our sex of fame and chastity:
What danger durst you hazard for my love?
Perils that that never mortal durst approve.
Isle double all the works of Hercules,
Expose my self in combat against an Host,
Meet danger in a place of certain death,
Yet never shrink, or give way to my Fate;
Bare-brested meet the murderous Tartars dart,
Or any fatal Engine made for death:
Such power he's love and beauty from your eyes,
He that dies resolute, does never die:
It is fear gives death his strength, which I resisted,
Death is but empty Air, the Fates have twisted.
Dare you revenge my quarrel, against a foe?
Then ask me if I dare embrace you thus,
Or kiss your hand, or gaze on your bright eye,
Where Cupped dances, on those globes of love,
Fear is my vassal, when I frown he flies,
A hundred times in life, a coward dies.
I not suspect your valour, but your will.
To gain your love, my fathers blood I'll spill.
Many have sworn the like, yet broke their vow.
My whole endeavour to your wish shall bow.
I am your plague to scourge your enemies.
Perform your promise, and enjoy your pleasure,
Spend my loves Dowry, that is women's treasure:
But if thy resolution dread the trial,
Isle tell the world, a Spaniard was disloyal.
Relate your grief, I long to hear their names,
Whose bastard spirits, thy true worth defames:
I'll wash thy scandal off, when their hearts bleeds,
Valour makes difference betwixt words and deeds.
Tell thy fems poison, blood shall wash thee white,
My spotless honour, is a slave to spite:
These are the monsters Venice doth bring forth,
Whose empty souls are bankcrupt of true worth.
False Count Guido, treacherous Guiaca,
Countess of Gazia, and of rich Massino.
Then if thou be a Knight, help the oppressed,
Through danger safety comes, through trouble rest.
And so my love.
Ignoble villens, their best blood shall prove,
Revenge false heavy, that is raised by love.
Think what reproach is to a women's name,
Honoured by birth, by marriage, and by beauty:
Be God on earth, and revenge innocence,
O worthy Spaniard, on my knees I beg,
Forget the persons, think on their offence.
By the white soul of honour, by heavens Jove:
They die if their death can attain your love.
Thus will I clip thy waste, embrace thee thus:
Thus dally with thy hair, and kiss thee thus:
Our Pleasures Pothean-like in sundry shapes,
Shall with variety stir dalliance.
I am immortal, O divinest creature:
Thou dost excel the Gods, in wit and feature.
False Counts you die, revenge now shakes his rods:
Beauty condemns you, stronger then the Gods.
Come Mars of lovers, Vulcan is not here,
Make vengeance like my bed, quite void of fear.
My senses are entranced, and in this slumber,
I taste heavens joys, but cannot count the number.
Well Madame: you see the destiny that follows marriage,
Our husbands are quiet now, and must suffer the law.
If my husband had been worth the begging some Courtier would have had him: he might be begged well enough, for he knows not his own wife from another.
O you're a couple of trusty wenches, to deceive your husbands thus.
If wee had not deceived them thus, we had been Trust wenches.
Our husbands will be hanged, because they think themselu's Cuckolds.
If all true Cuckolds were of that mind, the hangman would be the richest occupation, and more wealthy widows, then there be younger brothers to marry them.
The Merchant venturers would be a very small com∣panie.
It is twelve to one of that, how ever the rest scope, I shall fear a massacre.
If my husband hereafter for his wealth chance to be dubbed:
I'll have him called the Knight of the supposed home.
Faith, and it sounds well.
Come madcaps leave jesting, and let's deliver them out of their earthly purgation; you are the spirits that torment them: but my love and Lord, kind Mendosa, will loose his life, to preserve mine honour, not for hate to others.
By my troth, if I had been his judge, I should have hanged him for having no more wit, I speak as I think, for I would not be hanged for ne'er a man under the heavens.
Faith, I think I should for my Husband. I doe not hold the opinion of the Philosopher, that writes we love them best, that we enjoy first: for I protest I love my husband better then any that did know me before.
So doe I, yet life and pleasure are two sweet things to a woman.
He that's willing to die to save mine honour, I'll die to save his.
Tut: believe it who that list, wee love a lively man I grant you:
But to maintain that life, I'll ne'er consent to die.
This is a rule I still will keep in breast,
Love well thy husband wench, but thy self best.
I have followed your counsel hitherto, and mean to doe still.
Come: we neglect our business, it is no jesting,
To morrow they are executed leasse we reprieve them,
Wee be their destinies to cast their fate.
Let's all go.
I fear not to come late.
Day was my night, and night must be my day:
The sun shined on my pleasure, with my lone,
And darkness must lend aide to my revenge,
The stage of heaven, is hung with solemn black,
A time best fitting, to Act Tragedies,
The nights great Queen, that maiden governess
Musters black clouds, to hide her from the world,
Afraid to look on my bold enterprise.
Cursed creatures messengers of death, possess the world,
Night-Rauens, scritch-owles, and vote-killing Mandrakes,
The ghosts of misers, that imprisoned gold,
Within the harmless bowels of the earth,
Are nights companions: bawds to lust and murder,
Be all propitious to my Act of justice:
Upon the scandalizers of her fame,
That is the life-blood of deliciousness▪
Deemed Isabella, Cupids Treasurer.
Whose soul contains the richest gifts of love:
Her beauty from my heart, fear doth expel;
They relish pleasure best, that dread not hell.
Who's there?
A friend to thee, if thy intents be just &amp; honourable.
Count Rogero, speak, I am the watch.
My name is Rogero: dost thou know me?
Yes slanderous villen, nurse of Obloquy,
Whose poisoned breath, he's speckled clear faced virtue,
And made a Leper of Isabella's fame,
That is as spotless, as the eye of heaven.
Thy vital threads a cutting, start not slave,
Hoe's sure of sudden death, heaven cannot save.
Art not Guiaca turned Apostate, he's pleasure once again
Turned thee again a devil, art not Guiaca? ho!
O that I were, then would I stab my self,
For he is marked for death, as well as thee:
I am Don Sago thy mortal enemy,
Whose hand love makes thy executioner.
I know thee valiant Spaniard, and to thee
Murders more hateful, then is sacrilege
Thy actions ever have been honourable.
And this the crown of all my Actions,
To purge the earth, of such a man turned monster.
I never wronged thee Spaniard, did I? speak
I'll make thee satisfaction like a soldier,
A true Italian, and a Gentleman:
Thy rage is treachery without a cause.
My rage is just, and thy heart blood shall know,
He that wrongs beauty, must be honours foe:
Isabels quarrel, arms the Spaniards spirit.
Murder should keep with baseness, not with merit:
I'll answer thee to morrow by my soul,
And clear thy doubts, or satisfy thy will.
Hoe's wars best scholar, can with safety kill.
Take this to night, now meet with me to morrow,
I come Isabella, half thy hate is dead,
Valour makes murder light, which fear makes dead.
The pistol was shot here seize him,
Bring lights, what Don Sago Colonel of the horse?
Ring the Alarm bell, raise the whole City,
His Troops are in the town, I fear treachery:
Whose this lies murdered, speak bloud-thirstie Spaniard.
I have not spoiled his face, you may know his visnomy.
It is Count Rogero, go convey him hence.
Thy life proud Spaniard, answers this offence,
A strong guard for the prisoner, less the cities powers
Rise to rescue him.
What needs this strife?
Know slaves, I prize revenge aboue my life.
Fems register to future times shall tell
That by Don Sago, Count Rogero fell.
DOn Sago quak'st thou not to behold this spectacle,
This innocent sacrifice murdered nobleness,
When blood the maker ever promises,
Shall though with slow yet with sure vengeance rest.
I'tis a guerdon earned, and must be paid,
As sure revenge, as it is sure a deed:
I nee'r knew murder yet, but it did bleed.
Can thou after so many fearful conflicts,
Between this object, and thy guilty conscience,
Now thou art freed from out the serpents Jaws,
That wild Adulteress, whose sorceries
Doth draw chaste men into incontinence:
Whose tongue flows over with harmful eloquence.
Can thou I say repent this heinous Act,
And learn to loath, that killing Cockatrice?
By this fresh blood, that from thy manly breast,
I cowardly sluct out, I would in hell,
From this sad minute, still the day of doom:
To re-inspire vain Aesculapius.
And fill these crimson conduits, feel the fire
Due to the damned, and this horrid fact
Upon my soul, brave Spaniard, I believe thee.
O cease to weep in blood, or teach me too,
The bubbling wounds, doe murmur for revenge:
This is the end of lust, where men may see,
Murders the shadow of Adultery:
And follows it to death.
But hopeful Lord, we doe commiserate,
Thy bewitched fortunes▪ a free pardon give:
On this thy true and noble penitence.
With all we make thee Colonel of our horse;
Levied against the proud Venecian state.
Medina, I thank thee not, give life to him,
That sits with Risus, and the full cheeked Bacchus,
The rich and mighty Monarchs of the earth,
To me life is ten times more terrible,
Then death can be to me, O break my breast:
Divines and dying men may talk of hell,
But in my heart the several torments dwell.
What Tanais, Nilus? or what Tioris swift?
What Rhenus ferier then the Cataract?
Although Neptolis cold, the waives of all the northern sea,
Should flow for ever, through these guilty hands,
Yet the sanguinolent stain would extant be.
God pardon thee, we doe.
The Countess comes my Lord, unto the death:
But so unwillingly, and unprepared,
That she is rather forced, thinking the sum
She sent to you of twenty thousand pound,
Would have assured her of life.
O Heavens!
Is she not weary yet of lust and life?
Had it been Cressus wealth, she should have died;
Her goods by law, are all confiscate to vs,
And die she shall: her lust
Would make a slaughter house of Italy.
Ere she attained to four and twenty years,
Three Earls, one Vicount, and this valiant Spaniard,
Are known to abeene the fuel to her lust:
Besides her secret lovers, which charitably
I judge to have been but few, but some they were.
Here is a glass, wherein to view her soul,
A Noble, but unfortunate Gentleman,
Cropped by her hand, as some rude passenger
Doth pluck the tender Roses in the bud,
Murder and lust, the least of which is death,
And hath she yet any false hope of breath?
What place is this?
Madame, the Castle greene.
There should be dancing on a greene I think.
Madame: to you none other then your dance of death.
Good my Lord Cardinal doe not thunder thus,
I sent to day to my Physician▪
And as he soy's he finds no sign of death,
Good Madame, doe not jest away your soul▪
O servant, how hast thou betrayed my life?
Thou art my dearest lover now I see.
Thou wilt not leave me, till my very death.
Blessed be thy hand, I sacrifice a kiss
To it and vengeance: worthily thou did,
He died deservedly, not content to enjoy
My youth and beauty, riches and my fortune:
But like a Chronicler of his own vice,
In Epigrams and songs, he run'd my name,
Renowned me for a Strumpet in the Courts,
Of the French King, and the great Emperor.
Did thou not kill him drunk.
O shameless woman!
Thou shouldest, or in the embraces of his lust,
It might have been a women's vengeance.
Yet I thank thee Sago, and would not wish him living
Were my life instant ransom.
O Madame: in your soul have charity.
Ther's money for the poor.
O Lady this is but a branch of charity,
An ostentation, or a liberal pride:
Let me instruct your soul, for that, I fear,
Within the painted sepulchre of flesh,
Lies in a dead consumption: good Madame, read,
You put me to my book my Lord, will not that save me.
Yes Madame, in the everlasting world.
Amen, Amen.
While thou were my servant, thou hast ever said,
Amen to all my wishes, witness this spectacle:
Wher's my Lord Medina?
Here Isabella. What would you?
May we not be reprieved?
Mine honours past, you may not.
No, tic my honour past,
Thine honours past indeed.
Then ther's no hope of absolute remission.
For that your holy Confessor will tell you,
Be dead to this world, for I swear you dye,
Were you my fathers daughter.
Can you doe nothing my Lord Cardinal?
More then the world sweet Lady, help to save
What hand of man, wants power to destroy.
You're all for this world, then why not I?
Were you in health and youth, like me my Lord,
Although you merited the crown of life,
And stood in state of grace, assured of it:
Yet in this fearful separation,
Old as you are, even till your latest gasp,
You'd crave the help of the Physician:
And wish your days lengthn'd one summer longer▪
Though all be grief, labour and misery,
Yet none will part with it▪ that I can see.
Up to the scaffold with her, it is late.
Better late then never my good Lord you think:
You use square dealing, Medina's mighty Duke:
Tyrant of France, sent hither by the devil.
The fitter to meet you.
Peace: Good my Lord in death doe not provoke her.
Servant low as my destiny I kneel to thee,
Honouring in death, thy manly loyalty:
And what so ever become of my poor soul,
The joys of both worlds evermore be thine.
Commend me to the Noble Count Guiaca,
That should have shared thy valour, and my hatred:
Tell him I pray his pardon, and
Medina, art yet inspired from heaven,
Show thy Creators Image: be like him,
Father of mercy.
Head's man, doe thine office.
Now God lay all thy sins upon thy head,
And sink thee with them, to infernal darkness,
Thou teacher of the furies cruelty.
O Madame: teach your self a better prayer,
This is your latest hour.
He is mine enemy, his sight torments me,
I shall not die in quiet.
I'll be gone: off with her head there.
Take thou delight, to torture misery?
Such mercy find thou in the day of doom.
My Lord: here is a holy Friar desires,
To have some conference with the prisoners.
It is in private, what I have to say,
With favour of your father-hood.
Friar: in Gods name welcome.
Lady: it seems your eye is still the same,
Forgetful of what most it should behold,
Doe not you know me then?
Holy Sir: so far you are gone from my memory,
I must take truce with time, ere I can know you.
Bear record all, you blessed Saints in heaven,
I come not to torment thee in thy death:
For of himself hoe's terrible enough,
But call to mind a Lady like your self.
And think how ill in such a beauteous soul,
Upon the instant morrow of her nuptials,
Apostasy and wild revolt would show:
With all imagine that she had a Lord,
Jealous, the Air should ravish her chaste looks:
Doting like the creator in his models,
Who views them every minute, and with care,
Mixed in his fear of their obedience to him.
Suppose he sung through famous Italy,
More common then the looser songs of Petrarch:
To every several Zanies instrument,
And he poor wretch, hoping some better sate,
Might call her back from her Adulterate purpose:
Lives in obscure, and almost unknown life,
Till hearing, that she is condemned to die:
For he once loved her, lends his pined corps,
Motion to bring him to her stage of honour
Where drowned in woe: at her so dismal chance,
He clasps her: thus he false into a trance.
O my offended Lord lift up your eyes:
But yet avert them from my loathed sight.
Had I with you enjoyed the lawful pleasure,
To which belongs, nor fear, nor public shame:
I might have lived in honour, died in fame.
Your pardon on my faltering knees I beg:
Which shall confirm more peace unto my death,
Then all the grave instructions of the Church.
Pardon belongs unto my holy weeds,
Freely thou hast it, farewell my Isabella.
Let thy death ransom thy soul, O die a rare example,
The kiss thou gau'st me in the church, here take,
As I leave thee, so thou the world forsake.
Rare accident, ill welcome noble Lord:
Madame: your executioner desires you to forgive him.
Yes and give him too, what must I doe my friend?
Madame: only tie up your hair.
O these golden nets,
That have ensnared so many wanton youths,
Not one but he's been held a thread of life,
And superstitiously depended on,
Now to the block, we must veil: what else?
Madame: I must entreat you blind your eyes.
I have lived too long in darkness my friend:
And yet mine eyes with their maiesticque light,
Have got new Muses, in a Poets spright.
They have been more gazed at then the God of Day:
Their brightness never could be flattered,
Yet thou command a fixed cloud of Lawn,
To Eclipse eternally these minutes of light.
What else?
Now Madame: al's done,
And when you please, I'll execute my office.
We will be for thee straight.
Give me your blessing my Lord Cardinal:
Lord, I am well prepared:
Murder and lust, down with my ashes sink.
But like ungrateful seed perish in earth,
That you may never spring against my soul,
Like weeds to choke it in the heavenly harvest,
I fall to rise, mount to thy maker, spirit,
Leave here thy body, death he's her demerit.
An host of Angels be thy convey hence.
To funeral with her body, and this Lords:
None here I hope can tax vs of injustice:
She died deservedly, and may like fate,
Attend all women so insatiate.
I am amazed at this maze of wonder,
Wherein no thread or clue presents it self,
To wind vs from the obscure passages,
What says my Nephew?
Still resolute my Lord, and doth confess the theft.
We'll use him like a felon, cut him off:
For fear he doe pollute our sounder parts.
Yet why should he steal,
That is a laden Vine? riches to him,
Were adding sands into the Lybian shore,
Or far less charity: what say the other prisoners?
Like men my Lord, fit for the other world,
They tak't upon their death, they slew your Nephew.
And he is yet alive, keep them asunder
We may sent out the wile.
My friend; is it the rigour of the law
I should be tied thus hard, Isle undergo it:
If not, prithee then slacken; yet I have deserved it,
This murder lies heavy on my conscience.
Wedlock, I here's my wedlock; O whore, whore, whore.
O Sir be qualified.
Sir: I am to die a dogs death, and will snarl a little
At the old Segnior, you are only a Parenthesis,
Which I will leave out of my execrations: but first
To our quondam wives, that makes vs cry our Vowels
In red Capital letters, Jove are cuckolds, O may
Bastard bearing with the pangs of childbirth, be
Doubled to him: may they have ever twins
And be three weeks in travel between, may they be,
So Riuell'd with painting by that time they are thirty, that it
May be held a work of condign merit
But to look upon 'em, may they live,
To ride in triumph in a Dung-cart
And be crowned with al the odious ceremonies belonging too 't:
May the cucking stool be their recreation,
And a dungeon their dying chamber,
May they have nine lives like a Cat, to endure this and more;
May they be burnt for witches of a sudden,
And lastly, may the opinion of Philosophers
Prove true, that women have no souls.
What husband? at your prayers so seriously?
Yes: a few orisons; Friar, thou that stand between
The souls of men and the devil,
Keep these female spirits away,
Or I will renounce my faith else.
Oh husband, I little thought to see you in this taking.
O whore, I little thought to see you in this taking,
I am governor of this castle of cornets,
My grave will be stumbled at, thou adultrat whore,
I might have lived like a Merchant.
So you may still husband.
Peace, thou art very quick with me.
I by my faith, and so I am husband,
Belike you know I am with child.
A bastard, a bastard, a bastard:
I might have lived like a gentleman,
And now I must die like a Hanger on:
Show tricks upon a wooden horse,
And run through an Alphabet of scurvy faces:
Doe not expect a good look from me.
O me unfortunate!
O to think whilst we are singing the last Hymn,
And ready to be turned off,
Some new tune is inventing, by some Metermonger,
To a scurvy Ballad of our death.
Again at our funeral Sermons,
To have the Divine, divide his text into fair branches:
Oh, flesh and blood cannot endure it,
Yet I will take it patiently like a grave man,
Hangman, tie not my halter of a true lovers knot,
I shall burst it if thou dost.
Husband, I doe beseech you on my knees,
I may but speak with you. I'll win your pardon,
Or with tears like Niobe bedew a.
Hold thy water Crocodile, and say I am bound
To doe thee no harm: were I free yet I could not
Be looser then thou: For thou art a whore.
Agamemnons daughter that was sacrificed
For a good wind, felt but a blast of the torments:
Thou should endure, I'd make thee swooned
Oftner, then that fellow that by his continual practise
Hopes to become Drum Mayor.
What say thou to tickling to death with bodkins?
But thou hast laughed too much at me already, whore.
Justice O Duke, and let me not hang in suspense.
Husband: I'll nail me to the earth, but I'll
Win your pardon.
My Jewels, jointure, all I have shall fly:
Apparel, bedding, I'll not leave a Rug;
So you may come off fairly.
I'll come off fairly. Then beg my pardon,
I had rather Surgeons hall should beg my dead body
For an Anatomy, then thou beg my life:
Justice O Duke, and let vs die.
Signior, think, and dally not with heaven,
But freely tell vs, did you doe the murder?
I have confessed it, to my ghostly father,
And done the Sacrament of penance for it.
What would your highness more?
The like have I, what would your highness more?
And here before you all tak't o'my death.
In Gods name then on to the death with them,
For the poor widows that you leave behind,
Though by the law, their goods are all confiscate,
Yet we'll be their good Lord, and give 'em them.
Oh hell of hells. Why did not we hire some villain to fire our houses?
I thought not of that, my mind was altogether of the gallows.
May the wealth I leave behind me, help to damn her,
And as the cursed fate of courtesan,
What she gleanes with her traded art,
May one as a most due plague cheat from,
In the last dotage of her tired lust,
And leave her an unpitied age of woe.
Amen, Amen.
I never heard men pray more fervently.
O that a man had the instinct of a Lyon,
He knows when the Lioness place false to him:
But these solaces, these women,
They bring man to gray hairs before he be thirtle.
Yet they cast out such mists of flattery from their breath,
That a mans lost again▪ sure I fell into my marriage bed drunk:
Like the Leopard, well with sober eyes would I had avoided it;
Come grave and hide me from my blasted fame;
O that thou coldest as well conceal my shame.
Your pardon &amp; your favour gracious Duke
At once we doe implore, that have so long.
Deceived your royal expectation,
Assured that the Comic knitting up,
Will move your spleen, unto the proper use,
Of mirth, your natural inclination:
And wipe away the watery coloured anger,
From your enforced cheek.
Fair Lord, beguile
Them and your saf't, with a pleasing smile.
Now by my life I doe, fair Ladies rise,
I nee'r did purpose any other end,
To them and these designs.
I was informed,
Of some notorious error, as I sate in judgment.
And doe you hear? these night works require a Cats eyes,
To impierce dejected darkness: call back the prisoners.
Now what other troubled news,
That we must back thus?
He's any Senator begged my pardon,
Upon my wives prostitution to him.
What a spight's this, I had kept in my breath of purpose
Thinking to go away the quieter, and must we now back?
Since you are to die, we'll give you winding sheets,
Wherein you shall be shrouded alive,
By which we wind out all these miseries.
Segnior Rogero, bestow a while your eye,
And read here of your true wives chastity.
Chastity? I will sooner expect a Iesuites recantation:
Or the great Turks conversion, then her chastity.
Pardon my liege, I will not trust mine eyes:
Women and Devils, will deceive the wise.
The like Sir is apparent on your side.
Who? my wife? chaste? he's your grace your sense,
I'll sooner believe
A conjurer may say his prayers with zeal,
Then her honesty. Had she been an Hermaphrodite
I would scarce hath given credit to you,
Let him that hath drunk love drugs trust a woman,
By heaven I think, the air is not more common.
Then we impose a strict command upon you:
On your Allegiance, read what there is writ.
A writ of error, on my life my liege.
You'll find it so I fear.
What have we here the Art of Brachigraphy?
Hoe's stung already, as if his eyes were turned on Per∣sies shield.
There motion is fixed, like to the poole of Styx.
Yonders our flames, and from the hollow Arches,
Of his quick eyes, comes commit trains of fire:
Bursting like hidden furies, from their Canes,
Yours till he sleep, the sleep of all
The world, Rogero.
Marry and that Lethargy seize you, read again.
Thy servant so made by his stars, Rogero.
A fire on your wandering stars Rogero.
Satan, why hast thou tempted my wife?
Peace, seducer, I am branded in the forehead
With your starre-marke. May the stars drop upon thee▪
And with their sulphur vapours choke thee, ere thou
Come at the gallows.
Stretch not my patience Mahomet.
Termagant that will stretch thy patience.
Had I known this I would have poisoned thee in the Chalice,
This morning, when we received the Sacrament.
Slave, know thou this? tic an Appendix to the Letter,
But the greater temptation is hidden within.
I will scour thy gorge like a Hawk: thou shalt swallow thine
own stone in this letter,
Sealed and delivered in the presence of.
Keep them asunder, list to vs, we command.
O violent villain, is not thy hand hereto?
And writ in blood to show thy raging lust?
Spice of a new halter, when you go a ranging thus like
Devils, would you might burn for it as they doe.
Thus tic to lye with another mans wife:
He shall be sure to hear on it again.
But we are friends, sweet duck,
And this shall be my maxim all my life,
MAN never happy is till in a wife.
Here sunk our hate lower then any whirlepoole.
And this chaste kiss I give thee for thy care.
That fame of women full as wise as fair.
You have saved vs a labour in your love.
But Gentlemen, why stood you so prepostrously?
Would you have headlong run to Infamy,
In so defamed a death?
O my Liege, I had rather roar to death with Phaleris
Bull, then Darius-like, to have one of my wings extend to Atlas,
the other to Europe.
What is a Cuckold learn of me,
Few can tell his pedigree,
Nor his subtle nature construe,
Borne a man, but dyes a monster.
Yet great Antiquaries say,
They spring from our Methusala,
Who after Noahs flood was found,
To have his Crest with branches crowned.
God in Edens happy shade,
This same creature made.
Then to cut off all mistaking,
Cuckolds are of women's making.
From whose snares, good Lord deliver vs.
Amen, Amen.
Before I would prove a Cuckold, I would endure a winters Pile∣grimage
in the Frozen Zone,
Go stark naked through Muscouia, where the Climate is
degrees colder then Ice.
And thus much to all married men.
Now I see great reason why
Love should mary jealousy:
Since mans best of life is fame,
He had need preserve the same.
When tic in a women's keeping,
Let not Argos eyes be sleeping.
The pox is unto Panders given
By the better powers of heaven.
That contains pure chastity,
And each Virgin sovereignty,
Wantonly she op't and lost:
Gift whereof, a God might boast.
Therefore should thou Diana wed,
Yet be jealous of her bed.
Night, like a Masque, is entered heavens great hall,
With thousand Torches ushering the way:
To Risus will wee consecrate this Evening,
Like Missermis cheating of the brack.
Weal make this night the day. Fair joys befall
Vs and our Actions. Are you pleased all?

MY Lords,
Know that we far from any natural pride
Or touch of temporal sway, have seen our face
In our grave counsels foreheads: where doth stand
Our truest glass, made by Times wrinkled hand.
We know wee're old, my days proclaim me so:
Fortie-fiue years, I'ue gently ruled this Dukedom,
Pray heaven it be no fault,
For there's as much disease, though not to the eye,
In too much pity, as in Tyranny.
Your grace hath spoke it right.
I know that life
Has not long course in me, twill not be long
Before I show that Kings have mortal bodies
As well as Subjects, therefore to my comfort,
And your successful hopes I have a Son
Whom I dare boast of;—
Whom we all do boast off,
A Prince elder in virtues then in years,
His judgment is a Father to his youth,
I, I, would he were from Court,
Our largest hopes grow in him,
And tic the greatest pity Noble Lord,
He is vntraueld,
Tic indeed my Lord.
Had he but travail to his time and Virtue—oh hee should near return again.
It shall be so, what is in hope begun,
Experience quickens, travail confirms the man,
Who's else lives doubtful, and his days oft sorry,
"Who's rich in Knowledge, he's the stock of glory.
Most true my royal Lord.
Some one attend our Son.
See, here hee comes my Lord.
Oh you come well.
Tic always my desire my worthy Father.
Your Serious studies, &amp; those fruitful hours
That grow up into judgment, well become
Your birth, and all our loves: I weep that you are my son,
But Virtuously I weep, the more my gladness:
We have thought good and meet by the consent
Of these our Nobles, to move you toward Travail,
The better to approve you to your self
And give your apter power, foundation:
To see affections actually praesented,
Ee'n by those men that owe them, yield more profit,
I more content, then singly to read of them,
"Since love or fear, make Writers partial,
The good and free example which you find,
In other Countries, match it with your own,
The ill to shame the ill, which will in time,
Fully instruct you how to set in frame,
A kingdom all in pieces.
Honoured Father,
With care and duty I have listened to you,
What you desire, in me it is obedience,
I doe obey in all, knowing for right,
"Experience is a Kingdoms better sight.
Oh tic the very lustre of a Prince,
Travail! tic sweet and generous,
He that knows how to obey, knows how to reign
And that true knowledge have we found in you,
Make choice of your Attendants.
Their soon chose, only this man my Lord, a lo∣uing servant of mine.
What none but he?
I doe entreat no more,
For that's the benefit a private Gentleman
Enjoys beyond our state, when he notes all,
Himself unnoted,
For should I bear the fashion of a prince,
I should then win more flattery, then profit,
And I should give i'm time &amp; warning then
To hide their Actions from me, if I appear a Sun,
Theile run into the shade with their ill deeds,
And so prevent me.
A little too wise, a little too wise to live long.
You have answered vs with wisdom, let it be.
Things private are best known through privacy.
Stay you my elected servant.
My kind Lord.
The Duke my Father has a heavy burden,
Of years upon him.
My Lord it seems so, for they make him stoop.
Without dissemblance hee is deep in age,
He bows unto his grave, I wonder much
Which of his wilde Nobility it should bee
(For none of his sad counsel has a voice in it)
Should so far travail into his consent,
To set me over into other Kingdoms.
Upon the stroke and minute of his death?
My Lord, tic easier to suspect them all,
Then truly to name one.
Since it is thus,
By absence, isle obey the Duke my father,
And yet not wrong my self.
Therein my Lord,
You might be happy twice.
So it shall bee,
Isle stay at home, and travail;
Would your Grace
Could make that good.
I can, &amp; indeed a Prince need no travail farther then his own Kingdom, if hee apply himself faith∣fully, worthy the glory of himself and expectation of others: and it would appear far nobler industry in him, to reform those fashions that are already in his Country, then to bring new ones in, which have nei∣there true form nor fashion; to make his Court an Owl, City an Ape, and the Country a Wolf, prey∣ing upon the ridiculous pride of either, and therefore I hold it a safer sterne upon this lucky advantage, since my father is ne'er his setting, and I upon the Eastern hill to take my rise, to look into the heart &amp; bowels of this Dukedom, and in disguise, mark all abuses ready for Reformation or Punishment.
Give me but leave unfeignedly to admire you,
Your wisdom is so spacious and so honest,
So much have the complaints and suits of men, seven, nay seventeen years neglected, still interposd by coin and great enemies, prevailed with my pity, that
I cannot otherwise think but there are infectious dea∣lings in most offices, and foul mysteries throughout al Professions: and therefore I nothing doubt but to find travail enough within my self, and Experience I fear too much: nor will I be curious to fit my body to the humblest form and bearing, so the labour may be fruit∣full: for how can abuses that keep lowe, come to the right view of a Prince, unless his looks lie level with them, which else will be longest hid from him, hee shall be the last man sees 'em.
For oft between Kings Eyes, and subjects Crimes
Stands there a bar of bribes, the under office
Flatters him next aboue it: he the next,
And so of most, or many, Every Abuse will choose a brother,
Tic through the world, this Hand will rub the other.
You have set down the world briefly my Lord.
But how am I assured of faith in thee?
Yet I durst trust thee.
Let my soul be lost,
When it shall loose your secrets: nor will I only bee a preserver of them, but if you so please an assister.
It suffices:
That King stands sur'st who by his virtue rises
More then by birth or blood, that Prince is rare,
Who strives in youth to save his age from care,
Let's be prepared away.
Isle follow your Grace,
Thou wonder of all Princes, President, and Glory,
True Phoenix, made of an unusual strain,
"Who labours to reform is fit to reign.
How can that King be safe that studies not
The profit of his people? See where comes
The best part of my heart, my love.
Sir, I am bound to find you, I heard newly
Of sudden Travail which his grace intends
And only but your self to accompany him.
You heard in that, little beside the truth,
Yet not so sudden as to want those manners,
To leave you unregarded.
I did not think, so unfashionably of you:
How long is your return?
Tic not yet come to me, scarce to my Lord,
Unless the Duke refer it to his pleasure,
But long I think it is not, the Dukes age,
(If not his apt experience) will forbid it.
His grace commands, I must not think amiss, farewell
Nay stay, and take this comfort,
You shall hear often from vs, isle direct
Where you shall surely know, and I desire you
Write me the Truth, how my new father in law, the
Captain bears himself toward my Mother,
For that marriage, knew nothing of my mind,
It never flourished in any part of my affection.
Me thinks sha's much disgraced herself.
Nothing so: if he be good &amp; will abide the touch, a Captain may marry a Lady, if hee can sail into her good will.
Indeed thats all,
Tic al in al, commend me to thy breast, farewell.
So by my Lords firm policy we may see,
To present view, what absent forms would be.
There's Noble purchase Captain.
Nay admirable purchase.
Enough to make vs proud for ever.
Ho?
Never was opportunity so Gallant.
Why you make me mad.
Three Ships not a poop less.
And euerieone so wealthily burdened upon my manhood.
Pox on it, and now am I tied ee'n as the Devil would have it.
Captain, of all men living I wold have sworn thou would ne'er have married.
S'foot, so would I my self man, give me my Due, you know I ha sworn all heaven over and over:
That you have y faith.
Why go too then.
Of a man that has tasted salt water to commit such a fresh Trick.
Why tic abominable I grant you now I see it:
Had there been fewer Women—
And among those Women fewer Drabs—
And among those Drabs fewer pleasing—
Then t'ad been something:
But when there are more women, more common pretty sweet hearts, then ever any age could boast off.
And I to play the Artificer and marry: to have my wife dance at home, and my Ship at Sea, and both take in salt water together: oh Lieutenant you're hap∣pie, thou keepst a Wench.
I hope I am happier then so Captain, for a my Troth she keeps me.
How? is there any such fortunate man brea∣thing? and I so miserable to live honest? I envy thee Lieutenant, I envy thee, that thou art such a happy Knave, here is my hand among you, share it equally, Isle to sea with you.
There spoke a Noble Captain.
Lets hear from you, there will be news shortly.
Doubt it not Captain.
What lustful passion came aboard of me, that
I should marry, was I drunk? yet that cannot altoge∣there hold, for it was four a clock 'ith morning, had it been five, I would ha sworn it: that a man is in danger every minute to be cast away, without hee have an ex∣traordinarie Pilot that can perform more then a man can doe: and to say truth too, when 'ime abroad what can I doe at home? no man living can reach so far: &amp; what a horrible thing t'would bee to have horns brought me at Sea, to look as if the Devil were 'ith ship: and all the great Tempests would bee thought of my Raising, to bee the general curse of all Mer∣chants: and yet they likely are as deep in as my self, and thats a comfort: O that a Captain should live to be married! nay, I that have been such a Gallant salt-theefe, should yet live to be married: What a fortune∣nate Elder Brother is he, whose father being a Romish Plough-man, himself a perfumde Gentleman, spen∣ding the labouring reeke from his Fathers: Nostrils in Tobacco: the sweat of his Fathers body in monthly Phisickc for his pretty quesie Harlot: he sows a pace 'ith Country: the Taylor oretakes him in the City, so that often times before the Corn comes to Earning, tic up to the ears in high Collars, and so at every harvest the Reapers take pains for the Mercers, ha! why this is stirring happiness indeed, would my father had held a plow so, and fed upon squeezed Curds and Onions, that I might have bathed insensualitie: but hee was too ruttish himself to let me thrive under him, consumed me before hee got me, &amp; that makes me so wretched, now to be shackled with a wife, &amp; not greatly rich nei∣there.
Captain, my Husband.
S'life call me husband again, &amp; isle play the Cap∣taine and beat you.
What he's disturbed you sir, that you now look so like an Enemy upon me?
Go make a Widower, hang thy self,
How comes it that you are so opposite
To love and kindness? I deserve more Respect,
But that you please to be forgetful of it.
For love to you, did I neglect my state,
Chide better fortunes from me,
Gave the world talk, laid all my friends at waste.
The more fool you, could you like none but me?
Could none but I supply you?
I am sure you were sued to▪ by far worthier men,
Deeper in wealth and Gentry.
What could thou see in me, to make thee dote so on me,
If I know, I am a Villain: what a torments this? why did thou marry me? you think as most of your insatiate Widows, that Captains can doe wonders, when 'lasse the name do's often prove the better man.
That which you urge, should rather give me cause to repent then your self.
Then to that end I do it.
What a miserable state am I led into?
How now sir?
Count Proditer is now alighted.
What, my Lord: I must make much of him, heel one day write me Cuckold: tic good to make much of such a man, ee'n to my face, hee plies it hard I thank him:—
what, my worthy Lord!
Isle come to you in order Captain.
Oh thats in order: a kiss is the Gammoth to pricksong.
Let me salute you Captain.
My dear esteemed Count, I have a life for you:
Hear you the news?
What may it be my Lord?
My Lord, the Dukes Son is upon his tra∣uaile to several Kingdoms.
May it bee possible my Lord, and yet so little rumord?
Tak't of my Truth, nay, two's well managed, things are as they are handled: but all my care is still, pray heaven hee return safe, without danger Cap∣taine.
Why, is there any doubt to bee had of that my Lord?
I by my faith Captain.
Princes have private enemies, and great:
Put case a man should grudge him, for his Virtues:
Or envy him, for his wisdom: why you know
This makes him lye bare breasted to his foe.
That's full of certainty my Lord, but who be his Attendants?
Thence Captain comes the fear, but singlie attended neither (my best gladness) only by your Son in Law Fidelio.
Is it to be believed? I promise you my Lord then I begin to fear him my self, that fellow will undo him: I durst undertake to corrupt him with twelve pence over and aboue, and thats a small matter: he's a whorish Conscience, hoe's an inseparable Knave, and I could near speak well of that fellow.
All wee of the younger house, I can tell you do doubt him much,—the Ladies removed, shall we have your sweet soscietie Captain?
Though it bee in mine own house, I desire I may follow your Lordship.
I love to avoid strife,
Not many months Phoenix shall keep his life.
So, his way is in, he knows it,
We must not be discourteous to a Lord,
Warn him our house it were wild: his presence is an honour, if he lie with our wives, tic for our credit, wee shall be the better trusted, tic a sign wee shall live ith world: O Tempests and Whirlewinds (who but that man whom the forefinger cannot daunt, that makes his shame his living:) Who but that man I say, could en∣dure to be thoroughly married? Nothing but a divorce can relieve me: any way to be rid of her would rid my torment: if all means fail Isle kill, or poison her, and purge my fault at sea: but first Isle make gentle Try of a Divorce: But how shall I accuse her subtle honesty? Isle attach this Lords coming to her, take hold of that: ask counsel: and now I remember, I have acquaintance with an old crafty Client, who by the puzzle of suites &amp; shifting of Courts, has more tricks &amp; starting holes, then the dizzy pates of fifteen Atturneys: one that has been muzzled in Law like a Bear, and lead by the Ring of his spectacles from office to office: him Isle seek out with haste, all paths Isle tread,
All deaths Isle die ere I die married.
Puh, you doe resist me hardly.
I beseech your Lordship cease in this,
Tic never to be grāted: if you come as a friend unto my honour and my husband, you shall be ever welcome, if not, I must entreat it—
Why assure your self, Madame, tic not the fashion.
Tic more my grief my Lord, such as my self are judged the worse for such.
Faith y' are too nice, you'll see me kindly forth:
And honourably welcome.
Gentlemen, y' are most neatly welcome.
Y' are very cleanly Sir, prithee have a care to our Geldings.
Your Geldings shall be well considered.
Considered?
Sirha, what Guess do's this Inn hold now?
Some five and twenty Gentlemen besides their beasts.
Their Beasts?
Their wenches I mean sir, for your worship I nowes those that are vdder men are beasts.
How do's your Mother sit?
Very well in health I thank you heartily sir.
And so is my Mare y faith.
Isle doe her commendations indeed sir.
Well kept up Shuttle-cocke:
But what old fellow was he that newly aligh∣ted before vs?
Who he? as arrant a crafty fellow as ere made wa∣la on horseback: some say hoe's as good as a Lawyer, (marry 'ime sure hoe's as bad as a Knave) if you have a∣ny suites in law, hoe's the fittest man for your comp∣no: he's been so▪ toward and lugged himself▪ that hee is able to affoo•d you more knavish counsel for ten groats, then another for ten shillings.
A fine fellow: but doe you know him to be a Knave, and will lodge him.
Your worship begins to talk idly, your bed shall be made presently; if we should not lodge knaves, I wonder how we should bee able to live honestly, are there honest men enough think you in a Term time to fill all the Innes in the town, and as far as I can see▪ a knaves Gelding eats no more hay then an honest mans: nay thieves Gelding eats less, isle stād too't, his Moist∣er
allows him a better Ordnarie: yet I have my eight∣pe•ce day &amp; night, it were more for our profit I wuss, you were all thieves, if you were so contented: I shall bee called for: give your worships good morrow.
A royal knave y faith: wee have happened into a Godly Inn.
Assure you my L. they belong al to one church.
This should be some old busy turbulent fellow: villainous Law-worme, that eats holes into poor mēs causes.
May it please your worship to give me leave?
I give you leave sir, you have your Veniam, now fill me a browne Toste sirha.
Will you have no drink too't sir?
Is that a question in law?
Yes, in the lowest Court: 'ith Sellor sir.
Let me haa't removed presently sir.
It shall bee done sir.
Now as you were saying Sir, isle come to you immediately too.
Oh very well sir:
I'm a little busy sir,
But as how sir?
I pray sir?
He's brought me into the Court, marry my aduer∣sarie he's not declared yet.
Non declarauit Aduersarius say thou: what a Villain's that, I have a trick to doe thee good: I will get thee out a Proxy, &amp; make him declare with a Pox to him.
That will make him declare to his fore grief, I thank your good worship: but put case he doe declare?
Si declarasset, If he should declare there,
I would be loath to stād out to the judgment of that Court
Non ad iudicium, doe you fear corruption? then isle relieve you again: you shall get a Supers•…die, Non molest andam; and 〈◊〉 it big her.
Very good.
Now if it should ever come to a Testificandum, what be his witnesses?
I little fear his witnesses.
Non metuis testes? more valiant man then Orestes
Please you sir to dissolve this into Wine, Ale, or Beer, I come a hundred mile to you I protest, and leave all other counsel behind me.
Nay you shall always find me a sound Card, I stood not ath Pillory for nothing in eighty eight, all the world knows that: now let me dispatch you sir; I come to you Presenter.
Faith the party hath removed both body and cause with a habeas corpus.
Has he that knavery? But has hee put in bail aboue can tell?
That I can assure your worship, he has not.
Why then thy best course shall be, to lay out more money, take out a Procedendo, and bring down the cause and him with a Vengeance.
Then he will come indeed
As for the other party, let the Audit querela alone, take me out a special Supplicauit, which will cost you enough, and then you pepper him. For the first party after the Procedendo you'll get costs, the cause be∣ing sound, you'll have a Judgment, Nuns pro Tunc, you'll get a Venire faces to warn your Jury, a December tales to fill up the number, and a Capias vt Legatum for your execution.
I thank you my learned counsel.
What a busy Caterpillar's this? let's accost him in that manner.
Content my Lord.
O my old admirable fellow, how have I all this while thirsted to salute thee? I knew thee in Octauo of the Duke.—
In Octauo of the Duke: I remember the year well.
Bi•h mass a lusty proper man.
Oh was I?
But still in law▪
Still in Law. I had not breathed else now, tic very marrow, very manna to me to be in law: id been dead ere this else: I have found such sweet pleasure in the vexation of others, that I could wish my years o∣for and over again, to see that fellow a Beggar, that bawling Knave a Gentleman: a matter brough• 'een to a judgment to day, as far as ere t'was to begin again to morrow: O Raptures I here a writ of Demur, there a Procedendo, here a Sui surrara, there a Capiendo, Tricks, Delays▪ Money-lawes:
Is it possible old Lad?
I have been a Tearme-trotter my self any time this five and forty years, a goodly time &amp; a gre∣tious: in which space I ha been at least sixteen times beggard, and got up again: and in the mire again, that I have stunk again, and yet got up again.
And so clean and handsome how?
You see it apparently▪ I cānot hide it frō you: nay more, in foelice whore bee it spoken, you see i'm old, yet have I at this present, nine and twenty suits in Law.
Deliver vs man!
And all not worth forthy shillings.
May it 〈…〉 cu'd?
The pleasure of a man is all.
An old fellow and such a stinger.
A stake pulled out of my hedge, theres one: I was well beaten I remember, that's two: I took one a bed with my wife again her will, that's three: I was called cuckold for my labour▪ that's four: I took ano∣there a bed again, that's five thē one called me wittal that's six: he kilt my Dog for Barking, sea•en: my Maid Servant was knocked at that time, eight: my wife miscar∣riot
with a push, Nine, &amp; sic de coeteris, I have so vexed and beggerd the whole parish, with process, Suppoe∣neas, and such like molestations, they are not able to spare so much ready money from a Term, as would set up a new Weather-cocke: the Church-wardens are fine to go to law with the Poores money.
Fie, fie.
And I so fetch up al the men every Term time that tic impossible to be at civil cuckoldry, within our selves, unless the whole country rise upon our wives.
A my faith a pretty policy.
Nay an excellent stratagem: but of all I most wonder at the continual substance of thy wit, that ha∣uing had so many suits in law from time to time, thou hast still money to relieve 'em.
He's the best fortune for that, I never knew him without.
Why doe you so much wonder at that? why this is my course: my Mare and I come up some five days before a Term.
A good Decorum.
Here I Lodge as you see amongst Innes, and places of most receipt—
Very wittily.
By which advantage I dive into Country men's causes, furnish 'em with knavish counsel, little to their profit, buzzing into their Ears, this course, that writ, this office, that Ʋltimum refugium, as you know I have words enough for the purpose.
Enough a conscience y faith.
Enough a law, no matter for conscience. For which busy and laborious sweating courtesy, they can∣not choose but feed me with money, by which I main∣taine mine own suits: ho, ho, ho.
Why let me hug thee, Caper in mine arms.
Another special trick I have, no body must
know it, which is, to prefer most of those men to one Attorney whom I affect best, to answer which kind∣ness of mine, he will sweat the better in my cause, and doe them the less good, tak't of my word, I helped my Attorney to more Clients the last Term then he will dispatch all his life time: I did it.
What a noble memorable deed was there?
Sir.
Now sir.
There's a kind of captain, very robustiously enquires for you.
For me? a man of war: a man of law is fit for a man of war: we have no leisure to say prayers: wee both kill a Sunday mornings: Isle not be long from your sweet company.
O no I beseech you.
What captain might this be?
Thou Angel sent amongst vs, sober Law.
Made with meek Eyes, persuading Action,
No loud immodest Tongue, voiced like a virgin,
And as chaste from sale,
Save only to be heard, but not to rail.
How has abuse deformed thee to all Eyes?
That where thy virtues sat, thy vices rise,
Yet why so rashly for one villains fault▪
Doe I arraign whole man? Admired Law,
Thy upper parts must needs be sacred, pure,
And incorruptible, they are grave and wise,
It is but the dross beneath 'em, and the clouds
That get between thy glory and their praise,
That make the visible and foul Eclipse,
For those that are near to thee, are upright,
As noble in their conscience, as their birth,
Know that damnation is in every bribe,
And rarely put it from 'em: rate the Presenters,
And scourge 'em with five years imprisonment,
For off ring but to tempt 'em.
Thus is true justice exercised and used,
"Woe to the giver when the Bribe's refused.
Tic not their will, to have law worse then war,
Where still the poor'st die first,
To send a man without a sheet to his grave,
Or bury him in his Papers.
Tic not their mind it should be, nor to have
A suit hang longer then a man in chains
Let him be ne'er so fastened, they least know
That are aboue, the tedious steps below.
I thank my time, I doe.
I long to know what captain this should be:
See where the Bane or every cause Returns.
S'foote tic the captain my father in law, my L.
Take heed.
The Divorce shall rest then, and the five hun∣dred crowns shall stand in full force and virtue.
Then doe you wisely Captain.
A way sail I, fare thee well.
A lusty crack or wind go with thee.
But ah!
Ho:
Remember a Scrivener
Isle have him for thee. Why thus am I sought after by all professions; heir's a weather beaten Cap∣taine, who not long since new married to a Lady wi∣dow, would now fine have sued a Divorce between her and him, but that her honesty is his only hind∣rance: to be rid of which, he do's determine to turn her into white money, and there's a Lord his Chapman has bid five hundred Crowns for her already.
How?
Or for his part, or whole in her.
Why, do she •…eaue to sell his wife?
His wife? I bith mass, he would sell his soul if he knew what Merchant would lay out money vppon't, and some of 'em have need of one they swear so fast.
Why, I neuèr heard of the like.
Non audiuisti, didstnere here of that trick? why Pistor a Baker sold his wife tother day to a cheese∣monger, that made Cake and Cheese: another to a Co∣ferer: a third to a common player: why you see tic cō∣mon: ne'er fear the Captain, be he's not so much wit to bee a praesident himself: I promised to furnish him with an odd Scrivener of mine own▪ to draw the bar∣gain, and sale of his Lady, your horses stand here Gentleman.
I, I, I.
I shall bee busily plunged till towards bed time, aboue the chin in profundis.
What monstrous days are these?
Not only to be vicious, most men study,
But in it to be ugly, strive to exceed,
Each other in the most deformed deed.
Was this her private choice? did she neglect
The presence and opinion of her friends, for this?
I wonder who that one should be,
Should so disgrace that Reverend Name of Lord,
So loathsomly to buy Adultery?
We may make means to know.
Take courage man, weal beget some defence.
I am bound by nature.
I by Conscience — To sell his Lady: indeed she was a Beast to marry him, and so he makes of her, come, isle thorough now 'ime entered.
Is my sweet Knight coming, are you cer∣taine hoe's coming?
Certain for sooth, I am sure I saw him out of
the Barbers shop, ere I would come away.
A Barbers shop, O hoe's a trim Knight, would hee venture his body into a Barbers shop, when hee knows tic as dangerous as a piece of Ireland: O yonder, yonder, hee comes, get you back again, and look you say as I advised you.
You know me mistress?
My mask, my mask.
My sweet Revenue!
My pleasure welcome: I have got single, none but you shall accompany me to the Justice of peace my Fathers.
Why, is thy Father Justice of Peace, and I not know it?
My father! in faith sir I, simply tho I stand here a Citizens wife: I am a Justice of Peaces Daughter.
I love thee the better for thy birth.
Hoe's at thy service my sweet Revenue, for thy money paid for i'm.
Why then let him run a little before I beseech thee, for a my troth he will discover vs else.
Hee shall obey thee, before sirrha▪ trudge: but doe you mean to lye at your Fathers all night?
Why should I desire your company else?
S'foot where shall I lye then.
What an idle question's that? why doe you think I cannot make room for you in my Fathers house, as well as in my husbands, they are both good for nothing else?
A man so resolute in valour as a Woman in de∣sire, were an absolute Leader.
May it please your good worship moister Justice.
Please me and please are your self,
Thats my word.
The party your worship sent for, will by no means be brought to appear.
Hee will not, then what would you advise me to doe therein?
Only to grant your worships warrant, which is of sufficient force to compel him.
No by my faith: you shall not have me in that Trap: am I sworn Justice of Peace, and shall I give my warrant to fetch a man against his will? why there the peace is Broken, wee must doe all quietly, if hee come hoe's well∣come, and as far as I can seeyet, hes a fool to bee absent, I by this gold is hee (which hee gave me this morning)
Why, but may it please your good worcester∣ship.—
I say again please me and please your self, thats my word still.
Sir, the world esteems it a Common favour, upon the Contempt of the party, the justice to grant his war∣rant.
I, tic so common, tic the worse again, it were the bet∣la for me it were otherwise.
I protest sir, and this Gentleman can say as much, it lies upon my half undoing.
I cannot see yet, that it should be so— I see not a cross yet.
I beseech your worship show me your immediate fa∣uour, and accept this small trifle but as a remembrance to my succeeding Thankfulness.
Angels? isle not meddle with them, you give i'm to my wife not to me.
I, I sir.
But I pray tell me now, did the party Ʋina Voce, with his own mouth deliver that contempt, that
that he would not appear, or did you but iestint?
Jest• no a my troth sir, such was his insolent answer
And do you think it stood with my credit to put up such an abuse? will he not appear says he? Isle make him appear with a Vengeance Latronello.
Do's your worship call?
Draw me a strong limbed warrant for the Gen∣tleman speedily, he will be bountiful to thee: go and thank him within.
I shall know your worship hereafter.
I, I prithee doe. Two Angels one party, four another: and I think it a great spark of wisdom and policy (if a man come to me for Justice) first to know his griefs by his fees, which bee light and which bee he •…ie: he may coūterfet else, &amp; make me do Justice for nothing: I like not that▪ for when I mean to be just, let me be paid well for it: the deed so rare, purges the bribe: how now, what's the news thou art come so hastily? how fares my Knightly Brother?
Troth he ne'er fared worse in his life sir: he ne'er had less stomach to his meat since I knew him.
Why sir?
Indeed hoe's dead sir.
How sir?
Newly deceased I can assure your Worship: the Tabacco-pipe new dropped out of his mouth before I took horse, a shrewd sign: I knew then there was no way but one with him, the poor pipe was the last man he took leave off in this world, who sell in three pieces before him, &amp; seemed to morn inwardly, for it looked as blacke'th mouth as my moister.
Would hee die so like a Politician, &amp; not once write his mind to me?
No Isle say that for him sir: he dyed in the perfect state of memory, made your worship his full and whole executor: bequeathing his Daughter, and with her all
his wealth, only to your disposition.
Did he make such a godly end say thou? did he die so comfortably, and bequeath all to me?
Your niece is at hand sir, the will, &amp; the witnesses.
What a precious joy and comfort's this, that a Justices brother can die so well, nay in such a good and happy memory, to make me full executor. Well he was too honest to live, and that made him die so soon: now I beshrew my heart, I am glad hoe's in heaven, has left all his cares and troubles with me, and that great vex∣tion of telling of Money, yet I hope hee had so much grace before he died to turn his white money into gold, a great ease to his Executor.
See here comes your Niece my young mistress sir,
Ah my sweet Niece, let me kiss thee, &amp; drop a tear between thy lips: one tear from an old man is a great matter, the cocks of age are dry, thou hast lost a virtuous father, to gain a notable uncle.
My hopes now rest in you next under heauē
Let 'em rest, let 'em rest.
Sir?
You're most welcome ere ye begin sir.
We are both led by oath and dreadful promise,
Made to the dying man at his last sense,
First to deliver these into your hands,
The suerties and reuealers of his state.
Good.
With this his only daughter and your Niece,
Whose fortunes are at your disposing set,
Uncle and father are in you both met.
Good in faith, a well spoken Gentleman, you're not an Esquire sir?
Not sir.
Not sir? more's the pity: by my faith better men then you are, but a great many worse: you see I have been a Scholar in my time, tho I'm a Justice now: Niece you're most happily welcome, the charge of you is
wholly and soly mine own: and since you are so for∣tunately come Niece, Isle rest a perpetual widower.
I take the meaning chaster then the words:
Yet I hope well of both, since it is thus,
His phrase off ends least that's known humorous.
I make my brother (says he) full and whole Ex∣ecutor, honestly done of him in faith, seldom can a man get such a brother: and here again says he, very virtue∣ously, I bequeath all to him and his disposing: an excel∣lent fellow a my troth, would you might all die no worse, Gentlemen.
But as much better as might be.
Bless your uprightness moister Justice,
You're most soberly welcome sir: daughter you've that ye kneel for, rise, salute your weeping cousin.
Weeping cousin?
I cousin.
Eye to weeping is very proper, and so is the party that spake it believe me, a pretty, fine, slender, straight, delicate knit body.
Oh how it moves a pleasure through our senses!
How small are women's wastes to their expenses?
I cannot see her face, that's under water yet.
News as cold to the heart as an old mans kind∣ness: my uncle dead?
I have lost the dearest Father.
If she marry by your consent, choice and liking make her dowry five thousand crowns: hum, five thou∣sand crowns? therefore by my consent she shall ne'er marry, I will neither choose for her, like of it, nor con∣sent too't.
Now by the pleasure of my blood a pretty coo∣zen: I would not care, if I were as ne'er kin to her, as I have been to her kinswoman.
Daughter, what Gentleman might this be?
No Gentleman sir, hoe's a Knight.
Is he but a knight? troth, I would a sworn had been a Gentleman, to see, to see, to see.
Hoe's my husbands own brother, I can tel you (sir:
Thy husbands brother: speak certainly prithee.
I can assure you father, my husband and hee has lain both in one belly.
Isle swear then he is his brother indeed, &amp; by the surer side: I crave hearty pardon sweet kinsman that thou hast stood so long unsaluted in the way of kindred.
Welcome to my board: I have a bed for thee,
My daughters husbands brother shall command,
Keys of my Chests and Chambers.— I have stable for thy horse, chamber for thy self, and a loft above for thy lousy lackey, all fit, away with handkirchers, dry up eyes, at funeral we must cry: now let's be wise.
I told you his affection.
It false sweetly.
But here I bar you from all plots to night,
The time is yet too heavy to be light.
Why, I'm còntent, isle sleep as chaste as you,
And wager night by night who keeps most true.
Well we shall see your temper.
Fear not me Fidelio: become you that invisible Rope-maker the Scrivener, that binds a mā as he walks yet all his joints at liberty, as well as isle fit that com∣mon folly of Gentry, the easie-affecting venturer, and no doubt our purpose will arrive most happily.
Chaste duty my Lord works powerfully in me, and rather then the poor Lady my mother should fall upon the common side of rumour to beggar her name, I would not only undergo all habits, offices, disguised professions, tho ee'n opposite to the temper my blood holds: but in the stainless quarrel of her reputation, alter my shape for ever.
I love thee wealthier, thou hast a noble touch, &amp; by this means which is the only safe means to preserve
thy mother from such an ugly land and sea monster as a counterfeit Captain is, he resigning and basely selling all his estate, title, right, and interest in his Lady, as the form of the writing shall testify.
What otherwise can follow but to have,
A Lady safe delivered of a knave?
I am in debt my life, to the free goodness of your inventions.
Oh they must ever strive to be so good,
"Who sells his vow is stamped the slave of blood.
Away.
Captain, my husband.
Hence, we're at a price for thee, at a price, wants but the telling, and the sealing, then —
Have you no sense, neither of my good name or your own credit?
Credit? pox of credit, that makes me owe so much: it had bine better for me by a thousand Royals I had lost my credit, seven year ago, it is undone me, that's it that makes me fly: what need I to sea else, in the Spring time, when Woods have leaves, to look upon bald Oak.
Happier that man say I, whom no man trusts,
It makes him valiant, dares outface the prisons,
Upon whose carcass no Gown Raven jets,
Oh he that has no credit owes no debts.
Tic time I were rid on it.
Oh why do you so wilfully cherish your own poison? and breath against the best of life, chaste credit.
Well may I call it chaste, for like a Maid
Once falsely broke it ever lives deceit.
O Captain, husband, you name that Dishonest,
By whose good power all that are honest live,
What madness is it to speak ill of that,
Which makes all men speak well, take away credit
By which men amongst men, are well reputed,
That man may live, but still lives executed.
Oh then show pity to that noble Title
Which else you doe Usurp: you're no true Captain,
To let your enemies lead you, foul disdain,
And everlasting Scandal, Oh believe it!
The money you receive for my good name
Will not be half enough to pay your shame.
No, isle sell thee then to the Smock: see here comes my honourable Chapman.
Oh my poison!
Him, whom mine honour and mine eye abhors.
Lady, what so vniouially departed?
Fine she policy? she makes my back her Bole∣ster, but before my face, she not endures him, Tricks.
Captain, how haps it she removed so strangely?
Oh for Modesties cause awhile my Lord: she must restrain her self, shoe's not yours yet:
Beside, it wear not wisdom to appear,
Easy before my sight, fah, wherefore serves modesty but to pleasure a Lady now and then, and help her from suss∣spect, that's the best use tic put too.
Well observed of a Captain.
No doubt you'll be soon friends my Lord.
I think no less.
And make what hast I can to my ship, I durst wa∣ger you'll be under sail before me.
A pleasant voyage Captain.
I, a very pleasant voyage as can be: I see the hour is Ripe, here comes the Prisons Bawd the bond-maker, one that binds heirs before they are begot.
And here are the Crowns Captain, go? attend,
Let our bay Courser waite.
It shall be obeyed.
A Farmers son, first true?
Has crowns to scatter?
I give you your salute sir.
I take it not unthankfully sir.
I hear a good report of you sir—you've money.
I have so, true.
An excellent virtue.
I, to keeep from you—hear you me Captain?
I have a certain generous itch sir, to loose a few An∣gels in the way of profit: tic but a game at Tennis,
Where if the ship keep aboue line, tic three to one:
If not, there's but three hundred Angels gone.
Is your venture three hundred? you're very pre∣tiously welcome: heere's a voyage toward will make vs all.—
Beggarly fools, and swarming knaves.
Captain, whats he?
Fear him not my Lord, hoe's a Gull', hee ven∣tures with me, some filthy Farmers son, the father's a Jew, and the son a Gentleman:pha.—
Yet he should be a Jew too, for he is new come from giving over swine.
Why, that in our Country makes him a Gen∣tleman.
Go to, tell your money Captain.
Read aloft Scrivener. 1.2.—
To all good and honest Christian people, to whō this present writing shall come: know you for a certain, that I Captain, for and in the consideration of the sum of five hundred crowns, have clearly bargained, sold, given, granted, assigned and set over, and by these pre∣scents doe clearly bargain, sell, give, grant, assign and set over, al the right, estate, title, interest, demand, pos∣session, and term of years to come, which I the said Captain have, or ought to have.—
If I were as good as I should be,—
In and to Madonna Castiza, my most virtuous,
modest, loving, and obedient wife.—
By my troth my Lord and so she is.— 3.4.5.6.7.
The more Slave he that says it, and not sees it.
Together, with all and singular those admirable qualities with which her noble breast is furnished.
Well said Scrivener, hast put'em all in: you shall hear now my L.
In primis, the beauties of her mind, chastity, tem∣perance, and aboue all, patience:
You have bought a Jewel in faith, my L, nine and thirty, forty.
Excellent in the best of Music, in voice deli∣cious: in conference wise and pleasing: of age content∣full: neither too yōg to be a pish, nor too old to be sottish
You have bought as lovely a penny-woorth my Lord, as ere you bought in your life.
Why should I buy her else Captain?
And which is the best, of a wife a most comfor∣table sweet companion.
I could not afford her so y faith, but that I am-going to sea and have need of money.
A most comfortable sweet companion.
What again? the Scrivener reads in passion.
I read as the words move me: yet if that be a foul it shall be seen no more,—which said Madonna Casti••a lying, &amp; yet being in the occupatiō of the said captain
Ninteene—occupation? Pox out, out with oc∣cupation, a Captain is of no occupation, man.
Nor thou of no religion.
Now I come to the Habendum, to have and to hold, use and—
Use? put out use too for shame.
Till we are all gone, I prithee.
And to be acquitted of and from all former bar∣gains, former sales:
Former sails, nine &amp; twenty thirty, by my troth
my Lord, this is the first time that ever I sold her.
Yet the writing must run so Captain.
Let it run on then, nine and forty, fifty, —
Former sales, Gifts, Grants, Surrenders. Rein∣tries. —
For Reentries, I will not swear for her.
And furdermore (I the said) of and for the consi∣deration of the sum of five hundred Crowns to set me a board before these presents utterly disclaim for ever, any Title, estate, right, interest, demand, or posses∣zion, in or to the said Madonna Castiza, my late virtuous, and unfortunate wife.
Unfortunate indeed, that was well placed.
As also neither to touch, attempt, molest, or in∣cumber any part, or parts whatsoever: either to bee named or not to be named: either hidden or vnhid∣den, either those that boldly look abroad, or those that dare not show their face.
Faces: I know what you mean by faces: Scrivener, there's a great figure in faces.
In witness whereof, I the said Captain have in∣terchangeably set to my hand and seal: in presence of all these, the day and date aboue written.
Very good sir, Isle bee ready for you presently, four hundred and twenty. 1.2.3.4.5.—
Of all deeds, yet this strikes the deepest wound
Into my apprehension,
Reverend, and honourable Matrimony,
Mother of lawful sweets, vnshamed mornings:
Dangerlesse pleasures, thou that make the bed,
Both pleasant, and legitimately fruitful: without thee,
All the whole world were soiled Bastardy.
Thou art the only and the greatest form.
That put a difference between our desires
And the disordered appetites of Beasts,
Making their mates, those that stand next their lusts.
Then,—with what base injury is thy goodness paid
First, rare to have a Bride commence a Maid,
But do's beguile joy of the purity:
And is made strict by power of Drugs and Art,
An Artificall Maid, a Doctord Virgin,
And so deiceues the glory of his bod:
A foul contempt, against the spotless power
Of sacred wedlock, but if chaste and honest,
There is another Devil haunts marriage,
(None fondly loves but knows it) Jealousy,
That Wedlocks yellow sickness, that whispering sepe∣ration every minute.
And thus the curse takes his effect or progress,
The most of men in their first sudden furies,
Rail at the narrow bounds of marriage,
And call it a prison then it is most just,
That the disease'ath prison, Jealousy
Should still affect i'm, but oh! here I am fixed,
To make sale of a wife, monstrous and foul,
An act abhord in nature, could in soul:
Who that he's man in him, could so resign,
To make his shame, the poesy to the Coin?
Right in faith, my Lord fully five hundred,
I said how you should find it Captain, and with this competent sum you rest amplye conten∣ted.
Amply contented.
Heere's the Pen Captain: your name to the sale.
S'foote dost take me to be a pen-man? I protest I could ne'er write more then A, B, C, those three letters in my life.
Why those will serve Captain.
I could ne'er get further.
Would you have got further then A B C? ah Base Captain, that's far enough in faith.
Take the Seal off Captain.
It goes on hardly, and comes off easily.
I just like a Coward.
Will you write witness Gentleman?
Hee? he shall, prethe come and set thy hand for witness Rogue, thou shall venture with me?
Nay, then I ha reason Captain that com∣maunds me?
What a fair fist the pretty whoreson writes, as if he had had manners and bringing up, a farmers Son: his Father dam's himself to sell musty Corn, while hee ventures the Money, twill prosper well at Sea no doubt he shall ne'er see it again
So, Captain you deliver this as your deed.
As my deed, what else sir?
The ouglyest deed that ere mine eye did witness
So my Lord, you have her, clip her, enjoy her, shoe's your own, and let me be proud to tell you now my Lord, shoe's as good a soul if a man had a mind to live honest, and keep a wench, the Kindest, sweetest, comfortablest Rogue.—
Hark in thine ear,
The Baser slave art thou: and so isle tell her,
I love the Pearl, thou soldst, hate thee the Seller—
Go, to Sea, the end of thee—is Lousy.
This fine work: a very brave end, hum—
Well thought upon, this Scrivener may furnish me
Why should this fellow be a Lord by birth?
Being by blood a Knave, one that would sell
His Lordship if he liked her Ladyship.
Yes my Lord.
What's here Now?
I have employment for a trusty fellow, bold, sure—
What if he be a Knave my Lord?
There thou come to me, why he should be so,
and men of your quill are not unacquainted.
Indeed al our chief living my Lord, is by fools and knaves, we could not keep open shop else▪ Fools that enter into bonds, and Knaves that bind i'm.
Why now we meet.
And as my memory happily leads me: I know a fellow of a standing estate, never flowing: I durst convey treason into his bosom,
And keep it safe nine years.
A goodly Time.
And if need were would press to an attempt,
And cleave to Desperate action.
That Last fits me.
Thou hast the measure right, look I hear from thee.
With duteous speed.
Expect a large reward:
I will find time of her to find regard.
The end of me is lousy.
Oh my Lord! I have strange words to tell you.
Stranger yet? isle choose some other hour to list∣en to thee, I am yet sick of this, discover quickly.
Why, will you make yourself known my Lord
I.
Who scourges sin let him do it dreadfully.
Pox of his dissemblance: I will to s•n.
Nay, you shall to sea, thou would poison the whole land else—why how now Captain?
In health.
What, drooping?
Or a shamde of the sale of thine own wife?
You might count me an ass then in faith.
If not a shamed of that, what can you be a shamd ofthen?
Prethe ha done, I am ashamed of nothing.
I easily believe that.
This Lord sticks in my stomach.
How? take one of thy feathers down, and fetch him up.
Id make him come.
But what if the Duke should hear of this?
I, or your Son in Law, Fidelio knows of the sale of his mother.
What and they did, I sell none but mine own: as for the Duke, hoe's abroad by this time, and for Fide∣leo hoe's in labour.
Hee, in labour?
What call you Travelling?
That's true:— but let me tell you Captain: whether the Duke hear on it, or Fidelio know on it: or both, or neither, two's a most filthy loathsome part.
A base unnatural deed—
Slave and fool: —ha, who? oh—
Thou hateful villain: thou should choose (to sink
To keep thy baseness shrouded.
Ugly wretch.
Who hath laid violence upon my husband?
My dear sweet Captain, help—
Lady you wrong your value,
Call you him dear that has sold you so cheap?
I do beseech your pardon good my Lord.
Rise.
My abused Mother:
My kind Son,
Whose liking I neglected in this match.
Not that alone, but you far happier fortunes.
Is this the Scrivener and the Farmers Son,
Fire on his Lordship he told me they Trauaild.
And see the sum told out to buy that Jewel
More precious in a Woman then her eye, her honour:
Nay take it to you Lady, and liudge it,
Too slight a recōpence, for your great wrong, but that
his riddance helps it.
S'foot he undoes me, I am a Rogue &amp; a Beggar,
The Egyptian plague creeps over me already,
I begin to be lousy.
Thus happily prevented, you're set free,
Or else made over to adultery.
To heaven and to you my modest thanks.
Monster, to sea, spit thy al herred foam,
Where it may doe least harm, ther's ayre and roeme.
Thour't Dangerous in a Chamber, Ʋirulext Ʋenem,
Unto a Ladies name, and her chaste breath
If past this evenings verge, the Dukedom hold thee,
Thou art reserved for abject punishment.
I doe beseech your good Lordship consider the state of a poor downe-cast Captain.
Captain, off with that noble title thou becomst it vildely, I ne'er saw the name fit worse, isle sooner al∣lowe a Pander a Captain then thee.
More's the pity.
Sue to thy Lady for pardon.
I give it without suite.
I do beseech your Ladyship not so much for par∣don, as to bestow a few of those Crowns upon a poor unfathered Rover that will as truly pray for you, and wish you hanged, as any man breathing.
I give it freely all.
Nay by your favour:
I will contain you Lady, here▪ be gone:
Use slaves like slaves—wealth keeps their faults vnkowne.
Well 'ime yet glad, i'ue liberty and these:
The Land has plagued me, and isle plague the seas.
The Scene is cleared, the bane of brightness fled
Who sought the death of honour, is struck dead.
Come modest Lady:
My most honest mother.
Thy virtue shall live safe from reach of shames,
That Act ends nobly, preserves Ladies fems.
Why this is but the second time of your com∣ming Kinsman, visit me oftner, Daughter, I charge you bring this Gentleman along with you: Gentleman, I I cry ye mercy sir, I call you Gentleman still: I for∣get you're but a Knight, you must pardon me sir.
For your worships kindness—worship I cry you mercy sir, I call you worshipful still, I forget, you're but a Justice.
I am no more in faith.
You must pardon me sir.
Tic quickly done sir, you see I make bold with you Kinsman, thrust my Daughter and you into one Chamber.
Best of all sir: Kindred you know may lye a∣ny where.
True, true sir, Daughter receive your blessing— take heed the Coach iopper not to much▪ have a care to the fruits of your body—look to her Kinsman.
Fear it not sir.
Nay Father though I say it, that should not say it, hee looks to me more like a husband then a Kins∣man.
I hear good commendations of you sir.
You hear the worst of me I hope sir,—I salute my leave sir.
You're welcome all over your body sir: nay, I can behave my self courtly, though I keep house 'ith Country: what, does my Niece hide herself, not pre∣sent, ha? Latronello.
Sir.
Call my Niece to me.
Yes sir.
A foolish, coy, bashful thing it is, shoe's afraid
to lie with her own Uncle: id do her no harm in faith, I keep my self a widower a purpose, yet the foolish Girl will not look into it, she should have all y∣faith, she knows I have but a time, cannot hold long, see where she comes, pray whom am I Niece?
I hope you're your self.
Uncle to me, and Brother to my Father.
Oh am I so, it do's not appear so,—for surely you would love your Fathers Brother for your Fathers sake, your Uncle for your own sake.
I doe so.
Nay you doe nothing Niece.
In that love which becomes you best I love (you.
How should I know that love becomes me best?
Because tic chaste, and honourable.
Honourable! it cannot become me then Niece.
For'ime scarce worshipful: Is this an age,
To entertain bare love without the fruits
When I received thee first, I looked
Thou should have been a wife unto my house
And saved me from the charge of marriage.
Do you think your Fathers five thousand pound wold ha made me take you else? no, you should near a ha been a charge to me.
As far as I can perceive yet by you,
I'ue as much need to marry as ere I had: would not this be a great grief to your friends think you, if they were alive again?
Twould be a grief indeed.
You've confessed
All about house, that young Fidelio
Who in his Travails does attend the Prince,
Is your vowed love.
Most true, hoe's my vowed Husband.
And what's a Husband is not a Husband a strāger at first, and will you lye with a stranger before
you lie with your own Uncle? take heed what ye doe Niece, I counsel you for the best: strangers are drunken fellows I can tell you, they will come home late a nights, beat their wives, and get nothing but Girls: look too't, if you marry, your stubbernes is your Dowry: five thousand Crowns were bequeathed to you, true, if you marry with my consent: but if ere you go to marrying by my consent, isle go to hanging by yours: go too▪ be wise and love your Uncle.
I should have cause then to repent indeed.
Do you so far forget the Offices
Of blushing modesty? Uncles are half Fathers,
Why they come so near our bloods they are en part of it.
Why now you come to me Niece: if your Un∣cle be part of your own flesh and blood, is it not then fit your own flesh and blood should come nearest to you? answer me to that Niece.
You doe allude all to incestuous will,
Nothing to modest purpose: turn me forth,
Be like an Uncle of these latter days,
Periurde enough, enough unnatural,
Play your Executorship, in Tyranny,
Restrain my fortunes, keep me poor, I care not,
In this alone most women isle excel,
Isle rather yield to beggary then to hell.
Very good, a my troth my Niece is Valiant, sha's made me richer by five thousand Crowns, the price of her Dowry: are you so honest, I doe not fear but I shall have the Conscience to keep you poor y∣nough Niece, or else I am quite altered a late—The News, may it please you sir?
Sir, theres an old fellow, a kind of Law-driuer, entreats conference with your worship.
A Law-driuer, prithee drive him hither.
No, no I say if it bee for defect of Appearance, take me out a special Significauit.
Very good sir.
Then if he purchase an Alias or Capias, which are Writs of custom, only to delay time, your Proce∣dendo do's you Knights service—that's nothing at all, get your Distringas out as soon as you can for a Jury.
Isle attend your god worships coming out.
Do I prithee, attend me, isle take it kindly, a Vo∣luntate.
What, old Seigneur Tangle!
I am in debt to your worships remembrance.
My old master of Fence: come, come, come, I have not exerciz'd this twelve Moons, I have almost forgot all my Law-weapons.
They are under fine and Recovery, your worcester∣ship shall easily recover them.
I hope so: when there?
Sir.
The Rapler and Dagger foils instantly: and whats thy suite to me old Tangle, isle grant it pre∣sently.
Nothing but this sir, to set your worships hand to the commendation of a Knave whom no body speaks well on.
The more shame for i'm, what was his offence I pray?
Vestras Deducite Culpas—nothing but robbing a Vestry.
What, what! alas poor Knave, give me the Pa∣per, he did but save the Churchwardens a labour: come, come, he has done a better deed in it then the parish is a aware off, to prevent the Knaves, hee robs but seldom, they once a quarter: me thinks it were a part of good just∣ice, to hang i'm at years end, wen they come out of
their office, to the true terrifying of all Collectors and Sidemen.
Your worship would make a fruitful Com∣mon-wealths man, the Constable lets i'm alone, looks on, and says nothing.
A lass good man, he lets i'm alone for quietness sake, and takes half a share with i'm: they know well enough too, he he's an impediment in his tongue, hoe's always drunk when he should speak.
Indeed your worship speaks true in that sir: they blind him with beer, and make him so narrow eyed, that he wincks naturally at all their Knaveries,
So, so, hears my hand to his commendations.
A Charitate, you doe a charitable deed in it sir.
Nay, if it be but a Vestry matter, visit me at any time, old Signeor Law-thistle! O well done, here are the Foils, come, come sir, isle try a Law-bout with you.
I am afraid I shall overthrow you sir in faith.
Tic but for want of use then sir.
Indeed that same odd word Use, makes a man a good Lawyer, and a woman an arrant—tuh tuh, tuh, tuh, tuh, now am I for you sir: but first to bring you into form, can your worship name all your weapons?
That I can I hope, let me see, Longswoord, what's Longsword? I am so duld with doing justice, that I have forgot all in faith.
Your long sword, thats a writ of delay.
Mass that swords long enough indeed, I ha known it reach the length of fifteen Terms.
Fifteen Terms, that's but a short sword.
Me thinks tic long enough, proceed sir.
A Writ of Delay, Long-sword.
Scandal Magnatum, Backesword.
Scandals are back-swords indeed
Capias cominus, Case of Rapiers.
Oh Desperate!
A Latitat, sword and Dagger.
A writ of Execution, Rapier and Dagger.
Thou art come to our present weapon, but what call you sword and Buckler then?
Oh! that's out of use now, sword and Buckler was called a good conscience, but that weapons left long ago, that was too manly a fight, too sound a weapon for these our days, sl'id wee are scarce able to lift up a Buckler now, our arms are so bound to the Pox: one good bang upon a Buckler would make most of our Gentlemen fly a pieces, tic not for these lintie times, our Lawyers are good Rapier and Dagger men, theile quickly dispatch your—money.
Indeed since sword and buckler time, I have observed, there he's been nothing so much fighting: where bee all our gallant Swaggerers? there are no good frays alate.
Oh sir, the properties altered, you shall see less fighting every day then other, for every one gets him a Mistress, and she gives him wounds enough, and you know, the Surgeons cannot beehere and there too, if there were red wounds too, what wold become of the Reinish wounds?
Thou say true in faith, they would bee but il fa∣vouredly looked to then.
Very well sir.
I expect you sir.
I lye in this court for you sir, my Rapier is my Attorney, and my Dagger his Clarke.
Your Attorney wants a little oiling, me thinks, he looks very Rustily.
Tic but his proper colour sir, his Father was an Iremonger, he will ne'er look brighter, the rust he's so eat into him, he's never any leisure to be made clean.
Not in the vacation.
Non Vacat exiguis rebus adesse Ioui.
Then Jove will not be at leisure to scour him, because he •ere came to him before.
You're excellent at it sir—and now you least think on it, I arrest you sir.
Very good sir.
Nay very bad sir by my faith—I follow you still, as the Officers will follow you as long as you have a penny.
You speak sentences sir—by this time have I tried my friends, and now I thrust in bail—
This bail will not be taken sir, they must be two Citizens that are no Cuckolds.
Byr'lady then 'ime like to lye by it, I had rather it were a hundred that were.
Take heed I bring you not to an Nisiprius sir.
I must ward my self as well as I may sir.
Tic Court day now, Declarat Atturnatus, my Attorney gapes for money.
You shall have no Advantage yet, I put in my Answer.
I follow the suit still sir.
I like not this Court byr'lady—I: take me out a writ of Remove, a writ of Remove, doe you see sir?
Very well sir.
And place my cause higher.
There you started me sir—yet for all your Demurs, Plures, and Sursurarers, which are all Long∣swords: that's Delays: al the comfort is, in nine years a man may overthrow you.
You must thank your good friends then sir.
Let nine years pass, five hundred crowns cast away a both sides, and the suite not twenty, my Counsellors wife must have another hood you know, and my Attorneys wife will have a new fore-part, yet
see at length law, I shall have law: now beware, I bring you to a narrow exigent, and by no means can you avoid the Proclamation—
Oh!
Now follows a writ of execution, a Capias, vt Legatum, gives you a wound mortal, trips up your heals, and lays you ith Counter.
O Villain!
I cry your worship heartily mercy sir, I thought we had been in Law together, Aduersarius country aduersarium by my troth.
Oh! reach me thy hand, I ne'er had such an o∣uerthrowe in my life.
Two's long of your Attorney there, hee might a staide the execution of Capias vt Legatum, and re∣moved you with a Supersedes non molestandum into the Court of Equity.
Pox on him, he fell out of my hand when I had most need of him,
I was bound to follow the suite sir.
Thou could doe no less then overthrow me,
I must needs say so.
You had recovered cost else sir.
And now by the mass I think I shall hardly recover without cost.
Nay, that's Certoscio, an execution is very chargeable.
Well, it shall teach me wit as long as I am a Justice: I perceive by this trial, if a man have a sound fall in Law, hee shall feel it in his bones all his life after.
Nay, that's Recto upon Record, for I my self was overthrown in eighty eight by a Taylor, and I have had a Stitch in my side ever since, oh!
Why Latronello, Furtiuo, Fucato, where be these lazy knaves that should truss me, not one stirring yet?
Follow, follow, follow.
What news there?
This way, this way, follow, follow.
Hark you sluggish Soporiferous villains, ther's knaves abroad when you are a bed, are ye not a shamed on it, a Justices men should be up first, and give example all knaves.
Oh I beseech your good worship.
Your worshipful worship.
Thieves, my two hand sword, ime robed 'ith Hal, Latronello, Knaves, come down, my two hand sword I
I am Latronello, I beseech your worship, (say.
Thou Latronello, thou lie, my men scorn to have beards.
We forget our beards, now I beseech your worcester∣ship quickly remember vs.
How now?
Nay theres no time to talk of how now, tic don.
Follow, follow, follow.
Four mark and a Livery is not able to keep life and soul together, wee must fly out once a quar∣te, tic for your worships credit to have money in our purse, our Fellow Furtiuo is taken in the Action.
A pox on him for a lazy knave, would hee bee taken?
They bring him along to your worship, your the next Justice, now or never show your self a good my∣ster, an upright Magistrate, and deliver him out of their hands.
Nay, he shall find me—apt enough to doe him good I warrant him.
Hee comes in a false beard sir.
S'foot what, should hee doe here else? there's no coming to me in a true on: if he had one,—the slave to be taken: doe not I keep Geldings swift enough?
The goodliest Geldings of any Gentleman in the shire.
Which did the whoreson knave ride upon?
Upon one of your best sir.
Stand and deliver.
Upon Stand and Deliver: the very Gelding I choose for mine own riding, as nimble as Pegasus the flying horse yonder: go shift your selves into your coats, bring hither a great chair, and a little table.
With all present speed sir.
And Latronello.
I sir.
Sit you down, &amp; very soberly take the examna∣tion.
Isle draw a few horse heads in a paper, make a show: I hope I shall keep my countenence.
Pox on him again, would he be taken? hee frets me: I have been a youth my self, I ha seen the day I could have told money out of other men's purses (Mass so I can doe now) nor will I keep that fellow about me that dares not bid a man stand: for as long as drunken∣ness is a vice, stand is a virtue: but I would not have 'em taken. I remember now betimes in a morning I would have peeped through the greene boughs, &amp; have had the party presently, and then to ride away sinelye in fear, it was even Venery to me in faith, the pleasantst course of life, one would think every Woodcok a Con∣stable, and every Owl an officer, but those days are past with me: and a my troth I think I am a greater thief now, and in no danger: I can take my ease, sit in my Chair, look in your faces now, and rob you, make you bring your money by authority put off your hat, and thank me for robbing of you, O there is nothing to a thief under Covert Barn.
Come Officers bring him away.
Nay, I see thee through thy false beard, thou mid-winde chinde Rascal,
How now my Masters, whats he? ha?
Your worship knows, I never come but I bring a thief with me.
Thou hast left thy wont else Constable.
Sir, we understand you to be the only up right∣nes of this place.
But I scare understand you sir.
Why then you understand not your self sir.
Such another word, and you shall change places with the Thief.
A maintainer of equal causes I mean.
Now I have you, proceed sir.
This Gentleman and my self, being led hey∣there by occasion of business, have been offered the discourtesy of the Country, set upon by three thieves and robed.
What are become of the other two, Latronello, and Fuse?
Here sir.
They both made away from vs, the cry pursues i'm, but as yet none but this taken.
Latronello.
Sir.
Take his examination.
Yes sir.
Let the Knave stand single.
Thank your good worship.
He's been a suitor at Court sure, hee thanks me for nothing.
Hoe's a Thief now sure.
That we must know of him, what are you sir?
A piece next to the Tail sir—a Serving-man.
By my troth a pretty phrase and very
cleanly handled, put it down Latronello: thou may make use on it. Is hee of honour or worship whom thou serve?
Of both dear sir, honourable in mind, and worcester∣shipfull in body.
Why would one wish a man to speak better?
Oh sir, they most commonly speak best, that doe worst.
Say you so sir, then weal try him farther, — Do's your right worshipful moister, go before you, as an ensample of Vice, and so encourage you to this slin∣king iniquity? hee is not a Lawer, is he?
He's the more wrong sir, both for his conscience, and honesty, he deserves to be one.
Pity hoe's thief in faith, I should entertain him else.
I, if he were not as he is, hee would be better then himself.
No tic well known sir, I have a moister, the ve∣rye picture of wisdom,
For indeed he speaks not one wise word.
And no man but will admire to hear of his Virtues.
Because he ne'er had any in all his life.
You write all down Latronello.
I warrant you sir.
So sober, so discrete, so judicious:
Hum.
And aboue all, of most reverend gravity.
I like him for one quality, hee speaks well of his moister, he will fare the better:—Now sir, let me touch you,
I sir.
Why, serving a Gentleman of such worship and wisdom, such sobriety and virtue, such discretion and judgment as your master is, doe you take such a beastly
course, to stop horses, hinder Gentlewomen from their meetings, and make Citizens never ride but a Sundays, only to avoid Morning prayer and you: is it because your worshipful Ma. feeds you with lean spits, pays you with Irish money, or clothes you in northern dozēs?
Far be it from his mind, or my report, Tic well known he kept worshipful cheer the day of his wives burial, pays our four marks a year as duly by twelve pence a quarter as can be.
His wisdom swallows it.
And for Northern dozens, fie, fie, wee were ne'er troubled with so many.
Receiving then such plenteous blessings from your virtuous and bountiful master, what cause have you to be thief now? answer me to that gear:
Tic ee'n as a man gives his mind too't sir.
How sir?
For alas, if the whole world were but of one trade; traffic were nothing: if wee were all true∣men, wee should bee of no trade: what a pitiful world would here bee, heaven forbid we should bee all true∣men: then howe should your worships next suite bee made? not a Tailor left in the land: of what stuff would you have it made? not a Merchant left to deli∣for it, would your worship go in that suit still? You would ha more thieves about you then those you have banished, and be glad to call the great ones home again, to destroy the little.
A notable Rogue.
A my troth, a fine knave, &amp; he's answered me glo∣riously, what wages wilt thou take after thou art hāg'd?
More then your worship's able to give, I would think foul scorn to be a Justice then.
He says true too in faith, for we are all full of cor∣ruption here,—hark you my friends.
Sir.
By my troth if you were no crueler then I, I could find in my hart to let him go.
Could you so sir, the more pitiful Justice you.
Nay I did but to try you, if you have no pity, Isle ha none, away hoe's a Thief, to prison with him.
I am content sir.
Are you content, bring him back, nay then you shall not go.
Isle be as cruel as you can wish: you're content, be∣like you have a trick to break prison, or a bribe for the Officers.
For vs sir?
For you sir? what colour's silver I pray, you ne'er saw money in your life:—Isle not trust you with him, La∣tronello and Fucato, lay hold upon him, to your charge I commit him.
Oh, I beseech you sir.
Nay if I must be cruel, I will be cruel.
Good sir, let me rather go to prison.
You desire that▪—Isle trust no prison with you, Isle make you lye in mine own house, or Isle know why I shall not.
Merciful sir.
Since you have no pity I will be cruel.
Very good sir, you please vs well.
You shall appear to morrow sirs.
Upon my kees sir.
You shall be hanged out a'th way, away with him Latronello, and Fucato,—Officers I discharge you my house, I like not your company.
Report me as you see me, fire and fuel,
If men be Jaws, Justices must be cruel.
So sir, Extremes set of all Actions thus,
Either too tame, or else too tyrannous:
He being bent to fury, I doubt now
We shall not gain access unto your love or she to vs.
Most wishfully here she comes.
Is that she?
This is she my Lord.
A modest presence.
Virtue bless you Lady,
You wish me well sir.
I'd first in charge this kiss, and next this paper,
You'll know the language, tic Fidelios.
My ever vowed love, how is his health?
As fair as is his favour with the Prince.
I'm sick with joy, do's the Prince love him so?
His life cannot requite it,
Not to wrong the remembrance of his love,
I had a token for you, kept it safe,
Till by misfortune of the way this morning,
Thieves set upon this Gentleman and my self,
And with the rest robbed that.
Oh me, I'm dearly sorry for your chance, was it your loss?
They boldly look you in the face that robed you,
No farther villains then my uncles men.
What Lady?
Tic my grief I speak so true.
Why my Lord?
But give me pausing Lady: was hee one that took the examination?
One and the chief.
Hence-forth hang him that is no way a thief,
Then I hope few will suffer,—nay all the jest was, hee committed him to the charge of his fellows, and the rogue made it lamentable, cried to leaue'em.
None live so wise but fools may once deceive em?
An uncle so insaciate?
I, First not strange too,
That al should be by Nature vicious, and he bad against
Nature?
Then you have heard the sum of al my wrongs.
Lady, we have, and desire rather now
To heal 'em, then to hear 'em:
For by a letter from Fidelio
Direct to vs, we are entreated jointly,
To hasten your remove▪ from this foul den,
Of theft and purposed incest:
I rejoice in his chaste care of me, Isle soon bee furnished.
He writes that his return cannot be long.
I'm chiefly glad,—but whither is the place?
To the safe seat of his late wronged mother.
I desire it,—
Her conference will fit mine, well you prevail,
At next grove weal expect you:
Isle not fail.
It stands upon the frame of my reputation I pro∣test Lady.
Lady, that word is worth an hundred Angels at all times, for it cost more: if I live till tomorrow night, my sweet pleasure thou shalt have them.
Could you not make 'em a hundred and fifty think you?
Isle do my best endeavour to multiply, I assure you.
Could you not make 'em two hundred?
No by my faith.—
Peace, isle rather be confined in the hundred &amp; fifty.
Come ee'n much about this time, when Ta∣uerns give up their Ghosts, and Gentlemen are in their first cast.—
Isle observe the season.
And doe but whirl the Ring a'th door once a∣bout,
my maidservant shall be taught to understand the language.
Enough my sweet Revenue.
Good rest my effectual pleasure.
Come hither Phoenix.
What makes your honour break so early?
A toy, I have a toy.
A toy my Lord.
Before thou lay thy wrath upon the duke,— be advised.
I, I, I warren you my Lord.
Nay, give my words honour, hear me,
Isle strive to bring this Act into such form,
And credit amongst men, they shall suppose.
Nay verily believe the Prince his son,
To be the plotter of his Fathers murder.
Oh that were infinitely admirable!
Were not, it pleases me beyond my bliss:
Then if his son meet death as he returns,
Or by my hired Instruments turn up,
The general voice will cry—O happy vengeance!
O blessed vengeance!
I, isle turn my brain
Into a thousand uses, Tire my inventions,
Make my blood sick with study, and mine eye
More hollow then my heart, but I will fashion,
Nay I will fashion it,—Can counterfeit?
The Princes hand, more truly, most direct,
You shall admire it.
Necessary mischief.
Next to a woman, but more close in secrets
You're all the kindred that my breast vouch safes,
Look into me anon,—I must frame, and muse, and
fashion—
It was time to look into thee, in whose heart
Treason grows ripe, and therefore fit to fall,
That slave first sinks, whose envy threatens all,
Now is his Venom at full height.
Lying, or being in the said County in the Te∣nor and occupation aforesaid.
No more then, a writ of course upon the mat∣la of—
Silence.
Oh o-o-o-yes Carlo Turbulenzo, appear or loose twenty mark in the suites.
Ha? whether have my thoughts conueyed me? I am now within the Dizzy murmur of the law.
So that then, the cause being found clear, upon the last Scitation.
Carlo turbulenzo, Come into the Court.
Now, now, now, now, now, upon my knees I praise Mercury the God of law, I have two suits at issue, two suites at issue.
Doe you hear sir?
I will not hear, i'ue other business.
I beseech you my learned Counsel.
Beseech not me, beseech not me, I am a mortal man, a Client as you are, beseech not me.
I would doe all by your worships direction.
Then hang thy self.
Shall I take out a special supplycauit.
Mad me not, torment me not, tear me not, you'll give me leave to hear mine own cause, mine own cause
Nay moreover, and farther—
Well said my Lawyer, well said, well said.
All the opprobious speeches that man could in∣uent all malicious invectives, called Wittoll to his face.
Thats I, thats I, thank you my learned counsel for your good remembrance: I hope I shall overthrow him horse and foot.
Nay but good sir.
No more sir, he that brings me happy news first isle relieve first.
Sound executions rot thy cause and thee.
I, I, I, pray so still, pray so still, theile thrive the better
I wonder how this fellow keeps out madness?
What stuff his brains are made on?
I suffer, I suffer,—till I here a judgment.
What old Signior?
Prithee I will not know thee now, tic a busy time, a busy time with me.
What not me Signeur?
Oh cry thee mercy, give me thy hand,—fare thee well,—he's no relief again me then,—his demurs will not help him, his Sursararaes will but play the knaves with him.
The Justice: tic hee
Have I found thee in faith? I thought where I should smell thee out old Tangle.
What old Signeur Justicer,—embrace me another time and you can possible: how do's all thy wives i will∣drone,—well? that's well said in faith.
Hear me old Tangle.
Prithee doe not ravish me, let me go.
I must use some of thy counsel first.
Sirrah, I ha brought him to an Exigent▪ hark that's my cause, thats my cause yōder, I twind'g him, I twind'g him.
My Niece is stolen away.
Ah, get me a no exeat Regno quickly, nay you must not stay vppo'nt, id fine have you gone.
A no exeat Regno, isle about it presently,—adieu.
You seek to catch her Justice, sheele catch you.
A judgment, a judgment.
What, what, what?
Overthrown, overthrown, overthrown.
Ha, a, a.
News, news, news.
The devil, the devil, the devil.
Twice Tangle's overthrown, twice Tangles over∣thrown.
Hold:
Now old cheater of the Law,
Pray give me leave to bee mad.
Thou that hast found such sweet pleasure in
the vexation of others.
May I not be mad in quiet?
Very Marrow, very manna to thee to be in law.
Very syrup of Toads, and preserved Adders.
Thou that hast vexed, and beggerd the whole
Parish, and made the honest Church wardens go to
Law with the poores money.
Hear me, doe but hear me, I pronounce a terrible, horrible curse upon you al—and wish you to my Attorney: see where a Praemunire comes a Dedimus potestatem, and that most Dreadful Execution, Excom∣municato Capiendo, there's no bail to be taken, I shall rot in fifteen Iayles: make Dice of my bones, and let my Counsellors Son play away his Fathers money with i'm; may my bones revenge my quarrel!— A Capias Cominus? here, here, here, here: quickly dip your Quills in my blood, off with my skin and write four∣teen lines of a side—there's an honest conscionable fellow, he takes but ten shillings of a Bellowes-men∣der—heere's another deals all with charity, you shall give him nothing, only his wife an embroidered Petty∣coat, a gold frindge for her tail, or a border for her head, ah sirrha! you shall catch me no more in the sprindge of your Knaveries.
Follow, follow him still, a little thing now sets him forward.
None can except against him, the mans mad,
And priuiledgd by the Moon, if he say true:
Less madness tic to speak sin, then to doe.
This wretch that loved before, his food, his strife,
This punishment falls even with his life.
His pleasure was vexation, all his bliss
The torment of another.
Their heart, his health: their starved hopes his store,
Who so loves Law, dies either mad or poor.
A miracle, a miracle!
How now Fidelio?
My Lord a miracle!
What first?
I have found
One quiet, suffering, and vnlawyer'd man.
An opposite, a very Contrary
To the old turbulent fellow.
Why hoe's mad.
Mad, why he is in his right wits, could he be mad∣der then he was, if he be any way altered from what hee was, tic for the better, my Lord.
Well, but whore's this wonder?
Tic coming my Lord: A man so truly a man, so indifferently a creature, using the world in his right nature but to tread upon, one that would not bruise, the cowardly est enemy to man, the worm, that dares not show his malice till we are dead: nay my Lord, you will admire his temper! see where he comes, I promised your acquaintance, sir
Yon is the Gentleman I did commend for Temper.
Let me embrace you simply.
That's perfectly, and more in heart then hand:
Let affectation keep at Court.
I, let it.
Tic told me you love quiet
Aboue wealth.
I aboue life: I have been wilde and rash
Committed many and unnatural crimes,
Which I have since repented.
Two's well spent.
I was mad, stark mad, nine years together.
I pray! as how?
Going to law, in faith it made me mad.
With the like frenzy not an hour since
An aged man was struck.
Alas I pity him.
Hoe's not worth pitying, for two's still his glad∣nes to be at variance.
Yet a mans worth pity,
My quiet blood he's blessed me with this gift,
I have cured some, and if his wits be not
Too deeply cut, I will assay to help i'm.
Sufferance does teach you pity.
O Moister, Moister, your abominable next neighbor came into the house, being half in drink, and took away your best Carpet.
Has hee it?
Alas sir:
Let him go, trouble him not, lock the door queen∣etly after him, and have a safer care who comes in next.
But sir, might I advise you, in such a cause as this, a man might boldly, nay▪ with conscience go to Law.
Oh, isle give him the table too first. Better endure a fist then a sharpe sword: I had rather they should pull off my clothes then flea of my skin, and hang that on mine enemies hedge.
Why, for such good causes was the law ordained:
True, and in it self tic glorious and divine,
Law is the very Moister piece of heaven:
But see yonder.
Ther's many Clouds between the sun and vs,
There's too much cloth before we see the Law:
I'm content with that answer, be mild still,
Tic honour to forgive those you could kill.
There doe I keep.
Reach me your hand, I love you,
And you shall know me better.
Tic my suit.
The night grows deep—and—
Come away, this way, this way.
Who be those? stand close a little.
Oh, you're come as well as ere you came in your life, my Maister's new gone to bed, give me your Knightly hand, I must lead you into the blind Parlour, my mistress will be down to you presently.
I tell you our safest course will bee to arrest him when hee comes out a'th Tavern: for then he will bee half drunk, and will not stand upon his weapon.
Our safest course indeed, for hee will draw.
That he will, though he put it up again, which is more of his curtsy, then of our deserving.
The world is nothing but vexation,
Spite and uncharitable Action.
Did you see the Gentleman?
Not I.
Where should he be, it may be hoe's past by,
Good sir, lets overtake him.
Here sir, now you are there sir, sheele come down to you instantly, I must not stay with you, my Mistress would be jealous, you must doe nothing to me, my mistress would find it quickly.
S'foot whether am I led? brought in byth hand? I hope it can bee no harm to stay for a woman, tho in∣deed they were never more dangerous, I have ventu∣red hitherto and safe, and I must venture to stay now, this should be a fair Rome, but I see it not, the blind Parlour cal's she it?
Where art thou, O my Knight!
Your Knight, I am the Dukes knight.
I say you're my knight, for I'm sure I paid for you
Paid for you hum,—S'foot a light.—
Now out upon the Marmoset, hast thou served me so long, and offer to bring in a Candle?
Fair Room, villainous face, and worse woman, I ha learnt something by a glimpse ath Candle:
How happened it you came so soon, I looked not for you these two hours: yet as the sweet chance is, you came as well as a thing could come, for my hus: band's newly brought a bed.
And what he's Jove sent him?
Hee ne'er sent him any thing since I knew him, hoe's a man of a bad nature to his wife, none but his Maids can thrive under him.
Out upon him.
I, judge whether I have a cause to be a Courtesan or no? to doe as I doe, an elderly fellow as hee is, if hee were married to a young Virgin, hee were able to break her heart, tho he could break nothing else: here, here, there's just a hundred and fifty, but I stole i'm so hardly from him, twold ee'ne have grieud you to have seen it.
So twould in faith.
Therefore prithee my sweet pleasure, doe not keep company so much, how doe you think I am a∣ble to maintain you? though I bee a Jewellers wife, Jewels are like women, they rise &amp; fall, we must be con∣tent to loose sometimes, to gain often, but you're content always to loose, and never to gain: what need you ride with a Footman before you?
Oh thats the grace,
The grace? tic sufficient grace that you've a Horse to ride upon, you should think thus with your self e∣very time you go to bed if my head were laid, what would become of that horse? he would run a bad race then as well as his Moister.
Nay, and you give me money to chide me:—
No, if it were as much more, I would think it foul scorn to chide you, I advise you to be thrifty, to take the time now, while you have it, you shall seldom get such an other fool as I am, I warrant you: why there's Mettrezza Aureole keeps her love with half the cost that I am at, her friend can go a foot like a good Husband, walk in wosted Stockings, and enquire for the Six-penny ordinary.
Pox on it, and would you have me so base?
No, I would not have you so base neither: but now and then, when you keep your Chamber, you might let your Footman out for eighteen pence a day, a great relief at years end I can tell you.
The age must needs be foul when vice reforms it.
Nay, I'ue a greater quarrel to you yet.
In faith, what first?
You made me believe at first the Prince had you in great estimation, and would not offer to Travail without you, nay, that he could not travail without your Direction and intelligence.
I'm sorry I said so in faith, but sure I was over∣flown when I spoke it, I could ne'er ha said it else.
Nay more, you swore to me, that you were the first that taught him to ride a great horse, and tread the Ring with agility.
By my troth I must needs confess I swore a great lye in that, &amp; I was a villain to doe it, for I could ne'er ride great horse in my life.
Why lo, who would love you now but a Citti∣zens wife? so inconstant, so for sworn: you say women are false Creatures, but take away men, and thei'd bee honester then you—Nay last of all, which offends me most of all, you told me you covld countenance me at Court, and you know wee esteem a friend there, more
worth then a Husband here.
What I spake of that. Lady, isle maintain.
You maintain? you seen it court?
Why by this Diamond—
Oh take heed, you cannot have that, tic always in the eye of my husband.
I protest I will not keep it, but only use it for th is virtue, as a token to fetch you,&amp; approve my pow∣er, where you shall not only ye bee received, but made known to the best and chiefest.
Oh are you true?
Let me loose my Revenue else.
That's your word indeed, and upon that con∣dition take it this kiss and my love for ever.
Enough.
Give me thy hand, isle lead thee forth.
I'm sick of al professions, my thoughts burn:
He travails best, that knows when to return.
Adieu, farewell, to bed you, I to my sweet City∣bird, my precious Revenue, the very thought of a hundred &amp; fifty Angels, increases Oil and Spirit, ho:
I arrest you sir.
Oh!
You have made vs wait a goodly time for you, have you not think you? you are in your Rouses &amp; Mulwines a pox on you: and have no care of poor Officers staying for you.
I drunk but one health I protest, but I could void it now: at whose suit I pra'y?
At the suit of him that makes suits, your Taylor,
Why, he made me the last, this, this that I wear
Ergo, nay, we have been Scholars I can tell you, wee could not have been knaves so soon else, for as in that notable City called London, stand two most famous Universities, Poultry and Woodstreet, where some are of
twenty years standing, and have took all their de∣grees from the Masters side, down to the Mistress side, the Hole, so in like manner—
Come, come, come, I had quite forgot the hun∣dred and fifty Angels.
S'lid where be they?
Isle bring you to the sight of i'm presently.
A notable Lad, and worthy to be arrested: weal have but ten for waiting, and then thou shalt choose whether thou wilt run away from vs, or wee from thee.
A match at running, come, come, follow me.
Nay, fear not that.
Peace, you may happen to see toys, but doe not see i'm.
Pah.
Thats the Door.
This?—knocks.
S foot Officer you have spoiled all already?
Why?
Why? you shall see, you should have but whirld the ring once about, and there's a Maid servant brought up to understand it.
Whose at door?
Else well again: phist, tic I, tic I.
You, what are you?
Puh, whore's thy mistress?
What of her?
Tell her One, she knows who, her Pleasure's here, say.
Her Pleasure? my mistress scorns to be without her pleasure at this time of night: is she so void of friends think you? take that for thinking so: a Box
The hundred and fifty Angels are locked up in a Box, we shall not see i'm tonight.
Howe's this? am I used like a hundred pound
Gentleman? Do's my Revenue forsake me? Dam me if ever I bee her pleasure again.— Well I must to prison.
Go prepare his room, there's no remedy, isle bring him along, hoe's tame enough now.
Dare my Tailor presume to use me in this sort?
He steals and I must lie in prison for it.
Come, come away sir.
Art sure thou saw him arrested Drawer?
If mine eyes be sober.
And that's a question, Mass here he goes, hee shall not go to prison, I have a trick shall bail him— away.
Oh!
Guess, guess, who am I? who am I?
Who the Devil are you? let go, — a Pox on you, who are you? I have lost my prisoner.
Prisoner: I'ue mistook, I cry you hear∣tily mercy, I have done you infinite injury, a my troth I took you to be an honest man.
Where were your eyes? could you not see I was an Officer, stop, stop, stop, stop.
Ho, ho, ho, ha.
Now Phoenix.
Now my Lord.
Let princely blood
Nourish our hopes, we being confusion now.
A terrible sudden blow.
I:what day is this hangs over vs?
Bith Mass Monday.
As I could wish my purpose will thrive best.
Two's first my birthday, now my fortunes day,
I see whom fate will raise needs never pray.
Never.
How is the ayre?
Oh full of trouble.
Do's not the sky look piteously black
As if it were hung with Rich men's Consciences.
Ah, Stuck not a Comet like a Carbuckle
Upon the dreadful brow of Twelve last night?
Twelve, no two's about one.
About one most proper, for thats the Duke.
Well shifted from thy self.
I could have wished it between one and two
His son and him.
Isle give you comfort then.
Prithee.
There was a villainous Raven seen last night,
Over the presence chamber in hard Jostle
With a young Eaglet.
A Raven! that was I, what did the Raven?
Mary my Lord the Raven—to say truth,
I left the combat doubtful.
So tic still,
For all is doubt, till the deed crown the will,
Now bless thy loins with Freedom, wealth and honour,
Think all thy seed young Lords, and by this Act.
Make a foote-cloathd posterity: now imagine
Thou see thy Daughters with their trains borne up,
Whom else despised want, may curse to whoredom,
And public shames, which our state never threat,
Shoe's never lewd, that is accounted great.
Isle alter that Court-Axiom▪ thus renewd,
Shoe's never great, that is accounted lewd.
Stand close, the presence fills, here, here the place
And at his rising, let his fall be base,
Beneath thy foot.
How for his Guard my Lord?
My gold and fear keeps with the chief of them
That's rarely well.
Bold heedless slave, that dares attempt a deed which shall in pieces rend him my Lords both.
The happiness of the day.
Time my returning,
Treasons have still the worst, yet still are spurning.
The Duke!
I ne'er was gladder to behold him.
All. Long live your Grace.
I do not like that strain,
You know my age affords not to live long.
Spoke truer then you think for.
Bestow that wish upon the Prince our Son.
Nay, hoe's not to live long neither.
Him as the wealthy Treasure of our hopes,
You as possession of our present Comfort,
Both in one heart, we reverence in one.
Oh Treason of a good cōplexion.
How now, what fresher news fills the Courts ear?
Fidelio!
Glad Tidings to your Grace,
The prince is safe returned, and in your Court.
Our joy breaks at our eyes, the Prince is come!
Soul qucking news—pale vengeance to my blood.
By me presenting to your serious view,
A brief of all his Travails.
Tic most welcome.
It shall be Dear and precious to our Eye.
Hee Reads, i'm glad her reads.
Now take thyopportunitie, leave that place.
At his first rising let his fall be base.
That must be altered now.
Which? his rising or his fall?
Art thou dull now?
Thou hear the Prince is come.
What's here my Lord?
My Lord?
I have got such a large portion of knowledge, most worthy father, by the benefit of my Travail,
And so he has no doubt my Lord.
That I am bold now to warn you of Lord
Proditors insolent Treason, who has irreligiouslye se∣duc'd a fellow, and closely conveyed him ee'n in the pre∣sence-chaire to murder you:
Oh guilty, guilty.
What was that fell? whats hee?
I am the man.
O slave!
I have no power to strike,
I'm gone, i'm gone.
Let me admire heauen's wisdom in my Son.
I confess it, he hired me—
This is slave,
Tic forged against mine honour and my life,
For in what part of reason can't appear,
The Prince being Trauaild should know Treasons here
Plain counterfeit—
Dost thou make false our Son?
I know the prince will not affirm it.
He can and will my Lord.
Most just, he may:
A guard.
We cannot but in loyal zeal our selves,
Lay hands on such a Villain.—
Stay you, I find you here too.
Vs my Lord?
Against Lussurioso and Infesto, who not only most ryotouslye consume their houses in vicious ga∣ming, morgaging their livings to the Merchant, where∣by he with his heirs enter upon their lands, from whence this abuse comes, that in short time the Son of the Merchant has more Lordships then the Son of the Nobleman(which else was never borne to inhere∣tance) but that which is more impious, they most adul∣terously train out young Ladies to Mid-night ban∣quits, to the utter defamation of their own honours, &amp; ridiculous abuse of their Husbands.
How could the Prince hear that?
Most true my Lord.
My Conscience is a witness against it self,
For to that execution of chaste honour,
I was both hired and led.
I hope the Prince out of his plenteous wisdom
Will not give wrong to vs: as for this fellow
Hoe's poor, and cares not to be desperate.
Justice my Lord, I have my Niece stolen from me
Sh'as left her Dowry with me, but shoe's gone,
Id rather have had her love then her money I,
This, this, is one of them, Justice my Lord:
I know him by his face, this is the Thief.
Your grace may now in milder sense perceive
The wrong done to vs by this impudent wretch,
Who he's his hand fixed at the throat of law,
And therefore durst be desperate of his life,
Peace, you're too foul, your crime is in excess:
One spot of him, makes not your Ulcers less.
Oh!
Did your Violence force away his Niece?
No my good Lord; ilestil confess whats truth.
I did remove her from her many wrongs,
Which she was pleased to leave, they were so wild.
What are you named?
Falso my Lord, Justice Falso, i'm known by that name.
Falso, you came fitly,
You are the very next that follows here.
I hope so my Lord, my name is in all the Records
I can assure your good grace.
Against Justice Falso.
Ah.
Who having had the honest charge of his Niece committed to his trust, by the last will and Test∣amened of her deceased father, and with her all the pow∣er of his wealth, not only against faith and conscience detains her Dowry, but against Nature and humanity assays to abuse her body.
I'm present to affirm it my loved Lord.
How? what make I here?
Either I must agree.
To loathed lust, or despised beggary.
Are you the plaintive here?
I my good Lord,
For fault of a better.
Seldom comes a worse—and moreover not contained in this vice only, which is odious to much, but against the sacred use of Justice, maintains three threeues to his men.
Cuds me!
Who only take Purses in their Masters liber∣tie, where if any one chance to be taken, he appears be∣fore him in a false Beard, and own of his own fellows takes his examination.
By my troth as true as can be, but hee shall not know on it.
And in the end will execute Justice so cruelly upon him, that hee will not trust him in a prison, but
commit him to his fellows chamber.
Can a man doe nothing in the Country but tic told at Court? there's some busy informing knave a∣broad, a my life.
That this is true, and these, and more my Lord.
(Be it under pardon spoken for mine own)
Hee the disease of Justice, these of honour,
And This of Loyalty and Reverence:
The vnswept venom of the Palace,
Slave!
Behold the Prince to approve it.
Oh, where?
Your Eyes keep with your Actions, both look wrong.
An infernal to my spirit.
My Lord the Prince:
Tread me to dust, thou in whō wonder keeps,
Behold the Serpent on his belly creeps.
Ranckle not my foot, away.
Treason, we laugh at thy vain-labouring strings,
Aboue the foot thou hast no power ore Kings
I cannot with sufficient joy receive thee,
And yet my ioye's too much,
My royal Father,
To whose unnatural murder I was hired,
I thought it a more natural course of travail,
And answering future expectation,
To leave far Countries, and enquire mine own,
To thee let Reverence all her powers en∣gage,
That art in youth a miracle to age.
State is but blindness, ethou had piercing Art,
We only saw the knee; but thou the heart.
To thee then power and Dukedom we resign,
▪Hoe's fit to reign, whose knowledge can refine:
Forbid it my obedience.
Our word's not vain,
I know thee wise can both obey and reign,
The rest of life we dedicate to heaven.
A happy and safe reign to our new Duke.
Without your prayers safer, &amp; happier: Fidelio.
My royal Lord.
Here take this Diamond:
You know the virtue on it, it can fetch vice:
Madam Castiza:
She attends my Lord.
Place a guard near vs.
Know you you fellow Lady?
My honours evil.
Torment again?
So ugly are thy crimes,
Thine eye cannot endure 'em.
And that thy face may stand perpetually
Turned so from ours, and thy abhorred self,
Neither to threaten wrack of state or credit,
An everlasting banishment cease on thee.
Oh Fiend!
Thy life is such it is too bad to end.
May thy Rule, life, and all that's in thee glad,
Have as short time—as thy begetting had.
Away, thy curse is idle, the rest are under refor∣motion, and therefore under pardon.
Our duties shall turn edge upon our crimes.
S'lid I was afraid of nothing, but that for my thee∣very, and bawderie I should have been turned to an In∣keeper: my daughter, I am ashamed her worship should see me.
Who would not love a friend at Court? what fine Galleries and rooms am I brought through? I had thought my knight durst not have shown his face here, I.
Now mother of pride, and daughter of lust, which is your friend now?
Ah me!
I'm sure you are not so unprovided to be with∣out a friend here, you'll pay enough for him first.
This is the worst room that ever I came in.
I am your servant Mistress, know you not me!
Your worship is to great for me to know: I'm but a small timbred-woman when I'm out of my apparel, and dare not venture upon greatness.
Doe you deny me then? know you this purse?
That purse? O death has the Knight served me so? given away my Favours?
Stand forth—thou one of those, for whose close lusts the plague never leaves the City.
Thou worse then common: private, subtle harlot,
That dost deceive Three with one feigned lip,
Thy husband, the worlds eye, and the laws whip.
Thy zeal is hot, for tic to lust and fraud,
And dost not dread to make thy book thy Bawd,
You're curse enough to husbands il-got gains,
For whom the Court reiects, his gold maintains:
How dear and rare was Freedom wont to be,
Now few but are by their wives copies free,
And brought to such a head that now we see,
City and Suburbs wear one livery.
Tic long of those, an't like your grace, that come in upon vs, &amp; will never leave marrying of our widows till they make 'em all as free as their first husbands.
I perceive you can shift a point well.
Let me have pardon I beseech your grace, and Isle peach 'em all, all the close women that are, and upon my knowledge there's aboue five thousand within the walls and the liberties.
A band▪ they shall be sent against the Turk, Infidels against Infidels.
I will hereafter live so modestly, I will not lie with mine own husband, nor come near a man in the way of honesty.
Isle be her warrant my Lord.
You are deceived, you think y' are still a Justice.
S'foot, worse then I was before I kneeled, I am no Justice now, I know I shall be some Innkeeper at last.
My father! tic mine own father.
I should have wondered else, lust being so like.
Her birth was kin to mine, she may prove mo∣dest, for my sake I beseech you pardon her.
For thy sake Isle doe more, Fidelio hand her,
My favours on you both, next all that wealth
Which was committed to that Periur'ds trust.
I'm a beggar now, worse then an Innkeeper.
Your Mittimus shall not serve, Isle set my self free with a Deliberandum, with a Deliberandum, mark you:
What's he? a guard!
Under your sufferance, worthy Father,
His harm is to himself,
One that he's loved vexation so much,
He cannot now be rid on it,
Has been so long in suits that hoe's Law-mad.
A judgment, I crave a judgment, yea! Nuns pro tunc, Corruption alicuius, I peeped me a Raven in the face, and I thought it had been my Solister: oh the pens prick me.
And here comes he (wonder for temperance:)
Will take the cure upon him.
A blessing to this fair assembly.
Awa, yile have none ont, give me an Audit que∣rela, or a Testificandum, or a dispatch in twelve Terms, there's a blessing, there's a blessing.
You see the unbounded rage of his disease,
Tic the foul fiend my Lord he's got within him the rest are fair to this, this breeds in Ink,
And to that colour turns the blood possessed,
For instance, now your grace shall see him dressed.
Ah ho I rejoice then hoe's puzzled▪ &amp; muzzled too First come to a Soepe corpus?
Ah, good sir, this is for want of patience.
That's a fool.
She never saw the Dogs and the Bears fight,
A Country thing.
This is for lack of grace,
I'ue other business, not so much idle time.
You never say your prayers.
I'm, advised by my learned counsel,
The power of my charm come o'er thee,
Place by degrees thy wits before thee,
With silk en patience here I bind thee,
Not to move till I unwind thee.
Yea! is my cause so muddy? do I stick, do I stick (fast?
Advocate heir's my hand, pull, art made of flint?
Wilt not help out?—alas there's nothing in it.
Oh doe you sluice the Vein now?
Yes my honoured Lord.
Pray let me see the issue.
I therefore seek to keep it,—now burst out
Thou filthy stream of trouble, spite and doubt.
Oh an extent, a Proclamation, a Summons, a Re∣cognisance, a Tachment. and Injunction, a Writ, a Seizure, a Writ of praeisement, an Absolution, a Quietus est.
You're quieter I hope by so much Dreggs.
Behold my Lord:
This, why it out frowns Ink:
Tic the diseases Nature, the Fiends drink.
Oh sick, sick, Signior Ply-fee, sick: lend me thy Nightcap, oh!
The Balsum of a temperate brain,
I pour into this thirsty vein,
And with this blessed oil of quiet,
Which is so cheap, that few men buy it,
Thy stormy Temples I allay,
Thou shalt give up the Devil and pray,
Forsake his works, the'yre foul and black,
And keep thee bare in purse and back.
No more shalt thou in paper quarrel,
To dress up Apes in good apparel.
He throws his stock, and all his flock,
Into a swallowing gulf,
That sends his Goose unto his Fox,
His Lamb unto his Wolf.
Keep thy increase,
And live at peace,
For war's not equal to this battle,
That eats but men this men and cattail,
Therefore no more this combat choose:
Where he that wins, do's always loose,
And those that gain all, with this curse receive it,
From fools they get it, to their sons they leave it.
Hail sacred patience, I begin to feel
I have a Conscience now, Truth in my words, Compass∣zion in my hart, &amp; aboue al, in my blood peaces music,
Use me how you can,
You shall find me an honest-quiet man.
Oh, pardon, that I dare behold that face,
"Now I'ue least law, I hope have most grace,
We both admire the work-man and his piece:
Thus when all hearts are tunde to Honours strings,
There is no music to the Quire of Kings.
THe marks and notions extant in each spirit,
Sealed by th'industrious hand of art &amp; merit,
Me thinks appear transparent (as the mind
By fence were bounded and might seem confined
In the external eye) nor shall our tragic muse,
(If strong hope fail not) need a kind excuse
But to those marginal notes of yours do bring
(In following nombers from the learned spring)
Matter instructive to enrich their parts
Where knowledge reigns crowned with it own deserts,
Let such with serious and impartial hearing
Sound sense, quick sight and judgment never erring:
Survey and censure the mineruall frame
Of his elaborate work: and if his name
Merit regard, and you vouchsafe to grace him
With eminent love, or mongstthose laureates place him,
That with the magic of sweet poesy,
Transfer Pernassus into Brittany,
He shall digest the Chaos of his brain,
To tuneful order and acquire a strain,
Near to the music of the heavenly spheres,
To fit Times guard and ravish choicest ears.
FAme and Opinion like the two vvingd cap
On Harms head, do lift all Poets up:
Some, though deserving, yet aboue the Sphere
Of true impartial censure, whose tuned ear
Listens to all and can with judgment say,
Others sing well, though Thracian Orpheus play.
Our Muse affects no excellence: if Fame tell
And through her shrill tromp at the Muses well
(Where the thrice trebled bench of learning sits
In strict examination of others wits)
Sound ours, though humbly strains, whose infant growth
Nor dares, nor will, with times hugd darlings quarrel,
Nor stand the lightning with the sacred Laurel)
We rest content: yet thus far may conceit
Carry each labouring Artist, where the weight
Of his oyld task is over, that his tongue
May like a father of his tender young
Speak natures language and not be withstood,
When with our Muse he saith, that This is good.

OH, that ever I was borne, that ever I was borne!
Nay good Sister, dear sister, sweet
sister, bee of good comfort, show yourself a woman, now or
never.
Oh, I have lost the dearest man. I have buried the sue∣test
•usba•d •hat ever lay by woman.
Nay give him his due hee was indeed an honest,
virtuous, discreet wis•-man,—hee was my Brother, as right,
as right.
O, I shall never forget him, never forget him, hee was a
man so well given to a woman—oh:
Nay but kind Sister, I could weep as much as any
woman, but alas our •ears cannot call him again: me thinks
you are well read Sister, and know that death is as common as
Homo a common name to all men;—a man shall bee taken
when hoe's making water,—Nay, did not the learned Parson
Moister Pigman tell vs even now, that all Flesh is frail, wee are
borne to dye, Man he's but a time: with such like deep and
profound persuasions, as hee is a rare fellow you know and an
excellent Reader: and for example, (as there are examples
abundance,) did not Sir Humfrey Bubble dye tother day there's
a lusty Widow, why she cried no• aboue half an houe-for
shame, for shame: then followed him old Moister Fulsome the
Usurer, there's a wise Widow, why she cried ne'er a white
at all.
O rank no• me with those wicked women, I had a
Husband out-shinde 'e• all.
I that he •id I•aith, •e out-shind 'em all.
Dost thou stand there and see vs all weep, and not
once shed a tear for thy fathers death? oh thou ungracious
son and heir thou:
Troth Mother I should not weep I'm sure; I am
past a child I hope, to make all my old School fellows
laugh at me; I should bee mocked, so I should; Pray let one
of my Sisters weep for me, Isle laugh as much for her ano∣there
time?
Oh thou past-Grace thou, out of my sight, thou grace∣less
imp, thou grieve me more then the death of thy Fa∣there?
o• thou stubborn only son? had thou such an ho∣nest
man to thy Father—that would deceive all the world to
get riches for thee, and can thou not afford a little sa't wa∣la?
he that so wisely did quite ouer-throw the right heir of
those lands, whi•h now you respect not up every morning be∣twixt
four and five so duly at Westminster Hall every Tearme-Time,
with all his Cards and writings, for thee thou wicked
Absolon—oh dear husband!
Weep? quoth? I protest I am glad hoe's Churched?
for now hoe's gone I shall spend in quiet?
Dear mother; pray cease, half your Tears suffice,
Tic time for you to take truce with your eyes,
Let me weep now?
Oh such a dear knight! such a sweet husband have
I lost, have I lost?—if Blessed bee the coarse the rain raynes
upon, he had it pouring down?
Sister? be of good cheer, wee are all mortal our
selves, I come upon you freshly, I near speak without com∣fort,
here me what I shall say;—my brother he's left you well∣thy,
you're rich.
Oh!
I say you're rich? you are also fair.
Oh!
Go too you're fair you cannot smother it, beauty
will come to light; nor are your years so far entered with
you; but that you will bee sought after; and may very well
answer another husband; the world is full of fine Gallants,
choice enough Sister,—for what should wee doe with all ou•
Knights I pray? but to mar•y rich widows, wealthy Citti∣zens
widows; •usty fair—browd Ladies; go too, bee of
good comfort I say 〈◊〉 snob••g and weeping—yet my
Brother was a kind he••ed man—I would not have the
Elf see me now?—come pluck up a women's heart—here
stands your Daughters, who be well estated, and at matu∣rity
will also bee enq•ir'd after with good husbands, so
all these tears shall bee soon d•yed up and a better v•o•lt
then ever—what? Woman? you must not weep still?
hoe's dead hoe's buried—yet I cannot choose but weep for
him!
Marry again! no! let me be buried quick then!
And that same part of Quire whereon I tread
To such intent, O may it be my grave;
And that the Priest may 〈◊〉 his wedding prayers,
Even with a breath, to 〈◊〉 all dust and ashes;
Oh, out of a million of millions, I should ne'er find such a
husband, hee was unmatchable,—unmatchable? nothing was
•o hot, nor to dear for me, I could not speak of that one
thing that I had not, beside I had keys of all, kept all, re∣ceiu'd
all, had money in my purse, spent what I would, went
abroad when I would, came home when I would, and did all
what I would? Oh—my sweet husband; I shall never have
the like?
Sister? ne'er say so; hee was an honest brother of
mine, and so, and you may light upon one as honest again,
or one, as honest again may light upon you, that's the prop∣rer
phrase indeed?
Never? oh if you love me urge it not,
Oh may I be the by-word of the world,
The common talk at Table in the mouth
Of every Groom and Wa•la, if ever more
I entertain the carnal suite of Man?
I must kn•eel do•no for fashion too?
And I, whom never man as yet hath scald
Ee'n in this depth of general sorrow, vow
Never to marry, to sustain such loss
As a dear husband seems to be, once dead?
I loved my father well too; but to say,
Nay now, I would not marry for her death?
Sure I should speak false Latin; should I not?
Id as soon vow never to come in Bed.
Tut? Women must live by the quick, and not by the dead.
Dear Copy of my husband, oh let me kiss thee:
How like him is their Model? their brief Picture
Quickens my tears: my sorrows are renewed
At their fresh sight?
Sister—
Away,
All honesty with him is turned to clay,
Oh my sweet husband, oh—
My dear father?
Here is a puling indeed! I think my Mother weeps for
all the women that ever buried husbands: for if from time to
time all the Widowers tears in England had been bottled
up, I do not think all would have filled a three-halfe-penny Boat∣tle;
Alas a small matter bucks a hand-kercher,—and some∣times
the spittle stands to no Saint Thomas a Watrings; well, I
can morn in good sober sort as well as another? but where I
spend one tear for a dead Father, I could give twenty kisses
for a quick husband.
Well, go thy ways old Sir Godfrey, and thou moist
be proud on it, thou hast a kind loving sister-in-law; how con∣stant?
how passionate? how full of April the poor souls eyes
are; well, I would my Brother knew on it, he should then know
what a kind wife hee had left behind him; truth and it were
not for shame that the Neighbours at th next garden should
hear me▪ between joy and g•iefe, I should even cry out-right!
So, a fair riddance, my fathers •aid in dust his Cof∣fin
and he is like a whole-meate-pye, and the worms will cut
him up shortly; farewell old Dad, farewe'l. Isle be curbed in
no more, I perceive a some and heir may quickly be made
a fool and he will be one, but Isle take another order;—Now
she would have me weep for him for-sooth, and why? because
he cozn'd the right heir being a fool, and bestowed those
Lands upon me his eldest Son; and therefore I must weep for
him ha, ha; Why al the world knows as long as it was his plea∣sure
to get me, it was his duty to get for me: I know the law in
that point no Attorney can gull me; Well, my Uncle• an old
Ass, and an 〈◊〉 Cockscomb, Isle rule the Roast my self,
Isle be kept under •o more, I know what I may do well enough
by my Fathers Copy: the Lawe's in mine own hands now:
nay now I know my strength, Isle be strong enough for my Mo∣there
I warrant you?
What's to be done now? old Lad of War; thou that we•t
wont to be as hot as a turn-spit, as nimble as a fencer, &amp; as low∣zy
as a schoolmaster; now thou art put to silence like a Sec∣tarry?
—War sitts now like a Justice of peace, and does nothing,
where be your Muskets, Caleiuers and Hotshots? in Long-lane,
at Pawn, at Pawn;—Now keys, are your only Guns, Key-guns,
Key-guns, &amp; Bawds the Gunners,—who are your cen∣tinells
in peace, and stand ready charged to give warning; with
hems, hums, &amp; pockey-coffs; only your Chambers are licenc'st
to play upon you, and Drabs enough to give fire to 'em.
Well, I cannot tell, but I am sure it goes wrong with me,
for since the cessure of the wars, I have spent aboue a hundred
crowns out a purse: I have been a soldier any time this for∣tie
years, and now I perceive an old soldier, and an old
Courtier have both one destiny, and in the end turn both in∣to
hob-nayles.
Pretty mystery for a beggar, for indeed a hob-naile is the
true emblem of a beggars shoo-soale;
I will not say but that war is a bloud-sucker, and so;
but in my conscience, (as there is no soldier but has a p•ice of
one, tho it bee full of holes like a shot Ancient, no matter, twill
serve to swear by) in •y conscience, I think some kind of
Peace, he's more hidden oppressions, and violent heady sins,
(th• looking of a gentle nature) then a professed war.
Troth, and for mine own part, I am a poor Gentleman,
&amp; a Scholar, I have been matriculated in the University, wore
•ut •ixe Gowns there, seen some fools, and some Scholars,
some of the City, and some of the Country, kept order, went
bare-headed over the Quadrangle, eat my Commons with a
good stomach, and Battled with Discretion; at last, having
done many slights and tricks to maintain my wit in use
(as my brain would never endure me to bee idle,) I was
expelled the University, only for stealing a Cheese out of Iesus
College.
First possible?
Oh! there was one Welshman (God forgive him) pur∣sued
it hard; and never left, till I rnmde my staff toward
London, where when I came, all my friends were pitt-hold,
gone to Graves, (as indeed there was but a few left before)
then was I turned to my wits, to shift in the world, to tower
among Sons and Heirs, and Fools, and Gulls, and Ladies
eldest Sons, to work upon nothing, to feed out of Flint,
and ever since has my belly been much beholding to my
brain: But now to return to you old •kirmish. I say as you
say, and for my part wish a Turbulence in the world, for I have
nothing to loose but my wits, and I think they are as mad
as they will be: and to strengthen your Argument the more, I
say an honest wart, is better then a bawdy peace: as touching
my profession; The multiplicity of Scholars, hatched, and now∣risht,
in the idle Calms of peace, makes 'em like Fishes one de∣uoure
another; and the community of Learning he's so plaide
upon affections, and thereby almost Religion is come about to
Fantasy, and discredited by being too much spoken off—in so
many &amp; mean mouths, I my self being a Scholar and a Gradu∣ate,
have no other comfort by my learning, but the Affliction of
my words, to know how Scholler-like to name what I want, &amp;
can call my self a Beggar both in Grecke and Latin, and there∣fore
not to cog with Peace, Isle not be afraid to say, it is a great
Breeder, but a barren Nourisher: a great-getter of Children,
which must either be Thieves or Rich-men, Knaves or Beggars.
Well, would I had been borne a Knave then,
when I was borne a Beggar, for if the truth were known,
I think I was begot when my Father had •ever a penny in his
purse.
•uh, faint not old Skirmish, let this warrant thee, Faceless
Descensus Aver•i, it is an easy journey to a Knave, thou moist
bee a Knave when thou wilt; and Peace is a good Madam to
all other professions, and an arrant Drab to vs, let vs han∣dl
her accordingly, and by our wits thrive in despite of
her; for since the law lives by quarrelis, the Courtier by
smooth God-morrowes, and every profession makes it self
greater by imperfections, why not wee then by shifts, wiles,
and forgeries? and seeing our brains are ou• only Patrimo∣niece,
let's spe•d with judgment, not like a desperate son and
heir, but like a sober and discreet Templer,—one that will
never marche beyond the bounds of his allowance, and for
our thriving means, thus, I my self will put on the Deceit of a
Fortune-teller, a Fortune-teller.
Very proper.
And you of a figure-caster, or a Conjurer.
A Conjurer.
Let me alone, Isle instruct you, and teach you to deceive
all eyes, but the Devils.
Oh I, for I would not deceive him and I could choose,
of all others.
Fear not I warrant you; and so by those means wee
shall help one another to Patients, as the condition of the age
affords creatures enough for cunning to work upon.
Oh wondrous new fools and fresh Asses.
Oh, fit, fit, excellent.
What in the name of Conjuring?
My memory greetes me happily with an admi∣rabble
subject to graze upon. The Lady-Widdow, who of late
I saw weeping in her Garden for the death of her Hus∣band,
sure she as but a waterish soul, and hal•e on it by this
time is dropped out of her Lies: device well managde may doe
good upon her: it stands firm, my first practi•e shall bee
there?
You have my voice George?
Sh'as a gray Gall to her Brother, a fool to her
only son, and an Ape to her youngest Daughter;—I over∣heard
'em severally, and from their words Isle derive my device;
and thou old Peter Skirmish shall be my second in all slights.
Ne'er doubt me George Pye-boord.—only you must
•each me to conjure.
Push, Isle perfect thee, Peter:
How now? what's hee?
Oh George! this sight kills me,
Tic my sworn Brother, Captain Idle.
Captain Idle.
Apprehended for some felonious act or other, hee has
started out, he has made a Night on it, lacked silver; I cannot but
commend his resolution, he would not pawn his Buffe-Ierkin,
I would either some of vs were employed, or might pitch our
Tents at Usurers doors, to kill the slaves as they peep out at
the Wicket.
Indeed those are our ancient Enemies; they keep our
money in their hands, and make vs to bee hanged for robbing
of 'em, but come letts follow after to the Prison, and know the
Nature of his offence, and what we can steed him in, hee shall be
sure of; and Isle uphold it still, that a charitable Knave, is better
then a soothing Puritaine.
What Corporal Oath? I am sorry we have met with you
•axed our hearts; you are the man that we are forbidden to keep
company withal, wee must not swear I can tell you, and you
have the name for swearing.
I, Corporal Oath, I would you would do so much as for∣sake
vs sir, we cannot abide you, wee must not be seen in your
company.
There is none of vs I can tell you, but shall be soundly
whipped for swearing.
Why how now? we three? Putitanicall Scrape-shoes,
Flesh a good Fridays? a hand.
Oh.
Why Nich•las Saint-Tantlings, Simon Saint Mary Ove∣ries,
he's the De'ele possessed you, that you swear no better, you
halfe-Christned Katomites, you vngod-motherd Varlets, do's
the first lesson teach you to bee proud, and the second to bee
Cocks-combes; proud Cocks-combes? not once to doe duty
to a man of Mark.
A man of Mark, quatha, I doe not think he can show
a Beggars Noble.
A Corporal, a Commander, one of spirit; that is
able to blow you up all dry with your Books at your
Girdles.
Wee are not taught to believe that sir, for we know
the breath of man is weak?
•oh, you lie Nicholas; for here's one strong enough;
blow vs up quatha, hee may well blow me aboue twelue-score
off an him? I warrant if the wind stood right, a man might
smell him from the top of Newgate, to the Leads of Ludgate?
Sirrah, thou Hollow-Booke of Waxe-candle.
I, you may say what you will, so you swear not.
I swear by the—
Hold, hold, good Corporal Oath; for if you swear
once, wee shall all fall down in a sown presently.
I must and will swear: you quivering Cocks-combes,
my Captain is imprisoned, and by Uulcans Leather Cod-piece
point—
O Simon, what an oath was there.
If hee should chance to break it, the poor mans
Breeches would fall down about his heals, for Venus allows
him but one point to his hose?
With these my Bullye-Feete, I will thumpe op
the Prison doors, and brain the Keeper with the begging
Box, but Isle set my honest sweet Captain Idle at liberty.
How, Captain Idle, my old Aunts son, my dear
Kinsman in Capadochio.
I, thou Church-peeling, thou Holy-pa•ing, religious out∣side
thou? if thou had any grace in thee, thou would visit
him, relieve him, swear to get him out?
Assure you Corporal indeed-la, tic the first time I
heard on it,
Why do 't now then, Marmoset? bring forth thy yearly-wages,
let not a Commander perish!
But, if hee bee one of the wicked, hee shall pe∣rich.
Well Corporal, Isle even along with you, to visit my
Kinsman, if I can do him any good, I will,—but I have nothing
for him, Simon Saint Mary Oueris and Frailty, pray make a lie
for me to the Knight my Moister, old Sit Godfrey.
A lie? may you lie then?
O I, we may lie, but me must not swear.
True, wee may lie with our Neighbours wife, but wee
must not swear we did so;
Oh, an excellent Tag of religion?
Oh Simon, I have thought upon a sound excuse, it will
go currant, say that I am gon to a Fast;
To a Fast, very good?
I, to a Fast say, with Moister Ful-bellie the Minister.
Moister Ful-bellie? an honest man: he feeds the flock
w•ll, for he's an excellent feeder?
O I, I have seen him eat up a whole Pig, and after∣ward
falls to the pettitoes?
Pray turn the key.
Turn the key I pray?
Who should those be, I almost know their •oy•es?
O my friends?
Ya're welcome to a smelling Room here? you newly took
leave of the ayre first not a strange savour?
'As all prisons have, smells of sundry wretcher;
Who tho departed, leave their scents behind 'em,
By Gold Captain, I am sincerely sorry for thee.
By my troth George I thank thee; but pish,—what
must be, must bee.
Captain, what doe you lie in for? first great? what's
your offence?
Faith, my offence is ordinary,—common? A Hie-waye,
and I fear me my penalty will be ordinary and common too,
a halter.
Nay prophecy not so ill, it shall go heard'
But Isle shift for thy life.
Whether I live or die, th•• art an honest George 〈◊〉
tell you—silver stou'd not with ••ee, as it had done, (for now
the tide runs to Bawds and flatterers) I had a start out, and
by chance set upon a fat steward, thinking his purse had been
as pursey as his body; and the slave had about him but the
poor purchase of ten groats: notwithstanding being des∣cried,
pursued, and taken, I know the Law is so grim: in respect
of many desprate-vnsetled soldiers, that I fear me I shall
dance after their pipe for it.
I am twice sorry for you Captain: first that your purchase
was so small, and now that your danger is so great.
Push, the worst is 〈◊〉 death,—ha you a pipe of Tobacc•
about you?
I think, I have there abouts about me!
Her's a clean Gentleman too, to receive?
Well, I must cast about, some happy slight,
Work brain, that ever did thy Moister right?
Keeper? let the key be turn'dl
I, I pray Moister keeper gives a cast of your office? 
How now • more Visitants?—what Corporal Oath?
Corporal?
In prison honest Captalne? this must not be?
How do you Captain Kinsman?
Good Cocks-combe? what makes that pure—starched
fool here?
You see Kinsman I am somewhat bold to call in, and see
how you do, I heard you were safe enough, and I was very glad
on it that it was no worse;
This is a double torture now,—this fool by the book
Do's vex me more then my imprisonment?
What meant you Corporal to hook him hither?
Who he? he shall relieve thee, and supply thee,
Isle make him do it;
Fie, what vain breath you spend!
hee supply? Isle sooner expect mercy from a Usurer when my
bonds forfetted, sooner kindness from a Lawyer when my
mony's spent: nay sooner charity from the devil, then good
from a Puritaine? Isle look for relief from him, when I••cifer
is restored to his blood, and in Heaven again!
I warrant my Kinsman's talking of me, for my left ear
burns most tyrannically?
Captain Idle? what's he there? hee look; like a Mon∣key
upward; and a Crane downward.
Pshaw; a foolish Cozen of nine; I must thank God for
him.
Why the better subject to work a scope upon; thou shalt
even change clothes with him, and leave him here, and so;
Push, I published him even now to my Corporal, hee will
be damned, ere hee do me so much good; why I know a more
proper, a more handsome device then that, if the slave would be
sociable—now goodman Fleere-face?
Oh, my Cozen begins to speak to me now, I shall bee
acquainted with him again I hope,
Look what ridiculous Raptures take hold of his
wrinkles,
Then what say you to this device, a happy one Captain?
Speak lovve George; Prison Rats have vvider ears
then those in Malt-lof•s.
Cozen, if it lay in my power, as they say? — to — do;
Twould do me a• exceeding pleasure indeed that, but
• ere talk foe•der on it, the fool will be hanged, ere he do it.
Pox, Isle thump 'em to it.
Why doe but try the Fopster, and break it to him
bluntly.
And so my disgrace will dwell in his Jaws, and the
slave slaver out our purpose to his Moister, for would I were but
as sure on it as I am sure he will deny to do it.
I would bee heartily glad Cozen, if any of my friend∣ships,
as they say, might—stand, ah,
Why, you see he offers his friend-ship foolishly to you al∣ready?
I, that's the 〈◊〉 on it, I would hee would offer it
wisely?
Verily, and indeed la, Cousin?—
I have took note of thy steers a good while, if thou art
minded to do me good? as thou gapst upon me comfortably,
and giu'st me charitable faces? which indeed is but a fashion
in you all that are Pu•itaines? wilt soon at night steal me thy
Masters chain?
Oh, I shall sown!
Corporal, he starts already!
I know it to be worth three hundred Crowns, &amp; with
the half of that, I can buy my life at a Brokers, at second hand,
which now lies in pawn to 'th Law, if this thou re•suss to do,
being easy and nothing dangerous, in that thou art held in
good opinion of thy M••ster, why tic a palpable Argument
thou holdst my life at no price, and these thy broken &amp; vnioyn∣ted
offers, are but only created in thy lip, now borne, and now
buried, foolish breath only? what; woult do it? shall I look
for happiness in thy answer?
Steal my Masters chane quo the? no, it shall ne'er bee
said that Nicholas Saint Tantlings committed Bird-lime!
Nay, I told you as much; did I not; tho he be a Puritaine
yet he will be a true man?
Why Co•zen? you know tic written, thou shalt not
steal?
Why, and fool, thou shalt love thy Neighbour, and help
him in extremities?
Mass I think it bee indeed, in what Chapter's that
Cousin?
Why in the first of Charity, the 2. verse.
The first of Charity, qua tha, that's a good jest, there's
no such Chapter in my book!
No, I knew it was torn out of thy Book, &amp; that makes
so little in thy heart.
Come, let me tell you, ya're too unkind a Kinsman in faith;
the Captain loving you so dearly, I, like the Pomwater of his
eye, and you to be so uncomfortable, fie, fie.
Pray do not wish me to bee hanged, any thing else that
I can do, had it been to rob, I would ha don't, but I must not
steal, that's the word the literal, thou shalt not steal, and
would you wish me to steal then?
No faith, that were to much, to speak truth: why woult
thou nim it from him.
That I will?
Why enough bulhe; hee shall bee content with that, or
he shall ha none; let me alone with him now! Captain, I ha
dealt with your Kins-man in a Corner; a good—kind—na∣turd
fellow, me thinks: go too, you shall not have all your
own asking, you shall bate somewhat on •he is not contented
absolutely as you would say to steal the chain from him,—
but to do you a pleasure he will nim it from him.
I, that I will, Cousin.
Well seeing he will doe no more, as far as I see I must bee
contented with that.
Here's no notable gullery?
Nay Isle come nearer to you Gentleman? because weal
have only but a help and a mirth on it, the knight shall not
loose his chain neither, but be only laid out of the way some
one or two days?
I, that would be good indeed? Kinsman?
For I have a farther reach to profit vs better by the missing
on it only, then if wee had it out-right, as my discourse shall
make it known too you?—when thou hast the chain, do but
convey it out at backdoor into the Garden, and there hang it
close in the Rosemary bank, but for a small season; and by that
harmless devise, I know how to wind Captain Idle, out of
prison, the Knight thy Moister shall get his pardon and release
him, &amp; he satisfy thy Moister with his own chain &amp; wondrous
thanks on both hands.
That were rare indeed la•pray let me know how?
Nay tic very necessary thou should know, because thou
must be employed as an Actor?
An Actor? O no, that's a Plaier? and our Parson rails
again Players mightily I can tell you, because they brought
him drunk vpp'oth Stage once,—as hee will bee horribly
drunk.
Mass I cannot blame him then, poor Church-spout?
Why as an Intermedler then?
I that, that.
Give me Audience then? when the old Knight thy Maize∣la
has ridge his fill for the loss of the chain, tell him thou
hast a Kinsman in prison, of such exquisite Art, that the devil
himself is french Lackey to him, and runs bare-headed by
his horse—belly (when hee has one) whom hee will cause
with most Irish Dexterity to fetch his chain, tho it were hid un∣der
a mine of sea-cole, and ne'er make Spade or Picka•e
his instruments, tell him but this with farther instructions
thou shalt receive from me, and thou shoust thy self a Kins∣man
indeed.
A dainty Bullie.
An honest—Booke-keeper.
And my three times thrice honey Cousin.
Nay grace of God Isle rob him on it suddenly? and
hang it in the Rosemary bank, but I bear that mind Cou∣zen
I would not steal any thing me thinks for mine own
Father.
He bears a good mind in that Captain!
Why well said, he begins to be an honest fellow faith.
In t•oath he does.
You see Cousin, I am willing to do you any kindness,
always saving my self harmless?
Why I thank thee, fare thee well, I shall re∣quite
it.
Twill bee good for thee Captain, that thou hast such
an egregious Ass to thy Cousin.
I, is hee not a fine fool Corporal?
But George thou talk of Art and Coniuting,
How shall that bee?
Puh, be it not in your care,
Leave that to me and my directions;
Well Captain doubt not thy delivery now,
E 'en with the vantage man, to gain by prison,
As my thoughts prompt me: hold on brain and plot,
I aim at many cunning far events,
All which I doubt not but to hit at length,
Isle to the Widow with a quaint assault,
Captain be merry.
Who I? Kerrie merry Buffe-Ierkin?
Oh, I am happy in more slights, and one will knit strong
in another—Corporal Oath?
Ho Bully?
And thou old Peter Skirmish, I have a necessary task
for you both.
Lay it upon George Pye-boord.
What ere it bee, weal manage it.
I would have you two maintain a quarrel before the
Lady Widows door, and draw your swords in the edge of t•e
Evening: clash a lit•le, clash, clash.
Fuh.
Let vs alone to make our Blades 〈◊〉 noon,
Tho it be after Supper.
Know you can;
And out of that false fire, I doubt not but to raise strange be∣leefe
—and Captain to countenance my device the better, and
grace my words to the Widow, I have a good plain Satin
suit, that I had of a young Reveller t'other night, for words pass
not regarded now a days unless they come from a good suite
of clothes, which the Fates and my wits have bestowed upon
me. Well Captain Idle, if I did not highly love thee, I would
ne'er bee seen within twelve score of a pris••, for I protest at
this instant, I walk in great danger of small debts ••owe mo∣ney
to several Hostesses, and you know such lil• 〈…〉
be upon a mans Jack.
True George?
Fare thee well Captain. Come Corporal and Once∣ent?
thou shalt hear more news next time we greet thee?
More news? I; by you Bear at Bridge-Foote in hey∣uen
shalt thou.
Enough: my friends farewell,
This prison shows as if Ghosts did part in Hell.
Not Marry: forswear Marriage? why all women
know it is as honourable a thing as to lye with a man; and I to
spite my Sisters vow the more, have entertained a suitor al∣ready▪
a fine gallant Knight of the last Feather, hee says he will
Coach me too, and well appoint me, allow me money to
Dice with-all, and many such pleasing protestations hee sticks
upon my lips; indeed his short-winded Father in the Country is
wondrous wealthy, a most abominable Farmer, and therefore
hee may doo•e in time: troth Isle venture upon him; women
are not without ways •now to help them-selues▪ if he prove
wise and good as his word, why I shall love him, and use him
kindly: and if hee prove an Ass, why in a quarter of an hours
warning I can transform him into an Ox;—there comes in
my Relief again.
O Mistress Moll, Mistress Moll.
How now? what's the news?
The Knight your •utter, sir Iohn Penny-Dub.
Sir Iohn Penny-Dub? where? where?
Hoe's walking in the Gallery.
He's my Mother seen him yet.
O no, shoe's—spitting in the Kitchen.
Direct him hither softly, good Frailty,—Isle
meet him half way.
That's just like running a Tilt; but I hope heel break
nothing this time.
It is happiness my Mother saw him not:
O we come good Sir Ioha.
I thank you faith,—Nay you must stand me,
till I kiss you: it is the fashion every where In faith, and I came
from Court enough?
Nay the Fates forsend that I should anger the fashion?
Then not forgetting the sweet of new ceremonies,
I first fall back, then recovering my self; make my honour to
your lip thus: and then accost it.
Trust me, very pretty, and moving, you're worthy on it sir,—
O my Mother, my Mother, now shoe's here,
Weal steal into the Gallery.
Nay Sister, let Reason rule you, doe not play the
fool, stand not in your own light, you have wealthy offers,
large tendrings, doe not with-stand your good fortune: who
comes a wooing to you I pray? no small fool, a rich Knight ath
City, Sir Oliuer Muck-hill, no small fool I can tell you: and
furthermore as I heard late by your Maide-seruants, (as your
Maide-seruants will say to me any thing I thank `em) both
your Daughters are not without Suitors, I, and worthy ones
too? one a Brisk Cou•tier, Sir Andrew Tip-staffe; suitor a
far off to your eldest Daughter, and the third a huge-wel∣thie
Farmers son, a fine young Country Knight, they call
him Sir Iohn Penny-Dab, a good name marry, hee may have
it kind when hee lacks money: what blessings are these
Sister?
Tempt me not Satan.
Satan? doe I look like Satan? I hope the Deuill's
not so old as I, I trow.
You wound my senses Brother, when you name,
A suitor to me,—oh I cannot abide it,
I take in poison, when I hear one named,
How now Simon? whore's my son Edmund?
Ve•ely Madame, hee is at vain Exercise, dripping in
he Tennis-court.
At Tennis-court? oh, now his father's gon, I shall have
no rule with him; oh wicked Edmond, I might well compare
this with the Prophecy in the Chronicle, tho fart inferior, as
Harry of Monmouth won all, and Harry of Windsor lost all, so
Edmund of Breast•• that was the Father, got all, and Edmond of
London that's his son now, will spend all?
Peace Sister, weal have hem reformd, there's hope
on him yet, tho it be but a little.
Forsooth Madam? there are two or three Archers at
door, would very gladly speak with your Ladyship.
Archers?
Your husbands Fletcher I warrant.
Oh,
Let them come near, they bring home things of his,
Troth I should ha forgot 'em, how now?
Villain, which be those Archers?
Who do you not see 'em before you, are not these Are∣chers,
what do you call 'em Shooters: Shooters and Archers are
all one I hope.
Out ignorant slave.
Nay pray be patient Lady,
We come in way of honourable love.
Wee doe.
To you.
And to your Daughters?
O why will you offer me this Gentlemen? indeed
I will not look upon you; when the Tears are scarce out of
mine Eyes, not yet washed off from my Cheeks, and my
dear husbands body scars• so cold as the Coffin, what rea∣son
have you to offer it? I am not like some of your Wid∣dowes
that will bury one in the Evening, and bee sure to ano∣there
ere morning? pray away, pray, take your answers good
Knights, and you bee sweet Knights, I have vowed never to
marry;—and so have my daughters too!
I two of you have, but the thirds a good wench!
Lady, a shrewd answer many; the best is, tic but
the first, and hoe's a blunt wooer, that will leave for one sharpe
answer.
Where bee your daughters Lady, I hope theile give vs
better encouragements?
Indeed theyle answer you so, tak't a my word theile
give you the very same answer Verbat•m cruelly la;
Mum: Molls a good wench still, I know what she'll
doo?
Well, Lady, for this time weal take our leaves, ho∣ping
for better comfort.
O never, never? and I live these thousand years; and
you bee good Knights doe not hope; twiil bee all Vain,
Vain,—look you, put off all yours suites, and you come to
me again.
Put off all their suites qua tha? I, that's the best wooing
of a Widow indeed, when a man's Nonsuted, that is, when
he's a bed with her.
Sir Godfrey? here's twenty Angels more work
hard for me; there's life int yet.
Fea•e not Sir Oliuer Muckhill, Isle stick close for
you, leave all with me.
By your leave Lady Widow.
What another suitor now?
A suitor no I protest Lady? if you•de give me your self
Id not be troubled with you.
Say you so Sir, then you're the better welcome sir.
Nay Heaven bless me from a Widow, unless I were
sure to bury her speedily!
Good bluntness: well your business sit?
Very needful; if you were in private once?
Needful? brother pray leave vs; and you sit?
I should laugh now, if this blunt fellow should put 'em
all by side the sty•rope, and vault into the saddle himself, I have
seen as mad a trick.
Now Sir?—here's none but we—Daughters forbear.
O no, pray let 'em stay, for what I have to speak impor∣teeth
equally to them as to you?
Then you may stay.
I pray bestow on me a serious ear,
For what I speak is full of weight and fear?
Fear?
I left pass unregarded, and vneffected,
Else peace and joy:—I pray Attention?
Widow? I have been a mere stranger for these parts that
you live in, nor did I ever know the Husband of you, and Fa∣there
of them, but I truly know by certain spiritual Intelli∣gence,
that he is in Putgatorie?
Purgatory? tuh; that word deserves to bee spit upon;
I wonder that a man of sober tongue as you seem to be, should
have the folly to believe there's such a place.
Well Lady, in cold blood I speak it, I assure you that
there is a Purgatory, in which place I know your husband to
recide and wherein he is like to remain, till the dissolution of
the world, till the last general Bon-fire: when all the earth shall
melt into nothing. And the Seas scald their finny labourers:
so long is his abidance, unless you alter the property of your
purpose, together with each of your Daughters theirs, that is,
the purpose of single life in your self and your eldest Daugh∣la,
and the speedy determination of marriage in your
youngest.
How knows hee that, what, he has some Devil told
him?
Strange he should know our thoughts:—
Why but Daughter have you purposed speedy Marriage?
You see she tells you I, for she says nothing.
Nay give me credit as you please, I am a stranger to you, and
and yet you see I know your determinations, which must come
to me Metaphisically, and by a super-naturall intelligence.
This puts Amazement on me?
Know our secrets.
Id thought to steal a marriage, would his tongue
Had dropped out when he blabt it.
But sir, my husband, was too hon•st a dealing man to
be now in any purgatories—
O Do not load your conscience with untruths,
Tic but mere folly now to guild hem ore:
That has past but for Copper; Praises here,
Cannot unbind him there? confess but truth,
I know he got his wealth with a hard gripe:
Oh hardly, hardly?
This is most strange of all, how knows he that?
He would eat fools and ignorant heirs clean up;
And had his drink, from many a poor mans brow,
Even as their labour brewde it?
He would scrape retches to him most unjustly;
The very dirt between his •ails was Il-got:
And not his own,—oh
I groan to speak on it, the though't makes me shudder?—shudder?
It quakes me too, now I think on it—sir, I am much
gr•eu'd, that you a stranger should so deeply wrong my dead
husband!
Oh?
A man that would keep Church so du•y; rise early, be∣fore
his servants, and even foe• Religious hast, go vngarterd, un∣b•ttend,
nay sir Reverence untrust, to Morning Prayer?
Oh vff;
Dine quickly upon hie-dayes, and when I had g•eat
guess, would even shame me and rise from the Table, to get a
good seat at an afternoon Sermon?
There's the devil, there's the devil, true, hee thought it
Sanctity enough, if he had kilt a ma•, so• tad been done in a
Pue, or undone his Neighour, so ta'd been ne'er y•ough to'th
Preacher, Oh;—a Sermon's a fine short cloak of an hour
long, and will hide the vpper-part of a dissembler,—Church, I,
he seem•d al Church, &amp; his cōscience was as hard as the Pulpit!
I can no more endure this.
Nor I widow
Endure to flatter.
Is this all your business with me?
No, Lady, tic but the induction too'te,
You may believe my strains, I strike all true?
And if your conscience would leap up to your tongue, your self
would affirm it, and that you shall perceive I know of things
to come; as well as I doe of what is present, a Brother of your
husbands shall shortly have a loss!
A loss, marry heaven for-fend, Sir Godfrey, my brother!
Nay keep in your wonders, till I have told you the for∣tunes
of you all; which are more fearful, if not happily pre∣uented—for
your part &amp; your daughters, if there be not once
this day some bloud-shed befo•e your door, wheerof the hue∣maine
creature dies? two of you the elder shall run mad?
Oh.
That's not I yet!
And with most impudent prostitution show your na∣ked
bodies to the view of all beholders!
Our naked bodies? sie for shame:
Attend me: and your younger daughter bee s•rocken
dumb?
Dumb? out alas: tic the worst pain of all for a Wo∣man,
Id rather bee mad, or run naked, or any thing:
dumb?
Give ear? ere the evening fall upon, Hill Bog, and
Meadow, this my speech shall have past probation, and then shall
I be believed accordingly.
If this bee true, wee are all shamed, all un∣don?
Dumb? Isle speak as much as ever I can possible be∣fore
evening?
But if it so come to pass (as for your fair sakes I wish
it may) that this presage of your strange fortūes be preuēted by
that accidēt of death &amp; bloud-shedding which I before told you
off: take heed vpō your lives; that two of you which have vowed
no•er to marry, seek you out husbands with all present speed
and you the third that have such a desire to out-strip chastity,
look you meddle not with a husband.
A double torment.
The breach of this keeps your father in Purgatory,
and the punishments that shall follow you in this world, would
with horror kill the Ear should hear 'e• related.
Marry? why I vowed never to marry.
And so did I.
And I vowed never to be such an Ass, but to marry.
what a cross Fortune's this?
Ladies, tho I bee a Fortune-teller, I cannot better For∣tunes,
you have 'em frō me as they are reueald to me: I would
they were to your tempers, and fellows with your bloods,
that's all the bitterness I would you.
Oh it is a just vengeance, for my husbands hard pur∣chases.
I wish you to be-thinke your selves, and leauem.
Isle to Sir Godfrey my Brother, and acquaint him with
these fearful presages.
For Mother they portend losses to him.
Oh I, they doe, they doe,
If any happy issue crown thy words,
I will reward thy cunning.
It is enough Lady,
I wish no higher.
Dumb, and not marry, worse,
Neither to speak, nor kiss, a double curse?
So all this comes well about yet, I play the Fortune-teller,
as well as if I had had a Witch to my Grannam: for by
good happiness, being in my Hostesses Garden, which neigh∣bours
the Orchard of the Widow, I laid the hole of mine ear
to a hole in the wall, and heard 'em make these vows, &amp; speak
those words upon which I wrought these advantages; and to
encourage my forgery the more, I may now perceive in 'em a
na•urall simplicity which will easily swallow an abuse, if any co∣uering
be over it: and to confirm my former presage to the
Widow, I have advised old Peter Skirmis• the Soldier, to hurt
Corporal Oath upon the Leg, and in that hurry Isle rush amongst
'em, and in stead of giving the Corporal some Cordial to com∣fort
him, Isle power into his mouth a potion of a sleepy Nature,
to make him seem as dead; for the which the old soldier bee∣ing
apprehended, and ready to bee borne to execution, Isle step
in, &amp; take upon me the cure of the dead man, upon pain of die∣ing
the condemneds death: the Corporal will wake at his mi∣nut,
when the sleepy force has wrought it self, and so shall I
get my self into a most admired opinion, and under the pretext
of that cunning, beguile as I see oc•asion: and if that foolish
Nicholas Saint Tantlings keep true time with the chain, my
plot will be found; the Captain delivered, and my wits applau∣ded
among scholars and soldiers for ever.
Oh I have foūd an excellent advantage to take a way the
chain, my Moister put it off even now to say on a new Doub•et,
and I sneak't it away by little &amp; little most Puritanically! wee
shall have good sport a non when he's mist it, about my Cozen
the Conjurer▪ the world shall see I'm an honest man of my
word for now I'm going to hang it between Heaven &amp; Earth
among the Rosemary branches.
Si•rah 〈◊〉 Saint? my Mistress sends a∣way
a•l her suitors and puts ••eas 〈◊〉 ears?
Frailty? she dos like an honest chaste, and virtuous womā?
for widows ought not to wallow in the puddle of iniquity.
Yet Simon, many widows will do it, what so comes on it.
True Frailty, their filthy flesh desires a Conjunction Co∣pulatiue
what strangers a•e within, Frailty?
Ther's none 〈◊〉 but Moister Pilfer the Tailor: he's a∣above
with Sir Godfrey pra••ing of a Doublet: and I must trudge
anon to fetch Moister Suds the Barber!
Moister Suds, a good man, he washes the sins of the
Beard clean.
How now creatures? whats a clock.
Why do you take vs to be Jack at'h Clock-house?
I say again to you what's a clock?
Truly la, wee go by the clock of our conscience, all
worldly Clocks we know go false, and are set by drunken
Sextons.
Then what's a clock in your conscience?—oh, I must
break off, here comes the corporal—hum, hum!—what's a
clock?
A clock? why past seventeen.
Past seventeen? nay he's met with his match now,
Corporal Oath will fit him.
Thou dost not bawke or baffle me, dost thou• I am a
Soldier—pa•t seventeen.
I, thou art not angry with the figures art thou? I will
prove it unto thee, 12. and 1. is thirteen • hope, 2. fourteen,
3. fifteen, 4 sixteen, and 5. seventeen, then past seventeen,
I will take the Dials part in a just cause.
I say it is but past five then.
Isle swear it is past seventeen then• dost thou not
know numbers, can thou not cast?
Cast? dost thou speak of my casting in the street? Dr••.
I, and in the Market place.
Clubs, clubs, clubs.
I, I knew by their shuffling Clubs would be Trump;
mass here's the Knave, and hee can doe any good upon 'em:
Clubs, clubs, clubs?
O villain, thou hast opend a vain in my leg.
How now, for shame, for shame, put up, put up.
By yon blew Welkin, it was out of my part George to
bee hurt on the leg.
Oh peace now—I have a Cordial here to comfort thee.
Down with 'em, down with em, lay hands upon the villain.
Lay hands on me?.
Isle not be seen among em now.
Ime hurt, and had more need have Surgeons,
Lay hands upon me then rough Officers.
Go carry him to be dressed then:
This mutinous Soldier shall along with me to prison.
To prison, whore's George.
Away with hem.
So▪
All lights as I would wish, the amazed widow,
Will plant me strongly now in her belief,
And wonder at the virtue of my words:
For the event turns those presages from em
Of being mad and dumb, and begets joy
Mingled with admiration: these empty creatures,
Soldier and Corporal were but ordained,
As instruments for me to work upon,
Now to my patient, here's his potion.
O wondrous happiness, beyond our thoughts:
O lucky fair event, I think our fortunes,
Were blessed even in our Cradles: we are quited
Of all those shameful violent presages,
By this rash bleeding chance; go Frailty run, and know,
Whether he be yet living▪ or yet dead,
That here before my door received his hurt.
Madam, hee was carried to the superior, but if he had
no money when hee came there, I warrant hoe's dead by this
time.
Sure that man is a rare fortune-te•ler, never looked
upon our hands, nor upon any mark about vs, a wondrous fell∣low
surely.
I am glad, I have the use of my tongue yet: tho of no∣thing
else, I shall find the way to marry too, I hope shortly.
O whore's my Brother sir Godfrey, I would hee were
here, that I might relate to him how prophetically, the cunning
Gentleman spoke in all things.
O my Chain, my Chain, I have lost my Chain,
where be these Villains, Varlets?
Oh; has lost his Chain.
My Chain, my chain.
Brother bee patient, hear me speak, you know
I told you that a cunning man told me, that you should have a
loss, and he has prophesied so true.
Out he's a villain, to prophe•y of the loss of my
chain, it was worth aboue three hundred C•owns,—besides
it was my Fathers, my fathers fathers, my Grand-fathers huge
grand-fathers? I had as live ha lost my Neck, as the chain that
hung about it; O my chain, my chain.
Oh brother, who can be against a misfortune, tic happy
it was no more.
No, more! O goodly godly sister, would you had me
lost more? my best gown too, with the cloth of gold-lace? my
holiday Gascoines, and my Jerkin set with pearl; no more?
Oh, Brother! you can read.—
But I cannot read where my chain is,—what
strangers have been here? you let in strangers! The eves, and
Catch-poles; how comes it gone? there was none aboue
with me but my Taylor; and my Taylor will not—steal I
hope?
No he's afraid of a chain!
How now sirrah, the news?
O Mistress, he may well be called a Corporal now, for his
corpse are as dead as a cold Capons?
More happiness.
Sirrah, what's this to my chain? whore's my chain
knave?
Your chain sir?
My chain is lost villain.
I would hee were hanged in chains that has it then for
me? Alas sir, I saw none of your chain, since you were hung
with it your self?
Out varlet? it had full three thousand Link•,
I have oft told it over at my prayers:
Over and over, full three thousand Lincks.
Had it so sir: sure it cannot be lost then; Isle put you in
that comfort.
Why why?
Why if your chain had so many Lincks, it cannot
choose but come to light.
Delusion? now long Nicholas wheres my chain.
Why about your Neck, first not sir.
About my neck Varlet. My chain is lost,
Tic stole away, Ime robbed.
Nay Brother show your self a man:
I if it be lost or stole, if he would be patient Mistress I
could bring him to a Cunning Kinsman of mine that would
fetched again with a Sesar•ra.
Can thou? I will be patient, say where dwells he?
Marry he dwells now Sir, where he would not dwell and
he could choose: in the Marshals• sir; but hoe's an exlent fell∣low
if he were out, has trauyld all the world ore, he, and been
in the seven and twenty Provinces: why he would make it be
fetched Sir if it were rid a thousand mile out of town.
An admirable fellow what lies he for.
Why hee did but rob a Steward of ten groats tother
Night, as any man would ha done, and there he lies fort.
Isle make his peace, a Trifle, Isle get his pardon,
Beside a bountiful reward, Isle about it,
But fee the Clerks, the Justice will doe much;
I will about it straight, good sister pardon me,
All will be well I hope, and turn to good,
The name of Conjure• has laid my blood.
His Hostesses where he lies will trust him no longer, she
has feed me to arest him; and if you will accompany me, because
I know not of what Nature the Scholar is, whether desperate
or swift, you shall share with me Seriant Rauen-shaw, I have the
good Angel to arrest him.
Troth Isle take part with thee then, Sariant, not for
the sake of the money so much, as for the hate I bear to a School∣ler:
why Seriant tic Natural in vs you know to hate Scholars:
natural 〈◊〉, they will publish our imperfections, Knaveries,
and Convey 〈◊〉 upon Scaffolds and Stages.
I and spitefully to; troth I have wounderd how the
slaves could see into our breasts so much, when our doublers are
buttond with Pewter.
I and so close without yielding; oh their parlous fell∣lows,
they will search more with their wits then a Cunstable
with all his officers.
Whist, whist, whist, Yeoman Dogson, Yeoman Dogson.
Ha, what says Sariant?
Is he in the Apothecaries shop still,
I, I.
Have an eye, eye.
The best is Sariant if he be a true Scholar he wears
no weapon I think.
No, no, he wears no weapon.
Mass, I am right glad of that: 'tas put me in better
heart; nay if I clutch him once, let me alone to dra•e him if he
be stiff-necked; I have been one of the six my self, that has
dragd as tall men of their hands, when their weapons have bin
gone as ever bastinadoed a Sariant—I have done I can tel you.
Sariant Puttock, Sariant Puttock.
Ho.
Hes coming out single.
Peace, peace bee not to greedy, let him play a little let
him play a little, weal •erke him up of a sudden, I ha fished in
my time.
I and caught many a fool Seriant.
I parted now from Nicholas: the chains couched,
And the old Knight has spent his rage vpont,
The widow holds me in great Admire ion'
For cunning Art: amongst joys I am 'een lost,
For my device can no way now be crossed,
And now I must to prison to the captain, and there—
I arrest you sir.
Oh—I spoke truer then I was a ware, I must to prison
indeed.
They say your a scholar, nay sir—Yeoman Dogson, have
care to his arms—you'll rail again Sariants, and stage 'em:
you, tickle their vices.
Nay use me like a Gentleman, I'm little less.
You a Gentleman? thats a good Jest in faith; can a School∣ler
be a Gentleman,—when a Gentleman will not be a School∣ler;—look
upon your wealthy Citizens sons, whether they
be Scholars or no, that are Gentlemen by their fathers trades:
a Scholar a Gentleman.
Nay let Fortune drive all her stings into me, she can∣not
hurt that in me, a Gentleman, is Accidens Inseperabile to
my blood.
A rabblement, nay you shall have a bloody rabblement;
upon you I warrant you.
Go, Yeoman Dogson before, and Enter the Action 'ith
Counter.
Pray do not hand me Cruelly, Isle go,
Whether you please to have me,
Oh hes tame let him loose seriant.
Pray at whose suit is this?
Why at your Hostesses suite where you lie, Misters Cun∣nyburrow
for bed and board, the sum four pound five shil∣lings
and five pence.
I know the sum to true, yet I presumde,
Upon a farther day; well tic my stars:
And I must bear it now, tho never harder.
I swear now, my device is crossed indeed.
Captain must lie bite: this is Deceits seed.
Come, come away.
Pray give me so much time as to knit my garter, and
Isle a way with you.
Well we must be paid for this waiting upon you, this is
no pains to attend thus.
I am now wretched, and miserable, I shall ne'er recover
of this disease: hot Iron gnaw their fists: they have struck
a Fever into my shoulder, which I shall ne'er shake out again I
fear me, till with a true Habeas Corpus the Sexton remove
me, oh if I take prison once I shall bee pressed to death with
Actions, but not so happy as speedily; perhaps I may bee
forty year a pressing till I be a thin old man, that looking
through the grates, men may look through me; all my means
is confounded, what shall I doe? has my wit served me so long,
and now give me the slip (like a Trained servant) when I have
most need of 'em: no device to keep my poor carcase fro these
Puttocks?—yes, happiness, have I a paper about me now? yes
too, Isle try it, it may hit, Extremity is Touch-stone unto wit, I, I.
Sfoot how many yards are in thy Gatters, that thou art
so long a tying on them? come away sir.
Troth Seriant I protest, you could never ha took me
at a worse time, for now at this instant, I have no lawful picture
about me.
Slid how shall me come by our fees then.
We must have fees Sir.
I could ha wished in faith, that you had took me half an
hour hence for your own sake, for I protest if you had not
crossed me, I was going in great joy to receive five pound of a
Gentleman, for the Device of a Mask here, drawn in this pa∣per▪
but now, come I must be contented, tic but so much lost, and
answerable to the rest of my fortunes.
Why how far hence dwells that Gentleman?
I, well said seriant, tic good to cast about for money.
Speak, if it be not far—
We are but a little past it, the next street behind vs.
Slid we have waited upon you grievously already▪ if you'll
say you'll be liberal when you ha•e, give vs double •ees, and
spend vpon's, why weal shoe• 〈◊〉 that kindness, and go along
with you to the Gentleman.
I well said still seriant v•ge that.
Troth if it will su••ice, it shall be all among you, for my
p•rt isle not pocket a penny, my hostess•e shall have her four
pound five shillings, and bate me the five pence, and the other
••fteene shillings Isle spend upon you.
Why now thou art a good Scholar.
An excellent Scholar In faith; has proceeded very well
alate; come, weal along with you.
Who knocks, whose at door? we had need of a Porter.
A few friends here?—pray is the Gentleman your my∣ster
within.
Yes, is your business to him?
I, he knows it, when he see's me:
I pray you have you forgot me.
I by my troth sir, Pray come near, Isle in and tell him of
you, please you to walk here in the Gallery till he comes.
Wee will attend his worship,—worship I think, for so
much the Posts at his door should signify, and the fair com∣ming
in, and the wicket, else I neither knew him nor his worcester∣ship,
but it is happiness he is within doors, what so ere he bee,
if he be not too much a formal Citizen, hee may doe me good:
Seriant and Yeoman, how doe you like this house, first not most
wholsomly plotted?
Troth prisoner, an exceeding fine house.
Yet I wonder how hee should forget me, for hee ne'er
knew me: No matter, what is forgot in you will bee remem∣bred
in your Moister.
A pretty comfortable room this me thinks:
You have no such rooms in prison now?
Oh dog-holes toote,
Dog-holes indeed—I can tell you I have great hope to
have my Chamber here shortly, nay and diet too, for hoe's
the most free-hartedst Gentleman where he takes: you would
little think it? and what a fine Gallery were here for me to
walk and study, and make verse•,
O it stand• very pleasantly for a Scholar.
Look what maps, and pictures, and devices, and things,
neatly deli•italy? mass here he comes, he should be a Gentle∣man,
I like his Beard well;—All happiness to your worship.
You're kindly welcome sir.
A simple 〈◊〉.
Mass it seems the Gentleman makes great account
of him.
I have the thing here for you sir.
I beseech you conceal me sir, Ime undone else,—I have
•he Mask here for you sir, Look you sir,—I beseech your
worship first to pardon my rudeness, for my extremes makes
me boulder then I would bee; I am a poor Gentleman and a
Scholar, and now most unfortunately fallen into the •longs of
unmerciful officers, arrested for debt, which tho small, I am
not able to compass, by reason Ime destitute of lands, money,
and friends, so that i• I fall into the hungry swallow of the
prison, I am like utterly to perish, and with fees and extortions
be pinched clean to the bone: Now, if ever pity had interest
in the blood of a Gentleman, I beseech you vouchsafe but to
favour that means of my escape, which I have already thought
upon.
Go forward.
I warrant he likes it rarely.
In the plundge of my extremities, being giddy, and
doubtful what to doe; at last it was put into my labouring
thoughts, to make happy use of this paper, and to blear their
unlettered eyes, I told them there was a Device for a Mask
drawn int', and that (but for their interception,) I was go∣ing
to a Gentleman to receive my reward for it: they greedy
at this word, and hoping to make purchase of me, offered their
attendance, to go along with me, 'my hap was to make bold
with your door Sir, which my thoughts shout me the most
fairest and comfortablest entrance, and I hope I have happened
right upon understanding, and pity: may it please your good
Worship then, but to uphold my Device, which is to let one of
your men put me out at back-doore, and I shall bee bound to
your worship for ever.
By my troth an excellent device.
An excellent device hee says; hee likes it won∣derfully.
A my faith I never heard a better.
Hark, hee swears hee never heard a better,
Sergeant.
O there's no talk on it, hes an excellent Scholar, and
especially for a Mask.
Give me your Paper, your Device; I was never better
pleased in all my life: good wit, brave wit, finely roughed,
come in sir, and receive your money sir.
Isle follow your good Worship,—
You heard how he likte it now?
Puh, we know hee could not choose but like it: go thy
ways thou art a witty fine fellow in faith, thou shalt discourse it
to vs at Tavern anon wilt thou?
I, I, that I will,—look Seriants here are Maps, and prit∣tie
toys, be doing in the mean time, I shall quickly have told
out the money, you know.
Go, go little villain, fetch thy chinck, I begin to love
thee, Isle be drunk to night in thy company.
This •gentleman I may well call a part
Of my salvation, in these earthly evils,
For hee has saved me from three hungry Devils.
Sir•ah Seriant, these Mappes are pretty painted
things, but I could ne'er fancy 'em yet, •me thinks they're
too busy, and full of Circles and Conjurations, they say all the
world's in one of them, but I could ne'er find the Counter in
the Poultry.
I think so: how could you find it? for you know it
stands behind the houses.
Mass thats true, then we must look ath' back-side
fort; Sfoote here's nothing, ell's ba•e.
I warrant thee that stands for the Counter, for you
know theres a company of bare fellows there.
Faith like enough Seriant? I never marked so much be∣fore?
Siren Seriant, and Yeoman, I should love these Maps
out a cry now, i• wee could see 〈◊〉 peep out of door in
em, oh wee might have em in a morning to our Breake-fast
so finely, and ne'er kn••ke our heals to the ground a whole
day for em.
I marry sir, Id buy one then my self.
But this talk is by the way, where shall's sup to night,
Five pound received, 〈◊〉 talk of that,
I have a trick worth all, you two shall bear him to 'th Tavern,
whilst I go close with his Hostess, and work out of her, I
know she would bee glad of the sum to finger money; be∣cause
she knows tic but a desperate debt, and full of hazard,
what will you say if I bring it to pass that the Hostess shall
bee contented with one half for all; and wee to share tother;
fift-shillings bullies.
Why I would call thee King of Seriants, and thou should
be Chronicled in the Counter book for ever.
Well put it to me, weal make a Night on it faith.
Sfoote I think he receives more money he stays so long.
Hee tarries long indeed, may be I can tell you upon the
good liking ont the Gentleman may prove more bountiful.
That would be rare, weal search him.
Nay be sure of it weal search him! and make him light
enough.
Oh here comes the Gentleman; by your leave sir.
God you god den sirs,—would you speak with me;
No, not with your worship sir, only wee are bold to stay
for a friend of ours that went in with your worship.
Who? notthe scholar?
Yes even he and it please your worship?
Did he make you stay for him? hee did you wrong then
why, I can assure you hes gon aboue an hour ago.
How? sir?
I paid him his money, and my man told me he went out
at backdoor.
Backdoor?
Why, whats the matter.
He was our prisoner sir, we did arrest him.
What he was not? you the Sheriffs Officers—you were
to blame then,
Why did you not make known to me as much:
I could have kept him for you, I protest
He received all of me in Britain Gold
Of the last coining;
Vengeance dog him with it.
Sfoote has he gulled vs so.
Where shall wee sup now Sergeants?
Sup 〈◊〉 now, •ate Porridge for a month;
Well, wee cannot impute it to any lack of good-will in your
Worship,—you did but as another would have done, it was our
hard fortunes to miss the purchase, but if ere wee clutch him
again, the Counter shall charm him.
The hole shall rot him.
Amen.
So,
Vex out your Lungs without doors, I am proud,
It was my hap to help him, it fell fit,
He went not empty neither for his wit▪
Alas poor wretch, I could not blame his brain,
To labour his deliu•rye, to be free,
From their v•pitying sangs—Ime glad it stood,
Within my power to doe a Scholar good.
How now, whose that? what are you?
The same that I should be Captain.
George Pye-boord, honest George? why came thou i•
half face• d. mu•••ed so?
Oh Captain, I thought we should ne'er ha laughed again,
never spent frolic hour again.
Why? why?
I coming to prepare thee, and with news
As happy as thy quick delivery,
Was traced out by the sent, arrested Captain.
Arrested George.
Arrested, guess, guess, how many Dogs doe you think
Id upon me?
Dogs, I say? I know not.
Almost as many as George Stone the Bea•e,
Three at once, three at once.
How did thou shake 'em of then?
The time is busy, and calls upon our wits, let it suffice,
Here I stand safe, and escaped by miracle,
Some other hour shall tell thee? when weal steep
Our eyes in laughter: Captain my device
Leanes to thy happiness, for ere the day
Be spent to the G•rdle, thou shalt be set free,
The Corporal's in his first sleep the Chain is mist,
Thy Kinsman has expressed thee, and the old Knight
With Pali•y-hams now labours thy release,
What rests, is all in thee, to Coniu•e Captain.
Conjure: sfoote George you know the devil a coniu∣ring
• can conjure.
The Devil of conjuring nay by my fey, Id not have thee
do so much Captain as the Devil a conjuring: look here, I
ha brought thee a circle ready characterd and all.
Sfoote George, art in thy right wits, dost know what
thou say? why dost talk to a Captain, a conjuring, did thou
ever hear of a Captain conjure in thy life, dost call it a Circle,
tic too wide a thing my thinks: had it been a lesser Circle,
then I knew what to have done.
Why every fool knows that Captain: nay then Isle not
cog with you Captain, if you'll stay and hang the next Seffi∣once
you may.
No by my faith George, come, come, lets to conjuring,
lets to coniuing.
But if you look to be releasd, as my wits have took
pain to work it, and all means wrought to farther it, besides
to put crowns in your purse, to make you a man of better hopes,
and where as before you were a Captain or poor Soldier, to
make you now a Commander of rich fools, (which is truly the
only best purchase peace can allow you) safer then Hig-wayes,
Heath, or Cunny-groues, and yet a far better booty; for your
greatest thieves are never hanged, never hanged, for why they're
wise, and cheat within doors, and wee geld fools of more
money in one night, then your false tailed Gelding will pur∣chase
in a twelue-moneths running, which confirms the old
Beldams saying, hoe's wisest, that keeps himself warmest, that
is, hee that robs by a good fire.
Well opened in faith George, thou hast pulled that saying
out of the husk.
Captain Idle, tic no time now to delude or delay, the old
Knight will be here suddenly, Isle perfect you, direct you, till you
the trick on it: tic nothing.
Sfoote George, I know not what to say toot, conjure? I
shall be hanged ere I coniute.
Nay tell not me of that Captain, you'll ne'er conjure after
your hanged, I warrant you look you •ir, a parlous matter? sure,
first to spread your circle upon the ground, then with a little con∣iuring
ceremony, as Isle have an Hackney-mans wand siluerd ore
a purpose for you, then a•revenge in the circle, with a huge word,
and a great t•mple as for instance: have you never seen a stal∣king-stamping
Player, that will raise a tempest with his tongue,
and thunder with his heals?
O yes, yes, yes: often, often.
Why be like such a one, for any thing will blue•e the old
Knights eyes, for you must note that heel ne'er dare to venture
into the room, only perhaps peep fearfully through the Key
hole, to see how the Play goes forward.
Well I may go about it when I will, but mark the end
o•t, I shall but shame my self in faith George, speak big words,
and stamp and stare and he look in at Key-hole, why the very
thought of that would make me laugh out-right, and spoil all,
nay Isle tell thee George, when I apprehend a thing once, I am of
such a laxative laughter, that if the Devil him-selfe stood by, I
should laugh in his face.
Puh, thats but the babe of a man, and may easily bee
hushed, as to think upon some disaster, some sad misfortune, as
the death of thy Father ithe Country!
Sfoote that would be the more to drive me into such an
ecstasy, that I should ne'er lin laughing.
Why then think upon going to hanging else.
Mass that's well remembered, now isle do well I warrant
thee, ne'er fear me now: but how shall I do George for boyste∣rous
words, and horrible names.
Puh, any fustian invocations Captain will serve as well
as the best, so you rant them out well, or you may go to a Po∣thecaries
shop, and take all the words from the Boxes.
Troth and you say true George, there's strange words
enough to raise a hundred Quack-saluers; tho they be ne'er so
poor when they begin? but here lies the fear on it, how in
this false conjuration a true Devil should pop up indeed.
A true Devil, Captain, why there was ne'er such a one,
nay faith hee that has this place, is as false a Knave as our last
Church-warden.
Then hes false enough a conscience in faith George.
Good Gentlemen over the way, send your
relief,
Good Gentlemen over the way,—Good s•r Godfrey?
Hes come, hes come.
Moister, thats my Kinsman yonder in the Buff-Ierkin—
Kinsman, thats my Moister yonder in the Taffeta Hat—pray sa∣lute
him entirely?
Now my friend.
May I partake your name sir.
My name is Moister •dm••d.
Moister Edmond—are you not a Welshman sir?
A Welshman, why?
Because Moister is your Christen name, and Edmond
your sir name?
O no; I have more names at home, Moister Edmund
Pius, is my full name at length.
O cry you mercy 〈◊〉?
I understand that you are my Kinsmans good Moister,
and in regard of that, the best of my skill is at your service: but
had you fortunde a •eere stranger, and made no means to me
by acquaintance, I should have utterly denied to have been
the man; both by reason of the Act past in Parliament against
Conjurers and Witches, as also, because I would not have my
Art vulgar, trite, and common.
I much commend your care therein good Captain
Conjurer, and that I will be sure to have it private enough, you
shall doote in my Sisters house,—mine own house I may call
it, for both our charges therein are proportiond.
Very good sir—what may I call your loss sir?
O you may call it a great loss sir, a grievous loss
sir, as goodly a Chain of gold, tho I say it, that wore it: how
says thou Nichol•s?
O it was as delicious a Chain a Gold, Kinsman you
know, —
You know? did you know it Captain?
Trust a fool with secrets? — Sir hee may say I know:
his meaning is, because my Art is such, that by it I may gather
a knowledge of all things.—
I very true.
A pox of all fools—the excuse stuck upon my
tongue like Ship-pitch upon • Mariners gown, not to come off
in hast—ber-lady Knight to loose such a fair Chain a gold,
were a soul loss; Well, I can put you in this good comfort
on it, if it bee between Heaven and Earth Knight, Isle have it for
you?
A wonderful Coniuter,—O I, tic between hey∣uen
and earth I warrant you, it cannot go out of the realm,—
I know tic some-where aboue the earth?
I nigher the earth then thou worst on.
For first my Chain was rich, and no rich thing shall
enter into heaven you know?
And as for the Devil Moister, he has no need on it, for
you know he he's a great chain of his own?
Thou says true Nicholas, but hee has put off that
now, that lies by him.
Faith Knight in few words, I presume so much upon
the power of my Art; that I could warrant your Chain again.
O da•ntie Captain?
Marry it will cost me much sweat•e, I were better go to
sixteen whot-houses.
I good man, I warrant thee.
Beside great vexation of Kidney and Liver.
O twill tickle you here•abouts Cousin, because you
have not been used toot.
No, have you not been used too't Captain?
Plague of all 〈…〉—indeed Knight I have 〈◊〉
used it a good while, and therefore twill stray•e me so much the
more you know.
On it will, it will.
What plunges hee puts me to, were not this Knight a
fool, I had been twice spoiled now; that Captay•es wo•se then
accursed that has an ass to his Kinsman—Sfoote I fear hee will
driuell't out before I come toote.—Now sir—to come to
the point in deed—you see I stick here in the jaw of the
Marshalsea, and cannot do it.
Tut tur I now thy meaning, thou would say you're
a prisoner, I tell thee you're none.
How none? why is not this the Marshialsea?
woult hear me speak, I hard of thy rare cuniuring
My chain was lost, I sweat for thy release,
As thou shalt doe the like at home for me,
Keeper.
Sir.
Speak is not this man free?
Yes at his pleasure sir, the fee's discharged;
Go, go, Isle discharge them I.
I thank your worship
Now trust me yar a dear Knight kindness unexpected,
oh theirs nothing to a free Gentle man.—I will cuniute for you
sir till Froth come through my Buffe-ierkin?
Nay then thou shalt not pass with so little a boun∣tie,
for at the first sight of my chain again,—Forty fine Angels
shall appear unto thee.
Twill be a glorious show, in faith Knight a very fine show,
but are all these of your own house? are you sure of that fir?
I, I, no, no, whats he yonder? talking with my wild
Nephew, pray heaven, he give him good counsel;
Who he hoe's a rare friend of mine, an admirable fellow
Knight, the finest fortune-teller.
Oh tic he indeed that came to my Lady sister, &amp; fore∣told
the loss of my chain, I am not angry with him now, for I
see it was my fortune to loose it; by your leave M. Fortune-teller,
I had a glimpse on you at home at my Sisters the Widows,
there you prouisied of the loss of a chain, — simply tho I stand
here I was he that lost it.
Was it you sir?
A my troth Nunckle, hoe's the rarest fellow, has told
me my fortune so right; I find it so right to my nature.
What first? God send it a good one?
O tic a passing good one, Nuncle: for he says I shall
prove such an excellent gamester in my time, that I shall spend al
faster then my father got it,
T'here•s a fortune in deed,
Nay it hits my humour so pat.
I that will be the end ont. will the Curse of the beg∣gar
prevail so much, that the son shall consume that foolish∣lie,
which the father got, craftily, I, I, I, twill, twill, twill.
Stay, stay, stay
turn over George.
〈◊〉 Iutie, here July thats this month, Sunday thirteen,
yester day forteene, to day fifteen.
Look quickly for the fifteen day,—if within the com∣pass
of these two days there would be some Boisterous storm
or other, it would be the best, Id defer him off till then, some
tempest and it be thy will?
Here is the fifteen day—hot and fair.
Puh, would t'ad been hot and foul.
The sixteen day, thats to morrow, the morning for the
most part fair and pleasant.
No luck.
But about hye-none-lighning and thunder.
Lighning and thunder, admirable, best of all, Isle conjure
to morrow just at hie none George.
Happen but true to morrow Almanac, and isle give thee
leave to lie all the year after.
sir I must crave your patience, to bestow this day upon
me, that I may furnish my self strongly,—I sent a spirit into
Lanck•shire tother day, to fetch back a knave Drouer, and I
look for his return this evening—to morrow morning my
friend here and I will come and breake-fast with you.
Oh you shall be both most welcome.
And about Noon without fail, I purpose to conjure.
Mid noon will be a fine time for you.
Coniuting, do you mean to conjure at our house to
morrow sir?
Many do I sir •t is my intent young Gentleman.
〈◊〉 troth, Isle love you while I live sort, o rare, Nich∣olas
we sna•• 〈◊〉 conjuring, to morrow,
Puh I, I could ha told you of that.
Law hee could ha told him of that, fool, cockscomb
could ye.
Do you hear me sir, I desire more acquaintance on you,
you shall earn some money of me, now I know you can con∣i•re,
but can you fetch any that is lost?
Oh any thing thats lost.
Why look you sir, I tel't you as a friend and a Con∣juror,
I should marry a Poticaries daughter and it was told me she
lost her maiden head at Stonie-statford; now if you'll do but so
much as conure fort, and make all whole again.—
That I will sir.
By my troth I thank you la,
A little merry with your sisters son sir.
Oh a simple young man, very simple, come Captain,
and you sir, weal even part with a gallon of wine till to more∣row
breake-fast.
Troth agreed sir.
kinsman—Scholar?
Why now thou art a good Knave, worth a hundred
Brownists.
Am I indeed la: I thank you truly la.
But I hope you will not serve a Knight so: Gentlewo∣man
will you: to cashier him, and cast him off at your pleasure;
what do you think I was dubbed for nothing, no by my faith
Ladies daughter.
Pray Sir Iohn Pennydub, let it be deferd awhile, I have
as big a heart to marry as you can have; but as the Fortune∣teler
tolld me.
I ax a'th Fortune-teller, would Derecke had been
his fortune seven year ago, to cross my love them: did hee
know what case I was in, why this is able to make a man
drown himself in's Fathers fish-pond.
And then hee told me more-ouer Sir Iohn, that the
breach of it, kept my Father in Purgatory.
In Purgatory? why let him purge out his heart there,
what have we to do with that? there's Physicians enough there to
cast his water, is that any matter to vs: how can hee hinder our
love, why let him bew changed now hoe's dead?—Well, have I
rid post day and night, to bring you merry news of my fathers
death, and now—
Thy Fathers death? is the old Farmer dead?
As dead as his Barn door Moll.
And you'll keep your word with me now, Sir Iohn.
that I shall have my Coach and my Coach-man?
I faith.
And two white Horses with black Feathers to draw it?
Too,
A guarded Lackey to run befor't, and pied liveries to
come trashing after't.
Thou shalt Moll.
And to let me have money in my purse to go whether I will.
All this.
Then come, what so ere comes on it, weal bee made
sure together before the Maids a'the Kitchen.
How now? whore's my Brother Sir Godfrey? went hee
forth this morning?
O no Madame, hoe's aboue at breake-fast, with sir reave∣rinse
a Conjurer.
A Conjurer? what manner a fellow is he?
Oh, a wondrous ra•e fellow Mistress, very strongly made
upward, for he goes in a Buff-ierkin: he says hee will fetch Sir
Godfreys Chain again, if it hang between heaven and earth.
What he will not? then hoe's an exlent fellow I warrant.
how happy were that woman to be blessed with such a Husband,
a man a cunning? how do's hee look Frailty: very swartlie I
warrant, with black beard, scorched cheeks, and smoky eye∣brows.
Fooh—hoe's neither smoake-dryed, nor scorched, nor
black, nor nothing, I tell you Madame, hee looks as fair to see
to, as one of vs; I do not think but if you saw him once, you d•
take him to be a Christian.
So fair, and yet so cunning, that's to bee wonderd at
Mother.
Bless you sweet Lady.
And you fair Mistress.
Coades? what doe you mean Gentlemen? fie, did I
not give you your answers?
Sweet Lady?
Well, I will not stick with you now for a kiss,
Daughter kiss the Gentleman for once.
Yes for•ooth.
Ime proud of such a favour.
Truly la, sir Oliuer, y are much to blame to come again,
when you know my mind, so well delivered — as a Widow
could deliver a thing.
But I expect a farther comfort Lady.
Why la you now, did I not desire you to put off your suit
quite &amp; clean, when you came to me again, how say you did I not▪
But the sincere love which my heart bears you,
Go to, isle cut you off. &amp; Sir Oliuer to put you in comfort
a far off, my fortune is read me, I must marry again.
O blessed fortune!
But not as long as I can choose;—nay Isle hold out, well.
Yet are my hopes now fairer.
O Madam Madam.
How now, what's the hast?
Faith Mistress Francis Isle maintain you gallantly. Isle
bring you to Court, wean you among the fair society of ladies
poor Kinswomé of mine in cloth of silver, beside you shall have
your Monckie, your Parrot, your Musket, &amp; your peace, peace, peace.
It will do very well.
What dos he mean to conjure here the? how shall I do to
bee tid of these Knights,—please you Gentlemen to walk a
while ith Garden, go gather a pink, or a Iilly-flower.
With all our hearts Lady, and count vs favoured?
Step in Nicholas, look, is the coast clear.
Oh, as clear as a Cattes eye, sir.
Then enter Captain Conisurer?—now—how like you
your Room su?
O wonderful convenient.
I can tell you Captain, simply tho it lies here, tic the
fairest Room in my Mothers house, as dainty a Room to
Coniute in, me thinks,—why you may bid, I cannot tell
how many devils welcome in it; my Father has had twenty
here at once!
What devils?
Devils, no Deputies, &amp; the wealthiest men he could get.
Nay put by your chats now, fall to your business
roundly, the seskewe of the Dial is upon the Chrisse-crosse of
Noon, but oh: hear met Captain, a qualm comes ore my
stomach?
Why, what's the matter sir?
Oh, how if the devil should prove a knave, and tear
the hangings.
Fuh, I warrant you Sir Godfrey:
I Nuncle, or spit fire vpp'oth feeling!
Very true too, for tic but thin playsterd, and twill
quickly take hold a the laths, and if hee chance to spit down∣ward-too,
he will burn all the boards.
My life for yours Sir Godfrey?
My Sister is very curious &amp; dainty ore this Room
I can tell and therefore if he must needs spit, I pray desire him
to spit ith Chimney.
Why assure you Sir Godfrey, he shall not be brought up,
with so little manners to spit and spaule a'th flower.
Why I thank you good Captai•e, pray have a care
I, fall to your Circle, weal not trouble you I warrant you, come,
weal in to the next Room, &amp; because we•le be sure to keep
him out there, weal bar up the door with some of the Godlies
zealous works.
That will bee a fine device Nuncle, and because the
ground shall be as holy as the door, Isle tear two or three re∣fairs
in pieces, and strew the leaves about the Chamber? oh,
the devil already,—runs in—
Sfoote Captain speak somewhat for shame; it lightens &amp;
thunders before thou wilt begin, why when?
Pray peace George,—thou'lt make me laugh anon;
and spoil all.
Oh now it begins again, now, now? now? Captain?
Rumbos-ragdayon, pur, pur, colucundrion, Hoes—Plois.
Oh admirable Conjurer? has
fetched Thunder already:
Hark hark again Captain?
Beniamino,—gaspois—kay — gosgothoteron—umbrois.
Oh, I would the devil would come away quickly,
he has no conscience to put a man to such pain?
Again!
Flowste—Kakop••pos—dragon—Leloomenos—hodge—podge.
Well said Captain.
So long a coming? oh would I had ner• begun't
now, for I fear me these roaring tempests, will destroy all the
fruits of the earth, and tread upon my come—oh, ith Country.
Gog de gog, hobgoblin, huncks, houseslow, hockley te coome
park.
O brother, brother, what a tempests ith, Garden, sure
there's some conjuration abroad.
Tic at home sister!
By and by, Isle step in? Captain?
Nunck—Nunck—Rip—Gascoynes, Epic, Drip—Dropite.
Hee drippes and drops poor man? alas, alas.
Now I come?
O Sulphur Scoteface—
Arch-coniurer, what would thou with me?
O the devil sister, ith dining Chamber, sing Sister,
I warrant you that will keep him out, quickly, quickly, quickly. goes in.
So, so, so, Isle release thee, enough Captain, enough,
allow vs some time to laugh a little, they're shuddering and
shaking by this time, as if an Earth-quake were in their kid∣nays.
Sirrah George, how wast, how wast, did I do it well
enough.
woult believe me Captain, better then any Conjurer,
for here was no harm in this, and yet their horrible expectati∣on
satisffied well, you were much beholding to thunder &amp; light∣ning
at this time it gre•st you well I can tell you?
I must needs say so George? sirrah if wee could ha con∣uoide
hither cleanly a cracker or a fire-wheele t'ad been ad∣mitable.
Blutt, blutt theirs nothing remains to put thee to pain
now Captain.
Pain? I protest George my heals are sorer, then a Whit∣son
Morris-dancer.
Ell's past now,—oncly to reveal that the chains ith
Garden where thou know it has lain these two days.
But I fear that fox Nicholas has reueald it already?
Fear not Captain, you must put it to'th venture now
Nay tic time, call upon i'm, take pity on i'm, for I believe
some off 'em are in a pitiful case by this time.
Sir Godfrey? Nicholas, Kinsman-Sfoot they are fast at it still
George, Sir Godfrey?
Oh, is that the devils voice? how comes he to know
my name.
Fear not Sir Godfrey ell's quieted.
What is he laid?
Laid; and has newly dropped,
Your chain ith Garden.
Ith Garden! in our Garden?
Your Garden?
O sweet Conjurer? where abouts there?
Looke-well about a bank of Rosemary.
Sister the Rosemary bank, come, come, ther's my
chain he says.
Oh happiness, run, run.
Captain Conjurer?
Who? Moister Edmond.
I Moister Edmond may I come in safely, without danger
think you.
I uh long ago, tic all, as it was at first.
Fear nothing, pray come near—how now? man.
Oh this Rooms mightily hot in faith, slid my shirt sticks
to my Belly already, what a steam the Rogue has left be hind
him' foh this room must be ayrd Gentlemen it sinells horribly
of Brimstoone — lets open the windows.
Faith ma•ster Edmond tic but your conceit,
I would you could make me believe that in faith why
do you think I cannot smell his savour, from another: yet I take
it kindly from you, because you would not put me in a fear
in faith, a my troth I shall love you for this the lōgest day of my life.
Puh, tic nothing sir, love me when you see more.
Mass now I remember Isle look whether he has sin∣general
the hangings or no.
Captain, to entertain a little sport till they come; make
him bele•ue, you'll charm him invisible, hes apt to admire any
thing you see let me alone to give force too'te.
go, retire, to yonder end then.
I protest you are a rare fellow, are you not.
O moister Edmond, you know but the least part of me
yet, why now at this instant I could but flourish my wand thrice
ore your head, and charm you inusib'e.
What you could not? make me walk invisible man; I
should laugh at that in faith, troth isle requite your kindness and
you'll do it good Captain conjurer.
Nay I should hardly deny you such a small •indnesse
Master Edmond Plus, why look you sir tic no more but this and
thus and again and now yar invisible!
Am I faith, who would think it.
You see the fortune-teller yonder at farther end ath cham∣ber
go toward him, do what you will with him he shall ne'er
find you.
Say you so, isle try that in faith,—
How now? Captain, whose that iustled me?
Iustled you? I saw no body.
Ha, ha, ha,—say it was a spirit,
Shall I•—may be some spirit that haunts the circle.
O my nose, again, pray conjure• then Captain.
Troth this is exlent, I may do any knavery now and no∣for
be seen, and now I remember me, Sir Godfrey my Uncle
abused me tother day, &amp; told tales of me to my Mother—Troth
now Ime invisible, isle hit him a sound wherrit ath' ear, when he
comes out ath' garden,—I may be revenged on him now finely.
I have my Chain again, my Chaine's found again,
O sweet Captain, O admirable Conjurer. Edm. Strikes him.
Oh what mean you by that Nephew?
Nephew? I hope you do not know me Uncle?
Why did you strike your Uncle sir?
Why Captain am I not invisible?
A goodiest George:,—not now you are not Sir,
Why •id you not see me when I did un channe you?
Not I by my troth Captain:
Then pray you pardon me Uncle,
I thought Id been invisible when I struck you.
So. you would do it? go,—you're a foolish Boy,
And were I not ore-come with greater joy,
Id make you taste correction.
Correction, push—no, neither you nor my Mother shall
think to whip me as you have done.
Captain my joy is such, I know not how to thank
you, let me embrace you, hug you, O my sweet Chain, Glad∣ness
'een makes me giddy, rare man: it was as just in the Rose∣marie
bauck, as if one should ha laid it there—oh cunning,
cunning!
Well, seeing my fortune tells me I must marry; let me
marry a man of wit a man of parts, here's a worthy Cap∣taine,
and it is a fine Title truly 〈◊〉 to bee a Captains Wife, a
Captains Wife, it goes very finely. beside all the world knows
that a worthy Captain, is a fit Companion to any Lord,
then why not a sweet bed-fellow for any Lady.—Isle have
it so—
O Mistress, Gentlemen, there's the bravest sight com∣ming
along this way.
What brave sight?
Oh, one going to burying, &amp; another going to hanging.
A rueful sight.
Sfoot Captain, Isle pawn my life the Corporals coffind,
and old Skirmish the soldier going to execution, &amp; it is now full
about the time of his walking; hold out a little longer sleepy
potion, and we shall have exlent admiration; for Isle take upon
me the cure of him.
Oh here they come, here they come!
Now must I close secretly with the Soldier, prevent his
impatience, or else ell's discovered?
O lamentable seeing, these were those Brothers, that
sought and bled before our door.
What they were not Sister?
George, look toote, Isle peach at Tyburne else.
Mum,—Gentles all, vouchsafe me audience, and you
especially Moister S••if:
Yon man is bound to 〈◊〉,
Because he wounded this that now lies coffind?
True, true, he shall have the law,—and I know the law?
But under •auour Moister Sheriff, if this man had been
cured and safe again, he should have been releasde then?
Why make you question of that Sir?
Then I release him freely, and will take upon me the
death that he should dye, if within a little season, I do not cure
him to his proper health again.
How Sir? recover a dead man?
That were most strange of all.
Sweet Sir, I love you dearly, and could wish my best
part yours, — oh do not undertake such an impossible venture.
Love you me; then for your sweet sake Isle do it:
Let me entreat the corps to be set down.
Bearers set down the Coffln,—this were wonderful,
and worthy Stoic Chronicle.
I pray bestow the freedom of the ayre, upon our whole∣some
Art, — mass, his cheeks begin to receive natural
warmth: nay good Corporal wake betime, or I shall have a
longer sleep then you,—Sfoote if he should prove dead indeed
now, he were fully revenged upon me for making a property on
him, yet I had rather run upon the Ropes, then have the Rope
like a Tetter run upon me, oh—he stirs—hee stirs again—look
Gentlemen, he recovers, he starts, he rises.
Oh, oh, defend vs—out alas.
Nay pray be still; you'll make him more giddy else, — he
knows no body yet.
Zounes: who am I? covered with Snow? I marvel?
Nay I knew hee would swear the first thing hee did, as
soon as ever he came to his life again.
Sfoote Hostess—some hot Porridge,—oh, oh,
lay on a dozen of Faggots in the Moon parlour, there.
Lady, you must needs take a little pity of him in faith,
and send him in to your Kitchen fire.
Oh, with all my heart sir, Nicholas and Frailty, he'pe to
bear him in.
Bear him in, qua tha, pray call out the Maids, I shall
ne'er have the heart to do it indeed la.
Not I neither, I cannot abide to handle a Ghost of all me.
Shloud, let me see, where was I drunk last night, ho—
Oh, shall I bid you once again take him away.
Why, we're as fearful as you I warrant you—oh—
Away villains, bid the Maids make him a Caudle p•e∣sently
to settle his brain,—or a Posit of Sack, quickly, quickly.
Sir, what so ere you are, I do more then admire you.
O I, if you knew all Moister Sheriff, as you shall doe, you
would say then, that here were two of the rarest men within
the walls of Christendom
Two of'em, O wonderful: Officers I discharge you, set
him free ell's in tune.
I and a banquet ready by this time Moister Sheriff,
to which I most cheerfully enuite you, and your late prisoner
there? see you this goodly chain sir, mun, no more words,
it was lost, a dis found again; come my inestimable bullies,
weal talk of your noble Acts in sparkling Charnico, and in
stead of a Easter, weal ha the ghost ith white sheet sit at upper
end a'th Table.
Exlent merry man in faith.
Well, seeing I am enioynd to love and marry.
My foolish vow thus I cashier to Ayre
Which first begot it,—now love play thy part;
The scholar reads his lecture in my heart.
This is the marriage morning for my mother &amp; my sister.
O me Moister Edmund we shall ha rare doings.
Nay go Frailty run to the Sexton, you know my mo∣there
will be married at Saint Antlings, hie thee, tic past five, bid
them open the Church door, my sister is almost ready.
What al ready Moister Edmond.
Nay go hie thee first run to the Sexton, and run to the
Clarke and then run to Moister Pigman the Parson, and then
run to the Millanor, and the• run home again.
Heir's run, run, run—
But hark Frailty:
What more yet?
Has the maids remembered to strew the way to the
Church.
Faugh an hour ago I help 'em my self.
Away, away, away, away then.
Away, away, away then
I shall have a simple Father inlawe, a brave Captain
able to beat all our street: Captain Idle, now my Lady
Mother will be •itted for a delicate name, my Lady Idle, my
Lily Idle, the finest name that can be for a woman, and then
the Scholar Moister Pie-boord for my sister Francis, that will be
Mistress Francis Pie-bo•rd, Mistress Francis Pie-boord, theill
keep a good table I warrant you, Now all the knights noses
are put out of joint, they may go to a bone setters now.
Hark, hark oh who comes here with two Torches before
'em, my sweet Captain, and my fine Scholar, oh, how bravely
they are shot up in one night, they look like fine Britains
now me thinks, here is a gallant change in faith slid they have
hired men and all by the clock.
Moister Edmund, kind, honest, dainty Moister Edmond.
Faugh, sweet Captain Father inlaw a rare perfume
isayth.
What are the Brides stirring? may wee steall upon 'em
think thou Moister Edmond.
Few, there even upon red dines I can assure you? for they
were at there Totch even now, by the same token I tumbled
down the stairs.
Alas poor Moister Edmond.
O the musicians I prce the Moister Edmond call' em in
and licquour 'em a little.
That I will sweet Captain father in law and make each
of them as drunk as a common fiddeler.
Whewh Mistress Mole, Mistress Mole.
Who's there?
Who Sir Iohn Penidub O you're an early cock in faith, who
would have thought you to be so rare a stirrer.
Pree the Mole let me come up.
No by my faith Sir Iohn, Isle keep you down, for
you Knights are very dangerous if once you get aboue.
Isle not stay in faith.
In faith you shall stay, for Sir Iohn you must note
the nature of the Climates your Northern wench in her
own Country may well hold out till she bee fifteen,
but if she touch the South once, and up to London, here
the Chimes go presently after twelve.
O the art a mad wench Moll, but I pree thee make hast,
for the Priest is gone before.
Do you follow him, Isle not be long after.
O monstrous vn-heard of forge•ie.
Knight, I never heard of such villainy in our own coun∣try,
in my life.
Why it is impossible, dare you maintain your words?
Dare wee? even to their wezen pipe;, we know all their
plots, they cannot squander with vs, they have knavishly abused
vs, made only properties on's to advance their selves upon our
shoulders, but they shall rue their abuses, this morning they are
to bee married.
Tic too true, yet if the Widow be not too much be∣sotted
on slights and forgeries, the reue'ation of their villainies
will make 'em loathsome, and to that end, be it in private to you,
I sent late last night to an honourable personage, to whom I am
much indebted in kindness, as he is to me, and therefore pre∣sum
upon the payment of his tongue, and that hee will lay out
good words for me, and to speak truth, for such needful occa∣sions,
I only preserve him in bond, and some-times he may doe
me more good here in the City by a free word of his mouth,
then if hee had paid one half in hand, and took Dooms∣day
for to other.
In troth Sir, without soothing bee it spoken, you have
published much judgment in these few words.
For you know, what such a man utters will be thought
effectual and to weighty purpose, and therefore into his mouth
weel put the approved theme of their forgeries.
And Isle maintain it Knight, if sheele be true.
How now fellow.
May it please you Sir, my Lord is newly lighted from
his Coach.
Is my Lord come already; his honours early,
You see he loves me well up before seven,
Trust me I have found him night capt at a eleven,
Ther's good hope yet; come Iee relate all to him.
there meets them a Noble man, Sir Oliuer Muckil,
••d Sir Andrew Tip-staffe.
By your leave Lady.
My Lord your honour is most chastely welcome,
Madam tho I came now from court, I come not to flatter
you: upon whom can I justly cast this blot, but upon your own
fore-head, that know not ink from milk such is the blind be∣sotting
in the state of an vnheaded woman thats a widow. For
it is the property of all you that are widows (a hand full ex∣cepted)
to hate those that honestly and carefully love you, to
the maintenance of credit state and posterity, and strongly to
dote on those, that only love you to undo you who regard you
least are best regarded, who hate you most are best beloved,
And if there be but one man amongst ten thousand millions
of men that is accursed disastrous and evilly planeted whom
Fortune beats most, whom God hates most, and all Socie∣ties
esteem least, that man is suere to be a husband — Such is
the peevish Moon that rules you bloods. An Impudent fellow
best woes you, a flattering lip best wins you, or in a mirth who
talks roughliest is most sweetest, nor can you distinguish truth,
from forgeries, mists from Simplisity, witness those two deceit∣full
monsters that you have entertained for bridegrooms.
Deceitful.
All will out.
Sfoote who has blabbed George? that foolish Nicholas.
For what they have besotted you easy blood withal,
wear nought but forgeries, the fortune telling for husbands,
the conjuring for the chain, Sir Godfrey heard the falshod of al:
nothing but mere knavery deceit and eoozenage.
O wonderful, indeed I wondered that my husband with
all his crast could nor keep himself out of purgatory.
And I more wonder that my chain should be gon
and my Taylor had none of it.
And I wondered most of all that I, should be tied from
marriage having such a mind too't, come S. Iohn Pennydub, fair
whether on our side the moon has chaingd since yester night.
The Sting of every evil is with-in me.
And that you may perceive I fine not with you, behold
their fellow actor in those forgeries who full of Spleen and
envy at their so sudden advancements reveled all there plot
in anger.
Base Soldier to reueall vs.
First possible wee should be blinded so and our eyes open
Widow will you now believe that false, which to soon
you believed true.
O to my shame I doe.
But under favour my Lord my chain was truly
lost and straingly found again.
Resolve him of that Soldier,
In few words Knight then, thou were the arch-gull of all.
God How Sir.
Nay isle prove it: for the chain was but hid in the rose∣mary
bank all this while, and thou gotst him out of prison to
Conture for it who did it admirably fustianly, for indeed what
need any others when he knew where it was.
O vilainty of villainies, but how came my chain there
Wheres truly la, in deed la, he that will not swear, but
lie, he that will not steal, But rob: pure Nicholas Saint Antlings.
O Villain one of our society,
Deemed always holy, pure, religious,
A Puritan? a thief, when wast ever hard?
Sooner we'll kill a man then Steal thou know,
Out flan Isle rend my lyon from thy back—with mine own
hands.
Dear Moister, oh.
Nay Knight dwell in patience,
And now widow being so near the Church, it were great pity,
nay vncharity to send you home again without a husband,
draw nearer you of true worship, state and credit, that should
not stand so far of from a widow, and suffer forged shapes
to come between you, Not that in these, I blemish the trne
Title of a Captain, or blot the fair margent of a Scholar; For
I honour worthy and deserning parts in the one, and cherish
fruitful Virtues in the other. Come Lady, and you Virgin
bestow your eyes and your purest affections, upon me of esti∣motion
both in Court and Citry, that hath long wood you, and
both with there hearts and wealth sincerely love you.
Good Sister doe: Sweet little Frank, these are men
of reputation, you shall be welcome at Court: a great creddit for
a Citizen sweet Sister.
Come her silence doos consent too't.
I know not with what face,
Pah pah why with your own face they desire no other.
Pardon me worthy Sirs, I and my daughter have
wronged your lo•es.
Tic easily pardoned Lady,
If you vouch safe it now.
With all my soul,
And I with all my heart,
And I Sir Iohn with soul, heart, lights and all.
They are all mine Moll.
Now Lady?
What honest Spirit but will applaud your choice,
And gladly furnish you with hand and voice,
A happy change which makes even heaven rejoice,
Come enter into your loyes, you shall not want,
For fathers now, I doubt it not believe me,
But that you shall have hands enough to give.

TO sing a Song that old was sung,
From ashes, ancient Gower is come,
Assuming mans infirmities,
To glad your ear, and please your eyes:
It hath been sung at Festivals,
On Ember eves, and Holidays:
And Lords and Ladies in their lives,
Have red it for restoratives:
The purchase is to make men glorious,
Et bonum quo Antiquius •o melius:
If you, borne in those latter times,
When Wits more ripe, accept my rimes;
And that to hear an old man sing,
May to your Wishes pleasure bring:
I life would wish, and that I might
Waste it for you, like Taper light.
This Antioch, then Antiochus the great,
Built up this City, for his chiefest Seat;
The fairest in all Syria.
I tell you what mine Authors say:
This King unto him took a Peer,
Who dyed, and left a female heir,
So buxom, blithe▪ and full of face,
As heaven had lent her all his grace:
With whom the Father liking took,
And her to Incest did provoke:
Bad child, worse father, to entice his own
To evil, should be done by none:
But custom what they did bag•,
Was with long use, account'd no sin▪
The beauty of this sinful Dame,
Made many Princes thither frame,
To seek her as a bedfellow,
In marriage pleasures, playfellow:
Which to prevent, he made a Law,
To keep her still, and men in awe:
That who so asked her for his wife,
His Riddle told, not lost his life:
So for her many of wight did die,
As yon grimm looks do testify.
What now ensues, to the judgment of your eye,
I give my cause, who best can in•tifie.
Young Prince of Tyre, you have at large received
The danger of the task you undertake.
I have (Antiochus) and with a soul emboldened
With the glory of her praise, think death no hazard,
In this enterprise.
Music bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride,
For embraces even of •ove himself;
At whose conception, till Lucina rained,
Nature this dowry gave; to glad her presence,
The Senate house of Planets all did sit,
To knit in her, their best perfections.
See where she comes, appareled like the •pring,
Graces her subjects▪ and her thoughts the King,
Of every Virtue gives renown to men:
Her face the book of pra•ses, where is read,
Nothing but curious pleasures▪ as from thence,
Sorrow were ever racte, and testy wrath
Could never be her mild companion.
You Gods that made me man, and sway in love;
That have inflamed desire in my breast,
To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree,
(Or die in th'aduenture) be my helps,
As I am son and servant to your will,
To compass such a bondless happiness.
Prince Pericles.
That would be son to great Antiochus.
Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,
With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touched:
For Death like Dragons here affright thee hard:
Her face like Heaven, entices thee to view
Her countless glory; which desert must gain:
And which without desert, because thine eye
Presumes to reach, all the whole heap must die:
Yo• sometimes famous Princes, like thy self,
Drawn by report, adventurous by desire,
Tell thee with speechless tongues, and semblance pale,
That without covering, save yon field of Stars,
Here they stand Martyrs slain in Cupids Wars:
And with dead cheeks, advise thee to desist,
For going on deaths net, whom none resist.
Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught,
My frail mortality to know it self;
And by those fearful objects, to prepare
This body, like to them, to what I must:
For Death remembered should be like a mirror,
Who tells vs, life's but breath, to trust it error:
Isle make my Will then, and as sick men doe,
Who know the World, see Heaven, but feeling woe,
Gripe not at earthly joys as •arst they did;
So I bequeath a happy peace to you,
And all good men, as eu•rye Prince should doe;
My retches to the earth, from whence they came;
But my unspotted fire of Love, to you:
Thus ready for the way of li•e or death,
I wait the sharpest blow (Antiochus)
Scorning advice; read the conclusion then:
Which read and not expounded, tic decreed,
As these before thee, thou thy self shalt bleed.
Of all said yet, may thou prove prospero••,
Of all said yet, I wish thee happiness.
Like a bold Champion I assume the Lists,
Nor ask advise of any other thought,
But faithfulness and courage.
I am no Viper, yet I feed
On mothers flesh which did me breed:
I sought a Husband, in which labour,
I found that kindness• in a Father;
Hoe's Father, Son, and Husband mild•;
I, Mother, Wife; and yet his Child:
How they may be, and yet in two,
As you will live resolve it you.
Sharpe Physic is the last: But ô you powers!
That gives heaven countless eyes to view men's acts▪
Why cloud they not their sights perpetually,
If this be true, which makes me pale to read it?
Fair Glass of light, I loved you, and could still,
Were not this glorious Casket stored with ill:
But I must tell you, now my thoughts revolt,
For hoe's no man on whom perfections waite,
That knowing sin within, will touch the gate.
You are a fair Viol, and your sense, the strings;
Who fingered to make man his lawful music,
Would draw Heaven down, and all the Gods to ha•ken:
But being played upon before your time,
Hell only dances at so harsh a chime:
Good sooth, I care not for you.
Prince Pericl•s, touch not, upon thy life;
For that's an Article within our Law,
As dangerous as the rest: your time's expired,
Either expound now, or receive your senten•e.
Great King,
Few love to hear the sins they love to act,
T'wo•lt braid your self too near for me to tell it:
Who has a book of all that Monarchs doe,
Hoe's more secure to keep it shut, then shown.
For Vice repeated, is like the wandering Wind,
Blows dust in others eyes to spread it self;
And yet the end of all is bought thus dear,
The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear:
To stop the Ayre would hurt them, the blind Mole cast••
Copt hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is thronged
By mans oppression, and the poor Worm doth die for it:
Kings are earths Gods; in vice, their law's their will:
And if •ove stray, who dares say, •ove doth •ll:
It is enough you know, and it is fit;
What being more known, grows worse, to smother it.
All love the Womb that their first being bred,
Then give my tongue like leave, to love my head.
Heaven, that I had thy head; he he's found the meaning:
But I will gloss with him. Young Prince of Tyre,
Though by the tenor of your strict edict,
Your exposition misinterpreting,
We might proceed to counsel of your days;
Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree
As your fair self, doth tune vs otherwise;
Forty days longer we doe respite you,
If by which time, ou• ••cret be undone,
This mercy shows, wee•le joy in such a Son:
And until then, your entertain shall bee
As doth befit our honour and your worth.
How curtsy would seem to cover sin,
When what is done, is like an hipocrite,
The which is good in nothing but in sight.
If it be true that I interpret false,
Then were it certain you were not so bad,
As with foul Incest to abuse your soul:
Where now you both a Father and a Son,
By your untimely claspings with your Child,
(Which pleasures fits a husband, not a father)
And she an eater of her Mothers flesh,
By the defiling of her Parents bed,
And both like Serpents are; who though they feed
On sweetest Flowers, yet they Poison breed.
Antioch farewell, for Wisdom sees those men,
Blush not in actions blacker then the night,
Will show no course to keep them from the light:
One sin (I know) another doth provoke;
Murder's as near to Lust, as Flame to Smoke:
Poison and Treason are the hands of Sin,
I, and the targets to put off the shame,
Then least my life be cropped, to keep you clear,
By flight, Isle shun the danger which I fear.
He hath found the meaning,
For which we mean to have his head:
He must not live to trumpet forth my infan•e,
Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin
In such a loathed manner:
And therefore instantly this Prince must die,
For by his fall, my honour must keep hie.
Who attends vs there?
Doth your highness call?
Thaliar•, you are of our Chamber, Thali•rd,
And our mind partakes her private actions,
To your secrecy; and for your faithfulness,
We will advance you, Th•liard:
Behold, heere's Poison, and heere's Gold:
Wee hate the Prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him;
It fits thee not to ask the reason why?
Because we bid it: say, is it done?
My Lord, tic done.
Enough. Let your breath cool your self, telling
your haste.
My Lord, Prince Pericles is fled.
As thou wilt live fly after, and like an arrow shot
from a well experienced Archer hits the mark his eye doth
level at: so thou never return unless thou say Prince Pe∣ricles
is dead.
My Lord, if I can get him within my Pistols
length, Isle make him sure enough, so farewell to your
highness.
Thaliard adieu, till Pericles be dead,
My heart can lend no succour to my head.
Let none disturb vs, why should this chāge of thoughts
The sad companion dull eyed melancholy,
By me so used a guest, as not an hour
In the days glorious walk or peaceful night,
The tomb where grief stould sleep can breed me quiet,
Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun them,
And danger which I feared is at Antioch,
Whose arm seems far too short to hit me here,
Yet neither pleasures Art can joy my spirits,
Nor yet the others distance comfort me,
Then it is thus, the passions of the mind,
That have their first conception by mistreat,
Have after nourishment and life, by care
And what was first but fear, what might be done,
Grows elder now, and cares it be not done.
And so with me the great Antiochus,
Against whom I am too little to contend,
Since hoe's so great, can make his will his act,
Will think me speaking, though I swear to silence,
Nor boots it me to say, I honour,
If he susp•ct I may dishonour him.
And what may make him blush in being known,
Heel stop the course by which it might be known,
With hostile forces heel ore-spread the land,
And with the stint of war will look so huge,
Amazement shall drive courage from the state,
Our men be vanquished ere they doe resist,
And subjects punished that ne'er thought offence,
Which care of them, not pity of my self,
Who once no more but as the tops of trees,
Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them,
Makes both my body pine, and soul to languish,
And punish that before that he would punish.
Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast.
And keep your mind till you return to vs
peaceful and comfortable.
Peace, peace, and give experience tongue,
They doe abuse the King that flatter him,
For flattery is the bellows blows up sin,
The thing the which is flattered, but a spark,
To which that spark gives heate, and stronger
Glowing, whereas reproof obedient and in order,
Fits kings as they are men, for they may err,
When signior sooth here does proclaim peace,
He flatters you, makes war upon your life.
Prince paadon me, or strike me if you please,
I cannot be much lower then my knees.
All leave vs else: but let your cares ore-looke,
What shipping, and what ladings in our haven,
And then return to vs, Hellicans thou hast
Mooude vs, what •eest thou in our looks?
An angry brow, dread Lord.
If there be such a dart in Princes frowns,
How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?
How dares the plants look up to heaven,
From whence they have their nourishment?
Thou know I have power to take thy life from thee▪
I have ground the Axe my self,
Doe but you strike th• blow.
Rise, prithee rise, sit down, thou art no flatterer,
I thank thee fort, and heave forbid
That kings should let their •ares hear their faults hid.
Fit Counsellor, and servant for a Prince▪
Who by thy wisdom makes a Prince thy servant,
What would thou have me doe?
To bear with patience such griefs as you your
self doe lay upon your self.
Thou speak like a Physician Hellicanus,
That ministers a potion unto me:
That thou would tremble to receive thy self,
Attend me then, I went to Antioch,
Whereas thou know against the face of death,
I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty,
From whence an issue I might propogate,
Are arms to Princes, and bring joys to subjects,
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder,
The rest hark in thine ear, as black as incest,
Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father
Seemed not to strike, but smooth, but thou know this,
Tic time to fear when tyrants seems to kiss.
Which fear so grew in me I hither fled,
Under the covering of a careful night,
Who seemed my good protector, and being here▪
Bethought what was past, what might succeed,
I knew him tyrannous, and tyrants fear
Decrease not, but grow faster then the years,
And should he do it, as no doubt he doth,
That I should open to the listening ayre,
How m•ny worthy Princes bloods were shed,
To keep his bed of blackness vnlayde op,
To lop that doubt, he will fill this land with arms,
And make pretence of wrong that I have done him,
When all for mine, if I may call offence,
Must feel wars blow, who spares not innocence,
Which lou• to all of which thy self art one,
Who now reprou'dst me fort.
Alas sir.
Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood frō my cheeks,
Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts
How I might stop this tempest ere it came,
And finding little comfort to relieve them,
I thought it princely charity to grieve for them.
Well my Lord, since you have given me leave to speak▪
Freely will I speak, Antiochus you fear,
And justly too, I think you fear the tyrant,
Who either by public war, or private treason,
Will take away your life: therefore my Lord, go travel for
a while, till that his rage and anger be forgot, or till the De∣stinies
doe cut his thread of life: your rule direct to any,
if to me, day serves not light more faithful then Isle be.
I doe not doubt thy faith.
But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?
Weal mingle our bloods together in the earth,
From whence we had our being, and our birth.
Tyre I now look from thee then, and to Tharsus
Intend my travail, where Isle hear from thee,
And by whose Letters Isle dispose my self.
The care I had and have of subjects good,
On thee I lay, whose wisdoms strength can bear it,
Isle take thy word, for faith not ask thine oath,
Who shuns not to break one, will crack both.
But in our orbs will live so round, and safe,
That time of both this truth shall ne'er convince,
Thou shewdst a subjects s•in, I a true Prince.
So this is Tyre, and this the Court, here must I kill
King Pericles, and if I doe it not, I am sure to be hanged at
home: it is dangerous.
Well, I perceive he was a wi•e fellow, and had good
dis•ret•on, that being bid to ask what hee would of the
King, desired he might know none of his secrets.
Now doe I see hee had some reason for it: for if a
king bid a man bee a villain, hoe's bound by the inden∣ture
of his oath to bee one.
Hushed, here comes the Lords of Tyre.
You shall not need my fellow-Pee•s of Tyre▪
further to question me of your kings departure: his sea∣led
Commission left in trust with me, does speak suffice∣ently
hoe's gone to travail.
How? the King gone?
If further yet you will be satisfied, (why as it
were vnlicensed of your loves) he would depart? Isle give
some light unto you, being at Antioch.
What from Antioch?
Royal Antiochus on what cause I know •ot,
took some displeasure at him, at least hee iudg'•• so: and
doubting le•t hee had •rr'de or senator de, to show his sorrow,
he would correct himself; so puts himself unto the Ship∣mans
toil, with whom each minute threatens life or
death.
Well, I perceive I shall not be hanged now,
although I would, but since he•'s gone, the Kings ••as
must please: 〈◊〉 escaped the Land to perish at the Sea, 〈◊〉
present my self. Peace to the Lords of Tyre.
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.
From him I come with message unto princely
Pericles, but since my landing, I have understood your Lord
has betake himself to unknown travails, now message
must return from whence it came.
Wee have no reason to desire it, commended
to our moister not to vs, yet ere you shall depart, this wee
desire as friends to Antioch wee may feast in Tyre.
My Dyoniza shall wee rest vs here,
And by relating tales of others griefs,
See if t'will •each vs to forget our own•?
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it,
For who digs hills because they doe aspire?
Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher:
O my distressed Lord, even such our griefs are,
Here they are but felt, and seen with mischiefs eyes,
But like to Groves, being topped, they higher rise.
O Di•niza.
Who wants food, and will not say hee wants it,
Or can conceal his hunger till hee famish?
Our tongs and sorrows to sound deep:
Our woes into the air, our exes to weep.
Till tongs fetch breath that may proclaim
Them louder, that if heaven slumber, while
Their creatures want, they may awake
Their helpers, to comfort them.
Isle then discourse our woes felt several years,
And wanting breath to speak, help me with tears.
Isle doe my best Sir.
This Tharsus ore which I have the government,
A City on whom plenty held full hand:
For riches strew'de her self even in her streets,
Whose towers bore heads so high they kissed the clouds,
And strangers ne'er beheld, but wondered at,
Whose men and dames so jetted and adorned,
〈◊〉 one another glass to trim them by,
Their tables were stor'de full to glad the sight,
And not so much to feed on as delight,
All poverty was scor'nde, and pride so great,
The name of help grew odious to repeat.
O it is too true.
But see what heaven can doe by this our change,
These mouths who but of late, earth sea, and ayre,
Were all too little to content and please,
Although thy gave their creatures in abundance,
As houses are defiled for want of use,
They are now starved 〈◊〉 of exercise,
Those palates who not yet too savers younger,
Must have inventions to delight the taste,
Would now be glad of bread and beg for it,
Those mothers who to nouzell up their babes,
Thought nought too curious, are ready now
To eat those little darlings whom they loved,
So sharpe are hungers teeth, that man and w•e,
Draw lots who first shall die, to lengthen life.
Here stands a Lord, and there a Lady weeping:
Here many sink, yet those which see them fall,
Have scarce strength left to give them burial.
Is not this true?
Our cheeks and hollow eyes doe witness it.
O let those Cities that of plenties cup,
And her prosperities so largely taste,
With their superfluous riots hear these tears,
The misery of Tharsus may be theirs.
Wheres the Lord Governor?
Here, speak out thy sorrows, which thee bring
•n hast, for comfort is too far for vs to expect.
Wee have descried upon our neighbouring
shore, a portly sail of ships make hitherward.
I thought as much.
One sorrow never comes but brings an heir,
That may succcede as his inheritor:
And so ••ours, some neighbouring nation,
Taking advantage of our misery,
That stu•t't the hollow vessels with their power,
To beat vs down, the which are down already,
And make a conquest of unhappy me,
Whereas no glories got to overcome.
That's the least fear.
For by the semblance of their white flags displayed, they
bring vs peace, and come to vs as favourers, not as foes.
Thou speak like himnes vntuterd to repeat,
Who makes the fairest show, means most deceit.
But bring they what they will, and what they can,
What need wee leave our grounds the lowest?
And wee are half way there: Go tell their General wee
attend him here, to know for what he comes, and whence
he comes, and what he craves?
I go my Lord.
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist,
If wars, wee are unable to resist.
Lord Governor, for so wee hear you are,
Let not our Ships and number of our men,
Be like a beacon fier'de, t'amaze your eyes,
Wee have heard your miseries as far as Tyre,
And seen the desolation of your streets,
Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears,
But to relieve them of their heavy load,
And these our Ships you happily may think,
Are like the Trojan Horse, was stuffed within
With bloody veins expecting overthrow,
Are stored with Corn▪ to make your needy bread,
And give them life, whom hunger-staru'd half dead.
The Gods of Greece protect you,
And we'll pray for you.
Arise I pray you, rise; we do not look for reuer•nce,
But for love▪ and harborage for our self, our ships, &amp; men.
The which when any shall not gratify,
Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought,
Be it our Wives, our Children, or our selves,
The Curse of heaven and men succeed their evils:
Till when the which (I hope) shall near be seen:
Your Grace is welcome to our Town and vs.
Which welcome we'll accept, feast here awhile,
Until our Stars that frown, lend vs a smile.
Here have you seen a mighty King,
His child •'w•s to incest bring:
A better Prince, and benign Lord,
That Will prove awful both in deed and word:
Be quiet then as men should bee,
Till he hath past necessity:
I'll show you those in troubles reign;
Loosing a Mite, a Mountain gain:
The good in conversation,
To whom I give my benizon:
Is still at Tharstill, where each man,
Thinks all is writ, he spoken can:
And to remember what he does,
Build his Statue to make him glorious:
But tidings to the contrary,
Are brought your eyes, what need speak I.
Good Helicon that stayde at home,
Not to eat Honey like a Drone,
From others labours; for though he strive
To killen bad, keep good alive:
And to fulfil his prince desire,
Saved one of all, that haps in Tyre:
How Thali•rt came full bent with sin,
And had in tent to murder him;
And that in Tharsis was not best,
Longer for him to make his rest:
He doing so, put forth to Seas;
Where when men been, there's seldom ease,
For now the Wind begins to blow,
Thunder aboue, and deeps below,
Makes such unquiet, that the Ship,
Should house him safe; is wrecked and split,
And he (good Prince) having all lost,
By Waives, from coast to coast is tossed:
All perishen of man of pelf,
No ought escape•d but himself;
Till Fortune tired with doing bad,
Threw him a shore, to give him glad:
And here he comes: what shall be next,
Pardon old Gower, this long's the text.
Yet cease your ire you angry Stars of heaven,
Wind, Rain, and Thunder, remember earthly man
Is but a substance that must yield to you:
And I (as fits my nature) do obey you.
Alas, the Seas hath cast me on the Rocks,
Washed me from shore to shore, and left my breath
Nothing to think on, but ensuing death:
Let it suffice the greatness of your powers,
To have bereft a Prince of all his fortunes;
And having thrown him from your watery grau•,
Here to have death in peace, is all he will crave.
What, to pelch?
Ha, come and bring away the Nets.
What Patch-breech, I say.
What say you Moister?
Look how thou stir now:
Come away, or Isle fetched with a wanion.
Faith Moister, I am thinking of the poor men,
That were cast away before vs even now.
Alas poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear,
What pitiful cries they made to vs, to help them,
When (welladay) we could scarce help our selves.
Nay Moister, said not I as much,
When I saw the Porpas how he bounced and tumbled?
They say they're half fish, half flesh:
A plague on them, they ne'er come but I look to be washed.
Moister, I ma••ell how the Fishes live in the Sea?
Why, as Men 〈◊〉 island;
The great ones eat up 〈◊〉 little ones:
I can compare our rich Misers •o nothing so fitly,
As to a Whale; a plays and tumbles,
Driving the poor Fry before him,
And at last, devour them all at a mouthful:
Such Whales have I heard on, a'th land,
Who never leave gaping, till they swallowed
The whole Parish, Church, Steeple, Belles and all.
A pretty moral.
But Moister, if I had been the Sexton,
I would have been that day in the belfry.
Why, Man?
Because he should have swallowed me too,
And when I had been in his belly,
I would have kept such a jangling of the Belles,
That he should never have left,
Till he cast Belles▪ Steeple, Church and Parish up again:
But if the good King Simonides were of my mind.
Simonides?
We would purge the land of these Drones,
That rob the Bee of her Honey.
How from the fenny subject of the Sea,
These Fishers tell the infirmities of men,
And from their watery empire recollect,
All that may men approve, or men detect.
Peace be at your labour, honest Fisher-men.
Honest good fellow what's that, if it be a day fits you
Search out of the Calendar, and no body look after it?
May see the Sea hath cast upon your coast:
What a drunken Knave was the Sea,
To cast thee in our way?
A man whom both the Waters and the Wind,
In that vast Tennis-court▪ hath made the Ball
For them to play upon, entreats you pity him:
Hee asks of you, that never vs•d to beg.
No friend, cannot you beg?
Heir's them in our country of •rees,
Gets more with begging, then we can doe with working.
Can thou catch any Fishes then?
I never practiced it.
Nay then thou wilt starve sure: for heir's nothing to
be got nowadays, unless thou can fish for it.
What I have been, I have forgot to know;
But what I am, want teaches me to think on:
A man thronged up with cold, my Veins are• chill,
And have no more of life then may suffice,
To give my tongue that heat to ask your help:
Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead,
For that I am a man, pray you see me buried.
Di•, ke-tha; now Gods forbid't, and I have a Gown
here, come put it on, keep thee warm: now before me a
handsome fellow: Come, thou shalt go home, and we'll
have Flesh for all day, Fish for fasting-dayes and more; or
Puddings and Flap-iackes, and thou shalt be welcome.
I thank you sir.
Hark you my friend: You said you could not beg?
I did but crave.
But crave?
Then Isle turn Craver too, and so I shall scope whipping.
Why, are you Beggars whipped then?
Oh not all, my friend, not all: for if all your Beggars
were whipped, I would wish no better office, then to be Beadle:
But Moister, Isle go draw up the Net.
How well this honest mirth becomes their labour?
Hark you sir; doe you know where ye are?
Not •ell.
Why •e tell you, this I called Pantapoles,
And our King, the good Symonides.
The good Symonides, doe you call him?
I sir, and he deserves so to be called,
For his peaceable reign, and good government.
He is a happy King, since he gains from
His subjects the name of good, by his government.
How far is his Court distant from this shore?
Mary sir, half a days journey: And Isle tell you,
He hath a fair Daughter, and to morrow is her birth-day,
And there are Princes and Knights come from all parts of
the World to Just and Turney for her love.
Were my fortunes equal to my desires,
I could wish to make one there.
O sir, things must be as they may: and what a man can
not get, he may lawfully d•ale for his Wives soul.
Help Moister help; heere's a Fish hanges in the Net,
Like a poor mans right in the law: t'will hardly come out.
Ha bots on it, tic come at last; &amp; tic turned to a rusty Armour.
An Armour friends; I pray you let me see it?
Thanks Fortune, yeat that after all crosses,
Thou gives me somewhat to repair my self:
And though it was mine own part of my heritage,
Which my dead Father did bequeath to me,
With this strict charge even as he left his life,
Keep it my Per•cl•s, it hath been a Shield
Twixt me and death, and pointed to this brayse,
For that it saved me, keep it in like necessity:
The which the Gods protect thee, Fame may defend thee:
It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it,
Till the rough Seas, that spares not any man,
Took it in rage, though calmed, have given 't again:
I thank thee for it, my shipwreck now's no ill,
Since I have here my Father gave in his Will.
What mean you sir?
To beg of you (kind friends) this Coat of worth,
For it was sometime Target to a King;
I know it by this mark: he loved me dearly,
And for his sake, I wish the having of it;
And that you'd guide me to your Sovereigns Court,
Where with it, I may appear a Gentleman:
And if that ever my low fortune's better,
Isle pay your bounties; till then, rest your debtor.
Why wilt thou turney for the Lady?
Isle show the virtue I have borne in Arms.
Why di'e take it: and the Gods give thee good an't.
I but hark you my friend, t'was wee that made up
this Garment through the rough seames of the Waters:
there are certain Condolements, certain Veils: I hope
sir, if you thrive, you'll remember from whence you had
them.
•eleeue't, I will:
By your furtherance I am clothed in Steel,
And spite of all the rupture of the Sea,
This Jewel holds his building on my arm:
Unto thy value I will mount my self
Upon a Courser, whose delight steps,
Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread;
Only (my friend) I yet am unprovided of a pair of Bases.
We'll sure provide, thou shalt have▪
My best Gown to make thee a pair;
And Isle bring thee to the Court my self.
Then Honour be but a Goal to my Will,
This day Isle rise, or else add ill to ill.
Are the Knights ready to begin the Triumph?
They are my Leidge, and stay your coming,
To present them selves.
Return them, We are ready, &amp; our daughter here▪
In honour of whose Birth▪ these Triumphs are,
Sits here like Beauties child, whom Nature gat,
For men to see; and seeing▪ wonder at.
It pleases you (my royal Father) to express
My Commendations great, whose merit's less.
It's •it it should be so, for Princes are
A model which Heaven makes like to it self:
As Jewels loose their glory, if neglected,
So Princes their Renowns, if not respected:
It is now your honour (Daughter) to entertain
The labour of each Knight, in his device.
Which to preserve mine honour, I'll perform.
Who is the first, that doth prefer himself?
A Knight of Sparta (my renowned father)
And the device he bears upon his Shield,
Is a black Ethyope reaching at the Sun:
The word: Luxtu•vi••mihi.
He loves you well, that holds his life of you.
Who is the second, that presents himself?
A Prince of Macedon (my royal father)
And the device he bears upon his Shield,
Is an Armed Knight, that's conquered by a Lady:
The motto thus in Spanish. Pue Per dolecra kee per •orsa.
Knight.
And with the third?
The third, of Antioch; and his device,
A wreath of Chiually: the word: Me Pompey prouexit apex.
Knight.
What is the fourth.
A burning Torch that's turned upside down;
The word: Queen me alit me extingui•.
Which shows that Beauty hath his power &amp; will,
Which can as well inflame, as it can kill.
Knight.
The fifth, an Hand environed with Clouds,
Holding out Gold, that's by the Touch-stone tried:
The motto thus: Si• sp•cta•a▪ fides.
Knight.
And what's the sixth, and last; the which,
The knight himself with such a graceful curtsy delivered?
Hee seems to be a Stranger: but his Present is
A withered Branch, that's only greene at top,
The motto: In hac sp• la.
A pretty moral frō the dejected state wherein he is,
He hopes by you, his fortunes •et may flourish.
He had need mean better, then his outward show
Can any way speak in his just commend:
For by his rusty outside▪ he appears,
To have practised more the Whipstocke, then the Lau•ce.
He well may be a Stranger, for he comes
To an honoured triumph, strangely furnished.
And on set purpose let his Armour rust
Until this day, to scour it in the dust.
Opinion's but a fool, that makes vs scan
The outward habit, by the inward man.
But stay, the Knights are coming,
We will with-draw into the Gallery.
Knights, to say you're welcome, were superfluous.
I place upon the volume of your deeds,
As in a Title page, your worth in arms,
Were more then you expect, or more then's fit,
Since every worth in show commends it self:
Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a Feast.
You are Princes, and my guests.
But you my Knight and guest,
To whom this Wreath of victory I give,
And crown you King of this days happiness.
Tic more by Fortune (Lady) then my Merit.
Call it by what you will, the day is your,
And here (I hope) is none that envies it:
In framing an Artist, art hath thus decreed,
To make some good, but others to exceed,
And you are her labourd scholar: come Queen a th'feast,
For (Daughter) so you are; here take your place:
Martial the rest, as they deserve their grace.
We are honoured much by good S•monides.
Your presence glads our days, honour we love,
For who hates honour, hates the Gods aboue.
Sir, yonder is your place.
Some other is more fit.
Contend not sir, for we are Gentlemen,
Ha•e neither in our hearts, nor outward eyes,
Envies the great, nor shall the low despise.
You are right courteous Knights.
Sit sir, sit.
By •ove (I wonder) that is King of thoughts,
These Cates resist me, hee not thought upon.
By Iuno (that is Queen of marriage)
All Viands that I eat do seem unsavoury,
Wishing him my meat: sure hoe's a gallant Gentleman.
Hoe's but a country Gentleman: he's done no more
Then other Knights have done, he's broken a Staff,
Or so; so let it pass.
To me he seems like Diamond, to Glass.
You Kings to me, like to my fathers picture,
Which tells in that glory once he was,
Had Princes sit like Stars about his Throe•no,
And hee the Sun for them to reverence;
None that beheld him, but like lesser lights,
Did veil their Crowns to his supremacy;
Where now his son like a Gloworme in the night,
The which hath Fire in darkness, none in light:
Whereby I see that Time's the King of men,
Hoe's both their Parent, and he is their Grave,
And gives them what he will, not what they crave.
What▪ are you merry, Knights?
Who can be other, in this royal presence.
Here, with a Cup that's stirred unto the brim,
As do you love, fill to your Mistress lips,
Wee drink this health to you.
We thank your Grace.
Yet pause awhile, yon Knight doth sit too melancholy,
As if the entertainment in our Court,
Had not a show might countervail his worth:
Note it not you, Thaisa.
What is it to me, my father?
O attend my Daughter,
Princes in this, should live like Gods aboue,
Who freely give to every one that come to honour them:
And Princes not doing so, are like to Gnats,
Which make a sound, but kilt, are wondered at:
Therefore to make his entrance more sweet,
Here, say wee drink this standing boule of wine to him.
Alas my Father, it befits not me,
Unto a stranger Knight to be so bold,
He may my profer take for an offence,
Since men take women's gifts for impudence•.
How? doe as I bid you, or you'll move me else.
Now by the Gods, he could not please me better.
And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him
Of whence he is, his name, and Parentage?
The King my father (sir) has drunk to you.
I thank him.
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.
I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.
And further, he desires to know of you,
Of whence you are, your name and parentage?
A Gentleman of Tyre, my name Pericles,
My education been in Arts and Arms:
Who looking for aduent•res in the world,
Was by the rough Seas reft of Ships and men,
and after shipwreck, driven upon this shore.
He thanks your Grace; names himself Pericles,
A Gentleman of Tyre: who only by misfortune of the seas,
Bereft of Ships and Men, cast on this shore.
Now by the Gods, I pity his misfortune,
And will awake him from his melancholy.
Come Gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles,
And waste the time which looks for other revels;
Even in your Armours as you are addressed,
Will well become a Soldiers dance:
I will not have excuse with saying this,
Loud Music is too harsh for Ladies heads,
Since they love men in arms, as well as beds.
So, this was well asked, t'was so well performed.
Come sir, heir's a Lady that wants breathing too,
And I have heard, you Knights of Tyre,
Are excellent in making Ladies trip;
And that their Measures are as excellent.
In those that practise them, they are (my Lord)
Oh that's as much, as you would be denied
Of your fair curtsy: vnclaspe, vnclaspe.
Thanks Gentlemen to all, all •aue done well;
But you the best: Pages and lights, to conduct
These Knights unto their several Lodgings:
Yours sir, we have given order be next our own.
I am at your Graces pleasure.
Princes, it is too late to talk of Lo•e.
And that's the mark I know, you level at:
Therefore each one betake him to his rest,
To morrow all for speeding do their best.
No Escanes, know this of me,
Antiochus from incest lived not free:
For which the most high Gods not minding,
Longer to with-hold the vengeance that
They had in store, due to this heinous
Capital offence, even in the height and pride
Of all his glory, when he was seated in
A Chariot of an inestimable value, and his daughter
With him; a fire from heaven came and shrivelled
Up those bodies even to loathing, for they so stounke,
That all those eyes adored them, ere their fall,
Scorn now their hand should give them burial.
T'was very strange.
And yet but justice; for though this King were great,
His greatness was no guard to bar heavens shaft,
But sin had his reward.
Tic very true.
See, not a man in private conference,
Or counsel, he's respect with him but hee.
It shall no longer grieve, without reprofe.
And cursed be he that will not second it.
Follow me then: Lord Hellicane, a word.
With me? and welcome happy day, my Lords.
Know, that our griefs are risen to the top,
And now at length they ouer-flow their banks.
Your griefs, for what?
Wrong not your Prince, you love.
Wrong not your self then, noble Hellican,
But if the Prince do live, let vs salute him,
Or know what ground's made happy by his breath:
If in 〈…〉 he live, we'll seek him out:
If in his •rave he rest, we'll find him there,
And be resolved he lives to govern vs:
Or dead, give•'s cause to morn his funeral,
And leave vs to our free election.
Whose death in deed, the strongest in our sensure,
And knowing this Kingdom is without a head,
Like goodly Buildings left without a Roof,
Soon fall to ruin: your noble self,
That best know how to rule, and how to reign,
Wee thus submit unto our Sovereign.
Live noble Hellicane.
Try honours cause; forbear your suffrages:
If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear,
(Take I your wish, I leap into the seas,
Whore's hourly trouble, for a minutes ease)
A twelue-month longer, let me entreat you
To forbear the absence of your King;
If in which time expired, he not return,
I shall with aged patience bear your yoke:
But if I cannot w••no you to this love,
Go search like nobles, like noble subjects,
And in your search, spend your adventurous worth,
Whom if you find, and win unto return,
You shall like Diamonds •it about his Crown.
To wisdom, hoe's a fool, that will not yield:
And since Lord Hellicane enjoins vs,
We with our travels will endeavour.
Then you love vs, we you, &amp; we'll clasp hands:
When Peers thus knit, a Kingdom ever stands.
Good morrow to the good Simon•ui•es.
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know▪
That for this twelue-month, she'll not undertake
A married life: her reason to her self is only known,
Which from her, by no means can I get.
May we not get access to her (my 〈◊〉?)
Faith, by no means, she hath so strictly
Tied her to her Chamber, that it is impossible:
One twelve Moons more she'll wear Dianas livery:
This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vowed,
And on her Virgin honour, will not break it.
Loath to bid-farewell, we take our leaves.
So, they are well dispatcht:
Now to my daughters Letter; she tells me here,
She'll wed the stranger Knight;
Or never more to view nor day nor light.
It is well Mistress, your choice agrees with mine:
I like that well: nay how absolute she's in it,
Not minding whether I dislike or no.
Well, I do commend her choice, and will no longer▪
Have it be delayed: Soft, here he comes,
I must dissemble it.
All fortune to the good Sy•mid•s.
To you as much: Sir, I am beholding to you
For your sweet Music this last night:
I do protest, my ears were never better fed
With such delightful pleasing harmony.
It is your Graces pleasure to commend,
Not my desert.
Sir, you are Musickes moister.
The worst of all her scholars (my good Lord.)
Let me ask you one thing:
What do you think of my Daughter, sir?
A most virtuous Princess.
And she is fair too, is she not?
As a fair day in Summer: wondrous fair.
Sir, my Daughter thinks very well of you,
I so well, that you must be her Moister,
And she will be your Scholar; therefore look to it.
I am unworthy for her Scholemaister.
She thinks not so: peruse this writing else.
What's here, a letter that she loves the knight of Tyre▪
It is the Kings subtlety to have my life:
Oh seek not to entrap me, gracious Lord,
A Stranger, and distressed Gentleman,
That never aimed so hie, to love your Daughter,
But bent all offices to honour her.
Thou hast bewitched my daughter,
And thou art a villain.
By the Gods I have not; never did thought
Of mine levy offence; nor never did my actions
Yet commence a deed might gain her love,
Or your displeasure.
Traitor, thou lie.
Traitor?
I, traitor.
Even in his throat, unless it be the King,
That calls me Traitor, I return the lye.
Now by the Gods, I do applaud his courage.
My actions are as noble as my thoughts.
That never relished of a base descent:
I came unto your Court for Honours cause,
And not to be a Rebel to her state:
And he that otherwise accounts of me,
This Sword shall prove, hoe's Honours enemy.
No•here comes my Daughter, she can witness it.
Then as you are as virtuous, as fair,
Resolve your angry Father, if my tongue
Did ere solicit, or my hand subscribe
To any syllable that made love to you?
Why sir, say if you had, who take• offence?
At that, would make me glad?
Yea Mistress, are you so peremptory?
I am glad on it with all my heart,
Isle tame you; Isle bring you in subjection.
Will you not, having my consent,
Bestow your love and your affections,
Upon a Stranger? who for ought I know,
May be (nor can I think the contrary)
As great in blood as I my self:
Therefore, hear you Mistress, either frame
Your will to mine: and you sir, hear you;
Either be ruled by me, or Isle make you,
Man and wife: nay come, your hands,
And lips must seal it too: and being joined,
Isle thus your hopes destroy, and for further grief:
God give you joy; what are you both pleased?
Yes, if you love me sir?
Even as my life, my blood that fosters it.
What are you both agreed?
Yes, if it please your Majesty.
It pleases me so well, that I will see you wed,
And then with what haste you can, get you to bed.
Now sleep y slacked hath the rout,
No din but snores about the house,
Made louder by the orefed breast,
Of this most pompous marriage Feast:
The Cat with eyne of burning cole,
Now coutches from the Mouses •whole;
And Cricket sing at the Ouens mouth,
Are the blither for their drouth:
Hymen hath brought the Bride to bed,
Whereby the los•e of may denhead,
A Babe is moulded: be attent,
And Time that is so briefly spent,
With your fine fancies quaintly each,
What's dumb in show, I'll plain with speech.
By many a dearne and painful perch
Of Perycles the careful search,
By the •over opposing Crignes,
Which the world together joins,
Is made with all due diligence,
That horse and sail and hie expense,
Can steed the quest at last from Tyre:
Fame answering the most strange enquire,
To'th Court of King Symonides,
Are Letters brought, the tenor these:
Anti•choose and his daughter dead,
The men of Tyrus, on the head
Of Helycanus would set on
The Crown of Tyre, b•t he will none:
The mutiny, hee there hastes t'oppresse,
Says to'em, if King Pericles
Come not home in twice six Moons,
He obedient to their dooms,
Will take the Crown: the sum of this,
Brought hither to Penlapolis,
Irony shed the regions round,
And every one with claps can •and,
Our heir apparent is a King:
Who dreamt? who thought of such a thing?
Brief he must hence depart to Tyre,
His Queen with child, makes her desire,
Which who shall cross along to go,
Omit we all their dole and woe:
〈◊〉 her Nurse she takes,
And so to Sea; their vessel shakes,
On Neptune• billow, half the flood,
Hath their Keel cut: but fortune moved,
Varies again, the grisled North
Disgorges such a tempest forth,
That as a Duck for life that dives,
So up and down the poo•e Ship drives:
The Lady shrieks, and wel-a-neare,
Do's fall in travail with her fear:
And what ensues in this fell storm,
Shall• for it self, it self perform:
I n•ll relate, action may
Conveniently the rest convey;
Which might not? what by me is told,
In your imagination hold:
This Stage, the Ship, upon whose Deck
The seas tossed Pericles appears to speak.
The God of this great Vast, rebuke these surges,
Which wash both heaven and hell, and thou that hast
Upon the Winds command, bind them in Brass;
Having called them from the deep, ô still
Thy dea•n•ng dreadful thunders gently quench
Thy •••ble sulphirous flashes: ô How Lychorida!
How does my Queen then? storm venomously,
Wilt thou s•eat all thy self? the sea-mans Whistle
Is as a whi•per in the ears of death,
Unheard Lie•h•ri•a? 〈◊〉, oh!
Divinest patrionesse, and my wife gentle
To those that cry by night▪ convey thy deity
Aboard our dancing Boat make swift the pangs
Of my Queens travails? now Lychori••.
Here is a thing too young for such a place,
Who if it had conceit, would die, as I am like to doe:
Take in your arms this piece of your dead Queen.
How? how Lychori•a?
Patience (good sir) do not assist the storm,
Heir's all that is left living of your Queen;
A little Daughter: for the sake of it,
Be manly, and take comfort.
O you Gods!
Why do you make vs love your goodly gifts,
And snatch them straight away? we here below,
Recall not what we give, and therein may
Use honour with you.
Patience (good sir) even for this charge.
Now mild may be thy life,
For a more blusterous birth had never Babe:
Quiet and gentle thy conditions; for
Thou art the rudelyest welcome to this world,
That ever was Princes Child: happy what follows,
Thou hast as chiding a nativity▪
As Fire, Ayre, Water, Earth, and Heaven can make,
To harold thee from the womb:
Even at the first, thy loss is more then can
Thy portage quit, with all thou can find here:
Now the good Gods throw their best eyes upon it.
What courage sir? God save you.
Courage enough, I do not fear the •law,
It hath done to me the worst: yet for the love
Of this poor Infant, this fresh new seafarer,
I would it would be quiet.
Slack the bolins there; thou wilt not wilt thou:
Blow and split thy self.
But Sea-roome, and the brine and cloudy billow
Kiss the Moon, I care not.
Sir your Queen must over board, the sea works hie,
The Wind is loud, and will not ••e till the Ship
Be cleared of the dead.
That's your superstition.
Pardon vs, sir; with vs at Sea it hath bin still observed.
And we are strong in eastern, therefore briefly yeeld'er,
As you think meet; for she must over board straight;
Most wretched Queen.
Here she lies sir.
A terrible Child-bed hast thou had (my dear,
No light, no fire, th'vnfriendly elements,
Forgot thee utterly, nor have I time
To give thee hallowd to thy grave, but straight,
Must cast thee scarcely Cossind, in oar,
Where for a monument upon thy bones,
The ayre remaining lamps, the belching Whale,
And humming Water must orewelme thy corpse,
Lying with simple shells: ô Lychorida,
Bid Nes•or bring me Spices, Ink, and Taper,
My Casket, and my levels; and bid Nicander
Bring me the Satin Coffin: lay the Babe
Upon the Pillow; hie thee whiles I say
A priestly farewell to her: suddenly, woman.
Sir, we have a Chest beneath the hatches,
Caulked and bittumed ready.
I thank thee: Mariner say, what Coast is this?
Wee are near 〈◊〉.
Thither gentile Mariner,
Alter thy course for 〈◊〉: When can thou reach it?
By break of day, if the Wind cease.
O make for Th•suss,
There will I visit Cle•r, for the Babe
Cannot hold out to 〈◊〉; there •le leave it
At careful nursing: go thy ways good Mariner,
Isle bring the body presently.
Phylemon, hoe.
Doth my Lord call?
Get Fire and meat for these poor men,
It is been a turbulent and stormy night.
I have been in many; but such a night as this,
Till now, I near endured.
Your Moister will be dead ere you return,
There's nothing can be ministered to Nature,
That can recover him: give this to the Apothecary,
And tell me how it works.
Good morrow.
Good morrow to your Lordship,
Gentlemen, why doe you stir so early?
Sir, our lodgings standing bleak upon the sea▪
Shook as the earth did quake:
The very principals did seem to rend and all to topple:
Pure surprise and fear, made me to quite the house.
That is the cause we trouble you so early,
T•is not our husbandry.
O you say well.
But I much marvel that your Lordship,
Having rich tire about you, should at these early hours,
Shake off the golden slumber of repose; tic most strange•
Nature should be so conversant with Pain,
Being thereto not compelled.
I h•lt it ever Virtue and Cunning,
Were endowments greater, then Nobleness•e &amp; Riches;
Careless Heirs, may the two latter darken and expend;
But Immortality attends the former,
Making a man a god:
It is known, I ever have studied Physic:
Through which secret Art, by turning ore Authorities,
I have together with my practise, made familiar,
To me and to my aid, the blessed infusions that dwells
In Vegetiues, in Metals, Stones: and can speak of the
Disturbances that Nature works, and of her cures;
which doth give me a more content in course of true delight
Then to be thirsty after tottering honour, or
Tie my pleasure up in silken Bags,
To please the Fool and Death.
Your honour has through E•hesus,
Poured forth your charity, and hundreds call themselves,
Your Creatures; who by you, have been restored;
And not your knowledge, •our personal payne,
But even your Purse still open, hath built Lord Cerim•n,
Such strong renown, as time shall never.
So, lift there.
What's that?
Sir, even now did the sea toss up upon our shore
This Chest; tic of some wrack.
Set't down, let's look upon it.
It is like a Co••in, sir.
What ere it be, it is wondrous heavy;
Wrench it open straight:
If the Seas stomach be orecharg'd with Gold,
It is a good constraint of Fortune it belches upon vs.
It is so, my Lord.
How close tic caulked &amp; bottomed, did the sea cast it up?
I never saw so huge a billow sir▪ as tossed it upon shore.
Wrench it open soft; it smells most sweetly in my sense.
A delicate Odour.
As ever l••t m• nostril: so, up with it.
Oh you most potent Gods! what's here, a Corse?
Most strange.
Shrouded in Cloth of state, balmed and entreasured
with full bags of Spices, a Passport to Apollo, perfect me
in the Characters:
Here I give to understand,
If er• this Coffin drives aloud;
I King Pericles have lost
This Queen, worth all our mundaine cost:
Who finds her, give her burying,
She was the Daughter of a King:
Besiaes, this Treasure for a •ee,
The Go•s requite his charity.
If thou lives Pericles, thou hast a heart,
That ever cracks for woe, this chaunc'd to night.
Most likely sir.
Nay certainly to night, for look how fresh she looks
They were too rough, that threw her in the sea.
Make a Fire within; fetch hither all my Boxes in my Closet,
Death may usurp on Nature many hours, and yet
The fire of life kindle again the ore-prest spirits;
I heard of an Egiptian that had 9. hours lien dead,
Who was by good appliance recovered.
Well said, well said; the fire and clothes: the rough and
Woeful Music that we have, cause it to sound beseech you:
The Viol once more; how thou stir•st thou block?
The Music there: I pray you give her ayre:
Gentlemen, this Queen will live,
Nature awakes a warmth breath out of her;
She hath not been entranc'st aboue five hours:
See how she gins to blow into lifes flower again.
The Heavens, through you, increase our wonder,
And sets up your •am for ever.
She is ali•e, behold her ey•lids
Cases to those heau•nly jewels which Pericles hath lost,
Begin to part their fringes of bright gold,
The Diamonds of a most praised water doth appear,
T• make the world twice rich, live, and make vs weep.
To hear your fat•, •ur creature, rare as you seem to bee.
O dear Dian•, where am I? whore's my Lord?
What wo•lt is this?
Is not this strange?
Most rare.
Hush (my gentle neighbours) lend me your hands,
To the next Chamber bear her: get linen:
Now this matter must be looked to for her relapse
Is mortal: come, come; and 〈◊〉 guide vs.
Most honoured Cl•on, I must need• be gone, my twelve
months are expired, and 〈◊〉 stands in alitigious peace:
You and your Lady take from my heart all thankfulness,
The Gods make up the rest upon you.
Your shakes of foe•tune, though they hant you mortally
Yet glance full wondringly on vs.
O your sweet Queen! that the strict fates had pleased,
you had brought her hither to have blessed mine eyes with her.
We cannot but obey the powers aboue vs;
Could I rage and roar as doth the sea she lies in,
Yet the end must be as tic: my gentle babe Marina,
Whom, for she was borne at sea, I have named so,
Here I charge your charity withal; leaving her
The infant of your care, beseeching you to give her
Princely training, that she may be manere'd as she is borne.
Fear not (my Lord) but think your Grace,
That fed my Country with your Corn; for which,
The peoples prayers still fall upon you, must in your child
Be thought on if neglect should therein make me vile,
The common body by you relieved,
Would force me to my duty: but if to that,
My nature need a spur, the Gods revenge it
Upon me and mine, to the end of generation.
I belee•e you, your honour and your goodness,
Teach me too't without your vows, till she be married,
Madame by bright Diana, whom we honour,
All vnsule•• shall this heir of mine remain,
Though I show will in it; so I take my leave:
Good Madame, make me blessed in your care
In bringing up my Child.
I have one my self, who shall not be more dear
to my respect then yours, my Lord.
Madam, my thanks and prayers.
Weel bring your Grace en to the edge •th shore,
then give you up to the masked Neptune, and the gentlest
winds of heaven.
I will embrace your offer, come dearest Madame,
O no tears Licherida, no tears, look to your little Mistress,
on whose grace you may depend hereafter: come my Lord.
Madam, this Letter, and some certain Jewels,
Lay with you in your Coffer, which are at your command:
Know you the Character?
It is my Lords, that I was shipped at sea I well remem∣ber,
even on my learning time, but whether there deliue∣red,
by the holy gods I cannot rightly say: but since King
Pericles my wedded Lord, I ne'er shall see again, a vestal
livery will I take me to, and never more have joy.
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak,
Dianaes Temple is not distant far,
Where you may abide till your date expire,
Moreover if you please a Niece of mine,
Shall there attend you.
My recompense is thanks, thats all,
Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre,
Welcomed and settled to his own desire:
His woeful Queen we leave at Ephesus;
Unto Diana ther's a Votaress.
Now to Marina bend your mind,
Whom our fast growing seen must find
At Tha•suss▪ and by Cl••n trained
In Mu•icks letters, who hath gained
Of education all the grace,
Wh•ch makes hie both the art and place
Of gene all wonder: but alack
Th•t mo•ster 〈…〉 wrack
Of 〈◊〉 praise, •arin•• •ife
Seek to take off by treasons knife,
And in this kind, our Cl•on hath
O•e daughter and a full grown wench,
Even right for marriage •ight: this Maid
〈…〉 and it is said
For certain in our story, she
Would e••r with Marina bee.
Beet when they weave•e the ••eded silk,
W•th fingers long, small, white as milk,
Or when she would with sharpe needle wound,
The Cambric which she made more sound
By hurting it or when too'th Lu•e
She sung, and made the night bed mute,
That st•ll records with moan, or when
She would with rich and constant pen,
V••le to her Mistress D•an still,
Th•s Phylaten contends in skill
With absolute Marina: so
The Dove of Pap•os might with the cro•
Vie feathers white, Marina gets
All praises, which are paid as debts,
And not as g•uen, this so darkes
In Phil•ten all graceful marks,
That Cl••ns wife with Envy rare,
A present murderer does prepare
For good Marina, that her daughter
Might stand peerless by this slaughter.
The sooner her vile thoughts to stead,
〈…〉 our nurse is dead,
And cursed D•o••za hath
The pregnant instrument of wrath.
Pressed for this blow, the vnbor•e•uent,
I doe commend to your content,
Only I carri•d winged Time,
Post one the lame ••ete of my rime,
Which never could• I so conu•y,
Vnl•sse your thoughts went on my way,
Dioniza •os appear,
With Leo•in• a murth•rer.
Thy oath remember, thou hast sworn to do it,
tic but a blow which never ••all bee known, thou
can not doe a thing in the world so soon to yield
the• so much pro••te: let not con•••ence which is but
cold, in ••a•ning, thy love bosom, inflame too nicely,
nor let pity which even wo•en have cast off, melt thee,
but be a soldier to thy purpo••.
I will doo'•, •ut yet she is a goodly creature.
The ••tter then the Gods should have her.
Here she comes we•ping •or her only Mistress•e death,
Thou art resolude.
I am resolude.
No: I will •obe T•ll•s of her weed to strowe
thy greene w•th Flow•s, the yellows, blues, the purple
Violets, and Marigolds, shall as a Carpet hang upon thy
grave, while Summer days doth last: Aye me poor maid,
borne in a tempest, when my mother did, this world to me
is a lasting storm, whirring me from my friends.
How now Marina, why doe you keep alone?
How chance my daughter is not with you?
Doe not con•um your blood with sorrowing,
Have you a nurse of me? Lord how your favour▪
Changed with this unprofitable woe:
Come give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it,
Walk with Leonine, the ayre is quick there,
And it parses and sharpens the stomach,
Come Leonine take her by the arm, walk with her.
No I pray you, Isle not bercau• you of your serve•̄t.
Come, come, I love the king your father, and your
self, with more then foreign heart, we every day expect
him here, when he shall com• and find our Paragon to all
reports thus blasted,
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage, blame both
my Lord and me, that we have taken no care to your best
courses, go I pray you, walk and be cheerful once again,
reserve that excellent complexion, which did steal the
eyes of young and old. Care not for me, I can g•e home a∣lone.
Well, I will go, but yet I have no desire too it.
Come, come, I know tic good for you, walk half
an hour Leonine, at the least, remember what I have sed.
I warrant you Madam.
Isle leave you my sweet Lady, for a while, pray
walk softly, doe not heate your blood, what, I must have
care of you.
My thanks sweet Madame, Is this wind Westerly
that blows?
Southwest.
When I was borne the wind was North.
Wast so?
My father, as nu•se ses, did never fear, but cried
good sea-men to the Sailors, galling his kingly hands ha∣ling
ropes, and clasping to the Mast, endured a sea that al∣most
burst the deck.
When was this?
When I was borne, never was waives nor wind
more violent, and from the ladder tackle, washes off a can∣uas
climber, ha ses one, wolt out? and with a dropping in∣dustrie
they skip from sterne to sterne, the Boarswaine
whistles, and the Ma•ster calls and trebles their confusion.
Come say your prayers.
What mean you?
If you require a little space for prayer, I grant it,
pray, but bee not tedious, for the Gods are quick of •are•,
and I am sworn to do my work with haste.
Why will you kill me?
To satisfy my Lady.
Why would she have me kilt now? as I can re∣member
by my troth, I never did her hurt in all my life, I
never spake bad word, nor did ill turn to any living cry∣ture:
Believe me law, I never killed a Mouse, nor hurt a Fly:
I trod upon a worm against my will, but I wept fort. How
have I offended, wherein my death might yield her an••
profit, or my life imply her any danger?
My Commission is not to reason of the deed, but
do it.
You will not do it for all the world I hope: you
are well favoured, and your looks foreshew you have a
gentle heart, I saw you lately when you caught hurt in par∣ting
two that fought: good sooth it shewde well in you, do
so now, your Lady seeks my life Come, you between, and
save poor me the weaker.
I am sworn and will dispatch.
Hold villain.
A prize, a prize.
Half part mates, half part. Come lets have
her aboard suddenly.
These roguing thieves serve the great Pvrat•
Velds, and they have seizd Marina, let her go, ther's no
hope she will return, Isle swear shees dead, and thrown
into the Sea, 〈◊〉 see further: perhaps they will but
please themselves upon her, not carry her aboard, if she
remain
Whom they have ravished, must by me be slain.
Bolt.
Sir.
Search the market narrowely, M•tt•lyne is
full of gallants, wee lost too much much money this mart
by being too wenchlesse.
Wee were never so much out of Creatures, we
h•ue but poor three, and they ca• doe no more then they
can doe, and they with continue•ll 〈◊〉, are even as good
as rotten.
Therefore lets have fresh ones what ere wee pay
for them, if there bee not a conscience to be used in eu•rye
trade, wee shall neu•r prosper.
Thou say true, tic not our bringing up of poor
bastards, as I think. I hau• brought up some 〈◊〉.
I to eleven, and brought them down again,
but shall I search the mark•t?
What else ma•? •he stuff we have, a strong
wind will blow it to pieces, they are so pittifu•lie sudden.
Thou say true, ther's two unwholesome a conscience,
the poor Transiluanian is dead that lay with
the little baggage.
I, she quickly popped him, she made him roaste-meate
for worms, but Isle go search the market
Three or four thousand Chickens were as pret∣tie
a proportion to live quietly, and so give over.
Why to give over I pray you? Is it a shame to
get when wee are old?
Oh our credit comes not in like the common∣ditty
nor the commodity wages not with the danger:
therefore if in our youths we could pick up some pretty
estate, 't were not amiss to keep our door hatched, besides
the fore terms we stand upon with the gods will be strong
with us for giving ore.
Come other sorts offend as well as wee.
As well as wee, I, and better too, wee offend
worse, neither is our profession any trade, It's no calling,
but here comes Bolt
Come your ways my masters, you say shoe's a virgin.
O Sir, wee doubt it not.
Master, I have gone through for this piece you
see, if you like her so, if not, I have lost my earnest.
Bolt has she any qualities?
She has a good face, speaks well, and has ex∣cellent
good clothes: theres no farther necessity of qua∣lites
can make her be refused.
What's her price Bolt?
I cannot be bated one do it of a thousand pieces.
Well, follow me my masters, you shall have your
money presently, wife take her in, instruct her what she has
to doe, that she may not be raw in her entertainment.
Bolt, take you the marks of her, the colour of
her hair, complexion, height, her age, with warrant of her
virginity and cry. He that will give most shall have her first,
such a maidenhead were no cheap thing, if men were as
they have been: get this done as I command you.
Performance shall follow.
Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow, he should
have struck, not spoke or that these Pirates, not enough
barbarous, had not oreboord thrown me, for to seek my
mother.
Why lament you pretty one?
That I am pretty.
Come, the Gods have done their part in you.
I accuse them not.
You are light into my hands, where you are
like to live.
The more my fault, to scope his hands, where I
was to die.
I, and you shall live in pleasure.
No.
Yes indeed shall you, and taste Gentlemen of all
fashions, you shall fare well, you shall have the difference of
all complexions, what doe you stop your ears?
Are you a Woman?
What would you have me be, and I bee not a
woman?
An honest woman, or not a woman.
Marie whip the Gosseling, I think I shall have
something to doe with you, come you're a young foolish
sapling, and must be bowed as I would have you
The Gods defend me.
If it please the Gods to defend you by men, then
men must comfort you, men must feed you, men stir you
up: Bolts returned. Now sir, hast thou cried her through
the Market?
I have cried her almost to the number of her
hairs, I have drawn her picture with my voice.
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the in∣clination
of the people, especially of the younger sort?
Faith they listened to me, as they would have
harkened to their fathers testament, there was a Spaniards
mouth watered, and he went to bed to her very description.
We shall have him here to morrow with his best
ruff on.
To night, to night, but Mistress doe you know
the French knight, that cowres ethehams?
Who, Monsieur Verollus?
I, he, he offered to cut a caper at the proclaim∣tion,
but he made a groan• at it, and swore he would see her
to morrow.
Well, well, as for him, hee brought his disease hi∣there,
here he does but repair it, I know hee will come in
our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the Sun.
Well, if we had of every Nation a traveller, wee
should lodge them with this sign.
Pray you come hither a while, you have
Fortunes coming upon you, mark me, you must
seem to doe that fearfully, which you commit willing∣lie,
despise profit, where you have most gain, to weep
that you live as ye doe, makes pity in your Lovers sell∣dome,
but that pity begets you a good opinion, and that
opinion a mere profit.
I understand you not.
O take her home Mistress, take her home, these
blushes of hers must bee quenched with some present
practise.
Thou say true in faith, so they must, for your
Bride goes to that with shame, which is her way to go with
warrant.
Faith some doe, and some doe not▪ but Mistress
if I have bargained for the joint.
Thou moist cut a morsel off the spit.
I may so.
Who should deny it?
Come young one, I like the manner of your garments
well.
I by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.
Bolt, spend thou that in the town: repo•• what
a sojourn•r we have, you'll loose nothing by cu••ome.
When Nature framed this piece, •hee meant thee a good
tur•e, therefore say what a parrago• she is, and thou hast
the harvest out of thine own report.
I warrant you Mistress, thunder shall not so a∣wake
the beds of E•les▪ as my giving out her beauty stirs
up the lewdly inclined, Isle bring home some to night.
Come your ways, follow me.
If fires be hot, knives sharpe, or waters deep,
Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.
Diana aid my purpose.
What have we to doe with Diana, pray you will
you go with vs?
Why ere you foolish, can it be undone?
O Dioniza, such a piece of sla•ghter,
The Sun and Moon ne'er looked upon.
I think you'll •urn a chidle again.
Were I chief Lord of all this spacious world, Id
give it to undo the deed. O Lady much less in blood then
virtue, yet a Princes to equal any single Crown ath earth∣i•h
lustice of compare, O villain, Leonine whom thou hast
poisned too, if thou had drunk to him tad been a
kindness becoming well thy face, what can thou say
when noble Pericles shall demand his child?
That she is dead, Nurses are not the fates to foe∣ster
it, not ever to preserve, she did at night, Isle say so, who
can cross it unless you play the impious Innocent, and
for an honest attribute, cry out she died by foul
play.
O go too, well, well, of all the faults beneath the
heavens, the Gods doe like this worst.
Be one of those that thinks the petty wrens of
Tharsus will fly hence, and open this to Pericles. I do shame
to think of what a noble strain you are•, and of how co∣ward
a spirit.
To such proceeding who ever but his approba∣tion
added, though not his p•nce consent, he did not flow
from honourable courses.
Be it so then, yet none does know but you
how she came dead, nor none can know Leo•in being
gone. She did disdain my child, and stood between
her and her fortunes: none would look on her, but
cast their gazes on Marianas face, whilst •urs was blur∣ted
at, and held a Mawkin not worth the time of day.
It pierced me thorough, and though you call my course un∣natural,
you not your child well loving, •et I find it
greet•me as an enterprise of kindness performed to your
sole daughter.
Heavens forgive it.
And as for P•r•les, what should hee say, we wept
after her hearse, &amp; yet we morn, her monument is almost
finished, &amp; her epitaphs in glittering gold characters express
a general praise to her, and •are in vs at whose expense
tic done.
Thou art like the Harpy,
Which to betray, doest with thine Angels face cea•• with
thine Eagles talents.
Year like one that supersticiously,
Doe swear too'th Gods, that Winter kills
The Flii•s, but yet I know, you'll
doe as I advise.
Thus time we waste, &amp; long league▪ make short,
Sail seas in Cockles, have and wish but fort,
Making to take our imagination,
From bourne to bourne, region to region,
By you being pardoned we commit no crime,
To use one language, in each several clime,
Where our scenes seems to live,
I doe beseech you
To learn of me who stand with gappes
To teach you.
The stages of our story Pericles
Is now again thwarting thy wayward sea•,
Attended on by many a Lord and Knight,
To see his daughter all his lives delight.
Old Helicanus goes along behind,
Is left to govern it, you bear in mind.
Old Escenes, whom Hellicanus late
Advanced in time to great and hie estate.
Well sailing ships, and bounceous winds
Have brought
This king to Tharsus, think this Pilot though•t
So with his storage, shall your thoughts groan
To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone
Like moats and shadows, see them
Move a while,
Your ears unto your eyes Isle reconcile.
See how belief may suffer by foul show,
This borrowed passion stands for true old woe:
And Pericles in sorrow all devoured,
With sighs shot through, and biggest tears ore-showr'd.
Leaves Tharsus, and again embarks, hee swears
Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs:
Hee put on sack-cloth, and to Sea he bears,
A Tempest which his mortal vessel tears.
And yet hee rides it out, Now please you wit:
The Epitaph is for Marina writ, by wicked Dioniza.
The fairest, sweetest, and best lies here,
Who withered in her spring of year:
She was of Tyrus the Kings daughter,
On whom foul death hath made this slaughter.
Marina was she cal••d, and at her birth,
Thetis bein• proud, swallowed some part •th'earth:
Therefore the earth fearing to be ore-flowed,
Hath Thetis bier•h-childe on the heavens bestowed.
Wherefore• she does and swears sheele never sty•t,
Make raging Battery upon shores of flint.
No visor does become black villainy,
So well as soft and tender flattery:
Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead,
And bear his courses to be ordered;
By Lady Fortune, while our Steer must play,
His daughters woe and heavy welladay.
In her unholy service: Patience then,
And think you now are all in Mittelin.
Did you ever hear the like?
No, nor never shall doe in such a place as this,
she being once gone.
But to have dive•itie preach't there, did you ever
dream of such a thing?
No, no, come, I am for no more bawdy houses, shall's
go hear the Vestails sing?
Isle doe any thing now that is virtuous, but I am out
of the road of rutting for ever.
Well, I had rather then twice the worth of her
she had ne'er come here.
Fie, f•e, upon her, shoe's able to froze the god
Pri•pu•, and undo a whole generation, we must either get
her ra•ished, or be rid of her, when she should doe for Cly∣ants
her fitment, and doe me the kindness of our pro∣fession,
she has me her quirks, her reasons▪ her master rea∣sons,
her prayers, her knees, that she would make a Puri∣taine
of the devil, if hee should cheapen a kiss of her.
Faith I must ravish her, or she'll disfurnish vs
of all our Cavalier, and make our swearers priests.
Now the pox upon her greene sickness for me.
Faith ther's no way to be rid on'• but by the
way to the po•. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
Were should have both Lord and Lowne, if the
peevish baggage would but give way to customers.
How now, how a dozen of virginities?
Now the Gods to bless your Honour.
I am glad to see •our 〈◊〉 in good health.
You may, so it is the better for you that your re∣sorters
stand upon sound legs, how now▪ who•some ini∣quite
have you, that a man may deal withal, and defy
the Surgeon?
Wee have here one Sir, if she would, but
there never came her like in M•t•line.
If she would doe the deeds of darkness thou would say.
Your Honour knows when• it is to say well enough.
Well, call forth, call forth.
For flesh and blood Sir, white and red, you shall
see a rose, and she were a rose indeed, if she had but.
What prithi?
O Sir, I can be modest.
That dignities the renown of a Bawd, no less
then it gives a good report to a number to be chaste.
Here comes that which grows to the stalk,
Never plucked yet I can assure you.
Is she not a •air creature?
Faith she would serve after a long voyage at Sea,
Well theres for you, leave vs.
I beseech your Honour give me leave a word,
And Isle have done presently.
I beseech you doe.
First, I would have you note, this is an Hono∣rabble
man.
I desire to find him so, that I may worthily not him.
Next hes the Governor of this country, and
a man whom I am bound too.
If he govern the country you are bound to him
indeed, but how honourable hee is in that, I know not.
Pray you without any more virginal fencing,
will you use him kindly? he will lyne your apron with gold.
What hee will doe graciously, I will thankfully
receive.
Ha you done?
My Lord shees not pac'ste yet, you must take
some pains to work her to your manage, come wee will
leave his Honour, and her together, go thy ways.
Now pretty one, how long have you been at thy• trade?
What trade Sir?
Why, I cannot name but I shall offend.
I cannot be offended with my trade, please you to name it.
How long have you been of this profession?
Ere since I can remember.
Did you go too't so young, were you a gamest•
at five, or at seven?
Earlier too Sir, if now I bee one.
Why? the house you dwell in proclaims you to
be a Creature of sale.
Doe you know this house to be a place of such
resort, and will come intoo't? I hear say you're of honou∣rabble
parts, and are the Governor of this place.
Wh•, hath your principal made known unto
you who I am?
Who is my principal?
Why, your hearbe-woman, she that sets seeds and
roots of shame and iniquity.
O you have heard something of my power, and so
stand aloft for more serious wooing, but I protest to thee
pretty one, my authority shall not see thee, or else look
friendly upon thee, come bring me to some private place •
Come, come.
If you were borne to honour, show it now, if put
upon you, make the judgment good, that thought you
worthy of it.
How's this? how's this? some more, be sage.
For me that am a maid, though most ungentle
Fortune have placed me in this Sty, where since I came,
diseases have been sold dearer then physic, that the
gods would set me free from this vnhalowed place, though
they did change me to the meanest bird that flies •th
purer ayre.
I did not think thou could have spoke so well,
n•re dreamt thou coldest, had I brought hither • cor∣rupted
mind, thy speech had altered it, hold, hears
gold for thee, persevere in that clear way thou goosed and
the gods strengthen thee.
The good Gods preserve you.
For me be you thoughten, that I came with no ill
intent, for to me the very doors and windows •auor 〈◊〉,
fare thee well, thou art a piece of virtue, &amp; I doubt not 〈◊〉
•hy traini•g hath been noble, hold, hears more gold for
thee, a cu•se upon him, die he like a thief that robs thee of
thy goodness, if thou doest hear from me it shall be for thy
good.
I beseech your Honour one piece for me.
Avaunt thou damned dore-keeper, your house but
for this virgin that doth prop it, would 〈◊〉 and over∣whelm
you. Away.
How's this? wee must take another course with
you? if your peevish chastity, which is not worth a breake-fast
in the cheapest cou•trey under the cope, shall undo a
whole household, let me be gelded like a spaniel, come your ways.
〈◊〉 would you have me?
I must have your mayden-head taken off, or the
cōmon hāg-man shall execute it, come •our way, weal have
no more Gentlemen driven away, come your ways I say.
How now, ••ats the •atter?
Worse and worse 〈◊〉 is, she has here spoken
holy words to the Lore• 〈◊〉.
O 〈◊〉.
He makes our profession as it were to, 〈◊〉 a∣fore
the face of the gods
〈◊〉 hang her vpfor•for
The Nobleman would •aue dealt with her like
a Noble man, and she sent him away as 〈◊〉 as a S•owe∣ball,
saying his prayers too.
Bolt take her away, use her at thy pleasure, cr•ck
the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malia•le.
And if she were a thornier 〈◊〉 of ground
then she is, she shall be ploughed.
Hark, hark you Gods.
She con•uric, away with her, would she had no∣for
come within my doors, Marry hang you: she• borne
to undo vs, will you not go the way of wemen-kinde?
Marry come up my dish of chastity with rosemary &amp; ba••s.
Come mistress, come your way with me.
Whither wilt thou have me?
To take from you the Jewel you hold so deer•.
Prithee tell me one thing first.
Come now your one thing.
What can thou wish thine enemy to be.
Why, I could wish him to bee my master, or ra∣there
my mistress.
Neither of these are so bad as thou art, since they
doe better thee in their command, thou hold a place for
which the painedst fiend of hell would not in reputation
change: Thou art the damned doorkeeper to every c•∣sterell
that comes enquiring for his Tib. To the choleric
fisting of every rogue, thy care is liable, thy food is such
as hath been belch on by infected lungs.
What wold you have me do? go to the wars, wold you?
where a man may serve 7. years for the loss of a leg, &amp; have
not money enough in the end to buy him a wooden one?
Doe any thing but this thou doest, empty old re∣ceptacles,
or common-shores of filth, serve by indenture,
to the common hang-man, any of these ways 〈◊〉 yet
better then this: for what thou profess, a Baboon could
he speak, would own a name too dear, that the gods wold
safely deliver me from this place: here, heers gold for thee,
if that thy master would gain by me, proclaim that I can
sing, weave, sow, &amp; dance, with other virtues, which Isle keep
from boast, and will undertake all these to teach. I doubt
not but this populous City will yield many scholars.
But can you teach all this you speak off▪
Prove that I cannot, take me home again,
And prostitute me to th• basest groom that doth fre∣quent
your house.
Well I will see what I can doe for thee: if I can
place thee I will.
But amongst honest woman.
Faith my acquaintance lies little amongst them.
But since my master and mistress hath bought you, theres
no going but by their consent: therefore I will make them
acquainted with your purpose, and I doubt not but I shall
find them tractable enough. Come, Isle doe for thee what
I can, come your ways.
Marina thus the Brothel scopes, and chances
Into an Honest-house our Story says:
She sings like one immortal, and she dances
As Goddesse-like to her admired lays.
Deep clerks she dumb's, and with her neele compo∣ses,
Natures own shape, of bud▪ bird, branch, or berry.
That even her art sisters the natural Roses
Her Inckle, Silk Twine, with the rubied Cherry,
That puples lacks she none of noble race,
Who power their bounty on her: and her gain
She gives the cursed Bawd, here wee her place,
And to his Father turn our thoughts again,
Where wee left him on the Sea, wee there him left,
Where driven before the winds, hee is arrived
Here where his daughter dwells, and on this coast,
Suppose him now at Auc••r: the City• strived
God Neptunes Annu•ll feast to keep, from whence
〈◊〉 our Tyrian Ship aspics,
Hi• banners Sable, trimmed with rich expense,
And to him in his Barge with fervor hies,
In your supposing once more put your sight,
Of heavy Pericles, think this his Bark:
Where what is done in action, more if might
Shall be disco•rd, please you sit and hark.
Where is Lord Helicanus? hee can resolve you,
O here he is Sir, there is a barge put off from Metaline, and
in it is 〈◊〉 the Governor, who craves to come a∣board,
what is your will?
That hee have his, call up some Gentlemen.
Ho Gentlemen, my Lord calls.
Doth your Lordship call?
Gentlemen there is some of worth would come
aboard, I pray greet him fairly.
Sir, this is the man that can in ought you would
resolve you.
Hail reverent Sir, the Gods preserve you.
And you to out-liue the age I am, and die as I
would doe.
You wish me well, being on shore, honouring of
Neptunes triumphs, seeing this goodly vessel ride before
vs, I made to it, to know of whence you are.
First what is your place?
I am the Governor of this place you lie before.
Sir our vessel is of Tyre, in it the King, a man,
who for this three months hath not spoken to any one,
nor taken sustenance, but to prorogue his grief.
Upon what ground i• his distemperature?
Twould be too tedious to repeat, but the mayne
grief springs frō the loss of a beloved daughter &amp; a wife.
May wee not see him?
You may, but bootless. Is your sight, hee will not
speak to any, yet let me obtain my wish.
Behold him, this was a goodly person.
Till the disaster that one mortal wight drove him
to this.
Sir King all hail, the Gods preserve you, hail
royal sir.
It is in vain, he will not speak to you.
Sir we have a maid in 〈◊〉, I durst wager woul'd
win some words of him.
Tic well bethought, she questionless with her sweet
harmony, and other chosen attractions, would allure and
make a battery through his de•end parts, which now are
midway stopped, she is all happy as the fairest of all, and her
fellow maids, now upon the levy shelter that abuts a∣against
the Islands side.
Sure all effectless, yet nothing weal omit that
bears recoveries name. But since your kindness wee ha•e
stretched thus far, let vs beseech you, that for our 〈◊〉
we may provision have, wherein we are not destitute for
want, but weary for the staleness.
O sir, a courtesy, which if we should deny, the m•st
just God for every graffe would send a Caterpillar, and so
inflict our Province: yet once more let me entreat t•
know at large the cause of your kings sorrow.
Sit sir, I will recount it to you, but see I am pre∣uented.
O hee'rs the Lady that I sent for▪
Welcome fair one, first not a goodly present?
Shoe's a gallant Lady.
Shoe's such a one, that were I well assured
Came of a gentle kind, and noble stock, I do wish
No better choice, and think me r•rely to wed,
Fair on all goodness that co•sists in beauty,
Expect even here, where is a kingly patient,
If that thy prosperous and artificial fa•e,
Can draw him but to answer thee in ought,
Thy sacred Physic shall receive such pay,
As thy desires can wish.
Sir I will use my utmost skill in his re•ouerie, pro∣uided
that none but I and my companion maid be suffered
to come near him.
Come, let vs leave her, and the Gods make her pro∣sperous.
Mark he your Music?
No nor looked on vs.
See she will speak to him.
Hail sir, my Lord lend ear.
Hum, ha.
I am a maid, my Lord, that ne'er before invited
eyes, but have been gazed on like a Comet: She speaks
my Lord, that may be, hath endured a grief might equal
yours, if both were justly wayde, though wayward fortune
did malign my state, my derivation was from ancestors,
who stood equivalent with mighty Kings, but time hath
rooted out my parentage, and to the world, and augward
casualties, bound me in servitude, I will desist, but there is
something glowes upon my cheek, and whispers in mine
ear, go not till he speak.
My fortunes, parentage, good parentage, to equal
mine, was it not thus, what say you?
I sed my Lord, if you did know my parentage,
you would not do me violence.
I do think so, pray you turn your eyes upon me,
your like something that, what Country women hear of
these shows?
No, nor of any shows, yet I was mortally brought
forth, and am no other then I appear.
I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping: my
dearest wife was like this maid, and such• one my da•gh∣la
might have been: My Queens square brows, her
stature to an inch, as wandlike-straight, as silver voyst,
her eyes as Iewell-like, and caste as richly, in pace an o∣there
〈◊〉. Who starves the ears she feeds, and makes
them hungry, the more she gives them speech, Where doe
you live?
Where I am but a stranger from the deck, you
may discern the place.
Where were you bred? and how achieved you these
endowments which you make more rich to owe?
If I should tell my history, it would seem like
lies disdained in the reporting.
Prithee speak, falsnesse cannot come from thee,
for thou look modest as justice, &amp; thou seem a Pallas
for the crowned truth to dwell in, I will believe thee &amp; make
senses credit thy relation, to points that seem impossible,
for thou look like one I loved indeed: what were thy
friends? did thou not stay when I did push thee back,
which was when I perceived thee that thou came from
good descending.
So indeed I did.
Report thy parentage, I think thou said thou had
been tossed from wrong to injury, and that thou thoughts
thy griefs might equal mine, if both were opened.
Some such thing I sed, and sed no more, but what
my thoughts did warrant me was likely.
Tell thy story, if thine considered prove the thou∣sand
part of my endurance, thou art a man, and I have
suffered like a girl, yet thou doest look like patience,
gazing on Kings graves, and smiling extremity out of
act, what were thy friends? howe lost thou thy name,
my most kind Virgin? recount I doe beseech thee, Come
sit by me.
My name is Marina.
Oh I am mocked, and thou by some incensed God
sent hither to make the world to laugh at me.
Patience good sir: or here Isle cease.
Nay Isle be patient: thou little know howe thou
doest startle me to call thy self Marina.
Th• name was given me by one that had some
power, my father, and a King.
How, a Kings daughter, and called Marina?
You sed you would believe me, but not to bee a
troubler of your peace, I will end here.
But are you flesh and blood?
Have you a working pull•e, and are no Fairy?
Motion well, speak on, where were you borne?
And wherefore called Marina?
Called Marina▪ for I was borne at sea.
At sea, what mother?
My mother was the daughter of a King, who died
the minute I was borne, as my good Nurse 〈◊〉 hath
oft delivered weeping.
O stop there a little, this is the rarest dream
That ere duld sleep did mock sad fools withal,
This cannot be my daughter, buried, well, where were you
bred? Isle hear you more •oo'th bottom of your stone,
and never interrupt you.
You s•orne, believe me it were best I did give ore.
I will believe •ou by the syllable of what you shall
deliver, yet give me leave, how came you in these parts?
where were you bred?
The King my father did in There•us leave me,
Till 〈…〉,
Did seek to murder me: and having wooed a villain,
To attempt it, who having drawn to do it,
A crew of 〈◊〉 came and rescued me,
Brought me to Metaline,
But good sir whither will you have me? why doe you weep?
It may be you think me an imposture, no good faith: I
am the d•ughter to King P•ricl•s, if goo• king P•ricles be.
Hoe, Hellica••s?
Calls my Lord.
Thou art a grave and noble Counsellor,
Most wise in general, tell me if thou can, what this maid
is, or what is like to bee, that thus hath made me•
weep.
I know not, but here is the Regent sir of Metalin•,
speaks nobly of her.
She never would tell her parentage,
Being demanded, that she would sit still and weep.
Oh Hellicanus, strike me honoured sir, give me a
gash, put me to present pain, least this great sea of joys rue∣shing
upon me, ore-beare the shores of my mortality, and
drown me with their sweetness: Oh come hither,
thou that bege•st him that did thee beget,
Thou that wast borne at sea, buried at Tharsus,
And found at sea again, O Hellicanus,
Down on thy knees, thank the holy Gods as loud
As thunder threatens vs, this is Marina.
What was thy mothers name? tell me, but that
for truth can never be confirmed enough,
Though doubts did ever sleep.
Frist sir, I pray what is your title?
I am Pericles of Tyre, but tell me now my
Drowned Queens name, as in the rest you said,
Thou hast been God-like perfect, the heir of kingdoms,
And an other like to Pericles thy father.
Is it no more to be your daughter, then to say, my
mothers name was Thaisa, Thaisa was my mother, who did
end the minute I began.
Now blessing on thee, rise you are my child.
Give me fresh garments, mine own Hellicanus, she is not
dead at Tharsus as she should have been by savage Cl•o•,
she shall tell thee all, when thou shalt kneel, and justify in
knowledge, she is thy very Princes, who is this?
Sir, tic the governor of M•••line, who hearing of
your me lancholie state, did come to see you.
I embrace you, give me my robes.
I am ••lt in my beholding, O heavens bless my girl,
But hark what Music tell, 〈◊〉 my Marina.
Tell him ore point by point, for yet he seems to do•t.
How sure you are my daughter, but what music?
My Lord I hear none.
None, the Music of the Spheres, list my Marina.
It is not good to cross him, give him way.
〈◊〉 sounds, do ye not hear?
Music my Lord? I hear▪
Most heavenly Music.
It •ips me unto ••stning, and thick slumber
Ha•gs upon mine eyes, let me rest.
A Pillow for his head, so leave him all.
W•ll my companion friends, if this but answer to my 〈◊〉
belief, Isle well remember you.
My Temple stands in Ephesus,
Hie thee t•ether, and doe upon mine Altar sacrifice,
There when my maiden priests are met together before the
people all, reveal how thou at sea did loose thy wife, to
morn thy crosses with thy daughters, call, &amp; give them
repetition to the like, or perform my bidding, or thou li∣uest
in woe: do it, and happy, by my silver bow, awake and
tell thy dream.
Celestial Dian, Goddess Argentina▪
I will obey thee Hellicanus.
Sir.
My purpose was for Tharsus, there to strike,
The inhospitable Cleon, but I am for other service first,
Toward Ephesus turn our blown sails,
Eftsoones lle tell thee why, shall we refresh vs sir upon your
shore, and give you gold for such provision as our in∣tents
will need.
Sir, with all my heart, and when you come a shore,
I have another slight.
You shall prevail were it to woo my daughter, for
it seems you have been noble towards her.
Sir, lend me your arm.
Come my Marina.
Now our sands are almost run,
More a little, and then dum.
This my last boon give me,
For such kindness must relieve me:
That you aptly will suppose,
What pageantry, what feats, what shows,
What minstrelsy, and pretty din,
The Regent made in Metalin,
To greet the King, so he thrived,
That he is promised to be wined
To fair Marina, but in no wise,
Till he had done his sacrifice.
As Dian bad, whereto being bound,
The Interim pray, you all confound.
In fetherd briefness sails are filled,
And wishes fall out as they are wild,
At Ephesus the Temple see,
Our King and all his company.
That he can hither come so soon,
Is by your fancies thankful doom.
Hail Dian, to perform thy just comma••,
I here confe••e my self the King of Tyre,
Who frighted from my country did •ed at P••tapolis, the
fair 〈◊〉, at Sea in childbed died she, but broug•t forth a
Maid child ca•lt Marina▪ whom O Goddess wears yet thy
silver livery, •hee at Tharsus was nursed with 〈◊〉, who at
fourteen years he sought to murder, but her better s•ars
brought her to Meteline, against whose shore riding, her
For•unease brought the maid aboard vs, where by her
own most clear remembrance, she made known her
self my Daughter.
Voice and favour, you are, you are, O royal Pericles.
What means the mum? she die's, help Gen∣t•emen.
Noble Sir, if you have told Dianaes Altar
true, this is your wife?
R•uerent appearer no, I threw her overboard
with these very a•mes.
Upon this coast, I warrant you.
It is most certain.
Look to the Lady, O shoe's but ouer-joyde,
Early in b•u•tering morn this Lady was thrown upon
this shore.
I op't the coffin, found there rich Jewels, recoue∣red
her, and plac'ste her here in Dianaes temple.
May we see them?
Great Sir, they shall be brought you to my house,
whither I inuit you, look Thaisa is recovered.
O let me look if hee be none of mine, my san∣ctitie
will •o my sense bend no licentious ear, but curb
it spite of seeing: O my Lord are you not Pericles? like
him you spake, like him you are, did you not name a tem∣pest,
a birth, and death?
The voice of dead Thaisa.
That Thaisa am I, supposed dead and drowned.
I mortal •ian.
Now I know you better, when wee with tears
parted Pent•polis, the king my father gave you such a ring.
This, this, no more, you gods, your present kind∣nes
makes my past miseries sports, you shall doe well that
on the touching of her lips I may melt, and no more be
seen, O come, be buried a seco•d time within these are•es.
My heart leaps to be gone into my mothers by∣some.
Look who kneels here, flesh of thy flesh Thaisa,
thy burden at the Sea, and called Marina, for she was yeel∣ded
there.
Blessed, and mine own.
Hail Madame, and my Queen.
I know you not.
You have heard me say when I did fly from
Tyre, I left behind an ancient substitute, can you remem∣ber
what I called the man, I have named him oft.
It was 〈◊〉 then.
Still confirmation, embrace him dear Thaisa, this
is hee, now doe I long to hear how you were found? how
possibly pre•erued? and who to thank (besides the gods)
for this great miracle?
Lord Cerimon, my Lord, this man through whom
the Gods have shown their power, that can from first to
last resolve you.
R•ucrent Sir, the gods can have no mortal officer
more like a god then you, will you deliver how this dead
Queen reliues?
I will my Lord, beseech you first, go with me
to my house, where shall be shown you all was found with
her. How she came plac'ste here in the Temple, no
needful thing omitted.
Pure Dian bless thee for thy vision, and will offer
night oblations to thee Thai•a, this Prince, the •air betro∣thed
of your daughter, shall marry her at Pentapolis, and
now this ornament makes me look dismal, will I clip to
form, and what •his fourteen years no razer touched, to
grace thy marridge-day, Isle beautify.
Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit. Sir,
my father's dead.
〈◊〉 make a Star of him, yet there my
Queen, 〈◊〉 celebrate their Nuptials, and our selves
will in that kingdom spend our following day•, our son
and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.
Lord 〈◊〉 wee doe our longing stay,
To hear the rest untold, Sir lead's the way.
In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard
Of monstrous lust, the due and just reward:
In Pericles his Queen and Daughter seen,
Although assailed with Fortune fierce and keen.
Virtue preferred from fell destructions blast,
Lead on by heaven, and crowned with joy at last.
In Helycanus may you well descry,
A figure of truth, of faith, of loyalty:
In reverend C•rimon there well appears,
The worth that learned charity aye wears.
For wicked Cleon and his wife, when Fame
Had spread his cursed deed, the honoured name
Of Pericles, to rage the City turn,
That him and his they in his Palace burn:
The gods for murder seemed so content,
To punish, although not done, but meant.
So on your Patience evermore attending,
New joy wait on you, here our play has ending.

Our Authors Pen, loves not to swim in blood,
He dips no Ink, from out black Acheron:
Nor sucks invention, from the depth of hell,
Nor crosses Seas to get a foreign plot.
He taxes no Goddesses for foulest lust,
Nor doth disclose the secret scopes of Jove:
He rips not up the horrid maw of hell,
To show foul treasons hideous ugly face.
Nor doth he touch the falls of mighty Kings,
No ancient History, no Shepherds love.
No states-mans life, no power of death he shows.
He only strives with mirth to please each one,
Since laughter is peculiar unto man.
and being sure, freely to speak can be no sin,
If honest words have honest consturing.
Therefore to fly the least cause of offence,
He only finds but words, you find the sense:
Wherefore, if ought unto your ear taste tart,
Thank but your selves, which good to ill convert,
Yet this he ought, hath strictly charged me say:
That hoe's a slave, and of a base condition,
That doth but draw it to suspicion.
That here he privately taxes any man,
Since all the world yields vice to play upon.
What he intends, action shall make you know,
I should fore-stall the play, should I but show.
with feathered speed I pierced the Ayre,
The clouds a sunder I did tear,
And thus with wings and bow come I
Newly from Ioues hye Court in sky.
My mother kissed me at our parting,
But did charge me leave my darting,
And with a strict command did say,
Boy, on a Whirligig go play.
But such a round isle make him run,
As he shall end, where first begun.
My scourg-stickes shall be made of Darts,
Fethered with sighs of Lovers hearts.
Which made them fly with swiftest flight,
As lightning in tempestuous night.
My scourge it self, are golden tresses,
More richer far then chains of Esses.
With which isle make some dance a Jig,
More rounder yet then ere did Gig.
But time doth call me to be gone,
Yet first to all you lookers on,
Before I part, I thus much tell,
That Gods can go invisibell.
And though you do not all times eye me,
Yet know at all times, I am by ye.
And be assured, and doe not think
But that you stand full ne'er the brink
Of my displeasure: which if ye win,
In love isle make ye sink or swim.
Thus farewell all, sit patient yet a while,
Least Cupped make your selves, your selves be∣guile.
MY Lord, you know your self and I have
long lived friends, and shall we now with
firm affection knit? tie fast our friend∣ship
in our Of-springs love, convey our
cares in one, our goods together, and our loves in them,
and whiles the remnant of our aged days doe last, lets do'ff
all discontents, cast by the worlds incombers, and leave
the careful burden of keeping that, was care enough
to get upon the youthful hope of their more able
strength.
O Neighbour Venture, doe you not know
that to marry a Child, is but to mar a man? for hee that
cuts a tender twig in springing, both mars his length and
spoils his growing: my son shall first see twenty years
of age, before my condesent shall once be given to make him
father of a son: Besides, your daughter yet is very young:
and though in Women's sex it is always seen, desire to
marriage rides always in post; yet in their Inn ripen∣tance
is their host: the fault of this is always known
to be, through foolish husbands: or such as are to young,
for Children to their wives are like fruit half ripe, they
yield no taste, nor give no sweet delight.
Behold, here comes my young Lord, the very
model of your self, the Vigour of your youth, and
strength of all your future hopes.
And hee is welcome, what sudden gust (my
Son) in hast hath blown thee hither, and made thee
leave the Court, where so many earth-treading stars a∣dornes
the sky of state? or as the summers speckled flowery
garment is spread about the seat of Majesty? what is the
rea•on thou hast left this earthly Paradise, to visit vs be∣fore
our expectation?
My love dear Father (to your fair wife)
hath made my hours of absence from this place, seem
tedious years, I could not but return from whence I
came, as like to man, the which of clay was framed, at first
did walk a while upon the earth, but in the end returned
to dust; or like a River, which through the earth doth
draw his life and spring from out the sea. Thus I that
from you sprung, have run my course awhile, but now
as to my sea, return to you again.
Thy answer with thy wisdom hath in∣rich'd
thy welcome: dear friends, I pray you set your
hands to this my deed.
I doe my Lord, with all devoted love.
And I which hate my wife his mistress: his welcome
home, will breed my ill at home, I breed my horns as
Children teeth, with sickness and with pain: and yet I
will with as smooth a face as my wife will give me leave,
make show of welcome. Sir, I much rejoice to see you,
and doubt not, but ere long, youl'• come &amp; see where my
poor house doth stand.
Or else I were unworthy of your love if I
neglect the visitation of so kind friends as your self and
my dear mistress.
Visitation! my wife's not sick, what visitation? Tic I am
ill, tic the horn plague I have, I am sure that's not Gods
visitation, yet they are the Lords tokens, for hee hath sent
them me: but marry when you will, isle try and you bee a
Chandler, isle see if you'll take your own tokens again:
well, but in the mean time, I am marked for death, yet he will
be in the pit before me. O that I should bee a Cuckold!
a creature of the last edition, and yet of the old print.
O sir, What make you here, when there's a
gallant Gentleman newly come from Court, talking with∣in
with my Lady.
Ye• more Courtiers, more Gallants, more Gentle∣men?
now in a hūdred thousand horned devils names, what
makes a there? what is a gone to bed to your Lady? doth
a Cuckold me in mine own house, in mine own chamber?
nay in mine own Sheets? what he's come to visit her to, is
a not, ha? But let me see, I have now found out a trick to
know if my wife make me a Cuckold, I will geld my self,
&amp; then if my wife be with child, I shall be sure I am a Cuc∣kold,
that will do brave in faith, God a mer•ie brain.
Sir, I am sorry that I cannot with that free scope of
friendly entertainment, give welcome to your worth,
because a jealous spirit haunts my husband, which doth
disturb vs all, this devil hath long vexed h•m, and hee as
long vexed me, &amp; were I not composed of more then of an
ordinary female spirit, the burden of his wrongs would
tyre me quite.
Sir, this is my husband.
I cry ye mercy sir, I did not see ye.
A man would think ye saw me, for I am sure ye
have hit me right enough.
I pray sir be not angry, I have not any way of∣fended
you, nor would—
Nay, nay, though I be, ye may be friends again with
me in spite of my teeth, for look ye sir: my wife and I are
but one, and then though I fall out with you, you may fall
in with her.
Sir, I come not to offend you, nor—
Nay, nay, ye may, ye may in faith, ye may, my wife
is charitable, and would bee glad by such a means to make
vs friends.
Sir, then know, I scorn my eyes should stand as
witnesses unto your Ladies wrongs, and let you go vnpu∣nished:
slight see a sweet Lady abused!
Sir you shall not touch him, husband you are to
blame, your madness makes you much forget your man∣ners,
and wrongs my hi• birth, to make me the only can∣kerd,
and worm eaten branch that sprung out of my fa∣fathers
noble stock. No, no, know that the tree from
which I grew, brought forth good fruit to all, not bad
to you: but hence forth isle shake hands with mirth; and
entertain a careless humour: for look ye sir, the Devil
gives this jealousy to man, as nature doth a tail unto a Lie∣on,
which thinks in heat to beat away the Flies, when he
doth most enrage himself with it: but come sir, will ye
bee my servant, my cipher, my shadow, or indeed any
thing?
Your shadow if you please, and you my sub∣stance.
With all my heart.
I, I warrant her with al her heart, and now must be
doe as all shadows doe, when night comes, creeps into the
substance.
Say a doe, do'y here husband, I hear doe vow be∣fore
all the watchful guard of heaven, that I have lived
as true unto thy bed, &amp; chaste unto thy love, as ere was
Turtle to his mate: but hence forrth ceremonious custom
shall not curb me of delight, let her be bridled by opinion,
whose weak desires cannot break her rain•s: for my part,
isle make you know my will is like a flint, smooth and
cold, but being hardly struck, sparkles forth fire even
in the strikers eyes: I am a shamed that I have sa•id thus
much, yet I may lawfully speak, for why? come sir, will
ye walk? the proverb says, give losers leave to talk.
Owages, wages, O honest wages! what other Gal∣lants
come to your Lady in my absence?
Truly sir, sometimes there comes a proper young
Gentleman one Moister Woodlie.
Would lie! with whom would he lie good Wa∣ges?
Why with my Lady sir, and he could get her
good will: but he is a Gentleman I can assure ye sir, for he
walks always in boots, but in troth his gentility is some∣thing
decaying, his boots are on their death-bed, for their
souls are upon parting, and I think he be a Soldier too,
for his sword and his hangers are more worth then all his
clothes, and a is a very proper man, for he is as tall as one
of the Guard, and he will come sometimes and take my La∣die
by the hand, and pump for wit half an hour to∣gether.
How dost mean, pump, ha!
Why sir, thus he will take my Lady by the hand,
and wring it half an hour together, and say no∣thing.
Is that pumping for wit?
O sir I, for he that wrings a fair Lady by the
hand, and says nothing, doth but pump for wit, that's
certain.
A most witty exposition, of what years.
Faith sir he's indeed a man of no ears, for a hath
been on the Pillory.
But what makes the cropeard stallion with my wife
then?
Alas nothing but lies with her, and she lies with
him, would you have any more?
More! no, too much by heaven, nay then two's past
suspisition, past doubt, past jealousy, is not my hairs turned
all to horns? am I not a monstrous and deformed Beast?
my wife's a Goddess (though not Diana) she can trance∣form:
I branch wages, I brāch, do I not? am not I a good∣lie
screen for men to hang their hats upon.
Why sir? ye are no Cuckold:
No? no Cuckold? he lies with your Lady, and your
Lady lies with him, yet I am no cuckold.
Why no, give me but attention, and with a word isle
wipe away your horns.
No, no, words are to weak to wipe them off,
when deed have put them on.
But hear me sir.
with open ears to swallow comfort.
I met my Lady and he fast by the Garden wall,
&amp; asking for your jealous worship, they both replied you
were not jealous, this spoke they both together: in this,
you know they both did lie together, and yet made you no
cuckold.
Ha! mean so?
Even so indeed sir.
Nay, then I cry ye mercy wife, in faith she yet may
chance be honest.
O sir, very honest as a pretty Semsteris, or a poor
waiting Gentlewoman.
Well Wages, if I be a Cuckold—
Why sir, what will ye doe if ye be?
What will I doe? isle make it known, for I will bee a
Citizen, and so be a Subject for Poets, and a slave to my
own wife, therefore follow me Wages, I will
do it.
O grief! how thou torment me, it dwells in
mine eyes, feasts on my blood: swims in my tears,
and lodges in my heart. O heaven! have I deserved this
plague? O Husband! why should thou use me thus?
was not my behaviour unto thee as soft as Down, as
smooth as polished crystal, I and my love as clear? was
I not like a hand-maide, even obedient to thy very
thoughts? did not my nuptial duty like a shadow foal∣lowe
the very turning of thine eye? Oh! thou once did
love me, but thy love was too hot, and like to self consu∣ming
fire, it burnt out, and how soon, tic turned to cold
ashes, &amp; therefore henceforth isle seem jealous of him:
for since all endeavours fail, isle now try if Jealousy
can drive out jealousy: and here is fit occasion for to work
upon: Why how now Husband, wooing of another wife
before my death, whence comes this? in my conscience tic
a plague that Cupped hath lain upon me for sleeping
croslegd in your absence. What, are ye grown as weary of
your wife as of a foul shirt? must ye be changing?
Good madam be patient.
Patient! no, you are his patient, and he is your Phisi∣teen,
a ministers to ye (with a Morbus Gallicus take ye both)
I pray forsooth let me bee your Butler, and scrape your
Trenchers, since I am already fine to live of your lea∣uinges.
Woman, art Jealous?
I.
Why?
Because you give me cause: but man are you jealous?
I.
why?
Because thou gives me cause.
Tic false.
True, false, thou hast been false indeed, abused my
bed, infected even my very blood, and made it grow to
hard impostumes on my brows: hast thou not wantonly,
changed naked embraces with strangers? abused thy
nuptial vow? hath notthy unsatiate womb, brought forth
the bastardy of lust to call me father? but isle abandon thee,
disclaim that, and hate ye both.
Do'y hear me sir, upon my conscience you doe
wrong your Lady.
If I wrong her, you'll doe her right, I bear a blow
of yours, the which I never felt, you are like a mans Taylor
that works with open shop for the Husband, but if you
chance to doe any thing for the wife, you must doe it in∣wards,
inwards! you are a good workman, I must needs
say it: you have fitted my wives body, how sa'y wife, has
anot?
Not, but you can even in my sight cast amorous
glances on others: you have forsook my bed, abhorred my
presence▪ and like a man past grace and shame, strout like a
pimp before a wanton feather waging minkes at hie
noon: besides, did not I find thee kissing of thy Maid?
Did not I find thee in private conference with my
horsegroome?
Did thou not offer thy maid a new gown, for a
nights lodging?
Did not thou give a Diamond to the Butler?
Did not thou send a bowed Angel to thy Laundress∣sse
Daughter?
No tic false.
Yes, tic true, and then when I told thee on it, thou
swore it was out of charity, because the Wench was
poor, her Father a• honest man, and her Mother a pain∣full
woman: for these and these causes you were kind unto
the Daughter, great whilst I was contented to believe, be∣cause
I was unwilling, like a faint hearted Soldier to look
of mine own wounds, until I saw thou daily woundst
my love a new, and slew thine one reputation.
Art mad?
No, but a little Jealous like you, I will no longer
maintain thy, sanguine sin, sooth lust with patience, nor
in broken singing language flatter thy folly, as sweet hart
do not wāder: for I doe love thee dear as doth a Goose her
Gander: a Goose indeed for if ought but a Goose, I should
a sought revenge for wrongs.
What art drunk?
No, for I have sufficiēt reason, too much knowledge,
and sense enough to feel my wrongs: why should wee
women bee slaves to your imperfections? have wee not
souls of one mettle, are we not as free borne as you? are
we not all Adams Of-spring? did not you fall as well with
him as wee, and shall wee bee still kept down and you
rise?
Dost hear? ye are a sort of uncertain giddy wa∣uering,
tottering tumbling creatures, your affections are
like your selves, and yourselves like your affections, up &amp;
down, like the tuckes on your Petticotes, which you let
fall and take up as occasion serves: I have seen of your
sex fall in love with a man, for wearing a handsome Rose on
his shoe: another fall into the passion of the heart, to see
a man untie his point, to make water: a third fall into the
shaking Ague for eating a body cherry with two stones,
and yet youl' be fellows, even with the very image of
your maker: but wilt let me alone, and in faith isle be queen∣et.
A lone! faith no.
Then isle leave thee, since I know tic folly beyond
madness, to make her pleasure cause of my sadness.
Believe it Lady, this was well done, and like a La∣die
of a hie birth: make your husband know his advance∣meant.
O shadow, shadow, I would have you know I
would not wrong him for all the seas drowned retches: for
if my heart of blood should doe it as hee supposes it doth,
even that blood would like a traitor write my faults with
blushing red upon my cheeks: but because I (as all wo∣men
and Courtiers doe) love good clothes which his
eyes wear, yet hee abraides me, swearing tic to
please the multitude, and that I spread gay rags about
me like a net to catch the hearts of strangers: if I
go poor, then hee swears I am beastly, with a loath∣ed
sluttishnesse: if I bee sad, then I grieve hee is so
near: if merry, and with a modest wantonising kiss
Embrace his Love, then are my twistings more dan∣gerous
then a Snakes, my lust more un•atiate then
was Messal•nas: Yet this from Iealiousie doth always
grow. What most they seek they loth'st of all would
know. But now to you dear Cousin, forgiveness
let me ask, and pardon for my •ained Jealousy, and take
but thus much of my counsel. Marry not in hast, for
she that takes the best of Husbands, puts but on a gouldē
fetter, for husbands are but like to painted fruit, which
promise much, but still deceives vs when wee come to
touch: if you match with a Courtier, heel have a dozen
mistresses at least, and repent his marriage within four and
twenty hours at most, swearing a wife is fit for none but
an old Justice or a country Gentleman. If ye marry a
Citizen (though ye live never so honest) yet ye shall bee
sure to have a Cuckold to your Husband. If a Lawyer,
the neatenesse of his Clarke will draw in question the
good carriage of his wife. If a Merchant, heel be ven∣turing
abroad, when a might deal a great deal more
safe at home: therefore come Cousin come, lets home, and
this take of me, That amongst the best there's none
good, all ill: shoe's married best that's: wedded to her
will.
They say Cupped is a boy, yet I have known
him confute the oppinon of all your Phylosphers: for
they hold every light thing tends directly up: but
I think all know hee makes every light wench, fall
directly down. Well I am sure a hath knocked me
with his bird bolt, for the which Venus give him cor∣reaction;
for I doe already love a Lady of an imcompara∣ble
delicacy, but shoe's another mans, and will shut
her ears as close to keep out charms, as great men doe
their gates, to keep in alms. Yet I have no reason to dis∣pair,
for I have kissed her, and the French proverb says,
Fame baissee est demi joy, a woman kissed is half enjoyed:
but I fear he means but the upper half.
I have here a Letter must work a strange thing, and yet
no miracle, it must make a La•ie love her friend better
then her own husband.
Save ye my Lord.
O Wages! what Tennis-ball he's fortune taken thee
for, to toss thee thus into my way?
I hope ye will not strike me into any hazard of my
life though.
But what's the news my Lad, what's the news?
how doth Sir Timothy Troublesome, that jealous knight
thy Moister.
Why sir, a doth with his wife like a cowardly Cap∣taine
in a town of Garrison, fears every assault, trembles
at the battery, and doubts most, least the gates should bee
opened, and his enemy let in at midnight.
Now in the name of destiny who fears a?
O sir▪ next to you self, none so much as your Cour∣tier,
for even with vennum'd Breath, a speaks of them: for
saith he, have but a suite to one of thē, &amp; they are like Jour∣deigns,
which though ye open the Fludgates of your boun∣tie,
and fill them to the very brim, yet theile always
stand gaping for more.
But dost thou think his Lady honest?
As women's flesh may be.
But she he's been a Courtier, and therefore know∣ing
most good, me thinks she would commit least ill.
O sir, I will not but with sanctified and halowed
thoughts, touch Sinthias brightest beams, whom all
eyes doe adore, and hearts doe worship: where purest cha∣steady
doth shine in spotless robes of splendent majesty,
where nature emulating heaven to make her even as fair
as she is virtuous, but yet I well could wish, you know y•in
the sky of Court are many stars, the which at midnight
shoot and fall.
True, through most of the twelve signs, for they
shoot from their Husbands at Aries (which governs the
head) and fall at Scorpio, and so indeed they shoot from
top to tail: but honest Wages, will ye bind me to 'y.
I think sir twill not bee so much for your health,
as if I should keep you sollable.
I mean in curtsy good Wages.
O • the very name of good Wages, will make a Ser∣ningman
doe any courtesy.
Then be friend me thus, deliver this Letter to your
Ladies own hand, with as much secrecy as ye may, and
take this for your employment.
As secret as she that sel's complexion: none but
the chamber-Maide shall know it.
YE have your eyes like Sunne-glasses, caught the heate
of my beauty, &amp; cast it on your own heart, and doth
your sighs like bellows, make it more inflambe? then
spend your tears to quenchit, for my chaste bloods ho∣nor
shall never doe it. Lust, it's like an ouer-swollen
river, that breaks beyond all bounds: it's a Devil bred
in the blood, nursed in desire, &amp; like a Salamander lives in
a continual fire: it sprouted larger then the Ivy, which
embraces, twisted and intangleth every one within his
reach, &amp; makes no choice betwixt the goodliest Caeder &amp;
the stinckingst Elder: it's a foul usurper on the name of
love, and reigns with greater domination then an Empe∣roar:
it's a very leperous Itch, it staines, and leaves a fouler
spot upon the soul then tears can wash away: but my
chaste thoughts shall watch mine honour: isle muster up
my prayers to fight against temptation: shall I that have
bin a commander of my self, now prove a slave to sin?
No, no, my mounting thoughts doe soar too high a pitch
to stoop to any strangers lure. Say that a pecuish Fly
entangled were within my neuer-shorne tresses, should I
to save his life, cut and deform me of so rich an ornament?
What though the Lord Nonesuch within my love entangled
bee, must my honour now be clipped to set him free? No, no,
my saw is this and ever shall: he that on hope doth climb
doth often fall. But what shall I doe? a writes here a will
come: wit of a Woman now assist me, O aperne strings be
now auspicious, for here's my Husband, something I must
doe: I have it.
Now fair mistress: this is strange to find you here
alone:
Not alone, but environed and accompained.
With what?
With many heart-biting thoughts, which like Act∣teons
hounds have almost slain my self▪ yet now my
constancy shall prove a glass, in which your self shall see
your own errors: the Lord Nonesuch which you have long
suspected, with vnrebated edge of lust, hath aways sought,
(I must confess) to cut my very reputations throat, &amp; this
night—
This night?
I this night, but hear me husband:
No no, cuckold me, kill me with grief, doe, doe, &amp;
when I am dead marry him: a he's made you a jointer
already of Breech down: well wife well, I married you out
of the Country, but you have learned the City fashi∣once
already: I am a Cuckold, I am, but ignorance that I
was to marry thee so young, not being able scarce to
put thine own apparel on.
I was the fitter for a Husband, ye might then a bin
sure to have taken me a bed at all times,
True, so might other men too.
No, ye are deceived husband, other men never lie
with a mans wife but when she is ready for them, but to
the purpose: this night have I promised the Lord Non∣such
a shall enjoy my love, for which cause hee will send a
certain Pander before, for fear you stand a rock in his
way, on which all his hopes will suffer ship-wracke. Now
this same Panderlie Pilot shall bee by you bribed to stād
sentinel, and give the watchword when a comes, that you
may then punish him, either with death or fear.
O snallowe and womanish invention, as if he wold
betray his moister.
Tut money often times corrupts a good, disposition
and makes a knave ride post to hell.
But is this true? art honest indeed? come hither,
dost love me, dost? nay but tell me true, dost?
Or else in hatred let me ever live.
Doe not flatter me, I scarce believe thee, thou no∣for
kissest me but with such an affection, as a young wife
doth an old husband• wringing her lips, and making
a mouth as if she were taking a Potion.
You distaste me much sir.
Dost not distats me too sometimes, tell me true?
Nothing but your Jealousy.
Well prithee forgive me and lets go, but isle so
swindge my Lord a h•r son otter, isle teach him fish in other
men's ponds.
Did you deliver my Letter?
With secrecy.
To her self?
Her own hands.
Made she any answer?
Not any.
What other news then rides on the back of report?
Why they say sit that mistress Correction the Mid∣wife
is turned her Maphrodit.
Why Hermaphrodite?
Why sir, she is become a Midwife, for as your her∣maphrodit
hath two members the one to beget, the other
to bring forth, so hath your Mid •ife too means, the
one to bring you to beget, the other to bring it forth
when tic begotten: and look you sir, hear she appears
upon her Q.
O prithee doe thou board her as she passes by.
Who I board her? by this light I dare not.
Then I will: fairly met fair Mistress.
Indeed forsooth I have bin, by my truth I see
he is a fine spoken man.
Where abouts is your house fair Lady?
Here fast by sir, not aboue a couple of stones
cast off.
What Gentlewomen have ye at home?
O Moister Wages, how do'y? faith sir I have
no body at home but mistress Punckit, you know her well.
What's she?
Truly sir a very courteous Gentlewomā, &amp; she loves
to act in as clean linen as any Gentlewoman of her fun∣ction
about the town, and truly that's the reason that your
sincere puritans cannot abide to wear a Surplice, be∣cause
they say tic made of the same thing that your villa∣nous
sin is committed in, as your most profane holland.
Pra'y when was Moister Wrestler of the Guard
at your house?
Who he? in troth Mi. Punckit cannot abide him,
she swears a looks for all the world like the Dominicall
Letter in his red Coat: no Moister Wages no, I can tell ye
I have other manner of Guests come to my house then
•e: I have Pensioners, and Gentlemen Ushers, Knights,
Captains and Commanders, Lieftennants, and Ancients,
voluntary Gentlemen, I, &amp; men y• wear their cloaks lined
through with velvet; I entertain no Muttō eating Innes∣a
court men, no half lined cloak Citizens: nor flat capt
Prentices, no, the best come to my house, Moister New∣come
the Courtier was there the other day, and truly he
wold have had some dealing with Mi. Punckit, but that he
had no siller: and yet I must needs say it, a would
a put her in very good obscurity, for a brought a Gentle∣man
with him that wold a giuē his word in a consumpti∣on
of twenty pound, that a should a paid her at next
meeting, and truly but that her trade stands so much up∣pone
present payment, and partly for mortallities sake, I
think else she would a taken it, and yet before a went, I
must needs say it, a shewde himself like an honest Gentle∣man
and a Courtier, for a left his Periwig in pawn: but
had you seen how a looked, for all the world like an E∣stridges
egg, with a face drawn of the one side.
What other guests have ye?
There comes moister Exhibition of the Innes
a court very often, and Moister Angell-taker the coun∣seller
comes sometimes, but Mistress Punckit doth so jest
with him, she swe•res to him as she hopes to be saved, and
I may tell you sir, there's great hope on it, for truly she v∣seth
just and upright dealing with every man, but as I
said, as she hopes to bee saved, she would not marry him
of all the men in the world.
No, why?
Because she says that Lawyers are like Trum∣peters,
they sell their breath.
Shoe's a fool tell her, the Lawyers are the pillars
of the Realm.
Yes forsooth so I said but she said they
were not only the Pillars but the Polars also, but I pray
you sir of what profession are you?
Faith of none Gentlewoman, only a young gallant
as you see.
A young Gallant, say you lisaith, isle quickly try
that by and by, do'y hear sir, do'y hear?
What say you Gentlewoman?
I pray can you give me ten shillings for a piece
of gold.
Yes that I can.
O sir, O sir, I perceive you are no gallantifaith,
it would go deep my friend, I may tell you for a young
gallant to change three groats for a shilling, &amp; it were great
fish, I may tell you too, to Angle for in a gallants great
hose.
Hold mistress, spend that for my sake, and it shall
not be long ere I will come and visit your house.
I thank your worship, sir, isle bee so bold as to
take my deliverance out of your company.
Farewell.
God be with you mistress Correction.
The like to you good Moister Wages, but doe
you hear sir, I hope if your worship come to my house, if
there be no body at home but my self, though I am an old
woman, yet I hope your worship will not despise age.
No, no, fear not that.
I thank ye heartily sir.
With all my heart, Wages farewell, and bring but
an answer of my letter; and I will be thy pay-maister, not
thy debtor.
I understand so much by your name good Moister
Nuecome.
And I am in grace too Lady, what my souls sweet
secretary! you are fairly met indeed, how doth old Ven∣la
thy father?
O how perfumed your Courtiers phraisies are: I
left him in health sir.
O I, they speak in print I can tell you, and though
it be a sin, to rob a man of his learning yet Courtiers are
very seldom blamed for getting out of any men's
books.
Yet I have known them steal out of them ere
now.
Nay then you'll make a Courtier a Thief:
I, such a one as the good thief was.
Mass I wonder what Country man that good thief
was?
O, a was my countryman Lady, hee was a borderer
on North wales, I can assure you.
Indeed and so I think, for not to flatter ye, many
of your Country men have proved good thieves ever
since: but I pra'y tell me, is it the fashion of your north
wales, to suffer your beards to grow upwards thus, in spite
of your nose?
Yes Lady, al of vs that are Courtiers: marry before
when we were poor country fellows, wee suffered our
beards carelessly to grow downward, and then they
grow into our mouths in spite of our teeth, now you know
hair is but excrement, &amp; for mine own part, I had rather
have my excrement in my nose, then in my teeth.
I have heard most of your Country men are very
active men.
O Lady, I have seen a youth of eighteen years
in our Country, would a capered ye, thus hye!
'T as bin in a string then.
Is it possible?
Nay, believe it, a would have done it with all his
heart, but hee could not.
They say to, most of your Countrymen are ve∣rye
valiant
O I, they terrify their enemies with patience.
O, we make the excellent'st Soldiers in the
world.
I, but they say, they cannot press a man to the
wars though, in all your country.
yes Knights:
Why Knights?
To save our Landed men at home.
I have heard, most of ye are great Travellers.
I, for france Spain and England, and such neigh∣bore
countries, why I have been as far as Win∣chester
my self.
Indeed tic true, some of ye Travail so far abroad
as ye come short home many times.
I have heard ye are all Gentlemen.
Indeed I must confess Lady, we have few beg∣gers,
and those we have, we reward according, for if he bee
a lusty Knave, we give him a Lawyers alms, tell him of
the stature: if a poor and decrepit fellow, we give him a
Citizens wives charity, cry God help him, God help
him.
By your leave Moister Nuecome, me thinks you
have a pr••tie lace on your band
A pretty slight court lace, all show, all show•
What's this, a shirt that ye wear? else tic a mock•∣beggar
with strips.
No, tic a shirt Lady.
What, did you make this Doublet new, or else
ye new made it?
Yes I made it new Lady?
Believe me sir but the livings are old.
Fie, they are greasy.
I think they are something sweaty indeed
with hunting.
Hunting: why a man need not hunt far for game,
whats this?
O, a Salamander Lady, tic a Salamander bred
with the continual heate of sweating—
What's your breech made all of one stuff Moister
Nuecome?
Pray why doe you ask?
Because me thinks the soil change's here behind
I, and so doth the ayre as well as the soil I war∣rant
ye.
What are these hose made of the newest fashion ye
have at Court?
Faith Lady for mine own part I am no mans
Ape, this is my fashion, and sometimes I stand in the pre∣sense
with my cloak lined through, either with velvet or
with Taffeta, if with Velvet, I let him hang on my should∣der,
making the greatest show, carry my hat here.
Now by the soul of chastity I swear, a is a proper
man.
If any man pass by and salute me, I salute him a∣gain,
but if any Lady or Gentlewoman glide through
the presence, and cast her eye on me, as commonly they
use to doe on men, that makes any show or glister as
I always doe.
Ye! always making glisters, I hold my life he is a
Portecarie, doe you never make no suppositors sir?
I keep my place of standing, carry my body
stiff and upright, blush not, am impudent enough, when
perchance the heate of the Ladies affection makes her take
•place of standing, either against the hangings or one of
the bay windows, and therewith a greedy eye feeds on
my exteriors, which perceiving, I draw to her, kiss my
hand, &amp; accorst her thus.
I pra'y accorst her anon sir, and lets stand close and
trouble not true jealousy in the picture of Hieronimo, in
a little volume.
See, see how a looks, doe you not perceive his heart
beat hither?
I, for all the world like the Denmark Drummer.
Peace, hear what a says.
Forgiveness wife: O how have I wronged thee, O
who would abuse your sex, which truly knows ye?▪ O
women were we not borne of ye? should we not then ho∣nor
you? nursed by ye, and not regard ye? begotten on ye,
and not love ye? made for ye, and not seek ye? and since
we were made before ye, should we not love and admire
ye as the last? and therefore perfect'st work of nature, Mā
was made when nature was but an apprentice, but woman
when she was a skilful Mistress of her Art, therefore
cursed is he that doth not admire those Paragons, those
Moddels of heaven, Angels on earth Goddesses in shape:
by their loves we live in double breath, even in our Of∣spring
after death. Are not all Vices masculine, and
Virtues feminine? are not the Muses the loves of the lear∣ned?
doe not all noble spy•ritz follow the Graces because
they are women, there's but one Phoenix and shoe's a fe∣male:
Is not the Princes and foundres of good arts Miner∣••,
borne of the brain of highest Jove, a woman? have not
these women, the face of love the tongue of persuasion, the
body of delight? O divine perfectiō'd, women, whose prai∣ses
no tongue can full express, for that the matter doth ex∣ceede
the labour, O if to be a Woman bee so excellent,
what is it then to be a woman inritch'd by nature, made
excellent by education, noble by birth, chaste by virtue,
adorned by beauty: A fair woman which is the ornament
of heaven, the grace of earth, the joy of life and the delight
of all sense, even the very summum bonum of mans life.
O monstrous heresy, he will bee dimbed for that
error.
Nay, let him alone, for he had like to been burnt
for that opinion ere now, had not a friend of mine plucked
the fire from the stake.
Come, lets break out upon him.
O no good sir, though it be a thing much given to
your name, yet let not vs break out, let vs not show such
childish parts.
Save ye Knight.
And bless ye Lady, O sir, are you there? come ye
hither, what's that strange Lady there?
I think it be mistress Babee sir, moister Nuecome's
Mistress, for she looks like an Northern Lass, made of
a strange fashion, something like a Lute, all belly to the
neck.
So, like a Lute, and you like a skilful mu••teen have
bin fingering it.
How does your good Lady Knight, how doth she?
Well I praise H•mē, and I adore my stars, she hath no
acquaintance with such a female fly as you are.
What means he by that?
Why I think a means you are but a light huswife,
but come let's leave him.
Light Huswife, hang him dogged Cinicke.
Farewell Knight.
Forgiveness wife.
Now the plague of Egipt light upon you all, Lice
devour yetcomeye hither sir, what's the cause you keep
such villainous company?
I keep their company most sir for good vit∣tails,
for you keep such a villainous house, as if it were
always Easter eve, wee still hope for better: and you know
your Cooke is gone already sir, for fear a should forget
his occupation with you. Besides sir, if any man come to
your house to dinner though he hop upon one leg, yet
every man saith a comes to fast, and for mine own part sir,
you have given me nothing since I came unto you.
O thou pampered lade! what would thou have?
what would thou feed on Quails? art thou not Fat? is
not thy neck brawn, thy leg calfe? thy head beef, &amp; yet
thou wants meat.
No sir, but I would willingly have some wages.
Well, isle think on it, and so go call your mistress.
Look you sir, here she comes without calling.
Save your honesty then, and be gone without bid
ding.
Ivannish sir.
Do so: O my sweet wife, my selected spouse, the very
vessel of chastity, filled to the very btim with Hymen zeal
&amp; nuptial duty: how have I abused thee? but I have washed
repentance even in tears, and in thy absence I have dedica∣ted
sacred sighs unto thee to appease thy wrath: therefore
tel me sweet wife, when comes this pāder, when comes he?
I muse he stays so long, he should a been by pro∣mise
here an hour since, and look here a comes?
O you are welcome Sir, welcome in faith, but when
comes your Lord? is he at hand, wi• a come?
My Lord sir, what Lord?
Nay, come, come, make not the matter strange mā,
my wife hath told me all, you are an honest man, hold,
hold, will ye but be friend me now, and watch another
door unto my h•use, and give me notice when• a comes,
while I watch this.
O now I see the trick on it, his wife hath gulled him
with a lie &amp; made him believe I am but a pore seruingmā
only to enjoy my love: O kind woman! O sweet Lady!
nay now I see she loves me.
O excellent wife, how true she told me, what a beast
have I bin still to wrong her with suspect.
Faith sir I see ye are a very worthy Gentleman, and
for mine own part I shall be glad to doe you any pleasure,
for to tell you true, I think my Lord means to Cuckold
you indeed.
Why thats well said, hold hear's one Angel
more, and go but with my wife, sheele show you the other
door while I watch this: and if a come, knock him down,
kill him, and lay the fault on me, isle please you for your
pains, look, here's a club will hold.
Give me, give me, come.
Go wife, go with him, see a stand stiffly too't, and
if occasion serve.
I warrant ye husband, fear it not, but isle doe my
part.
Why thats well said, and if a come to this door, isle
teach him come to tie his mare in my ground, but what a
slave have I bin still thus to suspect my wife, I could never
feel any horns I had, and yet I know my scull is so thin
that if my wife should a Cuckold me with the least thing
in the world, yet my horns would a grown through now
am I for my Lord.
Now fair mistress, this far through the mouth of
danger am I come &amp; made my passage euē through her life.
deuoring Jaws to feast mine eyes upon this beauty,
which makes me think all danger's but a sport, so you
receive and wrap me in your loves embraces, and take
hold of this fair occasion, for well you know your Hus∣bands
Jealousy will turn this proffered time like for∣tunes
wheel, and drown our fairest hopes even in dis∣pair,
if you be tedious in our loves effects, and therefore
since your wi•te hath safely plotted my arrival here;
proceed even to the utmost lists of my desire, and make me
happy in the fruition of your long desired love.
O my Lord, shall a smile, a good word, a little kind
behaviour, or the title of dear servant, make your hopes
to swell into so great a sea of lust, as presently to euer-flow
and drown the honour of your Mis•ris? O my Lord no,
your judgment much deceives you of my disposition:
besides, I sent not for ye, it was your lewd unbridled
will, that made you thus come gallop heither: yet by my
means I must confess as yet you are unknown, and in
some sort I glad your being here, only to make you
know, that neither fairest occasions nor greatest pursue∣sions
shall ever make me violate my faith to him I owe my
love; No my Lord I know I durst to trust my self against
the most of opportunity and strength of all tempati∣on,
and though my husband watch you at the door, yet
know within, my conscience watches me though he be
blinded with a trick, yet the clear all-light• givers eyes
doe see: therefore good my Lord be gone, you see my hus∣band
is wilful bent, and if he chance to know you, I much
doubt your safety.
But is this my pains requital and my loves reward?
Alas my Lord, what would you have? my love is
not mine own.
Well, farewell Lady, you may repent this yet ere lōg:
yet peace fond breath, least threats my plots beguile: vē∣gence
intended policy, must smile.
Are ye going sir, are ye going, what will not your
Lord come•
I think not sir, his hour is past long since, some o∣there
business hinders him.
Gods my passion, what doe I see, this is hee, I see his
chain: nay but look you sit, when will you come again?
by this light I see his signet ring.
Assure your self sir, isle bring you notice before my
Lord come.
Nay, but will you sure? shall I trust to you? for
look ye sir, and if you should not come, pra'y stay a little,
me thinks your band is torn.
It's no matter no matter.
No, tic not now I se•t, by this hand tic he, tic he, what
should I doe, now if I should strike him, hee would be to
hard for me, for he is better armed then I.
Well 〈◊〉 isle take my leave of you, till your occasion
shall need my presence.
Fare ye well sir, I hope that shall be never: but have
not I spun a fair thread think you, to be a very Bawd,
an arrant withal, to give them opportunity, put them toge∣there,
Nay hold the door the whilst this is my wives plot,
by which I have sailed to Cuckolds haven yet my sail was
but asmocke, which she her self hoist up alas alas,
Gentlemen doe you not know the Philosopher saith this
world is but a stage: body mihi, cras tibi my part to day, it
may be some of yours to morrow •hy tic but matrimony∣all 
chance, wee that are Cuckolds should be wisest men,
for no men else doe know their ends, but wee know
ours, for we are forked at both O thou powerful and ce∣lestiall
Jove! strike down from heaven some congealed
bolts of thunder, that it may pierce the womb of earth,
and through it send thy lightning flames to make hell hot∣la
then it is, or with Egiptian dampes and rotten jaws re∣nouate thy
eating plague of life, dissolve nature, consume
earth, destroy hell, and dambe woman I beseech thee into
a deeper dungeon then the Devil. They fill men with
diseases, and give the wane-eyde Sun of Heaven cause
to smile to see our pains: shall the gaping of graves,
the scratching of Ghosts, and cries of damned souls, yet
longer bee deferred? shall time incorporate with sin,
and beget more mischief? shall hell bee better fur∣nished
with women then with Devils? infernal Lucifer
will muster up his female souls against thy deity, un∣less
thou doe abridge the course of sin by cutting
off the increase of women, and then wee shall have no
more cuckolds. Come ye hither wife, come ye hither,
pra'y tell me one thing true.
True: why husband, isle lye for no mans plea∣sure.
Yes, for his pleasure that is gone.
For his pleasure, why for his pleasure?
Because you are a Puncke wife, a puncke.
Now Jove bless me.
You are a Cockatrice wife, a cockatrice
Now heavens defend me.
You are a whore wife, a whore.
Sir, the man is mad.
I, horn mad, ah thou vile perfidious, detestable, las∣ciuious,
unsatiable, Luxurious and abominable strumpet,
was it not enough to be an Action, a cornuto, a cuckold,
but to make me a Bawd, a Pimp, a Pander?
What Pimp? what Pander?
What Pimp? what Pander? why was not this the
Lord Nonesuch? did I not see his chain, nay prithee say
two's not he, nay swear it too: over shoes over boots,
since ye have waded to the belly in sin, nay now go
deeper even to the breast and heart.
Pra'y hear me husband.
What vile excuses can make, how can thou hide
thy lust? would wrap thy sin in perjury to muffell up
thy villainy?
Nay good Husband for pity sake hear me.
Talk not of pity, pity is deaf and cannot hear
the poor mans cry, much less a strumpets.
For charity hear me.
Charity is frozen and benumbed with cold, it can∣not
help thee, dost kneel? dost kneel? to the heauen's
not to me yet they look thy heart should stoop, and not
the knee. Dost weep dost? Rise, rise thou stumpet, go out
of my sight, in, in.
I go, Yet this my comfort, in the gall of life,
Suspicion never wronged a truer wife.
Hoe, Wages!
Here sir.
Come heather Wages, my olderesolution is come
on me again, and it shall make me doe much, for I will
geld my self.
Alas sir thats the only way to make you doe lit∣tle.
Therefore go fetch me the Opperator.
What's he sir?
The stone-Cutter.
O you mean the Sow-gelder.
O •he's an excellent fellow, he takes away the cause
of a mans beastly desires.
I, and of their manly performance too.
He makes a man not care a rush for a woman.
No, nor a Woman care a straw for a man.
Doth not such a fellow deserve commendations?
Yes as a hangman doth, for cutting off the traitors
that makes the flesh rebel.
Wages I doe now more doubt my wives honesty
then ever, therefore isle make him the touchstone of her re∣putation.
Faith sir ye might get easier touchstones then hee
a great deal, theres many a Goldsmiths wife in Cheap∣side
could help you to a better.
He deserue's much praise.
I, as your cockatrice doth for the dismembering of
men.
If she be a punckit isle not be divorced.
Why should ye? why ye cannot keep more Gen∣tlema•
•eke company: besides, your puncke: is like your
pollitition, for they both consume themselves, for the com∣mō
people. And your punk of the two, is the better mem∣ber,
for she like a candle to light others's, burns his self.
Well wages, come follow me, for I am resoul'd to
try my wives honesty.
Venus lay where Mars had found her,
And in warlike arms he bound her,
Cupped cried, and Volcano spied:
And thereon threw the Sciclops,
But his horn, begat his scorn,
With all the little Gods mocks.
Now some honest Gentleman pass by that I might sell
him the maiden-head of my occupation for a half penny
mass, here a comes, a shall have it, ye faith.
Worshipful Gentleman, look with your eye, and pity
with your heart the distress of a martial mā, I have been a
man in my days, and acquainted with better fortunes then
I now see• time hath been I have borne arms, but now
one's gone, and I can no longer write Gentleman: where∣fore
if you please to bestow but one poor thistle of your
bounty to prick the blister of my poverty, it would set
my slender fortunes a flote, where they now lie beating on
the goodwins of famine, I am none of these Lu•gations
that beg for fourscore and ten poor men: my suite is on∣lie
for my self.
Whom hast thou served friend?
First I served in Ireland, then in Holland, Braband,
Zealand, Gelderland, Friesland and most of the seventeen
Provinces, I was at the siege of Bargon up soon, carried
a pike at the entrance of Sluice, and was hurt in the gro•e
entering the breche.
Who was thy Captain?
I served under the command of Captain pipe.
Who, captain Gregory Pipe?
No sir, Captain Tobacco Pipe.
O, I know him well indeed, hee is on the English
nation, hath much imploiments.
I can assure your worship sir, I have seen him in
very hot service, and when some of vs his followers have
smoked for it too: wherefore I beseech you sir, bestow•
something on me, for the knowledge you had of my good
Captain.
Go to sir, I fear ye are a counterf•ite Rogue.
How Rogue sir• though none of fortunes favourites,
nor great men's minions, yet perchances as good a man as
your self: swoundes Roguel
Nay be not a•gre good friend for if•ith I love a
Soldier with all my heart, for indeed I have a Co•ssen
is one, would give thee something, but in faith I have no
siller, yet I give thee eighteen pence in conceit, and so
farewell.
Well sir, in conceit I thank ye then.
Ye Wages, come ye after like a Clog to the heals of the
old Ape your Moister?
Wages, how many pounds go to a stone of beef?
Eight sir.
Then I am lighter by sixeteen pound now then I
was, I may now lie with any Lady in Europe for any hurt
I can doe her.
True sir, or good either.
I can cuckold no man,
Yet any man may cuckold you.
What's he VVages?
Some poor Soldier sir, lately come out of the low
countries.
I must not now beg lame, for fear I loose his ser∣vice
by it: I beseech ye good black Captain
bestow something of a poor Sold••r, that hath served
his Prince both by Sea and land: if you bestow but
one poor penny of your liberality, whē the wheel off•te,
turn•s, if •he bit•er frosts of poor•e •o not in the mean
time nip my fortunes in the blossoms, I doubt not but to
reciprocrate your cures•.
Hyda, what an excellent fellow this would make
to d•ell in the exchange, •ow the R•go prates?
What 〈◊〉 a Sol•ier?
I have bin one some few ye•es.
Why then thou art a Gen•lemon by profession, and
tic a 〈◊〉 Gentleman to beg.
So I think, for I have Ge•tleman like quality•s e∣nough:
for I had rather drink drunk to purge, then take
Physic: but will you give me any thing sir?
No sir my 〈◊〉 do•h 〈…〉 to give Gentlemen•n
money, for fear of 〈◊〉 them.
O, I cry you mercy good Moister Must•rd-Pot.
Mustard pot! Gods light, mustard Pot! and why
Mustard pot?
Because thou art a sawce-box.
Sauce box?
Go to, be quiet Wages.
But will ye give me any thing sir?
No not • penny.
Come th•n sir, will ye walk a turn or too?
〈◊〉 with th•e, why, art not lousy?
I need not, I ha•e change enough, for I have
two pair of 〈◊〉
We• never in better fashion?
Yes, I have borne the badge of honour in my
days.
I a •ath bin some Nobleman's Footman sure.
Was thy Father an Alcumist that thou art so
poor?
Why doe you not know poverty hath a Gentle∣man
Ushers place, it goes bear before death.
Thy name,
Slack.
Of what Religion art?
Faith I am yet clean paper, ye may write on me
what ye will, either Puritan or Protestant.
Wilt thou serve me?
So you will give me wages.
Yes that I will, and thou shalt wear my livery too,
isle give it thee, thou shalt not buy't thy self.
I thank ye sir.
O Mistress Correction •how doe you?
I thank ye good Moister Wages, and how
doth that goodly Gelding your Moister?
Why Gelding?
Because he hath both abused and accused one
of the most virtuous Ladies that ever frisseld her hair.
Peace, speak soft, that's he.
Is that he?
The very same.
Now by my troth I am glad to see your worship
in good health▪ and how doth your good Worship: Lord
you look ill, a body may see what grief will doe: O had
you had a good wife, your worship would look twenty
years younger then you doe, tic even pity of her life that
would wrong such a sweet man: what an excellent com∣plexion
your beard's off, and by my troth a keeps his
colour very well.
What now you sawfie Companion you, what aisle you
trow?
You had an ill Midwife Mistress, she hath not closed
your mould well behind.
Marry come up Jack an Apes father-in law,
what can you tell?
I felt it by giving my hand to bid it farewell.
O sir, that's sign ye are a clown, if ye had bin
a Gentleman ye would a kissed it, and a taken your leave
on it, I pray moister Wages what's this fellow?
A new man of my masters, and I can assure you a
tall Soldier too.
A tall Soldier say you? so me thinks, his
clothes have been in shrode services, for they are very
dangerously wounded. Sir, and like your worship, this that
you have entertained is no man, tic some Scar-crowe, and
you have done very ill to take him away: the Crows will
eat up the Corn now out of all measure, pray God wee
have not a dear year after it.
I know your husband well Mistress Correction, and
Mistress Punckit too, I hear she keeps her bed much, what
is she not in health?
Have you such a Gentlewoman lies at your house?
Yes indeed sir, a younger Brothers Daughter,
a kins-woman of my Husbands.
It seems he hath been acquainted with her.
Who hee? no sir, she scorns to speak with him,
unless it were by an Attorney.
Pra'y how doth your Husband good Mistress Cor∣reaction.
The better your asking good Moister
Wages.
Indeed her Husband is a very honest painful
man sir.
O moister Wages, no, no, moister Wages, you
are deceived in him, there's never a morning but I am ready
and abroad, an hour before hoe's up: and when he is up,
as I am a living woman▪ I can make him doe nothing for my
life.
No, doth he not study?
Yes, like the Clarke of a great mans kitchen,
what meat he shall have for dinner.
Believe it but he is a good Scholar though▪ O hee
hath a passing head of his own.
Hath he, I he hath indeed, if •e knew al, &amp; I can tel ye
he may thank me for it too, for he went to school to 〈◊〉 in
my first husbāds time
Pra'y what was your first husbād
M. Seldom the preacher an't like your worship,
he preached in two of his benefices in one day, &amp; sure t'was
the death of him, he never joyed himself after hee so over∣strained
his voice.
And then you married this man?
Yes forsooth, &amp; truly afterwards bought him a be∣nefice,
but he hath sold it again, &amp; I may tell you though I
am no Lady, yethe's called sir Iohn every word, &amp; for all this
now he makes no more account of me then your man My.
Wages doth of an old shoe-clout which a never thinks off,
but when a needs, and if he cannot find it, why any other
thing serves his turn, and so he deals by me, &amp; truly M.
Wages I may tell you, I mean to put him away.
Away I why ye cannot put him away for this.
Yes I warrāt ye, if you can find in your heart to love
&amp; marry me, let me alone for y•? isle keep ye like a mā al days
of your life• besides, if the stones of the street in y• ciue should
be too hot, for ye, &amp; that ye dare not walk on them for fear
the wicked vanities of the world should catch hold of ye, as
they have done to the utter overthrow &amp; undoing of many
a good mā, yet I can get my living in the Suburbs, &amp; what
trade so ever go down, I doubt not but mine will hold up as
long as the kingdom yields either soldiers or younger
brothers, which wants maintenance to keep wives of
their own No M. Wages, my trade is a sweet trade, little
doth any body know what cōmings in I have daily, I keep
3. as good fetherbeds going winter &amp; sūmer, as any sinner
in the suburbs: besides, I warrant ye, I get aboue 20 poūd
a year in Rhenish wine, at the second hand.
Well, ask my Ma•if he be willing, ye• shall find me forward
And thats as much as any woman can ask truly: and
please your worship I have a suite to you.
Whitest Mi. Cor• for you are very like to speed?
That I may have your good will to marry M. Wages.
Why you have a husband alive?
I, but I can be divorced from him, and like your
worship for three several causes which I know well en∣nough,
I warrant ye.
If he be willing, with all my hart.
I thank your worship.
Hise fellow Wages, pray a word we, dost mean to
have her?
I.
Well, goody ways, I warrant thee a sound piece of her.
A piece, why a piece? did thou ever shoot in her?
Who I, no: she recoils too much in the discharging
for me to meddle with, but dost hear, put her away a∣gain
as soon as thou can: if thou ke•pe her long, if she
prove not like a commodity of wood, and s•ink in thy hāds
then hang me.
Well Mistress Correction, I could wish you go a∣bout
this your affairs as soon as you may, &amp; Slack, &amp; Wa∣ges
doe you two follow me.
Now by my chaste thoughts which I was mother of
at nine years old, I here swear, never to be in love: yet
Moister Nuecome the Courtier thinks with the wearing
of a neat boot, and a clean band, to catch my love nap∣ping
as Morse catch this Mare, but Venus be my good
speed, and Cupped send me good luck, for my
heart is very light, and I fear tic but like a Candle, burnt
into the Socket, which lightens a litt•• before it goes out.
I most fear tic like lightning before thunder, I
pray have a careyehold fast.
Come, thou hast such a running wit, tic like an Y∣rich
foot boy• I fear twill rob thee of all thy 〈◊〉 and
then run from thee and leave thee.
But I pray thee tell me one thing,
I will an't be a good thing?
Hast thou thy Maiden head yet?
My maiden-dead! faith••.
Come, prithee doe not lye, for they say tic lost lie∣ing
and by the strength of my little virtue, I wonder (for
mine own part) to see how this foolish virginity is esteemed
when there is such danger in the keeping it, for who doth
not know that the barren womb• is cursed? and al know fire∣gins
have no children: besides, Women shall bee saved by
•he bearing of Children, how think thou, are they?
Nay, I cannot tell, you were best try.
Indeed they say tic good to try before one trust.
But I pray thee tell me one thing now,
And what's that?
The reason why thou art come run away from
thy Father, considering the forman of your Shop, me
thought was a good handsome fellow.
Tic true, so he was, but he had no leisure to keep me
comp••y a work days for crying what doe you lack,
and a Holy days hee would bee at stoole-ball amongst
the boys when I had most need of him: but to tell thee
the true cause of my coming away; I should have marry∣ed
a young unthrifty Lord, one that will give his very
soul to a fair woman, and faith sometimes though she
be never so foul, yet he will lend her his body: he had
never a hair on his beard this th•ee or four 〈◊〉, but
might a bin an utter barrister, for they have moulted all
five or six times: he's like death, he spares none, young nor
old, rich nor poor, fair nor foul, hee takes all.
Well Nan w•ll, thou art happy, thou were it borne
under a good Planet, thou hast store of suits, but prithee
look, is there none heare's our counsel?
No none, speak boldly lass.
I think an ill star reigned when I was borne, I
cannot have as much as suitor, this Moister Nuecome
that you for sooth so much scorn: I could find in my
heart to pray •in times to the Moon, and forced three Saint
Annes eves, so that I might bee sure to have him to my
husband.
I, thou would have him dreaming but not wa∣king
I am sure.
Not waking yea &amp; a 〈◊〉 too, for here I vow even
by the chastest thoughts that ere was nur•'d within Dia∣naes
breast and by those purple drops chaste Lucres spilt,
and by the unstained coulloar of a maidens blush, that I
will prove as true unto his bed, as ere did she that did V∣lisses
wed.
Nay, since I have refused a Lord, by this light I
scorn to marry any under the degree of a Knight.
No, I would not have a Knight if I might, for there
are so many, as they are forgotten what they be.
Nay I then • see you are deceived, why woman,
they have most of them taken an order that they will never
be forgotten, for they have booked themselves down a
purpose, I know aboue three &amp; twenty in one Mercers
books in Cheap side: th•n judge thou how many are in al
their books, and there is that will bee a witness I war∣rant
you to after ages, what their fore•others have been.
I, but that's but their faults, yet you know their
calling is honourable though.
Faith thou says true, I must needs say, Knight∣hood
is like marriage know a days, which thought be ho∣noarable
amongst al men, yet it beg••lie with a great ma∣ny:
but come shal's go to dinner and see what stomach I
have to my vittailes, for y faith i have none to a husband: I
would not taste a morsel of a men for any money.
O that's because thou art not hungry.
Tic true indeed, a little bit would 〈◊〉 my belly.
O my unkind husband, why dost reject me? if
not on thee, where should I fix my love to have reward▪
Here where you are, in dear and hie regard.
Alas thou art a man of mean condition.
Your love to me, will breed the less suspicion.
Fortune denie's me wealth: all ill upon her,
Yet I have courage to defend your honour,
Madam, you reason have to be unjust:
A wicked husband makes an unkind wife.
Men brag, that women weaker creatures be,
Yet you must suffer all gross Injury,
with silence too, and low lines of spirit,
And then forsooth a good wives name your merit.
A goodly purchase sure to be a slave,
Unto a slave, till you go to the grave.
Eve had a soul as well as Adam,
All souls are masculine, hold freedom Madam.
If strength of body make the noblest creature,
Why should not Lyons be the Kings of nature?
The strongest creatures governed are by sense,
And there thy soul hath little residence.
Philosophers say, the Element of fire,
Is active, purest, aptest to aspire:
Of which you women have the lesser portion,
Which makes your brains beget cold Notion.
I grant that Adam was created so,
But since his fall, all thinks doe backward go.
Now active heart, gets murder, theft and rapine:
Tic thy chariot which all vice doth ride in.
Against whose ille's women could temper spurns,
Give me the heart which warmes not that which burns.
O hateful is the state you now doe hold,
Worse then the slave, that is for money sold.
For you must money give to buy your evils,
and bind your selves, to some incarnate devils.
Be but chief steward in their drudgery,
Bring forth their brats with your lives jeopardy.
Scarce dare you give, an old sleeve from your arm,
But they cry out, you're under Couertbaren.
Presumptuous slave whose flesh upon thy boa•e,
Thy Moister just, may challenge as his own:
Which by the dead scrapes from his trencher got,
Is quickened now, to cut thy givers throat:
Thou venomed Snake, frozen with beggary,
Now being thawed by thy masters boun•ie.
Would sting the bosom that did revive thee,
and like a viper gnaw, who first conceived thee.
Full argument of a servile spirit,
For noble hearts will gratify each merit.
Yea, are ye vanished?
Why how now fellow Slack, what is she gone?
S'life what should I doe now to stop this slaves ven∣nomad
breath, for fear it infect my reputation with my
new moister? this time was ill taken, yet something I
must doe fellow Wages, how long hast thou been here?
Ever since fortune denied thee wealth: all ill upon
h•r: but thou hast courage to defend her honour.
Slight he hath heard all.
Why man two's my moister set me only to try her.
Nay, like enough, for I see he would willingly
prove an accessory to the stealing of his own goods.
True, and look here he comes, but I pray thee say
nothing, let me tell him of it.
Who I? not a word, my mouth is as close as a foul∣coners
pouch, or a country wenches placket.
She would never •nckold me, but that she hath some reason for it
True sir, there is nothing done, but there's reason for it,
(if a man could find it) for whats the reason your Citti∣zens
wives continually wear hats, but to show the desire
they have always to be covered. Or why doe your Sem∣sters
spend their time in pricking, and your Ladies in po∣king
of ruffs; but only to show they doe as they would be
don unto? or why doe your Innes of court men lie with his
Laundress in a long vacation, but because hee hath no mo∣ny
to go abroad? Or why doo your old judges widows
always marry young Gen•lemon, but to show that they
love execution better then judgment.
O, but I wonder much she would not give me leave
to make my first child my self.
Foe: she knew you were but a prentice to the occu∣potion,
and commonly Prentices spoil their first work,
and being unskilful, she was loath you should practise in
a good Shop, and therefore she befriended you, because
she would have it well done: she ga•a better workemā
to doe it for you. For whats the reason the younger bro∣theirs
(according to the old wives tails) always proved
the wisest men, but because the Fathers grew more skill∣full
at last then they were at the first? but I think your
wives eldest Son will prove an excellent fellow, because
she had the help of so many in the making of it. For com∣monly
if one have a thing to be done, as a conveyance to be
drawn, or a case in the law to be argued, a man would have
the help of as many good Lawyers as hee could get: now
this case of making of children, and a case in the law, is
something like, for as one Lawyer takes his fee, and deals
in it, another Lawyer comes and argues the case more
profoundly: but in the end wh•n all is done, leaves
it to bee tried by the Jury, in whom the right is, and so
must you: when they and you and al have done your best,
yet in the end, must leave it to be tried by your wife, whose
the child is, for a women's knowledge in this case, is bet∣la
then twelve men's.
O Slack, I hate worse then the worst sin
that is.
And I p•ay which sin doe you most hate?
That which is most like her, which if thou wilt
repeat—
Isle tell their conditions.
And I, which is most like her.
Then the first is pride.
I would have that sin burnt for a witch, it champion∣ges
men into so many shape.
The next is murder.
O! thats a thirsty sin, for nought can quench it
but blood.
What is Theft?
Faith the greatest fault that I can find in that is, it
cousins the Scriuners, for it borrows money without go∣uing
any obligation.
Covetousness.
O! that's an excellent sin, for to deal with, a that
hath a loose belly, for twill bind any man for ten
grotes.
What is sloth then?
Faith Sloth is a good Maidenly Greenesicknesse
sin.
But lechery my Lady?
O thats the suckingst sin that a man can bee ac∣qainted
withal, it cannot endure to bee in company, it
creeps into corners, and hides it self in the dark still.
What say then to drunkenness?
O that's a most gentleman like sin, it scorns to
be beholding for what it receives in a mans house, it com∣monly
leaves it again at his door.
Nay, then lea•cherie scorns to be bebolding too,
for I have known what it hath received in a mans house,
it hath sent home again nine months after, and lain at
his door, and therefore the more Gentleman like sin a
great deal, because it takes the longer time of repaiment,
but I pray sit now, which of all this is most like your
wife.
Murder, for nought can quench her thirst of
lust, but now I soon shall find his villainy, praised bee my
vigilant care: which if I doe espy, isle turn her off.
Alas, alas sir, you have no reason to be an∣gre,
much less to de divorced, although she doe trance∣gresse,
are you not cut? have ye not given her cause, is it
not out of mere necessity she doth it? therefore if you
follow my counsel, make• her amends with kindness,
and put not her away.
Believe me he speaks wisely, and good counsel,
like a Lady, is to be embraced.
Not put her away, and if she wrong him. If hee doe
not, I say he is one of the aranst blocks yt ever mā spurned
on: why is he not a Gentleman, a Knight, hath a not seen
fashion: sir, I would have you bear a noble mind, put he•
away and you list, tic no matter for cause, if she change but
a treneher with the Groom of your stable, tic dealing e∣•ough
to bee divorced, Therefore put her away, and then
you may have another wife.
Another wife?
True, a gallant, and yet a modest Lady too, one that
shall nourish no blood but your own, tender your repute∣tion
as the apple of her eye, &amp; honour even your very
footsteps.
She shall go, isle make her truss up her trinkets,
oh faith she shall away.
Shall she away? if she doe, you doe you know
not what, you draw a thousand thousand enemies about
your ears, her kindred theill exclaim, no friends will
seek revenge, and your enemies will grow even fat with
laughter at your folly. Besides: what Woman then will
have you, are you not gelded? assure your self that now
there is none will love you, most will hate you▪
but all will scorn you, therefore by my advice make
much of her, and keep her while you have her.
Ho! now by the virtue of my hearing, he speaks
but reason.
So, tic good to keep her still: dwell in the Suburbs
to break down your own glass windows, set some pickes
upon your hatch, and I pray profess to keep a Baudy-house.
A Bawdie-house? no, isle die first, and if I see but
any apparent show of her disloyalty, isle even be divorced
immediately.
Well, I see the substance of this slave is villa∣no.
But isle prevent him even what I can,
Since none is worse then a Serving honest man,
Why had I not a good leg? did I not always
wear clean lining? was not my hand washed, my beard
combed, my cloak brushed, and my shoes blacked, every
morning.
True, why the more viler strumpet she to cuc∣kold
you.
But how dost know she is with child.
Know it, why shoe's daily troubled with water
pangs, and quakings over her stomach.
Indeed I must needs say that's a great proof, she
hath filled her belly with something that stood against her
stomach, but dost not think tic my child.
Yours! why how can't be yours: are you not
circumcised to the quick?
Yes, and the remembrance of it galls me.
Thats a sign ye are too patient, and like an Ass ein∣dure
all without resistance.
Ha, ha, ha.
But why doe you laugh sir?
To think who the child will be like.
Why you, who should it be like •ls?
Why tic none of mine man.
Why the more like you for that: why doe you
not not know the Philosophers hold the child is always
like the party which the mother thinks off in the concep∣tion:
now she thought most of you, for fear you should a
come the whiles, and thats the reason so many Gentle∣men's
sons are like your Citizens, and calls
them fathers too, for otherwise how could it bee
that a young Cockney being left forty or fifty thousand
pounds: spends all within so many months, but that some
young gallant begat him, for you know the prouer be, Cat
will after kind. No, had the old Citizen begotten him, he
would a bit a Fig in two, to have made just weight, &amp; have
had a pot wi•h a false bottom, rather then a sold too much
measure, hee would have done al things within meas•re as
your old Citizen did, and not a spend al beyond measure,
as your young Gallants doe.
But were not I best go home and use her well, till
the child be borne, to see if it be like me, that I may bee
sure tic none of mine.
O no, that were base, and as deceitful as the Colic
when it breaks out in wind, which levels at a mans heel,
and it strikes him in the nose, therefore never make a show
of one thing, and doe an other, but put her away, rid your
hands of h•r, and there's an end.
I think whoe's the father of the bastard?
Why who's the Father of a Punckes child? first not
filius populi, it may have two Fathers for any thing wee
know.
Well Slack, I doe very much mistrust Wages too,
for he is grown very familiar of late.
True sir, and takes her part too, and ye mark him
I mark him: no Slack, no pray heaven a mark
not me, but isle instantly sue out a di•orce, hap what hap
shall, but ell's his hap whose wife lies down to all.
Of all honest aminall's your Cuckold is the best,
For he is sure a Gentleman, and known by his crest.
Of all occupations, that ever man professed,
In my opinion still doth hold, the Cutpursse is the best.
And why the Cutpursse?
Because he will trust no man, foe as soon as hee hath
lone his work, hee is sure to have his money in his
•and.
Nay then a lawyer is a better trade then that, for he
is sure of his money before hee doth his work.
But I pray thee what's the news ab•oat now?
Why they say the world is like a Bias bowl, and
it runs all on the rich men's sides: others say, tic like a
Tennis-ball, and fortune keeps such a Racket with it, as it
tosses it in to times hazard, and that devours all, and for
my part they say, twill shortly run upon wheels with
me, for my Moister swears a will have me car•ed, because
a thinks I have lain with my Lady.
Nay then twill run upon wheels with thee in∣deed,
but peace fool peace, when thou art once married,
that suspect will die.
Peace fool peace, say thou when I am married?
dost hear? I tell thee, there is no piece in marriage, unless
it bee with a dumb woman, no nor but little comfort nei∣there.
No way? why doth the Ballad say then, So sweet a
thing is Love, that rules both heart and mind, there is no
comfort in the world, to women that are blind.
Kind (man) the Ballet says.
Mass I think a be kind indeed, yet blind's the bet∣la
of the two I think, for as thou say, if she be dumb, I
am sure sheele say nothing that shall offend her Husband:
if blind, sheele see nothing that shall offend her, and where
he nor shoe's offended, there must needs be a peace: but
besides this is there no peace think thou in the marriage
of a wife.
Yes by the mans, side like a Gentleman only by
the fathers side, but twill ne'er be any perfect peace.
Why, why wilt thou marry then?
Because I hope to have some good behauio•r of
my wife, for the peace I never look for: but soft ye fellow
Slack, me thinks your suit is like a hard hearted Land∣lord,
it begins to receive great rents.
I, I would, my Moister had given me a suite of Buff
when he gave me this.
Phoe, buff is nought man, that hath bin out of re∣quest
quest ever since Soldiers have bin out of date, and they
poor men are now used like Almanacs of the last year,
either clap-vp behind the door, or thrust clean out of
door: but if thou wilt have a suite that shall last indeed (lad)
get thee a suite of law.
O, I doe not like such suites, for commonly they that
have many of them go almost naked for want of clothes,
yet I cannot deny but they are very lasting, but they are
subject to many discommodities: so if there bee any good∣ness
in one of them, your Lawyers like moths, eat shroad
holes to it, but your Country Attorneys like l•ce no∣ue•
leave wrighting and wrangling till they have crep't in∣to
it, but when it hath bin well worn and grown third
bare, they even like Lice drop off, and leave it.
What say thou by a suite at Courtthen?
I marry sir, I like that well, for commonly hee that
hath but one suite when hee comes there, hath two erehe
come away, for if hee sue by Petition, it lies so long
in your Courtiers pocket, that it is another suite to get his
Petition back again. There is none suddenly dispatch∣ed
of his suite there but a Taylor, marry hee stays not
at all, unless his suite bee to have mo•eye for his
suite, and so hee makes his suit two suits too ere
hee go. But come, shall wee go see what follows
after our Masters new divorce.
Why is a diuor'd?
I, I think by this time, for hee swore hee would bee
presently. By my troth, I am sorry for it, for in my con∣science
it is without cause, it grieves me to see him in these
humours, for I thank his Worship he hath ever used
me well, I am bound to pray for his life.
And me thinks thats a strange thing,
I see no reason for it that any serving-man should pray
for his Masters life, considering all that he have, is in
reuertion of him: but come, lets follow him, for if hee miss
vs, heel fret like a grogram I, and fume like a stue pot.
And let him fume, O would his gal would burst with
indignation, then should his tempe pr•create my bliss, and
I 〈◊〉 that Saint incarnate: but what shall I doe, since base
nor noble shape can win, a third isle try.
And if that fail knight, go to church and pray,
For vengeance wings brings on thy lethal day.
Hee that a long way voyage takes in hand, fears
dangerous gusts at sea, and storms:
At land conquering cold that cripels cursed age, and
doubts least every cloud should prove a storm, &amp; beat his
wearied carcass to the earth. But O, I wold to God my lone∣gest
Journey unto death were to bee tan, for I d•e
cast no doubts, having lost all comfort, My Son, I
fear, is dead, The loss of him makes life to me but like
a blister on my flesh, which grieves me much, and
nought can ease, unless it breaks. O whilst hee lived
his presēce was a force unto my age, &amp; gave it such a luster
as did enrich my ring of Life: for life is but a ring
beginning in our weakness, going round, till unto
weakness we return again, then to the ground. The world
it self is but a skilful game at chesses, which being
ended, Kings and Queens, Bishops and Knights
into one bags are thrown at last: So all of vs both poor
and rich, shall in the end into the earth, as into a Bag be cast-Mans
••ife is like unto a ship that crossed by tempests and
by tides, some thoughts of his like billows swell him up
a loft, another strikes him down, Thus man as on a sea is
•ost, info•est weather fears a sto•me, and in a storm
the event, but in the end hee sinckes, when life is
spent: grief hath no bounds in tears, it ebbes and
flows.
Till it have drowned life, and ended woes.
But Wages, is there no means (think thou) to
turn by it, nor to force back his stream of wrath.
Yes isle warrant ye Madam, if you'll be ruled by me,
you shall see isle make him seek to be friends with you, &amp;
entreat me to speak for him too, but then I would have you
seem a little strange: but you shall directly rail on him.
Therefore I wold have ye hide your selves here behind the
hangings, for twill not be long ere hee come this way, and
then you shall come forth and frame your behaviour ac∣cording
as our discourse shall require.
Mass here he come•, lets stand close.
Wee will, and heaven assist thy proiects.
Now Wages, what news with you?
That which I think will help you from being
divorced.
What's that?
Why your Lady is not with child.
I'st possible?
Why how should she, unless some Hobgoblin,
some Incubus or spirit of the buttery should beget it? why
she, since you were gelded, never saw a man but through a
window: she hath never trod her foot awry, for fear
some ill construction should attend her steps, which like
a boundless Ocean deep enraged, would drown her repu∣tation.
Not with child say thou?
Not of my word sir.
Wages I would thou would but doe some charity∣ble
offices•
What? make ye friends again?
True.
But you'll prove fall•e, and break that friend∣ship?
Never, as I hope to be reconciled, therefore tell me,
will• thou do it?
Hum: truly I would doe my good will, but I
fear twill be but labour lost.
I pray thee doe but try: I faith thou shalt not
loose thy pains.
O lass sir, you know I must feed on Quails.
That was in my fury man, but wilt thou not doe
it?
Pray sir, if you can get some other friend to speak
in 't, do.
Well, thou wilt leave me now then?
Alas Sir, what would you have me doe? by my
troth sir, I am ashamed to speak in it: have ye not gelded
and cut off al the content of marriage? why they that have
the full performance of it, tic as much as they can doe to
please their Wives, and you that want all ability, must
not only please her now, but make her amends for the
wrong you have done her heretofore, and how have I the
face to promise that which I know you have no means
to perform it?
Alas man, isle doe my good will.
Doe your good will, and thats much worth sure, yet
since you have been my moister, the world shall not say but
isle do •hat I can, isle persuade what I may, ye shall see there
shall be no fault in me.
Mass here she comes: what will you doe now?
O• isle hide me here, and so I shall hear all what she
says.
O this is excellent, come, come, come, and stand
close, ye shall hear how isle speak for ye: and if ye hear
your pardon granted, come forth.
I warrant ye.
Morrow Madam.
Morrow Wages.
Morrow Mistress Nan.
Morrow Wages.
The Fox is caught, his head is in the
•ouse.
peace, speak soft, persuade, persuade.
Faith Madam I have a suit unto you, but I am half
a shamed to speed in it.
Slight, the rogue says hee is a shamed to speak for
me, hist Wages, hist wages.
Madam, your man would make an ill suitor, that is a∣shamde
to speak in his suit.
What the Devil ail you, what are you made
you'll be spied anon.
A pox on thee, art not ashamed to
tell her that thou art a shamde to speak for me? hist,
hist, Wages.
I think the Fool rides you, what will you
have?
Dost hear Wages, speak for me, and by this light
isle mend thy Wages.
By how much?
Forty shillings.
Forty shillings?
Three pound, three pound.
Give me your hand, isle do it
But what's your suit Wages?
That you would forgive your Husband,
What and receive his love again, you
mean?
I Madam.
Marry there were aiest indeed, being as he is now, a
Woman would be loath to turn him amongst her ducks:
truly Wages I am ashamed in your behalf, that a
man of your discretion would urge it, therefore prethe
speak no more on it, isle tell thee what, I could find• in my
heart to speak for him my self, but that tic such a jealous
fool, that if hee catch but a Flea in her bed, hee will be
searching to see if it bee a male or a female, for fear a
comes to Cuckold him.
Well Wages well: to tell thee truly, I bear no
malice, and if I wist hee would amend, I should forgive
and love him with my heart again.
Ye faith I will wife.
Why how now Wages, have you betrayed
vs?
I, Madam, but tic into the hands of those that
love ye.
Well Wages well, I did not think you would have
used vs thus.
Is there honesty in this, to set a man behind the
hangings to euise-drop our words.
Be not angry sweet wife, in faith it was my
plot, but you have been a heavy enemy of
mine.
It was more for my credit then to have been your
light friend.
Be friends with me good wife, for here I doe
conf•sse.
Your Jealousy sprung from your own unworthy∣ness.
Tic true.
Then in hope you'll kinder prove, I am con∣tent,
For this know, a Woman's heart will soon re∣lent.
Then, come sweet wife, letsin,
And Wages, thy pains deserves to be requited,
For separated hearts, hast thou united.
La, la, la, la, la, they marched out manly by three,
and by three, and the foremost in Battle, was Mary Han∣brie.
Will you hear of a Spanish Lady, how she wood an
Englishman: hum, hum, hum.
Here sir.
Is the Taylor gone?
Gone, sir.
Go fetch me my doublet their,
I go sir,
Hum, hum, hum, by the greatest terror to Gentile∣tie,
which indeed is Creditors and Sergeants, this Rogue
Taylor came upon me with such a bill as a man were
better have ten Constables and their Watches come up•pone
him with their bills: why good words, or a dozen
of ale will please them, but nothing will stop this rogues
mouths but money: and yet in faith I am greatly in his
books, for though I misuse him never so much, yet the
Rogue durst not cross me.
Let me see Boy, mass tic a pretty Doublet.
The Taylor sir, entreats you to remember your
day.
My day▪ Gods light, my day? why what doth •
take me for, I think?
A takes you for a Gentleman sir, I think.
A Gentleman, and remember my day, no, isle hold
my life hee takes me for some Merchant or Citizen, but
isle make him know my strength, e•e I leave him, hee
shall find a second Simpson of me. I can break my
bonds boy, I can, I can.
But come sir, will you try your doublet first.
O I, come, come pluck, but take heed of my ruff
I pray thee• this doublet is too little, a pox in him.
Not now, hee is on sir.
No when he is off, I mean boy.
Believe it sir, but it becomes ye well though.
Doth it indeed? mass I think it doe, me thinks
I have a reasonable good leg in it.
So you have sir, but your heel is a little too short.
Yea, why too short?
Because your long heel sir doth always best b•∣come
your great Calfe.
Why? my Calfe is not very great.
O sir yes, why a man shall not see a greater Calfe
of your age, for I think you are not aboue twenty.
Not so much, but come help off my doublet
now.
I will sir.
Come, isle see how twill look here, and go thou
and watch the door, that no body come the whilst, hum,
hum, hum, if I had a band for it.
Why that about your neck sir.
But what if any body should come the whilst?
Why doe not I keep the door?
Mass that's true: hum, hum, hum.
O tic Moister Nuecome, I know him, a fine Gentleman
in faith isle salute him by and by as I pass. Moister Nu∣come
I take it, I cry ye heartily mercy good Moister Nu∣come,
I am glad to see you in good health sir, I shall entreat
you to pardon me, I protest I did not know you in that
suite, you have a very fair double•ton, the Gods give you
joy sir: There is never a Lord in the Land may be ashamed
to wear it sir, rap, rap, rap, rap.
Gods light carry away my Doublet quickly, quickly,
quickly.
I warrant ye sir.
Gods precious my Band, what shall I doe now?
By yeur leave sir, my •istris, mistress Peg sent to see
how your worship doth.
I thank her very heartily, I pray commend me to
her.
Isle doe your commendations sir, but I pray you bee
covered sir, I pray yon be covered.
I thank ye heartily, tic for mine ease, the weather
is hot, hot, very hot.
So it is indeed sir, well sir, by your leave sir, isle be so
bold sir as to carry your commendations sir.
Doe so good friend, farewell, farewell.
What a beast was I to put off my band, yet the greiefs the
less, because he came from Peg, which is a Wench I must
confess dotes on my exterior virtues, but I can by no
means affect his: only, because the poor Wretch, in
heate of her passion shall not melt her self away in tears,
she sometimes enforces me to swear and protest I af∣fact
her, marry always with mental reseruations
for my souls health, for you know that sometimes it is
policy Courtiers and Statesmen should use fallacy.
Give charge unto the cooke a make not too much
haste with supper, for I hope your moister will be here to
night, and look you keep fast the door, let no man trow∣ble
me.
I will Madam.
Now thanks gentle heavens, O bee you smiling still
on my designs, and let your influence pour down good
fortunes, and be not angry, nor no more malevolent, but
make my husbands reconcilement irrevocable.
Sir, I shall be shent for letting of you in.
Sblood I tell thee I will speak with her, what would
thou bar my chance whē my whole fortunes lies on y• cast.
O heavens, stars, fates, Gods smile not like Sūmer on
these Wasps no longer, that deli bussing come to sting my
honour.
Save thee sweet Lady, I hear thy husband is from
home, which makes me come to tender thee my persons
love.
Your parsons Love (sir) is most commonly a been∣fice,
O that I should bee troubled with this Ass now, doe
you hear •ir, if my husband should come and find you
here we were both undone.
Your husband, your husband is an ass, by this light
and he should offer you but an ill look in my sight, it were
better he had no eyes: but tic your own fault that would
not ere now accept of the love of a Soldier, to have kept
the slave in some awe.
O! how reprochfully the Captain swaggers, isle a∣way,
for fear he grow furious.
But dost hear me sweet Lady, I have loved thee
long, and must now enjoy thee. Fear nothing: this warlike
sword of mine shall defend thine honour, this Martial blade
shall do'•: life it shall in faith.
Hark, hark, my husband is come.
Your Husband, ha! where, where?
Tic not he? but isle try my Captains valour now. O
sir, my husband, what shall I doe now, he hath a Pistol in
his hand too, he will kill vs both.
A pistol? cods my life, what shall I doe then? I pray
hide me some where.
O no! as ye love me, must enjoy me, and will defend
my honour, draw forth this warlike sword: this is the mar∣teal
blade must doe it, therefore I beseech you good Cap∣taine
now or never.
Gods precious woman, he hath a pistol, a sword no
shield against a bullet.
receive, &amp; then to have, hold, manure &amp; occupy in statue
quo pri•s, that is in the state before &amp; I do not doubt but
your grant in this case will be good, for there is a case that
proves this in quinto of Rich the th•rd: a patrō was seisd of
an aduowsiō in fee, with two nuns appēdāt, &amp; therūto pre∣scented
a parsō, with a proviso, y• if the incūbent should alien
grāt, demise, let, set, or otherwise put away the premises, or
any part or parcel thereof▪ that then it should be lawful for
the patron (or his assigns) in and upon the whole to re∣enter.
The incumbent aliend, the Patron entered, the Quare
was, whether those two Nuns were any part of the prime∣ses,
&amp; by virtue of the proviso subject to y• reentry: &amp; after
long dispute it was agreed by all the Court, that the entry
was good, as well in the two Nūs, as in the rest of the prime∣ses.
Thē much more in this case, where we are both lay mē.
Sure this fellow thinks he hath some right to me, &amp;
he hopes to win me by law, but what think ye: if my hus∣band
should come and enter now upon vs two, in what
case were you?
Why well enough, perchance he would complain of
me to the bench, and then I should be put out of commons:
that's the worst he could doe, &amp; y•'s nothing; for I was once
put out of cōmons before, for beating of the poniard man:
and in again within three days after.
O Madam, madam, what will you doe? my moister
is come as I am a living man.
O lass sir, what shall I doe with you?
Why hide me some where, cannot ye hide me here?
O no, no, no, he doth use to search all the house still, to
see if he can find any body here, but isle tell ye what ye
shall doe, draw out your rapier and go out against him, &amp;
whatsoever question he ask you▪ make him no answer, but
only say, ye doubt not for all this, but you shall meet him
and be revenged well enough in an other place, and leave
the rest to me.
I warrant ye.
Come out, come out man.
Slight woman your husband will see me.
Spretious man, that's all one, come out, come out, draw
your sword, hold it in your hand, make some show of re∣sistance.
Sblood woman he hath a pistol.
He hath none, he hath none, by this hand I did but
•est.
Nor no other weapon?
Nor no other weapon?
In faith.
Why will ye not believe me▪ in faith he hath not.
Well then, well, nay I care not if he had.
Why how now Wife, whats the matter? what stir
have we here?
Why husband did you not meet a man with a rapier
drawn in his hand?
Yes, and hears another.
Alas husband, he would a kilt this poor Gentleman,
but that he came and ran in here for shelter, and because
I would not suffer him spoil him here in your house, he is
gone in such a rage as you never saw.
My faith, and he swore indeed hee would be reuen∣general
in an other place: did he not Wages?
he did indeed sir.
Believe me, and he might easily have slain you sir, for
he had a very long •appear.
True, I know my self he had the better weapon, or
else I would •ere a stood so against him.
I, had I such a rapier, I would a made him run like
an Irish Lackey.
I, to have overtaken ye.
Well wife, believe me, I thank ye for this: for I w•lt not
for the wealth of all this town he should a hurt him in my
house, well sir you shall sup with me: and after supper isle
conduct you to your lodging my self, but fear nothing.
I thank you sir.
Why did you not perceive it?
Not, I protest.
O monstrous! why did she not say herself, she knew
hee had the better weapō, for which cause she stood against
him, meaning Bauderie, flat baudery, and yet you could not
perceive it: now by this light, had you slept but one foot
lighter, ye had taken them in the very fact, but you go
dreaming hanging down your head, that tic no ma•uell
your wife makes you a Cuckold: for the husband being
the wives head, why when the head goes down thus▪ the
heals must needs mount up.
Isle never more hear of rcconcilement, but bee di∣•orced
immediately.
Straight put her away, why you may have 〈◊〉 e∣nough.
O wi•es too 〈◊〉
There's your 〈…〉 Peg, she is
fair, modest, honest, 〈…〉 dis∣create
and honourable.
And would a be acquainted with me fal'st?
Who?
The man thou speak of.
Why I speak of none, I talk of a woman,
And have all these good conditions.
I, why not?
Dost know her.
I.
Hark then, rent a chamber, hang out her picture,
take twelve pence a piece at the least,
For enough will come I know:
To see that which none else can show.
Slight I think the man be mad, but 〈◊〉 ye not
have her sir?
Yes, if thou tell true, who would not have her: but
first make winged speed to purchase my divorce, hold
heere's money, make hast, use no delay,
For all men must for expedition pay.
I go, and you shall bee divorced or else my brain•
shall swe•: for what your folly loses, my wit shall get.
O Wages, isle tell thee news, I have sent for a
divorce, and what wilt thou say when I am married to a
new wife?
Then sir will I say as the proverb says, marriage
and hanging comes by destiny: but if ye be divorced, &amp; will
follow my counsel you shall hang your self, rather then
marry again.
No Wages, I doe not hold that so good: for sure, mar∣riage
is better then hanging in some.
True, in some respect, and that only because you
have a longer time of repentance, but I pray sir, first a christi∣an
that you mean to marry?
A Christian! I, why dost think I would marry a 〈◊〉?
I doe not 〈◊〉 that so well sir, because it is the fa∣shion
amongst them to send Capons to their Godfathers
for New years gifts, and upon my life sir, sheele one time
or other clap you up in a basket, and send you away for
good handsel: but I pray sir who is it?
Peg, is she not a fine Gentlewoman?
Beyond p•aise.
Hath she not a piercing eye?
And it were a Ferrit.
A delicate nose.
And it were a Mulberry.
Teeth like two rows of orient pearl.
But the string is broken &amp; many of them are fall∣len
out.
Hands as white as Pelops shoulder.
I, and as thick too.
Wages.
Sir.
Go to her, and measure by thy protestations the
depth of my affections: tell her what I will bee to her, not
what I have bin to others: if she allege to thee her cousins
presupposed wrongs, tell •i•, I well could have been hood∣winck'd
to her cousins faults, so I had never seen her face.
But what shall I tell his if she say you are gelded?
I there's it indeed, there is no excuse for that: yet thou
moist tel her, I did it only to preserve my voice. Deliver this
Jewel to her hand, and with it even my hearts affe∣ction.
I will sir, and if the Wenches close my proiectes
carry, spite of mschan•ce you shall your own wife marry.
Now must I be frolic, learn to speak well, and
woo with a good garb: and now I think on it, I have a pre∣tie
cons•e of mine own, I will tell her that the wooing of
a young wench, is the felling of a tree, and the getting of
her friends good will, like the lopping of the tree, therefore
first it behooves me to hew down the tree &amp; then isle climb
with ease: but if at first to fell it I be not able, to assay to
climb it shall be in vain. Welcome, hast thou brought the
divorce.
Tic here sir.
Come then, lets in, it joys me much that thou so
scone hast sped,
For hours seem years, till it be published.
But tell me good Madam, why are you so melan∣cholly?
To think upon the saucy importunity of my Ser∣•ant
Slack: he is like a badge on a coat, he is never off, off
my sleeve•, and yet I shun him like the pest.
And he follows you like infection.
Nay I would he did so by me, for I protest I love him
beyond my thoughts, I covet nothing like his company, and
yet he hates me, lothes my sight, but then comes the welch∣man
your love, and he hanges on my lips like a Padlock
on a Peddlers Budget.
And hates me as much, for if I come but near
him, hee swears I am like a Kybe, always at his
heals.
Come Madam, doe not grieve at that which grief
can no way mend.
I would not, if I could mend that which doth cause
my grief.
News, news.
What news.
You are divorced.
Why ••uorced, why? ha, speak.
Nay, I cannot speak the cause Madam? but quest∣onles
tic true, and mistress Peg, my moister now makes love
to you.
To me?
To thee, I to thee, go thy ways, thou shalt be a Lady,
I ever thought thou would come to some promotion, as
the boy did that had a bag and a staff and begged for him∣self,
but how dost thou know he is in love with her.
Know it why I have seen him stand an hour to∣gender
behind an Oaken tree, calling it sweet mistress, kind
Peg and making speeches to it.
As how? as how? prithee how?
Stand you for the tree, and isle speak for my My∣ster.
I will, and that most stiffly in faith.
Then thus he begins: Dear mistress Peg I must con∣f•sse.
Nay then hee is a dead man already.
Why?
Why confess and be hanged ever.
O ho, but I mean he doth confess shoe's 〈◊〉▪
Thats all one, hoe's but one man, and one witness
can never prove her •act, but prithee on with thy speech.
Why then this fair Mistress I must confess.
But he will not confess before witness will he?
Push, did not I tell you he would speak to an Ok.
Nay, then that will bee a strong proof indeed.
Proof, Nay, if that be not proof, how say by this
token.
I marry sir, would wee had more such tokens of his
love.
This Mistress he hath sent to you.
Look you Madam, your husband now makes love
to me.
Sir how peart thou art, why look woman, your love
a• mad woes me, and to me sent this ring.
And my man the man you so esteem, spite of refu∣sall
left with me this cha•e.
This chain: for ever may he linked bee to woe,
that hates my love, and woes another so.
Well, lets in, and be but patient all a while, for if
the worst doe fall, that ever did fall,
A plots in chase that shall out strip them al
Now if she should refuse my Jewel and contemn
my love, or contemn my love, and take my Jewel: what a
•oole was I to send her a token till I had some token of her
affection, as if women might be wood with gifts, for when
we give them those things which most wee love, they doe
esteem we love them better then those things we give, when
they poor fools doe but deceive themselves, for we doe
•iue as Merchants venture, for a ••able; again we send them
•okens only to get thē and their portions. But there comes
my persecutor.
Why dost thou hand• me like a Ghost, thou female
inner: thou hast not holy church in thy power with all hit
commandments, to keep me from thy unhallowed pre∣sense:
how durst thou break the Edict pronounced by the
mouth of holy Church Man? art thou not Divorced? is not
our separation blown into the peoples ears, even by Ieho∣•ohs
chosen Trumpeter? First, thou did break thy vow
to me, and made of every Priapus a Trumpet; on which
thou blowedst thine own infamy: therefore avoid, thou
leauend lump of sinfulness, avoid.
O my still beloved Husband, like filth or dirt, doe not
flea me like a Serpent, which comes to sting thy bosom;
I come to kiss; Sweet let not suspect divorce me from thy
presence, though from thy bed:
For if you will trust this masked face, I know:
No fountain purer than my Love would show.
I fly, and hate thee like a Serpents hissing, which
comes to sting me with pretence of kissing.
O faint tears, and feeb•e hands, •or ever may you
close, and never part till sharpest grief have cut the heart∣strings
of my life. Or else let this same brain of mine dis∣solve
to tea•es, and drop it self even drop by drop, until
it make a Sea of woes, that therein I may drown my w•••∣ched
life.
Alas poor Lady, I pity your calamity, and
grieve to see you bruised by my Masters injury, which
makes your eyes like spunges drop these brinish tears, and
spoils a Face, such as was never better one framed by the
skilful hand of Nature.
Avoid thou slave, how durst thou woe me? I am
like a star to thee; my O•b's aboue thee.
O! then my Love is a most clear and brightest
star: look not with a malevolent Aspect upon me, but let
your eyes bright raise up my life, and so extol my thoughts
Perish may thy self and love together:
Heavens grant again, I ne'er may hear of either.
What shall I doe?
Respect her most, that most of all loves you.
O! doe not turn away those Eyes, whose radiant beams
first nursed my flame.
Avoid thou unresistable Torteror, more •ret∣ting
to my thoughts then Cankers are to Metals. How
often have I told thee of my ha•red? For of this bee thou
sure and still remembered: deep hate (like love) can hard∣lie
be dissembled.
I, doest thou hate me then? O brightest Venus,
Now or never make thy blind Son see; and 〈◊〉 his
heart, whose hate hath wounded me.
Oh here she is; pray God my Band sit well. Fair
Lady, may I presume with the Bee to suck Honey from thy
lips, for I dreamed the last night.
Nay, I thought he would woo me dreaming •eke a Welshman.
That I was transfigured, metamorphosd, or trance∣formed
into a flea in thy Bed.
But did I not kill ye then?
Me thought you did did, but first I dream't I flung you.
Yet again dreaming, isle talk no more, but be gon;
for fear I wake him.
And then me thought, as I was skipping from your
knee unto your thigh, &amp; so forth; you told a Gentleman of
it, a friend of yours; who most courtly and softly putting in
his hand to catch me. Spretious shoe's gone, sure it is the
acuteness of my ingenuity, which makes my jests so stin∣ging,
as she cannot endure them: I must needs eat some of
your new court-water-gruell, to qualify my my invention.
Thou need not love, speak what thou wilt, if
gently thou doe speak, thy words to me are much more
Musical then is a Sirens voice. Orpheus himself could
never strain his high stretched strings to such Melodious
sounds, as when thy voice doth pierce the •are.
It is but for my wit she loves me: I sent her tricks
already: for Courtiers must as well thriving bee,
Have Noses to smell out, as Eyes to see.
Despis'de, and left alone, filed brim full of grief,
and no way to unload me of my cares.
But through these running eyes, in streams of tears.
Whose tears like to a clear, yet poisoned source,
have with their vapours through these eyes (the windows
to my heart) infected all my thoughts. Thy eyes do shoot
forth glances like to stars, though seated in a moist and
rainy Sky, the which hath wounded even my heart, and I
must die; Lest Achilles launce-like, healed by your eye.
I pray you seek some-where else, if you bee ill,
For I in Surgerie-haue little skill.
Isle follow my suit, not ceasing till the most of trial,
For hoe's a fool in Love that makes denial.
Here hath been a Maze, a Round, a Whirling in Love,
How like the spoakes of a Ladies Coach-wheeles
They run one after another:
And as of them you see neither,
So none of these can overtake either.
And though you see them thus forsaken,
They shall be married, but mistaken:
Which for performance yet a while,
I must be labouring to beguile.
Only the men, and make them venture,
To run a Circle far from Center
Of their hopes; yet for their good,
Where blinded each like Hawk in hood,
Shall Marry better then they Wooed.
Nay Madame, it must needs bee so, or else the
Priest will never Marry me.
And so you would have vs all bee Married masked.
True, to which you all may easily persuade your
Lovers, telling them with my Marriage, will be with much
the less suspect effected.
But say, who shall know vs, when our Faces ••e
not seen?
The better; for then you shall appoint each one
of them, to choose you by their own Tokens, which you
within your selves shall change: Mistress Peg shall wear
Mistress Nans Ring, Mistress Nan your Chain, and you Mi∣stress
Pegs jewel.
But shall they need to come naked too?
O I, by any means, only for some private reasons
unto me, in which persuasion if you will practise that you
know, you will prevail.
Isle doe my best most willingly.
Then come Madam, let's in: I know it will doe.
For this is held a principle in Schools,
Love makes not fools wise men, but wise men fools.
Nominatiuo, hic, haec, hoc.
A Noun is the name of a thing.
Amo, amas, amaui, amare.
In speech be these eight parts.
I promise you sir, I had Dined forth to day,
but that you see the weather is Cloudy, and the Heavens
lower on my delights.
I pray you sir, whose Son is that bigger Boy?
It is Moister Parmisins son the Cheese-monger,
and the next to him is Moister Cauetas son the Ferry∣man,
two very pretty sparks isle assure you. Tobias Parma∣sin,
come hither Tobias, hold up your head Tobias, and
look and you can see a penny in my brow: So, it is well
done; What part of speech is Mentula?
A noun Adiectiue.
And why a noun adiectiue?
Because it stands not by himself, but it requires an
other word to be joined with it.
Mark you Sir, I teach both substance and mea∣ning;
I doe not teach as your common people, d, o, b, a, b,
b, bottles; Go sit you down again Tobyas, Timothy,
come ye hither Timothy: How construe you this verse
Timothy? I am, jam, Tacturus, Sidera sum putes.
I am, jam, O Iohn, Iohn, putes, doe thou put, Sidera,
sum, Cider in Summer, Tacturus, in Tankards.
A very forward child, I promise ye.
Go sit you down again: Will you hear
them all examined Sir?
Moss willingly good good Moister Correction.
Ye shall sir; Sir, I have taken as much pains
with them, as any Poet whatsoever could have done, to
make them answer upon their Q. with good action, destine∣ction,
&amp; deliberation: ha, ha, ha, how many devils are there?
Number infinite.
Look you Sir, there are an infinite number of
Devils: What is the Devil?
A wicked Spirit.
What is the nature of that wicked spirit?
To work mischief.
On whom doth it work mischief?
On all mankind.
When hath he most power to work mischief?
When Man hath taken his liquor.
With what visitations then deludes he mankind?
With strange Earthquakes.
What is the mans best comfort?
To sleep and slumber.
Look ye now sir, are they not pretty children?
Very pretty, and well taught, isle issue•e you sir.
Sir, I will tell you, notwithstanding all these pains
I take with them, yet how unkindly their Parents use me:
they suffer their younger Children to beray the Church∣porch:
And no longer since then Monday last, came the
Official, and there being angry with me about other
matters, hee threw that in my dish, as if I could have hell∣ped
it: but I answered him sufficiently: For I told him,
they that did it, were but the Children and the youth, and
youth would break out in despite of his Nose; or the best
mans Nose in the parish.
I think ye spend most of your time with your
Scholars here: ye keep little other company.
Yes sometimes sir, here was yesterday Moister Nu∣come
the Courtier, doe you not know him sir?
O very well sir.
Hee is a fine Gentleman, a good Scholar, and an
excellent Naturalist: and truly fell into a great disputation,
(peace these Boys there) and our Argument was, whether
a Fool or a wiseman made the best Lawyer. He stood for
the Wise man, and I most Scholastically, stood for the
Fool: and thus I began my Syllogism, (peace these Boys
when I bid ye) your wiseman (said I) uses few words, your
Fool, much babbling; your best Lawyers use much bab∣ling.
Ergo, your Fools makes the best Lawyers.
And believe me sir, t'was well proved.
A flash, a flash, a foolish Schoole-point, a foolish
Schole-point.
O I, and confuted me too, only by reason of a
scurvy old Proverb which says, Children and Fools doe
always tell true: but your best Lawyers doe not always
tell true: Ergò, your Fools make not your best Lawyers,
a most strong and strange Argument.
I pray Moister Correction, let me entreat a Play∣day
for your Scholars.
O Moister Wages, they do nothing else, they do
nothing but play, nothing but play.
Nay good sir, do not deny me, for I have some pri∣uate
business with you of 〈◊〉 importance.
Nay then sir you •hall prevail indeed: you shall,
yet I remember; Dyonisius ille Tyrānus, Scyciliae crudelissimus,
crudelissimus Scici•iae Tyrannus ille Dyonisius: says to one of
his Pupils: Hue ades, haec animo, concipe dictatuo. So I say
unto you all my Masters, reuerere Majors: pluck off your
Hats to your betters, and look ye give the Woman the
wall, and so go your ways.
Morrow Mistress Correction.
Morrow good Wages.
Morrow sweet Wife, sweet Frisset, sweet
Nuptial.
O Moister Wages! how doth your good
Moister, sir Timothy Troublesome? what, doth he think
he is a Cuckold still?
An arrant Cuckold (Wife) believe it.
Come, come, Husband, you are such ano∣there;
why doe you say so?
Because it is true, Wife.
Sir, Moister Correction you are mistaken, I
think hee be no Cuckold.
Good Moister Wages talk no more of Cuc∣kolds;
I would they were all in the Sea for my part.
Husband, can you swim?
No Wife, nor I desire not to learn.
I would have you in any case appoint with my
Husband that I may come masked.
Peace, that plot is already drawn, Moister Cor∣reaction,
I am sent unto you from my moister, who cōmends
his Love unto you, entreating you will give your diligent
attendance this Evening at the Church, because himself
upon his Divorce, is privately to be married to a new wife:
three other couples he brings with him, they all come mas∣ked,
yet I will give you private notice what each one is:
only I must desire you not to sail.
Moister Wages, your Moister is the helm by
which my labours are governed: and tell him I will steer
all the navy of my actions by his directions: And so pray
commend me back to him.
Well sir then, till then Farewell.
The like to you sir. Come Wise, I hope that
thou shalt thrive, for as all your Cockatrices maintain sir∣gions
by their issues: So doth the Priest and Midwife a∣gre:
I set them together, they make work for thee.
And truly Husband, isle come to their labours,
be it at midnight, if they send for me.
Doth my Tyre sit well Nan?
Passing well, isle assure you Madame.
Prithee tell me too, how am I dressed?
Why thou art very well dressed too, but basted ad∣mirably:
for the threedes sit in thy Gown, Marry thou
want a little Cramming.
And that's pity; for I can tell you, I am of my
self a rare bit.
Nay then thou art for the Serving-men, for your Gal∣lants
(I can assure you) ride altogether with a snaffle.
Come, thou hast such a deal of wit.
Indeed I had, before I spent it amongst such un∣thankful
persons as you are Peg; but I prithee pin, my
Gown close before: for it.
That I will, but why then doest thou obscure thy
Bravery? this thy Petticoat is a great deal richer the•
thy Gown.
Faith I, I wear my clothes as your Gallants we are
their wits, the best side inwards, I scorn to show it.
But for all this Idle talk, I would we had appoin∣ted
our marriage to morrow morning.
Then the people would a stood gazing on vs, and be∣sides,
we should have bin like thee in dutch, subject to every
Cobblers interpretation, but now being mar•yed in the eve∣ning,
presentely bed time follows.
Phoe, but tic not the fashion.
Tut, hang fashion, I love it in nothing but my cloa∣these.
Why, thou know tic not the fashion in all places to
lie with ones own husband every night. Slight I had ra∣there
lie with a man, and never marry him, then marry a mā
and never lie with him, come, come, I speak my mind
freely, I am none of these simpering wenches that come at e∣very,
word &amp; says I forsooth, &amp; no forsooth, &amp; blushes at
the sight of a child, it puts her in mind how it was made &amp;
cries faugh at a wanton lest in a play, and harkens to a bau∣die
tale in her ear.
I, tic but dishonourable to marry thus in hugger mug∣ger,
men will say we are with child, and are ashamed to
show our faces.
Our faces! why our faces I hope do: not show vs
to be with child, tic out bellies shows that, and I hope
thou art quick flesh and not dead fish, thou wilt not turn
up the white of thy belly, woo't? but prithee tell me, was I
not married yesterday?
Yesterday, why dost ask?
Because, like a young married woman that's poiso∣ned
before she is baud, I begin to long already.
For what I pray thee?
Faith to be a bed with my husband.
•alas woman, those that are past child bearing, use
to long for that too.
Nay, but my longing yet me thinks st•etches a
great deal longer, for I long to be a Widow, that I might
have a new Husband: yet not for any concupis•ent desires,
that I have in the world.
No, I think so too, but only a desire thou hast to
try the difference of men, and therefore I think thou
were best next to marry an old man with a white head,
because thou majesty sleep quiet &amp; not be trouble•d a nights.
By this light I had as live mar••e a Saint Dauis Leek,
no, no, take this of me, where ever thou see the Snow lye
on the Mountains, be assured there's no great heate in the
valley.
Let me see, I would be a—
A Priests wife I warrant ye, because thou would
fare costly, and live lasily.
No Nan, then marry a Londoner, for then thou shalt
live a life &amp; it were a Lady, wear thy gold necklace, and
go in thy Velvet cap every day.
True, and then when thy husband is a broad in traf∣ficke
for commodities, in other countries, why thou moist
deal at home for ready money
No not a Londoner by no means.
No, why?
Why if they have but a plague amongst them one
week they all cry out of a dead time straight, besides, if
they receive but a little loss at sea, they break straight, and
where the husband breaks, you know the wife can no
longer hold out, she must down too for want of mainte∣nonce.
Nay then marry a Soldier, for questionless most of
them will use their wives well, for they love their punkes ex∣ceedingly.
O but they have a vile salt too, for they always be∣get
their children by day, and then they be squint eyed, for
when the Father looks one way, and the mother another,
•o see if any body come the whilst, how can the child look
right?
What say thou by a Civilian Nan.
O no, by no means, for most of their posterity
have ill luck, for what their fathers get by bawdy courts,
they commonly spend it all again in bawdy houses, No and
ever • marry again, isle marry an Irish Merchant, because
they all speak latin, and indeed are most of them Philo∣sophers
by fortune: Omnia mea mecum porto, for they carry
all their ware in their breech: but come, let vs make hast
away, I fear out lovers doe our coming stay.
You see moister Venture, the greatest comfort
that is left me now, is only in my neighbours loves, where
are these knaves there?
My Lord.
What have they supped within.
Not yet my Lord.
Why so, thou art an honest knave, go see that
none want wine.
I will my Lord.
I would not have the worst complain of scar∣city
or want of any thing, for Moister Venture wee shall car∣rye
nothing with vs, for naked we into the world came, with∣out
that which we now possess and have, and without it we
must unto the grave.
O Sir Iohn, Sir Iohn, I thank you for your homely to
day, but it you have a fault sir Iohn, the which in any of your
Scholars would deserve a whipping: you are come to late, I
and to a feast and all, well, well, well, but you shall fare the
worse for this sir Iohn.
I would desire a word in private with your ho∣now.
With all my heart:
They shall be welcome, even exceeding welcome, and I
thank you too.
Hark you neighbour, Sir Iohn tells me that to honour
me in this my predecessors still accustomed feast, four new
married couples are heather come in a ma•ke, newlle from
the church, their feet not yet since their nuptial, have
kissed their own thresholds.
Tic Sign ye are well beloved my Lord.
I am indeed Moister Venture, I am indeed.
Gentlemen and Women, ye are all welcome even with
my heart, I with my heart in faith. O neighbour Venture
my Son and your Daughter now bee married, what a
joyful mask would this have bin.
Tic true my Lord, but they are fled beyond all hope
of ever seeing them again.
Tic true, tic true, yet though the fruit gone be,
my grief you see, like leaves stick 〈◊〉 upon this tree.
but come neighbour come, lets sit &amp; look upon this youth∣full
dancing mirth, for youth and mirth have danced
themselves out at heals with me.
Nay, pray Gentlemen unmask, that we may know to
whom we shall be thankful for this honour, how now my
Son?
My Daughter.
Now may my blessiug raise thee from the
ground.
And mine make thee both fruitful, and a faithful
wife.
Why what are you?
Mistook of you, but such is women's fantasy,
Constant in nothing but inconstancy:
For I that first you most abhord,
Loved you a slave, and hated you a Lord.
Well, woodcock like by thy bill, tic my hap,
Thus fast to be catched in a women's trap.
Now by my conscience I am deceived.
No, not a whit, for I will love you ever.
Well, give me your hand then, since ••s my fate,
What marriage 〈◊〉, isle never separate.
〈…〉
O! I repent it not, this match is double made, and
twice hath holy Hymens 〈…〉
Well, since tic thus hence forth isle love thee ever,
for que sera, sera, against what plots so ever, but who is this,
moister Correction?
A friend of yours.
Spretious tic my wife.
O then sir tic a friend of yours.
Come ye away huswife, come ye from him, come.
Faith •ir no, why is he not my husband? did not
you your self marry me to him? but doe you hear, you
were best be quiet and let me alone, if not, in faith isle tell all.
Tell what thou can, justice my Lord Justice, I
beseech ye for Justice.
Nay, I beseech your Lordship too, though I am
but a weak vessel called a Woman, &amp; therefore by reason
of my bashfulness unable sir to set forth mine own tale,
yet I doubt not, but I shall find good hearing at your Lord
ships hād, if ye will but give me leave to opē mine own case.
Speak, what are your grievances.
May it please your honour in few words, my
husband hath four wives, and then I hope tic as lawful
for me to have two husbands.
How doe you answer this Sir Iohn?
And like your honour, I think tic as lawful for
me to have four wives, as tic for my parson to have four
benefices, con•idering I use them as he doth his benefices,
for I protest to your honour, I near came near none of
them.
Will not this doe it Moister Wages?
No, you see he hath answered it.
Nay then and it like your Lordship, I may bee
divorced for another thing, but that I am ashamed to speak
on it.
Nay, you must tell what tic.
Truly I am half ashamed.
Come, come woman, never be a shamde to tell (true.
And I may be so bold to tell your honour in
private.
With all my heart.
Truly and like your honour, he hath not that a
man should have.
No, why what doth he want.
Nay pray your Lordship to spare me now, faith I
am ashamed.
Nay good Mistress Correction, I must know
what it is.
Why then sir I must needs tell: truly a hath
never a beard.
Indeed a man should have a beard.
Well mistress correction, your husband must have you
back again:
And thus in friendship ends long Jealous strife,
With all things well, save Wages wants a wife.
But Gentlemen, whose judgements sit
in str•ct commission on the wit:
Which from the Authors pen did flow
He wishes at all but this to know.
that if you well doe censure him,
He ready is with brains and pen•
Another time to pleasure you,
If not, he bids you all adieu.
For well he knows he hath done wels
And so he boldly dares to tell.
Yet for the children ere I go,
Your censure I would willing know.
For if you doe the Action blame.
They ready are with pardon drawn
And each of them here hoping stands
That you will sign it with your hands.

Dear Lord, I know it well becomes not me
to counsel him that best can counsel me:
yet if it please you but to lend your ears, &amp;
hear my love if not my counsel.
No more, I know thy love tends to the stopping of
my longing and my resolution: thou know that I no
longer now am Signior: Florēce hath got an other gouer∣nor,
and one step back in state of Majesty, is a greater fall
then to a meaner man that loses all: Besides, thou know
our Daughters they are fled, the true inheritors of Florence
right, and mighty Peso now usurps our regal seat: puis∣sant
in power and mighty in his wrong, hath mounted
Faulcon-like into the sky of state, seized on our feebleness,
and beat our weakness down. And therefore now I am
resolved to find my two lost Children out, or like as Phae∣ton
in pride did ride, so I in grief will pace the world about.
Unto your celsitude I wish, till their effects your
hopes may never fail.
Farewell, some strange disguise I needs must take
both for my stelth away, as for my passage on the way: and
yet my fortunes fall, disguisement is to great if pleased the
heavens, but their wills still are laws, all is but Justice &amp;
our sins the cause: cuor forterompe catiua sort.
With draw, leave vs, we would be private:
Sister what think you of this trade of ours?
Tic base to be a whore.
Tic base to abuse great place, or baseness to de∣ceiue
great trust.
And is it not baseness to abuse great birth?
Yes if great birth abused not vs: if Peso had not
proved the theife and robed vs of our right, to had bin worse
then theft in vs to rob our selves of honour: you'll say wee
are forbid to live by sin, and yet wee are commanded
seek to live: the letter law express forbids to kill, and
yet the sense permits it rather then be kilt: &amp; since of two
extremities the least is to be chosen, you know wee have
no other means to live, but had wee, yet wee are
fair by nature, scorning Art, and was not beauty made
to bee enjoyed? doe wee not exclaim on those who have
abundant store of Coin, and yet for want suffer the no∣die
perish at their door? so might all doe on vs, having so
much beauty, if we should suffer men for love of vs to die;
shall wee in whom beauty keeps her court bee curbed
and tide to one mans benevolence? no, no, not I: rather
then in virtue to live poor, in sin Isle dye.
Your resolutions hath confirmed my doubts,
and since tic hateful to live poor, to maintain our
state I am content: but these obseruances let vs keep,
strangely amongst strangers let vs hold our state, and let
our Servants seldom know, how familiar with our
friends wee bee, and though Englands wealth doe now
adorn vs; lets keep the fashion still of Florence.
Content, let's in, who's near? attend vs, ho!
This is the street, and as I remember this is the
door.
Isle ask this ancient Gentlewoman: health and beauty
dwell with you Lady.
I thank you sir, a has a courtly phrase in faith.
Doe the Florentine Ladies dwell here?
Yes forsooth sir, I am a poor Gentlewoman that foal∣lowes
'am.
I am sent to 'am by a Knight, who promised me he
had procured me the place of a Gentleman Usher to them.
Sir Iohn Haue-little I think.
Yes indeed the same.
By my troth hoe's an honest Knight, a has no fault
but that hes poor, and thats a small fault now adays: but
let me see sir I pray, were you never a Gentleman Usher
before?
No truly never yet.
Then you must be instructed sir.
I shall be glad to learn.
I hope you and I shall be more inward sir, and for
your instruction I shall bee glad to lay open any secrets
that I have; therefore first you must observe: ha you any
Tables?
Yes, sure I never go without Tables.
Pluck out your pin and write down as I shall vt∣la:
to be always ready, standing bare, to bee employed,
when, where, and howsoever your Ladies please. You
must never bee without money of your own, to lay out
when your Ladies bid you, as eighteen pence to the Pore∣la,
half a Crown to the Coachman, or twelve pence for
a torch if their Ladyships come home late at night. If you
be sent by your Lady to another Lady, to know what rest
she took in the night, you shall deliver your answer just as
it came from the Lady: you must always bee in a clean
band, and clean cuffs, how foul so ere your shirt be.
I will observe all this.
You may by virtue of your office were a Periwig,
provided, it be just of the colour of your beard: let me see,
you have a hatched sword of your own there, have ye
not?
Yes for sooth, I bought it for his Ladyships service.
T'was well done, you may wear it by your office,
what, is your Cloak lined through?
No, but tic of a good depth in.
Tic well done too, your Ladies love to have it
Lined a good depth in, tic for their credit.
What, are these silver hangers of your own?
No, I borrowed these, but I have a pair of mine own.
They are in trouble, are they?
No truly they are at mending.
Nay though they be, tic no shame, you have been
long out of service perchance.
Some three months.
Byr'lady tic a long time, but can you endure to walk
some half a day in the Hall or the great Chamber, while
some great Lord is busy with your Lady in an inner
room? you may sleep an honre or two as your Citizens
wives doe at a Sermon to pass away the time, but you must
have a care to wake at the rushing of a Satin gown, or
the creaking of a door, that if your Lady come, you may
be presently up and bare.
Yes sure, I could doe it well.
You must stand stiff up, and hold up your head,
tic the chiefest thing belongs to your place, look here
comes the elder Lady: Madam hears the Gentleman that
Sir Iohn Haue-little commended to your Ladyship for a
Gentleman Usher.
Let him draw near vs.
The Knight commends his dear affection, and by
me makes tender of his humble service to your Ladyship.
Kiss your hand and go forward upon her.
We accept it, have red it, you are beholding to the
knight, and he hath spared no pains to make your worthy
parts well known to vs: draw near vs, hence forth we
accept you as our own, and so wee bid you welcome: are
you a Gentleman?
Yes sure Madam, for I was both borne &amp; begotten
in an Innes Court.
Sure Madam then hes a Gentleman, for he thats but
admitted to the house is a Gent. much more he thats be∣gotten
in the house.
You are the more welcome, and our bounty shall
deserve your industry.
Is the Lady a Princess that she speaks vs and we
so much?
No, she says so meaning her self and her Sister, for
they are both one, and such things as they have, they use
in common, and must stand bare before them both: look
here comes the tother Lady.
Madam hears the Gentleman that Sir Iohn Haue-little
commended to your Ladyship for a Gentleman Usher.
We like him &amp; hoe's welcome, what good parts have
you? have you the tongues?
Not very well Madam.
Yes Madam, a has the Scottish tongue very perfect∣lie,
&amp; a has some skill in the Irish tongue too.
Thats a wilde speech.
Nay isle warrant your Ladyship heel not run away,
has travelled Madam too a says, for a has been in Wales.
Has a no skill in the French tongue?
Some little skill Madam.
No sure Madam, I think your Ladyship hath more
knowledge of the French then he.
Well, wee will at more leisure survey your good
parts, and make thereof the best for our own use.
I pra'y what wages doe these Ladies give?
Faith your wages will be much about the nature
of your office, very bare standing wages: I think some
forty shillings a year.
Why, how mean they I shall live in their ser∣vice?
Why, by their countenance: I ha known a Lord hath
given his fool nothing but his countenance to live by,
and I can tell you, it is proved a good Court-mainte∣nonce
too.
Countenance? I hope I have a countenance good
enough of mine own, I need not serve for one.
In troth and so a has for a Gentleman-vsher, I must
needs say a very harmless silly countenance.
Yet faith I mean to try their bounty.
Come will you walk in sir? Isle follow you.
Very willingly.
This is brave in faith, a shall go bare before me too,
a will serve vs all three when wee are abroad.
Come sister, come, wee were not borne to stand, it is
against the nature of our sexes kind: come, sit, and tell me,
how many suitors you have, and which you most doe love?
and I will tell you all mine, and which I most respect.
Faith I have a dozen at the least, and their deserts
are all so good, I know not which I should love most: and
one last day did court me thus: O had my tongue the influence
to lead thy fair thoughts as thy fair looks do mine: then should
thou be his prisoner who is thine. I seeing my poor Gentleman
likely to be drowned in the depth of Hellespont, delivered
him this verse to catch hold of: O be not fair, and so unkind:
misshapen stuff, is of behaviour boisterous and rough.
But come, what was a for a man?
What was a for a man? Why, a was a man for a wo∣man,
what should a be? and in faith he was a neat lad too,
for his beard was newly cut bare; marry it showed some∣thing
like a Meadow newly mowed: stubble, stubble.
Well I have a suitor too, if hee had as much wit as
living, it may bee I should find in my heart to love
him.
What, i'st Sir Iohn Haue-little that gallant Knight
that Courts delicate Ladies? spare not the sweat of my by∣die,
man was made to labour, use my creation, women to
bear, isle use yours: Birds to fly, Fish to swim, &amp;c. And
then swears by my cōscience Lady, I esteem you as I doe
money, which buys every thing, and thats but like a
Puncke, for every man has to doe with it.
No Sister no, tic not he, for I think his wit cannot
cal his wealth Moister, nor his wealth his wit, and yet they
are both Servants to a fool.
Faith who is it Sister, i'st a proper man? hath hee
a good face?
Tic the person and conditions I respect, and not
face, for every Boy has a good face, and its not worth a
hair. No Sister no, my love is more worthier then words
canne utter: I cannot sympathise his rare perfections
with any earthy substance: this Globe of dirt produces
nothing worthy of his comparison, so souls perfection
so refines his body, as you would think an Angel were
his sire: his discourse, behaviour, and humanity, attracts
to him my souls felicity.
Pray heaven it bee not mine: nay come who is
your love? tell me?
Nay who is yours? speak first.
Yet again!
If it be mine, my heart will break: mine is Moister
Who, who, who?
Ruffell.
Pray God 't be true.
In troth tic he.
And mine is Moister Spark, and look here
they come.
Faith Ladies, youth and beauty always bee your
handmaids.
Best fortunes your attendants.
Good clothes your companions.
Wee all of vs your servants.
And let Tobacco be your perfumes.
Lord Gentlemen how your wits Caper! me thinks
twould become you well at first entrance, your discretions
came in with a sober measure.
Ladies we are come to make a Gentleman of your ac∣quaintance
here.
His name good Moister Spark? hoe's very welcome.
His name is Sig. Petoune a Traveller and a great To∣baconist.
Faith Ladies I take it now and then fasting for the
purification of my wit.
Purification? why has your wit lain in child-bed
sir?
Yes indeed Lady, brought to bed of a Moone-calfe.
Faith Ladies if you used but mornings when ye rise,
the divine smoke of this Celestial herb, it will more puri∣fie,
cleanse and mundifie your complexions, by ten parts
then your dissolved Mercury, your juice of Lemmons,
your distilled snails, your gourd waters, your oil of rar∣tar,
or a thousand such toys.
Sure Ladies I must needs say the instinct of this herb
hath wrought in this Gentleman such a divine influence of
good words, excellēt discourse, admirable invention, incō∣parable
wit: why I tel ye, when he talks, wisdom stands
a mile off and dares not come near him, for fear a should
shame her: but before a did use this Tobacco, a was the are∣rantst
Woodcock that ever I saw.
Indeed I was a very silly fellow.
Nay you were an arrant ass.
Sure I was a fool.
Nay, you were a most monstrous puppy.
Indeed I was an Idiot, a very Idiot.
By this light thou were a most egregious cox∣comb.
Indeed I was, indeed I was.
But since, it hath embellished his good parts, perfec∣ted
his ill parts, and made his secrete actions correspon∣dent
to his outward wisdom, as you may well perceive.
Faith Lady these Gentlewomen have not long v∣sed
my company, yet you see how Tobacco hath already
refined their spirits.
Petoune I wonder Tobacco hath not purified the
complexion of thy nose?
Why, what ails my nose?
Nay, be not angry, I do not touch thy nose, to th'end
a should take any thing in snuff.
Why doy' play so about my nose?
It is a good turn hes no Fly signeur: if a were, a
would burn his wings.
O signeur, these Gentlewomen have not long used
your company, yet you see how Tobacco hath already
refined their spirits.
Faith Lady, would you bestow but one favour
of me.
Truly signeur if you should have as much favour
as you have complexion, you would bee highly favoured.
Dear Lady, now by this day I love you.
Cheap signeur, now by the light of this day, I
cannot love you.
Now Lady, what drugs of wit has this Apothecary
of Tobacco sold you?
Faith a sold me none sir, only a gave me a taste of
his good meaning.
Faith Lady I must enquire your name.
I pra'y doe sir, yond Gentlewoman knows it.
O, I know tit well enough.
Why doe you enquire it then?
Come, come, Lady can you love?
I.
And can you love me?
No.
Every fool can say, I, and no,
And I always answer every fool so.
Doy' think I want wit?
If you do, it is a shame you doe not learn it.
Will you teach me? Isle come to you to school.
It is not my profession sir, to teach a fool.
Look, look, this fellow is like your upright shoo,
he will serve either foot.
Good Lady, have a better regard of me, doe but
think me made of the same mettle other men are.
If others were of the same mettle you are, and
all mine, I should quickly sell them to the Bel-ma∣cares.
Why, what mettle doe you think me?
Copper sir, copper, for I take your body to be of
the same mettle your nose is.
Dear Lady, now by this day I love you.
Why, how now signeur, what says the Lady will
she love thee man?
Faith I can get but a cold comfort of her:
Well thank her for it:
For what?
Why, for her cold comfort, she gave it thee to cool
the heate of thy nose man?
Signeur, you see these Gentlewomen have not long
used your company; yet you see how Tobacco hath al∣ready
refined their spirits:
Why, how now signeur? at blind-man-buffe? bobbed
on either side?
Prethe peace: dear Lady, please you take a pipe
of Tobacco?
I, come: Isle begin to her (tab) why, what a rogue
art thou to offer a fair Lady an empty pipe?
Why signeur? do you make a fool of me?
Had you no body signeur to have bobbed with an
empty Pipe but her?
Why howe now signeur, could you find never a
fitter block to whet your wit on, but my sister?
By the divine smoke of Tobacco signeur, you have
shamed vs all.
Swear not good sir, swear not, profane not the
Indian plant.
Had you no body else signeur, to break an
empty jest on but this Lady?
No, no, a thinks any thing is good enough for me.
Sir, would you make my Lady and me friends?
Nay signeur, I have no face to speak, now you
have abused her in your own Element: if it had been
in any thing but Tobacco, I would have done my best.
Hark you sig you were best to ask her forgive∣nes
on your knees, ther's no way to get her friendship else.
But will she forgive me think you if I ask eher mer∣cie
on my knees?
Why, prove signeur, you can but try, weal al speak
for you.
Good Lady will you forgive this signeur? you see
his penitent, grief hath brought him very low, for hes
on's knees; besides he weeps; speak signeur speak for
your self.
Lady, I must confess I have offred you an empty
pipe, which me thinks hath small reason to be takē in snuff.
And you are sorry for it signeur, are you not?
I with all my heart.
Forgive him good Lady, pra'y forgive him,
I am content Gent at your entreaties vpō conditions.
Upon any conditions.
But you shall be sworn to them.
Nosed willingly.
Come, a shall be sworn on's own Tobacco pipe.
Look you signeur, he told you there was no way to
get her good will but by kneeling; for he that will have a
women's love must stoop.
Come moister
you shall take his oath, and Isle
minister't.
Come signeur, put your hand to the pipe.
First you shall never while you live offer Lady or
Gentlewoman an empty pipe.
Never.
Secondly, you shall never make Tobacco your I∣doll,
taking it in a morning before you say your prayers.
Never
Thirdly, you shall never in the praise of Tobacco
disclose or dispraise by the way of making comparisons,
the secrets of Ladies, or Gentlewomen, as repeating their
distilled waters, their censing oils, or their smoothing un∣guents.
To this you swear.
Most willingly.
Fourthly, you shall never come with your squibs
&amp; smoke-squirts amongst Ladies and Gentlewomē, fling∣ing
out fume at your Nostrils, as a whale doth salt-water,
unless you be entreated by them.
Never.
Fiftly, you shall presently convey your self out of
our company, never to come more near vs, unless you be
sent for.
Never?
No never: so, let him kiss the pipe.
Come Signior, you have kneeled to a fair end, to get
you a Mistress, and here you have for sworn her.
I'm in a fair case now.
I faith now thar't a comb for any case.
Well, isle keep my oath, farewell Gentlemen.
Farewell Signior.
Adieu Signior.
God bewe Signior.
Well, some shall smoke for this.
Let it be your nose then good Signior in any case:
Its a good soil, a whole some ayre, a pretty Town, hand∣some
slight buildings, well proportioned people, very
fair women.
Hayda, this is like a Lawyers study in the latter end
of a Term, one's no sooner thrung'd out, but another
thrust in, you're welcome sir.
But I am not sir, for I am sick.
Would you speak with any man here?
I care not greatly sir, if I spoke with every man here.
Hoe's a mad fellow.
What art?
Poor.
Dost mean to live in this town?
Id be loath to die in it.
In what country were borne?
In none.
Where then?
In a Town.
What nation art?
An Italian:
O then thou can make glasses.
I, and as wisemen as you Asses too, O are you there
Peso? your father is my good Lord, but no more of that yet.
Why Signior, I hope you wonnot swagger?
No, nor I care not greatly for them that doe, for
your swaggerer is but like your walking spur, a gingles
much but heel neu'r prick.
Why art so melancholy?
Isle hold my life hee is in love with some waiting
Gentlewoman.
Hoe's a mad fellow will love any of you all, lone∣ger
then a pissing while.
Why came thou out of Italy into England?
Because England would not come into Italy to me?
Why art sad?
Because I have cause.
Who dost follow?
My nose.
Who dost serve?
God.
Who art towards?
He thats before me.
What dost want?
Money.
Nothing else?
Yes.
What?
A good service.
Shall I prefer thee?
I cannot tell, tic as I like the man.
Nai't shall be to a couple of Gentlewomen of thine
own Country.
I shall have enough to doe then I hope, I have heard
of one woman hath served ten men, but I never heard that
one man should bee preferred to serve two women before:
you're an Englishman.
I.
So I thought indeed, you cannot poison so well as
we Italians, but you'll find a means to bring a man out of
his life as soon. Gods light serve two women quoth you?
Why thou shalt serve but one, yet take thy choice of
both.
I marry Sir, I like when 't comes to choosing.
Whats thy name?
Fleire.
Whats thy profession?
I have ever been a Courtier.
A Courtier! come Gentlemen, I like this fellow so
well that isle prefer him strait.
Do so, you shall doe a deed of charity in it.
Fair Ladies you'll excuse vs.
You have bin very welcome Gentlemē.
Come sister, there rests nothing for vs now but this:
wele get vs men's apparel, and serve them as Pages so shall
we hinder them in their marriages, and in the end prefer
our selves to be their wives.
I like it well, come lets about it presently.
I have not yet bin seven days here, and yet I see
that grieves my very soul: my Daughters, my Ladies
I must say now, make lust, labour for their maintenance, &amp;
this foolish natiō will sell their goods, their lands, nay their
very souls for nights delights and momentary sports,
which like to lightning appears, and vanishes ere one
can say tic come: but then repentance sticks close. There
was a fellow with one of my Ladies this morning, and the
poor slave has but seven shillings a week board wages,
and yet he has given six on it for a bit of extraordinary
flesh, well: God give him the grace to pray, for a must fast.
I asked the hot slave why a did not marry since a could not
bridle his lust? and a told me a had rather fall into the Sir∣gions
mercy, then the worlds beggary; well, I see it can∣not
be denied, mercenary women are necessary members:
they pluck down the pride of the flesh, yet are not proud
themselves, for thei'le be as familiar with the men as with
the Master: they doe as many good deeds as some Fryers
that puts one to penance for his sins, they put twenty
to pains: he out of charity sends one to the Hospital once
a year, they send twenty to the Surgeons once a month.
Say he bids men repent, they make i'm repent, yet for all
this some will call i'm damned Puncks: well, if they bee
damned, theile not be damned gratis like your young coūtrie
Gentlemen, nor in hugger mugger like your Citizens
wife with her Prentice. They can practise without an o∣uerseer:
they scorn to have a Suburban Bawed lend am a
Taffeta gown, &amp; they (like your common Players) let men
come in for two pence a piece, and yet themselves to have
but the tenth penny, like the tenth Pig, yet faith
the trade is a good trade: They for swear not themselves,
in commendation of their wares, as your common Trades∣men
doe, swearing they cannot afford it at the price. They
are no proverb breakers: beware the buyer say they, you
shall have enough for your money, if half will not serve
your turn take the whole, measure by your own yard, you
shall have Winchester measure. I was somewhat bold with
one of their Ladyships this morning, &amp; asked her why wo∣men
went to the generating sport al the year, since beasts
themselves went too't but once? And she answered me, be∣cause
they were women, &amp; had reason to know what was
good for themselves, and so had not beasts: but soft, here
comes Signior Petoune.
O Fleire, how dost Fleire?
O Signior, you may snuff out your smoke here
Signior, and save your oath too, here are no Cuckold ma∣cares.
What are they Fleire?
Women Signior, women: I heard what a rash Gen∣tleman
you are to forswear your Mistress company in the
very heat of your affection.
Hang her, hang her, shees a very crickee, she hath
written for me three or four times, but isle see her damned
ere isle come to her, wooed take any Tobacco
Fleire?
No, not I; isle not make my nose a red Herring, isle
not hang him in the smoke.
Thou art a good Courtier Fleire, tha'st got a suit
already.
Nay, I have two or three Offices too.
Prithe what are they?
Why I am Yeoman ath' Iurden, Gentleman ath' smock
and Squire of entertainment: for when your Gallants ap∣proch,
I take their in comb, for if I stay till their out come,
the devil a bit of any silver sir can I get: for your new
made Gallants lay all on the back and spend all ath belly.
How doe thy two Ladies live Fleire?
Like two musk-cast in a Coop.
Why? I here say they live gallantly.
Pheu, they? why they keep a little court.
And what art thou? a Sumner?
A Sumner, why?
Because thou art one of the; hark in thine ear.
Well said Calf, hast bin a sucking all this while for
that jest? no, I have an honourable place, I am one of their
leaders, for their shoes are so hie, and their heals so short
if they should not beled, thei'd play domestic tricks a∣broad,
and show all.
Thou their leader! why doe they mean to go to
the wars?
I think so, for I am sure here were a couple of gen∣tlemen
last night that scoured their pieces.
I think Fleir thy Ladies are not wee rich.
How can they? they spend when others get.
Dost hear Fleir? wooed prefer me to their service?
What! shall wee embrace? shall we have red-nos'd
Corporals here: what you rogue? will you turn Sumner?
away you whale-nosd rogue away, go, snufle, snufle in the
Ocean, away you slave.
Is thy name Fleir? tha'rt a flattering, flooring, cog∣ging
knave.
His mansred hose, were the colour of his nose,
and his breech was made of blue,
And he in shape, but a French-mans Ape,
And so sweet sir adieu.
" Holla, holla ye pampered Jade of Asia,
" And can you draw but twenty miles a day?
Give me a bow, Isle hit the Sun.
Why ti's impossible.
No more can thou hit true felicity.
O I am in an excellent humour, now I could laugh,
dance, leap, or doe any light tricks that belongs to a
light wench.
But look who's here?
O signeur Fleir, how dost, how dost man? we may bee
merry before thee, thoul't be secret, wo't not?
As your Midwife, or Barber Surgeon Madam;
How lik'st the City Fleir, ha, how lik'st it?
Faith well Madam, were not your Citizens, such hey∣uie
head fellows:
Thats a sign they are no drunkards.
Indeed Madam, drink lightens the head, the
heart, the heals, the pot, the purse; but it makes heavy
chamberpots, full bowels, and foul rooms enough.
Howe dost like the Gentlemen of this Coun∣trey?
I can compare your Gentleman, and your Mar∣chant,
to nothing so fitly as your Flea and your Louse: I
had rather trust your louse with a hundred pound, then
your Flea with for tie; for your Louse, like the Merchant,
stands too't, you shall know where to find him, but
your Flea, like the Gentleman, if you take him not at first
sight a slips from you.
Me thinks they have a strange fashion here, they
take money with their wives, and give money to their
wenches.
And good reason too (Madam) would you have
a man bee troubled with a wife, as long as he lives for
nothing? A gives money to his wench, to be as soon rid of
her as he has done with her.
Whats the reason Fleir, the Citizens wives wear
all Corks in their shoes?
O Madam, to keep the custom of the City, one∣lie
to bee light held. The City is like a Commode,
both in parts and in apparel, and your Gallants are the
Actors: for hee that yesterday played the Gentleman,
now plays the Beggar; she that played the Way∣ting-woman,
now plays the Queen; hee that played
the married-man, now plays the Cuckold; and
she that played the Lady, now plays the Painter.
Then for their apparel, they have change too: for she
that wore the Petticoat, now wears the Breech; hee that
wore the Coxcomb, now wears the feather; the Gentle∣man
that wore the long Sword, now wears the short
Hanger; and hee that could scarce get Velvet for his
Cape, has now lined his Cloak throughout with
it.
But how dost like the Court Fleir?
Well enough, if they did not catch their meat so; it
comes no sooner from Table, but tone fellow has a fat
Duck by the rump, tother a slippery Eel by the tail,
and an old Courtier that best knew the tricks on it, was
mumbling of a Cunnie in a corner alone by him∣self.
What good cheer did see there?
Faith there was much good meat, but me thought
your fair Lady was your only dish.
I, but thats a costly dish, and will ask rich saw∣cing.
Faith for mine own part when I had a stomach, I
should like it best in it own naked kind, without any
sauce at all.
Whats the news now at Court Fleir?
Faith they say your Ladies cannot endure the old
fashion Spur, they say it hanges to a mans heel like a
Wheele-barrow, but they love the fine little Scots
Spur, it makes the Court Gannet curuet, curuet gal∣lantly.
I prethe Fleir, howe goes the report of vs two a∣broad?
If I should tell you, I fear your Ladyships would
be angry.
No not a whit.
But alas they are your common people, they are
like your Slippers, they are always gaping, their mouths
are never shut.
But what say they of vs?
Alas Madam, their tongues are like your dry lea∣there
shoes, always creaking:
But I prethe tell vs, what doe they say of vs?
I shall offend your Ladyships.
I tell thee no.
But alas Madam, I doe not believe them, because
I know the conditions of the slaves; why Isle tell you,
their tongues are like the Jack of a Clock, still in la∣bore.
I think tha'rt mad, I prithee tell vs what they
say.
I would be loath to displease you.
I tell thee thou shalt not.
Faith they say your Ladyships are a couple of state∣lie
Courtesans.
Faith that was not much amiss said they no worse?
You'll not be angry with me.
No a'my word.
By my troth they said stately whores.
What pagan rogues be these? were they but roasted
Larks for my sake, I would crush em bones and all.
Why? are you so angry sister? you know they speak
truth.
Why are wee whores?
What are we else?
Why we are Courtesans.
And what difference pra'y?
O great great madam, your whore is for every ras∣call
but your Courtesan is for your Courtier.
He has given you a difference now.
And indeed Madā I said so, for in truth I was very
āgry with 'am, but they said you were for every seruingmā
too.
Did they say so?
Yes indeed Madam, I hope I have touched you now.
He hold my life this slave the Serving-man, that was
with me this morning, has bragged of my kindness to him.
Nay, thats like lie, never trust a fellow that will flat∣la,
fleire, and fawn for four nobles a year.
Well, isle ne'er have Serving-man touch any linnin
of mine again.
Yes Madam, a may touched when tic at the Lane∣dresses.
I, at my Laundresses, or else not: but what a rascal's
this? by this light, isle never suffer serving-man come near
me again.
Yes Madame, to deliver you a letter or so.
By this hand, not unless the Rogue kiss his hand first.
O Madam! why? since blew coats were left oft,
the kissing of the hand is the serving mans badge, you shall
know him by it: but Madam, I speak something boldly of
you now and then, when I am out of your hearing, to hear
what the world will say of you, for you know thats the way
to pump filthy words out of their mouths, if there bee
any in them.
And doe so still, wee allow thee to say any thing,
for thereby we shall know our friends from our foes.
I assure your Ladyships, I love you, and am sorry
for you from my soul, although you know it not.
Wee doubt it not.
Come sister will you in?
I prithee Fleire inform vs how the tide of opinion
runs on vs, least we be drowned in the slanderous image∣nations
of the world.
I shall be very vigilant of your reputations.
Be so.
Who comes here a Gods-name? O, my gallant
ruffles it out in silk, where have you bin all this while?
Faith at Court Fleire, when were thou there?
Faith but yesterday, where I saw a Farmers Son sit
newly made a courtier, that sat in the presence at cards, as
familiar as if the chair of state had bin made of a piece of
his fathers Barne-doore: O tic a shame: I would have state
be state in earnest and in game, I like your Courtier for no∣thing
but often saying his prayers.
What, I think thou feldome foist thy prayers,
since thou hast almost forgot thy Pater-noster.
Faith I pray once a week dost thou pray oftner?
I did pray oftner when I was an Englishman, but I
have not pried often, I must confess since I was a Britain:
but dost hear Fleire? can tell me if an Englishman were
in debt, whether a Britain must pay it or no?
No, questionless no.
I'm glad of that, I hope some honest statute will
come shortly, and wipe out all my scores.
But whats the news now abroad Moister Ruffell?
Why they say the Courtiers shall make the Citti∣zens
no more Cuckolds.
Excellent news in faith, excellent news, then the
Court will grow rich.
Rich? Why man why?
Why then your Courtier will not bestow his mo∣ny
in buying the Merchants idle commodities to lie with
his wife.
Fleire I did but to try thee, the tide of the flood is turned man.
Then let them sweat for it.
For what?
If they strive against the stream.
No, but I mean the Citizens must cuckold the courtiers
Excellent news y faith, excellent news, then the
court will grow rich.
What, like your weavers shuttle? make cloth
forward and backward, but how I prithe? but hark you
Fleire, are you capable of a secret?
As your common Cockatrice, that receives the se∣crets
of every man.
Then I must entreat, I may trust thee.
That's because I am no Taylor, for if I were, thou
would entreat me to trust thee.
Sir, they say your Ladies are a couple of com∣mon
Punckes, I hope I may trust you with a secret?
Sir, sir, doy' hear, doy' think they are no worse?
VVorse! why can they be worse?
O sir, I they may be private Puncks: why I tell you
he that takes up his private Punckes linnin, were better
take up any commodity about the Town: if it were a com∣moditie
of Mousetrappes, a should not loose much by the
bargain.
But hark you Fleire hark you, tic supposed I can tell
you they are a couple of private Puncks.
Nay, then theres some hope theile prove honest wo∣men.
Yea, how Fleire how?
Why your private punk would leave being a punk,
rather then be private to one man for nothing, and then if
al men were like thee, they would be honest, for thou hast
nothing to give am.
What a cogging fleiring Rogue is this, nothing
will anger him: but doy' hear Fleire; art thou a procurer,
or a knave? for one of them I am sure thou art.
A procurer! whats that?
One that procures means for procreation, vul∣garly
called a Pander.
By this light now, were I a notable Rogue, should I
deny my profession, why, I am a procurer sir.
Nay, then thou art a Knave too thats certain, for
there is such a sympathy between a Procurer and a knave,
as there is betwixt an Alcumist and a Beggar.
But look you sir, pra'y will you tel me one thing now.
VVhats that?
Are you a VVhoremaster or a Theife, for one of
them ime sure you are.
By this light now a comes near me too, why I
am a whoremaster.
Nay, then you are a thief too, thats certain, for your
whoremaster always filcheth for victuals, for you know
flesh is mans food, mary sir you cannot be hanged for it, tic
but pettilassarie at most, but you may chance bee whipped
for it and burned too; but not in the hand Signior, not in the
hand.
Save ye Gentles.
Then we are enemies to the Jaws.
O my good preferrer, how does your worship, you
are a stranger here.
Faith I have been with two Gentlewomen, in whose
company thou first saw vs, and there the Knight, Sir Iohn
Haue-little is so in love with the younger, as a knows not
whether a should rejoice, she had so much beauty: or la∣meant,
because he is like to enjoy none on it.
By my troth I took him for a Conjurer, when I first
saw him, a talked so much of his soul and the Devil.
Why a sold his soul to the Deuillman, for the vel∣uet
that lines his cloak.
And when will he give the Devil his dew?
Nay, a deals with him, as a does with his Tailor, goes
upon trust and means to pay them both at the latter day.
But does not the Gentlemen jest at him?
Yes, one of them asked if he were a celestriall or a la∣restrial
Knight, &amp; he very ignorant lie asked what Knights
they were? your terrestrial Knight quoth she, is of a gross
element, and lives upon lands of his own, but your ce∣lestrial
Knight, hee lives by the Heir, that is, by his elder
Brother. He it was, was Knighted, when so few escaped the
sword, and he it is that now lives by the sword.
And what said the Knight, what said he?
Faith as some Courtiers doe, laugh at that he did not
understand, and swore an oath or two of the new fashion,
as, by my conscience Lady you have a very good spirit, &amp;
so after two or three Court complements, beseeched the
Ladies retain him still in their good graces, kissed his hand
and went his way.
Faith me thinks your English Ladies were very
gallant Creatures, had they not one fault.
VVhat's that?
I have hend say, they will rise sooner, and go with
more devotion to see an extraordinary execution, then to
hear a Sermon.
O signor, condemn not all for some, indeed I must
confess there have been Ladies at executions.
I, and they sat bare faced too, for fear the little fleet
holes of their masks should not give their eyes room y∣nough
for such a prospect: one Lady thrust her head so far
out at a window, with greedy desire to see all, that the
whole body was like to follow, making a forked tree with
her head down, had another Gentleman Usher, contrary
to the nature of his office, caught hold of her behind.
A forked tree, why what tree dost thou think she
would have made?
O sir, a Medler-tree, a Medler-tree.
But Fleire, how does the Gentleman Usher live with
thy Ladies?
Faith sir in the nature of a Munkie, that flatters and
fawns, and shakes his tail in his Mistress lap: but in faith
Gallants, whether are you two bound now?
We are even ready for your two Ladies Signeur;
Faith and you shall find my two Ladies as ready for
you two: Come, come, Isle put you in the way of all flesh,
Isle send you to Graues-ende, Isle see you in the Tilt-boat,
When you are there, ship your selves: in, in, in.
How is it Fleir?
O my Lord, you are a welcome man.
Save you O signeur.
O my gracious knight, and whither are you two
bound now?
Faith even to your two Ladies signeur,
Yea? and will you to the South-ward in faith? will
you to the confines of Italy my Gallants? take heed how
ye go Northwards, tic a dangerous Coast, jest not
with it in Winter, therefore go Southwards my Gal∣lants,
South-wards hoe: I have shipped two Gallants in a
storm, I fear they have spent their maine Mastes by
this time, and are coming home again: but if you will
Southwards, my hearts of gold, Isle ship you in pomp,
Isle send ye under the very line, where the Sun's at
hottest.
But come, shall we go see thy Ladies, Fleir?
I, I, I, Come: but my good Lord you'll bee a well∣come
man, for I have heard her often swear, that had she
such a Husband, a man so richly decked in virtuous orna∣mints,
she would forsake this life, her-selfe, nay, her
very being, to be yours; O my good Lord, she loves you
dearly.
Pheu, but I cannot requite it,
Why my good Lord?
Shees a common thing.
But say she may turn my Lord.
She has been so much worn, shees not worth the
turning now.
O my Lord, penitence doth purge a spotted soul,
and better leave sin late then not at all: and I doe know
my Lord, that for your love from her immodest life sheel
turn.
I, I, I doubt not but sheele turn: but t'will bee
like a Buzzard Hawk that turns her tail to her
game.
Fleir, is the gentleman usher that I preferred to your
Ladies in any favour with them?
Great, great: a kisses his hand with an excellent
grace, and a will leire and fleire upon am, hoe's partly
their Physician, a makes am Suppositories, and gives am
Glisters.
And how lives he with am.
Faith like Thisbe in the play, a has almost killed
himself with the scabbard: but hark you Knight, you'll
bee a welcome man to my younger Lady, I protest she
thinks worthily of you.
Signeur, I must confess, I am beholding to your
Lady; and to tell you truly, I have much affected her since
I first saw her.
Upon my word sir, to my knowledge she is an
honest Gentlewoman, yet the world may chance speak
ill of her. Why I have heard some say Penelope was a
Puncke, having no reason to suspect her, but because
she set up late a nights, when t'was but to undo that
which she did by day. I have heard some say Hercules
was a coward because hee did not fight at single Rapier
like a gallant, but with a Club.
Nay, I have no reason to think the worse of her
for the report of the world; for the world signeur per∣chance
speaks ill of you, or me.
Why, you're inth' right, I have heard some say, you
were a very needy Knight, and that you had but one
shirt to your back when you came first to this town;
Nay more, when your Lackey carried it to the Lane∣dress,
it was found to bee a women's smock, that you
had borrowed: but what? should my Lady, or I
believe this now?
I hope she doth not,
No, no, no.
Come Fleir shall we see thy Ladies?
I, I, hoe, whose within there?
What would you have moister Fleir?
Prethe show these Gentlemen up into the great
Chamber, and give my Ladies notice of their being here,
have a little business my Lords, Heel conduct ye,
ye shall find a couple of your acquaintance there.
Could I but work Lord Peso, and my eldest daughter, to
make am both affect and love each other, that marriage
might unite their hearts together: O then there were as∣sured
hope wee might redeem our honours lost, and
regain our right in Florence. And for this Knight
though hee bee poor, yet would hee married were unto
Feli•in▪
For of a loving husbands awful eye,
Sets right the women's steps that went awry.
Heaven I know has grace enough in store,
To make most chaste, a most lascivious whore.
How now? who have we there? a couple of footmen?
You see sir, we are not a horseback.
Howe now my little fireworks of wit? what?
flashes and flames? tell me true, were you never Ushers to
some great mans Coach-mares? did you never run bare
before them?
Never we sir:
Whither are you going?
Sir we want a serrice, end are going to get a Ma∣ster.
Come, come▪ Isle prefer you both, thou shalt serve
a Countrey-man of mine, hes going to travail: shalt
go with him, &amp; thou shalt serve one of my Ladies.
We would willingly serve two ne'er friends, be∣cause
we are brothers, and indeed two twins, and therefore
are loath to be parted.
Two twins? that's all one, come, come, you shall
serue'am.
You shall pardon vs sir.
I hope you'll not condemn me for my love.
I have no reason Lady.
I offered you unasked.
That with a number oft hath bought.
Partly they have, and partly not, for I would have
you know, my function seldom sells affection: what though
I have evil lived? repentant tears can wash away my sin,
which isle poor forth like drops of winter rain, and
now henceforth, ever Isle this life abhor, and to the earth
my knees isle daily bow, to get mercy from heaven, love
from you.
O the devil take impudence she courts him.
Madam, the love that I may give you, fully doe in∣joy,
but I have sworn with other love then as a Brother
doth a sister never to love any.
O sir, my fortunes are not fellows with my birth,
they make me stoop to base dejected courses, but would
you love me, I would as swift as thought fly this life, and
leave lusts foulest sin, for fleshly beasts to sleep and
wallow in.
Shame to thy sex, no more.
Lady, in all the honest offices that friendship may
command, command me still, but yet I have not seen
the face to which I owe so much of love, as may justly are∣rest
my affections, and when I doe, isle pay so due a debt
without imprisonment.
Methinkes yond Lady grows fairer much then
she was wont, me thinks her feature mends, &amp; her come∣lie
gesture, much hath drawn my heart to love her, O but
shoe's a whore.
Gentlemen doe you lack a Boy?
No,
O God, I am undone.
Sir do'y want a Servant?
No.
O Lord what shall I doe?
What can doe?
Any thing that a Boy should doe.
Wooed dwell with me?
Tic partly as you'll use me.
Isle use thee well.
Well.
Tell me, are you both content to dwell with vs two?
As please you two.
Then thou shalt live with me.
And thou with me.
Come Gentlemen will you bee going?
We attend you sir.
Ladies our occasions calls vs hence, and I am sorry
we must leave you.
Gentlemen you all both have, and ever shall bee
welcome.
Lady I will leave you much affection more then I
thought to lend you, but I deal on use, and have much in∣terest.
Caught I hope: hold hook and line, hoe's fast by
heaven.
My Lord, what you lend me, with much interest
shall be repaid.
Adieu.
Fare you well; refused.
Contemned.
Disdained.
Abused.
Adyes.
A shall not live:
Disdain the Daughter of such a Signior.
Condemn a Lady borne? sister we are wronged.
But if you'll consent I have a project laid, that in re∣quitall
both of them shall die.
You make my soul sweet harmony, come lets a∣bout
it then.
Are we in private?
We are?
Pray Sister what mooing lines of love has your
Knight touched your affection with?
Faith his stile is plain, only a little courtlike silk∣en
phrase it has, but I hope your lord hath sent rich words
like jewels, for your ears against your nuptial day.
Faith a woes with lines that might persuade ano∣there
thought, not me, which isle lend your eyes, upon the
like received courtesy from you.
With all my heart.
What have we here?
Lady I know the nobleness of your disposition defends you from
the least Spark of baseness, wherefore I invoke every particu∣lar
virtue of yours to be mediators to your best judgment for my
better estimation in your love, my affection is zealous,
my intent honourable, my desire marriage: thus
desiring your resolved answer, I rest.
Ever at your disposure:
lack Haue-little
Knight.
Upon my life some friend did pen it for the fool.
Let me see what's this?
You the understanding spirit of a woman, let the splender of
your Beauty, with some heate of your affection shine upon the
creature that adores ye, and with the heavenly comfort of your
love, melt and thaw despair from in dying heart which if it live, it
lives to love, it dye if it dyes in love, but howsoever, tic
yours, it was made for you, lives by you,
and dies without
you.
Yours in the most affectionate
degree of affection.
Don Peso De Florence.
Sister upon my life this is son and heir to Duke Peso
that now is.
O would hee were! but whosoere he bee, a must bee
made a match to give fire to the hell black powder of our
revenge, yet your love: the wise Knight and he, are two in
one, there are no such friends as they.
Then let them march both hand in hand in one way.
Then shall be thus: these two being earnest suitors
for our loves, weal grant upon condition, that suddenly
they murder Spark and Ruffell, but first to take the Sacra∣meant
if ever it be known, os known twill be, to keep our
names unspotted in the action; this being done,
Let them challenge vs, wee and our loves are won.
but say they should reveal vs.
O none will break a Sacrament to heap up perjury
on other sins, when death &amp; hell stands gaping for their
souls.
But say they rail on vs.
If they doe, tic known, we loved Spark, and Ruffel,
and men will think they kilt i'm for our loves, since they
lived in our favour these in disgrace.
I like it well, come lets hasten it,
For this is even as true as ever was text,
Plots are but dreams until they take effects.
O God, I think the path to hell that women tread
is brother then the way men go: how they walk by cou∣ples
to the Devil?
O that I should love a whore, a very common Co∣catrise,
my thoughts are drowned in a gulf of sin, shoe's a
very Cannibal, which doth devour mans flesh, and a
Horse-leach that sucks out men's best bloods perfection: a
very prisoners box, thats op for every mans beneuolēce:
and I am Heir unto a Duke, yet love her: doth any man
here love a whore? I, who? I, I, I, tic I, an arrant puncke &amp;
common hired Hackney, and yet I love her; I adore her,
I dote on her, I worship her, O would some goodman
would cut my throat, and put me out of pain—of pain,
O that nature would not make an honest woman!
She did, she did my Lord.
Ar't there? speak, who was it?
Eve, Eve my Lord, she was honest.
Art sure on it?
I sure my Lord, for there was no man to tempt her
but her husband.
I thought it was some such country Gentlewoman,
O Fleire. Fleire I love a whore.
Why my Lord, were you never a Soldier?
Yes. yes,
Why then tic your profession, you need not be a∣shamed
of your trade.
But Fleire wooed help me, wooed help me man?
I, I, who i'st?
Thy Lady, thy elder Lady.
O my Lord, love her? why shoe's a whore.
I Fleire, but she may turn.
But she is so much worn my Lord, shoe's not worth
turning now.
Doe not vex me, doe not torment me: doe not tor∣ture
me upon the rack of jests, I tell thee if she please,
she may turn.
I my Lord, tail to her game, like a buzzard hauk, or so:
Yet again, now the Devil take thy body, and dam∣nation
light upon thy soul, destruction on thy bones,
confusion in thy marrow, dost scorn me, mock me, vex
me, torment me? dost? dost? Isle hang my self, nay, Isle
damn my self rather then love thy Lady, and be abused by
thee: I will, I will.
O Fleir how does thy Lady?
I delivered your letter sir, and she thanks you for it:
And how does she? ha, how does she?
Faith not well, she has taken physic, and your gen∣tleman
usher there ministers to her: shees very great, and
she says she feels much stirring in her belly.
Sure then Fleir she has eaten too much raw fruit.
Upon my life then, they be plums, and the stones
make her swell.
Sure there. it is so, I should send her something to
comfort her now being sick: what doest think were
best Fleir?
Send her an Oaten cake, it is a good Northern token:
sir Raph Shave sent his Mistress one, but I think a meant to
ride a journey on her, and thought Otes would make her
travel well.
No, Oats is too great a binder after her Phy∣sick,
I care not if I go and visit her, and carry her a
Woodcock.
You'll go alone sir.
I, I mean so, but how should I carry him Fleir?
Under your Cloak sir, under your Cloak.
Mas, and thou says true, Isle go buy one straight,
and yet now I remember me, it is no great matter if I defer
it till she be well, it shall be so Fleir, I will.
O you're of a French humour sir, as inconstant as imp∣cient:
I think you have scarce the patience to tell the
clock when it strikes.
Tush, I keep a boy for such uses.
For nothing else?
Yes, to wear a guarded Cloak.
Not till you be richly married.
No, not till I be richly married: hee should wear
one now, if my money were come out of the Country.
I wonder you would be knighted sir, since your mo∣ney
is so long a coming, that you cannot maintain your
knighthood gallantly.
Faith I was knighted to get me a good wife
Fleir.
Get you a good wife? Why look you sir, speak
but the Golden tongue very perfectly, marry you must
speak it well, and call some great Lord cousin: t'will
get you a better wife then three hundred pound jointer.
You may report you have Colepits too,, it is a warm
commodity I can tell you: they may bee sent about by
water; if they ne'er come, as your money doth not,
you may curse the winds, or complain of Ship∣wrack:
and then though't bee a lie it is drowned.
I, but say it should bee proved afterwards t'was
not true.
True? Gods my life, shoe's a wise woman that will
go as far as new Castle to search the depth of a Cole-pit
for your truth.
I would be loath to leave my truth so far hence.
But I am sure heel bring his honesty no nearer hi∣there;
but that comes about by water too as his money does.
But Fleir is not thy Lady a virtuous Gentlewoman?
O yes sir, I often find her in deep contemplation.
Of what I prethe?
Of Aratines pictures.
I, I warrant her, O she can endure no bawdry, she
spits when she hears one speak on it.
Thats because her mouth waters at it.
Shees wondrous musical too.
Very true, she every day sings Iohn for the King, and
at Up tails all, shees perfect.
Be these good tunes Fleir?
Excellent, excellent sir, far better then your Scot∣tech
Jigs.
Yet many of our Ladies delight much in the Scot∣tech
Music.
I, with their Instruments.
Thou hast a good wit Fleir: if I were a greatman
thou should be my Secretary.
And I hope I should discharge the place suffice∣ently:
for I have learning enough to take a bribe, and
wit enough to be proud: but whither are you going
now sir?
Faith I am going to thy Ladies Fleir.
You will not speak with am now; for my Ladies
will speak with none but Gentlemen.
Why sir, I hope I am a Knight, and Knights are be∣fore
Gentlemen.
What Knights before Gentlemen, say ye?
Faith I.
Thats strange, they were wont to bee Gentlemen
fore they were knighted: but for this news Isle follow you.
Doe, and as occasion serves Isle prefer thee.
Why should I love her? because shes fair, because
shees fair; because shoe's a whore: for if she wore not fair,
she would not be a whore; &amp; if she were not fair, I should
not love her: Ergo, if she were not a whore I should
not love her: well concluded wit, well concluded wit;
there is no man breathing could love her but I, shoe's a
whore, yet her beauty haunts me like a Ghost, I cannot
sleep for it, her remembrance rides me like the Mare a
nights, I cannot rest for it, what shall I doe? I shall burst
boy.
My Lord.
Will thy tongue be secret?
As the clapper of a Mill, my Lord.
Is not that always going?
I my Lord, but I hope it says nothing.
O thou hast wit I see I am in love boy, I am, I am.
With whom my Lord?
With a very Wagtail an'arrant woman, a very
Peace whose pride is maintained by her tail.
Thē it is maintained by the worthiest part of her body
Come, your wit boy, your proof.
If a hundred men in a company, mee't doth not
the worthiest man amongst them, first take his place, and
sit down?
I grant it.
And I am sure my Lord, where ere the body comes
the tail first takes his place, and sits down, and therefore
I hope tic the worthiest part of the body.
O that I had the reason of a Sailor to know her like a
rock, that I might sail from her and avoid her: or as a
virtuous man knows sin, to loath and leave it. And yet
shoe's wondrous fair, I would she were as honest: kind v∣sage
may reclaim her from her sin, and make her stoup
unto her Husbands will, as doth a wel-mand Hake unto
the lure.
O I, she has bin manned already, she knows the lure
and will come to any call.
O but her beauty may excuse the folly of her youth,
tic want of maintenance hath overthrown her, want and
pride are two notorious bawds: want makes the noblest
creature sell her soul for gold, and pride doth make the
gallants stoop to lust.
And often sells pure honesty, to clad her tail in
glittering bravery.
And tic well done, let every member wear that
which it won: why should the head study to maintain the
foot?
Or the foot trot to maintain the head?
Why should not every member like a mechanic
man in a common-wealth, labour in his own trade to main∣taine
it self? then since every thing must live, I will no more
condemn beauty for being clad in luxury, but hence∣forth
I will love her, and let my passion smoothly swim
along the stream of loves affection: henceforth I will no
more with foul and hated thoughts, abuse so rare a cry∣ture,
whose behaviour and discourse, enchants the ears of
men, and drives the world into a wonder—ay me!
Faith my Lord you'll ne'er win a woman by sighing,
crossing your arms, and crying aye me! the only way to
wiN them▪ is to care little for am: when they are sad doe ye
sing: when they sing and are merry, then take your time &amp;
put am too't: if they will, so: if not, let them sneck up, if
you will walk in my Lord, isle show ye many principles
I learned of my Mother, they may doe your lordship good.
Go go, I will: but O unhappy fate,
When youth and weakness must support our state.
How now Fleire?
Save you Fleire.
Save ye Gallants: O Signior Petoune, shall you and
I be friends again?
Why are ye enemies?
No great enemies, a quarrel rose between vs.
I doe not like such quarrels, a struck me sir, and I
protest and swear to you sir by this Trinidado, had I not
taken the box on my cheek, a had broke my Pipe.
Why did not strike him again?
O no, his Father's a Justice.
Nay if the Father be of the peace, I see no reason
the Son should fight.
What, a Coward Signior? fie, a coward?
A Coward? why thats his only virtue, for a Coward
abuses no man, but a makes him satisfaction: for if a wrōg
all men, a gives al men leave to beat him, hoe's like a whet∣stone,
he sets an edge on another, &amp; yet a will not cut him∣self.
Come, come, we must needs have you friends, &amp;
thou'st doe him some good offices.
Who? I? with all my heart, but what i'st sir? what i'st?
Thou shalt commend his love to Madā Fromaga.
His love to her? what Signior, in love with my La∣dies
Ancient?
Why her Ancient?
Because she carries her colours for her, but tic in a
box: but signior you shall have a good match on it, though
she be not rich, yet shoe's an ancient woman, and is able to
get her living, by midwifery, and I can tell ye tic not the
worst trade going, considering how young and old, and
all doe their good wills to set them a work, and tic a good
hearing, better they get then the Lawyers, for your mid∣wives
live by the agreement between party and party,
&amp; the falling in of lovers, but the Lawyers live by the fall∣ling
out of friends.
I pray sir what may she be worth?
Worth? let me see, she hath three yellow pere∣wigs
of her own: she hath a Fan with a short silver handle
about the length of a Barbors siringe; she has a Looking-glasse
too, but that has plaid the prodigal Citizen with
her, tic broken, and much other goods of the same na∣ture.
But come Signior, how will you woe her?
I will tell her she is so wise, that neither age nor
time could cousin her of beauty.
And by my faith that will doe well.
I will tell her that I love her most for the whiteness
of her skin.
But you may not say the sweetness of her breath, for
that stinks.
I will praise the smallness of her fingers.
But I assure you, you may better praise the length of
her nails.
I am afraid that being old she has a dry hand.
Thats certain, but she has a very moist nose, you
may praise her for that: but my Gallants why are ye such
strangers at our little Court?
Because thy Ladies live like the Beadles of Bride∣well.
How's that sir?
By the sins of the people.
They say the Lord Peso, hath bin a good Client
to thy elder Lady of late.
The more fool hee? why your good Client is but
like your study gown, sits in the cold himself, to keep
the Lawyer warm.
And what fees hast thou out of their trade?
Faith my fee's are like a puny Clarks, a penny a
sheet.
How a penny a sheet?
Why, if any lie with them a whole night, I make
the bed in the morning, and for that I have two pence, and
that's a penny a sheet.
What Gallants use to come to your house?
All sorts, all nations, and all trades: there is first
Moister Gallant your Britain, Moister Metheglins your
Welshman, Monsieur Mustroome the Frenchman: Sign∣or
Fumada the Spaniard, Moister Oscabath the Irishman:
and Moister Shamrough his Lackey, O and Moister Slopdra∣gon
the Dutchman. Then for your Trades-men, there
comes first Moister Saluberrimum the Physician, Moister
Smooth the Silk-man, Moister Thimble the Taylor, Moister
Blade the Cutler, and Moister Rowel the Spurrier: but
Moister Match the Gunner of Tower-hill comes often;
he has taught my Ladies to make fireworks, they canne
deal in Chambers already, as well as all the Gunners that
make am fly off with a train at Lambeth, whē the Mayor
and Aldermen land at Westminster: but come Signior,
you have Tobacco, and isle give you a Cup of Muld-sacke
and weal en go drink a health to our Mistresses.
Health to our best esteemed friends, Moister Spark
and Moister Ruffell.
Our, good wishes ever waite upon our best beloved
friends Moister Ruffell, and Moister Spark.
Wee both are much indebted to your Ladyships.
Look ye signior, thats she: whose love means to
assault your brains, since you have blown up your own
sconce with Tobacco.
As I am truly generous, shoe's modest.
Fair Mistress, you are so wise, that neither time nor age
could ever cousin you of beauty, and I swear even by the
Alps high heauen-touching tops, the trailers narrow
passage, and by the towering head of high mount Chiego, the
Sea-mās southward mark: by these the witnesses unto my
travel, I doe vow that you are passing fair.
If I be not fair sir, I must be foul.
A Foul Lady? what bird might that be?
A foul Lady? you're a saucy Jack to call me so,
that you are.
O be not angry, for I protest I cannot but commend
the whiteness of your skin.
Mary muff, I think a be a Tanner, and means
to buy me for my skin.
Gods me; shoe's angry, what shall I doe now
Signior?
To her again man, doe not leave her, the Moon is
now upon change, she will turn.
I pray you Lady know me by the title of some
kindness.
Kindness; faith sir you are mistaken in me, you
must seek your flurts some other where, and I pra'y come
not to make a fool of me: alas man though I am a waiting∣woman▪
do not think I spend my time in nothing but tem∣pering
of colours, working of drawn-worke, warming of
Smocks, and pinning in of ruffs, faith yes.
And you come to her Signior you must come to her
as country Gentlewomen doe into the fashion, that is: in
the tail and latter end on it.
Faith I, and ye come to begin your knavery on
me, isle take you down: I am none of your young simpering 
waiting-women, that are ashamed to be counted proud, &amp;
therefore suffer every Serving-man to use them at their
pleasure.
Now on my conscience Mistress, my love is honest,
and I desire marriage.
Indeed if you mean marriage, I am content to bear
the more with you: but I pra'y sir, when shall we be married?
by my troth I ask you, because I have been so often de∣ceiued,
I warrant you I have bin promised &amp; dealt upon
promises in the way of marriage aboue an hundred times.
At our next meeting we will set down a day for the
effecting of it.
Gentlemen, we have some small discourse which
a little requires secrecy, therefore if it please ye to walk
in, and make use of our better rooms, wee will not long
be absent from you.
With all our hearts.
Worthy Lord, doe not think immodesty in me
though contrary to the bashful habit of my sex, I
am enforced by loves almighty power, to reveal the se∣cretes
of my heart. Your Letters have so much pre∣uailed
with me, that in a word I must confess I love
you.
Worthy Knight, I would my words had but the
power so work in you, that which your lines have done
in me, then should the happy consolation of my life dwell
ever in your loves embraces.
Assure ye Lady, your gift of love to me shall bee
deserved, though nothing but my lives dear breath re∣quite
its.
And I will rather die a shameful death, then live
a hateful life, which I must do unless I find a means that
may deserve your love.
No we your tongue goes like a well tuned Instru∣meant,
and makes my heart within my bosom dance
with joy to hear such large requital of my love: but
duist you to maintain this your affection, although it
were with some danger of your life?
Durst I? I vow, even by my souls eternity, I
durst.
Alas, if you knew all, it is your own good, not mine:
and yet I lie, it is my good too, since my life depends upon
your safety.
What is it dear Lady? although it be the death of
man, if it be pleasing unto you Isle do it.
O let me embrace so dear a spirit in so dear a by∣some:
and since you have bound your self by promise, I
will be plain, there are two that hate you two, because
wee love you, and often have persuaded vs by gifts
and large protestations to have vs love them if they killed
you.
What vs?
Who wee?
Nay it is too true; for while you lived, they said
there was no hope for them to look for any love from
vs: now wee poor silly women, fearing least they
without consent of vs, should doe that which their ha∣tred
doth intend, wee think it fit prevention first
be used, by giving them to drink of what themselves
have brute.
First murder them.
True, so shall ye then be sure,
T'inioy our loves, we yours, and live secure.
But what are they Ladies?
Spark.
And Ruffell.
They die for it though they were my fathers sons.
They shall not live.
Let little children fear the shallow Brookes, for
I can swim though't be through Seas of blood; let foolish
fear go dwell with women, for bloody resolution shall
not part from me, Isle kill them both even with mine own
hands, Isle do it.
O no▪ Isle reveal it then, unless you first do swear
and take a Sacrament, what ever hap to keep our names untouched.
Untouched? weal do it.
Then for the means:
Weal stab them.
Weal fight with them.
No, so you may miss them, and they kill you.
Give them a Fig.
Make them drink their last.
Poison them:
But for the means.
You two shall make a banquet, and in a cup of
Wine a health shall pass.
In which isle mingle mingle such a dram, as they
shall ride to heaven in post, unless they miss the way.
But where shall we get the poison? because you
know it is dangerous, and will breed suspect where ere
wee buy it.
I have a Countrey-man in town an Apothecary,
one Signeur Aluino, a fellow that is well stored, and will
sell me of the best.
If a were of my mind, a would think no poison
too good for you.
Come then, I would have you go about the proper∣ration
of the feast.
Now boys, you have a couple of goodly masters,
I Fleir, and thou hast a couple of virtuous Mistress∣ses,
O they are a couple of damned pieces, that will
plot or counsel the death of two such worthy Gentle∣men.
For one of them the earth did never bear a worcester∣their
creature.
Which is that?
Which is that? Why sister, have you so oft confessed
that his all perfection'd spirit points him out for ver∣tu
herself to imitate, and yet doy' ask now which is
that?
Howe? sister, nay now I smell you in faith, doy'
hear, doy' hear, whose Fiddlers are you two? what In∣struments
do you bear I pra'y?
You have told a wise tale, faith fir wee carry
none.
It is true my little musicians, you carry but the cases
my little curtals, in faith I smell a smock here too, and are
you two wenches in faith?
If we were, I hope thou would not wrong vs.
No, as I am true Italian borne.
Then tic true, wee confess to thee wee are both
wenches, and the love of these two Gentlemen, Spark and
Ruffel hath made vs leave our selves to waite on them
which by misfortune we did miss.
But believe me my little Gallants, ye play the
Boys well.
Well? why isle tell thee, I have plaid the boy so long
as I am changed into the nature of a boy, isle go to span∣counter
with any page in Europe, for his best garters I can
tell bawdy tales, drink drunk, brag, swear, and lye with
any Lackey in the town.
I can man a punk to a play, or slander any Gentle∣woman
as well as any Innes a Court puny, I can as well as
he, swear such a Lady is in love with me, and such a Citti∣zens
Daughter would have come to bed to me, when all
shall be as true as thy Ladies are honest.
I wonder thoult live in such a sinful place.
Thy Ladies are as common as any Tavern door.
Good comparisons, for a man comes no sooner into
a Tavern, but hes welcome, and the operation of the pot
makes him not able to stand when he comes out.
But what shall we doe in this matter?
Doe? Why complain them to the Magistrates, and
prevent the murder.
No, not so, isle tell you how't shall bee, hark in your
ears.
Doe it and we shall ever thank thee.
Come lets about it then.
Whats this? O this is Arringus; this makes the old
man able, and the young man lusty, strengthens the
nerues &amp; doth concoct the blood, and her name is written
on the box, because my wife should know it in my ab∣sense:
this is Civet, this comes from the Cats tail, I would
my were such a Cat: this perfumes your Ladies, and not
without cause, for some, I mean whose sweet breath is
dead, and teeth morn in black for the loss on it this
makes your young Gallants smell them nine days before
they see them, like young poops: this drug is precious &amp;
dear; whats this? O this is the sptrit of roses, nineteen
bushels and a half of Roses make but an ounce, &amp; a dram
on it, tic made of the Quinressence of the water after the
fifteenth distillation: none may kiss a Lady after she hath
anointed her lips with this, under the degree of a Lord at
least, tic worth nine pounds an ounce, yet I could never
still it so.
Save you Signior.
Y`are welcome sir, what doe ye lack?
I want a service, and am by my profession an Apo∣thecarie,
and shall be glad to be entertained by you.
What country man art thou?
I am a Florentine borne.
Thou art my Country man, and therefore welcome
and in happy time, for I am bound for Italy, and want a
man to take charge of my Shop, only this is all: I shall re∣quire
of you, bee careful of your cares, and obedient to
your Mistress.
I shall remember still not to forget what you give
me in charge.
What is thy name?
Iacomo.
Well Iacomo, if I find thee honest thou shalt find
me liberal.
I would be loath to be found otherwise.
Continue so, I prithee, and so farewell Iaques, but
isle inform my wife before I go to respect thee according
to thy merit.
Now come away my Customers, I hope I am fitted
for an Apothecary▪ s'hart I think ime turned conjurer, for
I have no sooner called▪ but the Devils are appeared, what
do ye lack Gentlemen?
Whore's your Moister fellow?
My Moister is gone into Italy sir, but if you want
any thing, isle use you well, if you want any drugs to make
Lotiums, any Restringent Powders, any Aqua Mirabilis,
any Cordial receipts, or any Precious poisons?
What poisons have you?
Excellent good sir, as ever was tasted, look you sir,
this poisons by the smell, this by the sight, and this by the
tastes.
Come give me some of this that poisons by the
taste, but how must I use it?
Put it into a little wine, and drink it, twill bring you
into a long sleep.
But art sure twill poison a man?
Am I sure on it? why tak't upon my credit, twil poi∣son
any vermin, except it be a woman, for twill poison a
Cat sir.
Why a Cat hath nine lives sir, and wilt not poison
a woman, seeing twill poison a Cat?
O no, why a woman hath nine Cats lives, a woman
hath more lives then a horse hath diseases, and she will bee
sometimes in as many minds in an hour, as she has
lives.
What times are those?
When shoe's left a rich Merchants Widow, com∣monly,
and hath many suitors, she will in her mind marry
three or four and fifty of i'm in an afternoon, and three∣score
more, when she goes to bed, yet in the morning sheele
have none of them all, but go to Church before day, and
marry her Prentice for the good service a did her in her
Husbands time.
Well, but whats the price of your poison?
Theres an ounce will cost you a French crown sir.
Tic very dear.
O sir tic very cheap, considering the goodness
on it.
Yea? is there good in ill?
O sir, I, in many things the better the worser.
As how?
As in poison, or in a punk, for the better whore
the worser woman ever.
Well honest fellow, there's thy money and far∣well.
I thank you sir, I have sold you a poison my old
elders, twil make an• sleep indeed, and I thank God that's
the worst twill doe, well, farewell Moister Apothecary. I
must now like a friend entreat your shop to have a special
care of it self.
And shall wee dine with this Honourable Lord, &amp;
Knight to day?
Theile take it unkindly else.
Signior will you go?
Not I, I was not bid.
Thats all one, shalt be my guest.
Come, a shall go, for there will bee his Mistress
Madam Fromaga.
Nay then I know the Jet of her complexion will
draw the straw of his love thither.
Faith I, poor Signior, I see the Springle of her beau∣tie
hath already caught the Woodcock of his affections.
Well, I see he that will have the commodity of good
wits in his company, must endure the discommodity of
jests, wit is like the heate of blood in youth 'twil break
out.
True Signior, though it bee but on a Scab, but
come shall we go?
I my Heroic spirits, isle follow ye.
O Signior Petoune, what news?
Faith ill news, the two Florentine Ladies, with
Moister Spark and Moister Ruffell were all poisoned yest∣erday
at a feast by your Lord Peso and the Knight, but the
Ladies have recovered their health, but Spark and Ruffell
are dead, and their burial is committed to Fleire: your Lord
&amp; the Knight are committed to prison, &amp; shall to morrow
be arraigned for the murder, and tried by the Ciuill-lawe,
because your Lord is a stranger, and claims to be tried by
the law of nations.
Faith Signior I am very sorry for my Lord.
I protest sir so am I for them both.
Well Signior isle commit you to God.
Let the whole band of Angels be sentinels to your
safety sweet sir.
I pray sir doth Justice Ferrio dwell here?
Yes sir a dwells here.
Are you towards him sir?
I am a poor Gentleman, whose fortunes much de∣pend
upon his favours, and indeed sir I am his Clarke.
I pray sir your name.
My name is Mittimus sir.
Good Moister Mittimus I would very willingly
speak with your Moister.
Indeed sir hoe's not well, but if you please to send
by me the substance of your business I shall very carefully
deliver it.
Truly Moister Mittimus my business is but this:
to morrow the Italian Lord, and Sir Iohn Haue-little are to
be arraigned, and your moister being the chief Judge of
the Court, without this presence or licence, the rest can do
nothing: wherefore Doctor Caius entreats to know his
pleasure in this business.
Sir I shall deliver your message, and will return
his answer to you presently.
Good moister Mittimus therein shall you much
obleige me to be thankful.
O all-directing power yield good aspect,
And to my purpose give a blessed end,
My intent is good, O let it so succeed,
And be auspicious still to each good deed.
Sir my moister hath received your message, &amp; hath
sent this Ring as a token to Doctor Caius, desiring him,
since my masters health will not permit him to be present,
to proceed alone to judgment, and so commends his
love to him.
Good moister Mittimus, I shall both deliver your
masters commendations, and the Ring.
Still tongueless night put off thy sable robe,
Thou needs not morn, my villainies were done
By day, thou had no hand in them, O I am great, as is a
woman that is near her time:
And life's the burden that I bear.
But it is a bastard for that I am asha'md on it.
The Law I hope is a skilful midwife, and will soon deli∣for
me; grim Justice doe thy worst,
Thy cruelty shall prove a courtesy,
And bail me out of prison.
Lie there thou selfe-consuming Taper, true pattern of my
life, I have consumed my self for others, as thou hast
done for me, and now she has extinguished my life as I
this light.
O how obedient was my bounty, still
To her command? my liberality
Did fatten mischief, and hath made her proud:
O that too much of any thing should be so ill in every thing
The Suns all seeng eye, with too much intemperate heate
makes wither what it made to flourish.
The earth being mother to all wholesome herbs,
With too much fatness oft produces weeds.
A suit of cloth doth keep the body warm,
When richer garments makes the wearer proud.
O, the means the sweetest Music;
Contentment revels when that string is touched;
But O, the time will come she will repent
My death: for when she looks on vices face
Unmask like mine; she will detest and loath it.
For this is truth and evermore hath bin,
None can forsake before he knows his sin.
Come, come, thou did but dream thou were in
hell.
I tell thee I was in hell.
And so was I too, Isle be sworn.
And how long was it ere thou came thither?
Me thought t'was long, as long as a suit hangs here
in the Law ere it be ended.
But I prithee how broad was the way to hell?
As broad as the space between two lines in a Chaun∣cerie
bill.
O sir, there's the conscience on it, say the Plaintiff be
in one line, and the defendant in an other, they being en∣mies,
were it either conscience or honesty in the Clerk
to thrust them no near together, that they might go to∣gender
by th'eares? but in faith what good fellowship was
there in hell?
O the devils are excellent companions, theile drink
your Dutch captains, or Court Ladies spunges.
Who did see there?
Faith I saw the four sons of Aymon, and they were
Porters ever since there was a company made of am.
Why are there a company of Porters in hell?
O I, the Devils are but our Apes man.
But did thou see more of them that were damned▪
Yes, I saw a Citizen damned for refusing a de∣sperate
debt, because t'was tendered him on a Sabboth.
I hope wee shall have no more Citizens damned
for that fault.
There was a poor mercenary woman damned
because she forsook her Trade, and turned Puri∣tan.
And good reason, why could not she have
kept her Trade, and been a Puritan, as well as
a Puritan keep her Religion, and yet bee of her
Trade?
There was a Lady damned because she never
painted: a Puritan for saying Grace without turning
up the white of his eyes: A Tailor for never ha∣uing
scabby fingers: A Vintner for making great
two pennie-woorths of Sugar. But there was a Innes
of Court man damned, and I was sorry for him.
Why was he damned?
Alas for a small fault.
I prethe what wast?
For having always money in his purse.
Were there no Lawyers in hell?
There were none of your great Lawyers as your
Sergeants, and Benchers, for they take counsel of
too many good Angels to come there: but your young
puny Lawyers, they were in swarms like Gnats in
Summer.
Why are there so many of them there?
Alas man they seldom converse with a good Angel
scarce once in a whole Michaelmasse Term, and if a
come a stays not long with am to feed these souls,
for they are fine to send am away straight to
pay for the feeding of their Horses, there was a Chamber∣maid
dimbed for keeping her virginity till she was mar∣riot,
and there were many Soldiers dimbed for saying
their prayers when they were drunk.
But what did thou see in hell?
O, I saw a Scrivener dimbed for procuring a
Gentleman money Gratis, but I came in an excellent
time.
What time wa'st?
In a gossipping time, for Proserpina was newly
brought a bed of two twins.
Two twins! what were they?
A Sergeant and a Yeoman, but she has put them
out to nurse.
I prithee where?
Faith at the Counter in Wood-street, and the slaves
will suck already like little Horsleaches.
But when will she have am home, that she may be
rid of am.
Faith shoe's an unnatural Mother, she cares not
greatly if they never come home, but the devil their Fa∣there
hee loves am well, heel have am home again ere
long.
Which is the elder Brother?
O the Sergeant, the Devil allows him the bet∣la
maintenance, for hee has more to the dressing of his
meat.
Well, Gentlemen, since by the heavens pleasure
I have bin appointed to save your lives, let me entreat
you to keep your selves secret till the sequel of this act∣ion
shall need your presence.
Come lets go, weal only follow your direct∣once.
VVil't please ye have the prisoners brought
forth?
VVee can doe nothing till wee hear from
Doctor Ferrio, to know his pleasure in these prose∣dings.
Was any man sent to him?
Yes, Fleire, the Lady Floridaes man, which is
not yet returned.
Reverend Judges: heere's a Doctor at door de∣sires
admittance.
Entreat him to come in.
Learned Doctors, Doctor Ferrio commends him
to you, and because sickness hath laid so strong a hand
upon his weak decrepit body, which doth detain
his presence, hee entreats you to accept of me in his
place, and as assurance of his earnest desire thereof, he
has sent this well known ring as a token to you.
Sir, wee know the ring and you are very well∣come,
and so I pra'y assume his place.
Is it your pleasure the Prisoners be brought
food.
I, both of them.
My Lord, you are here indicted of a hateful
crime, &amp; I am very sorry to see you in this sort stand here.
Thrice Reverend Judges, and therefore honoured
Lords, I must confess, that like a skilful dancer, I have
truly footed folly, yet like a learner in my course of life,
trod much out of measure, I have lived like an vnbackt colt
proud and wanton, my tree of life hath borne more leaves
then fruit, I never was deboash'd &amp; steered away my days
anon in a sea of sin.
And in, that sea my Lord, you bore so great a
sail as you have over set your bark of life, and here you
are accused my Lord, even of a hateful crime, so is the
Knight there for poisoning two Gentlemen, Spark and
Ruffell, how doe you answer this my Lord?
Alas my Lord, this is soon answered, for though
that I have surfeited on sin, yet have I not bin drunk
with blood.
What say you Knight?
The crime is great I must confess my Lord, but I
am sure the proof can be but little.
Ladies you know most, and therefore tic fittest
most you speak.
Why then my Lord, this is all we can say, this Lord
and knight feasted divers of vs their friends, but four of
vs he drenched with such a dram which soon made two
discharge the debt they out to nature.
O conscience wonldst thou give me leave!
And wee no doubt my Lords, had long ere this
breathed out our lives like them, but that we had the lesser
quantisie, for being esteemed the weaker vessels, they
thought the lesser blow would break vs.
O had not death arrested me.
Why then my Lord, wee thus must now proceed,
they that spilt innocent blood themselves must bleed; but
Ladies I have heard you had a man called Fleire, what's be∣come
of him?
He was sent to Doctor Ferrio, and we never saw him
since.
Doe you know his hand Ladies?
Very well.
I pray look here then.
This is his hand indeed.
I very perfectly doe know it to be his.
Why then upon this hand I hear arrest you both,
upon your lives.
Who, wee?
I, you Ladies, my Lord I pray you, read this letter.
Reverend Judges, God will by some means punish
every sin, and though against my will, yet by my consci∣ence
I am enforced to unmask my Ladies vilianies, the
murder for which the Lord and Knight are like to die,
was first plotted by them: the two Pages with my self did
hear it: the Prisoners in this action, are enforced by Sacra∣meant
to be secret, and thus entreating heaven in Justice,
still to aid you.
Yours Fleer a Florentine.
Is this true my Lord?
They are sworn not to reveal it,
But being reueald they may affirm it.
Tic too true my Lord.
Where are the Pages?
Here my Lord.
How say you boys to this letter?
The letter speaks nothing but the truth.
Well Ladies, then we here pronounce this sentence
that you must die among the rest.
You powers divine, I know doe plainly see,
Heavens starry eyes sees all our villainy:
And God in Justice murder will reveal,
But were I now, my life for to begin,
Id be an honest wife to you, wherefore forgive me dearest
Lord.
Lady, I doe even as I hope to be forgiven.
Show mercy heaven, my sins doe thee offend,
Theres none can say hoe's happy till his end;
Forgiveness Knight, and since the law on vs,
Hath laid so strict a hand, O let me be
Thy wife before I die, and were I now
A thousand years to live, I would be honest
Loving none but thee.
I doe forgive you Lady with my soul.
Long live my honoured Lord and mighty Duke of
Florence.
So a will, as long is it please the Hang-man.
My honoured Lord, your Father is deceased, and
the state of Florence by me hath sent their Letters and al∣legiance.
Let them call back the banished Signior Antifront
whom they &amp; we, and al have wronged: O could I live but
to inquire him out, in satisfaction of his wrongs, id marry
his eldest Daughter, and whilst a lived a should be restored
to his estate, but O hoe's—
Here my Lord.
I tax you to your word, Signior Antifront yet lives,
And hears his elder Daughter whom himself
But now condemned to die: and hears the younger
Left for you, the poisoned men are here a live again,
Who did but dream of death, but yet doe
Live to enrich a nuptial bed to you two,
And now since every thing so well doth sort,
Let all be pleased in this our comic sport,
Whore's Petoune? he shall have his Mistress too,
He most deserves, for he did hotly woe,
If we part friends, your hands unto vs lend,
What was not well, weal next strive to amend.

Our Muse describes no Lovers passion,
No wretched Father, no unthrifty Son:
No craving subtle Whore, or shameless Bawd,
Nor stubborn Clown, or daring Parasite,
No lying Servant, or bold Sycophant.
We are not wanton, or Satirical.
These have their time and places fit, but we
Sad hours, and serious studies, to reprive,
Have taught severe Philosophy to smile.
The Senses rash contentions we compose,
And give displeased ambitious TONGVE her due:
Here is all Judicious friends; accept what is not ill,
Who are not such, let them do what they will.
NAy good Auditus doe but hear me speak.
Lingo thou strik'st too much upon one string,
Thy tedious plaine-song grates my tender ears.
It is plain indeed, for Truth no descant needs,
Vna's her name, she cannot be divided.
O but the ground it self is nought, from whence
Thou can not relish out a good division:
Therefore at length sur-cease, prove not stark mad,
Hopeless to prosecute a haplesse suit:
For though (perchance) thy first strains pleasing are,
I dare engage mine ears, the close will jar.
If then your confidence esteem my cause,
To be so frivolous and weakly wrought.
Why do you daily subtle plots devise,
To stop me from the ears of common Sense,
Whom since our great Queen 〈◊〉 hath ordained,
For his soot wisdom, our Vice-gouernour,
To him, and to his two so wise assistants,
Nimble Fantastic, and firm Memor•e:
My self and cause, I humbly do commit,
Let them but hear and •judge, I wish no more.
Should they but know thy rash presumption,
They would correct it in the sharpest sort:
Good low what Sense hast thou to be a Sense;
Since from the first foundation of the world,
We never were accounted more then five;
Yet you forsooth, an idle prating Dame,
Would fine increase the number, and vp-start
To our high seats, decking your babbling self
With usurped titles of our dignity.
An idle p•ating dame: know fond Auditus,
Records affirm my title full as good,
As his amongst the sieve is counted best.
Lingo confess the truth, you are wont to lie.
I say so too, therefore I do not lye,
But now spite of you all I speak the truth.
You five among vs subjects tyrannise,
Making the sacred name of common sense,
A cloak to cover your enormities:
Hee bears the rule, hoe's judge but judges still,
As hoe's informed by your false evidence:
So that a plaintiff cannot have access,
But through your gates hee hears but what, nought else
But that thy crafty ears to him conveys,
And all hee sees is by proud Visus showed him:
And what hee touches is by Tactus hand,
And smells I know but through Olfactus nose,
Gustus begins to him what ere he tastes:
By these quaint tricks free passage hath been bard
That I could never equally bee heard,
But well tic well.
Lingo thy feeble sex,
Hath hither-to with-held my ready hands
That longed to pluck that nimble instrument,
O horrible ingratitude? that thou,
That thou of all the rest should threaten me:
Who by my means conceiust as many tongues,
As Neptune closes lands betwixt his arms;
The ancient Hebrew clad with mysteries,
The learned Greek rich in fit Epithets.
Blessed in the lovely marriage of pure words,
The Caldy wise, the Arabian Physical,
The Romaine Eloquent, and Tuscane grave,
The Braving Spanish and the smooth-tongd French,
These precious Jewels that adorn thine ears.
All from my mouths rich Cabinet are stolen,
How oct hast thou been chaind unto my tongue.
Hanged at my lips and ravished with my words,
So that a speech fair fetherd could not fly:
But thy ea•es pit-fall caught it instantly,
But now O Heavens.
O heavens thou wrongst me much,
Thou wrongst me much thus falsely to upbraid me:
Had not I g•anted thee the use of hearing,
That sharpe edged tongue whetted against her moister,
Those pussing lungs, those teeth those dropsy lips,
That scale•ing throat those nosthril•s full of ire▪
Thy palate proper instruments of speech,
Like to the winged chanters of the wood,
Uttering nought else but idle siflements,
Tunes without sense, words inarticulate:
Had near been able to 'haue abused me thus.
Words are thy Children but of my begetting.
Perfidious Liar how can I endue•e thee,
Call my unspotted chastity in Question:
O could I use t•e B•eath mine anger spends,
I•de make thee know.
Heavens look on my distress,
Desend me from this railing viperesle:
For if I stay her words sharpe vinegar,
Will feet me through, Lingo I must be gone:
I hear one cal me more then earnestly.
Nay the loud cannoning of thunder-boults,
Screeking of Wolves, howling of tortured Ghos•s
Pursue thee still and fill thy amazed ea•es
With cold astonishment and horrid fears:
O how these senses mufftle common sense:
And 〈◊〉, and more with pleasing objects strive,
To dull his judgment and preuert his will
To their be-hests, who were he not so wrapped
In the dus•kie clouds of their dark policies,
Would never suffer right to suffer wrong,
Fie Lingo wilt thou now degenerate:
Art not a woman, dost not love revenge,
Delightful speeches, sweet persuasions
I have this long time used to get my right,
My right that is to make the Senses six;
And have both name and power with the rest.
Oft have I seasoned savoury periods,
With sugared words, to delude Gustus taste,
And oft embellished my entreatiue phrase
With smelling flowers of vernant Rhetoric,
Lemming and flashing it with various Dyes,
To draw proud Visus to me by the eyes:
And oft perfumed my petitory stile,
With Ciuet-speach, t'entrap Olfactus Nose,
And clad my sell•e in Silken Eloquence,
To allure the nicer touch of Tactus hand,
But ell's become lost labour, and my cause
Is still procrastinated; therefore now,
Hence ye base off-spring of a broken mind,
Supple entreaties and smooth flatteries:
Go kiss the loue-•ec lips of puling Gulls,
That still their Brain to quench their loves disdain,
Go guild the tongues of Bawds and Parasites,
Come not within my thoughts. But thou Deceit,
Break up the pleasure of my Brim-full breast,
Enrich my mind with subtle policies.
Well then Isle go, whither? nay what know I?
And do, in faith I will, the devil knows what,
What if I set them, all at variance,
And so obtain to speak, it must be so,
It must be so, but how? there lies the point:
How? thus: cut the devise will never prove,
Augment it so, twill be too soon descried,
Or so, nor so, it is too too dangerous,
Pish, none of these, what if I take this course? ha?
Why there it goes, good, good most excellent,
He that will catch Eels must disturb the flood,
The Chicken's hatched in faith, for they are proud,
And soon will take a cause of disagreement.
I see the heavens nurse my new-borne devise,
For lo my page Mendacio comes already,
To file and Bu••each that I hammerd out,
Never in better time Mendacio,
What hast thou done?
Done, yes long ago.
First possible thous should dispatch so soon?
Madame, I had no sooner told
Tactus, that Gustus would fine speak with him:
But I spied Visus, Gustus and the rest,
And se•ued them all with sauce of several lies,
Now the last Sense I spake with was Olfactus,
Who having smelt the meaning of my message,
Straight blew his nose, and quickly puffed me hither,
But in the whirlwind of his furious blast,
Had not by chance a Cobweb held me fast,
Mendacio had been with you long ere this,
Witness this lye, Mendacio's with me now,
But sir out of jesting will they come?
Yes and it like your Ladyship presently:
Here may you have me pressed to flatter them.
Isle slatter no such proud Companions,
Twill doe no good, therefore I am determined
To leave such baseness.
Then shall I turn and bid them stay at home.
No, for their coming hither to this grove,
Shall be a means to further my devise,
Therefore I pray thee Mendacio go presently,
Run you vile Ape.
Whether?
What dost thou stand?
Till I know what to doe.
S'pretious it is true,
So might thou finely ore-run thine errand.
Hast to my Chest.
I, I,
There shalt-thou find,
A gorgeous Robe, and golden Coronet,
Convey them hither nimbly, let none see them.
Madam, I fly, I fly.
But here you sir?
Lock up your fellow Servant, Veritas,
I warrant you,
You need not fear so long as I am with you.
What colour is the Robe?
There is but one.
The Key Madam, the Key.
By •uno how forgetful is sudden speed.
Here take it, run.
Isle be here instantly.
Meanwhile this Crown and gorgeous ornament,
Were the great prize, for which five Orators,
With the sharpe weapons of their tongues contended:
But all their speeches were so equal wrought,
And alike gracious, that if his were witty
His was as wise; the thirds fair eloquence
Did pararell the fourths fi•me g•auitie,
The lasts good gesture kept the Balance even
With all the rest so that the sharpest eye,
And most judicious censor could not judge
To whom the hanging victory should fall,
Therefore with one consent they all agreed,
To offer up both Crown and Robe to me,
As the chief patronise of their profession,
Which heretofore I holily have kept,
Like to amisers gold, to look on only.
But now Isle put them to a better use,
And venture both, in hope to—
Have I not hied me Madam? look you here,
What shall be done with these temptations?
They say a golden Ball,
Bred enmity betwixt three Goddesses,
So shall this Crown be author of debate,
Betwixt five Senses.
Where shall it be laid?
There, there, there, it is well, so, so, so,
A Crown's a pleasing bait to look upon,
The craftiest Fox will hardly scope this trap.
Come lets vs away, and leave it to the chance.
Nay rather let me stand close here-abouts,
And see the event.
Do so, and if they doubt
How it came there, fine them some pretty fable,
How that some God—
Tut, tut, tut, let me alone,
I that have fained so many hundred Gods,
Can easily forge some fable for the turn:
Whist Madame, away, away, you fright the Foul,
Tactus comes hard by, look you.
First he for certain?
Yes, yes, yes, it is he.
It is he indeed.
Now chaste Diana grant my nets to hold.
The blasting Child-hood of the cheerful morn
Is almost grown a youth and ouer-climbes
Yonder gilt Eastern hills, about which time,
Gustus most earnestly importund me,
To meet him here abouts, what cause I know not.
You shall do shortly to your cost I hope.
Sure by the Sun it should be nine a clock.
What a star-gazer, will you near look down?
Clear is the Sun and blew the Fi•moment,
Me thinks the heavens do smile.
At thy nishap.
To look so high and stumble in a trap.
High thoughts have slippry feet, I had well no• fallen.
Well doth he fall that rises with a fall.
Whats this?
O are you taken, tic in vain to strive.
How now?
You'll be so entangled straight.
A Crown?
That it will be heard.
And a Robe.
To loose your self.
A Crown and a Robe.
It had been fitter for you, to have found a fools
coat and a Babble, hey, hey.
Iupiter, Iupiter how came this here?
O Sir Iupiter is making Thunder hee here is you not,
here is one knows better.
Tic wondrous rich, ha, but sure it is not so, ho,
Do I not sleep and dream of this good luck, ha.
No I am awake and feel it now
Whose should it be?
Set up a Si quis for it.
Mercury alls mine own, here is none to cry halfes
mine.
When I am gone,
Tactus thy sneezing somewhat did potent,
Was ever man so fortunate as I?
To break his shins at such a stumbling Block,
Roses and Bays pack hence: this Crown and Robe,
My Brows and Body circles and inuests.
How gallantly it fits me, sure the slave,
Measurd my head that wrought this Coronet.
They lie that say Complexions cannot change:
My Blot's 〈◊〉, and I am transformed,
Unto the sacred temper of a King,
Me think I here my noble Parasites
Stiling me Caesar, or great Alexander,
Licking my feet and wondering where I got
This precious ointment; how my pace is mended,
How princely do I speak, how sharpe I threaten:
Peasants Isle curb your head strong impudence:
And make you tremble when the Lyon roots,
Yea earth-bred wo•mes. O for a looking glass:
Poets will w•ite whole volumes of this scarre,
VVhere's my attendants? Come hither Sir quickly.
Or by the wings of Her•es.—
Ay me Olfactus comes, I called too soon,
Heel have half part I fear what shall I do!
Where shall I run? how shall I shift him of!
This is the time &amp; this the place appointed,
Where Visiu promised to confer with me,
I think hoe's there—No, no, tic Tactus sure.
How now? What makes you sit so nicely?
Its past imagination, its so indeed.
How fast his deeds are fixed and how melancholy he
looks. Tactus, Tactus.
For this is true, Mans life is wondrous brittle.
He's mad I think he talks so Idly, so ho, Tactus.
And many have been metamorphosed,
To stranger matters and more uncouth fonnes,
I must go nearer him he doth not hear.
And yet me thinks, I speak as I was wont
And—
Tactus, Tactus.
Olfactus as thou love come not near me,
Why art thou hatching eggs you are feared to break them
Touch me not least thou chance to break my life.
Whats this under thee?
If thou meddle with me I am utterly undone,
Why man what ails thee?
Let me alone and Isle tell thee,
Lately I came from fine Fantastic house.
So I be•eeue for thar't very foolish.
No sooner had I parted out of doors,
But up I held my hands before my face:
To shield mine eyes from the lights piercing beams,
When I protest I saw the Sun as clear,
Through these my palms as through a prospective▪
No marvel, for when I beheld my fingers:
I saw my fingers near transformed to glass,
Opening my breast, my Breast was like a window,
Through which I plainly did perceive my heart:
In whose two Concaues I discerned my thoughts,
Confuse•dly lodged in great multitudes.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, why this is excellent,
Momus himself can find no fault with thee
Thou'st make a passing live▪ Anatom••.
And decide the Question much disputed:
Betwixt the Galenists and Aristotle.
But when I had arrived and set me down,
Viewing my self, my self ay me was changed.
As thou now see to a perfect urinal.
To a perfect urinal, O monstrous monstrous, art not mad
to think so?
I do not think so, but I say I am so,
Therefore Olfactus come not near I advise you:
See the strange working of dull mellanchollie.
Whose drossy drying the feeble Brain,
Corrupts the sense, deludes the Intellect.
And in the souls fair table falsely graves,
Whole squadrons of fantastical Chimeras
And thousand vain imaginations:
Making some think their heads as big as ho•ses,
Some that they are dead, some that they are turned to Wolves:
As now it makes him think himself all glass,
Tactus dissuade thy self, thou doest but think so.
Olfactus if thou love me get thee gone,
I am an urinal I dare not stir.
For fear of cracking in the Bottom.
Wilt thou sit thus all day?
Unless thou help me.
Bedlam must help thee, what would have me do!
Go to the City make a Case fit for me.
Stuff it with wool, then come again and fetch.
Ha, ha, ha, thou'lt be laughed out of case &amp; countenance.
I care not, so it must be, or I cannot stir.
I had best leave troubling him he's obstinate, (Urinal
I leave you) but aboue all things take heed Iupiter sees you
not, for if he doe heel ne'er make water in a sieve: again thoult
serve his turn so sit to carry his water unto Aesculapius, Fare∣well
Urinal, Farewell.
Speak not so loud, the sounds enough to crack me,
What is he gone? I an Urinal, ha, ha, ha, I protest I might have
had my face washed finely, if he had meant to abuse me: I an
Urinal, ha, ha, ha, go to▪ Urinal you have escaped a fair scou•ing,
well Isle away, and get me to mine own house, there Isle lock
up my self fast, playing the Chimick, augmenting this one
Crown to troops of Angels, with which gold-winged mes∣sengers,
I mean,
To work great wonders, as to build and purchase,
Fare daintily, tie up men's tongues, and loose them,
Command their lives, their goods, their liberties,
And captive all the world with chains of gold,
Hey, hey, tery linkum tinkum.
O Hercules!
Fortune the Queen, delights to play with me,
Stopping my passage with the sight of Visus,
But as he makes hither. Isle make hence,
Theres more ways to the wood then one.
What more Devils to affright me?
O Diabolo, Gustus comes here to vex me.
So that I poor wretch, am like a Shuttlecock betwixt two
Battledores▪ If I run there, Visus beats me to Scilla, If here,
then Gustus blows me to Carybdi•.
Neptune hath sworn my hope shall suffer shipwreck.
What shall I say?
Mine Vrinal's too thin to bide the fury of such stormcs as these.
Gustus good day.
I cannot have a bad,
Meeting so fair an omen as your self.
Shall I? wilt prove? ha? well it is best to venture.
Saw you not Tactus, I should speak with him.
Perchance so, a sudden lye hath best luck.
That face is his, or else mine eye's deceived,
Why how now Tactu•, what so gorgeous?
Where did thou get these fair habiliments?
Stand back I charge you as you love your lives,
By Styx, the first that touches me shall dye.
I can discern no weapons, will he kill vs?
Kill you? not I, but come not near me you had best.
Why, art thou mad?
Friends as you love your lives,
Venture not once to come within my reach.
Why dost threaten so?
I do not threaten, but in pure love advise you for the best,
Dare no to to touch me but hence fly a pace,
Add wings unto your feet and save your lives.
Why what's the matter Tactus prethe tell me?
If you will needs ieopard your live; so long,
As hear the▪ round of my amazedness,
Then for your better safety stand aside.
How full of ceremonies▪ sure he'll conjure,
For such like Robes Magicians use to wear.
Isle see the end▪ though he should unlock Hell:
And set the infernal hags at liberty,
How rash is man on bidden arms to rush.
It was my chance, O chance most miserable,
To walk that way that to Crumena leads.
You mean Cremona a little Town hard by.
I say Crumena, called Vacua,
A Town which doth, and always hath belongd,
Chiefly to Scholars: from Crumena walls,
I saw a man came stealing craftily,
Apparelled in this vesture which I wear,
But seeing me eft-soones, he took his heals,
And threw his garment from him all in hast,
Which I perceiving to be richly wrought,
Took it me up: But good now get you gone,
Warned by my harms, and scope my misery.
I know no dange•, leave these circumstances.
No sooner had I put it on my back,
But suddenly mine eyes began to dim,
My joints wa•e sore, and all my body burn
With most intestiue torture, and at length,
It was too evident, I had caught the plague.
The plague, away good Gustus lets be gone,
I doubt it is true, now I remember me,
Crumena Vacua never wants the plague.
Tactus Isle put my self in jeopardy to pleasure thee.
No gentle Gustus, your absence is the only thing I wish,
Least I infect you with my company.
Farewell.
I willingly would stay to do thee good.
A thousand thanks, but since I needs must die,
Let it suffice, death only murders me,
Oh it would augment the dolor of my death,
To know my self the most unhappy Bow,
Through which pale death should aim his shafts at you.
Tactus farewell, yet die with this good hope,
Thy corps shall be interred as they ought.
Go make my Tomb, provide my funerals, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Excellent Asses thus to be deluded,
Bewail his death and cruel destinies,
That lives, and laughs your fooleries to scorn,
But wher's my Crown, oh here: I well deserve,
Thus to be crowned for two great victories▪ ha, ha, ha,
Visus take care my corps be well interred:
Go make my tomb, and write upon the stone.
Here lies the Sense, that lying gulled them all,
With a false plague, and fained Urinal.
Tactus, Tactus.
O Iupiter, it is Auditus ell's mart, I doubt the sly knave
here is so far, but yet Isle grope him: how now Ea•es, what make
you here, ha?
Nay, what make you here, I pray what were you talk∣ing
even now, of an Ass, &amp; a Crown, &amp; an Urinal &amp; a plague?
A plague on you what I?
Oh, what you.
O I had well nigh forgot nothing, but I say—
What?
That if a man (do you mark sir) being sick of the plague
(do you see sir) had a a, a, hem, hem, (this cold troubles me, It
makes me cough sometimes extremely,) had a French Crown,
(sir you understand me) lying by him, and (come hither, come
hither) &amp; would not bestow 2. pence (do you hear) to buy an v∣renal
(do you mark me) to cary his water to the Phisitiā, (hem)
What of all this?
I say such a one was a very Ass, this was al I use to speak
to my self, whē I am alone; but Auditus, when shall wee hear a
new set of singing-books, or th'viols, or the cō•ort of Instrumēts.
This was not al, for I heard mētiō of a tomb, &amp; an epitaph.
True, true, I made my self merry with this Epitaph, upon
such a fools tomb thus a, thus, thus, plague brought this man,
(foh I have forgotten) ô thus, plague brought this man (so, so, so)
unto his burial, because, because, because, (hem, hem) because he
would not buy an urinal, come, come Auditus shall we here thee
play, the Lyeroway, or the Lute•-wa• shall we, or the Cornet, or
any Music, I am greatly revived when I hear.
Tactus, Tactus, this will not serve, I heard all, you have
not found a Crown: you, no, you have not.
Peace, peace, faith peace, come hither, hark thee
good now.
I cannot hold I must needs tell,
O do not, do not, do not, come hither, will you bee
a fool?
Had he not wings upon his feet and shoulders?
Yes, yes and a fine wand in his hand,
Curiously wrapped with a pair of snakes.
Will half content you, pish twil ne'er be known.
My life, it was Mercury.
I do not know his name but this I am sure his hat
had wings vp'ont.
Doubtless it was he, but say my Boy what did he?
First I beheld him hovering in the air,
And then down stouping, with a hundred gires:
His feet he fixed on Mount Ch•phil•n,
From whence he flew and lighted on that plain,
And with disdainful steps soon glided thither:
Whether arrived, he suddenly unfolds
A gorgeous Robe, and glittering ornament,
And lay them all, upon that hillock:
This done he wafts his wand, took wing again,
And in a moment vanished out of sight,
With that mine eyes began stare, and heart grew cold,
And all my quivering joints with sweat bedewed:
My heals my thought had wings as well as his,
And so away I run, but by the way:
I met a man as I thought coming thither,
What marks had he?
He had a great—what this is he, this is he,
What Tactus?
This was the plauge vexed him so,
Tactus your Grave gapes, for you are you ready:
Since you must needs die, do as others do,
Leave all your goods behind you; bequeath the
Crown and Robe, to your executo•s.
No such matter I like the Egiptian Knights,
For the more state, will be buried in them.
Come, come deliver:
What will you take my purse from me?
No but a Crown, thats just more then your own.
Ha, whats this? tic a very small hand,
What Inscription is this?
Hee of the five that proves himself the best,
Shall have his Temples with this Coronet blessed.
This Crown is mine, and mine this garment is,
For I have always been accounted best.
Next after me, I as your self at any time: besides I
found it first, therefore tic mine.
Neither of yours, but mine as much as both,
And mine the most of any of you all,
Give me it or else—
Isle make you late repent it—
Presumptuous as you are—
Spite of your teeth—
Never till now a ha it works a pace,
Visus I know tic yours and yet me thinks:
Auditus you should have some challenge to it,
But that your title Tactus is so good:
Gustus I would swear the Coronet were yours,
What will you all go brawl about a trifle:
View but the pleasant coast of Microcosm,
First not great pity to be rent with wars,
First not a shame, to stain with brinish tears,
The smiling cheeks of euer-cheer•full peace,
First not far better to live quietly:
Then broil in fury of dissention,
Give me the Crown ye shall not disagree,
If I can please you; Isle play Paris part,
And most unpartial judge the controversy:
Sauce-box go meddle with your Ladies fa•no,
and prate not here.
I speak not for my self, but for my Countries safe commodity.
Sir be still.
Nay and you be so hot the devil part you,
Isle to Olfactus and send him amongst you.
O that I were▪ Alecto for your sakes:
How liberally would I bestow my snakes.
Tactus upon thine honour,
I challenge thee to meet me here,
Strong as thou can provide in tha•flernoone.
I vnder-take the Challenge, and here is my hand,
In sign thou shalt be answered.
Tactus Isle join with thee, on this condition,
That if we win, he that fought best of vs,
Shall have the Crown, the other wear the Robe.
Give me your hand I like the motion.
Auditus shall we make our forces double,
Upon the same te•mes.
Very willingly,
Come lets away fear not the victory.
Rights more advantage, then an host of soldiers.
I long to see those hot-spur senses at it, they say they
have gallant preparations, and not unlikely, for most of the sol∣diers
are ready in Aims since the last field fought against their
yearly enemy Meleager, &amp; his wife Acre•sia; that Conquest hath
so fleshed them that no peace can hold them. But had not Me∣leaguer
been sick, and Acrasia drunk, the senses might have
whistled for the victory.
Foh, what a stink of gunpouder is yonder?
Whose this! oh oh tic Appetitus, Gustus his hungry
Parasite.
I cannot endure the smoking of Guns, the thunde∣••ng
of drums, I had rather here the merry hacking of pot∣herbs,
and see the reeking of a hot capon. If they would use no
other Bucklers in war, but shields of Brawn, brandish no
swords but sweards of Bacon, trail no spears, but spar•ibs of
Pork, and instead of Hargebush pieces discharge Hartichock∣pies,
toss no pikes but boiled pickrills, then Appetitus would
rouse up his crest, and bear up him self with the proudest.
Ah here is a youth stark nought at a trench, but old
dog at a trencher, at tall squire at a square table.
But now my good masters must pardon me, I am not
for their service, for their service is without service, and indeed
their service is too hoot for my diet. But what. If I bee not my
self▪ but only this be my spirit that wanders up and down, and
Appetitus be kilt in the Camp, the Devil he is as soon, howes
that possible? tut tut I know I am, •, I am 〈…〉, and alive
too, by this Infallible token, that I feel my self hungry.
Thou might have taken a bett• token of thy self,
by knowing thou a•t a fool.
Well thē though I made my fellow soldiers admire the
beauty of my back &amp; wonder at the nimbleness of my hee'es,
yet now will I at safety at home, tell in what dangers they are a∣broad,
•le speak nothing but guns, and glove•s, and sty•es, and
phalanges, &amp; squadrons, and barricade, ambus•adoes, palm∣does
blank point dept, counterpoint, counter sc•ate, •allies and
lies, saladoes, tarantan•aras, ranta, ta•a tara, hey
I must take the fife out of his mouth or he'll ne'er atone.
But aboue all Isle bee sure on my knees to thank the
great—
Who am I, who am I, who I?
By the bloud-staind fashion of Mauors—I am on your side.
Why, who am I?
Are you a soldier?
No.
Then you are moister Hell•• the Bear-heard,
No, no, he's dead.
Or Gulono the gutty Seriant, or Delphino the Venture, or
else I know you not, for these are all my acquaintance.
Would I were hanged if I be any of these.
What Mend•cio, by the faith of a Knight thou art
welcome, I must borrow thy Whetstone to sharpen the edges
of my martial complements.
By the faith of a Knight, what a pox, where are thy
Spurs?
I need no spurs, I ride like Pegasus on a winged horse,
on a swift Gannet, my Boy, called fear.
What should thou fear in the wars? hoe's not a
good soldier that hath not a good stomach.
O, but the stink of powder spoils Appetitus stomach,
and then thou know when it is gone, Appetitus is dead, there∣fore
I very manfully drew my sword, and flourished it bravely
about mine ears, kissed, and finding my self her, most manfully
ran away.
All heart indeed, for thou ran like a Hart out of the field,
It seems then the Senses mean to sight it out.
I and out-fight themselves I think, and all about a tri∣fl,
a paltry babble, found I know not where.
Thou art deceived, they fight for more then that, a
thing called superiority, of which the Crown is but an
Emblem.
Mendacio hang this superiority, Crown me no
Crown but Bacchus Crown of Roses, give me no Sceptre, but
a fat Capons leg, to show that I am the great King of Hun∣garie,
therefore I prithee talk no more of state-matters, but in
brief, tell me my little rascal, how thou hast spent thy time
this many a day?
Faith in some credit since thou saw me last.
How so, where?
Every where; in the Court your Gentlewomen hang
me at their Apron strings, and that makes them answer so rea∣deli.
In the City I am honoured like a God, none so well ac∣quainted
with your tradesmen: your Lawyers all the Term
time hire me of my Lady, your Gallants if they hear my name
abused, they stab for my sake: your Travellers so dote upon me
as passes, O they have good reason, for I have carried them to
many a good meal, under the Countenance of my familiarity:
nay your States-men have oftentimes closely cōueied me under
their tongues, to make their policies more currant, As for old∣men
they challenge my Company by authority.
I am exceeding glad of your great promotion.
Now when I am disposed I can Philophy it in the
University, with the subtilest of them all.
I cannot be persuaded that to art acquainted with
Scholars ever since thou were pressed to death in a Print-house.
No, why I was the first founder of the 3. sects of Phy∣losophy
except on of the Peripatetticks who accknowledge A∣ristotle
(I confess) their great Grand-father.
Thou Boy, how is this possible? thou art but a Child
and there were sects of Philosophy before thou were borne.
Appetitus, thou mistake me, I tell thee, 3000 years
ago was Mendacio borne in Greece, nursed in Create and ever
since honoured every where: Isle bee sworn I held old Homers
pen when hee write his Illiads, and his Odisses.
Thou had need, for I hear say he was blind.
I helped Herodotus to pen some part of his muses, lent
Ply•y ink to write his history, rounded Rabalais in the ear
when he historified Pantagruell, as for Lucian I was his Genius,
O those two Books De Vera history howsoever they go un∣der
his name, Isle be sworn I writ them every title.
Sure as I am Hungry thou'st have it for lying. But hast
thou rusted this latter time for want of exercise?
Nothing less▪ I must confess I would fine have •og∣general
Stow and great Hollings-head on their elbows, when they
were about their Chronicles, and as I remember Sir Iohn Man∣devils
travels, and a great part of the Decades were of my do∣ing.
But for the mirror of Knight-hood, Beuis of Southampton,
Palmerin of England, Amadis of Gaul, Huon de Bordeaux, Sir
Guy of Warwick Martin marprellate, Robin-hood, Garragantua,
Gerilion and a thousand such exquisite monuments as these, no
doubt but they breath on my breath up and down.
Downwards Isle swear for the'rs stinking lies in them.
But what should I light a Candle to the bright Sun∣shine
of my glorious renown, the whole world is full of Men∣dacios
fame.
And so it will be so long as the world is full of fame.
But Sir how hast thou done this long time?
In as much request as thy self. To begin with the
Court as thou did, I lie with the Ladies all night, and thats the
reason they call for Cullies, and Gruellies, so early before their
pray•s, your gallāts never sup, break-fast, or Beaver without me.
Thats false for I have seen them eat with a full sto∣macke.
True, but because they know a little thing drives me
from them, therefore in midst of meat they present me with
some sharpe sauce or a dish of delicate Anchoues, or a Cauiare,
to entice me back again, nay more your old Sirs that hardly
go without a prop, will walk a mile or two every day to re∣new
their acquaintance with me, as for the Academy it is be∣holding
to me, for adding the eight province unto noble Hep∣tarchie
of the liberal sciences.
Whats that I prithee.
The most desired and honourable art of Cookery.
Now Sir in the City I am—st, st.
O the body of a Louse.
What art a louse in the City?
Not a word more for yonder comes Fantastic, and
some body else.
What a pox can Fantastic do?
Work a miracle if he would prove wise.
Tic he indeed, the vilest nup: yet the fool loves me
exceedingly but I care not for his company for if he once catch
me, I shall never be r•d of him.
Sir Boy He•resi••boy how now biting your nails?
Three things have troubled my brain this many a day,
and just now, when I was laying hold on the Invention of thē,
your sudden call, made them like Tantalus apples, fly from
my •ingers.
Some great matters questionless, what were they?
The quadrature of a circle, the Philosophers stone and
the next way to the Indies;
Thou dost well to meditate on these three things at once
for th•isle bee found out altogether, ad gre•cas calendas, but let
them pass and cary the conceit, I told you this morning to the
party you wot of. In my imagination tic Capritious, t'will
take I warrant thee.
I will Sir▪ But what say you to the gentleman that
was with you yesterday?
O I think thou meanest him that made 19. sonnets of
his mistress Busk-point;
The same, the same, Sir. You promised to help him out
with the twentieth.
By Iupiters cloven pate tic true. But wee witty fellows
are so forgetful, but stay, hue, hue, cary him this.
The gordian knot which Alexander great,
Did meanwhile cut with his all conquering sword:
Was nothing like thy Busk-point pretty Peat,
Nor could so fair an a•gury afford.
Then to conclude let him pervert Catullus his zonam soluit dive
ligatam thus, thus.
Which if I cha•nce to cut or else untie,
Thy little world Isle conquer presently.
Tic pretty, pretty, tell him it was extemporal,
Well Sir, but now for Moister Inameratos loue-letter.
Some nettling stuff in faith; let him write thus▪
Most heart commanding faced Gentlewoman, •uen as the stone
in India called Basaliscus, hurts all that looks on it: and as
the Serpent in Arabia called Smaragdu• delights the sight,
so does thy celestial orb assimilating eyes, both please, and
in pleasing wound my loue-darted heart.
But what trick shall I invent for the conclusion?
Pish any thing Love will minister Ink for the rest,
He that once begun well, hath half done, let him begin again
and there's all.
Moister Gullio spoke for a new fashion, what for him?
A fashion for his suit—let him button it down the
sleeve with four elbows, and so make it the pure hieroglyphic
of a fool.
Nay then let me request one thing of you.
What's that Boy? by this fair hand thou shalt have i•.
Mistress Superbia a Gentlewoman of my acqua•ntance
wished me to devise her a new set for her Ruff, and an odd tire,
I pray sir help me out with it.
Ah Boy in my conceit it's a heard matter to perform,
these women have well nigh tired me, with devising tires for
them, and ferme at an non plus for new sets, their heads are so
light, &amp; their eyes so coy, that I know not how to please them.
I pray Sir, she hath a bad face, and fine would have
suitors, Fantastical and odd apparel, would perchance draw
some body to look on her.
If her face be nought, in my opinion, the more view it,
the worse, bid her wear the mu•titude of her deformities under
a mask, till my leisure will serve to devise some durable, and
unstained blush of painting.
Very good Sir.
Away then, hye thee again, meet me at the Court
within this hour at the farthest. 
Oh heavens, how have I been troubled these latter times with
Women, Fools, Babes, Tailors, Poets, Swaggerers, Gulls, Ballad∣makers,
they have almost disrobed me of all the toys and tri∣fles
I can devise, were it not that I pity the poor multitude of
Printers, these Sonnet-mungers should starve for conceits, for
all Fantastic. But these puling Lovers, I cannot but laugh at
them and their Encomions of their Mistresses. They make for∣sooth
her hair of Gold, her eyes of Diamond, her cheeks of
Roses, her lips of Rubies, her teeth of Pearl, and her whole
body of Ivory: and when they have thus Idold' her like Pig∣million,
they f•ll down and worship her. Psyche, thou hast laid
a hard task upon my shoulders, to invent at •very ones ask,
were it not that I refresh my dullness once a day with my most
Angelical presence, it were unpossible for me to undergo it.
I cannot stay, I tell you it is more then time I were at
Court, I know my sovereign Psyche hath expected me this hour
In good time, yonder comes Common-sense, I imagine
it should be he by his voice.
Crave my counsel, tell me what manner of man he is?
can he entertain a man into his house, can he hold his Velvet
Cap in one hand, and vale his bonnet with the other? knows
he how to become a Scarlet gown, hath he a pair of fresh
posts at his door?
Hoe's about some hasty State-matters, he talks of posts
me thinks.
Can hee part a couple of Dogs brawling in the
street? why then choose him Mayor•upon my credit, heel
prove a wise officer.
Save you my Lord, I have attended your leisure this
hour.
Fie upon it what a toil have I had to choose them a
Mayor yonder? there's a fusty Currier will have this man:
the•e's a Chandlor wipes his nose on his sleeve, and swears it
shall not bee so. There's a Musterd-maker looks as keen as
Vinegar will have another: O this many headed multitude, it's
a hard matter to please them.
Especially where the multitude is so well headed. But
I pray you whore's Moister Memory? hath hee forgotten him∣self
that he is not here.
It is high time he were at Court, I would he
would come.
How soon a wise man shall have his wish.
Memory the season of your coming is very ripe.
Had you staid a little longer it would have bin stark rottē.
I am glad I saved it from the Swine—Spretious I
have forgot something. O my purse, my purse, why Anamnestes?
Remembrance where art thou Anamnestes Remembrance, that
wild Boy is always gadding, I remember he was at my heals,
eve• now and now the wild Rascal is vanished.
Is he not here? why then in my imagination hoe's left
behind, ô la▪ Anamnestes remembrance.
 Anon, anon, sir anon, anon sir, anon, anon
sir, anon, anon, sir.
Ha sir, what a brawling's here?
I do but give you an answer with anon Sir.
You answer sweetly, I have called you three or four
times one after another.
Sir, I hope I answered you 3. or 4. times, one in the neck
of another. But if your good worship have lent me any more
calls, tell me, and Isle repay them as I am a Gentleman.
Leave your tattle▪ had you come at first I had not spent
so much breath in vain.
The truth is Sir, the first time you called, I heard you
not, the second I understood you not, the third I knew not
whether it were you or no: the fourth I could not tell where
you were, and that's the reason I answered so suddenly.
G•e sir, run, seek every where, I have lost my
purse some where.
I go sir; Go sir, seek, run, I have lost, bring, here's a
Dogs life with a pox, shall I bee always used like a water-Spanniell.
Come good Moister Register, I wonder you be so late nowadays.
My good Lord, I remember that I knew your Grand-father
in this your place, and I remember your Grand-fathers
great Grand-fathers, Grand-fathers Fathers, Father, yet in those
days I never remember that any of them could say, that Regi∣ster
Memory ever broke one minute of his appointment.
Why good Father, why are you so late now a days?
Thus it is, the most customers I remember my self to
have, are (as your Lordship knows) Scholars, and now a
days the most of them are become Critics, bringing me home
such paltry things to lay up for them, that I can hardly find
them again.
Iupiter, Iupiter, I had thought these Flies had bit none
but my self, do Critics tickle you in faith?
Very familiarly: for they must know of me forsooth
how every idle word is written in all the musty moath-eaten
Manusripts, kept in all the old Libraties in every City be∣twixt
England and Peru.
Indeed I have noted these times to affect Anti∣quites,
more then is requisite.
I remember in the age of Assaracus and Ninus, and
about the wars of Thebes, and the siege of Troy, the•e was few
things committed to my charge, but those that were well worcester∣thy
the preserving, but now every trifle must be wrapped up in
the volume of eternity. A rich pudding-wife, or a Cobbler cānot
die but I must immortalise his name with an •pitaph: A dog
cannot peace in a Nobleman's she, but it must be sp•inkled into
the Chronicles, so that I 〈◊〉 could remēber my Treasure more
full, &amp; never emptier of honourable, and true heroical actions.
By your leave Memory you are not alone troubled,
Chronologers many of them are so so Fantastic, as
when they bring a Captain to the Combat, lifting up
his revengeful arm to disport the head of his enemy,
they'll hold up his arms so long till they have bestowed
three or four pages in describing the gold hilts of his
threating Fashion. So that in my Fancy the reader may well
wonder his adversary stabs him not, before he strikes, moreover
they are become most palpable flatterers always begging at my
gates for Invention.
This is a great fault in a Chronologer to turn Pa∣rasite:
An absolute history should bee in fear of none, neither
should hee write any thing more then truth for friend-ship, or
less for hate, but keep himself equal and constant in all his
discourses, but for vs we must bee contented, for as our honours
increase, so must the burden of the cares of our offices urge vs
to waxeheauy.
But not till our backs break, •lute there was never any
so haunted as I am, this da•e there comes a Sophister to my
house, knocks at my door, his errand being asked, forsooth his an∣swear
was to borrow a fair suit of conceits out of my war∣drop,
to apparraile a show he had in hand, and what think you
is the plot?
Nay I know not, for I am little acquainted with such
toys.
Meane-while he's somewhat acquainted with you, for
he's bold to bring your person upon the stage.
What me? I cannot remember, that I was ever brought
upon the stage before.
Yes you and you, and my self with all my Phantisticall
tricks and humours▪ but I trow I have fitted him with Fooleries
I trust heel never troble me again.
O times, O manners, when Boys dare to traduce men
in authority was ever such an attempt heard?
I remember there was▪ For (to say the truth) at my
•ast being at others (It is now, let me see, about 1800. years a
go) I was at a Commedie of Aristophanes making, (I shall no∣for
forget it) The Arch-gouernor of Athens took me by the hād
and placed me, and there I say, I saw Socrates abused most gross∣lie,
himself being then a present spectator: I remember he sate
full against me, and did not so much as show the least count∣nonce
of discontent.
In those days it was lawful, but now the abuse of
such liberty is vnsuf•arable.
Think what you will of it, I think it is done, and I
think it is acting by this time; ha•ke ha•ke, what drummings
yonder, Isle lay my life they are com• to present the show
I spake off.
It may be so; stay weal see what it is.
Fine thy self in great hast.
I warrant you Madam: I doubt it is in vain to run,
by this they are all past ouer-taking.
Is not this Lingo that is in such hast?
Yes, yes stand still.
I must speak with him.
With whom?
Issue•e your self they are all at Court ere this.
Run after them, for unless he know it—
Lingo.
O first your Lordship: I beseech you pardon me hast,
and fear, I protest put out mine eyes: I looked so long for you,
that I knew not when I had found you.
In my conceit, that•s like the man that inquired, who
saw his Ass, when himse•fe rid on him.
O my heart beats so, fie, fie, fie, fie,
I am so weary▪ foe, foe, foe, foe.
I prithee Lingo make an end.
Let me begin fi•st I beseech you, but if you will
needs have the end first, thus it is. The common-wealth of M•∣crosme
at this instant, suffers the pangs of death, it is gasping for
breath. Will you have all? it is poisne•.
What Apothecary durst be so bold as make such a con∣fection:
ha what poison first?
A golden Crown.
I mistake, or else Galen in his book De sanitate tuenda,
commends gold as restorative.
Lingo express your self.
Madam if you want breath, let me help you out.
I prithee do, do.
My Lord, the report is, that Mercury coming late
into this country, in this very place, left a Coronet with this in∣scription,
that the best of the five should have it, which the Sen∣ses
thinking to belong unto them—
Challenge each other, and are now in arms, and
'tlike your Lordship.
I protest it likes not me.
Their battles are not far hence ready ranged.
O monstrous presumption? what shall we do?
My Lord, in your great Grand-fathers time, there
was I remember such a breach amongst them, therefore my
Counsel is, that after his example by the strength of your au∣thoritie
you convent them before you.
Lingo go presently, command the Senses upon their
allegiance to our dread Sovereign Queen Psyche, to dismiss
their companies, and personally to appear before me without
any pretence of excuse.
I go my Lord.
But here you Madam, I pray you let your Pages tongue
walk with vs a little, till you return again.
With all my heart.
Hot youths I protest, saw you those warlike preparations?
Lately my Lords, I spied into the Army,
But oh, it is far beyond my reach of wit.
Or strength of utterance to describe their forces.
Go to, speak what thou can.
Upon the right hand of a spacious Hill,
Proud Visus marshalleth a puissant army,
Three thousand Egles strong, whose valiant Captain,
Is Ioues swift Thunder-bearer, that same Bird,
That hoist up Ganimede from the Trojan plains:
The vant-gard strengthened with a wondrous flight.
Of Falcons, Haggards, Hobbies, Terselets,
Lanards and Goshaukes, Sparhaukes, and Ravenous Birds.
The rereward granted to Auditus charge.
Is stoutly followed with an impetuous heard
Of stif-neckt Bulls, and many home-mad stags,
Of the best head the Forest can afford.
I promise you a fearful troupe of Soldiers.
Right opposite stands, Tactus strongly mand,
With three thousand bristled Urchins foe his Pikemen;
Four hundredth Tortesses for Elephants.
Besides a monstrous troupe of ugly spiders,
Within an ambushment he hath commanded,
Of their own guts to spin a cordage fine,
Whereof t'haue framed a net (O wondrous work)
That fastened by the Concave of the Moon,
Spreds down it self toth'earths circumference.
Tic very strange, I can not remember the like Engine at any time.
Nay more my Lord, the masks are made so strong,
That I my self upon them scale•d the heavens,
And boldly walked about the middle region,
Where in the province of the Meteors,
I saw the cloudy shops of Hail and Rain,
Garners of Snow, and Christals full of dew,
Rivers of burning Arrows, Dens of Dragons,
Huge beams of flames, and Spears like fire-brands,
Where I beheld hot Mars and Mercury,
With Rackets made of Spheres, and Balls of Stars,
Playing at Tennis for a Tun of Nectar.
And that vast gaping of the Firmament,
Under the Southern pole is nothing else,
But the great hazard of their Tennis Court,
The Zodiac is the line. The shooting Stars,
Which in an eye-bright evening seemed to fall,
Are nothing but the Balls they loose at Bandy,
Thus having took my pleasure with those sights,
By the same net I went up, I descend.
Well S•rra to what purpose tends this Strata∣ge•e?
None know directly, but I think it is,
T'intrappe the Eagles, when the Battles join.
Who •aches Tactus his part?
Under the standard of thrice hardy Tactus,
Thrice valiant Gust•s, leads his warlike forces,
An-endles multitude of desperate Apes,
Five hundred Marmose•ts and long-ta••• Monkees:
All trained to the field, and nimble Gunners.
Ima•gin theres old moving amongst them: me thinks
a handful of nuts would turn them all out of their Soldiers
coats.
Ramparts of Pastie-crust and fortes of pies,
Entrenched wi•h dishes full of Custard stuff:
Hath Gustus made; and planted ordinance,
Strange ordinance: Cannons of hollow canes:
Whose pouder's Rape-seed, charged with Turnip shot.
I Remember in the Country of Utopia, they use no o∣there
kind of Artille•y.
But whats become of O•factus?
He politically lean• to neither part,
But stands betwixt the camps as at receipt:
Having great wine his Pioners to entrench them.
In my foolish imagination Olfactus is very like the God∣desse
of victory that never takes any part but the Conquerors.
And in the woods he placed secretly.
Two hundred couple of hounds and hungry Mastiffs:
And ore his head hover at his command,
A cloud of Vul•u•es▪ which over spread the light,
Making a night before the day be done:
But to what end not known but feared of all.
I conjecture hee intends to see •he• •ight and after the
ba•tail to feed his Dogs, Hogs and Vultures upon the
murdered •••cases.
My L. I think the fury of their Anger will not bee o∣bedient
to the Message of Li•gua, for otherwise in my conceit
the• should have been here er this: with your L. good li∣king
we'll attend upon you to see the field for more certainty.
It shall be so; Come Moister Register lets walk.
Forsooth Obliuio shut the door upon me I could come
no sooner, ha? is he not here? O excellent. Would I were hanged
but I looked for a sound rap on the pate and that made me be∣fore
hand to lift up this excuse for a Buckler, I know hoe's not at
court, for here is his purse without which warrant theres no c••ming
thither, wherefore now Anamnestes sport thy self a little,
while thou art out of the prison of his company. What shall I
do? by my troth anatomize his purse in his absence. Plutus send
there be Jewels in it, that I may finely geld it of the stones—The
best sure lies in the bottom—poxed o•t here is nothing but
a company of worm eat•n papers; whats this? Memorandum
that Moister Prodigo owes me four thousand pounds and that
his lands are in pawn for it: Memorandum that I owe; that hee
owes? tic well the old slave hath some care of his credit, to
whom owes he trow I? that I owe Anamnestes? What me? I no∣for
lent him any think; ha this is good, theirs something com∣ming
to me, more then I looked for. Come on, what first, Memo∣randum
that I owe Anamnestes—a breaching; I faith Sir I
will ease you of that payment (He rends the bill) Memoran∣dum
that when I was a child Robusto tripped up my heals at
foot-bale: what a Revengeful dizard's this?
No-thing but lay you upon the Cushion Sir, how so?
Nothing but lay the Cushion upon you Sir?
What my litt•e N•m? by this foot I am sorry I mis∣took
thee.
What my little Men? by this hand it grieves me I took
thee so right, But Sir whither with these Cushions?
To lay them here that the Judges may sit softly least
my Lady L•ngua's cause go hard with her.
They should have been wrought with gold; these will
do nothing; But what makes thy Lady with the Judges?
Pish, know not? she sues for the title of a Sense, as
well as the rest that beat the name of the Pentarchy.
Will Common sense and my Moister, leave their affairs
to detennine that Controversy?
Then thou hearst nothing,
What should I hear!
All the senses fell out about a Crown fallen frō hey∣uen
and pitched a field for it, but Vicegerent Common sense hey∣ring
of it took upon him, to umpire the contention, in which re∣guard
he hath appointed them (their arms dismissed) to appear
before him, charging every on to bring as it were in a show, their
proper objects, that by them he may determine of their several excellencies.
When is all this?
As soon as they can possibly provide.
But can he tell which deserves best by their objects?
No not only; for every sense must describe his Instrumēt,
that is his house, where he performs his daily duty, so that by
the Object and the Instrument, my Lord can with great •as dis∣corn
their place and dignities.
His Lord-ships very wise.
I thou shalt hear all anon, fine moister Fantastic, and
thy master will be here shortly. But how first my little Rogue? me
thinks thou look lean upon it?
Alas how should I do otherwise that lie all night with
such a Rawbo•d Skeleton as Memory and run all day on his
Ertands▪ The Chur•e's grown so old and forgetful, that every
hour he's calling Anamnestes, remembrance, where art Anam∣nests?
Then presently some thing's lost, poor I must run for it,
and these words, run Boy. Come Sir quick, quick, quick, are
as familiar with him as the Cough, never out once mouth.
Alack▪ alack poor Rogue, I see my fortunes are better.
My Lady loves me exceedingly; she's always kissing me, so
that (I tell thee Name) Mendacios never from betwixt her lips.
Nor out of Memories mouth; but in a worse sort, al∣ways
excercising my stumps and which is more, when hee fa∣uoures
best then I am in the worst taking.
How so.
Thus when wee are friends, then must I come and bee
dandled upon his palsie-quaking knees, and he'll tell me a long
story of his acquaintance with King Priamus and his familiarity
with Nectar and how he plaid at blowe-point with Iupiter when
he was in his side-coates and how he went to look Birds-nests
with Athotis, and where hee was at Deucal•once sloud &amp; 20. such
old wives tales.
I wonder he being so old can talk so much.
Nature thou know, (knowing what an un•uly Engine the
tongue is) hath set teeth round about for watchmen, Now Sir,
my Maister's old age hath caught our all his teeth &amp; that's the
cause it runs so much at liberty
Philosopicall;
O but ther's one-thing stings me to the very heart, to see
an ugly foul idle, fat, dusty clog-head, called Obliuio preserred
before, me dost know him?
Who I, I; But care not for his acquaintāce, hang himblock∣head
I could never abide him? Thou Remembrance art the only
friend that the arms of my friendship shall embrace. Thou hast
heard Oportet mendacem esse memorem. But what of Obliu•o.
The very naming of him hath made me forget my self.
O, O, O, O, that Rascal is so made-of every where.
Who Obliuio?
I, for our Courtiers hug him cōtinually in their ungrateful
bosoms, &amp; your smoth-belly fat back, barrel-pauncht, tū-gut∣ted
drones are ever without him, as for Memory he's a false hear∣ted
fellow, he always deceives th•̄, they respect not him, except
it be to play a game at Chests, Primero, Saunt, Maw, or such like.
I cannot think such fellows have to do with Obliuio
since they never got any thing to forget.
Again, there prodig all swagerers that are so much boūd to
their Creditors, if they have but one Cross about them, they'll
spend it in Wine upon Obliui•.
To what purpose I prithee?
Only in hope heel wash them in the Lethe of their cares.
Why then no man cares forth.
Yes a company of studious Paper-wormes and lean
Scholars, and niggardly scraping Usurers, &amp; a troupe of heart∣eating
envious persons, and those cancker-stomackt spiteful
creatures, that furnish up common place-bookes with other
men's faults•▪ The time hath been in those golden days, when
Saturn reigned, that if a man received a benefit of another, I
was presently sent for to put him in mind of it, but now in
these Iron after-noones, save your friends life, and Obliuio Will
be more familiar with him then you.
Fantastic not at Court? first possible it is the strangest
accident that ever was heard oft, I had thought the Ladies and
Gallants would never lye without him.
Hist, hist, Mendaicio I prithee observe Heuresis, it seems
he cannot find his Moister, that's able to find out all things;
and art thou now at a fault, can not find out thine own my∣ster?
nor? Isle try one more way. O yes.
What a Proclamation for him?
I, I, his nimble head is always full of proclamations▪
O yes.
But doth he cry him in the wood?
O good sir, and good reason, for every beast hath
Fantasy at his pleasure.
O yes• if any man can tell any tidings, of a spruce,
neat, apish, nimle, finbe, foolish, absurd, humorous, conceited,
Phantastique Gallant, with hollow eyes, sharpe look, answered
complexion, •e•ger face, wearing as many toys in his appear∣rell,
as fooleries in his looks and gesture, let him come •orth &amp;
certify me thereof, and shall have for his reward.—
I can tell you where he is, what shall he have?
A box of the ear sura, (snap)
How now Invention, are you so quick fingered? i∣faith,
ther's your principal sir, (snap) and here's the interest
ready in my hand (snap) 
Yea? have you found out scratching? now I remember me.
Do you bite you Rascal?
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, here's the lively picture of this axi∣ome,
A quick Invention and a good Memory can never agree. Fie
fie, fie Heuresis, beat him when hoe's down?
Prithee lets alone proud Iack-an-Apes, Isle—
What will you do?
Untruss thy points, and whip thee, thou paltry—
Let me go Mendacio if thou love me, shall I put up the—
Come, come, come you shall fight no more in good
faith: Heuresis, your Moister will catch you anon.
My Moister, where is he?
Isle bring you to him, come away.
Anamnestes, I scorn that thou should think I go
away for fear of any thing thou can do unto me; here's my
hand as soon as thou can pick the least occasion, put up thy fin∣ger
I am for thee.
When thou dare Heuresis, when thou dare, Isle be as
ready as thy self at any time.
This Heuresis, this Invention, is the proudest Iack-a-napes, the
pertest self conceited Boy that eve• breathed, because forsooth
some odd Poet, or some such Phantastique fellows, make
much on him, there's no ho with him, the vile dandi-pra•te will
ore-looke the proudest of his acquaintance: but well I remem∣ber
me, I learnt a trick t'other day, to bring a Boy ore the thigh
finely, if he come, in faith Isle tickle him with it.
As I am a Rascal Name, they are all coming, I see
Moister Register trudging hither, as fast as his three fee•e will
carry up his four Ages.
Ah you le•den held Rascal.
He•e it is Sir, I have it, I have it,
Is this all the hast you make.
A••t like your worship your Clog-head Obliuio went
before me, and foiled the trail of your footsteps, that I could
hardly undertake the quest of your purse forsooth.
You might have bee•e here long ere this: Come
hither sir, come •ether, what must you go round about, goodly,
goodly, you are so full of circumstances.
In t•uth Sir, I was here before, and missing you, went
back into the City, sought you in every Ale-house, Inn, Ta∣ue•no,
Dicing-house, Tennis-court, Stews, and such like places,
likely to find your worship in.
Havillaine, am I a man likely to be found in such ply∣ces,
ha?
No, no sir, sir but I was told by my Lady Lingua's page
that your Worship was seeking me, therefore I inquired for
you in those places where I knew you would ask for me, and
it please your worship.
I remember an other quarrel sir, but well, well, I
have no leisure.
Lin•ua, the Senses by our appointment anon are to
present their objects before vs; seeing therefore they be not
in readiness, we lice•se you in the mean while, either in your
own person, or by your Advocate, to speak what you can for
your self.
My Lord if I should bring before your honour all my
friends ready to importune you in my behalf, I should have
so many Retoricians, Logitians, Lawyers and which is more,
so many Women to attend me, that this Groa•e would hard∣lie
contain the Company, when•e•o•e to avoid the tedious∣ness
I wily the whole cause upon the tip of mine own
tongue.
Be as brief as the necessity of our short time
requires.
My Lord, though the Imb••ill tas of my fe•ble
sex, might! d•awe me back, •rome t•is T••bunall, with the
habenis to wit Timorss and the Catenis Pudori•, notwithstand∣ing
being so fairly led on with the gracious 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 of your
iustissimae. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Especially so aspremente spurd' con gli sproni
di necess••a mia pungent, I will without the help of Orators,
commit the tot•m sal•tem of my action to the Volutabilitati
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, which (ass vos•r• bonn• playscur) I will fi∣nish
with more then Laconic• bre•itate.
Whats this? here's a Gallemaufry of speech indeed.
I remember about the year 1602. many used this
skew kind of language. Which in my opinion is not much un∣like
the man Ply••ny the Son of Lagus, King of Egypt,
brought for a spectacle hal•e white half black.
I am persuaded these same language makers
have the very quality o• cold in their wi•, that freezes all He∣terog•n••ll
languages together, congealing English Tynne,
Grecian Gold, Romaine Latin all in a l•mp.
Or rather in my imagination like your Fantastical
Gulls Apparel, wearing a Spanish Felt, a French Doblet, a
Granado Stocking, a Dutch Slop, an Italian Cloak, with a
Welch frise Jerkin.
Well, leave your toying, we cannot pluck the
least feather from the soft wing of time. Therefore Lingo go on
but in a more formal manner, you know an ingenio•s Oratiō
must neither swell above• the Banks with insolent words, nor
cre•pe too shallow in the ford, with vulgar terms, but run e∣qually,
smooth, &amp; cheerful, through the clean current of a
pure stile.
My Lord, this one thing is sufficient to confirm my
worth to be equ•ll o• better then the seases, whose best opera∣tions
are nothing till I polish them with perfection; for their
knowledge is only of things present, quickly subluned with the
deft file of time; whereas the tongue is able to recount things
past, and often pronounce things to come by this means re-e∣defying
such Excellencies, as Time and Age doe easily depopu∣late.
But what profitable service, do you undertake for our
d•ead Q••en Psych•?
O how I am ravished to think how infinitely she hath
grace• me with her most acceptable service. But aboue all
(which you Moister Register may well remember) when her
highness taking my m•uch for her instrument, with the Bow
of my tongue st•ooke so heavenly a touch upon my teeth, that
she cha•med •he very Tigers a sleep, the listening Bears
and Lions, to couch at her fee••, while the Hills leaped, and
the woods d••nced, to the sweet harmony of her most Ange∣licall
accents.
I remember it very well, Orpheus played upon the
Harp, while she sang about some four yea•es after the Co•∣tention
betwixt Apollo and P••, and a little before the excori∣ation
of M••syas.
By the same token the River Alpheus, at that time pur∣suing
his beloved. 〈◊〉, dischanel'd himself of his former
course to bee partaker of their admirable consort, and the
music being ended, thrust himself h•ad-long into
earth, the next way to follow his amorous Chase; if you
go to A•cadi• you shall see his coming up again.
Forward Li•gua with your reason.
How oft hath her Excellence employed me as Im∣bassador
in her most urgent aff•ire• to foreign Kings and
Emperors I may say to the Gods themselves. How many
bloodless Battles have my persuasions attained, when the
senses forces have been 〈◊〉. Howe many Rebels
have I reclaimed when her s•cred authority, was little regar∣ded
(her Laws without exprobation be it spoken) had been al∣together
vnpubli•head, her will unperformed, her illustrio•s
deeds vnrenoumed had not the silver sound of my trumpet
•illed the whole circuit of the Vniuerse with her deserved
fame. Her Cities would dissolve, tra••ique would decay friend∣ships
be broken, were not my speech the knot▪ Mercury, and
M••tique, to bind, defend, and glewe them together. What
should I say more; I can never speak enough of the vnspeake∣able
praise of speech, wherein I can find no other imp•fection
at all, but that the most exquisite power &amp; excellence of speech
cannot sufficiently express the exquisite power, and excellence
of speaking.
Lingo your service and dignity we confess to be
great, nertheles these reasons prove you not to have the na∣ture
of a sense.
By your L. ships favour I can soon prove that a sense
is a faculty, by which our Queen sitting in her privy Cham∣ber
hath intelligence of exterior occurrents. That I am of this
nature, I prove thus. The object which I challenge is—
Stay, stay my Lo. defer I beseech, defer the Judgment.
Who's this that boldly interrupts vs this, hum.
My name is Appetitus, Common servant to the Pen∣tarchy
of the senses, who understanding that your Honour was
handling this Action of Lin•uae• sent me hither thus hastily,
most humbly requesting the Bench to cons•der these A ticles
they allege against her before you proc•ede to judgment.
Hum, here's good stuff, Moister Register read thē
Appetitus you may depart and bid your Mistress make conue∣nient
speed
At your Lordships pleasure.
I Remember that I forgot my spectacles, I left them
in the 349. page of H•lls Chronicles, where hee tells a great
wonder of a multitude of Mise which had almost destroyed
the Country, but that there resorted a great mighty slight of
Owls, that destroyed them, •n•mn•stes •eade these: ••ticles dis∣tinctly.
AN Inprimis wee accuse Lingu• of high t•eason, and
〈◊〉, against the most honourable Com•on-•e lth of let∣te•s,
foe• un•ler prete•ce of pro•iting the people with trance∣lotions,
she hath most vilely prostituted the ha•d mysteries
of unknown Languages to the profane ears of the vul∣ga•.
This is as much as to make a new hell in the upper
world, for in Hell they say Alexander is no better th•n a Cob∣ler,
and now by these translations every Cobbler is as familiar
with Alexander as he that wrote his life.
ANAM. Item that she hath wrong•ully imprisoned a
Lady called ••cr•tas.
Item that she's a wi•ch and exce•ciseth her tongue in
exorcisms.
Item that she's a common what and lets every one
lie with her.
art. Item that she rails on men in Authority depra∣uing
their Honours, with bitter Jests and taunts and that
she's a Backbiter setting strife betwixt Bosom friends.
Item that she lends wives weapons to fight against
their husbands.
Item that she maintains a train of prating petty
foggers, prouling Sumners, smooth tongued bawds, artless
Empericks, hungry Parasites, Newes-carriers, Ianglers, and
such like idle Companions, that delude the Commonalty.
Item that she made Rhetoric wanton, Logic to
babble, Astronomy to lie.
Item that she is an incontinent Tel-tale.
Item (which is the last and worst) that shoe's
a Woman in every respect and for these causes not to bee
admitted to the dignity of a Sense. That these Articles
bee true wee pawn our honours, and subcribe our names.
Lingo these bee shrewd allegations, and as I
think vn-answerable, I will defer the judgment of your
cause till I have finished the contention of the Senses.
Your Lordships must be obeyed, but as for them most
ungrateful, and perfidious wretches.
Good words become you better, you may depart if
you will, till we send for you, Anam••stes run, remember Vi∣suss,
tic time he were ready.
I go.  he stays here expos∣ting
your Lordships pleasure.
Lo here the object that delights the sight,
The goodliest objects that ma•s hey•t can wish,
For a•l things that the Orb first moveable,
Wrappes in the circuit of his large-stretcht arms,
Are subject to the power of 〈◊〉 eyes,
That you may know what profit light doth bring,
Note Lumcu• words that speaks next following.
Ligh• the fair Grand-child to the glorious Sun,
Opening the casements of the Rosie morn,
Makes the abashed heavens soon to shun,
The ugly darkness it emb•ac'd beforne,
And at his first appearance puts to fl•light,
The utmost relics of the Hell-borne night,
This heavenly shield soon as it is displayed,
D•smayes the vices tha• abhor the light,
To wanderers by Sea and Land gives aide,
Conquers display, •ecomforteth astright,
Rowseth dull Idleness, and starts soft sleep.
And all the world to daily labour keeps,
This a true looking glass impartial,
Where Beauties self, her self doth beautify,
With native hue, not artificial,
Discovering falsehood, opening verity,
The days bright eye colours distinction,
Just judge of measure and proportion.
The only means by which each mortal eye,
Sends messengers to the wide firmament,
That to the longing soul brings presently
High contemplation and deep wonderment.
By which aspitement she her wings displays,
And her self thither whence she came vpraisd.
What blew thing's that, that's dappled so with Stars.
He represents the heaven.
In my conceit it were pretty, if hee thundered when hee speaks.
Then none could understand him.
Tropic colours the Equinoctial,
The Zodiac poles, and line Eclipticall,
The Needs, Zenith, and Anomaly•,
The Azimeth and Ephemerids,
Stars, Orbs, and Planets, with their motions,
The Oriental Regradations,
Excentricks, Epicyctes, and—and—and—
How now Visus is your heaven at a stay?
Or is it his Motus trepidationis that makes him stammer:
I pray you Memory set him ag••e again.
I remember when Iupiter made Amphitrio Cuckold,
and lay with his wife Alcmena, Coelum was in this taking for
three days space, and stood still just like him at a non plus.
Leave jesting, you'll put the fresh Actor out of
•ountenance.
Excentricks, Epicyctes, and Aspects,
In Sextile, Trine, and Quadrate which effects
Wonders on earth: also the Oblique part
Of signs, that make the day both long and short,
The Constellations, rising Cosmicall,
Setting of Stars, Chronicke, and Heliacall,
In the Orizon or Meridionall,
And all the skill in deep Astronomy,
Is to the soul de•iued by the eye.
Visus you have made Coelum a heavenly speech, past
earthly capacity, it had been as good for him hee had thun∣dred.
But I pray you who taught him speak and use no action,
me think it had been excellent to have turned round about
in his speech.
Hee hath so many motions hee knows not which to
begin withal.
Nay rather it seems hoe's of Copernicus opinion, and
that makes him stand still.
Lets hear what Terra can say—just nothing.
And't like your Lordship, it were an indecorum Terra
should speak.
You are deceived, for I remember when Pha•ton ruled
the Sun, I shall never forget him, he was a very pretty youth,
the earth opened her mouth wide, and spoke a very good
speech to Iupiter.
By the same token Nylus hid his head then, he could
never find it since.
You know Memory that was an extreme hot day, &amp;
it is likely Terra sweat much, and so took cold presently after,
that ever since she hath lost her voice.
A C•uton Ermines added to the field, is a sure
sign the man that bore these Arms, was to his Prince as a de∣fensiue
shield, saving him from the force of present Arms.
I know this fellow of old, it is a Herald, many a Cen∣taure,
Chimera, Barnacle, Crocodile, Hippotame, and such like
toys, hath he stolen out of the shop of my Invention, to shape
new coats for his upstart Gentlemen. Either Africa must
breed more monsters, or you make fewer Gentlemen M. He∣rolled,
for you have spent all my devises already, but since you
are here, let me ask you a question, in your own profession,
how comes it to pas•e that the victorious Arms of England,
quartred with the conquered Coat of France are not placed
on the dexter side, but give the flower deluce the better hand?
Because that the three Lyons are one coat made of
two French Duke-domes, Normandy and Aquitaine: but I
pray you Visus, what Jay is that, that follows him?
It is Color an object of mine, subject to his cōmandment.
Why speaks he not?
He is so bashful, he dares not speak for blushing:
What thing is that, tell me without delay.
That's nothing of it self, yet every way,
As like a Man, as a thing, like may bee,
And yet so unlike, as clean contrary,
For in one point it every way doth miss,
The right side of it a mans left side is
Tic lighter then a Feather, and withal
It filles no place, nor room it is so small.
How now Visus, have you brought a boy with
a riddle to pose vs all.
Pose vs all? and I here; that were a jest indeed: My
Lord, if he have a Sphinx, I have an Oedipus assure your self,
lets hear it once again.
What thing is that Sir.
This such a knotty Enigma? why my Lord, I think
it's a Woman, for first a Woman is nothing of her self, and a∣gain
she is likest a man of any thing.
But wherein is she unlike?
In every thing, in pecuisnnes, in folly.—'st Boy.
In Pride, Decay•, Prating, Lying, Cogging, Coins,
Spite, Hate Sir.
And in many mo such vices: Now he may well say,
the left side a mans right side is, for a cross•e wife, is always
contrary to her husband, ever contradicting what hee wi∣shes
for, like to the verse in Martial, Velle tuum.
Velle tuvm •olo. Dindine nolle volo.
Lighter then a feather, doth any man, make quest∣on
of that?
They need not, for I remember I saw a Cardinal
weigh thē once, &amp; the Woman was found 3. grains lighter.
Tic strange, for I have seen Gentlewomen
wear feathers oftentime•, can they carry heavier things then
themselves?
O sir, I remember, tic their only delight to do so.
But how apply you the last verse, it fills no
place Sir?
By my faith, that spoils all the former, for these far∣dingalles
take up all the room now a days, tic not a woman
questionless, shall I be put down with a Riddle sirrah, Heu∣r•si•
search the corners of your conceit, and find it me quickly.
Hay 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. I have it, tic a mans face in a loo∣king
Glass.
My Lord, tic so indeed, Sirrha lets see it, for do
you see my right eye here?
Wh•t of your eye?
O Lord, sir, this kind of frown is excellent, especially
when tic sweetened with such a pleasing smile.
Fantastic.
O Sir my left eye is my right in the glass, do you see?
by these lips my garters hang so neatly, my Gloves &amp; shoes
become my hands and fee•e so well: Heuresis tie my shoes
strings with a new knot;—this point was scarce well trust,—so,
tic excellent.—Looking-glas•es were a passing inuentiō,
I protest the fittest books for Ladies to study on—
Take heed you fall not in love with your self Phone∣tastes,
as I remember: Anamnestes who wast that died of the
looking disease?
Forsooth Narcissus, by the same t•ken he was turned to a
Daffodil, &amp; as he died for love of himself, so if you remēber
there was an old ill-fauoured, precious nosed, babber-lipt, bee∣tle-browed,
Bleere-eyd, slouch-eard slave that looking him∣self
by chance in a Glass, died for pure hate.
By the lip of my-I could live and die with this face.
Fie fie Fantastic, so effeminate for shame leave off.
Visus your objects I must needs say are admirable if the house &amp;
instrument bee answerable, letts here therefore in brief your
description—
Under the fore-head of mount Cephalon,
That ouer-peeres the coast of Microco•me,
All in the shadow of two pleasant groves,
Stand my two mansion houses, both as round
As the clear heavens, both twins as like each other▪
As star to star, which by the vulgar sort,
For their resplendent composition,
Are named the bright eyes of mount Cephalon:
With four fair rooms those lodgings are contrived.
Four goodly rooms in form most spherical,
Closing each other like the heavenly orbs:
The first whereof, of Natures substance wrought,
As a strange moat the other to defend,
Is trained moveable by Art divine:
Stirring the whole compacture of the rest,
The second chamber is most curiously
Composed of burnished, and transparent horn.
That's a matter of nothing, I have known many
have such bed-chambers.
It may be so, for I remember being once in the towns
Library, I read such a thing, in their great book of monu∣mints
called, Cornucopia, or rather their copia-Cornu▪
The third's a lesser room of purest glass,
The ford's smallest, but passes all the former,
In worth of matter built most sumptuously;
With walls transparent of pure Crystalline.
This the souls mirror and the bodies guide,
Loves Cabinet bright beacons of the Realm,
Casements of light quiver of Cupids shafts:
Wherein I sit and immediately receive,
The species of things corporeal,
Keeping continual watch and sentinel;
Least foreign hurt invade our Microcosm,
And warning give, (if pleasant things approach)
To entertain them, from this coastly room:
Leads my Lord an entry to your house,
Through which I hourly to your self convey
Matters of wisdom by experience bred:
Arts first invention, pleasant vision,
Deep contemplation, that attires the soul,
In gorgeous robes of flowering literature:
Then if that Visus have deserved best,
Let his victorious brow, with Crown be blessed.
Anamnestes, see who's to come next.
Presently my Lord.
Visus, I wonder that amongst all your objects, you
presented vs not with Platoes Idea, or the sight of Niniuie, Babt∣lone,
London, or some Sturbridge faire-monsters, they would have
done passing well, those motions in my imagination are very
delightful.
I was loath to trouble your honours with such toys,
neither could I provide them in so short a time.
We will consider your worth, mean while wee
dismiss you.
Hark, hark, hark, hark, peace, peace, O peace:
O sweet, admirable, Swanlike heavenly, hark, O most mel∣li•uous
strain, O what a pleasant close was there, O full, most
delicate.
How now Phantast•s, is Auditus mad?
Let him alone, his musical head is always full of od
•rotchets.
Did you mark the dainty driving of the last
point, an excellent maintaining of the songe, by the choice
timpan of mine ear, I never •eard a better, hist, st▪ st, hark,
why theres a caden•able to •auish the dullest Stoic.
I know not, what to think on him.
There how sweetly the plane-song was dissolved in∣to
descant, and how easily they came of with the last rest, hark,
hark▪ the •itter sweetest Achromaticke.
Audatus.
Thanks good Apollo for this timely grace, never
coldest thou in fit•er: O more then most musical narmony, O
most admirable consort, have you no ea•es? doe you not hear
this music?
It may bee good, but in my opinion, they rest too
long in the beginning.
Are you then deaf? do you not yet perceive the won∣dross
sound the heavenly orbs do make with their continual
motion, hark, hark, O honey sweet.
What tune do they play?
Why such a tune as never was, nor ever shall be heard,
mark now, now mark, now, now. PHONE. List, list▪ list.
Hark O, sweet, sweet sweet.
List how my heart envies my happy ears, hisht, by
the gold strung harp of Apollo, I hear the celestial music of
the spheres, as plainly as ever Pithagoras did, O most excel∣lent
diapason good, good, good, It plays fortune my •o, as dis∣tinctly
as may be.
As the fool thinks, so the bell clinked I pro∣test
I hear no more then a post.
What, the Laualta hay? nay if the heavens fiddle,
Fancy must needs dance.
Prethe sit still, thou must dance nothing but the passing
measures. Memory do you hear this harmony of the spheres?
Not now my Lord, but I remember about some 4000.
years ago, whē the Sky was first made, we heard very perfectly.
By the same token the first tune the planets played, I re∣mēeber
Venus the treble ran sweet diusion vpō Saturn the base.
The first tune they played was Sellengers roūd, in memory where∣of
ever since, it hath been called the beginning of the world.
How comes it we cannot hear it now.
Our ears are so well acquainted with the sound,
that we never mark it. As I remember the Egiptian Catadupes
never heard the to••nge of the fall of Nilus, because the noise
is so familiar unto them.
Have you no other objects to judge by, then these Auditu•?
This is the rarest and most exquisite,
Most spherical, divine, angelical,
But since your duller ears cannot perceive it:
May it please your Lordship to with draw your self,
Unto this neigh-boring grove, there shall you see:
How the sweet treble, of the chirp•ng birds,
And the soft stirring of the moved leaves.
Running delightful descant to the sound,
Of the base murmuring of the bubbling brooke,
Becomes a consort of good instruments.
While twenty babbling echoes round about,
Out of the stony concave of their mouth:
Restore the vanished music of each close,
And fill your ears full with redoubled pleasure▪
I will walk with you very willingly, for I grow
weary of sitting. Come Moister R•gister, and Moister Fantastic,
Prithee Name, bee persuaded, first nor better go to a
feast then stay here for a fray?
A feast? d•est think Auditus will make the Judges a feast?
Faith I, why should he carry them to his house else?
Why sir• a to hear a set or two of songs, slid his ban∣quits
are nothing but fish all soll, soll? soll? Isle teach thee wit
boy, never go me to a musicians house for lunkets, un•esse thy
••omake lies in thine ea•es; for there is nothing but come∣ding
this songs delicate air, that motects dainty air, this son∣nets
sweet air, that madrialls melting air, this dirges
mournful air, this Church air that Chamber air, French air,
English air, Italian air, why Lad, they bee pure Chamaelions,
they seed only upon the air.
Cham•elions? Isle be sworn some of your Fiddlers be
rather Ca••else, for by their good-wills they will never leave
eating.
True, and good reason, for they do nothing all the day
but stretch and grate their small guts; but ô, yonders the Ape
Heuresis: let me go I prithee.
Nay good-now stay a little, let's see his humour.
I see no reason to the contrary, for we see the quintes∣sense
of Wine will convert Water into Wine; why therefore
should not the Elixir of gold turn lead into pure gold?
Ha, ha, ha, ha, he is turned Chimick sir, it seems so
by his talk.
But how shall I devise to blow the fire of Beach∣coals,
with a continual and equal blast? ha? I will have my
bellows driven with a wheel, which wheel shall bee a self
mover.
Here's old turning, these Chimicks seeking to turn
Lead into Gold, turn away all their own Silver.
And my wheel shall be Geometrically proportioned
into 7. or 9. concave encircled arms, wherein I will put equal
poises, hai, hai, hai, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, I have it, I have it, I have it.
Heuresis?
But what's best to contain the Quick-siluer? ha?
Do you remember your promise Heuresis?
It must not be Iron, for Quick-siluer is the tyrant of
Mottles, and will soon fret it.
Heuresis? Heuresis?
Nor Brass, nor Copper, nor Mastlin, nor Mineral,
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, I have it, I have it, it must be.
You have indeed sir, and thus much more then you
looked for. (snap.)
You shall not fight, but if you will always disagree,
let vs have words and no blows; Heuresis, what reason have
you to fall out with him?
Because he is always abusing me, and takes the upper
hand of me every where.
And why no• sir? I am thy better in any place.
Have I been the Author of the seven liberal Scion∣ces,
and consequently of all learning? have I been the patron
of all Mechanical devises, to be thy inferior? I tell thee Anam∣nes•es
thou hast not so, much as a point but thou art beholding
to me for it.
Good, good▪ but what had your invention been, but
for my remembrance: I can prove that thou belly-sprung in∣uention,
art t•e most improfitable member in the world, for
euersince thou we•t bore•e thou hast been a bloody murthe∣rer,
and thus I prove it: In the quiet years of Saturn (I re∣member
Iupiter was then but in his swath-bands) thou rentest
the bowels of the earth, &amp; broughts gold to light, whose beau∣tie
(like Helen) set al the world by the ears, then vpō that thou
fondest out Iron, and put weapons in their hands, and
now in the last populous age, thou taugh'st a scab-shin friar, the
hellish invention of powder and guns.
Call it hellish? thou least it is the admirable'st inuen∣tion
of all others, for whereas others imitate nature, this excels
nature her self.
True for a Cannon will kill as many at one shot, as
Thunder doth commonly at twenty.
Therefore more murdering art thou then the light
bolt.
But to show the strength of my conceit, I have
found out a means to withstand the stroke of the most vio∣lent
culuering: Mendatio thou saw it when I demonstrated
invention.
What some wool-packes? or mudwalls? or such like?
Mendatio I prithee tell it him for I love not to bee a
trumpeter of mine own praises.
I must needs confess, this devise to pass all
that ever I heard or saw, and thus it was, first hee takes a Foul∣con,
and charges it without all deceiptes, with dry powlder
well canphred, then did hee put in a single bullet, and a great
quantity of drop shot both round and lach•imall, this done he
sets me a boy 60. paces off, just point blank over against the
mouth of the piece, now in the very midst of the direct line hee
fastens a post, upon which he hangs me in a corde a Siderits, of
Herculean stone.
Well, well, I know it well, it was found out in Ida, in
the year of the world—by one Magnes, whose name it re∣taines,
though vulgarly they call it an Adamant.
When hee had hanged this Adamant in a corde, he
comes back, and gives fire to the tutch-hole, now the powder
consumed to a void vacuvm.
Which is intolerable in Nature, for first shall the whole
Machine of the world, heaven, earth, sea, and ayre, return to the
misshapen house of Chaos, then the least vacuvm be found in
the vniuerse.
The bullet and drop-shot most impetuously from the
•eerie throat of the Culuering, (but • strange) no sooner
•am they near the Adamant in the corde, but they were all
arrested by the Sergeant of Nature, and hovered in the ayre
round about it, till they had lost the force of their motion, clas∣ping
themselves close to the Stone in most lovely manner, and
not any one flew to endanger the mark, so much did they re∣member
their duty to nature, that they forgot the errand they
were sent of.
This is a very artificial lye.
Name believe it, for I saw it, and which is more, I have
practised this devise often: once when I had a quarrel with
one of my Lady Veritas naked knaves, and had pointed him
the field, I conveyed into the heart of my Buckler an Adamant,
and when we met, I drew, all the foins of his Rapier, whether
so ever hee intended them, or howsoever I guided mine arm,
pointed still to the midst of my buckler, so that by this means,
I haut the Knave mortally, and my self came away untouched, to
the wonder of all the beholders.
Sir you speak Metaphorically, because thy wit
Mend•cio always draws men's objections to thy fore∣thought
excuses.
Anamnestes it is true, and I have an addition to this,
which is to make the bullet, shot from the enemy, to return
immediately upon the Gunner: but let all these pass, and say the
worst thou can against me.
I say Guns were found out for the quick dispatch
of mortality, and when thou saw men grow wise, and beget
so fair a child as Peace, of so foul and deformed a mother
as War, least there should bee no murder, thou deuisest
poison.
Nayfie Name, urge him not too far.
And last and worst, thou fondest out cookery, that
kills more then weapons, guns, wars or poisons, and would
destroy all, but that thou inuentedst Physic, that helps to
make away some.
But sir, besides all this, I devised Pillories for such
forging villains as thy self.
Call me villain?
You shall not fight as long as I am here, give over
I say.
Mendatio you offer me great wrong to hold me, in
good-faith I shall fall out with you.
Away, away, away, you are Invention, are you
not.
Yes Sir, what then?
And you remembrance?
Well sir, well.
Then I will be Iudicium, the moderator betwixt you,
and make you both friends, come, come, shake hands, shake
hands.
Well, well, if you will needs have it so?
I am in some sore content.
Why this is as it should be, when Mendatio hath In∣uention
on the one hand, and Remembrance on the other, as heel
be sure never to bee found with Truth in his mouth: so hee
scorns to be taken in a lye, hai, hai, hai, my fine wags whist?
Whist.
Whist.
They had some reason that held the soul a harmony,
for it is greatly delighted with music, howe fast wee wear
tied by the ears to the consort of voices powder; but all is
but a little pleasure, what profitable objects hath he?
Your ears will teach you presently, for now hee is
com•ing, that fellow in the baize me thinks I should have
known him; o tic Comedus, tic so but he is become now a days
something humorous, and too too, Satirical, up and down,
like his great grand-father A •istophanes.
These two my Lord Comaedus and Tragedus,
My fellows both, both, twins, but so unlike,
As birth to death, wedding to funeral:
For this that rears him self in bus kins quaint,
Is pleasant at the first, proud in the midst:
Stately in all, and bitter death at end.
That in the pumps doth frown at first acquaintance▪
Troble the midst, but in the end concludes,
Closing up all with a sweet catastrophe?
This grave and sad disdain with btinish tears,
That light and quick with wrinkled laughter painted;
This deals with Nobles, Kings, and Emperors:
Full of great fears, great Hopes, great enterprises,
This other trades with men of mean condition:
His proiects small, small Hopes and dangers little,
This gorgeous embroidered with rich sentences:
That fair and pursled round with merriments▪
Both vice detect, and virtue beautify:
By being deaths mirror, and lifes looking glass.
Salutem jam primum a principio propitiam.
Mihi atque Vobis spectators nuntio.
Pish, pish this is a speech with no action, lets here TE∣RINSE,
quid eg•tur faciam. &amp;c.
Quid igitur faciam? non eam no nuns quidem cum ac∣cusorvliro?
Phy, phy, phy, no more action, lend me your bays, doe
it thus. Quid igitur. &amp;c. (he acts it after the old kind of Pinto∣mimic
action.)
I should judge this action Fantastic most absurd, un∣les
we should come to a Commedy, as gentlewomen to the co∣mencement,
only to see men speak.
In my imagination it's excellent, for in this kind the
hand (you know) is ha•bingerto the tongue and prou•des the
words a lodging in the ears of the Auditors.
Auditus it is now time you make vs acquainted
with the quality of the house you keep in, for our better help
in judgment.
Upon the sides of fair mount Cephalor,
Have I two houses passing human skill:
Of finest matter by dame nature wrought,
Whose learned fingers have adorned the same
With gorgeous porches of so strange a form,
That they command the passengers to stay:
The doors whereof in hospitality,
Nor day, nor night, are shut, but open wide,
Gently inuit all comers; whereupon,
They are named the open ears of Cephal•n.
But least some boulder sound should boldly rush,
And break the nise composture of the work,
The skilful builder wisely hath inrangd,
An eatry from each port with curious twines,
And crooked Meanders, like the labyrinth,
That Dedalus framed to enclose the Minotaure;
At end whereof is placed a costly portal:
Resembling much the figure of a drum,
Granting slow entrance to a private closet:
Where daily with a mallet in my hand,
I set and frame all words and sounds that come,
Upon an Anvil and so make them fit:
For the pere: vinckling poor; that winding leads,
From my close chamber to your Lordships cell.
Thither do I chief Justice of all accents,
Psyches next porter, Microcosms front:
Learnings rich treas•re, bring discipline,
Reasons discourse, knowledge of foreign states,
Loud fame of great Heroes virtuous deeds:
The marrow of grave speeches and the flowers:
Of quickest Wits, neat Jests, and pure Conceits,
And often times to ease the heavy burden,
Of government, your Lordships shoulder bear,
I thither do conduce the pleasing Nuptials:
Of sweetest iustruments with heavenly noise.
If then A•ditus, have deserved the best:
Let him be dignified before the rest.
Auditus I am almost a Skepticke in this matter,
scarce knowing which way the balance of the cause will decline,
when I have heard the rest, I will dispatch judgment, mean
while you may depart.
Your only way to make a good pomander, is this,
take an ownce of the purest garden mould, cleansed and sty∣ped
seven days in change of motherless rose water, then
take the best Labdanum, Benioine, both Storaxes, amber
greece, and Civet, and mus ke, incorporate them together, and
work them into what form you please, this if your breath bee
not to valiant, will make you smell as sweet as my Ladies
dog.
This Boy it should seem represents Odor, hee is so
perfect a persumer.
I do my Lord, and have at my command,
The smell of flowers, and Odoriferous drugs,
Of ointments sweet, and excellent perfumes,
And Court-like waters, which if once you smell,
You in your heart would wish as I suppose:
That all your Body were transformed to Nose.
Olfactus of all the Senses, your objects have the worst
luck, they are always earring with their contraries, for none
can wear Civet, but they are suspected of a proper bad
sent, where the proverb springs, hee smells best, that doth of
nothing smell.
Foh, foh, what a smell is hear? is this one of your de∣lightfull
objects?
It is your only sent in request Sir.
What fiery fellow is that, which smokes so
much in the mouth?
It is the great and puissant God of Tobacco.
L•doch guevarroh pufuer shelvaro baggon,
Oisia di quanon, Indi cortilo vraggon.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, this in my opinion is the tongue of the Antipodes.
No I remember it very well, it was the language the
Arcadians spake, that siued long before the Moon.
What signifies it Olfactus?
This is the mighty Emperor Toba•co, King of Tri∣nidado,
that in being conquered, conquered all Europe, in ma∣king
them pay tribute for their smoke.
Erfronge inglues condo hisingo,
Deuelin sloscoth ma pu cocthinge.
Expeller of Catarhes, banisher of all agues, your guts
only salve for the greene wounds of a non plus.
Alvulcam vercu, I parda poraside gratam, kafamala
mara, che Bau•o respartera, quirara?
Son to the God Vulcan, and Tellus, kin to the fa∣there
of Mirth, called Bacchiu?
Viscardonok, pillostuphe, pascano •inaromagas,
Pagidagon stollisinfe, carociba•o scribes.
Genius of all Swaggerers, professed enemy to Physiti∣once,
sweet ointment for sour teeth, firm knot of good fell∣lowship,
Adamant of Company, switt wind, to spread the
wings of Time, hated of none, but those that know him not,
and of so great deserts, that who so is acquainted with him,
can hardly forsake him.
It seems these last words were very significant, I
promise you a God of great denominatiō, he may be my Lord
Tappes for his large Ti•les.
But forward Olfactus, as they have done before
you, with your description?
lust in the midst of Cephalons round face
As it were a fron•is-spice unto the hill,
Olfactus lodging built in figure long,
Doubly dis-parted with two precious vaults,
The roots whereof most richly are enclosed,
With Orient Pearls, and sparkling Diamonds:
Beset at the end with Emerauds and Turchois,
And Rubies red, and flaming Crisolits,
At upper end whereof in costly manner,
I lay my head between two spungeous pillows,
Like fair Atones twixt the paps of Venus,
Where I conducting in and out the wind,
Daily examine all the ayre inspired.
By my pure searching, if it be pure,
And sit to serve the lungs with lively breath:
Hence do I likewise minister perfume
Unto the neighbour brain, perfumes of force
To cleanse your head, and make your fanta•ie
To refine wit, and sharpe invention
And strengthen memory, from whence it came,
That old devotion, •ncence did ordain
To make mans spirits more apt for things divine,
Besides a thousand more commodities,
In lieu whereof your Lordships I request,
Give me the crown if I deserve it best.
In good time Gustus, have you brought your
objects?
My servant Appetitus follows with them.
Come come Bacchus, you are so fat; enter enter.
Fie, fie Gustus this is a great indecorum to bring Bac∣choose
alone, you should have made Thirst •ed him by the hand.
Right Sir, but Men now a days drink often when
they be not dry, besides I could not get red hearings and dri∣ed
neates tongues enough to apparel him in.
What never a speech of him.
I put an Octave of lambicks in his mouth, and hee
hath drunk it down.
Well done, M•scadine and Eggs stand hot; what but∣ter'd
Claret? go thy way thou had best, for blind man that
cannot see how wickedly thou look • how now, what small
thin fellow, are you here? ha?
Beer forsooth, beer forsooth.
Beer forsooth? get you gone to the buttery, till I call
for you, you are none of Bacchus attendants, I am sure, he can∣not
entire the smell of Malt. Whereas Ceres? ô well, well, is
the March-pa•e broken? ill luck, ill luck, come hanged, never
stand to set it together again; serve out fruit there; (Enter
Boys with a Ba•ket, M•rmolet, sweet &amp;c. deliver it round among
the Gentlewomen, and go out) what doe you come with roast∣meat
after Apples, away with it. Digestion serve out cheese;
what, but a penny-worth, it is just the measure of his nose that
sold it? lambs wool; the meekest meat in the world, t'will
let any man fleece it. Snap-dragon there.
O I remember this dish well, it was first invented by
Pluto to entertain Proserpina with all.
I think not so Memory, for when Hercules had kilt
the flaming Dragon of Hesperdia, with the Apples of that
Orchard, he made this siery meat, in memory whereof hee
named it Snap-dragon.
Gust•s, lets here your description?
Near to the lowly base of Cehalon,
My house is placed, not much unlike a Cave.
Yet arched aboue by wondrous workmanship
With hewn stones wrought smoother and more fine
Then Jet or Marble fair from Island brought.
Over the door directly doth incline
A fair Percullis of compacture strong,
To shut out all that may annoy the state,
Or health of Microcosm; and within
Is spread along board like a pliant tongue,
At which I hourly sit, and trial take,
Of meats and drinks needful and delectable:
Twice every day do I provision m•ke
For the sumptious kitchen of the common wealth,
which once well boiled, is soon distributed,
To all the members, well refreshing them
With good supply of strength-renewing food,
Should I neglect this musing diligence
The body of the Realm would ruinate:
Your self my Lord with all your policies
And wont•os wit, could not preserve your self,
Nor you Fantastic, not you Memory;
Psyche her self, were it not that I repair
Her crazie house with props of nourishment,
Would soon forsake vs: for whose dearest sake
Many a grievous pain have I sustained,
By bitter pills, and sour purgations,
Which if I had not valiantly abidden,
She had been long ere this departed,
Since the whole Microcosm I maintain,
Let me as Prince, aboue the Senses ra•gne.
The reasons you urge Gustus breed a new doubt
whether it be better to be commodious or necessary, the reason∣lution
whereof I refer to your judgment, licensing you mean
while to depart. (Gustus leads his show about the stage, &amp; goes out)
Ready anon forsooth? the Devil she will,
Who would be toiled with wenches in a show.
What in such anger Tactus? whats the matter?
My Lord I had thought as other Senses did,
By sight of objects to have proved my worth;
Wherefore considering that of all the things,
That please me most, women are counted chief.
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
I had thought to have represented in my show,
The Queen of pleasure, Venus and her Son,
Leading a Gentleman enamoured,
With his sweet touching of his Mistress lips,
And gentle griping of her tender hands,
And ••uers pleasant relishes of touch,
Yet all contained in the bounds of chastity.
〈◊〉, of all I long to see your objects,
How comes it we have lost those pretty sports.
Thus it is, •iue hours ago I set a dozen maids to
attire a boy like a nize Gentlewoman: but there is such doing
with their looking-glasses, pinning, vnpinning, setting, vnseting,
formings and conformings painting blew veins, and cheeks,
such st•rre with Sticks and Combs, Cascanets, Dressings,
Purls, Falls, Squares, Busks, Bodies, Scarves, Neck laces, Car∣canets,
Rebatoes, Borders, Tires, Fans, Palizadoes, Puffs,
Ruffs, Cuffs, Muffs, Puzzles, Fussles, Partsets, Frislets, Bandlets,
F••lets, Croslets, Pendulets, Amulets, Annulets, Bracelets, and so
many lets, that ye: she is scarce dressed to the girdle: and now
there's such calling for Fardingales, Kirtlets, Busk-points, shoo∣ties
&amp;c. that seven Peddlers shops, nay all Sturbridge Fair will
scarce furnish her: a Ship is sooner rigd by far, then a Gentle∣woman
made ready.
Tic strange, that women being so mutable,
Will never change in changing their apparel?
Well let them pass; Tactus we are content,
•o know your dignity by relation.
The instrument of instruments, the hand,
Courtesies index, Chamberlain to Nature,
The bodies Soldier, and mouths Caterer,
Psyches great Secretary, the dumbs eloquence,
The blindmans Candle, and his forheads Buckler,
The minister of wrath, and friendships sign,
This is my instrument: nevertheless my power
Extends it self, far as our Q•even commands,
Through all the parts and climes of Microcosm.
I am the root of life, spreading my virtue
By sinews that extend from head to foot,
To every living part.
For as a subtle Spider closely sitting,
In center of her web that spreddeth round:
If the least Fly but touch the smallest thread,
She feels it instantly; so doth my self,
Casting my slender nerve and sundry nets,
Over •very particle of all the body,
By proper I kill perceive the difference,
Of several qualities, hot, cold, moist and dry;
Hard, soft, rough, smooth, clammy and slippery.
Sweet pleasure, and sharp pain profitable,
That makes vs wounded seek for remedy:
By these means do I teach the Body fly,
From such bad things as may endanger it:
A wall of bristle can be no more defence,
Unto a town then I to Microcosm?
Tell me what sense is not beholding to me,
The nose is hot or cold, the cies do weep:
The ears do feel, the tast's a kind of touching,
That when I please, I can command them all,
And make them tremble when I threaten them:
I am the eldest, and biggest of all the rest,
The chiesest note, and first distinction,
Betwixt a living tree and living beast;
For though one hear, and see: and smell: and taste
If he wants touch, he is counted but a block?
Therefore my Lord grant me the royalty:
Of whom there is such great necessity.
Tactus stand aside; you sir Anamnestes tell the
Senses we expect their appearance
At your Lordships pleasure•
Though you deserve no small punishment for
these vp-rores, yet at the request of these my assistants I remit it,
&amp; by the power of Judgment our gracious souera•gne Psuche
hath given me. Thus I determine of your controversies: hum?
By your former objects, instruments and reasons, I conceive
the state of 〈◊〉 to bee divided into two parts, one of com∣modity,
the other of necessity, both which are either for our
Queen or for our country, but as the Soul is more excellent
then the Body, so are the Senses that proffit the Soul to be esti∣mated
before those that are needful for the Body; visus and
Auditus serve your selves, Moister Register give me the crown;
because it is better to be well, then simply to be, therefore I judge
the crown by right to belong to your of the Commodities part
&amp; the robe to you of the Necessities side; and since you Visus are
the author of invention, &amp; you Auditus of increase and additiō
to the same, seeing it is more excellent to invent, then to aug∣meant,
I establish you Visus the better of the two, and chief of all
the rest, in token whereof, I bestow upon you this crown to
wear at your liberty.
I most humbly thank your Lordships.
But least I should seem to neglect you Auditus,
I hear choose you to bee the Lords intelligencer to Psuche• her
Majesty, and you Olfactus, we bestow upon you the chief Priest∣hood
of Microcosm•, perpetually to offer ince•se in her majesties
temple. As for you Tactus upon your reasons aleaged, I bestow
upon you the robes.
I accept it most gratefully at your just hands, and will
wear it in the dear remembrance of your good Lordship.
And lastly, Gustus we elect you P•uche her only
taster, and great purueior for all her dominions, both by sea and
land, in her realm of Microco•••.
We thank your Lordship, and rest well content with e∣quall
arbitrament.
Now for you Lingo.
I beseech your honour let me speak, I will neither trow∣ble
the company nor offend your patience.
I cannot stay so long; wee have consulted about
you, and find your cause to stand upon these terms, and con∣ditions.
The number of the Senses in this little world, is an∣swerable
to the first bodies in the great world: now since there
bee but five in the Vniuerse, the four elements and the pure
substance of the heavens, therefore the•e can bee but five
senses in our Microc•sme, correspondent to those, as the sight
to the heavens, hearing to the air, touching to the earth, smell∣ling
to the •••e, tasting to the water, by which •••e means one∣lie
the understanding is able to apprehend the knowledge of
all Corporeal substances? wherefore wee judge you to bee no
Sense simply, only thus much we from hence forth pronounce,
that all women for your sake shall have six 〈◊〉, that is seeing,
heating, tasting, smelling, touching, and the last and feminine
sense, the sense of speaking.
I beseech your Lordships and your assistants, (the one∣lie
cause of our friendship,) to grace my table with your most
welcome presence this night at supper.
I am sorry I cannot stay with you, you know we
may by no means omit our daily attendance at the Court,
therefore I pray you pardon vs.
I hope I shall not have the denial at your hands my
Masters, and you my Lady Lingo, come let vs drown all our
anger in a bowl of hippocras.
Come Moister Registe• shall we walk?
I pray you stay a little? let me see? ha, ha, ha, ha
ha,
How now Memory so merry? what doe you trow∣ble
your self with two palsies at once? shaking, and laugh∣ing.
Tic a strange thing that men will so confidently op∣pose
themselves against Plato•• great year.
Why not.
Tic as true an opinion as need be; for I remember it
very readily now, that this time 49000. years ago all wee
wear in this very place and your Lordship judged the very
same controversy, after the very same manner, in all respects,
and circumstances alike.
Tic wondrous strange.
By the same token you held your Staff in your
right hand, just as you do now, and Mr. Fantastic stood won∣dring
at you, gaping as wide as you see him.
I but I did not give you a box on the •are sirrah 49000.
years ago, did I? (snap)
I do not remember that Sir.
This time Platoes twesue month to come, look you
save your cheeks better.
But what entertainment had we at Court for our
long staying?
Lets go, Isle tell you as we walk.
If I doe not seem pranker now, then I did in those
days, Isle be hanged?
Why this is good by common Senses means,
Lingo thou hast framed a perfect comoedy
They are all good friends, whom thou made enemies,
And I am half a Sense: a sweet piece of service,
I promise you a fair step to preferment.
Was this the care and labour thou hast taken,
To bring thy foes together to a banquet,
To loose thy Crown, and be deluded thus,
Well now I see my cause is desperate,
The judgements past, sentence irrevocable,
Therefore Isle be content and clap my hands,
And give a Plaudit to their proceedings:
What shall I leave my hate begun imperfect?
So foully vanquished by the spiteful Senses?
Shall I the Embassadress of Gods and Men
That pulled proud Phoebe from her brightsome sphere
And darkt Apollo's countenance with a word
Raising at pleasure storms, and winds, and earth-quakes
Be ouercrowed? and breath without revenge?
Yet they forsooth base slaves must be preferred,
And deck themselves with my •ight ornaments:
Doth the all-knowing 〈◊〉 see this shame
Without redress? will not Hey•ens help me?
Then shall Hell do it, my enchanting tongue
Can mount the skies, and in a moment fall,
From the Pole Arctic to dark Acheton.
Isle make them know mine anger is not spent,
L•ngua hath power to hurt, and will to do it.
Mend••io, come hither quickly sir.
Madame.
Hark hither in thine •are.
Why do you which thus? here's none to hear you.
I dare not trust these secrets to the Earth, •re since
she brought forth Reeds, whose babbling noise told all the
world of Midas Asses ea•es, (She whispers him in the ear•)
Dost understand me?
I, I, I—never fear that—there's a jest indeed—pish,
pish,—Madam—doe you think me so foolish?—tut, tut,
doubt not.
Tell her if she doe not.
Why do you make any question of it—what a stir
is here—I warrant you—presently?
Well, Isle to supper, and so closely cover,
The rusty cancker of mine Y•on spite,
With golden foil of goodly semblances,
But if I do not t•ounce them—
My Lady 〈◊〉 is just like one of these •eane-witted
Comedians, who disturbing all to the fist Act, 〈◊〉 cowne some
Mercuri• or 〈◊〉 in an Eng••e to make• 〈…〉. So she,
but in a contrary man•er, seeing her 〈◊〉 plots dispur•osed,
sends me to an old Witch called 〈…〉 to w•eake 〈◊〉
spite upon the Senses: the old •ag after many an incricled
circumstance, and often naming of the direful Hecate, and
Demogorgon, gives me this bottle of wine mingled with
such hellish drugs and forcible words, that whosoever
drinks of it shall bee presentile possessed with an enraged and
mad kind of anger.
What's this Crapula beating Appetitus out of doors?
ha!
You filthy long Crane, you meager slave, will you kill
our guests with blowing continual hunger in them? (tiff, toffe,
tiff, toffe) the Senses have overcharged their stomachs already,
and you Sir serve them up a fresh appetite with every new
dish, they had burst their guts if thou hadd'st stayed but a
thought longer? (tiff, toffe, tiff, toffe,) bee gon or isle set thee a∣way,
begone ye gnawe-bone, raw-bone, rascal.
Then my devise is clean spoiled. Appctitus should
have been as the bowl to present this medicine to the Sen∣ses,
and now Crapula hath beaten him out of doors? what shall
I doe?
Away Sir, (tiff toff, tiff. &amp;c.
Well Crapula, well, I have deserved better at your
hands then so, I was the man you know first brought you into
Gustus his service, I lined your guts there, and you use me thus?
but grease a fat sow. &amp;c.
Dost thou talk (tiff, toff) hence, hence tiff, tiff, hence
avaunt cur, avaunt you dog!
The belching gor-bellie hath well-nigh killed me; I am
shut out of doors finely, well this is my comfort, I may walk
now in liberty at my own pleasure.
Appetitus, Appetitus•
Ah Mendaci•, Mendaci•,
Why how now man, how now? how first (can not speak.
Faith I am like a bag-pipe, that never sound's but when
the belly is full.
Thou empty, and come from a feast.
From a sray I tell thee Mendaci•. I am now just like
the Ewe that gave suck to a wolfs whelp. I have must up my
fellow Crapula so lunge, that hoe's grown strong enough to
beat me.
And whither wilt thou go, now thou at banished out
of service?
Faith Isle travel to some College or other in an Uni∣uersitie.
Why so?
Because Appetite•••• is well beloved amongst Scholars,
for there I can dine and sup with them &amp; rise again as good
friends as we sate down, Isle thither questionless.
Hear thou? give me thy hand; by this hand I love
thee; go too then, thou shalt not forsake thy my••ers thus, I say
thou shalt not.
Alas I am very loath; but how should I help it?
Why take this bottle of wine, come on, go thy ways
to them again.
Ha, ha, ha, what good will this do•?
This is the N•p•nth• that reconciles the God's: do•
but let the Senses taste of it, and sear not, the•e love thee as well
as ever they did.
I pray thee where had it?
My Lady gave it me to bring her: 〈◊〉 stale it
from H••• for her: thou know there were some in•res betwixt
her and thy masters, &amp; with this drink she would gladly wash
out all the relics of their disagreement: Now because I lowe
thee, thou shalt have the grace of presenting it to them and so
come in favour again.
It smell•es well I would sane begin to them;
Nay stay no longer least they heue supp't before
thou come.
M•ndacio, howe shall I requite thy infinite 〈◊〉.
Nay pray thee leave, go catch occasion by the •••atop,
but hearst thou? as soon as it is presented, round my Lady
Lingo in the ear, and tell her of it.
I will, I will, I will, Adieu, adieu, adieu,
Why this is better then I could have wished it,
Fortune I think is fallen in love with me,
Answering so right mine expectation.
By this time Appetite is at the Table.
And with a lowly Cringe presents the Wine,
To his old Moister Gustus, now he takes it,
And drinks perchance to Lingo, she craftily
Kisles the Cup, but lets not down a drop,
And gives it to the rest; it is sweet, theile swallow it,
But when it is once descended to the stomach,
And sends up noisome vapours to the brain,
Twill make them swagger gallantly, the••e rage
Most strangely, or 〈◊〉 Art deceives her,
When if my Lady stir her nimble tongue,
And closely sow contentious words amongst them,
O what a stabbing there will be? what bleeding?
What art thou there M•ndacio? pretty rascal,
Come let me kiss thee for thy good deserts.
Madame dost take? have they all tasted it?
All, all, and all are well nigh mad already:
Oh how they stare, and swear, and fume, and brawl,
W•ath gives them weapons; Pots and Candle-sticks,
Joined stools and Trenchers fly about the room,
Like to the bloody banquet of the C•utaure•,
But all the sport is to see what several thoughts
The potions works in their Imaginations.
For Visus thinks himself; a ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
So-hoe Mendatio! so-hoe, so-hoe!
Madame I doubt they come, yonder is Appetitus, you
had best begone, least in their outrage they should injure you.
 How now Hunger? how dost thou my fine
may-pole, ha?
I may well be called a may-pole: for the Senses do no∣thing
but dance a morris about me.
Why? what ails them? are they not (as I promised
thee) friends with thee.
Friends with me? nay rather frenzy: I never knew
them in such a case, in all my life.
Sure they drank too much, and are mad for love of
thee.
They want common Sense amongst them: there's such
a hurly burly Auditus is stark deaf, and wonders why Men
speak so so•tly that he cannot here them: Visiu hath drunk
himsel•e ••a•ke blind, and therefore imagines himsel•e to bee
Polyphemu•: Tactus is raging mad, and cannot bee otherwise
persuaded, but hee is Hercules furens; there's such conceits
amongst them.
O that I could but find the villain Outis,
Outis the v•llaine, that thus blinded me.
Who is this? Visus?
I, I, I, otherwise called Polyphemus.
By heavens bright Sun, the days most glorious
eye,
That lightneth all the world but Polypheme,
And by mine eye that once was answerable
Unto that Sun, but now's extinguished.
He can see to swear me thinks?
I• I but once lay hands upon the slave,
That thus hath robed me of my dearest towel,
Isle rend the Milcreant into a thousand pieces.
And gnash his trembling members twixt my teeth,
Drinking his liue-warme blood to satissie,
The boiling thirst of pain and surio•snesse,
That thus exasperates great Pol•pheme.
'Pray thee Appetitus see how hee grasps for that hee
would be loath to •inde.
What's that? a stumbling block?
T•es hands, that wh•loom tote up sturdy Oaks,
And rent the rock that dashed out Acis brains,
Both in the stole-blisse of my Galate•,
Serve now (ô misery) to no better use,
But for bad guides to my unskilful feet.
Never accustomed thus to be directed.
As I am a rogue, hee wants nothing but a wheel, to
make him the true picture of Fortune; how say? what shall
we play at blind-man-buffe with him?
I if thou wilt, but first isle try whether he can see!
Find me out Outis, search the rocks, and woods,
The hill•es and dales, and all the Coast's adjoining.
That I may have him, and revenge my wrong,
Visus me thinks your eyes are well enough.
What's hee that calls me Visus? dost not know.
To him Mendatio, to him, to h•n.
There, there Appetitus, hee comes, he comes; ware
wa•e, he comes, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Is this he that thinks himself Hercules?
I, willt see me out-swagger him?
I do, do, I love not to sport with such mad play-fel∣lowes;
tickle him Appetitus, tickle him, tickle him.
Have I not here the great and puissant Club,
Where with I conquered three Chopped Cerberus.
Have I not here the sharpe, and warlike teeth,
That at one break-fast quaild thrice three hogg's faces?
And are not these Alcides brawny arms,
That rent the Lyons jaws and killed the boar?
And is not this the Stomach that defeated
Nyne yards of pudding, and a rank of pies?
Did nor I crop the seven-fold Hydras crest,
And with a river cleansed Ages stable?
Did not I crush a seven-fold Custards crust,
And with my tongue, swept a well furnished table?
Did not these feet and hands oretake and slay,
The nimble Stag, and fierce impetuous bull?
Did not this throat at one good meal devour,
That Stags sweet venison, and that strong Bulls beef?
•hall Hercules be thus difparaged?
I•no! you pouting. Queen, you low•ng trull?
Take heed I take you not; for by Ioues thunder
I le be revenged
Why Visus, Visus. will you be killed? away, away.
Who have we here, see, see the Giant Cacus,
Draws an Ox backward to his thievish den,
Hath this devise so long deluded me?
Monster of men Cacus restore my cattle,
Or instantly Isle crush thy idle Cox-combe.
And dash thy doltish brains against thy Cave.
Cacus, I Cacus? ha, ha, ha. Tactus you mistake me.
I am yours to command. App•titus.
Art Appetitus? You are so; run quickly villain.
Fetch a whole Ox to satissie my stomach.
Fetch an Alle to keep you company.
Then down to Hell, tell Pluto Prince of Devils,
That great Al••des wont's a kitchen wench.
To turn his spit, command h•m from my self!
To send up Proserpine shee'• serve the turn.
I must find you meat and the Devil find you cooks
Which is the next way?
Follow the beaten path thou can not miss it
Tic a wide Causie that conducted thither,
An easy tract and down hill all the way,
But •f the black Prince will not send her quickly,
But still detain her for his bed-fellow,
Tell him Isle drag him from his iron chair,
By the steel tres•es, and then sow him fast,
With the three furies in a leathern bag.
And thus will drown them in the Ocean.
You had better keep him alive to light Tobacco-pipes▪
or to sweep chimneys.
Act thou not gone, nay then isle send thy soul,
Before thee, twill do thy message sooner (tiff, tiff.)
Hercules, Hercules, Hercules? do not you hear Omphal••
Hark how she calls you, hark?
Tic she indeed I know her sug•ed voice?
Omphale dear Command resse of my life
My thoughts repose, sweet Center of my cares
Where all my hopes, and best desires take rest.
Lo! where the mighty Son of Iupiter
Throws himself Capture at your conquering feet
Do not disdain my voluntary humbleness.
Accept my service, bless me with commanding,
I will perform the hardest imposition
And run through twelve new labours for thy sake,
Omphale dear▪ ommandresse of my life.
Do you not see how she beckons to you to follow her?
Look how she 〈◊〉 her distaff, look you?
Where is she gone, that I may follow her?
Omphal• stay, stay, take thy Hercules!
There there man, you are right.
What a strange temper are the Senses in?
How come their wits thus topsy turme turned?
Hercules Tactus, Visus Polypheme,
Two goodly surnames have they purchased:
By the rare Ambrosian of an Oyste •ie;
They have got such proud imaginatious,
That I could wish I were mad for company:
But since my fortunes cannot stretch so high,
Isle rest contented with this wise estate.
What more anger? Auditus got abroad too.
Take this abuse at base Olfactus hands?
What did he challenge me to meet me here,
And is not come? well Isle proclaim the slave,
The vilest dastard that ere broke his word;
But stay yonder's Appetitus.
I pray you Auditus, what ails you?
Ha, ha!
What ails you?
Ha! what say thou?
Who hath abused you thus?
Why dost thou whisper thus? Can not speak out?
Sa•e me I had clean forgotten; why are you so angry
Auditus•
Bite vs, who dare bite vs?
I talk of no bitting, I say whats the matter between
Olfactus and you?
Will Olsactus bite me? do if he dares, would he would
meet me here according to his promise: Mine ears are some∣what
thick of late, I pray thee speak out louder.
Ha ha ha ha this is sine i'faith: ha, ha, ha. Hear you,
have you lost your ears at supper.
Excellent cheer at supper I confess it:
But when it is sauced with sour contentions,
And breeds such quarrels it is intolerable,
Pish, pish this is my question. Hath your supper spoiled
your hearing?
Hearing at supper, tell not me of hearing:
But if thou saw Olfactus, bring me to him.
I ask you whether you have lost your hearing?
O dost thou hear them ring? what a grief is this
Thus to be deaf, and loose such harmony?
Wretched Auditus now shalt thou never here
The pleasing changes that a well tuned Corde,
Of trowling bells, will make, when they are true rung.
Heir's a do indeed, I think he is mad, as well as drunk
or deaf.
Ha. What's that.
I say you have made me hoarse with speaking so loud.
Ha, what say thou of a creaking Crowed?
I am hoarse I tell you, and my head aches.
Oh I understand thee! the first crowd was made of a horse-head
Tic true, the sinding of a dead horse-head,
Was the first invention of string instruments,
Whence rose the Gitterme, Vial, and the Lute:
Though others think the Lute was first deuis'd,
In imitation of a Tortes back
Whose sinews parched by Apollo's beams,
Echoed about the concave of the shell,
And seeing the shortest and smallest gave shrillest sound,
They found out frets whole sweet diversity
(Well couched by the skill-full learned fingers)
Raises so strange a multitude of Cords,
Which their opinion many do con•irme,
Because Testudo signifies a Lute.
But if I by no means.—
Nay if you begin to critic once, wee shall never have
done.
Somnus, good Somnus, sweet Somnus, come a pace!
Hei-oh, oh, are you sure they be so? oho, ho, oho, hei,
waw?
What good can I do? ou, ho, haw.
Why I tell you unless you help
Soft son of night, right heir to Quietness,
Labours repose, lifes best restorative,
Digestions careful Nurse, bloods Comforter,
Wi•s help, thoughts charm, the stay of Microcosm,
Sweet Somnus chiefest enemy to Care:
My dearest friend, liftvp thy lumpish head,
Op thy dull eyes, shake of this drowsiness,
Rouse up thy self.
O Crapula, how now, how now, oh oh howe
whose there?
Crapula speak quickly what's the matter?
As I told you, the noble Senses peers of Microcosm;
Will left soon fall to ruin perpetual,
Unless your ready helping hand recur them:
Lately they banqueted at Gustus table.
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
And there fell mad, or drunk, I know not whether,
So that it's doubtful in these outrageous fits,
That the•e murder one another.
Fear it not if they have escaped already,
Bring me to them, or them to me,
I•e quickly make them know the power,
Of my la•ge stretched authority,
These co••es of sleep wherewith I wont to bind,
The strongest arms that ere resisted me,
Shall be the means, whereby I will correct
The Senses outrage, and distemperature.
Thanks gentle Somnus, Isle go seek them out,
And bring then to you soon as possible.
Dispatch it quickly, least I fall a sleep for want of work.
Stand still, stand still? Visus I think comes yonder.
If you think good, begin and bind him first:
For he made fast, the rest will soon be quiet.
Sage Telemus, I now too late admire,
Thy deep fore-sight and skill in Prophecy,
Who meanwhile toldst me, that in time to come
Vlisses should deprive me of my sight.
And now the slave that marched in Outis name,
Is proved V•sses, and by this device,
Hath escaped my hands, and fled away by Sea,
Leaving me desolate in eternal night.
Ah wretched Polypheme, whore's all thy hope,
And longing for thy beauteous Galatea?
She scorned thee once, but now she will detest,
And loath to look upon thy darkened face:
Aye me most miserable Polphemus.
But as for 〈◊〉, heaven and earth
Send vengeance ever on thy damned head.
In just re•enge of my great injury.
Who is he that dares to touch me? Cyclops come?
Come all ye Cyclop's help to rescue me.
There rest thy self and let thy quiet sleep,
Restore thy weak imaginations.
Ha, ha, ha: oh how my spline is tickled with this sport.
The matting Senses make about the woods,
It cheers my soul and makes my body fat:
To laugh at their mischances, ha, ha▪ ha, ha,
Heigh ho, the stitch hath caught me, oh my heart!
Would I had one to hold my sides a while,
That I might laugh a fresh: oh how they run,
And chafe, and swear, and threaten one another,
Ay me, out alas, ay me help, help, who's this that bind's me?
Help Mendatio, Mendatio help, here is one will ravish me.
Lingo content your self you must be bound.
What a spight's this? are my nails par'd so near?
Can I not scratch his eyes out? What have I done? what? doe
you mean to kill me? murder, murder, murder,
Who cries out murder! What a woman slain?
My Lady •ing•a dead? oh Heavens unjust
Can you behold this fact, this bloody fact!
And shower not fire upon the murderer?
Ah peerless Lingo mistress of heavenly words,
Sweet tongue of eloquence, the life of fame,
Heart's dea•e enchantress▪ what disaster fates
Have reft this Jewel from our common-wealth.
Gustus the ruby that adorns thy ringe,
Lo here defect, how shalt thou lead thy days,
Wanting the sweet Companion of thy life.
But in dark sorrow and dull melancholy,
But •taie? whose this? inhumane wretch:
Blou•-•hi•sty miscreant, is this thy handy work?
To kill a woman, a harmless Lady?
Villain prepare thy self draw, or isle sheath my fashion in
thy sides.
There take the guerdon fit sor murderers.
Heir's such a stir I never knew the Senses in such
disorder.
Ha, ha, ha; M•nd•cio, Mendicio? See how Visus
hath broke his fore-head against the oak yonder, ha, ha, ha,
ha.
Howe now? Is not Lingu• bound sufficiently? I have
more trouble to make one women in sleep, then all the world be∣sides
they be so full of tattle.
Oh mine ears, mine ears, mine ears.
Oh my nose, my nose, my nose,
Leave, leave at length these base contentions, Olfac∣tus
let him go?
Let him first loose my nose?
Good •u litus give over?
IIe have his life that sought to kill me.
Come, come Isle end this quarrel, bind him Crapula!
Thanks Dei•near for thy kind remembrance,
Tic a fair shirt Isle wear it for thy sake.
Somnus heir's 〈◊〉 worse then all his sellowes
Stay but a while and you shall see him rage!
What will he do? see that hee scopes vs not!
Tic a good shirt, it fit's me passing well,
Tic very warm indeed, but whats the matter.
Me thinks I am some-what hotter then I was,
My heart beats faster then it was wont to do
My brains inflamed, my temples ache extremely, oh, oh,
Oh what a wild-fire creeps among my bowels:
A•tna's with in my breast, my marrow f•ies,
And •unease about my bones, oh my sides:
My sides, my rains, my head my rains, my head;
My heart, my heart, my liver, my liver, oh,
I burn, I burn, I burn oh how I burn:
With scorching heate of implacable fire,
I burn extreme with flames unsufferable,
Sure he doth but try how to act Her•ules:
Is it this shirt that boils me thus? oh heavens,
It fires me worse, and heats more furiously
Then loves dire thunderbolts; oh miserable,
They bide less pain that bathe in Phlegeton;
Could not the triple kingdom of the world,
Heaven, earth and hell destroy great Hercul•?
Could not the damned sprights of hateful Inno?
Nor the great dangers of my labours kill me?
Am I the mighty son of inp••er?
And shall this poisned linen thus consume me?
Shall I be burnt? villains s•ie up to heaven,
Bid 〈◊〉 m•ster up a troupe of clouds,
And shower down cata•acts of rain to cool me?
Or else Isle break her speckled by•e in pieces?
Will ••e not? no she hates me like her mistress;
Why then descend you rogues to the vile deep,
F••ch. 〈◊〉 hither charge him bring the sea,
To quenc• these flames, or else the worlds fair frame:
Will be in greater danger to be burnt,
Then when proud Phaeton ruled the Suns rich Chariot.
Isle take that care the world shall not be burnt:
If Somnus cords can hold you.
What Vulcan's this that offers to enchain,
A greater soldier then the God of Mars.
He that each night with bloodless battle conquers,
The proudest conqueror that triumphs by wars:
Now Somnus there's but only one remaining,
That was the author of these outrages.
Who's that? is he under my Command?
Yes, yes, yes, tic Appetitus; if you go that way, and
look about those thickets, isle go hither, and search this grove,
I doubt not but to find him?
Content.
So now's the time that I would gladly meet,
These matting Senses that abused me thus;
What? haunt me like an owl? make an Ass of me?
No they shall know, •I scorn to serve such masters,
As cannot master their affections,
Their injury• have changed my nature,
Now I •le be no more called hungry parasite:
But he•ceforth answer to the wrathful name
Of angry Appetite, my choler's up:
〈◊〉 cool me quickly with thy fan,
Ore•ce I le cut thy cheeks, why this is brave:
Fa••e better then to fane at Gustus table,
For a few scraps, no, no, such words as these,
By Pluto stab the villain, kill the slave:
By the infernal hags, Isle hough the rogue,
And paunch the rascal that abused me thus,
Such words as these fit angry Appetite.
Somnus, Somnus, come hither, come hither quickly,
hoe's here, hoe's here.
I marry is he sir, what of that? base miscreant Cra• pula.
O gentle Appetitus.
You muddy gulch, dare look me in the face, while
mine eyes sparkle, with revengeful fire? (tiff, toff, tiff, toff,)
Good Appetitus.
Peace you fat bawson, peace, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff,)
See not this fatal engine of my wrath?
Villain Isle maule thee for thine old offences,
And grind thy bones to powder with this pestle:
You when I had no weapons to defend me,
Could beat me out of doors; but now prepare,
Make thy self ready, for thou shalt not scope.
Thus doth the great revengeful Appetite,
Upon his fat foe, wreak his wrathful spite.
Why how now Crapula?
Am I not dead? is not my soul departed?
No, no, see where he lies, that would have •iurt thee?
fear nothing?
So rest you all in silent quietness,
Let nothing wake you till the power of sleep,
With his sweet dew, cooling your brains inflamed,
Hath rectified the vain and idle thoughts,
Bred by your surfeit, and distemperature:
Lo here the Senses late outrageous,
All in a round together sleep like friends,
For there's no difference twixt the King and Clown,
The poor and rich, the beauteous and deformed,
Wrapped in the veil of night, and bonds of sleep,
Without whose power, and sweet dominion,
Our life were Hell, and pleasure painfulnesse,
The sting of envy, and the dart of love,
A•arice talons, and the fire of hate:
Would poison, wound, distract, and soon consume,
The heart, the liver life and mind of man;
The 〈◊〉 Mower, that with •rawnie arms,
Wi••death the crooked sith, in many a swathe,
Cutting the flowery pride on the velvet plain,
Lies down at night, and in the weaty folds
Of his wives arms, forgets his labour past,
The painful Mariner, and careful Smith,
The toiling Ploughmen, all Artificers,
Most humbly yceld to my dominion,
Without due rest, nothing is durable.
Lo thus doth Somnus conquer all the world
With his most awful waud, and half the year
Reigns over the best and proudest Emperors.
Only the nurslings of the Sisters nine,
Rebels against me scorn my great command:
And when dark night from her bedewy wings,
Drops sleepy silence to the eyes of all,
They only wake, and with vnwearied toil,
Labour to find the Via lac•ea,
That leads to the heaven of immortality,
And by the lofty to towering of their mind,
Fledgd with the feathers of a learned muse,
They raise themselves unto the highest pitch,
Marrying base earth and heaven in a thought;
But thus I punish their rebellion,
Their industry was never yet rewarded,
Better to sleep then wake, and toil for nothing.
So' ho Rocwood, so ho Rocwood, Rocwood, your Or∣began,
hay Chanter, Chanter, by 〈◊〉 hed-tyre it's a very deep
mouthed dog, a most admirable cry of hounds, look here,
again, again, there, there, ah wa•e counter.
Do you see the full Moon yonder, and not the man in
it, why me thinks it is too, too evident, I see his dog very
plain, and look you, just under his tail is a Thorne bush
of Furs.
Twill make a fine tooth-pick: that Larks heel
there, ô do not burn it.
Boy, Heuresis, what think thou I think, when I
think nothing?
And it please you sir, I think you are devising how to
answer a man that asks you nothing.
Well gest boy, but yet thou mistookst it, for I was
thinking of the constancy of women, 
Beware sir, take heed, I doubt me there's some wild Boar
lodged here about? how now? me thinks these be the Sen∣ses,
ha? in my conceit the elder brother of death has kissed
them.
Oh, oh, oh, I am stabbed, I am stabbed, hold your hand,
oh, oh, oh.
How now? doe they talk in their sleep? are they not
awake Heuresis?
No questionless, they be all fast a sleep.
Eat not too many of those Apples, they bee very
sl•tiue?
Foh, foh, beat out this Dog hear, foh, was it you
Appetitus?
In faith it was most sweetly winded, whosoever it
was, the warble is very good, and the horn is excellent?
Put on man, put on, keep your head warm, it is
cold.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, st, Heuresis, stir not sir.
Shut the door, the pot runs over, sir Cooke
that will be a sweet Pastie, if you nibble the venison so?
Say you so, is a Marrow Pie the Helena of meates?
give meet, if I play not Paris hang me, Boy a clean
Trencher?
Serve up, serve up, this is a fat Rabbit, would I
might have the maiden-head of it, come give me the •each there,
who hath meddled with these maids? ha?
Fie, shut your Snuffers doser for shame, it is the worst
smell that can be.
O the cramp, the cramp, the cramp, my leg, my
leg.
I must abroad presently, reach me my best Neck∣lace
presently.
Ah Lingo are you there?
Here take this Rope, and Isle help the leader close
with the second Bell: Fie, fie, there is a goodly peal clean
spoiled.
Isle lay my life that Gentlewoman is painted: well. well
I know it, mark but her nose, doe you not see the complexion
crack out, I must confess it is a good picture.
Ha, ha, ha, fie, I pray you leave, you tickle me so, oh, ah,
ha, ha, take away your hands I cannot endure, ah you tickle me,
ah, ha, ha, ha, ah.
Hai, rett, rett, rett, now bird, now,—look about that
bush, she trust her thereabout,—here she is, ware wing Cater,
ware wing, avaunt.
Mum, mum, mum, mum.
st, sir take heed you wake her not.
I know sir she is fast a sleep, for her mouth is
shut.
This it is, to venture upon such uncertainties, to
loose so rich a Crown to no end, well, well.
Ha, ha, ha, wee shall here avon, where she lost her
maiden-head, st, boy, my Lord Vicegerent, and Moister Regi∣ster
are hard by, run quickly, tell them of this accident, wish
them come softly.
Mendatio never talk farther, I doubt'tis past re∣couery,
and my Robe likewise, I shall never have them again,
well, well.
How? her Crown, and her Robe, never recover
them? hum, wast not said to bee left by Memory? ha? I con∣gesture
here's some knauery-fast locked with sleep, in good faith.
Was that Crown and Garment yours L•ngua?
I marry were they, and that some body hath felt, and
shall feel more, if I live.
O strange, she answers in her sleep to my question, but
how come the Senses to strive for it?
Why, I laid upon purpose in their way, that they
might fall together by the ears.
What a strange thing is this?
st, my Lord, softly, softly, here's the notablest piece of
treason discovered, how say you Lingu. set all the Senses at odds,
she hath confessed it to me in her sleep.
First possible Moister Register? did you ever know
any talk in their sleep?
I remember my Lord many have done so very oft, but
women are troubled, especially with this talking disease, many
of them have I heard answer in their dreams, and tell what
they did all day awake.
By the same token, there was a wanton maid, that
being asked by her Mother, what such a one did with her so late
one night in such a room, she presently said, that—
Peace you wild rake hell, is such a jest fit for this
company, no more I say sir.
My Lord will you believe your own ears, you shall
hear her answer me, as directly and truly as my be. Lingo,
what did you with the Crown and garments.
Isle tell thee Mends••.
She thinks Mendacio speaks to her, mark
now, mark howe truly she will answer: what say you Ma∣dame?
I say Fantastic is a foolish transparent gull; a mere
fanatic nupson in my imagination not worthy to •it as a Iud∣ges
assistant.
Ha, ha, ha, howe truly and directly she an∣swears.
Few, few, she dreams now she knows not what she
says, I try her once again: Madame? what remedy can you
have for your great losses?
O are you come Acrasia? welcome, welcome, boy
reach a Cushion sit down good 〈◊〉? I am so beholding to
you, your potion wrought exceedingly, the senses were so mad,
did not you see how they raged about the woods?
Hum, Acre•••? is Acrasia her confederate? my life
that witch hath wrought some villainy,—
how's this? is she a sleep? have you seen one walk thus
before?
It is a very common thing, I have seen many sick
of the Peripatetic disease.
By the same token my Lord, I knew one that went
abroad in his sleep, bent his bow, shot at a Magpie, kilt
her, fetched his arrow, came home, locked the doors, and went
to bed again.
What should be the reason of it?
I remember 〈◊〉 told me the reason once, as I
think thus: The nerues that carry the moving faculty, from
the brains, to the thighs, legs, feet, and arms, are wider
far then the other nerues, where•ore they are not so easily stopped
with the vapours of sleep, but are night and day ready to per∣form
what fancy shall command them.
It may bee so, but Fantastic enquire more
of Acrasia.
What did you with the potion Acrasia made you:
Gave it to the Senses, and made them as mad as—well,
If I cannot recover it—let it go, Isle not leave them
thus.
Boy a wake the Senses there.
Hoe, hoe, Auditus, up, up, so hoe, Olfactus have at your
nose, up Visus, Gustus, Tactus, up: What can you not feel a
pinch? have at you with a pin.
Oh, you stab me, oh,
Tactus, know you how you came hither:
No my Lord, not I, this I remember,
We sup't with Gustus, and had wine good store,
Where of I think I tasted liberally.
Amongst the rest, wee drunk a composition,
Of a most delicate, and pleasant relish,
That made our brains, somewhat irregular.
My Lord, here's a fat rascal was lurking in a bush
very suspitiously, his name he says is Crapula.
Sirrah, speak quickly what you know of
these troubles,
Nothing my Lord, but that the Senses were mad,
and that Somnus at my request laid them asleep, in hope to
recover them.
Why then tic too evident, Acrasia at Lingua's re∣quest,
bewitched the Senses, wake her quickly Heuresis.
Heigh ho, out alas, aye me, where am I? how came I
here? where am I? ah.
Li•gua look not so strangely upon the mat∣la,
you have confessed in your sleep, that with a Crown, and
a Robe, you have disturbed t•e Senses, using a crafty help
to enrage them, can you deny it?
Aye me, most miserable wretch, I beseech your
Lordship forgive me.
No, no, tic a fault unpardonable,
In my conceit Lingo, you should seal up
your lips, when you go to bed, these Feminine tongues
be so glib.
Visus, Tactus, and the rest, our former sentence
concerning you, wee confirm as irrevocable, and establish
the Crown to you Visus, and the Robe to you Tactus, but as
for you Lingo—
Let me have mine own, howsoever you determine,
I beseech you.
That may not bee, your goods are fallen into
our hands, my sentence cannot bee recalled, you may see,
those that seek what is not theirs, oftentimes loose what's
their own: Therefore Lingo granting you your life, I
commit you to close prison, in Gustus his house, and charge
you Gustus, to keep her under the custody of two strong
doors, and every day till she come to 80. years of age, see she
be well guarded with 30. tall watchmen, without whose licence
she shall by no means wag abroad, nevertheless use her
Lady-like, according to her estate.
I pray you my Lord add this to the judgment
that whenever she obtayneth licence to walk abroad, in
token the Tongue was the cause of her offence, let her
wear a velvet hood, made just in the fashion of a great
Tongue, in my conceit it is a very pretty Emblem of a
Woman,
My Lord, she hath a wild boy to her page, a chief
agent in this treason, his name's Mendatio.
Ha? well, I will inflict this punishment on him
for this time, let him be soundly whipped, and ever after though
he shall strengthen his speeches with the sinews of Truth, yet
none shall believe him.
In my imagination my Lord, the Day is dead to the
great toe, and in my conceit it grows dark, by which I con∣gesture
it will be cold, and therefore in my fa•cie, and opinion,
it is best to repair to our lodgings.
What's this? a fellow whispering so closely with the
Earth? so, ho, so, ho: Appetitus? faith now I think Morpheus
himself hath been here, up with a pox to you, up you luck,
I have such news to tell thee sirta: all the Senses are well, and
Lingo is proved guilty, up, up, up, I never knew him so fast a
sleep in my life.
Nay then have at you a fresh, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)
Jog me once again, and Isle throw this whole mess
of pottage in your face, cannot one stand quiet at the dresser
for you?
Ha, ha, ha, I think it's impossible for him to sleep
longer then hee dreams of his victuals. What Appetitus, up
quickly, quickly up, Appetitus, quickly sir, (toff, toff, toff, toff,)
Isle come presently, but I hope you'll stay till they bee
roasted, will you eat them raw?
Roasted? ha, ha, ha, ha, up, up, up, away,
Reach the sauce quickly, here's no Sugar, whew,
women, oh, ou, oh.
What never wake? (Tiff, toff, tiff, toff,) wilt never be?
Then I must try another way I see.
IVdicious friends, it is so late at night,
I cannot waken hungry Appetite:
Then since the close upon his rising stands,
Let me obtain this at your courteous hands,
Try if the friendly opportunity,
Of your good will, and gre•ious Plaudit,
With the thrice welcome mumure it shall keep,
Can beg this prisoner from the bands of sleep.
Upon the Plaudit, APPETITVS awakes,
and runs in after ANAMNESTES.

But Frank, Frank, now we are come to the house,
what shall we make to be our business?
Tut, let vs be Impudent enough, and good enough.
We have no acquaintance here, but young Scar∣borrow.
How no acquaintance: Angels guard me from thy
company. I tel thee Wentloe thou art not worthy to wear guilte
Spurs, clean Linen, nor good Clothes.
Why for Gods sake?
By this hand thou art not a man fit to Table at an Ordi∣nary,
keep Knights company to Bawdy houses, nor Beggar thy
Taylor.
Why then I am free from Cheaters, clear from the Pox,
and escape Curses?
Why dost thou think there is any Christians in the world?
I and Jaws too, Brokers, Puritans, and Sergeants.
Or dost thou mean to beg after Charity, that goes in a
cold suit already, that thou talk thou hast no acquaintance here.
I tel thee Wentloe thou can not live on this side of the world: feed
well, drink Tobacco, and be honoured into the presence, but thou
must be acquainted with all sorts of men, I and so far in to, till
they desire to be more acquainted with thee.
True, and then you shall be accounted a gallant of good
credit.
But stay, here is a Scrape-trencher arrived: How now blew
bottle, are you of the house?
I have heard of many black Jacks Sir, but never of a blew
Bottle.
Well Sir, are you of the house?
No Sir, I am twenty yards without, and the house stands
without me.
Prithee tells who owes this building.
He that dwells in it Sir.
Who dwells in it then.
He that owes it.
Whats his name.
I was none of his God-father.
Dus moister Scarberow lie here,
Isle give you a rime for that Sir,
Sick men may lie, and dead men in their Graves,
Few else do lie abed at noon, but Drunkards, Punks, &amp; knaves.
What am I the better for thy answer?
What am I the better for thy question?
Why nothing.
Why then of nothing comes nothing.
Sblud this is a philosophical fool.
Then I that am a fool by Art, am better then you that
are fools by nature.
Gentlemen, welcome to Yorkshire.
And well encountered my little Villain of fifteen hundred
a year, S•ut what make thou here in this barren soil of the
North, when thy honest friends miss thee at London?
Faith Gallants tic the Country where my Father lived,
where first I saw the light, and where I am loved,
Loved, I as Courtiers love Usurers, &amp; that is just as long as
they lend them money. Now dare I lay.
None of your Land good Knight, for that is laid to more∣gage
already?
I dare lay with any man that will take me up.
Who list to have a Lubberly load.
Sirrah wag, this Rogue was son and heir to Antony Now,
Now, and Blind Moon. And he must needs be a scurvy Musiti∣on,
that hath two Fiddlers to his Fathers: but tel me in faith, art thou
not, nay I know thou art called down into the country here, by some
hoary Knight or other, who knowing thee a young Gentleman of
good parts, and a great living▪ hath desired thee to see some pitti∣full
piece of his Workmanship, a Daughter I mean, First not, so?
About some such preferment I came down.
Preferment, a good word: And when do you commence
into the Cuckolds order, the Preferment you speak of when shall
we have Gloves: when, when?
Faith gallants
I have bin guest here but since last night.
Why, and that is time enough to make up a dozen marria∣ges,
as marriages are made up now adays. For look you Sir: the
father according to the fashion, being sure you have a good living,
and without Encumbrance, comes to you thus:—takes you by
the hand thus:—wipes his long beard thus:—or turn svp his
Muchacho thus:—Walks some turn or two thus:—to show
his comely Gravity thus:—And having washed his foul mouth
thus:—it last breaksout thus.—
O God: Let vs hear more of this?
Moister Scarborrow, you are a young Gentleman, I knew
your father well, hee was my worshipful good Neighbour, for
our Demeans lay near together. Then Sir,—you and I must
be of more ne'er acquaintance.—At which, you must make an
eruption thus:—O God (sweet Sir)
Sfut, the Knight would have made an excellent Zany, in
an Italian Comedy.
Then hee goes forward thus: Sir, my self am Lord of some
thousand a year, a Widower, (moister Scarberrow) I have a cou∣ple
of young Gentlewomen to my Daughters, a thousand a year
will do well divided among them? Ha, wilt not Moister Scarbor∣row,
—At which you out of your education must reply
thus.—The Portion will deserve them worthy husbands: on
which Tinder he soones takes fire and swears you are the Man
his hopes shot at, and one of them shall be yours.
If I did not like her, should hee swear to the devil, I
would make him forsworn.
Then putting you and the young Puggs to in a close room
together.
If he should lie with her there, is not the father partly the
Bawd?
Where the young puppet, having the Lesson before from
old Fox, give the son half a dozen warm kisses, which after
her fathers oths, takes such Impression in thee, thou straight call
by Iesu Mistress, I love you:—When she has the wit to ask,
but Sir, will you marry me, and thou in thy Cox-sparrow-humor
reply, I (before God) as I am a Gentleman will I, which the Fa∣there
overhearing, leaps in, takes you at your word, swears hee is
glad to see this; nay he will have you contracted straight, and for
a need makes the priest of himself.
Thus in one hour, from a quiet life,
Thou art sworn in debt, and troubled with a wife.
But can they Love one another so soon?
Oh, it is no matter now adays for love, tic well, and they can
but make shift to lie together.
But will your father doe this too, if hee know the gallant
breaths himself at some two or three Bawdy houses in a morning.
Oh the sooner, for that and the Land together, tell the old
lad, he will know the better how to deal with his Daughter?
The Wise and Ancient Fathers know this Rule,
Should both wed Maids, the Child would be a Fool.
Come Wag, if thou hast gone no further then into the Ordinary
fashion, meet, see, and kiss, give over: Mary not a Wife to have
a hundred plagues for one pleasure: lets to London, theres vary∣tie:
and change of pasture makes fat Calves.
But change of women bawld Knaves, Sir Knight.
Wag and thou be a Lover but three days, thou wilt bee
Hartles, Sleepless, witless, Mad, Wretched, Miserable, and indeed,
a stark Fool. And by that, thou hast been married but three
weeks, tho thou should wed a Cynthia rara avis, thou would
be a man monstrous: A Cuckold, a Cuckold.
And why is a Cuckold monstrous, Knight?
Why, because a man is made a Beast by being married?
Take but example thy self from the Moon, as soon as she is
delivered of her great belly, doth she not point at the world with
a pair of horns, as who should say, married men, some of ye are
Cuckolds.
I construe more Divinely of their sex,
Being Maids, methinkes they are Angels: and being Wives,
They are Souèraignes: Cordials that preserve our Lives,
They are like our hands that feed vs, this is clear,
They renew man, as spring renews the year.
Theres ne'er a wanton Wench that hears thee, but thinks
thee a Coxcom for saying so: Marry none of them, if thou wilt
have their true Characters, Isle give it thee,—Women are the
Purgatory of men's Purses, the Paradise of their bodies, and the
Hell of their minds; Marry none of them. Women are in Chur∣ches
Saints, abroad Angels, at home Devils.
Here are married men enough, know this: Marry none of them.
Men that traduce by custom, show sharpe wit
Only in speaking Ill, and practise it:
Against the best of Creatures, divine women
Who are Gods Agents here, and the Heavenly eye
By which this Orb hath her Maturity;
Beauty in women, get the world with Child,
Without whom, she were barren, faint, and wilde.
They are the stems on which do Angels grow,
From whence Virtue is stilt, and Arts do flow.
Let them be what Flowers they will, and they were Roses, I
will pluck none of them for pricking my fingers. But soft, here
comes a voider for vs: and I see, do what I can, as long as the world
lasts, there will be Cuckolds in it. Do you hear Child, hears one
come to blend you together: he has brought you a kneading-tub,
if thou dost take her at his hands,
Tho thou had Argus eyes, be sure of this,
Women have sworn with more then one to kiss.
Nay no parting Gentlemen: Hem.
Sfut dus he make Punkes of vs, that he Hems already?
Gallants,
Know old Iohn Harcop keeps a Wineseller,
Has Travelled, bin at Court, known Fashions,
And unto all bears habit like your selves,
The shapes of Gentlemen and men of sort.
I have a health to give them ere they part.
Health Knight, not as Drunkards give their healths I
hope, to go together by the ears when they have done?
My healths are welcome: welcome Gentlemen.
Are we welcome Knight, Infayth.
Welcome infayth Sir.
Prithee tell me hast not thou bin a Whoremaister.
In youth I swelled my fill at Venus cup,
In sted of full draughts now I am fine to sup.
Why then thou art a man fit for my company:
Dost thou hear that he is a good fellow of our stamp,
Make much of his •ather.
The Father, and the Gallants have left me hear with a
Gentlewoman, and if I know what to say to her I am a villen, hey∣uen
grant her life hath borrowed so much Impudence of her sex,
but to speak to me first: for by this hand, I have not so much steel
of Immodesty in my face, to Parley to a Wench without blushing.
Isle walk by her, in hope she can open her teeth.—Not a
word?—Is it not strange a man should be in a women's com∣pany
all this while and not hear her tongue.—Isle go fur∣there?
—God of his goodness: not a Syllable. I think if I should
take up her Clothes to, she would say nothing to me.—With
what words trow dus a man begin to woe. Gentlewoman pray you
what First a Clocks?
Troth Sir, carrying no watch about me but mine eyes, I
answer you: I cannot tell.
And if you cannot tell, Beauty I take the Addage for my
reply: You are nought to keep sheep.
Yet I am big enough to keep my sclfe.
Prithee tell me: Are you not a Woman?
I know not that neither, till I am better acquainted with a
man.
And how would you be acquainted with a man?
To distinguish betwixt himself and my self.
Why I am a Man.
Thats more then I know Sir.
To approve I am no less: thus I kiss thee.
And by that proof I am a man too, for I have kissed you.
Prithee tell me can you love?
O Lord Sir, three or four things: I Love my meat,
choice of Suitors: Clothes in the Fashion: and like a right woman
I love to have my will.
What think you of me for a Husband?
Let me first know, what you think of me for a wife?
Troth I think you are a proper Gentlewoman.
Do you but think so?
Nay I see you are a very perfect proper Gentlewoman.
It is great pity then I should be alone without a proper
man.
Your father says I shall marry you.
And I say God forbid Sir: I am a great deal to young.
I love thee by my troth.
O pray you do not so, for then you stray from the steps
of Gentility, the fashion among them is to marry first, and love
after by leisure.
That I do love thee, here by heaven I
swear, and cal it as a witness to this kiss.
You will not enforce me I hope Sir?
Makes me this women's husband, thou art my Clare,
Accept my hart, and prove as Chaste, as fair.
O God, you are too hot in your gifts, should I ac∣cept
them, we should have you plead nonage, some half a year
hence: sue for reuersement, &amp; say the deed was done under age.
Prithee do not Jest?
No (God is my record) I speak in earnest: &amp; desire to know
Whether ye mean to marry me, yea or no.
This hand thus takes thee as my loving wife,
For better, for worse.
I, till death vs depart love.
Why then I thank you Sir, and now I am like to have
that I long looked for: A Husband.
How soon from our own tongues is the word sed,
Captives our maiden-freedome to a head.
Clare your are now mine, and I must let you know,
What every wise doth to her husband owe,
To be a wise, is to be Dedicate
Not to a youthful course, wild, and unsteady,
But to the soul of virtue, obedience,
Studying to please, and never to offend.
Wives, have two eyes created, not like Birds
To rome about at pleasure, but for two sentinels,
To watch their husbands safety as their own,
Two hands, ones to feed him, the other her self:
Two feet, and one of them is their husbands,
They have two of every thing, only of one,
Their Chastity, that should be his alone.
Their very thoughts they cannot term them one,
Maids being once made wives, can nothing call
Rightly their own; they are their husbands all:
If such a wife you can prepare to be,
Clare I am yours: and you are fit for me.
We being thus subdued, pray you know then,
As women owe a duty, so do men.
Men must be like the branch and bark to trees,
Which doth defend them from tempestuous rage,
Cloth them in Winter, tender them in age,
Or as Ewes love unto their Eanlings lives,
Such should be husbands custom to their wives.
If it appear to them they have strayed amiss,
They only must rebuke them with a kiss,
Or Clock them, as Hens Chickens, with kind call,
Cover them under their wing, and pardon all:
No jars must make two beds, no strife divide them,
Those betwixt whom a faith and troth is given,
Death only parts, since they are knit by heaven:
If such a husband you intend to be,
I am your Clare, and you are fit for me.
By heaven.
Advise before you swear, let me remember you,
Men never give their faith, and promise marriage,
But heaven records their oath: If they prove true,
Heaven smiles for joy, if not it weeps for you,
Unless your hart, then with your words agree,
Yet let vs part, and less vs both be free.
If ever man in swearing love, swore true,
My words are like to his: Here comes your father.
Now moister Scarborrow.
Prepar`d to ask how you like that we have done,
your daughters made my wife, and I your son.
And both agreed so.
We are Sir,
Then long may you live together, have store of sons.
Tic no matter who is the father.
But son here is a man of yours is come from London.
And brought you Letters Sir.
What news from London Butler.
The old news Sir, the Ordinaries are full, some Citizens
are bankerouts, and many Gentlemen beggars.
Clare here is an unwelcome Pursuivant,
My Lord and Guardian writes to me with speed,
I must return to London.
And you being Ward to him son Scarborrow,
And know him great, it fits that you obey him.
It dus it dus, for by an ancient law,
We are borne free heirs, but kept like slaves in awe,
Who are for London Gallants?
Switch and Spur we will bear you company.
Clare I must leave thee, with what unwillingness
Witness this dwelling kiss upon thy lip,
And tho I must be absent from thine eye,
Be sure my hart doth in thy bosom lie,
Three years I am yet a ward, which time Isle pass,
Making thy faith my constant Looking-glasse,
Till when.
Till when you please, where ere you live or lie,
Your loves here worn, your presence in my eye.
Sir William,
How old say you is your kinsman Scarborrow.
Eighteen my Lord, next Pentecost.
Bethink you good Sir William,
I reckon thereabout my self, so by that account
Theres full three Winters yet he must attend,
Under our awe, before he sue his Livery:
First not so?
Not a day less my Lord.
Sir William you are his Uncle, and I must speak
That am his Guardian, would I had a son
Might merit commendations even with him.
Isle title you what he is, he is a youth,
A Noble branch, increasing blessed fruit.
Where Caterpillar vice dare not to touch,
He is himself with so much gravity,
Praise cannot praise him with Hypperbole:
He is one whom older look upon, as one a book,
Wherein are Printed Noble sentences
For them to rule their lives by. Indeed he is one
All Emulate his virtues, hate him none.
His friends are proud, to hear this good of him.
And yet Sir William being as he is,
Young, and unsettled, tho of virtuous thoughts,
By Genuine disposition, yet our eyes
See daily presidents, hopeful Gentlemen,
Being trusted in the world with their own will,
Divert the good is looked from them to Ill,
Make their old names forgot, or not worth note
With company they keep, such Revelling
With Panders, Parasites, Podigies of Knaves,
That they sell all, even their old fathers graves.
Which to prevent, weal match him to a wife,
Marriage Restrains the scope of single life.
My Lord speaks like a father for my Kinsman.
And I have found him one of Noble parentage,
A Niece of mine, nay I have broke with her,
Know thus much of her mind, what for my pleasure
As also for the good appears in him,
She is pleased of all thats hers to make him King.
Our name is blessed in such an honoured marriage
Also I have appointed Doctor Baxter,
Chancellor of Oxford to attend me here
And see he is come. Good moister Doctor.
My honourable Lord.
I have possessed you with this business moister Doctor
To see the contract twixt you honoured Niece
and moister Scarborrow.
Tic so, and I did look for him by this.
I saw him leave his horse as I came up.
So, so.
Then he will be here forthwith: you Moister Baxter
Go Usher hither straight young Katherine,
Sir William, here and I will keep this room till you return.
My honourable Lord.
Tic well done Scarborrow.
Kind Uncle.
Thanks my good Cos.
You have bin welcome in your Country Yorkshire.
The time that I spent there my Lord was merry.
It was well, it was very well, and in your absence,
your Uncle here and I, have bin bethinking
what gift betwixt vs we might bestow on you,
That to your house large dignity might bring,
With fair increase, as from a Crystal spring.
My name is bound to your beneficence,
your hands hath bin to me like bounties purse,
Never shut up, your self my foster-Nurse:
Nothing can from your honour come; prove me so rude,
But Isle accept to shun Ingratitude.
We accept thy promise, now return thee this,
A virtuous wife, accept her with a kiss.
My honourable Lord.
Fear not to take her man, she will fear neither,
Do what thou can being both abed together.
O but my Lord.
But me a Dog of wax, come kiss, and agree,
Your friends have thought it fit, and it must be.
I have no hands to take her to my wife.
How Sawce-box.
O pardon me my Lord the vnripenes of my years,
Too greene for government, is old in fears
To undertake that charge.
Sir, sir, I and sir knave, then here is a mellowed experience
knows how to teach you,
O God.
O Jack.
How both our cares, your Uncle and my self,
Sought, studied, found out, and for your good,
A maid, a Niece of mine, both fair and chaste,
And must we stand at your discretion.
O Good my Lord
Had I two souls, then might I have two wives,
Had I two faiths, then had I one for her,
Having of both but one, that one is given
To Sir Iohn Harcops daughter.
Ha, ha, whats that, let me hear that again?
To Sir Iohn Harcops Clare I have made an oath,
Part me in twain, yet shees one half of both.
This hand the which I wear it is half hers,
Such power hath faith and troth twixt couples young,
Death only cuts that knot tide with the tongue.
And have you knit that knot Sir.
I have done so much, that if I wed not her,
My marriage makes me an Adulterer,
In which black sheets, I wallow all my life,
My babes being Bastards, and a whore my wife.
Ha, first even so, My secretary there,
Write me a Letter straight to Sir Iohn Harcop,
Isle see Sir Jack and if that Harcop dare,
Being my Ward, contract you to his daughter.
My steward too, post you to Yorkshire,
Where lies my youngsters Land, and sirrah,
Fell me his wood, make havoc, spoil and wast.
Sir you shall know that you are Ward to me,
Isle make you poor enough: then mend your self.
O Cozen.
O Uncle.
Contract your self and where you list,
Isle make you know me Sir to be your guard.
World now thou see what tic to be a ward.
And where I meant my self to have disbursed
Four thousand pound, upon this marriage
Surrendered up your land to your own use,
And compassed other portions to your hands,
Sir Isle now yoke you still.
A yoke indeed.
And spite of they dare contradict my will,
Isle make thee marry to my Chambermaid. Comecouz.
Faith Sir it fits you to be more advised.
Do not you flatter for preferment sir
O but good Cos.
O but good uncle could I command my love,
Or cancel oaths out of heavens brazen book,
Engrossed by Gods own finger, then you might speak.
Had men that law to love as most have tongues
To love a thousand women with, then you might speak.
Were love like dust lawful for every Wind,
To bear from place to place, were oaths but puffs,
Men might forswear themselves, but I do know,
Tho sin being past with vs, the acts forgot,
The poor soul groans, and she forgets it not.
Yet hear your own case?
O tic to miserable:
That I a Gentleman should be thus torn
From mine own right, and forest to be sorsworne.
Yet being as it is, it must be your care,
To salve it with advice, not with despair,
you are his ward, being so, the Law intends,
He is to have your duty, and in his rule
Is both your marriage, and your heritage,
If you rebel against these Injunctions,
The penalty takes hold on you, which for himself,
He straight thus prosecutes, he wastes your land,
Weds you where he thinks fit, but if your self
Have of some violent humour matched your self,
Without his knowledge, then hath he power
To Merce your purse, and in a sum so great,
That shall for ever keep your fortunes weak,
Where otherwise if you be ruled by him
Your house is raised by matching to his kin.
Now death of me, shall I be crossed by such a Jack, he wed
himself, and where he list: Sirrha Malapert, Isle hamper you,
You that will have your will, come get you in:
Isle make thee shape thy thoughts to marry her,
Or wish thy birth had bin thy murderer.
Fare pity me, because I am enforced,
For I have heard those matches have cost blood,
Where love is once begun and then withstood,
Boy, hast thou delivered my Letter?
I Sir, I saw him open the lips ont.
He had not a new suit on, had he?
I am not so well acquainted with his Wardrobe Sir, but
I saw a lean fellow, with sunk eyes, and shamble legs, sigh
pitifully at his chamber door, and entreat his man to put his ma∣ster
in mind of him.
O, that was his Taylor, I see now he will be blessed he pro∣fits
by my counsel, he will pay no debts before he be arrested, nor
then neither, if he can find ere a beast that dare but be bail for
him, but he will seal in the afternoon.
Yes Sir, he will imprint for you as deep as he can.
Good, good, now have I a Parsons Nose, and smell tithe
coming in then. Now let me number how many rooks I have
half undone already this Term by the first return: four by
Dice, six by being bound with me, and ten by queens, of which
some be Courtiers, some Country Gentlemen, and some Citti∣zens
Sons. Thou art a good Frank, if thou pe•gest thus, thou
art still a Companion for Gallants, moist keep a Caramite, take
Physic, at the Spring and the fall.
Frank, news that will make thee fat Frank.
Prithee rather give me somewhat will keep me lean,
I ha no mind yet to take Physic.
Master Scarberrow is a married man.
Then heaven grant he may, as few married men do, make
much of his wife.
Why? would have him love her, let her command al, and
make her his master?
No no, they that do so, make not much of their wives, but
give them their will, and its the marring of em.
Honest Frank, valorous Frank, a portion of thy wit,
but to help vs in this enterprise, and we may walk London street
and cry pish at the Sergeants.
You may shift out one term, and yet die in the Counter,
these are the scabs now that hang upon honest Iob, I am Iob, and
these art the scurvy scabs, but whats this your pot seeths over
withal?
Moister Scarborrow is a married man.
He has all his land in his own hand.
His brothers and sisters portions.
Besides four thousand pound in ready money with his wife.
A good talent by my faith, it might help many Gentlemen
to pay their Tailors, and I might be one of them.
Nay, honest Frank, hast thou found a trick for him, if
thou hast not, look hears a line to direct thee. First draw him in∣to
bands for money, then to dice for it: Then take up stuff at the
Mercers, straight to a punk with it: Then mortgage his Land,
and be drunk with that: so with them and the rest, from an An∣cient
Gentleman, make him a young beggar.
What a Rog is this, to read a lecture to me, and mine own
lesson too, which he knows I ha made perfect to 9 hundred four∣score
and nineteen. A cheating Rascal will teach me that ha made
them that have worn a spacious Park, Lodge and all of their
backs this morning: bin fain to pawn it before night, and they
that ha staked like a huge Elephant, with a Castle on their
necks, and removed yt to their own shoulders in one day which
their fathers built up in seven year, bin glad by my means, in so
much time as a child sucks, to drink bottle Ale, tho a punk pay
fort. And shall this Parat instruct me?
Nay but Frank.
A rog that hath fed upon me, &amp; the fruit of my wit like Pull∣len
from a Pantlers chippings, and now I put him into good cloths
to shift two suits in a day, that could scare shift a patched shirt once
in a year, and says prayers when he had it: hark, how he prates.
Besides Frank, since his marriage, he stawkes me like a
cashiered Captain discontent, in which Melancholy, the least
drop of mirth, of which thou hast an Ocean, will make him, and
all his ours for ever.
Says mine own Rog so, give me thy hand then, weal
doot, and theres earnest. Strikes him. Sfut you Chitrtiface,
that looks worse then a Collier thorough a wooden window, an
Ape afraid of a whip, or a Knaves head, shook seven years in
the weather upon London-bridge. Do you Catechise me?
Nay but valorous Frank, he that knows the secrets of al
harts, knows I did it in kindness.
Know your seasons: besides, I am not of that Species for you
to instruct. Then know your seasons.
Sfut friends, friends, al friends: Here comes young Scar∣borrow,
should he knew of this, all our designs were prevented.
What, melancholy my young moister, my young married
man, God give your worship joy.
Joy, of what Frank?
Of thy wealth, for I hear of few that ha joy of heir wives
Who weds as I have to enforced sheets,
His care increases, but his comfort fleets.
Thou having so much wit, what a Devil meantst thou to
marry?
O speak not of it,
Marriage sounds in mine care like a Bell,
Not rung for pleasure, but a doleful knell.
A common course, those men that are married in the More∣ning,
to wish themselves buried ere night.
I cannot love her.
No news neither, wives know thats a general fault amongst
their Husbands.
I will not lie with her.
Cetera volunt sheele say still, if you will not, another will.
Why did she marry me, knowing I did not love her.
As other women do, either to bee maintained by you, or to
make you a Cuckold. Now sir, what come you for?
As men do in hast, to make an end of their business.
Whats your business?
My business is this Sir, this Sir, and this Sir,
The meaning of al this Sir. Cl. By this is as much as to say Sir,
may My. has sent unto you. By this is as much as to say Sir, my my∣ster
has him humbly commended unto you, and by this is as much
as to say, my master craves your answer.
Give me your Letter. And you shall have this Sir, this Sir, and
this Sir.
No Sir.
Why Sir?
Because as the learned have very well instructed me, Queen
supranos, nihil ad nos, and tho many Gentlemen will have to doe
with other men's business, yet from me know, the most part of them
prove knaves for their labour.
You ha the Knave in faith Frank.
Long may hee live to enjoy it. From Sir Iohn Harcop of
Harcop, in the County of York Knight, by me his man, to your
self my young moister, by these presents greeting.
How came thou by these good words?
As you by your good clothes, took them upon trust, &amp;
swore I would never pay for em.
Thy moister Sir Iohn Harcop writes to me,
That I should entertain thee for my man,
His wish is acceptable, thou art welcome fellow.
Oh but thy masters Daughter, sends an Article
Which makes me think upon my present sin,
Here she remembers me to keep in mind
My promised faith to her, which I ha broke.
Here she remembers me I am a man,
Black tore with perjury, whose sinful breast,
Is Charactred like those cursed of the blessed.
How now my young Bully, like a young wench forty weeks
after the loss of her Mayden-head, crying out.
Trouble me not,
Give me Pen, Ink, and Paper, I will write to her,
O? but what shall I write?
Mine own excuse, why no excuse can serve
For him that swears, and from his oath doth swerve?
Or shall I say, my marriage was info rest,
It was bad in them, not well in me to yield.
Wretched thee to whose marriage was compelled,
Isle only write that which my grave hath bred,
Forgive me Clare, for I am married:
Tic soon set down, but not so soon forgot, or worn from hēce.
Deliver it unto her, theres for thy pains,
Would I as soon could cleanse these periurd staines.
Well, I could alter mine eyes from filthy mud into fair wa∣la:
you have paid for my tears, and mine eyes shall prove bank∣routs,
and break out for you, let no man persuade me, I will cry,
and every Town betwixt Shoreditch-church and York bridge,
shall bear me witness.
Gentlemen, Isle take my leave of you,
She that I am married to but not my wife,
Will London leave, in Yorkshire lead our life.
We must not leave you so my young Gallant,
We three are sick in state, and your wealth must help to make vs
whole again.
For this saying, is as true as old:
Strife nursed twixt man and wife, makes such a flaw,
How great so eres their wealth, twil have a thaw,
Brothers to him ere long shall be my son,
By wedding this young girl: You are welcome both,
Nay kiss her, kiss, tho that she shall
Be your Brothers wife, to kiss the cheek is free.
Kiss, Sfut what else? thou art a good plump wench, I like you well, prithee make hast and bring store of boys, but bee
sure they have good faces, that they may call me vnck•e.
Glad of so fair a sister, I salute you.
Good, good y faith, this kissings good y faith,
I loved to smack it too when I was young,
But Mum: they have felt thy cheek Clare, let them hear thy tongue.
Such welcome as befits my Scarborrows brothers,
From me his troth-plight wife be sure to have,
And tho my tongue prove scant in any part,
The bounds be sure are large, full in my hart.
Tut, thats not that we dout on wench, but do you hear
Sir Iohn, what doe you think drew me from London, and the
Innes of Court, thus far into Yorkshire?
I guess to see this girl, shall be your sister.
Faith, and I guess partly so too, but the maine was, and I
will not lie to you, that your coming now in this wise into our
kindred, I might be acquainted with you aforehand, that after my
brother had married your daughter, I his brother might borrow
some money of you.
What? Do you borrow of your kindred Sir?
Sfut what else, they having interrest in my blood, why
should not I have interrest in their coin. Besides Sir, I being a
younger brother, would be ashamed of my generation if I would
not borrow of any man that would lend, especially of my affinity,
of whom I keep a Calendar. And look you Sir, thus I go over
them. Frst ore my Uncles, often ore mine Aunts, then up to my
Nephews, straight down to my Nieces, to this Cousin Thomas,
and that Cousin Ieffrey, leaving the courteous claw given to none
of their elbows, even unto the third and fourth remove of any
that hath interest in our blood. Al which do upon their summons
made by me, duly and faithfully provide for appearance, and so
as they are, I hope we shall be, more indeerd, entirely, better, and
more feelingly acquainted.
you are a merry Gentleman.
Tic the hope of money makes me so, and I know none but
fools use to be sad with it.
From Oxford am I drawn, from serious studies
Expecting that my brother still had soiournd
With you his best of choice, and this good Knight.
His absence shall not make our harts less merry
Then if we had his presence. A day ere long,
Will bring him back, when one the other meets,
At nooneith Church, at night between the sheets.
Weal wash this chat with wine. Some wine: fill up,
The sharpner of the wit, is a full cup.
 And so to you Sir.
Do, and Isle drink, to my new sister, but upon this condi∣tion,
that she may have quiet days, little rest a nights, hapleasant
afternoons, bee pliant to my brother, and lend me money when
soar Isle borrow it.
Nay, nay, nay,
Women are weak and we must bear with them,
Your frolic healths, are only fit for men,
Well, I am contented, women must to the wall, tho it be to
a feather-bed. Fill up then.
From London am I come, tho not with pipe and Drum,
Yet I bring matter, in this poor paper,
Will make my young mistress, delighting in kisses,
Do as all Maidens will, hearing of such an ill,
As to have lost, the thing they wished most,
A Husband, a Husband, a pretty sweet Husband,
Cry oh, oh, oh, and alas, And at last ho, ho, ho, as I do.
Returned so soon from London? Whats the news?
O mistress, if ever you have seen Demoniceacleare look in∣to
mine eyes, mine eyes are Seuerne, plain Seuerne, the Thamee,
nor the River of Tweed are nothing to em: Nay all the rain that
fell at Noahs flood, had not the discretion that my eyes have: that
drunk but up the whole world, and I ha drowned all the way be∣twixt
this and London.
Thy news good Robin.
My news mistress, Isle tell you strange news, the dust up∣on
London way, being so great, that not a Lord, Gentleman,
Knight, or Knave could travel, least his eyes should bee blown
out: At last, they all agreed to hire me to go before them, when I
looking but upon this Letter, did with this water, this very water,
lay the dust, as well as if it had raind from the beginning of April
to the last of May.
A Letter from my Scarborrow, give it thy mistress.
But Mistress.
Prithee be gon,
I would not have my father nor this Gentlemen,
Be witness of the comfort it doth bring.
Oh but mistress.
Prithee begone,
With this, and the glad news, leave me alone.
Tic your turn Knight, take your licquor, know I am boun∣tifull,
Isle forgive any man any thing that hee owes me, but his
drink, and that Isle be paid for.
May Gentlemen the honesty of mirth
Consists not in Carousing with excess,
My father hath more welcomes then in wine:
Pray you no more.
Says my sister so, Isle be ruled by thoe then. Do you hear, in
hope hereafter you'll lend me some money, now we are half drunk
lets go to dinner. Come Knight.
I am glad your gone,
Shall I now opent: no, Isle kiss it first,
Because his outside last did kiss his hand.
Within this fouled, Isle calt a sacred sheet,
Are writ black lines, when our white harts shall meet,
Before I op this door of my delight,
Methinkes I guess how kindly he doth write,
Of his true Love to me, as Chuck, Sweet-hart,
I prithee do not think the time too long,
That keeps vs from the sweets of marriage rites,
And then he sets my name and kisses it,
Wishing my lips his sheet to write upon,
With like desire methinkes as mine own thoughts,
Ask him now here for me to look upon,
Yet at the last thinking his love too slack,
Ere it arrive at my desired eyes,
He hastens up his message with like speed,
Even as I break this op, wishing to read:
Oh: whats hear? Mine eyes are not mine own? sure they are not,
Tho you ha bin my lamps this sixteen years,
You do belie, my Scarborrow reading so;
Forgive him, he is married, that were Ill:
What lying lights are these. Look I ha no such Letter,
No wedded syllable of the least wrong
Done to a Troth-plight-Virgin like my self▪
Beshrow you for your blindness: Forgive him, he is married.
I know my Scarborrowes constancy to me,
Is as firm knit, as faith to Charity,
That I shall kiss him often, hug him thus,
Be made a happy and a fruitful Mother
Of many prosperous children like to him,
And read I, he was married? Asked forgiveness?
What a blind Foolo was I? yet hears a Letter
To whom directed trow? To my beloved Clare.
Why Law?
Women will read, and read not that they saw,
It was but my fervent love misled mine eyes,
Isle once again to the Inside, Forgive me, I am married:
william Scarborrow. He has set his name too't to,
O perjury? within the harts of men
Thy feasts are kept, their tongues proclaims them.
Sister, Gods precious, the cloths laid, the meat cools,
we all stay, and your father calls for you.
Kind Sir, excuse me I pray you a little,
Isle but peruse this Letter and come straight.
Pray you make hast, the meat stays for vs, and our stomach▪
Ready for the meat, for believe this,
Drink makes men hungry, or it makes them lie,
And he thats drunk ore night, ith mornings dry,
Seen and approved.
He was contracted mine, yet he unjust
Hath married to another: whats my estate then?
A wretched maid, not fit for any man,
For being united his with plighted faiths,
Who ever sues to me commits a sin,
Besieged me, and who shall marry me:
Is like my self, lives in Adultery, (O God)
That such hard Fortune, should betide my youth.
I am Young, Fair, Rich, Honest, Virtuous,
yet for all this, who ere shall marry me
I am but his where, live in Adultery.
I cannot step into the path of pleasure
For which I was created, borne unto,
Let me live ne'er so honest, rich or poor,
If I once wed, yet I must live a whore.
I must be made a strumpet against my will,
A name I have abhord, a shameful Ill
I have eschewed, and now cannot withstand it
In my self. I am my fathers only child,
In me he hath a hope, tho not his name
Can be increased, yet by my Issue
His land shall be possessed, his age delighted.
And tho that I should vow a single life
To keep my soul unspotted, yet will he
Enforce me to a marriage:
So that my grief doth of that weight consist,
It helps me not to yield, nor to resist:
And was I then created for a Whore? A whore,
Bad name, bad act, Bad man makes me a scorn:
Then live a Strumpet? Better be unborn.
Sister, Pray you will you come,
Your father and the whole meeting stays for you.
I come, I come, I pray return: I come.
I must not go without you.
Be thou my Usher, sooth Isle follow you
He writes here to forgive him, he is married:
False Gentleman: I do forgive thee with my hart,
Yet will I send an answer to thy letter,
And in so short words thou shalt weep to read them,
And hears my agent ready: Forgive me, I am dead.
Tic writ, and I will act it: Be judge you Maids
Have trusted the false promises of men.
Be judge you wives, the which have been enforced
From the white sheets you loved, to them ye loathed:
Whether this Axiom may not be assured,
Better one sin, then many be endured.
My arms embracings, Kisses, Chastity,
Were his possessions: and whilst I live
He doth but steal those pleasures he enjoys,
Is an Adulterer in his married arms,
And never goes to his defiled bed,
But God writes sin upon the Teasters head.
Isle be a Wife now, help to save his soul
Tho I have lost his body, give a slake
To his iniquities, and with one sin
Done by this hand, end many done by him.
Farewell the world, then farewell the wedded joys
Till this I have hoped for, from that Gentleman,
Scarborrow, forgive me: thus thou hast lost thy wife,
Yet record would, though by an act too foul,
A wife thus did to cleanse her husbands soul.
Gods precious, for his mercy, wheres this wench?
Must all my friends and guests attend on you?
Where are you Minion?
Scarborrow come close mine eyes, for I am dead.
That sad voice was not hers I hope:
Whose this, my daughter?
Your daughter,
That begs of you to see her buried,
Prays Scarborrow to forgive her: she is dead.
Patience good tears, and let my words have way
Clare, my daughter, help my servants there:
Lift up thine eyes, and look upon thy father,
They were not borne to loose their light so soon,
I did beget thee for my comforter,
And not to be the Author of my care.
Why speak thou not? Some help my Servants there:
What hand hath made thee pale? Or if thine own,
What cause had thou that were thy fathers Joy,
The Treasure of his age, the Cradle of his sleep,
His all in all? I prithee speak to me?
Thou art not ripe for death, come back again,
Clare, my Clare, If death must needs have one,
I am the fittest, prithee let me go,
Thou dying whilst I live, I am dead with woe.
What means this outcry?
O ruthful spectacle.
Thou were not wont to be so sullen child,
But kind and loving to thy aged father:
Awake, awake, Left be thy lasting sleep,
Would I had not sense for grief, nor eyes to weep.
What Papers this, the sad contents doth tell me,
My Brother writ, he hath broke his faith to her,
And she replies, for him she hath kilt her self.
Was that the cause that thou hast soiled thy self,
With these red spots, these blemishers of beauty?
My child, my child, wast perjury in him,
Made thee so fair, act now so foul a finn,
That he deceived thee in a Mothers hopes,
Posterity, the bliss of marriage?
Thou hast no tongue to answer no, or I,
But in red Letters writes: For him I die.
Curse on his Traitorous tongue, his youth, his blood,
His pleasures, Children, and possessions,
Be all his days like winter, comfortless:
Restless his nights, his wants Remorseless,
And may his Corps be the Physicians stage,
Which plaid upon, stands not to honoured Age,
Or with diseases may he lie and pine,
Till grief wastes blood, his eyes, as grief doth mine.
O good old man, made wretched by this deed,
The more thy age, were to be pitied.
What ride by the gate, &amp; not call, that were a shame in faith.
Weal but taste of his Beer, kiss his Daughter, and to
horse again, wheres the good Knight hear?
You bring me to my shame unwillingly.
Shamed of what, for deceiving of a wench, I ha not blushed,
that ha dnut to a hundred of em.
In women's love hes wise, doth follow this,
Love one so long till her another kiss.
Wheres the good Knight here?
O Brother, you are come to make your eye
Sad mourner at a fatal Tragedy.
Peruse this Letter first, and then this Corps.
O wronged Clare? Accursed Scarborrow?
I writ to her, that I was married,
She writes to me, forgive her she is dead:
Isle balm thy body with my faithful tears,
And be perpetual mourner at thy Tomb,
Isle sacrifice this Commit into sighs,
Make a consumption of this pile of man,
And all the benefits my parents gave,
Shall turn distempered to appease the wrath
For this blood shed, and I am guilty of.
Dear husband.
False woman, not my wife, tho married to me,
Look what thy friends, and thou art guilty of,
The murder of a creature, equalled heaven
In her Creation, whose thoughts like fire,
Never looked base, but ever did aspire
To blessed benefits, till you and yours undid her,
Eye her, view, tho dead, yet she dus look,
Like a fresh frame, or a new printed book
Of the best paper, never looked into,
But with one fullied finger, which did spot her,
Which was her own too, but who was cause of it,
Thou and thy friends, and I will loath thee fort.
They do belly her that do say shees dead,
She is but strayed to some by-gallery,
And I must ha her again. Clare, where art thou Clare?
Here, laid to take her everlasting sleep.
A lies that says so,
Yet now I know thee, I do lie that say it,
For if she be a villen like thy self,
A periurd Traitor, recreant, miscreant,
Dog, a dog, a dog, has dunt.
O Sir Iohn Harcop.
O Sir Iohn villen, to be troth thy self
To this good creature, harmless, harmless child,
This kernel hope, and comfort of my house,
Without Enforcement, of thine own accord,
Draw all her soul ith compass of an oath,
Take that oath from her, make her for none but thee,
And then betray her?
Shame on them were the cause of it.
But hark what thou hast got by it,
Thy wife is but a strumpet, thy children Bastards,
Thy self a murderer, thy wife, accessory,
Thy bed a stews, thy house a Brothel.
O, tic too true.
I, made a wretched father childless.
I, made a married man, yet wiueles.
Thou the cause of it.
Thou the cause of it.
Curse on the day that ere it was begun,
For I an old man am, undone, undone.
For Charity have care upon your father,
Least that his grief, bring on a more mishap,
This to my arms, my sorrow shall bequeath,
Tho I have lost her, to thy grave Isle bring,
Thou were my wife, and Isle thy Requiem sing:
Go you to the Country, Isle to London back,
All riot now, since that my souls so black.
Thus am I left like Sea-tost-Marriners,
My Fortunes being no more then my distress,
Upon what shore soever I am driven,
Be it good or bad, I must account it heaven,
Tho married, I am reputed not a wife,
Neglected of my Husband, scorned, despised,
And tho my love and true obedience
Lies prostrate to his beck, his heedles eye,
Receives my services unworthily.
I know no cause, nor will be cause of none,
But hope for better days when bad be gone,
You are my guide, whether must I, Butler?
Toward Wakefield, where my masters living lies.
Toward Wakefield where thy moister weal attend,
When things are at the worst, tic hopt theyle mend.
How now sister, no further forward on your journey yet?
When griefs before one, who'd go on to grief,
Id rather turn me back to find some comfort.
And that way sorrows hurtfuller then this,
My Brother having brought unto a grave,
That murdered body whom he called his wife,
And spent so many tears upon her Hearse,
As would have made a Tyrant to relent,
Then kneeling at her Coffin, thus he vowed,
From thence he never would embrace your bed.
The more Fool he.
Never from hence acknowledge you his wife,
When others strive to enrich their fathers name,
It should be his only aim, to beggar his,
To spend their means, and in his only pride,
Which with a sigh confirmed, hes rid to London,
Vowing a course, that by his life so foul
Men ne'er should join the hands, without the soul.
All is but grief, and I am armed for it.
Weel bring you on your way in hope thats strong
Time may at length make strait. what yet is wrong.
Hes our own, hes our own, Come, lets make use of
his wealth, as the snow of Ice: Melt it, melt it.
But art sure he will hold his meeting.
As sure as I am now, &amp; was dead drunk last night.
Why then so sure will I be arrested by a couple of Ser∣geants,
and fall into one of the unlucky Cranks about Cheap∣side,
called Counters.
Withal, I have provided M. Grype the Usurer, who
upon the instant will be ready to step in, charge the Seargeaunts
to keep thee fast, and that now hee will have his five hundred
pounds, or thou shalt rot for it.
When it follows, young Scarborow shall be bound
for the one: then take up as much more, we share the one half, &amp;
help him to be drunk with the other.
Ha, ha, ha.
Why, dost laugh Frank?
To see that wee and Usurers line by the fall of young heirs
as swine by the dropping of Acorns. But hes come. Where be
these Rogues? shall we ha no tendance here?
Good day Gentlemen.
A thousand good days, my noble Bully, and as many
good fortunes as there were Grasshoppers in Egypt, and thats co∣uered
over with good luck: but Nouns, Pronouns, and Par∣ticiples.
Where be these Rogues here: what, shall we have no
Wine here?
Anon, anon, sir.
Anon, goodman Rascal, must wee stay your leisure?
gee't vs by and by, with apoxe to you.
O, do not hurt the fellow?
Hurt him, hang him, Scrape-trencher, star-waren, Wine
speller, mettle-clancer, Rogue by generation. Why, dost hear
Will? If thou dost not use these Grape-spillers as you doe their
pottle-pots, quoit em down stayres three or four times at a sup¦per,
they le grow as saucy with you as Sergeants, and make bills
more unconscionable then Taylors.
Here is the pure and neat grape Gent. I hate for you.
Fill up: what ha you brought here, goodman rog?
The pure element of Claret sir.
Ha you so, and did not I call for Rhenish
you Mongrel?
Thou need no wine, I prithee be more mild?
Be mild in a Tavern, tic treason to the red Lattice, en∣my
to their sign post, and slave to humour:
Prithee, lets be mad,
Then fill our heads with wine, till every pate be drunk,
Then peace in the street, Iustell all you meet, and with a Punk,
As thou wilt do now and then: Thank me thy good
Master, that brought thee to it.
Nay, he profits well, but the worst is he will not swear yet
Do not belie me: If there be any good in me thats the
best: Oaths are necessary for nothing, They pass out of a mās
mouth, like smoke through a chimney, that files all the way it
goes.
Why then I think Tobacco be a kind of swearing,
for it furs our nose pockily.
But come, lets drink our selves into a stomach asor sup¦per.
Agreed. Isle begin with a new health. Fill up.
To them that mnke Land fly,
By wine, whores, and a Die.
To them, that only thrives,
By kissing others Wives.
To them that pay for clothes,
With nothing but with Oaths:
Care not from whom they get,
So they may be in debt:
This health my harts
But who their Taylors pay,
Borrow, and keep their day,
Weel hold him like this Glass,
A brainless empty Ass,
And not a mate for vs.
Drink round my harts.
An excellent health.
Master Ilford, theres a couple of strangers be∣neath
desires to speak with you.
What beards ha they? Gentleman-like-beards, or bro∣ker-like-beards?
I am not so well acquainted with the Art of Face∣mending
sir: but they would speak with you.
Isle go down to em.
Doe: and weal stay here and drink Tobacco.
Thus like a Fever that doth shake a man
From strength to weakness, I consume my self:
I know this company, their custom wild,
Hated, abhord of good-men, yet like a child
By reasons rule instructed how to know
Evil from good, I to the worser go.
Why doe you suffer this, you upper powers,
That I should surfeit in the sin I taste,
have sense to feel my mischief, yet make wast
Of heaven and earth:
My self will answer, what my self doth ask?
Who once doth cherish sin, begets his shame,
For vice being fosterd once, coms Impudence,
Which makes men count sin, Custom, not offence,
When all like me, their reputation blot,
Pursuing evil, while the good 〈◊〉 got.
Nay, never strive, we can hold you.
I, me, and any man else, and a fall into your Clutches: Let
go your tugging, as I am a Gentleman, Isle be your true prisoner.
How now: whats the matter Frank?
I am fallen into the hands of Sergeants, I am arrested.
How, arrest a Gentleman in our company?
Put up, put up, for sins sake put up, lets not a•l sup in the
Counter to night, let me speak with moister Gripe the Creditor.
Well: what say you to me Sir?
You have arrested me here moister Gripe.
Not I Sir, the Sergeants have.
But at your suit master Gripe: yet hear me, as I am a Gent.
I rather you could say as you were an honest man, and then
I might believe you.
Yet hear me.
Hear me no hearings, I lent you my money for good will.
And I spent it for mere necessity, I confess I owe you five
hundred pound, and I confess I owe not a penny to any man, but
he wold be glad to hate: my bond you have already master Gripe
If you will, now take my word.
Word me no words: Officers look to your prisoner: If
you cannot either make me present payment, or put me in security
such as I shall like too.
Such as you shall like too: what say you to this young Gent.
He is the widgen that wee must feed upon.
Who young moister Scarborrow, he is an honest Gentle∣man
for ought I know, I ne'er lost penny by him.
I would be ashamed any man should say so by me, that I have
had dealings withal: But my enforced friends, wilt please you but
to retire into some small distance, whilst I descend with a few words
to these Gentlemen, and Isle commit my self into your hands im∣mediately.
Well sir weal wait upon you.
Gentlemen I am to profer some conference, and in espe∣cially
to you moister Scarborrow, our meeting here for your mirth
hath proved to me thus adverse, that in your companies I am Are∣rested:
How ill it will stand with the flourish of your reputations
when men of rank and note communicate, that I Frank Ilforde,
Gentlemen. whose Fortunes may transcend, to make ample Gratui∣ties
future, and heap satisfaction for any present extention of his
friends kindness, was Enforced from the Meter in Bredstreet, to the
Counter i`th Poultry: for mine own part, if you shall think it
meet, and that it shall acord with the state of gentry, to submit my
self from the featherbed in the Masters side, or the Flock-bed in
the Knights ward, to the straw-bed in the hole, I shall buckle to
my heals insted of guilt spurs, the armour of patience, and doote.
Come, come, what a pox need all this, this is Mellis Floe∣ra,
the sweetest of the honey, he that was not made to fat Cattle, but
to feed Gentlemen.
You wear good clothes.
Are well descended.
Keep the best company.
Should regard your credit.
Stand not upon`t, be bound, be bound.
Ye are richly married.
Love not your wife.
Have store of friends.
Who shall be your heir.
The son of some slave.
Some groom.
Some Horse-keeper.
Stand not vpont, be bound, be bound.
Well at your Importance, for once Isle stretch my purse
Whose borne to sink, as good this way as worse.
Now speaks my Bully like a Gentleman of worth.
Of merit.
Fit to be regarded.
That shall command our souls.
Our swords.
Our selves.
To feed upon you as Pharoes lean kine did upon the fat.
Moister Gripe is my bond currant for this Gentleman.
Good security you Egyptian Grasshopper, good security?
And for as much more kind Moister Scarborrow.
Provided that men mortal as we are,
May have.
May have security.
Your bond with land conveyed, which may assure me of mine
own again.
You shall be satisfied, and Isle become your
debtor, for full five hundred more then he doth owe you.
This night we sup here, bear vs company,
And bring your Counsel, Scrivener, and the money with you,
Where I will make as full assurance as in the Law you`d wish.
I take your word Sir,
And so discharge you of your prisoner.
Why then lets come and take up a new room, the infected
hath spit in this.
He that hath store of Coin, wants not a friend,
Thou shalt receive sweet rogue, and we will spend.
Brother, you see the extremity of want
Enforces vs to question for our own,
The rather that we see, not like a Brother
Our Brother keeps from vs to spend on other.
True, he has in his hands our portions, the patrimony which
our Father gave vs, with which he lies fatting himself with Sack
and sugar in the house, and we are fine to walk with lean purses
abroad. Credit must be maintained which will not be without mo∣ny,
Good clothes must be had, which will not be without money,
company must be kept which will not be without money, al which
we must have, and from him we will have money.
Besides, we have brought our sister to this Town,
That she her self having her own from him,
Might bring her self in Court to be preferred,
Under some Noble personage, or else that he
Whose friends are great in Court, by his late match,
As he is in nature bound, provide for her.
And he shall do it brother, tho we have waited at his lod∣ging,
longer then a Tailors bil on a young Knight for an old re∣koning,
without speaking with him, Here we know he is, and we
will call him to parley.
Yet let vs doot in mild and gentle terms,
Fair words perhaps may sooner draw our own,
Then ruffer courses by which his mischief grown.
Anon, anon, look down into the Dolphin there.
Here comes a drawer we will question him.
Doe you hear my friend, is not moister Scarborrow here?
Here sir, what a jest is that, where should hee bee else, I
would have you well know my moister hopes to grow rich before
he leaves him.
How long hath he continued here since he came hither.
Faith Sir not so long as Noahs floude, yet long enough
to have drowned up the livings of three Knights, as Knights goes
now adays, some month or there abouts.
Time ill consumed to ruinate our house,
But what are they that keep him company?
Pitch, Pitch, but I must not say so, but for your further sa∣tisfaction,
did you ever see a young whelp and a Lyon play to∣gether.
Yes.
Such is moister Scarborrows company
Within Oliuer.
Anon, anon, look down to the Pomegranate there.
I prithee say hears them would speak with him.
Isle do your message: Anon, anon there.
This fool speaks wiser then he is aware,
young heirs left in this town where sins so rank,
And prodigals gape to grow fat by them,
Are like young whelps thrown in the Lyons den,
Who play with them awhile, at length devour them.
Whose there would speak with me?
Your Brothers, who are glad to see you well.
Well.
Tic not your riot, that we hear you use,
(With such as wast their goods, as Time the world
With a continual spending, nor that you keep
The company of a most Leprous route,
Consumes your bodies wealth, infects your name
With such Plague-sores, that had you reasons eye,
Twould make you sick, to see you visit them)
Hath drawn vs, but our wants to crave the dew
Our father gave, and yet remains with you.
Our Byrth-right good brother, this Town craves main∣teinance,
silk stockings must be had, and we would be loath our
heritage should be arraigned at the Vintners bar, and so condemn∣ned
to the Vintners box, though while you did keep house, wee
had some Belly-timber at your Table, or so, yet wee would have
you think, we are your Brothers, yet no Esaus to sell our patrimo∣ny
for Porridge.
So, so, what hath your coming else?
With vs our sister joins in our request,
Whom we have brought along with vs to London,
To have her portion, wherewith to provide,
An honoured service, or an honest bride.
So, then you two my Brothers, and she my sister, come not
as in duty you are bound, to an elder brother, out of Yorkshire to
see vs, but like leaches to suck from vs.
We come compelled by want to crave our own.
Sir, for your own, then thus be satisfied,
Both hers and yours were left in trust with me,
And I will keep it for ye: Must you appoint vs,
Or what we please to like mixed with reproof,
You have bin to saucy both, and you shall know,
Isle curb you for it, ask why; Isle have it so?
We do but crave our own.
Your own sir: whats your own?
Our portions given vs by our fathers will,
Which here you spend.
Consume?
Ways worse then ill.
Ha, ha, ha.
Nay, nay, nay, Will: prethy come away, we have a full gal∣lone
of Sack stays in the fire for thee, thou must pledge it to the
health of a friend of thine.
What dost think these are Frank?
They are Fiddlers I think, if they be, I prithee send them
into the next room, and let them scrape there, and weell send to
them presently.
They are my brothers Frank, come out of Yorkshire,
To the Tavern here, to ask their portions:
they call my pleasures, riots, my company Leproes, &amp; like a school
boy, they would tutor me?
O, thou should have done well to have bound them prone∣tises
when they were young, they would have made a couple of
saucy Tailors.
Tailors?
I Birdlime: Tailors: Tailors are good men, and in the
Term time they wear good Clothes. Come, you must learn
more manners, stand at your Brothers back, as to shift a Train∣cher
neatly, and take a Cup of Sack, and a Capons leg con∣tentedly.
You are a slave
That feeds upon my brother like a fly,
Poisoning where thou dost suck.
You lie.
O, to my grief I speak it, you shall find,
Theres no more difference in a Tauern-haunter
Then is between a Spittle and a Beggar.
Thou workst on him like Tempests on a ship.
And he the worthy Traffic that doth sink.
Thou makst his name more loathsome then a grave.
Lives like a Dog, by vomit,
Die a slave?
Do, fight: I love you all well, because you were my old
masters sons, but Isle neither part you, nor be partaker with you.
I come to bring my mast, news, he hath two sons borne at a birth
in Yorkshire, and I find him together by the ears with his brothers
in a Tavern in London. Brother and brother at odds, tic nought:
sure, it was not thus in the days of charity. Whats this world like to?
Faith just like an Inne-keepers Chamber-pot, receives all waters,
good and bad, It had need of much scouring. My old mast kept a
good house, and twenty or thirty tall sword and Buckler men a∣bout
him, and y faith his son differs not much, he will have met∣tle
to, tho he hath not store of Cutlers blades, he will have plenty
of Vintners pots. His father kept a good house for honest men,
his Tenants, that brought him in part, and his son keeps a bad de
house with Knaves that help to consume al. Tic but the change of
time: why should any man rapine at it: Crekits, good li∣uing,
and lucky worms, were wont to feed, sing, and rejoice in
the fathers chimney, and now Carrion Crows builds in the sons
Kitchen, I could be sorry for it, but I am too old to weep. Well
then, I will go tel him news of his of-springs.
Alas good Brothers, how came this mischance?
Our portions, our brother hath given vs our portions sister,
hath he not?
He would not be so monstrous I am sure.
Excuse him not, he is more degenerate,
Then greedy Vipers that devour their mother,
They eat on her but to preserve themselves,
And he consumes himself, and Beggars vs.
A Tavern is his Inn, where amongst Slaves,
He kills his substance, making pots the graves
To bury that which our forefathers gave.
I asked him for our portions, told him that you
Were brought to London, and we were in want,
Humbly we crave`d our own, when his Reply
Was, he knew none we had, beg, starve, or d•e.
Alas what course is left for vs to live by then?
In troth sister, we two to beg in the fields,
And you to betake your self to the old trade,
Filling of small Cans in the suburbs.
Shall I be left then like a common road,
That every beast that can but pay his told
May travel over, and like to Cammomil,
Flourish the better being trodden on.
Well I will not curse him: he seeds now upon Sack
&amp; Anchoues with a pox to him: but if he be not fine before he
dies to eat Acorns, let me live with nothing but pollerd, and
my mouth be made a Cooking stool for every scold to set her
tail on.
How now Butler, whats the meaning of this?
Your brother means to lame as many as he can, that
is a beggar himself, many live with him in the Hospital. His wise
sent me out of Yorkshire, to tell him, that God had blessed him with
two sons, he bids a plague of them, a vengeance of her, crosses
me ore the pate, and sends me to the Surgeons to seek salve:
I looked at least he should have given me a brace of Angels for my
pains.
Thou hast not lost all thy longing, I am sure he hath given
thee a cracked crown.
A plague on his fingers, I cannot tel, he is your Brother &amp;
my moister, I would be loath to Prophecy of him, but who soar
doth curse his Children being Infants, ban his wife lying in childbed,
and beats his man brings him news of it, they may bee borne
rich, but they shall live Slaves, be Knaves, and die Beggars.
Did he do so.
Guess you, he bid a plague of them, a vengeance on her, &amp;
sent me to the Surgeons.
Why then I see there is no hope of him. Some husbands
are respectless of their wives,
During the time that they are yssulesse,
But none with Infants blessed, can nourish hate,
But love the mother for the childrens sake.
But hee that is given over unto sin,
Leprosed therewith without, and so within,
O Butler, we were issue to one father?
And he was an honest Gentleman.
Whose hopes were better then the sun he left,
Should set so soon, unto his houses shame.
He lives in Taverns, spending of his wealth,
And here his Brothers and distressed Sister,
Not having any means to help vs with.
Not a Scots Baubee (by this hand) to bless vs with.
And not content to riot out his own,
But he detains our portions: suffers vs
In this strange Ayre, open to every wrack,
Whilst he in riot swims to be in lack.
The mores the pity.
I know not what course to take me to,
Honesty fine would live: What shall I do?
Sooth Isle tell you, your brother hath hurt vs,
We three will hurt you, and then go all to a spittle together.
Jest not at her, whose burden is too grievous,
But rather lend a means how to relieve vs.
Well I doe pity you, and the rather because you sale, you
would fine live honest and want means for it, for I can tell you
tic as strange here to see a maid fair, poor, and honest, as to see
a Collier with a clean face. Maids here do live (especially with∣out
maintenance)
Like Mice going to a trap,
They nibble long▪ at last they get a clap.
Your father was my good Benefactor, and gave me a house whilst
I live to put my head in: for I would be loath then to see his only
daughter, for want of means, turn punk, I have a drift to keep
you honest. Have you a care to keep your self so, yet you shall
not know of it, for women's tounges are like siues, they will hold
nothing, they have power to vent. You two will further m•▪
In any thing good honest Butler.
Left be to take a purse Isle be one.
Perhaps thou speak righter then thou art aware of: well,
as chance it, I have received my wages: there is forty shillings for
you, Isle set you in a lodging, and till you hear from vs, let that
provide for you, weal first to the surgeons,
To keep you honest, and to keep you brave,
For once an honest man, will turn a Knave.
Boy▪ bear the Torch fair: Now am I armed to fight with
a Wind-mill, and to take the wall of an Emperor: Much drink,
no money: A heavy head, and a light pair of heals.
O, stand man?
I wear an excellent creature to make a Punk of, I should
down with the least touch of a knaves finger, thou hast made a
good night of this: What hast won Frank?
A matter of nothing, some hundred pounds.
This is the hell of al gamsters▪ I think when they are at
play, the board ea•es up the mo•ey: For if there be five hundred
pound lost, theres never but a hundred pounds won. Boy, take
the wall of any man, and yet by light, such deeds of darkness may
not be.
What dost mean by that Will?
To save charge, and walk like a Fury with a fire-brande
in my hand, every one goes by the light, &amp; weel go by the smoke.
Boy, keep the Wall: I will not budge for any man, by
these Thumbs, and the paring of the Nails shall stick in thy teeth
not for a world.
Whose this, young Scarborrow?
The man that the Mare•id on.
Is this the reverence that you owe to me?
You should have brought me up better.
That vice should thus transform man to a beast.
Go to, your names Lord, Isle talk with you when your
out a debt and ha better clothes.
I pity thee even with my very soul.
Pity ith thy throat, I can drink Muscadine and Eggs,
and Muld sack, do you hear: you put a piece of turned stuff up∣on
me, but I will -
What will you do Sir?
Peace in thy way, and thats no slander.
Your sober blood will teach you otherwise.
My honoured Lord, your happily well met,
Ill met to see your Nephew in this case,
More like a brute Beast, then a Gentleman.
Fi: Nephew, shame you not thus to transform your self?
Can your nose smell a Torch.
Be not so wilde, it is thine Uncle Scarborrow.
Why then tic the more likely tic my Fathers brother.
Shame to our name, to make thy self a Beast,
Thy body worthy borne, and thy youths breast
Tyld in due time for better discipline.
Thy self new married to a Noble house,
Rich in possessions, and Posterity,
Which should cal home thy unstaid affections.
Where thou makst havoc.
Riot, spoil, and wast,
Of what thy father left.
And lives disgracst.
Isle send you shorter to heaven, then you came to the
earth, do you Catechise? Do you Catechise?
Hold, hold, do you draw upon your uncle?
Pox of that Lord,
Weal meet at Meter, where weal sup down sorrow,
We are drunk to night, and so weal be to morrow.
Why now I see: what I hard of, I believed not,
Your kinsman lives.
Like to a swine.
A perfect Epithet hee feeds on draff,
And wallowes in the mire, to make men laugh,
I pity him.
No pities fit for him.
Yet weal advise him.
He is my kinsman.
Being in the pit where many do fall in,
We will both comfort him, and counsel him.
What shall we do now Butler?
A man had better lyne a good handsome pair of gallows
before his time, then be born to do these sucklings good, their mo∣theirs
milk not wrung out of their nose yet, they know no more
how to behave themselves in this honest and needful calling of
Purse-taking, then I do to piece stockings.
Sfut what shall we do now?
See if they do not quake like a trembling. Asp-leafe, and
look more miserable then one of the wicked Elders pictured in the
painted cloth, should they but come to the credit to be arraind for
their valour, before a worshipful bench, their very looks would
hang 'em, and they were indighted but for stealing of Eggs.
Butler.
Honest Butler.
Squat hart squat, creep me into these Bushes,
lye me as close to the ground as you would do to a wench.
How good Butler, show v•how.
By the Moon patronise of all purse-takers, who would
be troubled with such Changelings, squat hart squat.
Thus Butler.
I so suckling, so, stir not now, If the peering Rogues
chance to go over you, yet stir not younger Brothers call you
em and have no more forecast, I am ashamed of you, these are such
whose fathers had need leave them money, even to make them
ready withal, for by this hilts, they have not wit to button their
sleeves without teaching, close, squat close. Now if the lot of hau∣ging
do fall to my share, so, then the Fathers old man drops for his
young masters. If it chance it chances and when it chances, hey∣uen
and the Sheriff send me a good rope, I wold not go up the la∣there
twice for any thing, in the mean time preuentious, honest
preventions do well, off with my skin, so you on the ground, and
I to this tree to escape the Gallows.
Do follow, if I do not deceive you, Isle bid a pox of this
wit, and hang with a good grace.
Up to this wood they took, search near my friends, I
am this morn robbed of three hundred pound.
I am sorry there was not four to ha• made even money
now by the Devils horns, tic Sir Iohn Harcop.
Leave not a bush vnbeare, nor tree unsearched, as sure as
I was robbed the thieves went this way.
Theirs Nobody I perceive but may lie at sometime for
one of them climbed this ways.
1. Stand, I hear a voice, and here is an Owl in an Ivy bush.
You lie, tic an old Serving-man in a Nut-tree.
2 Sirrah, sir, what make you in that tree.
Gathring of Nuts, that such fools as you are may crack the
shells, and I eat the kernels.
What fellows that?
Sir Iohn Harcop, my Noble Knight, I am glad of your
good health, you hear your Age fair, you keep a good house, I
ha fed at your board, and bin drunk in your buttery.
But sirha: what made you in that tree?
My man and I at foot of yonder hill
Were by three kanues robbed of three hundred pound.
A shrewd loss byr'lady sir, but your good worship may
now see the fruit of being miserable: You will ride but with one
man to save hors-meat and mans meat at your Inn at night, &amp;
lose three hundred pound in a morning.
Sirha, I say I ha lost three hundred pound.
And I say sir, I wish all miserable knights might bee ser∣ued
so: For had you kept half a dozen tall fellows, as a man of
your coat should do, they would have helped now to keep your
money.
But tell me sir, why lurked you in that tree?
Mary, I will tell you sir, Coming to the top of the hill
where you (Right worshipful) were robbed at the bottom, &amp; see∣ing
some a scuffling together, my mind strait gave me there were
knaves abroad. Now sir, I knowing my self to be old, tough,
and unwieldy, not being able to doe as I would, as much as to
say▪ Rescue you (right Worshipful,) I like an honest man, one
of the Kings liege people, and a good subject
A says well Sir.
Got me up to the top of that tree: The tree (if it could speak)
would bear me witness, that there I might see which way the
knaves took, then to tell you of it, and you right worshipfullie
to send hue to cry after em.
Was it so.
Nay it was so sir.
Nay then I tell thee they took into this wood.
And I tell thee (setting thy worsh. knighthood aside)
he lies in his throat that sa•es so: Had not one of them a white
Frock? Did they not bind your worships knighthood by the
thumbs? then fagoted you and the fool your man, back to back.
He says true.
Why then so truly, came not they into this wood, but
took over the Lawns, &amp; left Wino steeple on the left hand.
It may be so, by this they are out of reach,
Well, farewell it.
Ride with more men, good knight.
It shall teach me wit.
So, If this bee not played a weapon beyond a Scholars
Prize, let me be hist at. Now to the next. Come out you Hedge∣hogs?
O Butler, thou deserust to be chronicled for this.
Do not belly me, If I had my right I deserve to be han∣general
fort. But come, Down with your dust, our mornings pur∣chase.
Heer tic, Thou hast played well, Thou de∣serust
two shares in it.
Three hundred pound: A pretty breakfast: Many a mā
works harde all his days and never sees half the money. But
come, Tho it be badly got, it shall be better bestowed. But do ye
hear Galants, I ha not taught you this trade to get your livings
by. Use it not, for if you doe, though I escaped by the Nut tree, be
sure you'll speed by the Rope: But for your pains at this time,
Theres a hundred pounds for you, how you shall bestow it, Isle
give you instructions. But do you hear, Look you go not to
your Gills, your Punkes, and your Cock-tricks with it, If I hear
you do: as I am an honest thief, tho I helped you now out of the
Briars, Isle be a means yet to help you to the Gallows. How
the rest shall be employed I have determined, and by the way Isle
make you acquainted with it.
To steal is bad, but taken where is store,
The faults the less, being don to help the pore
Sure I ha sed my prayers, and liud virtuously a late, that
this good fortunes befallen me. Look Gallants: I am sent for
to come down to my Fathers burial.
But dust mean to go?
Troth no, Isle go down to take possession of his land, let
the cūtry bury him &amp; the will: Isle stay here a while, to save charge
at his funeral.
And how dost feel thy self Frank, now thy father is
dead?
As I did before, with my hands, how should I feel
my self else? But Isle tell you news Gallants.
Whats that? Dost mean now to serve God?
Faith partly, for I intend shortly to go to Church, and
from thence do faithful service to one woman.
Good, I ha met my flesh-hooks together.
What, Dost mean to be married?
I Mongrel, Married.
Thats a bait for me.
I will now be honestly married.
Its impossible, for thou hast bin a whoremayster this
seven year.
Tic no matter, I will now marry, And to some honest wo∣man
to, and so from hence her virtues shall be a countenance to
my vices.
What shall she be, prithee?
No Lady, no widow, nor no waiting gentlewoman, for
under protection
Ladies may lard their husbands heads, Widows will Wood∣cocks
make, &amp; chambermaids of seruīgmē learn that, theyle ner
forsake.
Who wilt thou wed then, prethe?
To any maid, so she be fair: To any maid, so she be rich
To any maid so she be young: and to any maid
So she be honest.
Faith, its no great matter for her honesty, for in these
days, thats a Dowry out of request.
From these Crabes will I gather sweetness: wherein Isle
imitate the Bee, that sucks her honey, not from the sweetest flow∣ers,
but Timb the bitterest: So these having been the means to
beggar my master, shall be the helps to relieve his brothers and
sister.
To whom shall I now be a suitor?
Fair fall ye Gallants.
Nay, and she be fair she shall fall sure enough. Butler,
how First good Butler.
Will you be made gallants?
I, but not willingly Cuckolds, tho we are now talking
about wives.
Let your wives agree of that after, will you first be rich∣lie
married?
How Butler: richly married?
Rich in beauty, rich in purse, rich in virtue, rich in all
things. But Mum, Isle say nothing, I know of two or three rich
heirs. But Cargo, my fiddlestick cannot play without Rosin: Avaunt.
Butler.
Dost not know me Butler?
For Kex, dryde Kex, that in summer ha bin so liberal to
fodder other men's cattle, and scarce have enough to keep your
own in Winter. Mine are precious Cabinets, and must have
precious Jewels put into them, and I know you to he merchants
of Stockfish, and not men for my market: Then vanish.
Come, ye old mad-cap you, what need all this? Cannot
a man ha bin a little whoore-mayster in his youth, but you must
upbraid him with it, and tell him of his defects, which when he
is married, his wife shall find in him? Why my fathers dead man
now, who by his death has left me the better part of a thousand
a year.
Tut, she of Lancashire has fifteen hundred.
Let me have her then, good Butler.
And then she the bright beauty of Leystershire, has a
thousand, nay thirteen hundred a year, at least.
Or let me have her, honest Butler.
Besides, she the most delicate, sweet countenanced, black
browd gentlewoman in Northamptonshire, in substance equals
the best of em.
Let me have her then.
Or I.
Or I, good Butler.
You were best play the parts of right fools, and most
desperāte whore-maysters, and go together by the ears for thē
ere ye see them. But they are the most rare featured, well faced,
excellent spoke, rare qualited, virtuous, and worthy to be admi¦red
gentlewoman,
And rich Butler?
(I that must be one, tho they want all the rest) And rich
Gallants, as are from the utmost parts of Asya, to these present
confines of Europe.
And wilt thou help vs to them Butler?
Faith, tic to be doubted, for precious pearl will hardly
be bought without precious stones, and I think theres scarce one
indifferent one to be found, betwixt you three: yet since there is
some hope ye may prove honest, as by the death of your fathers.
Fathers you are proved rich, walk severally, for I knowing you
all three to be covetous Tug-muttons will not trust you with the
sight of each others beauty but will severally, talk with you, and
since you have deigned in this needful portion of wedlock to bee
ruled by me Butler, will most bountifully provide wives for you
generally.
Why that honestly said.
Why so, and now first to your Sir Knight
Godamercy.
You see this couple of abominable Woodcocks hear.
A pox on them, absolute Coxcomes.
You heard me tel them, I had Intelligence to give of three
Gentlewomen.
True.
Now indeed Sit I ha but the performance of one.
Good.
And her I doe intende for you, only for you.
Honest Butler.
Now sir, she being but lately come to this town, and so
nearly watched by the jealous eyes of her friends, she being a Rich
heir, least she should be stolen away by some dissolute Prodigal,
or desperate estated spend thrift, as you ha bin Sir.
O but thats past Butler.
True I knew, &amp; intend now but to make use of them, flat¦la
with them with hopeful promises, and make them needful
instruments.
To help me to the wench,
You ha hit it which thus must beeffected, first by keeping
close your purpose.
Good.
Also concealing from them, the lodging beauty and riches
of your new, but admirable Mistress.
Excellent.
Of which your following happiness, if they should know
either in envy of your good, or hope of their own advancement
theyd make our labours known to the gentlewoman's Uncles, and
so our benefit be frustrate.
Admirable Butler.
Which done, else but this, being as you shall be brought in∣to
his company, and by my praising your virtues you get possess∣on
of her Love, one morning step to the tower, or to make al sure,
hier some stipendary priest for money: for Money in these
days, what will not be done, and what will not a man do for a rich
wife, and with him make no more ado but marry hit in his lodging
and being married, he with her and spare not.
Do they not see vs, do they not see vs, let me kiss thee, let
me kiss thee Butler, let but this be done, and all the benefit requi∣tall
and happiness. I can promise thee fort, shall be this, Isle be thy
rich moister, and thou shalt carry my purse.
Enough, meet me at her lodging some half an hour hence:
hark she lies.
I hate.
Fail not.
Will I live.
I will but shift of these two Rhinoceros,
Wigens, wingens, a couple of gulls.
With some discourse of hope to wive them two, and be
with you straight.
Blessed day, my love shall be thy cushion honest Butler.
So now to my tother Gallants.
O Butler, we ha bin in passion at thy tediousness,
Why look you. I had al this talk for your good.
Had.
For you know the knight is but a scuruy-proud-prating-Prodigall,
licentious unnecessary.
An Ass, an Ass, an Ass.
Now you heard me tel him I had three Wenches in store,
And he would ha had them al would he.
Hear me, tho he may live to be an Ox, he had not now
so much of the Goat in him, but only hopes for one of the three
when indeed I ha but two, and knowing you to bee men of more
virtue, and dearer in my respect intend them to be yours.
We shall honour thee.
But how Butler.
I am now go∣ing
to their place of residence, situate in the choicest place in the
City, and at the sign of the Wolf just against Gold-smiths-row
where you shall meet me, but ask not for me, only walk too and fro
and to avoid suspicion you may spend •ome conference w•h the
Shop-keepers wives, they have seats built a purpose for such fami∣liar
entertainment, where from a bay window which is opposite,
I will make you known to your desired beauties, commend the
good parts you have.
Bith mass mine are very few.
And win a kind of desire, as women are soon won to
make you bee beloved where you shall first kiss, then Woe, at
length Wed, and at last bed my Noble harts.
O Butler.
Wenches bone robes, blessed beauties, without colour or
counterfeit: Away, put on you best Clothes, get you to the Bar∣bers,
Curl up your hair, walk with the best strouts you can, you
shall see more at the Window, and I ha vowed to make you.
Wilt thou.
Both Fools, and Isle want of my wit but Isle doot.
We will live together as fellows.
As Brothers.
As arrant knaves if I keep you company,
O, the most wretched season of this time,
These men like Fish, do swim within one stream,
Yet theyd eat one another, making no Conscience
To drink with them theyd poison, no offence,
Betwixt their thoughts and actions have control,
But headlong run, like an vnbiaest Bowl,
Yet I will throw them on, but like to him,
At play knows how to loose, and when to win.
Butler.
O, are you come.
And fit as I appointed: so, tic well,
you know you knees, and have instructions howe to bear your
selves: Al, al is fit, play but your part, your states from hence are
firm.
What shall I term this creature not a man.
Hes not of mortals temper but hes one,
Made all of goodness, tho of flesh and bone,
O Brother, brother, but for that honest man,
As near to misery had bin our breath,
As where the thundering pellet strikes is death.
I, my shift of shirts and change of cloths
knew.
Well tel of him, like bells whose music rings
One Coronation day for joy of Kings,
That hath preserve`d their steeples not like towels,
That summons living tears for the dead souls,
Gods preciour Sir, the hell Sir, even as you had new kissed,
and were about to court her, if her Uncles be not come.
A plague on thee, spit out.
But tic no matter Sir, stay you here in this upper cham∣ber,
&amp; Isle stay beneath with her, tic ten to one you shall hear them
talk now, of the greatness of her possessions, the care they have to
see her well bestowed, the admirablenes of her virtues, all which
for all their coming, shall be but happiness ordained for you, &amp;
by my means be your inheritance.
Then thou't shift them away, and keep from the sight of
them.
Have I not promised to make you.
Thou hast.
Go to then, rest here with patience, and be confident in
my trust, only in my absence, you may praise God for the blessed¦nes
you have to come, and say your prayers if you will, Isle but pre∣pare
her hart for entertainment of your love, dismiss them, for
your free access, and return straight.
Honest-blest-natural-friend, thou dialect with me like
a Brother: Butler,
Sure heaven hath reserved this man to wear Grey-hairs to do me
good, now will I listen, listen close, and suck in her Uncles words
with a rejoicing ear,
As we were saying Brother,
Where shall we find a husband for my Niece.
Marry she shall find one here tho you little knew, thanks,
Thanks honest Butler.
She is left rich in Money, Plate, and Jewels.
Comfort, comfort to my soul.
Hath all her manner houses richly furnished.
Good, good, Isle find employment for them.
Speak loud enough that he may hear you.
I take her state to be about a thousand pound a year,
And that which my father, hath left me, will make it about
fifteen, hundred admirable.
Indebt to no man, then must our natural care be,
As she is wealthy to see her married well.
And that she shall be as well as the priest can, hee shall not,
Leave out a word ont.
I think she has.
What a Gods name.
About four thousand pound in her great chest.
And Isle find a vent fort I hope.
She is virtuous, and she is fair.
And she were foul, being rich, I would be glad of her.
Pisht, pisht.
Come, weal go visit her, but with this care,
That to no spend-thrift we do marry her.
You may chance be deceived old gray-beardes, •ears hee
will spend some of it, thanks, thanks, honest Butler, now doe I
see the happiness of my future estate, I walk me as to morrow, be∣ing
the day after my marriage, with my fourteen men in Livery
cloaks after me, and step to the wall in some chief street of the
City, tho I ha no occasion to use it, that the Shop-keepers may
take notice how many followers stand bare to me, and yet in this
latter age, the keeping of men being not in request, I will turn
my aforesaid fourteen into two Pages and two Coaches, I will get
me self into grace at Court, run head-long into debt, and then
look scurvily upon the City, I will walk you into the presence in
the afternoon having put on a richer suit, then I wore in the more∣ning,
and call boy or sitrah, I will ha the grace of some great Lady
though I pay fort, and at the next Triumphs run a Tilt, that
when I run my course, though I break not my lance: she may
whisper to her self, looking upon my smell, well run my knight
I will now keep great horses, scorning to have a Queen to keep
me, indeed I will practise all the Gallantry in use, for by a Wife
comes all my happiness.
Now sir, you ha heard her Uncles, and how do you like
them.
O But. they ha made good thy words, &amp; I am ravished with thē.
And having seen &amp; kissed the gentlewo. how do you like his?
O Butler beyond discourse, she`s Paragon for a Prince,
then a fit Implement for a Gentleman, beyond my Element.
Well then, since you like her, and by my means, she shall
like you, nothing rests now but to have you married.
True Butler, but withal to have her portion.
Tut, thats sure yours when you are married once, for tic hers
by Inheritance, but do you love her?
O, with my soul.
Ha you sworn as much.
To thee, to her, and ha called heaven to witness.
How shall I know that.
Butler, here I protest, make vows Irrevocable.
Upon your knees.
Upon my knees, with my hart, and soul I love her.
Will live with her.
Will live with her.
Marry her and maintain her.
Marry her and maintain his.
For her forsake al other women.
Nay for her forswear all other women.
In al degrees of Love.
In all degrees of Love, either to Court, kiss, give private
favours, or use private means, Isle doe nothing that married men
being close whoremaisters do, so I may have her.
And yet you having bin an open whoremaister, I will not
believe you till I hear you swear as much in the way of contract to
her self, and call me to bee a witness.
By heaven, by earth, by Hell, by all that man can swear, I
will so I may have her.
Enough.
Thus at first sight, rash men to women swear,
When such oaths broke, heaven grieves and sheds a tear:
But shees come, ply her, ply her.
Kind Mistress, as I protested, so again I vow, I faith I love
you.
And I am not Sir so uncharitable,
To hate the man that loves me.
Love me then,
The which loves you as Angels loves good men,
Who wish them to live with them ever,
In that high bliss whom hell cannot diss ever.
Isle steal away and leave them, so wise men do,
Whom they would match, let them ha leave to wo.
Mistress I hnow your worth is beyond my desert, yet by my
praising of your virtues, I would not have you as women use to
do, become proud.
None of my affections are prides children, nor a kin to them
Can you love me them?
I can, for I love al the world, but am in love with none.
Yet be in love with me, let your affections
Combine with mine, and let our souls
Like Turtles have a mutual Sympathy,
Who love so well, that they together die,
Such is my life, who covets to expire,
If it should loose your love.
May I believe you?
In truth you may,
Your lifes my life, your death my dying day.
Sir the commendations I have received from Butler of your
birth and worth, together with the Judgment of mine own eye,
bids me believe and love you.
O seal it with a kiss,
Blessed hour my life had never joy till this.
Here about is the house sure.
We cannot mistake it, for here is the sign of the Wolf
and the Bay-window.
What so close? Tic well, I ha shifted away your Uncles
Mistress, but see the spite Sir Francis, if you same couple of
Smel-smockes, Wentloe and Bartley, ha not scented after vs.
Apoxe on em, what shall we do then Butler?
What but be married straight man.
I but how Butler.
Tut, I never fail at a dead lift, for to perfect your bliss,
I have provided you a Priest.
Where, prethe Butler where?
Where? But beneath in her Chamber. I ha filled his hands
with Coin, and he shall tie you fast with words, he shall close
your hands in one, and then doe clap your self into her sheets
and spare not.
O sweet.
Down, down, tic the only way for you to get up.
Thus in this task, for others good I toil,
And she kind Gentlewoman weds her self,
Having bin scarcely wood, and ere her thoughts,
Have learned to love him, that being her husband,
She may relieve her, brothers in their wants,
She marries him to help her nearest kin,
I make the match, and hope it is no sin.
Sfut it is scurvy Walking, for vs so near the two Coun∣ters,
would he would come once?
Mass hes yonder: Now Butler.
O Gallants are you here, I ha done wonders for you com∣mended
you to the Gentlewomen, who having taken note of your
good legs, and good faces, have a liking to you, meet me beneath.
Happy Butler.
They are yours, and you are theirs, meet me beneath I say.
By this they are wed, I and perhaps have bedded,
Now follows whether knowing she is poor,
Heel swear he loved her as he swore before.
Ho Sirrha, who would ha thought it, I perceive now a wo∣man
may be a maid, be married, and loose her maiden-head, and
all in half and an hour, and how doest like me now wench.
As doth befit your servant and your wife,
That owe you love and duty al my life.
And there shall be no Love lost, nor service neither, Isle do
thee service at board, and thou shalt do me service a bed: Now
must I as young married men use to do, kiss my portion out of my
young wife. Thou art my sweet Rogue, my Lamb, my Pigsny, my
play-fellow, my pretty pretty any thing, come a bus prithee, so
tic my kind hart, and wats thou what now?
Not till you tel me Sir,
I ha got thee with Child in my Conscience, and like a
kind Husband, methinkes I breed it for thee. For I am already
sick at my stomach and long extremely. Now must thou bee my
helpful Physician, and provide for me.
Even to my blood,
Whats mine is yours, to gain your peace or good.
What a kind soul is this, could a man have found a greater
content in a wife, if he should ha sought thorough the world for
her: Prethy hart as I said, I long, and in good troth I do, and me∣thinks
thy first child will bee borne without a nose, if I loose my
longing, tic but for a trifle too, yet methinkes it will do me no good
unless thou effect it for me. I could take thy keys my self, go in∣to
thy Closet, and read over the deeds and evidences of thy Land,
&amp; in reading over them, rejoice I had such blessed fortune to have so
fair a wife with so much endowment, and then open thy Chests,
and survey thy Plate, Jewels, Treasure. But a pox ont, al will doe
me no good, unless thou effect it for me.
Sir I will show you al the wealth I have,
Of Coin, of Jewels, or Possessions,
Good gentle hart, Isle give thee another bus for that, for
that give thee a new gown to morrow morning, by this hand do
thou but dream what stuff and what Fashion thou wilt have it
on to night.
The land I can endow you with, is my Love,
The riches I possess for you is love,
A Treasure greater then is Land or Gold,
It cannot be forfeited, and it shall near be sold.
Love I know that, and Isle answer thee love for. Love in a∣bundance:
but come prithee come, lets see these deeds and e∣uidences,
this Money, Plate, and Jewels, with ha thy Child borne
without a nose▪ if thou be so careless, spare not, why my little
frappet you, I heard thy Uncles talk of thy riches, that t•ou had
hundreds a year, several Lord-ships, Manors Holes, Thou∣sands
of pounds in your great Chests, Jewels, Plate, and Rings
in your little Box.
And for that riches you did marry me.
Troth I did, as now adays Bachelors do swear I lou`d thee
but indeed married thee for thy wealth.
Sir I beseech you say not your oths were such,
So like false coin, being put unto the touch,
Who bear a flourish in the outward show,
Of a true stamp, but truly are not so,
You swore me love, I gave the like to you,
Then as a ship being wedded to the sea,
Dus either sail or sink even so must I,
You being the haven to which my hopes must she.
True Chuck I am thy haven, and harbour too,
And like a ship I took thee, who brings home Treasure
As thou to me, the Marchant-venturer.
What riches I am ballast with are yours.
Thats kindly said now,
If but with sand, as I am but with earth,
Being your right of right, you must receive me,
I ha no other lading but my Love.
Which in abund•nce I will render you,
If other fraught you do expect my store,
Isle pay you •ears, my riches, are no more.
Howes this? howes this? I hope you do but Jest,
I am Sister to decayed Scarborrow.
Ha.
Whose substance your Enticements did consume.
Worse then an Ague.
Which as you did believe so they supposed,
It was fitter for your self then for another,
To keep the sister, had undone the brother.
I am gulled by this hand. An old Co•ichacher, and beguiled;
where the pox now are my two Coaches, choice of houses, several
suits, a plague on them, and I know not what: Doe you hear
Puppet, do you think you shall not be damned for this, to Cousin
a Gentleman of his hopes, and compel your self into Matrimo∣ny
with a man, whether hee will or no with you, I ha made a fair
match in faith, will any man buy my commodity out of my hand, as
God save me he shall have her for half the money she cost me.
O, ha we met you Sir.
What, turned Micher, steal a wife, and not make your
old friends acquainted with it.
A pox on her, I would you had her.
Well, God give you Joy, we can hear of your good for∣tune,
now tic done, tho we could not be acquainted with it before∣hand.
As that you have two thousand pound a year.
Two or three manor houses.
A wife, fair, rich, and virtuous.
Pretty infaith, very pretty.
Store of Gold.
Plate in abundance.
Better, better, better.
And so many Oxen, that their horns are able to store
al the Cuckolds in your Country.
Do not make me mad good Gentlemen, do not make me
mad, I could be made a Cuckold with more patience, then endure
this.
For we shall have you turn proud now, grow respect∣les
of your Ancient acquaintance, why Butler told vs of it: Who
was the maker of the match for you?
A pox of his furtherance, Gentlemen as you are Christi∣ans,
vex me no more, that I am married I confess, a plague of the
Fates, that wedding and hanging comes by destiny, but for the
riches she has brought, bear witness how Isle reward her.
Sir.
Whore, I and Jade, Witch, Ilfacst, stinking-breath, croo∣ked-nose,
worse then the Devil, and a plague on thee that ever I
saw thee.
A Comedy, a Comedy.
Whats the meaning of all this, is this the mask after
thy marriage.
O Gentlemen, I am undone, I am undone, for I am
married, I that could not abide a Woman, but to make her a
whore, hated all Shee-creatures, fair and poor, swore I would
never marry but to one that was rich, and to be thus cun nicacht.
Who do you think this is Gentlemen?
Why your wife, Who should it be else?
Thats my misfortune, that marrying her in hope she was
rich, she proves to be the beggarly Sister to the more beggarly
Scarborrow.
How?
Ha, ha, ha.
I, you may laugh, but she shall cry as well as I for it,
Nay, do not weep.
He dus but conterfeit now to delude vs, he has all her
portion of Land, Coin, Plate, Jewels: and now dissembles thus
least we should borrow some Money of him.
And you be kind Gentlemen lend me some, for ha∣uing
payed the Priest, I ha not so much left in the world, as will
higher me a horse to carry me away from her.
But art thou thus gulled infaith.
Are you sure you ha eyes in your head.
Why then, By her brothers setting one in my conscience,
who knowing thee now to ha somewhat to take to, by the death
of thy father, and that hee hath spent her portion, and his own
possessions, hath laid this plot, for thee to marry her, and so he to
be rid of her himself.
Nay, thats without question, but Isle be revenged of em
both, for you Minx. Nay Sfut, give em me, or Isle kick else.
Good, sweet.
Sweet with a pox, you stink in my nose, give me your
Jewels? Nay Bracelets too.
O me, most miserable.
Out of my sight, I and out of my doors, for now, whats
within this house is mine, and for your brother
He made this match, in hope to do you good,
And I wear this for which, shall draw his blood.
A brave resolution.
In which wele second thee.
Away, whore, Out of my doors whore.
O grief, that poverty should ha that power to tear:
Men from themselves, tho they wed, bed, and swear.
How now sister.
Undone, undone.
Why Mistress, how first? how first?
My husband has forsook me.
O perjury.
Has taine my Jewels, and my Bracelets from me.
Vengeance, I played the thief for the money that bought
em.
Left me distressed, and thirst me forth a doors.
Damnation on him, I will here no more,
But for his wrong revenge me on my brother,
Degenerate, and was the cause of all,
He spent our portion, and Isle see his fall.
O but Brother.
Persuade me not.
All hopes are shipwract, misery comes on,
The comfort we did look from him is frustrate,
All means, all maintenance, but grief is gone.
And all shall end by his destruction.
Isle follow and prevent, what in this heat may happen,
His want makes sharpe his sword, to greates the ill,
If that one brother should another kill.
And what will you do Mistress?
Isle sit me down, sigh loud in stead of words,
And wound my self with grief as they with swords.
And for the sustenance that I should eat,
Isle feed on grief, tic woes best relished meat.
Good hart I pity you,
You shall not be so cruel to your self,
I have the poor Seruingmans allowance,
Twelve pence aday to buy me sustenance,
One meal aday Isle eat, the tothet fast,
To give your wants relief. And Mistress
Be this some comfort to your miseries,
Isle ha thin cheeks, ear you shall ha wet eyes.
What is prodigality? Faith like a Brush
That wears himself to flourish others clothes,
And having worn his hart even to the stump,
Hes thrown away like a deformed lump.
Oh such am I, I ha spent all the wealth
My ancestors did purchase, made others brave
In shape and riches, and my self a knave.
For tho my wealth raised some to paint their door,
Tic shut against me, saying I am but poor:
Nay, even the greatest arm, whose hand hath grast,
My presence to the eye of Majesty, shrinks back,
His fingers cluch, and like to lead,
They are heavy to raise up my state, being dead.
By which I find, spend thriftes, and such am I,
Like strumpets flourish, but are foul within,
And they like Snakes, know when to cast their skin.
Turn, draw, and dye, I come to kill thee.
Whats he that speaks? Like sickness: Oh first you,
Sleep still, you cannot move me, fare you well.
Think not my fury slakes so, or my blood
Can cool it self to temper by refusal,
Turn or thou die.
Away.
I do not wish to kill thee like a slave,
That taps men in their cups, and brooch their harts,
Ear with a warning piece they have waked their ears,
I would not like to powder shoot thee down,
To aflat grave, ere thou hast thought to frown:
I am no Coward, but in manly terms,
And fairest oppositions vow to kill thee.
From whence proceeds this heat.
From sparkles bred by thee, that like a villain.
Ha.
Isle hallow it in thine ears till thy soul quake to hear it,
That like a villain hast undone thy brothers.
Would thou were not so near me: yet farewell.
By nature, and her laws make vs a kin,
As near as are these hands, or sin to sin.
Draw and defend thy self, or Isle forget
Thou art a man.
Would thou were not my Brother?
I disclaim them.
Are wee not off-spring of one parent wretch.
I do forget it, pardon me the dead,
I should deny the pains you bid for me.
My blood grows hot for vengeance, thou hast spent
My lives revenues that our parents purchased.
O do not wrack me with remembrance ont.
Thou hast made my life a Beggar in this world,
And I will make thee bankrupt of thy breath:
Thou hast bin so bad, the best I can give,
Thou art a Devil, not with men to live.
Then take a Devils payment.
Hes here, draw Gentlemen.
Die Scarborrow.
Girt round with death.
How set upon by three, Sfut fear not Brother, yon Co∣wards,
three to one, slaves, worse then Fencers that wear long wea∣pons.
You shall be fought withal, you shall be fought withal.
Brother I thank you, for you now have bin
A patron of my life, forget the sin
I pray you, with my loose and wasteful hours,
Hath made against your Fortunes, I repent em,
And wish I could new joint and strength your hopes,
Tho with indifferent ruin of mine own.
I have a many sins, the thought of which
Like finished Needles prick me to the soul,
But find your wrongs, to have the sharpest point.
If penitence your losses might repair,
You should be rich in wealth, and I in care.
I do believe you Sir, but I must tell you,
Evils the which are against an other done,
Repentance makes no satisfaction
To him that feels the smart. Our father sir,
Left in your trust my portion: you ha spent it,
And suffered me (whilst you in riots house,
A drunken Tavern, spilled my maintenance
Perhaps upon the ground with overflown cups,
Like birds in hardest winter half starved, to fly)
And pick up any food, least I should die.
I prithee let vs be at peace together.
At peace for what? For spending my inheritance,
By yonder son that every soul has life by,
As sure as thou hast life Isle fight with thee.
Id not be moved vntoot.
Isle kill thee then, were thou now clasped
Within thy mother, wife, or childrens armea.
Would homicide? art so degenerate?
Then let my blood grow hot.
For it shall cool.
To kill rather then bee kilt is manhoods rule.
Stay let not your wraths meet.
Hart, what makst thou here?
Say who are you, or you, are you not one,
That scarce can make a fit distinction
Betwixt each other. Are you not Brothers?
I renounce him.
Shalt not need.
Give way.
Have at thee,
Who stirs, which of you both hath strength within his arm
To wound his own breast, whose so desperate,
To dam himself by killing of himself,
Are you not both one flesh?
Hart, give me way.
Be not a bar betwixt vs, or by my sword
Isle mete thy grave out.
O do, for Gods sake do?
Tic happy death, if I may die and you
Not murder one another. O do but harken,
When dus the Sun and Moon borne in one frame
Contend, but they breed Earthquakes in men's harts:
When any star prodigiously appears,
Tells it not fall of kings or fatal years.
And then if Brothers fight, what may men think,
Sin grows so high, tic time the world should sink.
My hart grows cool again, I wish it not.
Stop not my fury, or by my life I swear,
I will reveal the robbery we ha done,
And take revenge on thee,
That hinders me to take revenge on him.
I yield to that, but near consent to this,
I shall then die as mine own, sin affords,
Fall by the law, not by my Brothers swords.
Then by that light that guids me here I vow,
Isle straight to Sir Iohn Harcop, and make known
We were the two that robbed him.
Prethy do.
Sin has his shame, and thou shalt ha thy due.
Thus have I shown the nature of a Brother,
Tho you have proved unnatural to me.
Hes gone in heate to publish out the theft,
Which want and your unkindness forest vs to,
If now I die that death and public shame,
Is a Cursive to your soul, blot to your name.
O tic too true, theres not a thought I think,
But must partake thy griefs, and drink
A relish of thy sorrow and misfortune,
With weight of others tears I am ore borne,
That scarce am Atlas to hold up mine own,
And al to good for me. A happy Creature
In my Cradle, and have made my self
The common curse of mankind by my life,
Undone my Brothers, made them thieves for bread,
And begot pretty children to live beggars,
O Conscience, how thou are stung to think vpont,
My Brothers unto shame must yield their blood,
My Babes at others stirrups beg their food,
Or else turn thieves to, and be choked fort,
Die a Dogs death, be percht upon a tree,
Hang betwixt heaven and earth, as fit for neither,
The curse of heaven thats due to reprobates,
Discends upon my Brothers, and my children,
And I am parent to it, I, I am parent to it.
Where are you Sir?
Why starest thou, whats thy hast?
Hears fellows swarm like flies to speak with you.
What are they?
Snakes I think Sir, for they come with stings in their
mouths, and their tongues are turned to teeth to: They claw Villa∣nously,
they have eat up your honest name, and honourable re∣putation
by railing against you, and now they come to devour
your possessions.
In plainer Euargy, what are they, speak?
Mantichoras, monstrous beasts, enemies to mankind,
that ha double rows of teeth in their mouths. They are Usurers,
they come yawning for money, &amp; the Sheriff with them, is come
to serve an extent upon you Land, and then cease on your by∣die
by force of execution, they ha begirt the house round.
So that the roof our Ancestors did build
For their sons comfort, and their wives for Charity,
I dare not to look out.
Besides Sir, here is your poor children.
Poor children they are indeed.
Come with fire and water: tears in their eyes, and burning
grief in their harts, and desire to speak with you.
Heap sorrow upon sorrow? Tell me, are
My brothers gone to execution?
For what I did, for every heinous sin,
Sits on his soul by whom it did begin.
And so did theirs by me. Tell me withal,
My children carry moisture in their eyes,
Whose speaking drops, say father, thus must we
Ask our relief, or die with infamy,
For you ha made vs beggars. Yet when thy tale has kilt me
to give my passage comfort from this stage,
Say all was done by enforced marriage:
My grave will then be welcome.
What shall we do sir?
Do as the devil dus, hate panther-mankind,
And yet I lie: for devils sinners love,
When men hate men, tho good like some aboue.
Your wives come in sir.
Thou lie, I ha not a wife. None can be called,
True man and wife, but those whom heaven instald. Say,
O my deer husband?
You are very welcome, peace: wele ha complement.
Who are you Gentlewoman.
Sir your distressed wife, and these your children.
Mine? Where, how begot:
Prove me by certain instance thats divine,
That I should call them lawful, or the mine.
Were we not married sir?
No, tho we heard the words of Ceremony,
But had hands knit as felons that wear fetters
Forsty upon them. For tell me woman,
Did ere my Love with sighs entreat thee mine,
Did ever I in willing conference,
Speak words, made half with tears that I did love thee.
Or was I ever
But glad to see thee as al Lovers are.
No, no, thou know I was not.
O me.
The mores the pity.
But when I came to Church, I did there stand
All water, whose forest breach had drowned my Land,
Are you my wife, or these my children?
Why tic impossible, for like the skies,
Without the suns light, so look al your eyes,
Dark, Cloudy, thick, and full of heaviness,
Within my Country there was hope to see
Me and my issue to be like our fathers,
Upholders of our Country, al our life,
Which should ha bin, if I had wed a wife.
Where now,
As dropping leaves in Autume you look al,
And I that should uphold you like to fall,
It was, nor, shall be my fault. Heaven bear me witness.
Thou lie? stumpet thou lie?
O Sir.
Peace saucy Jack, strumpet I say thou lie,
For wife of mine thou art not, and these thy Bastards
Whom I begot of thee, with this unrest,
That Bastards borne, are borne not to be Blessed
One me pour al your wrath, but not on them.
On thee, and them, foot tic the end of lust,
To scourge it self, heaven lingering to be just:
Harlot.
Husband.
Bastards.
Father.
What hart not pities this?
Even in your Cradle, you were accursed of heaven,
Thou an Adulteress in thy married arms.
And they that made the match, bawds to thy lust:
I, now you hang the head, should ha done so before,
Then these had not bin Bastards, thou a whore.
I cannot brooked no longer, Sir you doe not well in this?
Ha slave.
Tic not the aim of gentry to bring forth,
Such harsh vnrellisht fruit unto their wives,
And to their pretty pretty children by my troth.
How rascal.
Sir I must tel you, your progenitors
Two of the which these years were servant to,
Had not such mists before their understanding,
Thus to behave themselves.
And you'll control me sir.
I, I, will.
You rogue.
I tic, I will tel you tic ungently done
Thus to defame your wife, abuse your children,
Wrong them, you wrong your self, are they not yours?
Pretty, pretty Impudence infaith,
Her whom your are bound to love, to rail against,
These whom you are bound to keep, to spurn like dogs,
And you were not my moister, I would tell you.
What slave.
Put up your Bird-spit, tut I fear it not,
In doing deeds so base, so wild as these,
Tic but a Kna, kna, kna.
Rog.
Tut howsoever, tic a dishonest part,
And in defence of these I throw off duty
Good Butler.
Peace honest Mistress, I will say you are wronged,
Prove it upon him, even in his blood, his bones,
His guts, his Maw, his Throat, his Entrails.
You runagate of threescore,
Tic better then a knave of three and twenty,
Patience be my Buckler,
As not to file my hands in villains blood,
You knave Slaue-trencher-groome
Who is your moister?
You if you were a moister.
Off with your coat then, get you fort a doors.
My cote sir.
I your coat slave.
Sfut when you hate, tic but a thred-bare coat,
And there tic for you: know that I scorn
To wear his Livery is so worthy borne,
And live so base a life, old as I am,
Isle rather be a beggar then your man,
And theres your service for you.
Away, out of my door: Away.
So, now your Champions gone, Minx thou had better ha gone
quick unto thy grave.
O me, that am no cause of it.
Then have subornd that slave to lift his hands against me.
O me, what shall become of me?
Isle teach you tricks for this, ha you a companion.
My hart not suffer me to leave my honest Mistress and his
pretty children.
Isle mark thee for a strumpet, and thy Bastards.
What will you do to them Sir.
The Devil in thy shape come back again.
No, but an honest servant Sir will take this cote,
And wear it with this sword to safeguard these,
And pity them, and I am wo for you,
But will not suffer
The husband Viper-like to pray on them.
That love her, and have cherished him as these,
As they have you.
Slave.
I will not humour you,
Fight with you, and loose my life or these
Shall taste your wrong whom you are bound to love.
Out of my doors slave.
I will not, but will stay and wear this coat,
And do you service whether you will or no.
Isle wear this sword to, and be Champion,
To fight for her in spite of any man.
You shall. You shall be my moister Sir.
No, I desire it not,
Isle pay you duty even upon my knee,
But loose my life, ere these oppressed Isle see.
Yes goodman slave, you shall be master,
Lie with my wife, and get more Bastards, do, do, do.
O me.
Turns the world upside down, that men orebeare their
Masters, It dus, it dus.
For even as Iudas sold his Moister Christ,
Men buy and sell their wives at highest price,
What will you give me? what will you give me? what will you give
me?
O, Mistress,
My soul weeps, tho mine eyes be dry,
To see his fall and your adversity,
Some means I have left, which Isle relieve you with,
Into your chamber, and if comfort be a kin
To such great grief, comfort your children.
I thank thee Butler, heaven when he please,
Send death unto the troubled a blessed ease.
In truth I know not if it be good or ill,
That with this endless toil I labour thus,
Tic but the old times Ancient conscience
That would do no man hurt, that makes me doot,
If it be sin that I do pity these,
If it be sin I have relieved his Brothers,
Have plaid the thief with them to get their food,
And made a luckless marriage for his Sister,
Intended for her good, heaven pardon me.
But if so, I am sure they are greater sinners,
That made this match, and were unhappy men,
For they cause all, and may heaven pardon them.
Whose within here.
Sir William, kindly welcome.
Where is my kinsman Scarborrow?
Sooth hes within sir, but not very well.
His sickness?
The hell of sickness, troubled in his mind.
I guess the cause of it,
But cannot now intend to visit him,
Great business for my sovereign hastes me hence,
Only this Letter from his Lord and Guardian to him,
Whose inside I do guess, tends to his good,
At my return Isle see him, so farewell.
Whose inside I do guess turns to his good,
He shall not see it now then, for men's minds
Perplexed like his, are like Land-troubling-winds,
Who have no gracious temper.
O Butler.
Whats the fright now?
Help strait, or on the tree of shame
We both shall perish for the robbery.
What first reueald man?
Not yet good Butler, only my brother Thomas
In spleen to me▪ that would not suffer him
To kill our elder brother, had undone vs
Is riding now to sir Iohn Harcop straight, to disclose it.
Hart, who would rob with Sucklings:
Where did you leave him?
Now taking horse to ride to Yorkshire.
Isle stay his journey, least I meet a hanging.
Isle parley with the Devil: I, I will,
He gives his council freely, and the cause
He for his Clients pleads, goes always with them,
He in my cause shall deal then: and Isle ask him
Whether a Cormorant may have stuffed Chests
And see his brother starve: why heel say I,
The less they give, the more I gain thereby.
Their souls, their souls, their souls.
How now master? Nay, you are my moister?
Is my wives sheets warm? Dus she kiss well?
Good sir.
Foe, miked not strange for in these days,
Theres many men lie in their masters sheets,
And so may you in mine and yet: Your business sir?
Theres one in civil habit sir, would speak with you.
In civil habit.
He is of seemly rank sir, and calls himself
By the name of Doctor Baxtor of Oxford.
That man undid me, he did blossoms blow
Whose fruit proved poison, tho it was good in show,
With him Isle parley, and disrobe my thoughts
Of this wilde frenzy that becomes me not:
A table, candles, stools, and all things fit,
I know he comes to chide me, and Isle hear him,
With our sad conference we will call up tears,
Teach Doctors rules, instruct succeeding years:
Usher him in:
Heaven spare a drop from thence wheres bounties throng
Give patience to my soul, inflame my tongue.
God master Scarborow.
You are most kindly welcome, sooth ye are.
I ha important business to deliver you.
And I have leisure to attend your hearing.
Sir, you know I married you.
I know you did sir.
At which you promised both to God and men,
Your life unto your spouse should like snow,
That false to comfort, not to overthrow,
And love unto your issue should be like
The dew of heaven, that hurts not tho it strike,
When heaven and men did witness and record
It was an eternal oath, no idle word▪
Heaven being pleased therewith, bleste you with children,
And at heavens blessings, all good men rejoice.
So that Gods chair and footstool, heaven and earth
Made offering at your nuptials as a knot
To mind you of your vow, O break it not?
Tic very true.
Now sir, from this your oath and band,
Faiths pledge, and seal of conscience you ha run,
Broken all contracts, and the forfeiture,
Justice hath now in suit against your soul,
Angels are made the Iurots, who are witnesses
Unto the oath you took, and God himself
Maker of marriage, he that sealed the deed,
As a firm lease unto you during life,
Sirs now as judge of your transgression,
The world informs against you with this voice,
If such sins reign, what mortals can rejoice.
What then ensues to me?
A heavy doom, whose executions
Now served upon your conscience, that ever
You shall feel plagues whom time shall not dissever,
As in a map your eyes see all your life,
Bad words, worse deeds, false oths, and al the injuries,
You ha done unto your soul, then comes your wife,
Full of woes drops, and yet as full of pity,
Who tho she speaks not, yet her eyes are swords,
That cut your hart-strings, and then your children.
Oh, oho, oh.
Who what they cannot say talk in their looks,
You have made vs up, but as misfortunes books,
Whom other men may read in, when presently,
Taskt by your self, you are not like a Thief,
Astonished being accused, but scorch with grief,
I, I, I.
Here stands your wives tears.
Where?
And you fry for them, here lie your childrens wants.
Here?
For which you pine in conscience burn,
And wish you had bin better, or ne'er borne.
Dus all this happen to a wretch like me.
Both this and worse, your soul eternally
Shall live in torment, tho the body die.
I shall ha need of drink then Butler,
Nay all your sins are on your children laid,
For the offences that the father made.
Are they Sir.
Besure they are.
Butler.
Sir?
Go fetch my wife and children hither.
I will sir.
Isle read a Letter to the Doct. too, hes a Divine? I hes a
Divine.
I see his mind is troubled, and have made bold with
duty to read a Letter tending to his good, have made his Bro∣theirs
friends: both which I will conceal till better temper: He
sends me for his wife and children, shall I fetch em.
Hes a Divine, and this Divine did marry me, thats
good, thats good,
Moister Scarborrow.
Isle be with you straight Sir,
I will obey him,
If any thing doth happen that is Ill,
Heaven bear me record tic against Butlers will.
And this Divine did marry me,
Whose tongue should be the key to open truth,
As Gods Ambassador. Deliver, deliver, deliver.
Naister Scarborrow.
Isle be with you straight sir,
Salvation to afflicted consciences,
And not give torment to contented minds,
Who should be lamps to comfort out our way,
And not like Firedrakes to lead men astray,
I, Isle be with you straight sir.
Here is your wife and children sir?
Give way then,
I ha my lesson perfect, leave vs here▪
Yes I will go, but I will be so near,
To hinder the mishap the which I fear.
Now sir, you know this Gentlewoman?
Kind mistress Scarborrow,
Nay pray you keep your seat, for you shall hear,
The same affliction you ha taught me fear,
Due to your self.
To me sir.
To you sir,
You matched me to this Gentlewoman.
I know I did sir.
And you will say she is my wife then.
I ha reason sir, because I married you.
O that such tongues should ha the time to lie,
Who teach men how to live, and how to die,
Did not you know my soul had given my faith,
In contract to another, and yet you
Would join• this Loom unto unlawful twists.
Sir.
But sir,
You that can see a Mote within my eye,
And with a Cassock blind your own defects,
Isle teach you this, tic better to do ill,
Thats never known to vs, then of self will,
And these all these in thy seducing eye,
As scorning life make em be glad to die.
Me Scarborrow.
Here will I write, that they which marry wives,
Unlawful live with strumpets al their lives.
Here will I seal the children that are born,
From wombs vnconsecrate, even when their soul
Has her infusion, it registers they are foul,
And shrinks to dwell with them, and in my close,
Isle show the world, that such abortive men,
Knit hands without free tongues look red like them
Stand you and you, to acts most Tragical,
Heaven has dry eyes, when sin, makes sinners fall.
Help moister Scarborrow,
Father.
Husband.
These for thy act should die, she for my Clare,
Whose wounds stare thus upon me for revenge.
These to be rid from misery, this from sin,
And thou thy self shalt have a push amongst em,
That made heavens word a pack-horse to thy tongue.
Cotest scripture to make evils shine like good,
And as I send you thus with worms to dwell,
Angels applaud it as a deed done well.
Stay him, stay him.
What will you do sir.
Make fat worms of stinking carcasses,
What hast thou to do with it?
Look who are here sir.
Injurious villen that preuentst me still.
They are your brothers and alliance Sir.
They are like full ordinance then, who once discharged,
A far off give a warning to my soul,
That I had done them wrong.
Kinsman.
Brother.
Husband.
Father.
Hark how their words like Bullets shoot me thorough
And tel me I have undone em, this side might say.
We are in want, and you are the cause of it,
This points at me, y•re shame unto your house,
This tongue says nothing, but her looks do tell,
Shees married but as those that live in hell:
Whereby all eyes are but misfortunes pipe,
Filled full of wo by me, this feels the stripe.
Yet look Sir,
Hears your Brothers hand in hand, whom I ha knit so.
And look Sir hears my husbands hand in mine,
And I rejoice in him, and he in me.
I say Cos what is past, the way to bliss,
For they know best to mend, that know amiss,
Wee kneel, forget, and say if you but love vs,
You gave vs grief for future happiness.
What al this to my Conscience?
Ease▪ prom•se of succeeding joy to you,
Read but this Letter.
Which tells you that your Lord &amp; Guardians dead.
Which tells you that he knew he did you wrong,
Was greeud fort, and for satisfaction
Hath given you double of the wealth you had.
Increased our portions.
Given me a dowry too.
And that he knew,
Your sin was his, the punishment his due.
All this is here,
Is heaven so gracious to sinners then?
Heaven is, and has his gracious eyes,
To give men life not like entrapping spies.
Your hand, yours, yours, to you my soul, to you a kiss,
In truth I am sorry I ha strayed amiss,
To whom shall I be thankful. All silent:
None speak: whist: why then to God,
That gives men comfort as he gives his rod,
Your portions Isle see paid, and I will love you,
You three Isle live withal, my soul shall love you,
You are an honest servant, sooth you are,
To whom, I these and all must pay amends,
But you I will admonish in cool terms,
Let not promotions hope, be as a string,
To tie your tongue, or let loose it to sting.
From hence it shall not Sir.
Then husbands thus shall norish with their wives.
As thou and I will wench.
Brothers in brotherly love thus link together,
Children and servants pay their duty thus.
And all are pleased.
We are.
Then if all these bee so,
I am new wed so ends old marriage woe,
And in your eyes so lovingly being wed,
We hope your hands will bring vs to our bed.

THe tranquil silence of a propitious hour,
Charm your attentions in a gentle spell:
Whilst our endeavours get a vocal tongue,
To fill the pleasing roundure of your ears.
Our Scene is mantled in the robe of truth,
Yet must we crave (by law of poesy)
To give our history an ornament.
But equalling this definition, thus,
Who gives a foul unto his Cooke to dress:
Likewise expects to have a foul again,
Though in the Cooks laborious workmanship
Much may be diminished, somewhat added,
The loss of feathers and the gain of face:
Yet in the back surrender of this dish,
It is (and may be truly called) the same:
Such are our acts: should our tedious muse
Pace the particulars of our travellers,
Five days would break the limits of our Scenes
But to express the shadows: therefore we,
(Leaving the feathers and some needless stuff)
Present you with the fairest of our feast,
Clothing our truth within an argument,
Fitting the stage and your attention:
Yet not so hid but that she may appear,
To be her self, even truth: now your assists
To help the entrance of our history:
First see a father parting with his sons,
Then in a moment, on the full fails of thought
We will divide them many hundred leagues,
Our Scene lies speechless, active, but yet dumb:
Till your expressing thoughts give it a tongue.
Imagine now the gentle breath of heaven,
Hath on the liquid high-way of the waives▪
Conveyed him many thousand leagues from vs.
Think you have seen him sail by many lands,
And now at last arrived in Persia:
Within the confines of the great Sophey,
Think you have heard his courteous salute
Speak in a peal of shot, the like, till now
Ne'er heard at Casbin, which towns governor,
Doth kindly entertain our English knight:
With him expect him first, the rest observe.
If foreign strangers to him be so kind,
We hope his native Country we shall find
More courteous, to your just censures then,
We offer up their travels and our pen.
SIr, yet your entertain hath been but weak,
But now assure ye, 't shall be strengthened:
A Princes absence clothes his public weal
In mourning garments: now our widdo-hood
In a conquering return shall be made good.
This day my royal moister, the Persian Sophey:
(Accompanied with a glorious tribute
Which forty thousand Turkish lives have paid)
Is hitherwards in march, to whom I have
Delivered your arrival here in Persia,
Your state, your habit, your fair demeanour,
(And so well as my weak oratory could recite)
Spoke of those words I have observed in you.
Sir, nothing I fear so much,
Least that the merit you have laid on me
Should not go even with your report.
It will: yet (if I may), Isle thus far counsel ye.
It is the Sophyes high will and pleasure:
That you be seated here in the market place,
To view the manner of his victories:
Which would you greet with your high tongues of war,
Whose thunder ne'er was heard in Persia:
Till you gave voice to them at Casbin first,
In what his kingdom best can furnish ye,
It is his pleasure and command you want not.
It was my purpose so to salute him
Brother, pray ye see our diections falter not,
See all in order as we did determine.
I shall sir.
With such a train as many Casualties,
(A travellers mishaps) have left with me:
Isle greet his highness in the best I may.
Christian or howsoever, courteous thou seem,
We bid thee welcome in unused phrase:
No gentle stranger greetes our continent,
But our arms fold him in a soft embrace:
Yet must his gratulation first be paid
Upon our foot, you stoop but to our hand:
This for your followers, welcome, welcome, 
Our governor of Casbin, see these strangers placed,
Be it your care and charge, since they have met
Their welcome first in weatherbeaten steel,
Weal show the manner of our Persian wars,
Our musique and our conquests, divide ye,
The one half are Persians, the rest are Turks,
Strike, a conqueror that still retains his name:
To tell his conquests, is not pride but fame.
These are our victories, to see those tongues
That lately threw defiance in our teeth
Quite put to silence in their caves of Earth:
Then are we sure our enemy is dead,
When from the body we divide the head:
How likes the Christian of our Persian wars?
As themselves deserve renowned Sophie,
Your Wars are manly, stout and honourable,
Your Arms have no employment for a coward:
Who dares not charge his courage in the field,
In hardy strokes against his opposed foe,
May be your Subject, not your Soldier.
Your Grace in this hath done me too much honour,
Which would you licence me but in part to pay
With sight of such wars as Christians use▪
So far as my small retinue will serve.
Isle shadow forth my Countries hardiment:
Think it a picture which may seem as great,
As the substantial self, when laid unto it
The compass of the hand would cover it,
Your favour and tic done, so that your eyes,
Will deign to grace our seeming victories.
You have prevented vs in proffering it,
We had requested else, our self will sit,
And so justly censure of your state in field,
That if yours best deserve, then ours shall yield.
What powers do wrap me in amazement thus?
Me thinks this Christian's more then mort all,
Sure he conceals himself, within my thoughts
Never was man so deeply registered,
But God or Christian, or what ere he bee,
I wish to be no other but as hee.
The Sophie dotes upon this fellow already,
Most devoutly, we shall have his statue erected in our Temple shortly.
Isle ne'er pray again if it be,
Hark they come, weal note how the Sophie will grace them.
It shall not please me be it ne'er so good.
Next Mortus Ally, and those Deities,
To whom we Persians pay devotion
We do adore thee: your wars are royal,
So joined with music that even death it self
Would seem a dream: your instruments dissolve
A body into spirit, but to hear
Their cheerful Clamours: and those your Engines,
(We cannot give their proper Character)
Those loud tongues that spit their spleen in fire,
Drowning the groans of your then dying friends,
And with the smoke hiding the gasp of life,
That you ne'er think of ought but victory,
Till all be won or lost, we cannot praise
It well, but what means those in bondage so?
These are our prisoners,
Why do they live?
In this I show the nature of our wars,
It is our clemency in victory,
To shed no blood upon a yielding foe,
Sometimes we buy our friends life with ourfoes,
Sometimes for Gold, and that hardens valour,
When he that wins the honour, gets the spoil.
Sometime for torment we give weary life.
Our foes are such, that they had rather die,
Then to have life in our Captivity.
We never heard of honour until now,
Yet have we engines of more force then these
When our ore-heated bloods would massacre:
We can lay Cities level with the pavement,
Bandee up Towers and turrets in the ayre;
And on the Seas ore-whelme an Argosy 
These are those Warriors.
Mahomet, it thunders.
Sure this is a God.
Sure it is a Devil, and Ime tormented to see him graced thus.
First teach me how to call thee ere I speak▪
I more and more doubt thy mortality:
Those tongues do imitate the voice of heaven
When the Gods speak in thunder: your honours
And your qualities of war, more then humane,
If thou hast God-head, and disguised art come
To teach vs unknown rudiments of war,
Tell vs thy precepts; and we'll adore thee.
Oh let your Princely thoughts descend so low,
As my beings worth, think me as I am:
No stranger are the deeds I show to you
Then yours to me: My countrie's far remote,
An Island but a handful to the world;
Yet fruitful as the meads of paradise,
Defenced with streams such as from Eden run,
Each port and entrance kept with such a Guard
As those you last heard speak: there lives a Princess,
Royal as your self, whose subject I am,
As these are to you.
As we? comparisons.
So long as war attempted our decay,
So ill repayd, we so by heaven preserved,
That war no more dares look upon our Land.
All Princes league with vs, which causes vs,
That wont to write our honours down in blood,
Cold and vnactiue to seek for employment
Hither am I come, (renowned Persian,)
My force and power is yours, say but the word,
So against Christians I may draw no sword.
With arms of love and adoration,
I entertain thee worthy Christian,
And think me happier in thy embrace,
Then if the God of Battles fought for me,
Thou shalt be General against the Turks.
He will make him his heir next,
Isle loose my head first.
A camp of equal spirits to thy self,
Would turn all Turkey into Persia,
Let me feast upon thy tongue, I delight to hear thee speak.
Isle interrupt ye. Ye Persian Gods look on,
The Sophie will profane your Deities,
And make an Idol of a fugitive: My Liege,
You describe wonders.
he minds me not: My Liege,
You trouble vs, and what's the difference twixt vs and you?
None but the greatest (mighty Persian)
All that makes up this earthly Edifice,
By which we are called men, is all alike.
Each may be the others Anatomy,
Our Nerues, our Arteries, our pipes of life,
The motives of our senses all doe move
As of one Axeltree, our shapes alike,
One worke-man made vs all, and all offend
That maker, all taste of interdicted sin,
Only Art in a peculiar change
Each country shapes as she best can please them,
But that's not all, our inward offices
Are most at jar, would they were not, (great Prince)
Your favour here if I outstrip my bounds,
We live and die, suffer calamities,
Are underlings to sickness, fire, famine, sword,
We all are punished, by the same hand and rod.
Our sins are all alike, why not▪ our God.
My Liege.
What makes these slaves so bold to trouble me,
Well sir, now your sweating message?
The Turks have gathered power,
So have we.
Those that retired from your last victory have met fresh supply, and all turn head upon your confines.
So have we fresh supply
We'll meet half way, welcome again brave Englishman
Our best employment in this war is thine,
For thy sake do I love all Christians:
Wee give thee liberty of Conscience,
Walk in our hand, thou hast possessed our heart,
Away, for wars, we must cut short our feasts,
Least that our foes prove our unwelcome guests.
Stand, stand, our fury swells so high,
We cannot march a foot ere it break forth,
Oh thou inconstant fate whose deadly wings,
Lifts thee like Falcons up to fall on Kings
On greater then on Kings, for it strikes vs
To whom Kings kneel, our potent power,
Whom Judgment holds to bee invincible,
Be but a handful of our enemies,
The Sophie and his troupes are forced to fly,
Not daring to resist, fearing to die,
Yet let the Sun of Ottoman take strength,
Call up his forces, and join war again.
Join war again we may to show our will,
But prove like those, resist to their own ill.
Hark Bassa how their voice of coming on,
Speaks like the tongue of heaven
Threatening destruction to mankind when it please,
Yet, let your blood be like the Oceā troubled with the wind
Rise till it dim the stars such your high mind,
It shall it shall, we will hold calm no longer,
Swell sea of fury, till these Persians,
Standing like trees upon our circling banks,
Be ouer-flowne: Men, wrath and blood,
Meet like Earth, Fire and Ayre, thats not withstood.
We thus confront thee.
We thus answer thee.
Know thou that call thy self a God on Earth,
And would have nations stoop to thee, as men to heaven,
We are thus armed, I, and for this defence,
Twixt God and Man, to approve a difference.
Know thou whose power is but a wart to mine,
If Earth have good from Heaven, Hell power by sinners,
If death be due to men, as bliss to Angels.
This Sun at Christians west shall not set true,
Before thy life meet death, hell have her due.
Endure him not Great Emperor,
Patience,
Know thou again, in this just war I'm knit
With Christians and with subjects, whose warlike arms
Like steel rebates not, but like fire shall fly,
To burn thee down, whose Prid's aboue the sky.
Thy Christians I contemn like to their God,
Oh
They shall have graves like thee dishonoured,
Unfit for heaven or earth this we prepare,
Betwixt them both weal seat you in the Ayre.
Turk, Infidel, thou that talk of Angels,
The Chroniclers of Heaven who in their register
Record thee living as a soul for hell.
By him that died for me, my pains shall sweat,
These poets to open, but I will pay this debt,
Isle vex them with my sword and being pangd:
With earthly torments send them to be damned.
Wilt Christian.
If I live I will,
As sure as day doth progress toward night,
In death of Pagans all Christs sons delight,
And I am one of them.
A larum then.
To fight with devils loathed of virtuous men,
Our Patron the great Sophie hath the worst,
Yet I have taine this Bassa from the Turks:
Stir not thou son of Ismaell or thou die,
Young Robin and my brother tho as yet
The art but a novice in this school of death,
And scarcely red in martial discipline:
As thou hast a great spirit or would show,
That thou art sprung from aged Sherlies loins,
Approve it now, keep this prisoner for me,
Loose rather life then leaue-him, if he scope:
Tic not by cowardice but my mishap.
And if I do not,
From all our Ancestors most worthy roll,
Be my name blotted, and from heaven my soul,
I thank thee by my troth isle to the battle,
To save the Sophie pressed with multitudes,
And rescue him or die, sure without doubt:
Our lives are lighted tapers that must out.
Come Turk I am made your Jailer &amp; in these chains,
To which thou art bond-man who dares fetch thee out:
I could have wished my self in thick of danger,
When men drop down for graves like rain from heaven
But that my brother counselled otherwise,
Who is my schoolmaster in these designs:
He swettes for honour like a Christian
Against Christ's foes, leaving me here
To keep thee prisoner purchase of his sword,
And come thy Father thats the devil Turk:
To be thy rescue, tho he fight in fire,
Rather then loose thee, by the King of stars,
Isle part with life, make this a pile of scars.
Resign thy prisoner youthful Englishman,
His life, thy victory is due to vs:
By the custom of our nation.
Is it so my Lord.
It is, let it suffice thee that I say it is,
Tic grace enough that thou hast made him Captive
His head shall be the honour of our sword:
And thus I cease on it.
You may my Lord.
Thou shalt have soldiers pay, good words for deeds,
Not have the honour to present his head:
That Trophes due to Cusshan Halybeck,
Then Cusshan Halibeck must have this prisoner:
I must, I will, who dare deny him me.
Not I, a Sherly dare not to deny a Persian.
Bassa.
What say thou Halibeck.
See thou this blade.
I do, but fear it not.
Custom of tirany betwixt our nations,
Hath made me not so much amazed of thee.
As by a stranger which did conquer me.
This steel shall glase it self within thy blood,
And blunt his keen edge with thy Turkish bones:
This point shall tilt it self within thy scull,
And bear it, as birds fly twixt vs and heaven;
And as thy blood, shall stream along this blade:
Isle laugh, and say, for this our foes were made.
Will the great Halie be so tyrannous?
What boots it thee to ask, or fit to know?
He was my prisoner, I had charge of him.
But now my prisoner, who ere conquered him,
Whose life shall pay his ransom, and his grave
Shall be in the breast of Fowls as fits a slave.
It were good I see it not then.
Ha.
So.
How.
Thus, it were good I see it not then:
These hands were made his keeper by my brother,
Whose sword subdued him, gave him prisoner
To me.
To thee.
To me, Persian to me.
Thus Eagles wings shake off a buzzing Fly.
Pray Turk, let thy heart sigth, &amp; thine eyes weep,
That thus they go to their eternal sleep.
Thou art better go down quick unto thy grave
Then touch him, better abuse thy Parents,
Be thine own murderer, let thine own blood out,
And seal therewith thine own damnation:
Better do all may tumble thee to hell,
Then wrong him.
How Christian?
Thus Pagan, hoe's my prisoner.
And here is the Key that locks him in these chains,
Rescue, release, or hurt him if thou dare.
Dare.
Dare,
State out thine eye-balls I out dare thee to it,
Or let thy hand wrong but a hair on's head,
This hand meates out thy grave where thou doest tread.
Your will shall be our moister, weal obey you Sir.
Your swords not tilted then within his scull,
Our nations custom shall be old by you.
Nor borne as birds do fly twixt vs and heaven.
We will become your slaves, and kneel to you.
Hoe's not your prisoner then, who ever conquered him.
Weal be your dogs, and fawn, and curse our fate,
When upstarts nobles brave, wretched's the state.
But it is more woe in realms, when men's deserts,
Are spurnd or stolen then worn in cowards hearts.
Yet English Christian, this be sure Isle keep,
The Sun's heats waking, when it is thought a sleep.
Thy valour hath commanded vs the day,
Brave Englishman we thank thee, &amp; by a peace concluded▪
Bassa, we ransomless return thee to thy moister:
His valour that subdued thee weal reward
With favour, and with bounty: and now to counsel,
Where weal determine of your motion,
Made of a league twixt vs and Christendom.
A league with Christendom.
He hath advised him too't, ha patience brother,
In the eye of heaven we swear without offence,
Weal hear what instances you can produce,
How such a league may be advantage to vs,
Sit, sit, to hear, and speak as free,
Without control it is we give liberty.
Concerning then our peace with Christian Princes.
To join with them, great Emperor you shall be,
A Captain for the highest, and in your war,
Have. Angels hands to guard and fight for you,
Religious men shall wear their bended knees,
Even to the bone, in ceaslesse prayers for you:
To whose continual kneelings, tears and sighthes,
Heavens ears be never shut, but do receive
Their souls devotion, makes the clouds to clear,
And thus dispatches each peticioner.
Who fights for vs, Isle be their comforter,
White headed age, then with their hearts like youth.
Go boldly to the field: Infants at suck,
Cry as they thought it long ere they were men,
Then Christian Princes join their hands with yours,
And sweep their several nations to a heap,
With one desire to number out their men,
Knowing who fight for heaven each soldier's ten,
And every hand is free in shedding blood,
Since tic to wash the evil from the good
What profit may this war accrue to vs.
Honour to your name, bliss to your soul.
Dishonour unto both my sovereign,
Shall you whose empire for these thousand years,
Have given their adoration to the sun,
The silver moon, &amp; those her countless eyes,
That like so many servants wait on her,
Forsake those lights perpetually abide,
And kneel to one, that lived a man and died.
Or shall our sacred Sovereign forget,
You means, by which his Ancestors did rise,
And had the name of Persian Emperors.
What can this English Christian say that they receive,
Of gift, of comfort, riches, or of life,
Unto the deity that hee adores,
That we enjoy not from that glorious Lamp,
Enough to make a Pagan, if a man
Of vnderstanding-soule turn Christian.
Our God gives vs this light by which we see,
And our God made that light by which you see,
Then who can this deny If not a Turk,
The maker still is better then his work,
What fruit, what food, what good to men doth flow,
But by our Gods created and doth grow,
I grant the Sun a vegetatiue soul,
Gives to all fruits of the earth, herbs, plants and trees,
And yet but as a servant swayed by him
Made men like Angels and controuleth sin.
Our King of day, and our fair Queen of nights,
Walk over vs with their perpetual lights,
To see wee should not want and to defend vs,
Her rain with dews doth all our fruits adorn,
Which in his rise are offered to his throne,
He warmes, she waters, and to them as due,
Our knees we give all other Gods eschew.
Then all your lives are but to meet a death,
That keeps you dying, and yet never dead,
And he that speaks in thunder, and whose brow,
Is now contract to here his name denied,
Hath vengeance in his hand to strike you down,
Yet with a smile, he doth wipe of his frown,
And spares in hope, yet he stores up his doom,
That plagues heaped up, fall weightiest when they come.
You then that scourge my Saviour with your words,
My sword hath no assistance for; nor this arm
A growing strength to bear in your defence.
Great Emperor, for your favours here's a friend
Should do you manly service in your wars,
Did not so just a cause compel me hence,
Now back I go upheld with this good,
In my Gods cause, I ha'shed some pagans blood,
Stay worthy Englishman and worthy Christian,
We cannot loose a mowld of so much worth,
What is the end thy suit would have of vs.
That you by Embassy make league with Chri∣stendom
And all the neighbor Princes bordering here,
And crave their general aid against the Turk,
Whose grants no doubt of: so shall your Grace
Enlarge your Empire living, and being gon,
Be called the Champion for the holiest one,
These arms shall do you credit; and if I
Miscarry, then tic happy so to die,
Thy counsel we accept, and do applaud it,
Advise vs then ye friends of Persia,
Who's fittest in our power to undertake,
A business of so great import as this,
Who better then the Councellor my Lord,
Being both a Christian and a 〈◊〉,
Whom if men envied could not but commend,
And him will now prefer as you advise,
And grace him forth such an Ambassador as never went frō
(Persian Emperor.
Yet were it requisite my noble Lord
Some man of worth were joined along with him,
It would give more countenance to his designs.
Good, thats the way to choke him.
So shall your business soonest take effect,
The cause be heard, he had in chief respect.
Thy counsel wee accept and order thee,
As the first friend to bear him company,
Late Shirley Knight, now Lord Ambassador
Chife in commission with Duke Halibeck,
To make a League twixt vs and Christendom,
For furtherance of sharpe war against the Turk,
Isle send thee forth as rich as ever went,
The proudest Trojan to a Gracious tent.
Call thy best eloquence into thy tongue,
That may prevail with Princes; if thou speed,
The Christians bee the honour, while Turks bleed.
My utterance is to short for fitting thanks.
And to approve we'll not forget thee absent,
Call ne'er the brother of the Ambassador. 
Thy place of General given thee in our wars,
From thee wee thus take of, and here bestow.
Hart how these honours makes me hate these Christi∣ans
Poison finds time time to burst, &amp; so shall ours▪
Though young. I have scene thee valiant, still deserve,
And still be honoured: then this charge forget not,
That in thy battles thou preserve no foe▪
Unto our Nation, or for love or wealth,
So prove victorious, while within our eye,
Thy self art gracious, stayres to seat thee high.
If to spend blood may make me honourable,
I will be thrifty yet a prodigal.
Enough
Let me 〈…〉
So let vs part, at parting only this
Unto my dearest Mistress give this jewel,
Say that to leave her here I go from hence,
Like one thats banished, and for no offence.
Isle find fit time to tell your griefs to her,
That in my business I will faithful bee,
I leave my brother as a pledge for me.
You straight shall be dispatcht to levy forces,
You as befits be furnished on your way,
But first in full cups, weal every other greet,
That at next meeting we may prosperous meet.
Dalibra?
Madam
Give me thy bosom? what dost thou think of the two English brothers?
I think Madam, if they be as pleasant in taste, as they are fair to the eye, they are a dish worth eating.
A Caniball Dalibra, would eat men,
Why not Madam; fine men cannot choose but bee fine meat.
I, but they are a filling meat.
Why so are most of your sweet meats, but if a wo∣man have a true appetite to them they'll venture that.
Id not be free of that company of Venturers.
What tho their voyages bee somewhat dangerous? they are but short, thei'le finish one of their voyages in forty weeks, and with in a month after, hoist sail, and too't again for another.
You sail clean from the Compass Dalibra: I only questioned you about the Christians habits and be∣hauiors.
Thats like their conditions very civil and comely,
I but they are strangers Dalibra.
Strangers? I see no strangeness in them, they speak as well or rather better then our own Countrymen, and I make no question can do as well if it came once to execution.
There valour shown in the late overthrow of the Turks, seals that for currant.
And yet there are some about the Sophie your uncle that look with a sullen brow upon them.
I hold them the more worthy for that: For envy &amp; malice are always stabbing at the bosom of worth: when folly and cowardice walk up and down in reguardles secu∣rity, and here comes one of them.
Health to your Ladyship.
In wine? or beer my Lord:
In a full bofome of love madame.
I pledge no love healths my Lord: but frō whence first? If I like the party my maid shall take it form.
From my great brother warlike Halibeck,
That makes your love the mark of all his hopes.
Im'e sorry for him has mist his mark then: but how did the two English brothers bear themselves in the battle▪
Marched with the rest of meaner action,
Like stars amongst a regiment of planets:
Shined with the rest tho much below the rest.
Thats very strange, it came to vs by letters,
The English brothers took more prisoners:
Then any four Commanders in the camp
Indeed they took some straggling runagates,
Poor heartless snakes that scarce had strength to crawre:
But had you seen the valiant Prince my brother—
Do any thing worth note I should commend him fort, nor is the elder of the English Sherlies employed in Am∣bassage to Christendom.
Only for guide unto my warlike brother,
But neither privy to the business:
Nor party joined in his commission.
Then fems a lier,
Madame my brother doth commend himself.
He could do little and he cold not cōmend himself but who comes here.
The younger brother of the Sherleys madam:
Now by my hopes a goodly personage,
Compōs'd of such a rich perfection:
As valour seems his servant—ought with vs.
As servants to there Lords, subjects to Kings,
Love mixed with duty worthless Shirley brings:
To your high excellence.
From whence and whom.
Worthy employment having called my brother,
Your worthless servant to the Christian states:
Me has he made his trembling messenger,
To bring his dear commends unto your grace.
Which with no common favour we receive, 
Our hand for his tried service and your own:
Our love in fair requite all shall be shown.
Death to a Christian.
Nearer yet more nearer.
I cannot.
Why.
Your beauty shines to clear,
Let cloud borne Eagles tower about your seat:
Suffice it me I prosper by the heate.
The glorious Sun of Persia shall induce,
His strength of heate into thy generous veins
And make thee like himself: in the mean time
Look high; find feet, weal set thee steps to clime.
I am high enough, the Sherlies humble aim,
Is not high Majesty, but honoured Fame.
And that you both have won, and with the loss
Of your best bloods do your high deeds engross
In times large volume: where to Englands Fame,
Ranked with best Warriors stands brave Sherleys name:
Me thinks your Country should grow great with pride,
To see such branches spring out of her sides,
Your aged Father should grow young again▪
To hear his sons live in the friendly pen,
Of kind Antiquity: all Persia sings
The English Brothers are Coe-mates for Kings.
You overprise vs madame and report,
Striving to right vs doth our words much wrong:
Las: we are men but meanly qualified,
To the rich worthies of our English soil:
And should they hear what prodigal report
Gives out of vs, they would condemn vs for it,
And though these parts would swear vs Innocent,
Our Countrymen would count vs insolent:
For tic the nature of our English coast,
What ere we do for honour not to boast.
You do your Country credit.
Honoured princes.
The mighty Sophey your renowned uncle,
Expects my service.
Fare thee well good Sherlei,
Were thy religion—wherefore stays your honour.
My brother.
Is employed, pray begone,
Our thoughts are private and would talk alone.
Slighted tic well, what I intend isle keep,
Revenge may slumber but shall never sleep.
But he is a Christian and his state to mean,
To keep even wing with vs, then die the thoughts:
Of idle hope, be thy self complete,
Great in descent, be in thy thoughts as great.
What dreaming madame?
Yes and my dream was of the wandering knight Ones.
O the true Trojan.
Yet hee played false play with the kind hearted Queen of Carthage.
And what did you dream of them.
A very proffitable dream, which tells me that as strangers are amorous, so in the end they prow dangerous, and like the industrious Bee, having sucked the Juice of for∣rain gardens they make wing to there own homes, and there make merry with the fraught of there adventures.
Troubled with the fear of suspicion madame.
Tic a disease very incident to our sex: but who comes here, my old malady.
Madam the Sophey your renowned uncle,
Expects your company.
It may be so.
Presently madam.
And that may be to.
What to my message.
Why you may be gone.
This is no answer.
Why then look for none.
I hope for better.
This is all you get,
I cannot come, excuse me by your wit.
Cannot, nor will not.
Honourable princes,
The mighty Sophey craves your company.
Instantly Shirley: my huge honoured Lord,
If your all lauded brother Halybeck
Would ought of love with vs give it our maid,
She knows our mind and you may sooner hast:
When Emperors call we cannot fly to fast.
Then madden.
Nay good my Lord if you would ought with me deli∣uert to my boy, I must observe my Lady.
If you would any thing with me tell it to the post I must go play again at shuttlecock.
Life, a disgrace, deluded to my teeth,
Lives my great brother in so mean respect:
By Mortus Aly, and our Persian Gods,
The Sophie shall have note on it, if he pause,
To take revenge, no more, isle put the cause,
To steeles Arbitrament: Revenge and Death,
Likeslander attend the sword of Calymath.
Time that upon his wrestles wings Conveys,
Hours, days and years, we must entreat you think
By this hath borne our worthy Trauailor,
Toward Christendom as far as Russia
In his affairs, with hem's gon Halibeck,
Who seems with friendly steps to tread with him,
But in his heart lurks envy like a Snake,
Who hurts them sleeping whom he fears awake.
Our Story then so large we cannot give,
All things in acts, we should entreat them live;
By apprehension in your judging eyes,
Only for taste, before their Ambasly
Had time of hearing with the Emperor,
Great Holy traitorously suggests against him
Of his low birth, base manners, and defects,
Which being fastened in their credulous ears,
How he was welcome by this show appears.
Stay, and resolve you Councellors of State,
What cause neglects or what offence of ours
Makes this disgrace wear such a public habit.
Shirley thy self, that art a Fugitive,
A Christian spy, a Pirate and a Thief.
O Halibeck,
Whom my great My▪ made Coe-mate with me.
As candles lighted to burn out themselves,
He gave thee grace as parent to disgrace:
His wisdom there held thee unfit for life,
Yet sent thee hither near thy Christian floor,
That falling there thy shame might bee the more.
O treason when thou bear the highest wing,
Thy tongue seems oily with a venomous sting:
I stand not Lords to purge his evidence,
Nor to accuse his slander, these blushelesse papers
Which his Imperial Moister made to me,
Or quit me or condemn me, If I look red,
Tic my hearts die with anger not with dread.
Your letters weal advise on, in the mean time,
We take you to our charge as prisoner:
If fair we find your cause and without rust,
Such shall your sentence be upright and just.
How ere, come death tic innocence delight,
Tho the world spot her, yet her face is white.
Thus by your information have we done,
Our Justice on that stranger gentleman:
Your Princely self we doe entreat to feast,
Till leisure ean conclude your business.
Which in our masters name we thank you for,
Now droopes the Christians honour ne'er to rise:
And in his fall envy hath washed her eyes.
Sir Anthony Shirley was thus imprisoned.
And Cusshan Halybeck in royal sort
Had entertainment with the Russian,
During which time his counsel with advice:
Had red his letter by the Persian sent,
Suspected by the commendation given
Of his approved worth in war and peace,
And his authority asseign'd to them:
That all sugestions from the others tongue,
Were envies bolts, that spares not whom to wrong,
Yet to make strong their censure they straight sent,
For the English agent, and for English merchants,
Where after question of his life and birth,
They found him sprung from honourable stock,
And that his country hopes in time to come,
To see him great, though envied of some.
They so resolved their Moister, how he left the Court,
To please your eyes wee in this show report. 
Thus graced by the Muscouian Emperor,
Envy grew still more rank in Haly's heart,
Yet both dispatcht on their designs in hand.
Time now makes short their way, and they at Rome;
In state are brought before his holiness:
Where what succeeded for the former grudge,
Give you vs leave to show, take leave to judge.
With greatest pomp, magnificence and state,
To the adoration of all dazzled eyes,
We do intend, the Ambassadors once come,
Shall have a hearing, feasting▪ and their welcome.
Descend O brother-hood of Cardinals,
And all the holy orders that attend vs.
And let your diligence approve your care,
To bring them to our presence in Peters chair.
Your Holiness shall have your will obeyed.
If to the advancement of Gods Church and Saints,
The tennor of their Embassage appears,
They shall have all our furtherance, prayers and tears.
Peace to the Father of our Mother Church,
The stayre of men's saluations, and the Key▪
That binds or loses our transgressions.
The virtue of your Embassy, go on.
These papers be the precepts taught my tongue,
The force of whose inscription runs thus:
That Christian Princes would lend level strength,
To curb the insulting pride of Paganism,
And you the mouth of heaven, advertise them,
To join their bodies, to an able arm,
That as oboe's sterne vengeance for heavens foes,
So men (heavens friends) should seek their overthrows.
Ascend my son, the furtherance of this right,
Commands our conscience, is our souls delight,
Down for thy pride, and for the wrong thou did me.
This place admits not thy unhallowed feet,
And heart being treasons, fondly climb unto it.
Even step by step, whereas this business tends,
My place admits me, and my feet ascends.
But Phaeton for climbing had a fall,
And so shalt thou, damnation prove withal.
Refrain therefore, and what ere you are,
If you were Kings, as but Kings ministers,
Thinking by privilege of your affairs,
Your outrage hath a freedom, you are deceived,
For as vncheckt, the winds command the seas,
The best shall shake our mightiness displeased.
Pardon dread Father, that my heate of blood▪
Took from me the remembrance of the place,
Wherein all knees should stoop, no hand offend,
And this repentance for remission plead,
Rashness doth make the obedient be deceived,
Nor wast so much my wrongs in Russia,
Wherein his slander made me prisoner,
Remember me to take revenge on him,
As that his Pagan feet should dare to clime,
Where none but Christians knees should, and then mine▪
Much less admit him have the upper way,
From men whose souls fear them whom we obey.
Christian thy name, that in this register,
To honour thee we may remember it.
Sherlye a Christian and a Gentleman,
A Pilgrim Soldier, and an Englishman.
For all these stiles wee love and honour thee,
And in thy affairs will so effectually
Deal for thee in our name to Christian Princes,
They shall so honour thee, that thou shalt back,
With powers so strong, whose sight makes Turkey shake.
Heaven shall gain souls thereby, religion glory.
First to Saint Angelo thus hand in hand▪
Then counsel, to make Christian Turkish land.
Our Traveller here's feasted, banquets done,
And he with letters is dispatcht from Rome,
Unto the States of Venice, suppose him there,
Where we will leave him, and entreat your thoughts,
To think their eyes transported, and they see,
Sir Thomas Sherleys following misery,
From England by desire to see his brother,
With some few ships well mand, and well provided,
Suppose him now at sea, where with cross winds,
Unequal to his merits and his hopes
He long remained: at last in Italy.
In the great Duke of Florence Court he is arrived,
Feasted and honoured; from thence being furnished,
With all things fitting for a prosperous voyage,
He is come unto the Staights of Gibraltar,
Then to Legorne, then to the Duke of Tuscan,
Where divers Merchants did corrupt his men,
Against his course, and made them mutinous,
Which to appease, they put to Sea again,
And being in sight of the Isle of Sicily,
Two of his ships forsook him, and he with one,
Is come to Ieo in the Turks dominion:
This latter warning me frō speech doth break, 
Suppose him landed here himself to speak.
Welcome a shore, a shore, welcome a shore,
Forget the past adventures, think that the Seas,
Played with vs but as great men doe a land.
Hurled vs now up then down, had room to toss,
And fed their pleasures though to others loss,
Believe that all misfortunes are like thirst,
That makes your drink taste sweeter when it comes,
For me, as you are, so am I, a little pile
Of earth slim'd earth, and have no greater stile
Then you have, but a man
And if your blood have the same heate as mine,
Weal never back unto our mother country, but our stream
Shall loose his vital way, ot be a theme,
Unto our sanguine brothers, how to raise,
Poeans of Triumphs in our virtues praise,
Or else, even here this be our fatal lot,
Weal dye unknown, so buried and forgot.
While we have life, even against this rocky town,
Weal find vs graves in stones, or beat it down.
You are our General, and with you weal stand,
Who fear not sea-stormes, shrink not being a land.
I thank you all, be but your actions thus,
Men shall not fright vs, nor this losty town,
Built upon stony hills to out-face the clouds,
Be able to amaze vs, but the men
That keep those walls, shall perish though not then:
Then Moister Gunner instead of other parley,
Go let a piece of Ordinance summon them.
I go.
The rest make good this ground, while that my self
At their walls side will question them to yield:
Mercy weal offer, which if they deny, 
In the same hour they do resist, they die.
This tongue proclaims, to them we are hither come,
With Soldiers hands that bring destruction
To them and their fenced town, if they hold out,
Our self will take their answer, left be proud,
The spoil is yours, the earths for them a shroud.
Arm then as I do.
Tic for hope of wealth.
And Pagans glories to enrich vs with.
At my return weal fight to purchase gould,
Or tak't with ease which hope makes cowards bold.
But whose too venturous, generals should know▪
In steed of gold may meet his overthrow:
For tell me sailors and my fellow mates,
What gain may be expected from this town:
That we should venture for, nay what from him,
We term our general of worth or rule:
More then we him enabled in our selves?
Why speaks the Captain thus.
That mischiefs should be shunt ere they begun,
And we our selves void danger ere vndun:
For but bethink your selves in all our voyage,
What prosperous hour, hath given encouragement
To make our hopes look cheerful? what have wee had
But sickness, sea-stormes and contrary winds?
And what can we expect here being landed,
Should but the hardy enemy come and descend
But wretched slavery and at last our end?
But how can we prevent it being here?
And to perform this voyage bound with him.
Why leave him here and take our selves to sea,
And every man be Captain of himself:
Where what pillage we can make our prey,
Twill be our own and we to none obey.
Degenerous man:
So big of boon and yet so base of mind,
To counsel against him so good then:
What tho our fortune with ungentle hand,
Hath crossed his enterprise and actions:
Can then to him whose bounty gave thee means,
Preferment, grace, beyond thy mortise worth,
Poison thy self and make thy tongue a sting,
Against his life that gives thy fortunes wing:
Whats don is past times were fortunes to come,
And to repay sometimes to speak is dum:
Then speak my hearts if that my motion please,
Hoist sails my masters and again to seas:
A Captain a Captain.
Say whether fly you feeble mates in streams,
When I am come to have you bring relief:
Unto our general thats oppressed by the Turks.
To sea, to sea.
To sea for what?
And leave our general in distress a land:
The Turks that at my sommons gave their oaths,
To hold an hours parley break there word:
Come valiantly upon him: soldier like
He hath resisted till his fastened hilto
Was bladlesse in his hand: nothing now rests▪
But present rescue or a present death.
Death unto him that seeks it, we will fly
For certain safeguard; wise security
Seeks shelter ere the storm can trouble.
To sea my mates then Inn you must with vs.
Deny all serves not, nor resistance neither,
They are best in health can set them to the weather:
And so to sea.
To sea, to sea.
Base villains Fates,
Unpartial fates to spin their lives this length,
Who leave their Moister and should be his strength.
Friends, soldiers, sailors,
A rescue or I am taken prisoner.
Bootless you call Sir their inconstant faith is fled from you.
ha.
Hark they way anchor get your ships to sea,
And leave you to men's tirany a land:
They in one knot are knit and only I,
Stay here, as you, now ere to live or die:
I thank thee, less I cannot give thee,
Fate doe thy worst my courage takes no flight:
But here keeps court though my cross destines fight.
Follow, follow, follow.
A Christian, a Christian.
Though weaponless I am left with these isle fight,
In what I may isle show my best of might.
So bear him prisoner to Constantinople,
To be examined of the Emperor.
Even where you will if to my overthrow,
My mind is high, lie my head ne'er so lowe.
I will not leave you Moister since I have escaped
From their surprise, but with my best endeavour,
Will strive to see what shall become of you.
If worse then I could wish isle sorrow for it:
If in my means to help, isle comfort it.
My thanks to heaven that overlooked this day,
And thus hath aided with an host divine:
The feeble remnants of vs thy heralds,
That shall proclaim thy name throughout the world:
And wear this badge of courage on our breasts,
Joined with a motto, calling on thy name:
This shall redouble valour when it faints,
This says our blood can be no better shed
Then in that bloods behalf that died this red,
Lets now recount our victory to day,
What prisoners have we taken?
Between thirty and forty of their chief comanders.
Between thirty and forty of their chief commanders:
We are now here the Persian substitute,
And cannot use our Christian clemency,
To spare a life, off with all their heads:
Speak, do ye renounce your Prophet Mahomet?
Bow to the Deity that we adore.
Or die in the refusal.
For Mahomet we dye.
Join Mortus Aly then with Mahomet,
That slew your Prophets Homer and Vsman,
And on a snowy Cammell went to heaven,
And yet you shall find grace in Persia.
For Mahomet, none but Mahomet,
To death with them, the rest shall follow.
Off with his head too, weal have no ransom,
But conversion.
I have somewhat to deliver ere I dye.
Be thou a convertite, weal here thee, not else.
Then I must be silent, Isle choose to dye,
Before the faith I do profess, deny.
Off with his head then.
Stay, I am not as I seem.
Thou seem a Turk.
Yet am a Christian.
The more thy crime.
Against Christians, thou hast been a foe to day,
How comes it else thou art our prisoner?
If I be blameful found, then let me dye:
First peruse this.
I am prisoner in Constantinople, use your best relief. Thomas Sherlie.
Oh heavens!
Although the news be bitter in it self,
I cannot but applaud this happy knowledge,
Ten thousand heads now shall not buy this head,
Thou art my best friends equal for this deed:
Oh that the fortune of ten doubtful days,
Were to begin their pale encountering close:
So that my brother stood in armour here,
To join with me, but can ye help my
Understanding with any further notice.
Not any, letters had I none, but short commends,
Whilst his hand writ down this brief tenor:
So straight is his converse with Christians:
For him and you this have I undertook:
First I was forced your most unwilling foe,
So to become your willing prisoner.
I thank ye, and I shall remember ye,
How many of their commanders are yet living?
Thirty my Lord.
Still let them live,
Those thirty lives shall buy my brothers life,
And I shall think them happily bestowed,
Isle send an Embassy to offer it:
But pray ye bee sparing in your speech,
For if by any half intelligence
Hee bee known my brother, hes sure to die.
So heaven hath aided me, thrice against these Turks,
That they would hate the man that loves me,
And to my name they add, Shirley the great:
Though my humility (I vow by heaven)
Doth not affect that over dignity:
But if they do refuse this proffered gift,
Shirley shall wish to bee no other great,
Then to be great in their great over throw:
If that he die within their Captives thrall:
Ten thousand Turks shall morn his funeral.
Thus like the Sun in his Meridian pride.
Attended by a regiment of stars,
Stand we triumphant amongst our petty Kings.
Upon the highest proment of either globe,
That heaves his forehead nearest to the clouds
Fix we our foot: and with our Egles wings
Canopy ore three quarters of the world,
And yet we write, Non ultra: the proud Sophey:
The Persian beggar that by starts Invades vs,
Our potent Army like so many wolves
Let loose into a flock of fencelesse sheep,
Shall bait and werrie home into there folds,
Whilst Fate and Conquest our high state upholds.
Yet mighty and magnificent; your powers,
In this late conflict against Persia
Have met much loss.
Base and degenerate coward,
Are not wee Hamath the sole god of earth
King of all Kings, provost of Paradise,
Sultan and Emperor of Babilon:
Of Catheria, Aegipt, Anthioche,
Lord of the precious stones of India:
A Champion and defendor of the gods,
Prince and conductor from the withered tree
To the greene bosom of Achaia mount,
The joy and comfort of great Mahomet:
And last protector of the Sepulchre,
Of Juries god and crucified King:
And dares the Persian compaire with vs?
What and from whom?
The Christian general,
Shirley the great sends you this mild falute:
In this his late yet bleeding overthrow,
Where men like grass stepped to the street of death,
20. most choice and valorous commanders,
He has given life to, and in fair exchange,
Tenders them for the life and liberty,
Of an imprisoned English Gentleman.
Twenty for one what is the Christians name?
I know not that.
How shall we know to free him.
His stature and proportion
Is given me by prescription so directly
As from a thousand I can point him out.
Conduct him in, and bring the prisoner forth,
He is sure some Prince or else a man of worth
That in exchange of him the General
Proffers so largely. Now is this the man.
The same great Emperor.
Then Christian,
For by no other title can we call thee,
Acquaint vs with thy parentage and name:
For from the Christian general Shirley the great,
We have means that labour thy delivery
Great Emperor, I am a man whose birth
And mean attempts were never registered,
Amongst the English worthies: if great Shirley,
Hath ought proposd for my delivery,
It was in a genetall zeal to Christendom,
Not any private notice of my worth.
Dissemble not; for subtle Englishman,
We rather judge, nay absolutely know,
Thou either art allied to him by birth,
Or some great Prince, which till thou dost confess,
Thy torments shall be more, thy freedom less.
As for our Captains, let them live or die,
The Christian shall in slavish irons lie:
Begone with that and back with him to prison,
Double his irons and take back half his diet,
Strengthen our powers and bravely to the field,
Our breasts with Iron, our spirits with fire are steeld.
Come Sir, had not you better confess and be hanged, then bestaru'd to death, and hanged after.
Sir Ime armed with patience: tyrants hate
Is bounded with in limits: they may will,
But their's a God that can prevent their ill.
That power I ground on: here is my greatest cross,
A brothers love turns to a brothers loss▪
My Journey towards heaven, fate sent me hither,
You like kind guides send me the next way thither.
I will send you the nearest way but because you shall not be hungry. Isle diet you with puddle water and bran, you will be the lighter to take your journey.
That into England, that to Persia,
And now dear friend what tidings at S. Mark.
Like to men's minds distract and variable,
You have hard your brothers bloody overthrow
Given to the Turks.
It came to me last night:
What news from England.
Nothing of import.
The yongst and greatest grows up here at hand.
Ought that concerns me.
About the jewel,
It fills the town with admiratlon,
That which great Princes for the worth deny,
You but a Lord Ambassador should buy
It was for the Sophie and I wonder much
He sends not in the cash.
The Jew expects it.
And here he comes, God morrow honest Zariph.
The Hebrew God and sanctified King
Bless them that east kind greeting at the Jew,
Jove thee money Zariph.
Thats the cause.
Of your kind speech, a Christian spaniel claws,
And fauns for gain, jest on, deride the Jew,
You may, vexed Zareph will not jest with you,
Now by my soul, it would my spritz much refresh;
To taste a banquet all of Christians flesh.
I must entreat thee of forbearance Zariph,
No not an hour,
You had my Jewel I must have your Gold.
Let me entreat thee Zariph for my sake
That have stood friend to all thy brethren.
You have indeed, for but this other fast,
You sold my brother Zacharie like a horse,
His wife and children at a common out-crie,
That was the Law,
And I desire no more,
And that I shall have, tho the Jew be poor,
He shall have law for money.
Nay but Zariph
I am like thee, a stranger in the City:
Strangers to strangers should be pitiful.
If we be cursed we learned of Christians,
Who like to swine crash one another bones.
Is it a sin ih them? it is sin in you,
But they are Christians Zariph is a Jew,
A crucifiyng Hang-man trained in sin,
One that would hang his brother for his skin.
But till to morrow.
Well you shall not say,
But that a Jew will bear with you a day,
Yet tak't not for a kindness but disgrace,
To show that Christians are then Turks more base,
Theile not forbear a minute, there's my hand,
Tomorrow night shall serve to clear your band.
I thank thee and inuit thee to a banquet,
No banquets, yet I thank you with my heart,
And vow to play the Jew why tic my part.
Sir here is an Englishman desires access to you.
An Englishman whats his name,
He calls himself Kemp.
Kemp, bid him come in, welcome honest Will, and how doth all thy fellows in England.
Why like good fellows when they have no money, live upon credit.
And what good new Plays have you.
Many idle toys, but the old play that Adam and Eve acted in bare action under the fig tree draws most of the Gentlemen.
Jesting Will.
In good earnest it doth sir.
I partly credit thee, but what Play of note have you?
Many of name, some of note, especially one, the name was called Englands Joy, Marry hee was no Poet that wrote it, he drew more Connies in a purse-nette, then ever were taken at any draught about London.
Sir, here is an Italian Harlaken come to offer a play to your Lord-ship.
We willingly accept it, hark Kemp:
Because I like thy gesture and thy mirth,
Let me request thee play a part with them.
I am somewhat hard of study and like your honour, but if they will invent any extemporal merriment, isle put out the small sack of wit I have left, in venture with them.
They shall not deny it, Signior Harlaken he is con∣tent: I pray thee question him—
Now Signior, how many are you in company?
None but my wife and my self sir.
Your wife, why hark you, will your wife do tricks in public.
My wife can play.
The honest woman, I make no question, but how if we cast a whores part or a courtesan.
Oh my wife is excellent at that, she's practiced it ever since I married her, tic her only practise.
But by your leave, and she were my wife, I had ra∣there keep her out of practise a great deal.
Yet since it is the custom of the country,
Prithe make one, conclude upon the project:
We neither look for Scholarship nor Art.
But harmless mirth, for thats thy usual part.
You shall find me no turne-coate, but the project come, and then to casting of the parts.
Marry sir, first we will have and old Pantaloon.
Some jealous Coxcomb.
Right, and that part will I play.
The jealous Cox-combe.
I ha plaid that part ever since.
Your wife plaid the Courtesan.
True, and a great while before, then I must have a peasant to my man, and he must keep my wife,
Your man, and a peasant, keep your wife, I have known a Gentleman keep a peasants wife: but it is not usual for a peasant to keep his masters wife.
Oh it is common in our country.
And isle maintain the custom of the coūtry.
What do you mean sir?
Why to rehearse my part on your wives lips: we are fellows, and amongst friends and fellows you know all things are common.
But she shall bee no common thing, if I can keep her several: then sir wee must have an Amorado that must make me Cornuto.
Oh for love sake let me play that part.
No ye must play my mans part, and keep my wife.
Right, and who so fit to make a man a Cuckold, as hee that keeps his wife.
You shall not play that part.
What say you to my boy?
I, he may play it and you will.
But he cannot make you jealous enough?
Tush I warrant you, I can be jealous for nothing.
You should not be a true Italian else.
Then we must have a Magnifico that must take up the matter betwixt me and my wife.
Any thing of yours, but Isle take up nothing of your wives.
I wish not you should, but come, now am I your Moister.
Right, and I your servant.
Lead the way then.
No, I ha more manners then so: in our country it is the custom of the Moister to go In-before his wife, and the man to follow the moister.
In—
To his Mistress.
Ye are in the right—
Way to Cuck-holds-hauen, Saint Luke bee your speed.
A hundredth thousand Ducats, sweet remembrance,
Isle read it again, a hundredth thousand Ducats,
Sweeter still: who owes it? a Christian,
Canaans brood: honey to my joyful soul,
If this sum fail (my bond unsatisfied)
Hoe's in the Jaws mercy, mercy, ha, ha:
The Lice of Aegipt shall devour them all,
Ere I show mercy to a Christian:
Unhallowed brats, seed of the bond-woman,
Swine devourers, vncircumcised slaves,
That scorn our Hebrewsanctimonious writ,
Despise our laws, profane our sinagogues,
Old Moises ceremonies, to whom was left,
The marble Decalogue, twice registered,
By high Iehouahs self, lawless wretches,
One I shall gripe, break he but his minute,
Heaven grant he may want money to defray,
Oh how Isle then embrace my happiness,
Sweet gold, sweet Jewel, but the sweetest part
Of a Jaws feast, is a Christians heart:
Whose there, a friend, a friend, good news, good news.
Zariph the best, the Christian is thine own,
Isle sell him to thee at an easy rate,
It shall but cost thy pains, joined with a heart,
Relentless as a Flint, that with more strokes,
Reuerberates his anger with more fire:
I know i'ts thine, Ime sure it is my desire.
It is, it is, sweeten my longing hopes,
For charity give me the happy means.
He should discharge thy bond to night?
He should, but I hope he cannot.
He cannot,
The money he expected from the Sophie,
My self have intercepted by the way,
Tic (to him unknown) given to my hands,
And ere this shall aid him.
Hee shall dye with Core,
As poor and loathsome as was leprous Iob;
Sink down with Dathan to hells black abisse,
A Christians torture, is a Jaws bliss,
For further execution, say, say.
Sit at his banquet with a smiling cheek▪
Let him run out his prodigal expense:
To the full length, the beggar has a hand
As free to spread his coin▪ as the swollen clouds,
Throw down their watery pillage, which from the sea,
The misty Pirats fetch: then cease on him:
Defer not, this night, vengeance in height of mirth,
Galls deepest, like a fall from heaven to earth.
Oh that thou were one of the promised seed,
To sleep with blessed Abraham, when thou die
For this good news: here shall be Cannibals,
That shall be ready to tear him peece-meale,
And devour him raw, throw him in the womb
Of unpitied misery, the prison,
There let him starve, and rot, his dungeon cry,
To Zariphs cares shall be sweet harmony.
It is enough, determine, follow it,
My self will presently back to Persia,
And by the way I will invent such tales,
As shall remove the Sophies further love.
Ere any stranger shall with me walk even,
Isle hate him, were his virtues writ in heaven, 
The Musique says the banquet is at hand.
Let vs abridge the office of our breath,
To give to each of you a several welcome,
I doe beseech ye take it all at once,
Yee' are all welcome, now I pray ye sit,
Weal not strive for first.
It is more used then fit.
Oh this sweet Musique is heavens rhetoric,
The Art was first reueald to Tuball Cain,
Good Hebrew, it is now forgot, it is grown stale,
Newfangled ages makes old virtues fail.
So much the Hebrew writ doth testify,
Yet are there different to that opinion:
The Gracious doe allow Pithagoras,
The Thracians give it to their Orpheus,
As first inuentors of the harmony.
All errors, Tuball, Tuball, Hebrew Tuball.
But howsoever, weal hold no dispute,
Our attention is tied to some other sports.
Our act is short, your liking is our gains,
So we offend not, we are paid our pains.
No more of this, weal have a Jaws Jig, to your business de∣lay not.
What means this violence?
Weal not stand upon Intergatories, away with him▪
Jew.
Christian, away with him.
Hear me.
In prison, Isle listen to laugh at thee.
Be merciful.
Merciful, ha, ha,
No not to me, I scorn to ask it of thee,
But to thine own black soul be merciful
Inhumane Dog; that in midst of cuitesie
Dost yoke me in a Serpents arm: true seed
Of that kiss killing Iudas, can thy black soul
Have hope of pity being pitiless?
Pray for thy self, I am saved already.
Halibeck, ▪does not your eye discover a treacherous heart in this?
Ha ha.
Dost laugh at me?
Sir, be comforted, Uenice shall not see your fortunes long oppressed for a greater matter then this.
I am not moved sir,
It hath not emptied the least pipe of blood,
That are within my Cheeks, only this is all
That wrappes my senses in astonishment,
In all my travails I ne'er saw hell till now,
Tic here true portrait, set in open view;
In an envious knave and a bloody Jew.
There rot and starve, starve and rot, Oh my delight, I shall dream of this happiness to night.
To Persia now, while Shirley here sinks lowe,
There Hallebeck aboue his height shall grow.
No more; by Mortus Ali we are moved:
Dares that proud Shirly whom our powerful heate,
Drew from the Earth, refined and made up great:
Dares he presume to contradict our Will,
And save a man whom we command him kill.
He would not: nay he durst not, he bruise his death
Rides in a cloud of our offended breath.
He knows it,
And he fears it.
All your self
I speak not to disparadge Sherlies worth,
Nor to divorce him from your gracious favour,
But to maintain the custom of our wars,
Which most contemptuously he has broke down
In giving life to thirty prisoners,
And talking with the Turk by messengers.
Send to the Turk, and save our prisoners lives.
With proffer to return them ransomless.
By Mortus Ali and our Persian Gods.
For every man he saved Isle have a joint,
And for conversing with the Turk his head—
Besides your gracious Niece.
Ha? what of her?
Dares the proud Christian think upon our Niece.
And look and love her.
How?
And she on him.
To save the body we must loose a limb;
Shirley shall off.
And time.
One call our Niece.
Alter our Customs▪ steal our subjects bosoms,
And like a cunning Adder twine himself
About our Nieces heart, she once his own,
Hoe's Lord of vs, and of the Persian Crown.
What craves the mighty Sophie.
Loose your train.
And to the purpose, when and what commends
Came to your hands from our new general,
Shirley the Great.
That he is great in name,
Springs not from ought in vs, but his own fame▪
But for what reason doth your greatness make,
This privy search in my concealed thoughts
Touching the English General.
Thy bosom.
Harbours a Traitor, dost thou not love young Shirley.
I do not hate him, should I answer so
Against my tongue, my conscience would say no.
Why then you love him.
Should I not say I,
My honoured thoughts would give my tongue the lie.
She has confessed,
That I love him: true.
And English Shirley.
If he had his dew,
You should all love him, he has spent a sea
Of English blood to honour Persia.
And through that bloody sea his treacherous head,
Shall make a purple voyage to the shade
Where treason lives appareled in red flames.
For me? because your Niece does honour him.
For thee because my Niece doth dote on him,
Forgetful of thy Fortunes and high birth,
More bestial in thine Appetite then beasts.
The Princely Lioness disdains to mate
But with a Lyon. Time and Experience shows,
That Eagles scorn to build or bill with crows.
What means all this?
That with thy love to Shirlie.
Thou bui'st our hate.
Byr'lady a hard bargain:
But Merchant venturers cannot always win,
You forced my thought to love him, and like a Tutor,
First taught my tongue to call him honourable,
Your breath commanded knees to bow to him,
Tongue to adore and duty to attend him,
And is affection turned Apostate?
But I have found your humour you grow jealous,
Least I should rob you of your Minion,
In faith you need not.
Our inkinled rage,
Is grown too strong to be blown out with Jests,
Thou love.
The very ground he goes upon,
But why? because it bears my bodies want,
By Jove and by a Virgins modest thought:
(Which like a Laurel Gyrland decks my brows,)
I love not Sherly: never harbord thought
That told me he was lovely, at least equal
To maintain wing with vs.
Come you dissemble.
I loved him to please you: to humour you
Gave him kind language: if I praised his worth,
It was not my tongue but yours, if it were a lie,
It came from these, they author'd it not I,
Yet isle recant it too; call him un civil,
Ill-favoured, treacherous, disobedient,
And to appease the tempest of your wrath,
Swear him a coward worse then Calimath.
Isle not endure.
Unequalled Excellence,
She doth disgrace vs all to honour him,
You all disgrace your selves to Envy him,
Whose worth has been an honour to you all.
Conquest and peace attend you.
A strong guard.
What means the Sophey? here are none—
But traitors.
Ignoble Shirley, treacherous Christian:
How durst thou against the custom of our kingdom,
reserve those prisoners lives.
Dread Majesty.
Not proud contempt but Christian charity:
The Pilot of mine actions.
But we know,
You come not empty of excuse proud Shirley:
Have we breth'd life into thy sickly fortunes,
And like the lowe and mean bred Saraber:
Having alloud thee seat-roome at our foot,
Dare thou presume to clime up to our Crown:
Presumptuous, know our breath can shake thee down.
Look through my bosom, if you find one thought,
Basely conditioned or ambitious.
You are all ambition and hast drawn the love,
Out of our subjects breasts; who to defeat,
Vs of our due, title thee Shirley the great.
Great was there error that informd you so,
My thoughts are like my fortunes, mean and lowe
If the high favours you have thrown on me,
By my dear industry I have increased:
Adds honour to your own, for saving of my prisoners,
Let but a brothers love plead my excuse.
Ambitious like your own
Are his proceedings; tic brought to vs by letter
How much he has abused himself, and vs
In his employments.
Dearest excellence,
Let not his want of duty fall on me:
Nor mine return to him.
Yet for his love
You do confess you save these prisoners.
True for a brothers love but not for his,
I have an elder brother, so every way complete
With virtuous qualities, that even his foes,
Cannot but speak him well: desire of fame
That in all ages has been Sherleys aim
Drew him from home: mischances that like hail
Fall on bold minds did him so hard assail,
That by the Turk he was surprised and taken▪
"By many strokes the tallest oaks are shaken:
To ransom him, not to Infringe your right,
I freed these prisoners, manly taine in fight.
And was not that ambition.
If to save,
A worthy brother from a worthless grave
Be held ambitious, I have in a sin
Waded so deep that I must perish in.
Perish may twenty cowards first.
Away with her to prison suppose as you infer,
To ransom him you saved your prisoners lives:
For whose sake do you love our Niece.
You fire
That lightens all the world, knows my desire
Durst never look so high.
Come you that durst
Break our Lands custom for a brothers sake
Durst for your own sake dote upon our Niece.
But see what credit your ambition bears,
Go mount those prisoners heads on thirty spears.
First be my blood there ransom, ere the Turk
Should have that proud advantage to report,
A Christian and a true borne English soldier
Promised and had not power to perform:
Then learn to promise nothing but your own.
Nor did I mighty Prince, with my one hands:
I took those Captive Turks, with my dere blood
I bought them of proud danger: this being known:
In giving them I gave nought but my own.
Come you're to peremptory.
I am indeed,
Before mine honour let my mans heart bleed:
Were it mine equal did me half this wrong:
He should find sharper vengeance then my tongue.
You can produce no probable excuse.
Your ears will here no reason Calimath,
Thou hast a brother, Persian so have I:
A prisoner brother to redeem his life,
That all this while lies on the the edge of death:
I saved these prisoners, were to do again,
Again id venture: have ye shapes of men
And want there spirits: we in all are three,
Sons of one Father, branches of one tree:
Should a rough hand but violently tear,
One siens from a tree the rest must bear
Share in the hurt, the smallest wound that draines,
Blood from our breasts empties our fathers veins:
Hast thou another brother.
We in all are three,
The youngst and meanest spirit speaks in me:
Yet ere the Turk should think I had not power
To back my word; O be this Instant hour
My latest minute: with your warlike sword:
Strike of my head lifes cheaper then my word
Be Moister of thy wish, but first wee here take off,
Thy offices and titles, and bestow them
Upon this worthy gentleman, charging thee,
By that first moouer whom thou call thy god:
The blessed Mossies and the Sacrament
Which Christians hold so ceremonious:
Thy Fathers blessing, and thy brothers love,
And the long progress which thy soul must go,
Whether thou ever leueledst at our Crown,
Or an unlawful contract with our Niece.
Never: for had I harbord such intent,
Nothing cold make me basely to repent:
But I had never▪ any life nor death,
Can make a Christian falsify his breath:
Withdraw the Christian and produce our Niece,
And officer tic well.
Will you speak yet, yet can ambition read,
Your hateful practise.
Had young Sherleys head—
A traitors head whose proud ambitious tongue,
Did at his death basely confess his wrong:
Do you as much and take our princely pardon,
Speak did you love that Christian or no.
I never loved him living, but being dead,
Thus isle embrace, thus kiss his lovely head:
Alas good Shirley did thy warlike hand,
For this defend the Sophey, guard his land:
Did thou for this, forsake thy country, friends?
And weeping father, thats a kind amends.
Speak did you love him.
No for if I had,
I should have grown impatient, wilde and mad:
Washed of this blood with tears and—
Take her hence.
She dies but she acknowledge her offence.
Stay, since I must I will, I did offend,
Cause undeserved I wrought brave Sherleis end:
I did offend for careless I stood by,
And let true valour amongst cowards die.
Cowards.
I cowards, his worth recorded stands
Upon you file of stars, he has the hands
Of all the holly Angels, to approve.
What blood he's spent in quest of Christian love,
I speak not like a strumpet, that being filled,
With spirit of lust, her own abuse to gild
Slanders her friend: till now I never loved him,
And now by yonder Sun I dote on him.
I never heard him vow, protest or speak
Word that might his approved allegiance break:
Oh you have done a deed blacker then night,
A murder that would murders soul affright,
Your very foes will say when this is known,
In cutting off his head, you have scard your own▪
Were I his brother, countrey-man, or slave,
Id kill his murderer or dig my grave
Under the Sophies feet: oh you have won
The Ire of heaven, and hate of Christendom.
If he be Innocent.
By heaven he is.
Then we confess our spleen he's done amiss.
Redeem it then, and in his winding sheet,
Let his dissevered head and body meet:
Return them me, let me the credit have,
And lay his mangled body in a grave.
Take it with our best love and furtherance,
And having ioynde his body to the head,
His winding sheet be thy chaste marriage bed,
Then lives young Shirley?
Yea and still shall stand,
Loved of the Sophie, honoured in his land,
All stiles and offices we late took off,
We back restore; and now to Callymath,
Thus far on your report we have proceeded,
And had we found them either culpable,
Their heads had paid for it, but being clear,
We here restore them to their former state,
Renew them with our love, thee with our hate.
For this dear favour, as for all the rest,
Low-minded Shirley counts him highly blessed.
Your sweating news?
To the great General.
To your demand, thus sends the haughty Turk,
That were your thirty prisoners petty Kings,
He would not free the English Gentleman.
Would not: lead on? weal talk with him in Steel,
What he denies to hear, weal force him feel:
Will not return them? then will we head our spears,
With Vizeroyes skulls, and ore his craven ears
Batter his Castles like a shower of Hail:
On to the field heaven and our right prevail.
Hell on our wrongs: give him his Niece in Manet Cally. marriage.
First like an Ass load me with ornaments,
To see how I de, become his golden trapps
And the same minute snatch them off again,
Oh I am vexed, damnation and black hell,
Author my actions: in my passions dwell,
Commotiue thoughts envy and hate,
Strive in my breast like twins inseperate,
My spleens in travel, and till they be borne,
My swollen heart labours and my breast is torn:
To ease which torment and to free my breath,
Isle be delivered, my kind Midwives death.
According to this my warrant here, I must this morning fetch my prisoner to airing, hee had need bee hung out, least his flesh should mould, for I am sure, his clothes are musty already; Wee Turks are to these Chri∣stians for all the world like Usurers to young heirs, make picking meat of their carcases, even to the very bones, and then leave them to the hang-man, for theil none of them: and not like Englishmen to their Oxen, the nearer fat, the
nearer fed upon, well hither he must come, and yet I think scarcely too unless he be carried, for I am sure, let me see, these five or six months at least, he has had nothing but the hard boards for his bed, dry bread for his food, and mise∣rabble water for his drink: and wee Turks think, that it is too good for these Christians too, for why should we do any better to them, since they do little better one to another, but where are you here, ha.
What would thy tongue with me, unless to have,
Thy tyrannies writ here, fright thine own soul,
Or art thou come to add unto my bones,
Having no sense of suffering in my flesh,
Speak out thy worst, our spirits not afraid,
At what can come, though in our looks dismayed.
All this Sir is to be left to the discretion of the higher powers, I ha nothing to doe with it, only sir I have a war∣rant here, to make two knots to tie your ankles in, all the teeth in your head cannot tel how to undo 'hem, and here they are ready sir.
How slave?
Nay come resist not, but remember wee have cold I∣rons, a good cudgel, and a strong arm, put in your bearers,
Blind Fortune when thou look a skance on mē. Thou art without conscience in thy plaguing them.
Come, come, your legs are shrunk, as you had bin at your lechery lately, we shall have 'hem slip their collars a∣non; so, you may say your prayers now, you shall have more company presently.
What folly were in me to sigh at this
Or chide my fortune, being cōmon that she brings
Full hands to fools &amp; knaves grief; even to Kings:
Or what avails it me to rail at them,
That fled from me whose faiths I built upon,
Since tic as ripe in trust, to find some slaves,
As honest men to die and have due graves:
Or that my flesh is shrunk, and my blood pal'd,
Since I have this to make my courage bold,
Men have but done a part of what death should:
Or why should my captivity afflict me?
Good minds know this, imprisonment's no shame,
Unless the cause be foul which blots the name.
Then all the griefs in my remembrance bee
Is that my Fathers eyes should weep for me
And my misfortune: for mine own mishapps,
Are to my mind as are heavens thunder-claps,
Who clears the ayre of foul infection,
And in my thoughts do only publish this,
Affliction's due to man as life and sin is.
Speak.
Where is this Captive English Christian.
Here as appointed by our Emperor.
Say Christian yet resolve vs thy descent,
And promise of the ransom thats assigned thee,
Our tortures shall enforce it from thy tongue:
With the suns light this day we have thee graced,
Which till this hour we have exempt from thee,
Which grace of ours unless thou do confess,
Thy tortures shall be more, thy freedom less.
That I enjoy you benefit of heaven.
The life and solace of each living creature,
Here to refresh mine eyes, I do confess
By you kept from me, by you bounty given me,
And this some comfort to my misery,
That sun shines on my Father looks on me:
But to resolve your grace to pay a ransom,
And know not how to make my promise good,
I had rather you should take, I yield my blood.
Why think thou Christian our beliefs so slight,
Great Shirley for thy ransom would send back
Thirty of chiefest note in our respect
And thou of obscure parentage and birth,
Thou hast waked our anger put him on the rack,
Where four and twenty hours he shall remain,
Upon your lives I charge it quickly done,
Our self will see the execution.
It is but the farthest way about to death
To give men lingering tortures, when a small prick
Is mans conclusion: but how so ere my Lord,
I have patience to accept what you afford,
The dungeon, this, now that. If back again
Unto your loathsome prison after rack,
True constancie's my fore-front and my back.
Weell try your patience Christian, hoist him up.
Oh oh.
Now whore's your haughty courage durst withstand vs.
And Roman spirit that forswore to yield.
Here, Emperor here, even in these outstretched veins,
Lives my amaselesse vitals, here is an undaunted heart,
That never yields by Turkish tyranny:
I am the same, through all that made me man,
Scorn Pagans threats, to die a Christian.
Wrench him again.
Ohoh.
Yet wilt thou tell thy blood and parentage,
And yield unto the ransom we have assigned thee.
No Emperor, no,
Even in this hell of pain I answer never,
I once denied thee, and my tongue's no lier.
we stand amazed at thy constancy.
Yet answer vs, wilt thou forsake thy faith,
Become as we are, and to Mahomet
Our holy prophet, and his Alcoran
Give thy devotion, and by our Kings we swear
We will accept thee in the place of Kings.
First shall the Sun melt from his rest-lesse seat,
Ere that our name shall turn Apostate:
Thy Kingdoms be unpeopled, and thy nations
Become as free for beasts as now for men,
Thy self as sometimes were thy Ancestors
Fed in a cage 〈◊◊〉 at conquerors heals.
Presumptuous Christian.
And thy bad life meet such a hateful death,
Even fowls shall loath thy body, men thy breath.
Thy strength of faith hath bred a wonder in vs,
One take him down and bear him back to prison:
We yet resolve not how to deal with him.
Even where you will, to torture back again,
Our comforts this hell stores for you like pain.
The hasty news.
The English agent craves access to you,
Admit him.
From my dread Moister Englands royal King,
By these his letters fair commends to you.
We greet him with like love; his letters crave
A prisoner thats called Shirley we should have.
An English knight whom his misfortunes cast,
Upon your Turkish shore.
We have as yet had notice of no such.
By name perhaps dread Emperor, yet in this place,
By your commandment he lives prisoner:
And brother to that Shirley called the great.
Ha.
Which in the Persians wars is general:
Had I known that, by Mahomet he had died.
His misers have spoke unto our king,
Joined with his worth, and he hath sent for him.
Weal not deny your Mr his request,
Yet how to know we do not send him back
His subject: but a present given from vs,
Whom we esteem of an unvalued worth:
One bring him forth receive him English Agent.
To thee,
As to thy Masters hand we thus present him:
Bid him accept him as our thoughts did hold,
A Gem could not be bought from vs with 〈◊◊〉
His pass shall be for Florence, then for England:
Least he in Persia should embrace his brother,
And prove a plauge to vs as great as the other.
Grave father for the reverence of your age,
And Justice of the cause for which you come:
Being to advance the glory of our God,
Wherein no soul should have neglectful thoughts:
I have lain by particular affairs,
To give a hearing to your buysines.
Go on my son, to him being dutiful,
Virtue will make thy name more honourable:
My self from far have on these aged feet,
Whose knees do buckle, and have scarce there strength
To bear me further then a graves in length.
With easy paces but a swift desire,
Inquird thee out: that hearing thee a Christian:
So gracious with this Persian Emperor,
A mind so noble in thy actions.
A body fortunate in his designs,
Thou mights as well bestow thy pains and blood
To advance religion as for heathens good.
Heaven knows,
Knew I the means I were his willing servant.
If like thy tongue thy intention have a care,
Clime up to heaven by this ascending stair:
Entreat thy Emperor thou moist raise a Church,
To sacrifice thy prayers unto that name
To whom all names should kneel: when if his Priests,
Himself, his Counsel; any heathen breath
Should contradict the high authority,
Of thy devoted zeal, spare not to say,
Their god's, his servant whom thy thoughts obey:
And win, as by persuasion kings are won,
Or else confute them by religion.
Alas sir my vngrowne experience,
To argue a difference of that height
Betwixt their god and ours, is so far unfit,
I rather shall abuse then honour it:
Why, why my son doest thou forget to know,
Our gods the spring whence eloquence doth flow:
And can infuse into thee were thou dumb,
Words thunderlike, a contradictlesse tongue:
That when thou speak for the honour of that name:
Made earth to hang betwixt yon heavenly frame
Borne on no Axeltree, angels do sit
About thine ears and breath into thy wit,
And if thou shouldest in such a quarrel die,
Martirs looks on thee with a joyful eye:
Ye have given unto my life another soul,
And never reverend father could you have come
In time thats fitter; wherein I may prove,
My duty to the highest, to Christians love:
This present day I have an Infant borne,
Who tho descended from the Emperors Niece,
A Pagan, isle baptise in Christian faith,
Confute there Ignorance, heaven assisting me:
That mine one soul this comfort may partake,
Shirley in Persia did the first Christian make:
Then raise a temple for our further good,
Or in the fair adventure spend my blood.
In all necessities isle further thee,
And if by my advice thou die, isle die with thee:
And so to die your life were new begun,
Old age to die with him a made gods son:
Holy go on, and of your great affairs,
Deliver vs every several circumstance.
From thence I left dread sovereign thus ensues,
That Shirley, whom you joined with me in embassy
Having our footing once on Christian ground,
Became so proud, so wilde, so prodigal,
All eyes contemn him, only some few,
That gave his rising looks, but for the dew
Your Grace bestowed on him in Princes Courts:
His fellowship was fools: his actions sports
For wise-mens tables. I often did advise him,
That such behaviours no way did befit
The glory of his place, nor would you suffer it
When his return gave place for punishment.
When first in Russia he abused your greatness,
For which the just State did imprison him,
Yet for the honour of the Cause in hand,
Ere long he was releast: we come to Rome,
Where I but striving to ascend as chief,
Being in person there your sacred self,
His hand first struck me, while his tongue did chime,
No Pagans must ascend where Christians climb.
Durst he say so?
He did my Lord;
Yet past we thence to Venice, where as before,
He kept his flood of riot and abuse,
For which hes there kept prisoner: and the State,
Returned me back, nothing determined of.
Now may my sovereign evidently see,
Their subtle glosings, have this inward kind,
Theild wound your heart, though seem to please your mind
By day, if this be true no Christian lives,
Within the compass where our word may kill,
Speak?
How can thou answer this appeal of theirs?
O let the Emperor but desist a while,
From the remembrance of a tale he heard:
Or else but think, great men may face a lie,
Till truth appear and give their check a die.
These letters in your eyes first speak for me,
Whilst in their ears a story Isle unfold
Shall make their heads shake and their hearts cold.
The first from Russia, where this envious man,
Accused my brother as a Fugitive,
A thief, a Pirate, and a Christian spy,
For which he was imprisoned; till evidently
The State had knowledge of his innocence:
Then him releast, sent that intelligence.
At Rome I not deny my brother struck him,
For pride, so just the Father of that seat,
In his behalf doth in his letter speak.
Now let your eyes but look what Uenice writes,
That this man by suggestions wrought the State,
Against my brothers labours: with-held the treasure,
Your Princely self sent to discharge the Jew,
For the rich Jewel that my brother bought,
And all the benefit to Christendom
And to your honour is by him undone.
Treasons unheard of, such shall the revenge bee,
His silence and his looks approves his guilt:
Great Shirley at thy censure there he stands,
To doom him death may equal his offence;
Unto thy brothers life▪ he stretched his sin,
Be his alike, we freely give thee him.
Then here's my justice for so vile a crime,
Since that it retched unto my brothers life,
And blemish of his honour and his worth,
And hindered that ordained for Christian glory;
He shall confess unto your sacred self
All treasons in those letters mentioned
To be his plots and actions against my brother:
And tell the world to shut up scandals tongue,
All that thou did from roots of envy sprung▪
And no desert of his: they satisfied,
For all conspiracy all envies sin,
We thus will love thee, learn but to love him.
Thou art to merciful,
In this as merciful as honourable.
Thy clemency doth make me see my self,
To have been a villain to that gentleman,
Deserves so well of all men, best of me,
Great Emperor not a letter that is there,
If every character were doubled twice,
But the attempts are mine against his life,
Death I have deserved then much I owe to thee,
That might have tan my life and set me free.
Stay there Sir.
Shirley he's pardoned the offence to him,
Not the transgressions thou hast done to vs,
We sent thee forth as our Ambassador,
To deal for vs, as we our self were there,
Which dignity of ours thy tongue profaned,
For which we do adjudge thee loose thy tongue:
We made thy hand like ours to strike, or spare,
Which power and grace of ours thou did abuse,
For which thou shalt go handles to thy grave,
And that thy head that made the rest offend
Shall off.
Mercy dread Emperor.
Who talks of mercy tastes our wrath with him,
And you that are a kin to him in blood,
Whose eyes being brothers should taste grief alike,
We charge you see the execution.
Dread Emperor.
Speak not we are resolved.
And I to dye.
Ambition still lies lowest, seeking to fly.
His honours and possessions now are thine,
If yet unsatisfied thy griefs remain,
Ask yet to please thy self it shall be granted.
I fear to be too bold.
Ask and obtain.
My child may be baptised in Christian faith,
And know the same God that the father hath.
Baptise thy Child, our self will aid in it,
Our self will answer for it, a Godfather,
In our own arms weal bear it to the place,
Where it shall receive the complete Ceremony;
Speak, what else thou would have granted thee,
You are too lavish of your high favours,
I would entreat I might erect a Church,
Wherein all Christians that do hither come
May peaceably hear their own Religion.
Tic granted, erect a stately Temple,
It shall take name from thee, great Sherleys Church,
Finish thy suit, what ere it be.
You are too prodigal, I too presuming,
Yet sith your self doth thus authorize me,
I will not hide my heart: your further leave,
I would by your permission raise a house,
Where Christian children from their cradles,
Should know no other Education,
Manners, language, nor Religion,
Then what by Christians is delivered them.
Weal ask no Council to confirm that grant
it is obtained, speak al▪
Your favour, love and good estimation,
And my suit is ended.
In the best embrace of our endeared love,
We do enclose thee, Shirley shall approve,
Our favours are no cowards to give back,
They shall abide till death, thou shalt not lack
Our loves plenitude, our déarest nephew,
Now for the Temple, where our royal hand,
Shall make thy Child first Christian in our land.
Thus far hath Fame with her proclaiming trump,
Sounded the travails of our English brothers,
Unhappy they (and hapless in our Scenes)
That in the period of so many years,
That destinies mut able commandress
Hath never suffered their regreeting eyes
To ki•• each other at an interview:
But would your apprehensions help poor art
Into three parts dividing this our stage:
They all at once shall take their leaves of you,
Think this England, this Spain, this Persia,
Your favours then, to your observant eyes:
Weal show their fortunes present qualities.
To those that need further description,
Wee help their understandings with a tongue:
Sir Anthony Shirley we have left in Spain,
Knight of Saint Iago, one of the counsel
Of his highness wars against the infidels,
Captain of the Armado, with other honours:
The eldest in England is: to sew unknown
His worth, his merit and his offices.
The last in Persia, as you have seen:
This is the utmost of intelligence,
If we should prosecute beyond our knowledge:
Some that fill up this round circumference,
(And happily better know their states then we:)
Might justly call the authors, travellers,
And give the actors too, the soldiers spite,
Then here we leave them, now the rest to you:
Since they have safely past so many perils,
(For what through danger passes, is the best,)
Since they in all places have found favourites:
We make no doubt of you it were too hard doom,
To let them want your liking here at home.

IS your pawn good and sound sir?
Isle pawn my life for that sir;
Place your self there then, I will seek to prefer it pre∣sently: my Moister is very jealous of the pestilence; marry the po• sits at meat and meal with him.
Lent the fifth day of September to mistress Onset upon her gown, Taffeta petticoat with three broad silver Laces, three pound fifteen shillings.
Lent to Justice Cropshin upon both his Velvet Jackets, five pound ten shillings.
Lent privately to my Lady New-cut, upon her gilt Casting∣bottle, and her silver Lye-pot, fifty five shillings.
Sir.
Lent to Sir Oliuer Needy upon his Taffeta cloak, Be∣for hat, and perfumd lether-Ierkin, 6. pound 5. shillings.
May it please your worship—
Lent to moister Andrew Lucifer, upon his flame-colourd doublet, and blew Taffity-hose—top the candle firrah, me thinks the light burns blew-when came that suite in.
Tas lain aboue the year now?
Fire and brimstone, cut it out into matches, the white li∣nings will serve for tinder.
And with little help sir, they are almost black enough
already?—Sir here's an other come with a pawn;
Keep him aside awhile▪ and reach me hither the Bill of the last week;
T••••ere at hand sir?
Now sir what's your pawn?
The second part of a Gentlewoman's gown sir, the low∣er half I mean;
I apprehend you easily, the breeches of the gown!
Very proper, for she wears the doublet at home, a ghuest that lies in my house sir; she looks every hour: for her cousin out at'h country.
Oh her cousin lies here a may mistake in that? my firend of what parish is your pawn?
Parish why? Saint Clements sir, -Ile come to you presently,
What parish is your pawn my friend. Saint Brides 5. Saint Dunst•••s none; Saint Clements 3. 3. at Clements, away with your pawn sir, your parish is infected, I will neither pur∣chase the plague for six pence in the pound, and a great Bill money, nor venture my small stock into contagious parishes: you have your answer fare-you-well, as fast as you can sir.
The pox arrest you sir at the suite of the Suburbs.
I welcome, welcome.
For I think plague scorns your company.
I rank with chief Gallants, I love to smell safely: lent in the vacation to moister Proctor upon his Spiritual gown, 5. angels; and upon his Corporal doublet, 15. shil∣lings. sum 3. pound 5. shillings.
Sir.
Now sir.
Heir's one come in with a trunk of apparel.
Whence comes it?
From Saint Martins in the field.
Saint Martins in the field,—Saint Mary Maudlin 2. Saint Martins none, her's an Honest fellow, let him appear sir.
You may come near sir,
Oh welcome, welcome what's your pawn sir?
Faith a Gentlewoman's whole suite sir.
Whole suite? tic well.
A poor kind soul, troubled with a bad husband; one that puts her to her shifts here.
Hee puts her from her shifts me thinks when she is fine to pawn her clothes?
Look you sir, a fair Satin gown; new Taffeta petticoat.
Stay, this petticoat has been turned?
Often turned up and down &amp; you will, but never turned sir.
Cry you mercy indeed:
A fine white Beaver, pearle-band; 3. falls, The known her have more in her days.
Alas and she bee but a Gentlewoman of any count or charge, 3. faules are nothing, in these daies-Know that; tut the worlds changed, gentlewoman's faules stand upright now, no sin but has a Bolster, that it may lye at ease: Well what do you borrow of these sir?
Twelve pound and you will sir.
How?
They were not hers for twenty.
Why so: our pawn is ever thrice the value of our mo∣ny unless in plate and Jewels, how should the months bee re∣stored and the use else? we must cast it for the twelve month, so many pounds, so many months, so many eighteen pence, then the use of these eighteen pence, then the want of the return of those pounds, all these must bee laid together, which well considered, the valuation of the pawn had need to sound treble: Can six pound pleasure the Gentlewoman.
It may please her, but like a man of threescore in the Limbrest degree.
I have but one word more to say in it, twenty nobles is all and the utmost that I will haxard vppon't.
she must be content with it, the less borrowed the better paid, come.
Arthur?
At hand sir.
Tell out twenty nobles, and take her name in a Bill?
Im e satisfied sir?
Welcome: good Saint Martins in the field, welcome, welcome, I know no other name?
What so hard at your prayers?
A little sir, summing up my pawns here: what Moister Pri∣mero? is it you sir Gallant; and how does all the pretty sweet Ladies, those plump, kind, delicate blisses; ha? whom I kiss in my very thoughts: how do they Gallant?
Why Gallant? if they should not doe well in my house, where should it be done boy, have I not a glorious Sc•tuition?
Oh a Gallant Receipt, Violet ayre, curious garden, quaint walks, fantastical Arbors, three back-doores and a Coach∣gate, nay tha'rt admirably seated, little furniture will serve thee, tha'rt never without movables.
I praise my Stars; ah the goodly virginities that have been cut up in my house, and the goodly patrimonies that have lain like sops in the grauie, and when those sops were eaten, yet the meat was kept whole for another, and another, and another, for as in one pie twenty may dip their sippits, so upon one woman forty may consume their patrimonies.
Excellent, master Primero?
Well, isle pray for women while I live, the're the profit∣blessed fools, isle say that for em, a mā can keep about his house the pretiest kind foul, so tame, so gentle e en to strangers, hands, So soon familiar, suffer to be touched, Of those they ne'er saw twice: the Doves not like em.
Most certain, for thats honest; but I have a suite to you?
And so have I to you.
That happens well,
Grant mine and isle grant yours?
A match.
Make me perfect in that trick that got you so much at Primero.
Oh for the thread tied at your partners leg: the twich?
I that twich and you calt so.
That secret twich got me five hundred pound,
Ere it was first known and since I ha sold it well
Five hundred pound laid down shall not yet buy,
The see simple of my twitch I would be here with it,
It was a blessed invention, I had been a beggar many alowsie year
But for my twitch. It was the prettiest twitch?
Many ouer-cheated gulls, have fatted
Me with the bottom of their patrimonies
Ee'n to the last Soap, gapte while I fed em;
who now live by that Art that first undid i'm.
But I must swear you to be secret, close,
As a maid, at Ten.
Had you sworn but two years higher I would here h'a believed you.
Nay I let twelve alone,
For after twelve has struck, mades look for one.
I look for one too and a maid I think.
What, to come hither?
Sure she follows me? a pretty fat eyed wench, with a Venus in her cheek, did but Raiment smile upon her, she were Nectar for great Dons, boy and thats my suite to thee.
And thats granted already: of what volume is this book, that I may fit a cover too't?
Faith neither in folio, nor in Decimo sexto, but in Octauo between both, a pretty middle fist trug.
Then I have fitted her already: in my eye in faith: here came a pawn in even now will make shift to serve her as fit, look you sir Gallants, Satin, Taffeta, Beaver, fall and all.
Is it new.
New? you see it bears her youth as freshly,—
A pretty suite of clothes in faith;—but put case the party should come to redeem em of a sudden?
Puh then your wits sickly, have not I the policy think you to seem ••treame bufie and defer em till the morrow, a∣against which time that pawn shall bee secretly fetched home, and another carried out to supply the place.
I like thy craft well there.
A general course, oh Frippery is an unknown benefit sir Gallant!
And what must I give you for the hire now in faith.
And for both those weal fit it.
I if the devil bee not int, make halt:
I follow straight, vanish thou Fog, and Sink beneath our brightness,
Abashed at the splendour of such beams:
We scorn thee, basse eclipser of our glories,
That would have hid our shine from nortalls eyes,
Now Gallants, I am for you, I and perhaps before you▪
You can appears but glorious from your selves,
And have your beams but drawn from your own light,
But mine from many, many make me bright.
Here is a dimond that sometimes grassed the finger of a coun∣tesse, here sits a Ruby that near lines blushing for the Party that pound it: here a Sapphire, O providence and fortune! my beginning was so poor, I would fine forget it, and I take the only course, for I scorn to think ont. Sl•ue to a trencher: observer of a saltcellar, privy to nothing, but a close-stoole, or such unsavoury secret: but as I strive to forget the da•es of my serving, so I shall once remember the first step of my raising, for having hardly rakte five mark together, I rejoiced so in that small stock, which most providently I ventured by water to Blackwall, among fishwives, and in small time, what by week∣lie return, and gainful restitution it rise to a great body, be∣side a dish of fish for a present, that stately preserved me a seven-night: nor ceased it there but drew on greater profit, for I was held religious by those that do profess like abstinence, and was full often secretly supplied, by charitable Catholickes, Who concurred me sincerely obstinate, when merely I for hun∣ger nor •or zeal, eat up the fish, &amp; put their alms to vselha, ha ha; but those times are run out, and for my sake, zealous dissemblance has since fared the worse; —let me see now, whose cloak shall I wear to day to continue change,
Oh—Arthur.
Here sir.
B•ing down sir Oliuer Needs Taffetv cloak. &amp; Beaver hat, I am sure he is fast enough? &amp; Andrew ••cifers Rapier and dagger, in the knights •art, with the emb•st gitdle and han∣gers, for he's in his third sweat by this time, sipping of the doc∣to•s bottle, or picking the ninth part of a Rack of mutton dry
roasted, with a leash of night-caps on his head like the popes triple crown, and as many pillows c•usht to his back, with oh the needles, for he got the pox of a Se•ster, and it pricked so much more naturally,—quick Arthur quick, now,
To the deceased knights daughter
Whom many Gallants sue to, I amongst many: foe•
Since impudence gains more respect then virtue,
And come them blood which few can now deny,
who're your chief Gallants, then but such as I.
You do your Beauties injury, sweet virgin,
To loose the time they must rejoice in youth:
Theres no perfection in a woman placed
But wastes it self tho it be never wasted,
Then iud•e your wrongs your self.
Good Moister Fitsgraue?
Through sorrow •or the knight my fathers death,
(Whose being was the perfections of myioye:
And crown of my desires,) I cannot yet,
But forcedly, on marriage fi•e my heart,
Yet heaven forbid I should deject your hopes
Conceive not ofn eso uncharitably,
I should belie my soul if I should say,
You are the man I never should affect:
I understand you thus far, you're a Gentleman
Whom your estate and virtues may command
To a far worthier breast, then this of mine,
O cease, I dare not hear such blasphemy,
What is without you worthy, I neglect,
In you is placst the worth that I respect:
Vouchsase unequalled Virgin whereon I justly kept,
Accept this worthless favour from your servants arm, the hal∣lowed beads,
The true and perfect number of my fighs.
Mine cannot equal yours, yet in exchange, accept and wear it for my sake.
Even as my isle ra•e it?
Heart? Fitsgraue in such bosom single-loues?
So close, and private with her?
Observe hem, he grows proud and bold?
Why was not this a general meeting?
By her own consent, Death how I could taste his blood?
See, the gentlemen, at my request do all present them-selues?
Manifold blisses waite on her desire,
whose beauty and whose mind so many honour?
I take your wishes thankfully? —kind gentlemen!
all here assembled, over whose long suites,
I near insulted,
Not like that common sickness of our sex,
Grew proud in the abundance of my suitors,
Or number of the days they sued unto me.
Dutiful sorrow for my fathers death,
Not wilful coyness hath my hours detained
So long in silence:
Im'e left to mine own ehoyce, so much the more
My care calls on me If I err through love,
Tic I must chide my self, I cannot shift
The fault unto my parents, they're at rest,
And I shall sooner err through love, then wealth.
Good.
Excellent.
That likes me well?
Hope still.
And my affections do pronounce you all▪
Worthy their pure and most entire deserts,
Yet they can choose but one,
Nor doe I dissuade any of his hopes,
(Because my heart is not yet thoroughly fixed,
On marriage, or the man,)
But crave the quiet respite of one month,
The month unto this night, against which tim•,
I doe inuit you all to that election,
Which on my unstained faith, and Virgin promise,
Shall light amongst no strangers, but your selves:
May this content you?
Glad, and content.
It is a good time to leave,
Till then, commend vs to your gentlest thoughts.
Enough.
Ough.
Hist, moister Hist.
Boy? how now?
Look you sir.
Her Chain of Pearl.
I s•asked it away fi•ely.
Active boy, thy masters best revenue, his life &amp; soul
Thou keepst 'em both together? whip, away,
Fall back, fall belly, I must be maintained,
Hope is no purchase, nor care I if I miss her, why I rank
In this desiegne with gallants, there's fu'l cause
Policy enuites me to it, it is not for love, or for her sake alone:
It keeps my state suspect•e•le and unknown.
Their looks run through, &amp; through me, &amp; the st••gs
Of their Snake-hissing whispers pierced my hearing:
They're mad she graced me with one private minute,
Aboue their fortunes, I have observed em often,
Most spitefully aspected toward my happiness,
Beyond all others: but the • use I know not,
A quiet month the Virgin has enclosed
Unto her self: suitors stand without till then,
In which space cunningly lle wind my self,
Into their Bosoms. I have be-thought the shape,
Some credulous Scholar, easily infected
With fashion▪ time, and humour. unto such
Their deepest thoughts, will like to wanton fish•,
Play aboue water, and be all parts seen:
F•r since▪ ••me their envy pi•es isle see
Whether their lives from touch of blame sit free.
I seldom saw so few here, you shall haue'em some∣times in every corner of the house, with their Viols betwixt their legs, and play the sweetest strokes twould even filch your soul almost out of your bosom.
Pox on it: we spoil our selves for want of these things at University?
You have no such natural happiness, let's draw near,
Gentlemen you are all most respectively welcome:
We are bold and insatiate Suitors sir to the breath of your music, &amp; the dear sight of those Ladies.
And what our poor skill can inuit you to,
You are kindly welcome: you must pardon 'em Gentlemen,
Virgins and bashful, besides new beginners,
Tic not a whole month since they were first entered.
Seven year in my knowledge▪
They blush at their very lessons, they will not endure,
To hear of a Stop, a Prick, or a Semy-quauer,
O out upon you:
La I tell you, you'll bear me witness Gentlemen,
If their complaints come to their parents ears,
Their words of Art, I teach 'em nought but Art.
Why tic most certain.
For all Scholars know, that Musica est Ars.
O beastly word?
Look to the Ladies, Gentlemen;
Kiss again?
Come an other?
this a good Interim?
what have you done sir?
why? what have I done,
Saw you their stomachs queasy, and come with such gross meat!
Why first not latin sir,
Latin? •hy then let the next too't be latin too:
So enough?
Nay I can assure you thus far, I that never knew the
language ha eheard so much that Ars, is latin for Art, and it may well be too, •or ther's more art int now a days thē ever was:
first possible▪ I am sorry then I have followed it so far.
A Scholar call you him,
Music must not jar; the offence is satisfied, come to the Song, beg•n sir.
Not a whole month since you were entered Ladies?
None that shall see their cunning will believe it,
It is no affliction Gentlemen?
I care not much in faith, if I write down to my father presently, to send up my sister in all haste, that I may place her here at this Music school.
Slid tic the fool my cousin, I would not for the value of three recreations he had seen me here?
How like you your new prize;
Pray give me leave, I have not yet sufficiently admire▪d her
My wits must not stand idle, Slife hoe's in a sick trance?
A cheat or two among these mistresses,
Would not be ill bestowed, I affect none,
But for my pray such are their affections,
I know it, how could drabs and cheaters live else,
Then since the world rolls on dissimulation,
Isle be the first dissembler.
Prethy love, comfort, choice, my only wish in thee
I am confined, deny me any thing a slight chain of pearl,
Nay an't be but slight—
Being denied,
I prize it slight; but given me by my love,
Light shall not be so dear unto my eye;
Mine eye unto the body as the gift,
How have I power to deny this to you,
That commandall my fortunes are thy servants,
And thou the Mistress both of them and me.
The truest that ere breathed.
To a Gentleman,
That thus so long and has so sincerely loved you,
As I my self, ne'er was less pity shown.
Why I never was held cruel.
But to me.
Nor to you.
Go too, 'tas scared you much,
I'm sorry your cons•t is so unkind,
To think me so.
When had I other argument,
I'ue often tendered you my love and service,
And that in no mean fashion:
Yet were you ne'er that requ•tefull Mistress,
That grac▪st me with one favour,
Slight, not so much as such a pretty ring, pox on it,
It is almost broke my heart.
Has took it off, Sfoot moister Bosser,
Nay where a man loves most, there to be scanted.
My Ring, come, come.
What reckon I a Satin gown or two,
If she were wise.
Life my Ring sir, come.
Have you the face in faith.
Give me my Ring.
Prithee hence, by this light you get none on it.
How?
I hold your favours of more pure esteem,
Then to part from 'em, •aith I doe,
How ere you think of me.
Push, pray sir,
Hark you, go too, you have lost much by unkindness, go your ways.
Sfoot.
But yet there's no time past, you may redeem it.
Come, I cannot miss it in faith; beside the Gentleman that bestowed it on me▪ swore to me it cost him twenty nobles.
Twenty nobles▪ pox of twenty nobles,
But you must cost me more, you pretty villain,
Ah you little rogue.
Come come, I know you're but in jest,
In jest no you shall see.
No way will get it.
As good give it him now, and hope for some-what.
I rue• love made jest.
I did but try thy faith, how fast you would hold it,
Now I see a woman may venture worthy favours to thy trust,
and have 'em truly kept, and I protest, had I drawn't from thee,
I should ne'er ha loved thee, I know that.
Sfoote I was ne'er so wronged in my life,
Think you I am in jest with you, what with my love?
I could find ••ghter subjects you shall see,
And time will show, how much you injure me.
The Ring were it thrice worth I freely give,
For I know you will requite it.
Will I live.
Enough.
Why this was well come off now,
Wheres my old Serving-man? not yet returned,
Oh here he peepes: now sirrah?
May it please your worship—they're done artificiallyy∣faith boy.
Both the great Beakers.
Both Lad.
Just the same size.
I and the marks as just.
So fall off respectively now.
My Lord desires your worship of all love.
His Lordship must hold me excusd till morning,
Isle not break company to night,
Where sup w•e Gallants?
At Ma•maid.
S•p there who list, I have forsworn the house.
Serving. For the truth is this plot must take effect •t Meter.
Faith Ime indifferent.
So are we Gentlemen.
Name the place moister Goldstone.
Why the Meter in my mind,
For neat attendance, diligent boys and, push, excels it fair.
Agreed, the Meter then: Boy, some goodness toward, the Boys whipped away.
The Jewel, heart the Jewel.
How now sir? what moved you?
Nothing sir, a spice of poetry, a kind a fury,
A disease runs among Scholars.
Mass it made you stamp.
Whoo, till make some stamp and stare, make a strange noise,
Curse swear, beat Tire-men, and kick players boys,
The effects are very fearful.
Bless me from it.
Oh you need not fear it sir—hell of this luck.
Hark, hoe's at it again.
Some pageant plot, or some device for the Tilt-yeard:
Disturb him not.
How can I gain her love, when I have lost her favour.
What money hast about thee?
Look you sir, I must be fine to pawn a fair Stone here, for ordinary expenses: a pox of my tenants, I give 'em twenty days after the quarter, and they cut out forty.
Why you might take the forfeiture of their leases then.
I know I might, but whats their course? the rogues comes me up all together, with Geese and Capons, and petite∣once in pigs shouts, which would move any man in faith, were his stomach ne'er so great, and to see how pitifully the pullen will look, it makes me after relent, and turn my anger into a quick fire to roast 'em—nay touched and spare it not.
Tic right, well, what do's your worship borrow of this sir?
The Stone's twenty nobles.
Nay hardly.
As I am a right Gentleman.
It comes near it indeed: well here's five pound in gold upon it.
Twill serve, and the Ring safe and secret,
As a Virgins.
I wish no hyer: what Gallants▪ are you constant,
Does the place hold?
The Meter.
Sir, in regard of our continued boldness, &amp; trouble, (which love to your Music hath made vs guilty of) shall we in∣treat your worships company, with these sweet Ladies, your professed Scholars, to take part of a poor Supper with my self and these Gentlemen at the Meter.
Pray moister Primer.
I beseech you sir let it be so.
Oh pardon me sweet Gentlemen, the worlds apt to cen∣sure, I have the charge of them, they are left in trust, they are Virgins, and I dare not hazard their fems, the least touch mars 'em, and what would their right worshipful parents think, if the report should fly to them, that they were seen with Gentlemen in a Tavern.
All this may be prevented, what serves your coach for,
They may come coached and maskt.
You put me too't sir,
Yet I must say again, I fear the Drawers,
And Vintners boys will be familiar with them,
And think 'em Mistresses.
There are those places where respect seems slighter,
More censure is belonging to the Meter, you know that sir?
Gentlemē you prevail.
Weel all expect you there.
And weal not fail.
The devil will ne'er dissemble with them so, as you for thē.
Come sir.
What else, lets go,
How cheer you sir?
Faith like the Moon, more bright,
Decreased in body▪ but re-made in light,
Here thou shalt share some of my brightness with me.
By my faith they are comfortable beams sir.
Come, where have you spent the time now from my sight,
Ime jealous of thy action.
Push I did but walk, a turn or two in the garden.
What made you there?
Nothing but cropped a flower.
Some women's honour I believe.
Foh, is this a women's honour.
Much about one?
When both are plucked their sweetness is soon gon.
Prethe be true to me.
When did I fail.
Yet I am ever doubtful, that your sin.
I do account the world but as my spoil, to adorn thee,
My love is artificial to all others,
But purity to thee,—dost thou want gold?
Here take this chain of pearl, supply thy self,
Be thou but constant, firm and just to me,
Rich heirs shall want, ere want come near to thee.
Upon thy lip I seal sincerity.
Was this your vow to me?
Pox, whats a kiss to be quite rid of her, shoe's sued so long I was ashamed of her, it was but her cheek I kissed neither, to save her longing.
Tic not a kiss I weigh.
Had you weighed this,
T'ad lacked aboue five ounces of a true one:
No kiss that ere weighed lighter.
Tic thy love that I suspect.
My love, why by this,—what shall I swear by?
Swear by this jewel, keep thy oath, keep that▪
By this jewel then, no creature can bee perfect in my love, but thy▪ dear self.
I rest.
Ha, ha, ha, lets laugh at em sweet soul.
I, they may laugh at me, I was a novice, and beleiude your oths,
Why what do you think of me, make I no difference,
Turn seven years prostitution, and seven days,
Why you're but in the wane of a maid yet:
You wrong my health in thinking I love them,
Do not I know their populous imperfections.
Why they cannot live till Easter, let em show
The fairest side to'th world like hundreds more, whose clothes
Even stand upright in silver, when their body,
Are ready to drop through em, such there be,
They may deceive the world, they ne'er shall me.
Forgive my doubts, and for some satisfaction were this •ing,
From which I vow de ne'er, but to the, to part.
With which thou ever bindst me to thy heart.
My pocket picked, this was no bro•he•-house,
A music school; damnation has fine shapes,
I paid inoug for'th song, I have lost a jewel
To me more precious then their souls to them,
That gave consent to filch it, isle hunt hard:
Wast time and money, trace and wheel about,
But I will find these secret mischiefs out-how now, whats he:
Oh a servant to my love, being thus disguised,
Isle learn some news, now sir; you belong to me.
I Do sir, but I cannot stay to say, so, nay good sir detain me not I am going in al hast to enquire or lay waite for a chain of pearl nimd out of her pocket the fifth of November, a dis∣mall day.
Ha a chain of pearl say thou.
A chain of pearl sir, which one Moister Fitsgraue a gen∣tleman and a suitor fastened upon her as a pledge of his love.
Ha?
Urge me no more I have no more to say,
Your friend Ieroni•o Bedlam.
Thou 'rt a mad fellow indeed, some comfort yet,
Thats hers is missing too, I feel my soul at much more ease: both stolen.
When griefs have partners they are better borne.
Oh the parting of vs twain, 
Hath caused me mickle pain, and I shall ne'er be married,
Until I see my muggle again.
Hist?
Ha.
The nimble gentleman, in the clestiall stockings.
Has the best smock fortune, to be beloved of women?
Valle loo lo lille lo lilo, vallee loo lee lo lillo.
Vallee loo lo lillee lilo, Vallee loo le lo lil'o.
Ah sweet gentleman, he keeps it up stately.
Well held in faith sir—mass and now I remember too, I think you ne'er saw my little banqueting, box aboue, since I al∣terd it.
Why have you altered that?
Oh divinely sir: the pictuers are all new run over again.
Fie.
For what had the painter done think you, drew me, Venus naked, which is the grace of a mans Room you know, &amp; when he had done, drew a number of Oken-leaues before her, had not lawn been a hundred times softer, made a better show, and been more gentlewoman like?
More ladie-like, a great dea'e.
Come, you shall see how tic altered now? I do not think but you'll like her.
Where be your liveries?
They attend without.
Go, call the Coach! Gentlemen, you have exceld in kindness as we in boldness.
So you think amiss sir?
Kind Ladies we commit you to sweet dreams,
Our selves unto the fortune of the dice, dice ho?
You rest firm mine.
Even al my soul to thee.
You keep your vows.
Why do I breathe, or see?
Is your love constant.
I to none but these• now gon, I, now I love nor them nor thee, slife, I should be cloide, should I love one in three.
Oh here is moister Bowser now.
Save you sweet Gentlemen.
Sweet moister Bowser? welcome?
When come these dice.
Yet anon, anon sir.
Hast thou shown art in em.
You shall be judge sir, here be the Tavern Beakers, And here peep out the fine Alchemy knaves, looking like, well sir, most of our Gallants, that seem what they are not.
Peace villain, am not I in presence.
Why that puts me in mind of the jest sir.
Again, you quarter her.
Nay, compare 'em, and spare 'em not.
The bigness of the bore, just the same size, The marks, no difference: away, put money in thy pocket, and offer to draw in upon the least occasion.
I am no babe sir.
Hist.
Whats the matter now?
Give me a pair of false Dice, ere you go.
Pox on it, you're so troublesome too, you cannot remem∣ber a thing before, if I stay a little longer, I shall be staid anon.
Here be Dice for your worships.
Oh come, come.
The Vintner himself,
Ilo shift away these beakets by a slight.
Moister Goldstone?
How now you conjuring rascal?
Bless your good worship, you're in humours me thinks.
Humours: say that again.
I said no such wont sir,—would I had my beakers out on's fingers.
Whats thy name Vintner?
Jack and please your worship.
Turn Knight like thy companions, scoundrel, live vpō usury, wear thy gilt spurs at thy girdle for fear of slubbering.
O no, I hope I shall have more grace then so sir:
Pray let me help your worship.
Cannot I push 'em together without your help?
O I beseech your worship, they're the two standards of my house.
Standards, there lie your Standards.
Good your worship; I am glad they are out of his fin∣gers, my wife shall lock 'em up presently, they shall see no sun this twelue-months day for this trick.
Let me come to the sight of your Standards again.
Your worship shall pardon me, now you shall not see em in hast I warrant ye.
I do not desire't; ha, ha.
Why moister Goldstone?
I am for you Gallants—Moister Boxeer cry you mercy sir, why supped you from vs?
Faith sir, I met with a couple of my fellow pupils at V∣niuersitie, &amp; so we renewed our acquaintance &amp; supped together.
Fie, thats none of the newest fashion, I must tell you that moister Bosser, you must never take acquaintance of any ath' University, when you are at London, nor any of London when you're at University you must be more forgetful in faith, every place ministers his acquaintance abundantly.
He tells you true sir.
I warrant you here's a Gentleman will ne'er commit such an absurdity.
Who I, no, it is well known, if I be disposed, Isle forget any man in a seven-night, and yet look him in the face: nay let him ride but ten mile from me, and come home again, it shall be at my choice whether Isle remember him or no, I have tried that.
This is strange sir.
It is as a man gives his mind too 't sir: and now you bring me in; I remember it was once my fortune to be coozned of all my clothes, and with my clothes my money; a poor Shepherd pitting me, took me in, and relieve de me.
It was kindly done of him in faith,
Nay you shall see now, it was his fortune likewise not long after, to come to me in much distress in faith, and with weeping eyes, and do you think I remembered him.
You could not choose.
By my troth not •, I sorgot him quite, and never remem∣bred him to this hour.
And yet knew who he was.
As well as I know you in faith—
It is a gift given to some aboue others.
To fools and knaves they never miss on it.
Do's any make such a wonder at this; why alas tic nothing to forget others; what say you to those that forget themselves?
Nay then to Dice: come set me Gallants, set.
I, fall too 't Gentlemen. I shall here some news from some of you anon: I have you are to know which loose and ne'er look on; Isle bee ready with all the worst money I can find
about me, Arthur!
Here sir.
Stand ready.
Fear not me sir.
These are mine sir.
Here's a washed Angel, it shall away: Here's Mistress Rose-noble has lost her maiden-head, cracked in the Ring, shoe's good enough for gaimsters, and to pass from man to man: for gold presents at Dice your harlot, in one hour won and lost thrice, every man has a fling at her.
Again pox of these dice
Tic ill to curse the dead sir.
Mew, where should I wish the pox, but among bones.
He tells you right sir.
I ne'er have any luck at these odd hands,
None here to make vs fix—why Moister Frip.
I am very well here I thank you sir, I had rather be tel∣ling my money my self, then have others count it for me; tic the scuruiest music in the world me thinks, to hear my money gingle in other men's pockets, I never had any mind toot in faith.
Slut play six or play four, Isle play no more.
Sfoot you see, there's none here to draw in.
Rather then you should be destitute gentlemen, isle play my ten pound, if my masters worship will give me leave.
Come.
He shall, he shall.
Pray excuse me Gentlemen: •soot how now goodmā Rascal, what? because you served my Grand-father when hee went Ambassador, &amp; got some ten pound by the hand, has that put such spirit in you, to offer to draw in among Gentlemen of worship, knave.
Pray sir, lets entreat so much for once.
It is a usual grace in faith sir,
Yo'ue many gentlemen will play with their men.
I and with their Maids to in faith.
Good sir give him leave.
Yes, come, and you be weary on it, I pray draw ne'er sir.
Not so sir.
Come fool, fear nothing, I warrant toe, he has given thee leave, stand here by me, come now, set round Gentlemen, set,
How the poor fellow shakes: throw lustily man.
At all gentlemen.
Well said in faith.
The're all mine.
By my troth I am glad the fellow has such luck, •t will encourage him well.
At my masters worship alone.
Now sit slave?
At my masters worship alone.
So, saucy rascal.
At my masters worship alone.
You're a rogue and will be ever be one?
By my troth Gentlemen at all again for once.
Take em to the• boy, take em to thee, you're worthy of em in faith.
Gentlemen faith I am angry with you, go and suborn my knave again me here; to make him proud &amp; peremptory.
Troth thats but your conceit sir, the fellows an ho∣nest fellow and knows his duty, I dare swear for him.
Heart, I am sick already.
Whether goes Moister—
Play on, isle take my turn si•?—boy?
Moister.
Pissed?—a supply, carryit closely my little fooker,—how much—
Three pound sir.
Good boy,—take out another lesson? how now gen∣tlemen?
Devils int did you ere see such a hand?
I set you these three angels.
My moister may set hie? —for all his stakes are drawn out of other men's pockets.
As I said gentlemen?
Dues Ace.
At all your right worshipful worships.
Death and vengeance!
Hell, darkness,
Hold sir.
Moister Goldstone.
Hinder me not sweet gentlemen—you rascal—I banish thee the board.
In faith but you shall not sir?
Touch a Die and thou dare, come you in with your low∣zie ten pound, you slave among gentlemen of worship, and win thirty at a hand.
Why will you kick again luck sir?
As long as the poor fellow ventures the loss of his own money, who can be offended at his fortunes.
I have a Moister here? many a Gentleman would bee glad to see his man come forward aha.
Prey be persuaded sir:
'Slife, here's none cuts my throat in play but he I have observed it, an unluckily slave tic.
Me thinks his lucks good enough sir.
Upon condition Gentlemen that I may ever bar him frō the board hereafter I am content to wink at him.
Faith, use your own pleasure hereafter, has won our money now! come to'th table sir your master's friends with you.
Pray Gentlemen.
The fiends int I think, I left a fair chain of pearl at my lodging too, like an ass and ne'er remembered it; that would ha bin a good pawn now, speak what do you lend upon these Moister Frip? I care not much if you take my Beaver hat too, for I perceive tic dark enough already, &amp; it dos but troble me here.
Very well sir why now I can lend you 3. pound sir—
Prethe do it quickly then?▪
There tic in six angels.
Very compendiously.
Here Arthur, run away with these presently, isle enter em into'th shop-booke to morrow. Item one gilt hatched rapier and dagger, with a fair embroidered girdle, and hangers, with which came also a Beaver hat, with a correspondent band.
Push, in faith sir your to blame, you have snibd the poor fellow too much, hee can scarce speak, hee cleaves his words with sobbing.
Haff haff, haff, haff at al Gentlemen.
Ah rogue, isle make you know your self.
At the fairest.
Out in faith—two Aces.
I am glad of that, come pay me al these good-man cloak∣bag:
Why are you the fairest sir?
You need not doubt of that sir—five. angels you Scoundrel.
Fie ath these Dice, not one hand to night,—there they go Gentlemen at al in faith.
Pay all with 2. treas and a quitter.
Al curses follow em, pay your selves withal, isle pawn my self to it, but isle see a hand to night, not once hold in? here Moister Frip, lend me your hand, quick, quick, So.
What do you borrow of this doublet now?
Ne'er saw the world three days.
Go too, in regard your a continual customer, isle use you well, and pleasure you with five angels upon it.
Let me not stand too long ith cold for them:
Had ever country gentleman such fortune?
All swooped away id, need repair to'th Brokers,
If you be in that mind sir there sits a Gentleman will furnish you upon any pawn, as well as the publickst broker of em all:
Say you so sir, there's comfort in that in faith.
Item, upon his orange tawny satin doublet, five angels,
But by your leave sir? next comes the breeches,—.
Oh I have tongue fit for any thing—
Saving your tail sir? tic given me to understand that you are a Gentleman ith hundred, and deal in the premises aforesaid.
Moister Bungler, Moister Bungler, you're mightily mis∣took, I am content to do a gentleman a pleasure for once, so his pawn be neat and sufficient.
Why what say you to my Grandfathers seal ring here
I marry sir, this is somewhat like.
Nay view it well, an ancient arms, I can tell you.
Whats this sir?
The great codpeice with nothing int.
How?
The word about it, partur iunt montes.
Whats that I pray sir?
You promise to mount vs.
And belike he was not so good as his word.
So it should seem by the Story, for so our names came to be Bunglers▪
A lamentable hearing that so great a house should shrink and fall to ruin.
Two quitters and yet loose it heart, boy? ▪in faith? what first?
Five pound sir.
By my troth this boy goes forward well, ye shall •ee him come to his preferment in the end!
Why how now, whose that gentlemen, a barge-man?
I never have any luck Gallants, till my doublets off, Ime not half nimble enough, at this old finquanter drivel∣beard:
Your worship must pay me al these sir?
There, and feast the devil with em.
Hell gnaw these dice.
What do you give over Gallants.
First not time.
I protest, I have but one angel left to guide me home to my lodging.
How much think?
Some fourscore angels, sir.
Peace, weal join powers anon, and see how strong w• are in the whole number, mass, yon guilt Goblet stands so full in mine eye, the whoreson tempts me, it comes like cheese after a great feast, to digest the rest, he will hardly scope me in faith I see that by him already; back for a parting blow now,▪boy?
Anon anon sir:
Fetch a pennyworth of soft wax to seal letters.
I will sir?
Nay had not I strange casting, thrice together, 2. qua∣ters and a dews.
Why was not I as often haunted with two treas, and a quitter:
Ther's wax for your worship—anon, anon, sir.
Screen me a little you whoreson old cross biter.
Why whats the business? fill chiton h•b Goblet.
And what has moister Bowser lost?
Faith not very deeply sir, enough for a scholar, some half a score royals.
Sfoot I have lost as many with spurs at their heals.
Come Gallants shall we stumble:
Whats a clock.
Here is none ont Dick, the Goblets carried down.
Nay tic upon the point of three, boy, Drawer, whats to be done sirs?
Ell's paid, and your worships are welcome, Only there's a Goblet missing Gentlemen, and cannot bee found about house.
How a Goblet:
What manner a one▪
A guilt Goblet sir, of an indifferent size.
Sfoote I saw such a one lately.
It cannot be found now sir.
Came there no strangers here?
No sir.
This a marvelous matter, that a Goblet should bee gone, and none but wee in the room, the loss is mere all, here as we are; keep the door Vintner.
No I beseech your worship.
By my troth Vintner weal have a privy search for this; What? we are not all one women's children.
I beseech ye Gentlemen, have not that conceit of me, that I suspect your worships.
Tut, you are an Ass; do you know every mans nature: There's a Broker in the company.
Slife you have not stole the Goblet, boy, have you?
Not I sir.
I was afraid,—tic a good cause in faith, let each man search his fellow, weal begin with you.
I shall save some body a labour Gentlemen, for Ime half searched already.
I thought the Goblet had hung here in faith—none here, nor here.
Seek about flower,—What was the Goblet worth Vintne.
Three pound ten sh•lings sir no more.
Pox on it Gentlemen, tic but Angels a piece, it shall be a brace of mine, rather then I would have our reputations brea∣thed upon by all comers, for you must think theile talk ont in all companies; such a night, in such a company, such a Gob∣let, Sfoote it may grow to a gangrene in our credits and bee incurable.
Faith I am content.
So am I.
There's my Angel too.
So, and mine, Isle tell thee what, the missing of this goblet
has dismayed the Gentlemen much.
I am sorry for that sir.
Yet they send thee this comfort by me, if they see thee but rest satisfied, and depart away contented, which will ap∣pear in thy countenance; not three times thrice the worth of the Goblet shall hang between them and thee, both in their continual custom, and all their acquaintances.
I thank their worships all▪I am satisfied.
Say it again: do you hear Gentlemen?
I thank your worships all I am satisfied.
Why la, was not this better then hazarding our repu∣tations upon trifles, and in such public as a Tavern, such a questionable place.
True.
Faith it was well thought on. Nay keep your way Gen∣tlemē: I have sworn moister Bowcer, I will bee last in faith▪ Rascal the goblet.
Where sir?
Peep yon sir under.
Here sir.
My husband is rode from home, make us delay', I know if your will bee as free as your horse, you will see '•ee yet •re dinner: From Kingston this eleventh of November▪ Ha? these womē are such creatures such importunate sweet souls: theile sca•se give a mā leave to be ready, that's their only fault in faith, if they be once set upon a thing, why there's no remoouing of em, till their pretty wills be fulfild—O pity thy poor oppressed client here sweet Cupped, that has scarce six hours vacation in a month, his causes hang in so many Courts, yet never suffer my French adversary, nor his big swollen confederates to over∣throw me,▪Who without mercy would my blood carouse, And lay me in prison in a Doctors house:
Thy clemency great Cupped: peace, who comes here?
Sir Gallant, well encountered.
I both salute, and take my leave together.
Why whether so fast sir▪
Excuse me pray, lme in a little hast,
My horse waits for me.
What some journey toward?
A light one in faith sir.
I am sorry that my business so commands me,
I cannot ride with you; but I make no question,
You have company enough.
Alas not any—nor do I desire it,
Why it is but to Kingston yonder.
O cry you mercy sir,
Scope but one reach, there's little danger thither.
True a little of Come-parke.
You've named the place sir, that's all I fear in faith,
Farewell swear moister Taylebee,
This fell out happily; Isle call this purchase mine, before I greet him,
Even where his fear lies most, there will I meet him: Boy.
Sir.
Walk my horse behind yon thicket, give a word, if you descry.
I have all perfect sir.
So, he cannot now belong: What with my boys dex∣terity at Ordinaries, and my Geldings celerity over hedge and ditch, but we make pretty shift to rub out, a Gallant, for I have learnt these principles.
Stoop thou to the world, twill on thy bosom tread,
It stoops to thee, if thou advance thy head:
The mind being far more excellent then fate,
Tic fit our mind then be aboue our state;
Why should I write my catremitics in my brow,
To make them loath me, that respect me now,
If every man were in his courses known;
Legs that now honour him, might spurn him down.
To conclude, nothing seems as it is but honesty, &amp; that makes it so little regarded amongst vs.
Eel, ha, ho.
The Boy: hoe's hard at hand, Isle cross him sudden∣lie: and here he comes; stand.
Ha!
Deliver your purse sir.
I feared none but this place in faith, nay when my mind gives me a thing once.
Quick, quick sir, quick.
I must dispatch three robberies yet ere night.
I'm glad you have such good doings by my troth sir.
You'll fare never a whit the better for your flattery I warrant you sir.
I speak sincerely, it is pity such a proper-parted gen∣tleman should want; nor shall you, as long as I have it about me, nay search and spare not: there's a purse in my left pocket as I take it, with fifteen pound in gold in it, and there's a fair chain of pearl in the other: nay In deal truly with you; it grieves me in faith when I see such goodly men in distress, Isle rather want it my self then they should go with-out it.
And that shows a good nature sir.
Nay tho I say it, I have been always accounted a man of a good nature, I might have hanged my self ere this time else▪ Pray use me like a gentleman, take all, but injury not my body.
You must pardon me sir, I must a little play the Usurer, and bind you, for mine own security.
Alas ther's no conscience in that sir, shall I enter into bond, and pay money too.
Tut, I must not be betrayed.
Here me but what I say sir, I do protest I would not be he that should betray a man, to be Prince of the world.
Mass that's the devil, I thank you heartily, for hoe's called prince ath' world.
You take me still at worst.
Swear on this sword then, to set spurs to your horse, not to look back, to give no marks to any passenger.
Marks, why I think you have left me ne'er a penny sir.
I mean no marks of any.
I understand you sir.
Swear then.
In faith I do sir:
Away.
Ime gon sir, by my troth of a fierce thief he seems to be a very honest Gentleman.
Why this was well adventured, trim a Gallant:
Now with a courteous and long thusting eye,
Let me behold my purchase, &amp; try the soundues of my bones with laughter, how? is n•t this the chain o• pearl I gave to that periurde ha•lat, tic, Sfoot tic, the very chain, oh damned mistress, ha; and this the purse, which not five days before I scene▪ her filled with fair spur-royalls—heart; the very gold?—slife is this no robbery, how many oaths flew toward heaven,
Which ne'er came half way thither; but like fire drakes,
Mounted a little, gave a crack, and fell;
Fainde oaths bound up to sink more deep to hell.
What folded papers this? death—tic her hand.
Moister Taylbee, you know with what affection I love you, You do:
I count the world but as my pray to maintain you, The more dissembling queen you I must tell you,
I have sent you an embroderd purse here with fifty fair spur∣royals int—A pox on you for your labour wench: And I desire you of all loves to keep that chain of pearl from Moister Pursnets sight—
He cannot strumpet, I behold it now, unto thy secret torture:
So fare thee well, but be constant and want nothing.
As long as I have it in faith? me thinks it should have gon so,—well; what a horrible age do we live in, that a man cannot have a queen to himself let him but turn his back the best of her is chipt away like a Court loaf, that whē a man comes himself, has nothing but bombast; &amp; these are 2. simple chippings here, do's my boy pick, &amp; I steal, to enrich my self, to keep her, to maintain him: why this is right the sequence of the world,—A. L. maintains her, she maintains a Knight, he maintains a Whore, she maintains a captain. So in like manner, the pose∣ket keeps my boy, hee keeps me, I keep her, she keeps him, it runs like quick-siluer, from one to another; Sfoote I per∣ceiue I have been the chief upholder of this Gallant all this while; it appears true, we that pay dearest for our pasture are e∣for likely worse-usde, Sfoot he has a Nag can run for nothing, has his choice, nay and gets by the running of him;—oh fine world strange devils, and pretty damnable affections.
Lil ha, ho?
There boy, again, what news there?
Moister, pissed, master?
How now boy.
I have discride a prize.
Another lad?
The gull, the scholar?
Moister Bowser:
I, comes a long this way:
Without company.
As sure, as he is your own.
Back to thy place boy,
I have the luck to day, to rob in safety:
Two precious cowards, whist: I hear him—stand
You lie, I came forth to go.
Deliver your purse.
Tic better in my pocket.
How now, at disputations, signior fool.
I'ue so much logic to con•ute a knave, a thief, a rogue
Hold, hold, sir, and you be a gentleman hold, let me rise.
Heart tic the courtesy of his scarf un•asked him to me,
Aboue the lip by chance, isle counterfeit,
Light, because I am a scholar, you think belike that scholars have no metal in em, but you shall find,—I have not don with you cousin.
As you're a Gentleman:
As you're a rogue?
Keep on upon your way sir:
You bad me stand?
I have been once down for that:
And then deliver?
Deliver me from you sir—oh pox on it, has wounded me Eel, ha, ho my horse, my horse boy:
Have you your boy so ready: oh thou world,
How art thou muffled in deceitful fonnes:
There's such a mist of these, and still hath been,
The brightness of true Gentry is scarce seen:
This journey was most happily assigned,
I have found him dross both in his means and mind: what
papers this he dropped? isle look on it as I go.
A gull call you him, let me always set upon wisemen, theyle be afraid of their lives, they have a feeling of their in∣niquities, and knows what tic to die with fighting▪ sfoote this gull lays on without fear, or wit, how deepe's it say thou boy?
By my faith three inches sir.
La, this was long of you, you rogue:
Of me sir.
Forgive me dear boy, my wound akte, and I grew angry, there's hope of life boy, is there not?
Puh, my life for yours.
A comfortable boy in mans extremes! I was ne'er so afraid in my life but the fool would have seen my face, hee had me at such advantage, hee might have commanded my Sca•f•, Escaped well there tad choked me; my reputation had been past recovery, yet live I unsuspected, and still fit for Gal∣lants choice societies—but here I vow, if ere I see this Bow∣ser when hee cannot see me, either in by-lane, privilege place, Court, Alley, or come bekinde him when hes standing, or take him when heereeles from a Tavern late, pissing a∣gain a Cundit, Wall, or Gate, when hoe's in such a plight and clear from me, isle do that I am ashamed to speak till then.
Nay read forward, I have found 3. of your Gallants, like your bewitching shame merely sophistical, there's your Bawde-Gallant, your pocket-Gallant, &amp; your Whore-Gallant.
Moister Taylbee.
Thats he
I count the world but as my prey, to maintain you?
Thats just the phrase and still of em all, to him: they meet altogether in one effect, and it may well hold too, for they all jump upon one cause, subands lechery.
What shapes can flattery take, let me entreat you,
Both in the virgins right, and our good hopes
Since your hours are so fortunate, to proceed.
Why he's base that fairs, until he crown his deed.
See that dissembling devil, that periurde strumpet.
Welcome my souls best wish,—oh out alasle▪ thy arm bound in a scarf, I shall sown instantly,
Heart and isle fetch you again in the same tune,
O my unmatched love, if any spark of life remain,
Look up, my comfort, my delight, my—
O good, o good?
The organ of her voice is tunde again,
Theres hope in women, when their speech returns▪
See like the Moon after a black eclipse,
She by degrees recovers her pure light:
How cheers my love?
As one new wah't out of a deadly trance,
The fit scarce quiet.
It was terrible for the time, Id much ado to fetch you.
Shrew your fingers,
How came my comfort wounded, speak?
Faith in a fray last night.
In a fray? will you loose your blood so vainly,
Many a poor creature lacks it, tell me how?
What was the quarrel?
Loath to tell you that.
Loath to tell me.
Yet it was my cause of coming.
Why then, must not I know it:
Since you urge it, you shall,
You're a strumpet.
O news abroad sir?
Say you so.
Why you knew that the first night you lay with me.
Nay not to me, only but to the world.
Speak within compass man.
Faith you know none, you sail without.
I have the better skill then.
At my first step into a Tauerne-roome, to spy that chain of pearl wound on a strangers arm you begged of me.
How, you mislooke it sure.
By heaven the very self same chain▪
O cry you mercy, tic true, id forgot it, tic S. Georges day to morrow, I lent it to my couzin only to grace his arm before his m•s•is.
Notable cunning.
And is this all now in faith.
Not, I durst go further.
Why, let me never possess your love, if you see not that again a Thursday morning, I tak't unkindly in faith you should fall out with me for such atrifle.
Better and better.
Come, a kiss and friends.
Away.
By this hand Isle spoil your atme and you will not.
More for this then the Devil.
Ye, at your book so hard.
Against my will, are you there Signior Logic,
A pox of you sir.
Why how now, what has fate sent vs here, in the name of Venus goddess of Cypress.
A Freebooters pink sir, three or four inches deep.
No more, thats conscionable in faith.
Troth Ime sorry for it, pray how came ir sir?
Faith by a paltry fray, in Colman-streete.
Coome-parke he would say.
No less then three at once sir, made a Triangle with their Swords and Daggers, and all opposing me.
And amongst those three, only one hurt you sir.
Ex for ex.
Troth and Isle tell you what luck I had too, since I par∣ted from you last.
What I pray?
The day you offered to ride with me, I wish now Id had your company, Sfoote I was set upon in Coome-parke by three too.
Bah.
Robbed by this light of as much gold and Jewels, as I va∣lued at forty pound,
Sure Saturn is in the fifth house.
I know not that, hee may be in the sixth and he will for me, I am sure they were in my pocket wheresoever they were: but Isle ne'er refuse a Gentleman's company again when it is of∣feared me, I warrant you.
I must remember you, it is Miter-night Ladies.
Mass it is indeed, Friday to day, Id quite forgot, when a women's busy, how the time runs away.
Oh you've betrayed vs both.
I understand you not.
You've let him see, the chain of Pearl I gave you.
Who him: will you believe me,
By this hand he never saw it.
Upon a strangers arm he swore to me,
Mass that may be, for the truh is in faith,
I was robbed on it `at Coome-parke.
It was that betrayed it,
I would had staide him,
He was no stranger, he was a thief in faith,
For thieves will be no strangers.
How shall I excuse it?
Nay I have you fast enough boy, you rogue.
Good sir, I beseech you sir, let me go.
A pick-pocket, nay you shall to Newgate luck you: is this your Boy sir.
How now boy? a monster? thy arm lined fast in an others pocket, where learnt you that manners; what comp∣ny have you kept alate, that you are so transformed into a roage, that shape I know n•t, believe me sir I much wonder at the al∣teration of this boy, where he should get this nature: as good a child to see to, and as virtuous, hee has his Creed by heart, reads me his chapter duly every night; hee will not miss you one tittle in the nine commandments.
Theres ten of em.
I fear he skips ore one; thou shalt not steal.
Mass like enough.
Else grace and memory, would quite abash the boy. Thou graceless imp, ah thou prodigious child, begot at some ec ipse, degenerate rogue. Shame to thy friends, and to thy my∣ster eke: how far digressing from the noble mind of thy brave Ancestors that lie in Marble, with their coat a••ors ore em.
Had he such friends?
The boy is well descend, though he be a rogue and has no feeling ont, yet for my sake, &amp; for my reputations seek not the blood of the boy, his near allied to many men of worcester∣ship now yet living, a fine old man to his father, it would kill his heart in faith, heed away like a Crysom.
Alas good gentleman?
Ah shameless villain, complainst thou? dost thou want?
No, no, no, no.
Art not well clad, thy hunger well resisted.
Yes, yes, yes, yes,
But thou shalt straight to Bridewell.
Sweet moister.
Live upon bread and water, and chap choke.
I beseech your worship.
Come Isle be his suerty for once:
You shall excuse me indeed sir?
He will mend, a may prove an honest man for all this, I know gallant Gentlemen now, that have done as much as this comes too in their youth.
Say you so sir?
And as for Bridewell, that will but make him worse, a will learn more knavery there in one week, then will furnish him and his heirs for a hundredth year.
Deliver the boy.
Nay I tell you true Sir, ther's none goes in there a queen, but she comes out an arrant whore I warrant you.
The boy comes not there for a million.
No you had better forgive him by ten parts.
True, but a must not know it comes from me, down a your knees you rogue, and thank this gentleman has got your pardon.
O I thank your worship:
A pox on you for a rogue, you put me to my set speech one a quarter:
Nay gentlemen you quite forget your hour, •ead moister Bowser
Let me go you're a dissembler
How.
Did not you promise me a new gown?
Did I not? yes faith did I, and thou shalt have it, go firrah run for a Tailor presently.
Let me see for the colour now; Orange tawny, Peach colour, what say to a Watchet Satin?
O tic the only colour I affect.
A very orient colour, ant please your worships, I made a gown ont for a Gentlewoman tother day, and it does passing well upon her.
A Watchet Satin gown.
There your worship left sir.
Laid about Tailor.
Very good Sir.
With four fair Laces.
That will be costly sir.
How you rogue costly, out ath'house, you slip-shood, shamlegd, browne-thred, penny-skeand rascal.
Nay my sweet love.
Hang him rogue, he's but a Botcher neither, come Isle send thee a fellow worth a hundred of this, if the slave were clean enough.
Who knocks.
A Christian: pray is not this moister Taylbees lodging, I was directed het her.
Yes, this is my masters lodging.
Cry you mercy sir. Is he yet stirring.
Hoe's awake, but not yet stirring, for he plaide away half his clothes last night
My mistress commends her secrets unto him, and presents him by me with a new Satin suite here.
Mass that comes happily.
And she hopes the fashion will content him.
Ther's no doubt to be had of that sir—your mistress name I pray? you're much pretiously welcome.
I thank you vncommonly sir.
The suite shall be accepted I warrant you sir.
Thats all my Mistress desires sir.
Fare you well sir.
Fare you well sir.
This will make my moister leap out of the bed for joy, and dance Wigmois galliard in his shift about the chamber?
Came this suit from mistress Cle•ueland?
She sent it secretly sir.
A pretty requitefull squall, I like that woman, that can remember a good turn 3 months ever the date, it shows both a good memory, and a very feeling spirit.
This came fortunately sir, after all your ill luck last night.
I'd beastly casting Jack.
Oh abom noble sir, you had the scuruiest hand—the old Serving-man swooped up all;
I am glad the fortune lighted upon the poor fellow by my troth, tmade his moister had?
Did you mark that sir, • warrant hee has the doggedst moister of any poor fellow under the dog-signe, Id rather serve your worship, Isle say that behind four back •ir, for no∣thing, as indeed I have no standing wages at all, your worship knows.
Oh but your veils Jack your veils considered, when you run too and fro between me and mistresses.
I must confess my veils are able to keep an honest man go I where I lift.
go to then Jack.
But those veils stand with the state of your body sir as long as you hold up your head, if that droop once, farewell you, farewell I, farewell all, and droop it will, though all the caudles in Europe should put to their helping hands toot; tic ee'n as uncertain as playing now vu now down, for if the Bill rise to aboue thirty, heir's no place for players, so if your years rise to aboue 〈…〉tie, ther's no room for old lechers.
and thats the rea on all rooms are taken up for young Temp'ers?
you're in the right sir?
pize ont I pound a good beaver hat to moister Frip last night Jack,
I feel the want of it now, —hark whose that knocks;
I• moister Taylbee stirring?
Whats your pleasure with him, he walks hereith hall.
Give •our worship good morrow,
Welcome honest lad;
A letter from my mistr•sse.
Whose th• mistress?
Mistress 〈…〉 block.
Mistress new-blocke my sincere love how do's she?
Faith only ••n the wait of your sight.
A•ass •eere sweet, Iu'e had such buisines, I protest I ne'er stood still since I saw her.
She has sent your worship a Beaver hat here, with a band best in fashion.
How shall I requite this dear soul?
Tit not a thing fit for me to tell you sir, for I have three years to serve yet: your worship knows how I warrant you;
I know the drift of her letter, and for the Beaver, say, I accept it highly.
O• she will be a proud woman of that sir.
And hark thee tell thy mistress as lm'e a Gentleman, Isle dispatch her out of hand, the first thing I do a my credit, can thou remember these words now?
Yes siras you are a Gentleman you'll dispatch her out of hand the first thing you do
In my credit.
Oh of your credit, I thought not of that fir.
Remember that good boy?
Fear it not now fir.
I dreamt to nigh Jack, I should have a secret supply out a'th City
Your dream craules out partly well sir,—what news there now?
I have an arrant no moister Taylbee—
Yonder walks my moist•r;
Mistress Tiffany commends her to your worship and he has sent you your ten pound in gold back gain, and says she cannot furnish you of the same Lawn you desire, till after
all hollantide—
Thank her she would let me understand so much? ha, ha,—this wench will live, why this was sent like a work wo∣man now, the rest are borchers to her, faith I commend her cunning, shees a fool, that makes her servant fellow to her heart, it robs her of respect, dams up all duty, keeps her in awe even of the slave she keeps.
This takes a wise course I commend her more,
Sends back the gold, I never saw before:
Well women are my best friends in faith,
Takes lands give me good legs:
Firm back white hand black eye, browne hair,
And ad but to these five a comely stature,
Let others live by art and I by nature.
Moister Bowser Maistr Bowser, ha, ha, ho, moister Bowser.
Holla:
What not out of thy kennel, Moister Bowser.
Moister Goldstone, your an early Gallant sir?
A fair cloak yonder in faith,—by my troth a bed My∣ster Bowser, you remember your promise well ore night.
Why whats a clock sir?
Do you ask that now, why the chimes are spent at Saint Brides.
Tic a Gentleman's hour, saith Moister Goldstone isle bee ready in a trice.
Away theres no trust to you:
Faith isle come instantly?
Nay choose whether you will or no, by my troth your cloak shall go before you—
Nay Moister Goldstore I ha sworke—do you hear sir:
Away, away, faith Ime angry with you, pox, a bed now Ime ashamed of it.
Foot my cloak, my cloak Moister Goldstone, slife what meant you by this sir you'll bring it back again, I hope, no not yet, by my troth I care very little for such kind of jesting, me thinks this familiarity now extends a little too far, unless it be a new fashion come forth this morning▪ secretly yester∣day twould have shown unmannerly, and saucily; I scarce
know yet what to think on it, well there's no great profit in standing in my shirt, isle on with my clothes, has bound me to follow the suite, my cloaks a stranger hee was made but yesterday, &amp; I do not love to trust him alone in company.
What may I conjecture of this Goldstone? hee has not only pound to me this cloak, but the very Diamond and Sapphire, which I bestowed upon my new love at Moister Pri∣meroes house; the cloaks new and comes fitly, to do me great grace at a wedding this morning, to which I was solemnly invited. I can continue change more thē the proudest Gallant of em all; yet never bestow penny of my self, my pawns do so kindly furnish me: but the sight of these jewels is able to cloy me, di• I nor preserve my stomach the better for the wedding dinner, a gift could never have come in a more pati∣ent h•ur, nor to be better digested; is she proved false,—but isle not fiet to day no▪ chafe my blood.
Ha, yonder goes Bowser, the place is fit:—boy stand with my horse at Corner, I owe you for a Pink 3. inches deep sir?
On—o—o;
Take that in part of payment; for Coome-parke:
On—o—o?
How now, whose this? sfoote one of our Gallants, knocked down like a Calfe, is there such a plauge of em here at London, they begun to knock em ath head already:
Oh Moister Bowser, prayrend me your hand sir; I am slain:
Slain and alive? oh cruel execution?
What man so sauage-spirited durst presume,
To strike down •attin on two taffeties cut:
O• li•e his hand against a Beuet hat.
Some toague that owes me money, and had no other means
To a wedding dinner: I must be d'est myself me thinks.
How why this my cloak, life how came my cloak hither?
welsaid moister Bowcer, first the Device, a fair purse wide open, the mouth downward, the word Alli•nis ass crumenis?
Whats that prithee?
Your bounty powers it self forth to all men.
And so it does in faith? that's all my fault, bountiful?
Moister Goldstone heers yours sir, 3. silver Dice, the word, Fratrem{que} Patrem{que}?
And whats that?
Fortune of my side?
Welsaid little Bowcer in faith?
What say you to me sir?
For the device A Candle in a corner; the word, Con∣sumptio, Victus:
The meaning of that sir?
My light is yet in darkness, till •in•oy her, right sir?
Now mine sir?
The Device an unvalued pearl hid in a Cave.
Ah ha sirs?
The word, Occultes vendit honours;
Very-good I warrant,
A black mans a pearl in a fair Ladies eye,
I said it was some such thing;
My turn must needs come now; am I fitted Moister Bowcer?
Trust to me, your device here is a Cuckoo sitting on a tree,
The Welsh Ledger, good.
The word, En Anis ex A•ib•s.
I marry sir.
Why do you know what it is sir.
No by my troth not yet sir▪
Oh, I keep one tune, I •ecant not.
I me like the Cuckoo in that indeed, where I love I hold.
Did I not promise you I would fit you.
They re all very well done in faith, and very Schollerlike, tho I say it before thy face little Bowcer, but I would not have thee proud ont now: come if this be performed well.
Who the Boy, he has performed deeper matters then this.
I a pox on him, I think was in my pocket now, and truth were known.
I caught him once in mine.
Suppose the shields are presented, then you begin boy.
I representing Mercury, am a Pick-pocket, and have his part at my fingers ends, Page I am to that great and secret thief, magno illo et Secret• Latroni.
There you make your honour sir▪
At Latroni.
You have it sir.
Latroni, thats mine.
He confesles the Theefe's his.
Remember boy, you point Latroni to me.
To you Moister, proceed▪
These four are his companions, the one a notable chea∣la, that will cousin his own father.
Moister Goldstone.
Let me alone moister Boucer, I can take mine own turn.
Why.
Peace.
The second an notorious lecher maintained by harlots cuius virtus consumptio corpus.
Thats I moister Bowcer.
There you remember your honour sir.
Ille leno pretiosissi••s, Virgineos obe lucrum vendens honours.
It sounds very well in faith.
Postremus ill•, quamuis apparatusplendidus, is no other∣wise but a Broker, these feathers are not his own, sed anis ex Auibus; all which to bee nothing but truth, will appear by the event.
In faith here's all now Gentlemen.
Short and pithy.
A good boy in faith and a pregnant.
I dare put trust in the Boy sir; forget not firrah at any ▪hand to point that same Latroni to me.
I warrant you moister.
Come Gentlemen the time beckons vs away.
I, furnish Gentlemen, furnish.
Hark one word moister Boucer, what's the same La∣troni, I have a good mind to that word in faith.
Is it yours sir,? Moister Goldstone pound it to me this morning fresh and •a••ing▪ and borrowed sieve pound upon it.
How, pound i•? pray let me near out this story, come, and isle lend you to the next barbers-surgeons;—pound my cloak?
How now Mar•aduke whats the wager;
Nay my care is at end sir, now I am come to the sight of you? my mistress your couzin entreats you to take part of a dinner with her at home at her house, and bring what Gentleman you please to accompany you.
Thank my sweet couze, isle munch with her say.
Isle tell her so.
Marmaduke—
Sir?
Will there be any stock-fish think thou?
How sir?
Tell my couze I'ue a great appetite to stock-fish in faith—Moister Goldstone isle entreat you to bee the gentleman that shall accompany me.
No•? me sir?
You sir.
By my troth concluded, what state bears thy couze •irrah?
Oh a fine Merchants wife,—
Or rather a Merchants fine wife—
Trust me and thats the •roperer phrase here at Lone∣don, and tic as absurd too, to call him •in Merchant, for be∣ing at sea, a man knows not what pickle he is in.
Why true—
Yet my couze will be served in plate I can tell you, she has her silver lug• and her guilt Tankards.
Fie.
Nay you shall see a house dressed v• in faith, you must not think •o tread ath ground when you come there.—
No, how there•?
Why upon paths made of fig-frailes, &amp; white blankets cut out in steakes.
Away—I have thought of a device, where shall we meet an hour hence.
In Powles.
Agreed.
The Broker-Gallant, and the Cheating-Gallant,
Now I have found 'em all, I so rejoice,
That the redeeming of my cloak I way not:
I have spied him.
Pox here's Boucer.
Moister Goldstone, my cloak, come wher's my cloak sir?
Oh you're a sure Gentleman; especially if a man stand in need of you, he may bee slain in a morning to breakfast, ere you vouchsafe to peep out of your lodging.
How?
No less then four Gallants, as Ime a gentleman, drew all upon me at once, and opposde me so spitefully, that I not only lost your cloak in the fray.
C•mes it in there?
But my tic•e Hangers, sirrah, I think thou hast seen e••.
Never i•a•h sir.
Those with the two Unicorns, all wrought in Pearl and gold pox on it it frets me ten times more then the loss of the platty cloak; prithee and thou love me speak no more on•t, it brings the Unicorns into my mind, and thou would not think how the conceit grieves me: I will not do thee that disgrace in faith, to offer thee any satisfaction, for in my soul I think thou scornst it thou bear that mind in my conscience▪ I have always said so of thee; fare thee well, when shall I see thee at my chamber, when?
Every day shortly.
I have •in toys to show thee.
You win my heart then:
The Devil scarce knew what a portion hee gave his children, when he allowde 'em large impudence to live upon, &amp; so turned em into th'world, surely he gave away the third part of the ri∣ches of his kingdom, revenues are but fools too't; the filed tongue and the undaunted fore-head,
Are mighty patrimonies, wealthier then those
The Citty-Sire, or the Court-father leaves,
In these behold it, riches oft like flaues
Revolt, they bear their fore-heads to their graves,
What soonest grasps advancement, me • great suites
Trips down rich widows, gains repute and name,
Makes way where ere it comes, bewitches all
Thou impudence, the minion of our days
On whose pale cheeks favour and fortune plays!
Call you these your five Gallants, trust me they are rare fellows
They live on nothing; many cannot live on something,
Here they may take example;—Suspectlesse virgin!
How easy had thy Goodness been beguiled
Now only rests, that as to me they are known,
So to the world their base Arts may be shown.
Art sure thou saw him receiu't boy?
Forty pound in gold as Im'e a gentleman borne,
Thy father gave the Rams-head boy?
No you're deceived my mother gave that sir.
whats thy mothers, is thy fathers;
Im'e sorry it holds in the Rams-head, see here he walks, I was sure hee came into Powles, the gold had been yours moister long ere this, but that he wears both his hands in his pockets:
How unfortunately is my purpose seated, what the de∣will should come in his mind to keep in his hands so long, the biting but of a paltry louse would do me great kindness now, I knew not how to requite •t, will no rascal creature assist me, stay, what i• I did impudently salute 'em out, good, boy be ready boy.
upon the least advantage sir?
You're most devoutly met in Powles sir?
So are you, but I scarce remember you sir.
Oh I cry you mercy sir, I pray pardō me I fear I have tendered an offence sir, troth I took you at the first for one moister Dumpling a Norfolk gentleman.
Ther's no harm done yet sir?
I hope hee is there by this time, how now boy, hast it?
No by troth have I not, this labours lost, it is in the right pocket, and he kept that hand in sure enough.
Vnpractizd Gallant, salute me but with one hand, like a counterfeit soldier, O times and manners? are wee grown beasts, doe wee salute by halfes, are not our limbs at leisure, wheres comely nurture, the Italian kiss, or the French cringe, with the Polonian waste: are all forgot, then misery follows—Surely fate forbad it, had hee employed but his right hand, Id had it:—It must be an everlasting devise I think, that procures both his hands out at once: do you walk sir.
No I stay a little for a Gentleman's coming too.
Farewell then sir, I have forty pound in gold about me, which I must presently send down into the country.
Fare you well sir: I wonder Moister Goldstone spares my company so long, it is now about the nauill of the day, upon the belly of noon.
See where he walks, be sure you let off at a twinkling now.
When did I miss you,—your worship has forgot, you promised Mistress Newcut your cozen, to dine with her this day.
Mass that was well remembered.
I am bold to salute you sir.
Sir.
Is Mistress New-cut your cousin sir.
Yes, shoe's a cousin of mine sir.
Then I am a cousin of yours, by the Sisters side.
Let me salute you then, I shall be glad of your farther acquaintance.
I am a bidden guest here too.
Indeed sir?
Faith invited this morning.
Your good company, s•all be kindly embraced sir.
I walk a turn or two here for a Gentleman, but I think heel either ouer-take me, or be before me.
Tic very likely sir; there sirrah, go to dinner, &amp; about two waite for me?
Nay let him come between two and three cousin, for we love to sit long at dinner in the City.
Come sweet cousin.
Nay cousin, keep your way cousin,
Good cousin I will not in faith cousin.
Why how now sirtah, upon twelve of the clock, &amp; not the cloth laid yet—must we needs keep Exchange time still.
I am about it forsooth.
You're about it forsooth; you're still about many things, but you ne'er do one well, I am an Ass to keep thee inth' house now my husbands at sea, thou hast no audacity with thee, a foolish dreaming lad, fitter to be in the garret, thē in any place else, no grace, nor manly behaviour; when did thou ever come to me, but with thy head hanging down, oh decheerefull prentice, uncomfortable servant: pray heaven the Gull my coo∣zen has so much wit left, as to bring moister Taylbee along with him; my comfort, my delight, for that was the chiefest cause I did inuit him, I bad him bring what Gentlemen he pleased to accompany him, as far as I durst go, why may hee not then make choice of moister Taylbee, had hee my wit or feeling hee would do it.
Wher's my sweet cousin here, dos she lack any guess?
Ever such guess as you, you're welcome cousin.
I am rude Lady.
You're most welcome sir.
There will be a gallant here anon cousin,
Hee promised faithfully.
Who first moister Taylbee?
Moister Taylbee, no moister Goldstone.
Moist. Goldstone; I could think well of that Goldstone, were not for one wild trick he has.
Whats that Lady?
In jest, he will pawn his puns es for suppers.
Thats a wild part in him in faith, &amp; he were my brother.
Pray gentlemen sit a while, your dinner shall come pre∣sently.
Ye mistress New-cut, at first give me a trip,
A close bite always asks a secret nip.
My cousin here is a very kind natured soul in faith, in her humour.
Puh you know her not so well as I cousin, I have observed her in all her humours you ne'er saw her a little waspish I think.
I have In faith.
Puh, then yea ne'er saw pretty humour in your life, I ca• bring her into it when I list.
Would you could in faith.
Would I could? by my troth and I were sure thou could keep thy countenance couze, what a pretty jest have I thought upon already to entertain time before dinner.
Preach couze what first, I love a jest a life in faith.
Ah but I am jealous you will not keep your count∣nonce in faith.
Why yea shall see a pretty story of a humour.
Faith isle try you for once, you know my couzin will wonder when she comes in to see the cloth laid and ne'er a salt upon the board.
Thats true in faith.
Now will I stand a while out of sight with it, and give her humour play a little.
Couze dost thou love me, and thou wilt ever doe any thing for me, do it.
Marry I build upon you countenance.
Why dost thou think Ime an ass couze?
I would be loath to undertake it else, for if you should burst out presently, couze the jest would be spoiled.
Why do not I know that, away, stand close, so, so mum cousin? a merry companion in faith, here will be good sport a∣non,—whist she comes?
I make you stray long for a bad dinner, here cousin, if Moister Goldstone were come, the meates even ready.
Some great business detains him couzin, but heel not be long now?
Why how now, cuds my life,—
Why?
Was ever mistress so plaugd with a shetle-headed ser∣uant—why Marmaduke.
I come forsooth:
Able to shame me from generation to generation.
Did you call forsooth?
Come hither forsooth—did you lay this cloth?
Yes forsooth:
Do you use to lay a cloth without a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt.
How many salts would you have, Ime sure I set the best ith house upon the boor.
How? cousin:—sings—cousin, cousin, did call couze.
Did you see a salt upon the board when you came in.
Puh.
Come, come, I thought as much, beshrew your sin∣gers, where first now?
Your cousin yonder.
Why the mans mad.
Cousin, hist cousin.
What say you.
Puh, I call not you, I call my cousin, come forth with the salt cousin: ha, how, nobody: why wa• not he that came in even now your cousin?
My cousin: O my bell salt, O my great bell salt.
The tenor bell salt; oh here comes Moister Goldstone now cousin, he may tell vs some news on him. Did you not meet a fellow about door, with a great silver salt under his arm.
No sure, I met none such.
Pardon me sir, I forgot all this while to bid you well∣come. I shall loath this room for ever. Take hence the cloth you unlucky maple-fac'd rascal, come you shall dine in my chamber sir.
No better place lady.
No less then forty pound in fair gold at one lift, the next shall sown, and sown again till the devil fetch him ere I set hand to him, heart, nothing vexes me so much▪ but that I paid the Goldsmith for the change too not an hour before, had I let it alone in the chain of silver as it was at first, it might have given me some notice at his departure, sfoote I could fight with a win-mill now, sure it was some unlucky vile∣lain, why should he come and salute me wrongfully too mis∣take me at noon day, now I think ont in cold blood? it could not be but an induction to some villainous purpose, well, I shall meet him—
This forty pound came fortunately to redeem my chain of pearl from mortgage, I would not care how often I sowned to have such a good caudle to comfort me, gold and pearl is very restorative.—
See yonders the rogue I suspect for foul play, isle walk muffled by him, offer some offence or cause of a quarrel, only to try his temper, if he be a coward, he's the likelier to be a rogue, an infallible note.
What a pox ail you sir, would I had been aware of you.
Sir, speak you to me?
Not I sir, pray keep on your way I have nothing to say to you.
You're a rascal.
You may, say your pleasure sir,—but I hope I go not like a rascal.
Are you▪ fine to fly to your clothes, because ya•e Gallant, why theres no rascal, like your Calla•t rascal be∣leeue that.
You have took me at such an hour, faith you may call me even what you please, nothing will move me.
No, isle make somewhat n ooue you? draw? I suspected you were a rogue, &amp; you have pursed it up well with a coward?
Who my Patron.
Keep out you rascal.
The gest that did me the kindness in Powles,
Hold as you are a gentleman, you'll give me breath sir.
Are you there with me, a vengeance stop you, you have found breath enough to run away from me I will never meet this slave hereafter in a morning but I will breath my self upon him, since I can have no other satisfaction, hee shail save me that forty pound in fence-schoole.
When things are cleanly carried, sign of judgment,
I was the welcomst Gallant to her alive,
After the salt was stolen; then a good dinner,
A fine provoking meal which drew on apace,
The pleasure of a day-bed, and I had it:
This here one ring can witness, when I parted,
Who but seewte Moister Goldstone, I left her in that trance.
What cannot wit so it be impudent
Devise and compass? I would fine know that fellow now,
That would suspect me but for what I am.
He lives not,; It is all in the conveyance, what? Thou look not like a beggar, what makst thou on the groūd, I have a hand to help thee up, a fair chain of pearl, surely a merchants wife gives lucky bandsell; they that find pearl may were it at a cheap rate, mary my Lady dropped it from her arm for a device to toale me to her bed, Iu'e seen as great a matter—who be these? Isle be to crafty for you, oh monsieur Primero, Signior Fr•, is it you gallants.
Sweet moister Goldstone?
every bawd exceeds me in fortune: moister Primero was robed of a Carkanet upon monday last▪ laid the goldsmiths and found it. I h'a laid goldsmits Jeweller, Burnisher Broker, and the devil and all I think, yet could never so much as here of that chain of pearl, he was a notable thief, hee works close; peace, who be these, ha•let me see, by this light there it it is back least they see thee; a happy minute, Goldstone what an age do we breath in, who, that saw him now would think hee were maintained by purses: so, who, that meets me, would th•nke I were maintained by wenches, as far as I can see tic all one case, and holds both in one Court, wee are both maintained by the common road way? Keep thou thine own heart, thou liu'st unsuspected, I leese you again now.
But I pray you tell me,
met you no Gentlewomen by the way you came?
Not any what should they be?
Nay I do but ask,
Because a Gentlewoman's glove was found,
Near to the place I met you?
Faith we saw none sir.
good officers, upon suspicion of felony.
Very good sir
What call you the theefs name you do suspect?
Moister Iustinian Goldstone.
Remember, moister Justice Goldstone, a terrible world the whilst, my Masters.
Look you that's he; upon him officers.
I see him not yet, which is he sir.
Why that.
He a thief sir, who that Gentleman in the Sat in?
Even hee.
Farewell sir, you're a merry Gentleman.
As you will answer it officers, Isle bear you out, Isle be your warrant.
Nay and you say so, what's his name then.
Iustinian Goldstone.
Moister Iustinian Goldstone, wee apprehend you sir upon suspicion of felony.
Me.
You sir.
I charge you in the Kings name gentlemen to assist vs.
Moister Taylbee?
The same man sir.
Life whats the news?
Ha you forgot Come-parke?
Come-parke? no, tic in Kingston way.
I believe you'll find it so.
I not deny it.
Bear witness has confessed.
What have I confessed, pair of cockscombs indubitable?
I was robbed finely of this chain of Pearl there,
And forty fair Spur-Royals.
Did I rob you?
There where I find my goods I may suspect sir.
I dreamt this would be his end.
See how I am wronged Gentlemen:
As I have a soul, I found this chain of pearl,
Not three yards from this place, just when I met you.
Ha, ha!
Yet the law's such, if he but swear it is you, you're gon.
Pox ont, that ere I saw't.
Can you but swear it is he, do but that, and you tickle him in faith?
Nay and it come once to swearing let me alone:
Say and hold, hee called my Jewels counterfeit, and so cheated the poor wench of 'em:
Come bring him away, come?
T will call my state in question!
I think what's got by theft doth never prosper, Now lost my chain of pearl—come moister Goldstone, lets go this mine in faith,
The chain of pearl?
By my trothit's mine;
By my troth much good do it you sir?
Im'e glad in my soul sie—Gnaws,
Deliver your weapons,
How?
You're apprehended upon supition of felony?
Felony? whats that'
Was it you in faith, sir all this while, that did me that kindness to ease both my pockets at Coom-parke:
I si•? pray gentlemen draw near, lets talk among our selves, stand a part Scoundrel;—must every gentleman be up braided in public that flies out now and then upon necessi∣tie, to be Theames for peddlers and weavers? this shou•d not bee, it was never seen among the Romaines; nor read we of it in the time of Brute▪ are wee more Brutish now? did I list to blab, do not I know your course of lise moister Taylbee to bee as base as the basest, maintained by me, by him by all of vs, and a second hand from mistresses, Iu'e their letters here to show?
Why should you be so violent to strip naked
Another Reputation, to the world knowing your own so le∣prous, Beside this •nai•ie of pearl and those spur-royals came to you fa se y for she broke her faith, and made her soul a strumpet with her body, when she sent those; they were ever justly mine? Pray what moves you sir, why should yo• shake your head, you're clear, sure I should know you sir, pray are not you some∣times a pander, &amp; oftner a bawd sir, have I never Sinned in your banqueting boxes, your bowers and towers? you slave, that keeps fornication upon the tops of trees, the very Birds can∣not in gender in quiet for you, why rogue, that goes in good clothes made out of wenches cast gowns.
Nothing goes so near my heart as that?
Do you shake your slaves nodle?
And heir's a rascal looked asway too, (saving the pre, seace of moister Goldstone;) a filthy-slymy-lousie-nitticall bro∣kerr, pricked up in pawns from the hat-band to the shoostring∣a necessary hook to hang gentlemen's suites ont it'h Air, least they should grow musty with long lying? which his pawns seldom are guilty off, a fellow of several scents and Seem; French, Duch, Italian, English, and therefore his lice must needs be mungrells. why Bill money?
I am sorry to here this among you, you've all deceived me, truly I took you for other Spirits, you must pardon me hence-forward, I have a reputation to look to, I must bee no more seen in your companies;
Nay, nay, nay, nay, moister Golstone, you must not scope so in faith, one word before you go sir,
Pray dispatch then, I would not for half my reave∣news in faith now, that any gallants should pass by in the mean time, and find me in your companies, nay as quick as you can sir.
You did not take away moister Bowcers cloak •other morning, pound it to me and borrowed five pound vppon't;
Ha?
It was not you neither that finely cheated my little Novice at moister Primeroes house, of a Diamond and Sapphire, and swore they were counterfeit, both glass, mere glass as you were a right gentleman;
Slife, why were we strangers all this while? s•oot I perceicue wee are all natural Brothers? a pox on•s all are we found in faith?
A cheater?
A these, a lecher, a bawd and a Broker?
What mean they to bee so merry, Im'e afraid they laugh at vs and make fools on's.
Push, leave it to me—how now: who would you speak withal?
Speak withal? have wee waited all this while, for a suss∣pected thief•
How? your'r scarce awake yet I think, look well, does any appear like a thief in this company▪ a∣way you slaves, you stand loitering, when you should look to the common wealth? you catch knaves apace now, do you not? they may walk by your nose, your as kills?
Sweet Moister Goldstone.
You lacked spirit in your company, till I came among you▪ here •ee •iue on's, lets but glow together, why now the world shall not come between vs.
If we be true among our selves.
Why true; we cannot lack to be rich; for we cannot lack riches, nor can our wenches want, nor we want wenches.
Let me alone to furnish you with them.
And me.
Theres one care past: and as for the Knights daughter,
Our chiefest business, and least thought upon.
Thats true in faith.
How shall we agree for her.
With as much ease as for the rest: to morrow brings the night, lets all appear in the best shape we may; troth is, we have need on it, and when amongst vs five she makes election, as one she shall choose.
True, she cannot choose.
That one so fortunate amongst vs five,
Shall bear himself more portly, live regarded,
Keep house, and be a countenance to the rest.
Admiral.
For instance, put case your self after some robbery done
Were pursued hardly; why there were your shelter,
You know your Sanctuary: nay say you were taken,
His letter to the Justice will strik't dead,
It is policy to receive one for the head.
Lets hug thee Goldstone.
What have I begot?
What Sir?
I must plot for you all, it likes me rarely.
Prithee what first sir?
It would strike Fitsgraue pale,
And make the other Suitors appear blanckes.
For our united mysteries.
What if we five: presented our full shapes
In a Strange-gallant, and conceited mask?
In a mask, your thoughts and mine w•te• wins.
So the device were subtle nothing like it.
Some Post must 〈◊◊〉▪
Poet? you'll take the direct l•no to have vs sta'gde? why what lacks Bowser, are you too well, too safe, an absolute scholar, easy to be wrought, •o danger in the operation.
But have you so much interest▪
What in Bowser? why my least woo• com••• •• him:
Then no man fit•.
And there's Moister Frip too, 〈…〉sh vs of ma•king s•i•e〈…〉 ••ow.
Upon sufficient pawn I think I can sir•
Pawn? I•we, here take my ••aine•pa w•es among bro∣theirs? we shall thrive? but wee must still expect one •ongue in five, and think vs happy too.
Last man we spoke on, Moister Bowser.
Little moister Bowser, sweet moister Bowser welcome in faith?
Are your fathers dead▪ gentlemen, you're so m•rry.
By my troth a good jest, did not I co•••nd his wit to you gentlemen, hark ••rm Raf Bowser, co••• Bowser in faith? theirs a kind of portion in town, a girl of 15 hundred, whom we al powrefully affect, and determine to present our parts to her in a Mask.
In a Mask!
Right sir, now a little of thy brain for a device to pre∣sent vs firm, which wee shall never bee able to do our selves thou know that; and with a kind of speech wherein thou may express what gallants are▪ bravely;
Puh, how can I express em otherwise but bravely: now for a Mercury and al were fitted.
Could not a boy supply it?
Why none better.
I have a boy shall put down al the Mercuries ith town,
A will play a Mercury naturally, at his fingers end in faith.
Why then wee are suited; for torch-bearers and shield∣boys, these are always the writers properties; you're not troub∣led with them.
Come my little Bowser; do it finely now, to the life.
I warrant you gentlemen.
Hist; give me a little touch aboue the 〈◊〉 and you can possible, for I mean to present this chain of pearl to her.
Now I know that let me a•o•e to fit you.
Come forth you ••rye private—why spring strumpet have we found your close. haunts, your private watchtowers, and your 〈…〉till means.
How then?
You can steal secretly hither, you mystical queen you, at twilight, 〈…〉 you have a privilege from your hat forsooth, to walk without a man, and no suspicion, But 〈…〉 gentlewomen that go in Ti•es Have no such liberty we cannot do thus▪ Custom grants that to you thats shame in vs.
Have you donne yet?
You broke the back of one husband already &amp; nowth' others dead with grief at sea, with your secret expenses, close ••elths cunning filches, and continued banquets in cor∣ners; then forsooth you must have your milke-baths to white you, your •ose-leaues to sweeten you, your beane-floure bags, to sleek you, and make you soft, smooth, &amp; delicate, for lasci∣uious entertainment.
So, and you think all this while you dance like a these in a ••st you're safe, no body can find you; pray were not you a P•lmo•gers daughter at first, that run away with a new Courtier for the love of Gentlewoman's clothes, and bought the fashion at a dear rate, with the loss of your name &amp; cre∣dit, why what are all of you, but rustical insides, and city flesh, the blood of yeom•n, and the b•m of gentlewomen—
What shall wee suffer a changeable fore-part to out∣tongue vs, take that.
Murder, murder—
How now? why Ladies, a retreat, come, you have shown your spirits sufficiently, y are all land captains, and so they shall find that come in your quarters, but have you the law free now to fight and scrod among your selves and let your
Gallants run away with vs.
How?
Good.
Sweet moister Bowser.
Another?
Why then I perceive you know nothing: why they are in the way of marriage:
A knights daughter here in town makes her election among em this night.
This night?
This very night, and they all present themselves in a mask before her, know you not this?
O traitor Moister Goldstone.
Periurde Moister Tail•eer
Without soul?
She will chase him.
You have more cause to join, and play the grounds of friendship amongst your selves, then rashly run diuisional could tell you a means to pleasure you:
Good moister Bowser.
But that you're women and are hardly secret.
We vow it seriously?
You should be all there in presence▪
See all, hear all, and yet not they perceive you.
So that—
Sweet moister Bowser,—I
I can stand you in stead,
For I frame the device,—
If ever—
Will you do it—hark you—
Content.
And isle make one.
And I another,
Weal mar the match,
When that good news came of my husbands death,
Goldstone promised me marriage.
and Swear to me.
Isle bring his oths in question▪
So will•:
Agree among your selves, for shame.
Are we resolude?
In this who would not fine,
Friends all for my part,
Heir's my lip for thine▪
Round let it go,
All wrath thus quenched,
And I conclude it so.
How all events strike even with my wishes, Their own invention damnes them,—now Gentlemen? stands your assistance firm?
Why it is our own case,
Ime sorry you should doubt.
Weal furnish you?
Are these our Gallants?
Are our Gallants these?
Here be five shields sir?
Finished already, thats well? Isle see thy moister shortly▪
Ime satisfied.
Prithee lets see moister Fitsgraue,
I have blazed them,
Whats this;
Fooh, you should be a gallant too, for you're no university School∣ler?
Look this is Pursuit:, the device, a purse wide open, and the mouth downward. The wood, Alienis •ee• •r••••nis.
Whats that?
One that lives out of other men's pockets,
Thats right?
Heir's Goldstones three silver dice,
They run hye, two sincks and a quitter?
They are hye men fit for his purposes—The word,
Nay he will cheat his own brother, nay his own fa∣there in faith?
So much the word imports—Moister Primero,
Pox what says he now?
The device, an unvalued pearl, hid in a cave. The word, Occulos vendit honours,
Whats that▪
One that sells maidenheads by whole-sale;
Excellently proper?
Moister Frip?
That pythagoricall rascal, in a gentleman's suite to day, in a knights to morrow:
The devise for him; a Cuckoo sitting on a tree? The word, Enauis ex a•ib•s; one bird made of many; for you know as the Sparrow hatches the Cuckoo, so the Gentleman feathers the Broker?
Let me admire thee, moister Fitsgraue?
They will scorn gentlemen: and to assist them the bet∣la, Pursnets boy that little precious pick-pocket, has a com∣pend os speech in latin, and like a Mercury presents their their dispositions more liberally:
Never were poor gallants so abused?
Hang 'em, their counterfeits, no honest spirit will pity 'em▪
This is my Crown,
So good men smile I dread no raskalls frown.
Away, bestow your selves secretly, ore'head, this is the place appointed for the rehearsal, to practise their behaviours.
We are vanished.
Moister Bowcer,
Welsaid in faith, off with your cloaks gallants, let's fall roundly to our business:
Is the boy perfect?
That's my credit sir, I warrant you?
If our little Mercury should bee out, wee should scarce be known what we are▪
I have took a course for that, fear it not sir; look you first here be your Shields:
I Where be our Shields?
which is mine?
Which is mine moister Bowcer? this?
I pray be contained a little gentlemen, they'll come all time enough to you, I warrant:
This Frip is grown so violent;
Yours to begin withal sir?
Latroni? why Sheerse of the Sheer.
In faith? and I have sh••uen some shears in my days.
Now gentlemen are you satsfied and pleased?
Never: more amply▪
Amongst vs now falls that desired lot,
For we shall blast five rivals with one plot.
Grave gentlemen, in whose approved bosoms,
My deceased father did repose much faith
Your dearly welcome: pray sit, command music,
See nothing want to beautify this night,
That holds my election in her peaceful arms,
Feasts, Music, Hymns, those sweet celestial swarms.
May you be blessed in this election.
That content, may meet perfection.
Sound Lute. Band•ra, Gitterne,
Viol, Virginals and Sithron!
Voices spring and lift aloud,
Her name that makes the Music proud:
this night perfection,
makes her election:
Follow, follow follow, follow round,
Look you to that, nay you to that, nay you to that:
Anon, you will be found, anon you will bee found, anon you will bee found.
Cornets.
Alienis ass crumenis.
Bows to her.
Fratremque, Patremque.
Bows to her.
Consumptio victus.
Bows to her.
Occultos vendit honours.
Bows to her.
A Cuckoo: en anis ex a•ibus.
Bows to her.
Are you all as the speech and shields display you?
Wee shall prove so.
The very chain of Pearl was filched from me.
Hold stop th• boy there.
Will none lay hands on him.
How now.
Alas Ime but a broker, it was pound to me in my shop.
Ha, Fitsgraue?
Peamo•t and the rest.
Whore's Boucer?
Here.
Wee are all betrayed.
Betrayed▪ • ••e new forth to betrayed, you have not so much worth: nay struggle not with the net, you are caught for this world.
Would we were out.
It was I framed your devise: do you see it was I;
The whole assembly has took notice of it,
That you are a gallant cheator,
So much the pawning of my cloak contains▪
You a base thief, think of Coome-parke and tell me that your a hired Smokster, here is her letter. In which we are cer∣tified that you are a Bawd.
The broker has confessed it.
So has the boy.
That boy will be hanged, he stole the chain at first and has thus long maintained his masters Gallantry.
All which we here present like captive slaves,
Waiting that doom which their presumption craves.
How easily may our suspectlesse sex,
With fair appearing shadows be deluded:
Dear sir, you have the work so well begun,
That took from you small glory would be won.
Since tic your pleasure to refer to me,
The doom of these; I have provided so:
They shall not altogether loose their cost;
See I have brought wives for em.
Heart, the strumpets—out, out▪
Having assumed out of their impudence,
The shape of sheeld-boyes.
To heapefull confusion.
Rather confine vs to strikt chastity▪
A mere impossible task then to wed these:
Whom we loath worse then the f•ul'st desease.
O grant em their requests.
The doom is past,
So since your aim was marriage:
Either embrace it in these Courtesans,
Or have your base acts, and fello••os live•
Proclaimed to the indignation of the law,
Which will provide a public punishment:
As for the boy, and that infectious Bawd,
We put forth those to whipping.
Whipping? you find not that in the statute to whip sat∣tin.
Away with him.
Since all our shifts are discovered, as far as I can see tic
our best course to marry em: weal make them get our livings.
He says true.
You see how we are threatened, by my troth wenches be ruled by me, lets many em and it bee but to plauge em; for when we have husbands we are under couert-baron, and may lie with whom wee list; I have tried that in my tother husbands days.
A match.
Isle be no more de•erd▪ come, when do you join:
These forced marriages do never come to good.
How can they, when the come to such as you?
The often prove the ruin of great houses,
Nor Virgin do I in this seek to entice:
All glory to my self; these Gentlemen,
To whom I am bound to love for kind assistance,
Had great affinity in the plot with me.
To them I give my thanks: my self to thee,
Thrice worthy Fitsgraue.
I ha• •ll my wishes.
And I presume ther's none but those can frown,
Whose •nu•s like the rushes we tread down.

