Hail holy earth, whose cold arms do embrace
The truest man that ever fed his flocks:
By the fat plains of fruitful Thessaly,
Thus I salute thy grave, thus do I pay
My early vows and tribtute of mine eyes,
To thy still loved ashes: thus I free
My self from all ensuing heats and fires
Of love, all sports, delights and games,
That Shepherds hold full deers thus put I off.
Now no more shall these smooth brows be go•t,
With youthful coronals, and lead the dance,
No more the company of fresh fair Maids
And wanton shepherds be to me delightful.
Nor the shrill pleasing sound of merry pipes,
Under some shady dell• when the cool wind
Plays on the leaves, all be far away:
Since thou art far away: by whose dear side,
How often have I sat crowned with fresh flowers
For Summers queen, whilst every Shepherds boy•
Puts on his lustily greene with gaudy hook,
And hanging scrip o• finest cordeuan:
But thou art gone, and these are gone with thee,
And all are dead but thy dear memory:
That shall outlive thee, and shall ever spring,
Whilst there are pipes, or Jolly shepherds sing.
And here will I, in honour of thy love,
Dwell by thy grave, forgetting all those joys,
That former times made precious to mine eyes:
Only remembering what my youth did gain,
In the dark hidden virtuous use of herbs:
That I will I practise, and as freely give
All my endeavours, as I gained them free.
Of all greene wounds I know the remedies,
In men or cattle, be they stung with snakes,
Or charmed with powerful words of wicked art,
Or be they loue-sicke, or through too much heat
Grown wilde or lunatic, their eyes or ears
Thickened with misty film of dulling rum,
These I can cure, such secret virtue lies
In herbs applied by a virgins hand:
My meat shall be what these wilde woods afford,
Berries, and Chestnuts, Plantains, on whose cheeks
The Sun sits smiling, and the lofty fruit
P•lt from the fair head of the strait grown pine:
On these Isle feed with free content and rest,
When night shall blind the world, by thy side blessed.
Through yon same bending plain,
That flings his arms down to the maine,
And through these thick woods have I run,
whose boat•ome never• kissed the Sun
Since the lusty spring began,
All to please my M•ester Pan,
Have I trotted without rest
To get him fruit, for at a feast,
He entertains this coming night,
His Paramour the Syrinx bright:
But behold a fairer sight•
By that heavenly form of thine,
Brightest fair thou art divine:
Sp•ong from great immortal race
Of the G•ds: for in thy face,
Shines more awful majesty,
Then dull weak mortality
Dare with misty eyes behold
And live, therefore on this mould,
Lowly do I bend my knee,
In worship of thy deity,
Deign it Goddess from my hand,
To receive what ere this land,
From her fertile womb doth send
Of her choice fruits: and but lend,
Belief to that the Satire tells,
Fairer by the famous wells,
To this present day ne'er grew,
Never better nor more true,
Here be grapes whose lusty blood,
Is the learned Poets good,
Sweeter yet did never crown,
The head of Bacchus, nuts more browne
Then the squirrels teeth that crack them,
Deign ô fairest fair to take them,
For these black eyed Driope,
Hath often times commanded me,
With my clasped knee to clime,
See how well the lusty time,
Hath decked their rising cheeks in red,
Such as on your lips is spread,
Here be berries for a Queen,
Some be red, some be greene:
These are of that luscious meat,
The great God Pan, himself doth eat:
All these, and what the woods can yield,
The hanging mountain or the field,
I freely offer, and ere long,
Will bring you more, more sweet and strong.
Till when humbly leave I take,
Least the great Pan do awake:
That sleeping lies in a deep glade,
Vnde a broad beeches shade:
I must go, I must run,
Swifter then the fiery Sun.
And all my fears go with thee.
What greatness or what private hidden power,
Is there in me to draw submission,
From this rude man, and beast? sure I am mortal,
The daughter of a Shepherd, he was mortal:
And she that bore me mortal: prick my hand
And it will bleed: a fever shakes me,
And the selfsame wind that makes the yoūg lambs shrink,
Makes me a cold, my fear says I am mortal:
Yet I have heard (my mother told it me)
And now I doe believe it, if I keep
My virgin flower vncropt, pure, chaste, &amp; fair,
No Goblin, wood-god, Faiery, Elf, or Fiend,
Satyr or other power that haunts these groaues,
Shall hurt my body, or by vain illusion,
Draw me to wander after idle •iers.
Or voices calling me in dead of night,
To make me follow, and so told me on,
Through mires and standing pools:
Else why should this rough thing, who never knew
Manners, nor smooth humanity, whose heats
Are rougher then himself, and more misshapen,
Thus mildly kneel to me? sure there is a power
In that great name of virgin; that binds fast
All rude uncivil bloods, all appetites
That break their confines: then strong chastity,
Be thou my strongest guard, for here Il'e dwell
In opposition against Fate and Hell.
Now we have done this holy festival,
In honour of our great God, and his rights
Performed, prepare your selves for chaste
And uncorrupted fires: that as the priest,
With powerful hand shall sprinkle on your brows
His pure and holy water, ye may be
From all hot flames of lust, and loose thoughts free,
Kneel shepherds kneel, here comes the Priest of Pan.
Shepherds thus I purge away,
Whatsoever this great day,
Or the past hours gave not good,
To corrupt your maiden blood:
From the high rebellious heat,
Of the grapes and strength of meat.
From the wanton quick desires,
They do kindle by their fires.
I do wash you with this water,
Be you pure and fair hereafter.
From your livers and your veins,
Thus I take away the staines.
All your thoughts be smooth and fair,
Be ye fresh and free as ayre.
Never more let lustful heat,
Through your purged conduits beat,
Or a plighted troth be broken,
Or a wanton verse be spoken:
In a Shepherdesses ear,
Go your ways you're all clear.
Sing his praises that doth keep,
our Flocks from harm,
Pan the Father of our sheep,
And arm in arm
Tread we softly in a round,
Whilst the hollow neighbouring ground,
Fills the music with her sound,
Pan, o great God, Pan to thee
Thus do we sing:
Thou that keep vs chaste and free,
As the young spring,
Ever be thy honour spoke,
From that place the morn is broke,
To that place Day doth vnyoke.
Stay gentle Amoret thou fair browd maid,
Thy Shepherd prays thee stay, that holds thee de ere.
Equal with his souls good:
Speak, I give
Thee freedom Shepherd, &amp; thy tongue be still
The same it ever was: as free from ill
As he whose conversation never knew
The court or city: be thou ever true.
When I fall off from my affection,
Or mingle my clean thoughts with foul desires,
First let our great God cease to keep my flocks,
That being left alone without a guard,
The woolfe, or winters rage, summers great heat,
And want of water, to•s: or what to vs
Of ill is yet unknown, fall speedily,
And in their general ruin let me go.
I pray thee gentle Shepherd wish not so,
I do believe thee: tic as hard for me
To think thee false, and harder then for thee
To hold me foul.
ô you are fairer far,
Then the chaste blushing morn, or that fair star,
That guides the wandering seaman through the deep•
Straighter then the straightest pine upon the steep
Head of an aged mountain, and more white,
Then the new milk we strip before day light
From the full freighted bag• of our fair flocks:
Your hair more beauteous then those hanging lockes
Of young Apollo.
Shepherd be not lost,
Ye are sailed too far already from the coast
Of our discourse.
Did you not tell me once
I should not love alone, I should not loose
Those many passions, vows• and holy oaths,
I have sent to heaven: did you not give your hand,
Even that fair hand in hostage? do not then
Give back again those sweets to other men.
You your self vowed were mine,
Shepherd so far as maidens modesty
May give assurance, I am once more thine,
Once more I give my hand, be ever free
From that great foe to faith, foul jealousy.
I take it as my best good, and desire
For stronger confirmation of our love,
To meet this happy night in that fair grove,
Where all true shepherds have rewarded been
For their long service: say sweet shall it hold?
Dear friend you must not blame me if I make
A doubt of what the silent night may doe,
Coupled with this days heat to move your blood:
Maids must be fearful, sure you have not been
Washd white enough, for yet I see a stain
Stick in your liver, go and purge again.
O do not wrong my honest simple truth,
My self and my affections are as pure,
As those chaste flames that burn before the shrine•,
Of the great Dian: only my intent
To draw you thither, was to plight our trothes,
With interchange of mutual chaste embraces,
And ceremonious tying of our souls:
For to that holy wood is consecrate,
A virtuous Well, about whose flowery banks,
The nimble footed Faieries dance their rounds,
B• the pale mooneshine, dipping often times
Th•ir st•len children, so to make them free
From dying flesh, and dull mortality:
By this fair Fount hath many a Shepherd sworn,
And given away his freedom, many a troth
Been plight, which neither envy nor old time
Could ever break, with many a chaste kiss given,
In hope of coming happiness: by this
Fresh Foun•aine many a blushing maid
Hath crowned the head of her long loved shepherd,
With gaudy flowers, whilst he happy sung,
Lays of his love and dear captivity,
There grows all h•orbs fit to cool looser flames,
Our sensual parts pro•ok chiding our bloods,
And quenching by they• power those hidden sparks,
Th•t else would break out, and provoke our sense,
To open fires, so virtuous is that place:
Then gentle Shepherdess believe and grant,
In troth it 〈◊〉 not with that face to scant.
Your faithful Shepherd of those chaste desi•es,
He ever aimd at, and—
Thou hast prevailed, farewell, this coming night,
Shall crown thy chaste hopes with long wished delight.
Our great God Pan reward thee for that good,
Thou hast given thy poor shepherd fairest bud
Of maiden virtues: when I leave to be
The true admirer of thy chastity,
Let me des•rue the hot polluted name,
Of a wilde woodman, or affect some dame
Whose often prostitution hath begot,
More foul diseases, then ever yet the hot
Sun bred through his burnings, whilst the dog
Pursues the raging Lyon, throwing fog
And deadly vapor from his angry breath.
Filling the lower world with plague and death.
Shepherd may I desire to be believed,
What I shall blushing tell?
Fair maid you may.
Then softly thus, I love thee Perigot,
And would be gladder to be lewd again,
Then the cold earth is in his frozen arms
To •l•p the wanton spring: nay do not start,
Nor wonder that I woe thee! thou that art
The prime of our young grooms, even the top
Of all our lusty Shepherds: what dull eye
That n•for was acquainted with desire,
Hath s•en thee wrestle, run, or cast the stone,
Wi•h nimble strength and fair delivery,
And hath not sparckled fire, and speedily
Sent secret heat to all the neighbouring veins?
Who ever heard thee sing, that brought again,
That freedom back was lent unto thy voice?
Then do not blame me (shepherd) if I be
One to be numbered in this company,
Since none that ever saw thee yet, were free.
Fair Shepherdess much pity I can lend,
To your complaints: but sure I shall not love:
All that is mine, my self and my best hopes,
Are given already: do not love him then
That cannot love again: on other men
Bestow those heats more free, that may return
You fire for fire, and in one flame equal burn.
Shall I rewarded be so slenderly
For my affection, most unkind of men?
If I were old, or had agreed with Art,
To give another nature to my cheeks,
Or were I common mistress to the love
Of every swain, or could I with such ease
Call back my love, as many a wanton doth,
Thou might refuse me Shepherd, but to thee
I am only fixed and set, let it not be
A sport, thou gentle Shepherd, to abuse
The love of silly maid.
Fair soul, ye use
These words to little end: for know, I may
Better call back, that time was yesterday,
Or stay the coming night, then bring my love
Home to my self again, or recreant prove.
I will no longer hold you with delays,
This present night I have appointed been,
To meet that chaste fair (that enjoys my soul)
In yonder grove, there to make up our loves.
Be not deceived no longer, choose again,
These neighbouring plains have many a comely swain,
Fresher and freeer far then I ere was,
Bestow that love on them and let me pass,
Farewell, be happy in a better choice.
Cruel, thou hast struck me deader with thy voice
Then if the angry heavens with their quick flames,
Had shot me through: I must not leave to love,
I cannot, no I must enjoy thee boy,
Though the great dangers twixt my hopes and that
Be infinite: there is a Shepherd dwells
Down by the More, whose life hath ever shown
More fullen discontent then Saturnes brow,
When he sits frowning on the births of men:
One that doth wear himself away in lonenesse,
And never joys unless it be in breaking
The holy pl•ghted troths of mutual souls:
One that lusts after every several beauty,
But never yet was known to love or like,
Were the face fairer or more full of truth,
Then Phoebe in her fullness, or the youth
Of smooth Lyeus, whose ny starved flocks
Are always scabby, and infect all sheep
They feed withal, whose lambs are ever last,
And dye before their weaning, and whose dog,
Looks like his Moister, lean, and full of scurffe,
Not caring for the pipe or whistle: this man may
(If he be well wrought) do a deed of wonder,
Forcing me passage to my long desires:
And here he comes, as fitly to my purpose
As my quick thoughts could wish for.
Fresh beauty, let me not be thought uncivil,
Thus to be partner of your lonenesse: t'was
My love (that ever working passion) drew
Me to this place to seek some remedy
For my sick soul: be not unkind and fair,
For such, the mighty Cupped in his dombe
Hath sworn to be avenged on, then give room
To my consuming fires, that so I may
Enjoy my long desires, and so allay
Those flames, that else would burn my life away.
Shepherd, were I but sure thy heart were sound
As thy words seem to be, means might be found
To cure thee of thy long pains: for to me
That heavy youth consuming misery,
The love sick soul endures, never was pleasing,
I could be well content with the quick easing
Of thee &amp; thy hot fires, might it procure
Thy faith, and farther service to be sure.
Name but that great work, danger, or what can
Be compassed by the wit or art of man,
And if I fail in my performance, may
I never more kneel to the rising day,
Then thus I try thee shepherd, this same night,
That now comes stealing on, a gentle pair
Have promised equal love, and do appoint
To make yon wood the place, where hands and hearts
Are to be tied for ever: break their meeting
And their strong faith, and I am ever thine.
Tell me their names, and if I doe not move
(•y my great power) the center of their love
From his sixth being, let me never more,
Warm me, by those fair eyes I thus adore.
Come, as we go Isle tell thee what they are,
And give thee fit directions for thy work.
How have I wronged the times, or men, that thus,
After this holy feast I pass unknown,
And unsaluted? t'was not wont to be
Thus frozen with the younger company
Of jolly shepherds: t'was not then held good,
For lusty grooms to mix their quicker blood
With that dull humour: most unfit to be
The friend of man, cold and dull chastity:
Sure I am held not fair, or am too old,
Or else not free enough, or from my fouled
Drive not a flock sufficient great, to gain
The greedy eyes of wealth alluring swain.
Yet if I may believe what others say,
My face has foil enough, nor can they lay
Justly too strict a coyness to my charge.
My flocks are many, and the downs as large
They feed upon: then let it ever be
Their coldness, not my virgin modesty
Makes me complain.
Was ever man but I,
Thus truly taken with uncertainty?
Where shall that man be found that loves a mind
Made up in constancy, and dares not find
his love rewarded? here, let all men know,
A wretch that lives to love his mistress so.
Shepherd I pray thee stay, where haste thou been,
Or whether goosed thou? here be woods as greene
As any, ayre as fresh and sweet,
As where smooth Zephirus plays on the fleet
Face of the curled streams: with flowers as many
As the young spring gives, and as choice as any:
Here be all new delights, cool streams and wels,
Arbors are grown with wood bins, Caves, and dels,
Choose where thou wilt, whilst I sit by and sing,
Or gather rushes, to make many a ring
For thy long fingers, tell thee tales of love,
How the pale Phoebe hunting in a grove,
First saw the boy Endimion, from whose eyes,
She took eternal fire, that never dies,
How she conveyed him softly in a sleep,
His temples bound with poppy to the steep
Head of old Litmus, where she stoops each night,
Gilding the mountain with her brothers light
To kiss her sweetest.
Far from me are these
Hot flashes bred from wanton heat and ease,
I have forgot what love and loving meant,
Rimes, Songs, and merry rounds, that oft are sent
To the soft ear of Maid, are strange to me:
Only I live t'admire a chastity,
That neither pleasing age, smooth tongue, or gold,
Could ever break upon, so sure the mould
Is, that her mind was cast in: tic to her
I only am reserved, she is my form, I stir
By, breath, and move: tic she and only she
Can make me happy or give misery.
Good Shepherd, may a stranger crave to know,
To whom this dear observance you do owe?
Ye may, and by her virtue learn to square
And level out your life: for to be fair
And nothing virtuous, only fits the eye
Of gaudy youth, and swelling vanity.
Then know, shoe's called the virgin of the grove,
She that hath long since buried her chaste love,
And now lives by his grave, for whose dear soul
She hath vowed her self into the holy role
Of strict virginity, tic her I so admire,
Not any looser blood or new de•ire.
Farewell poor swain, thou art not for my bend,
I must have quicker souls, whose words may tend,
To some free action: give me him dare love
At first encounter, and as soon dare prove.
Come Shepherds come,
Come away without delay,
Whilst the gentle time doth stay,
Greene woods are dumme,
And will never tell to any,
Those dear kisses, and those many
Sweet embraces that are given,
Dainty pleasures that would even
Raise in coldest age a fire,
And give virgin blood desire.
Then if ever,
Now or never,
Come and have it,
Think not I,
Dare deny,
If you crave it.
Here comes another: better be my speed,
Thou God of blood, but certain if I read
Not false, this is that modest shepherd, he
That only dare salute, but ne'er could be
Brought to kiss any, hold discourse, or sing,
Whisper, or boldly ask that wished thing
We all are borne for: one that makes loving faces,
And could be well content to covet graces,
Were they not got by boldness: in this thing
My hopes are frozen, and but fate doth bring
Him heather, I would sooner choose
A man made out of snow, and fraser use
An Euuenke to my ends: but since hee is here,
Thus I attempt him: Thou of men most dear,
Welcome to her, that only for thy sake,
Hath been content to live: here boldly take
My hand in pledge, this hand, that never yet
Was given away to any: and but •it
Down on this rushy bank, whilst I go pull
Fresh blossoms from •he bows, or quickly cull
The choicest delicates from yonder mead,
To make thee chains or chaplets, or to spread
Under our fainting bodies, when delight
Shall locke up all our senses• how the sight
Of those smooth rising cheeks renew the story
Of young Atones, when in pride and glory
He lay enfolded twixt the beating arms
Of willing Venus: me thinks stronger charms,
Dwell in those speaking eyes: and on that brow
More sweetness then the painters can allow,
To their best pieces: not Narcissus he:
That wept himself away in memory
Of his own beauty, nor Siluanus boy,
Nor the twice ravished maid, for whom old Troy,
Fell by the hand of Pirrhus, may to thee,
Be otherwise compared then some dead tree
To a young fruitful Olive:
I can love, but I am loath to say so, least I prove
Too soon unhappy.
Happy thou would say,
My dearest Daphnis, blush not if the day
To thee and thy soft heats be enemy,
Then take the coming night, fair youth tic fre•
To all the world, shepherd Isle meet thee then
W•en darkness hath shut up the eyes of men,
In yonder gro•e: speak shall ou• meeting hold?
Indeed ye are too bashful, be more bold,
And tell me I.
I am content to say so,
And would be glad to meet, might I but pray so
Much from your fairness, that you would be true.
Shepherd thou hast thy wish,
Fresh maid adieu,
Yet one word more, since you have drawn me on
To come this night, fear not to meet alone,
That man that will not offer to be ill,
Though your bright self would ask it• for his fill
Of this worlds goodness: do not fear him then,
But keep your pointed time, let other men
Set up their bloods to sail, mine shall be ever,
Fair as the soul it carries, and unchaste never.
Yet am I poorer then I was before.
Is it not strange, among so many ascore
Of lusty bloods, I should pick out these things
whose veins like a dull river far from springs,
Is still the same, slow, heavy, and unfit
For stream or motion, though the strong winds hit
With their continual power upon his sides?
O happy be your names that have been brides:
And tasted those rare sweets, for which I pine,
And far more heavy be thy grief and tine.
Thou lazy swain that moist relieve my needs,
Then his upon whose liver always feeds
A hungry vulture.
Can such beauty be
Safe in his own guard, and not draw the eye
Of him that passes on to greedy gaze,
Or covetous desire, whilst in a maze
The better part contemplates, giving rain
And wished freedom to the labouring vain?
Fairest and whitest, may I crave to know,
The cause of your retirement, why ye go
Thus all alone? me thinks the downs are sweeter
And the young company of swains more meeter,
Then these forsaken and untrodden places.
Give not your self to lonenesse, and those graces
Hide from the eyes of men, that were intended
To live amongst vs swains.
Thou art befriended,
Shepherd in all my life, I have not seen,
A man in whom greater contents hath been,
Then thou thy self art: I could tell thee more,
Were there but any hope left to restore
My freedom lost: ô lend me all thy red,
Thou shamefaced morning, when from Tithons bed
Thou resist ever maiden.
If for me,
Thou sweetest of all sweets, these flashes be,
Speak and be satisfied, ô guide her tongue,
My better angel, force my name among
His modest thoughts, that the first word may be,
Alexis when the sun shall kiss the sea,
Taking his •est by the white Thetis side,
Meet in the holy wood, where Isle abide
Thy coming Shepherd.
If I stay behind,
An everlasting dullness and the wind,
That as he passes by shuts up the stream,
Of Reine or volga whilst the suns hot beam,
Beats back again, cease me, and let me turn
To coldenesse more then ice: oh how I burn
And rise in youth and fire! I dare not stay.
My name shall be your word.
Fly fly thou day,
My grief is great if both these boys should fail,
He that will use all winds must shift his sail.
Shepherds all, and maidens fair,
Fold your flocks up, for the Air
Gins to thicken, and the Sun
Already his great course hath run,
See the dew drops how they kiss
Every little flower that is:
Hanging on their velvet heads,
Like a rope of crystal beads.
See the heavy clouds load falling
And bright Hesperus down calling,
The dead night from under ground,
At whose rising mists unsound,
damps, and vapours fly apace,
Hovering ore the wanton face,
Of these pastures, where they come,
Striking dead both bud and bloom,
Therefore from such danger locke
Every one his loved flock,
And let your dogs lye loose without,
Least the Woolfe come as a scout
From the mountain, and ere day
Bear a Lamb or Kid away:
Or the crafty thievish Fox,
Break upon your simple flocks,
To secure your selves from these,
Be not too secure in ease,
Let one eye his watches keep,
Whilst the tother eye doth sleep.
So you shall good Shepherds prove,
And for ever hold the love
Of our great God: sweeeest slumbers
And soft silence fall in numbers
On your eye-lids: so farewell,
Thus I end my evenings knell.
Now let me know what my best Art hath done,
Helped by the great power of the virtuous moon,
In her full light, ô you sons of earth,
You only brood, unto whose happy birth
Virtue was given, holding more of nature
Then man her first borne &amp; most perfect creature.
Let me adore you, you that only can,
Help or kill nature, drawing out that span
Of life and breath, even to the end of time,
You that these hands did crop, long before prime
Of day, give me your names, and next your hidden power.
This is the Clo•• bearing a yellow flower:
And this black Horehound, both are very good,
For sheep or shepherd, bitten by a wood
Dogs venomed tooth, these Ramuns branches are,
Which stuck in entries, or about the bar
That holds the door fast, kill all the enchantments, charms,
Were they Medea• verses that do harms
To men or cattle: these for frenzy be
A •piety and a sovereign remedy.
The bitter Wormwood, Sage, and Marigold,
Such sympathy with mans good they do hold:
This Tormen•l whose virtue is to part
All deadly killing poison from the heart,
And here Narcissus root, for swellings best:
Yellow L•cimacus, to give sweet rest
To the faint Shepherd, killing where it comes,
All busy gnats, and every fly that hummes,
For leprosy, Darnel, and Sellondine,
With Calamined, whose ve•tues do resin
The blood of Man, making it free and fair,
As the first hour it breathed, or the best air.
Here other to, but your rebellious use,
Is not f•rme, whose goodness is abuse,
Therefore foul standergrasse, from me and mine
I banish thee, with lustful Turpentine,
You that entice the veins, and stir the heat
To civil mutiny, scaling the seat
Our reason moves in, and deluding it
With dreams and wanton fancies, till the fit
Of burning lust be quenched by appetite,
Robbing the soul of blessedness and light:
And thou light Var•in to, thou must go after
Provoking easy souls to mirth and laughter,
No more shall I dip thee in water now,
And sprinckle every post, and every bow
With thy well pleasing juice, to make the gromes,
Swell with high mirth as with joy all the romes.
This is the Cabin where the best of all
Her sex, that ever breathed, or ever shall
Give heat or happiness to the Shepherds side,
Doth only to her worthy self abide.
Thou blessed star, I thank thee for thy light,
Thou by whose power the darkness of sad night
Is banished from the earth, in whose dull place
Thy chaster beams play on the heavy face
Of all the world: making the blew sea smile,
To see how cunningly thou dost beguile
Thy brother of his brightness, giving day
Again from Chaos• whiter then that way
That leads to Ioues hye Court, and chaster far
Then chastity it self: yo• blessed star
That nightly shines, thou all the constancy
That in all women was, or ere shall be:
From whose fair eye-balles flies that holyfire,
That ports stile the mother of desire,
Infusing into every gentle breast,
A soul of greater price, and far more blessed
Then that quick power which gives a difference
Twixt man and creatures of a lower sense.
Shepherd how came thou hither to this place?
No way is trodden, all the verdant grass
The spring shot up stands yet vnbrused here
Of any foot, only the dappld dear:
Far from the feared sound of crooked horn
Dwells in this fastness.
Chaster then the morn,
I have not wandered, or by strong illusion
Into this virtuous place have made intrusion,
But hither am I come (believe me fair)
To seek you out, of whose great good the Air
Is full, and strongly labours, whilst the sound,
Breaks against heaven, and drives into a stround
The amazed Shepherd, that such virtue can
Be resident in lesser then a man.
If any art I have, or hidden skill,
May cure thee of disease or festered ill,
Whose grief or greenenesse to another eye,
May seem unpossible of remedy,
I dare yet undertake it.
Tic no pain
I suffer through disease, no beating vain
Conveys infection dangerous to the heart,
No part impostumde to be curd by Art:
This body holds, and yet a feller grief
Then ever skilful hand did give relief
Dwells on my soul, and may be heald by you,
Fair beauteous virgin:
Then shepherd let me sue
To know thy grief that man yet never knew
The way to health, that durst not show his sore.
Then fairest know I love you,
Swain no more.
Thou hast abused the strictness of this place,
And offred Sacrilegious foul disgrace
To the sweet rest of these interred bones,
For fear of whose ascending fly at once,
Thou and thy idle passions, that the sight
Of death and speedy vengeance may not fright.
Thy very soul with horror.
Let me not
Thou all perfection merit such a blot,
For my true zealous faith.
Dare thou abide
To see this holy earth at once divide
And give her body up, for sure it will,
If thou pursue with wanton flames to fill
This hallowed place: therefore repent and go,
Whilst I with prays appease his Ghost below,
That else would tell thee what it were to be,
A rival in that virtuous love, that he
Embraces yet.
Tic not the white or red
Inhabits in your cheek, that thus •an wed
My mind to adoration: nor your eye,
Though it be full and fair, your forehead hye,
And smooth as Pelops shoulder: not the smile
Lies watching in those dimples, to beguile
The easy soul, your hands and fingers long,
With veins inameld richly, nor your tongue,
Though it spoke sweeter then Arions Harp,
Your hair woven into many a curious warp,
Able in endless error to unfold
The wandering soul, not the true perfect mould,
Of all your body, which as pure doth show,
In Maiden whiteness as the Alpsien snow,
All these, were but your constancy away,
Would please me less then a black stormy day
The wretched Seaman toiling through the deep.
But whilst this honoured strictness you dare keep,
Though all the plagues that ere begotten were,
In the great womb of air were settled here
In opposition, I would like the tree,
Shake off those drops of weakness, and be free
Even in the arm of danger.
Would thou have
Me raise again fond man, from silent grave,
Those sparckes that long ago were buried here,
With my dead friends cold ashes?
Dearest dear,
I dare not ask it, nor you must not grant,
Stand strongly to your vow, and do not faint:
Remember how he loved ye, and be still,
The same opinion speaks ye, let not will,
And that great god of woven Appetite,
Set up your blood again, do not inuit
Desire, and fancy for their long exile,
To seat them once more in a pleasing smile:
Be like a Rock made firmly up against all
The power of angry heaven, or the strong fall
Of Neptunes battery, if ye yield I die
To all affection: tic that loyalty
Ye tie unto this grave I so admire,
And yet theres something else I would desire,
If you would hear me, but withal deny,
O Pan, what an uncertain destiny
Hanges over all my hopes! I will retire,
For if I longer stay, this double fire,
Will like my life up.
Do, and let time wear out,
What Art and Nature cannot bring about.
Farewell thou soul of virtue, and be blessed
For ever, whilst I wretched rest
Thus to my self, yet grant me leave to dwell
In kenning of this Arbor, yon •am dell
Ore topped with mourning Cyprus and sad Ewe,
Shall be my Cabin, where I'll early r•w,
Before the Sun hath kissed this dew away,
The hard uncertain chance which Fate doth lay
Upon this head.
The Gods give quick release
And happy cure unto thy hard disease.
I do not love this wench that I should meet,
For never did my inconstant eye yet greet
That beauty, were it sweeter or more fair,
Then the new blossoms, when the morning air
Blows gently on them, or the breaking light,
When many maiden blushes to our sight
Shoots from his early face: were all these set
In some neat form before me, twould not get
The least love from me: some desire it might,
Or present burning: all to me in sight
Are equal, be they fair, or black, or browne,
Virgin, or careless wanton, I can crown
My appetite with any: sweat as oft,
And weep as any, melt my words as soft
Into a maidens ears, and tell how long
My heart has been her servant, and how strong
My passions are: call her unkind and cruel,
Offer her all I have to gain the jewel
Maidens so highly praise: then loath and fly,
This do I hold a blessed destiny.
Hail Shepherd Pan bless both thy flock &amp; thee,
For being mindful of thy word to me.
Welcome fair Shepherdess, thy loving swain
Gives thee the self same wishes back again:
Who till this present hour ne'er knew that eye,
Could make me cross mine arms or daily dye
With fresh consumings: boldly tel me then,
How shall we part their faithful loves, and when•
Shall I belly him to her, shall I swear
His faith is false, and he loves every where?
Isle say he mocked her the other day to you,
Which will by your confirming show as true,
For he is of so pure an honesty,
To think (because he will not none will lye.
Or else to him Isle slander Amoret,
And say, she but seems chaste, Isle swear she •e•
Me amongst the shady sycamores last night,
And loosely offered up her flame and spright,
Into my bosom: made a wanton bed
Of leaves and many flowers, where she spread
Her willing body to be pressed by me,
There have I carved her name on many a tree,
Together with mine own, to make this show
Morefull of seeming: Hobinal you know,
Son to the aged Shepherd of the Glen
Him I have sorted out of many men,
To say he found vs at our private sport,
And roused vs fore our time by his resorts
This to confirm, I have promised to the boy
Many a pretty knack, and many a toy,
As grins to catch him birds with bow, and bolt,
To shoot at nimble squirrels in the holt:
A pair of painted buskins and a lamb,
Soft as his own lockes, or the down of Swan,
This I have done to win ye, which doth give
Me double pleasure, discord makes me live.
Loved swain I thank ye, these tricks might pre∣uaile
With other rus•icke shepherds, but will fail
Even once to stir, much more to overthrow,
His fixed love from judgment, who doth know,
Your nature, my end, and his chosens merit,
Therefore some stronger way must force his spirit
Which I have found: give second, and my love
Is everlasting thine.
Try me and prove.
These happy pair of lovers meet straight way,
Soon as they fouled their flocks up with the day
In the thick grove bordering upon yon hill,
In whose hard side Nature hath carved a well:
And but that matchless spring which Poets know,
Was ne'er the like to this: by it doth grow
About the sides, all herbs which witches use,
All simples good for medicine or abuse,
All sweets that crown the happy nuptial day.
With all their colours, there the month of May
Is ever dwelling, all is young and greene,
There's not a grass on which was ever seen,
The falling Autume or cold winters hand
So full of heate and virtue is the land:
About this fountain: which doth slowly break
Below yon Mountains foot, into a creek
That waters all the valley, giving fish
Of many sorts, to fill the shepherds dish.
This holy well, my Grandam that is dead,
Right wise in charms, hath often to me sed,
Hath power to change the form of any creature,
Being thrice dipped over the head, into what feature,
Or shape t'would please the letter down to crave,
Who must pronounce this charm to, which she gave
Me on her death bed, told me what and how
I should apply unto the patients brow,
That would be changed, casting them thrice a sleep
Before I trusted them into this deep.
All this she showed me, and did charge me prove,
This secret of her Art, if crossed in love,
I'll this attempt, now Shepherd I have here
All her prescriptions• and I wi•l not fear
To be my self dipped: come, my temples bind
With these sad herbs, and when I sleep you find
As you do speak your charm, thrice down me let,
And bid the water raise me Amoret,
Which being done, leave me to my affair,
And ere the day shall quite it self out wear,
I will return unto my Shepherds arm,
Dip me again, and then repeat this charm,
And pluck me up my self, whom freely take,
And the hotst fire of thine affection slake.
And if I fit thee not, then fit not me,
I long the truth of this wels power to see.
Here will I stay, for this the covert is
Where I appointed Cloe, do not miss:
Thou bright eyed virgin, come, ô come my fair,
Be not abused with fear, nor let cold care
Of honour slay thee from thy Shepherds arm,
Who would as hard be won to offer harm
To thy chaste thoughts, as whiteness from the day,
Or yon great round to move another way.
My language shall be honest, full of truth,
My flame as smooth and spotless as my youth:
I will not entertain that wandering thought,
Whose easy currant may at length be brought
To a loose vastenes.
 Cloe!
Tic her voice
And I must answer, Cloe! ô the choice
Of dear embraces, chaste and holy strains
Our hands shall give! I charge you all my veins
Through which the blood and spirit take their way,
Lo•ke up your disobedient heats, and stay
Those mutinous desires, that else would grow
To strong rebellion: do not wilder show
Then blushing modesty may entertain.
 Cloe!
There sounds that blessed name again,
And I will meet it: let me not mistake,
This is some Shepherd, sure I am awake,
What may this riddle mean? I will retire,
To give my self more knowledge
Oh my fire,
How thou consum'st me? Cloe answer me,
Alexis, strong Alexis, high, and free,
Calls upon Cloe: see mine arms are full
Of entertainment, ready for to pull
That golden fruit which too too long hath hung,
T•mpting the greedy eye: thou stayest too long,
I am impatient of these mad delays,
I must not leave unsought those many ways
That lead into this center, till I find
Quench for my burning lust, I come unkind.
Can my imagination work me so much ill,
That I may credit this for truth, and still
Believe mine eyes, or shall I firmly hold her
Her yet untainted, and these sights but bold
Illusion? sure such fancies oft have been
Sent to abuse true love, and yet are seen,
Daring to blind the virtuous though with error,
But be they far from me with their fond terror:
I am resolved my Cloe yet is true.
Cloe hark Cloe sure this voice is new,
Whose shrillness like the sounding of a bell,
Tells me it is a woman: Cloe, tell
Thy blessed name again
Oh what a grief is this to be so near
And not encounter?
Shepherd we are met,
Draw close into the co•ert, least the wet
which falls like lazy mists upon the ground,
Soak through yous startvps.
Fairest, are you found
How have we wandered that the better part
Of this good night is perished? oh my heart!
How have I longed to meet ye? how to kiss
Those lily hands? how to receive the bliss
That charming tongue gives to the happy ear
Of him that drinks your language? but I fear
I am too much vnmannerd, far to rude,
And almost grown lasciuous to intrude
These hot behaviours, where regard of fame,
Honour, and modesty, a virtuous name,
And such discourse, as one fair sister may
Without offence unto the brother say,
Should rather have been tendered, but believe
Here dwells a better temper, do not grieve,
Then ever kindest that my first salute,
Seasons so much of fancy, I am mute
Hence•orth to all discourses, but shall be
Suiting to your sweet thoughts and modesty:
Indeed I will not ask a kiss of you,
No not to wring your fingers, nor to sue
To those blessed pair of fixed stars for smiles,
All a young lovers cunning, all his wiles:
And pretty wanton dyings shall to m•
Be strangers, only to your Chastity
I am devoted ever.
Honest swain,
First let me thank you, then return again
As much of my love: no thou art too cold
Unhappy boy, not tempered to my mold,
Thy blood false heavy downward, tic not fear
To offend in boldness wins, they never wear
deserved favours that deny to take
When they are offred freely: do I wake
To see a man of his youth, years and feature,
And such a one as we call goodly creature,
Thus backward? what a world of precious Art,
Were merely lost, to make him do his part?
But I will shake him off, that dares not hold,
Let men that hope to be beloud be bold,
Daphnis I do desire since we are met
So happily, our lives and fortunes set,
Upon one stake to give assurance now,
By interchange of hands and holy vow,
Never to break again: walk you that way,
Whilst I in zealous meditation •tray
A little this way when wee both have ended
These rights and duties by the woods befriended,
And secrecy of night, retire and find
An aged oak whose hollowness may bind
Vs both within his body, thither go:
It stands within yon bottom••
Be it so
And I will meet there never more with thee,
Thou idle shamefastness,
 Cloe!
Tic hee.
That dare I hope be bolder.
Cloe.
now
Great Pan for Sirinx sake bid speed our plow.
From thy forehead thus I take
These herbs, and charge thee not awake,
Till in yonder holy well,
Thrice with powerful magic spell,
Filled with many a baleful word,
Thou hast been dipped, thus with my cord
Of blasted hemp, by moone-light twinned,
I do thy sleepy body bind,
I turn thy head into the East,
And thy feet into the West,
Thy left arm to the South put forth,
And thy right unto the North:
I take thy body from the ground,
In this deep and deadly sound:
And into this holy spring,
I let thee slide down by my string:
Take this maid thou holy pit
To thy bottom, nearer yet,
In thy water pure and sweet,
By thy leave I dip her feet:
Thus I let her lower yet,
That her anckles may be wet:
Yet down lower, let her knee
In thy waters washed bee,
There stop: Fly away Every thing that loves the day,
Truth that hath but one face,
Thus I charm thee from this place.
Snakes that cast your coats for new,
Chameleons, that alter hue,
Hares that yearly sexes change,
Proteus altering oft and strange,
Haecatae with shapes three,
Let this maiden changed be,
With this holy water wet, To the shape of Amoret:
Cynthia work thou with my charm,
Thus I draw thee free from harm,
Up out of this blessed lake,
Rise both like her and awake.
Speak shepherd, am I Amoret to sight?
Or hast thou mist in any magic right?
For want of which any defect in me,
May make our practises discovered be?
By yonder moon, but that I here do stand,
Whose breath hath thus reformd thee, and whose hand,
Let thee down dry, and plucked thee up thus wet,
I should my self take thee for Amoret,
Thou art in clothes, in feature, voice and hew
So like, that sense can not distinguish you.
Then this deceit which cannot crossed be,
At once shall loose her him, and gain thee me.
Hither she needs must come, by promise made,
And sure his nature never was so bad,
To bid a virgin meet him in the wood,
When night and fear are up, but understood,
T'was his part to come first: being come, Isle say
My constant love made me come first and stay,
Then will I lead him further to the grove,
But stay you here, and if his own true love
shall seek him here, set her in some wrong path,
Which say her lover lately trodden hath:
Isle not be far from hence, if need there bee
Here is another charm, whose power will free
The dazzled sense read by the moon beams clear,
And in my one true shape make me appear.
Stand close, heeee's Perigot, whose constant heart,
Longs to behold her, in whose shape thou art.
This is the place (fair Amoret) the hour
Is yet scarce come, here every sylvan power
Delights to be, about yo• sacred well,
Which they have blessed with many a powerful spell,
For never travailer in dead of night,
Nor strayed beasts have fallen in, but when •ight,
Hath failed them, then their right way they have found,
By help of them, so holy is the ground,
But I will farther seek, least Amoret
Should be first come and so stray long vnmet.
My Amoret, Amoret!
 Perigot!
Per My love! A•april. I come my love.
Now she hath got
Her own desires, and I shall gainer be
Of my long looked for hopes as well as she;
How bright the moon shines here, as if she strove
To show her glory in this little grove
To some new loved Shepherd: yonder is
Another Amoret: where differs this
From that, but that she Perigot hath met,
I should have tan this for the counterfeit:
Herbs, woods, and springs, the power that in you lies,
If mortal men could know your properties.
Me thinks it is not night, I have no fear,
Walking this wood of Lyon, or of Bear,
Whose names at other times, have made me quake,
When any shepherdess in her tale spake,
Of some of them, that underneath a wood
Have torn true lovers that together stood.
Me thinks there are no goblins, and men's talk,
That in these woods the nimble Faieries walk,
Are fables, such a strong hart I have got,
Because I come to meet with Perigot,
My Perigot, whose that my Perigot?
Fair Maid.
Ay me thou art not Perigot.
But I can tell ye news of Perigot,
An hour together under yonder tree,
He sat with wreathed arms and called on thee,
And said, why Amoret staiest thou so long:
Then starting up down yonder path he flung,
Least thou had mist thy way: were it day light
He could not yet have borne him out of sight.
Thanks gentle Shepherd and beshrew my stay,
That made me fearful I had lost my way:
As fast as my weakelegs, (that cannot be
Weary with seeking him) will carry me,
Isle follow, and for this thy care of me,
Pray Pan thy love may ever follow thee.
How bright she was? how lovely did she show?
Was it not pity to deceive her so?
She plucked her garments up and tripped away,
And with a virgin innocence did pray
For me, that periurd her: whilst she was here,
Me thought the beams of light that did appear,
Were shot from her: me thought the moon gave none,
But what it had from her: she was alone
With me, if then her presence did so move,
Why did not I assay to win her love?
She would not sure have yielded unto me,
Women love only opportunity
And not the man, or if she had denied
Alone, I might have forced her to have tried
Who had been stronger: ô vain fool, to let
Such blessed occasion pass, Isle follow yet,
My blood is up, I cannot now forbear.
I come sweet Amoret, soft who is here?
A pair of lovers, he shall yield her me,
Now lust is up, alike all women be.
Where shall we rest, but for the love of me,
Cloe I know ere this would weary be.
Alexis let vs rest here, if the place
Be private, and out o• the common trace
Of every shepherd: for I understood,
This night a number are about the wood,
Then let vs choose some place where out of sight,
We freely may enjoy our stolen delight,
Then boldly here, where we shall ne'er be found,
No shepherds way lies here, tic hallowed ground,
No maid seeks here her strayed Cow, or Sheep,
Faieries and Fawns, and Satires do it keep,
Then carelessly rest here, and clip and kiss,
And let no fear make vs our pleasures miss.
Then lye by me, the sooner we begin,
The longer ere day descry our sin.
Forbear to touch my love, or by yon flame
The greatest power that Shepherds dare to name,
Here where thou first under this holy tree,
Her to dishonour thou shalt buried be.
If Pan himself should come out of the lawns,
With al his troops of Satyrs and of Fauns,
And bid me leave I swear by her two eyes,
A greater oath then thine, I would not rise.
Then from the cold earth never thou shalt move,
But loose at one stroke both thy life and love.
Hold gentle Shepherd.
Fairest Shepherdess,
Come you with me, I do not love ye less
Then that fond man that would have kept you there
From me of more desert.
O yet forbear
To take her from me, give me leave to die
By her.
Now whilst theme one doth rule the sky,
And the stars, whose feeble light
Give a pale shadow to the night,
Are up, great Pan commanded me
To walk this grove about, whilst he
In a corner of the wood,
Where never mortal foot hath stood,
Keeps dancing, music and a feast,
To entertain a lovely guest:
Where he gives her many a rose
Sweeter then the breath that blows
The leaves: grapes, beries of the best,
I never saw so great a feast.
But to my charge: here must I stay,
To see what mortals loose their way,
And by a false fire seeming bright,
Train them in and leave them right:
Then must I watch if any be
Forcing of a chastity,
If I find it, then in haste,
Give my wreathed horn a blast,
And the faieries all will run,
Wildely dancing by the moon,
And will pinch him to the bone,
Till his lustful thoughts be gone.
O death•
Back again about this ground
Sure I hear a mortal sound,
I bind thee by this powerful spell,
By the waters of this well:
By the glimmering moon beams bright,
Speak again thou mortal wight.
Oh
Speak again thou mortal wight,
Here the foolish mortal lies,
Sleeping on the ground, arise,
The poor wight is almost dead,
On the Ground his wounds have bled,
And his Clothes fouled with his blood,
To my Goddess in the wood,
Will I lead him, whose hands pure,
Will help this mortal wight to cure,
Since I beheld, you shaggy Man, my breast,
Doth pant, each bush me thinks should hide a Beast,
Yet my desire, keeps still aboue my fear,
I would fine meet some Shepherd knew I where,
For from one cause of fear, I am most free,
It is Impossible to Ravish me,
I am so willing, here upon this ground,
I left my love all Bloody wi•h his wound,
Yet till that fearful shape made me be gone,
Though he were hurt, I furnished was of one,
But now both lost• Alexis speak or move,
If thou hast any life thou art yet my love,
Hoe's dead, or else is with his little might,
Crept from the Bank for fear of that ill spright,
Then where art thou that strike my love• o stray,
Bring me thy self in Change, and then Isle say,
Thou hast some Justice, I will make thee trim,
With Flowers, and Garlands, that were meant for him,
Isle Clip thee round, with both mine arms as fast,
As I did mean, he should have bin embraced.
But thou art fled what hope is left for me?
Isle run to Daphnis in the hollow tree.
Who I did mean to mock, though hope be small,
To make him bold, rather then none at all,
Isle try him, his heart, and my behaviour to
Perhaps may teach him, what he ought to doe.
This was the place, it was but my feeble sight,
Mixed with the horror of my deed, an night,
That shaped theise fears• and made me run away,
And loose my Beauteous hardly gotten Pray,
Speak Gentle Sheappardess I am alone,
And tender love, for love, but she is gone,
From me, that having struke her lover dead:
For filly fear left her a lone and fled:
And see the wounded Body is Removed.
By her of whom it was so well beloved.
But all theise fancies must be quite for go•t,
I must lye close here comes young Perigott,
with subtle Amarillis in the shape,
Of Amoret pray love hee may not scope.
Beloved Perigot, show me some place,
Where I may rest my Li•bes, weak with the Chase•
Of thee• an hour before thou came at least
Beshrew my Tardy steps, here shalt thou rest
Upon this holy bank no deadly snake,
Upon this Turf her self in folds doth make,
Here is no poison, for the Toad• to feed.
H•re •oldly spread thy hands, no venomed weed,
Dares blister them, No sly my snail dare creep,
Over thy face when thou art fast a sleep,
Here never durst the babbling Cuckoo spit.
No slough off •ing Starr did ever hit.
Upon this Bank• let this thy Cabin bee.
This other set with violets for me.
Thou dost not lone me Perigot?
Fair maid
You only l•ue to hear it often said;
You do n•t •oubt,
Believe me, but I doe.
What shall wee now begin again to woe,
Tic the best way to make your lover last,
To play with him, when you have caught him fast,
By I an I swear, beloved Perigot,
And by you Moon, I think thou love me not.
By Pan I swear and if I falsely swear:
Let him not guard my flocks, let Foxes tear,
My Earelyest lambs, and wolves whilst I doe steep
Fall one the rest a Rot among my sheep,
I love the better, then the careful Ewe,
The new yeand lamb that is of her own hew,
I dote upon thee more t•en that young l•mbe.
Doth on the Bag, that feeds him from his dam.
W•re there a sort of wolves go•t in my fouled,
And one Ran after thee both young and old,
Should be devoured, and it should bee my strife,
To save thee, whom I love aboue, my life,
Howe should I trust thee when I see thee choose
Another bed, and dost my side refuse,
It was only that the chaste thoughts, might bee shown,
Tu•xt thee and me, although we were alone,
Come Perigot will show his power that hee
Can make his Amoret, though she weary bee,
Rise nimbly from her Couch and come to his.
Here take thy Amoret embrace, and Kiss:
What mean• my love;
To do as lovers shut.
That are to bee enjoyed not to bee wood.
Ther's •ere a Shepherd esse in all the plain,
Can kiss thee with more Art, ther's none can fine.
More wanton tricks,
Forbear dear soul to t•ye,
Whether my hart be pure, Isle rather dye,
Then nourish one thought to dishonour thee,
Still think thou such a thing as Chastity,
Is amongst women. Perigot theirs none,
That with her love is in a wood alone,
And wood come home a Maid be not abused,
With thy •and first belief, let time be used,
Why dost thou rise,
My true heart, thou hast slain,
Faith Perigot, Isle pluck thee down again,
Let go thou Serpent that into my breast,
Hast with thy Cunning dived art, art not iniest;
Sweet love lye down,
Since this I live to see,
Some bitter North wind blast my flocks and me
You swore you loved yet will not doe my will,
O be as thou were, once, Isle love thee still,
I am, as still I was and all my kind,
Though other shows wee have poor men to blind,
Then here I end all love, and lest my vain,
Beleei•e should ever draw me in again,
Before thy face that hast my youth mislead,
I end my life my blood be on thy head,
O hold thy hands thy Amoret doth cry,
Thou c•unsayl'st well, first Amoret shall dye,
That is the cause of my Eternal smart,
O hold.
This steel shall peirse thy lustful hart,
up and down every where,
I strew the herbs to purge the Air•
Let your Odor drive hence,
All mists that dazzle sense,
Herbs and springs whose hidden migh••
Alters shapes, and mocks the sight.
Thus I charge ye to undo;
All before I brought ye to•
Let her fly let her scope,
Give again her own shape:
For bear thou gentle swain thou dost mistake;
She whom thou followed fled into the brake•
And as I crossed thy way I met thy wrath;
The only fear of which near slain me hath,
Pardon fair Shepherds•e my rage and night,
Were both upon me and beguiled my sight;
But far be it from me to spill the blood.
Of harmless maids that wander in the wood,
Many a weary step in yonder path
Poor hopeless Amoret twice trodden hath,
To seek her Perigot, yet cannot hear,
His voice, my •erigot, she loves thee dear:
That calls.
See yonder where she is how fair.
She shows, and yet her breath infects the Air.
My Perigot:
Here.
Happy.
Haplesse first:
It lights, on thee, the next blow is the worst,
Stay Perigot, my love, tho• art unjust:
Death is the best reward, thats due to lust;
Now shall their love be crossed, for being struck;
Isle throw her in the Fount least being took:
By some Night Travailer, whose honest care,
May help to cure her, Sherpardesse prepare,
Your self to dye,
No mercy I doe crave•
Thou can not give a worse blow then I have;
Tell him that gave me this, who loved him to•
He struck my soul and not my body through:
Tell him when I am dead my soul shall bee.
At peace if hee but think hee iniurd me•
In this Fount bee thy Grave, thou were not meant,
Sure for a woman, thou art so Innocent•
She cannot scope for underneath the ground,
In a lunge h•llowe the clear spring is bound,
Till on you side where the Morns sun doth look•
The struggling water breaks out in a brooke,
what powerful Charms my streams doe bring
Back again unto their spring?
With such force that I their god,
Three times stricking with my rod,
Could not keep them in their Ranks
My fishes shute into the banks.
Ther's not one, that stays and feeds,
All have hid th•m in the weeds
Here is a Mortal almost dead,
Fallen into my River head,
Hollowed so with many a spell,
That till now none ever fell,
Ti• a Female young and clear,
Cast in by some Ravisher,
See upon her breast a wound,
On which there is no plaster bound,
Yet shoe's wa•me, her pulses beat,
Tic a sign of life and heate,
If thou be a virgin pure,
I can give a present cure,
Take a droop into thy wound
From my watery locke more round,
Then Orient Pearl, and far more pure,
Then unchaste fl•sh may endure,
See she pants and •rome her flesh,
The warm blood gushes out a fresh,
She is an vnpoluted maid:
I must have this bleeding stayde,
From my banks, I pluck this flower.
With holy hand whose virtuous power,
Is at once to heal and draw•
The blood Returns• I never saw,
A •ayrer Mortal, now doth break,
Her deadly slumber, virgin, speak,
Who hath restored my sense, given me new breath,
And brought me back out of the Arms o• death,
I have heald thy wounds:
Aye me,
Fear not him that succord thee:
I am this Fountain• God below,
My waters to a River grow,
And twixt two banks with Osiers set,
That only p•o•per in the wet,
Through the Meadows do they glide,
Wheeling still •n every side,
Sometimes winding round about.
To •end the Evenest channel o•t,
And if thou wilt go with me,
Leaving Mortal company.
In the Cool streams •hall thou lye:
Free from harm as well as I,
I will give thee for thy food,
No fish that use•h in the mud,
But Trout and Pike that love to swim,
Where the Gravel from the bri•,
Though the pure streams may beseene,
Orient Pearl fit for a Queen,
Will I give thy love to win•
And a shell to keep them in,
Not a fish in all my brooke,
That shall disobey thy l•ok,
But when thou wilt come sliding bye,
And from thy white h•nd take a•lye,
And to make thee understand:
How I can my waives command,
They shall Bubble whilst I sing,
Sweeter then the silver string.
Doe not fear to put thy feet,
Naked in the River sweet,
Think not leach, or Neu•e, or Toad,
Will byte thy foot, when tho• hast trod,
Not •et the water rising hye•
As thou widest in make thee cry:
And sobb, but ever li•e with me.
And not a wave shall trouble thee.
Immortal power, there rul'•t this holy •lute,
I know my self, unworthy to be wood,
By the a God, for ere this, but •or thee:
I should have shown my weak Mortality,
Besides by holy Oath betwixt vs twain,
I am be throthd unto a Shepherd Swain,
Whose comely face; I know the Gods aboue:
May make me leave to see; but not to love,
May hee prove to thee as •few:
Fairest virgin now adieu,
I must make my waters fly,
Least they leave there Channels dry.
And beasts, that come unto the spring
Miss there mornings watering.
Which I would not, for of late.
All the Neighbour people sate.
One my banks and from the fold,
Tow white Lambs of three weeks Old,
Offered to my Deity,
For which this year they shall bee free
From raging floods that as they pass,
Leave their gravel in the grass,
Nor shall their Meads be over flown,
When their grass is newly moan,
For thy kindness to me shown,
Never from thy banks be blown,
Any Tree; with windy force.
Cross thy streams to stop thy Course,
May no Beast that comes to drink
With his Horns cast down thy brincke
May non that for thy fish doe look,
Cut thy banks to damme thy Brooke:
Barefoot may no Neighbour wade:
In thy cool streams? wife nor maid,
When the spawn•s one stones do lye,
To wash there Hemp and spoil the fry.
Thanks Virgin, I must down again.
Thy wound will put thee to no pain.
Wonder not, so soon tic gone;
A holy hand was laid upon.
And I unhappy borne to bee.
Must follow him, that flies from me,
She is untrue inconstant, and unkind,
Shoe's gone• shoe's gone, blow high thou North west wind,
And raise the Sea to Mountains: let the Trees,
That dare oppose thy Raging fury leese
Their firm foundation: Creep into the ea•th,
And shake the world as at the monstrus b•rth,
Of some new Prodigy, whilst I constant stand,
Holding this trusty Bore-Speare in my hand,
And falling thus upon it.
Stay •hy dead doing hand thou art to hot,
Against thy self believe me comely Swain,
If that thou die, not all the showers of Rain.
The heavy Clouds send down can wash away:
The •whole unmanly guilt, the world will lay,
Upon thee, yet thy love untainted stands:
Believe me she is constant, not the sands,
Can bee so hardly numbered as she won:
I do not trifle, Shepherd, by thee Moon,
And all those lesser lights our eyes doe view
All that I could thee Perigot is true,
Then bee a freeman, put away despair,
And will to dye, smooth gently up that fair,
Dejected forehead: be as when those eyes,
Took the first heat,
Allas hee doable dyes,
That would believe, but cannot, •is not well,
Ye keep me thus from dying here to dwell,
With many worse companions: but oh death,
I am not yet inamourd of his breath,
So much, but I dare leave it, tic not payne,
In forcing of a wound: nor after gain,
Of many days, can hold me from my will,
Tic not my self, but Amoret. bids kille•
Stay, but a little• little but on hour,
And if I do not show thee through the power?
Of herbs and words I have, as dark as Night?
My self, turned to thy Amoret, in sight?
Her very figure, and the Robe she wears;
With tawny Buskins, and thee hook she bears
Of thine own Carving, where your names are set,
Wrought underneath with many a Curious fret
The prim-Rose Chaplet? taudry-lace and Ring,
Thou gave her for her singing with each thing,
Else that she wears about her let me feel;
The first tell stroke of that Revenging steel?
I am contented if there bee a hope;
To give it Entertainment for the scope;
Of one poor hour; go you shall find me next?
Under you shady Beech? even thus perplexed;
And thus believing.
Bind before I go;
Thy soul by Pan unto me, not to doe,
Harm or outrageous wrong upon thy life,
Till my Return.
By Pan and by the strife;
Hee had with Phoebus for the Masterye,
When Golden Midst, judged their Minstralcye;
I will not.
Softly gliding as I go;
With this Burden full of woe;
Through still silence of the night?
Guided by the glooe-wormes light.
Hither am I come at last;
Many a Thicket hane I past;
Not at twig that durst deny me;
Nor a bush t•at durst descry me.
To the little Bird that sleeps:
On the tender spray nor creeps,
That hardly worm with pointed Tail;
But if I bee under sail;
Flying faster then the wind;
Leaving all the Clouds behind,
But doth hide her tender head,
In some hollow Tree o• bed;
Of •eeded Nettells not a Hare
Can be started from his fare;
By my footing nor a wish;
Is more sudden, nor a fish?
Can bee found; with greater ease,
Cut the vast unbounded seas;
Leaving neither print nor •and.
Then I when nimbly on the ground,
I measure many a leage an hour;
But behold the happy bower,
That must ease me of my charge,
And by holy hand enlardge;
The •whole of this sad man that yet,
Lies fast bound in dead lice•t,
Heaven and great Pan, sucker it,
Hay•e thou beauty of the Bower,
Whither then the Paramore:
Of my Moister; let me crave,
Thy virtuous help to keep from Grave,
This poor Mortal that here lies,
Waiting when thee destinies.
Will undo his thread of life,
View the wound by cruel knife,
Trenched into him•
What art thou? call me from my holy Rights
And with the feared name of death a frights
My tender Ears, speak me thy name and will,
I am the Statyre that did fill,
Your lapp with early fruit and will,
When I hap to gather more,
Bring ye better, and more store:
Yet I come not empty now,
See a blossom from the bow,
But be shrew his hart that pulled it,
And his perfect Sight that Culld it,
From the other springing blooms
For a sweeter youth the Gwomes
Cannot show me nor the downs:
Nor the many neighbouring Towns,
Low in yonder glade I found him,
Softly in mine Arms I bound him,
Hither have I brought him sleeping,
In a Trance, his wounds fresh weeping,
In remembrance such youth may
Spring and perish in a Day.
Satire: they wrong thee, that doe term thee rude
Though thou be outward rough and tawny hued:
Thy manners are as gentle and as fair,
As his who brags himself, borne only heir,
To all Humanity: let me see thie wound:
This Herb will stay the Currant being bound,
Fast to the Or•physe, and this restrain,
Vicers, and Swellinges, and such inward payne,
As the cold Ayre hath forced into the sore,
This to, draw out such Putrifiing gore,
As inward falls.
Heaven grant it may doe good,
Fairly wipe away the blood,
Hold him gently till I fling,
Water of a virtuous spring:
On his Temples tu•no him twice:
To the Moon beams pinch him thrice:
That the labouring soul may draw.
From his great ecclip•e.
I saw.
His Eye-lids mooing.
Give him breath,
All the danger of cold death:
Now is vanished, with this plaster:
And this unction doe I moister:
All the festered ill that may:
Give him grief another day.
See hee gathers up his spright
And begins to hunt for light,
Now a gapes and breathes again:
How the blood runs to the vain:
That east was employ.
Oh my hart,
My dearest, dearest Cloe O the smart,
Runs, through my side: I feel some pointed thing,
Pass through my Bowels, sharper then the sting,
Of Scorpion.
Pan, preserve me, what are you,
Doe not hurt me. I am true,
To my Cloe though she fly
And leave me to this Destiny,
There she stands, and will not lend,
Her smooth white hand to help her friend,
But I am much mistaken, for that face,
Bears more Austerity and modest grace,
More reproving and more awe.
Then theise Eyes yet ever saw,
In my Cloe, oh my payne:
Eagerly Renews again:
Give me your help for his sake you love best:
Shepherd thou Can not possible take rest.
Till thou hast laid a side all heats, dossiers,
Provoking thoughts, that stir up lusty fierce.
Commerce with wanton Eyes: strong blood and will,
To execute theise must bee purged until,
The vain grow Whiter then Repent and pray:
Great Pan, to keep you from the like decay,
And I shall undertake your cure with ease.
Till when this virtuous Plasters will displease,
Your tender sides. give me your hand and rise.
help him a little Satire. for his Thighs.
Yet are feeble.
Sure I have lost much blood.
Tic no matter, it was not good,
Mortal you must leave your wooing,
Though there be aloye in doing,
Yet it brings much grief, behind it,
They best •eel it, that doe find it,
Come bring him in, I will attend his sore,
When you are well, take heed you lust no mo•e,
Shepherd see what comes of kissing
By my head it were better missing,
Brightest if there, bee remaining,
Any service, without fayninge,
I will do it, were I set,
To catch the nimble wind or get,
Shadows gliding on the greene,
Or to steal from the great Queen,
Of Fairies, all her Beauty,
I would do it so much duty,
Doe I owe those precious Eyes,
I thank the honest Satire, if the Cries,
Of any other that be hurt, or ill,
Draw thee unto th•m, prithee do thy will?
To bring them hither,
I will and when the weathe•:
Se•ues to Angle in the brooke,
I will bring a silver hook,
With a lyne of finest silk,
And a rod• as white as mi•ke,
To deserve the little fish,
So I take my leave and wish,
On this bower may ever dwell,
Spring, and summer.
Friend farewell.
This place is Ominous sor here I lost,
My love and almost life, and since have crossed,
All theise woods over, never a Nook or dell,
Where any li•tle Bird, or beast doth dwell,
But I have sought it• never a bending brow,
Of any hill or Glade, the wind sings through,
Nor a greene bank or shade when•e Sheapeards use,
To si•t and Riddle sweetly pipe or choose,
Their valentines• but I have mist to find.
My love in, Perigot, Oh to unkind.
Why hast thou fled me? whether art thou gone,
Howe have I wronged thee? was my love alone,
To thee, worthy this scorned Recompense? tic well,
I am content to fee• eit; but I tell
Thee Shepherd: and theise lusty woods shall hear.
Forsaken Aomret• is yet as clear,
Of any stranger fire, as Heaven is.
From foul Corruption, or the deep: Abisse,
From light, and happiness, and thou may know,
All this for truth and how that fatal blow,
Thou gave me, never from desert of mine,
Fell on my life, but from suspect of thine,
Or fury more then Madness therefore, here.
Since I have lost my life, my love, my dea•e,
Upon this cursed place, and on this greene,
That first divorced vs, shortly shall bee seen,
A sight of so great pity that each eye,
Shall daily spen• his spring in memory.
Of my untimely fall.
I am not blind,
Nor is it through the working of my Mind.
That this shows Amoret, for sake me all,
That dwell upon the soul, but what men call
Wonder, or more then wonder Miracle,
For sure so strange as this the Oracle,
Never gave answer of, It passes dreams,
Or maddmens fancy when the many streams,
Of new Imagination rise and fall:
Tic but an hour since theise Ears heard her call,
For pity to young Perigot? whils•hee,
Directed by his fury Bloodelye,
Lanch't up• her breast, which bloodless fell and cold,
And if belief may Credit what was told,
After all this the Melancholy Swain,
Took her into his Arms being almost slain.
And to the bottom of the holy well,
slung her for ever with the waives to dwell,
Tic she, the very same, tic Amoret.
And living yet, the great powers will not let,
Their virtuous love be Crossed, maid wipe away,
Those heavy drops of sorrow, and allay,
The storm that yet goes high, which not depressed,
Breaks, hart, and life, and all before it rest:
Thy Perigot:
where: which is Perigot.
Sits there below lamenting much God wott:
Thee, and thy fortune, go and comfort him,
And thou shalt find him under neath a brim,
Of sailing Pines that edge yon Mountaiue in,
I go, I run Heaven grant me. I may win:
His soul again.
Stay Amarillis stay,
Ye are to fleet, tic two hours yet to days
I have performed my promise le•t vs sit;
And warm our bloods together till the sit;
Come lively on vs;
Friend you are to keen;
The Morning, Rises, and wee shall be seen,
For bear a little;
I can staye no longer;
Hold Shepherd hold, learn not to bee a wronger;
Of your word, was not your promise laid,
To break their loves first:
I have done it Maid?
No they are yet vnbroken, met again,
And are as hard to part yet as the stain?
Is from the finest lawn,
I say they are.
now at this present parted, and so far,
That they shall never meet,
Swain tic not so,
For do but to yon hanging Mountain go,
And there believe your eyes,
you doe but hold:
Of with delays: and trifles, fare well cold,
And frozen bash•ullnes, unfit for men,
Thus I salute thee virgin,
And thus then,
I bid you follow, Catch me if ye can,
And If I stay behind I am no Man.
Night do not steal away: I woe thee yet?
To hold a hard hand ore the Rusty bytt,
Tha• Gydes thy Lazy team• go back again,
Boots thou that drive thy frozen wane,
Round as a Ringe and bring a second Night,
To hyde my sorrows from the coming light,
Let not the Eyes of men stare on my face,
And read my falling• give me some black place,
Where never sun beam, shot his wholesome light,
That I may sit, and power out my sad spright,
Like running water never to be known:
After the forced fall and •and is gone,
This is the bottom: speak if thou be here,
My Perigot, thy Amoret, thy dear,
Calls on thy loved Name,
What thou dare,
Tread theise forbidden paths, where death and care,
Dwell on the face of darcknes,
Tic thy friend,
Thy Amoret come hither to give end,
To theise consumings look up gentle Boy,
I have forgot those pains, and dear annoy,
I suffered for thy sake, and am content,
To bee thy love again why hast thou rent,
Those curled lockes, where I have often hung,
Ribbons and damask Roses, and have flung,
Waters distilld to make thee fresh and gay,
Sweeter then Nose-gayes on a Bridal day,
Why dost thou cross thine Arms, and hang thy face,
Down to thy Bosom, letting fall apace,
From those too little Heavens upon the ground
Showers of more price, more Orient, &amp; more round
Then those that hang upon the moons pale brow
Cease theise complainings Shepherd I am now,
The same, I ever was, as kind and free,
And can forgive before you ask of me,
Indeed I can, and will.
So spoke my fair,
O you great working powers of Earth, and Ayre,
Water, and forming fire, why have you lent,
Your hidden virtues of so ill intent,
Even such efface, so fair so bright of hew,
Had Amoret, such, words •so smooth and new,
Came flowing from her tongue, such was her eye,
And such the pointed sparckle that did fly•
Forth like a bleeding shaft, all is the same,
The Robe, and Buskins, painted, hook, and frame,
Of all her Body O me Amoret,
Shepherd what means this Riddle who hath set,
So strange a difference, twixt my self and me,
That I am grown another, look and see.
The Ring thou gave me, and about my wrest.
That Curious Braeslet thou thy self did twist.
From those fair Tresses, know thou Amoret.
Hath not some newer love forced thee forget,
Thy Ancient faith,
Still nearer to my love;
Theise be the very words she oft did prove,
Upon my temper, so she still wot take,
wonder into her face, and silent make,
Singes with her head and hand as who wot say
Shepherd remember this another day:
Am I not Amoret. where was I lost,
Can there be Heaven, and time, and men• most
Of theise inconstant? faith where art thou fled?
Are all the vows and protestations dead:
The hands held up? the wishes and the hart?
Is there not one remayningne not apart,
Of all theise to bee found why then I see:
Men never knew that virtue constancy
Men ever were most blessed, till Cross fate,
Brought love, and women forth unfortunate,
To all that ever tasted of their smiles,
Whose Actions are all double, full of wiles,
Like to the subtle Hare, that fore the Hounds,
Makes many turnings leaps and many rounds,
This way and that way, to deceive the sent,
Of her p•rsuers:
Tic but to prevent,
There speedy coming, on that seek her fall,
The hands of Cruel men• more Bestial,
And of a nature more refusing good,
Then beasts themselves, or fishes of the flood,
Thou art all theise, and more then nature meant,
When she created all, frowns, joys, content:
Extreme fire for an hour, and presently:
Colder then sleepy poison: or the sea,
Upon whose face sitts a continual frost
Your Actions ever driven to the most,
Then down again as lowe that none can find,
The rise or falling of a woman's mind,
Can there bee any Age, or days, or time,
Or tongues: of Men, guilty so great a crime:
As wronging simple Maid, O Perigot:
Tho• that wast yesterday without a blott,
Thou that wast every good• and every thing,
That men call blessed: thou that wast the spring.
From whence our looser grooms drewall their best:
Thou that wast always Just, and always blessed,
In faith and promise, thou that had the name,
Of virtuous given thee, and made good the same:
Even from thy Cradle: thou that wast that all,
That men delighted in, Oh what a fall,
Is this to have been so, and now to bee,
The only best in wrong, and infamy,
And I to live to know this, and by me.
That loved thee dearer then, mine Eyes or that,
Which wee esteem our honour virgin state,
Dearer then swallows love the early morn,
Or dogs of Chase the souud of merry Horn,
Dearer then thou can love thy new love, if thou hast•
Another and far dearer then the last,
Dea•er then thou can love thy self, though all,
The self love were wîthin thee, that did fall.
with that coy swain: hat now is made a flower
For whose dear sake, Echo weeps many a shower
And am I thus rewarded for my flame,
Loved worthily to get a wantons name,
Come thou forsaken willow wind my head,
And noise it to the world, my love is dead:
I am forsaken I am Cast away,
And left for every lazy Grome to say,
I was inconstant light, and sooner lost,
Then the quick Clouds wee see or the Chill •roast,
When the hot sun beats on it tell me yet,
Can thou not lone again thy Amorett?
Thou art not worthy of that blessed name,
I must not know thee, fling thy wanton flame,
upon some lighter blood: that may be hot,
With words and feigned passi•ns, Perigot,
Was ever yet unstained, and shall not now.
Stoop to the meltings of a borrowed brow:
Then hear me heaven: to whom I call for right.
And you sayre twinkling stars that crown the night,
And hear me woods and and silence of this place,
And ye sad hours, that move a sullen pace,
Hear me ye shadows, that delight to dwell,
In horrid darkness, and ye powers of Hell,
Whilst I breath out my last, I am that maid,
That yet untainted Amoret tha• played:
The careless Prodigal: and gave away:
My soul to this young man that now dares say:
I am a stranger, not the same, more wild,
And thus with much belief, I was be guild,
I am that Maid, that have delayed deny,
And almost scorned the loves of all that tryded,
To win me but this swain, and yet confess,
I have been wood by many with no less.
Soul of affection and have often had:
Rings Rellts and Cracknels. sent me from the lad.
That •eeds his flocks down westward, Lambs and Doves
By young Alexis, Daphnis sent me gloves,
All which I gave to thee not theise nor they
That sent them, did I smile one, or ere lay.
up to my af•er memo•ye but why,
Do I resolve to grieve and not to dye
Happy had been the stroke thou gave if home,
By this time had I found a quiet room.
Where every slave is free, and every breast,
That living bread, new care, now lies at rest,
And thither will poor Amoret,
Thou must,
Was ever any man, so loath to trust,
His Eyes as I, or was there ever yet,
Any so like, as this to Amoret,
For whose dear •ache, I promise if there bee
A living soul within thee thus to •ree,
Thy Body from it,
So this work hath end.
Farewell and live be constant to thy friend,
That loves thee next,
See the day begins to break,
And the light shuts like a streak,
Of subtle fire the wind blows cold,
Whilst the morning doth unfold,
Now the Birds begin to rouse,
And the Squirrel from the boughs,
Leps to get him Nuts and fruit,
The early Lark erst was mute,
Carr•lls to the Rising day,
Many a Note, and many lay,
Therefore here I end my watch,
Least the wandering Swain should catch,
Harm or loose him self••Amo: ah me.
speak again what ere thou bee,
I am ready speak I say,
By the dawning of the day,
By the power of Night and Pan;
I enforce thee speak again,
O I am most unhappy.
Yet more blood,
Sure these wanton Swains are wood,
Can there be a hand, or hart,
Dare commit so wild a part,
As this Murder, by the Moon,
That hydd her self when this was done,
Never was a sweeter face,
I will bear her to the place,
Where my Goddess keeps and crave,
Her to give her life, or grave,
Here whilst one patient takes his rest secure
I steal a broad to doe another Cure,
Pardon thou buried body of my love,
That from thy side I dare so soon remove,
I will not prove inconstant nor will leave,
Thee for an hour alone, when I deceive,
My first made vow, the wildest of the wood,
Tear me, and ore thy Grave let out my blood,
I go by wit to Cure a lovers payne,
Which no herb can, being done, Isle come again,
Poor Shepherd in this shade for ever lye,
And seeing thy fair Clorins, Cabin dye,
O hapless love which being answered ends,
And as a little Infant cries and bends,
Hist tender Brows, when rolling of his eye,
He hath espied some thing that glisters ny.
Which he would have, yet give it him, away,
He throws it straight, and cries a fresh to play
With some thing else such my affection set,
On that which I should loath if I could geett
See where hee lies did ever man but hee,
Love any woman for her Constancy,
To her dead lover which she needs must end,
Before she can allow him, for her friend,
And he himself, must needs the cause destroy,
For which he loves, before he can enjoy,
Poor Shepherd, Heaven grant I at once may free,
Thee from thy payne, and keep my loyalty,
Shepherd look up,
Thy brightness doth amaze,
So Phoebus may at Noon bid mortals gaze,
Thy glorious constancy appears so bright,
I dare not meet the Beams with my weakesight
Why dost thou pine away thy self for me
Why dost thou keep such spotless constancy?
Thou holy Shepherd see what for thy sake,
Clorin, thy Clorin, now dare undertake, he starts up
Stay there, thou constant Clorin if there bee,
Yet any part of woman left in thee,
To make thee light think yet before thou speak,
See what a holy vow, for thee I break,
I that already have my fame •arr spread,
For being constant to my lover dead
think yet dear Clorin of your love, how true,
If you had dyed, he would have been to you
Yet all Isle loose for thee.
Think but how blessed,
A constant woman is aboue the rest,
And offer up my self, here on this •round,
To be disposed by thee,
why dost thou wound,
His hart with Malice, against women more.
That hated all the Sex, but thee before,
How much more pleasant had it been to me,
To dye then behold this change in thee,
Yet, ye•• return: let not the woman swaye,
In sult not on her now, nor use delay
Who for thy sake hath ventured all her fame,
Thou hast not ventured but bought Certain shame,
Your Sexes Curse, foul falsehood, must and shall,
I see once in your lives light on you all;
I hate thee now: yet turn
Be just to me:
Shall I at once• loose both my fame and thee,
Thou had no fame, that which thou did like good
Was but thy Appetite that swayed thy blood,
For tha• time to the best, for as a blast,
That through a nouse comes, usually doth cast,
Things out of order: yet by chance may come,
And blow some one thing to his proper rome,
So did thy Appetite, and not thy zeal.
Swaye the by chance to do some one thing well.
Yet turn.
Thou dost but try me if I would.
Forsake thy dear embraces for my old
Loves though he were alive, but doe not fear•
I doe contemn thee now: and dare come near.
And gays upon thee, for me thinks that grace:
Austerity, which sat upon that •ace,
Is gone, and thou like others false maid see,
This is the gain of foul Inconstancy,
Tic done great: Pan, I give thee thanks for it,
What Art could not have heald, is curd by wit,
Will ye be constant yet, will ye remove,
Into the Cabin to your buried love,
No let me dye, but by thy side remain,
Ther's none shall know that thou did ever stain,
Thy worthy stricknes, but shalt honoured bee
And I will lye again under this tree,
And pine and dye for thee with more delight,
Then I have sorrow now to know thee light,
Let me have thee, and Isle be where thou wilt.
Thou art of women's race and full of guilt,
Farewell all hope of that sex, whilst I thought,
There was one good, I feared to find one nought
But since there minds I all alike espy
Hence forth Isle choose as theirs, by mine eye,
Blessed be ye powers that gave such quick redress,
And for my labours sent so good success,
I rather choose though I a woman bee,
He should speak ill of all,
then dye for me.
Shepherds, rise and shake of sleep.
See the blushing Morn doth peep,
Through the windows, whilst the Su•e
To the Mountain topps is run,
Gilding all the vales below,
With his rising flames which grow,
Greater by his climbing still.
Up ye• lazy grooms and fill,
Bag and Bottle for the field,
Clasp your cloaks fast lest they yield,
To the bitter Northeast wind,
Call the Maidens up and find.
Who lay longest, that she may,
Go without a friend all day.
Then reward yonr dogs and pray,
Pan to keep you from decay,
So unfold, and then away
What not a Shepherd stirring sure the grooms,
Have found their bed• to easy, or the Rooms.
Filled with such new delight, and heat that they,
Have both forgot their hungry sheep, and day,
Knock that they may remember what a shame,
Sloth and neclect, lays on a Shepherds name.
It is to little purpose, not a swain,
This night hath known his lodging, here; or lain,
Within these cotes: the woods or some near town,
that is a neighbour to the bordering down:
Hath drawn them thither, bout some lusty sport;
Or spiced wassal Boule, to which resort.
All the young men and maids of many a coat,
Whilst the Trim, Minstrel strikes his merry note.
God pardon sin, show me the way that leads,
To any of their haunts.
This to the Meads.
And that down to the woods,
Then this for me,
Come Shepherd let me crave your company.
Now your thoughts are almost pure:
And your wound begins to cure.
Strive to banish all thats vain,
Lest it should break out again.
Eternal thanks to thee, thou holy maid:
I find my former wandering thoughts, well stayed,
Through thy •ise precepts, and my outward payne,
By thy choice herbs is almost gone again.
Thy sexes vice and virtue are reueald,
At once, for what one hurt another heald.
May thy grief more apease,
Relapses, are the worst disease:
Take heed how you in thought offend,
So mind and body both will mend.
Be thou the wildest creature of the Wood,
That bear me thus a way drowned in my blood.
And dying, know I cannot iniurd be
I am a maid, let that name fight for me:
Fairest Virgin do not fear,
Me that doth thy body bear,
Not to hurt, but held to be,
Men are ruder far then we.
See fair Goddess in the wood,
They have let out yet more blood:
Some savage man hath struck her breast
So soft and white, that no wild beast,
Durst a touched asleep or wake,
So sweet that Adder, Neut, or Snake.
Would have lain• from arm to arm,
On her Bosom to be warm,
All a night and being hot,
Gone away and stung her not.
Quickly clap herbs to her breast,
A man sure is a kind of Beast,
With spotless hand, on spotless Breast,
I put these herbs to give thee rest.
Which till it heal the there will bide
If both be pure, if no• of slide.
See it falls of from the wound,
Sepheardesse thou art not sound,
Fall of lust.
Who would have thought it,
So fair a face:
Why that hath brought it.
For ought I know or think, these words my last:
Yet Pan, so help me as my thoughts are chaste.
And so may Pan bless this my cure,
As all my thoughts are just and pure,
Some vncleanesse ny doth lurk,
That will not let my medcines work.
Satire search if thou can find it,
Here away me thinks I wind it.
Stronger yet, Oh here they be,
Here here in a hollow tree.
Two fond mortals have I found,
Bring them out they are unsound.
By the fingers thus I wring ye,
To my Goddess thus I bring ye.
Strife is vain come gently in,
I scented them, they are full of sin,
Hold Satire, take this Glass,
Sprinkle over all the place,
Purge the Ayre from lustful breath,
To save this Shepherdess frō death.
And stand you still, whilst I do dress
Her wound for fear the payne increase,
From this glass I throw a drop,
Of Crystal water on the top.
Of every grass on flowers a pair:
Send a fume and keep the Ayre,
Pure and wholesome, sweet &amp; blessed,
Till this virgins wound be dressed,
Satire help to bring her in,
By Pan, I think she hath no sin.
She is so light, lye on these leaves,
Sleep that mortal sense deceives.
Crown thine eyes, and ease thy pain,
May thou soon be well again,
Satire bring the Sheph•art ne'er,
Try him if his mind be clear,
Shepherd come,
My thoughts are pure,
The better trial to endure.
In this flame his figer thrust,
Which will burn him if he lust.
But if not away will turn,
As loath unspotted flesh to burn:
See it gives back let him go.
Farewell Mortal keep thee so.
Stay fair Nymph, fly not so fast,
Wee must try if yon be chaste:
Here is a hand that quaks for fear,
Sure she will not prove so clear:
Hold her finger to the flame:
That will yield her praise or shame.
To her doom she dares not stand,
But plucks away her tender hand:
And the Taper darting sends,
His hot beams at her fingers ends.
O thou art foul within, and hast;
A mind if nothing else unchaste.
Is not that Cloe? tic my love; tic she:
Cloe, fair Cloe.
My Alexis. Alexis: He.
Let me embrace thee.
Take her hence, Least her sight disturb his sense.
Take not her: take my life first.
See his wound again is burst,
Keep her near here in the wood.
Till I have stopped these streams of blood.
Soon again he ease shall find,
If I can but still his mind:
This curtain thus I do display,
To keep the pierceing Ayre away.
Sure they are lost for ever, tic in vain,
To find them out, with trouble and much pain:
That have a Ripe desire, and forward will,
To fly the company of all, but ill:
What shall be counsaild: Now shall we retire?
Or constant follow still, that first desire,
We had to find them?
Stay a little while:
For if the mornings mist do not beguile,
My sight with shadows: sure I see a swain
One of this jolly troops come back again.
Doest thou not blush young shepherd to be known,
Thus without care, leaving thy flocks alone:
And following what desire and present blood,
Shapes out before thy burning sense, for good,
Having forgot what tongue hereafter may
Tell to the world thy faleing off, and say
Thou art regardless both of good and shame,
Spurning at virtue, and a virtuous name:
And like a glorious desperate man, that buys,
A poison of much price, by which he dyes
Doest thou lay out for lust, whose only gain,
Is foul disease, with present age and pain:
And then a Grave: these be the fruit that grow,
In such hot veins that only beat to know,
Where they may take most ease &amp; grow ambtious,
Through their own wanton fire, and pride de•itious.
Right holy Sir I have not known this night,
What the smooth face of Mirth was: or the sight,
Of any looseness, music, joy and ease,
Have been to me, as bitter drugs to please
A Stomach lost with weakness, not a game
That I am skilled at throghly, nor a dame,
Went her tongue smoother then the feet of Time,
Her heavy ever living like the Rime,
Our blessed Tyterus did singe of yore,
No, were she more enticing then the store
Of fruitful Summr, when the laden tree,
Bids the faint Traveller be bold and free
It were but to me like Thunder against the bay,
Whose lightning may enclose, but never stay
Upon his charmed branches, such am I,
Against the catchiug flames of women's eye.
Then wherefore hast thou wandered.
It was a vow,
that drew me out last night, which I have now,
Strictly performed, and homewards go to give
fresh pasture to my sheep, that they may live.
Tic good to hear ye Sheeph art if the heart,
In this well sounding Music bear his part;
Where have you left the rest,
I have not seen,
Since yesternight, we met upon this greene,
To fouled our flocks up, any of that train
Yet have I walked these woods round and hauelaine
All this long night under an aged tree•
Yet neither wandering Shepherd did I see,
Or Shepherdess, or drew into mine ear,
The sound of living thing unless it were,
The Nightingale, among the thick leaved spring
That fits alone, in sorrow and doth sing:
Whole nights away in mourning, or the Owl,
Or our great Enemy that still doth howl.
Against the Moons cold beams.
Go and beware,
Of after falling.
Father tic my care.
Here comes another straggler, sure I see,
A shame in this young Shepherd Daphinis,
Hee,
Where hast left the rest, that should have been
Long before this, grazing upon the greene:
Their yet imprisoned flocks,
Thou holy man.
Give me a little breathing till I can,
Be able to unfold what I have seen,
Such horror that the like hath never been,
Known to the ear of Shepherd: oh my heart,
L•bours a double motion to impart,
So heavy tidings you all know the Bower,
Where the chaste Clorin, lives by whose great power,
Sick men and cattle hane been often cured,
There lovely Amoret, that was assured,
To lusty Perrigot: bleeds out her life:
Forced by some iron hand and fatal knife,
And by her young Alex•s.
If there be
Ever a Neighbour-brooke or hollow tree,
Receive my body, close me up from lust,
That follows at my heals, be ever just,
Thou God of shepherds: Pan for her dear sake,
That loves the Rivers brinks, and still doth shake,
In cold remenbrance of thy quick pursuit:
Let me be made a reed, and ever mute,
Nod to the waters fall, whilst every blast,
Singes through my slender leaves that I was chaste:
This is a night of wonder, Amarill,
Be Comforted, the holy gods are still,
Revengers of these wrongs.
Thou blessed man,
Honoured upon these plains and loved of Pan:
Hear me, and save from endless infamy,
My yet vnblasted flower Virginity
By all the Garlands that have croun'd that head,
By thy chaste office, and the marriage bed,
That still is blessed by thee: by all the rights
Due to our God: and by those virgin lights,
That burn before his Altar: let me not,
Fall from my former state to gain the blot
That never shall be purged.
I am not now,
That wanton Amarillis: here I vow,
To Heaven, and thee grave father, if I may,
Scope this unhappy Night, to know the day,
A virgin, never after to endure
The tongues, or company of men impure.
I hear him, come, save me.
Retire a while,
Behind this bushk, till wee have known that vile
Aboser of young maidens.
Stay thy pace,
Most loved Amarillis: let the chase,
grow calm and milder, fly me not so fast,
I fear the pointed Brambles have vnlac't
Thy golden Buskins, turn again and see:
Thy Shepherd follow, that is strong and free,
Able to give thee all cont•ned and case,
I am not bashful virgin, I can please:
At first encounter hug thee in mine arm,
And give thee many kisses, soft and warm,
As those the Sun prints on thy smiling cheek,
Of Plummes or mellow peaches I am sleek,
And smooth as Neptune when stern Eolus,
Lo•ks up his surely winds and nimbly thus,
Can show my Active youth why dost thou fly.
Remmber Amarillis it was I,
That kilt Alexis for thy sake, and set,
An everlasting hate twixt Amoret,
And her beloved Perigot it was I,
That drowned her in the well, where she must lye,
Till time shall leave to be, then turn again:
Tur•e with thy open arms and clipp the swain
That hath performed all this, turn turn I say:
I must not be deluded,
Monster stay,
Thou that art like a canker to the state,
Thou lives and brethest in, eating with debate,
Through every honest bosom, forcing still,
The veins of any men, may serve thy will.
Thou that hast offered with a sinful hand,
To seize upon this virgin that doth stand,
yet trembling here.
Good holiness declare,
What had the danger been if being bare,
I had imbracd her, tell me by your Art:
What coming wonders wood that fight impart.
Lust, and branded soul,
Yet tell me more,
Hath not our Mother Nature for her store,
And great increase, said it is good and just,
And willed that every living creature must,
Beget his like.
Ye are better read then I,
I must confess in Blood and Lechery:
Now to the Bower and bring this beast along,
Where he may suffer Penance for his wrong,
Here will I wash it in the mornings dew,
Which she on every little grass doth strew,
In silver drops ago•st the Suns appear:
Tic holy water and will make me clear.
My hand will not be cleansed, my wronged love,
If thy chaste spirit in the Ayre yet move,
Look mildly down on him that yet doth stand,
All •ull of guilt thy blood upon his hand,
And though I struck thee undeservedly,
Let my revenge on her that Iniurd thee.
Make less a fault which I intended not,
And let these dew drops wash away my spot,
It will not cle•nse, O to what sacred •loot,
Shall I resort to wash away this blood:
Amidst these Trees the holy Clorin. dwells,
In a low Cabin, of cut boughs and heales,
All wounds, to her I will my self a dress,
And my rash•faults repentantly confess:
Perhaps sheele find a means by Art or prayer,
To make my hand with chaste blood stained, fair
That done not far hence underneath some tree,
Isle ha•e a little Cabin built since she,
Whom I adored is dead, there will I give,
My self to stricknesse and like Clorin live.
Shepherd once more your bloold is stayed,
Take example by this maid,
Who is healed e•e you be pure,
so hard it is lewd lust to cure,
Take heed then how you turn your eye•
On these other lust fully,
And sheephear•esse take •eedleast you,
Move his willing eye thereto,
Let no wring, nor pinch, nor smile
Of yours, his weaker sense beguile,
Is your love yet true and chaste,
And for ever so to last.
I have forgot all vain desires,
All looser thoughts, ill temp•ed fires,
True love I find a pleasant •um,
Whose moderate heat can ne'er consume.
And I a new fire feel in me,
Whose base end is not quenched to be.
Join your hands with modest touch,
And for ever keep you such.
Yon is her cabin, thus far off isle stand,
And call her forth, for my unhallowed hand,
I dare not bring so near yo• sacerd place,
Clorin come forth and do a timely grace,
To a poor swain,
What art thou that doest call?
Clorin is ready to do good to all.
Come near.
I dare not.
Clorin. Satire, see
Who it is that calls on me.
Theirs a hand some swain doth stand,
Stretching out a bloody hand.
Come Clorin bring thy holy waters clear,
To wash my hand.
What w•nders have been here
To night stretch •oorth thy hand young swain,
Wash and •ubbe it whilst I rain
Holy water.
Still you power,
But my hand will never scour.
Satire• bring him to the bower
Wee will try the soueragne power
Of other waters.
Mo•tall su•e,
Tic the blood of maiden pure
That staines hee so.
What ever thou be.
Be thou her spright, or some divinity,
That in her shape thinks good to walk this grove,
Pardon poor Per•got
I am thy love.
Thy Amoret. for evermore thy love:
Stick once more on my naked breast, Isle prove
As constant still, O can thou love me yet,
How soon could I my former griefs forget.
So over great with joy, that you live now
I am, that no desire of knowing how
doth seize me; hast thou still power to forgive,
Whilst thou hast power to love, or I to live,
More welcome now then had thou never gone
A stray from me.
And when thou love alone
And not •, death or some lingering pain•
That's worse, light on me.
Now your stain
Perhaps will cleanse, thee once again
See the blood that erst did stay,
With the water drops away:
All the powers again are pleased,
And with this new knot are appeasd:
Join your hands, and rise together,
Pan be blessed that brought you hither.
Go back again what ere thou art: unless
Smooth maiden thoughts possess thee, doe not press
This hallowed ground, go Satire take his hand,
And give him present trial.
Mortal stand.
Till by fire, I have made known
Whether thou be such a one,
That may freely tread this place,
Hold thy hand up, never was,
More untainted flesh then this,
Fairest he is fall of bliss.
Then boldly speak why doest thou seek this place,
First honoured virgin to behold thy face,
Where all good dwells, that is, next for to try
The truth of late report, was given to me:
Those shepherds that have met with •whole mischance,
Through much neglect, and more ill governance,
Whether the wounds they have may yet endure
The open ayre, or stay a longer cure,
And lastly what the doom may be, shall light
Upon those guilty wretches, through whose spite
All this confusion full. For to this place,
Thou holy maiden have I brought the race,
Of these offenders, who have freely told,
Both why, and by what means, they gave this bold
Attempt upon their live.
Fume all the ground,
And sprinckle holy water, for unsound
And foul Infection gins to fill the Ayre
It gathers yet more strongly,
Of Censors filled with Franckensence and Mire.
Together with cold Camphor, quickly stir.
The gentle Satire, for the place begins
To sweat and labour, with the abhorred sins
Of those offenders, let them not come ny,
For full of itching flame and leprosy,
Their very souls are, that the ground goes back,
And shrinks to feel the •ullen weight of black
And so unheard of venom, hye thee fast,
Thou holy man, and banish from the chaste,
These manlike monsters, let them never more
Be known upon these dounes, but lunge before,
The next suns rising, put them from the sight,
And memory of every honest wight.
Be quick in expedition, lest the sores
Of these weak patients, break into new gores
My dear dear Amoret, how happy are,
Those blessed pairs, in whom a little l•rr
Hath bred an everlasting love, to strong
For time or steel, or envy to do wrong,
How do you feel your hurts, a lass poor heart
How much I was abused, give me the smart
For it is justly mine.
I doe believe.
It is enough dear friend, leave off to grieve,
And let vs once more in despite of ill,
Give hands, and hearts again
with better will,
Th•n ere I went to find, in hottest day
Cool Christ all of the fountain, to allay
My eager thirst, may this band never break,
Hear vs o heaven.
Be constant.
Else Pan wreak
With double vengeance, my disloyalty.
Let me not dare to know the company
Of men, or any more behold those eyes.
Thus shheepheare with a kiss all envy dies.
Bright Maid, I have performed your will, the swain
In whom such heate, and black rebellions reign
Hath undergone your sentence:
Only the maid I have reserved, whose face
shows much amendment, many a tear doth fall
In sorrow of her fault, great fair recall
Your heavy doom, in hope of better days
Which I dare promise: once again, vpraise
her heavy Spirit, that near drowned lies
In self cons•ming care that never dies.
I am content to pardon: call her in,
The ayre grows cool again, and doth begin
To purge it self, how bright the day doth show
After this stormy cloud, go Satire go,
And with this taper boldly try her hand.
If she be pure and good, and firmly stand
to be so still: we have perfoormd a work
worthy the gods them-selues 
Come forward Maiden, do not lurk
Nor hide your face with grief &amp; shame,
Now or never get a name,
That may raise thee, and recur,
All thy li•e that was impure,
Hold your hand unto the flame,
If thou be a perfect dame:
Or hast truly vowed to mend,
This pale fire will be thy friend.
See the Taper hurts her not,
Go thy ways let never spot,
Henceforth cease upon thy blood.
Thank the Gods and still be good.
Young shepherdess now, ye are brought again
To virgin state, be so, and so remain
To thy last day, unless the faithful love
Of some good shepherd force thee to remove,
Then labour to be true to him, and live
As such a one, that ever strives to give
A blessed memory to after Time:
Be famous for your good, not for your crime.
Now holy man, I offer up again
These patients full of health, and free from pain
Keep them, from after ills, be ever near
Unto their actions: teach them how to clear,
The tedious way they pass though, from suspect
Keep them from wrong in others, or neglect
Of duty in them selves, correct the blood,
With thrifty bitts and labour, let the flood,
Or the next neighbouring spring give remedy
To greedy thirst, and travail, not the tree
That hanges with wanton clusters, let not wine
•nlesse in sacrifice or rights divine,
Be ever known of shepherds, have a care,
Thou man of holy life, Now do not spare,
Their faults through much remissness, not forget,
To cherish him, whose many pains and sweat,
Hath given increase, and added to the downs.
Sort all your Shepherds from the lazy clowns:
That feed their heifers in the budded Brooms,
Teach the young maidens tricknes that ye grooms
May ever fear to tempt their blowing youth,
Banish all complement but single truth.
From every tongue, and every Shepherds heart,
Let them use persuading, but no Art:
Thus holy Priest, I wish to thee and these,
All the best goods and comforts that may please,
And all those blessings Heaven did ever give,
Wee pray upon this Bower may ever live.
Kneel every Shepherd, whilst with powerful hand,
I bless you after labours, and the Land.
You feed your flocks upon Great Pan defend you.
From misfortune and amend you,
Keep you from those dangers still,
That are followed by your will:
Give ye means to know at length,
All your Retches all your strenght.
Cannot keep your foot from falling,
To lewd lust, that still is calling,
At your cottage, till his power,
Bring again that golden hour:
Of peace and rest, to every soul.
May his care of you control,
All diseases, sores or payne,
That in after time may reign,
Either in your flocks or you,
Give ye all affections new.
New desires and tempers new,
That ye may be ever true.
Now rise and go, and as ye pass away,
Sing to the God of sheep, that happy lay:
That honest D•rus taught ye, Dorus hee,
That was the soul and God of melody.
 All ye Woods, and Trees, and Bowers,
All ye virtues, and ye powers:
That inhabit in the lakes,
In the pleasant springs or brakes.
Move your feet,
to our sound:
Whilst wee greet,
all this ground.
With his honour and his name.
That defends our flocks from blame.
Hee is great, and he is just,
Hee is ever good and must:
Thus be honoured, Daffodils,
Roses, Pinckes, and loved Lilies.
Let vs fling,
Whilst wee sing,
Ever holy,
Ever holy.
Ever honoured, ever young,
Thus great Pan is ever sung.
Thou divinest, fairest, brightest,
Thou most powerful maid, and whitest.
Thou most virtuous, and most blessed,
Eyes of Stars and Golden Tressed,
Like Apollo, tell me sweetest,
What new service now is meetest.
For thee Satire shall I stray,
In the middle Ayre and staye,
Thy Sailing Rack or nimbly take,
Hold by the Moon, and gently make.
Suite to the pale Queen of the night,
For a Beam to give thee light,
Shall I dive into the Sea,
And bring the corrall making way,
Through the rising waives that fall,
In snowy fleeces, dearest shall,
I catch the wanton fawns, or flies,
Whose woven wings the Summer dyes,
For many colours get thee fruit,
Or steal from Heaven old Orpheus Lute
All these I venture for and more,
To do her service, all these Woods adore
No other Service Satire but thy watch,
About these Thicks least harmless people catch,
Mischief or sad mischance.
Holy virgin, I will dance,
Round about these woods as quick,
As the breaking light, and prick,
Down the lawns, and down the vales,
Faster then the Windmill sails.
So I take my leave and pray,
All the comforts of the day:
Such as Phoebus heate doth send,
On the Earth may still be friend,
Thee and this Arbor.
And to thee,
All thy masters love be free.
The Pastoral of the faithful Shepherdess.

THE honour, and splendour of these Spectacles was such in the performance, as could those hours have lasted, this of mine, now, had been a most unprofitable work: But (when it is the fate, even of the greatest, and most absolute births, to need, and borrow a life of posterity) little had been done to the study of magnificence in these, if presently with the rage of the people, who (as a part of greatness) are privileged by Cu∣stome, to deface their carcasses, the spirits had also perished. In duty, therefore, to that Ma∣jest, who gave them their authority, and grace; and, no less then the most royal of pre∣decessors, deserves eminent celebration for these solemnities: I add this later hand, to re∣deem them as well from ignorance, as envy, two common evils, the one of Censure, the other of Oblivion.
 PLINIE,  SOLINVS,  PTOLOMAEE, and of late LEO  the African, remember unto vs a river in Aethiopia, famous by the name of Niger; of which the people were called Nigritae, now Negro's: &amp; are the blackest nation of the world. This  river takes spring out of a certain Lake, east-ward; &amp; after a long race, falls into the western Ocean. Hence (because it was her Ma∣jests will, to have them Black-mores at first) the invention was derived by me, &amp; presented thus.
First, for the Scene, was drawn a Landtschape, consisting of small woods, and here and there a void place filled with huntings; which falling, an artificial Sea was seen to shoot forth, as if it flowed to the land, raised with waives, which seemed to move, and in some places the billow to break, as imitating that orderly disorder, which is common in nature. In front of this Sea were placed six  Tritons, in moving, &amp; spright∣lie actions, their upper parts humane, save that their hairs were blew, as partaking of the Sea∣colour: their desinent parts, fish, mounted aboue their heads, and all varied in disposition. From their backs were borne out certain light pieces of Taffeta, as if carried by the wind, and their Musique made out of wreathed shells. Be∣hind these, a pair of Sea-Maides, for song, were as conspicuously seated; between which, two great Sea-horses (as big as the life) put forth themselves; the one mounting aloft, &amp; writhing his head from the other, which seemed to sink forwards; so intended for variation, &amp; that the
Figure behind, might come of better:  upon their backs, OCEANVS &amp; NIGER were advanced.
OCEANVS, presented in a humane form, the co∣lore of his flesh, blew; and shadowed with a robe of Sea-greene; his head grey, &amp;  horned; as he is described by the Ancients: his beard of the like mixed colour▪ he was gyrlonded with Al∣ga, or Sea-grasse; and in his hand a Trident.
NIGER, in form and colour of an Aethiope; his hair, and rare beard curled, shadowed with a blew, and bright mantle: his front, neck, and wrists adorned with Pearl, and crowned, with an artificial wreath of Cane, and Paper-rush.
These induced the Masquers, which were twelve Nymphs, Negro's; and the daughters of NIGER; attended by so many of the  ONE∣NIAE which were their Light-bearers.
The Masquers were placed in a great concave shell, like mother of Pearl, curiously made to move on those waters, and rise with the billow; the top thereof was stuck with a cheu'rō of lights, which, indented to the proportion of the shell, struck a glorious beam upon them, as they were seated, one aboue another: so that they were all seen, but in an extravagant order.
On sides of the shell, did swim six huge Sea-monsters, varied in their shapes, and dispositions, bearing on their backs the twelve Torch bearers; who were planted there in several graces; so as the backs of some were seen; some in purfle, or side; others in face; &amp; all having their lights burning out of Whelks, or Murex shells.
The attire of the Masquers was alike, in all, without difference: the colours, Azure, and Silver; but returned on the top with a scroll and antique dressing of Feathers, and Jewels interlaced with ropes of Pearl. And, for the front, ear, neck, and wrists, the ornament was of the most choice and orient Pearl; best set∣ting of from the black.
For the Light bearers, Sea-greene, moved about the skirts with gold and silver ••eir hair loose, and flowing, gyrlanded with Sea-grasse, and that stuck with branches of Coral.
These thus presented, the Scene behind, see∣med a vast Sea (and united with this that flowed forth) from the terminaton, or horizon of which (being the level of the State, which was placed in the upper end of the Hall) was drawn, by the lines of Prospective, the whole work shoo∣ting downwards, from the eye; which decorum made it more conspicuous, and caught the eye a far of with a wandering beauty. To which was added an obscure and cloudy night-piece, that made the whole set of. So much for the bodily part. Which was of Moister YNIGO IONES his design, and act.
By this, one of the Tritons, with the two Sea-Maides, began to sing to the others loud Mu∣sique, their voices being a tenor, and two trebles.
SOund, sound aloud
The welcome of the orient Flood,
Into the West;
Fair, NIGER,  son to great OCEANVS,
Now honoured, thus,
With all his beauteous race:
〈◊〉 though but black in face,
Yet, are they bright,
And full of life, and light.
To prove that Beauty best,
Which not the colour, but the feature
Assures unto the creature.
BE silent, now the Ceremonies done.
And NIGER, say, how comes it, lovely Son,
That thou, the AETHIOPES River, so far East,
Art seen to fall into the extremest West
Of me, the King of floods, OCEANVS,
And, in mine Empires heart, salute me, thus?
My ceaseless current, now amazed stands!
To see thy labour, through so many lands,
Mix thy fresh billow, with my brackish stream;
And, in thy sweetness, stretch thy diadem,
To these far distant, and vn-equall'd skies
This squared Circle of celestial bodies:
Divine OCEANVS, tic not strange at all,
That (since the immortal souls of creatures mortal,
Mix with their bodies, yet reserve for ever
A power of separation) I should sever
My fresh streams, from thy brackish (like things fixed)
Though, with thy powerful saltness, thus far mixed.
" Virtue, though chained to earth, will still live free;
" And Hell it self must yield to industry.
But, what's the end of thy Herculean labours,
Extended to these calm, and blessed shores?
TO do a kind, and careful Fathers part,
In satisfying every pensive heart
Of these my Daughters, my most loved birth:
Who though they were the first formed Dames of earth,
And in whose sparkling, and refulgent eyes,
The glorious Sun did still delight to rise;
Though he (the best Judge, and most formal Cause
Of all Dames beauties) in their firm hues, draws
Signs of his feruent'st Love; and thereby shows
That, in their black, the perfectst beauty grows;
Since the fixed colour of their curled hair,
(Which is the highest grace of dames most fair)
No cares, no age can change; or there display
The fearful tincture of abhorred Gray;
Since Death his self (his self being pale &amp; blew)
Can never alter their most faith-full hew;
All which are arguments, to prove, how far
Their beauties conquer, in great Beauties war;
And more, how near Divinity they be,
That stand from passion, or decay so free.
Yet, since the fabulous voices of some few
Poor brain-sicke men, styled Poets, here with you,
Have, with such envy of their graces, sung
The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly
To infect all climates, yea our purity;
As of one  PHAETON, that fired the world
And, that, before his heedles flames were hurled
About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as fair,
As other Dames; now black, with black despair:
And in respect of their complexctions changed,
Are each where, since, for  luckless creatures ranged.
Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
Most jealous of their beauties) fear, and care
Possessed them whole; yea, and believing  them,
They wept such ceasles tears, into my stream,
That it hath, thus far, overflowed his shore
To seek them patience: who have since, ere more
As the Sun rises,  chardg'd his burning throne
With volleys of revilings; cause he shone
On their scorched cheeks, with such intemperate fires,
And other Dames, made Queens of all desires.
To frustrate which strange error, oft, I sought,
(Though most in vain, against a settled thought
As women's are) till they confirmed at length
By miracle, what I, with so much strength
Of argument resisted; else they feigned:
For in the Lake, where their first spring they gained,
As they sate, cooling their soft Limbs, one night,
Appeared a Face, all circumfus'd with light;
(And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes  never dream)
Wherein they might decipher through the stream,
These words.
That they a Land must forthwith seek,
Whose termination (of the Greek)
Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
Their bloods, doth never  rise, or set,
But in his Journey passes by,
And leaves that Climate of the sky,
To comfort of a greater Light,
Who forms all beauty, with his sight.
In search of this, have we three Princedomes past,
That speak out Tania, in their accents last;
Black Mauritania, first; and secondly,
Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
The place unto these longing Nymphs designed.
Instruct, and aid me, great OCEANVS,
What Land is this, that now appears to vs?
This Land, that lifts into the temperate Ayre
His snowy cliff, is  Albion the fair;
So called of  Neptunes Son, who rules here:
For whose dear guard, my self, (four thousand year)
Since old Deucalion's days, have walked the round
About his Empire, proud, to see him crowned
Aboue my waives.
At this, the Moon was discovered in the up∣per part of the house, triumphant in a Silver throne, made in figure of a Pyramid. Her gar∣mints White, and Silver, the dressing of her head antique; &amp; crowned with a Luminary, or Sphere of light: which striking on the clouds, and heightened with Silver, reflected as natural clouds do by the splendour of the Moon. The Heaven, about her, was vaulted with blew silk, and set with Stars of Silver which had in them their several lights burning. The sud∣deign sight of which, made NIGER to interrupt OCEANVS, with this present passion.
— O see, our silver Star!
Whose pure, auspicious light greetes vs, thus far!
Great Aethiopia, Goddess of our shore,
Since, with particular worship we adore
Thy general brightness, let particular grace
Shyne on my zealous Daughters: Show the place,
Which, long, their Longings vrdg'd their eyes to see.
Beautify them, which long have Deified thee.
NIGER, be glad: Resume thy native cheer.
Thy Daughters labours have their period here,
And so thy errors. I was that bright Face
Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
Read mystic lines; (which skill PITHAGORAS
First taught to men, by a reuerberate glass)
This blessed Isle doth with that TANIA end,
Which there they saw inscribed, and shall extend
Wished satisfaction to their best desires.
BRITANIA, which the triple world admires,
This Isle hath now recovered for her name;
Where reign those Beauties, that with so much fame
The sacred MVSES Sons have honoured,
And from bright HESPERVS to EOVS spread.
With that great name BRITANIA, this blessed Isle
Hath won her ancient dignity, and stile,
A World, divided from the world: and tried
The abstract of it, in his general pride.
For were the World, with all his wealth, a Ring,
BRITANIA (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
Might be a Diamant worthy to inches it,
Ruled by a SUN, that to this height doth grace it:
Whose Beams shine day, and night, and are of force
To blanch an AETHIOPE, and revive a Cor's.
His light scientiall is, and (past mere nature)
Can salve the rude defects of every creature.
Call forth thy honoured Daughters, then;
And let them, before the Britain men,
Indent the Land, with those pure traces
They flow with, in their native graces.
Inuit them, boldly, to the shore,
Their Beauties shall be scorched no more:
This Sun is temperate, and refines
All things, on which his radiance shines.
Here the Tritons sounded, &amp; they danced on shore, every couple (as they advanced) severally presenting their Fans: in one of which were in∣scribed their mixed Names, in the other a mute Hieroglyphic, expressing their mixed qualities. Which manner of Symbol I rather chose, then Imprese, as well for strangeness, as relishing of antiquity, and more applying to that original doctrine of sculpture, which the Egyptians are said, first, to have brought from the Aethiopians.
 
The Names.
The Symboles.
The Queen. 
1 EUPHORIC. 
1 A golden Tree, la∣den with fruit.
Co: of Bedford.
1 AGLAIA.
 
La: Herbert. 
2 DIAPHANE. 
2 The figure Isocae∣drone of crystal.
Co: of Derby.
2 EVCAMPSE.
 
La: Rich. 
3 OCYTE. 
3 A pair of naked feet, in a River.
Co: of Suffolk
3 KATHARE.
 
La: Bouilli. 
4 NOTIS. 
4 The Salamander simple.
La: Effingham.
4 PSYCHROTE.
 
La: El: Howard. 
5 GLYCYTE. 
5 A cloud full of rain, dropping.
La: Suss: Vere.
5 MALACIA.
 
La: Wroth. 
6 BARYTE. 
6 An vrne' spheard with wine.
La: Walsingham
6 PERIPHERE.
 
Their own single Dance ended, as they were about to make choice of their Men: One, from the Sea, was heard to call'hem with this charm, sung by a tenor voice.
Come away, come away,
We grow jealous of your stay:
If you do not stop your ear,
We shall have more cause to fear
Sirens of the land, then they
To doubt the Sirens of the Sea.
Here they danced with their men, several measures, and corranto's. All which ended, they
were again accited to sea, with a Song of two Trebles, whose cadences were iterated by a double Echo, from several parts of the Land.
DAughters of the subtle Flood,
Do not let Earth longer intertayne you;
Let Earth longer entertain you.
Longer entertain you.
It is to them, enough of good,
That you give this little hope, to gain you
Give this little, hope to gain you.
Little hope, to gain you.
If they love,
You shall quickly see;
For when to flight you move,
They'll follow you, the more you flee
follow you, the more you flee.
The more you flee.
If not, impute it each to others matter;
They are but Earth, &amp; what you vowed was Water.
but earth &amp; what you vowed was Water.
earth &amp; what you vowed was Water.
And what you vowed was Water.
You vowed was Water.
I Nough, bright Nymphs, the night grows old,
And we are grieved, we can not hold
You longer light: But comfort take.
Your Father, only, to the Lake
Shall make return: Your selves with feasts,
Must here remain the Ocean's guests.
Nor shall this veil, the Sun hath cast
Aboue your blood, more Summers last.
For which, you shall observe these rites.
Thirteen times thrice, on thirteen nights,
(So often as I fill my Sphere
With glorious light, throughout the year)
You shall (when all things else do sleep
Save your chaste thoughts) with reverence, steep
Your bodies in that purer brine,
And wholesome dew called Ros-marine:
Then with that soft, and gentler some,
Of which the Ocean, yet, yields some,
Whereof bright Venus, Beauties Queen,
Is said to have begotten been,
You shall your gentler limbs ore-laue,
And for your pains, perfection have.
So that, this night, the year gone round,
You do again salute this ground;
And, in the beams of yond' bright Sun,
Your faces dry, and all is done.
At which in a Dance they returned to the Sea, where they took their Shell; and, with this full Song, went out.
NOw Dian, with her burning face,
Declines apace:
By which our Waters know
To ebb, that late did flow.
Back Seas, back Nymphs; but, with a forward grace,
Keep, still, your reverence to the place:
And shout with joy of favour, you have won,
in sight of Albion, Neptunes Son.
So ended the first Masque, which (beside the singular grace of Music and Dances) had that success in the nobility of performance; as no∣thing needs to the illustration, but the memo∣rye by whom it was personated.
TWo years being now past, that her May∣sty had intermitted these delights, and the third almost come; it was her Highness plea∣sure again to glorify the Court, &amp; command that I should think on some fit presentment, which should answer the former, still keeping thē the same persons, the Daughters of NIGER, but their beauties varied, according to promise, and their time of absence excused, with four more added to their Number.
To which limits, when I had opted my in∣uention, and being to bring news of them, frō the Sea, I induced Bores, one of the winds, as my fittest Messenger; presenting him thus.
In a robe of Russet, and White mixed, full, and bagg'd: his hair, and beard rough: and horrid; his wings gray, and full of snow, and icicles. His mantle borne from him with wires, &amp; in several puffs; his feet  ending in serpents tails; and in his hand a levels Branch, laden with icicles.
But before, in midst of the Hall; to keep the State of the feast, and season; I had placed  In∣nuary, in a throne of Silver; His robe of Ash∣coullor
long, fringed with Silver; a white mantle: His wings white, and his buskins: In his hand a laurel bough, upon his head an Anademe of lau∣rell, fronted with the sign Aquarius, and the Character. Who as Bores blusterd forth, dis∣covered himself.
WHich, among these is Albion, Neptunes Son?
WHat ignorance dares make that question?
Would any ask, who Mars were, in the wars?
Or, which is Hesperus, among the stars?
Of the bright Planets, which is Sol? Or can
A doubt arise, among creatures, which is man?
Behold, whose eyes do dart Promethean fire
Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
The rest with duty; yet commanding, cheer:
And are obeyed, more with love, then fear.
WHat Power art thou, that thus inform me?
DOst thou not know me? I, to well, know thee
By thy  rude voice, that doth so hoarsely blow,
Thy hair, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
Thy Serpent feet, to be that rough North-winde,
Bores, that, to my reign, art still unkind.
I am the Prince of Months, called January;
Because by me  Ianus the year doth vary,
Shutting up wars, proclaiming peace, &amp; feasts,
Freedom, &amp; triumphs: making Kings his guests.
TO thee then, thus, &amp; by thee, to that King,
That doth thee present honours, do I bring
Present remembrance of twelve Aethiope Dames:
Who, guided hither by the Moons bright flames,
To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
Enjoined again, and (thence assigned a day
For their return) were in the waives to leave
Their blackness, and true beauty to receive.
WHich they received, but broke their day: &amp; yet
Have not returned a look of grace for it,
Showing a course, and most unfit neglect.
Twice have I come, in pomp here, to expect
Their presence; Twice deluded, have been fine
With  other rites my Feasts to intertayne:
And, now the Third time, turned about the year
Since they were looked for; and, yet, are not here.
IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that cause their stay;
For they were all prepared by their day,
And, with religion, forward on their way:
When PROTEVS,  the gray Prophet of the Sea,
Met them, and made report, how other four
Of their black kind, (whereof their Sire had store)
Faithful to that great wonder, so late done
Upon their Sisters, by bright Albion,
Had followed them to seek BRITANIA forth,
And there, to hope like favour, as like worth.
Which Night envied, as done in her despite,
And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
Thought to prevent in these; least men should deem
Her coulor, if thus changed, of small esteem.
And so, by malice, and her magic, tossed
The Nymphs at Sea, as they were almost lost,
Till, on an Island, they by chance arrived,
That  floted in the mayne; where, yet, she' had gived sight.
Them so, in charms of darkness, as no might)
Should loose them thence, but their changed Sisters
Whereat the Twelve (in piety moved, &amp; kind)
Straight, put themselves in act, the place to find;
Which was the Nights sole trust they so will do,
That she, with labour, might confound them too.
For, ever since, with error hath she held
Them wandering in the Ocean, and so quelled
Their hopes beneath their toil, as (desperate now
Of any least success unto their vow;
Nor knowing to return to express the grace,
Wherewith they labour to this Prince, and place)
One of them, meeting me at Sea, did pray,
That for the love of my  ORYTHYIA,
(Whose very name did heate my frosty breast,
And make me shake my Snow-fill'd wings, &amp; crest)
To bear this sad report I would be won,
And frame their just excuse: which here I have done.
WOuld thou had not begun, unlucky Wind,
That never yet blow goodness to mankind;
But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
Strik'st  horrors through the ayre, as sharp as death.
Here a second Wind came in, VVLTVRNVS, in a blew coloured robe &amp; mantle, puffed as the former, but somewhat sweeter; his face black, and on his  head a red Sun, showing he came from the East: his wings of several colours; his buskins white, and wrought with Gold.
ALL horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
Bee all things here as calm as is my breath.
A gentler Wind, Vulturnus, brings you news
The Isle is found, &amp; that the Nymphs now use
Their rest, &amp; joy. The Nights black charms are flown.
For, being made unto their Goddess known,
Bright Aethiopia, the Silver Moon,
As she was  Hecate, she brake them soon:
And now by virtue of their light, and grace,
The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
Of all the earth for Beauty.  There, their Queen
Hath raised them a Throne, that still is seen
To turn unto the motion of the World;
Wherein they sit, and are, like Heaven, whirld
About the Earth; whilst, to them contrary,
(Following those nobler torches of the Sky)
A world of little Loves, and chaste Desires,
Do light their beauties, with still moving fires.
And who to Heavens consent can better move,
Then those that are so like it, Beauty and Love?
Hither, as to their new Elysium,
The spirits of the antique Greeks are come,
Poets, and Singers, Linus, Orpheus, all
That have excelled in  knowledge musical;
Where, set in Orb•rs made of myrtle, and gold,
They live, again, these Beauties to behold.
And thence, in flowery mazes walking forth
Sing hymns in celebration of their worth.
Whilst, to their Songs, two Fountains flow, one hight
Of lasting Youth, the other chaste Delight,
That at the closes, from their bottoms spring,
And strike the Ayre to echo what they sing.
But, why do I describe what all must see?
By this time, ne'er thy coast, they floating be;
For, so their virtuous Goddess, the chaste Moon,
Told them, the Fate of the Island should, &amp; soon
Would fix it self unto thy continent,
As being the place, by Destiny fore-ment,
Where they should slow forth, dressed in her attires:
And, that the influence of those holy fires,
(First rapt from hence) being multiplied upon
The other four, should make their Beauties one.
Which now expect to see, great Neptunes Son,
And love the miracle, which thy self hast done.
Here, a Curtine was drawn (in which the Night was painted.) and the Scene discovered. which (because the former was marine, and these, yet of necessity, to come from the Sea) I devised, should bee an Island, floating on a calm water. In the midst thereof was a Seat of state, called the Throne of Beauty, erected: divided into eight Squares, and distinguished by so many Ionic pilasters. In these Squares the sixteen Masquers were placed by couples: behind them, in the center of the Throne was a tralucent Pillar, shining with several coloured lights, that reflected on their backs. From the top of which Pillar went several arches to the Pilasters, that sustained the roof of the Throne, which was likewise adorned with lights, and gyrlonds; And between the Pilasters, in front, little Cupids in
flying posture, waving of wreaths, and lights, bore up the Coronice: over which were placed eight Figures, representing the Elements of Beauty; which advanced upon the Ionic, and being females, had the Corinthian order. The first was
SPLENDOUR.
In a robe of flame colour, naked breasted; her bright hair loose flowing: She was drawn in a circle of clouds, her face, and body break∣ing through; and in her hand a branch, with two Roses, a white, and a red. The next to her was
SERENITAS.
In a garment of bright skye-colour, a long tress, &amp; waued with a veil of divers colours, such as the golden sky some-times shows: upon her head a clear, and fair Sun shining, with rays of gold striking down to the feet of the figure. In her hand a  Crystal, cut with several angles, and shadowed with diverse co∣lours, as caused by refraction. The third
GERMINATIO.
In greene; with a Zone of gold about
her Wast, crowned with Myrtle, her hair like∣wise flowing, but not of so bright a colour: In her hand, a branch of  Myrtle. Her socks of greene, and Gold. The fourth was
LAETITIA.
IN a Vesture of diverse colours, and all sorts of flowers embroidered thereon. Her socks so fitted. A  Gyrland of flowers in her hand; her eyes turning up, and smiling, her hair flowing, and stuck with flowers. The fifth
TEMPERIES.
IN a garment of Gold, Silver, and colours wea∣ued: In one hand she held a  burning Steel, in the other, an Urn with water. On her head a gyrland of flowers, Corn, Vine-leaues, and Olive branches, enter-wouen. Her socks, as her garment. The sixth
VENVSTAS.
IN a Silver robe, with a thin subtle veil over her hair, and it:  Pearl about her neck, and forehead. Her socks wrought with pearl. In her hand she bore several coloured  Lilies. The seventh was
DIGNITAS.
IN a dressing of State, the hair bound up with fillets of gold, the Garments rich, and set with jewels, and gold; likewise her buskins, and in her hand a  Golden rod. The eight
PERFECTION.
IN a Vesture of pure Gold, a wreath of Gold up∣on her head. About her body the  Zodiac, with the Signs: In her hand a Compass of gold, drawing a circle.
On the top of all the Throne, (as being made out of all these) stood
HARMONIA.
A Personage, whose dressing had something of al the others, &amp; had her robe painted full of Figures. Her head was compassed with a crown of Gold, having in it  seven jewels e∣qually set. In her hand a Lyra, whereon she rested.
This was the Ornament of the Throne. The ascent to which, consisting of six steppes, was covered with a  multitude of Cupids (chosen out of the best, and most ingenuous youth of the Kingdom, noble, and others) that were the
Torch-bearers; and all armed, with Bows, Queen∣uers, Wings, and other Ensigns of Love. On the sides of the Throne, were curious, and eel∣gent Arbors appointed: &amp; behind, in the back part of the Isle, a Grove, of grown trees laden with golden fruit, which other little Cupids plucked, and threw each at other, whilst on the ground  Leuerets picked up the bruised apples, and left them half eaten. The Ground-plat of the whole was a subtle indented Maze: And, in the two foremost angles, were two Fountains, that ran continually, the one  Hobo's, the other  Hedone's: In the Arbors, were placed the Musicians, who represented the Shades of the old Poets, &amp; were attired in a Priest-like habit of Crimson, and Purple, with Laurel gyrlonds.
The colours of the Masquers were varied; the one half in Orenge-tawny, and Silver: the o∣there in Sea-greene, and Silver. The bodies and short skirts of White, and Gold, to both.
The habit, and dressing (for the fashion) was most curious, and so exceeding in riches, as the Throne whereon they sat, seemed to be a Mine of light, stroke frō their jewels, &amp; their garmēts.
This Throne, (as the whole Island moved for∣ward, on the water,) had a circular motion of it own, imitating that which we cal Motum mun∣di, from the East to the West, or the right to the left side. For so Home. Ilia. M. vnderstāds by 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, Orientalia mundi: by 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, Occidentalia. The
steps, whereon the Cupids sate, had a motion con∣trary, with Analogy, ad motum Planetarum, from the West to the East: both which turned with their several lights. And with these three va∣ried Motions, at once, the whole Scene shot it self to the Land.
Aboue which, the Moon was seen in a Sell∣for Chariot, drawn by Virgins, to ride in the clouds, and hold them greater light: with the Sign Scorpio, and the Character, placed before her.
The order of this Scene was carefully, and ingeniously disposed; and as happily put in act (for the Motions) by the Kings Master Car∣penter. The Painters, I must needs say, (not to belie them) lent small colour to any, to attri∣bute much of the spirit of these things to their pen'cills. But that must not bee imputed a crime either to the invention, or design.
Here the loud Musique ceased; and the Mu∣sitians, which were placed in the Arbors, came forth through the Mazes, to the other Land: singing this full Song, iterated in the closes by two Eccho's, rising out of the Fountains.
WHen Love, at first, did move
From  out of Chaos, brightened
So was the world, and lightened,
As now!
As now!
As now!
Yield Night, then, to the light,
As Blackness hath to Beauty;
Which is but the same duty.
It was  for Beauty, that the World was made,
And where she reigns,  Loves lights admit no shade.
Loves lights admit no shade.
Admit no shade.
Which ended, Vulturnus the Wind, spake to the River Thamesis that lay along between the shores, leaning upon his Urn (that flowed with water,) and crowned with flowers; with a blew cloth of Silver robe about him: and was person∣nated by Moister THOMAS GILES, who made the Dances.
RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
Receive these Nymphs, within the land:
And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
Wherewith thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
Of fruitful Kent, and Essex fair,
That lend thee gyrlands for thy hair;
Instruct their silver feet to tread,
Whilst we, again to sea, are fled.
With which the Winds departed; and the River received them into the Land, by couples &amp; foures, their Cupids coming before them.
The dancing forth a most curious Dance, full of excellent device, and change, ended it in the figure of a Diamant, and so, standing still, were by the Musicians, with a second Song (sung by a loud Tenor) celebrated.
SO Beauty on the waters stood,
(When Love had  severed earth, from flood!
So when he parted ayre, from fire,
He did with concord all inspire!
And then a Motion he them taught,
That elder then himself was thought.
Which thought was, yet,  the child of earth,
For Love is elder then his birth.
The Song ended; they Danced forth their second Dance, more subtle, and full of change, then the former; and so exquisitely performed;
as the Kings Majesty incited first (by his own liking, to that which all others, there present, wished) required them both again, after some time of dancing with the Lords. Which time, to give them respite, was intermitted with Song; first by a treble voice, in this manner.
IF all these Cupids, now, were blind
As is  their wanton Brother;
Or play should put it in their mind
To shoot at one another:
What pretty battle they would make
If they their objects should mistake
And each one wound his Mother!
Which was seconded by another treble; thus.
IT was no polity of Court,
Albee' the place were charmed,
To let in earnest, or in sport,
So many Loves in, armed.
For say, the Dames should▪ with their eyes,
Upon the hearts, here, mean surprise;
Were not the men like harmed?
To which a tenor answered.
YEs, were the Loves or false, or straying;
Or Beauties not their beauty weighing:
But here, no such deceit is mixed,
Their flames are pure, their eyes are fixed:
They do not war, with different darts,
But strike a musique of like hearts.
AFter which Songs, they danced Galliards, &amp; C•ranto's; and with those excellent Graces, that the Musique, appointed to celebrate them, showed it could be silent no longer: but by the first Tenor, admitted them thus.
HAd those, that dwell in error foul,
And hold  that women have no soul,
But seen these move; They would have, then
Said, Women were the souls of Men.
So they do move each heart, and eye
With the  Worlds soul, true Harmony.
Here, they danced a third most elegant, and curious Dance, and not to be descry∣bed again, by any art, but that of their own footing: which, ending in the figure, that was to produce the fourth, January from his state saluted them, thus,
YOur grace is great, as is your Beauty, Dames;
Enough my Feasts have proved your thankful flames.
Now use your Seat: that seat which was, before,
Thought stray'ing, uncertain, floating to each shore,
And to whose having  every Clime laid claim,
Each Land, and Nation urged as the aim
Of their ambition, Beauties perfect Throne,
Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
And that, by'impulsion of your destinies,
And his attractive beams, that lights these Skies:
Who (though with th'Ocean compassed) never wets
His hair therein, nor wears a beam that sets.
Long may his light adorn these happy rites
As I renew them; and your gracious sights
Enjoy that happiness, eu'en to envy, 'as when
Beauty, at large, brake forth, and conquered men.
At which they danced their last dance, into their Throne again: and that turning, the Scene closed with this full Song.
STill turn, and imitate the Heaven
In motion swift and even;
And as his Planets go,
Your brighter lights do so:
May Youth and Pleasure ever flow.
But let your State, the while,
Be fixed as the Isle.
So all that see your Beauties sphere
May know the Elision Fields are here.
Th'Elysian fields are here.
Elision fields are here.

HOme-bred mirth our Muse doth sing,
The Satyrs tooth and Waspish sting,
Which most do hurt when least suspected,
By this Play are not affected;
But if Conceit with quick-turn'd Scenes,
Observing all those ancient streams,
Which from the Horse-foot fount do flow,
As Time, Place, Person, and to show,
Things never done with that true life,
That thoughts and wits shall stand at strife,
Whether the things now shown be true,
Or whether wee our selves now do
The things wee but present: if these
Free from the loathsome stage disease,
(So overworn, so tired and stale,
Not Satyring but to rail,)
May win your favours, and inherit
But calm acceptance for his merit:
A vows by Paper, Pen and Ink,
And by the learned Sisters drink,
To spend his Time, his Lamps, his Oil,
And never cease his brain to toil,
Till from the silent hours of night,
Hee doth produce for your delight,
Conceits so new, so harmless free,
That Puritans them-selues may see
A Play, yet not in public Preach,
That Players such lewd doctrine teach
That their pure joints do quake and tremble,
When they doe see a man resemble
The Picture of a Villain: This
As hee a friend to Muses is,
To you by me a gives his word,
Is all his Play doth now afford.
IN this disguise, (ere scarce my mourning robes)
Could have a general note, I have forsook,
My shape, my mother▪ and those rich demeans,
Of which I am sole heir, and now resolve,
In this disguise of Page to follow him,
Whose love first caused me to assume this shape.
Lord how my feminine blood stirs at the sight
Of these same breeches, me thinks this codpiece
Should betray me: well, I will try the worst,
Hither they say hee usually doth come,
Whom I so much affect, what makes he here
In the skirts of Holborn, so near the field,
And at a garden house, a has some punk
Upon my life: no more here hee comes.
God save you sir: your name unless I err,
Is moister Thomas Boutcher.
It is sweet boy.
I have a letter for you.
From whom first,
The inside sir will tell you: I shall see
What love he bears me now.
You are welcome boy.
How does the fair Constantia Somerfield,
My noble mistress.
I left her in health.
She gives thee here good words, and for her sake,
Thou shalt not want a moister, be mine for ever.
I thank you sir: now shall I see the Punk.
Who knocks so fast? I thought it was you, what news.
You know my business well, I sing one song.
Foot, what would you have me do, my land is gon,
My credit of less trust then Courtiers words
To men of judgment, and for my debts
I might deserve a Knight-hood; what's to be done?
The Knight my father will not once vouchsafe
To call me son; That little land a gave,
Throat the Lawyer swallowed at one gob,
For less then half the worth, and for the City
There be so many rascals, and tall yeomen
Would hang upon me for their maintenance,
Should I but peep or step within the gates,
That I am forced only to ease my charge,
To live here in the suburbs: or in the town
To walk in Tenebris, I tell you sir,
Your best retierd life is an honest Punk
In a thatched house with Garlic: tell not me,
My Punk's my Punk, and noble Lechery
Sticks by a man, when all his friends forsake him.
The Pox it will, art thou so senseless grown,
So much endeared to thy bestial lust,
That thy original worth should lye extinct
And buried in thy shame? far be such thoughts
From spirits free and noble: begin to live,
Know thy self, and whence thou art derived,
I know that competent state thy father gave,
Cannot be yet consumed.
It is gon by Heaven,
Not a denier is left.
It is impossible.
Impossible zart▪ I have had two suckers,
Able to spend the wealthy Croesus store.
What are they?
Why a Lawyer and a Whore,
See here comes one, dost think this petticoat,
A perfumed smock, and twice a week a bathe,
Can be maintained with half a years revenues,
No by Heaven, wee Annual younger brothers,
Must go to it by hole-sale, by hole-sale man
These creatures are maintained: her very face
Has cost a hundred pound.
Sir, thank your self.
They keep this whore betwixt them.
You know sir,
I did enjoy a quiet country life,
Spotless and free, till you corrupted me,
And brought me to the Court, I never knew,
What sleeking, glazing, or what pressing meant,
Till you preferred me to your Aunt the Lady,
I knew no Iuotie teeth, no caps of heir,
No Mercury water, fuses, or perfumes,
To help a Ladies breath, until your Aunt,
Learnt me the common trick.
The common trick,
Say you, a pox upon such common tricks,
They will undo vs all.
And knowing this
Art thou so wilful blind, still to persist
In ruin and defame.
What should I doe?
I'aue past my word to keep this Gentlewoman,
Till I can place her to her own content,
And what is a Gentleman but his word.
Why let her go to service.
To service,
Why so she does, she is my Landeresse,
And by this light, no puny Inn a Court
But keeps a Laundress at his command
To doe him service, and shall not I, ha!
Sir, you are his friend (I love him to)
Propound a course which may advantage him,
And you shall find such real worth in me,
That rather then Isle live his hindrance,
I will assume the most penurious state
The City yields, to give me means of life▪
Why ther's it, you hear her what she says,
Would not he be damned that should forsake her,
Says she not well, can you propound a course,
To get my forfit land, from yonder rogue,
Parcel Lawyer, parcel Devil, all Knave,
Thrate, throat.
Not I.
Why so, I thought as much▪
You are like our Citizens to men in need,
Which cry it is pity, a proper Gentleman,
Should want money, yet not an vsuring slave,
Will lend him a denier, to help his wants,
Will you lend me forty shillings.
I will.
Why God-amercy, there's some goodness in thee,
You'll not repent.
I will not.
With that money
I will redeem my forfit land, and wed
My Coccatrice to a man of worship,
To a man of worship by this light.
But how?
Thus in Ramme-alley lies a fellow, by name
Throat: one that professes law, but indeed
Has neither law nor conscience, a fellow
That never saw the bar, but when his life
Was called in question for a cozenage,
The Rogue is rich, to him go you, tell him
That rich Sir Iohn Somerfield.
How's that?
Is lately dead, and that my hopes stand fair
To get his only daughter. If I speed,
And have but means to steal away the wench,
Tell him I reckon him my chiefest friend,
To entertain vs till our nuptial rites
May be accomplished, and could you but procure
My elder brother meet me on the way,
And but associate me unto his house,
It were hit in faith, I'd give my cunning Throat
An honest slit for all his tricks in law.
Why this shall be performed, take ther's my store,
To friends all things are common.
Then at the court
There are none foes, for all things there are common.
I will as carefully perform thy wish,
As if my fortunes lay upon th'attempt.
When shall I here from you.
Within this hour
Let me alone for the rest, if I gull not
And go beyond my open throted lawyer,
For all his book cases of Tricesimo nono
And Quadragessimo octauo: let me
Like waiting Gentlewomen be ever bound,
To sit upon my heals, and pick rushes,
Will you about this gear.
With my best speed.
Then fare you well, yole meet me.
Without fail.
Adieu: now you pernicious Coccatrice,
You see how I must skelder for your good,
Isle bring you where you shall have means to cheat,
If you have grace enough to apprehend it.
Believe me love, how ere some stricter wits,
Condemn all women which are prone to love,
And think that if their favour fall on any,
By consequence they must be nought with many,
And hold a false position, that a woman
False to her self, can trusty be to no man,
Yet know I say, how ere my life hath lost
The fame which my Virginity aspired,
I will be true to thee, my deed shall move,
To win from all men pity, if not love.
Tut, I know thee a good rascal, lets in,
And on with all your neat and finest rags.
On with your cloak and saue-gard, you arrant drab,
You must cheat without all conscience, filtch for thee &amp; me.
Do but thou act what I shall well contrive,
Weal teach my Lawyer a new way to thrive.
Come loved Adriana here let vs sit,
And mark who passes; now for a wager,
What coloured board comes next by the window?
A black mans I think.
I think not so,
I think a red, for that is most in fashion,
Lord how scarce is the world of proper men
And gallants; sure wee never more shall see
A good leg worn in a long silk stocking,
With a long codpiece, of all fashions
That carried it in faith, what's he goes by?
A sniueling Citizen, he is carrying ware,
Unto some Ladies chamber: but whoe's this?
I know him not, a looks just like a fool.
He's very brave a may be a Courtier,
Whats that a reads.
Ah how light a treads
For durting his silk stockings, Isle tell thee what,
A witty woman may with ease distinguish,
All men by their noses, as thus: your nose
Tuscan is lovely, large and brought,
Much like a Goose, your valiant generous nose.
A crooked smooth and a great puffing nose,
Your scholars nose is very fresh and raw
For want of fire in winter, and quickly smells,
His choppes of mutton, in his dish of porrage.
Your Puritan nose is very sharpe and long,
And much like your widows, and with ease can smell,
An edifying capon some five streets off,
O mistress a very proper gentleman,
And trust me so it is, I never saw
A man that sooner could captive my thoughts
(Since I writ widow) then this gentleman,
I would a would look up.
Isle laugh so loud
That he may here me.
Thats not so good
And spake you with Moister Smalshanke.
I did.
Will a meet his brother.
A said a would,
And I believed him, I tell you moister
I have done that for many of these gallants
That no man in this town would do but I.
Whats is that boy.
Why trust them on their words
But will you hear the news which now supplies,
The city with discourse.
What is it wag
This sir, they say some of our city dames
Were much desirous to see the Baboons
Doe their newest tricks, went, saw them, came home,
Went to bed, slept, next morning one of them,
Being to shift a smock, sends down her maid,
To warm her one, mean while she gins to think
On the Babones tricks, and naked in her bed
Begins to practise some, at last she strove,
To get her right leg over her head; thus:
And by her activity she got it
Cross he shoulder: but not withal her power,
Could she reduce it, at last much struggling
Tumbles quite from the bed upon the flower,
The maid by this returned with the warm smock,
And seeing her mistress thrown on the ground
Trust up like a foote-ball, exclaims, calls help,
Runs down amazed, swears that her mistress neck
Is broke up comes her husband and neighbours,
And finding her thus trus'd, some flatly said
She was bewitch, others she was possessed,
A third said for her pride, the Devil had set
Her face where her rump should stand, but at last
Her valiant husband steppes me boldly to her,
Helps her; she a shamed; her husband amazed,
The neighbours laughing as none forbear,
She tells them of the fatal accident.
To which one answers, that if her husband
Would leave his trade, and carry his wife about
To doe this trick in public, she'd get more gold
Then all the Babones, Calves with two tails,
Or motions what soever.
You are a wag,
He will be gone if we neglect to stay him.
Shall I cough or sneeze.
No I have it stand a side,
Aye me my handkertcher Adriand, Fabia.
Mistress,
Run, run I have let my handkertcher fall,
Gentleman shall I entreat a courtesy,
Within my power your beauty shall command.
What courtesy first.
To stoop and take up,
My handkertcher.
Your desire is performed.
Sir most hearty thanks: please you come in
Your welcome shall transcend your expectation.
I accept your courtesy, ha! whats this?
Assailed by fear and hope in a moment.
Boucher this womanish passion fits not men,
Who know the worth of freedom: shall smiles and eyes
With their lascivious glances conquer him
Hath still been Lord of his affections?
Shall simpering niceness load-stones but to fools,
Attract a knowing spirit: •t shall, it dooes,
Not Phoebus rising from Auroras lap,
Spreds his bright rays with more majestic grace
Then came the glances from her quickening eye
And what of this.
By my troth I know not
I will not enter: continued flames burn strong,
I yet am free and reason keeps her seat,
Aboue all fond affections yet is she fair.
Sir I bring you thanks for this great courtesy,
And if you please to enter I dare presume,
My mistress will afford you gracious welcome,
How doe men call your mistress.
The mans in love.
Her name sir is Mistress Changeable, late wife
To moister Tafata Mercer deceased.
I have heard she is both rich and beautiful,
In the eyes of such as love her, judge your self.
Please you but prick forward and enter,
Now will I fall a board the wating maid,
Fall a board of me, dost take me for a ship,
I And will shoot you betwixt wind and water.
Blurt moister gunner your linstocks to short.
Foot how did she know that, dost here sweet hart
Should not the page be doing with the maid,
Whilst the moister is busy with the mistress,
Please you prick forwards, thou art a wench
Likely to go the way of all flesh shortly
Whose witty knave art thou.
At your service.
At mine faith, I should breach thee.
How breach me.
I breach thee, I have breach a taler man,
Then you in my time, come in and welcome.
Well I see now a rich well-practis'd baud,
May purse more fees in a summers progress,
Then a well traded lawyer in a whole term,
Panderism! why't is grown a liberal science
Or a new sect, and the good professors
Will like the Brownest frequent gravel pits shortly,
For they use woods and obscure holes already.
Not marry a widow.
No.
And why?
Belike you think it base and seruant-like,
To feed upon reversion, you hold vs widows,
But as a pie thrust to the lower end
That hath had many fingers int before,
And is reserved for gross and hungry stomachs.
You much mistake me.
Come in faith you do:
And let me tell you thats but ceremony,
For though the Pie bee broken up before,
Yet says the proverb, the deeper is the sweeter.
And though a capons wings and legs be carved,
The flesh left with the rump I hope is sweet.
I tell you sir, I have been wood, and sued to,
By worthy Knights of fair demeans: nay more,
They have bin out of debt, yet till this hour,
I neither could endure, to be in love.
Or be beloved, bu• proffered ware is cheap.
whats lawful thats loathd, and things denied,
Are with more stronger appetite pursuit.
I am to yielding.
You mistake my thoughts.
But know thou wonder of this continent,
By one more skilled in unknown fate, then was,
The blind Achaian Prophet, It was foretold,
A widow should endanger both my life,
My soul, my lands, and reputation,
This cheks my thoughs, and cools th'ssentiall fire,
Of sacred love; more ardent in my breast
Then speech can utter.
A trivial Idle jest,
Tic for a man, of your repute, and note,
To credit fortunetellers, a petty rogue,
That never saw five shillings, in a heap
Will take upon him to divine men's fate,
Yet never knows himself, shall die a beggar,
Or be hanged up for pilfering tablecloaths,
Shirts and smocks, hanged out to dry on hedges,
Tic merely base, to trust them, or if there be,
A man in whom the Delphic, God hath breathed,
His true divining fire, that can foretell,
The fixed decree of fate, he likewise knows,
What is within the everlasting book,
Of Destiny decreed cannot by wit,
Or mans Invention be disolued, or shunt,
Then give thy love free scope embrace and kiss,
And to the distafe sisters leave th'euent,
How powerful are their words whom we affect,
Small force shall need, to win the strongest fort,
If to his state the Captain be perfidious,
I must entreat you licence my depart
For some few hours.
Choose what you will of time,
There lies your way.
I will entreat her, stay.
Did you call sir.
No.
Then fare you well.
Who gins to love, needs not a second Hell.
Adriana, makes a no stay.
Mistress.
I prithee see if hee have left the house,
Peep close, see, but be not seen: is a gon.
No, has made a stand.
I prithee keep close.
Nay, keep you close y'ad best.
What does he now?
Now a retiers.
O you much partial gods!
Why gave you men affections, and not a power
To govern them? what I by fate should shun,
I most affect, a widow, a widow.
Blows the wind there.
A ha, h'is in in faith,
Yo'aue drawn him now within your purlews mistress.
Tut I will not love, my rational
And better parts shall conquer blind affections,
Let passion children, or weak women sway,
My love shall to my judgment still obey.
What does he now?
H'is gon.
Gon Adriana.
A went his way, and never looked behind him.
Sure he's taken.
A little singed or so,
Each thing must have beginning, men must prepare
Before they can come on, and show their loves
In pleasing sort: the man will doe in time,
For love good Mistress is much like to wax,
The more it is rubbed, it sticks the safter too,
Or like a bird in bird-lime, or a pit-fall,
The more a labours, still the deeper in.
Come, thou must help me now, I have a trick
To second this beginning, and in the nick,
To strike it dead in faith, women must woe,
When men forget what Nature leads them too.
Chaste Phoebe, splende; there's that left yet,
Next to my book, Claro micante Euro,
I that's the soul of law: that's it, that's it,
For which the Buckrome bag must trudge all weathers:
Though scarcely filled with one poor replication,
How happy are we that wee joy the law,
So freely as we doe; not bought and sold,
But clearly given, without all base extorting,
Taking but bareten Angels for a fee,
Or upward: to this renowned estate,
Have I by indirect and cunning means,
In-wouen my self, and now can scratch it out,
Thrust at a bar, and cry my Lord as loud,
As ere a listed gowne-man of them all.
I never plead before the honoured bench,
But bench right-worshipfull of peaceful Justices
And Country-Gentlemen, and yet I'aue found
Good gettings by the Mass, besides od cheats,
Will Small-shankes lands and many garboils more,
Dash Sir.
Is that reioynder done.
Done sir.
Have you drawn't at length, have you dashed it out,
According to your name.
Some scauen-score sheets.
Is the demurror drawn twixt Snip and VVoodcock,
And what doe you say to Peacocks pitiful bill,
I have drawn his answer negative to all.
Negative to all. The plaintive says,
That VVilliam Goose, was son to Thomas Goose,
And will a swear the general bill is false.
A will.
Then he forswears his father, it is well,
Some of our clients will go prig to hell
Before ourselves; has a paid all his fees.
A lest them all with me.
Then truss my points,
And how think thou of law?
Most reverently,
Law is the worlds great light, a second sun,
To this terrestrial Globe, by which all things
Have life and being, and with-out which
Confusion and disorder soon would seize
The general state of men, wars, outrages,
The ulcerous deeds of peace, it curbs and cures,
It is the kingdoms eye, by which she sees
The acts and thoughts of men.
The kingdoms eye,
I tell thee fool, it is the kingdoms nose,
By which she smells out all these rich transgressors,
Nor first of flesh but merely made of wax,
And tic, within the power of vs Lawyers,
To wrest this nose of wax which way we please.
Or it may be as thou say an eye indeed.
But if it be tic sure a women's eye
Thats ever rolling.
one knocks.
Go see who tic,
Stay, my chair, and gown, and then go see who knocks.
Thus must I seem a Lawyer which am indeed,
But merely dregs and offscumme of the Law,
I tricesimo primo Alberti Magni
Tic very clear.
God save you sir.
The place is very pregnant, Moister Boucher;
Most hearty welcome sir.
You study hard,
No I have a cushion.
You ply this gear,
You are no truant in the law, I see.
Faith some hundred books in folio I have
Turned over to better my own knowledge,
But that is nothing for a student,
Or a Stationer they turn them over too,
But not as you doe gentile Moister Throat,
And what? the Law speaks profit does it not?
Faith some bad angels haunt vs now and then,
But what brought you hither.
Why these small legs,
You are conceited sir,
I am in Law.
But let that go, and tell me how you doe,
How does Will Smalshankes and his lovely bride,
In truth you make me blush, I should have asked,
His health of you, but tic not yet to late.
Nay good sir Throat forbear your quillets now,
By Heaven I deal most plain, I saw him not,
Since last I took his Mortgage.
Sir be not nice,
(Yet I must needs herein commend your love)
To let me see him; for know I know him wed,
And that a stole away Sommerfields heir,
Therefore suspect me not I am his friend,
How wed to rich Sommerfields only heir,
Is old Sommerfield dead?
Do you make it strange?
By heaven I know it nor.
Then am I grieved.
I spake so much (but that I know you love him.
And is reserved for gross and hungry stomachs.
You much mistake me.
Come in faith you do:
And let me tell you thats but ceremony,
For though the Pie bee broken up before,
Yet says the proverb, the deeper is the sweeter.
I should entreat your secrecy sir, fare you well.
Nay good sir stay, if ought you can disclose
Of Moister Smale-shankes good, let me partake,
And make me glad in knowing his good hap.
You much indeere him sir, and from your love,
I dare presume you make your self a fortune
If his fair hopes proceed.
Say on good sir.
You will be secret.
Or be my tongue torn out.
Measure for a Lawyer, but to the point
Has stole Somerfields heir hither a brings her
As to a man on whom a may rely
His life and fortunes: you hath a named
Already for the Steward of his lands,
To keep his Courts, and to collect his rent,
To let out Leases and to raise his fines,
Nothing that may, or love, or profit bring,
But you are named the man.
I am his slave
And bound unto his noble courtesy
Even with my life, I ever said a would thrive,
And I protest I kept his forfeit mortgage,
To let him know what tic to live in want.
I think no less, one word more in private.
Good Moister Dash shall I put you now a case.
Speak on good Moister Page.
Then thus it is,
Suppose I am a Page, he is my Moister,
My Moister goes to bed and cannot tell
What moan•'s in his hose, I ere next day
Have filched out some, what action lies for this.
An action boy, called firking the Posteriors,
With vs your action seldom comes in question:
For that tic known that most of your Gallants
Are seldom so well stored, that they forget
What mone'is in their hose, but if they have,
There is no other help then swear the page
And put him to his oath.
Then fecks-law,
Dost think that he has conscience to steal,
Has not a conscience likewise to deny.
Then hang him up in faith.
I must meet him,
Commend me to them, come when they will,
My doors stand open and all within is theirs
And though Ram stinks with Cooks and ale,
Yet say theirs many a worthy lawyers chamber,
Buts upon Rame-alley, I have still an open throat,
If ought I have which may procure his good,
Bid him command, I, though it be my blot.
Is this the place you were appointed to meet him.
So Boutcher sent me word.
I find it true,
That wine, good news, and a young wholesome wentch
Chere up an old mans blood, I tel thee boy,
I am right hearty glad, to hear thy brother;
Hath got so great an heir; now were my self,
So well bestowed I should rejoice in faith.
I hope you shall doe well.
No doubt, no doubt.
A sir has a borne the wentch away,
My son in faith, my very son in faith,
When I was young and had an able back,
And wore the brissell on my upper lipe,
In good Decorum I had as good conveyance,
And could have ferd, and forked y'away a wench,
As soon as ear a man a live; tut boy,
I had my winks, my becks treads on the toe,
Wrings by the fingers, smiles and other quirks,
No Courtier like me, your Courtiers all are fools,
To that which I could doe, I could have done it boy.
Even to a hare, and that some Ladies know,
Sir I am glad this match may reconcile,
Your love unto my brother.
Tic more then so.
Isle seem offended still though I am glad,
Has got rich Sommer-fields heir.
Come wench of gold,
For thou shalt get me gold, besides od ends
Of silver: weal purchase house and land,
By thy bare gettings, wentch, by thy bare gettings,
How says Lieftenant-Beard, does she not look
Like a wentch newly stole from a window?
Exceeding well she carries it by Jove;
And if she can forbear her Rampant trick,
And but hold close a while twill take by Mars.
How now you slave? my rampant tricks you rogue,
Nay fear not me my only fear is still,
Thy filthy face betrays vs, for all men know,
Thy nose stands compass like a bow,
Which is three quarters drawn, thy head.
Which is with greasy hair ore-spred,
And being vncurld and black as cole,
Doth show some Scullion in a hole
Begot thee on a Gypsy, or
Thy mother was some Colliers whore
My rampant tricks you rogue, thou't be descried
Before our plor be ended.
What should descry him,
Unless it be his nose? and as for that;
Thou moist protest a was thy fathers butler,
And for thy love is likewise run away,
Nay sweet Lieutenant now forbear to puff,
And let the brissells of thy beard grow downward,
Reverence my Punk and Pandarize a little,
Theirs many of thy rank that doe profess it,
Yet hold it no disparagment.
I shall doe,
What fits an honest man.
Why thats enough,
Foot my Father and the goose my brother,
Back you two.
Back.
Retyer sweet Lieutenant,
And come not on, till I shall wave you on.
Is not that he.
Tic he.
But wheres the wentch.
It shall be so, Isle cheat him thats flat.
You are well met, know ye me good sir,
Belike you think I have no eyes, no ears,
No nose to smell, and wind out all your tricks,
You've stole Sir Somerfields heir, nay we can find,
Your wildest paths, your turnings and returns,
Your traces, squats, the insets, forms and holes,
You young man use, if once cursagest wits
Be set a hunting, are you now crept forth,
Have you hid your head within a suburb hole
All this while, and are you now crept forth?
It is a stark lye.
How?
who told you so did lye,
Foot, a Gentleman cannot leave the City
And keep the suburbs to take a little Physic,
But strait some slave will say he hides his head:
I hide my head within a Suburb hole,
I could have holes at Court to hide my head,
Were I but so disposed.
Thou varlet knave,
T'hast stolen away Sir Iohn Somerfields heir,
But never look for countenance from me,
Carry her whether thou wilt.
Father, father,
Zart will you undo your posterity.
Will you sir undo your posterity?
I can but kill my brother then hang my self,
And where is then your house, make me not despair,
Foot now I have got a wench, worth by the year
Two thousand pound and upwards, to cross my hopes:
Would ere a clown in Christendom do it but you.
Good Father, let him leave this thundering,
And give him grace.
Why law, my brother knows
Reason, and what an honest man should doe.
Well, wheres your wife.
Shees coming here behind,
Isle give her some-what, though I love not thee.
My father right, I knew you could not hold
Out long with a woman, but give some-thing
Worthy your gift and her acceptance father,
This chain were excellent by this good-light,
She shall give you as good if once her lands
Come to my fingering.
Peace knave, whats she your wife?
That shall be sir.
And whats he.
My man.
A Ruffian Knave a is.
A Ruffian sir,
By heaven, as tall a man as ere drew sword,
Not being counted of the damned crew,
A was her fathers Butler, his name is Beard,
Of with your Mask, now shall you find me true,
And that I am a son unto a Knight,
This is my father.
I am indeed fair maid,
My stile is Knight: come let me kiss your lips.
That kiss shall cost your chain.
It smacks in faith,
I must commend your choice.
Sir I have given
A longer venture then true modesty
Will well allow, or your more graver wit
Commend.
I dare be sworn she has.
Not so,
The foolish knave he's been accounted wilde,
And so have I, but I am now come home,
And so will he.
I must believe it now.
Beg his chain wench.
Will you cheat your father?
I by this light will I.
Nay sigh not.
For you shall find him loving and me thankful.
And were it not a scandal to my honour,
To be consenting to my sons attempt,
You should unto my house, mean while take this,
As pledge and token of my after love:
How long since dyed your father.
Some six weeks since.
We cannot stay to talk, for slaves pursue,
I have a house shall lodge vs till the Priest
May make vs sure.
Well sir, love this woman,
And when you are man and wife bring her to me,
She shall be welcome.
I humbly thank you sir.
I must be gone, I must a wooing too.
Jove and Priapus speed you, you'll return.
Instantly.
Why this came cleanly off.
Give me the chain, you little Cockatrice,
Why this was luck, foot four hundred crowns
Got at a clap, hold still your own you whore,
And we shall thrive.
T'was bravely fetched about.
I, when will your nose and beard perform as much.
I am glad he is gon, a put me to the blush
When a did ask me of rich Somerfields death.
And took not I my q: wast not good,
Did I not bring you off, you arrant drab,
Without a counterbuffe? look who comes here,
And three merry men, and three merry men,
And three merry men bee wee a.
Still in this vain, I have done you service,
The Lawyers house will give you entertainment,
Bountiful and free.
O nay second self,
Come let me bus thy beard, we are all made,
Why are so melancholy, dost want money?
Look heir's gold, and as wee pass along,
Isle tell thee how I got it, not a word
But that shoe's Somerfields heir, my brother
Swallows it with more ease, then a Dutchman
Does slap-Dragons: a comes, now to my Lawyers:
Kiss my wife, good brother; she is a wench
Was borne to make vs all.
I hope no less,
Yo'are welcome sister into these our parts,
As I may say.
Thanks gentle brother.
Come now to Ram-alley. There shalt thou lye,
Till I provide a Priest.
O villainy!
I think a will gull his whole generation,
I must make one, since it is so well begun,
Isle not forsake him, till his hopes be won.
Then you're friends.
We are, so please your worship.
It is well, I am glad, keep your money, for law
Is like a Butlers box: while you two strive,
That picks up all your money, you are friends,
We are so please you, both perfect friends.
Why so,
Now to the next Tap-house, there drink down this,
And by the operation of the third pot.
Quarrel again, and come to me for law:
Fare you well.
The Gods concern your wisdom. E. Ci.
Why so, these are tricks of the long fifteens,
To give counsel, and to take fees on both sides,
To make 'em friends, and then to laugh at them.
Why this thrives well, this is a common trick:
When men have spent a deal of money in law,
Then Lawyers make them friends: I have a trick
To go beyond all these, if Small-shanke come
And bring rich Somerfields heir, I say no more,
But it is within this skonse to go beyond them.
Here are Gentlemen in hast would speak with you.
What are they?
I cannot know them sir
They are so wrapped in Cloaks.
Have they a woman?
Yes sir, but shoe's Maskt, and in her riding suit.
Go, make hast, bring them up with reverence,
Oh are they in faith, has brought the wealthy heir:
These stools and cushions stand not handsomely.
Bless thee Throat.
Moister Smalshanke welcome.
Welcome love, kiss this Gentlewoman, Throat.
Your worship shall command me.
Art not weary.
Can you blame his since she has rid so hard?
You are welcome Gentlemen.—Dash.
Sir.
A fire in the great chamber, quickly.
I that's well said, we are almost weary,
But Moister Throat, if any come to inquire
For me, my brother, or this Gentlewoman,
Wee are not here, nor have you heard of vs.
Not a word sir, here you are as safe
As in your fathers house,
And he shall thank you.
You are not merry love, good moister Throat
Bid this Gentlewoman welcome: she is one
Of whom you may receive some curtsy
In time.
She is most hearty welcome,
Wilt please you walk into another room▪
Where is both bed and fire,
I, I, that that
Good brother lead her in, Moister Throat and I
Will follow instantly, now Moister Throat
It rests within your power to pleasure me,
Know that this same is sir Iohn Somerfields Heir,
Now if she chance to question what I am,
Say son unto a Lord, I pray thee tell her
I have a world of land, and stand in hope
To bee created Baron, for I protest
I was constrained to swear it forty times
And yet she'll scarce believe me.
pauca sapienti,
Let me alone to set you out in length
And breadth:
I prithee do it effectually:
Shat have a quarter share by this good light,
In all she has, I prithee forget not
To tell her the Smal-shankes have been dancers,
Tilters, and very ancient Courtiers,
And in request at Court since sir Iohn Short-hose
With his long silk stockings was beheaded,
Wilt thou do this?
Refer it to my care.
Excellent, Isle but shift my boots, and then
Go seek a Priest, this night I will bee sure,
If we bee sure, it cannot be undone,
Can it Moister Throat?
O sir not possible:
You have many Presidents and book Cases for it,
Bee you but sure and then let me alone.
La Rex, currat Lex and Isle defend you.
Nay then hang care, come lets in.
A ha,
Have you stole her, fallere fallentem non est france.
It shall go hard but I will strip you boy.
You stole the wench, but I must her enjoy.
Come Adriana, tell me what thou think,
I am tickled with conceit of marriage,
And whom think thou (for me) the fittest husband
What say thou to young Bouchor.
A pretty fellow
But that his back is weak,
What dost thou say
To Throat the Lawyer?
I like that well,
Were the Rogue a Lawyer, but he is none,
He never was of any Inne-of-court;
But Inn of Chancery, where a was known,
But only for a swaggering whyfler,
To keep out rogues, and prentices, I saw him,
When a was stocked for stealing the cooks fees.
A Lawyer I could like, for tic a thing,
Used by you Citizens wives, your husbands dead;
To get French-hoods you straight must Lawyers wed,
What say thou then to Nimble Sir Olive. Smal-shanck
Faith he must hit the hair: a fellow fit,
To make a pretty Cuckold: take an old man,
Tic now the newest fashion, better be
An old mans darling, then a young mans warling,
Take me the old brisk Knight, the fool is rich,
And will be strong enough to father children,
Though, not to get them.
Tic true he is the man,
Yet will I bear some dozen more in hand,
And make them all my gulls.
Mistress stand aside.
Young Boutcher comes let me alone to touch him.
This is the house.
And thats the chambermaid.
Whirs the widow gentle Adriana.
The widow sir is not to be spook to,
Not speak to, I must speak with her.
Must you!
Come you with authority, or doe you come
To sue her with a warrant that you must speak with her.
I would Entreat it.
O you would entreat it,
May not I serve your turn, may not I unfold,
Your secrets to my Mistress, love is your suit,
It is fair creature.
And why did you fall off
When you perceived my mistress was so cunning,
Do you think she is still the same.
I doe.
Why so,
I took you for a novice; and I must think,
You know not yet the inwards of a woman,
Doe you not know that women are like fish,
Which must be struck when they are prone to byte,
Or all your labours lost, but sir walk here.
And Isle inform my Mistress your desires.
Moister
boy.
come not you for love,
I do boy
And you would have ye widow.
I would
by Jove
I never saw one go about his business
More untowardly: why sir, doe not you know
That he which would be inwatd with the Mistress,
Must make a way first through the waiting maid?
If you'll know the widows affections
Feel first the waiting Gentle-woman; do it Moister,
Some half a dozen kisses were not lost
Upon this Gentle-woman, for you must know
These wayting-maids are to their Mistresses
Like Porches unto doors, you pass the one
Before you can have entrance at the other:
Or like your mustard to your piece of brawn,
If you'll have one taste well you must not scorn
To bee dipping in the other, I tell you Moister
Tic not a few men's tales which they prefer
Unto their Mistress, in compass of a yeare-
Be ruled by me, untruss your self to her,
Out with all your loue-sicke thoughts to her,
Kiss her and give her an angel to buy pins,
And this shall sooner win her Mistress love,
Then all your protestations, sides and tears.
Here they come; to her boldly Moister
Doe, but dally not, thats the widows phrase,
Most worthy fair such is the power of love
That now I come t'accept your proffered grace,
And with submissive thoughts t'entreat a pardon
For my so gross neglect.
Theres no offence,
My mind is changed.
I told you as much before.
With a hey pass with a repose.
Dearest of women,
The constant virtue of your nobler mind
Speaks in your looks: Nor can you entertain
Both love and hate at once.
Tic all in vain.
You strive against the stream.
Fee the waitingmaid Moister
Stand thou propitious, indeere me to thy love
Dear Mistress turn to this Gentleman, I protest,
I have some feeling of his constant love,
Cast him not away, try his love.
Why sir,
With what audatious front can you entreat
To enjoy my love, which yet not two hours since,
You scornfully refused.
Well sare the waiting maid.
My fate compelled me, but now farewell fond fear,
My soul, my life, my lands, and reputation,
Isle hazard all, and prize them all beneath thee.
Which I shall put to trial, lend me thy ear.
Can you love boy
Yes.
What or whom.
My victuals.
A pretty knave, in faith come home to night,
Shalt have a posit and candied Eringoes,
A bed if need be to, I love a life,
To play with such Babounes as thou.
Indeed,
But dost think the widow we will have my moister.
Isle tell thee then, wo't come.
I will.
Remember.
Will you perform so much.
Or loose my blood.
Make him subscribe it, and then I vow,
By sacred Vistas ever hallowed fire,
To take thee to my bed.
Till when farewell.
Hoe's worthy love, whose virtues most excel.
Remember, what first a match betwixt you Mistress?
I have set the fool in hope, he's vnder-tooke
To rid me of that fleshy Captain Face,
Which swears in Taverns, and all Ordinaries,
I am his lawful wife: hee shall allay,
The fury of the Captain, and I secure,
Will laugh at the disgrace they both endure.
Open your case, and I shall soon resolve you.
But will you do it truly.
As I am honest.
This Gentleman whom I so much affect,
I scarcely yet doe know, so blind is love,
In things which most concerns it, as you're honest
Tell me his birth, his state, and farthest hopes.
He is my friend, and I will speak him truly,
He is by birth, son to a foolish Knight,
His present state I think will be the prison,
And farthest hope to be baild out again,
By sale of all your land.
O me accursed,
Has a no credit, Lands and Manors.
That lands he has lies in a fair Church-yard,
And for his manners, they are so rude and wild,
That scarce an honest man will keep him company.
I am abused, coosned, and deceived.
Why that's his occupation, hee will cheat
In a cloak lined with Velvet, a will prate
Faster then five Barbers and a Taylor,
Lye faster then ten City occupiers,
Or cunning tradesmen: goes a trust
In every Tavern where has spent a faggot,
Swears love to every whore, squires bawds,
And takes up houses for them as their husband.
A is a man I love, and have done much
To bring him to preferment.
Is there no trust,
No honesty in men.
Faith some there is,
And it is all in the hands of vs Lawyers
And women, and those women which have it,
Keep their honesty so close, that not one
Amongst a hundred is perceived to have it.
Good sir, may I not by law forsake him
And wed another, though my word be past
To be his wife.
O questionless you may,
You have many Presidents and booke-cases for it,
Nay, though you were married by a booke-case,
Of Milesimo sexantesimo, &amp;c.
You may forsake your husband, and wed another,
Provided that some fault be in the husband,
As none of them are clear.
I am resolved,
I will not wed him, though I beg my bread.
All that I have is yours, and were I worthy
To be your husband.
I thank you sir,
I will rather wed a most persidious Redshanke,
A noted Iewe, or some Mechanic slave,
Then let him joy my sheets.
A comes, a comes,
Now my Virago, it is done, ell's cock-sure,
I have a Priest will mumble up a marriage,
Without bell, book, or candle, nimble slave,
A honest Welsh-man that was a Taylor,
But now is made a Curate.
Nay you're fitted.
Now moister Throat.
Whore's your spirit sister?
What all amort? whats the matter? do you here?
What's the reason of this melancholy?
By heaven I know not.
Has the gudgin bit.
He has been nibbling.
Hold him to it wench,
And it twill hit by heaven: why art so sad?
Foot wench we will be married to night,
Weal sup at th'Myter, and from thence
My brother and we three will to the Sauoy,
Which done, I tell thee girl, weal hand ore head,
Go to it pell mell for a maiden-head,
Come yo'are lusty, you wenches are like bells,
You give no music, till you feel the clapper,
Come Throat a tortch, we must be gon.
Servant.
Mistress.
We are undone.
Now Jove forfend.
This fellow has no land; and which is worse,
Hee has no credit.
How are we outstripped,
Blown up by wit of man: Let vs be gone
Home again, home again, our market now is done.
That were too great a scandal.
Most true,
Better to wed another then to return
With scandal and defame▪ wed me a man
Whose wealth may reconcile your mothers love,
And make the action lawful.
But whore's the man?
I like your council, could you show the man.
My self am he, might I but dare aspire
Unto so high a Fortune.
Mistress, take the man,
Shall we be baffled with fair promises,
Or shall we trudge, like beggars back again,
No, take this wise and virtuous man,
Who should a lose his legs, his arms, his ears,
His nose, and all his other members,
Yer if his tongue be left twill get his living,
Take me this man.
Thanks gentle moister Beard.
It is impossible, this night he means to wed me.
If not by law, we will with power prevent it,
So you but give consent.
Lets here the means.
Isle muster up my friends, and thus I cast it,
Whilst they are busy, you and I will hence
Directly to a Chapel, where a Priest
Shall knit the nuptial knot ere they pursue vs.
O rare invention, Isle act my part,
A owes me thirteen pound, I say no more,
But there be catch-poles: speak•st a match.
I give my liking.
Dash.
Sir.
Get your sword
And me my buckler, nay you shall know
We are Tam mart quam mercurio,
Bring my cloak, you shall thither, Isle for friends,
Worship and wealth the Lawyers state attends.
Dash, we must bear some brain, to Saint Iohns street,
Go run, fly: and a far off enquire,
If that the Lady Somerfield be there,
If there, know what news, and meet me strait
At the My•er door in Fleet-streete, away,
"To get rich wives, men must not use delay.
A hunting Sir Oliuer and drye-foote to,
We old men have our crotchets, our conundrums,
Our fegares, quirks and quibibles,
As well as youth, Justice Tutchim I go
To hunt no Buck, but prick a lusty Doe,
I go in truth a wooing.
Then •id with me,
Isle bring you to my sister Somerfield.
Justice not so: by her there hangs a Tale.
That's true indeed.
She he's a daughter.
And what of that.
I likewise have a son,
A villainous Boy, his father up and down,
What should I say, these Velvet bearded boys,
Will still be doing, say what we old men can,
And what of this Sir Oliuer, be plain,
A nimble spirited knave, the villain boy,
Has one trick of his sier, has got the wench.
Stolen your rich Sisters heir.
Somer-fields heir,
Has done the deed, has pierced the vessels head,
And knows by this the vintage.
when should this be,
As I am by my council well informed,
This very day,
Tut It cannot be,
Some ten miles hence I saw the maid last night.
Maids may be maids to night and not to morrow.
Women are free and sell their maiden-heads,
As men sell cloth, by yard and handful,
But if you chance to see your Sister widow,
Comfort her tears and say her daughters matched,
With one that has a knocker to his Father,
An honest Noble Knight.
Stand close Knight, close,
And mark this Captains humour, his name is Puff,
A dreams as a walks, and thinks no woman
Sees him but is in love with him.
Twe•e brave,
If some great Lady, through a window spied me,
And straight should love me, say she should send,
5000 pound unto my Lodging,
And crave my company: with that money,
I would make three several cloaks, and line them
With black, Crimson, and Tawny three piled velvet,
I would eat at Chares Ordinary, and dice
At Antonies: then would I keep my whore,
In beaten velvet and, have two slaves to tend her.
Ha ha ha.
What my case of Justices,
What are you eaues-dropping or doe you think,
Your tawny coats with gresie facings here,
Shall carry it? Sir Oliuer Smal-shankes,
Know my name is Puff, Knight, thee have I sought,
To fright thee from thy wits.
Nay good Sir Puff,
We have to many mad men already,
How? I tell thee Justice Tuchim, not all
Thy Bailiffs, Sergants busy Constables,
Defesants, warrants, or thy Mittimusses,
Shall save his throat from cutting if he presume,
To woe the widow eclipped Tafata,
She is my wife by oath. Therefore take heed,
Let me not catch thee in the widows house,
If I doe, Isle pick thy head upon my sword,
And peace in thy very visnomy, beware, beware.
Come there no more, a Captains word,
Flies not so fierce as doth his fatal sword,
How like you this, shall we endure this thunder,
Or go no further.
We will on Sir Whole•for,
We will on, let me aloe to touchim,
I wounder how my spirit did forbear,
To strike him on the face: had this been spoke,
Within my Liberties, had dyed for it.
I was about to draw.
If you come there,
Thy beard shall serve to stuff, those balls by which
I get me heat at Tonic.
Is he gon.
I would a durst a stood to this awhile,
Well I shall catch him in a narrow rome,
Where neither of vs can flinch; If I do,
Isle make him dance a trenchmoor to my sword,
Come Isle along with you to the widow.
We will not be out-braued, take my word,
Weal not be wronged while I can draw a sword.
Let the Cotch stay at Showlane end: be ready,
Let the boot stand open, and when she's in:
Hurry towards Saint Giles in the field,
As if the Devil himself were wagoner,
Now for an arm of oak, and heart of steel,
To bare away the wench, to get a wife,
A gentlewoman, a maid, nay which is more,
An honest maid, and which is most of all,
A rich and honest maid: O Jove Jove!
For a man to wed such a wife as this,
Is to dwell in the very suburbs of Heaven,
Is she so exquisite.
Sir she is rich
And a great heir.
Tic the more dangerous,
Dangerous? Lord where be those gallant spirits,
The time has been when scarce an honest woman,
Much less a wench could pass an Inn of court,
But some of the fry would have been doing
With her: I knew the day when Shreds a Taylor
Coming once late by an Inn of Chancery,
Was laid a long, and muffled in his cloak,
His wife took in, Stitched up, turned out again,
And he persuaded all was but in jest,
Tut those brave boys are gone, these which are left,
Are wary lads, live poring on their books,
And give their linen to their laundresses,
By tail, they now can save their purses,
I knew when every gallant had his man.
But now a twelpenny weekly Laundress,
Will serve the turn to half a dozen of them,
Here comes my man, what news.
As you would wish.
The Lady Somer-field is come to town,
Her horses yet are walking, and her men say,
Her only daughter, is conveyed away,
No man knows how: now to it mast,
You and your Servant Dash are made for ever
If you but stick to it now.
Gentlemen,
Now show your selves at full, and not a man,
But shares a fortune with me if I speed.
Tut fear not vs be sure you run away,
And weal perform the quarrel.
Stand close, they come,
Art sure he will be here
Most sure.
Beard. Be. Sir.
Bear up the torch, and keep your way apace
Directly to the Sauoy.
Have you a License,
Look to that brother before you marry,
For fear the Parson loose his benefice.
Tut our Curate craves no license, a swears
His living cam to him by a miracle,
How by miracle?
Why a paid nothing fort,
A swears that few be free from Symony,
But only welshmen, and those a says to,
Are but mountain Priests▪
But hang him fool he lies,
Whats his reason?
His reason is this,
That all their livings are so rude and bare,
That not a man, will venture his damnation
By giving money for them: a does protest,
There is but two pair, of house, and shoes,
In all his Parish.
Hold up your light Sir.
Shall I be taught how to advance my torch,
Whats the matter Lieutenant.
Your Lieftenants an ass.
How an ass; die men like dogs.
hold gentlemen.
An ass, an ass.
Hold brother hold, Lieutenant.
Put up as you are men, your wife is gone.
Gone.
Gone.
How, which way? this is some plot,
Down toward Fleet bridge.
Follow, follow, foal∣low▪
So has the wentch let vs pursue a aloof,
And see the event, this will prove good mirth,
When things vnshapde shall have a perfect birth.
Tic a thing unpossible, they should be gon
Thus far and we not see them.
Upon my life.
They went in by the Grey-hound, and so struck,
Into Bridewell.
What should she make there;
Take water at the dock.
Water at Dock,
A fico for her Dock, you'll not be ruled.
You'll still be obstinate, Isle pawn my fate,
She took a long shew-lane, and so went home,
Home.
I home; how could she chose but go,
Seeing so many naked tools at once,
Drawn in the street?
What scurvy luck was this,
Come we will find her, or weal fire the Suburbs,
Put up your tools, letts first along show-lane,
Then strait up Holborn, If we find her not;
Weal thence direct to Throats, if she be lost
I am undone and all your hopes are crossed.
Widow I must be short.
Sir Oliuer,
Will you shame your self, ha? You must be short,
Why what a word was that to tell a widow?
I meant I must be brief.
Why say so then,
Yet thats almost as ill; go to, speak on.
Widow I must be brief, what old men doe,
They must doe quickly.
Then good sir do it,
Widows are seldom slow to put men to it.
And old men know their q's, my Love you know,
Has been protested long, and now I come
To make my latest tender, an old grown oak
Can keep you from the rain, and stands as fair
And portly as the best'
Yet search him well,
And wee shall find no pith or hearty Timber
To underlay a building.
I would that Oak
Had been a fire: Forward good sir Oliuer,
Your Oak is nought: stick not too much to that.
If you can like, you shall be Ladified,
Live at the court, and soon bee got with child,
What do you think we old men can do nothing?
This was somewhat like:
You shall have Ie∣wels,
A Baboon, Parrot, and an Izeland Dog,
And I my self to bear you company.
Your Jointer is five hundred pound by year,
Besides your Plate, your Chains and household stuff,
When envious sate shall change this mortal life.
But shall I not be ouer-cloyde with love?
Will you nor be too busy shall I keep
My chamber by the month, if I bee pleased
To take Physic, to send for Visitants,
To have my maid read Amadis de Gaul,
Or Donzel del Phoebo to me? shall I have
A Carotch of the last edition,
The Coatch-mans seat a good way from the Coatch,
That if some other Ladies and my self
Chance to talk bawdy, he may not ouer-heare vs.
All this and more.
Shall we have two chambers?
And will you not presume unto my bed,
Till I shall call you by my waiting maid.
Not I by heaven.
And when I send her,
Will you not entice her to your lust,
Nor tumble her before you come to me.
Nay let him do his worst, make your match sure,
And fear not me, I never yet did fear
Any thing my moister could doe to me.
What noise is that, go see Adriana,
And bring me word: I am so haunted
With a swaggering Captain, that swears God bless vs
Like a very Termagant, a Rascal knave,
That says he will kill all men which seeks to wed me.
O Mistress! Captain Puff half drunk, is now
Coming up stairs.
O God have you no room
Beyond this Chamber, has sworn to kill me,
And peace in my very visnomy,
What are you afraid Sir Oliuer?
Not afraid,
But of all men I love not to meddle with a Drunkard:
Have you any Rome backwards.
None Sir.
Is there ne'er a Trunk or Cubbert for him,
Is there ne'er a hole backwards to hide him in.
I must speak with her.
O God a comes.
Creep under my Mistress Farthingale Knight,
That's the best and safest place in the Chamber.
I there, there, that he will never mistrust.
Enter Knight, keep close, gather your self
Round like a Hedge-hog stir not what ere you near,
See or smell Knight, God bless vs, here a comes.
Bless thee widow and wife.
Sir get you gon.
Leave my house, or I will have you conjured
With such a spell, you never yet have heard of,
Have you no other place to vent your froth,
But in my house, is this the fittest place,
Your Captaineship can find to puff in: ha!
How, am I not thy spouse, did thou not say,
These arms should clip thy naked body fast,
Betwixt two linen sheets, and be sole Lord
Of all thy pewter work, thy word is past,
And know that man is powder, dust, and earth,
That shall once dare to think thee for his wife.
How now you slave, one call the Constable.
No Constable with all his Holberteeres,
Dare once advance his head, or peep up stairs,
If I cry but keep down: have I not lived,
And ma•ched on the sieged walls,
In thunder, lightning, rain, and snow,
And eake in shot of powdered balls,
Whose costly marks are yet to show?
Captain Face, for my last husbands sake,
With whom you were familiarly acquainted,
I am content to wink at these rude tricks,
But hence, trouble me no more, if you doe,
I shall lay you fast, where you shall see
No Sun or Moon.
Nor yet the Northern Pole,
A fico for the Sun and Moon, let me live in a hole,
So these two stars may shine.
Sir, get you gon,
You swaggering, cheating, Turne-bul-streete rogue,
Or I will hale you to the common-Iayle,
Where Lice shall eat you.
Go to, I shall spurn
And slash your petticoat.
Run to the Counter,
Fetch me a red-bearded Sergeant, Isle make
You Captain think the Devil of hell is come
To fetch you, if hee once fasten on you.
Dambe thee &amp; thy Sergeants, thou Mercers Punk.
Thus will I kick thee and thy Farthingales.
Hold Captain.
What do you cast your whelps.
What have I found you sir? have not I placed
My Sakers, Culuerings, Demi-culuerings,
My Cannons, Demi-cannons, Basilisks,
Upon her breach, and do I not stand,
Ready with my Pike to make my entry,
And are you come to man her?
Good Captain hold.
Are not her Bulwarks Parapets, Trenches,
Scarfs, Counter-scarfes, Fortifications,
Curtains, Shadows, Mines, Counter-mines,
Rampires, Forts, Ditches, Works, Water-workes,
And is not her halfe-moone mine, and do you bring
A rescue good-man Knight
Call up my men,
Where be these knaves, have they no ears or hearts,
Beat hence this rascal, some other fetch a warrant,
Isle teach him know himself.
Down with the slave.
It is not your beard shall cary it, down with the rogue.
Not Hercules against twenty.
A sir,
I knew my hands no longer could forbear him,
Why did you not strike the Knave, sir Oliuer?
Why so I did.
But then it was too late.
What would you have me do when I was down,
And hee stood thundering with his weapon drawn,
Ready to cut my throat.
The rogue is gon,
And heir's one from the Lady Somerfield,
To entreat you come with all the speed you can,
To Saint Iohns street.
Which I will do.
Gentlemen
I am sorry you should be thus disturbed
Within my house, but now all fear is past,
You are most welcome: supper ended,
Isle give a gracious answer to your suit,
Mean while let nought dismay, or keep you mute.
Pay the Coatch-man Dash, pay him well,
And thank him for his speed. Now La Rex,
The knot is knit, which not the law it self,
With all his Hydra heads and strongest nerues,
Is able to disioyne: Now let him hang,
Fret out h•s guts, and swear the stars from Heaven,
A never shall enjoy you, you shall be rich.
Your Lady mother this day came to town
In your pursuit: wee will but shift some rags,
And strait go take her blessing.
That must not be,
Furnish me with Jewels, and then my self,
Attended by you man and honest Beard,
Will thither first, and with my Lady mother
Crave a peace for you.
I like that well,
Her anger some-what calmed, I brisk and fine,
Some half hour after will present my self
As son in law unto her, which she must needs
Accept with gracious looks.
I when she knows
Before by me, from what an eminent plague
Your wisdom has preserved me.
I, that, that,
That will strike it dead: but here comes Beard.
What are you sure, tide fast by heart and hand.
I now do call her wife, she now is mine,
Sealed and delivered by an honest Priest,
At Saint Giles in the field.
God give you joy sir.
But whore's mad Smal-shanke.
O hard at hand,
And almost mad with loss of his fair bride▪
Let not my lovely Mistress bee seen,
And see if you can draw him to compound
For all his title to her, I have Sergeants
Ready to do the feat, when time shall serve.
Stand you aside dear love nay I will firk
My silly novice, as he was never firkt
Since Midwives bound his noddle: here they come.
O Moister Throat, unless you speak good news,
My hopes are crossed, and I undone for ever.
I never thought you'd come to other end,
Your courses have been always so profane,
Extravagant and base.
Nay good sir hear?
Did not my love return? came she not hither,
For Ioues love speak.
Sir will you get you gon,
And seek your love elsewhere; for know my house
Is not to entertain such customers
As you and your comrades.
Is the man mad,
Or drunk, why Moister Throat know you to whom
You talk so saucily?
Why unto you,
And to your brother Smale-shaneks, will you be gon?
Nay good sir hold vs not in this suspense,
Answer directly, came not the Virgin hither.
Will you be gon directly, are you mad?
Come you to seek a Virgin in Ram-alley
So near an Inn of Court, and amongst Cooks,
Ale-men and Laundresses, why are you fools?
Sir leave this firck of law, or by this light
Isle give your throat a slit, came she not hither?
Answer to that point.
What, have you lost her?
Come doe not gull your friends.
By heaven she's gon
Unless she be returned since wee last left you.
Nay then I cry you mercy, she came not hither
As'am an honest man: First possible
A maid so lovely, fair, so well demeand,
Should be took from you? what from you three?
So young, so brave and valiant Gentlemen?
Sure it cannot bee.
A fore God tic true.
To our pepetuall shames tic now too true.
Is she not left behind you in the Tavern▪
Are you sure you brought her out? were you not drunk
And so forgot her?
A pox on all such luck,
I will find her, or by this good light
Isle fire all the City, come let's go,
Who ever has her shall not long enjoy her,
Isle prove a contract, lets walk the round,
Isle have her if she keep aboue the ground.
Ha ha ha, a makes me sport. if aith
The gull is mad, stark mad, Dash draw the bond
And a release of all his interest
In this my loved wife,
I be sure of that,
For I have certain goblins in buff Jerkins
Lye in ambuscado for him.
I arrest you sir:
Reskue, resku.
O he is caught.
Isle give you bail
Hang off honest catch-poles
good, wise,
Learned, and honest moister Throat, now, now,
Now or never help me..
Whats the matter?
Here are two retainers, hangers on sir,
Which will consume more then ten liveries,
If by your means they be not strait shook off:
I am arrested.
Arrested? what's the sum?
But thirteen pound, due to Beard the Butler,
Do but bail me, and I will save you harmless.
Why heir's the end of Riot, I know the law,
If you be baild by me, the debt is mine,
Which I will undertake.
Law there; Rogues,
Foot I know hee would not let me want
For thirteen pounds.
Provided, you seal a release,
Of all your claim to Mistress Somerfield.
Sergeants doe your kind, hale me to the hole,
Seal a release, Sergeants come, to prison,
Seal a release for Mistress Somerfield,
First I will stink in Jail, be eat with Lice,
Endure an object worse then the Devil himself,
And that's ten Sergeants peeping through the grates
Upon my lousy linen, come to Jail,
Foot a release.
Ther's no conscience in it.
It is a demand uncharitable.
Nay choose.
I can hold no longer, impudent man.
My wife, foot my wife, let me go Sergeants.
O thou perfidious man dare thou presume
To call her wife, whom thou so much hast wronged,
What conquest hast thou got, to wrong a maid,
A silly harmless maid? what glory first
That thou hast thus deceived a simple Virgin,
And brought her from her friends? what honour wast
For thee to make the Butler loose his office
And run away with thee. Your tricks are known,
Did thou not swear thou should be Baroniz'd?
And had both lands and fortunes? both which thou want.
Foot that's not my fault, I would have lands
If I could get em.
I know your trick:,
And know I now am wife unto this man.
How?
I thank her sir, she has now voutchsaft
To cast her self on me.
Therefore subscribe,
Take some-what of him for a full release,
And pray to God to make you an honest man,
If not, I doe protest by earth and Heaven,
Although I starve, thou never shalt enjoy me.
Her vow is past, nor will she break her word▪
Look to it mitcher.
I hope a will compound.
Foot shall I give two thousand pound a year
For nothing.
Brother come, be ruled by me,
Better to take a little then loose all.
You see shoe's resolute, you'd best compound.
Isle first be damned ere I will lose my right,
Unless a give me up my forfit mortgage,
And bail me of this action.
Sir you may choose,
What's the mortgage worth?
Lets have no whispering.
Some forty pounds a year.
Doe it, doe it,
Come you shall do it, we will be rid of him
At any rate.
Dash, go fetch his mortgage,
See that your friends be bound, you shall not claim
Title, right, possession in part or whole,
In time to come, in this my loved wife:
I will restore the mortgage, pay this debt,
And set you free.
They shall not.
We will,
Come draw the bonds, and we will soon subscribe them.
They're ready drawn; here's his release,
Sergeants let him go.
Here's the mortgage sir.
Was ever man thus cheated of a wife:
Is this my mortgage.
The very same sir.
Well I will subscribe, God give you joy,
Although I have but little cause to wish it,
My heart will scarce consent unto my hand,
Tic done.
You give this as your deeds.
We doe,
Certify them Dash.
What am I free.
You are, Sergeants I discharge you,
There's your fees.
Not so, I must have money.
Isle pass my word.
Foutrè, words are wind,
I say I must have money.
How much sir.
Three pounds in hand, and all the rest to morrow.
Ther's your sum, now officers begone,
Each take his way, I must to Saint Iohns street,
And see my Lady-mother: shoe's now in town,
And we to her shall strait present our duties.
O Jove shall we loose the wench thus.
Even thus
Throat farewell, since it is thy luck to have her,
I still shall pray, you long may live together:
Now cach to his affairs.
Good night to all,
Dear wife step in, Beard and Dash come hither:
Here take this money: go borrow Jewels
Of the next Gold-smith: Beard take thou these books,
Go both to the Brokers in Fetter lane,
Lay them in pawn for a Velvet Jerkin
And a double Ruff, tell him a shall have
As much for loan to night, as I do give
Usually for a whole circuit, which done
You two shall man her to her mothers: go,
My fate looks big; me thinks I see already,
Nineteen gold chains, seventeen great beards, and ten
Reverent bald heads, proclaim my way before me,
My Coatch shall now go prancing through Cheapside,
And not be forced to hurry through the streets,
For fear of Sergeants: nor shall I need to try,
Whether my wel-graft tumbling foot-cloth nag,
Be able to out-runne a wel-breath'd Catchp whole,
I now in pomp will ride, for it is most fit,
Hee should have state that rises by his wit.
Good meat the belly fills, good wine the brain,
Women please men, men pleasure them again,
Call me, call thee, one thing must rub another,
English love Scots, VVelshmen love each other.
You say very right sir Oliuer, very right,
I have it in my noddle in faith, That's all the fault
Old Justices have, when they are at feasts,
They will bib hard, they will be fine: Sun-burnt
Sufficient, foxed, or Columberd now and than,
Now could I sit in my charier at home and nod
A drunkard to the stocks, by virtue of,
The last statute •early.
Sir you are merry,
I am indeed.
Your supper sir was light.
But I hope you think you welcome.
I doe,
A light supper quoth you, pray God it be,
Pray god I carry it cleanly, I am sure it lies,
As heavy in my belly as moult lead,
Yet lle go see my Sister Sommerfield,
So late good Justice.
I even so late,
Night is the mother of wit, as you may see,
By Poets or rather Cunstables
In their examinations at midnight,
Weal lie together without marrying,
Save the Curats fees, and the parish a labour,
Tic a thriving course.
That may not be,
For excomunications then will flee.
Thats true, they fly indeed like wild-geese,
In flocks, one in the breech of another.
But the best is a small matter stays them,
And so farewell.
Farewell good Justice Tutchim,
Alas good gentleman his brains are erased,
But let that pass: speak widow first a match,
Shall we clap it up.
Nay if it come to clapping,
Good night in faith Mistress look before you,
Theres nothing more dangerous to maid or widow,
Then sudden clippings up; nothing has spoiled,
So many proper ladies as clippings up:
Your shittill-cocke, striding from tables to ground,
Only to try the strength of the back,
Your riding a hunting, I though they fall,
With their heels upward, and lay as if
They were taking the height, of some high star
With a cross staff: no nor your iumlings
In horsslitters, coatches or caroatches,
Have spoiled so many women as clippings up,
Why then weal chop it up.
Thats not allowed.
Unless you were son to a welch Curate:
But faith sir Knight I have a kind of itching,
To be a Lady, that I can tell you woes,
And can persuade with better rhetoric,
Then oaths, wit, wealth, valour, lands, or person,
I have some debts at court, and marrying you,
I hope the Courtier will not stick to pay me,
Never fear thy payment. This I will say,
For Courtiers theyle be sure to pay each other,
How ere they deal with Citizens.
Then here is my hand,
I am your wife condition we be joined,
Before to morrows sun.
Nay even to night,
So you be pleased with little warning widow,
We old men can be ready, and thou shalt see,
Before the time that chanticlere,
Shall call and tell the day is near,
When wentches lying on their backs,
Receive with joy their loue-stolne smacks,
When maids awaked from their first sleep,
Deceived with dreams begin to weep,
And think if dreams, such pleasures know,
What sport the substance them would show,
When Ladies gin white Limbs to spread,
Her love but new stolen to her bed,
His cotton shows yet scarce put off,
And deers not laugh, speak, sneze, or cough,
When precise dames begin to think,
Why their gross souring husbands stink,
What pleasure it were then to enjoy,
A nimble vicar, or a boy.
Before this time thou shalt behold,
Me quaffing out our bridal bole.
Then belike before the morning Sun
You will be coupled.
Yes faith Adriana,
Well I will look you shall have a clean smock,
Provided that you pay the fee Sir Oliuer,
Since my Mistress sir will be a Lady,
Isle loose no fees due to the waiting maid.
Why is there a fee belonging to it.
A Knight and never heard of smock fees,
I would I had the monopoly of them,
So there were no imposed set upon them:
Whom have wee here what my mad-headed son
What makes he here so late? say I am gone,
And I the whilst will step behind the hangings.
God Bless thee parcel of mans flesh,
How sir.
Why parcel of mans flesh art not a woman?
But widow whirs the old stinkerd my father,
They say widow you dance altogether.
After his pipe.
What then.
Thar't a fool,
Isle assure thee theres no music in it.
Can you play better.
Better widow?
Blood dost think I have not learnt my prick song,
What not the court pricksong? one up and another down,
Why I have it to a hare by this light.
I hope thou love him not.
Isle marry him sir,
How marry him, foot art mad widow,
Wooed marry an old crazed man,
With meager looks, with visage wan,
With little legs and cryncled this,
With Chapfalne gummes and deep sunk eyes,
Why a dog seazd on ten days by death
Stinks nor so loathsome as his breath,
Nor can a city common iaques,
Which all men's Breeches undertakes,
Yield fasting stomachs such a favour.
As doth his breath, and ugly favour.
Rogue,
Thats all one sir she means to be a Lady,
Does she so, and thou must be her waiting woman.
Faith thou wilt make a fine dainty creature,
To sit at a chamber door and look fleas,
In thy Ladies dog while she is showing,
Some slippery britcht Courtier rare faces,
In a by window, foot widow,
Marry me a young and complete gallant,
How a complete gallant? what? a fellow,
With a hat tuck't up behind, and what we use,
About our hips to keep our coats from dabbling,
He wears about his nook, a farthingale:
A standing collar to keep his neat band clean,
The whilst his shirt does stink, and is more foul,
Then an in of chancery table cloth,
His breeches must be plaited as if a had
Some thirty pockets, when one poor halpeny purse,
Will carry all his treasure, his knees all points,
As if his legs and hams were tide together,
A fellow that has no inside, but prates
By rote, as players, and parrots use to doe,
And to define a complete gallant right,
A mercer formed him, a taylor ma••• him,
And a player gives him spright,
Why so, in my conscience to be a Countess,
Thou would marry a hedgehog: I must confess,
Tic state to have a coxcomb kiss your hands,
While yet the chamberly is scarce wiped off,
To have an upright usher march before you,
Bare headed in a Tuftafata jerkin
Maid of your old cast gown, shows passing well,
But when you feel your husbands pulses, thats hell,
Then you fly out and bid strait smocks farewell,
I hope sir what ere our husbands be,
We may be honest.
May be; nay you're,
Women and honesty are as near alyde,
As parsons lives are to their doctrines,
One and the same: but widow now be ruled,
I hope the heavens will give thee better grace,
Then to accept the father and I yet live,
To be bestowed, if you wed the stinckerd,
You shall find the tale of Tantalus
To be no fable widow.
How I sweat,
I can hold no longer, degenerate bastard,
I here disclaim thee, cashier thee, nay more,
I disinherit thee both of my love.
And living, get thee a gray cloak and hat
And walk in Paules amongst thy cashiered mates
As melancholy as the best:
Come not near me,
I forbid the my house, my out-houses,
My Garden, Orchard, and my backside,
Thou shalt not harbour near me.
Nay to thy grief,
Know varlet I will be wed this morning,
Thou shalt not bee there, nor once be graced
With a piece of Rosemary: Isle cashier thee,
Do not reply, I will not stay to hear thee.
Now may I go put me on a clean shirt
And hang my self, foot who would have thought
The Fox had earthed so near me; whats to bee done?
What miracle shall I now undertake
To win respective 〈◊〉 with God and men?
What if I turned Courtier and lived honest?
Sure that would do it: I dare not walk the streets,
For I dwindle at a Sergeant in buff
Almost as much as a new Player does
At a plague bill certified forty:
Well I like this widow, a lusty plump drab
Has substance both in breach and purse,
And pity and sin it were she should be wed
To a furd cloak and a night-cap. Isle have her,
This widow I will have: her money
Shall pay my debts and set me up again,
Tic here, tic almost forged, which if it take,
The world shall praise my wit, admire my fate.
Sergeants beware, be sure you not mistake,
For If you do.
She shall be`quickly bayld:
She shall Corpus cum causa be removed,
Your action entered first below, `shall shrincke,
And you shall find sir Sergeant she has friends
Will stick to her in the common place.
Sir
Will you procure her bail:
She shall be baylde,
Drawer bring up some wine, use her well,
Her husband is a Gentleman of sort
A Gentleman of sort, why what care I:
A woman of her fashion shall find
More kindness at a lusty Sergeants hand
Then ten of your Gentlemen of sort.
Sir use her well, shoe's wife to Moister Throat:
Isle use her sir as if she were my wife,
Would you have any more.
Drink upon that
Whilst wee go fetch her bail. Dash, fellow Dash,
With all the speed thou hast run for our Moister,
Make hast least hee be gone before thou come,
To Lady Somerfields: Isle fetch another,
She shall have bail.
And a firking writ
Of false imprisonment, she shall be sure
Of twelue-pence damage, and five and twenty pound
For suits in law: Isle go fetch my Moister.
And I another:
Drawer leave the Room
Here Mistress a health:
Let it come sweet Rogue.
I, say you so: then must I have an eye,
These Sergeants feed on very good reversions,
On Capons, Teales, and sometimes on a Wodcock
Hot from the shrieues own table, the knaves feed well
Which makes them horrid lechers.
This health is pledged
And honest Sergeant how does moister Gripe
The keeper of the Counter, I do protest
I found him always favourable to me,
A is an honest man, has often stood to me,
And been my friend and let me go a trust
For victual when a denied it knights: but come,
Lets pay and then begone, th'arrest you know
Was but a trick to get from nimble Dash
My husbands man:
True but I have an action
At sure of Mistress, Sel-smocke, your quondam Bawd,
The sum is eight good pound, for six weeks board,
And five weeks loan for a red Tafata gown
Bound with a silver lace:
I doe protest,
By all the honesty twixt thee and me,
I got her in that gown in six weeks space
Four pound and fourteen pence given by a Clarke
Of an Inn of Chancery, that night I came
Out of her house, and does the filthy Jade
Send to me for money? but honest Sergeant,
Let me go, and say thou did not see me,
Isle doe thee as great a pleasure shortly.
Shall we embrace to night.
With all my heart.
Sit on my knee and kiss,
What news boy? why stand you Sentinel?
Do but conceal your self, and we shall catch
My Sergeant napping.
Shall maids be here deflowered,
Now kiss again.
Now, now.
Deflower virgins, rogue? avaunt ye slave,
Are maids fit subjects for a Sergeants mace.
So now are we once more free: ther's for the wine.
Now to our Randeuow: three pounds in gold
These stops contain; weal quaff in Venice glasses,
And swear some Lawyers are but silly Asses.
Is the coast clear, are these combustions ceased,
And may we drink Canary sack in peace?
Shall we have no attendance here you rogues,
Where be these raskals that skip up and down,
Faster then Virginal jacks? drawers.
Sir.
On whom waite you sir rogue?
Faith Captain
I attend a conventicle of Players.
How players, what is there ere a Cuckold among them?
Jove defend else, it stands with policy,
That one should be a notorious Cuckold,
If it be but for the better keeping
The rest of his company together.
When did you see sir Theophrastus Slop,
The City Dog-maister?
Not to day sir.
What have you for my supper.
Nothing ready
Unless you please to stay the dressing Captain,
Zownes stay the dressing; you damned rogue,
What shall I waite upon your greasy cooke,
And waite his leisure, go down stairs rogue,
Now all her other customers be served,
Ask if your Mistress have a snip of Mutton
Yet left for me.
Yes sir.
And good-man rogue
See what good thing your Kitchin-maide has left
For me to work upon, my barrow-gutlings grumble
And would have food: Say now the Vintners wife
Should bring me up a Pheasant, Partridge, Quail,
A pleasant banquet, and extremely love me,
Desire me to eat, kiss, and protest,
I should pay nothing for it, say she should drink
Her self three quarters drunk, to win my love,
Then give me a chain, worth some three score pounds,
Say it were worth but forty, say but twenty,
For Citizens do seldom in their wooing,
Give aboue twenty pounds: say then it is twenty,
Isle go sell some fifteeene pounds worth of the chain,
To buy some clothes, and shift my lousy linen,
And wear the rest as a perpetual favour,
About my arm in fashion of a Bracelet,
Say then her husband should grow jealous,
Id make him drunk, and then Isle Cuckold him,
But then a Vintners wife, some Rogues will say,
Which sits at Bar for the receipt of custom,
That smells of chippings and of broken fish,
Is love to Captain Face, which to prevent,
Isle never come but when her best stitched hat,
Her Bowgle gown and best wrought smock is on,
Then does she neither smell of bread, of meat,
Or drappings of the tap, it shall be so.
Now leave vs boy; bless you Captain Face.
Isle have no Music?
Foot dost take vs for fiddlers
Then turn straight, Drawer run down the stares,
And thank the Gods a gave me that great patience
Not to strike you.
Your patience sir is great,
For you dare seldom strike. Sir they say,
You needs will wed the widow Taffeta,
Nolens volens.
Doe not urge my patience,
Awake not fury, new raked up in embers,
I give you leave to live.
Men say you've tricks,
You're an admirable Ape, and you can doe
More feats then three Babounes, we must have some.
My patience yet is great, I say be gone,
My tricks are dangerous.
That's nothing,
I have brought you furniture, come get up
Up upon this table, doe your feats,
Or I will whip you to them, doe not I know
You are a lousy knave.
How? Lousy knave,
Are wee not English bred?
You're a coward Rogue,
That dares not look a Kitling in the face,
If she but stare or mew.
My patience yet is great:
Doe you bandy troops, by Dis I will be Knight,
Wear a blew coat on great Saint Georges day,
And with my fellows drive you all from Paules
For this attempt.
Will you yet gee up,
I must lash you to it,
By Pluto, Gentlemen,
To doe you pleasure, and to make you sport,
Isle do it.
Come get up then quick.
Isle dress you sir.
By Jove it is not for fear,
But for a love I bear unto these tricks,
That I perform it.
Hold up your snout sir,
Sit handsomely, by heaven, sir you must do it,
Come boy.
No by this good light, Isle play
Him that goes with the motions.
Wher's the Cap. Gen∣tlemen?
Stand back boy, and be a spectator, Gentlemen
You shall see the strange nature of an outlandish beast,
That he's but two legs, bearded like a man,
Nosed like a Goose, and toungd like a woman,
Lately brought from the land of Catita,
A beast of much understanding, were it not given
Too much to the love of Venery: do I not do it well?
Admirably.
Remember noble Captain,
You skip when I shall shake my whip. Now sit,
What can you doe for the great Turk?
What can you doe for the Pope of Rome?
Hark, he stirs not, he moves not, he waggeth not,
What can you do for the town of Geneua sir?
Sure this Baboune is a great Puritan.
Is not this strange.
Not a whit by this light,
Banks his horse and hee were taught both in a stable.
O rare.
Zounes Isle first be dam'nd, shall sport
Bee laughed at; by Dis▪ by Pluto, and great Proserpine,
My fatal blade once drawn, falls but with death,
Yet if you'll let me go, I vow by Jove,
No widow, maid, wife, punk, or Cockatrice,
Shall make me haunt your goasts.
Twill not serve sir,
You must show more.
Isle first be hanged and damned.
Foot can a jump so well.
Is a so quick?
I hope the slave will haunt no more the widow,
As for that take no care, for by this light
Sheele not have thee.
Not have me?
No not have thee,
By this hand, flesh, and blood, she is resolved
To make my father a most fearful Cuckold,
And he's resolved to save his soul by her.
How by her?
Thus, all old men which marry
Young wives, shall questionless be saved,
For while they are young, they keep other men's wives,
And when they are old, they keep wives for other men,
And so by satisfaction procure salvation.
Why thou dejected tail of a Crab,
Does not the fair Constantia Somerfield
Dote on thy filthy face; and wilt thou wed
A wanton widow? what can thou see
To dote on her.
Only this, I love her.
Dost love her then, take a purgation,
For love Isle assure thee is a binder:
Of all things under heaven, there's no fitter parralells then a Drunkard and a Lover: for a drunkard looses his senses, so does your lover; your drunkard is quarrelsome, so is your lover: your drunkard will swear, lye, and speak great words, so will your lover: your drunkard is most desirous of his lechery, and so is your lover: Well the night grows old, farewell:
I am so much thy friend, that none shall bed thee,
While fair Constantia is resolved to wed thee.
Foot shall we let the wentch go thus,
My masters now show your selves Gentlemen
And take a way the Lawyers wife;
Foot though I have no wit, yet I can,
Love a wentch and choose a wife,
Why sir, what should you doe with a wife, that are
held none of the wisest? you'll get none but fools.
How fools, why may not I a fool get a wise child
as well as wise men get fools: all lies but in the agility of
the woman: in truth I think all fools are got when there
mothers a sleep; therefore Isle never lie with my wife but
when she is brawd waking, stand to it honest friends, knock
down the Lieutenant and then hurry the wentch to Fleet∣street,
there my father and I will this morning be married.
Stand close they come.
By Jove the night grows dark and Luna looks,
As if this hour some fifty cuckolds were making,
Then let vs trudge.
Down with 'em, down with them, away with her
Moister Smal-shankes to Fleetestreet, go the Curate there stays for you.
And stays the Curate.
Whats here knocked down, and blud of men let out,
Must men in darkness bleed, then Erebus look big,
And Bores blow the fire of all my rage,
Into his nose. Night thou art a whore,
Smalshanke a rogue: and is my wench took from me,
Sure I am gulled, this was no Coccatryce,
I never saw her before this day-light peeped,
What dropst thou head, this surely is the heir,
And mad will Smal-shankes lay in Ambuscado,
To get her now from me, Beard: Liefrenant Beard,
Thou art an asses what a dull slave was I,
That all this while smelt not her honesty.
Pate I doe not pity thee: had thou brains,
Lieutenant Beard had got this wealthy heir,
From all these rogues, blood to be this orereachd,
In pate and wench: revenge, revenge come up,
And with thy curled locks cling to my beard,
Smale-shamkes I will betray thee: I now will trudge,
To Saint Iohns street to inform the Lady Sommerfield,
Where thou art: I will prevent the match,
Thou art to Fleetestreet gone, revenge shall follow,
And my incensed wrath shall like great thunder,
Disperse thy hopes and thy brave wife a sunder.
Say as I say widow, the wench is gon,
But I know whether, stolen she is, well.
I know by whom, say as I say widow,
I have bin drinking hard, why say so too,
Old men they can be fine, with small a doe,
The law is not offended, I had no punk,
Nor in an alehouse, have I made me drunk.
The statute is not broke, I have the skill,
To drink by law, then say as I say still,
To what extremes doth this licentious time,
Hurry unstayed youth, nor Gods nor Laws,
Whose penal scurges are enough to save,
Even damned fiends, can in this looser age,
Confine unbounded youth, who durst presume,
To steal my youths delight, my ages hope,
Her fathers heir, and the last noble stem,
Of all her ancestors: fear they or Gods or laws.
I say as you say sister, but for the laws,
There are so many that men do stand in awe,
Of none at all; take heed they steal not you.
Who woes a widow with a fair full Moon
Shall surely speed, beware of full Moons widow,
Will Smalshankes has your daughter no word but mum,
My warrant you shall have when time shall come.
your warrant?
I my warrant widow.
My warrant can stretch far; no more but so,
Twill serve to ketch a knave, or fetch a Doe.
Here is a gentleman much desirous to see you madam.
What is a for a man.
Nothing for a man, but much for a beast,
I think him lunatic for a demands,
What plate of his is stirring in the house,
A calls your men his Butlers, Cooks, and Steward,
Kisses your woman, and makes exceeding much
Of your Coach-mans wife;
Then he's a gentleman, for tic a true note of a gentleman, to make much of other men's wives, bring him up, a sir, makes a much of your Choach∣mans wife, this gear will run a wheels then shortly, A man may make much more of a another mans wife, then a can do of's own.
How much brother?
A man may make with ease,
A Punk, a Child, a Bastard, a Cuckold, of another mans wife
all at a clap.
And that is much I think.
Thats my Lady.
For that thou first hast brought me to her sight,
I here create thee Clarke a the Kitchen, no man shall beg it from thee.
Sure the fellows mad.
What would you sir? I guess your long profession,
By your scant suite: your habit seems to turn:
Your inside outward to me, you're I think.
Some Turner of the law.
Law is my living.
And on that ancient mould I wear this outside,
Suite upon suite wastes some yet makes me thrive.
First law, then gold, then love, and then we wive.
A man of form like me but what's your business?
Be brief good sir: what makes this bold intrusion?
Intrude, I do not, for I know the law,
It is the rule that squares out all our actions,
Those actions bring in coin, coin gets me friends,
Your son in law hath law it's fingers ends.
My son in law.
Madame your son in law,
Mother I come, (be glad I call you so)
To make a gentle breach into your favour,
And win your approbation of my choice,
Your cherry-ripe sweet daughter (so renownd,
For beauty, virtue, and a wealthy dowre)
I have espousd.
How? you espouse my daughter?
Nouerint vniuersi, the laws of heaven,
Of nature, church, and chance, have made her mine,
Therefore deliver her by these presents.
How's this? made her yours sir? per quam regulam,
Nay we are lettered sir, as well as you,
Red rationem per quam regulam.
Famine Iudificantur viros:
By that same rule these lips have taken season,
Tut I do all by Statute law, and reason.
Hence you base knave, you petty-fogging groom,
Clad in old ends, and pieced with Brokery,
You wed my daughter?
You sir Ambo-dexter,
A Sumners son, and learned in Norfolk wiles,
Some common bail, or Counter Lawyer,
Marry my niece? your half sleeves shall not carry her.
These Storms will be dissolved in tears of joy,
Mother I doubt it not: Justice to you,
That jerk at my half sleeves, and yet your self
Doe never wear but Buckerom out of sight,
A Flannel wast-coate, or a Canvas Truss,
A shift of thrift, I use it: let's be friends,
You know the law hath tricks, call me, call thee,
Viderit vtilitas, the mott to these half arms,
Corpus cum causa needs no bumbasting.
We wear small hair yet have we tongue and wit,
Lawyers close breech't have bodies politic.
Speak, answer me sir Jack: stole you my daughter?
Short tale to make, I fingered have your daughter,
I have tan livery and season of the wench,
Deliver her then, you know the Statute laws,
Shoe's mine without exception, bar or clause:
Come, come, restore.
The fellow's mad I think,
I was not mad before I married,
But ipso facto what the act may make me,
That know I not.
Fellows come in there,
By this sir you confess you stole my No••,
And I attach you here of felony:
Lay hold on him: Isle make my Mittimus,
And send him to the Jail; have we no bar
Nor clause to hamper you, away with him,
Those claws shall claw you to a bar of shame,
Where thou shalt show thy Goll, Isle bar your claim,
If I be Justice Tutchin.
Hands off you slaves,
Oh! favour my Jerkin, though you tear my flesh,
I set more store by that: my Audit
Querela shall be heard, and with a Certiorare
Isle fetch her from you with a pox.
What's here to do? is all the world in arms?
More tumults, brawls, and insurrections,
Is blood the Theme whereon our time must treat.
Heir's Beard your Butler: a rescue Beard; draw,
Draw? not so: my Blot's as ominously drawn
Unto the death of nine or ten such grooms,
As is a knife unsheathed with the hungry maw,
Threatening the ruin of a chine of Beef:
But for the restless toil it took of late,
My blade shall sleep awhile.
Help.
Stop thee Throat
And hear me speak, whose bloody Characters,
Will show I have been scuffling: briefly thus,
Thy wife, your daughter, and your lovely Niece,
Is hurried now to Fleet-streete, the damned crew
With glaues and clubs have rapt her from these arms,
Throat thou art bobbed, although thou boughtst the heir,
Yet hath the slave made a re-entry.
Sir what are you?
My Ladies Butler sir.
Not I by heaven.
By this good light he swore it,
And for your daughters love he ran away.
By love I gulled thee Throat.
More knavery yet,
Lay hands on him, pinion them both,
And guard them hence towards Fleet-streete, come away,
Must we be led like thieves, and pinniond walk,
Spent I my blood for this? is this my hire?
Why then burn rage, set Beard and nose on fire.
On, on I say.
Justice, the law shall sirke you.
On this one hour depends my hopes and fortunes,
Foot I must have this widow: what should my Dad
Make with a wife, that scarce can wipe his nose,
Untruss his points, or hold a Chamber-pot,
Steady till a pisses: The doors are fast,
It is now the midst of night; yet shall this chain,
Procure access and conference with the widow:
What though I cheat my father, all men have sins,
Though in their several kinds, all ends in this,
So they get gold, they care not whose it is.
Begging the Court, use bears the City out,
Lawyers their quirks, thus goes the world about,
So that our villainies have but different shapes,
Th'effects all one, and poor men are but Apes,
To imitate their betters, this is the difference,
All great men's sins must still be humoured,
And poor men's vices largely punished,
The privilege that great men have in evil,
Is this, they go unpunished to the Devil
Therefore Isle in, this chain I know will move,
Gold and rich stones, wins coyest ladies love.
What would you sir, that you do knock so boldly.
I must come in to the widow.
How come in,
The widow has no entrance for such mates.
Dost here sweet Chamber-maid, by heaven I come,
With letters from my father, I have brought her stones,
Jewels and chains, which she must use to morrow.
You're a needy knave, and will lye:
Your father has cashiered you, nor will a trust you,
Begone, least I doe wash you hence.
Dost here,
By this good night, my Father and I are friends,
Take but this cheine for token, give her that,
And tell her I have other things for her,
Which by my fathers will I am commanded
To give to her own hands.
Say you so,
In truth I think you'll prove an honest man▪
Had you once got a beard: let me see the cheine,
Dost think I lye? by this good light Adrian
I love her with my soul, heir's letters
And other Jewels sent her from my father,
Is she a bed.
By my virginity,
She is uncased, and ready to slip in,
Betwixt the sheets, but I will bear his this,
And tell her what you say.
But make some hast,
Why so twill take, zart how a waiting maid,
Can shake a fellow up that is cashiered,
And has no money: foot should she keep the chain,
And not come down, I must turn Citizen,
Be banckrout, and crave the Kings protection
But here she comes.
What would you sir with vs,
That on the sudden, and so late you come.
I have some secrets to acquaint you with,
Please you to let the chamber maid shake off,
And stand as Sentinel.
It shall not need,
I hope I have not brought her up so ill,
But that she knows how to contain your secrets,
As well as I her Mistress: Therefore on.
It is not fit forsooth that I should on,
Before she leave the room.
Tic not indeed▪
Therefore Isle waite in the with-drawing room
Until you call.
Now sir, what's your will?
Dear widow, pity the state of a young,
Poor, yet proper Gentleman, by Venus pap
Upon my knees I'd creep unto your lap
For one small drop of favour, and though this face
Is not the finest face, yet it is been praisd
By Ladies of good judgment in faces.
Are these your secrets?
You shall have secrets
More pleasing, nay here sweet widow,
Some wantons doe delight to see men creep,
And on their knees to woe them.
I am none of those,
Stand up, I more desire a man should stand,
Then cringe and creep that means to win my love,
I say stand up, and let me go ye'ad best.
For ever let me creep upon the ground,
Unless you here my suit.
How now sir sauce,
Would you be capering in your fathers saddle,
Away you cashiered younger brother, begone,
Doe not I know the fashions of you all,
When a poor woman has laid open all
Her thoughts to you, then you grow proud and coy,
But when wise maids dissemble and keep close,
Then you poor snakes come creeping on your bellies,
And with all oiled looks prostrate your selves,
Before our beauties sun, where once but warm,
Like hateful snakes you strike vs with your stings,
And then forsake vs, I know your tricks begone.
Foot Isle first be hanged, nay if you go
You shall leave your smock behind you widow,
Keep close your womanish weapon, hold your tongue,
Nor speak, cough, sneeze or stamp, for if you doe,
By this good blade Isle cut your throat directly,
Peace, stir not, by Heaven Isle cut your throat
If you but stir: speak not, stand still, go to,
Isle teach coy widows a new way to woe,
Come you shall kiss, why so, Isle stab by Heaven
If you but stir, now here, first kiss again,
Why so, stir not, Now come I to the point,
My hopes are past, nor can my present state,
Afford a single halfe-penny, my father
Hates me deadly; to beg, my birth forbids,
To steal, the law, the hang man, and the Rope
With one consent deny; to go a trust,
The City common-councell has forbad it,
Therefore my state is desperate, stir not,
And I by much will rather choose to hang,
Then in a ditch or prison-hole to starve,
Resolve, wed me, and take me to your bed,
Or by my soul Isle strait cut off your head,
Then kill my self, for I had rather dye,
Then in a street live poor and lowsily:
Doe not I know you cannot love my father.
A widow that has known the quid of things,
To dote upon an old and crazed man,
That stinks at both ends, worse then an elder pipe,
Who when his blood and spirit are at the height,
Hath not a member to his palsy body,
But is more limber then a Kings head pudding,
Took from the pot half sod doe I not know this?
Have you not wealth enough, to serve vs both?
And am not I a pretty handsome fellow,
To doe your drudgery, come, come, resolve.
For by my blood, if you deny your bed,
Isle cut your throat, without equivocation,
If you be pleased hold up your finger, if not
By heaven Isle gar my whyniard through your weombe,
First a match.
Here me but speak.
You'll prate to loud.
No.
Nor speak one word against my honest suit.
No by my worth
Kiss upon that and speak,
I dare not wed, men say yare nought you'll cheat▪
And you do keep a whore.
That is a lie,
She keeps her self and me, yet I protest,
Shees not dishonest.
How could she then maintain you,
Why by her comings in, a little thing,
Her friends have left her which with putting to best use.
And often turning yields her a poor living,
But what of that; shes now shook off, to thee
Isle only cleave, Isle be thy merchant.
And to this wealthy fair, Isle bring my ware,
And here set up my standing: therefore resolve,
Nought but my sword is left left be a match,
Clap hands, contract and strait to bed,
If not, pray, forgive and straight goes off your head.
I take thy love.
Then strait lets both to bed.
Isle wed to morrow.
You shall not sleep vpont.
An honest contract is as good as marriadge.
A bird in hand you know the proverb widow,
To let me tell thee, Isle love thee while I live,
For this attempt give me that lusty lad,
That wins his widow with his well drawn blade,
And not with oaths and words: a widows wooing,
Not in bare words but should consist in doing,
I take thee to my husband.
I thee to wife,
Now to thy bed and there weal end this strife.
Warm blood the young mans slave, the old mans God
Makes me so stir thus soon, it stirs isayth,
And with a kind of Itching pricks me on,
To bid my bride boun Jour, O this desire,
Is even another filtcht promethian fire,
By which we old men live, performance then,
I thats poor old men's bain, that in old men,
Comes limping off more lame God knows then he,
Which in a close, a hot and dangerous fight,
Has bin dismembered and craves by letter patents,
Yet scarce a woman that considers this,
Women have tricks fi•ks and farthinggales,
A generation are they full of subtlety,
And all most honest where they want the means.
To be otherwise. Therefore Isle have an eye
My widow goes not oft to visit kinsfolks,
By birth she is a Ninny, and that I know,
Is not in London held the smallest kindred,
I must have wits and brains, come on my friends,
Out with your tools, and toot, a strane of mirth.
And a pleasant song to wake the widow.
Musicians, mnistrills, foot rogues,
For Gods love leave your filthy squeaking noise
And get you gone, the widow and my self,
Will scamble out the shaking of the sheets,
Without your music, we have no need of fiddlers,
To our dancing, foot have you no manners,
Cannot a man take his natural rest.
For your scraping, I shall wash your gut-strings.
If you but stay a while; yet honest rascals,
If you'll let vs have the tother crash
The widow and Isle keep time, theres for your pains,
Hows this? will the widow and you keep time,
What trick? what quiddit? what figare is this?
My cashiered Son speak from the widows chamber,
And in his shirt ha, sure she is not there,
Tic so she has took him in for pity,
And now removes her chamber I will home,
On with my neatestrobes, perfume my beard,
Eat cloves, Eringoes and drink some aquauita.
To sweeten breath and keep my women from rambling.
Then like the month of March, come blustering in,
Marry the widow shake up this springall,
And then as quiet as a sucking lamb,
Close by the widow will I rest al night,
As for my breath I have crotchets and devises,
Ladies rank breaths are often helped with spices.
Come straw a pace, Lord shall I never live,
To walk to Church on flowers. O tic fine,
To see a bride trip it to Church so lightly,
As if her new choppiness would scorn to bruise
A silly flower: and now I prithee tell me,
What flower think thou is likest to a woman?
A marigold I think.
Why a mary gold:
Because a little heate makes it to spread,
And open wide his leaves.
Thart quite wide,
A marigold doth open wide all day,
And shuts most close at night; I hope thou know,
All wenches doe the contrary: but sir,
How does thy Uncle the old Doctor,
Dost think heel be a Bishop?
O questionless,
For has got him a young wife, and carried her,
To Court already: but now I prithee say,
Why will the widow wed so old a knight,
Why for his riches.
For riches only,
Why riches cannot give her her delight,
Retches I hope can soon procure her one
Shall give her her delight thats the Devil,
Thats it in faith makes vs waiting gentlewomen
Live maids so long.
Think you so.
Yes infaith,
Married women quite have spoiled the market,
By having secret friends besides their husbands,
For if these married wives would be content
To have but one a piece I think in troth,
There would be doings enough for vs all,
And till we get an act of parliament,
For that our states are desperate.
Come straw a piece.
So ho ho, Moister.
Boy,
In truth I thought y'ad been more fast asleep,
Then a midwife or a Puritan Taylor,
At a sunday evenings Lecture, but sir
Why do you rise so soon?
To see the widow,
The weaker you, you are forbid a widow,
And it is the first thing you will fall into.
Me thinks a young clear skinned country Gentlewoman,
That never saw Babounes, Lyons, or Courtiers,
Might prove a handsome wife, or what do you say
To a Citizens daughter, that never was in love
With a Player, that never learnt to dance,
That never dwelt near any Inn a Court,
Might not she in time prove an honest wife?
Faith take a maid, and leave the widow, Moister
Of all meates I love not a gaping Oyster,
God speed your works fair maids.
You much mistake,
Tic no work.
What then.
A preparation
To a work sir.
What work sweet Ladies?
Why to a marriage? thats a work I think,
How? a preparation to a marriage,
Of whom kind maids, of whom?
And why kind maids?
I hope you have had no kindness at our hand,
To make you say so: but sir understand,
That Sir Oliuer Smal-shanke the noble Knight,
And mistress Tafata the rich widow,
Must this day be coupled, conjoined,
Married, espoused, wedded, contracted,
Or as the Puritaine says, put together,
And so sir, to the shifting of our clean smocks,
Wee leave you.
Married, and to day,
Dissention, Jealousy, hate, beggary,
With all the dire events which breed dislike
In nuptial beds, attend her bridal steps,
Can vows and oaths, with such protesting action,
As if their hearts were spit forth with their words,
As if their souls were darted through their eyes,
Be of no more validity with women?
Have I for her contem'd my fixed fate.
Neglected my fair hopes, and scorned the love
Of beauteous, virtuous, and honoured Constantia.
Now works it with my wish: my hopes are full.
And I engaged my worth and ventured life
On yonder buffolne face, to have men scorn,
And point at my disgrace: first will I leave to live:
There take my purse, live thou to better fate.
Better thus die, then live unfortunate.
Aye me accursed: help, help, murder murder,
Cursed be the day and hour that gave me breath,
Murder, murder: if any Gentleman
Can hear my plaints, come forth and assist me.
What out-cryes call me from my naked bed,
Who calls Ieronimo, speak here I am.
Good sir leave your struggling and acting,
And help to save the life of a distressed man,
O help if you be Gentlemen!
Whats here?
A man hanged up and all the murderers gone?
And at my door to lay the guilt on me.
This place was made to pleasure Citizens wives,
And not to hang up honest Gentlemen
Where be these lazy knaves? some raise the house,
What meant the cry of murder? whore's my love?
Come Isabella, help me to lament,
For sigthes are stopped, and all my tears are spent.
These clothes I oft have seen, aye me my friend:
Pursue the murderers, raise all the street
It shall not need, a stirs, give him breath.
Is there yet life, Horatio my dear boy,
Horatio! Horatio, what hast thou mis-done,
To lose thy life when life was new begun?
Zeart a man had as good be hanged outright,
As to endure this clapping: shame to thy sex,
Perfidious perjured woman, wher's thy shame?
How can thy modesty forbear to blush,
And know I know thee an adulteress?
Have not thy vows made thee my lawful wife
Before the face of heaven? where is thy shame?
But why speak I of shame to thee, whose face,
Is steeled with customed sin, whose thoughts want grace:
The custom of thy sin so luls thy sense:
Women ne'er blush, though ne'er so foul th'offence,
To break thy vow to me and straight to wed,
A doting stinckerd.
But hold your tongue,
Or by this light Isle truss you up again,
Zeart rail on my wife, am I a stinkerd,
Or do I dote? speak such another word,
And up you truss again, am I a stinkerd?
The knight your father is:
Why who denies it.
He supplants thee and I supplanted him.
Come come, you shall be friends come forgive her:
For by this light there is no remedy,
Unless you will betake you to my leavings.
Rather then so Isle help you to a wife:
Rich, well borne, and by some accounted fair,
And for the worth of her Virginity,
I dare presume to pawn my honesty:
What say you to Constantia Somerfield?
Dost know where she is boy?
I do, nay more,
If he but swear to embrace her constant love,
Isle fetch her to this place.
A shall do it boy,
A shall do it, go fetch her boy, foot my father,
Stand too't now old wench, stand too't now.
Now fresh and youthful as the month of May,
Isle bid my Bride good morrow, Musicians on,
Lightly, lightly, and by my knighthoods spur,
This year you shall have my protection,
And yet not buy your livery coats your selves:
God morrow Bride, fresh, fresh, as the month of May,
I come to kiss thee on thy wedding day.
Saving your tale sir, Isle show you how,
April showers spring May flowers▪
So merrily singes the Cuckoo:
The truth is, I have laid my knife aboard,
The widow sir is wedded.
Ha,
Bedded.
ha:
Why my good father what should you do with a wife?
Would you be crested? will you needs thrust your head
In on of Vulcans Helmets? will you perforce
Wear a City cap and a Court feather?
Villain, slave, thou hast wronged my wife.
not so,
Speak my good wench, have I not done thee right.
I find no fault, and I protest Sir Oliuer.
I'd not have lost the last two hours sleep,
I had by him, for all the wealth you have.
Villain slave, Isle hang thee by the statute,
Thou hast two wives.
Be not so furious sir,
I have but this, the other was my whore,
Which now is married to an honest Lawyer.
Thou villain slave thou hast abused thy father.
Your son in faith, your very son in faith,
The villain boy has one trick of his sire,
Has firkt away the wench, has pierced the hogshead,
And knows by this the vintadge.
I am undone.
You could not love the widow but her wealth.
The devil take my soul but I did love her.
That oath doth show you are a Northern Knight,
And of all men alive, Isle never trust,
A Northern man in love.
And why? and why slut.
Because the first word he speaks is the Devil
Take his soul, and who will give him trust,
That once has given his soul unto the Diueil.
She says most true father, the soul once gon,
The best part of a man is gone.
And in faith
If the best part of a man be once gone,
The rest of the body is not worth a rush,
Though it be ne'er so handsome.
Bring them away.
How now?
My Lawyer pinioned I begin to stink
Already.
Cheater my daughter.
Shoe's mad.
My wife sir, my wife.
They're mad, stark mad,
I am sorry sir you have lost those happy wits
By which you lived so well. The ayre grows cold,
Therefore Isle take my leave.
Stay him officers,
Sir it is not your tricks of wit can carry it.
Officers attach him, and this Gentleman,
For stealing away my heir.
You do me wrong,
Zart I never saw your heir.
That's a lye,
You stole her, and by chance I married her.
God give you joy sir.
Ask the Butler else,
Therefore widow release me, for by no law,
Statute or book case, of Vicesimo
Edwardi Secundi, nor by the Statute
Of Tricesimo Henrici sixty,
Nor by any book case of decimo
Of the late Queen, am I accessory,
Part, or party confederate, a better,
Helper, seconder, perswader, forwarder,
Principal or maintainer of this late theft:
But by law, I forward, and she willing,
Clapped up the match, and by a good Statute
Of Decimo tertio Richardi quart,
She is my leefull lawful, and my true
Married wife, teste Liftenant Beard.
Who lives would think that you could prate so fast,
Your hands being bound behind you, foot a talks
With as much ease as if a were in's shirt.
I am witness thou had the heir.
So am I.
And so is my man Dash.
Here me but speak,
Sit you as Judges, undo the Lawyers hands,
That a may freely act, and Isle be bound
That William Smalshanke shall put your Throat to silence,
And ouer-throw him at his own weapon.
Agreed, take each his place, and here the case
Argued betwixt them two.
Agreed, agreed.
Now Throat or never, stretch your self.
Fear not
Here stand I for my client, this Gentleman▪
I for the widow.
Begin.
Right worshipful
I say that William Small-shanke mad-man,
Is by a Statute made in Octauo
Of Richard Cordelion guilty to the law
Of felony, for stealing this Ladies heir,
That a stole her, the proof is most pregnant,
He brought her to my house, confessed himself,
A made great means to steal her, I liked her,
(And finding him a novice) truth to tell,
Married her my self, and as I said,
By a Statute Richardi Quart,
She is my lawful wife.
For my client,
I say the wench brought unto your house,
Since all our friends so happily are met,
Here will I choose a husband: this be the man,
Whom since I left your house in shape of Page,
I still have followed.
Foot would I had known so much,
I would have been bold to have lain with your page.
Say am I welcome.
As is my life and soul,
Heaven give you joy,
Since all so well succeeds, take my consent,
Then are we all paired, I and my lass,
You and your wife, the lawyer and his wench,
And father fall you aborde of the widow,
But then my brother.
Faith I am a fool.
Thats all one; If God had not made
Some elder-brothers fools, how should witty
Younger brothers be maintained,
Strike up Music, lets have an old song,
Since all my tricks have found so good success,
Weal sing, dance, dice, and drink down heaviness.
THus two hours have brought to end,
What many tedious hours have pend,
A dares not glory nor distrust,
But he (as other writers must)
Submits the censures of his pains
To those whose wit and nimble brains,
Are able best to judge: and as for some,
Who filled with malice, hither come
To belch their poison on his labour,
Of them he doth entreat no favour,
But bids them hang, or soon amend,
For worth shall still it self defend,
And for our selves wee doe desire,
You'll breath on vs that growing fire,
By which in time wee may attain,
Like favours which some others gain:
For bee assured our loves shall tend,
To equal theirs, if not transcend.

TRust me my Lord Dorialus, I had mist of this if you had not called me, I thought the Princesses birth day had been to morrow.
Why, did your Lord∣ship sleep out the day?
I marvel what the Duke meant to make such an idle vow.
Idle, why?
Is it not idle, to swear to grant his Daugh∣la any thing she shall ask on her birth day? she may ask an impossible thing: and I pray heaven she doe not ask an unfit thing at one time or other; tic dan∣gerous trusting a mans vow upon the discretion on's daughter.
I wonder most at the Marquess her brother, who is always vehemently forward to have her de∣sires granted.
Hoe's acquainted with 'em before.
Shoe's doubtless very chaste and virtuous.
So is Leucippus her Brother.
Shoe's twenty year old, I wonder
She ask not a Husband.
That were a folly in her, having refused all the
Great Princes in one part of the world:
Sheele dye a Maid.
She may ask but one, may she?
A hundred times this day if she will;
And indeed, every day is such a day, for though
The Duke has vowed it only on this day,
He keeps it every day: he can deny
Her nothing.
Come fair Hidaspes, thou art
Duchess to day,
Art thou prepared to ask, thou know
My oath will force performance.
And Leucippus, if she now ask ought that shall,
Or would have performance
After my death, when by the help of heaven,
This Land is thine, accursed be thy race,
May cuery one forget thou art my son,
And so their own obedience.
Mighty Sir,
I doe not wish to know that fatal hour,
That is to make me King, but if I doe,
I shall most hastily (and like a son)
Perform your grants to all, chiefly to her:
Remember that you ask what wee
Agreed upon.
Are you prepared? then speak.
Most Royal Sir, I am prepared,
Nor shall my will exceed a Virgins bounds,
What I request shall both at once bring
Me a full content.
So it ever does:
Thou only comfort of my feeble age,
Make known thy good desire,
For I dare swear thou love me.
This is it I beg,
And on my knees. The people of your Land,
The Lycians, are through all the Nations
That know their name, noted to have in use
A vain and fruitless Superstition;
So much more hateful, that it bears the show
Of true Religion, and is nothing else
But a selfe-pleasing bold lasciviousness.
What is it?
Many Ages before this,
When every man got to himself a Trade,
And was laborious in that chosen course,
Hating an idle life, far worse then death:
Some one that gave himself to wine and sloth,
Which breed lascivious thoughts;
And found himself conioynd
For that by every painful man,
To take his stain away, framed to himself
A god, whom he pretented to obey,
In being thus dishonest, for a name
He called him Cupped. This created god,
Mans nature being ever credulous
Of any vice that takes part with his blood,
Had ready followers enough: and since
In every age they grew, especially
Amongst your Subjects, who doe yet remain
Adorers of that drowsy Deity:
Which drink invented: and the winged Boy,
(For so they call him) has his sacrifices.
These loose naked statutes through the Land,
And in every Village, nay the palace
Is not free from'em. This is my request,
That these erected obscene Images
May be plucked down and burnt: and every man
That offers to'em any sacrifice, may lose his life.
But be advised my fairest daughter, if he be
A god, he will express it upon thee my child:
Which heaven avert.
There is no such power:
But the opinion of him fills the Land
With lustful sins: every young man and maid
That feel the least desire to one another,
Dare not suppress it, for they think it is
Blind Cupids motion: and he is a god.
This makes our youth unchaste. I am resolved:
Nephew Ismenus, break the Statues down
Here in the palace, and command the City
Doe the like, let proclamations
Be drawn, and hastily sent through the Land
To the same purpose.
Sir, I will break down none my self,
But I will deliver your command:
Hand I will have none int, for I like it not.
Go and command it. Pleasure of my life,
Would thou ought else? Make many thousand suits,
They must and shall be granted.
Nothing else.
But go and meditate on other suites,
Some six days hence Isle give thee audience again,
And by a new oath bind my self to keep it:
Ask largely for thy self, dearer then life
In whom I may be bold to call my self,
More fortunate then any in my age,
I will deny thee nothing.
It was well done Sister.
How like you this request my Lords?
I know not yet I am so full of wonder,
We shall be gods our selves shortly,
And we pull'em out of heaven o'this fashion.
We shall have wenches now when we can
Catch'em, and we transgress thus.
And we abuse the gods once, tic a Justice
We should be held at hard meat: for my part,
Isle even make ready for mine own affection,
I know the god incensed, must send a hardness
Through all good women's hearts, and then we have
Brought our eggs and muskadine to a fair market:
Would I had gin an 100. poun for a toleration,
That I might but use my conscience in mine
Own house.
The Duke hoe's old and past it, he would
Never have brought such a plague upon the land else,
Tic worse then Sword and Famine:
Yet to say truth, we have deserved it, we have lived
So wickedly, every man at his livery, and would that
Would have sufficed vs: we murmurd at this
Blessing, that was nothing; and cried out to the
God for endless pleasures, he heard vs,
And supplied vs, and our women were new still
As we need'em: yet we like beasts still cried,
Poor men can number their wooers, give vs
Abundance: we had it, and this curse with all.
Byr'lady we are like to have a long Lent out,
Flesh will be flesh: now Gentlemen I had rather
Have angered all the gods then that blind Gunner.
I remember once the people did but flight him
In a sacrifice: and what followed?
Women kept their houses, grew good housewives,
Honest forsooth, was not that fine?
Wore their own faces,
Though they wear gay clothes without surveying:
And which was most lamentable,
They loved their husbands.
I doe remember it to my grief,
Young Maids were as cold as Cowcumbors,
And much of that complexion:
Bawds were abolished: and to which misery
It must come again.
There were no Cuckolds.
Well, wee had need pray to keep these
Devils from vs,
The times grow mischievous.
There he goes, Lord!
This is a sacrilege I have not heard of:
Would I were gilt, that I might not
Feel what follows.
And I too. You shall see within these
Few years a fine confusion in the country, mark it:
Nay, and we grow for to depose the Powers,
And set up Chastity again, well I ha done.
A fine new Goddess certainly, whose blessings
Are hunger and hard beds.
This comes of fulness, a sin too frequent with vs;
I believe now we shall find shorter commons.
Would I were married, some what has some savour
The race of Gentry will quite run out now,
Tic only left to husbands: if younger sisters
Take not the greater charity tic lawful.
Well, let come what will come,
I am but one, and as the plague falls,
Isle shape my self: If women will be honest, Isle be
Sound, if the god be not too unmerciful,
Isle take a little still where I can get it,
And thank him, and say nothing.
This ill wind yet may blow the City good,
And let them (if they can) get their own children,
They have hung long enough in doubt: but howsoe∣for, the old way was the surer, then they had'em.
Farewell my Lords, Isle even take up what
Rent I can before the day, I fear the year will fall out ill.
Weal with you Sir: And Love so favour vs,
As we are still thy servants. Come my Lords,
Lets to the Duke, and tell him to what folly
His doting now has brought him.
Come my children, let your feet,
In an even Measure meet:
And your cheerful voices rise,
For to present this Sacrifice
Lo great Cupped, in whose name,
I his Priest begin the same.
Young men take your Loves and kiss,
Thus our Cupped honoured is.
Kiss again, and in your kissing,
Let no promises be missing:
Nor let any May den here,
Dare to turn away her ear,
Unto the whisper of her Love,
But give Bracelet, Ring, or Glove,
As a token to her sweating,
Of an after secret meeting:
Now boy sing, to st•cke our hearts
Fuller of great Cupids darts.
Lovers rejoice, your pains shall be rewarded,
The god of love himself grieves at your crying;
No more shall frozen honour be rewarded,
Nor the coy faces of a maid denying.
No more shall Virgins sigh, and say we dare not,
For men are false, and what they doe they care not.
All shall be well again, then doe not grieve,
Men shall be true, and women shall believe.
Lovers rejoice, what you shall say henceforth,
When you have caught your Sweet-hearts in your arms,
It shall be accounted Oracle, and worth:
No more faint-hearted Girls shall dream of harms,
And cry they are too young: the god hath said,
Fifteen shall make a Mother of a Maid:
Then wise men, pull your Roses yet vnblowne,
Love hates the too ripe fruit that falls alone.
No more of this: here break your Rights for ever
The Duke commands it so; Priest doe not stare,
I must deface your temple, though unwilling,
And your god Cupped here must make a Scarcrow
For any thing I know, or at the best,
A dorne a Chimney-peece.
O Sacrilege unheard of!
This will not help it, take down the Images
And away with'em.
Priest change your coat you had best, all service now
Is given to men: prayers aboue their hearing
Will prove but bablings; learn to lye, and thrive,
Twill prove your best profession: for the gods,
He that lives by'em now, must be a beggar.
There's better holiness on earth they say,
Pray God it ask not greater sacrifice. Go home,
And if your god be not deaf as well as blind,
He will some smoke for it.
Sir —
Gentlemen there is no talking,
This must be done, and speedily;
I have Commission that I must not break.
We are gone, to wonder what shall follow.
On to the next Temple.
Am I then scorned? is my all-doing will
And power, that knows no limit, nor admits none,
Now looked into by less then gods? and weakened
Am I, whose Bow struck terror through the earth,
No less then Thunder, and in this, exceeding
Even gods themselves; whose knees before my Altars
Now shook off; and contemd by such, whose lives
Are but my recreation! anger rise,
My sufferance and my self are made the subject
Of sins against vs. Go thou out displeasure,
Displeasure of a great god, flying thy self
Through all this Kingdom: so we what ever evils
Proud flesh is taking of, amongst these Rebels;
And on the first heart that despise my Greatness,
Lay a strange miscry, that all may know
Cupids revenge is mighty; with his arrow,
Hotter then plagues or mine own anger, will I
Now Nobly right my self: nor shall the prayers
Nor sweet smokes on my Altars hold my hand,
Till I have left this a most wretched Land,
Cleophila, what was he that went hence?
Means your Grace now?
I mean that handsome man,
That something more then man I met at door.
Here was no handsome man.
Come, hoe's some one
You would preserve in private, but you want
Cunning to doe it, and my eyes are sharper
Then yours, and can with one neglecting glance,
See all the graces of a man. Who was it?
That went hence now?
That went hence now: I he.
Faith here was no such one as your Grace thinks,
Zoylus your Brothers Dwarf went out but now.
I think it was he: how bravely he past by:
Is he not grown a goodly Gentleman?
A goodly Gentleman Madame?
He is the most deformed fellow in the Land.
O blasphemy! he may perhaps to thee
Appear deformed, for he is indeed
Unlike a man: his shape and colours are
Beyond the Art of Painting; he is like
Nothing that we have seen, yet doth resemble
Apollo, as I oft have fancied him,
When rising from his bed he stirs himself,
And shakes day from his hair.
He resembles Apollos Recorder.
Cleophila, go send a page for him,
And thou shalt see thy error, and repent.
Alas what doe I feel, my blood rebels,
And I am one of those I used to scorn,
My mayden-thoughts are fled against my self,
I harbour Traitors in my Virginity,
That from my child-hood kept me company,
Is heavier then I can endure to bear:
Forgive me Cupped, for thou art a god,
And I a wretched creature; I have sinned,
But be thou merciful, and grant that yet
I may enjoy what thou wilt have me, Love.
Zoylus is here Madame.
Hoe's there indeed.
Now be thine own Judge; see thou worse then mad,
Is he deformed? look upon those eyes,
That let all pleasure out into the world,
Unhappy that they cannot see themselves.
Look on his hair, that like so many beams,
Streaking the East, sure light ore half the world.
Look on him all together, who is made
As if two Natures had contention
About their skill, and one had brought forth him.
Ha, ha, ha: Madame, though Nature
Hath not given me so much
As others in my outward show;
I bear a heart as loyal unto you
In this unsightly body (which you please
To make your mirth) as many others doe
That are far more be friended in their births:
Yet I could wish my self much more deformed
Then yet I am, so I might make your Grace
More merry then you are, ha, ha, ha.
Beshrew me then if I be merry;
But I am content whilst thou art with me:
Thou that art my Saint,
By hope of whose mild favour I doe live
To tell thee so: I pray thee scorn me not;
Alas, what can it add unto thy worth
To triumph over me, that am a Maid?
Without deceit, whose heart does guide her tongue,
Drowned in my passions, yet I will take leave.
To call it reason that I door on thee.
The Princess is besides her Grace I think,
To talk thus with a fellow that will hardly
Serve in the dark when one is drunk.
What answer wilt thou give me?
If it pleafe your Grace to jest on, I can abide it.
If it be jest, not to esteem my life,
Compared with thee: If it be jest in me,
To hang a thousand kisses in an hour
Upon those lips, and take 'em off again:
If it be jest for me to marry thee,
And take obedience on me whilst I live:
Then all I say is jest:
For every part of this, I swear by those
That see my thoughts, I am resolved to doe.
And I beseech thee, by thine own white hand,
(Which pardon me, that I am bold to kiss
With so unworthy lips) that thou wilt swear
To marry me, as I doe here to thee,
Before the face of heaven.
Marry you! ha, ha, ha.
Kill me or grant: wilt thou not speak at all?
Why I will doe your will for ever.
I ask no more: but let me kiss that mouth
That is so merciful, that is my will:
Next, go with me before the King in hast,
That is my will, where I will make our Peers
Know, that thou art their better.
Ha, ha, ha, that is fine, ha, ha, ha.
Madam, what means your Grace?
Consider for the love of heaven to what
You run madly; will you take this Viper
Into your bed?
Away, hold off thy hands:
Strike her sweet Zoylous, for it is my will,
Which thou hast sworn to doe.
Away for shame
Know you no manners: ha, ha, ha.
Thou know none I fear,
This is just Cupids Anger, Uenus look down mildly on vs: And command thy Son to spare this Lady once, and let me be in love with all: and none in love with me.
Is your Lordship for the wars this summer?
Timantus wilt thou go with me?
If I had a company my Lord
Of Fiddlers: Thou a Company?
No, no, keep thy company at home, &amp; cause cuckolds,
The wars will hurt thy face, theres no semsters,
Shoemakers, nor Taylors, nor almon milked morning,
Nor poacht eggs to keep your worship soluble,
No man to warm your shirt, and blow your roses:
Nor none to reverence your round lace breeches:
If thou wilt needs go, and go thus,
Get a case for thy Captain-ship, a shower will spoil thee else. Thus much for thee.
Your Lordships wondrous witty, very plea∣sant, believe it.
No news yet my Son?
Sir, there be divers out in search:
No doubt theyl bring the truth where hee is,
Or the occasion that led him hence.
They have good eyes then.
The Gods go with them:
Who be those that wait there?
The Lord Ismenus, your General, for his dispatch.
On•ph•n Wee have no use to employ your
Virtue in our war: now the province is well settled:
Hear you ought of the Marquis?
No Sir,
Tic strange hee should be gone thus:
This 5. days hee was not seen.
Isle hold my life, I could bolt him in an hour:
Wher's my Daughter?
About the purging of the Temples, Sir.
Shees chaste and virtuous; Fetch her to me,
And tell her I am pleased to grant her now
Her last request, without repenting me.
Be it what it will: she is wise Dorialus,
And will not press me farther then a Father.
I pray the best may follow: yet if your grace
Had taken the opinions of your people,
At least of such, whose wisdoms ever wake
About your safety, I may say it Sir,
Under your noble pardon: that this change
Either had been more honour to the Gods,
Or I think not at all. Sir the princess.
O my Daughter, my health!
And did I say my soul, I lyde not;
Thou art so near me, speak, and have what ever
Thy wise will leads thee too: had I a Heaven,
It were too poor a place for such a goodness.
Whats here?
An Apes skin stuffed I think, tic so plump.
Sir, you have past your word,
Still be a prince, and hold you to it.
Wonder not I press you, my life lies in your word,
If you break that, you have broke my hart, I must ask
Thats my shame, and your will must not deny me:
Now for Heaven be not for sworn.
By the Gods I will not,
I cannot, were there no other power,
Then my love called to a witness of it.
They have much reason to trust,
You have for sworn one of em out oath country already.
Then this is my request: This Gent:
Bee not ashamed, Sir:
You are worth a Kingdom.
In what?
In way of marriage.
How?
In way of Marriage, it must be so.
Your Oath is tide to heaven: as my love to him,
I know thou doest but try my Age,
Come ask again.
If I should ask all my life time, this is all still.
Sir I am serious, I must have this worthy man with∣out enquyring why; and suddenly, and freely:
Doe not look for reason or obedience in my words:
My Love admits no wisdom:
Only hast, and hope hangs on my fury.
Speak Sir, speak, but not as a Father,
I am deaf and dull to counsel: my inflamed blood
Hears nothing but my will,
For Gods sake speak.
Here is a brave alteration.
This comes of Chastity.
Will not you speak Sir?
The God begins his vengeance; what a sweet youth he has sent vs here, with a pudding ins belly?
O let me never speak,
Or with my words let me speak out my life;
Thou power abused great Love, whose vengeance now we feel and fear, have mercy on this Land.
How does your Grace?
Sick, very sick I hope.
Gods comfort you.
Will not you speak? Is this your royal word?
Doe not pull perjury upon your soul.
Sir, you are old, and near your punishment; re∣member.
Away base woman.
Then be no more my Father, but a plague,
I am bound to pray against: bee any sin
May force me to despair, and hang my self,
Bee thy name never more remembered King
But in example of a broken Faith,
And cursed even to forgetfulness:
May thy Land bring forth such Monsters as thy daughter is?
I am weary of my rage. I pray forgive me,
And let me have him, will you Noble Sir?
Mercy, mercy heaven:
Thou heir of all dishonour, shame thou not to draw
This little moisture left for life, thus rudely from me?
Carry that Slave to death.
For Heavens sake Sir, it is no fault of mine,
That she will love me.
To death with him, I say.
Then make hast Tyrant, or Isle be for him;
This is the way to Hell.
Hold fast, I charge you away with him.
Alas old man, Death hath more doors thē one,
And will meet him.
Dorialus, Pray see her in her Chamber,
And lay a guard about her:
The greatest curse the Gods lay on our frailties,
Is will and disobedience in our Issues,
Which wee beget as well as them to plague vs,
With our fond loves; Beasts you are only blessed
That have that happy dullness to forget
What you have made, your young ones grieve not you
They wander where they list, and have their ways
Without dishonour to you; and their ends,
Fall on em without sorrow of their parents,
Or after ill remembrance: Oh this Woman
Would I had made my self a Sepulchre,
When I made her: Nephew where is the prince?
Pray God hee have not more part of her baseness
Then of her blood about him,
Gent: where is hee?
I know not Sir.
Has his ways by him self, is too wise for my com∣panie.
I doe not like this hiding of him self,
From such society as his person:
Some of it ye needs must know.
I am sure not I: nor have known twice this ten days, which if I were as proud as some of em I should take scurvily, but hee is a young man:
Let him have his swinge, twill make him.
Theres some good matter now in hand:
How the slave gears and grins: the Duke is pleased.
Theres a new pair of Scarlet Hose now, and as much
Money to spare, as will fetch the old from pawn, a Hat and a Cloak to go out to morrow:
Garters and stockings come by nature.
Bee sure of this.
I durst not speak else Sir.
Leucippus thou art shot through with a shaft
That will not rankle long, yet sharpe enough
To sow a world of helpless misery
In this happy Kingdom, doest thou think
Because thou art a prince, to make a part
Against my power, but it is all the fault
Of thy old Father, who believes his Age
Is cold enough to quench my burning Darts,
But hee shall know ere long, that my smart loose,
Can thaw Ice, and inflame the witherd hart,
Of Nestor, thou thy self art lightly stroke,
But his mad love, shall publish that the rage
Of Cupped, has the power to conquer Age.
Why, whats the matter?
Have you got the spoil
You thirsted for. O tyranny of men! Lenc. I pray thee leave.
Your envy is Heaven knows,
Beyond the reach of all our feeble Sex:
What pain alas could it have been to you,
If I had kept mine honour? you might still
Have been a prince, and still this Countries Heir,
That innocent Guard, which I till now had kept,
For my defence, my virtue, did it seem
So dangerous in a State, that your self came to suppress it.
Dry thine eyes again, Isle kiss thy tears away,
This is but follic, tic past all help.
Now you have won the treasure,
Tic my request that you would leave me thus:
And never see these empty walls again,
I know you will doe so, and well you may:
For there is nothing in em thats worth
A glance, I loath my self, and am become
Another woman; One me thinks with whom
I want acquaintance.
If I doe offend thee; I can be gone,
And though I love thy sight, so highly do I prize thine own content, that I will leave thee.
Nay, you may stay now;
You should have gone before: I know not now
Why I should fear you: All I should have kept.
Is stolen: Nor is it in the power of man
To rob me farther: if you can invent
Spare not; No naked man fears robbing less
Then you doe: now you may for ever stay.
Why, I could doe thee farther wrong.
You have a deeper reach in evil then I:
Tic past my thought.
And past my will to act: but trust me I could doe it.
Good Sir doe, that I may know there is a
Wrong beyond what you have done me.
I could tell the world what thou hast done.
Yes you may tell the world
And doe you think I am so vain to hope
You will not: you can tell the world but this,
That I am a widow, full of tears in show,
My Husband dead: And one that loved me so
Hardly, a week forgot my modesty,
And caught with youth and greatness,
Gave my self to live in sin with you:
This you may tell: And this I doe deserve.
Why doest thou think me so base to tell?
These limbs of mine shall part
From one another on a wrack,
Ere I disclose; But thou doest utter words
That much asflict me: you did seem as ready
Sweet Bash as my self.
You are right a man: when they have witched vs into misery, poor innocent souls,
They lay the fault on vs:
But bee it so- For prince Leucippus sake
I will bear anything.
Come weepeno more.
I wrought thee to it, it was my fault:
Nay, see if thou wilt leave? Here, take this pearl,
Kiss me sweet Bash, and receiuet this purse.
What should I doe with these? they will not deck my mind.
Why keep em to remember me.
I must be gone, I have been absent long:
I know the Duke my Father is in rage,
But I will see thee suddenly again.
Farewell my Bash.
Gods keep you: Do you hear Sir: pray give me a point to wear.
Alas good Bash, take one, I pray thee where thou wilt.
Coming from you: This point is of as high Esteem with me, as all pearl and gold: nothing but good bee ever with or near you.
Fare thee well mine own good Bash;
I will make all haste.
Just as you are a Dozen I esteem you:
No more, does he think I would prostitute
My self for love: it was the love of these pearls
And gold that wanne me, I confess
I lust more after him then anyother,
And would at any rate if I had store,
Purchase his fellowship: but being poor,
Isle both enjoy his body and his purse,
And hee a Prince, ne'er think my self the worse.
Nay, you must back and show vs what it is,
That witches you out of your Honour thus.
Whose that?
Look there Sir.
Lady, never fly you are betrayed.
Leave me my tears a while,
And to my just rage give a little place:
What saucy man are you, that without leave,
Enter upon a Widows mournful house?
You hinder a dead man from many tears.
Who did deserve more then the world can shed,
Though they should weep themselves to Images:
If not for of me, yet of your self
A way, for you can bring no comfort to me.
But you may carry hence, you know not what.
Nay sorrow is infectious.
Thou thy self
Art grown infectious: would thou know my name?
I am the Duke, father to this young man
Whom thou corruptst.
Has he then told him all.
You doe her wrong Sir.
O he has not told. Sir I beseech you pardon
My wild tongue, directed by a weak distempord head, matted with grief: Alas I did not know
You were my Sovereign; but now you may
Command my poor unworthy life,
Which will be none I hope ere long.
All thy dissembling will never hide thy shame:
And were not more respecting Woman-hood in
General, then any thing in thee, thou should
Be made such an example, that posterity,
When they would speak most bitterly, should say,
Thou art as impudent as Bash was.
Sir, though you be my King, whom I will
Serve in all just causes: yet when wrongfully
You seek to take mine Honour, I will rise
Thus and defy you; for it is a Jewel
Dearer then you can give, which whilst I keep,
(Though in this lowly house) I shall esteem
My self aboue the Princes of the earth
That are without it. If the Prince your son,
Whom you accuse me with, know how to speak
Dishonour of me, if he doe not doe it,
The plagues of hell light on him, may he never
Govern this Kingdom: here I challenge him
Before the face of heaven, my Liege, and these,
To speak the worst he can: if he will lye,
To lose a women's fame, Isle say he is
Like you (I think I cannot call him worse.)
Hoe's dead, that with his life would have defended
My reputation, and I forced to play
(That which I am) the foolish woman,
And use my liberal tongue.
Is it possible! we men are children in our
Carriages, compared with women: wake thy self
For shame, and leave not her whose honour thou
Should keep safe as thine own, alone to free her self:
But I am pressed I know not how, with guilt,
And feel my conscience (never used to lye)
Loath to allow my tongue to add a lye
To that too much I did: but it is lawful
To defend her, that only for my love loved evil.
Tell me, why did you
stay here so long?
If I can urge ought from me but a truth, hell
Take me.
Whats the matter, why speak you not?
Alas good Sir, forbear
To urge the Prince, you see his shamefastness.
What does he say Sir? if you be a Prince
Show it, and tell the truth.
If you have lain with her tell your Father,
No doubt he has done as ill before now:
The Gentlewoman will be proud ont.
For Gods sake speak.
Have you done prating yet?
Who prates?
Thou know I do not speak to thee Ismenus:
But what said you Time. concerning my shamefastness?
Nothing I hope that might displease your
Highness.
If any of thy great, Great-grandmothers
This thousand years, had been as chaste as she,
It would have made thee honester. I stayed
To hear what you would say: she is by heaven
Of the most strict and blameless chastity
That ever woman was: (good gods forgive me)
Had Tarquin met with her, she had been kilt
With a Slave by her ere she had agreed:
I lye with her! would I might perish then.
Our Mothers, whom we all must reverence,
Could ne'er exceed her for her chastity,
Upon my soul: for by this light shoe's
A most obstinate modest creature.
What did you with her then so long Leucip?
Isle tell you Sir: You see shoe's beautiful.
I see it well.
Moved by her face,
I came with lustful thoughts,
Which was a fault in me:
But telling ttuth, something more pardonable,
(And for the world I will not lye to you:)
Proud of my self, I thought a Princes name
Had power to blow'em down flat of their backs;
But here I found a Rock not to be shook:
For as I hope for good Sir, all the battery
That I could lay to her, or of my person,
My greatness, or gold, could nothing move her.
Tic very strange, being so young and fair.
Shoe's almost thirty Sir.
How doe you know her age so just?
She told it me her self
Once when she went about to show by reason
I should leave wooing her.
She staines the ripest Virgins of the age.
If I had sinned with her, I would be loath
To publish her disgrace: but by my life
I would have told it you, because I think
You would have pardond me the rather:
And I will tell you father: By this light Sir,
(But that I never will bestow my self
But to your liking) it she now would have me,
I now would marry her.
How's that Leucippus!
Sir, will you pardon me one fault, which yet
I have not done, but had a will to doe, and I will tel it?
Be it what it will, I pardon thee.
I offered marriage to her.
Did she refuse it?
With that earnestness, and almost scorn
To think of any other after her lost Mate, that she
Made me think my self unworthy of her.
You have stayed too long Leucippus.
Yes Sir, forgive me heaven, what multitudes
Of oaths have I bestowed on lies, and yet they were officious lies, there was no malice in 'em.
She is the fairest creature that ever I beheld;
And then so chaste, tic wonderful! the more I look
On her, the more I am amazed.
I have long thought of a wife, and one I would have
Had, but that I was afraid to meet a woman
That might abuse my age: but here she is
Whom I may trust too; of a chastity
Impregnable, and approved so by my son:
The means of her birth will still preserve her
In due obedience; and her beauty is
Of force enough to pull me back to youth.
My son once sent away, whose riuall-shippe
I have just cause to fear, if power, or gold,
Or wit, can win her to me, she is mine.
Nephew Ismenus, I have new intelligence,
Your Province is unquiet still.
Ime glad ont.
And so dangerously, that I must send the
Pirnce in person with you.
Ime glad of that too: Sir will you dispatch
Vs, we shall wither here for ever.
You shall be dispacht within this hour,
Leucippus, never wonder nor ask, it must be thus.
Lady I ask your pardon, whose virtue I have
Slubberd with my tongue, and you shall ever be
Chaste in my memory hereafter;
But we old men often dote: to make amends for
My great fault, receive that Ring:
Ime sorry for your grief, may it soon leave you.
Come my Lords lets go.
Heaven bless your Grace.
One that had but so much modesty left, as to blush,
Or shrink a little at his first encounter,
Had been undone; where I come off with honour,
And gain too: they that never would be tracked
In any course, by the most subtle sense,
Must bear it through with frontlets impudence.
Gentlemen, this is a strange piece of Justice,
To put the wretched Dwarf to death because
She doted on him; Is she not a woman, and
Subject to those mad figures her whole Sex
Is infected with? Had she loved you, or you, or I,
Or all on's, (as indeed the more the merrier still
With them) must we therefore have our heads par'd
With a Hatchet? So she may love all the Nobility
Out ath Duke dome in a month, and let the raskals in.
You will not, or you doe not see the need
That makes this just to the world?
I cannot tell, I would be loath to feel it:
But the best is, she loves not proper men, we three
Were in wise cases else: but make me know this need.
Why yes: Hee being taken away, this base incontinence dyes presently, and she must see her shame and sorrow for it.
Pray God she doe: but was the Sprat behea∣ded, or did they swing him about like a chicken, and so break his neck.
Yes, he was beheaded, and a solemn justice made of it.
That might have been deducted.
Why how would you have had him did?
Faith I would have had him roasted like a war∣den in a browne paper, and no more talk ont: or a teather stuck in's head, like a Quail: or a hanged him in a Dog-coller: what should hee be beheaded? wee shall have it grow so base shortly, Gentlemen will be out of love with it.
I wonder from whence this of the Dwarfs first sprung?
From an old lecherous pair of breeches that lay upon a wench to keep her warm: for cer∣tainely they are no mans work: and I am sure a Mon∣key would get one of the guard to this fellow, he was no bigger then a small Portmantu, and much about that making, if t'ad legs.
But Gentlemen, what say you to the Prince?
I, concerning his being sent I know not whither.
Why then hee will come home I know not when: you shall pardon me, Isle talk no more of this subject, but say gods be with him where ere he is, and send him well home again: For why, hee is gone, or when he will return, let them know that directed him: Only this, there's mad Moriscoes in the state; but what they are, Isle tell you when I know. Come, lets go, hear all, and say nothing.
Content.
Timantus, is the Duke ready yet?
Almost.
What ails him?
Faith I know not, I think he has dreamt he's but eighteen: has been worse since he sent you forth for the frizling-yron.
That cannot be, he lay in Gloves all night, and this morning I brought him a new Periwig with a locke at it, and knocked up a swinge in's chamber.
O but since, his Taylor came, and they have fallen out about the fashion on's clothes: and yon∣ders a fellow come, has board a hole in's ear; and he has bespoke a Vauting-horse, you shall see him come forth presently: hee looks like Winter, stuck here and there with fresh flowers.
Will he not Tilt think you?
I think he will.
What does he mean to doe?
I know not: but by this light I think hee is in love; he would ha bin shau'd but for me.
In love, with whom?
I could guess, but you shall pardon me: hee will take me along with him some whither.
I ouer-heard him ask your opinion of some bodies beauty.
Yes, there it goes that makes him so youth∣full, and has laid by his Crutch, and halts now with a leading staff.
Timantus.
Sir.
This Feather is not large enough.
Yes faith, tic such a one as the rest of the young
Gallants wear.
Telamon, does it doe well?
Sir, it becomes you, or you become it, the rareliest —
Away, dost think so?
Think sir? I know it. Sir, the Princess is past all hope of life since the Dwarf was put to death.
Let her be so, I have other matters in hand: but this same Taylor angers me, he has made my doublet so wide: and see, the knave has put no points at my arm.
Those will be put too quickly Sir, upon any occasion.
Telamon, have you bid this Dancer come a mornings?
Yes Sir.
Timantus, let me see the glass again: look you how careless you are grown, is this tooth well put in?
Which Sir?
This Sir.
It shall be.
Me thinks that tooth should put him in mind on's years: and Timantus stands as if (seeing the Duke in such a youthful habit) he were looking in's mouth how old he were.
So, foe.
Will you have your Gown sir?
My Gown? why, am I sick? bring me my Sword.
Let a couple of the great horses be brought out for vs.
Heel kill himself. Why, will you ride sir?
Ride? Doft thou think I cannot ride?
O yes sir, I know it: but as I conceive your journey, you would have it private; and then you were better take a Coach.
These Coaches make me sick: yet tic no matter, let it be so.
Sir, heere's your sword.
O well sed: let me see it, I could me thinks. Why Telamon, bring me another: what, think thou I will wear a sword in vain?
He has not strenghth enough to draw it, a yoke of Fleas tide to a hair would have drawn it. Tic out sir now, the Scabbert is broke.
O put it up again, and on with it; me thinks I am not dressed till I feel my sword on.
Telamon, if any of my counsel ask for me,
Say I am gone to take the ayre.
He has not been dressed this twenty years then, If this vain hold but a week, hee will learn to play oath base viol and sing too't: Hes poetical already; For I have spied a Sonnet once making lye by's beds side, Isle be so unmannerly to read it.
Hes dead, hes dead, and I am following.
Ask Cupped mercy Madame.
O my hart!
Help! stir her:
ô, ô.
Shees going, wretched women that wee are:
Look to her, and Isle pray the while.
Why Madam?
Cupped pardon what is past,
And forgive our sins at last,
Then we will be coy no more,
But thy Deity Adore,
Troths at fifteen wee will plight,
And will tread a Dance each night,
In the Fields, or by the Fire,
With the youths that have desire.
How does she yet?
O ill:
Given Eare-rings we will wear,
Bracelets of our Lovers hair,
Which they on our Arms shall twist,
With their Names carved on wrist,
All the Money that wee owe,
Wee in Tokens will bestow:
And learn to write, that when tic sent,
Only our Loves know what it meant:
O then pardon what is past,
And forgive our sins at last.
What, Minds she?
Nothing, you do it not want only, you should sing
Leave, leave, tic now too late:
Why She is dead:
Her last is breathed.
What shall wedoe.
Go run,
And tell the Duke; And whilst Isle close her eyes.
Thus I shut thy faded light,
And put it in eternal night.
Where is she can boldly say
Though she be as fresh as May:
She shall not by this Corps be laid,
Ere to morrows light doe fade.
Let vs all now living bee,
Warned by thy strict Chastity.
And marry all fast as we can,
Till then we keep a piece of man,
Wrongfully from them that owe it
Soon may every Maid bestow it.
Who is it?
Forsooth theres a gallant Coach at the door,
And the brave old man int, that you said was the Duke.
Cupped grant hee may be taken.
Hee is coming up, and looks the swag∣geriugst, &amp; has such glorious clothes. Bac: Let all the house see me sad, and see all handsome.
Nay widow fly not back, we come not now to chide, stand up and bid me welcome.
To a poor widows house that knows no end
Of her ill fortune: your Highness is most welcome.
Come kiss me then, this is but manners wid∣dow: Ne'er fling your head aside, I have more cause of grief then you: my Daughters dead: but what? Tic nothing, is the rough French horse brought to the door? They say he is a high gore, I shall soon try his mettle.
Hee will be sir, and the gray Barberry, they are fiery both.
They are the better: Before the gods I am lightsome, very lightsome: How doest thou like me Widow?
As a person in whom all graces are,
Come, Come, ye flatter: Isle clap your cheek for that, and you shall not be angry.
Hast no Music? Now could I cut three times with ease, and doe a cross point, should shame all your gallants.
I doe believe you, and your self too: Lord what a fine old Zany my Love has made him? Is' mine, I am sure: Heaven make me thankful for him.
Tell me how old thou art, my pretty sweet heart?
Your Grace will not buy her, she may trip Sir?
My sorrow shows me Elder then I am by many years?
Thou art so witty I must kiss again.
In deed her Age lies not in her mouth: ne'er look it there Sir she has a better register, if it be not burnt.
I will kiss thee, I am a fire Timanthus.
Can you choose Sir, having such heavenly Fire before you?
Widow, guess why I come, I prithee doe.
I cannot Sir, unless you bee pleased to make a mirth out of my rudeness: and that I hope your pit∣tie will not let ye, the subject is so barren: Bite King Bite, Isle let you play a while.
Now as I am an honest man, Isle tell thee true∣lie, how many foot did I jump yesterday Timanthus?
Fourteen of your own, &amp; some three fingers.
This Fellow lies as lightly, as if hee were in cut Taffeta.
Alas good Almanac get thee to Bed, and tell what weather wee shall have to morrow.
Widow I am come in short to be a Suitor.
For whom?
Why by my troth, I come to woo thee wench: And win thee for my self: Nay, look upon me: I have about me that will doe it.
Now Heaven defend me, your whore shall never: I thank the Gods, I have a little left me to keep me warm, and honest: if your grace take not that, I seek no more.
I am so far from taking any thing, Isle add unto thee.
Such Additions may bee for your ease Sir, Not my honesty: I am well in being single, good Sir seek another, I am no meat for money.
Shall I fight for thee?
This Sword shall cut his throat, that dares lay claim
But to a Finger of thee, but to a look, I would
See such a fellow.
It would bee but a cold sight to you:
This is the father of S. George a foote-backe,
Can such dry Mumming talk.
Before the gods, your grace looks like AEncaes.
Hee looks like his old father upon his back,
Crying to get Aboard.
How shall I win thy love, I pray thee tell me?
Isle marry thee if thou desire that: That is an honest
Course, I am in good earnest, and presently within this hour, I am mad for thee: prithee deny me not,
For as I live Isle pine thee, but Isle have thee.
Now hes in the Toil, isle hold him fast.
You doe not know what tic to be a Queen,
Go to your Maid, else what the old man falls short of, theres others can each out, when you please to call on em.
I understand you not, Love I adore thee,
Sir, on my knees I give you hearty thanks, for so much
Honouring your humble Handmaid aboue her birth:
Far more her weak deservings. I dare-not trust the
Enuiou: tongues of all that must rapine at my vnwor∣thy rising.
Beside, you have many fair ones in your kingdom
Borne to such worth: ô turn your self about
And make a Noble choice.
If I doe, let me famish: I will have thee,
Or break up house, and board here.
Sir, you may command an unwilling woman to obey vee: but heaven knows —
No more: these half a dozen kisses, and this Jewel, and every thing I have, and away with me, and clap it up; and have a boy by the morning Timan∣tus. Let one be sent post for my son again: and for Ismenus, they are scarce twenty mile on their way yet, by that time weal be married.
There shall Sir.
Is not this a fine marriage?
Yes, yes, let it alone.
I, I, the King may marry whom's list, lets talk of other matters.
Is the Prince coming home certainly?
Yes, yes, hee was sent post for yesterday, lets make haste, weal see how his new Mother-in-law will entertain him.
Why well I warrant you: did you not mark how humbly she carried her self to vs on her marriage day, acknowledging her own unworthiness, and
that she would be our servant.
But mark whats done. Nis. regard not show
O God! I knew her when I have been offred her to be brought to my bed for five pound: whether it could have been performed or no, I know not.
Her daughters a pretty Lady.
Yes: and having had but mean bringing up, it talks the pretlest and innocentlest, the Queen will be so angry to hear her betray her breeding by her lan∣gauge: but I am persuaded shoe's well disposed.
I think better then her mother.
Come, we stay too long.
How now man, struck dead with a tale?
No, but with a truth.
Stand of your self: can you endure blows, and shrink at words?
Thou know I have told thee all.
But that ell's nothing to make you thus: your
Sisters dead.
Thats much, but not the most.
Why, for the other let her marry and hang, tic no purposed fault of yours: and if your father will needs have your cast whore, you shall show the duty of a child better in being contented, and bidding much good doe his good old heart with her, then in ripening thus at it: let her go: what, there are more wenches man, weal have another.
O thou art vain, thou know I do not love her:
What shall I doe? I would my tongue had led me
To any other thing, but Blasphemy,
So I had mist commending of this woman,
Whom I must reverence now, she is my mother;
My finn Ismenus has wrought all this ill:
And I beseech thee, to be warned by me,
And doe not lye, if any man should ask thee
But How thou dost, or, What a clock tic now,
Be sure thou doe not lye, make no excuse
For him that is most near thee: never let
The most officious falsehood scope thy tongue,
For they aboue (that are entirely truth)
Will make that seed, which thou hait fowne
Of lies, yield miseries a thousand sold
Upon thine head, as they have done of mine.
Sir, your Highness is welcome home, the Duke and Queen will presently come forth to you.
Isle weight on them.
Worthy Ismenus, I pray how have you sped in your wars?
This Rogue mocks me. Well Timantus, 'pray how have you sped here at home at shouelboord?
Faith reasonable. How many Towns have you taken in this Summer?
How many Stags have you been at the death of this grass?
A number. 'pray how is the province settled?
Prithee how does the dunne Nag?
I think you mock me my Lord.
Mock thee? Yes by my troth doe I: why what would thou have me doe with thee? Art good for any thing else?
My good Ismenus, hold me by the wrist:
And if thou see me fainting, wring me hard,
For I shall soon again else —
Welcome my son; rise, I did send for thee
Back from the Province, by thy Mothers counsel,
Thy good Mother here, who loves thee well:
She would not let me venture all my Joy
Amongst my enemies: I thank thee for her,
And none but thee, I took her on thy word.
Pinch harder.
And she shall bid thee welcome: I have now
Some near affairs, but I will drink a Health
To thee a non: Come Telamon, Ime grown
Lustier, I thank thee for it, since I married;
I can stand now alone, why Telamon,
And never stagger.
Welcome most noble sir, whose fame is come
Hither before you: out alas you scorn me,
And teach me what to doe.
No, you are my Mother.
Far unworthy of that name God knows:
But trust me, here before these Lords,
I am no more but Nurse unto the Duke;
Nor will I breed a faction in the State,
It is too much for me that I am raised
Unto his bed, and will remain the servant
Of you that did it.
Madame I will serve you
As shall become me. O dissembling woman!
Whom I must reverence though Take from thy
Quiver, suer-aymd Apollo, one of thy swift darts,
Headed with thy consuming golden beams,
And let it melt this body into mist,
That none may find it.
Shall I beg my Lords
This Room in private for the Prince and me?
What will she say now?
I must still enjoy him:
Yet there is still left in me a spark of woman,
That wishes hee would move it, but he stands,
As if hee grew there with his eyes on earth,
Sir, you and I when we were last together
Kept not this distance as we were afraid
Of blasting by our selves.
Madame tic true, Heaven pardon it.
Amen Sir.
You may think that I have done you wrong in this strange marriage,
Tic past now.
But it was no fault of mine:
The world had called me mad, had I refused
The King: nor laid I any train to catch him,
It was your own Oaths did it.
Tic a truth: that takes my sleep away, but
Would to Heaven, if it had so been pleased, you had
Refused him, though I had gratifide that curtsy
With having you my self: But since tic thus,
I doe beseech you that you will bee honest
From henceforth, and not abuse his credulous Age,
Which you may easily doe. As for my self
What I can say you know alas too well
Is tide within me, here it will sit like lead,
But shall offend no other, it will pluck me
Back from my entrance into any mirth,
As if a servant came, and whispered with me
Of some Friends death, but I will bear my self,
To you, with all the due obedience
A son owes to a Mother: more then this,
Is not in me, but I must leave the rest to the
Just gods: who in their blessed time,
When they have given me punishment enough,
For my rash sin, will mercifully find
As unexpected means to ease my grief
As they did now to bring it.
Grown so godly: this must not bee. And
I will be to you, no other then a natural Mother ought:
And for my honesty, so you will swear
Never to urge me, I shall keep it safe from any other.
Bless me I should urge you?
Nay but swear then that I may be at peace,
For I doe feel a weakness in my self,
That can deny you nothing, if you tempt me,
I shall embrace finn as it were a friend, and run to meet it
If you know how far
It were from me, you would not urge an Oath,
But for your satistaction, when I tempt you.
Swear not: I cannot move him, this sad talk
Of things past help, does not become vs well.
Shall I send one for my Musicians and weal dance?
Dance Madame.
Yes, Alaualta.
I cannot dance Madam.
Then lets be merry
I am as my Fortunes bid me.
Doe not you see me sour?
Yes.
And why think you I smile?
I am so far from any joy my self,
I cannot fancy a cause of mirth.
He tell you, we are alone:
Alone. Bac. Yes.
Tic true, what then?
What then? you make my smiling now
Break into laughter: what think you is to be don then?
We should pray to Heaven for mercy.
Pray, that were a way indeed
To pass the time, but I will make you blush,
To see a bashful woman teach a man
What wee should doe alone, try again
If you can find it out.
I dare not think I understand you.
I must teach you then; Come, kiss me.
Kiss you?
Yes, be not ashamed:
You did it not your self, I will forgive you.
Keep you displeased gods, the due respect
I ought to bear unto this wicked woman,
As she is now my Mother, Hast within me,
Least I add sins to sins, till no repentance will cure me.
Leave these melancholy moods,
That I may swear thee welcome on thy lips
A thousand times.
Pray leave this wicked talk,
You doe not know to what my Fathers wrong
May urge me.
I me careless, and doe weigh
The world, my life, and all my after hopes
Nothing without thy Love, mistake me not:
Thy Love, as I have had it, free and open
As wedlock is, within it self, what say you?
No-thing.
Pity me, behold a Duchess
Kneels for thy mercy, and I swear to you,
Though I should iye with you, it is no Lust,
For it desires no change, I could with you
Content my self: what answer will you give?
They that can answer must be less amazed,
Then I am now: you see my tears deliver
My meaning to you.
Shall I be contemd? thou art a beast, worse thē a savage beast,
To let a Lady kneel, to beg that thing
Which a right man would offer.
Tic your will Heaven: but let me bear me like
My self, how ever she does.
Were you made an Eunuch, since you went hēce? yet they have more desire then I can find in you:
How fond was I to beg thy love? He force thee to my will
Doest thou not know that I can make the King
Dote as my list? yield quickly, or by Heaven
Isle have thee kept in prison for my purpose,
Where I will make thee serve my turn, and have thee fed
With such meates as best shall sit my ends
And not thy health, why doest not speak to me?
And when thou doest displease me, and art grown
Less able to perform; then I will have thee
Killed and forgotten: Are you stricken dumb?
All you have named, but making of me sin
With you, you may command, but never that;
Say what you will, Isle hear you as becomes me,
If you speak, I will not follow your counsel,
Neither will I tell the world to your disgrace,
But give you the just honour
That is due from me to my Fathers wife.
Lord how full of wise formality you are grown
Of late: but you were telling me
You could have wished that I had married you,
If you will swear so yet, Isle make away the King.
You are a strumpet.
Nay, I care not
For all your Railings: They will Batter walls
And take in Towns, as soon as trouble me
Tell him, I care not, I shall undo you only, which is no matter.
I appeal to you still, and for ever, that are
And cannot be other, Madame I see tic in your power
To work your will on him: And I desire you
To lay what trains you will for my wished death,
But suffer him to find his quiet grave
In peace; Alas he never did you wrong,
And further I beseech you pardon me,
For the ill word I gave you, for how ever
You may deserve, it became not me
To call you so, but passion urges me
I know not whether my heart break now, &amp; ease me ever.
Pray you get you hence
With your goodly humour, I am weary of you extremely.
Trust me, so am I of my self too:
Madame, Isle take my leave; gods set all right.
A men, Sir get you gone;
Am I denied? it does not trouble me
That I have moved, but that I am refused:
I have lost my patience: I will make him know
Lust is not Love, for Lust will find a mate
While there are men, and so will I: &amp; more
Then one, or twenty: yonder is Timantus,
A fellow void of any worth, to raise himselse
And therefore like to catch at any evil
That will but pluck him up, him will I make
Mine own: Timantus.
Madam?
Thou know well
Thou were, by chance a means of this my raising:
Brought the Duke to me, and though it were but chase
I must reward thee.
I shall bend my service unto your Highness.
But doe it then entirely, and in every thing,
And'tell me, Could thou now think that thing
Thou would not doe for me?
Noc by my soul Madam.
Then thou art right.
Go to my Lodging, and Isle follow thee
With my instruction I doe see already,
This prin ce that did but now contemn me, dead:
Yet will I never speak an evil word
Unto his Father of him till I have wonnc
A belief I love him, but Isle make
His virtues his undoing, and my praises
Shall be so many swords against his breast,
Which once performed, Isle make Urania
My Daughter, the Kings heir, and plant my Issue,
In this large Throne: Nor shall it bee withstood,
They that begin in Lust, must end in blood.
Wee live to know a fine time, Gentle.
And a fine Duke, that through his doting age
Suffers him to be a child again
Under his Wives tuition.
All the Land holds in that tenor too: in wo∣mans service? sure we shall learn to spin.
No, thats too honest: we shall have other
Liberal Sciences taught vs too soon;
Lying, and Flattering, those are the studies now:
And Murder shortly I know, will be humanity Gent.
If we live here we must be knaves, believe it.
I cannot tell my Lord Dorialus, though my
Own nature hate it, if all determine to be knaves,
Isle try what I can doe upon my self, thats certain,
I will not have my throat cut for my goodness,
The virtue will not quit the pain.
But pray you tell me,
Why is the Prince, now ripe and full experient,
Not made a door in the State?
Because he is honest.
Goodness attend your Honours.
You must not be amongst vs then.
The Duchess, whose humble Servant I am proved to be, would speak with you.
Sir we are pleased to wait: when is it?
An hour hence my good Lords, and so I leave my service.
This is one of her Ferrets that she bolts bu∣sinesse out withal: this fellow, if hee were well ripped, has all the linings of a knave within him: how sly he looks?
Have we nothing about our clothes that he may catch at?
Of my conscience there's no treason in my doublet, if there bee, my elboes will discover it, they are out.
Faith, and all the harm that I can find in mine is, that they are not paid for, let him make what
he can of that, so he discharge that. Come, lets go.
And you shall find sir what a blessing heaven gave you in such a son.
Pray gods I may. Lets walk &amp; change out subject.
O sir, can any thing come sweeter to you, or strike a deeper joy into your heart then your sons virtue?
I allow his virtues: but tic not handsome thus to feed my self with such moderate praises of mine own.
The subject of our commendations is it self grown so infinite in goodness, that all the glory wee can lay upon it, though we should open volumes of his praises, is a mere modesty in his expression, and shows him lame still, like an ill wrought piece wan∣ting proportion.
Yet still he is a man, and subject still to more inordinate vices, then our love can give him blessing.
Else hee were a god: yet so near as he is, hee comes to heaven, that we may see so far as flesh can point vs things only worthy them, and only these in all his actions.
This is too much my Queen.
Had the gods loved me, that my unworthy womb had bred this brave man.
Still you run wrong.
A would have lived upon the comfort of him, fed on his growing hopes.
This touches me.
I know no friends, nor being, but his virtues.
You have laid out words enough vpō a subject.
But words cannot express him sir: why what a shape Heaven has conceived him in, oh Nature made him up!
I wonder Duchess.
So you must: for less then admiration loses this god-like man.
Have you done with him?
Done with? ô good gods what frailties this pass by vs without reverence!
I see no such perfection.
O dear Sir: you are a father, and those i oyes
To you speak in your heart, not in your tongue.
This leaves a taste behind it worse then physic.
Then for all his wisdom, valour,
Good Fortune, and all those Friends of honour,
They are in him as free and natural as passions
In a Woman.
You make me blush at all these years
To see how blindly you have flung your praises
Upon a Boy, a very child, and worthless,
Whilst I live of these Honours.
I would not have my love Sir: Make my tongue
Show me so much a woman: as to praise
Or dispraise, where my will is, without reason
Or general allowance of the people.
Allowance of the people, what allow they
Al, I have seed for truth, and they must doe it,
And dote upon him: love him, and admire him.
Howes that?
For in this youth and noble frowardness
All things are bound together that are kingly
A fitness to bear rule
No more
And sovereignty, not made to know command
I have sed no more.
I have done Sir though unwilling, and pardon me.
I doe, not a word more
I have gin thee poison
Of more infection then the Dragons tooth
Or the gross Ayre ore heated.
Timantus when saw you the prince?
I left him now Sir.
Tell me truly, out of your free opinion with∣out courting, How you like him:
How I like him?
Yes, for you in conversation may see more
then a Father.
It works.
Your grace has chosen out an ill observer.
Yes I mean of his Ill: you take rightly.
But you take me wrong: All I know by him
I dare deliver boldly: He is the store-house
And head of virtue: your great self excepted
That feeds the Kingdom.
These are flatteries: speak me his vices there you doe a service worth a Fathers thanks.
Sir, I cannot, If there bee any, sure they are the times which I could wish less dangerous. But pardon me, I am too bold.
You are not, forward and open what these dangers are.
Nay, good Sir.
Nay fall not off again,
I will have all.
Alas Sir, what am I, you should believe
My eyes or ears, so subtle to observe
Faults in a State, all my maine business
Is service to your Grace, and necessaries
For my poor life.
Doc not displease me Sirrah,
But that you know tell me, and presently.
Since your Grace will have it
Isle speak it freely: Always my obedience
And Love preserved unto the Prince.
Prithee to the matter.
For Sir if you consider
How like a Sun in all his great employments,
How full of heate.
Make me understand what I desire.
And then at his return
Doe not anger me.
Then thus Sir, All mislike ye,
As they would do the gods, if they did dwell with em.
What?
Talk and prate, as their ignoant rages
leads em, without Allegiance or Religion. For Heavens sake have a care of your own person, I cannot tell, their wickedness may lead Farther then I dare think yet.
O base people.
Yet the prince, for who this is pretended may
Perswadeem, &amp;c no doubt will, virtue is ever watchful
But be you still secured and comforted.
Heaven you have I offended, that this rod
So heavy and unnatural, should fall upon me
When I am old and helpless.
Brave Gentle: that such a matting love should sollow thee, to rob thee of a Father: All the Court is full of dangerous whispers.
I perceive it, and spite of all they, strengths will make my safety: Isle cut him shorter.
Isle cut him shorter first, then let him rule.
What a foul Age is this, when Virtue is
Made a sword to smite the virtuous? Alas, alas!
Isle teach him to fly lower.
By no means Sir, rather make more your love,
And hold your favour to him: for tic now
Impossible to yoke him, if his thoughts,
As I must ne'er believe, run with their rages,
Hee never was so innocent, but what reason
His grace has to with draw his love from me
And other good men that are neared your person
I cannot yet find out: I know my duty
Has ever been attending.
Tic too plain: He means to play the villain,
Isle prevent him, not a word more of this, be private.
Madame ti's done.
He cannot escape me. Have you spoken with the noble men?
Yes Madame they are here: I waite a fur∣there service.
Till yet be the prince, you need no more instructions.
No I have it.
That fool that willingly provokes a woman,
Has made him self another evil Angel,
And a new Hell, to which all other torments
Are but mere pastime: Now my Noble Lords
You must excuse me that unmannerly
Wee have broke your private business.
Your good grace may command vs, &amp; that.
Faith my Lord Agenor: Tic so good a cause
I am confident, you cannot loose by it.
Which way does she Fish now?
The Devil is but a Fool to a right woman.
Madame wee must needs win in doing
Service to such a gracious Lady.
I thank you, and will let you know the busi∣ness: So I may have your helps, never be doubtful,
For tic so just a cause, and will to you
Upon the knowledge, seem so honourable,
That I assure my self your willing harts
Will strait bee for me in it.
If she should prove good now, what were like?
Thunder in January, or a good woman,
Thats stranger then all Africa.
It shall not need your wonder, this it is;
The Duke you know is old, and rather subject
To ease and prayers now, then all those troubles,
Cares, and continual watchings, that attend
A Kingdoms safety, therefore to prevent
The fall of such a flourishing Estate
As this has ever been, and to put off
The murmur of the people that increase
Against my government, which the gods knows
I only feel the trouble of: I present
The prince unto your loves, a Gent.
In whom all Excellencies are knit together,
All pieces of a true man, let your prayers
Win from the Duke half his Vexation,
That he may undertake it, whose discretion
I must confess, though it be from the Father,
Yet now is stronger, and more apt to govern.
Tic not my own desire, but all the Lands
I know the weakness of it.
Madam, this noble care and love has won vs
For ever to your lives, weal to the King,
And since your Grace has put it in our mouths,
Weasel win him with the cunningest words we can.
I was never consent in a woman before,
For commonly they are like Apples: If once they bruise
They will grow rotten through, and serve for no∣thing but to assuage swellings.
Good Lords delay no time since tic your good
Pleasures to think my counsel good, &amp; by no means
Let the prince know it, whose affections
Will stir mainly against it; besides his Father,
May hold him dangerous, if it be not carried
So that his forward will apreare not in it,
Go, and be happy.
Well, I would not bee Chronikled as thou
Wilt be for a good woman, for all the world.
Madame, wee kiss your hands, and so inspire
Nothing but happiness can crown our prayers.
And thus she has used me, first not a good mother?
Why killed you her not?
The Gods forbid it.
S'light, if all the women ithe world were
Barren, she had died.
But tic not reason directs thee thus.
Then gave I none at all, for all I have in me
Directs me: Your Father's in a pretty Rage.
Why.
Nay, tic well, if hee know himself, but some of the Nobility have delivered a petition to him: whats int, I know not, but it has put him to his trumps: hee has taken a months time to answer it and chafes like himfelfe.
Hoe's here Ismenus.
Set me down Tellamon. Leucippus.
Sir.
Nay good sir bee at peace, I dare swear hee knew not of it.
You are foolish: peace.
All will go ill, deny it boldly sir, trust me he cannot prove it by you.
What!
You'll make all worse too with your facing it.
What is the matter!
Know thou that petition?
Look on it well: would thou be joined with me
(Unnatural child to be weary of me)
Ere Fate esteem me fit for other worlds.
May be he knows not of it.
O strange carriages!
Sir, As I have hope that there is any thing
To reward doing well, my usages
Which hane been (but tic no matter what)
Have put me so far from the thought of Greatness,
That I should welcome it like a disease
That grew upon me, and I could not cure.
They are my enemies that gave you this,
And yet they call me friend, and are themselves
I fear abused. I am weary of my life,
For Gods sake take it from me: it creates
More mischief in the State then it is worth.
The usage I have had, I know would make
Wisdom her self run frantic through the streets.
And Patience quarrel with her shadow.
Sir, this sword —
Alas: help for the love of heaven,
Make way through me first, for he is your father,
What, would he kill me?
No sir, no.
Thou always make the best ont: but I feare--
Why doe you use me thus? who first can think
That I would kill my father, that can yet
For bear to kill you? Here sir is my sword,
I dare not touch it, lest she say again
I would have kilt you: let me not have mercy
When I most need it, if I would not change
Place with my meanest servant. Let these faults
Be mended Madame: if you saw how ill
They did become you, you would part with them.
I told the Duke as much before.
What? what did you tell him?
That it was only an ambition,
Nursed in you by your youth, provoked you thus,
Which age would take away.
It was his doing then: come hither Love.
No indeed sir.
How am I made; that I can bear all this?
If any one had used a friend of mine ne'er this,
My hand had carried death about it.
Lead me hence Tellamon: come my dear
I shall find time for this.
Madame, you know I dare not speak before
The King; but you know well, if not I le tell it you,
You are the most wickedst, and most murderous
Strumpet that ever was called Woman.
My Lord, what I can do for him he shall com∣mand me.
I know thou art too kind; away I say.
Sir, I am sure we dream this cannot be.
O that we did my wickedness has brought
All this to pass, else I should bear my self.
Look, doe you see whose there? your ver∣tuous Mothers issue: kill her, yet take some little bid∣ling revenge.
Away, the whole Court calls her virtuous; for they say, she is unlike her mother and if so she can have no vice.
I le trust none of em that come of such a breed.
But I have found
A kind of love in her to me: alas,
Think of her death; I dare be sworn for her,
She is as free from any hate to me
As her bad mothers full. She was brought up
7th Country, as her tongue will let you know
If you but talk with her, with a poor Uncle,
Such as her mother had.
Shees come again.
I would fene speak to the good Marquess my brother, if I but thought he could abaid me.
Sister, how doe you.
Very well I thank you.
How does your good mother?
Fie, fie, Ismenus for shame, mock such an innocent soul as this.
Feth a she be no good, God may her so.
I know you wish it with your heart dear sister, but she is good I hope.
Are you so simple, to make so much of this,
Doe you not know,
That all her wicked mother labours for, is but to raise
Her to your right, and leave her this Duked ome.
I, but ne'er sir be afred;
For though she take th'vngainst weas she can,
Isle ne'er hat fro you.
I should hate my self Ismenus;
If I should think of her simplicity,
Ought but extremely well.
Nay as you will.
And though she be my Mother,
If she take any caurse to doe you wrong,
If I can feet, youst quickly hear ont sir:
And so Isle take my leave.
Farewell good Sister, I thank you.
You believe all this:
Yes;
A good faith doth well, but me thinks
It were no harde matter now, for her Mother to send
Her: yonder's one you may trust if you will too.
So I will, if he can show me as apparent signs
Of truth as she did; Does he weep Ismenus?
Yes, I think so: some goods happened I war∣rant; Doe you hear you? What honest man has escaped misery, that you are crying thus?
Noble Ismenus, wheres the Prince?
Why there; hast wept thine eyes out?
Sir, I beseech you hear me.
Well speak on.
Why will you hear him?
Yes Ismenus, why?
I would hear blasphemy as willingly.
You are to blame:
No Sir: Hee is not to blame;
If I were as I was.
Nor as thou art, y faith a whit to blame,
Whats your business?
Faith Sir, I am ashamed to speak before you,
My conscience tells me I have iniurd you,
And by the earnest instigation,
Of others have not done you to the King
All ways the best and friendliest offices,
Which pardon me, or I will never speak.
Never pardon him and silence a knave.
I pardon thee.
Your mother sure is nought
Why should thou think so?
O noble Sir, your honest eyes perceive not
The dangers you are led to shame upon her,
And what fell miseries the gods can think on
Show down upon her wicked head, she has plotted,
I know too well your death: would my poor life
Or thousand such as mine is might be offered
Like sacrifices up for your presuming,
What free oblations would she have to glut her,
But she is merciless, and bent to ruin,
If Heaven and good men steppe not to your reskue,
And timely, very timely, O this Duke dome!
I weep, I weep for the poor Orphans ith Country
Left with but Friends; or parents.
Now Ismenus, what think you of this fellow?
This was a lying knave, a flatterer,
Does not this love still show him so.
This love, this halter: if he prove not yet
The cunningest, ranckest Rogue that ever Canted,
Isle never see man again, I know him to bring,
And can interpret every new face he makes,
Look how he wrings like a good stool for a tear,
Take heed, Children and Fools
First feel the smart: Then weep.
A way, away, such an unkind distrust,
Is woes then a dissembling, if it be one,
And sooner leads to mischief I believe it,
And him an honest man: he could not carry
Under an evil cause so true a sorrow.
Take heed, this is your Mothers scorpion,
That carries stings even in his tears,
Whose soul is a rank poison through: Touch
Not at him, if you doe you are gone, if you had twenty
Lives: I knew him from a Roguish boy, when
Hee would poison Dogs, and keep tame Toads,
Hee lay with his Mother, and infected her, and now
She begs ith Hospital, with a patch of velvet,
Where her Nose stood: like the queen of spades.
And all her Teeth in her purse, the Devil and this
Fellow are so near, Tic not yet known which is the euiller Angel.
Nay then I see tic spite: Come hither friend. Hast thou not heard the cause yet that incēsd my mo∣there to my death, for I protest I feel none in my self?
Her will Sir, and ambition, as I think
Are the provokers of it as in women
Those two are ever powerful to destruction,
Beside a hate of your still growing virtues,
She being only wicked.
Heavens defend me as I am innocent,
And ever have bin from all immoderate thoughts and
Actions, that carry such rewards along with em.
Sir all I know, my duty must reveal
My country and my love command it from me,
For whom Isle lay my life down, this night coming.
A Counsel is appointed by the Duke,
To sit about your apprehension:
If you dare trust my faith: which by all good things
Shall ever watch about you: Go along,
And to a place Isle guide you: where no word,
Shall scope without your hearing, Nor, no plot.
Without discovering to you, which once known, you
have your answers and prevention.
You are not so mad to go; shift of this fellow, you shall bee ruled once by a wise man: rats bane get you gone, or —
Peace, peace for shame, thy love is too suspicious, tic away offered to preserve my life, and I will take it: be my Guide Timantus, and doe not mind this angry man, thou know him: I may live to requite thee.
Sir, this service is done for virtues sake, not for reward, how ever he may hold me.
The great pox on you: but thou hast that curse so much, twill grow a blessing in thee shortly. Sir, for wisdoms sake court not your death, I am your friend and subject, and I shall lose in both: if I loved you not, I would laugh at you, and see you run your neck into the noose, and cry a Woodcock.
So much of man, and so much fearful; fie, prithee have peace within thee: I shall live yet many a golden day to hold thee here dearest and nearest to me: Go on Timantus. I charge you by your love no more, no more.
Go, and let your own rod whip you:
I pity you, And dog, if he miscarry thou shalt pay fort,
Isle study for thy punishment, and it shall last
Longer and sharper then a tedious Winter,
Till thou blasphemst, and then thou die and dambst.
I wonder the Duchess comes not.
She has hard sir your will to speak with her:
But there is some thing leaden at her heart
(Pray God it be not mortal) that even keeps her
From conversation with her self.
O whither will ye me cross affections pull me?
Fortune, Fate, &amp; you whose powers direct our actions,
And dwell within vs: you that are Angels
Guiding to virtue, wherefore have you given
So strong a hand to cuill? wherefore suffered
A Temple of your own, you Deities
Where your fair selves dwelt only, &amp; your goodness
Thus to be soiled with sin?
Heaven bless vs all.
From whence coms this distemper? speak my fair one.
And have you none, love and obedience,
You ever faithful Servants to employ
In this strange story of impiety,
But me a Mother, Must I bee your strumpet?
To lay black treason upon and in him,
In whom all sweetness was: in whom my love
Was proud'de, to have a being, in whom Justice,
And all the gods for our imaginations
Can work into a man, were more then virtues,
Ambition down to Hell, where thou were fosterd
Thou hast poisoned the best soul, the purest, whitest,
And merest innocentst it self that ever
Men's greedy hopes gave life to.
This is still stranger: lay this treason,
Open to my correction.
O what a combat duty and affection
Breeds in my blood.
If thou concealst him may
Beside my death the curses of the Country,
Troubles of conscience, and a wretched end,
Bring thee unto a poor forgotten grave.
My being: for another tongue to tell it,
Cease, a mother! some good man that dares
Speak for his King and Country: I am full
Of too much women's pity: yet ô Heaven,
Since it concerns the safety of my sovereign
Let it not be a cruelty in me
Nor draw a Mothers name in question,
Amongst unborn people, to give up that man:
To law and Justice that vnrighteously
Has sought his sathers death: be dease, be dease Sir,
Your Son is the Offender, Now have you all,
Would I might never speak again.
My Son? Heaven help me.
No more I thought it: and since
His life is grown so dangerous: Let them that
Gave him, take him: Hee shall dye,
And with him all my fears.
O use your mercy: you have a brave subject
To bestow it on, Isle forgive him Sir: and for his
Wrong to me, Isle be before ye.
Durst his villainy extend to thee?
Nothing but heats of youth Sir.
Upon my life hee sought my Bed.
I must confess he loved me:
Somewhat beyond a Son, and still pursued it
With such a Lust: I will not say Ambition,
That clean sorgetting all obedience,
And only following his first heate unto me,
Hee hotly fought your death, and me in Marriage.
O Villain!
But I forget all: and am half ashamed
To press a man so far.
Where is the Duke? for Gods sake bring me to him.
Here I am; Each corner of the Dukedom
Sends new affrights forth: what would thou speak?
I cannot Sir, my fear ties up my tongue.
Why, whats the matter? Take thy courage
To thee; and boldly speak, where are the Guard?
In the Gods name, cut with it:
Treason, treason.
In whom?
Double the Guard.
There is a fellow Sir.
Leave shaking man.
It is not for fear, but wonder. Leon. Well.
There is a fellow Sir, close ith Lobby:
You other Guard, look to the door there.
But let me know the business.
O that the hearts of men should be so hardened
Against so good a Duke, for Gods sake Sir,
Seek means to save your self, This wretched slave
Has his sword in his hand, I know his heart:
Oh it hath almost killed me with the thought of it.
Where is hee?
The Lobby Sir, close in a corner:
Look to your selves, for Heavens sake,
Me thinks hee is here already.
Fellows of the Guard be valiant.
Go sirs, and apprehend him; Treason shall
Never dare me in mine own Gates.
Tic done.
And thou shalt find it to thy best content.
Are these the comforts of my Age?
Their happy that end their days Contented
With a little, and live aloof from dangers, to a King
Every content doth a new; peril bring.
O let me live no longer, shame of Nature,
Bastard to Honour: Traitor, Murderer,
Devil in a humane shape, A way with him,
Hee shall not breath his hot infection here.
Sir hear me.
Am I or hee your Duke? away with im
To a close prison: your Highness now shall know,
Such branches must be cropped before they grow,
What ever Fortune comes, I bid it welcome,
My innocence is my Armour: Gods preserve you.
Fare thee well. I shall never see so brave a Gētl:
Would I could weep out his offences.
Or I would weeepe out mine eyes.
Come Gentlemen, weal determine presently
About his death: wee cannot be too forward in our
Safety: I am very sick, lead me unto my Bed.
Sirrah, go fetch my Fox from the Cutlers: Theres money for the scouring: Tell him, I stop a Groat since the last great Muster: Hee had in store Pitch for the bruise. He took with the Recoiling of his Gun.
Yes Sir.
And doe you hear? when you come, Take down my Buckler, and sweep the Copwebs off: and Grind the pick out, and fetch a Nail or two: and Tack on bracers: your Mistress made a potlid ont, I thank her at her Maids wedding, and burnt off the Handle.
I will Sir.
Whose within here, hoe Neighbour, not stirring yet?
O God morrow, god morrow: what
News, what news?
It holds, he dyes this morning.
Then happy man be his fortune, I am resolude,
And so am I, and 40. more good fellows
That will not give their heads for the washing, I take it.
Sfoote man, who would not hang in such Good company, and such a cause? A Fire a Wife and Children, Tic such a Jest that men should look be∣hind em to the world: And let their honours, their honours Neighbour slip.
Isle give thee a pint of Bastard and a roll For that bare word,
They say that we Taylors, are things that
Lay one another, and our Geese hatche vs: Isle make some of um feel they are Goof ath game then,
Ifack take down my Bill, tic ten to one I use it, Take a
Good heart man, all the low ward is ours, with a wet
Finger.
And lay my Cut-fingred Gantlet ready for me,
That that I used to work in, when the Gentle: were
Up against vs, a beaten out of town, and almost out a
Debt to, for a plague on um, they never paid well since,
And take heed sirrah: your mistress hears not of this
Business, shees near her time: yet if she doe,
I care not, she may long for Rebellion,
For she has a devilish spirit,
Come, lets call up the new Ircmonger, is as
Tough as steel, &amp; has a fine wit in these resurrections:
Are you stirring Neighbour?
O Good morrow Neighbours,
Isle come to you presently.
Go too, this is his Mothers doing: shees a Polecat.
As any is in the world.
Then say I have hit it, and a vengeance on her, let her be what she will.
Amen say I, she has brought things to a fine pass with her wisdom, doe you mark it?
One thing I am sure she has, the good old Duke she gives him pap again they say, and dandles him, and hangs a corrall and bells about his neck, and makes him believe his teeth will come again; which if they did, and I he, I would worry her as never cur was worried: I would neighbour till my teeth met I know where, but thats counsel.
Good morrow neighbours: hear you the sad news?
Yes, would we knew as well how to prevent it.
I cannot tell, me thinks it were no great matter, if men were men: but —
You do not twit me with my calling neighbor?
No surely: for I know your spirit to be tall, pray be not vexed.
Pray forward with your counsel:
I am what I am, and they that prove me, shall find me to their cost: do you mark me neighbour, to their cost I say.
Nay look how soon you are angry.
They shall neighbours: yes, I say they shall.
I doe believe they shall.
I know they shall.
Whether you doe or no I care not two-pence,
I am no beast, I know mine own strength neighbours;
God bless the King, your companies is fair.
Nay neighbour now ye err, I must tell you so and ye were twenty neighbours,
You had best go peach, doe, peach.
Peach, I scorn the motion.
Doe, and see what follows: Isle spend an hun∣dred pound, and be two I care not, but Isle undo thee.
Peach, ô disgrace: peach in thy face, and doe the worst thou can: I am a true man, and a free-man peach!
Nay look, you will spoil all.
Peach!
Whilst you two brawl together, the Prince will lose his life.
Come, give me your hand, I love you well, are you for the action.
Yes: but peach provokes me, tic a cold fruit,
I feel it cold in my stomach still.
No more, Isle give you cake to digest it.
Shut up my shop, and bee ready at a call boys, and one of you run over my old tucke with a few ashes, tic grown odious with tosting cheese: and burn a little giniper in my murrin, the maid made it her chamber-pot, an hour hence Isle come again; and as you here from me, send me a clean shirt.
The Chandler by the wharf, and it be thy will.
Gossip good morrow.
O good morrow Gossip: good morrow all, I see wee of one mind you cleave so close together: come tic time, I have prepared a hundred if they stand.
Tic well done: shall we sever, and about it?
First lets to the Tavern, and a pynt a piece will make vs Dragons.
I will have no mercy, come what will of it.
If my tucke hold Isle spit the Guard like Larks with sage between em.
I have a foolish bil to reckon with em, will make some of their hearts ache, and Isle lay it on: now shall I fight, twill doe you good to see me.
Come Isle do something for the Town to talk of when I am rotten: pray God there bee enough to kill, thats all.
How black the day begins!
Can you blame it, and look upon such a deed as shall be done this morning?
Does the Prince suffer to day?
Within this hour they say.
Well, they that are most wicked are most safe: twill be a strange Justice and a lamentable, gods keep vs from the too soon feeling of it.
I care not if my throat were next: for to live still, and live here, were but to grow fat for the Shambles.
Yet we must doe it, and thank em too, that our lives may be accepted.
Faith Isle go starve my self, or grow diseased to shame the hangman; for I am sure hee shall be my Herald, and quarter me.
I a plague on him, hoe's too excellent at annes.
Will you go see this sad sight my Lord Agenor?
Isle make a mourner.
If I could doe him any good I would go, The bare sight else will but afflict my spirit, my prayers shall be as near him as your eyes: As you find him settled, remember my love and ser∣vice to his Grace.
We will weep for joy sir, farewell.
Farewell to all our happiness, a long farewell.
Thou angry power, whether of heaven or hell,
That layst this sharpe correction on our Kingdom
For our offences, infinite and mighty,
O hear me, and at length be pleased, be pleased
With pity to draw back thy vengeance,
Too heavy for our weakness; and accept,
(Since it is your discretion, heavenly Wisdoms,
To have it so) this sacrifice for all,
That now is flying to your happiness,
Only for you most fit: let all our sins suffer in him.
Gods, whats the matter! I hope tic joy.
How now my Lords?
Isle tell you with that little breath I have;
More joy then you dare think, The Prince is safe from
Danger.
How!
Tic true, and thus it was; His hour was come
To lose his life, he ready for the stroke,
Nobly, and full of Saint-like patience,
Went with his Guard: which when the people saw,
Compassion first went out, mingled with tears,
That bred desires, and whispers to each other,
To doe some worthy kindness for the Prince.
And ere they understood well how to doe,
Fury stepped in, and taught them what to doe,
Thrusting on every hand to rescue him,
As a white innocent: then flew the roar
Through all the streets, of Save him, save him, save him;
And as they cried, they did for catching up
Such sudden weapons as their madness show them.
In short, they beat the Guard, &amp; took him from em,
And now march with him like a royal Army.
Heaven, heaven I thank thee,
What a slave was I to have my hand so far from
This brave rescue, 'tad been a thing to brag on
When I was old. Shall we run for a wager to the
Next Temple and give thanks?
As fast as wishes.
Good friends go home again, there's not a man shall go with me.
Will you not take revenge? I le call them on.
All that love me depart:
I thank you, and will serve you for your loves:
But I will thank you more to suffer me
To govern em once: more, I doe beg ye,
For my sake to your houses.
Gods preserve you.
And what house will you go too?
Ismenus I will take the wariest courses that I can think of to defend my self, but not offend.
You may kill your mother, and never offend your father an honest man.
Thou know I can scope now, thats all I look for: Isle leave.
Time. a pox take him, would I had him here, I would kill him at his own weapon single sides wee
have built enough on him: plague ont, Ime out of all patience: discharge such an Army as this, that would have followed you without paying, ô gods!
To what end should keep em? I am free.
Yes, free of the Traitors, for you are proclay∣med one.
Should I therefore make my selse one?
This is one of your moral Philosophy is it?
Heaven bless me from subtilties to undo my self with;
But I know if, reason her self were here,
She would not part with her own safety.
Well, pardon Ismenus, for I know
My courses are most just; nor will I stain em
With one bad action: for thy self, thou know,
That though I may command thee, I shall be
A ready servant to thee if thou need: and so Isle
Take my leave.
of whom?
Of thee.
Heart, you shall take no leave of me.
Shall I not?
No by the gods shall you not: nay if you have no more wit but to go obsolutely alone, Isle bee in a little.
Nay prithee good Ismenus part with me.
I wonnoty faith, never move it any more; for by this good light I wonnot.
This is an ill time to be thus unruly:
Ismenus you must leave me.
Yes if you can beat me away: else, the gods resuse me if I will leave you till I see more reason; you sha'nt undo your self.
But why wilt not leave me?
Why Isle tell you, Because when you are gone, then — life, if I have not forgot my reason— heel take me: you put me out of patience so: O!
marry when you are gone, then will your Mother: a pox confound her, she never comes in my head but she spoils my memory to: there are a hūdred reasons.
But show me one.
Show you, what a stir here is, why I will show you: Doe you think; well, well, I know what I know, I pray come, come. Tic in vain: but I am sure. Devils take em, what doe I meddle with em? You know your self. Soul, I think I am: is there any man ith world? as if you knew not this already better then I. Pish, pish, I le give no reason.
But I will tell thee one why thou should stay:
I have not one friend in the Court but thou,
On whom I may be bold to trust to send me
Any intelligence: and if thou love me
Thou wilt doe this, thou need not fear to stay,
For there are new-come Proclamations out;
Where all are pardoned but my self.
Tic true, and in the same Proclamation your fine sister Vrania, whom you used so kindly, is pre∣claimed heir apparent to the Crown.
What though, thou may stay at home with∣out danger.
Danger, hang danger, what tell you me of danger?
Why if thou wilt not do it, I think thou dare not.
I dare not: if you speak it in earnest, you are a boy.
Well fir, if you dare, let me see you do it.
Why so you shall, I will stay.
Why God a mercy.
You know I love you but too well.
Now take these few directions: farewell, send to me by the wariest ways thou can: I have a soul tells me we shall meet often. The gods protect thee.
Pox o'me self for an Ass, I me crying now, God be with you, if I never see you again: why then pray get you gone, for grief and anger wonnot let me know what I say. Isle to the Court as fast as I can, and see the new heir apparent.
What hast thou sound him?
Madame he is coming in.
Gods bless my brother where so ere he is:
And I be seech you keep me fro the bed
Of any naughty Tyrant whom my mother
Would ha me have to wrong him.
What would her new Grace have with me?
Leave vs a while. My Lord Ismenus,
I pray for the love of heaven and God,
That you would tell me one thing, which I know
You can doe weal.
Wheres her fine Grace?
You know me weel enough, but that you mock,
I am she my sen.
God bless him that shall bee thy husband, if thou worst breeches thus soon, thoult bee as im∣pudent as thy mother.
But will you tell me this one thing?
What first? if it be no great matter whether I doe or no, perhaps I will.
Yes faith tic matter.
And what first?
I pray you let we know whaire the Prince my brother is.
I faith you shan be hanged first, is your mother so foolish to think yonr good Grace can sift it out of me?
If you have any mercy left i'you to a poor wench tell me.
Why would not thou have thy brains beat out for this, to follow thy mothers steps so young?
But believe me, she knows none of this.
Believe you? why do you think I never had wits? or that I am run out of them? how should it belong to you to know, If I could tell?
Why I will tell you: and if I speak false
Let the Devil ha me, Yonders a bad man,
Come from a Tayrant to my mother, and what name
They ha for him, good faith I cannot tell.
An Ambassador.
Thats it: but he would carry me away,
And have me marry his Master; and Isle day
Ere I will ha him.
But whats this to knowing where the Prince is?
Yes, for you know all my mother does:
Again the Prince is but to ma me great.
Pray, I know that too well, what ten?
Why I would go to the good Marquess my
Brother, and put my self into his hands, that so
He may preserve himself.
O that thou had no seed of thy Mother in thee, and could mean this now.
Why feth I do, would I might ne'er stir more if I doe not.
I shall prove a ridiculous fool, Isle be damned else: hang me if I doe not half believe thee.
By my troth you may.
By my troth I doe: I know Ime an Ass fort,
But I cannot help it.
And won you tell me then?
Yes faith will I, or any thing else ith world, for
I think thou art as good a creature as ever was borne.
But ail go i'this ladst reparrell:
But you mun help me to Silver.
Help thee: why the Pox take him that will not help thee to any thing ith world; Isle help thee to Money, and Isle do it presently to, and yet soul, If you should play the scurvy Harlotry little pocky baggage now and cousin me, what then?
Why, an I do, would I might ne'er see day again.
Nay by this light I do not think thou wilt:
Isle presently provide thee money and a letter.
I but Isle ne'er deliver it.
When I have found my Brother, I will beg
To serve him; but he shall never know who I am;
For he must hate me then for my bad mother:
Isle say I am a country Lad that want a service,
And have streid on him by chance, lest he discover me;
I know I must not live long, but that taime
I ha to spend, shall be in serving him.
And though my Mother seek to take his life away,
In ai day my brother shall be taught that I was
Ever good, though she were nought.
Run away, the devil be her guide.
Faith shees gone: theres a Letter I found it in her pocket, would I were with her, shees a handsome Lady, a plague upon my bashfulness, I had bobbed her longagoe else.
What a base Whore is this, that after all
My ways for her advancement, should so poorly make virtue her undoer, and choose this time,
The King being deadly sick: and I intending
A present marriage with some foreign Prince,
To strengthen and secure my self. She writes here
Like a wise Gentle woman; She will not stay:
And the example of her dear brother, makes her
Fear her self, to whom she means to fly.
Why, who can help it?
Now poverty and Lechery which is thy end, rot thee, where ere to goosed with all thy goodness.
Byr'lady theyle bruise her: and she wear a brass. I am sure theyle break stone walls: I hane had experience of them both, and they have made me desperate: but theres a Messenger Madam come from the Prince with a Letter to Ismenus, who by him re∣turns an answer.
This comes as pat as wishes: thou shalt pre∣sently away Timantus.
Whither Madame?
To the Prince, and take the Messenger for guide.
What shall I doe there? I have done too much mischief to be believed again, or indeed, to scope with my head on my back if I be once known.
Thou art a weak shallow fool: get thee a disguise, and withal, when thou come before him, have a Letter faind to deliver him; and then, as thou hast ever hope of goodness by me, or after me, strike one home stroke that shall not need another: dare thou speak, dare thou? if thou fal'st off, go bee a Rogue a again, and lye and Pander to procure thy meat: dare thou speak to me.
Sure I shall never walk when I am dead. I have no spirit Madame, Isle bee drunk but Isle doe it, thats all my refuge.
Away, no more, then Isle raise an Army whilst the King yet lives, if all the means and power I have can doe it I cannot tell.
Are you inventing still? weal ease your studies.
Why how now saucy Lords?
Nay Isle shake ye, yes devil, I will shake ye.
Doe not you know me Lords?
Yes deadly sin we know ye, would we did not.
Doe you hear Whore, a plague a God upon thee, the Duke is dead.
Dead!
I, wild-fire and brimstone take thee: good man hee is dead, and past those miseries which thou, salt infection-like, like a disease, flungst upon his head. Doft thou hear, and it were not more respect in Wo∣man-hood in general then thee, because I had a Mo∣there, who I will not say she was good, she lived so near thy time, I would have thee in vengeance of this man, whose peace is made in heaven by this time, tide to a post, and dryde ith sun, and after carried about and shone at fairs for money, with a long sto∣rye of the devil thy father that taught thee to be who∣rich, envious, bloody.
Ha, ha, ha.
You flooring harlot, Isle have a horse to leap thee, and thy base issue shall carry Sumpters. Come Lords, bring her along, weal to the Prince all, where her hell-hood shall waite his censure; and if he spare thee she Goat, may he lye with thee again; and be∣side, may thou upon him some nestle soul dis∣ease that hate still follows, and his end, a dry ditch. Lead you corrupted whore, or Isle draw god shall make you skip: away to the Prince.
Ha, ha, ha, I hope yet I shall come too late to find him.
Alas poor boy, why dost thou follow me?
What can thou hope for? I am poor as thou art.
In good feth I shall be weell and rich enough
If you will love me, and not put me from you.
Why dost thou choose out me boy to undo thee?
Alas, for pity take another Master,
That may be able to deserve thy love
In breeding thee hereafter: me thou know not
More then my misery: and therefore can not
Look for rewards at my hands: would I were able,
My pretty knave, to doe thee any kindness: truly
Good boy, I would upon my faith thy harmelesle
Innocence moos me at heart, wilt thou go
Save thy self, why doest thou weep? Alas I doe not chide thee.
I cannot tell if I go from you, Sir I shall ne'er dawn day more: Pray if you can I will bee true To you: Let me waite on you: If I were a man, I would fight for you: Sure you have some ill-willers, I would slay um.
Such harmless souls are ever Prophets, well I take thy wish, thou shalt be with me still: But pri∣thee eat, then my good Boy: Thou wilt die my child If thou fasts one day more. This four days thou hast tasted nothing: Go into the Cave and eat: Thou shalt find something for thee, to bring thy blood a∣gen, and thy fair colour.
I can not eat God thank you,
But Isle eat to morrow.
Thow't bee dead by that time.
I should be well then, for you will not love me.
Indeed I will. This is the prettiest passion that ere I felt yet: why dost you look so earnestly upon me?
You have fair eyes Master.
Sure the Boy dotes: why dost thou sigh my child?
To think that such a fine man should live, and no gay Lady love him.
Thou wilt love me?
Yes sure till I dye, and when I am in heaven Isle even wish for you.
And Isle come to thee Boy. This is a love I never yet heard tell of: come, thou art sleepy child, go in; and Isle sit with thee: heaven what portends this?
You are sad, but I am not sleepy, would I could doe ought to make you merry: shall I sing?
If thou wilt good Boy.
Alas my boy, that thou should comfort me, and art far worse then I:
Law Master, theres one, look to your sen.
What art thou, that in this dismal place,
Which nothing could find out but misery,
Thus boldly stepped? Comfort was never here,
Here is nor food, nor beds, nor any house
Built by a better Architect then beasts;
And ere you get dwelling from one of them,
You must fight for it: if you conquer him,
He is your meat; if not, you must be his.
I come to you (for if I not mistake, you are the Prince) from that most Noble Lord Ismenus with a Letter.
Alas, I fear I shall be discovered now.
Now I feel my self the poorest of all mortal things.
Where is he that reciues such courtesies,
But he has means to show his gratefulness
Some way or other? I have none at all:
I know not how to speak so much as well
Of thee but to these trees.
His Letters speak him sir —
Gods keep me but fro knowing him till I dye: aye me, sure I cannot live a day, ô thou foul Traitor: How doe you Master?
How dost thou my child? alas, look on his, it may make thee repentant, to behold those innocent drops that thou hast drawn from thence.
Tic nothing sir and you be well.
O pardon me, know you me now sir?
How could thou find me out?
We intercepted a Letter from Ismenus, and
the bearer directed me.
Stand up Timantus boldly,
The world conceives that thou art guilty
Of divers treasons to the State and me:
But ô far be it from the innocence
Of a just man to give a traitor death
Without a trial: here thy Country is not
To purge thee or condemn thee; therefore
A nobler trial then thou dost deserve,
Rather then none at all, here I accuse thee
Before the face of heaven, to be a traitor
Both to the Duke my father and to me, and the
Whole Land: speak, is it so or no?
Tic true sir, pardon me.
Take heed Timantus how thou dost cast away thy self, I must proceed to execution hastily if thou confess it: speak once again, first so or no?
I am not guilty sir.
Gods and thy sword acquit thee, here it is.
I will not use any violence against your Highness.
At thy peril then, for this must be thy trial: and from hence forth look to thy self.
I doe beseech you sir let me not fight.
Up, up again Timantus,
There is no way but this believe me.
Now if — Fie, fie Timantus, is there no
Usage can recover thee from baseness? were thou
Longer to converse with men, I would have chidde
Thee for this: be all thy faults for given.
O spare me sir, I am not fit for death.
I think thou art not; yet trust me, fitter then
for life: Yet tell me ere my breath be gone, know of any other plots against me?
Of none.
What course would thou have taken when thou had kilt me?
I would hane tan your Page, and married her.
What Page?
Your boy there. — Dyes.
Is he fallen mad in death, what does he mean?
Some good God help me at the worst: how dost thou?
Let not thy misery vex me, thou shalt have
What thy poor heart can wish: I am a Prince.
And I will keep thee in the gayest clothes,
And the finest things, that ever pretty boy had given him.
I know you well enough,
Feth I am dying, and now you know all too.
But stir up thy self; look what a Jewel here is,
See how it glisters: what a pretty show
Will this make in thy little ear? ha, speak,
Eat but a bit, and take it.
Doe you not know me?
I prithee mind thy health: why thats well said my good boy, smile still.
I shall smile till death an I see you.
I am Vrania your sister-in-law.
How!
I am Vrania.
Dullness did cease me, now I know thee well;
Alas why came thou hither?
Feth for love, I would not let you know till I was dying; for you could not love me, my Mother was so nought.
I will love thee, or any thing: what? wilt
Thou leave me as soon as I know thee?
Speak one word to me: alas shees past it,
She will ne'er speak more.
What noise is that? it is no matter who
Comes on me now. What worse then mad are you
That seek out sorrows? if you love delights
Be gone from hence.
Sir, for you we come, as Soldiers to revenge the wrongs you have suffered under this naughty Creature: what shall bee done with her? say, I am ready.
Leave her to heaven brave Cousin, they shall tell her how she has sind against em, my hand shall no∣for be stained with such base blood: live wicked Mo∣there, that reverent title bee your pardon, for I will use no extremity against you, but leave you to heaven.
Hell take you all, if there be a place
Of torment that exceeds that, get you thither:
And till the devils have you, may your lives
Be one continued plague, and such a one,
That knows no friends nor ending.
May all ages that shall succeed curse you as I doe:
And if it be possible, I ask it heaven,
That your base issues may be ever Monsters,
That must for shame of nature and succession,
Be drowned like dogs
Would I had breath to please you.
Would you had love within you, and such
Grief as might become a Mother: look you there,
Know you that face, that was Vrania:
These are the fruits of those unhappy Mothers,
That labour with such horrid byrths as you doe:
If you can weep, theres cause; poor innocent,
Your wickedness has kilt her: Isle weep for you.
Monstrous woman,
Mars would weep at this, and yet she cannot.
Here lies your Minion too, slain by my hand,
I will not say you are the cause: yet certain,
I know you were too blame, the Gods forgive you.
See, she stands as if she were inventing
Some new destruction for the world.
Ismenus, thou art welcome yet to my sad com∣panie.
I come to make you somewhat sadder sir.
You cannot, I am at the height already.
Your Fathers dead.
I thought so, heaven be with him: ô woman, woman, weep now or never, thou hast made more sorrows then we have eyes to utter.
Now let heaven fall, I am at the worst of evils, a thing so miserable wretched, that every thing, the last of humane comforts hath left me: I will not bee so base and cold, to live and wait the mercies of these men I hate: no, tic just I dye, since Fortune hath left me my step descent attends me: hand, strike thou home, I have soul enough to guide; and let all know, as I stood a Queen, the same Isle fall, and one with me.
Ho.
How doe you sir?
Nearer my health, then I think any here, my tongue begins to falter: what is man? or who would be one, when he sees a poor weak woman can in an instant make him none.
She is dead already.
Let her be damned already as she is: post all for Surgeants.
Let not a man stir, for I am but dead:
I have some few words which I wold have you heart,
And am afraid I shall want breath to speak em:
First to you my Lords, You know Ismenus is
Undoubtedly heir of Licia, I doe beseech you all,
When I am dead to show your duties to him.
We vow to do it.
I thank you.
Next to you Cousin Ismenus, that shall be the Duke,
I pray you let the broken Image of Cupped
Be reedified, I know all this is done by him.
It shall be so.
Last, I beseech you that my Mother-in-Law may have a burial acording to — Dyes.
To what sir?
There is a full point.
I will interpret for him; she shall have burial according to her own deserts, with dogs.
I would your Majesty would haste for settling of the people.
I am ready.
Agenor, go and let the Trumpets sound
Some mournful thing, whilst we convey the body
Of this unhappy Prince unto the Court,
And of that virtuous Virgin to a grave:
But drag her to a ditch, where let her lye
Accursed, whilst one man has a memory.
The time now of my Revenge draws near;
Nor shall it lessen, as I am a god,
With all the cries and prayers that have been;
And those that be to come, tho they be infinite,
In need and number.

Enough, these loud sounds deafes my passions
How long shall love make me a slave to hope,
And mix my calm desires with 〈◊〉
O Phylocles it is heresy I hold,
Thought and affection cannot be controlled.
Yet mai't be bent and supplied wi•h extremes,
Sith few dare see the end of violence
What makes the skilful Leech to use the fire,
Or war her engines, or st•tes policy,
But to recover things most desperate?
Renolt is recreant when pursuit is brave,
Never to faint doth purchase what we crave
True my Phylocles, yet my recreant soul,
Slaued to her beauty, would renounce all war,
And yield her right to love, did not thy spirit
Mixed with my longing, fortify these arms.
But I am now resolved and this sad hour,
Shall give an end to my disemprature.
Summon a parley.
What says our tyrant suitor, our disease in love,
That makes our thoughts a slave unto his sword:
What says my Lord?
Madame attend me, this is my latest summons,
The many suns my sorrows have beheld,
And my sad nights of longings, all through hope,
T'enioy the joy of earth, (your own dear self)
Are grown so infinite in length and weight,
That like to wearied Atl•…, I enforce
These wars as Hercules, to bear my load:
Briefly I must enjoy you, or else loose
The breath of life, which to prevent, behold,
My sword must be my Cupped, and with feathered steel,
Force pity from your breast, your Cities walls,
Chidden with my Canons, have set op a path
And boldly bids me enter, all your men of war,
Feebled with famine, and a weary siege,
Take danger from mine actions, only your self,
Strong in your will, oppose even destiny:
And like the giants war offend the heavens,
Which to prevent, do but descend and give
Peace to my loue-suit, and as overcome thereby,
I'll yield my self your prisoner, and be drawn,
A thrall in your triumphant victory.
If otherwise, behold these fatal swords,
Shall never be sheathed, till we be conquerors:
And not respecting innocence nor sex,
The cries of infants, nor the prayers of age,
All things shall perish, till within my arms
I fouled your self my thrall and conqueror.
Thou majesty be moister of my bodies Tomb
But for my soul and mind, they are as free
As their creation: and with Angels wings
Can soar beyond thy reach; trust me king of Cypress
Those coals the Roman Portia did devour,
Are not burnt out, nor have th'Egiptian worms,
Yet lost their stings, steel holds his temper still,
And these are ransoms from captivity.
But art thou noble, hast thou one royal thought?
Approve me by your question.
Then briefly thus:
To shun the great effusion of their bloods,
Who feel no touch in mine affections,
Dare you to single combat, two to two,
Refer your right in love?
Who are your combatants? we love equality.
This is the first, the Epyre duke, a man,
Sprung from the line, of famous Scanderbag:
The next Alphonso, sprung from noble blood:
Who laden with rich lusitanian prize,
Hath rod through Syrac•… twice in pomp.
Their likings to the motion.
They are like wrath,
Never vnannd to beat weak injury.
Nay more, we are the sons of destiny:
Ve•…'s our guide, our aim is dignity.
S'foot king, shalt not forsake them: this I see,
Love, fight, and death, are ruled by destiny.
My spirit speaks thy motion.
Madame, although advantage might euade,
And give my love more hope, yet my bent will,
Bowd to your pleasure, doth embrace your law,
We do accept the combat, and our self
Will with that Duke try fortunes, this my friend,
The more part of my self, me dearest Philocles,
One of an Angels temper, shall with that that Lord
Try best and worst the place, the time, the sword.
They are your rights, we claim as challengers.
And we would lose that vantage, but since fame
Makes virtue dulat, we embrace our rights:
The place before these walls, the hour next sun,
The pollax and the hand axe for the fight.
It is enough,
My hostage is my person and my love:
And mine my hope, my f•…ith and royalty.
They are of poysse sufficient, and one light
Shall at one instant, give vs day and night.
Shoe's gone my Philocles: and as she goes even so,
The sun forsakes the heavens to kiss the sea,
Day in her beauty leaves vs, and methinkes,
Her absence doth exile all happiness.
Tell me my Philocles, nay pray thee tell me true,
Even from that love
Which to vs both should bend one sympathy:
Discharge an open breast, dost thou not think,
She is the mirror of her beauteous sex?
Unparalleled, and vncompanioned.
Envy will say shoe's rare, then truth must vow,
She is beyond compare, sith in her looks,
Each motion hath a speaking majesty,
She is herself, compared with her self:
For but her self, she hath no companion.
But when I think of beauty, wit and grace,
The elements of active delicacy,
Those all eie-pleasing harmonies of sight
Which do enchant men's fancies, and stir up
The life blood of dull earth, O then methinkes,
Fair Mariana hath an equal place
And if not outshine, it shows more beautiful.
More then my Queen?
More in the gloss of beauty, less in worth,
Of wisdom and great thoughts, the one I find
was made for wonder, the other for admire.
Thine equal praises makes my facnies rich:
And I am pleased with thy comparisons,
Things of like nature live in best consent,
Beauty with subjects, majesty with Kings,
Then let those two Ideaes lively move,
Spirit beyond all spirit, in our breasts,
That in the end of our great victory,
we may attain both love and majesty.
Although my first creation and my birth,
My thoughts and other tempers of my souls,
Took all their noble beings from the sword,
And made me only for the use of wars:
Yet in this combat, something methinkes appears,
Greater then greatest glory, and doth raise
My mind beyond her self,
S'foot methinkes Casars Pharsalia,
Nor Sc•…os Carthage, nor Emilias acts,
Were worthy chairs of triumph, they ore men's
Poor mangled bodies, and fire-wasted climes,
Made their triumphant passage, but we two
Must conquer thoughts and love, more then the gods can doe.
True, and therein
Consists the glorious garland of our praise,
But we neglect th'aff•…ires of preparation. Florio be it your charge
To see th'erection of the squared lists,
Fit ground for either army, and what else,
Belongs unto such royal eminence.
How near will your majesties hand the lists extend
Unto the Cities walls?
So as the dullest eye,
May see the heedfulst passage in the fight.
What square or circuit?
Threescore pace each way.
Your majesty shall have your will performed.
Do, and you do vs grace; and now thou sun,
That art the eye of heaven, whose pure sight,
Shall be our guide, and Ioues great Chronicler,
Look from thy sphere,
No guilt of pride, of malice or of blood,
Puts on our armour, only pure naked love
Tutors our hopes, and doth our actions move.
Enough my Philocles, thine orisons are heard.
Come lets away.
Now fie upon it, who would be an Orators wife, and not a Gen∣tlewoman if she could choose? a Lady is the most sweet lascivious life, conieyes and kisses, the tire, O the tire, made castle upon castle, jew∣ell upon jewel, knot upon knot, crowns, garlands, gardens, and what not? the hood, the rebato, the french fall, the loose bodied gown, the pin in the hair, now clawing the pate, then picking the teeth, and every day change, when we poor souls must come and go for every mans pleasure, and what's a Lady more then another body? we have legs and hands, and rolling e•…es, hanging lips, sleek brows, cher∣rye cheeks, and other things as Ladies have, but the fashion carries it away.
Why how now Mistress Prat? in the old disease still, will it no∣for be better, cannot a woman find one kind man amongst twenty? O the days that I have seen, when the law of a women's wit, could have pu•… her husbandspurse to execution.
O Mistress Collaquintida, mine is even the vnnaturallest man to his wife.
Faith for the most part, all scholars are so: for they take so upon thē to know al things, that indeed they know nothing: &amp; besides, they are with study and ease, grown so unwieldy, that a woman shall near want a sore stomach that's troubled with them.
And yet they must have the government of all.
True, and great reason they have for it, but a wise man will put it in a women's hand, what? she'll save what he spends.
You have a pretty ruff, how deep is it?
Nay this is but shallow, marry I have a ruff is a quarter deep, measured by the yard.
Indeed, by the yard?
By the standard I assure you: you have a pretty set too, how big is the steel you set with?
As big as a reasonable sufficient; pity of my life, I have forgot my self, if my husband should rise from his study, and miss me, wee should have such a coil.
A coil, why what coil? if he were my husband and did but thwart me, I would ring him so many alarms, sound him so many brass trumpets, beat him so many drums to his confusion, and thunder him such a peal of great shot, that I would turn his brain in the pan, and make him mad with an eternal silence.
O mistress Coloquintida, but my husbands anger is the worst fauouredst without all conscience of any mans in all Sicilie, he is even as peevish as a sick munkie, and as waspish as an ill pleased bride the second morning.
Let your wrath be reciprocal, and pay him at his own wea∣pone: but to the purpose for which I came, the party you wot of, commends him to you in this diamond, hee that met the party you know, and said the parties party was a party of a partly pretty under∣standing.
O the Lord, Alphonso.
The very same belceue it, he loves you, and swears he so loves you, that if you doe not credit him you are worse then an infidel.
Indeed mistress Coloquintida, he hath the right garb for ap∣apparel, the true touch with the tongue in the kiss, and he dances well but falls heavily: but my husband woman, my husband, if we could put out his cattes cics, there were something to be said but they are e∣for peeping &amp; prying that they are able to pierce through a millstone: besides: I may say to you, he is a little jealous too, and see where hee comes, wee shall have a coil now.
Begin you to pout first, for thats a women's prevention.
What Lolly I say, where are you my house looks you, my men lack you, I seek you, and a whole quest of inquiry cannot find you, fie, fie, fie, fie, Idleness is the whip of thrift, a good huswife should ever be occupied?
Indeed I have much joy to bee occupied in any bodies com∣pany.
Why, whats the matter?
Why Orators wives shortly will bee known like images on water stairs, ever in one weatherbeaten suite, as if none wore hoods but Monks and Ladies, nor feathers but fore-horses and waiting gen∣tlewomen,
nor chains but prisoners and Lords officers, nor parry∣wigs but players and hot brains, but the weakest must to the walls still.
Go to, you shall have what you will.
Nay nay, it was my hard fortune to be your wife, time was I might have done otherwise, but it matters not, you esteem me as you doe your self, and think all things costly enough that covers shame, and that a pair of silken foresleeues to a satin breastplate, is a garment good enough for a capitol: but is master Wrangle, master Tangle, or master Trobleare of that opinion? in faith sir no.
Ther's never a gallant in our state
That goes more rich in gaudy bravery:
And yet I hope for quality of speech,
Audacious words or quirks or quidities,
You are not held their much inferior.
Fie, fie, I am ashamed to see your baseness.
Indeed master Prate she tells you truly; I wonder that you being a proper man and an Orator will not go brave, according to the custom of the country.
Go to neighbour, he that will rise to the top of a high ladder must go up, not leap up: but be patient wench, and thou shalt short∣lie see me gallant it with the best, and for thy self my Lolly,
Not Lolly Pauline, nor those blazing stars,
Which makes the world the Apes of Italy:
Shall match thy self in sun-bright splendency.
Nay, verily for my self I care not, tic you that are my pride, if you would go like your self I were appeasd.
Believe it wench so I will, but to the purpose for which I came, the end of this great war is now brought to a combat, two to two, the Duke of Epyre and Alphonso for our Queen against the King and Prince Philocles: now wench if thou wilt go see the fight, I will send and provide thee of a good standing.
Indeed, for you have ne'er a good one of your own.
What, President I say?
Anon, anon sir.
Why when I say, the villains belly is like a bottomless pit, ever filling and yet empty, at your leisure sir.
I can make no more haste then my teeth will give me leave.
Well sir, 〈◊〉 you without the town, to the place for the combat, and provide me for my wife some good standing, to see the conflict.
How master how, must I provide a good standing for you for my mistress? truly Master I think a mary bone pie, candied er∣ringoes, preserved dattes, or marmaladd of cantharides were much better harbingers, cock sparrows stewed, doves brai•…es or swans pizels are very provocative, roasted potatoes or boiled skerrets are your only lofty dishes, me thinks these should fit you better then I can doe.
Whats this, whats this I say? provide me a standing for my wife upon a scaffold.
And truly Master, I think a private chamber were better.
I grant you, if there were a chamber convenient.
Willing minds will make shift in a simple hole, close win∣dowes, strong locks, hard bed and sure posts, are your only orna∣mints.
I think the knave he mad, sir you chop logic, blockhead, you that have your brain pan made of dry leather, &amp; your wit ever wetshod: pack about your business, or Isle pack your pen and inkhorn about your cares.
Well sir, I may go or so, but would my mistress take a standing of my preferment, I would so mount her, she should love strange things the better all her life after.
Why when sir.
And come sweet wife, nay neighbour let vs have your company too.
Holla, what are you?
High marshall for the King, your Character.
I likewise for the Queen, where lies your equal gr•…not?
Here underneath these walls, and the•… and there ground for the battles.
Place there the Queens seat,
And there and there chaiers for the combatants.
Place here the lists, fix every joint as strong
As 'twe•…e a wall, for on this foot of earth
This day shall stand two famous monuments,
The one a throne of glory bright as gold,
Burnished with angels luster, and with stars,
Plucked from the crown of conquest, in which shall sit
Men made half Gods through famous victory:
The other a rich tomb of memorable fame,
Built by the curious thoughts of noble minds,
In which shall sleep these valiant souls in peace,
Whom Fortunes hand shall only overthrow.
Heaven in thy Palm, this day the balance hings.
Which makes Kings Gods, or men more great then Kings.
So now let the heralds give the champions sign
Of ready preparations.
What are you that appear, and what deuoyre
Draws you within these lists?
I am the Duke of Opine, and the 〈◊◊〉
Which doth attract my spirit to run this marshall course,
Is the fair guard of a distressed Queen,
Would wed to hate and in equality and brutish force,
Which to withstand I boldly enter thus,
And will defaile, or else prove recreant.
And what are you or your intendiments?
I am Alphonso marshall of this realm,
Who of like tempered thoughts and like desires,
Have grounded this my sanctimonious zeal,
And will approve the Dukes assertions,
Or in this field lie slain and recreant.
Enter and prosper as your cause deserves.
What are you that appear, and what deuoyre
Draws you within these lists?
I am the King of Cypress, who led on
By the divine instinct of heavenly love,
Come with my sword to beg that royal maid,
And to approve by gift of heaven and fate
She is a one to me appropriate:
Which to maintain I challenge entrance here,
Where I will live a King or recreant.
And what are you or your intendiments?
I am less then my thoughts, more then my self,
Yet nothing but the creature of my fate,
By name my nature only is obscured,
And yet the world baptised me Philocles.
My entrance here is proof of holy zeal,
And to maintain that no severe disdain,
False shape of chastity, nor women's will,
Neglective petulāce, or uncertain hope,
Foul vizard coins, nor seducing fame
Should rob the royal temper of true love
From the desired aim of his desires,
Which my best blood shall witness, or this field
Entomb my body made a recreant.
Enter and pro sper as your cause deserves.
Princes, lay your hands on these swords points
Here you shall swear by hope, by heaven, by love;
And by the right you challenge in true fame,
That here you stand not armed with any guile,
Malignant h•…te, or usurpation
Of philters charms, of nightspels characters,
Or other black infer•…ll vantages,
But even with thoughts as pure
As your pure vallures, or the suns pure beams,
T'approue the right of pure affection;
And howsoe're your fortunes rise or fall,
To break no faith in your conditions,
So help you Jove.
We swear.
How often doth my maiden thoughts correct
And chide my froward will, for this extreme
Pursuit of blood! believe me, fine I would
Recall mine oaths vow, did not my shame
Hold fast my cruelty, by which is taught
Those gems are prized best, are dearest bought,
S•…up my loves softness then, waken my flame,
Which guards a vestal sanctity; Princes behold,
Upon those weapons sits my God of love,
And in their powers my loves severity.
If them you conquer, we are all your slaves,
If they triumph, weal morn upon your graves.
Now by my maiden modesty I wish
Good fortune to that Philocles, my mind
Presages virtue, in his eaglets eyes.
S'foot he looks like a sparrow hake, or a wanton fire
A flash of lightning, or a glimpse of day,
His eye steals to my heart, and lets it see
More then it would, peace, blab no secrecy,
He must have blows.
Sound co•…ets, Princes respect your guards.
I crave the Queens conditions, or this blow
Sends this afflicted soul to heaven or hell.
Speak madame, will you yield or shall he die?
Neither bold Prince, if thou but touch a hair,
The kings breath shall redeem it: madame your love
Is safe in angels guarding, let no fear
Shake hands with doubtfulness, you are as safe
As in a tower of Diamonds.
O it is but glass,
And cannot bear this axes messiness.
Duke, thy brave words that second thy brave deeds,
Fills me with emulation, only we two
Stand equal victors; then if thou hast that tie
And bond of well knit valor, which vnites
Virtue and same together, let vs restore
Our captives unto freedom, and we two,
In single combat try out the mastery.
Where whosoever falls each other, shall subscribe
To every clause in each condition.
Thou art the index of mine ample thought,
And I am pleased with thine election.
Speak madame, if ever I deserved grace,
Grace me with your consent.
It is all my will.
Thy noble hand erect and perfect me.
What says his majesty?
My stars are writ in heaven, nor death nor fate
Are slaves to fear, to hope or human state.
I neither fear thy fortune nor my ruin;
But hold them all beyond all prophecy.
Thou hast my free consent, and on thy power
Lies my lives date o•… my deaths hour.
Then rise and live with safety.
Alphonso, here my hand,
Thy fortune lends thy peace no infamy.
And now thou glorious issue of Ioues brain,
That burnt the Telamonian Ravisher,
Look from thy sphere, and if my heart contain
An impure thought of lust, send thy monsters forth
And make me more then earthly miserable.
Yield, recant or dye.
Thine axe hath not the power to wound my thought,
And yields a word my tongue could never sound,
I say you are worthy valiant, for my death,
Let the Queen speak it, tic an easy breath.
Not for the worlds large circuit, hold gentle Prince,
Thus I doe pay his ransom, lowe as the ground,
I tender mine unspotted virgin love,
To thy great wills commandment, let not my care
My woman tyranny, or too strict guard,
In bloody purchase take away those sweets
Till now have governed your amazed desires:
For trust me king, I will redeem my blame,
With as much love, as Philocles hath fame.
Thus comes a calm unto a Sea-wract soul,
Ease to the pained, food unto the starved,
As you to me my best creation.
Trust me my Queen, my loves large chronicle
Thou never shalt ore read, because each day
It shall beget new matter of amaze:
And live to doe thee grace eternally,
Next whom my Philocles my bounteous friend,
Author of life, and sovereign of my love,
My heart shall be thy throne, thy breast the shrine,
Where I will sit to study gratefulness
To you and you my Lords, my best of thoughts,
Whose loves have showed a duteous carefulness,
To all free thanks and graces, this unity
Of love and kingdoms, is a glorious sight.
Mount up the royal Champion, music &amp; cornets sound.
Let shouts and cries make heaven and earth rebound.
How like the suns great bastard ore the world,
Rides this man mounted engine, this proud prince
And with his breath sindges our continents
Sit fast proud Phaeton, for by heaven isle kick
And plunge thee in the sea: if thou'lt needs ride,
Thou should have made thy seat upon a slave,
And not upon mine honours firmament.
Thou hast not heard the God of wisdoms tale,
Nor can thine youth curb greatness, till my hate,
Confound thy life with villain policy.
I am resolved since virtue hath disdained
To cloth me in her riches, henceforth to prove
A villain fatal, black and o•…nous:
Thy virtue is the ground of my dislike:
And my disgrace, the edge of envies sword,
Which like a razor shall vnplumbe thy crest;
And rob thee of thy native excellence,
When great thoughts give their homage to disgrace
Thers's no respect of deeds, time, thoughts or place.
COme wife, me thought our party stood stiffly to it.
Indeed they were stiff whilst they stood, but when they
were down, they were like men of a low world, a man might have wound their worst a•…ger about his finger.
Go to sir, you must have your fools bolt in every bodies quiver.
Indeed mistress, if my master should break his arrow with foul shooting or so, I would bee glad if mine might supply the whole.
I find you kind sir.
True sir, according to my kind, and to pleasure my kind Mistress.
Go to sir, I will not have your kindness to intermeddle with her kind, she is meat for your master.
And your man sir, may like your foul trencher.
I but not eat of his mutton.
Yet I may deep my bread in the wool, Mistress Colloquintida.
Go to sir, you will bee obscene, and then I shall knock you; but to the combat, me thought our side were the more proper men.
True, and therefore thoy had the worse fortune: but see here is the Lord Florio.
Master Orator, it is the King and Queens majesties plea∣sure, that you presently repair unto the Court, touching the draw∣ing out of certain Articles for the benefit of both the king∣domes.
My Lord, I will instantly attend their majesties.
Doe, for they expect you seriously.
Wise you can have my service no longer. Sir, President, attend you upon your mistress home: and wife, I would have you to hold your journey directly homeward, and not to imitate prin∣ces in their progress, step not out of your way to visit a new gossip, to see a new garden-house, to smell the perfumes of Court jerkins, or to handle other tools then may fit for your modesty: I would not have you to step into the Suburbs, and acquaint your self either with monsters or motions, but holding your way directly home•…ward, show your self still to bee a rare house∣wife.
I'faith, I'faith, your black out-side will have a yellow li∣ning.
Content thee wife, it is but my love that gives thee good coun∣sail. But here comes one of my clients.
Sir, master Orator, I am bold to trouble you about my suit.
Si, Mr. country gentleman, I am now for present business of the kings.
You may the better remember me.
Hey day, I shall mix your business with the kings.
No but you may let his majesty know my necessity.
Sir, sir, you must not confine me to your seasons, I tell you I will collect mine own leasures.
Master Orator, is it your pleasure I attend you about my dispatches?
Sir, it is my pleasure you dispatch your self from mine incum∣bronco, I tell you I am for instant business of the Kings,
Sir, I have borne mine attendance long.
Bear it till your bones ache, I tell you I cannot bear it now, I am for new business.
Yet the old would be dispatcht, it was first paid for.
If you be gentlemen do not make me mad.
Sir, our suits are of great weight.
If you be Christians do not make me an Atheist, I shall pro∣phone if you vex me thus.
What more vexation? my Lord, my Lord, save your breath for your broth, I am not now at leisure to attend you.
A word good Mr. Orator.
Not a word I beseech your Lordship, I am for the Kings bu∣sinesse, you must attend me at my chamber.
And every where else, wee will not leave you.
Now methinkes my master is like a horse-leech, and these su∣tors so many sick of the gout, that come to have him suck their blood: O it is a mad world.
Go to sir, you will never leave your crabtree similes;
but pity of me who have we hear?
O it is the Lord Alphonso.
Mistress God save: nay your lip I am a stranger; &amp; how doth Mistress Colloquintida, O you are an excellent seasoner of city sto∣makes.
Faith my Lord I have done my best to make somebody relish your sweet meates; but hark you my Lord, I have struck the stroke, I have done the deed, there wants nothing but time, place and her consent.
Call you that nothing?
A •…ste, a trifle, upon her, upon her my Lord, she may seem a little rough at the first; but if you stand stiffly to her, she'll fall; a word with you Mr. President.
Mistress Prat, I am a soldier, and can better act my love then speak it, my suit you know by your neighbour, my love you shall prove by my merit, to both which my tokens have bin petty witnesses and my body shall seal &amp; deliver upon thee such a brave confirmatiō, that not all the Orators in Sicill shall bee able to cancel the deed.
Truly my Lord, methinkes you being witty should bee honest.
Nay wench, if I were a fool, ther's no question but I would be honest; But to the purpose, say wench, shall I enjoy, shall I possess?
To enjoy my love, is not to possess my body.
Tut wench, they be words of one signification, and cannot be separated.
Nay then I should wrong my husband.
Sfoot, thou shouldest but do for him as he does for the whole world; why an Orator were a needle name, if it were not to defend wrong: then wench, do as he doth, write by a president.
O my Lord, I have a husband,
A man whose waking jealousy survives,
And like a Lion, sleeps with open eyes;
That not a minute of mine hours are free
From the intelligence of his secret spies.
I am a very toward Dane
Thorough whose roof, suspicion will not let,
Gold showers have passage, nor can I deceive,
His Argus eyes, with any policy:
And yet I swear I love you.
Death of affection, if thou love me, as thou says thou dost,
Thou can invent some means for our delight.
The rather •…th it ever hath been said,
That walls of brass withstand not willing minds:
And women whenth'are prone make love admired:
For quaint endeavours, come instruct thy wit:
And find some scale to our hie hight of bliss.
Then briefly thus my Lord.
To morrow doth the Senate sit to judge,
Causes both criminal and of the stave;
Where of necessity my husbands place,
Must be filled by himself, because his tongue,
Must guild his clients causes, Now if you please,
All that self hour, when he is turmoiled,
About those serious trifles, to vouchsafe
To visit me, his absence and my care
Shall give vs liberty of more delight.
You know my meaning, and I am ashamed
My love should thus betray my modesty;
But make the use according to your fancy.
What hour assures his absence?
Eight is the latest time.
This kiss leave my faith with thee, farewell.
You have given me double glory from thy breath,
Nothing shall lose me time but certain death.
Truly Mistress Collaquint•…àa, you are an excellent piece of sweet gall.
Well sir, will you lead the way homeward?
To your bed chamber 〈◊〉, or your privy lodging.
Night clad in black mourns for the loss of day,
And hides the silver spangles of the air,
That not a spark is left to light the world,
Whilst quiet sleep the nourisher of life
Takes full possession on mortality.
All creatures take their rest in soft repose
Save malcontents, and we accursed lovers,
Whose thoughts perturbed, makes vs passions slave:
And robs vs of the juice of happiness.
Dear Mariana, shaped in an Angels mould,
Thou thral'st my senses, and inflam'st my blood,
Love, power, by wisdom cannot bee withstood.
But see the morning star breaks from the East,
To tell the world her great eye is awaked
To take his journey to the western vales:
And now the court begins to rise with him.
There goes the Physician, the waiting maid,
And a fine straight legged Gentleman Usher,
The preface to a kirtill all puff past.
One that writes sonnets in his Ladies praise,
And hides her crimes with flattering poesy.
But peace amazement, see the day of life,
Natures best work, the worlds chief paragon.
Madame one word.
I; so now farewell.
You do mistake me.
That your self can tell,
You asked me one word, which I gave, said I,
A word of least use in a virgins breath,
Urge not my patience then with fond reply.
Dear Lady lend an ear unto my voice
Sith each were made for others happiness:
My tong's not oild with courtly flatterings,
Nor can I paint my passions to the life;
But by that power which shaped this heavenly form,
I am your bond-slaue, forced by loves command,
Then let soft pity with such beauty dwell.
Madame I love you.
As I am a virgin so do I.
But Madame whom?
My self, no Lady better.
But will you love me?
No by my chastity.
I hope you do but jest.
Nay isle keep mine oath,
Men shall abandon pride and jealousy
Ere isle be bound to their captivity,
They shall live continent, and leave to range,
But men like to the moon, each month must change.
Yet we must seek that nought their sight displeases,
And mix our wedlock sweets with loathd diseases:
When we consume our selves and our best beauty,
All our reward is why, t'was but our duty.
Judge not so hard of all for some offenders;
For you are subject to the self same crimes,
Of men and women always have been had
Some good of each.
But for the most part bad:
Therefore isle have none at all but die a perfect maid.
That humour like a flower soon will fade,
Once did mine own thoughts sing to that delight,
Till love and you reformd my barbarousnesse:
Therefore dear Lady, pity my wounded heart.
A Surgeon here for this loue-wounded man.
How deep's your vlcerd orifice, I pray you tell?
Quite thorough my heart.
It is strange and look so well;
Yet Ladies eyes have power to murder men,
And with one smile to make them whole again.
Achilles lance to a hair, but doe you love me prince?
Dearer then my soul.
Would I could love you.
Madame so you may.
As yet I cannot, therefore let me go.
O do not leave me, grant me but one request,
And here I vow by that divinest power,
The salt-seas glorious issue, whose bright sphere
Rules my sick heart, and knows my chaste intent,
That if you please t'impose on me that task
Which neither men nor monster can achieve,
Which even Angels have a dread to touch,
Deeds which outstretch all possibility,
S'foot more then can be thought, and i'll effect,
Or else i'll perish in th'accomplishment.
Let your request fit virgin modesty,
And you obey your vow, I am content
To give your thoughts contented happiness,
It is but a kiss I ask, a minutes joy.
Now Cupped help thee, is thy grief for this,
Keep thy strong vow, &amp; freely take a kiss.
I have obtained my heaven, and in this touch,
I feel the breath of all delitiousnesse:
Then freely give the sentence of my work,
Muster up all the engines of your wit,
Teach Iuno rules beyond malitiousnesse,
What ear it be, i'll die bu•…le perform it.
Thou shalt not kill thy self, nor fight with monsters,
Nor bring the great Turks berd to show thy zeal:
Thy life thou shalt not hazard for my love,
Nor will I tie thee to an endless task,
But even with ease, and gentle ringlet knots,
Thou shalt vntwind thy clew of miseries,
Let it have passage, madame give me my doom.
Then Philocles knit silence to my words,
And mark thy doom: for thus my strickter will
Loads grief upon thy vainer levity.
Hence for the space and compass of one year
Thou shalt abjure the liberty of speech,
Thou shalt not speak for fully twelve months space,
For friend nor foe, for danger nor for death;
But live like air, with silent emptiness.
Break thou this vow, i'll hold thee for a villain:
And all the world shall know thy periu•…y.
Be heaven and earth a witness of my vow,
And mine eternal silence, I am dumb.
Why so, now shall I not be troubled with vain chat
Oridle prate of idle wantonness:
For love I cannot, therefore tic in vain,
Would all my suitors tongues I thus could rain,
Then should I live free from faind sighs and groans,
With O take pity, tic your servant moans,
And such harsh stuff, that frets me to the heart:
And sonnets made of Cupids burning dart.
Of Venus lip, and Iunoes majesty.
Then were I freed from fools and foolery.
In May the cuckoo sings, then sheel'e come hither,
Her voice and yours will rarely tune together.
Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you:
Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you,
Prince Philocles, the king would speak with you.
The pox rot off your fingers for this blow,
It is coronation day, thorough all my scull,
Theres such a fatal ringing in my brain,
Has won the selt, has laid five fingers on;
But it was a knavish part of him to play so.
Hear me you Gods for this my open wrong,
Make short his fingers as you have his tongue.
Tic not mans fortune, envy or neglect,
Which makes him miserable, but tic mean fate,
Even sole predestination, a firm gift,
Fixed to his birth, before the world was made,
For were it otherwise, then within our lives,
We should find some distractions, errors change.
And other toys of much uncertainty:
But my mishaps are fixed so to my blood,
They have no sire but my creation:
The Queen out of suspicion that my love,
First set an edge upon the Kings desires,
And made him woo her with a victors sword,
Casts me from favour, seazes all my lands,
And turns my naked fortunes to the cold.
The King made proud with purchase of his wish
Neglects my sufferance for him, and ore looks,
The low-tide of my fortunes; lest my woes
Should speak my wrongs to his ingratitude;
The whilst those lords whose supple hams have bowed
To doe me formal reverence, now despise
And slight me in their meanest compliments:
O tic a torment more then hell yet knows
To be an honest flatterer, or to live
A saint in Limbo, which that I may prevent,
Isle be nor best nor worst, but all indifferent.
But here comes a noble man, I must turn petitioner.
My Lord, may I not see the king?
You may not.
His majesty is now down pressed with seriousness:
As for your suit it is with Prat the Orator.
I heard his highness give him a special charge
For your dispatch with favour.
O but he doth neglect,
And sleights me like his weak orations,
And by your Lordships leave, I do not think
His wisdom worthy of the conference.
Nay if you will correct the kings coin you are not for my con∣ference,
Fare you well.
Why, and fare you well, S'foot this is more then strange,
That being grieved I may not say i'm pained.
But here comes another: Mine honourable Lord
May I not have some conference with the king?
You may not, business of greater weight
Imports both him and vs: nay pray you cease;
As for your suit tic with the Orator.
Yet methinkes it were meet
That you would rather trouble him then me.
Its strange.
Its strange indeed, to see you wrong your ease.
I am not now for idle conferences, adieu.
Why this is court grace to men in misery,
And thus these taile-lesse Lions with their roar,
Affright the simple heard: O I could now
Turn rebel against their pride.
But here comes the Duke:
My gracious Lord, vouchsafe to hear my griefs.
For Gods love cease your trouble, wee are all
Troubled with griefs of stranger qualities.
Words are no heavy burden.
No, had I no other weight;
But we are all down pressed with other poise:
As for your sui•… it is referred to Prat:
And he must give you fair dispatch with favour;
Which if he •…leight for envy or for bribe,
Repair to 〈◊〉, and I will not forget
To give you ease, and chide his negligence.
Mean space I pray you leave me, for we all
Are troubled now with greatest miracles.
Your grace doth do me comfort, and I will
Study with service to deserve your favours,
And so I take my leave.
Your own content•…ts follow you.
Now gentlemen what news within, can this dumb wonder speak?
Have youcutoff •…hose l•…s that tied his speech.
And made your •…ames 〈◊〉 sound thorough Sicille?
All hopeful means that man or art can find,
Have we made trial of, but tic in vain:
For still my Lord, the cur's invincible.
Those Organs nature gave to move the tongue,
He fully doth possess as w•…ll as we;
Which makes vs think his sudden apoplexy,
Is either will, vow, or a miracle.
I should think strangely, had wee strange things on earth;
But wonders now are most familiar:
But here comes his majesty, now we shall see
If this dumb beast can speak before the king.
My best of friends, my dearest Philocles,
Thy griefs run in my spirit, make me sad,
And dulls my sense with thine affliction.
My soul with thine doth sympathize in woe,
And passion governs him that should rule all.
What say our Doctors is there no hope of help?
No hope my Lord, the cure is desperate.
Then I am king of grief, for in his words
Found I more music then in quires of Angels,
It was as silver as the chime of spheres.
The breath of Lutes, or ioues deliciousness:
Next to my Queen, he is my joy on earth:
Nor shall the world contain that happy good
Which with my t•…res I will not woo for him.
My Lord of Epyre, let it be straigh•… proclaimed
Thorough all the cicies in our kingdoms verdge,
That who so will avow to cure this prince,
And bring his wo•…ke to wished effectualnesse
Shall have ten thousand crowns and our best love;
But if he fail in his great enterprise,
His daring is the loss of present life,
Since no man hitherto could doe him good,
The next shall help him or else loose his blood.
Your Majesty shall have your will performed.
Not all so soon dear brother, what if a womā now
Should turn Aesculapius and restore
This dumb Hypolitus? nay do not look strange,
I dare avow and undertake the cure.
You sister, are you in your wits?
Faith of the out side of them brother, yet a womās tongue
Whose burden still is superfluity,
May lend a man an ages complement.
Madam I would not have you with the bark
Play your self into day net, this great cure,
I fear is far beyond your Physics help.
My Lord, you know not how Apollo loves me,
I have been thought as fair as Oenon was,
And dare be bold to claim this miracle.
Mariana attend, glory &amp; ruin compass thee a∣bout
This hand shall raise thee to a golden throne,
And grace thee with all stiles of dignity;
This cast thee down.
Lower then lives misfortune and orewhelme
Thy beauties with thy grave, perform be great,
Fail and be worse then worst calamity.
Stay gentle friend, my love doth bid thee stay,
Attempt not, and be safe from misery.
Sister you shall not grasp with mischief thus,
My blood doth challenge interest in your ill,
And I conjure you from this desperatnes.
Brother content your self, words but augment our strife,
I will perform or else my pawn's my life.
Proceed fair virgin.
Vouchsafe me privacy: now 〈◊〉 be my speed,
Speak gentle philocl•…s, thine oaths bond I untie
And give thy vows a free enfranchisement,
Thy well kept league hath showed thy strength of truth,
And doth confirm me in my virtuousness:
Thy martyrdom and sufferance is too long,
And I restore it to new liberty.
Then speak my Philocles, speak gentle Prince
To her whose love respects and honours thee.
How now, what virtue from thy charms?
No hope is left, dear Philocles regard my miseries.
Untie that wilful let which holds in speech,
And make me happy through thy noble pity.
I see the face of mine ill shaped contempt,
Where like with like hath quit most injury:
Then speak my Lord, utter one Angel breath
To give me joy, and save me from strange death.
What not a word, hath this small silence brought
An utter detestation to thy speech?
Wilt thou nor hear, nor speak, nor pity me,
The gentle Gods move thee to more remorse.
What, wilt not be?
Fond maid thou hast drawn affliction on thy head,
And thrald thy self to worst calamity:
Till morrow sun thy incantations use,
But then effectless, all hopes desperate,
Were thou my bosom love thou die the death,
Best ease for madness is the loss of breath.
O Philocles I am no courts disgrace,
No cities Prostitution, countries shame,
Nor one shall bring Troys fire unto thy house,
Turn not away hard hearted Mir•…eton,
See, on my knees Isle follow thee in court,
And make the world condemn thy cruelty:
Yet if my tears may mollify thy heart,
Receive them as the floods of strangest rides,
Turn not thy face from her that dotes on thee,
Love now hath made me subject to thy will,
And pale disdain hath tan revenge on •…e.
Behold my nerues Isle wear upon this earth,
And fill this roof with lamentations.
What dost thou smile, hath fury so much sway
As even to banish poor civility?
Then be thy self, and break thine itching spleen:
For I disdain thy ransoms victory,
Life thou art weary brought, welcome my death,
Sweet because wished for, good because my choice:
Yet when I am dead, this of me shall be said,
A cruel Prince murdered a loving maid.
And after ages to th'unborne shall tell,
Thy hate, my love, thy envy and my hell.
Nay do not speak I charge thee, go let nothing move thee,
Death is my glory, since thou wilt not love me.
Grief which controls the motions of our thoughts,
Rains in my blood and makes me passions slave,
My sisters misery torments my soul,
And breaks my gall when I but think of her:
She was bewitched with spells to her misfortune,
Or else borne haplesse under a lowering star,
And tic her fate to be thus miserable:
O Philocles had thou no other scale
To mount thy heaven but by our miseries,
Must all the noble fame of our great house
Waste down her royal pillars to make steps
For thee to climb to glory? well I see
Thou plots our shames in thy great dignity.
Patience great Lord, me thinks these ill raised storms
Have not more violence then may be borne,
Come we will both go sue unto the King.
We there will kneel and pray eternally,
And never rise till he remit his dome:
It shall be so, I will unto the King,
To beg great favour for a small offence:
But if she die for this, then King take heed,
Thee and thy fortunes by this hand shall bleed.
Come my harts, lets make all things ready for the execution, heir's a maiden head must be cut off without a featherbed.
Its a sign she deals with sharp tools &amp; a cruel heads man.
If I had been her judge, she should have been tossed to death in a blanket.
No, I would have had her smothered in a featherbed.
They say she would not plead at her trial.
No thats true, for she had a great desire to be pressed.
And I have known some of her sex, have got that favour to be pressed for speaking.
Then she was unwise to hold her tongue being a woman.
What is her crime that she must loose her head?
Because she lived honest, contrary to the statute.
There is a great number of my neighbours well never suffer for that fault.
No nor thou neither if the truth were known, for my part I shun that danger.
I think we are all out of danger of the law for that crime.
I know I am free, for I am a knave if I have not forgot what wench had my maiden head.
Make room there, his Majesty is coming to the execution.
Come, now all things a•…e ready: lets away.
Mercy is banished courts, the King like flint,
Hardens his royal temper against our plaints,
And makes our woes most unavoidable.
What inauspicious starve raignd at her birth,
That heaven thus frowns upon her misery;
And my good Lord, now innocence must die.
As white as vntroade snow, or cvluer down,
Kings words are laws, and cannot be withstood;
Yet it is false greatness, which delights in blood.
Patience my Lord, I do not think this ill
Is yet so big as unrecoverable.
The king doth hold you in most choice respect,
And whom kings love, they study to oblige.
Then call your reason home, make not this civil ware,
To suffer makes woes lesser then they are.
How well the sound can salve the sicke-mans grief!
But O how ill he can digest his pills!
O my good Lord, you shall not lose a sister,
That is the joy and comfort of your breath,
It is not your blood shall issue from her wound•…
But mine that runs in rivers from her tears:
And rounds my face in her calamity.
Well, let her pe rich, since her soul is clear,
And for her death, isle make a massacre.
Your suits are bootless: for my vows have glewd
And closed mine ears that they retain no sound
Of your entreaties, and even now the time
Doth run upon his latest minutes, and
Save but by speech, theres no rec•…very.
Have mercy good my Lord, O let my tears intrude
Betwixt your vows and her calamity.
In her you take from me my best of life,
My joy, my comfort and my play-fellow.
Content you madame, for my vow is past,
And is like fate still vnreuocable:
Ascend poor model of calamity.
As lightly burdened with the weight of crimes,
As spotesse infants, or poor harmless lambs,
Thus I ascend my heaven, this first step lower,
Mounts to this next, this, thus and thus hath brought
My bodies frame unto its highest throne;
Here doth her office end, and hence my soul
With golden wings of thought shall mount the sky,
And reap a palace of pure sanctity.
Farewell my soueragine, madame within your thoughts
Make me a tomb, and love my memory.
Brother farewell, nay do not morn my death,
It is not I that die to spot our house,
Or make you live in after obloquy.
Then weep no more, but take my last adieu,
My virtues not my faults preserve with you.
Lastly, to you that are my last of hope,
Nay do not hide your eyes, I love them still:
To part friends now is greatest charity.
O be thy days as fruitful in delights,
As Eden in choice flowers, thine honours such
As all the world may strive to imitate.
Be master of thy wishes: only this,
When the sad nurse to still the wrangling babe,
Shall sing the careful story of my death,
Give me a sigh, from thy hearts purest breath:
And so farewell.
Madame kneelehere, forgive me for your death.
With all my heart, thou art but laws poor hand,
Thus to my death I bow, and yet arise,
Angels protect my spirits in the skies.
Hold, or thine own hand shall be thine own destruction.
Never did music soun dwith better voice.
Unbind the Lady.
The fear of death hath brought her to a swooned.
Endeavour her recovery.
Sister, dear sister call thy spirits back;
Sister, O sister, hearken to my woes,
Recover breath and live with happiness.
She stirs, give way to ayre that she may breath.
Speak Mariana, thy woes are cancelled:
You are not charitable unto my moans,
Thus to afflict me with a double punishment:
One death for one poor fault might well suffice,
They are most wretched who twice lives and dies.
Madame to save your life I kill my soul:
And speckle that which was immaculate.
Black perjury that open eyed disease,
Which is the plague sore of society,
Brands me with mischief, and protests I hold
Nothing within me but unworthiness:
And all these else are your creation.
Which to wash off; lo here I yield my self
An humble sacrifice to love and thee:
All my best hopes, my fortunes and my love,
My faith, my service, and my loyalty,
Shall as thy slaves attend on thy commands,
And make me famous in my suffrages.
Receive her Philocles, for it pleases vs.
But not me my thrice royal sovereign.
I'll rather wed a sooty blackamoore,
A Leper, monster, Incubus or hag,
A wretch deformd in nature, loathed of men
Then her that hath bemonster'd my pure soul,
Her scorn and pride had almost lost her life,
A maid so faulted, seldom proues' good wife.
What is the reason you not love her now,
And were so passionate in love before?
Not that I love her less, but rather more,
Run I this backward course; only my vow,
Sith unperformed craves satisfaction;
Which thus I reconcile, when this fair maid,
Shall with as strong a love, as firm a •…eale,
A Faith as constant, and a shame as strong,
Requite my care, and show as ample proof
In mine extremes, as I have in her death,
Then will I love, enjoy and honour her.
Till when, I will not think a loving thought;
Or give the easy temper of my mind
To loue-sicke passion, or delitiousnesse.
Only with those which do adore the sun,
I'll give her all respect and reverence,
I am well pleased, and with a doubtful foe,
You have good reason thus to capitulate,
Then hang your colours forth, ex•…ed your thought
Muster your strongest powers, of stricktest wit,
And when your reasons best artilleries bent
Love not my love, if it be not excellent.
I have not seen a war breed better wit,
Or passion draw on more delightfulness:
Proceed in your contention, for we boast,
That love is best, which is approved most.
But now to revels, since our tragic scene
Is turned to comic mirthful constancy;
In stead ofmourning we will dance and banquet
And fill our empty veins with all delights:
For oft we find that storms and sorrows prove
The best forerunners of a happy love.
He will, but he will not, loves but cannot like,
Will and affection in this Prince are like
Two buckets which do never both ascend:
Or those star twins which shine not in one sphere.
O Phil•…eels, I see thy soul grows fat,
And feeds upon the glories of my same;
But I'll forestall thine Epileptique fits;
And by my plots breed thy destruction.
Revenge now rules as soueragine of my blood,
And others ruins shall advance my good.
Which once attained to, I will prove ambitious,
Great men like Gods, are ne'er thought-vitious.
Now Philocles stand fast, King guard thy crown,
For by this brain, you both shall tumble down.
This is his chamber, lets enter, hears his clarke.
Fondling, said he, since I have hemmed thee here,
Within the circuit of this Ivory pale.
I pray you sir help vs to the speech of your master.
Isle be a park, and thou shalt be my Dear:
He is very busy in his study.
Feed where thou wilt, in mountain or on dale.
Stay a while he will come out anon.
Graze on my lips, and when those mounts are dry,
Stray lower where the pleasant fountains lie.
Go thy way thou best book in the world.
I pray you sir, what book doe you read?
A book that never an Orators clarke in this kingdom but is be∣holden unto; it is called maids philosophy, or Venus and Atones: Look you gentlemen, I have divers other pretty books.
You are very well stored sir, but I hope your master will not stay long.
No he will come presently.
Who have we here? another Client sure, crows flock to car∣kisses; O tic the Lord Meshant.
Save you Gentlemen; sir is your master at any leisure?
Here sit thee down where never serpent hisses,
And being set isle smother thee with kisses.
His businesses yet are many, you must needs attend a while.
We must attend, um, even snails keep state
When with slow thrust their horns peep forth the gate.
We must attend, tic customs fault not mine
Tomake men proud, on whom great favours shine,
Its somewhat against my nature to attend.
But when we must, we must be patient,
A man may have admittance to the king
As soon as to these long robes, and as cheap.
Come gentlemen shall we walk?
Thus are the pa•…amened stones before the doors
Of these great tongue guilt Orators, worn smooth
With clients dancing for them.
It's strange to see how the world waits upon them, therein they are the only men now.
O only; they of all men in request.
Your physician is the lawyer for your health:
And moderate unruly humours best.
Others are no body compared with him:
For all men neglect their health in regard of their profit.
True, and thats it makes these men grow so fat,
Swell with rich purchases.
Yea with golden fees,
And golden titles too, they can work miracles,
And like creators, even of empty nothing
Erect a world of goodly livings, fair demeans,
And gallant manors, heaped one on another.
They gain indeed excessively, &amp; are not like vs citizens
Exposed to hazard of the seas and traffic.
Why here is a •…allow now, this Orator
Even Prat, you would little think it, his father was
An honest proiner of our country vines;
Yet hoe's shot to his foot-cloath.
O hee is; hee proind him well and brought him up to lear∣ning.
Faith reasonable learning, a s•…attring in the Latin tongue,
A little Rhetoric, with wrangling sophistry,
Were his preparatives unto his art.
After these preparatives (if you call them so)
The physic wrought well for a few years practise,
Brought him in wondrous credit, and preferments
Came tumbling in: O such a sudden rise,
Hath fortune for her minions, blame him not then,
Though he look high on it.
Nay for his pride, of weaker souls termed state,
It hurts none but himself.
Yet to my seeming it is very strange,
That from so base beginning, men can breath
Such soaring fems.
Srange; it's not strange a whit,
Dunghills and marrish bogs, dart store of vapours,
And viscous exhalations, against heaven,
Which borrowing luster there (though basly bred)
Seem yet like glorious planets fairest stars:
To the weak e•…es of wondering ignorance,
When wise men know they are but Meteors.
But here comes the Orator.
What President I say, come and attend me to the senate house.
I am ready s•…r, if you have Copiaverborum, I have Copy reru•… in a buckram bag here.
Your Lordships pleasure.
Master Orator, tic not unknown my suit
Nay your Lordship must be brief, I not attend
The shallow slight of words, your suit, your suit.
The restoration of my lands and honours.
They are confiscate.
My lands confiscate, and my body free?
My Lord, my Lord, the Queen's more merciful.
Sir, you forget my place.
Sir you forget your faith,
T'was known unto the Queen, the state and vs,
Your malcontented spirit, your disease in duty:
Your diligent purturbance of the peace:
Your passages, occurrences and—
Sir.
Sir me no sirs.
Do not I know you were the chief of those
Which raised the wars in Sicill? and long since
Wrought in the kings loves bloody business.
Did not you hold fair quarter and commerce
With all the spies of Cypress? fie I am ashamed,
Blind impudence should make you be so bold,
To bear your face before authority.
But hear me.
I will hear no reply, go home, repent, pray &amp; die.
Come Gentlemen, what's your businesses?
Your confirmation to his highness grant, touching our trade with Spain, in which if it please you to assist vs, wee have a thousand crowns which shall attend you.
O I have you in my memory, the suit is great:
And I must squeisse forth more then a thousand crowns.
We latent me to the senate, you shall have fair dispatches
I not attend the shallow slight of words,
Go home repent, pray and die.
Excellent precepts for an Orators chamber.
Where speech must bath a handful deep in gold,
Till the poor givers conduit being dry,
The wretch goes home, doth curse, repent and die.
It is thy counsel Orator, thy tale breath
Good only but to season infamy.
From this reproach, this incarressing humour
Hath taught my soul a new philosophy.
I will go home and there repent all good
Done to thy name or thy profession.
I will go home and there new frame my self
More thirstily pernicious to thy state,
Then war or vnabated mutiny.
As for my prayers Orator, they are for thee;
Thou hast a pretty, lovely, witty wife:
O moist thou live, both to be known and know
Thy self the greatest cuckold in our land;
And yet not dare to amend or grieve at it.
Moist thou embrace thy shame with thankful arms,
Hug thy disgrace, make thy black poison wine,
And cap and crouch to thy dishonour,
May thy remembrance live, upon my knees I pray,
All night in belmens mouths, with Pasqu•… in the day.
Day be my speed, night shall not cloak my sin,
If I have nought to doe, its by the Sun,
The light gives leave to all mine Idleness.
Quick business and op eyes cease on mine orator,
Whilst I create him horny presidents.
But hears my bed broker. Now my great armefull of good intelli∣gence, where is my Mistress?
Fast locked in her bed with a close ward to devour thee my brave Paraquito; but hushed no words, there is a calm before the tempest.
Tut, tell me of no storms, but direct me to her bed chamber, my noble firelock of a flesh pistol.
Follow thy colours my brave worthy, mount up thy standard, so enter and prosper.
Thou hast a rich room, safe locks, sweet sheets, a choice armefull, with ô the rare, rare thought of imagination.
Whats this, whats this, doth this Lord Alphonso turn the
Orator to an Antelope? tic more then excellent,
And from the juice of this despite I suck
Delight more great then all my miseries,
Observe, dear eyes observe.
Nay go thy way for a Camel or a Chameleon, thou moist com∣pare with all Europe, Africa and Asia, and one that will change tricks, though thou were worthy to be schoolmaster either to Proteus or Aritine: what an excellent gift did God give unto man when he gave him woman, but how much more when that woman was made fair? but ô the most of all when she had wit to use every member of her cre∣ation. Well Isle stand to it, theirs nothing but beauty, use and old age that puts women of my rank out of request, and yet like old buck∣lers though few of your gallant cauileres will wear vs, yet many of your stale Ruffians will employ vs, and thats our comfort still.
Was ever heard a bawd more damnable?
A very mountebank of wench flesh, an Empiric,
A dog-leech for the puttefied sores,
Of these Iust-cankerd great ones, O I could
Even mad my self with railing at their vices.
But hark one knocks, O for the orator,
Heavens I beseech thee, O for the orator.
How now, who knocks so rudely at the door?
Tic I I say, open the door, I am in hast.
Tic he, just heavens tic he, fore God the orator.
Soul of my bawdy office, how are wee betrayed,
Anon, anon sir, what Mistress Prate I say?
Arise for shame, your husbands at the door,
I come, I come, Lord God how dull you are
When danger's at your heals, rise quickly.
Open the door, or I will break it op.
I come, I come, I think hoe's mad with hast,
What Iohn, what Thomas, Robert, wher's these knaves,
What Iulian, Mary, Sislie, near a maid within.
For Gods love stay, isle find the key straight way.
O mistress Coloquintida, what shall become of vs?
Nay I am at my wits end, and am made
Duller then any spurgald, tired Jade.
Sfoote ifhe enter, I will break his neck.
Not for a world dear love, step into my closet.
Did ever slave come thus unluckily?
Nay now's no time for passion, good Lord in.
Fie I have almost broke my hart with running.
How now dear husbād, what hath moved this hast?
I think I was not blessed this morning when I rose: for through my forgetfulness I have left behind me in my study the breuiates of all my causes, and now the Se•…at is fine to dance attendance on my lea∣sure, fie, fie, fie.
Nay if he smell nothing but papers, I care not for his dry foot
hunting, nor shall I need to puff pepper in his nostrils, but see hee comes again.
I think the Devil have laid his ho•…nes in my way.
Yes, and if you had wit you might conjure him out of your wives closet.
Sancte benedicite, what have we here, hath the golden snake cast his skin upon my bed, go toe wife, I smell I smell, me thinks your plain rug should not agree with this rich counterpoint.
Husband, either I have fitted you now, or else I shall never fit you whilst I breath.
You oft have told me, that like those of your rank,
Who both adorn their credits and them selves,
Yea even their causes with their costly clothes,
Your self in like sort would strive to imitate,
And now my neighbour here hath brought this suite,
Which if you please to buy, tic better cheap
Then ere t'was made by full five thousand crowns.
Say thou me so wench, a kiss for that in faith,
Fore God it is a delicate fine suite, rich stuff, rare work, and of the newest fashion; nay if the Sonnets business were never so hasty, I will stay to try it on, come, help good wenches help, so there, there there.
Sfoote will the ox put on the Lions hyde,
He will, he will, tic more then excellent,
So guild the tomb which holds but rottennes,
Laughter I fear will burst me, look how hee struts,
O God that ever any man should look
Upon this maumet and not laugh at him,
Fit fit: excellent fit as though,
The body it was made for wore my mould,
Wife I will have it, weal dispute no price.
Master Orator, the Senate are set, and can dispatch no causes through your absence, therefore they earnestly entreat your presence.
I come, I come, good friend go say I come,
And wife see that you pay for this suite, what so ere it cost.
Not aboue making you cuckold, thats the most.
What is he gone?
He is.
Why then come forth poor naked Lord.
What is he gone, may the Devil and his horns both follow him.
He is gone: but yet he hath discovered your treason.
How?
Yes, and in revenge thereofhath vowed, that in this naked sort as you are, you shall doe penance through the City for your •…nne of unchastity.
I pray thee leave thy women's phrase, and speak like a man, plainly, plainly.
Then plainly thus, he is gone and hath taken away your ap∣apparel.
Upon what accident?
This, when your negligence had left your clothes upon my bed, he espied them, taskt me for the owner, I in excuse told him it was a suite brought by my gossip to be sold, hee straight like a child proud of a new coat, presently puts it on, presently is sent for to the Senate, and at this present hath left you that the world may behold your naked doings.
I would it were washed in the blood of a Centaur, that when he puts it off, his skin might follow it, but how shall I get to my cham∣ber?
Truly I know not, except you will wear a smocks vpper-coate.
What a petticoat, you mad me with your mirth.
Then seriously thus, as he hath tan your clothes, you must take his, and let the world know you have had more then fiddlers fare, for you have meat, money and cloth.
Sfoote how shall I look in this Devils suite, sure I shall grow sick to see my shape.
Well extremity must then be your physic, but come, you shall attire your self in my chamber.
Are these the winding turns of female shames,
Loose women's gambols, and the tricks of sin?
And are we borne to bear these suffrages?
O hee thats tide unto a brothel bed,
Feels his worst hell on earth, and may presume
There is no sickness like his pestilence:
Well, what the issue of this jest will prove,
My wit but yet conceives and after time
Shall perfect it and give it liberty,
In such sort, that if it true fire strike,
A world of Apes shall study for the like.
My thoughts are troubled, Joy forsakes me quite,
And all my meditations are revenge:
Ambition and fell murder join in me,
And aid each other to untwine a state,
And make whole millions prove unfortunate.
Now must I practise court art flattery,
And wisely temporise with blackest deeds:
Isle smile and stab now weep, then laugh, then frown,
And with sly tricks of state kill all suspicion.
Devils must seem like Angels, saith ambition,
The blackest thoughts Isle study to excel,
Crowns and revenge have made men dive to hell.
My plot is cu•…rant and it cannot miss,
Whilst wisdom winds me on the clew of bliss.
The King shall kill the Queen, that acted right,
I soon will turn his brightest day to night.
Hes simple, honest, and loves downy rest,
Then he must fall, tic policy in state
To hurl them down a•…e blessed with happy fate.
Thus each shall scourge himself with his own rod,
Who is all policy, avows no God.
Who is within there hoe?
Did your grace call?
I did, where is the King?
He is in his privy chamber playing at chess.
Go straight and tell him I must speak with him,
And say my business doth import great haste.
I go my Lord.
Be a blessed Mercury, now mount thee up my spirit,
And show thy self a Politician,
Let slander rule thy tongue, envy thy hart,
And let destruction be thy period
Of what thou speak; for this my maxim is,
But rule no heaven, and but revenge no bliss.
Here comes the King, my Lord we must be private,
Remove your hearings from our conference,
Now speak my Lord, speak freely as to heaven.
First with my knee I kiss this prostrate earth,
And humbly beg, that which my tongue shall speak,
So it proceed from love and vassalage,
May bear a pardon or forgetfulness.
You have it, arise, discharge an open breast.
O my dread Liege, my speech will make you sad,
(And Kings doe seldom relish their distastes)
And from that sadness such a storm will rise
As will even drone up all credulity.
O that my loyal hart could cover sin,
Or that my tongue inured unto grief,
Might lose his spleen ere it distemper you,
But love and mine alleagance bid me speak.
Then speak, and doe not rack me with delay.
Women, why were you made for mans affliction,
The first that ever made vs taste of grief,
And last of whom in torments we complain,
You devils shaped like Angels, through whose deeds,
Our forked shames are made most visible,
No soul of sense would wrong bright Majesty,
Nor stain their blood with such impurity.
Nay good Lord leave this Allegorick speech,
And give me knowledge from a plainer phrase.
Then plainly thus, your bed is pressed with lust.
I know you doe not credit, nay whats more,
I know you hate me for my virtuousness,
Your Queen behaves her like a courtesan,
I know you hold me for a wild impostor,
O foolish zeal that makes me be so fond
To leave my faith unto black censuring,
O she hath sinned and done a double wrong
To you, to her and sacred chastity.
Duke thou art valiant, and with a valiant mind,
Slander is worse then theft or sacrilege,
Nay more then murder, or the height of treason,
A step beyond the utmost plagues in hell.
Then thou which in that nature wrongst a Queen,
Deserve a scourge beyond their punishments,
Virtue should kill thee now.
Nay doe, my breast is bare unto thy steel,
Kill me because I love thee and speak true,
Is this the merit of a Roman faith,
For this have I observed, pried in unto,
And searched each secret shift of vanity?
Nay pray you kill me, faith Isle patient stand,
Live still a monster, hold shame in your hand.
Speak a word more, a King shall be thy death.
Death is a slave to him that is resolved,
And my soul loathes this servile flattery:
Nor will I cover such intemperate sin,
But to the world make them and that transparent,
Unless your self will seek to right your self.
Thou hast awaked me, and thy piercing words
Have split my sense in sunder: yet what ground ha?
Remains whereon to ground suspicion? a cuckold, cuckold
Your absence is the baud to her desires,
For their masks, dancings, gaming, banqueting,
Strange private meetings and all to•…ses in love.
As want•… speeches to st•…re Appetite,
And all enchantments that inflame desire.
When you return, then all is hushed and still,
And she demurely walks like virtues Ghost:
Before your f•…ce shees like a Puritan,
Behind your back a blushes courtesan.
O I have drunk in poison at mine ears,
which makes my blood boil with vnquēched flames,
But speak who is it that dishonours me?
He that you prize a line before your life,
I know you will not credit faith you will not.
Nay if thou cease to speak, thou hat•…st my life,
Take thou delight to kill me, then forbear,
Sfoote I am mortal man kill me, doe doe doe.
Your best of friends, your dearest Philocles
Usurps your bed and makes you a cornu•…e,
A creature vncreate in paradise.
And one thats only of a women's making.
I•…t possible? can I give faith to this?
Nay be but patient, smooth your brow a little,
And you shall take them as they clip each other.
Even in their height of sin then dam them both,
And let them stink before they ask God pardon,
That your revenge may stretch unto their souls.
To be a cuckold doth exceed all grief.
To have a pleasant scoff at Majesty.
To taste the fruit forbidden from my tree.
But he shall loose his paradise for that.
The slave will make base songs in my disgrace.
And wound your reputation in strange Lands.
This injury sad all my joys on earth.
Horns are not shunt by wisdom, wealth or birth
Watch their close meetings, &amp; thē give vs notice,
Mean space my love shall in thy bosom rest,
My grief is like my birth great, great and hie:
Give close intelligence, till then farewell,
Lust is the broadest path which leads to hell.
Hoe's gone with black suspicion in his heart:
And made his soul a slave to jealousy,
My plots shall drive him to his own destruction;
And I gain both revenge and dignity.
He shall no sooner put his Queen to death,
But isle proclaim her spotless innocence.
All men will hate him for so vile an act,
And mad with rage depose him from his crown.
Then I will be his death, his state doth give,
Kings once depose d, long after must not live;
For like a Phoenix rare in jealousy,,
He shall consume himself in scorching flames,
Whilst from his ashes I a Phoenix spring:
Many renounce their God to be a king,
And isle be one to kill men with a frown.
None dare dispute the actions of a crown.
THe Que•…no is all for revels, her light heart,
Unloaded from the heaviness of state,
Bestows it self upon delightfulness.
She follows her creation and her sex.
In my conceit it is as vile a thing,
To see the worthy model of a woman,
Who had not been at all; but to give life,
And stirring spleen to man•… alacrity,
To sit orewh•…lmd with thought, with dark amuse
And the sad sullenness of a grieved dislike;
As to behold an old man in his furs,
Whose well spent youth, hath given his age full strength
To be his countries best physi•…an,
To caper to his grave, and with vain gauds
Trick up his coffin, and upon his tomb,
To leave no knowledge but his levity.
Tic true indeed, and nature in her self,
Doth give vs still distaste in contraries.
And in my thoughts it is as base to see a woman man
As see a man a long roab'd feminine.
Well, we forget our selves my Lord, What is the music rea∣die? I pray you command the guard to take their halberds in their hands, the Ushers should have seen this room perfumed, in faith they are too negligent: here comes the Queen.
Loud music there, and let the God of Harmony
Ravish our senses with delightful aires,
Tuned to the music of the higher sphere,
And with that mortal sign rarely show,
The joys in Ioues high court, to feast the Gods,
Making that place abound in happinsse.
Come noble Philocles I cease you first,
(Mariana there are choice of other Lords)
In gracing you, it is the king I grace.
Come honest Lord, tic you must stand to me,
The Queen in mine doth challenge interest,
And I must fly for shelter to my friends.
And isle be glad to be your coverture.
O no my Lord, not till the weather change.
Well when you please, mean time you do me grace.
Nay my Lord, ther's a L•…die worth the handling.
Sound music then, fill earth with heavens pleasure,
My Queen is out of time, though she keep measure.
Be lucky villainy,
Hit now the mark that mine ambition aims at
Me thinks I see that lean Italian devil, jealousy, dance
In his eyes: possess him spirit of rage,
Muffile his understanding with black thoughts,
Let passion govern reason, falsehood truth,
Oblivion hide his age, hate kill his youth.
Thou dauncest on my heart lascivious Queen,
Even as upon these rushes, which thou treads:
See how her motions wind about his eyes,
And doth present to him her passions,
Now doth her moistning palm glow in his hand
And courts him unto dalliance: she dies, tic just,
Shoe's slave to murder that is slave to lust.
Thou curse of greatness, waking eyed suspicion,
Now help thy poorefriends, murder and ambition.
This strain contained a preticke change.
Proceed unto the next.
Sin follows sin, and change on change doth wait,
Thy change doth change my love to cruel hate.
Madam methinks this change is better then the first.
I if the music would not alter it.
Methinks tic worse, come we will have another strain
I pleased, let vs proceed.
Rivals in crowns and beds of kings must bleed,
Can that fair house contain so foul a guest.
As lust, or cloak in ordinate and base desires,
Un•…er so fair a coverture; O yes,
Women can blind our sense when we se best,
And set •…ire landscapes on inconstancy,
Making vs blind with seeing the dance ends,
Your sins are blackest, breach of love and friends.
Now to the king, blow rage till it flame hate,
A politician thrives the best in state.
Come sweet Prince Philocles,
Devise some new delights to shorten time,
This dullness hath no relish in my sense,
It hath no pith, and sloth in my conceit
Is but a tip of pride in best constructions.
Madame isle stand, that a fair woman must bee proud or else a fool.
I would fine hear that I'faith.
Thy reason wench, I pray the come disburse.
A woman fair is like a full blown rose,
Which holds the fair no longer then it grows.
A woman fair is like the finest gold.
Which kept from use is good though ne'er so old.
Nay good Lord leave a little,
She that is fair is wise, and ought to know it,
For to that end did nature first bestow it.
Now of this knowledge if we be not proud,
We wrong the author, and we are allowed
To rank with senseless beasts, •…ith careless we•…
For want of pride detract our dignity.
Now knowing it, we know truth in the same,
Not to be pr•…ud of truth asks follies name.
This lesson still is read in beauties school,
She that is fair and humble is a fool:
For neither know she how to hold her good,
Or to keep safe the treasure of her blood.
a notable declamation.
Nay madame by your leave,
Pride gives a luster to a women's fair,
Things that are highest prized, are ever dear.
Why is the Diamond the Saphyrs king,
But for esteem and rareness? both which spring
From the stones pride, which is so chaste and hard,
Nothing can pierce it, it self is it selfes guard,
Now what is pride? self love, our own esteem,
A strength to make vs of our selves well deem:
From whence this maxim I collect amongst other,
Who hates her self can never love another.
And to conclude, mans appetite grows dull
To what it may have, empty hope is full,
To all our sex on earth, maid, widow, wife and bride,
They happy live, when they live with chaste pride.
My Queen will speak as much for lust as she for pride, if the toy take her.
Your Ladyship sows dangerous seed abroad.
But I hope my lord all grounds are not fruitful.
Well wench, shalt be the proud women's champion.
And isle defend them against all men, as at single tongue.
I had rather fight with a giant, then you at that weapon.
My Lord go forth, return in your own shape, say I am com∣ming.
I go my Lord.
Isle note their countenance when they hear of me.
Kings often see that which they would not see.
Dancing hath made me weary, what sport is next?
What your highness will command.
she will command you sir to play with her.
Madame his majesty is returned to court.
Nay then away with revels and with sports,
Lie hushed, and still this vainer idleness,
It now hath lost his spleen, come Lords away.
My sun is risen, brings a brighter day.
Darkness is thy delight •…asciuious Queen,
And thou would have thy sun p ent up in cloud:
If I be he, O falsnesse did I for this,
In single opposition hand to hand,
Hazard my royal blood for thee to be
My greatest shame, the scandal of my blood,
Whilst rumour crowns me king of infamy•…
But I will be revenged: watch gentle Lord,
When next I see them, they shall taste of death,
Such power hath baseness over great defame
That monarchs cannot cover their own shame.
My plot yet holds a true proportion,
And I do see, an even way to rule,
A crown like a bold champion bids me on,
And fame shall chronicle mine enterprise:
The Queen being dead, I must oppose my self,
Against her tyrant husband, thats my claim
And with strong courage, stand the shock of war:
If of my self I can withstand the King,
Then all the Land will 〈◊〉 unto mine aide, if not,
The king is Gods 〈◊〉, my head fi•…s the block,
And thats the worst, yet future times will tell:
I sunk not •…eightly, for a crown I fell.
Come on my masters, you know the 〈◊〉 of the kings cōmand,
And what in this great business you must do,
Which is to keep him safe, and not vouchsafe
That any creature speak or visit him,
Till he be brought to the presence•… of the king,
You must not start for bounty nor for threats.
No though he say he is a noble man,
As it may be, he may prove mighty borne,
Yet what for that? you must perform your office
Or else expect to taste sharp punishment.
Tut, fear not my Lord, wee that have had Cerberus office so many years under a gate, are not to learn now to play either diules or tyrants, let vs but see him, and then take no care for his safety.
Nay hee shall bee put into safe keeping, for my wife shall take charge of him.
Tic well deui'sd, see where he comes,
He may not see my presence, think upon it,
Your charge is trusty, 〈◊〉 of mi•…wwaight.
Farewell.
Fear not: come my •…arts, compass him about, and cease on him all at once, like so many Ravens on a dead horse.
Now an eternal sleep, an apoplex, a swooned
Cease on their senses, who in this disguise
Shall view or note my vile deformity.
I was bewitched with spells to my misfortune:
Or else star crossed with some hags hellishnesse.
Sure I said my prayers, riced on my right side,
Washed hands and eyes, put on my girdle last;
Sure I met no splea-footed baker,
No hare did cross me, nor no bearded witch,
Nor other ominous sign, O then why
Should I be thus damn'nd in the devils nets?
Pst possible? this habit which I wear
Should become any man? now of my soul,
I loath to see my self, and willingly
I would even vomit at my counteneance.
Stand sir, we arrest you.
Arrest me, why I injure no man but my self.
You are the more unkind, he that wrongs himself, will not stick to wrong the whole world also.
Nay strive not for we arrest you by virtue of the Kings com∣mission.
Well my masters be careful, you may mistake me.
Indeed it is no marvel you are so like other men.
Indeed at this time, I am hardly like one of Gods making.
Faith and I am sure you are no man of a good taylors making, you are but beast work.
Well yet I may hap to prove a noble man.
A whoremaster or an unthrift, away with him, and let •…man man catechise him upon pain of my displeasure.
Roll on the chariot wheels of my dear p•…ots,
And bear mine ends to their desired •…kes:
As yet theirs not a rub of wit, a gulf of thought,
No rocky misconstruction, thorny amaze,
Or other let of any doubtfulness;
As yet thy way is even smooth and plain,
Like the greene Ocean, in a silent calm.
Blessed credulity, thou great God of error,
That art the strong foundation of •…uge wrongs•…
To thee give I my vows 〈◊◊〉,
By thy great deity he doth believe
Falsehoods, that falsehoods self could not invent,
And from that misbeleefe doth draw a course
To overwhelm even virtue, truth and sanctity.
Let him go on blessed stars, tic meet he fall,
Whose blindfold judgment hath no guide at all.
But O these shadows have bewitchted long,
To threat and not to do, doth malice wrong;
And see here comes the Queen.
My Lord the Duke, your presence and my wish,
Jump in an even line together: come we must to cards,
I have some crow•…es I needs must lose to you.
I humbly beseech your highness pardon me,
I have important business of the Kings,
Which doth command mine instant diligence.
Brother, indeed you shall attend the Queen,
Another time will serve those state dispatches.
Sister content you, the affairs of state
Must give their best attendance on the times,
And great occurrents must not lose their minutes.
Now isle stand to it, that to be a states man or a la•…ier, is to be of the most thankless occupation that ever was derived from human invention.
Why I pray thee wench?
Because they bestow all the laborious toil of the mind un∣till they be forty, that they may live imprisoned in a study chamber till they be fourscore, only this worlds Mammon, which is great name and riches, like a string between a galley slaves legs, is the on∣lie ease of their fetters.
A notable construction of a noble labour: but shall we not have your company my Lord?
My service Madam, but my presence the King hath employed, only if you please, I will send Prince Philocles to your Majesty.
No creature better for his skill in play,
Is equal with our knowledge, good my Lord,
Send him to my privy chamber presently.
I will, and send affliction after him,
And see where he comes, My Lord your presence hath
Saved me much labour, and a little care,
I was in quest for your fair company:
The Queen my Lord entreats you earnestly
You will attend her in her privy chamber.
Unto what end?
Only to waste some time at cards with her,
The lasy hours stick heavy on her thoughts,
Which she would lose with some forgetfulness.
Faith, &amp; play ne'er relished worse within my thoughts,
I know not how, but laden heaviness
Draws me to be in love with melancholy.
The fitter for you with more light sports
To chase that blood consumer from your breast,
Who with a honey poison doth devour,
And kill the very life of livelihood.
Tic true, &amp; therefore shall your counsel tutor me,
Where is her Majesty?
Gone to her privy chamber where she doth ex∣pect you.
I will attend her presently.
Doe, and I will attend thee to thy grave,
Poor shallow Lord, by much too virtuous.
Hoe, whose within there?
Your graces pleasure.
Go tell his Majesty that I must speak with him.
I go.
Come my Lord take your place, here are cards, and here are my crowns.
And here are mine, at what game will your Majesty play?
At mount saint.
A royal game, and worthy of the name,
And meetest even for Saints to exercise:
Sure it was of a women's first invention.
It is not Saint, but Cent, taken from hundreds.
True, for amongst millions hardly is found one saint
Indeed you may allow a double game,
But come list for the dealing, it is my chance to deal.
Inaction most, most proper to your sex.
How now my waking dragon, thou whose eyes
Doe never fall or close through Lethean sleep,
What is there a Hercules that dare to touch,
Or enter the Hesperian Rosaries?
Speak softly gentle Lord behold, behold
The silly birds are tangled in your snare,
And have no way to scope your punishment:
See how her eyes doe court him, and his looks pay to her
love a double interest: fie fie, they are toe blame.
What are you my Lord?
Your highness servant, but misfortunes flaue.
Your game I mean.
Nothing in show, yet somewhat in account,
Madam I am blank.
You are a double game, and I am no less, theres an hundred, &amp; all cards made but one knave.
Mark that, of my life she means your Majesty.
True, I know she holds me as her varlet,
And that I am imperfect in her game,
But my revenge shall give me better place,
Beyond the hate of her foul impudence.
Nay good my Lord observe, they will confirm you better.
Whats your game now?
Four Kings as I imagine.
Nay I have two, yet one doth me little good.
Indeed mine are 2 Queens, &amp; one Isle throw away.
Doth your Majesty mark that?
You are the King that she is weary of,
And my sister the Queen that he will castaway.
Can you decard Madam?
Hardly but I must doe hurt.
But spare not any to confirm your game.
Would you have more plain proof of their foul •…son?
They doe not plot your highness death alone.
But others which they think depend on me.
My self and those which doe you services,
They are bloody minded, yet for my self,
Were it not for your safety, I could wish
You would remit and blot these errors out,
In hope that time would bring them to more virtue.
O then thou did not loom, nor thy faith
Took hold upon my scandals, fie I am mad,
Shamed and disgrac't, all wit-stung, wisdomlesse.
Within there ho?
Did your majesty call?
Go instantly, (nay doe not look sad or pale,
Neither dispute with me nor with thy thoughts:
But as thou love thy life, effect my will)
Call all my guard, ascend the Queens privy chamber,
And in my name arrest her and Prince Philocles of treason:
Make no delay but in thy diligence
Show how thou dost respect me, arrested once,
Convey them unto straightest prison: away.
For you my Lord, go instantly prepare,
And summon all the Princes of our land
Unto an instant Parliament, where we
Will have them both condemned immediately,
Without their answers plaints or pitiousnes.
Since women's tears doe blunt revenges sword,
I will not see nor hear thē speak one word.
Madam and Prince Philocles, in the Kings name I arrest you both of high treason.
He lies that saith I ever knew the word.
I pray thee doe not affright me gentle Lord,
Thy words doe cary death even in their sound.
Madam I am most sorry tic my fortune,
But what I doe is by the Kings commission.
Whence is that warrant grounded, or whats our treason?
I am his instrument but not his counsailor.
Witness my tears that I am innocent.
Madam be patient, that we doe not know,
Wee have no cause to grieve at, as for envies toil,
Let her even break her own gall with desire,
Our innocence is our prevention.
Be cheerful Madam, tic but some villains sound,
Made only to amaze, not to confound.
And what must wee doe my Lo•…d?
To prison are the words of my commission.
Then lead the way; he hath of grief no sense,
Whose conscience doth not know of his offence.
HOw now mad sister, your dear love is condemned,
A sweet adulterer.
How, condemned before their trial?
No they were condemned by Act of Parliament.
I doe not hold thee brother for a man,
For it is reasonless to mock cala•…ity,
If he die innocent, thrice happy soul;
If guilty, weep, that man should so transgress:
Nature of reason thus much doth importune,
Man should partake in grief with mans misfortune.
For him, if ere mine eyes weep, may they drop out
And leave my body blinder then my sense:
Pity my foe the ruin of my house,
My valours scandal, and mine honours poison!
No let him fall, for blood must still quench lust,
Law hath condemned him, then his death is just.
Spit out that monster envy, it corrupts you,
And mildly hear me answer for my love,
What did he against you was not honourable,
Which you against him would not have gladly done?
Will you hate him for acting your own thoughts?
Can it be ill in him yet good in you?
Let reason weigh this difference then you'll find
His honour poises down his infamy.
Can thou love him that brought thee to thy death?
No like a God he made me with his breath.
Did he not win thy love and then reject thee?
His honour not his love doth now neglect me.
Fond maid thy soolish dotage doth mistake him.
Hell shall have mercy ere I will sorsake him.
Farewell then sister, friend to my greatest foe,
Revenge strikes home, being ended with one blow.
Prevention thou best midwife to misfortune,
Unfold this ugly monsters treachery,
And let his birth be ominous struck dead,
Ere it have being in this open world:
Loves commands nature, brother pardon me,
Thine envy di•…s by my loves liberty.
Invention (hart of wit) possess my brain,
For treason is to treason her own bane.
And you bright heavens, now aid me in my plots,
That truth may shine through falsehoods leporous spots.
My life Isle hazard to redeem my love,
Firm constancy like rocks can never move.
Be bold then maiden hart in his defence
He saved thy life, thy life's his recompense.
My wit and hopes have furnish•… me with all
The helps of art, to bring forth treasons fall.
Now to the means: some say that gold hath power,
To enter without force a gatelesse tower;
And Isle try that, which if it take fast hold,
Isle never blame them more that dote on gold.
Hoe, whose within there?
Who calls, what would you have? I thought you were a womā you were so hasty: O Madam is it you? I cry you mercy.
My grief speaks loud sir, and my swist desire
Ore rules my tongue, makes it keep time with thought,
I long to see a prisoner in this ill built house.
What prisoner Madam?
The worthy Prince, the famous Philocles.
Madame I dare not, without especial warrant.
I have my brothers strong commission, hold there is gold.
This golden calfe is an excellent Idol; and sew of my profes∣zion but serves it this dumb god gives tongue to all men, wit to all mē, honour to any man, but honesty to no man; and therefore as for ho∣nasty I mean not to deal with so dear a commodity, but leave it to my better: Madam those stairs direct you to his lodging.
I thank you sir.
This is a worthy Lady to give thus much for the bare sight of a man in affliction, if he were at liberty it were nothing: but being as it is, it is most bountiful, but it may be it is for the past hours of for∣mer recreations, well let it be what it shall be, I am sure it was not that I should hold this disputation: but see here she comes again.
Madame my soul cannot consent to leave
Your life in this great hazard, nor can death
Carry such ugly shape as doth the thought
That you are left in this extremity:
Indeed I will not leave you.
Will you grow mad? what shall your nobler spirit
Which is the school of wisdom grow so fond,
As to revolt from all our happiness?
Our plots you know, and how to manage cares,
Whose true events have true proportions.
Then dear Lord rest resolved, the Gailer over hears:
Live you with safety, most worthy maid farewell.
Farewell fair Prince; thanks M Jailer and a kind commend.
As much unto your Ladyship. So now Isle lock my doors.
Is our commission, as wee gave in charge,
Delivered ore to the Corigidors?
It is, and with such strictness and advice,
For speedy execution of the •…am,
That by this time I know they are in the way
Unto their execution, for the hour
Of death doth run upon his latest minutes.
Tic well: for till their shameless liu•…s have end,
There can no comfort creep into my thoughts,
Or ought save mifchi•…f keep me company.
Why was I borne to this malignity
And l•…wnesse of base fortune: yet my place
Aboue the level of the vulgars sight,
O it is but to let me know thus much,
That those which lie within the richest graves
Were at the best but fortunes glorious •…aves.
But see, here comes my shame.
My dearest Lord.
Pass and respect me not lascivious woman,
Thy tears are of the spears of Crocodils,
See how I stop mine ears against thy plaints,
And glue mine understandings from thy charms,
Nay call on him thou hast offended most,
Mercy from me were worse then cruelty.
My dearest dread, my best best sovereign,
Whom I have ne'er offended but with zeal
And constant love, loyal and honourable,
Vouchsafe me though a Queen a subjects right,
And let me know for what offence I perish.
For thine adulterate and monstrous lust,
Shameful and gross and most unsufferable.
Who doth accuse vs•…
Our self, and our own soul that have beheld
Your vile and most lascivious passages.
O that my tongue would not betray my knowledge
Then would I amaze them all with mine assertions:
Madame, challenge the law.
My gracious Lord, since no desert in me,
Can merit your belief, nor that your eye,
Can rightly judge my pure complexion:
Yet as your handmaid, let me beg the right,
Due unto wretches from our countries laws.
The tenure of the law you do demand.
That in the case of slander, where the proof
Proceeds as much from envy as from truth,
We are allowed our champions to defend
Our innocence, with a well ordered sword.
I looked for this objection and allow it,
Nor am I unprovided for your best
And strongest hope in any victory; Lords attend in my Champion.
Will you my Lord approve the Kings assertion.
Madame, although against the nature of my spirit,
And my first duty, bound to your allegiance,
Yet now compelled by duty and by truth,
I must of force become your opposite.
Thou art no true Italian, nor true gentleman,
Thus to confound the glory of thy judgment.
Hath not that arm which now is armed against me
That valour, spirit, judgment and that worth,
Which only makes you worthy, stood t'approue
More then my self will challenge to my virtues?
And are you now basely turned retrograde?
Well, I perceive ther's nought in you but spleen,
And times observance, still to hold the best:
Still I demand the Law.
And you shall have it in the amplest manner. Sound cornets.
There is a cōbatant on the defēdāts part; your majesties pleasure.
Give him his oath according to the laws.
Are the fair ends of this your warlike posture,
To prove the innocence of the•…e two condo•…nd?
So help you Jove.
They are.
Then give the warlike final to the fight.
Thou art my slave, either confess or die.
Did thou speak true, I would not sound a word
To save the world from cinders; yet that thou majesty
With more resolved fury murder me,
This I confess, it was I that only stirred,
Out of strong falsehoods hate and jealousy
The kings eternal wrath, and made him think
Untruths, that even untruth would not suggest:
And all my malice sprung from that Prince Philocles.
No it was from me that still am Philocles.
My Philocles, my Queen, O double pardon me,
My jealousy, his envy, and your virtues:
Are sprung from such impatient contraries,
I cannot reconcile them; yet O pardon me:
My faith in life shall make you recompense:
For thee rare Mariana; thou hast wrought
A work of noble constant magnitude.
As for this monster, this my tempting devil,
Whose forfeit life is witness to his shame:
I give his life and fortunes to the Queen,
She whom his malice would have brought to death,
Shall now be judge and Juror of his breath.
In which commission, (madame) let it be enroled
He is my brother and my best of blood.
And only that is charter for his life:
Live enuiou•… Lord, more envious then you are great,
Live to lament thy worst of wretchedness,
Live to repent, since this I certain know:
Thine own gald conscieuce will be thy worst woe.
Come bring him away, thrust him forward, though favour and a great purse were against him.
How now, what tamult have we there?
And it please your majesty we have brought you here a slip a piece of false coin: one that is neither stamped with true coin for his excuse, nor with good clothes for his redemption.
Alphouso, in the name of madness how comes this Metamorphosu? Nay stand forth, discourse, if thou dost lie, thou art mine enemy.
Nay more, if thou stick in any bog, and by a trick seek to wind out, I 〈◊〉 discover you.
This conjuration (believe it my Lord) shall make me leap out of all •…etters, and briefly thus I have long time loved the fair wife of the Orator; &amp; having no opportunity but his absence at the senate, I took that season: hee out of negligence, omitting his papers returned unseasonably, sound me insufficiently, and forced me to take san∣ctuary strangely, which however I purchased, yet hee found mine
apparel, and mistaken in the tenure, reached it presently, put it on im∣mediatly: and now in the senate house is pleading in it seriously.
I cannot blame him, you having got so much within his in∣ward garment.
Of all which my Lord, I being (in a strict conceit) a bawdy wit∣ness: and having both from the Orators scorns and delays received many indignities; though by this discovery to cry quittance with my proud enemy.
And you have amply done, yet this jest,
So perfect doth deserve more memory.
〈◊〉, go bid the Orator attend vs presently.
And now to you Drap and Velous, I did
Refer you long since to the Orator.
Yet I note your attention: come there is
Some too close fisted hardness in your hearts,
You gripe too hard, your bribes will not disburse,
Come tell me truly, as you look for heaven,
What must you pay for your dispatches?
A thousand crowns we offred willingly.
And will your suit avail with such disbursment?
It will, and we most richly satisfied.
Will you bestow the m•…ney on our self,
We will see the business perfited.
With all our hearts, and be full joyed thereat, here are the crowns.
You shall have your dispatches.
See here comes the Orator, Prat come hither.
These Gentlemen whom long since I referd
To Your dispatches, are yet unsatisfied.
Alas my Lord the state,
I know implo•…es you, yet theres many minute•…
May give your best cares leisure; come there is
Some odd disburse, some bribe, some gratulance,
Which makes you lock up leisure, come tell true,
What bribe must they give, what is your v•…most price
But five hundred c•…wnes of my best conscience.
Tut it is nothing, hold here is the coin,
And let them have their pattens presently:
Or look to loose both place and sovereignty.
Legions of devils haunt their diligence.
Fie, I would not have a man of your high place,
Or for respect of wealth or base observance
In smallest things thus to neglect your credit.
Why look you my Lords, this Orator is not like others of his ra•…ke,
Who from their ganish and fantastic humours,
Go thorough the streets, spotted in peacocks plumes.
Wearing all colours, laces, broderies,
Sattans and silks, so antike garnished,
That when their gowns are off, you cannot find
In Italy a master shaped more nice.
But this fellow Prate, heir's of another •…ort,
Clothed like himself, demure and soberly:
Nay you shall see him for a president.
Passion of mine eie-sight, who have we here?
This is Alphonso, ther's th•… Orator.
Heart of impatience, I am 〈◊〉 Cuckold,
A scorn, a by word and a laughing stock.
What is my wife turned •…whore 〈◊〉 must he•… deptn
Be sounded by the plumes of 〈◊〉
Well, the revenge that I will take for this my 〈◊〉,
Shall make all whores hereafter 〈◊〉 my name.
Not for thy life, not for my love I 〈◊〉 thee:
Thy wife is honest, chaste and 〈◊〉:
Only this wanton Lord, with lust and come
Hath much attempted, but 〈◊〉 in nought,
For proof see here the crowns 〈◊〉 would have given
T'haue purchased her beds hono•… •…ut she would not,
Which I bestow on you for recompense.
Therefore as thou dost hope my grace to find,
So to thy wife, be loving, gentle kind.
Your majesty may mould me to your pleasure
I thank you and will quittance it.
Now Meshant, we restore to you your lands,
Your honours and near places, next our self,
To all that feel distaste in any sore,
We give to cure them, all our grace and favour,
Thus storms bring gentle sun-shine, and our hands,
May after shipwreck bring vs to safe lands.

IF for opinion hath not blast his fame,
Nor expectation filled the general round,
You deem his labours slight, you both confound
Your graver judgment and his merits.
Impartial hearing fits judicious spirits▪
Nor let the fruit of many an hour fall,
By envies tooth, or base detractions gall.
Both which are tokens of such abject spirits,
Which wanting worth, themselves hate other merits:
Or else of such, which once made great by fame,
Rapine at those which seek t'attaine the same.
From both we know all truer judgements free
To them our muse with blushing modesty
Patiently to her entreats their favour,
Which done, with judgment praise, or else dislike the labour.
Tricks and shows; protestations with men are like tears with women, forgot ere the cheek be dry: Gerardine is a gentleman, his Lands be in Sty∣tutes: A is not for thee nor thou for him, a is a Gallant, and young thoughts be most inconstant.
Yet young vines yield most wine.
But old veins the best, believe not these great breached gallants, they love for profit, not for affection, if a brings thee to a fools paradise, a will forsake thee.
Which fortune, God send my enemy: Love is a cold heate, a bitter sweet, a pleasure full of pain, a huge loss, and no gain, why should thou love him only?
Words cannot force what destiny hath sealed,
Who can resist the influence of his stars,
Or give a reason why a loves, or hates
Since our affections are not ruled by will,
But will by our affections. Tic blasphemy
Against Loves most sacred deity, to axe
Why we do love, since tic his only power
That sways all our affections, all things which be
Beasts, Birds, Men, Gods, pay him their fealty
Tut, Love is an idle fantasy, bred by desire, nursed by delight, An humour that begins his dominion in Leo the Lyon, the sign of the hart, and ends in Aries the Ram, the sign of the head, His power is to stir the blood, pricks up the flesh, fills all the body with a libidinous humour, and is indeed the overture of all Ladies: which to prevent, J have banished Ge∣rardine (your dearly beloved) my house, and as for you, since I 〈2 pages missing〉
In her smile deceitful.
In her hate reuengeable.
And in nothing but her death acceptable, Jle tell thee: ther's no creature more desirous of an honest name and worse keeps it, then a woman, Dost here, follow this song &amp; if ever thou forsake thy Country for a wagtail, let me be whipped to death with ladies hearelaces.
Letts here that worthy song Gentile master Lipsalue.
Observe? Now if I list will I love no more
Nor longer waite upon a gill.
Since every place now yields a wench
If one will not another will;
And if what I have heard be true
Then young and old, and all will doe:
How dost thou like this? man.
No more no more,
This is the chamber which Confines my love,
This is the Abstract of the spacious world,
Within it holds a Gem, so rich so rare
That Art or nature never yet could set
A valued prise to her in valued worth.
Vnvalued worth, ha ha ha! Why? shees but a woman,
And they are windy turning veins, love light as chafe which when
Our nourishing grains are winnowed from them,
Vnconstantly they fly at the least wind of passion
A women's eye, can turn it self with quick dexterity
And in each wanton glass can comprehend
Their sundry fancy suited to each fend
tut their loves are all compact of levity
even like themselves, Nil muliere lenius.
Tut man every one knows their worth, when they are at a rack rent; In the term time, they bear as great a prise as wheat when transportations are.—
Peace lets draw ne'er the window and listen if we may hear her.
Debarred of liberty! Oh that this flesh
could like swift moving thoughts transfer it self,
From place to place, unseen and undissolved:
Then should no iron ribs, or Churlish flint
divide my love and me, Deer Gerardin
despite of Chance or Guardians Tyranny,
Jde move within thy orb and thou in mine.
She'd move within thy orb, and thou in hers, blud she talk bawdy to her self: Guggin stand close;
But in vain do I proclaim my grief,
when ayre and walls can yield me no relief.
The walls are the more stony •arted then,
Peace good Gudgin gape not so loud.
Come thou my best companion, thou art sensible
and can my wrongs reiterate; Thou and I.
will make some mirth in spite of Tyranny:
The black browed night drawn in her pithy wayne
In starry spangled pride rides now ore heaune
Now is the time when stealing minutes tell
The stole delight joyed by all faithful lovers
Now loving souls contrive both place &amp; means,
for wished pastimes only I am pent
within the closure of this fatal wall
deprived of all my joys.
My dear Maria be Comforted in this?
the frame of heaven shall sooner seas to move,
bright Phoebus Steeds leave their diurnal race
and all that is forsake their natural being
Ere I forget thy love.
Who's that protestes so fast?
Thy ever vowed servant Gerardine.
O By your vows it seems you'd fine get up
I and ride to.
I would most loved Maria.
I knew it: he that to get up to a fair woman
will stick to vow and swear, may be accounted no man,
but tell me why hast thou chose this hour to visit me?
which nor the day nor night can claim but both
or neither, why in this twilight came thou?
T'auoyd suspicious eyes, I come dear love
To take my last farewell, fitting this hour
which nor bright day will claim nor pitchy night
An hour sit to part conjoined souls,
Since that my native soil will not afford
My wished and best content, I will forsake it
And prove more strange to it then it to me.
In times swift course all things shall find event
Bee it good or ill, &amp; destinies do grant
That most preposterous courses often gain,
What labour and direct proceedings miss.
VVo't thou forsake me then?
Let first blessed life forsake me, be constant
My absence may procure thy more enlarge
and then —
Desires conceit is quick, I apprehend thee
Be thou as loyal, as I constant prove,
And time shall knit our mutual knot of love,
Wear this my loves true pledge: I need not wish
I know thou wo't return, or will I say
Thou may conceal thy self being returned
till I may make escape and visit thee.
I prethe love attempt not to ascend
my Chamber window by a lathered rope?
the entrance is to narrow: except this post
Which may with ease, yet that is dangerous:
I pre thee do it not I here some call: Farewell
my constant love let after actions tel;
O perfection of women!
A plague of such perfectiō, How she woes, by negatives shows
Thee? what to do? under colour of disswation
Shees truly virtuous.
Tut man outward appearance is no authentic instance of the inward desires, women have sharp falcons eyes, and can soar aloft, but keep them like Falcons from flesh and they soon stoop to a gaudy lure.
Why then Huguenot women are admirable An∣gells.
But Angels make them admirable devils.
My loves chaste smile to all the world doth speak his spotless innocence.
Women's smiles are more of custom then of cur∣tesy, women are creatures, their hearts and they are full of holes, apt to receive but not retain affection; Thou wilt to morrow thou saift be gone, if thou wilt know the worst of a Countries marry before thou goosed, for if thou can endure a cursed wife, never care what company thou come in.
Come merry gallants, will you associate me to my Cousin Purges the Potticaries, and take part of my parting feasts to night.
O his wife is of the family of Love, Isle thither, per∣haps I may prove of the Fraternity in time, weal thither thats flat.
What Club, Club, is Club within there.
Mistress.
J pray what said Master Doctor Glister, will a come.
A sent word a would, for a was but to carry a diet to one of his pacients; what call you his, she that paints a day times, and looks fair and fresh, on the outside, but in the night time is filthier then the inside of Bocardo, and is indeed far more unsavoury that know her forsooth.
Went a to his.
A had a receipt for the Grincomes in his hand, and a said a would take that in his way.
Tic well, and what guest besides him &amp; his wife will be here at supper.
The first in my Account is Master Gerarine your cou∣sin:
Master Doctor Glister and his wife: Master Drifat the Merchant, Master Lipsalue the Courtier, Master Guggin the gallant, and their pages. These J take will be your full number∣ber.
Then belike my room shall be stuffed with Court∣ers and gallants to night: of all men I love not these gallants, they'll prate much but do little, they are people most vncer∣taine: They use great words, but little sense: great Beards, but little wit: Great breeches but no money.
That was the last thing they swore away.
Belike they cannot fetch it again with swearing, for if they could, theirs not a page of theirs, but wot be as rich as a monarch.
Ther's nothing mistress that is sworn out of date, that returns; their first oath in times past was by the Mass: And that they have sworn quite away: Then came they to their Faith, as by my Faith it is so: That in a short time was sworn away too; For no man believes now more then a sees. Then they swore by their honesties, and that Mistress you know is sworn quite away: After their honestyes was gone, then came they to their Gentility, and swore, as they were Gentlemen: and their Gentility they swore a∣way so fast, that they had almost sworn away all the Ancient Gentry out of the Land, which indeed are scarce mist: for that Yeomen and Farmers Sons, with the help of a few welshmen, have undertook to supply their places. That at the last they came to Silver; and their Oath was, by the Cross of this silver, and swore so fast upon that, that now they have scarce left them a Cross for to Swear by.
And what do they swear by now their money is gone.
Why by () and God refuse them.
And can they not as well say men refuse them, as God refuse them.
No mistress, for men, especially Citizens and rich
men, have refused them their bonds and protestations all∣ready.
Tic well, see how supper goes forward, and that my shoes be very well blackt, against J go to the Fa∣milye.
Now sweet Chick, where hast thou been, in troth law I am not well, J had thought to have spent the morning at the Fa∣mily, but now I am resolved to take pills, and therefore I prey thee desire Doctor Glister that a wud minister to me, in the morning.
Thy will is known, and this for answer say,
Tic fit that wisemen should their wives obey.
And now sweet duck know, I have been for my cousin Ge∣rardines Will and have it, a has given thee a legacy, but the to∣tall is Marries.
Master Doctor, your wife and master Dryfat are most well∣come, now were my cousin Gerardine &amp; Master Lipsalue here, our number were complete.
Is this frantic Will done, will master Gerardine to sea, let me tell you I am no whit sorry, let such as will be headstrong bite on the bridle.
Tic here master Doctor, all his worth is Marries and locked in a trunk, which by to morrow Sun, shall be deli∣uered to your custody.
Me thinks it were a reasonable match to bestow your Niece on master Gerardine: A is a most hopeful gentleman, and his revenue such, that having your Nieces portion to clear it of all incombraunces, t'will maintain them both in a very worthy degree.
Tut, you are master Dryfatt the Merchant, your skill is greater in Connyskins and Wollpacks, then in Gentlemen, his Lands be in Statutes, you Merchants were wont to bee Merchant staplers, but now Gentle∣men have gotten up the trade, for there is not one
gentleman amongst twenty but his land be ingagd in twen∣tie Statutes staple.
Let every man his humour have, I do at none re∣pine,
J never regard whose wench J kiss, nor who doth the like by mine:
The indifferent minds I hold still best, what ever does befall,
For she that will doe with me and thee, will be a wench for all; and how goes the squares.
Your stay gentleman does wrong to a great many of good stomachs, your suppers expect you.
And we our suppers.
And from what good exercise come you three.
From a play, where we saw most excellent Simpson excel the whole world in gate carrying.
Was it performed by the youths.
By youths: why I tell thee we saw Simpson, and J hope it is not for youths to play Simpson: Believe it we saw Simpson bear the Town gates on his neck, from the lower to the upper stage, with that life and admirable accord, that it shall never be equalled (unless the whole new livery of Pore∣ters set their shoulders)
Fie fie, tic pity young Gentlemen can bestow their time no better, This playing is not lawful, for I cannot find that either plays or players were allowed in the prime Church of Ephesus by the Elders.
Aha, I think she ticklde you there.
Cousin Gerardine, shall the Will be read before supper?
Before supper I beseech you.
J, I, before supper, for when these women's bellies be full their bones will be soon at rest.
Well Master Doctor Pity the state of a poor gentle∣man it is in you to stay his journey, and make him &amp; your self happy in his choice.
Hold you content shall this Will be read?
It shall, read you good Master Lipsalue.
Command silence then.
Silence.
In the name of God Amen. Know all men by these pre∣sense, that I Gerardine being strong of body, and perfect in sense.
Thats false, theirs no lover in his perfect sense.
Peace Dryfat.
Doe give and grant to Maria Glister: Daughter of Iohn Glister, and Niece to Doctor Glister Physician, all my leases, lands, Chattels, goods and movables whatsoever: This is stark nought, you cannot give away your movables, for Mistress Doctor and Mistress Purge, claim both shares in your movables by reason of their legacies.
Thats true, for their legacies must go out of your movables.
J put it in all my movables, these following Legacies being paid.
Doe so good Master Lypsalue.
Tic done.
I pray read only the Legacies, for Supper stays.
Well, the Legacies, first I give to my Cousin Mistress Purge A fair large standing, whats this, O Cup; A fair large standing cup, with a close stool.
Tic not so, tic not so.
I cry you mercy, a close cover tic, To mistress Doctor I give a fair Bodkin of gold, with two orient Pearls atten∣ding the same: All which are in my Trunk to be delivered to the keeping of Maria, In witness, &amp;c. Is this your Will?
Tic.
To it with your hand and seal.
How is it Chic, I must have the standing Cup, and mistress Glister the bodkin.
Right sweet Duck.
I pray gentlemen put to your hands.
Come, your fists Gentlemen your fists.
Mistress Glister, I have found you always more flex∣ible to understand the estate of a poor gentleman, then your husband was willing, therefore I have thought it a point of charity to reveal the wrongs you sustained by your husbands looseness. Let me tell you in private, that the Doctor cuckolds Purgo oftener then he visits one of his pacients: what a spares from you, a spends lavishly on his: These Apothecaries are a kind of panders, look to it, if a keep Maria long close, it is for some lascivious end of his own.
She is his Niece.
Tut, these Doctors have tricks, your niceness is such, that you can endure no polluted shows in your house, take heed least a make you a Bawd before your time, look to it.
Come, our hands are testimonies to thy follies, shall's now to supper, we'll have a health go round to thy voyage.
I and to all that forswear marriage, and can be content with other men's wives.
Of which consort you two are grounds, one touches
the Base, and the other tickles the minikin.
But to our cheer, come gentles let's away,
The Roastmeat's in consumption by our stay.
THe gray eyed morning Braves me to my face, and calls me sluggard, tic time for Tradesmen to be in their
shops, for he that tends well his shop, and hath an alluring wife, with a graceful what de lack, shall be sure to have good doings, and good doings is that, that crowns so many Cit∣tizens, with the horns of abundance. My wife (by ordinary course) should this morning have been at the Family, but now her soft Pillow hath given her counsel to keep her bed, Master Doctor should (indeed) minister to her: to whose pills she is so much accustomed, that now her body looks for them as duly, as the Moon shakes off the old, and borrows new horns. J smile to my self to hear our Knights and gallants say, howe they gull vs Citizens, when indeed wee gull them, or rather, they gull themselves: Here they come (in Term time,) hyer Chambers, and perhaps kiss our wives: Well: what loose I by that: Gods blessing on's heart I say still, that makes much of my wife, for they were very hard fauou∣red, that none could find in's heart to love but our selves: Drugs would be dog cheap but for my private well practiced doctor, and such customers. Tut, jealousy is a hell, and they that will thrive, must utter their wares as they can, and wink at small faults.
The tedious night is past, and the iocond morn looks more lively and fresh, then an old gentlewoman's glazd face in a new periwig; By this time my humorous lo∣for is at Grauesend, and J go with more joy to fetch his trunk, than ever the valiant Troianes did to draw in the Grecian Jade, his goods shall into the walls of my Troy, and be offered to a face more lively, then ever was that thrice ravished Helen, yet with such Caution, that no danger shall happen to me.
Master Lipsalue, welcome within ken, we two are so nearly linked, that if thou be absent but one two hours, thy acquaintance grows almost mouldy in my memory.
And then fly blown in mine how dost thou doe.
Fellow page, I think our acquaintance runs low to, but if it run not of the lees, lets set it a tilt, and give 'hem some dregs to their mouldy fly blown complements.
No rather lets pierce the Rundlets of our running heads and give 'hem a neat cup of wagshippe, to put down their Courtship.
Courtship, Cartship: for the tongues of Complemen∣ters run on wheels: but mark 'hem they have not done yet.
And in faith how yst: me thinks thou hast been a long vagrant.
The Rogation hath been long indeed: therefore we may salute as ceremoniously as Lawyers when they meet after a long vacation, who to renew the discontinud state Tale, they strech it out with such length, that whilst they greet before, their Clients kiss them behind.
If his nose were put in the remainder of that state Tale, he would say it were an unsavoury one.
J wonder why many men gird so at the Law.
Isle tell thee, because they themselves have neither Law nor conscience.
But what news now? how stands the state of things at Brussels.
Faith weak and limber, weak and limber: nothing but pride and double dealing, virtue is vices lackey; beggars suck like horse leaches at the hart of bounty, and loves theme so tyerd and spurgald, that he can be no longer ridden with honesty.
Well fare the City yet: there virtue rides a cockhorsse cherished and kept warm in good sables, and Fox fur, and with the breath of his nostrils, drives pride and covetousness before him, like's own shadow: beggars have whipping cheer, bounty obliges men too't, gives money for Scrips and Scrolls, &amp; liberality sealed with strong Arms and Heraldry, to out live mortality: love there will see the last man borne, no∣for give over while ther's an Arrow in the Quiver.
Now we talk of love, I do know not far hence so good a subject for that humour, that if she would wear but the standing collor, and her things in fashion, our Ladies in the Court were but browne sugarcandy, as gross as grocery to her.
She is not so sweet as a potticaries shop is she?
A plague on you, ha you so good a sent? for my life hoe's my Rival.
Her Name begins with mistress Purge dus it not?
True, the only commit of the City.
I, if she would let her Ruffs stream out a little wider; but J am sure she is ominous to me, she makes civil wars and insurrections in the state of my stomach: J had thought to have bound my self from love, but his purging comfets makes me loose bodied still.
What has she ministerd to thee then?
Faith some Lectuary or so.
J, I fear she takes too much of that Lectuary to stoop to love, it keeps her body soluble from sin, she is not troubled with carnal crudities, nor the binding of the flesh.
Thou hast sounded her then belike.
Not I: I am too shallow to sound her, shoe's out of my Element, if I show passion, and discourse of love to his, she tells me I am wide from the right scope, she says she has an other Object, and aims at a better Love then mine.
O thats her husband.
No, no, she speaks pure devotion, shees impenetrable, no gold, or Oratory, no virtue in herbs, nor no physic will make her love.
More is the pity I say, that fair women should prove Saints, before Age had made them croo∣ked: Tic my luck to be croft still, but I must not give over the chase.
Come hither boy while I think on it.
Faith friend Lipsalue I perceive you would fine play with my love, a pure creature tic, for whom I have sought eve∣rye Angle of my brain: but either she scorns Courtiers (as most of them doe, because, they are given to boast of their do∣ings) or else shoe's exceeding straight laced: therefore to prevent this smell smock, Isle to my friend Doctor Glister, (a man ex∣quisite in the Art magic) who hath told me of many rare experiments available in this case: Farewell friend Lip∣salve.
Adieu honest Gregorio, frequent my lodging, J have a Viol de Gambo and good Tobacco: Thou wilt doe this feat boy?
Else knock my head and my pate together,
Away then bid him bring his measure with him: Ge∣rardine is travelled, and I must needs be cast into his mould: my flesh grows proud; and Marries a sweet wench, &amp;c. But yet I must not let fall my suite with mistress Purge, least (Cede va∣canti) my friend Gudgin join issue: Isle rather to my learned Doctor for a spell, for J have a fire in my liver, burns like Hell.
J pray lets have no polluted feet nor Rheumatic chaps enter the house, I shall have my flower look more gre∣sie shortly, then one of your Inn of Court dining Tables: and now to you good Niece I bend my speech, let me tell you plainly, you are a fool to be loue-sicke for any man, longer then he is in your company, are you so ignorant in the rules of Courtship, to think any one man to bear all the prick and praise? I tell thee, be he never so proper, there is an other to se∣cond him.
Let rules of Courtship be authentic still,
To such as doe pursue variety,
But unto those whose modest thoughts do tend.
To honoured Nuptials, and a regular life
As far from show of niceness, as from that
Of impure thoughts, all other objects seem
Respectless, of no proportion balanced with esteem
Of what their souls affect.
No marvel sure you should regard these men with such reverend opinion, ther's few good faces, and fewer graces in any of them, if one among a multitude have a good pair of legs, he never leaves •iding the ring, till he has quite mared the proportion: nay some (as I have heard) wanting lie∣niaments to their liking, and Calfe to support themselves, are fain to use Art, and supply themselves with quilted Calu•s, which oftentimes in Revelling fall about their Ankles, and for their behaviour, wit and discourse (except some few that are travelled) it is as imperfectious and silly, as your Scholars new come from the University, by this light I think we loose part of our happiness when we make these weathercocks our equals.
Disgrace not that for which our sect was made,
Society in nuptial beds aboue these joys
Which lovers taste, when their conjoined lips
Suck forth each others souls, the earth the Ayre,
Yea Gods themselves know none: Elisiums sweet
J all that bliss which Poets pens describe
Are only known, when soft and amorous folds,
Entwine the Corps of two united lovers,
Where what they wish, they have yet still desire,
And sweets are known without society.
Heir's Club forsooth and his fellow prentice have brought master Gerardines Trunk.
Let them come in if their feet be clean.
So then your best beloved is gone, fair weather after him; all thy passions go with him, recomfort thy self wench in a bet∣la choice, his love to thee would have bin of no longer con∣tinuāce
then the untrussing of his hose, then why sholdst thou pine for such a one.
Shoe's foolish sure, with what imperfect phrase,
And shallow wit she answers me.
Honest Club welcome, is this master Gerardines Trunk? he is gone then?
I indeed mistress Glister, he is departed this transitory City, but his whole substāce is here enclosed, which (by com∣mand) we here deliver to your custody, to the use of mistress Maria according to the tenure of the premises.
Place it here my honest Club, well done: and how does thy mistress▪ was she at the Family to day,— spit not good Club, J can not abide it.
Not to day forsooth, she hath overcharged her self and her memory, she means to use a moderation, and take no more then she can make use of.
And I pre thee Club what kind of creatures are these Familists, thou art conversant with them.
What are they? With reverence be it spoken, they are the most accomplished Creatures under heaven, in them is all perfection.
As how good Club?
Omitting their outward graces, Isle show you only one instāce which includes all other: they love their neighbours better then themselves.
Not then themselves Club.
Yes better then themselves, for they love them better then their husbands, and husband and wife are all one; there∣fore better then themselves.
This is logic. But tell me doth she not endeavour to bring my Doctor of her side and Fraternity.
Let him resolve that himself for here he comes.
O: hast thou brought the Trunk honest Club, I com∣mend thy honest care, heir's for thy pains.
J thank you master Doctor, you are free and liberal still, you'll command me nothing back?
Nothing but commendations, farewell: your sweet hart Gerardine is by this time cold of his hope to enjoy thee: he's gone, and a more equal and able husband shall my care ere long provide thee: what clients have bin here in my absence wife?
Faith Mouse none that I know, more then an old woman that had lost her Cat, and came to you for a Spell in the recovery.
I think egregious ignorance will go near to save this age, their blindness takes me for a conjurer: yester∣day a Justice of peace salutes me, with profer of a brace of An∣gells to help him to his footcloth, some 3. days before stolen, and was fine to use his mans cloak in stead on it.
Heers a gentleman craves speech with you sir.
Go in sweet wife, and give my Niece good counsel:
His name.
He will not tell it me.
His countenance.
I can see nothing but his eyes; the rest of him is so rapt in cloak, that it suffers no view.
Admit him, what should he be for a man: what Master Lipsalue is it you? why thus obscured, what discontent overshadows you.
A discontent indeed Master Doctor, which to shake off, J must have you extend your Art to the utmost bounds: you Physitiās are as good as false doors behind hangings to Ladies necessary uses: you know the very hour in which they have neither will to deny, nor wit to mistrust: faith now by the way, when are women most apt.
Shall I vnbutton my self unto you; after the receipt of a purgation▪ for then are their pores most open: but what creature of a Courtier is it, hath drawn your head into the woodcocks noose.
A Courtier? nay by this flesh, J am clean fallen out with them, they have nothing proportionable.
O I perceive then tic some City Star that attracts your aspect.
He knows by his Art —in plain terms a certain Apothecaries wife.
Upon my life master Purge, I smell you sir.
You may smell a man after a purgation indeed: Sir, tic she: Now for that same hath bruited you to be a man expert in necromancy, I would endeavour my self to you for ever, would you vouchsafe to let one of your Spirits bring Mistress Purge into some convenient place, where I might enjoy her: I have heard of the like, can you perform this.
With much facility I assure you: but you must un∣derstand, that the apparition of a spirit is dreadful, and with all covetous, and with no small sum of gold hired to such feats.
Sir heers another gentleman muffeld too, that desires present conference with you.
Walk you into that room, I will bethink my self for your good, and instantly resolve you; let the gentle∣man come in: Lipsalue in love with my vessel of ease? come to me to help him to a morsel most affected by mine own palate? No more but so, I have shaped it, the conceit tickles me.
Sir, as a stranger J welcome you, what master Gudgin have J caught you: J thought it was a gallant that walked muffled, Come, let me behold you at full, here are no Sergeants man.
Master Doctor, this my obscure coming requires an action more obscure: and in brief this tic; Sir, you are held a man far seen in natures secrets, I know you can effect many things almost impossible; know then I love mistress Purge, and opportunity favours me not, nor indeed is she so tractable as I expected, if either by medicine, or your Art magikall, you can work her to my will, J have a poor Gallants reward sir.
Thats just nothing. But how sir would you have me to procure you access to mistress Purge, you never knew a physician a bawd.
Why by conjuration (I tell you) wherein you are said to be as well practised, as in Physic; heir's the best part of my present store to effect it.
Not a penny for my self, but my Spirits indeed they must be fed; walk you by here, while I think upon a spell. What mystery should this be, Lipsalue and Gudgin both in love with mistress Purge, and come to me to help 'hem by Art magic? Tic some gullery sure; yet if my invention hold, isle fit them:
Whose within there, fetch me in all hast two good whips, I think you may have them not far hence; It shall be so, now tell me master Gudgin does no man know of your love to mi∣stress Purge:
Not a man by my Gentry.
Then sir know isle effect it; but understand withal, the apparition will be most horrid, if it appear in his proper form, and will so amaze and dull your senses, that your appe∣tight will be lost and weak, though mistress Purge should at∣tend it naked Now sir, could you name a friend with whom you are most conversant, in his likeness should the spirit ap∣pear.
Of all men living, my conversation is most frequent with Lipsalue the Courtier.
Tic enough: isle to my Spirit— are these whips come there?
Ready here sir.
So lie thou there; my noble gallants isle so firk you: Sir my Spirit agrees in Lipsalues shape; to morrow twixt the hours of four and five, shall mistress Purge be rapt with a whirlwind into Lypsalues chamber, thats the fittest place: for by the break of day Lipsalue shall be mounted, and forsake the City for three days, so my Spirit resolves me▪ Now sir, by my Art, at that very hour shall his chamber door fly open,
into which boldly enter in this sort accoutred: put me on a pure clean shirt, leave off your doublet, (for Spirits endure nothing polluted) take me this whip in your hand, and being entered you shall see the Spirit in Lipsalues shape, in the self same form that you appear; speak these words here ready written, take three bold steps forward, then whip him soundly, who straight vanishes and leaves mistress Purge to your will.
I but shall your Spirit come armed with a whip too?
He shall, but have no power to strike.
Is this infallible, have you seen the proof?
Probatum upon my word, I have seen the expo∣rience, if it fail, say I am a fool, and no Magician.
Master Doctor I would you had some suite at Court, by the faith of a Courtier, J would beg it for you: Fare you well Sir, I shall report of you, as I find your charm.
And no otherwise sir; let me understand how you thrive: ha, ha, ha, now to my friend Lipsalue, I must possess him with the same circumstance, wherein J am assured to get per∣petuall laughter in their follies, and my revenge.
O which way shall J turn, or shift, or go,
To loose one thought of care, no soothing hope
Gives intermission, or beguiles one hour
Of tedious Time, which never will have end,
Whilst love pursues, in vain my absent friend,
Thou continent of wealth, whose want of stoare
For that it could not peiz thvnequall Scale
Of Avarice giu'st matter to my moan,
O dross the level of insatiate Eyes
The Devils Engine, and the souls corrupter,
Thou plaist the Attorney against the lawful force
Of true affection, dost interpose a Barr,
twixt Harts conjoined: Cursed be thy seed of strife,
Whose progress chokes the natural course of life.
O help, help, help.
Stay sweet Maria, I bring thee ample joy
To check that sudden fear, let thy sweet heart
That constant seat of thy affection,
Repay that blood exhausted from thy veins;
Fear not sweet wench? I am no apparition,
But the firm substance of thy truest friend,
Know thou me now?
Gerardine my love?
What unheard of accident presents
Thy unexpected self, and gives my heart
Matter of joy, mixed with astonishment.
I thought thou had bin cabined in thy ship.
Not Trunked within my cruel gardyans house.
That cruelty gives fuel to desire,
For love suppressed fares like a raging fire
which burns all obstacles that stop his course,
And mounts aloft; the Ocean in his source
May easier hide himself, and be confined,
Then Love can be obscured; For in the mind,
She holds her seat, and through that heavenly essence,
Is near, when far remote; her virtual presence,
Fills (like the Air) all places, gives delight,
Hope in despair and hart, against fell despite.
That worst of men thy cruel gardyan may
Keep down a while, but cannot dissipate
what heaven hath joined, for fate and providence,
Gave me this Stratagem, to let him know,
That Love will creep, where tic restraynd to go.
I apprehend the rest: O rare conceit,
I see thy travel happily was faynd
To win access, which with small ease thou hast gained:
This Trunk, which he so greedily supposes,
Contains thy substance (as it doth indeed)
Upon thy fair pretence, in lieu of love
Bequeathed to me, if death should stop the course,
This Trunk (J say) he hugs; sink thou or swim,
So he may feed his wolf, that root of Sin;
His Avarice but heaven (that mocks mans might
Gives this close means t'incist upon our right.
Ingenious Spirit, true Oracle of love,
Thou hast prevented me, this was my plot,
Whose end and scope I long to imitate,
With accents free, and uncontrolled with fear,
Do's opportunity stand fair?
Not now,
Danger stands sentinel.
Then Isle retire,
We must be cautilous.
So so, and Time
Shall not oft turn his hour glass ere isle find,
Peace and occasion fitting to thy mind.
THe coast is clear, and Argus wakeful eyes
Securely sleep: time turns to vs his front;
Come sweet Maria of the auspicious hours
Lets take advantage.
With all my hart, J do embrace the motion with thy self:
Welcome sweet friend to liberty of Air,
Which now me thinks doth promp our breaths to move
Sweet accents of delight, the joys of love:
How dost thou brooke thy little ease, thy Trunk?
That Trunk confines this Chest, this Chest contains
The unbounded speculacion of our love
Incomprehensible: Grief, joy, hope, and fears
(Thaffections of my mind) are like the spheres,
Which in their earring motions do agree,
Through the influence of loves sweet harmony.
Are not inferior bodies here on earth,
Produced and governed by those heavenly ones?
They are.
They jar (you say) yet in that strife maintain
Perpetual league: why should their influence
In rational souls be checked by erring sense?
Or why should mutual love (confirmed by heaven)
B'infringd by men, me thinks tic most uneven.
Thou argu'st well Maria: and this withal
That Bruites, nor Animals do prove a thrall
To such servility: souls that are wards
To gold opinion, or the undue regards
Of broking men, wolves that in sheep-skin bands,
Pray on the harts to join the unwilling hands,
Ruin fair Stocks, when generous houses die,
Or propagate their name with Bastardy.
Sterility and barennes ensue,
Such forced love: nor shall erroneous men
Pervert my settled thoughts, or turn mine eye
From thy fair object, which I will pursue,
Rich in thy love, proud of this interview.
Isle suck these accents, let our breaths engender
A generation of such pleasing sounds,
To interchange delights: O my blot's on fire,
Sweet let me give more scope to true desire.
What would thou more then our minds firm contract?
Tut words are wind▪ thought vnreduct to Art,
Is but an Embrion in the truest sense.
I am beleagued I had need of sense,
You make me blush: play fair yet aboue board:
Here me exemplify loves Latin word
Together with thy self
As thus: harts joined Amore: take A from thence,
Then more is the perfect moral sense,
Plural in manners, which in thee doe shine
Saintlike, immortal, spotless and divine.
Take m away, ore in beauties name,
Craves an eternal Trophy to thy fame,
Lastly take o, in re stands all my rest,
which I in Chaser stile do term a jest.
You break all modest bounds, away, away?
So when men come behind, do women say.
Come come, I say
I thats the word indeed,
Men that come bold before, are like to speed.
But who comes here? monstrum horrendum, my nostrils have the rank sent of knavery, Maria lets remove our selves to the window, and observe this piece of mans flesh.
Now mistress Maria ward your self, if my strong hope fail not, I shall be with you to bring.
To bring what sir? some more o'your kind.
Faith boy thats mine aim.
Jle be sworn sir, you have a good loose, you let fly at chem a pace.
I have shot fair and far off, but now I hope to hit the mark indeed.
God save it.
But wher's the Sign?
Why there.
Thats a special thing to be observed.
I have heard talk of the Gemini, me thinks that should be a Star favourable to your proceeding.
The Gemini, O I apprehend thee: that's because J am so like Gerardine, ha is it not so boy?
As if you were spit out once mouth sir, you must needs be like him, for you are both cut out of a piece: but Lord sir,
how you hunt this chase of love, are you not weary?
Jndefatigable boy, indefatigable.
Fattigable (quoth you) you may call it leaneable well enough, for J am sure it is able to make a man lean.
Tic my vocation boy, we must never be weary of well doing, loue's as proper to a Courtier, as preciseness to a Puri∣tan.
Love (subbandy lust) a Punk in this place subintelli∣gitur.
Boy I have spied my Saint.
Then down on your knees.
Fly of, least she take thee for my familiar: Save thee sweet Maria, Nay wonder not (for thou thy self art wonder,) To see this unexpected gratulaion.
Whom do I see? O how my senses wander?
Am not I Hero: art not thou Lender?
Thar't in the right sweet wench more of that vain;
Her passion ouercomes her, tic the kindest soul:
O excellent devise; it works, it works boy.
It dos in deed sir, like the suds of an Alefat, or a washing Bole.
Joy not too much, extremes are perilous.
O weather beaten love: Cicely go make a fire?
Go fetch my ladder of Ropes, Lender's come.
Mark how prettily in her rapture she harps upon Ge∣rardines travel, let thextasie have end for I am Gerardine.
The devil you are.
Ha? let me see, my love so soon returned.
I never travelled farther then thine eyes,
My bruited journey was a happy project,
To cast a mist before thy jealous gardyan,
Who now suspectles, gives some hope t'attaine
My wished delight, before pursued in vain.
Ask if he strained not hard for that same project.
Has not that project ouerrackt thy brain.
And spent more wit then thou hast left behind.
By this light she flouts him.
No, wit is infinite I spent some brain;
Thy love did stretch my wit upon the Tenters
Then is it like to shrink in the wetting.
It cottons well, it cannot choose but bear
A pretty nap; I tender thy capacity,
A comfortable Caudle cherish it:
But whirs my favour that I bid thee wear
As pledge of love.
Now dost thou put him toot,
More Tenters for his wit, hoe's Nonplus quite
I wear it sweet Maria but on hy days,
Preserve it from the tainting of the ayre,
What should J say: tic in my tother hose.
How in your tother hose? he that J love
Shall wear my favour in those hose he has on.
Fiends and furies: block that I am.
In your tother hose? she talked of a ladder of Ropes; if she would let it down; for my life he would hang himself in it: In your tother hose? why those hose are in Lavender, be∣sides, they have never a Codpeece: but indeed there needs no Ivy where the wine is good. In your tother hose?
I said you were too prodigal of wit.
Expostulate no more, grant me access,
Or else isle travel to the wilderness.
Your only way, go travel till you tier,
Be rid, and let a gull discharge the hyer.
Master, the Doctor the Doctor.
Where? which way.
This way, that way, some way I heard him com∣ming.
O boy J am abused, gulled, disgrac't, my credit's cracked.
You know thats nothing for a new Courtier.
O I shall run beside my self.
No sir, thats my office, isle run by your side.
My brain is out of temper, what shall J do?
••ke her council sir, get a cullis to your capacity, a re∣storatiue to your reason, and a warming pan to your wit: he comes he comes.
Follow close boy, let him not see vs.
What more flatterers about my carrion? more battery to my walls? shall I never be rid of these Petronell Flashes? As for my friend Gerardine, the wind of my rage has blown him to discover countries, and let the sea purge his love away and him together, I care not: young wenches now are all of the hoigh: we that are gardyans must respect more besides Titles, gold lace, person, or parts, we must have Lordships and manors, elsewhere as well as in the man: wealth commands all, and wealth isle have, or else my minion shall lead Apes in hell. J must after this gallant too, isle know his rendezvous, and what company he keeps.
Now must we be abrupt; retire sweet friend
To thy small ease; what more remains to do,
VVee'l consummate at our next interview.
So shall J bear my prisonment with pleasure,
Look thou but big or cruel, foe will yield,
And give to Hymen the honour of the field.
Fie fie Club, go a tother side the way, thou collowst me &amp; my ruff, thou wilt make me an unclean mem∣ber in the congregation,
If you be unclean mistress, you may pure your self, you have my masters ware at your commandment, but what am I then, that does all the drudgery in your House.
Thart born to it, why boy I can show thy Indentures thou giu'st no other milk: wee know how to use all i'theyr kind.
Y are my better in Bark and Rhyne, but in pith and
substance I may compare with you: you're aboue 〈◊◊〉 flesh mistress, and theirs your boast, but in my tother part, we are all one before God.
All one with me! dost thou swear too? why then up and ride.
Whither away mistress Purge?
To the Family master Dryfat to our exercise.
What by night?
O Lord, I sir, with the candles out too, we fructify best in the dark, the glance of the Eye is a great matter, it leads vs to other objects besides the right.
Indeed I think we perform those functions best, when we are not thrall to the fetters of the body.
The fetters of the body, what call you them?
The Organes of the body, as some term them.
Organes: fie, fie, they have a most abominable sque∣king sound in mine ears, they edify not a whit I detest hem: I hope my body has no Organes.
To speak more familiarly Mistress Purge, they are the senses: the sight, hearing, smelling, taste, and feeling.
I mary: (Mary said J Lord what a words that in my mouth) you speak now Master Dryfat: but yet let me tell you where you err too: this feeling I will prove to be neither Organ nor fetter, it is a thing (a sense did you call it?
I, a sense.
Why then a sense let it be (I say it is that we can∣not be without: for (as I take it) it is a part belonging to under∣standing; understanding (you know) lifts up the mind from earth; if the mind be lift up, you know the body goes with it: also it descends into the conscience, and there tickles vs with our works and doings: so that we make singular use of fee∣ling.
And not of the rest?
Not at that time; therefore we hold it not amiss to put out the candles, for the soul sees best it'h dark.
You come to me now Mistress Purge.
Nay J will come to you else Master Dryfat: those senses (as you term them) are of much efficacy in carnal mix∣tures, that is, when we crowd and thrust a man and a woman together.
What so close at it: I thought this was one end of your exercise. By our lady I think there is small profit in this, Isle wink no more for I am now tickled with a conceit that it is a scur∣uy thing to be a Cuckold.
I commend this zeal in you Mistress Purge, J desire much to be of your society.
Do you indeed, blessing on your heart: are you up∣right in your dealings?
Yes, J do love to stand to any thing I do, though J lose by it, in truth J deal but too truly for this world: You shall hear how far I am entered in the right way already: First I live in Charity and give small Alms to such as bee not of the right Sect. J take under twenty in the hunderd, nor no forfeiture of Bonds unless the law tell my conscience I may do it, I set no pot on a sundays, but feed on cold meat dressed a Saturday∣days, I keep no holy days, nor fasts, but eat most flesh o'fry∣days of all days in the week: J do use to say inspired graces able to starve a wicked man with length, I have Aminadabs and A∣brims to my god sons, and I chide them when they ask me blessing: and I doe hate the red letter, more then J follow the written verity.
Heir's Clergy.
These are the Rudiments indeed Master Dryfat.
Nay I can tell you I am or will be of the right stamp.
A pox o'your Stamp.
Then learn the word for your admittance, and you will be much made on by the Congregation.
I the word good Mistress Purge.
A Brother in the Family.
Enough J have my lesson.
So have I mine, A Brother in the family, I must be a fa∣milist to day. Isle follow this gear while tic on foot in faith.
Then shore up your eyes, and lead the way to the goodliest people that ever turned up the white of the eye, give me my book Club, put out thy Link, and come behind vs.
Who's there?
Two brothers and a Sister in the Family—Let in.
Who's there?
A Familiar brother.
Heers no room for you nor your familiarity.
How? no room for me nor my familiarity? why whats the difference between a familiar brother, and a brother in the Family? O I know: J made eclipses of in, in this place where it should have bin expressed, so that the want of in, put me clean out; or let me see: may it not be some mystery drawn from Arithmetic? For my life these Familists love no substracti∣on, take nothing away, but put in and ad as much as you will, and after addition follows multiplication of a most Pharasi∣thipocriticall crew. Well for my part I like not this family, nor indeed some kind of private lecturing that women use: look toot, you that have such gadders to your wives: self willed they are as children, and in faith capable of not much more then they peevish by custom, naturally fools. J remember a pretty wooden sentence in a preamble to an exercise, where the Reader prayed: that men of his Coat might grow up like Cedars to make good wainscot in the house of sincerity, would not this wainscot phrase be writ in Brass, to publish him that spake it for an Animal: why, such wooden pellets out of earthen Trunks, doe strike these females into admiration, hits 'hem home, sometimes (perhaps) in at one ear, and out at tother, and then they depart in opinion, wiser then their neighbours, fraught with matter, able to take down and more∣tifie their husbands. Well isle home now, and bring the true word next time: I shall expect my wife anon red hot with zeal, and big with melting tears; and this night do I expect, (as her manner is) she will weep me a whole Chamber-pot full, Loquor Lipids? do J cast pills abroad? tic no matter what I
say, J talk like a Apothecary (as I am) I have only purgd my self of a little choler and passion, and am now armed with a patient resolution, but how? to put my Horns in my Pose∣ket? no:
What wise men bear is not for me to scorn,
Tic a hornorable thing to wear the horn.
Fortune, devils turd i'thy teeth, isle turn no more o'thy wheel, Art is aboue thy might: what though my project with Mistress Maria fayld, more ways to the wood then one, theirs variety in love. It is beleeud I am out of town, my door is o∣pen, the hour is at hand, all things squirt by the Doctors rule, and now I look for the Spirit to bring me warm comfort, to cloth my nakedness, and that is Mistress Purge, the cordial of a Familist, and come quickly good Spirit, or else my teeth will chatter for thee.
O the naked pastimes of love, the scourge of dullness, the purifier of uncleanness, and the hot house of humanity: I have taken physic of master Purge, any time this twelve months to purge my humour vpon's wife, &amp; J have ever found her so fugitive, from exercise to exercise, and from family to Family, that I could never yet open the close stool of my mind to her: so that I may well say with Ouid: Hei mihi quote nullus amor est medicabilis herbs: now am J driven to prove the violent virtue conjuration, if it hit, and that I yearke my familist out of the Spirit, isle hang up my Scourge-sticke for a Trophy, and emparadize my thoughts, though the Doctor go to the devil, tic no matter: ha let me see; Lipsalues door open! and himself out of town? excellēt Doctor, soothsaying Doctor, oraculous Doctor.
I have taken up this standing to see my Gallants play at Barriers with Scourge-sticks for the honour of my Punk: and in good time I see my brave Spirits shining in bright Are∣more
nakedly burning in the Hell fire of Lechery, and ready for the hot encounter: sound Trumpets, the Combatants are mounted.
The apparition: Mistress Purge peers through him, I see her.
The spirit appears: but he might have come sooner: I am num'd with cold, a shivering ague hath taken away my Courage.
They are afraid one of another, look how they trem∣ble, the flesh and the devil strengthen 'hem: ha, ha, ha.
Has a no cloven feet, what a laxative fever shakes me.
Will a not carry me with him to Hell? well I must ven∣la: Clogmathos
My Cue: Clogmathathos.
My Cue Garrazin.
Garages.
Garrazinos.
Ton tetuphon.
Tes tetuphes.
With a Whirley Twinos—they lash one another.
Hold, hold, hold, gogs nouns, Gogs blude, a pox, a plague, the Devil take you, truce, truce, J smart, J smart.
Ha, ha, ha. O for one of the hoops of my Cornelius Tub: I must needs be gone, I shall burst my self with laugh∣ing else:
Magic hath no such Rule, men can not find,
Lust ever better handled in his kind.
What art thou? with the name of Jove I conjure thee?
With any name saving the whip, isle no more of that conjuration a plague on it.
Speak art not a Spirit, in the likeness of my friend Lipsalue, that should transform thy self to mistress Purge.
How? a Spirit? I hope Spirits have no flesh and blood, &amp; I am sure thou hast drawn blood out of my flesh with the spy∣rit of thy whip.
Then shall we prove to be honest Gulls, and the Doctor an errant knave.
A plague upon him for a Glister▪ he has given our loves a suppositar with a Recombentibus—Isle tell thee sir.
Tell not me, let me prevent thee, the wind shall not take the breath of our gross abuse, we feel the gullery: There∣fore let vs swear by our naked truths, &amp; by the hilts of these our blades, our flesh-tamers, to be revenged upon that Parape∣ropandenticall Doctor, that pocky Doctor.
Agreed, we'll Cuckold him, that hee shall not be able to put his head in it's doors, and make his precise puritanical, &amp; peculiar Punk his Apothecaries drug there, a known Cocka∣trice to the world.
If report catch this knavery, we have lost our reputati∣once for ever,
Wherefore lets be secret;
Ill tax we women of Credulity,
When men are gulled with such gross foppery.
Come let vs in, and cover both our shames?
This Conjuration to the world's a novelty,
Gallants turned Spirits and whipped for Lechery.
Gerardine come forth Maria calls?
Those Ribs shall not enfold thy buxom Limbs
One minute longer the cincture of mine arms
Shall more securely keep thy soul from harms.
What heavenly breath of Phitonessaes power
(That raised the dead corpse of her friend to life)
Prevails no less on me, for even this urn
(The figure of my sadder Requiem)
Gives up my bones, my love, my life, and all
To her, that gives me freedom in my thrall.
Be brief sweet friend, salute and part in one,
For niggard time now threats with imminent danger
Our late joyed scope: Thy earnest then of love
Ere Sol have compassed half the signs I fear
Will show a blushing fault, but t'was thy plot, thine aim,
T'inforce consent in him that bars thy claim.
Love salves that fault, let time our guilt reveal,
Isle near deny my Deed, my hand, and Seal.
The Elements shall loose their ancient force;
Water and earth suppress the fire and Ayre,
Nature in all use, a preposterous course,
Each kind forget his likeness to repair,
Before isle falsify my faith to thee.
The humorous bodies elemental kind,
Shall sooner lose the innated heate of love,
The Soul in natures bounds shall be confined,
Heavens course shall retrograde, &amp; leave to move
Ere I surcease to cherish mutual fire,
With thoughts refined in flames of true desire.
These words are odours in the sacred shrine
Of Loves best deity: the marriage God
Longs to perform these ceremonious rites,
Which terminate our hopes; till mine grow full
Isle use that intercourse amongst my friends,
That erst I did: then in the hight of joy,
Isle come to challenge interest in my boy.
Till then farewell.
You'll come upon your Cue
Doubt not of that;
Then twenty times adieu.
COme Boys, our clothes boys, and what is the most currant news Periwincle.
Faith sir, Fortune hath favoured vs with no news, but what the Peddler brought from Norfolk.
Is there nothing stirring at Court Shrimp?
Faith there is sir, but nothing new.
Good wag faith, thou smellst somewhat of a Courtier, though thy Mother was a Citizens wife, Off with that filthy great Band, nay quick, on with your robe of sanctity; nay sud∣denly man.
And why must we shift our selves into this demure habit, if impossible to be of the Family, and keep our own fashion.
Tut man the name of a gallant is more hateful to them, then the sight of a Corner Cap, had thou heard the prote∣stations the wife of a bellowsmender made but yesternight, a∣against Gallants, thou had for ever abjured Crimson bree∣ches. She swore that all Gallants, were persons inferior to bellowsmenders, for the trade of Bellowsmaking was very ae∣real &amp; high, And what were men and women but bellows, for they take wind in at one place, and doe evaporate at ano∣there; evaporate was her very phrase.
Me thinks her phrase flew with somewhat too strong a vapor.
Nay she proves farther, that all men receive their being chiefly from bellows, without which the fire burns not, without fire the pot seeths not, the pot not seething, powdered Beef is not to be eaten, of which she then averred our nation was a great devourer, and without which they could neither fight for their Country abroad, nor get children at home: For said she, powdered beef is a great joiner of nerues toge∣there.
What answer made thou?
Mary, that I thought a Bawd was a greater joiner of nerues together, then powdered beef, with that she protested, that a Bawd was an instrument of the Devil, and as she had proved that bellowsmakers were of Gods trade, foe Bawds were of the devils trade: For (and thereupon she blew her Nose) the devil and Bawds did both live by the sins of the people.
No more, mistress Purge is at hand.
Vanish boys, away, make hast, before Jove sheel be
with vs ere we can be provided for her.
Advance your Link Club? At what time were thou bound Club? At Guttyde: Hollantyde, or Candletide?
I was bound indeed about Mydsommer.
And when hath thy prentiship end, At Michael∣tide next?
So I take it.
They say Club you fall very heavy on such you love not, you never learnt that of me.
Indeed mistress I must confess, my falling is rustic gross, and butcherlike, marry yours is a pretty foolish light Court take falling: Yet believe me my master smells some∣what too gross of the Purgation, he wants tutoring.
And why I pray?
My moister being set last night in his shop, comes moister Doctor Glister (as his manner is) squirting in sudden∣lye, and after some conference, tells my master that by his own knowledge you were young with Child, to which my moister replied, why moister Doctor, will yo put me to more Charges yet?
Thou art a fool, In that my husband spake as wife∣lie as if the moister of his company had spoke▪ hee knows Doctors have receipts for women, which makes them most apt to conceive, and hee promising a had ministered the same lately to me, thereupon spake it, Lead on with your link?
Art ready?
Ready.
Then speak pitifully, look scurvily, and dissemble cunningly, and we shall quickly prove two of the fraternity Benediction and Sanctity; love and Charity: fall on Mistress Purge, Sister of the family.
And what I pray be you two?
Two newly cōuerted from the rags of Christianity; to be∣come good members in the house of the family.
Who I pray converted you?
Dryfat the merchant.
And from what sins hath he converted you?
From two very notorious Crimes, The first was from eating fish on fridays, and the second from speaking reverently of the Clergy: but a resolved vs, your talent in edifying young men went far beyond his.
A talent I have therein, I must confess, nor am I very nice at fit times to show it; for your better instructions therefore, you must never hereafter frequent Taverns nor Taphouses, no Masks nor Mummeries, no pastimes nor Play∣houses.
Must we have no recreation?
Yes, on the days which profane lips call Holli∣days, you may take your Spaniel and spend some hours at the Duckingpond.
What are we bound unto, during the time we remain in the Family.
During the light of the Candle, you are to be very attentive, which being extinguished, how to behave your selves, I will deliver in private whisper.
Tic now come to a whisper, what young Familists be these? in faith Isle make one, isle trip you wife, I sent your footing wife.
For Gallus writes, Paraselsus can tell,
Apothecaries have brains, and Noses eke to smell,
We shall with much diligence observe it.
J fear I shall have small cause to thank that diligence, but doe your worst, He that hath red fine hear-balls in one year, can find a trick which shall prevent this gear, they are going, follow Purge, close, close and softly, like a Horsekeeper in a Ladies matted Chamber at mid∣night.
Who knocks?
Brethren and a Sister in the Family.
Enter in peace.
Brethren and a sister, thats the word, How bea∣stly was I mistaken last day, J should have said a Brother in the Family—And I said a Familiar brother, for which J and my family were thrust out of doors: but as Titus Selves of Holborn bridge most learnedly was wont to say, quoth —
Whose there?
A brother in the family.
Enter, and welcome.
Thou sacred Deity, love:
Thou power predominate, more to be admired,
Then able to be expressed, whose Orb includes
All terrene joys which are, all States which be,
Pay to thy sacred Throne, as tribute fee
Their thoughts &amp; lives like Ioues so must thy acts
Endure no question, why, thy hidden facts,
The Gods themselves obey, Heaven Synod holds,
No Gods, but what thy awful power controlls,
The Delphian Archer proud with Pythons spoil
At Cupids hand was forced to take the foil:
Not Mars his warlike Adamantine Targe,
Could free his warlike breast at Cupids charge;
And Jove whose frown all mortal lives bereaves
This marble throne and Ivory Sceptre leaves:
And in the likeness of a Bull was seen,
As forced by him to bear the Tyrian Queen:
Through Neptunes watery kingdom, if these submit
My Metamorphose is not held unfit:
And see in most wished occasion Drifat the Merchant presents himself: Sir, in the best of hours met, my thoughts had marked you out for a man most apt, to do them the fairest of offices.
What? art thou a welch Carrier, or a Northern Land∣lord, thart so saucy.
First possible sir, my disguise should so much fool your knowledge? how, a Northern Landlord? can you think J get my living by a bell and a Clackdish?
By a bell and a Clackdish, how's that?
Why by begging sir, know you me now?
Ma. Gerardine, disguised &amp; a shore, nay then J smell a Rat.
Master Dryfat, shall I repose some trust in you, will you lay by a while your Cities precise humour, will you not de∣ceiue me?
If I deceive your trust, the general plague seize me, that is, may I die a Cuckold.
And I say thou shall die a true Citizen, if thou conceal it: And thus in brief, It stands with thy knowledge how seri∣ously I have (and doe still affect Maria: Now sir, I have so wrought it, that if thou could procure me a fellow, that could serve in stead of a Crier, I my self would play Placket the Parritor, and summon Doctor Glister and Maria to appear at thy house, and as he plays the Parritor, so would thou but assume the shape of a Proctor, I should have the wench, thou the credit, and the whole City occasion of discourse this nyne days.
Hows this, hows this! I should procure a fellow to play the Parritor, and I my self should play the Proctor: but upon what occasion should they be summoned?
Upon an accusation, that Doctor Glister should get Maria his Niece with child, and have Bastards in the Cuntery which I have a trick to make probable.
And now I recall it to memory, I heard somewhat to that effect last night, in master Beardbush the Barbers shop, but how will this sort, who shall accuse him?
Refer that to me, I say, be that my care, all shall end in merriment, and no disgrace touch either of their reputations.
Then take both word and hand, tic done, Club (mistress Purges prentice) shall be the Sumner.
O my most precious Dryfat, may none of thy daughters prove vessels with foul bungholes, or none of thy Sons hogsheads, but all true and honourable Drifats like thy self.
Well Master Gerardine, I hope to see you a Familist be∣fore I die.
Thats most likely, for J hold most of their principles already: I never rail nor calumniate any man, but in love and charity; I never cousin any man for any ill will I bear him, but in love and charity to my self: I never make my neigh∣bore a Cuckold for any hate or malice I bear him, but in love and charity to his wife.
And may those principles fructify in your weak mem∣bers: Isle be gone, and with most quick dexterity provide you a Crier: To morrow at my house (said you) they should ap∣pear.
Be that the time, most honoured Dryfat, but be this known to none, most loved sir, save Club, or to some other whom your judgment shall select, as a fit person for our project.
Thus enough time out of sight.
Maria, thou art mine: earths affecton and natures glory, woman of what an excellence, if her thoughts and acts were squirt and leveled with the fi•st celsitude of her creation:
T'inioy a creature, whose disheueld locks,
Like gems against the repercussiue Sun,
Gives light and splendour▪ whose starlike eyes
Attract more gazer loves to see them move
Then the Tartarians God, when first Egeons Hill
Amounts in triumph, a skin more pure and soft,
Then is the silke-worme bed, to the more white
Then newfalne Snow, or shining Ivory,
Is happiness sought by the Gods themselves,
Celestial Venus borne without a mother,
Be thou probitious, thee and I implore
Not vulgar Venus, Heavens scorn and Mars his whore.
Good Aunt quiet your self, ground not upon dreams, you know they are ever contrary.
Minion, minion, coin no execuses; I grant dreams are deceitful, but a true judgment grounded upon know∣ledge never fails: what? have not I observe▪d the rising and
falling of the blood, the coming and going of the count∣nonce, your qualms, your vnlacings, your longings, most eui∣dent tokens, besides a more certain sign then all these too, you know it, I need not speak it; nay I am as skilful in that point as my husband: I can tell you Aristotle speaks English enough to tell me these secrets: Body of me, so narrowly looked too, and yet fly out? well, I see maids will ha'te, in spite of Laws or lockes that restrain 'hem, they will open, doe men what they can.
I see my fault appears, simplicity
Hath no evasion: tic bootless to deny,
Where guilty blood, cited by touch of shame,
Runs through my veins, and leaves my conscience stain,
Even in my face for bear I doe beseech you,
To publish my defame, what I have done,
You shall not answer, I must bear mine own.
Bear your own? I mary there it goes, what must you bear?
My sins forsooth.
Your sins forsooth: confess to me, and go not a∣bout the bush, you have bin doing thats flat, you have caught a clap, thats round, and answer me roundly to the point, or else isle square. Come whose act first? I can not devise unless it be my husbands, for none else had access to thee; J am sure time has turned his bald side to thee, and I doe but wonder how thou took opportunity: speak, tell me.
Now good Aunt press me not, let time reveal
What you suspect, for never shall my tongue
Confess an Act that tends unto my wrong.
Will you not bolt, I must have it out on you, and will.
By your leave mistress.
Passion of my heart, what art thou?
No Ghost forsooth, though I appear in white.
No, but a saucy knave J perceive by your manners.
None of that Livery neither: I am of the bearing trade forsooth, you may see by my Smock—frock I wold say: I am (if it please you) of the spick &amp; span new set up Company of Pore∣ters,
Heir's my Breast plate, and besides our own Arms we have the arms of the City to help vs in our burdens, Ass signum: heir's the Cross, and the sword of Justice in good Pewter, J can tell you which goes as currant with vs as better mettle.
Whats your name sir?
Nicholas Nebulo ther's but a straws breadth between that and the Arms, tic in the back side of the Cross here, &amp; well known in the City for an ancient name, and an honest an't like your worship.
You are none of the 12 are you?
No forsooth but one of the 24.
Orders of knaves, I thought so, sir you're a Rascal to come thus bluntly into my house with your dirty Star∣tups, get you without doors like a filthy fellow as you are, a place more fit for you.
O good words mistress; I may be warden of my com∣pany for ought you know and for my bluntness we have a clause in our Charter to warrant that for as we bear, so like∣wise we may be borne with, and have free egress and regress where our business lies.
And whats your business here?
I have a letter an't please you to moister Doctor.
From whence?
That I cannot show your Worship, but I had it of Cur∣tal the Carrier whose lawful deputy I am.
Leave your scraping sir: fie how rank the knave smells of grease and Tapsdroppings.
Coughs and spits.
What are you Rheumatic too with a vengeance?
Yes indeed mistress, though I bee but a poor man, I have a spice of the gentleman in me, Moister Doctor could smell it quickly, by cause hoe's a gentleman himself; I must to the diet and that is Tobacco at the Alehouse, J use n'other phi∣sick for it.
Did ever such a peasant defile my floor, or breathe so near me: in faith sir you would be bumd for your Roguery if you were well served.
I am bum'd well enough already Mistress, look here else; surreuerence in your worship, moister Doctors lips are not made of better stuff.
What an impudent Rogue is this: sir be gone I say, I would be rid o'you?
Be rid o'me? I shall gallop then: you mistake me forsooth I am a footpost, I do not use to ride.
I think the Rascal be humorus or drunk: well I will read the letter and send him packing, or else hee will spew or do worse before me: fie on him, I think hee will infect me with some filthy disease.
Or else I loose mine aim.
VVhat's here Your poor nurse Thomasine Sweed∣less for my life now shall I find out my husbands knavery, I have so long suspected.
She begins to nibble, twill take in faith—mistress
I see some discontentment in your looks,
Care ill befits so delicate a spirit.
Be frolic wench for hee that is so near thee
has been much nearer?
That Accent sounds sweet music, tic my love.
That tong breaths life into my liveless spirits
Gerardine! ô rapture, why thus disguised!
No more, be mute; thus must I vary forms
To bring our Cares to end her Jealousy,
Ensues this Drift, which if it take true scope,
Loves joy comes next be fearless in that hope:
Tic so: Ratsbane: I hate, it rack's on it torments me here tic, —Woe worth the time that ever I gave suck to a Child that came in at the window god knows how villainous Lea∣cher; Yet if you did but see, how like the little red headed knave is to his Father damnable Doctor: A Bastard in the Country, and an other towards here J am out of doubt, this is his wo•ke. You are an Arrant Strumpet, Incest, fornication, abomination in my own house; intolerable; O for long nails to scratch out his Eyes.
Or the breeches to fight with him.
Out of my sight queen, thou shalt to Bridewell —O, I shall be mad with rage.
Then you shall go to Bedlam.
Hence you Slave.
I must have a penny, you must pay me for my pains.
The Devil pay thee.
O thats the Doctor, but he wants his horns.
But isle furnish him ere long if I live.
It works as I would wish, farewell Maria,
This storm once past, fair weather ever after.
Was ever woman so moved? but you shall be talked withal, and for mine old fornicator, he shall have it as hot as coals in faith: heers stuff indeed! Come mynkes come, ther's Law for you both, have I found your knavery: if I wink at this, let me be stone blind, or stoned to death, bear this and bear all.
Our hopes are crossed, sure theirs some providence
Which countermands libidinous appetites,
For what we most intend, is countercheckt
By strange and unexpected accidents:
For by disguise procuring full access,
Nay ready to have feared thexpected prize
The candle out, steps twixt my hopes and me
Some pleasant Groin, possessed and full enjoyed
That sweet, for which our vigilāt eyes have watched
And in one moment frustrates all our hopes.
Upon my life we are bewitched, the greasy Ras∣call, that first seized Mistress Purge (by the last reflection of the light) appeared to my sight not much unlike her hus∣band.
The Courts gall, the Cities plague, and Europaes Sea form be his perpetual Crest, what ere a was. To loose Mistress Purge for lack of dexterity, is a disgrace insalueable. The like opportunity will never present it self.
It was an egregious grief, I must confess to see a knave slip betwixt vs both, and take occasion by the foretop, but since these proiects have had so star cross events, lets lay some plot how to revenge our late disgrace on the Doctor, by making him Cuckold.
Agreed, but what melancholy sir with a crostick arms now comes from the Family?
Purge the potecarie, J prithee lets step aside and hear the issue of this discontent.
O the misery of married men's estate!
A begins very pitifully.
O women what are many of you?
Why disease to bachelors, and plagues to married men.
O marriage, the rage of all our miseries, my wife is a de∣sembling strumpet.
So is many a mans besides yours, and what of that?
I would have a law that all such which pray little should instantly be married, for then would they pray conti∣nually if it were but to be rid of their wives.
This is a charitable request and surely would pass the lower House.
Surely if affliction can bring a man to heaven I cannot see how any married man can bee damned, J have made my self a plain Cuckold.
A pile on ye, want you? had you not been so manable, here are some would have saved you that labour.
What shall I doe in this extremity, had I but witness of the fact, I would make her answer it before authority, This is my wedding Ringe; Tic hit I know it by the posy This I took from her finger
in the dark, and she was therewith very well pleased, were not this trow, a sufficient testimony? She knows not that it was my self got so near her, J will take council; well, little know Bachelors the miseries they undergo, when they prostrate themselves to women.
O most true Master Purge, little knows a man what Eel∣mints a is to pass, when a puts his head under a women's girdle: your passion Master Purge is over heard, and (plain tale to tell) we were eye witnesses of your wives treachery, and if need be will be ready to depose as much.
What master Lipsalue and master Guggin are you disguised testimonies, nay then Revenge look big?
Alpha and Phayrie
Help to revenge the wronged Apothecary?
Why now a speaks like himself, get me a Parritor for her strait?
Conceal the Ring, my little Purge, let not thy wife know thou hast it, until she comes to her trial.
Your advices are very pithy, therefore in private let me disclose my intent.
Off boys, Shrimp what dost thou think of thy Ma∣ster, is a not a rare gull?
J think a will swallow, and pocket more disgraces then large consenst Lawyer Fees in a Michaelmasse Term. Thy master my honest Periwincle comes not much short of a fool to, but that a is a Courtier.
Draw somewhat near, and ouer-heare their confe∣rinse?
This shape of the Crier, must Club to morrow assume: Are you fitted for Popin the Proctor?
Excellent! and have spent some study in the mystical cases of Venery: J can describe how often a man may lye with another mans wife, before a come to the white sheet.
How long is that?
Why till a be taken tardy.
How long all women kind may by the statute profess and swear they are maids.
And how long is that?
Why till their bellies bee so big that it cannot bee no longer concealed, but come forward towards Glis∣ters.
It must be so: let the sumner tickle her, you shall bring in these allegations and let vs alone to swear them; who's this Master Dryfat? Oportunely met sir, and whither so fast? The news, the news?
Faith Gentlemen, I think to relate for news what I here of Doctor Glister would come stale to your hey∣rings.
O the getting of his niece with child, tut thats appa∣rantly known to all the company, but in the name of Jupiter what art thou? or from whence came thou?
Why sir? I come from compassing the corners of the Land.
Of what trade in the name of Pluto?
Of the devils trade, for J live as hee does, by the sins of the people, In brief sir, I am Placket the Paritor.
As the devil would, we have (my noble Partor) instant, employment for thee; A grey great is to be purchased without sneaking my little Sūner, wher's thy Quorum nominee my ho∣nest Placket?
Sir, according to the old Ballad; my quorum nominee ready have I, with my pen and inkehorne hanging by: her name sir, her name?
Jst no more but so?
I have most right to her name, her name moister Plac∣ket is my wife, Mistress Purge Sir: To what place dost thou belong?
To the Commissioners, which sit to morrow at my∣ster Dryfats upon the crimes of Doctor Glister and others.
Sits there a commission Dryfat? Now for the love of
lechery, lets have mistress Purge summoned, thither?
She makes my Quorum nominee reasonable full my grant Sir and she shall appear there upon a crime of con∣cupiscence, Js not that your meaning?
Yes my honest Paritor, heers thy Fee.
And see howe happily it succeeds, mistress Purge is new come from the Family, let vs step aside whilst Placket the paratour, gives her a Summons?
Content · Too her Placket But see for the bri∣berie of twelve pence you strike her not out of your Quorum nominee.
Fear not sir.
Forward apace Club.
Your name I take to bee mistress Purge fair gen∣tlewoman.
I am mistress Purge, Purges wife the apothecary: what of that?
Now you shall see him tickle her with a Quorum nominee
I cite you by virtue of my Quorum nominee to make your personal appearance by eight of the clock in the morrow morning, before certain commissioners at master Dryfats hows to answer to an accusation of a crime of concupisence?
To answer a crime of concupiscence, whats that I pray?
Why tic to answer a venereal Crime, for having car∣nil copulation with others besides your husband.
What are you I pray?
By name Placket, By trade a parator?
And must I answer say you, to a venereal Crime? I tell thee placket the paritor, I am able to answer thee, or any man else in any venereal crime theyle put me to: And so tell your Commissioners:
If you fail your appearance, the penalty must fall heavy.
If it fall never so heavy, I am able to bear it and so set forward Club.
Excellent in faith after your wife Purge: Read Placket thy quorum nominee my noble great monger.
Silence, the first that marches in this fair rank is, Thum the feltmaker, for getting his maid with child and sen∣ding his prentice to Bridewell for the fact, whip the Bedel, for letting a punk escape for a nights lodging, and bribe of ten groats, Batt the belman, for lying with a wench in a Tailors stall at midnight when a should bee performing his office.
And Tipple the Tipster for deflouring a virgin in his sell∣ler. Doctor Glister, his wife, Maria: mistress Purge These bee the complete number.
Now dissolve and each to his occasion, till to morrow morning.
THis was your colour to keep her close, but what Cloak have you for hers and your own shame? What your own niece, your brothers daughter besides your bastard in the country?
Wife range not too far I would advise you? Come home in time? vex me not beyond sufferance: The two edged sword of thy tong, hath drawn blood o'my? patience, I say thou art all this while in an error.
No, thou hast been all this while in an Urinal, thou hast gone out of thy compass in women's waters, You're a con∣juror (forsooth) and can rouse your Spirits into Circles, a you old Fornicator that ever I saw that read beard of thine; now could I rail against thy complexion. I think in my conscience the Trases &amp; Caparison of Venus coach, are made o'red hairs
which may be a true Emblem, that no flaxen stuff, or tanned white-leather draws love like 'hem; J think thou manurd'st thy Chin with the droppings of Eggs and Muskadine, before it bristled: a shame take thee and thy Loadstone: but tic no mat∣la, Master Placket the Parritor has cited you, and you shall answer it.
O the raging jealousy of a woman! do you hear wife I will show my self a man of sense, and answer you with si∣lence, or like a man of wisdom, speak in brief: I say you are a scold, and beware the Cucking stool?
I say you are a nynnyhammer, and beware the Cuckoo; for as sure as J have ware, isle traffic with the next Merchant venturer, and in good time here comes gallants of the right trade.
All alone mistress Glister? meditating who shall be your next child's Father.
Indeed me thinks that should be one end of her thought an't be but to cry quittance with her husband, or whose abuse the Town rings.
Flax and fire, flax and fire, here are fellows come in the nick, to light their matches at my tynder.
He tells you true mistress Glister, the Doctor hath made you ordinary in our Ordinaries, Satyrs whet their tooths, and steep rods in peace, Epigrams lye in Poetries pickle and we shall have rhyme out of all reason against you.
Ere long hee will take up his station at a Statio∣ners, where wee shall see him doe penance in a Sheet at least.
O I am nettled, my patience is so prouoak't, that I must doffe my modesty: what shall I do? if ye be honest gen∣tlemen, counsel me in my revenge, teach me what to do, make my Case your own.
Why you are in the common road of revenge, take which hand you will, you cannot go out o'your way; tic as soon taken, as Time by his fore-part.
Faith since he has struck with the sword, strike you with the Scabbard: in plain terms Cuckold him: you may as easily do it, as lye down o'your bed.
This gear cottons in faith.
I apprehend you gentlemen: Lord how much bet∣la are two heads then one, to make one large head?
You say true mistress Glister, theirs help required in graf∣ting▪ and how happily we come to tender our service: let our pretence be to take physic of the Doctor: and that he may with as much ease minister to vs, as we to you, we'll take a lodging in his house.
How say you to this, is the colour good? dost like you?
Passing well: the colour is so good, that you shall wear my favour out of the same piece.
Excellent, excellent, now shall we be revenged for the whipping; mistress Glister let me be your first man?
Nay soft sir: I plied her as soon as you.
I should have an oar in her boat too by right? spoke by.
How ill advised were you to marry one with a red beard?
O master Lipsalue, I am not the first that has salne under that ensign: theirs no complexion more attractive in this time for women, then gold and red beards: such men are all liver.
J, but small hart, and less honesty.
Yes, they are honest too (in some kind) for theyle beg before they'll steal.
Thats true, for, for one that holds up his hand at the Ses∣sions, you shall have ten come into the bawdy Court.
Was ever Beard so backbitten: this were enough to make red beards turn medley: and dash 'hem clean out of countenance: but I hope like mine they fear no colours: and you were ten Courtiers isle front you: I must give you physic with a pox: well, if I pepper ye not, call me Doctor Doddipoll: Master Lipsalue and master Gudgin you are heartily welcome, I am very glad to see you well.
O master Doctor, your salutation is very suspicious?
Why master Lipsalue?
It can scarce be hearty, for physicians are rather glad to see men ill, then well.
Not so sir, you must distinguish of men: though this J know, virtue is not the end of all science, which commonly keeps the professor poor, some study questuary and gainful Arts, and every one would thrive in's calling, but in faith gen∣tlemen, what wind drives you hither?
The wind Collect master Doctor, or some such disease
But not the Stone Collect?
O no sir, we have no obstructions in those parts, we are loose enough there.
If you were troubled with that, my wife can tell you of an excellent remedy.
We need it not, we need it not: but indeed master Do∣ctor, for some private infirmities (which our waters shall make known to you) we desire to take some physic of you for a few days, and to that end we would take a lodging in your house during the time?
Shall we entreat your favour?
No entreaty gentlemen, you shall command me to search the very profundity of my skill for you. Have them in wife, and show them their lodging? I will think upon an o∣there receipt, and follow you immediately.
And in faith we shall requite your pains to the full.
To the fool you mean: I know you ha the horn of plenty for me, which you would derive unto me, from the li∣berality of your bawdies, not your minds; here are Lords, that having learned the O.P.Q. of Courtship, travel up and down among Citizens wives to show their learning, and bringing up: as if the City were not already a good proficient in the Court Hornebooke: yes I warrant they have heads as capa∣ble as other men; I and some of them can wisely say with
the philosopher, that in knowing all they know nothing. Well, because I am of the Livery, and pay Scot and Lot a∣amongst you, doe but observe how isle fetch over my gallants for your sakes; they say I am of the right hair, and indeed they may stand too't, and hold the position good; saving with my wife: soft, are they not at pro and country already? I know they are hot spurs, and I must have an eye to the maine. They have bin whipped already for lechery, and yet the pride of the flesh pricks 'hem; well I must in, I have given them such a Pill shall take 'hem down, for lust must have his fill.
Now natures pencil, and the hand of time,
Gives life and lym, to generations Act;
My shame and guilt in wordles notes appear
The argument of scorn, O now J stand
The Theme and comment to each liberal tongue,
Whilst hope breeds comfort, and fear threats my wrong.
O Gerardine how oft thy lively figure
(Deadly impressed in my yielding temper)
Assures me thou art mine: how fancy paints
Thy true proportion in my troubled sleep,
Because sole subject of my daily thoughts;
O if thy vows prove fayn'd, and thou unjust,
I say and swear, in men there is no trust.
Thus have J past the Round and Court of Guard,
Without the word: either conceit is strong,
Or else the Body where true lou's confined,
VValkes as a Spirit, and doth force his way
Through greatest dangers frightful to those eyes,
That wait to intercept him: Maria?
How like to Cynthia in her silver Orb
She seems to me, attended by loves Lamp
Whose mutual Jnfluence, and souls sympathy
Doth show, heavens model in mortality▪
Gerardine?
Aurora now the blushing Sons approach,
D'art not more comfort to this Vniuerse
Then thou to me: most acceptably come,
The Art of number cannot count the hours
Thou hast bin absent.
Infinity of Love
Holds no proportion with Arithmetic.
Think not Maria but my hart retains
A deep impression of such thoughts as these:
I have bin forging of a mirthful Plot,
To celebrate our wished Conjunction;
Which now digested, come to summon thee
To be an Actress in the Comedy.
How, where, whē, speak? mine ears are quick to hear,
I stand on thorns already to be there.
At Dryfats house the Merchant, ther's our Scene,
Whose sequel (if I fail not in intent,)
Shall answer our desires, and each content: But when saw thou Lipsalue and Gudgin our two gallants?
They are here in the house: so handled by mine uncle, that they are the pitifullest patients that ever you beheld.
No matter, he serves them in their kind, they were in∣famous in the Court &amp; now are grown as notorious in the Ci∣tie: they may happily prove particles in our sport, &amp; fit subjects for laughter: Time calls me hence, adieu, prepare to meet.
I shall outstrip the nimblest in my feet.
Come Club come, theirs a merry Fray towards, we shall see the death of melancholy, wherein thou and I must call a grand Jury of jests together, and pass upon them with the Club Law.
Now as I am O, the Crier, &amp; yet but a young Club, J have not yet practiced that Law, you have a whole dryfat on it, I pray you instruct me?
Why tic a Law enacted (by the common counsel of Sty∣tute Caps) to qualify the rage of the Time, to follow, to call back, and sometimes to encounter gentlemen when they run in arrerages, I tell thee theirs no auerment against our Book Cases: Tic the Law called make peace, it makes them even, when they are at odds, it shows 'hem a flat case, as plain as a pack staff, that is, knocks 'hem down without circumstance
I marry I like that law well, tic studied with the tur∣ning of a hand: ther's no quiddits, nor peddlers French in it, there needs no book for the exposition of the terms; tic as ea∣sly learned as the felling of wood, and getting of Children, all is but laying on load the down right blow.
I and by the way of exhortation it prints this moral Sentence on their Costards, in Capital Letters Agree? for the Law is costly.
Good good; but al this while ther's no Doctor thought on, we must have one to arbitrate;
Why (moister Gerardine) man, has his name for the pur∣pose, he shall be called Doctor Stickler, Lupus est in Fabula, here hee comes.
How now lads do's our Conceit cotton, ha you sum∣monte your wits from wool gathering? Are you fraught with matter for this merriment?
Full full, wee are in labour man, and we shall die with∣out midwifery.
We are ravished with delight like the wench that was got with child against her stomach—O but if we could wrest this smock law (now in hand) to our Club law, it were excel∣lent.
Easily, easily, all shall be called the Club law.
As how?
Why thus: Club is the Crier, I am Poppin the Proctor and you Stickler the Doctor, he calls them to appear, I must be of their counsel, &amp; you must atone them put 'hem together we may know their cases, and be in their Elements (mark you me) but they cannot be in ours, Tut, none knows our secrets, we can speak fustian aboue their vnderstāding, &amp; make Asses ears attentive, Isle play Ambodexter tell 'hem tic a plain Case and put 'hem down with the club law; so that (as Club said well ee'now) our knavery is as near allied, as felling of wood and getting of children.
Excellent excellent, by this they are at hand; lets bear these things like our selves; Isle withdraw and put on my habi∣liments and then enter for the Doctor.
Do so, they come, they come? welcome Master Doctor Glister and moister Purge, ther's a commission to be sat upon this day, to open a passage for imprisoned truth, concerning Acts yet in tenebris.
True; I am brought hither by the malice of my wife
And I have a just Appeal against my wife.
Moister Exigent (so I think you are called) I under∣stand you have the Law at your fingers ends.
I can box Cases, and scold &amp; scratch it out amōgst them
Indeed fame reports you to be a good Trumpeter of causes, I must retain you sir to sound mine?
My Sagbut shall do it most pathetically; tell me in brief the nature of your Case?
Faith sir, a scandalous Letter devised to wrong my repu∣tation, about a Bastard in the Country which should be mine.
About a Bastard in the Country which should be yours? hum; tic very like you then, it should seem.
O no sir, understand me, only fathered upon me.
Only fathered upon you, cum nemini obtrude potest; I un∣derstand you and like you well to, you do not flatter your self in your own Case, no: tic not good, well what more:
And about my Niece got with child, in my own house.
By our lady burdens of some weight, which you make light of—you deny?
What else sir, I have reason.
I know it well, I take you for no beast: believe me (ma∣ster Doctor) denial and reason are two maine grounds, stand upon them and you cannot err. Your case master Purge?
First take your fee master Exigent, that you may have the more feeling, and urge it home when you come toot, mine is a discovery of my wives Iniquity at the Family of love.
Otherwise called the house of Venery, where they hun∣ger and thirst for it.
True sir, you have heard of the hole in the wall, where they assemble together in the day time, like so many Bees under a hyue.
Come home Crura Thimo plane, and lodge among hornets, is it not so?
J cannot tell sir, but for my part, I am much noted as I go
No doubt of that sir, your wife can furnish you with notes out of her Cotations.
I and give him a two tag'd point to tie 'hem together.
But how came you to detect her?
Why thus sir: getting the word, I dogd her to the Family where closing with her I whispered so pleasing a tale in her ear, that J got from her her wedding Ring, &amp; heer tic.
Well, out of that ring we will wring matter that shall carry meat ith mouth. But what witness or proof can you produce to make good your wives iniquity, and your own Cuccoldry
Master Lipsalue, and Moister Gudgin, who were her cō∣pinions at that same time.
Very good a, re they cited in the quorum nominee?
they will be here sir.
If they be they will beray all.
So much the better twill savor well for Master Purge.
You understand my case now? D.Gl. And mine too sir?
I do J do, they are as different as a Doctor &amp; a Dunce, a man and a beast, heers the Compēdium; yours master Doctor stands upon the negative, &amp; yours master Purge upon the offer∣motive Pauca sapienti, J have it, J have it.
Mine is very currant sir, J can show you good gilt.
I marry, there spoke an Angel, guilt's currant indeed, let me feel it let me fooled.
I mean my wives guilt.
Master Poppin, you shall have Innocence to speak for me?
Tut, Innocence is a fool, I care not for's company, I can speak enough without him.
Then J hope you will be as good to vs, as the fiue-fin∣ger at Maw.
No rather as Hercules, to lip labour 'hem with the Club Law, tut let me alone.
O are you here sir, I have brought you a full barn to glut your greedy appetite if you have any maw, feed here till you choke again: Now shall J see the whole Carcass of your knavery ripped up, if thou hast any grace, now will thy red beard turn white upon it.
O how have I been tossed from post to pillar,
In this libidinous world: the yoke I bear
Is so vneu'n, as if an Innocent Lamb
And a mad hare-braind Ox should draw together:
But I must have patience ther's no remedy.
Theirs some difference between these two tempers.
J would give a hundred pounds my wife had so gentle a spirit.
My wife must needs be gentle, for she can bear double.
Here comes master Doctor, now rig up your vessels, e∣very one to his Tackling.
Good day to all at once, and peace amongst you: fie how I sweat, J think Vulcan ne'er toyld so at his Anvil, as J have done, and all to make maids water to slake Cupids fire, and to turn his shafts from the featherbed to the bed post, from the hart to the heel: Come master Poppin shall we to this gear?
Reverend Doctor we have staid your coming: Crier cry silence?
Master Doctor: I have heard in general terms, the
Tales of master Doctor Glister, and master Purge, which have in mutual manner jumped into the Quagmire of my mind, out of which quagmire (by your enforcement, and mine own duty) I pluck them up by the ears, and thus in naked appa∣rance I present them.
Ad rem, ad rem master Poppin: leave your alegories,
your metaphors, and Circumlocutions, and to the point?
Then briefly thus: I have compared their tales, how short they will come of their wives I know not: and first for mistress Purge, Crier call mistress Purge?
Rebecca Purge, wife to Peter Purge Apothecary, appear upon thy purgation, upon pain of excommunication.
Here I am: O times impiety!
Hither I come from out the harmless fold,
To have my good name eaten up by wolves:
See how they grin? well, the weak must to the wall,
I must bear wrong, but shame shall them befall.
Who is her accuser?
Her own husband upon the late discovery of a Crewe of narrow Rust strait laced, yet loose bodied Dames, with a Route of Omnium gatherums, assembled by the title of the fa∣mily of love; which master Doctor if they be not punished and suppressed by our Club Law, each mans copy hold, will become free hold, specialties will turn to generalities and so from v∣nity to parity, from parity to plurality, &amp; from plurality to uni∣uersalitie, their wives, the only ornaments of their houses and of all their wares, goods and Chattel, the chief movables will be made common.
Most Voluble and eloquent proctor.
Byrladie these Enormities must and shall bee redressed, otherwise I see their Charter will bee infringd, and their aun∣cient Staff of government the Club (from whence wee de∣rive our law of Castigation) this club I say (they seeming no∣thlng less then men by their fore-part) will be turned upon their own heads. Speak Rebecca Purge art thou one of this fami∣lie? hast thou ever known the body of any man there, or else∣where Concupiscentically?
No M. Doctor, those are but devises of the wicked to trap the Innocēt, but I thank my spirit I have fear before my eyes, which my husband sees not, because something hangs in's light.
That's my horns: she flouts me to my face, and I will not endure it: I shall carry her mark to my grave: master Doc∣tor she has given me that, that Esculapius (were he now extāt) could not heal, nor Edax rerum take away?
Produce your witness M. Purge, and blow not your own horn?
Master Lipsalue and master Gudgin, let them be called.
Laurence Lipsalue &amp; Gregory Gudgen late of hic &amp; vbi{que} in the County of nusquam Gentlemen, come into the Court, and give your evidence, upon payne of that which shall en∣sue.
Here they come, in payne I warrant them: how works your physic Gallants? doe you go well to the ground? now Cuckold the Doctor? wife who's your first man now, now strike with the scabbard: ha, ha, ha.
A villainous Doctor.
Mountybank you're a rascal, and wee will cast about to be revenged.
Cast about this way, and beray what you can concer∣ning Mistress Purge, who stands here upon her purgation, either to prove modified or contaminated, according to the tenor piece of your principal Evidence, first give 'hem the Book?
Come, lay your hands upon the Book: you shall speak and aver no more, nor wade no farther into the Cream pots of this women's crime, then the naked truth, and the cart-rope of your conscience shall conduct you, so help you the contents: kiss the book.
Alas, we are not in case to answer largely, but if you will have our evidence in brief, I think I kissed her at the Fa∣mily
some three times; once at coming, once at going, and once in the midst, otherwise never knew her disho∣nestle.
I, mark that middle kiss master Doctor?
And for my part I have bin more mortified by her, then ever I was provoked.
How say you to this master Purge, your witness is weak, and surreuerence on, without sounder proof, they may depart to the close stool whence they came, and you to your Apothecaries shop.
No master Doctor, I have an other bolt to shoot, that shall strike her dead, she shall not have a word to say.
Answer me to this Mistress Purge, wher's your wed∣ding Ring?
My wedding Ring? why what should J doe with unnecessary things about me, when the poor begs at my gate ready to starve; is it not better (as I learned last Lecture) to send my substance before me, where I may find it, then to leave it behind me, where I must forgo it? yes verily; wherefore (to put you out of doubt) I have given that Ring to charitable v∣ses?
Nay now she falters: my Client can show that Ring, got from her at the Family, when these two Courtling had at the same time beleaguerd her Fort.
This alters the Case clean, what starting hole ha you now mistress Purge?
Even the Sanctuary of a safe conscience: now truly, truly, (how ever he came by that Ring) by my Sisterhood I gave it to the relief of the distressed Geneua.
How! to the relief of the distressed Geneua? Justice master Doctor: I may now decline victus vista victum, one word more shall overthrow her: I my self was a Familist that day, who more Jealous then zealous in devotion, thrust in amongst the rest (as I had most right) on purpose to sound her, to find out the knavery: short tale to make, I got her Ring, and here it is? let her deny it if she can; and
what more I discovered, non est nuns narrandi locus.
Husband, I see you are hudwynck't in the right use of feeling and knowledge, as if J knew you not then, as well as the Child knows his own father, look in the posy of my Ringe: does it not tell you that we two are one flesh? and hath not fellow feeling taught vs to know one another as well by night as by day? husband husband, will you do as the blind Jade, break your neck down a hill because you see it not? ha you no light of nature in that flesh of yours? Now (as true as I live moister Doctor I had a secret operation, and J knew him then to be my husband even by very instinct.
Impudence dost not blush? art not ashamed to lie so abominable.
No husband, rather be you ashamed of your own weakness, for, for my part J neither fear nor shame what man can doe unto me.
Master Purge J see you have spent your pith; therefore best make a full point at the ring, and attend our pleasure, my∣ster Exigent proceed to the rest?
Crier, call Doctor Glister?
Doctor Glister, alias suppositar doctor of physic, ap∣pear upon thy purgation, upon the belly pain that may en∣sue therein.
Here master Doctor.
Who is his accuser?
His clamorous wife, who seems to enforce a separation about a Bastard in the Country, which should be his, only fa∣ther'd upon him.
What proof of that?
Proof vnaunswerable master Doctor, the Nurses Letter: let it be red, but first observe his countenance? it may be his blushing will bewray his guilt.
Now by this light, I thought it had indeed, but I see tic but the reflection of his beard, Read the Letter Master Exigent?
After my hearty commendations remembered unto
your worshipful doctorship, trusting in god that you are as∣well as I was at the making hereof thanks be to him there∣fore, The cause of my writing unto you at this time is, to let you understand that your little son is turned a ragged colt, a very stripling, for being now stripped of all his clothing, his backside wants a tayle-peece commends it self to your fa∣therly Consideratiō. Wo worth the time that ever I gave suck to a child that came in at the window, god knows how. Yet if you did but see how like the peart little read headed knave is, to his Father: and how like a Cock sparrow he mouses and touses my little Bess already, you would take him for your own, and pay me my hier, I write not of the want of one thing for I want all things, wherefore take some speedy order or else as naked as he came from the mother will I send him to the father. From Pis. the xxii of —
Your poor nurse Thomasiue Tweed es.
Moister doctor: Truth needs not the foil of The∣torick, I will only in Monosillaba answer for my self, (as sometimes a wise man did) such and such things are laid to my charge, which J deny, you may think of me what you please, but I am as innocent in this, as the child new borne.
Why theirs partly a confession: the child wee know is innocent and not new borne neither: for it should seem by the letter he is able to call his dad, knave.
You take me wrong master Proctor?
Under correction thus much can I say for my clients Justification; Indeed hee hath travelled well in the beating of pulses, and hath been much conversant in women's Iordanes, but he had ever a care to raise his patient, being before cast down: his charitable disposition hath been such to poor folk, that he never took aboue four pence for the casting of a water, which good custom was so well known among all his patients, that if sixpence were at any time offered him they might be bold to ask and have two pence again. Hee hath been so skilful and painful withal, in the cure of the greene sickness, that of my knowledge) hee hath risen at all
hours in the night to pleasure maids that have had it. And for that foul mouthed disease termed by a fine phrase— a pox on it what dee call it? ô! the Grincomes, at that he hath plaid his doctors prize, and writes Nil ultra to all Bountibāckes. So that the wise woman in Pissing alley, nor she in Do-little lane are more famous for good deeds thē he. Then moister Doct∣or, out of these presumptions, besides his flat denial (a more infallible ground) you may gather his innocence, and let him have his purgation.
No Moister Exigent it is not so to be foisted off.
Nay master Doctor what say you to his own Niece that looks big upon him, an arrow that sticks for the upshot against al comers, which by his restraint of her, from master Gerardine an honest Gentleman that loved her, and upon that Colour from the sight and enter-course of other men, must by all presumptions be his own Act.
O monstrous! this is a foul Blot in your Tables in∣deed.
Wife thou hast no shame nor womanhood in thee, thy conscience knows me.
True of thy flesh who knows not that? thy beard speaks for thee: I, J, thou least by me like a Stone, but abroad the art like a stone horse you old Timelifter.
Cease your clamour, and attend my speech; most Worcester∣shipfull, reverend and judicial Doctor, for the quickening of your memory I will give you a Breviate of all that hath been spoken: Master Doctor Glister hath a cradlefull and a belly full (you see) thrust upon him, and master Purge a head fool. Your wife is an angry honilesse wasp, whose sting I hope you need not fear? and yours carries honey in her mouth, but her sting makes your forehead swell: your wife makes you deaf with the shrill treble of her tong, and yours makes you horn mad with the tenor of her Tail. In fine, master Doctors re∣fuge is his conscience, and Master Purge runs at his wives Ring.
Sum totalis, a good Audit, ha you made master Exi∣gent: now attend my Arbitrament: For you Gallants though you have incurd the danger of the Law, by using counter∣fet keys, and putting your hands into the wrong pocket; yet because I see you punished and purgd already, my advise is, that you learn the A.B.C. of better manners, go back and tell how you have been used in the City, and being thus scoured keep your selves clean, and the bed undefiled. For you Master Purge, because I see your Evidence insufficient, and indeed too weak to foil your wives uprightness, and seeing Jealousy and unkindness, hath only made her a stranger in your land of Ham; my counsel is that you readuance your Standard, give her new press money?
You may enjoin me sir but —
But not at me man, I will enjoin you, and conjoin you, and briefly thus, you have your Ring that has made this combustion and uproar, that keep still, wear it, and here by my edict bee it proclaimed, to all that are jealous, to wear their wives Ring still on their fingers, as best for their secure∣tie, and the only charm against Cuckoldry.
Then wife at master Doctors enioyntment (so thou wilt promise me to come no more at the Family) I receive thee into the lists of my favour.
Truly Husband my love must be free still to Gods creatures, yea nevertheless preserving you still as the head of my body, I will doe as the Spirit shall enable me.
Go too: thou hast a good wife, and there an end: upon you master Doctor (being solicited by so apparent proof) J can doe no less then pronounce a severe sentence: and yet in faith the reverence of your calling and profession doth some∣what check my austerity, what if master Gerardine (by my persuasion would yet be induced to take your Niece and fa∣there the child, would you launch with a thousand pound, be∣sides her fathers portion?
Master Doctor I would, were it but to redeem her lost good name.
Then foreknowing what would happen, I thought good in master Gerardines name, to have this bond ready, which if you seal to, he shall take her with all faults.
That will I instantly—So, this is done, which to∣gether with my Niece doe I deliver by these presents to the use of master Gerardine.
He thanks you heartily, and lets you know (they discover themselves
That Indian mines and Tagus glistening oar
To this bequest were unto me but poor.
What! Gerardine, Dryfat and Club?
The very same: your are welcome to our Club Law?
The very same: your are welcome to our Club Law?
Cease admiration here! what doubt remains
Isle satisfy at full, now join with me,
For approbation of our Family.
Gentles whose favour have over spread this place,
And shed the real influence of grace
On harmless mirth▪ we thank you, for our hope
Attracts such vigour and unmeasured scope
From the reflecting splendour of your eyes,
That grace presumd, fear in oblivion dies.
Your judgment as it is the Touch and Tryer
Of good from bad, so from your harts comes fire,
That gives both ardor to the wit refined,
And sweetness the Incense of each willing mind:
O may that fire ne'er dye, nor let your savours
Depart from vs: give countnance to their labours
Proposed a Sacrifice, which may no less
Their strong desires, then our true zeals express.

O For a Muse of Fire, that would ascend
The brightest Heaven of Invention:
A Kingdom for a Stage, Princes to Act,
And Monarchs to behold the swelling Scene.
Then should the Warlike Harry, like himself,
Assume the Port of Mars, and at his heals
(Leashed in, like Hounds) should Famine, Sword, and Fire
Crouch for employment. But pardon, Gentles all:
The flat vnraysed Spirits, that hath dared,
On this unworthy Scaffold, to bring forth
So great an Object. Can this Cock-Pit hold
The vast fields of France? Or may we cram
Within this Wooden O, the very Casks
That did affright the Ayre at Agincourt?
O pardon: since a crocked Figure may
Attest in little place a Million,
And let vs, Ciphers to this great Account,
On your imaginary Forces work.
Suppose within the Girdle of these Walls
Are now confined two mighty Monarchies,
Whose high, vp-reared, and abutting Fronts,
The perilous narrow Ocean parts asunder.
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts:
Into a thousand parts divide one Man,
And make imaginary Puissance.
Think when we talk of Horses, that you see them,
Printing their proud Hooves in the receiving Earth:
For it is your thoughts that now must deck our Kings,
Carry them here and there: Jumping o'er Times;
Turning the accomplishment of many years
Into an Howre-glasse: for the which supply,
Admit me Chorus to this History;
Who Prologue-like, your humble patience pray,
Gently to hear, kindly to judge our Play.
MY Lord, Isle tell you, that self Bill is urged,
Which in the eleuēth year of ye last Kings reign
Was like, and had indeed against vs past,
But that the scambling and unquiet time
Did push it out of farther question.
But how my Lord shall we resist is now?
It must be thought on: if it pass against vs,
We loose the better half of our Possession:
For all the Temporal Lands, which men devout
By Testament have given to the Church,
Would they strip from vs; being valued thus,
As much as would maintain, to the Kings honour,
Full fifteen Earls, and fifteen hundred Knights,
Six thousand and two hundred good Esquires:
And to relief of Lasers, and weak age
Of indigent faint Souls, past corporal toil,
A hundred Almes-houses, right well supplied:
And to the Coffers of the King beside,
A thousand pounds by the year. Thus runs the Bill.
This would drink deep.
It would drink the Cup and all.
But what prevention?
The King is full of grace, and fair re∣guard.
And a true lover of the holy Church.
The courses of his youth promised it not.
The breath no sooner left his Fathers body,
But that his wildness, mortified in him,
Seemed to dye too: yea, at that very moment,
Consideration like an Angel came,
And whipped the offending Adam out of him;
Leaving his body as a Paradise,
To inuelop and contain Celestial Spirits.
Never was such a sudden Scholar made:
Never came Reformation in a Flood,
With such a heady currants scouring faults:
Nor never Hidra-headed Wilfulness
So soon did loose his Seat; and all at once;
As in this King.
We are blessed in the Change.
Hear him but reason in Divinity;
And all-admiring, with an inward wish
You would desire the King were made a Prelate:
Hear him debate of Common-wealth Affairs;
You would say, it hath been all in all his study:
List his discourse of War; and you shall hear
A fearful Battle rendered you in Musique.
Turn him to any Cause of Policy,
The Gordian Knot of it he will unloose,
Familiar as his Garter: that when he speaks,
The Ayre, a Chartered Libertine, is still,
And the mute Wonder lurks in men's ears,
To steal his sweet and honeyed Sentences:
So that the Art and Practique part of Life,
Must be the Mistress to this Theoric.
Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,
Since his addiction was to Cour•e, vain,
His Companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,
His Hours filled up with Riots Banq•ets, Sports;
And never noted in him any study,
Any retirement, any sequestration,
From open Haunts and Popularity.
The Strawberry grows underneath the Nettle,
And wholesome Berries thrive and ripen best,
Neighboured by Fruit of baser quality:
And so the Prince obscured his Contemplation
Under the V•yle of Wildness, which (no doubt)
Grew like the Summer Grass▪ fastest by Night,
Unseen, yet cressiue in his faculty.
It must be so: for Miracles are ceased:
And therefore we must needs admit the means,
How things are perfected.
But my good Lord:
How now for mitigation of this Bill,
Urged by the Commons? doth his Majesty
Incline to it, or no?
He seems indifferent:
Or rather swaying more upon our part,
Then cherishing the exhibitors against vs▪
For I have made an offer to his Majesty,
Upon our Spiritual Convocation,
And in regard of Causes now in hand,
Which I have opened to his Grace at large,
As touching France, to give a greater Sum,
Then ever at one time the Clergy yet
Did to his Predecessors part withal.
How did this offer seem received, my Lord?
With good acceptance of his Majesty:
Save that there was not time enough to hear,
As I perceived his Grace would sane have done,
The severals and vnhidden passage:
Of his true Titles to some certain Dukedoms,
And generally, to the Crown and Seat of France,
Derived from Edward his great Grandfather.
What was the impediment that broke this off?
The French Ambassador upon that instant
Craved audience; and the hour I think is come,
To give him hearing: Is it four a Clock?
It is.
Then go we in, to know his Embassy:
Which I could with a ready guess declare,
Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.
Isle wait upon you, and I long to hear it.
Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?
Not here in presence.
Send for him, good Uncle.
Shall we call in the Ambassador, my Liege?
Not yet, my Cousin: we would be resolved,
Before we hear him, of some things of weight,
That task our thoughts, concerning vs and France.
God and his Angels guard your sacred Throne,
And make you long become it.
Sure we thank you.
My learned Lord, we pray you to proceed,
And justly and religiously unfold,
Why the Law Salike, that they have in France,
Or should or should not bar vs in our Claim:
And God forbid, my dear and faithful Lord,
That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading,
Or nicely charge your understanding Soul,
With opening Titles miscreate, whose right
Suits not in native colours with the truth:
For God doth know, how many now in health,
Shall drop their blood, in approbation
Of what your reverence shall incite vs to.
Therefore take heed how you impawne our Person,
How you awake our sleeping Sword of War;
We charge you in the Name of God take heed:
For never two such Kingdoms did contend,
Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops
Are every one, a Woe, a sore Complaint,
Against him, whose wrongs gives edge unto the Swords,
That makes such waste in brief mortality.
Under this Conjuration, speak my Lord:
For we will hear, note, and believe in heart,
That what you speak, is in your Conscience washed,
As pure as sin with Baptism.
Then hear me gracious Sovereign, &amp; you Peers,
That owe your selves, your lives, and services,
To this Imperial Throne. There is no bar
To make against your Highness Claim to France,
But this which they produce from Pharamond,
Interim Salicam Mulieres no succedaul,
No Woman shall succeed in Salike Land:
Which Salike Land, the French unjustly gloss
To be the Realm of France, and Pharamond
The •nder of this Law, and Female Bar.
Yet their own Authors faithfully affirm,
That the Land Salike is in Germanie,
Between the Clouds of Sala and of Elue:
Where Charles the Great having subdued the Saxons,
There left behind and settled certain French:
Who holding in disdain the German Women,
For some dishonest manners of their life,
Established then this Law; to wit, No Female
Should be Inheritrix in Salike Land:
Which Salike (as I said) twixt Elue and Sala,
Is at this day in Germanie, called Meisen.
Then doth it well appear, the Salike Law
Was not devised for the Realm of France:
Nor did the French possess the Salike, Land,
Until four hundred one and twenty years
After defunction of King Pharamond,
Idly supposed the founder of this Law,
Who died within the year of our Redemption,
Four hundred twenty six: and Charles the Great
Subdued the Saxons, and did seat the French
Beyond the River Sala, in the year
Eight hundred five. Besides, their Writers say,
King Pippin, which deposed Childerike,
Did as Heir General, being descended
Of Blithild, which was Daughter to King Clothier,
Make Claim and Title to the Crown of France.
Hugh Capet also, who usurped the Crown
Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole Heir male
Of the true Line and Stock of Charles the Great:
To find his Title with some shows of truth,
Though in pure truth it was corrupt and nought,
Conveyed himself as the Heir to the Lady Linger,
Daughter to Charlemain, who was the Son
To Lewes the Emperor, and Lewes the Son
Of Charles the Great: also King Lewes the Tenth,
Who was sole Heir to the Usurper Capet,
Could not keep quiet in his conscience,
Wearing the Crown of France, 'till satisfied,
That fair Queen Isabel, his Grandmother,
Was Lineal of the Lady Ermengare,
Daughter to Charles the foresaid Duke of Lorraine:
By the which Marriage, the Lyne of Charles the Great
Was re-vnited to the Crown of France.
So, that as clear as is the Summers Sun,
King Pippins Title, and Hugh Capets Claim,
King Lewes his satisfaction, all appear
To hold in Right and Title of the Female:
So doe the Kings of France unto this day.
Howbeit, they would hold up this Salique Law,
To bar your Highness claiming from the Female,
And rather choose to hide them in a Net,
Then amply to imbarre their crooked Titles,
Usurped from you and your Progenitors.
May I with right and conscience make this claim?
The sin upon my head, dread Sovereign:
For in the Book of Numbers is it writ,
When the man dyes, let the Inheritance
Descend unto the Daughter. Gracious Lord,
Stand for your own, unwind your bloody Flag,
Look back into your mighty Ancestors:
Go my dread Lord, to your great Grandsires Tomb,
From whom you claim; invoke his Warlike Spirit,
And your Great Uncles, Edward the Black Prince,
Who on the French ground played a Tragedy,
Making defeat on the full Power of France:
Whiles his most mighty Father on a Hill
Stood smiling, to behold his Lyons Whelp
Forage in blood of French Nobility.
O Noble English, that could entertain
With half their Forces, the full pride of France,
And let another half stand laughing by,
All out of work, and cold for action.
Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,
And with your puissant Arm renew their Feats;
You are their Heir, you sit upon their Throne:
The Blood and Courage that renowned them,
Runs in your Veins: and my thrice-puissant Liege
Is in the very May-Morne of his Youth,
Ripe for Exploits and mighty Enterprises.
Your Brother Kings and Monarchs of the Earth
Doe all expect, that you should rouse your self,
As did the former Lyons of your Blood.
They know your Grace hath cause, and means, and might;
So hath your Highness: never King of England
Had Nobles richer, and more loyal Subjects,
Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England,
And lye pauillion'd in the fields of France.
O let their bodies follow my dear Liege
With Bloods, and Sword and Fire, to win your Right:
In aid whereof, we of the Spirituality
Will raise your Highness such a mighty Sum,
As never did the Clergy at one time
Bring in to any of your Ancestors.
We must not only arm to invade the French,
But lay down our proportions, to defend
Against the Scot, who will make road upon vs,
With all advantages.
They of those Marches, gracious Sovereign,
Shall be a Wall sufficient to defend
Our in-land from the pilfering Borderers.
We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,
But fear the maine intendment of the Scot,
Who hath been still a giddy neighbour to vs:
For you shall read, that my great Grandfather
Never went with his forces into France,
But that the Scot, on his vnfurnisht Kingdom,
Came pouring like the Tide into a breach,
With ample and brim fullness of his force,
Galling the gleaned Land with hot Assays,
Girding with grievous siege, Castles and Towns:
That England being empty of defence,
Hath shook and trembled at the ill neighbourhood.
She hath bin thē more feared thē harmed, my Liege:
For hear her but exampled by her self,
When all her Chivalry hath been in France,
And she a mourning Widow of her Nobles,
She hath her self not only well defended,
But taken and impounded as a Stray,
The King of Scots: whom she did send to France,
To fill King Edwards fame with prisoner Kings,
And make their Chronicle as rich with praise,
As is the Owes and bottom of the Sea
With sunken Wrack, and sum-lesse Treasuries.
But there's a saying very old and true,
If that you will France win, then with Scotland first begin.
For once the Eagle (England) being in prey,
To her unguarded Nest, the Weasel (Scot)
Comes sneaking, and so sucks her Princely Eggs,
Playing the Mouse in absence of the Cat,
To tame and havoc more then she can eat.
It follows then, the Cat must stay at home,
Yet that is but a crushed necessity,
Since we have lockes to safeguard necessaries,
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.
While that the Armed hand doth fight abroad,
The advised head defends it self at home:
For Government, though high, and low, and lower,
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,
Congreeing in a full and natural close,
Like Music.
Therefore doth heaven divide
The state of man in divers functions,
Setting endeavour in continual motion:
To which is fixed as an aim or butt,
Obedience: for so work the Honey Bees,
Creatures that by a rule in Nature teach
The Act of Order to a peopled Kingdom▪
They have a King, and Officers of sorts,
Where some like Magistrates correct at home:
Others, like Merchants venture Trade abroad;
Others, like Soldiers armed in their stings,
Make boot upon the Summer, Velvet buds:
Which pillage, they with merry march bring home
To the Tent-royal of their Emperor:
Who busied in his Majesties surveys
The singing Masons building roofs of Gold,
The civil Citizens kneading up the honey;
The poor Mechanic Porters, crowding in
Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate:
The sad-ey'd Justice with his surly humm,
Delivering ore to Executors pale
The lazy yawning Drone: I this infer,
That many things having full reference
To one consent, may work contrariously,
As many Arrows loosed several ways
Come to one mark: as many ways meet in one town,
As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea;
As many Lines close in the Dials center:
So may a thousand actions once a foot,
And in one purpose, and be all well borne
Without defeat. Therefore to France, my Liege,
Divide your happy England into four,
Whereof, take you one quarter into France,
And you withal shall make all Galley shake.
If we with thrice such powers left at home,
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,
Let vs be worried, and our Nation lose
The name of hardiness and policy.
Call in the Messengers sent from the Dolphin.
Now are we well resolved, and by Gods help
And yours, the noble sinews of our power,
France being ours, we'll bend it to our Awe,
Or break it all to pieces. Or there we'll sit,
(Ruling in large and ample Empery,
Ore France, and all her (almost) Kingly Dukedoms)
Or lay these bones in an unworthy Urn,
Tomblesse, with no remembrance over them:
Either our History shall with full mouth
Speak freely of our Acts, or else our grave
Like Turkish mute shall have a tongueless mouth,
Not worshipped with a waxen Epitaph.
Now are we well prepared to know the pleasure
Of our fair Cousin Dolphin: for we hear,
Your greeting is from him, not from the King.
May it please your Majesty to give vs leave
Freely to render what we have in charge:
Or shall we sparingly show you far off
The Dolphins meaning, and our Embassy.
We are no Tyrant, but a Christian King,
Unto whose grace our passion is as subject
As is our wretches fettered in our prisons,
Therefore with frank and with vncurbed plainness,
Tell vs the Dolphins mind.
Thus than in few:
Your Highness lately sending into France,
Did claim some certain Dukedoms, in the right
Of your great Predecessor, King Edward the third.
In answer of which claim, the Prince our Master
Says, that you savour too much of your youth,
And bids you be advised: There's nought in France,
That can be with a nimble Galliard won:
You cannot revel into Dukedoms there.
He therefore sends you meeter for your spirit
This Tun of Treasure; and in lieu of this,
Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim
Hear no more of you. This the Dolphin speaks.
What Treasure Uncle?
Tennis balls, my Liege.
We are glad the Dolphin is so pleasant with vs,
His Present, and your pains we thank you for:
When we have matched our Rackets to these Balls,
We will in France (by Gods grace) play a set,
Shall strike his fathers Crown into the hazard.
Tell him, he hath made a match with such a Wrangler,
That all the Courts of France will be disturbed
With Chases. And we understand him well,
How he comes o'er vs with our wilder days,
Not measuring what use we made of them.
We never valued this poor seat of England,
And therefore living hence, did give our self
To barbarous license: As it is ever common,
That men are merriest, when they are from home.
But tell the Dolphin, I will keep my State,
Be like a King, and show my sail of Greatness,
When I do rouse me in my Throne of France.
For that I have laid by my Majesty,
And plodded like a man for working days:
But I will rise there with so full a glory,
That I will dazzle all the eyes of France,
Yea strike the Dolphin blind to look on vs,
And tell the pleasant Prince, this Mock of his
Hath turned his balls to Gun-stones, and his soul
Shall stand sore charged, for the wasteful vengeance
That shall fly with them: for many a thousand widows
Shall this his Mock, mock out of their deer husbands;
Mock mothers from their sons, mock Castles down:
And some are yet vngotten and unborn,
That shall have cause to curse the Dolphins scorn.
But this lies all within the will of God,
To whom I do appeal, and in whose name
Tel you the Dolphin, I am coming on,
To avenge me as I may, and to put forth
My rightful hand in a wel-hallow'd cause.
So get you hence in peace: And tell the Dolphin.
His Jest will savour but of shallow wit,
When thousands weep more then did laugh at it,
Convey them with safe conduct. Fare you well.
This was a merry Message.
We hope to make the Sender blush at it:
Therefore, my Lords, omit no happy hour,
That may give furth'rance to our Expedition:
For we have now no thought in vs but France,
Save those to God, that run before our business.
Therefore let our proportions for these Wars
Be soon collected, and all things thought upon,
That may with reasonable swiftness add
More Feathers to our Wings: for God before,
We'll chide this Dolphin at his fathers door.
Therefore let every man now task his thought,
That this fair Action may on foot be brought.
Now all the Youth of England are on fire,
And silken Dalliance in the Wardrobe lies:
Now thrive the Armourers, and Honours thought
Reigns solely in the breast of every man.
They sell the Pasture now, to buy the Horse;
Following the Mirror of all Christian Kings,
With winged heals, as English Mercuries.
For now sits Expectation in the Ayre,
And hides a Sword, from Hilts unto the Point,
With Crowns Imperial, Crowns and Coronets▪
Promised to Harry, and his followers.
The French advised by good intelligence
Of this most dreadful preparation,
Shake in their fear, and with pale Policy
Seek to divert the English purposes.
O England: Model to thy inward Greatness,
Like little Body with a mighty Heart:
What might thou do, that honour would thee do,
Were all thy children kind and natural:
But see, thy fault France hath in thee found out,
A nest of hollow bosoms, which he filles
With treacherous Crowns, and three corrupted men:
One, Richard Earl of Cambridge, and the second
Henry Lord Scroope of Masham, and the third
Sir Thomas Grey Knight of Northumberland,
Have for the Gilt of France (O guilt indeed)
Confirmed Conspiracy with fearful France,
And by their hands, this grace of Kings must dye.
If Hell and Treason hold their promises,
Ere he take ship for France; and in Southampton.
Linger your patience on, and we'll digest
The abuse of distance; force a play:
The sum is paid, the Traitors are agreed,
The King is set from London, and the Scene
Is now transported (Gentles) to Southampton,
There is the Play-house now, there must you sit,
And thence to France shall we convey you safe,
And bring you back: Charming the narrow seas
To give you gentle Pass: for if we may,
We'll not offend one stomach with our Play.
But till the King come forth, and not till then,
Unto Southampton do we shift our Scene.
Well met Corporal Nym.
Good morrow Lieutenant Bardolf.
What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?
For my part, I care not: I say little: but when time shall serve, there shall be smiles, but that shall be as it may. I dare not fight, but I will wink and hold out mine iron: it is a simple one, but what though? It will toste Cheese, and it will endure cold, as another mans sword will: and there's an end.
I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends, and we'll bee all three sworn brothers to France: Let it be so good Corporal Nym.
Faith, I will live so long as I may, that's the cer∣taine of it: and when I cannot live any longer, I will doe as I may: That is my rest, that is the rendezvous of it.
It is certain Corporal, that he is married to Nil Quickly, and certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her.
I cannot tell, Things must be as they may: men may sleep, and they may have their throats about them at that time, and some say, knives have edges: It must be as it may, though patience be a tyred name, yet she will plodde, there must be Conclusions, well, I cannot tell.
Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife: good Corporal be patient here. How now mine Hoaste Pi∣stole?
Base Tyke, call thou me Host, now by this hand I swear I scorn the term: nor shall my Nel keep Lodgers.
No by my troth, not long: For we cannot lodge and board a dozen or fourteen Gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of their Needles, but it will bee thought we keep a Bawdy-house straight. O welliday Lady, if he be not hewn now, we shall see wilful adult∣rye and murder committed.
Good Lieutenant, good Corporal offer nothing here.
Pish.
Pish for thee, Island dog: thou prickeard cur of Island.
Good Corporal Nym show thy valour, and put up your sword.
Will you shogge off? I would have you solves.
Solves, egregious dog? O Viper vile; The solves in thy most marvelous face, the solves in thy teeth, and in thy throat, and in thy hateful Lungs, yea in thy Maw party; and which is worse, within thy nasty mouth. I do retort the solves in thy bowels, for I can take, and Pi∣stols cock is up, and flashing fire will follow.
I am not Barbason, you cannot conjure me: I have an humour to knock you indifferently well: If you grow foul with me Pistol, I will scour you with my Rapier, as I may, in fair terms. If you would walk off, I would prick your guts a little in good terms, as I may, and that's the humour of it.
O Braggart vile, and damned furious wight,
The Grave doth gape, and doting death is near,
Therefore exhale.
Hear me, hear me what I say: Hee that strikes the first stroke, Isle run him up to the hilts, as I am a sol∣dier.
An oath of mickle might, and fury shall abate.
Give me thy fist, thy fore-foote to me give: Thy spirits are most tall.
I will cut thy throat one time or other in fair terms, that is the humour of it.
Couple a gorge, that is the word. I defy thee a∣gain. O hound of Create, think thou my spouse to get? No, to the spittle go, and from the Powdering tub of in∣famy, fetch forth the Laser Kite of Cressids kind, Doll Teare-sheete, she by name, and her espouse. I have, and I will hold the Quondam Quickly for the only she: and Pauca, there's enough to go to.
Mine Host Pistol, you must come to my May∣ster, and your Hostess: He is very sick, &amp; would to bed. Good Bardolf, put thy face between his sheets, and do the Office of a Warming-pan: Faith, he's very ill.
Away you Rogue.
By my troth he'll yield the Crow a pudding one of these days: the King has kilt his heart. Good Hus∣band come home presently.
Come, shall I make you two friends. Wee must to France together: why the devil should we keep knives to cut one another throats?
Let stoods ore-swell, and fiends for food howl on.
You'll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at Betting?
Base is the Slave that pays.
That now I will have: that's the humour of it.
As manhood shall compound: push home.
By this sword, hee that makes the first thrust,
Isle kill him: By this sword, I will.
Sword is an Oath, &amp; Oaths must have their course
Coporal Nym, &amp; thou wilt be friends be friends, and thou wilt not, why then be enemies with me to: pre∣thee put up.
A Noble shalt thou have, and present pay, and Liquor likewise will I give to thee, and friendship shall combine, and brotherhood. Isle live by Nymme, &amp; Nymme shall live by me, is not this just? For I shall Sir∣ler be unto the Camp, and profits will accrue. Give me thy hand.
I shall have my Noble?
In cash, most justly paid.
Well, then that the humour of't.
As ever you come of women, come in quickly to sir Iohn: A poor heart, hee is so shook of a burning quotidian Tertian, that it is most lamentable to behold. Sweet men, come to him.
The King hath run bad humours on the Knight, that's the even of it.
Nym, thou hast spoke the right, his heart is fra∣cted and corroborate.
The King is a good King, but it must bee as it may: he passes some humours, and careers.
Let vs condole the Knight, for (Lambekins) we will live.
Fore God his Grace is bold to trust these traitors
They shall be apprehended by and by.
How smooth and even they do bear themselves,
As if allegiance in their bosoms sate
Crowned with faith, and constant loyalty.
The King hath note of all that they intend,
By interception, which they dream not of.
Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow,
Whom he hath dulled and cloyed with gracious favours;
That he should for a foreign purse, so sell
His Sovereigns life to death and treachery.
Now sits the wind fane, and we will aboard.
My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham,
And you my gentle Knight, give me your thoughts:
Think you not that the powers we bear with vs
Will cut their passage through the force of France?
Doing the execution, and the act,
For which we have in head assembled them.
No doubt my Liege, if each man do his best.
I doubt not that, since we are well persuaded
We carry not a heart with vs from hence,
That grows not in a fair consent with ours:
Nor leave not one behind, that doth not wish
Success and Conquest to attend on vs.
Never was Monarch better feared and loved,
Then is your Majesty; there's not I think a subject
That sits in heart-greefe and uneasiness
Under the sweet shade of your government.
True: those that were your Fathers enemies,
Have steeped their gals in honey, and do serve you
With hearts create of duty, and of zeal.
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,
And shall forget the office of our hand
Sooner then quittance of desert and merit,
According to the weight and worthiness.
So service shall with steeled sinews toil,
And labour shall refresh it self with hope
To do your Grace inconstant services.
We Judge no less. Uncle of Exeter,
Enlarge the man committed yesterday,
That •ailed against our person: We consider
It was excess of Wine that set him on,
And on his more advice, We pardon him,
That's mercy, but too much security:
Let him be punished Sovereign, least example
Breed (by his sufferance) more of such a kind.
O let vs yet be merciful.
So may your Highness, and yet punish too.
Sir, you show great mercy if you give him life,
After the taste of much correction.
Alas, your too much love and care of me,
Are heavy Orisons against this poor wretch:
If little faults proceeding on distemper,
Shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch our eye
When capital crimes, chewed, swallowed, and digested,
Appear before vs? We'll yet enlarge that man,
Though Cambridge, Scroope, and Gray, in their dear care
And tender preservation of our person
Wold have him punished▪ And now to our French causes,
Who are the late Commissioners?
I one my Lord,
Your Highness bad me ask for it to day.
So did you me my Liege.
And I my Royal Sovereign.
Then Richard Earl of Cambridge, there is yours:
There yours Lord Scroope of Masham, and Sir Knight:
Gray of Northumberland, this same is yours:
Read them, and know I know your worthiness.
My Lord of Westmerland, and Uncle Exeter,
We will aboard to night. Why how now Gentlemen?
What see you in those papers, that you loose
So much complexion? Look ye how they change:
Their cheeks are paper. Why, what read you there,
That have so cowarded and chased your blood
Out of appearance.
I do confess my fault,
And do submit me to your Highness mercy.
To which we all appeal.
The mercy that was quick in vs but late,
By your own counsel is suppressed and killed:
You must not dare (for shame) to talk of mercy,
For your own reasons turn into your bosoms,
As dogs upon their masters, worrying you:
See you my Princes, and my Noble Peers,
These English monsters: My Lord of Cambridge here,
You know how apt our love was, to accord
To furnish with all appertinents
Belonging to his Honour; and this man,
Hath for a few light Crowns, lightly conspired
And sworn unto the practises of France
To kill vs here in Hampton. To the which,
This Knight no less for bounty bound to Vs
Then Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn. But O,
What shall I say to thee Lord Scroope, thou cruel,
Ungrateful, savage, and inhumane Creature?
Thou that did bear the key of all my counsels,
That knew the very bottom of my soul,
That (almost) might have coined me into Gold,
Would thou have practised on me, for thy use?
May it be possible, that foreign hyer
Could out of thee extract one spark of evil
That might annoy my finger? It is so strange,
That though the truth of it stands off as gross
As black and white, my eye will scarcely see it.
Treason, and murder, ever kept together,
As two yoke devils sworn to eiders purpose,
Working so grossly in an natural cause,
That admiration did not hoop at them.
But thou (against all proportion) did bring in
Wonder to waite on reason, and on murder:
And whatsoever cunning fiend it was
That wrought upon thee so preposterously,
Hath got the voice in hell for excellence:
And other devils that suggest by treasons,
Do botch and bungle up damnation,
With patches, colours, and with forms being fetched
From glist'ring semblances of piety:
But he that tempered thee, bad thee stand up,
Gave thee no instance why thou should do treason,
Unless to dub thee with the name of Traitor.
If that same Daemon that hath gulled thee thus,
Should with his Lyon-gate walk the whole world,
He might return to vast Tartar back,
And tell the Legions, I can never win
A soul so easy as that Englishman's.
Oh, how hast thou with jealousy infected
The sweetness of affiance? Show men dutiful,
Why so did thou: seem they grave and learned?
Why so did thou. Come they of Noble Family?
Why so did thou. Seem they religious?
Why so did thou. Or are they spare in diet,
Free from gross passion, or of mirth, or anger,
Constant in spirit, not sweruing with the blood,
Garnished and decked in modest complement,
Not working with the eye, without the ear,
And but in purged judgment trusting neither,
Such and so finely bolted did thou seem:
And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot,
To make thee full fraught man, and best endued
With some suspicion, I will weep for thee.
For this revolt of thine, me thinks is like
Another fall of Man. Their faults are open,
Arrest them to the answer of the Law,
And God acquit them of their practises.
I arrest thee of High Treason, by the name of Richard Earl of Cambridge.
I arrest thee of High Treason, by the name of Thomas Lord Scroope of Marsham.
I arrest thee of High Treason, by the name of Thomas Grey, Knight of Northumberland.
Our purposes▪ God justly hath discovered,
And I repent my fault more then my death,
Which I beseech your Highness to forgive,
Although my body pay the price of it.
For me, the Gold of France did not seduce,
Although I did admit it as a motive,
The sooner to effect what I intended:
But God be thanked for prevention,
Which in sufferance heartily will rejoice,
Beseeching God, and you, to pardon me.
Never did faithful subject more rejoice
At the discovery of most dangerous Treason,
Then I do at this hour joy ore my self,
Prevented from a damned enterprise;
My fault, but not my body, pardon Sovereign.
God quit you in his mercy: Hear your sentence
You have conspired against Our Royal person,
Joined with an enemy proclaimed, and from his Coffers,
Received the Golden Earnest of Our death:
Wherein you would have sold your King to slaughter,
His Princes, and his Peers to servitude,
His Subjects to oppression, and contempt,
And his whole Kingdom into desolation:
Touching our person, seek we no revenge,
But we our Kingdoms safety must so tender,
Whose ruin you sought, that to her Laws
We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,
(Poor miserable wretches) to your death:
The taste whereof, God of his mercy give
You patience to endure, and true Repentance
Of all your dear offences. Bear them hence.
Now Lords for France: the enterprise whereof
Shall be to you as vs, like glorious.
We doubt not of a fair and lucky War,
Since God so graciously hath brought to light
This dangerous Treason, lurking in our way,
To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now,
But every Rub is smoothed on our way.
Then forth, dear Countrymen: Let vs deliver
Our Puissance into the hand of God,
Putting it straight in expedition.
Cheerly to Sea, the signs of War advance,
No King of England, if not King of France.
Prithee honey sweet Husband, let me bring thee to Staines.
No: for my manly heart doth erne. Bardolph, be blithe: Nim, rouse thy vaunting Veins: Boy, bristle thy Courage up: for Falstaff hee is dead, and wee must erne therefore.
Would I were with him, wheresomere hee is, either in Heaven, or in Hell.
Nay sure, hoe's not in Hell: hoe's in Arthurs Bosom, if ever man went to Arthurs Bosom: a made a finer end, and went away and it had been any Christian Child: a parted even just between Twelve and One, even at the turning of the Tide: for after I saw him sumble with the Sheets, and play with Flowers, and smile upon his fin∣gers end, I knew there was but one way: for his Nose was as sharpe as a Pen, and a Table of greene fields. How now Sir Iohn (quoth I?) what man? be a good cheer: so a cried out, God, God, God, three or four times: now I, to comfort him, bid him a should not think of God; I hoped there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet: so a bad me lay more Clothes on his feet: I put my hand into the Bed, and felt them, and they were as cold as any stone: then I felt to his knees, and so vp-peer'd, and upward, and all was as cold as any stone.
They say he cried out of Sack.
I, that a did.
And of Women.
Nay, that a did not.
Yes that a did, and said they were Deules incar∣nate.
A could never abide Carnation, it was a Co∣lore he never liked.
A said once, the Duel would have him about Women.
A did in some sort (indeed) handle Women: but then hee was rheumatic, and talked of the Whore of Babylon.
Doe you not remember a saw a Flea stick upon Bardolphs Nose, and a said it was a black Soul burning in Hell.
Well, the fuel is gone that maintained that fire: that's all the Riches I got in his service.
Shall wee shogg? the King will be gone from Southampton.
Come, let's away. My Love, give me thy Lips: Look to my Chattels, and my Movables: Let Senses rule: The world is, Pitch and pay: trust none: for Oaths are Straws, men's Faiths are Wafer-Cakes, and hold-fast is the only Dog: My Duck, therefore Caueto bee thy Counsailor. Go, clear thy Crystals. Yoke-fellowes in Arms, let vs to France, like Horse-leeches
my Boys, to suck, to suck, the very blood to suck.
And that's but unwholesome food, they say.
Touch her soft mouth, and march.
Farewell Hostess.
I cannot kiss, that is the humour of it: but adieu.
Let Housewifery appear: keep close, I thee command.
Farewell: adieu.
Thus comes the English with full power upon vs,
And more then carefully it vs concerns,
To answer Royally in our defences.
Therefore the Dukes of Berry and of Britain,
Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth,
And you Prince Dolphin, with all swift dispatch
To lyne and new repair our Towns of War
With men of courage, and with means defendant:
For England his approaches makes as fierce,
As Waters to the sucking of a Gulf.
It fits vs then to be as provident,
As fear may teach vs, out of late examples
Left by the fatal and neglected English,
Upon our fields.
My most redoubted Father,
It is most meet we arm vs against the Foe:
For Peace it self should not so dull a Kingdom,
(Though War nor no known Quarrel were in question)
But that Defences, Musters, Preparations,
Should be maintained, assembled, and collected,
As were a War in expectation.
Therefore I say, it is meet we all go forth,
To view the sick and feeble parts of France:
And let vs doe it with no show of fear,
No, with no more, then if we heard that England
Were busied with a Whitson Morris-dance:
For, my good Liege, she is so idly King'd,
Her Sceptre so phantastically borne,
By a vain giddy shallow humorous Youth,
That fear attends her not.
O peace, Prince Dolphin,
You are too much mistaken in this King:
Question your Grace the late Ambassadors,
With what great State he heard their Embassy,
How well supplied with Noble Councellors,
How modest in exception; and withal,
How terrible in constant resolution:
And you shall find, his Vanities fore-spent,
Were but the out-side of the Roman Brutus,
Covering Discretion with a Coat of Folly;
As Gardeners doe with Ordure hide those Roots
That shall first spring, and be most delicate.
Well, it is not so, my Lord High Constable.
But though we think it so, it is no matter:
In cases of defence, it is best to weigh
The Enemy more mighty then he seems,
So the proportions of defence are filled:
Which of a weak and niggardly proiection,
Doth like a Miser spoil his Coat, with scanting
A little Cloth.
Think we King Harry strong:
And Princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.
The Kindred of him hath been fleshed upon vs:
And he is bred out of that bloody strain,
That haunted vs in our familiar Paths:
Witness our too much memorable shame,
When Crazy Battle fatally was struck,
And all our Princes captived, by the hand
Of that black Name, Edward, black Prince of Wales:
Whiles that his Mountain Sire, on Mountain standing
Up in the Ayre, crowned with the Golden Sun,
Saw his Heroical Seed, and smiled to see him
Mangle the Work of Nature, and deface
The Patterns, that by God and by French Fathers
Had twenty years been made. This is a Stem
Of that Victorious Stock: and let vs fear
The Native mightiness and fate of him.
Ambassadors from Harry King of England,
Doe crave admittance to your Majesty.
Weal give them present audience.
Go, and bring them.
You see this Chase is hotly followed, friends.
Turn head, and stop pursuit: for coward Dogs
Most spend their mouths, whē what they seem to threaten
Runs far before them. Good my Sovereign
Take up the English short, and let them know
Of what a Monarchy you are the Head:
Selfe-loue, my Liege, is not so vile a sin,
As selfe-neglecting.
From our Brother of England?
From him, and thus he greets your Majesty:
He wills you in the Name of God Almighty,
That you deuest your self, and lay apart
The borrowed Glories, that by gift of Heaven,
By Law of Nature, and of Nations, longs
To him and to his Heirs, namely, the Crown,
And all wide-stretched Honours, that pertain
By Custom, and the Ordinance of Times,
Unto the Crown of France: that you may know
It is no sinister, nor no awkward Claim,
Picked from the worme-holes of long-vanisht days,
Nor from the dust of old Oblivion raked,
He sends you this most memorable Lyne,
In every Branch truly demonstrative;
Willing you ouer-looke this Pedigree:
And when you find him evenly derived
From his most famed, of famous Ancestors,
Edward the third; he bids you then resign
Your Crown and Kingdom, indirectly held
From him, the Native and true Challenger.
Or else what follows?
Bloody constraint: for if you hide the Crown
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it.
Therefore in fierce Tempest is he coming,
In Thunder and in Earth-quake, like a Jove:
That if requiring fail, he will compel.
And bids you, in the Bowels of the Lord,
Deliver up the Crown, and to take mercy
On the poor Souls, for whom this hungry War
Opens his vast Jaws: and on your head
Turning the Widows Tears, the Orphans Cries,
The deadmen's Blood, the privy Maidens Groans,
For Husbands, Fathers, and betrothed Lovers,
That shall be swallowed in this Controversy.
This is his Claim, his Threatening, and my Message:
Unless the Dolphin be in presence here;
To whom expressly I bring greeting to.
For vs, we will consider of this further:
To morrow shall you bear our full intent
Back to our Brother of England.
For the Dolphin,
I stand here for him: what to him from England?
Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt,
And any thing that may not mis-become
The mighty Sender, doth he prize you at.
Thus says my King: and if your Fathers Highness
Doe not, in grant of all demands at large,
Sweeten the bitter Mock you sent his Majesty;
He will call you to so hot an Answer of it,
That Caves and Womb Vaultages of France
Shall chide your Trespass, and return your Mock
In second Accent of his Ordinance.
Say: if my Father render fair return,
It is against my will: for I desire
Nothing but Odds with England,
To that end, as matching to his Youth and Vanity,
I did present him with the Paris-Balls.
He will make your Paris Lover shake for it,
Were it the Mistress Court of mighty Europe:
And be assured, you'll find a difference,
As we his Subjects have in wonder found,
Between the promise of his greener days,
And these he masters now: now he weighs Time
Even to the utmost Grain: that you shall read
In your own Losses, if he stay in France.
To morrow shall you know our mind at full.
Dispatch vs with all speed, least that our King
Come here himself to question our delay;
For he is footed in this Land already.
You shall be soon dispatcht, with fair conditions.
A Night is but small breathe, and little pause,
To answer matters of this consequence.
Thus with imagined wing our swift Scene flies,
In motion of no less celerity then that of Thought.
Suppose, that you have seen
The well-appointed King at Dover Peer,
Embark his Royalty: and his brave Fleet,
With silken Streamers, the young Phebus feigning;
Play with your Fancies: and in them behold,
Upon the Hempen Tackle, Ship-boyes climbing;
Hear the shrill Whistle, which doth order give
To sounds confused: behold the threaten Sails,
Borne with the invisible and creeping Wind,
Draw the huge Bottoms through the furrowed Sea,
Breasting the lofty Surge. O, doe but think
You stand upon the Revenge▪ and behold
A City on the inconstant Billows dancing:
For so appears this Fleet Majestic,
Holding due course to Harflew. Follow, follow:
Grapple your minds to sternage of this Navy,
And leave your England as dead Mid-night, still,
Guarded with Grandsires, Babies, and old Women,
Either past, or not arrived to pyth and puissance:
For who is he, whose Chin is but enriched
With one appearing Hair, that will not follow
These culled and choyse-drawne Cavaliers to France?
Work, work your Thoughts, and therein see a Siege:
Behold the Ordinance on their Carriages,
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harflew.
Suppose the Ambassador from the French comes back:
Tells Harry, That the King doth offer him
Katherine his Daughter, and with her to Dowry,
Some petty and unprofitable Dukedoms.
The offer likes not: and the nimble Gunner
With Lynstock now the devilish Cannon touches
And down goes all before them. Still be kind,
And each out our performance with your mind.
Once more unto the Breach,
Dear friends, once more;
Or close the Wall up with our English dead:
In Peace, there's nothing so becomes a man,
As modest stillness, and humility:
But when the blast of War blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the Tiger:
Stiffen the sinews, commune up the blood,
Disguise fair Nature with hard-fauour'd Rage:
Then lend the Eye a terrible aspect:
Let it pry through the portage of the Head,
Like the Brass Cannon: let the Brow o'rewhelme it,
As fearfully, as doth a galled Rock
O're-hang and iutty his confounded Base,
Swilled with the wild and wasteful Ocean,
Now set the Teeth, and stretch the Nosthrill wide,
Hold hard the Breath, and bend up every Spirit
To his full height. On, on, you Noblish English,
Whose blood is fet from Fathers of Warre-proofe:
Fathers, that like so many Alexanders,
Have in these parts from Morn till Even fought,
And sheathed their Swords, for lack of argument.
Dishonour not your Mothers: now attest,
That those whom you called Fathers, did beget you.
Be Copy now to me of grosser blood,
And teach them how to War. And you good Yeomen,
Whose Limbs were made in England; show vs here
The mettell of your Pasture: let vs swear,
That you are worth your breeding: which I doubt not:
For there is none of you so mean and base,
That hath not Noble luster in your eyes.
I see you stand like Grey-hounds in the slips,
Straying upon the Start. The Game's afoot:
Follow your Spirit; and upon this Charge,
Cry, God for Harry, England, and S. George.
On, on, on, on, on, to the breach, to the breach.
'Pray thee Corporal stay, the Knocks are too hot: and for mine own part, I have not a Case of Lives: the humour of it is too hot, that is the very plaine-Song of it.
The plaine-Song is most just: for humours doe a∣bound: Knocks go and come: Gods Vassals drop and dye: and Sword and Shield, in bloody Field, doth win immortal fame.
Would I were in an Ale-house in London, I would give all my fame for a Pot of Ale, and safety.
And I: If wishes would prevail with me, my purpose should not fail with me; but thither would I high.
As duly, but not as truly, as Bird doth sing on bough.
Up to the breach, you Dogs; avaunt you Cullions.
Be merciful great Duke to men of Mould: a∣bate thy Rage, abate thy manly Rage; abate thy Rage, great Duke. Good Bawcock bate thy Rage: use lenity sweet Chuck.
These be good humours: your Honour wins bad humours.
As young as I am, I have observed these three Swashers: I am Boy to them all three, but all they three, though they would serve me, could not be Man to me; for indeed three such Antiques doe not amount to a man: for Bardolph, hee is white-liuer'd, and red-fac'd; by the means whereof, a faces it out, but fights not: for Pistol, hee hath a killing Tongue, and a quiet Sword; by the means whereof, a breaks Words, and keeps whole Weapons: for Nim, hee hath heard, that men of few Words are the best men, and therefore hee scorns to say his Prayers, lest a should be thought a Coward: but his few bad Words are matched with as few good Deeds; for a never broke any mans Head but his own, and that was against a Post, when he was drunk. They will steal any thing, and call it Purchase. Bardolph stole a Lute-case, bore it twelve Leagues, and sold it for three halfepence. Nim and Bardolph are sworn Brothers in filching: and in Callice they stole a fire-shouell. I knew by that piece of Service, the men would carry Coals. They would have me as familiar with men's Pockets, as their Gloves or their Hand-kerchers: which makes much against my Manhood, if I should take from another Pocket, to put into mine; for it is plain pocketing up of Wrongs. I must leave them, and seek some better Service: their Villainy goes against my weak stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.
Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the Mines; the Duke of Gloucester would speak with you.
To the Mines? Tell you the Duke, it is not so good to come to the Mines: for look you, the Mines is not according to the disciplines of the War; the con∣cavities of it is not sufficient: for look you, the athuer∣sarie, you may discuss unto the Duke, look you, is digt himself four yard under the Countermines: by Cheshu, I think a will plow up all, if there is not better direct∣once.
The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the Order of the Siege is given, is altogether directed by an Irish man, a very valiant Gentleman in faith.
It is Captain Makmorrice, is it not?
I think it be.
By Cheshu he is an Ass, as in the World, I will verify as much in his Beard: he he's no more directions in the true disciplines of the Wars, look you, of the Roman disciplines, then is a Puppy-dog.
Here a comes, and the Scots Captain, Captain Iamy, with him.
Captain Iamy is a marvelous falorous Gen∣tleman, that is certain, and of great expedition and know∣ledge in the ancient Wars, upon my particular know∣ledge of his directions: by Cheshu he will maintain his Argument as well as any Military man in the World, in the disciplines of the Pristine Wars of the Romans.
I say gudday, Captain Fluellen.
Gotten to your Worship, good Captain Iames.
How now Captain Mackmorrice, have you quit the Mines? have the Pioners given o'er?
By Chrish Law tech ill done: the Work each give over, the Trumpet sound the Retreat. By my Hand I swear, and my fathers Soul, the Work each ill done: it each give over: I would have blowed up the Town, so Chrish save me law, in an hour. O tech ill done, tech ill done: by my Hand tech ill done.
Captain Mackmorrice, I beseech you now, will you voutsafe me, look you, a few disputations with you, as partly touching or concerning the disciplines of the War, the Roman Wars, in the way of Argument, look you, and friendly communication: partly to satisfy my Opinion, and partly for the satisfaction, look you, of my Mind: as touching the direction of the Military dis∣cipline, that is the Point.
It fall be vary good, good feith, good Captens bath, and I fall quit you with good leave, as I may pick occasion: that fall I mary.
It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save me: the day is hot, and the Weather, and the Wars, and the King, and the Dukes: it is no time to discourse, the Town is beseeched: and the Trumpet call vs to the breech, and we talk, and be Chrish do nothing, tic shame for vs all: so God sa'me tic shame to stand still, it is shame by my hand: and there is Throats to be cut, and Works to be done, and there each nothing done, so Christ sa'me law.
By the Mes, ere theise eyes of mine take them∣selves to slumber, aisle de good service, or Isle lig in the grunt for it; ay, or go to death: and Isle pay't as valo∣rously as I may, that fall I suerly do, that is the brief and the long: mary, I wad full fine heard some question tween you tway.
Captain Mackmorrice, I think, look you, under your correction, there is not many of your Na∣tion.
Of my Nation? What each my Nation? Each a Villain, and a Bastard, and a Knave, and a Rascal. What each my Nation? Who talks of my Nation?
Look you, if you take the matter otherwise then is meant, Captain Mackmorrice, peradventure I shall think you doe not use me with that affability, as in discretion you ought to use me, look you, being as good a man as your self, both in the disciplines of War, and in the derivation of my Birth, and in other particula∣rites.
I doe not know you so good a man as my self: so Chrish save me, I will cut off your Head.
Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.
A, that's a foul fault.
The Town sounds a Parley.
Captain Mackmorrice, when there is more better opportunity to be required, look you, I will be so bold as to tell you, I know the disciplines of War: and there is an end.
How yet resolves the Governor of the Town?
This is the latest Parley we will admit:
Therefore to our best mercy give your selves,
Or like to men proud of destruction,
Defy vs to our worst: for as I am a Soldier,
A Name that in my thoughts becomes me best;
If I begin the battery once again,
I will not leave the halfe-atchieued Harflew,
Till in her ashes she lye buried.
The Gates of Mercy shall be all shut up,
And the fleshed Soldier, rough and hard of heart,
In liberty of bloody hand, shall range
With Conscience wide as Hell, mowing like Grass
Your fresh fair Virgins, and your flowering Infants.
What is it then to me, if impious War,
Arrayed in flames like to the Prince of Fiends,
Doe with his smirched complexion all fell feats,
Enlynckt to wast and desolation?
What is it to me, when you your selves are cause,
If your pure Maidens fall into the hand
Of hot and forcing Violation?
What Reyne can hold licentious Wickedness,
When down the Hill he holds his fierce Career?
We may as bootless spend our vain Command
Upon the enraged Soldiers in their spoil,
As send Precepts to the Leuiathan, to come ashore.
Therefore, you men of Harflew,
Take pity of your Town and of your People,
Whiles yet my Soldiers are in my Command,
Whiles yet the cool and temperate Wind of Grace
O're-blowes the filthy and contagious Clouds
Of headly Murder, Spoil, and Villainy.
If not: why in a moment look to see
The blind and bloody Soldier, with foul hand
Desire the Locks of your shrill-shriking Daughters:
Your Fathers taken by the silver Beards,
And their most reverend Heads dashed to the Walls:
Your naked Infants spitted upon Pikes,
Whiles the mad Mothers, with their howls confused,
Doe break the Clouds; as did the Wives of Iewry,
At Harrods bloody-hunting slaughter-men.
What say you? Will you yield, and this avoid?
Or guilty in defence, be thus destroyed.
Our expectation hath this day an end:
The Dolphin, whom of Succours we entreated,
Returns vs, that his Powers are yet not ready,
To raise so great a Siege: Therefore great King,
We yield our Town and Lives to thy soft Mercy:
Enter our Gates, dispose of vs and ours,
For we no longer are defensible.
Open your Gates: Come Uncle Exeter,
Go you and enter Harflew; there remain,
And fortify it strongly against the French:
Use mercy to them all for vs, dear Uncle.
The Winter coming on, and Sickness growing
Upon our Soldiers, we will retire to Calis.
To night in Harflew will we be your Guest,
To morrow for the March are we addressed.
Alice, tu as este en Augleterre, &amp; tu bien parlas le Language.
En pave Madame.
Ie te pry m'ensigniez, il faut que ie apprend a par∣len: Comient appelle vous le main en Anglois?
Le main il &amp; appelle de Hand.
De Hand.
Eel doyts.
Le doyts, ma foy Ie oublie, e doyt mays, ie me souemeray le doyts ie pens qu'ils ont appelle de fingres, on de fingres.
Le main de Hand, le doyts le Fingres, ie pens que ie suis, le bon escholier.
In ay gain diux mots d' Anglois vistement, comment appelle vous le ongles?
Le ongles, les appellons de Nails.
De Nails escoute: dites moi, si ie parley bien: de Hand, de Fingres, e de Nails.
Cest bien dict Madame, il &amp; fort bon Anglois.
Dites moi l' Anglois pour le bras.
De Arm, Madame.
E de coudee.
D' Elbow.
D' Elbow: Ie men fey le repiticio de touts les mots que vous moves, apprins des a present.
Il &amp; trop difficile Madame, comme Ie pens.
Excuse moi Alice escoute, d' Hand, de Fingre, de Nails, d' Arma, de Bilbow.
D' Elbow, Madame.
O Seigneur Dieu, ie men oublie d' Elbow, comment ap∣pelle vous le col.
De Nick, Madame.
De Nick, e le menton.
De Chin.
De Sin: le col de Nick, le menton de Sin.
Oy. Sauf vostre honour en verity vous pronoun∣cies les mots ausi droict, que le Natifs d' Angleterre.
Ie no dout point d' apprendre par de grace de Dieu, &amp; en pave de temps.
N' aue vos y daisy oublie ce que ie vous a enfignie.
Nome ie recitera a vous promptement, d' Hand, de Fingre, de Maylees.
De Nails, Madame.
De Nails, de Arm, de Elbow.
Sans vostre honeus d' Elbow.
Ainsi de ie d' Elbow, de Nick, &amp; de Sin: comment ap∣pelle vous les pied &amp; de robe.
Le Foot Madame, &amp; le Count.
Le Foot, &amp; le Count: O Seignior Dieu, il sont le mots de son mauvais corruptible gross &amp; impudique, &amp; non pour lo Dames de Honour d' user: le no voudray pronouncer ce mots divined le Seigneurs de France, pour tout le monte, foe le Foot &amp; le Count, neant moys, Ie recitera un autrefoys ma lecon ensembe, d' Hand, de Fingre, de Nails, d' Arm, d' Elbow, de Nick, de Sin, de Foot, le Count.
Excellent, Madame.
C' est asses pour vne foyes, alons nous a diner.
It is certain he hath past the River Some.
And if he be not fought withal, my Lord,
Let vs not live in France: let vs quit all,
And give our Vineyards to a barbarous People.
O Dieu viuant: Shall a few Sprays of vs,
The emptying of our Fathers Luxury,
Our Syens, put in wilde and savage Stock,
Spirt up so suddenly into the Clouds,
And ouer-looke their Grafters?
Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards:
Mort du movie, if they march along
Unfought withal, but I will sell my Dukedom,
To buy a slobbery and a dirty Farm
In that nooke-shotten Isle of Albion.
Dieu de Battles, where have they this mettell?
Is not their Climate foggy, raw, and dull?
On whom, as in despite, the Sun looks pale,
Killing their Fruit with frowns. Can sodden Water,
A Drench for sur-reyn'd •ades, their Ba•lie broth,
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
And shall our quick blood, spirited with Wine,
Seem frosty? O, for honour of our Land,
Let vs not hang like roping Icicles
Upon our Houses Thatch, whiles a more frosty People
Sweat drops of gallant Youth in our rich fields:
Poor we call them, in their Native Lords.
By Faith and Honour,
Our Madams mock at vs, and plainly say,
Our Mettell is bred out, and they will give
Their bodies to the Lust of English Youth,
To new-store France with Bastard Warriors.
They bid vs to the English Dancing-Schooles,
And teach Lauolta's high, and swift Carranto's,
Saying, our Grace is only in our Heals,
And that we are most lofty Run-awayes.
Where is Montioy the Herald? speed him hence,
Let him greet England with our sharpe defiance.
Up Princes, and with spirit of Honour edged,
More sharper then your Swords, high to the field:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France,
You Dukes of Orleans, Burbon, and of Berry,
Alanson, Brabant, Bar, and Burgonic,
Iaques Chattillion, Rambures, Vandemont,
Beaumont, Grand Free, Rouse, and Faulconbridge,
Loys, Lestrale, Bouciquall, and Charaloyes,
High Dukes, great Princes, Barons, Lords, and Kings;
For your great Seats, now quit you of great shames:
Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our Land
With Penons painted in the blood of Ha•flew:
Rush on his Host, as doth the melted Snow
Upon the Valleys, whose low Vassal Seat,
The Alps doth spit, and void his rheum upon.
Go down upon him you have Power enough,
And in a Captive Chariot into Roan
Bring him our Prisoner.
This becomes the Great.
Sorry am I his numbers are so few,
His Soldiers sick, and famished in their March:
For I am sure, when he shall see our Army,
He will drop his heart into the sink of fear,
And for achievement, offer vs his Ransom.
Therefore Lord Constable, hast on Montioy,
And let him say to England, that we send,
To know what willing Ransom he will give.
Prince Dolphin, you shall stay with vs in Roan.
Not so, I doe beseech your Majesty.
Be patient, for you shall remain with vs.
Now forth Lord Constable, and Princes all,
And quickly bring vs word of Englands fall.
How now Captain Fluellen, come you from the Bridge?
I assure you, there is very excellent Services com∣meted at the Bridge.
Is the Duke of Exeter safe?
The Duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Aga∣memnon, and a man that I love and honour with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my live, and my living, and my uttermost power. He is not, God be praised and blessed, any hurt in the World, but keeps the Bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. There is an aun∣chient Lieutenant there at the Pridge, I think in my very conscience hee is as valiant a man as Mark Anthony, and hee is a man of no estimation in the World, but I did see him doe as gallant service.
What doe you call him?
Hee is called ancient Pistol.
I know him not.
Here is the man.
Captain, I thee beseech to doe me favours: the Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.
I, I praise God, and I have merited some love at his hands.
Bardolph, a Soldier firm and sound of heart, and of buxom valour, hath by cruel Fate, and giddy Fortunes furious fickle Wheel, that Goddess blind, that stands upon the rolling restless Stone.
By your patience, ancient Pistol: Fortune is painted blind, with a Muffler before his eyes, to signify to you, that Fortune is blind; and she is painted also with a Wheel, to signify to you, which is the Moral of it, that she is turning and inconstant, and mutability, and variation: and her foot, look you, is fixed upon a Spherical Stone, which rolls, and rolls, and rolls: in good truth, the Poet makes a most excellent descripti∣on of it: Fortune is an excellent Moral.
Fortune is Bardolphs foe, and frowns on him: for he hath stolen a Pox, and hanged must a be: a damned death: let Gallows gape for Dog, let Man go free, and let not Hemp his Wind-pipe suffocate: but Exeter hath given the doom of death, for Pox of little price. Therefore go speak, the Duke will hear thy voice; and let not Bardolphs vital thread bee cut with edge of Penny-Cord, and vile reproach. Speak Captain for his Life, and I will thee requite.
Ancient Pistol, I doe partly understand your meaning.
Why then rejoice therefore.
Certainly Ancient, it is not a thing to rejoice at: for if, look you, he were my Brother, I would desire the Duke to use his good pleasure, and put him to execu∣tion; for discipline ought to be used.
Dye, and be damned, and Figo for thy friendship.
It is well.
The Fig of Spain.
Very good.
Why, this is an arrant counterfeit Rascal, I remember him now: a Bawd, a Cut-purse.
Isle assure you, a vtt'red as prove words at the Pridge, as you shall see in a Summers day: but it is very well: what he he's spoke to me, that is well I warrant you, when time is serve.
Why it is a Gull, a Fool, a Rogue, that now and then goes to the Wars, to grace himself at his return into London, under the form of a Soldier: and such fellows are perfect in the Great Commanders Names, and they will learn you by rote where Services were done; at such and such a Sconce, at such a Breach, at such a Con∣uoy: who came off bravely, who was shot, who dis∣graced, what terms the Enemy stood on: and this they conn perfectly in the phrase of War; which they trick
up with new-tuned Oaths: and what a Beard of the Ge∣neralls Cut, and a horrid Suit of the Camp, will doe a∣mong foaming Bottles, and Ale-washt Wits, is wonder∣full to be thought on: but you must learn to know such slanders of the age, or else you may be marvelously mi∣stooke.
I tell you what, Captain Gower: I doe perceive hee is not the man that hee would gladly make show to the World hee is: if I find a hole in his Coat, I will tell him my mind: hark you the King is coming, and I must speak with him from the Pridge.
God plesse your Majesty.
How now Fluellen, came thou from the Bridge?
I, so please your Majesty: The Duke of Exeter he's very gallantly maintained the Pridge; the French is gone off, look you, and there is gallant and most prove passages: marry, the adversary was have possession of the Pridge, but he is enforced to retire, and the Duke of Exeter is Master of the Pridge: I can tell your Majesty, the Duke is a prove man.
What men have you lost, Fluellen?
The perdition of the adversary hath been very great, reasonable great: marry for my part, I think the Duke hath lost never a man, but one that is like to be exe∣cuted for robbing a Church, one Bardolph, if your May∣sty know the man: his face is all bubukles and whelkes, and knobs, and flames a fire, and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a coal of fire, sometimes plow, and sometimes red, but his nose is executed, and his fire's out.
Wee would have all such offenders so cut off: and we give express charge, that in our Marches through the Country, there be nothing compelled from the Vile∣lages; nothing taken, but paid for: none of the French upbraided or abused in disdainful Language; for when Levity and Cruelty play for a Kingdom, the gentler Gamester is the soonest winner.
You know me by my habit.
Well then, I know thee: what shall I know of thee?
My Masters mind.
Unfold it.
Thus says my King: Say thou to Harry of England, Though we seemed dead, we did but sleep: Advantage is a better Soldier then rashness. Tell him, wee could have rebuked him at Harflewe, but that wee thought not good to bruise an injury, till it were full ripe. Now wee speak upon our Q. and our voice is im∣periall: England shall repent his folly, see his weak∣ness, and admire our sufferance. Bid him therefore con∣cider of his ransom, which must proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we have lost, the disgrace we have digested; which in weight to re-answer, his petti∣ness would bow under. For our losses, his Exchequer is too poor; for the effusion of our blood, the Muster of his Kingdom too faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own person kneeling at our feet, but a weak and worth∣less satisfaction. To this add defiance: and tell him for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose con∣damnation is pronounced: So far my King and Master; so much my Office.
What is thy name? I know thy quality.
Mountioy.
Thou dost thy Office fairly. Turn thee back,
And tell thy King, I doe not seek him now,
But could be willing to march on to Callice,
Without impeachment: for to say the sooth,
Though it is no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of Craft and Vantage,
My people are with sickness much enfeebled,
My numbers lessened: and those few I have,
Almost no better then so many French;
Who when they were in health, I tell thee Herald,
I thought, upon one pair of English Legs
Did march three Frenchmen. Yet forgive me God,
That I doe brag thus; this your ayre of France
Hath blown that vice in me. I must repent:
Go therefore tell thy Master, here I am;
My Ransom, is this frail and worthless Trunk;
My Army, but a weak and sickly Guard:
Yet God before, tell him we will come on,
Though France himself, and such another Neighbor
Stand in our way. There's for thy labour Mountioy.
Go bid thy Master well advise himself.
If we may pass, we will: if we be hindered,
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood
Discolour: and so Mountioy, fare you well.
The sum of all our Answer is but this:
We would not seek a Battle as we are,
Nor as we are, we say we will not shun it:
So tell your Master.
I shall deliver so: Thanks to your High∣ness.
I hope they will not come upon vs now.
We are in Gods hand, Brother, not in theirs:
March to the Bridge, •t now draws toward night,
Beyond the River we'll encamp our selves,
And on to morrow bid them march away.
Tut, I have the best Armour of the World: would it were day.
You have an excellent Armour; but let my Horse have his due.
It is the best Horse of Europe.
Will it never be Morning?
My Lord of Orleans, and my Lord High Con∣stable, you talk of Horse and Armour?
You are as well provided of both, as any Prince in the World.
What a long Night is this? I will not change my Horse with any that treads but on four postures: ch' ha: he bounds from the Earth, as if his entrails were hairs: le Cheual volante, the Pegasus, ches les na•nes de five. When I bestride him, I soar, I am a Hawk: he trots the ayre: the Earth sings, when he touches it: the basest horn of his house, is more Musical then the Pipe of Harms.
Hoe's of the colour of the Nutmeg.
And of the heat of the Ginger. It is a Beast for Perseus: hee is pure Ayre and Fire; and the dull Eel∣mints of Earth and Water never appear in him, but on∣lie in patient stillness while his Rider mo•nts him: hee is indeed a Horse, and all other Jade you may call Beasts.
Indeed my Lord, it is a most absolute and ex∣cellent Horse.
It is the Prince of Palfreys, his Neigh is like the bidding of a Monarch, and his countenance enforces Homage.
No more Cousin.
Nay, the man hath no wit, that cannot from the rising of the Lark to the lodging of the Lamb, vary deserved praise on my Palsray: it is a Theme as fluent as the Sea: Turn the Sands into eloquent tongues, and my Horse is argument for them all: it is a subject for a Sovereign to reason on, and for a Sovereigns So∣ueraigne to ride on: And for the World, familiar to vs, and unknown, to lay apart their particular Functions, and wonder at him, I once writ a Sonnet in his praise, and began thus, Wonder of Nature.
I have heard a Sonnet begin so to ones Mi∣stress.
Then did they imitate that which I composed to my Courser, for my Horse is my Mistress.
Your Mistress bears well.
Me well, which is the prescript praise and per∣fection of a good and particular Mistress.
Nay, for me thought yesterday your Mistress shrewdly shook your back.
So perhaps did yours.
Mine was not bridled.
O then belike she was old and gentle, and you rode like a Kern of Ireland, your French Hose off, and in your strait Strossers.
You have good judgment in Horseman∣ship.
Be warned by me then: they that ride so, and ride not warily, fall into foul Bogs: I had rather have my Horse to my Mistress.
I had as live have my Mistress a Jade.
I tell thee Constable, my Mistress wears his own hair.
I could make as true a boast as that, if I had a Sow to my Mistress.
Le chien est return a son propre vemissement est la levy lauee au bourbier: thou make use of any thing.
Yet doe I not use my Horse for my Mistress, or any such Proverb, so little kin to the purpose.
My Lord Constable, the Armour that I saw in your Tent to night, are those Stars or Suns upon it?
Stars my Lord.
Some of them will fall to morrow, I hope.
And yet my Sky shall not want.
That may be, for you bear a many superflu∣ously, and it were more honour some were away.
Even as your Horse bears your praises, who would trot as well, were some of your brags dismoun∣ted.
Would I were able to load him with his de∣sert. Will it never be day? I will trot to morrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with English Faces.
I will not say so, for fear I should be faced out of my way: but I would it were morning, for I would fine be about the ears of the English.
Who will go to Hazard with me for twenty Prisoners?
You must first go your self to hazard, ere you have them.
It is Mid-night, Isle go arm my self.
The Dolphin longs for morning.
He longs to eat the English.
I think he will eat all he kills.
By the white Hand of my Lady, hoe's a gal∣lant Prince.
Swear by her Foot, that she may tread out the Oath.
He is simply the most active Gentleman of France.
Doing is activity, and he will still be doing.
He never did harm, that I heard of.
Nor will doe none to morrow: hee will keep that good name still.
I know him to be valiant.
I was told that, by one that knows him better then you.
What's hee?
Marry hee told me so himself, and hee said hee cared not who knew it.
Hee needs not, it is no hidden virtue in him.
By my faith Sir, but it is: never any body saw it, but his Lackey: it is a hooded valour, and when it appears, it will bate.
Ill will never said well.
I will cap that Proverb with, There is flattery in friendship.
And I will take up that with, Give the Devil his due.
Well placed: there stands your friend for the Devil: have at the very eye of that Proverb with, A Pox of the Devil.
You are the better at Proverbs, by how much a Fools Bolt is soon shot.
You have shot over.
It is not the first time you were ouer-shot.
My Lord high Constable, the English lye within fifteen hundred paces of your Tents.
Who hath measured the ground?
The Lord Grandpree.
A valiant and most expert Gentleman. Would it were day? Alas poor Harry of England: hee longs not for the Dawning, as wee doe.
What a wretched and peevish fellow is this King of England, to mope with his fat-brain'd followers so far out of his knowledge.
If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.
That they lack: for if their heads had any in∣tellectuall Armour, they could never wear such heavy Head-pieces.
That Island of England breeds very valiant Creatures; their Mastiffs are of unmatchable cou∣rage.
Foolish Cures, that run winking into the mouth of a Russian Bear, and have their heads crushed like rotten Apples: you may as well say, that's a valiant Flea, that dare eat his breakfast on the Lip of a Lyon.
Just, just: and the men doe sympathize with the Mastiffs, in robustious and rough coming on, leaving their Wits with their Wives: and then give them great Meals of Beef, and Iron and Steel; they will eat like Wolves, and fight like Devils.
I, but these English are shroudly out of Beef.
Then shall we find to morrow, they have only stomachs to eat, and none to fight. Now is it time to arm: come, shall we about it?
It is now two a Clock: but let me see, by ten
Wee shall have each a hundred English men.
Now entertain conjecture of a time,
When creeping Murmur and the poring Dark
Fills the wide Vessel of the Vniuerse.
From Camp to Camp, through the foul Womb of Night
The Humm of either Army stilly sounds;
That the fixed Sentinels almost receive
The secret Whispers of each others Watch.
Fire answers fire, and through their poly flames
Each Battle sees the others vmber'd face.
Steed threatens Steed, in high and boastful Neighs
Piercing the Nights dull Ear: and from the Tents,
The Armourers accomplishing the Knights,
With busy Hammers closing Rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation.
The Country Cocks doe crow, the Clocks doe towel:
And the third hour of drowsy Morning named,
Proud of their Numbers, and secure in Soul,
The confident and ouer-lustie French,
Doe the low-rated English play at Dice;
And chide the creeple-tardy-gated Night,
Who like a foul and ugly Witch doth limp
So tediously away. The poor condemned English,
Like Sacrifices, by their watchful Fires
Sit patiently, and inly ruminate
The Mornings danger: and their gesture sad,
Inuesting lanke-leane Cheeks, and Warre-worne Coats,
Presented them unto the gazing Moon
So many horrid Ghosts. O now, who will behold
The Royal Captain of this ruined Band
Walking from Watch to Watch, from Tent to Tent;
Let him cry, Praise and Glory on his head:
For forth he goes, and visits all his Host,
Bids them good morrow with a modest Smile,
And calls them Brothers, Friends, and Countrymen.
Upon his Royal Face there is no note,
How dread an Army hath enrounded him;
Nor doth he dedicate one jot of Colour
Unto the weary and all-watched Night:
But freshly looks, and ouer-beares Attained,
With cheerful semblance, and sweet Majesty:
That every Wretch, pining and pale before,
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his Looks.
A Largess universal, like the Sun,
His liberal Eye doth give to every one,
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all
Behold, as may unworthiness define.
A little touch of Harry in the Night,
And so our Scene must to the Battle fly:
Where, O for pity, we shall much disgrace,
With four or five most vile and ragged foils,
(Right ill disposed, in brawl ridiculous)
The Name of Agincourt: Yet sit and see,
Minding true things, by what their Mock'ries bee.
Gloster, it is true that we are in great danger,
The greater therefore should our Courage be.
God morrow Brother Bedford: God Almighty,
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men obseruingly distill it out.
For our bad Neighbour makes vs early stirrers,
Which is both healthful, and good husbandry.
Besides, they are our outward Consciences,
And Preachers to vs all; admonishing,
That we should dress vs fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather Honey from the Weed,
And make a Moral of the Devil himself.
Good morrow old Sir Thomas Erpingham:
A good soft Pillow for that good white Head,
Were better then a churlish turf of France.
Not so my Liege, this. Lodging likes me better,
Since I may say, now lye I like a King.
It is good for men to love their present pains,
Upon example, so the Spirit is eased:
And when the Mind is quickened, out of doubt
The Organs, though defunct and dead before,
Break up their drowsy Grave, and newly move
With casted slough, and fresh legerity.
Lend me thy Cloak Sir Thomas: Brothers both,
Commend me to the Princes in our Camp;
Doe my good morrow to them, and anon
Desire them all to my Pavilion:
We shall, my Liege.
Shall I attend your Grace?
No, my good Knight:
Go with my Brothers to my Lords of England:
I and my Bosom must debate a while,
And then I would no other company.
The Lord in Heaven bless thee, Noble Harry.
God a mercy old Heart, thou speak cheer∣fully.
Che vous la?
A friend.
Discuss unto me, art thou Officer, or art thou base, common, and popular?
I am a Gentleman of a Company.
Trail thou the puissant Pike?
Even so: what are you?
As good a Gentleman as the Emperor.
Then you are a better then the King.
The King's a Bawcock, and a Heart of Gold, a Lad of Life, an Imp of Fame, of Parents good, of Fist most valiant: I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart∣string I love the lovely Bully. What is thy Name?
Harry le Roy.
Le Roy? a Cornish Name: art thou of Cornish Crew?
No, I am a Welshman.
Know thou Fluellen?
Yes.
Tell him Isle knock his Leek about his Pate upon S. Dauies day.
Doe not you wear your Dagger in your Cap that day, least he knock that about yours.
Art thou his friend?
And his Kinsman too.
The Figo for thee then.
I thank you: God be with you.
My name is Pistol called.
It sorts well with your fierceness.
Captain Fluellen.
'So, in the Name of Iesu Christ, speak fewer: it is the greatest admiration in the universal World, when the true and ancient Prerogatifes and Laws of the Wars is not kept: if you would take the pains but to examine the Wars of Pompey the Great, you shall find, I warrant you, that there is no tittle tadle nor pebble ba∣ble in Pompeyes Camp: I warrant you, you shall find the Ceremonies of the Wars, and the Cares of it, and the Forms of it, and the Sobriety of it, and the Modesty of it, to be otherwise.
Why the Enemy is loud, you hear him all Night.
If the Enemy is an Ass and a Fool, and a pra∣ting Coxcomb; is it meet, think you, that wee should also, look you, be an Ass and a Fool, and a prating Cox∣comb, in your own conscience now?
I will speak lower.
I pray you, and beseech you, that you will.
Though it appear a little out of fashion,
There is much care and valour in this Welshman.
Brother Iohn Bates, is not that the Morning which breaks yonder?
I think it be: but wee have no great cause to desire the approach of day.
Wee see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think wee shall never see the end of it. Who goes there?
A Friend.
Under what Captain serve you?
Under Sir Iohn Erpingham.
A good old Commander, and a most kind Gentleman: I pray you▪ what thinks he of our estate?
Even as men wrecked upon a Sand, that look to be washed off the next Tide.
He hath not told his thought to the King?
No: nor it is not meet he should: for though I speak it to you, I think the King is but a man, as I am: the Violet smells to him, as it doth to me; the Element shows to him, as it doth to me; all his Senses have but humane Conditions: his Ceremonies laid by, in his Na∣kednesse he appears but a man; and though his affecti∣once are higher mounted then ours, yet when they stoup, they stoup with the like wing: therefore, when he sees reason of fears, as we doe; his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish as ours are: yet in reason, no man should possess him with any appearance of fear; least hee, by showing it, should dis-hearten his Army.
He may show what outward courage he will: but I believe, as cold a Night as it is, hee could wish him∣self in Thames up to the Neck; and so I would he were, and I by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.
By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the King: I think hee would not wish himself any where, but where hee is.
Then I would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed, and a many poor men's lives saved.
I dare say, you love him not so ill, to wish him here alone: howsoever you speak this to feel other men's minds, me thinks I could not dye any where so con∣tented, as in the Kings company; his Cause being just, and his Quarrel honourable.
That's more then we know.
I, or more then wee should seek after; for wee know enough, if wee know wee are the Kings Subjects: if his Cause be wrong, our obedience to the King wipes the Crime of it out of vs.
But if the Cause be not good, the King him∣self hath a heavy Reckoning to make, when all those Legs, and Arms, and Heads, chopped off in a Battle, shall join together at the latter day, and cry all, Wee die∣ed at such a place, some swearing, some crying for a Sir∣gean; some upon their Wives, left poor behind them; some upon the Debts they owe, some upon their Children roly left: I am afeared, there are few dye well, that dye in a Battle: for how can they charitably dispose of any thing, when Blood is their argument? Now, if these men doe not dye well, it will be a black matter for the King, that led them to it; who to disobey, were against all pro∣portion of subjection.
So, if a Son that is by his Father sent about Merchandise, doe sinfully miscarry upon the Sea; the im∣putation of his wickedness, by your rule, should be im∣posed upon his Father that sent him: or if a Servant, un∣der his Masters command, transporting a sum of Mo∣ney, be assailed by Robbers, and dye in many irreconcil'd Iniquities; you may call the business of the Master the author of the Servants damnation: but this is not so: The King is not bound to answer the particular endings of his Soldiers, the Father of his Son, nor the Master of his Servant; for they purpose not their death, when they purpose their services. Besides, there is no King, be his Cause never so spotless, if it come to the arbitre∣meant of Swords, can try it out with all unspotted Soul∣diers: some (peradventure) have on them the guilt of premeditated and contriued-Murther; some, of begui∣ling Virgins with the broken Seals of Perjury; some, making the Wars their Bulwark, that have before go∣red the gentle Bosom of Peace with Pillage and Rob∣rye. Now, if these men have defeated the Law, and out∣run Native punishment; though they can out-strip men, they have no wings to fly from God. War is his Beadle, War is his Vengeance: so that here men are punished, for before breach of the Kings Laws▪ in now the Kings Quarrel: where they feared the death, they have borne life away; and where they would bee safe, they perish. Then if they dye unprovided, no more is the King guilty of their damnation, then hee was be∣fore guilty of those Impieties, for the which they are now visited. Every Subjects Duty is the Kings, but every Subjects Soul is his own. Therefore should every Soldier in the Wars doe as every sick man in his Bed, wash every Moth out of his Conscience: and dying so, Death is to him advantage; or not dying, the time was blessedly lost, wherein such preparation was gained: and in him that escapes, it were not sin to think, that making God so free an offer, he let him out∣live that day, to see his Greatness, and to teach others how they should prepare.
It is certain, every man that dyes ill, the ill upon his own head, the King is not to answer it.
I doe not desire hee should answer for me, and yet I determine to fight lustily for him.
I my self heard the King say he would not be ransomed.
I, hee said so, to make vs fight cheerfully: but when our throats are cut, hee may be ransomed, and wee ne'er the wiser.
If I live to see it, I will never trust his word af∣la.
You pay him then: that's a perilous shot out of an Elder Gun, that a poor and a private displeasure can doe against a Monarch: you may as well go about to turn the Sun to ye, with fanning in his face with a Peacocks feather: You'll never trust his word after; come, it is a foolish saying.
Your reproof is something too round, I should be angry with you, if the time were convenient.
Let it bee a Quarrel between vs, if you live.
I embrace it.
How shall I know thee again?
Give me any Gage of thine, and I will wear it in my Bonnet: Then if ever thou dare acknowledge it, I will make it my Quarrel.
Heere's my Glove: Give me another of thine.
There.
This will I also wear in my Cap: if ever thou come to me, and say, after to morrow, This is my Glove, by this Hand I will take thee a box on the ear.
If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it.
Thou dare as well be hanged.
Well, I will doe it, though I take thee in the Kings company.
Keep thy word: fare thee well.
Be friends you English fools, be friends, wee have French Quarrels enough, if you could tell how to rec∣kon.
Indeed the French may lay twenty French Crowns to one, they will beat vs, for they bear them on their shoulders: but it is no English Treason to cut French Crowns, and to morrow the King himself will be a Clipper.
Upon the King, let vs our Lives, our Souls,
Our Debts, our careful Wives,
Our Children, and our Sins, lay on the King:
We must bear all.
O hard Condition, Twin-borne with Greatness,
Subject to the breath of every fool, whose sense
No more can feel, but his own wringing.
What infinite hearts-ease must Kings neglect,
That private men enjoy?
And what have Kings, that Priuates have not too,
Save Ceremony, save general Ceremony?
And what art thou, thou Idol Ceremony?
What kind of God art thou? that suffer more
Of mortal griefs, then doe thy worshippers.
What are thy Rents? what are thy Comings in?
O Ceremony, show me but thy worth.
What? is thy Soul of Odoration?
Art thou ought else but Place, Degree, and Form,
Creating awe and fear in other men?
Wherein thou art less happy, being feared,
Then they in fearing.
What drink thou oft, in stead of Homage sweet,
But poisoned flattery? O, be sick, great Greatness,
And bid thy Ceremony give thee cure.
Thinks thou the fiery Fever will go out
With Titles blown from Adulation?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending?
Can thou, when thou command the beggars knee,
Command the health of it? No, thou proud Dream,
That play so subtly with a Kings Repose.
I am a King that find thee: and I know,
It is not the Balm, the Sceptre, and the Ball,
The Sword, the Maze, the Crown Imperial,
The enter-tissued Robe of Gold and Pearl,
The forced Title running before the King,
The Throne he sits on: nor the Tide of Pomp,
That beats upon the high shore of this World:
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous Ceremony;
Not all these, laid in Bed Majestic,
Can sleep so soundly, as the wretched Slave:
Who with a body filled, and vacant mind,
Gets him to rest, crammed with distressful bread,
Never sees horrid Night, the Child of Hell:
But like a Lackey, from the Rise to Set,
Sweates in the eye of Phebus; and all Night
Sleeps in Elizium: next day after dawn,
Doth rise and help Hiperio to his Horse,
And follows so the euer-running year
With profitable labour to his Grave:
And but for Ceremony, such a Wretch,
Winding up Days with toil, and Nights with sleep,
Had the fore-hand and vantage of a King.
The Slave, a Member of the Countries peace,
Enjoys it; but in gross brain little wots,
What watch the King keeps, to maintain the peace;
Whose hours, the Peasant best advantages.
My Lord, your Nobles jealous of your absence,
Seek through your Camp to find you.
Good old Knight, collect them all together
At my Tent: Isle be before thee.
I shall do it, my Lord.
O God of Battles, steel my Soldiers hearts,
Possess them not with fear: Take from them now
The sense of reckoning of the opposed numbers:
Pluck their hearts from them. Not to day, O Lord,
O not to day, think not upon the fault
My Father made, in compassing the Crown.
I Richards body have interred new,
And on it have bestowed more contrite tears,
Then from it issued forced drops of blood.
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay,
Who twice a day their withered hands hold up
Toward Heaven, to pardon blood:
And I have built two Chantries,
Where the sad and solemn Priests sing still
For Richards Soul. More-will I doe:
Though all that I can doe, is nothing worth;
Since that my Penitence comes after all,
Imploring pardon.
My Liege.
My Brother Gloucesters voice? I:
I know thy errand, I will go with thee:
The day, my friend, and all things stay for me.
The Sun doth gild our Armour up, my Lords.
Monte Cheual: My Horse, Ʋerlot Lackey: Ha.
Oh brave Spirit.
Viales swes &amp; terre.
Rein puis le air &amp; f•.
Coin, Cousin Orleans.
Now my Lord Constable?
Hark how our Steeds, for present Service neigh.
Mount them, and make incision in their Hides,
That their hot blood may spin in English eyes,
And doubt them with superfluous courage: ha.
What, will you have them weep our Horses blood?
How shall we then behold their natural tears?
The English are embattail'd, you French Peers.
To Horse you gallant Princes, straight to Horse.
Doe but behold yond poor and starved Band,
And your fair show shall suck away their Souls,
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
There is not work enough for all our hands,
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly Veins,
To give each naked Curtleax a stain,
That our French Gallant• shall to day draw out,
And sheath for lack of sport. Let vs but blow on them,
The vapour of our Valour will o're-turne them.
It is positive against all exceptions, Lords,
That our superfluous Lackeys, and our Peasants,
Who in unnecessary action swarm
About our Squares of Battle, were enough
To purge this field of such a hilding Foe;
Though we upon this Mountains Basis by,
Took stand for idle speculation:
But that our Honours must not. What's to say?
A very little little let vs doe,
And all is done: then let the Trumpets sound
The Tucket Sonnance, and the Note to mount:
For our approach shall so much dare the field,
That England shall couch down in fear, and yield.
Why do you stay so long, my Lords of France?
Yond Island Carrions, desperate of their bones,
Ill-fauoredly become the Morning field:
Their ragged Curtains poorly are let loose,
And our Ayre shakes them passing scornfully.
Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggared Host,
And faintly through a rusty Beaver peepes.
The Horsemen sit like fixed Candlesticks,
With Torch-staues in their hand: and their poor Jade
Lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips:
The gum down roping from their pale-dead eyes,
And in their pale dull mouths the Iymold Bit
Lies foul with chaw'd-grasse, still and motionless.
And their executors, the knavish Crows,
Fly o'er them all, impatient for their hour.
Description cannot suit it self in words,
To demonstrate the Life of such a Battle,
In life so lifeless, as it shows it self.
They have said their prayers,
And they •ay for death.
Shall we go send them Dinners, and fresh Suits,
And give their fasting Horses Provender,
And after fight with them?
I stay but for my Guard: on
To the field, I will the Banner from a Trumpet take,
And use it for my haste. Come, come away,
The Sun is high, and we out-weare the day.
Where is the King?
The King himself is rode to view their Bat∣tail.
Of fighting men they have full threescore thou∣sand.
There's five to one, besides they all are fresh.
Gods Arm strike with vs, it is a fearful odds.
God buy' you Princes all; Isle to my Charge:
If we no more meet, till we meet in Heaven;
Then joyfully, my Noble Lord of Bedford,
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
And my kind Kinsman, Warriors all, adieu.
Farewell good Salisbury, &amp; good luck go with thee:
And yet I doe thee wrong, to mind thee of it,
For thou art framed of the firm truth of valour.
Farewell kind Lord: fight valiantly to day.
He is as full of Valour as of Kindness,
Princely in both.
O that we now had here
But one ten thousand of those men in England,
That doe no work to day.
What's he that wishes so?
My Cousin Westmerland. No, my fair Cousin:
If we are marked to dye, we are enough
To doe our Country loss: and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honour.
Gods will, pray thee wish not one man more.
By Jove, I am not covetous for Gold,
Nor care I who doth seed upon my cost:
It yearns me not, if men my Garments wear;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires.
But if it be a sin to covet Honour,
I am the most offending Soul alive.
No faith, my Couze, wish not a man from England:
Gods peace, I would not loose so great an Honour,
• one man more me thinks would share from me,
•r the best hope I have. O, doe not wish one more:
•there proclaim it (Westmerland) through my Host,
•at he which hath no stomach to this fight,
•t him depart, his Passport shall be made,
A•d Crowns for Convoy put into his Purse:
We would not dye in that mans company,
That fears his fellowship, to dye with vs.
This day is called the Feast of Crispian:
He that out-liues this day, and comes safe home,
Will stand a tip-toe when this day is named,
And row him at the Name of Crispian.
He that shall see this day, and live old age,
Will yearly on the Vigil feast his neighbours,
And say, to morrow is Saint Crispian.
Then will he strip his sleeve, and show his skarres:
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot:
But he will remember, with advantages,
What feats he did that day. Then shall our Names,
Familiar in his mouth as household words,
Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick, and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing Cups freshly remembered.
This story shall the good man teach his son:
And Crispine Crispian shall ne'er go by,
From this day to the ending of the World,
But we in it shall be remembered;
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers:
For he to day that sheds his blood with me,
Shall be my brother: be he ne'er so vile,
This day shall gentle his Condition▪
And Gentlemen in England, now a bed,
Shall think the •selves accursed they were not here;
And hold their Manhoods cheap, whiles any speaks,
That fought with vs upon Saint Crispines day.
My Sovereign Lord, bestow your self with speed:
The French are bravely in their battles set,
And will with all expedience charge on vs.
All things are ready, if our minds be so.
Perish the man, whose mind is backward now.
Thou dost not wish more help from England, Couze?
Gods will, my Liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, could fight this Royal battle.
Why now thou hast unwished five thousand men:
Which likes me better, then to wish vs one.
You know your places: God be with you all.
Once more I come to know of thee King Harry,
If for thy Ransom thou wilt now compound,
Before thy most assured Overthrow:
For certainly, thou art so near the Gulf,
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy
The Constable desires thee, thou wilt-mind
Thy followers of Repentance; that their Souls
May make a peaceful and a sweet retire
From off these fields: where (wretches) their poor bodies
Must lye and fester.
Who hath sent thee now?
The Constable of France.
I pray thee bear my former Answer back:
Bid them achieve me, and then sell my bones.
Good God, why should they mock poor fellows thus?
The man that once did sell the Lyons skin
While the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find Native Graves: upon the which, I trust
Shall witness live in Brass of this days work.
And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
Dying like men, though buried in your Dunghills,
They shall be famed: for there the Sun shall greet them,
And draw their honours reeking up to Heaven,
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your Climb,
The smell whereof shall breed a Plague in France.
Mark then abounding valour in our English:
That being dead, like to the bullets crasing,
Break out into a second course of mischief,
Killing in relapse of Mortality.
Let me speak proudly: Tell the Constable,
We are but Warriors for the working day:
Our Gayness and our Gilt are all besmirched
With rainy Marching in the painful field.
There's not a piece of feather in our Host:
Good argument (I hope) we will not fly:
And time hath worn vs into slovenry.
But by the Mass, our hearts are in the trim:
And my poor Soldiers tell me, yet ere Night,
They'll be in fresher Robes, or they will pluck
The gay new Coats o'er the French Soldiers heads,
And turn them out of service. If they doe this,
As if God please, they shall; my Ransom then
Will soon be levied.
Herald, save thou thy labour:
Come thou no more for Ransom, gentle Herald,
They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints:
Which if they have, as I will leave um them,
Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.
I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well:
Thou never shalt hear Herald any more.
I fear thou wilt once more come again for a Ransom.
My Lord, most humbly on my knee I beg The leading of the Vaward.
Take it, brave York.
Now Soldiers march away,
And how thou please God, dispose the day.
Yield Cur.
Ie pens que vous acts le Gentilhome de bon qua∣litee.
Qualtitie calm cuslure me. Art thou a Gentle∣man? What is thy Name? discuss.
O Seigneur Dieu.
O Seignior Dew should be a Gentleman: per∣pend my words O Seignior Dew, and mark: O Seignior Dew, thou die on point of Fox, except O Seignior thou doe give to me egregious Ransom.
O prennes miserecordie aye pits de moi.
Moi shall not serve, I will have forty Moyes: for I will fetch thy rymme out at thy Throat, in drops of Crimson blood.
Est il impossible d'eschapper le force de ton bras.
Brass▪ Cur? thou damned and luxurious Moun∣taine Goat, offer me Brass?
O pardon moi.
Say thou me so? is that a Tonne of Moyes? Come hither boy, ask me this slave in French what is his Name.
Escoute comment acts vous appelle?
Monsieur le Fer.
He says his Name is M. Fer.
M. Fer: Isle fer him, and firk him, and ferret him: discuss the same in French unto him.
I doe not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firk.
Bid him prepare, for I will cut his throat.
Que dit il Monsieur?
Il me command a vous dire que vous feet vous prost, car ce soldat icy est dispose tout asture de couppes vostre gorge.
Owy, cuppele gorge permafoy peasant, unless thou give me Crowns, brave Crowns▪ or mangled shalt thou be by this my Sword.
O Ie vous supply pour l'amour de Dieu: ma par∣donner, Ie suis le Gentilhome de bon maison, guard ma vie, &amp; Ie vous donneray deux cent accuse.
What are his words?
He prays you to save his life, he is a Gentleman of a good house, and for his ransom he will give you two hundred Crowns.
Tell him my fury shall abate, and I the Crowns will take.
Petit Monsieur que dit il?
Encore qu il et country son Iurement, de pardonner au∣cune prisoner: neant-mon• pour les issues que vous laid a pro∣mets, il est content a vous donnes lo liberie le franchisement.
Sir mes genoux se vous donnes milles remercious, et Ie me esteem heurex que Ie entomb, entry les main. d'vn Che∣ualier Ie pause le plus bran valiant et tres destiny seignior d' Anglererre.
Expound unto me boy.
He gives you upon his knees a thousand thanks, and he esteems himself happy, that he hath fallen into the hands of one (as he thinker) the most brave, valorous and thrice-worthy signeur of England.
As I suck blood, I will some mercy show. Foal∣low me.
Saaue vous lo grand Captain? I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart: but the saying is true. The empty vessel makes the greatest sound, Bardolse and Nym had ten times more valour, then this roaring devil in th old play, that every one may pair his nails with a wooden dagger, and they are both hanged, and so would this be, if hee durst steal any thing adueuturously. I must stay with the Lackeys with the luggage of our camp, the French might have a good pray of vs, if he knew of it, for there is none to guard it but boys.
O Diable.
O signeur le jour et perdia, tout et party.
More Dieu ma vie, all is confounded all,
Reproach, and everlasting shame
Sits mocking in our Plumes.
O meschante Fortune, do not run away.
Why all our ranks are broke.
O perdurable shame, let's stab our selves:
Be these the wretches that we plaid at dice for?
Is this the King we sent too, for his ransom?
Shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame,
Let vs dye in once more back again,
And he that will not follow Burbon now,
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand
Like a base Pander hold the Chamber door,
Whilst a base slave, no gentler then my dog,
His fairest daughter is contaminated.
Disorder that hath spoiled vs, friend vs now,
Let vs on heaps go offer up our lives.
We are enough yet living in the Field,
To smother up the English in our throngs,
If any order might be thought upon.
The devil take Order now, Isle to the throng;
Let life be short, else shame will be too long.
Well have we done, thrice-valiant Countrymen,
But ell's not done, yet keep the French the field.
The D. of York commends him to your Majesty
Lives he good Uncle: thrice within this hour
I saw him down; thrice up again, and fighting,
From Helmet to the spur, all blood he was.
In which array (brave Soldier) doth he lye,
Larding the plain: and by his bloody side,
(Yoake-fellow to his honour-owing-wounds)
The Noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
Suffolk first dyed, and York all hagled over
Comes to him, where in gore he lay insteeped,
And takes him by the Beard, kisses the gashes
That bloodily did yawn upon his face.
He cries aloud; Tarry my Cousin Suffolk,
My soul shall thine keep company to heaven:
Tarry (sweet soul) for mine, then fly abreast:
As in this glorious and well-foughten field
We kept together in our Chivalry.
Upon these words I came, and cheered him up,
He smiled me in the face, roughed me his hand,
And with a feeble gripe, says: Dear my Lord,
Commend my service to my Sovereign,
So did he turn, and over Suffolkes neck
He threw his wounded arm, and kissed his lips,
And so espoused to death, with blood he sealed
A Testament of Noble-ending-loue:
The pretty and sweet manner of it forced
Those waters from me, which I would have stopped,
But I had not so much of man in me,
And all my mother came into mine eyes,
And gave me up to tears.
I blame you not,
For hearing this, I must perforce compound
With mixtfull eyes, or they will issue to.
But hark, what new alarm is this same?
The French have re-enforc'd their scattered men:
Then every soldier kill his Prisoners,
Give the word through.
Kill the boys and the luggage, It is expressly against the Law of Arms, tic as arrant a piece of knave∣rye mark you now, as can bee offered in your Conscience now, is it not?
Tic certain, there's not a boy left alive, and the Cowardly Rascals that ran from the battle have done this slaughter: besides they have burned and carried a∣way all that was in the Kings Tent, wherefore the King most worthily hath cause every soldier to cut his pri∣sonars throat. O it is a gallant King.
I, hee was porne at Monmouth Captain Gower:
What call you the Towns name where Alexander the pig was borne?
Alexander the Great.
Why I pray you, is not pig, great? The pig, or the great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the magnani∣mous, are all one reckonings, save the phrase is a little va∣riations.
I think Alexander the Great was borne in Macedon, his Father was called Phillip of Macedon, as I take it.
I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is
porne: I tell you Captain, if you look in the Maps of the World, I warrant you sall find in the comparisons be∣tweene Macedon &amp; Monmouth, that the situations look you, is both alike. There is a River in Macedon, &amp; there is also moreover a River at Monmouth, it is called Wye at Monmouth: but it is out of my praines, what is the name of the other River: but it is all one, tic alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is Salmons in both. If you mark Alexanders life well, Harry of Monmouthes life is come after it indifferent well, for there is figures in all things. Alexander God knows, and you know, in his rages, and his furies, and his wraths, and his chollers, and his moods, and his displeasures, and his indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in his praines, did in his Ales and his angers (look you) kill his best friend Clytus.
Our King is not like him in that, he never killed any of his friends.
It is not well done (mark you now) to take the tales out of my mouth, ere it is made and finished. I speak but in the figures, and comparisons of it: as Alexander kilt his friend Clytus, being in his Ales and his Cups; so also Harry Monmouth being in his right wits, and his good judgements, turned away the fat Knight with the great belly doublet: he was full of jests, and gyps, and knaveries, and mocks, I have forgot his name.
Sir Iohn Falstaff.
That is he: Isle tell you, there is good men porne at Monmouth.
Here comes his Majesty.
I was not angry since I came to France,
Until this instant. Take a Trumpet Herald,
Ride thou unto the Horsemen on yond hill:
If they will fight with vs, bid them come down,
Or void the field: they do offend our sight.
If they'll do neither, we will come to them,
And make them scare away, as swift as stones
Enforced from the old Assyrian slings:
Besides, we'll cut the throats of those we have,
And not a man of them that we shall take,
Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.
Here comes the Herald of the French, my Liege
His eyes are humbler then they used to be.
How now, what means this Herald? Know thou not,
That I have fined these bones of mine for ransom?
Come thou again for ransom?
No great King:
I come to thee for charitable License,
That we may wander ore this bloody field,
To book our dead, and then to bury them,
To sort our Nobles from our common men.
For many of our Princes (woe the while)
Lye drowned and soaked in mercenary blood:
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
In blood of Princes, and with wounded steeds
Fret fet-locke deep in gore, and with wilde rage
Yerk out their armed heals at their dead masters,
Killing them twice, O give vs leave great King,
To view the field in safety, and dispose
Of their dead bodies.
I tell thee truly Herald,
I know not if the day be ours or no,
For yet a many of your horsemen peer,
And gallop ore the field.
The day is yours.
Praised be God, and not our strength for it:
What is this Castle called that stands hard by.
They call it Agincourt.
Then call we this the field of Agincourt,
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.
Your Grandfather of famous memory (an't please your Majesty) and your great Uncle Edward the Placke Prince of Wales, as I have read in the Chronicles, fought a most prove pattle here in France.
They did Fluellen.
Your Majesty says very true: If your Majesties is remembered of it, the Welshmen did good service in a Garden where Leekes did grow, wearing Leekes in their Monmouth caps, which your Majesty know to this hour is an honourable badge of the service: And I do believe your Majesty takes no scorn to wear the Leek upon S. Tau•es day.
I wear it for a memorable honour:
For I am Welch you know good Countryman.
All the water in Wye, cannot wash your May∣sties Welsh plood out of your pody, I can tell you that: God plesse it, and preserve it; as long as it pleases his Grace, and his Majesty too.
Thanks good my Countrymen.
By leshu, I am your Majesties Countryman, I care not who know it: I will confess it to all the World, I need not to be ashamed of your Majesty, praised be God so long as your Majesty is an honest man.
Good keep me so.
Our Heralds go with him,
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
On both our parts. Call yonder fellow hither.
Soldier, you must come to the King.
Soldier, why wear thou that Glove in thy Cap?
And't please your Majesty, tic the gage of one that I should fight withal, if he be alive.
An Englishman?
And't please your Majesty, a Rascal that swag∣ge•'d with me last night: who if alive, and ever dare to challenge this Glove, I have sworn to take him a box a' th ere: or if I can see my Glove in his cap, which he swore as he was a Soldier he would wear (if alive) I will strike it out soundly.
What think you Captain Fluellen, is it fit this soldier keep his oath.
Hee is a Craven and a Villain else, and't please your Majesty in my conscience.
It may bee, his enemy is a Gentleman of great sort quite from the answer of his degree.
Though he be as good a Ientleman as the devil is, as Lucifer and Beelzebub himself, it is necessary (look your Grace) that he keep his vow and his oath: If hee bee perjured (see you now) his reputation is as arrant a villain and a lack sauce, as ever his black shoo trot upon Gods ground, and his earth, in my conscience law
Then keep thy vow sirrah, when thou meet the fellow.
So, I will my Liege, as I live.
Who serve thou under?
Under Captain Gower, my Liege.
Gower is a good Captain, and is good know∣ledge and literatured in the Wars.
Call him hither to me, Soldier.
I will my Liege.
Here Fluellen, wear thou this favour for me, and stick it in thy Cap: when Alanson and my self were down together, I plackt this Glove from his Helm: If any man challenge this, hee is a friend to Alanson, and an enemy to our Person; if thou encounter any such, appre∣hend him, and thou dost me love.
Your Grace doo's me as great Honours as can be desired in the hearts of his Subjects: I would fine see the man, that he's but two legs, that shall find himself agreesd at this Glove; that is all: but I would fine see it once, and please God of his grace that I might see.
Know thou Gower?
He is my dear friend, and please you.
Pray thee go seek him, and bring him to my Tent.
I will fetch him.
My Lord of Warwick, and my Brother Gloster,
Follow Fluellen closely at the heals.
The Glove which I have given him for a favour,
May happily purchase him a box a' the care.
It is the Soldiers: I by bargain should
Wear it my self. Follow good Cousin Warwick:
If that the Soldier strike him, as I judge
By his blunt bearing, he will keep his word;
Some sudden mischief may arise of it:
For I doe know Fluellen valiant,
And touched with Choler, hot as Gunpowder,
And quickly will return an injury.
Follow, and see there be no harm between them.
Go you with me, Uncle of Exeter.
I warrant it is to Knight you, Captain.
Gods will, and his pleasure, Captain, I beseech you now, come apace to the King: there is more good toward you peradventure, then is in your knowledge to dream of.
Sir, know you this Glove?
Know the Glove? I know the Glove is a Glove.
I know this, and thus I challenge it.
'Sbl•d, an arrant Traitor as anies in the Vniuer∣sall World, or in France, or in England.
How now Sir? you Villain.
Doe you think Isle be forsworn?
Stand away Captain Gower, I will give Treason his payment into plowes, I warrant you.
I am no Traitor.
That's a Lye in thy Throat. I charge you in his Majesties Name apprehend him, he's a friend of the Duke Alansons.
How now, how now, what's the matter?
My Lord of Warwick, here is, praised be God for it, a most contagious Treason come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a Summers day. Here is his Majesty.
How now, what's the matter?
My Liege, here is a Villain, and a Traitor, that look your Grace, he's struck the Glove which your Majesty is take out of the Helmet of Alan∣son.
My Liege, this was my Glove, here is the fellow of it: and he that I gave it to in change, promised to wear it in his Cap: I promised to strike him, if he did: I met this man with my Glove in his Cap, and I have been as good as my word.
Your Majesty hear now, saving your Majesties Manhood, what an arrant rascally, beggarly, lousy Knave it is: I hope your Majesty is pear me testimony and witness, and will avouchment, that this is the Glove of Alanson, that your Majesty is give me, in your Con∣science now.
Give me thy Glove Soldier;
Look, here is the fellow of it:
It was I indeed thou promise to strike,
And thou hast given me most bitter terms.
And please your Majesty, let his Neck answer for it, if there is any Marshall Law in the World.
How can thou make me satisfaction?
All offences, my Lord, come from the heart: no∣for came any from mine, that might offend your Ma∣jest.
It was our self thou did abuse.
Your Majesty came not like your self: you appeared to me but as a common man; witness the Night, your Garments, your Lowliness: and what your Highness suffered under that shape, I beseech you take it for your own fau•t, and not mine: for had you been as I took you for, I made no offence; therefore I beseech your Highness pardon me.
Here Uncle Exeter, fill this Glove with Crowns,
And give it to this fellow. Keep it fellow,
And wear it for an Honour in thy Cap,
Till I doe challenge it. Give him the Crowns:
And Captain, you must needs be friends with him.
By this Day and this Light, the fellow he's met∣tell enough in his belly: Hold, there is twelue-pence for you, and I pray you to serve God, and keep you out of prowls and prabbles, and quarrels and dissentions, and I warrant you it is the better for you.
I will none of your Money.
It is with a good will: I can tell you it will serve you to mend your shoes: come, wherefore should you be so pashfull, your shoes is not so good: it is a good silling I warrant you, or I will change it.
Now Herald, are the dead numbered?
Here is the number of the slaughtered French.
What Prisoners of good sort are taken, Uncle?
Charles Duke of Orleans, Nephew to the King,
Iohn Duke of Burbon, and Lord Bouchiquald:
Of other Lords and Barons, Knights and Squires,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
This Note doth tell me of ten thousand French
That in the field lye slain: of Princes in this number,
And Nobles bearing Banners, there lye dead
One hundred twenty six: added to these,
Of Knights, Esquires, and gallant Gentlemen,
Eight thousand and four hundred: of the which,
Five hundred were but yesterday dubbed Knights.
So that in these ten thousand they have lost,
There are but sixteen hundred Mercenaries:
The rest are Princes, Barons, Lords, Knights, Squires,
And Gentlemen of blood and quality.
The Names of those their Nobles that lye dead:
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France,
Iaques of Chatilion, Admiral of France,
The Master of the Crosse-bowes, Lord Rambures,
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dolphin,
Iohn Duke of Alanson, Anthony Duke of Brabant,
The Brother to the Duke of Burgundy,
And Edward Duke of Barr: of lusty Earls,
Grandpree and Rosie, Fauconbridge and Foyes,
Beaumont and Marle, Vandemont and Lestrale.
Here was a Royal fellowship of death.
Where is the number of our English dead?
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
Sir Richard Ketly, Day Gam Esquire;
None else of name: and of all other men,
But five and twenty.
O God, thy Arm was here:
And not to vs, but to thy Arm alone,
Ascribe we all: when, without stratagem,
But in plain shock, and even play of Battle,
Was ever known so great and little loss?
On one part and on the other, take it God,
For it is none but thine.
It is wonderful.
Come, go me in procession to the Village:
And be it death proclaimed through our Host,
To boast of this, or take that praise from God,
Which is his only.
Is it not lawful and please your Majesty, to tell how many is killed?
Yes Captain: but with this acknowledgement,
That God fought for vs.
Yes, my conscience, he did vs great good.
Doe we all holy Rights:
Let there be sung Non nobis, and Te Deum,
The dead with charity enclosed in Clay:
And then to Callice, and to England then,
Where ne'er from France arrived more happy men.
Vouchsafe to those that have not read the Story,
That I may prompt them: and of such as have,
I humbly pray them to admit the excuse
Of time, of numbers, and due course of things,
Which cannot in their huge and proper life,
Be here presented. Now we bear the King
Toward Callice: Grant him there; there seen,
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts,
Athwart the Sea: Behold the English beach
Pales in the flood; with Men, Wives, and Boys,
Whose shouts &amp; claps out-voyce the deep-mouth'd Sea,
Which like a mighty Whiffler before the King,
Seems to prepare his way: So let him land,
And solemnly see him set on to London.
So swift a pace hath Thought, that even now
You may imagine him upon Black-Heath:
Where, that his Lords desire him, to have borne
His bruised Helmet, and his bended Sword
Before him, through the City: he forbids it,
Being free from vain-nesse, and selfe-glorious pride;
Giving full Trophy, Signal, and Ostent,
Quite from himself, to God. But now behold,
In the quick Forge and working-house of Thought,
How London doth power out her Citizens,
The Mayor and all his Brethren in best sort,
Like to the Senators of the antique Rome,
With the Plebeians swarming at their heals,
Go forth and fetch their Conquering Caesar in:
As by a lower, but by loving likelihood,
Were now the General of our gracious Empress,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing Rebellion broached on his Sword;
How many would the peaceful City quit,
To welcome him? much more, and much more cause,
Did they this Harry. Now in London place him.
As yet the lamentation of the French
Invites the King of Englands stay at home:
The Emperor's coming in behalf of France,
To order peace between them: and omit
All the occurrences, what ever chance it,
Till Harryes back return again to France:
There must we bring him; and my self have played
The interim, by remembering you it is past.
Then brooke abridgement, and your eyes advance,
After your thoughts, straight back again to France.
Nay, that's right: but why wear you your Leek to day? S. Dauies day is past.
There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things: I will tell you ass my friend, Captain Gower; the rascally, scauld, beggarly, lousy, pragging Knave Pistol, which you and your self, and all the World, know to be no petter then a fellow, look you now, of no merits: hee is come to me, and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, and bid me eat my Leek: it was in a place where I could not breed no contention with him; but I will be so bold as to wear it in my Cap till I see him once again, and then I will tell him a little piece of my desires.
Why here hee comes, swelling like a Turkey∣cock.
It is no matter for his swellings, nor his Turkey∣cocks. God plesse you ancient Pistol: you scurvy low∣sie Knave, God plesse you.
Ha, art thou bedlam? doest thou thirst, base Trojan, to have me fold up Parses fatal Web? Hence; I am qualmish at the smell of Leek.
I beseech you heartily, scurvy lousy Knave, at my desires, and my requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you, this Leek; because, look you, you doe not love it, nor your affections, and your appetites and your digestions doo's not agree with it, I would desire you to eat it.
Not for Cadwallader and all his Goats.
There is one Goat for you.
Will you be so good, scauld Knave, as eat it?
Base Trojan, thou shalt dye.
You say very true, scauld Knave, when Gods will is: I will desire you to live in the mean time, and eat your Victuals: come, there is sauce for it. You called me yesterday Mountaine-Squier, but I will make
you to day a squire of low degree. I pray you fall too, if you can mock a Leek, you can eat a Leek.
Enough Captain, you have astonished him.
I say, I will make him eat some part of my leek, or I will peat his pate four days: bite I pray you, it is good for your greene wound, and your ploodie Cox∣comb.
Must I bite.
Yes certainly, and out of doubt and out of que∣stion too, and ambiguities.
By this Leek, I will most horribly revenge I eat and eat I swear.
Eat I pray you, will you have some more sauce to your Leek: there is not enough Leek to swear by.
Qu•et thy Cudgel, thou dost see I eat.
Much good do you scald knave, heartily. Nay▪ pray you throw none away, the skin is good for your broken Coxcomb; when you take occasions to see Leekes hereafter, I pray you mock at 'em, that is all.
Good.
I, Leekes is good: hold you, there is a great to heal your pate.
Me a great?
Yes verily, and in truth you shall take it, or I have another Leek in my pocket, which you shall eat.
I take thy great in earnest of revenge.
If I owe you any thing, I will pay you in Cud∣gels, you shall be a Woodmonger, and buy nothing of me but cudgels: God bu'y you, and keep you, &amp; heal your pate.
All hell shall stir for this.
Go, go, you are a counterfeit cowardly Knave, will you mock at an ancient Tradition began upon an honourable respect, and worn as a memorable Trophy of predeceased valour, and dare not avouch in your deeds any of your words. I have seen you gleeking &amp; galling at this Gentleman twice or thrice. You thought, because he could not speak English in the native garb, he could not therefore handle an English Cudgel: you find it o∣therwise, and henceforth let a Welsh correction, teach you a good English condition, fare ye well.
Doth fortune play the huswife with me now? News have I that my Doll is dead in th Spittle of a mala∣die of France, and there my rendezvous is quite cut off: Old I do wax, and from my weary limbs honour is Cudgeld. Well, Baud Isle turn, and something lean to Cut-purse of quick hand: To England will I steal, and there Isle steal:
And patches will I get unto these cudgeld scars,
And swore I got them in the Galley wars.
Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met;
Unto our brother France, and to our Sister
Health and fair time of day: Joy and good wishes
To our most fair and Princely Cosine Katherine:
And as a branch and member of this Royalty,
By whom this great assembly is contrived,
We do salute you Duke o• Burgogne,
And Princes French and Peers health to you all.
Right joyous are we to behold your face.
Most worthy brother England, fairly met,
So are you Princes (English) every one.
So happy be the Issue brother Ireland
Of this good day, and of this gracious meeting,
As we are now glad to behold your eyes,
Your eyes which hitherto have borne
In them against the French that met them in their bent,
The fatal Balls of murdering Basilisks:
The venom of such Looks we fairly hope
Have lost their quality, and that this day
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.
To cry A men to that, thus we appear.
You English Princes all, I doe salute you.
My duty to you both, on equal love.
Great Kings of France and England: that I have laboured
With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavours,
To bring your most Imperial Majesties
Unto this Bar, and Royal interview;
Your Mightiness on both parts best can witness.
Since then my Office hath so far prevailed,
That Face to Face, and Royal Eye to Eye,
You have congreeted: let it not disgrace me,
If I demand before this Royal view,
What Rub, or what Impediment there is,
Why that the naked, poor, and mangled Peace,
Dear Nurse of Arts, Plentyes, and joyful Births,
Should not in this best Garden of the World,
Our fertile France, put up her lovely Visage?
Alas, she hath from France too long been chased,
And all her Husbandry doth lye on heaps,
Corrupting in it own fertility.
Her Vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
Vnpruned, dyes: her Hedges even pleach'd,
Like Prisoners wildly ouer-growne with hair,
Put forth disordered Twigs: her fallow Leas,
The Darnel, Hemlock, and •ink Femetary,
Doth too• upon; while that the Culter rusts,
That should de•acinate such Sauagery:
The even Mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
The freckled Cowslip, Burnet, and greene Clover,
Wanting the Since, withal uncorrected, rank;
Conceives by idleness, and nothing teemes,
But hateful Docks, rough Thistles, Keksyes, Burs,
Loosing both beauty and utility;
And all our Vineyards, Fallowes, Meads, and Hedges,
Defective in their natures, grow to wildness.
Even so our Houses, and our selves, and Children,
Have lost, or doe not learn, for want of time,
The Sciences that should become our Country;
But grow like Savages, as Soldiers will,
That nothing doe▪ but meditate on Blood,
To Swearing, and sterne Looks, defused Attire,
And every thing that seems unnatural.
Which to reduce into our former favour,
You are assembled: and my speech entreats,
That I may know the Let why gentle Peace
Should not expel these inconveniences,
And bless vs with her former qualities.
If Duke of Burgonie, you would the Peace,
Whose want gives growth to the imperfections
Which you have cited; you must buy that Peace
With full accord to all our just demands,
Whose Tenures and particular effects
You have enschedul'd briefly in your hands.
The King hath heard them: to the which, as yet
There is no Answer made.
Well then: the Peace which you before so urged,
Lies in his Answer.
I have but with a curselarie eye
O're-glanc't the Articles: Pleases your Grace
To appoint some of your Council presently
To sit with vs once more, with better heed
To re-suruey them; we will suddenly
Pass our accept and peremptory Answer.
Brother we shall. Go Uncle Exeter,
And Brother Clarence, and you Brother Gloucester,
Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King,
And take with you free power, to ratify,
Augment, or alter, as your Wisdoms best
Shall see aduantageable for our Dignity,
Any thing in or out of our Demands,
And we'll consign thereto. Will you, fair Sister,
Go with the Princes, or stay here with vs?
Our gracious Brother, I will go with them:
Happily a Women's Voice may doe some good,
When Articles too nicely urged, be stood on.
Yet leave our Cousin Katherine here with vs,
She is our capital Demand, comprised
Within the fore-ranke of our Articles.
She hath good leave.
Fair Katherine, and most fair,
Will you vouchsafe to teach a Soldier terms,
Such as will enter at a Ladies ear,
And plead his Loue-suit to her gentle heart.
Your Majesty shall mock at me, I cannot speak your England.
O fair Katherine, if you will love me soundly with your French heart, I will be glad to hear you con∣fesse it brokenly with your English Tongue. Doe you like me, Kate?
Pardon moi, I cannot tell wat is like me.
An Angel is like you Kate, and you are like an Angel.
Que dit il que Ie suis semblably a les Anges?
Oy verayment (sauf vostre Grace) ainsi dit il.
I said so, dear Katherine, and I must not blush to affirm it.
O bon Dieu, les langues des hommes sont plain de tromperies.
What says she, fair one? that the tongues of men are full of deceits?
Oy, dat de tongeus of de mans is be full of de∣ceits: dat is de Princess.
The Princess is the better English-woman: in faith Kate, my wooing is fit for thy understanding, I am glad thou can speak no better English, for if thou coldest, thou would find me such a plain King, that thou would think, I had sold my Farm to buy my Crown. I know no ways to mince it in love, but di∣rectly to say, I love you; then if you urge me farther, then to say, Doe you in faith? I wear out my suite: Give me your answer, in faith doe, and so clap hands, and a bar∣gain: how say you, Lady?
Sauf vostre honour, me understand well.
Marry, if you would put me to Verses, or to Dance for your sake, Kate, why you undid me: for the one I have neither words nor measure; and for the other, I have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable measure in strength. If I could win a Lady at Leape-frogge, or by vawting into my Saddle, with my Armour on my back; under the correction of bragging: be it spoken. I should quickly leap into a Wife: Or if I might buffet for my Love, or bound my Horse for her favours, I could lay on like a Butcher, and sit like a Jack an Apes, never off. But before God Kate, I cannot look greenly, nor gasp out my eloquence, nor I have no cunning in protestation; only downright Oaths, which I never use till urged, nor never break for urging. If thou can love a fellow of this temper, Kate, whose face is not worth Sunne-bur∣ning? that never looks in his Glass, for love of any thing he sees there? let thine Eye be thy Cooke. I speak to thee plain Soldier: If thou can love me for this, take me? if not? to say to thee that I shall dye, is true; but for thy love, by the L. No: yet I love thee too. And while thou liu'st, dear Kate, take a fellow of plain and vncoyned Constancy, for he perforce must do thee right, because he hath not the gift to woo in other places: for these fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into Ladies savours, they doe always reason themselves out again. What? a speaker is but a praetor, a Rhyme is but a Ballad; a good Leg will fall, a strait Back will stoop, a black Beard will turn white, a curled Pate will grow bald, a fair Face will wither, a full Eye will wax hollow: but a good Heart, Kate, is the Sun and the Moon, or rather the Sun, and not the Moon; for it shines bright, and never changes, but keeps his course truly. If thou would have such a one, take me? and take me; take a Soldier: take a Soldier; take a King. And what say thou then to my Love? speak my fair, and fairly, I pray thee.
Is it possible dat I sold love de enemy of France?
No, it is not possible you should love the En∣my of France, Kate; but in loving me, you should love the Friend of France: for I love France so well, that I will not part with a Village of it; I will have it all mine: and Kate, when France is mine, and I am yours; then yours is France, and you are mine.
I cannot tell wat is dat.
No, Kate? I will tell thee in French, which I am sure will hang upon my tongue, like a new-married Wife about her Husbands Neck, hardly to be shook off; Ie quand sir le possession de France, &amp; quand vous aves le pos∣session de moi. (Let me see, what then? Saint Dennis bee my speed) Donc vostre est France, &amp; vous acts mienne. It is as easy for me, Kate, to conquer the Kingdom, as to speak so much more French: I shall never move thee in French, unless it be to laugh at me.
Sauf vostre honour, le Francois ques vous parleys, il &amp; milieus que l' Anglois le qual Ie parley.
No faith is it not, Kate: but thy speaking of my Tongue, and I thine, most truly falsely, must needs be granted to be much at one. But Kate, dost thou understand thus much English? Can thou love me?
I cannot tell.
Can any of your Neighbours tell, Kate? Isle ask them. Come, I know thou love me: and at night, when you come into your Closet, you'll question this Gentlewoman about me; and I know, Kate, you will to her dispraise those parts in me, that you love with your heart: but good Kate, mock me mercifully, the rather gentle Princess, because I love thee cruelly. If ever thou be mine, Kate, as I have a saving Faith within me tells me thou shalt; I get thee with skambling, and thou must therefore needs prove a good Souldier-breeder: Shall not thou and I, between Saint Dennis and Saint George, compound a Boy, half French half English,
that shall go to Constantinople, and take the Turk by the Beard. Shall wee not? what say thou, my fair Flower-de-Luce.
I doe not know dat.
No: it is hereafter to know, but now to promise: doe but now promise Kate, you will endeavour for your French part of such a Boy; and for my English moiety, take the Word of a King, and a Bachelor. How answer you. La plus belle Katherine du monte mon trescher &amp; divine does.
Your Majesty aue fause French enough to deceive de most sage Damoiscil dat is en France.
Now fie upon my false French: by mine Honour in true English, I love thee Kate; by which Honour, I dare not swear thou love me, yet my blood begins to flat∣la me, that thou dost; notwithstanding the poor and vntempering effect of my Visage. Now beshrew my Fathers Ambition, hee was thinking of Civil Wars when hee got me, therefore was I created with a stub∣borne out-side, with an aspect of Iron, that when I come to woo Ladies, I fright them: but in faith Kate, the el∣der I wax, the better I shall appear. My comfort is, that Old Age, that ill layer up of Beauty, can doe no more spoil upon my Face. Thou hast me, if thou hast me, at the worst; and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and better: and therefore tell me, most fair Call∣therein, will you have me? Put off your Maiden Blushes, avouch the Thoughts of your Heart with the Looks of an Empress, take me by the Hand, and say, Harry of England, I am thine: which Word thou shalt no sooner bless mine Ear withal, but I will tell thee aloud, Eng∣land is thine, Ireland is thine, France is thine, and Henry Plantaginet is thine; who, though I speak it before his Face, if he be not Fellow with the best King, thou shalt find the best King of Good-fellowes. Come your An∣swer in broken Music; for thy Voice is Music, and thy English broken: Therefore Queen of all, Katherine, break thy mind to me in broken English; wilt thou have me?
Dat is as it shall please de Roy mon pere.
Nay, it will please him well, Kate; it shall please him, Kate.
Den it fall also content me.
Upon that I kiss your Hand, and I call you my Queen.
Laisse mon Seigneur, laisse, laisse, may foy: Ie no veus point que vous abbaisse vostre grandeus, en baisant le main d'une nostre Seigneur indign servitor excuse moi. Ie vous supply mon tres-puissant Seigneur.
Then I will kiss your Lips, Kate.
Les Dames &amp; Damsels pour astra baize divined lour nopcese il net pas le costume de France.
Madame, my Interpreter, what says she?
Dat it is not be de fashion pour le Ladies of France; I cannot tell wat is buisse en English.
To kiss.
Your Majesty entendre better que moi.
It is not a fashion for the Maids in France to kiss before they are married, would she say?
Oy verayment.
O Kate, nice Customs curse to great Kings. Dear Kate, you and I cannot bee confined within the weak List of a Countries fashion: wee are the ma∣cares of Manners, Kate; and the liberty that follows our Places, stoppes the mouth of all finde-faults, as I will doe yours, for upholding the nice fashion of your Country, in denying me a Kiss: therefore patiently, and yielding. You have Witch-craft in your Lips, Kate: there is more eloquence in a Sugar touch of them, then in the Tongues of the French Council; and they should sooner persuade Harry of England, then a general Petition of Monarchs. Here comes your Father.
God save your Majesty, my Royal Cousin, teach you our Princess English?
I would have her learn, my fair Cousin, how perfectly I love her, and that is good English.
Is she not apt?
Our Tongue is rough, Cos, and my Conditi∣on is not smooth: so that having neither the Voice nor the Heart of Flattery about me, I cannot so conjure up the Spirit of Love in her, that hee will appear in his true likeness.
Pardon the frankness of my mirth, if I answer you for that. If you would conjure in her, you must make a Circle: if conjure up Love in her in his true likeness, hee must appear naked, and blind. Can you blame her then, being a Maid, yet ros'd over with the Virgin Crimson of Modesty, if she deny the appearance of a naked blind Boy in her naked seeing self? It were (my Lord) a hard Condition for a Maid to consign to.
Yet they doe wink and yield, as Love is blind and enforces.
They are then excused, my Lord, when they see not what they doe.
Then good my Lord, teach your Cousin to consent winking.
I will wink on her to consent, my Lord, if you will teach her to know my meaning: for Maids well Summered, and warm kept, are like Flies at Bartholo∣mew-tyde, blind, though they have their eyes, and then they will endure handling, which before would not abide looking on.
This Moral ties me over to Time, and a hot Summer; and so I shall catch the Fly, your Cousin, in the latter end, and she must be blind to.
As Love is my Lord, before it loves.
It is so: and you may, some of you, thank Love for my blindness, who cannot see many a fair French City for one fair French Maid that stands in my way.
Yes my Lord, you see them perspec∣tiuely: the Cities turned into a Maid; for they are all girdled with Maiden Walls, that War hath en∣tred.
Shall Kate be my Wife?
So please you.
I am content, so the Maiden Cities you talk of, may wait on her: so the Maid that stood in the way for my Wish, shall show me the way to my Will.
Wee have consented to all terms of rea∣son.
Is it so, my Lords of England?
The King hath granted every Article:
His Daughter first; and in sequel, all,
According to their firm proposed natures.
Only he hath not yet subscribed this:
Nor this I have not Brother so denied,
But your request shall make me let it pass.
I pray you then, in love and dear alliance,
Let that one Article rank with the rest,
And thereupon give me your Daughter.
Take her fair Son, and from her blood raise up
Issue to me, that the contending Kingdoms
Of France and England, whose very shores look pale,
With envy of each others happiness,
May cease their hatred; and this dear Conjunction
Plant Neighbour-hood and Christian-like accord
In their sweet Bosoms: that never War advance
His bleeding Sword twixt England and fair France.
Amen.
Now welcome Kate: and bear me witness all,
That here I kiss her as my Sovereign Queen.
God, the best maker of all Marriages,
Combine your hearts in one, your Realms in one:
As Man and Wife being two, are one in love,
So be there twixt your Kingdoms such a Spousal,
That never may ill Office, or fell Jealousy,
Which troubles oft the Bed of blessed Marriage,
Thrust in between the Potion of these Kingdoms,
To make divorce of their incorporate League:
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
Receive each other. God speak this Amen.
Amen.
Prepare we for our Marriage: on which day,
My Lord of Burgundy we'll take your Oath
And all the Peers, for surety of our Leagues.
Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me,
And may our Oaths well kept and prosperous be.
Thus far with rough, and all-vnable Pen,
Our bending Author hath pursued the Story,
In little room confining mighty men,
Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.
Small time: but in that small, most greatly lived
This Star of England. Fortune made his Sword;
By which, the Worlds best Garden he achieved:
And of it left his Son Imperial Lord.
Henry the Sixth, in Infant Bands crowned King
Of France and England, did this King succeed:
Whose State so many had the managing,
That they lost France, and made his England bleed:
Which oft our Stage hath shown; and for their sake,
In your fair minds let this acceptance take.

I Would not for half Sauoy, but have bound
France to some favour, by my personal presence
More than your self, (my Lord Ambassador)
Could have obtained; for all Ambassadors
(You know) have chiefly these instructions;
To note the State and chief sway of the Court,
To which they are employed; to penetrate
The heart, and marrow of the Kings designs,
And to observe the countenances and spirits,
Of such as are impatient of rest;
And wring beneath, some private discontent:
But, past all these, there are a number more
Of these State Critiscismes: That our personal view
May profitably make, which cannot fall
Within the powers of our instruction,
To make you comprehend; I will doe more
With my mere shadow, than you with your persons.
All you can say against my coming here,
Is that, which I confess, may for the time,
Breed strange affections in my brother Spain;
But when I shall have time to make my Cannans,
The long-tong'd Heralds of my hidden drifts,
Our reconcilement will be made with triumphs.
If not, your Highness hath small cause to care,
Having such worthy reason to complain
Of Spaines cold friendship, and his lingering succours,
Who only entertains your griefs with hope,
To make your medcine desperate.
My Lord knows
The Spanish gloss too well; his form▪ stuffe'lasting,
And the most dangerous conditions,
He lays on them with whom he is in league.
Th'iniustice in the most unequal dowre,
Given with th'Infanta whom my Lord espousde,
Compared with that her elder sister had,
May tell him how much Spaines love weighs to him;
When of so many Globes and Scepters held
By the great King, he only would bestow
A portion but of six score thousand Crowns
In yearly pension, with his highness wife,
When the Infant wedded by the Archduke
Had the French County, and lowe Provinces.
We should not set these passages of Spline
Twixt Spain and Sauoy; to the weaker part,
More good by suff•ance grows, than deeds of heart,
The nearer Princes are, the further off
In rites of friendship; my advice had never
Consented to this voyage of my Lord,
In which he doth endanger Spaines whole loss,
For hope of some poor fragment here in France.
My hope in France you know not, though my counsel,
And for my loss of Spain, it is agreed,
That I should slight it, oft-times Princes rules
Are like the Chemical Philosophers;
Leave me then to mine own proiection,
In this our thrifty Alchemy of state,
Yet help me thus far, you that have been here
Our Lord Ambassador; and, in short inform me,
What Spirits here are fit for our designs.
The new-created Duke Byron is fit,
Were there no other reason for your presence,
To make it worthy; for he is a man
Of matchless valor, and was ever happy
In all encounters, which were still made good,
With an vnwearyed sense of any toil,
Having continewd fourteen days together
Upon his ho•se; his blood is not voluptuous,
Nor much inclined to women; his desires
Are higher than his sty•e▪ and his deserts
Not much short of the most he can desire,
If they be weigh•d with what France feels by them:
He is past measure glorious: And that humour
Is fit to feed his Spirits, whom it possesses
With faith in any error; chiefly where
Men blow it up, with praise of his perfections,
The taste whereof in him so soothes his palate,
And takes up all his appetite, that oft times
He will refuse his meat, and company
To feast alone with their most strong conceit;
Ambition also, cheek by cheek doth march
With that excess of glory, both su•taind
With an unlimited fancy, That the King,
Nor Fr•uncle it self, without him can subsist.
He is the man (my Lord) I come to win;
And that supreme intention of my presence
Saw never light till now, which yet I fear,
The politic king, suspecting, is the cause
That he hath sent him so far from my reach,
And made him chief in the Commission,
Of his embassage to my brother Arch-duke,
With whom he is now; and (as I am told)
So entertained and fitted in his humour,
That ere I part, I hope he will return
Prepared, and made the more fit for the physic
That I intend to minister.
My Lord,
There is another discontented Spirit
Now here in Court, that for his brain, and aptness
To any course that may recover him
In his declined and litigious state,
Will serve Biro•, as he were made for him,
In giving vent to his ambitious vain,
And that is, De Laffin.
You tell me true,
And him I think you have prepared for me.
I have my Lord, and doubt not he will p•ooue,
Of the yet taintlesse fortress of Byron,
A quick Expugner, and a strong Abider.
Perhaps the battery will be brought before him,
In this embassage, for I am assured
They set high price of him, and are informde
Of all the passages, and means for mines
That may be thought on, to his taking in:
The King comes, and Laffin: the Kings aspect
Folded in clouds.
I will not have my train,
Made a retreat for Bankroutes, nor my Court,
A hyue for Droanes: proud Beggars, and true Thieves,
That with a forced truth they swear to me,
Rob my poor subjects, shall give up their Arts,
And henceforth learn to live by their deserts;
Though I am grown, by right of Birth and Arms
Into a greater kingdom, I will spread
With no more shade, then may admit that kingdom
Her proper, natural, and wonted fruits,
Navarre shall be Navarre, and France still France:
If one may be the better for the other
By mutual rites, so, neither shall be worse.
Thou art in law, in quarrels, and in debt,
Which thou would quit with countnaunce; Borrowing
With thee is purchase, and thou seekst by me
(In my supportance) now our old wars cease
To wage worse battles, with the arms of Peace.
Peace must not make men Cowherds, nor keep calm
Her purse regiment with men's smootherd breaths;
I must confess my fortunes are declined,
But neither my deservings, nor my mind:
I seek but to sustain the right I found,
When I was rich, in keeping what is left,
And making good my honour as at best,
Though it be hard; mans right to every thing
Wanes with his wealth, wealth is his surest King;
Yet Justice should be still indifferent.
The overplus of Kings, in all their might,
Is but to piece out the defects of right:
And this I sue for, nor shall frowns and taunts
(The common Scarre-crowes of all poor men's suites)
Nor mis-construction that doth colour still
Licentiate Justice, punishing good for ill,
Keep my free throat from knocking at the Sky,
If thunder chid me for my equity.
Thy equity, is to be ever banished
From Court, and all society of nobles,
Amongst whom thou throwst balls of all dissention;
Thou art at peace with nothing but with war,
Hast no heart but to hurt, and ea•st thy heart,
If it but think of doing any good:
Thou witchest with thy smiles, suckst blood with praises,
Mock al humanity; society poisonst;
Coosinst with virtue; with religion
Betrayst, and massacrest; so vile thy self,
That thou suspectst perfection in others:
A man must think of all the villainies
He knows in all men, to decipher thee,
That art the centre to impiety:
Away, and tempt me not.
But you tempt me,
To what, thou Sun be judge, and make him see.
Now by my dearest Marquisate of Salusses,
Your Majesty hath with the greatest life
Described a wicked man; or rather thrust
Your arm down through him to his very feet,
And plucked his inside out, that ever yet,
Mine ears did witness; or turned ears to Eyes;
And those strange Characters, writ in his face,
which' at first sight, were hard for me to read,
The Doctrine of your speech, hath made so plain,
That I run through them like my natural language:
Nor do I like that mans Aspect, me thinks,
Of all looks where the Beams of Stars have carved
Their powerful influences; And (O rare)
What an heroic, more than royal Spirit
Bewraide you in your first speech, that defies
Protection of vile droanes, that eat the honey
Sweat from laborious virtue, and denies
To give those of Navarre, though bred with you,
The benefits and dignities of France.
When little Rivers by their greedy currants,
(Far far extended from their mother springs)
Drink up the foreign brookes still as they run,
And force their greatness, when they come to Sea,
And jostle with the Ocean for a room,
O how he roars, and takes them in his mouth,
Digesting them so to his proper streams,
That they are no more seen, hee nothing raised
Aboue his usual bounds, yet they devoured,
That of themselves were pleasant, goodly floods.
I would doe best for both, yet shall not be secure,
Till in some absolute heirs my Crown be settled,
There is so little now betwixt Aspirers
And their great object in my only self,
That all the strength they gather under me,
Tempts combat with mine own: I therefore make
Means for some issue by my marriage,
Which with the great Dukes niece is now concluded,
And she is coming; I have trust in heaven
I am not yet so old, but I may spring,
And then I hope all traitrous hopes will fade.
Else may their whole estates fly, rooted up
To Ignominy and Oblivion:
And (being your neighbor servant, and poor kinsman)
I wish your mighty Race might multiply,
Even to the Period of all Empery.
Thanks to my princely cousin, this your love
And honour •hewn me in your personal presence,
I wish to welcome to your full content:
The peace I now make with your brother Archduke,
By Duke Byron our Lord Ambassador,
I wish may happily extend to you,
And that at his return we may conclude it.
It shall be to my heart the happiest day
Of all my life, and that life all employed,
To celebrate the honour of that day.
The wondrous honour done our Duke Byron
In his Embassage here, in th'Archdukes Court,
I fear will taint his loyalty to our King.
I will observe how they observe his humour,
And glorify his valor; and how he
Accepts and stands attractive to their ends,
That so I may not seem an idle spot
In train of this embassage but return
Able to give our King some note of all,
Worth my attendance; And see, heere's the man,
Who (though a French man, and in Orleans borne
Serving the Arch-duke) I doe most suspect,
Is set to be the tempter of our Duke;
Isle go where I may see, all though not hear.
Spread here this history of Cateline,
That Earth may seem to bring forth Roman Spirits;
Even to his Genial feet; and her da•ke breast
Be made the clear Glass of his shining Graces,
Weal make his feet so tender, they shall gall
In all paths but to Empire; and therein
Isle make the sweet Steppes of his State begin.
What place is this? what ayre? what rhegion?
In which a man may hear the harmony
Of all things mooing? Hymen marries here,
Their ends and uses and makes me his Temple.
Hath any man been blessed, and yet lived?
The blood turns in my veins, I stand on change,
And shall dissolve in changing; tic so full
Of pleasure not to be contained in flesh:
To fear a violent Good, abuses Goodness,
Tic Immortality to die aspiring,
As if a man were taken quick to heaven;
What will not hold Perfection, let it burst;
What force hath any Cannan, not being charged,
Or being not discharged? To have stuff and form,
And to lie idle, fearful, and unused,
Nor form, nor stuff shows; happy Semel•
That died comprest with Glory: Happiness
Denies comparison, of less, or more,
And not at most, is nothing: like the shaft
Shot at the Sun, by angry Hercules,
And into shivers by the thunder broken
Will I be if I burst: And in my heart
This shall be written: yet it was high and right.
Here too? they follow all my steppes wi•h Musique,
As if my feet were numerous, and trod sounds
Out of the Center, with Apolloes virtue,
That out of every thing his ech-part touched,
Struck musical accents: wheresoever I go,
They hide the earth from me with coverings rich,
To make me think that I am here in heaven.
Th•s way, your Highness.
Come they?
I my Lord.
My Lord d' Aumall, I am exceeding sorry,
That your own obstinacy to hold out,
Your mortal enmity against the King,
When Duke du Maine, and all the faction yielded,
Should force his wrath to use the rites of treason,
Upon the members of your senseless Statue,
Your Name and House, when he had lost your person,
Your love and duty.
That which men enforce
By their own wilfulness; they must endure
With willing patience, and without complaint.
I use not much impatience nor complaint.
Though it offends me much, to have my name
So blotted with addition of a Traitor.
And my whole memory, (with such despite,
Marked and begun to be so rooted out.)
It was despite that held you out so long,
Whose penance in the King was needful justice.
Come let vs seek our Duke, and take our leaves
Of th'Archdukes grace.
Here may we safely breathe?
No doubt (my Lord) no stranger knows this way▪
One•y the Arch-duke, and your friend Count Mansfield,
Perhaps may make their general scopes to you,
To utter some part of their private loves,
E•e your departure.
Then, I well perceive
To what th'intention of his highness tends;
For whose, and others here, most worthy Lords,
I will become (with all my worth) their servant,
In any office, but disloyalty;
Bu• that hath ever shout so foul a monster
To all my Ancestors, and my former life,
That now to entertain it; I must wholly
Give up my habit, in his contrary,
And strive to grow out of privation.
My Lord, to wear your loyal habit still,
When it is out of fashion; and hath done
Service enough; were rustic misery:
The habit of a servile loyalty,
Is reck•nd now amongst priuations,
With blindness, dumbness, deafness, silence, death,
All which are neither natures by themselves
Nor substances, but mere decays of form,
And absolute decisions of nature,
And so, it is nothing, what shall you then loose?
Your highness hath a habit in perfection,
And in desert of highest dignities,
Which carve your self, and be your own rewarder▪
No true power doth admit privation,
Adverse to him; or suffers any fellow
Ioynde in his subject; you, superiors;
It is the nature of things absolute.
One to destroy another; be your Highness,
Like those steep hills that will admit no clouds,
No dew•, nor lest fumes bound about their brows;
Because their tops pierce into purest ayre,
Expert of humour; or like ayre it self
That quickly changes; and receives the sun
Soon as he rises; every where dispersing
His royal splendour; guirds it in his beams,
And makes it self the body of the light;
Hot, shining, swift, light, and aspiring things,
Are of immortal, and celestial nature;
Cold, dark, dull, heavy of infernal fortunes,
And never aim at any happiness:
Your excellence knows; that simple loyalty,
Faith, love, sincerity, are but words, no things;
Merely devised for form; and as the Legate,
Sent from his Holiness, to frame a peace
Twixt Spain and Sauoy; laboured •eruently,
(For common ends, not for the Dukes particular)
To have him sign it; he again endeavours
(Not for the Legates pains, but his own pleasure)
To gratify him; and being at last encountered;
Where the flood Tesyn enters into Po,
They made a kind contention, which of them
Should enter th'others boat; one thrust the other:
One leg was over, and another in:
And with a fiery curtsy, at last
Sauoy leaps out, into the Legates arms,
And here ends all his love, and th'others labour;
So shall these terms, and impositions
Expressed before, hold nothing in themselves
Really good; but florishes of form:
And further then they make to private ends
None wise, or free, their proper use intends.
O it is a dangerous, and a dreadful thing
To steal prey from a Lyon; or to hide
A head distrustful, in his opened jaws;
To trust our blood in others veins; and hang
Twixt heaven and earth, in vapors of their breaths:
To leave a sure pace on continuate earth,
And force a gate in iumps, from tower to tower,
As they doe that aspire, from height to height;
The bounds of loyalty are made of glass,
Soon broke, but can in no date be repaird;
And as the Duke D'Aumall, (now here in Court)
Flying his country; had his Statue tome
Peece-meale with horses; all his goods confiscate,
His Arms of honour, kicked about the streets,
His goodly house at Annet raced to th'earth.
And (for a strange reproach of his foul treason)
His trees about it, cut off by their wastes;
So, when men fly the natural clime of truth,
And turn them-selues loose, out of all the bounds
Of Justice, and the straight-way to their ends;
Forsaking all the sure force in themselves
To seek, without them, that which is not theirs,
The forms of all their comforts are distracted;
The riches of their freedoms forfeited;
Their human nobles shamd; the Mansions
Of their cold spirits, eaten down with Cares;
And all their ornaments, of wit, and valor,
Learning, and judgment, cut from all their fruits.
O, here were now the richest prize in Europe,
Were he but taken in affection,
Would we might grow together, and be twins
Of eiders fortune; or that, still embraced
I were, but Ring to such a precious stone:
Your highness honours, and high bounty shown me,
Have won from me, my voluntary power;
And I must now move by your eminent will;
To what particular objects; if I know
By this mans intercession, he shall bring:
My uttermost answer, and perform betwixt vs,
Reciprocal and full intelligence.
Even for your own deserved royal good,
Tic joyfully accepted, use the loves
And worthy admirations of your friends,
That beget vows of all things you can wish,
And be what I wish: danger says, no more.
Your highness makes the light of this Court stoop,
With your so near departure, I was forced
To tender to your excellence, in brief,
This private wish in taking of my leave;
That in some army Royal, old Cont Mansfield,
Might be commanded by your matchless valour,
To the supremest point of v•ctorie:
Who vows for that renown all prayer, and service:
No more least I may wrong you.
Thank your Lordship.
All majesty be added to your highness,
Of which, I would not wish your breast to bear
More modest apprehension: then may tread,
The high gate of your spirit; and be known
To be a fit Bound for your Boundless valour;
So Orange wishes, and to the deserts
Of your great actions, their most royal Crown.
Away my Lord, the Lords enquire for you.
Would we might win his valour to our part.
Tic well prepared in his entreaty here;
With all states highest observations:
And to their form, and words are added gifts,
He was presented with two goodly horses,
One of which two, was the brave Beast Pastrana:
With plate of gold, and a much prized jewel;
Girdle and hangers, set with wealthy stones:
All which were valued, at ten thousand crowns;
The other Lords had suites of tapestry,
And chains of gold, and every gentleman
A pair of Spanish Gloves, and Rapire blades:
And here ends their entreaty; which I hope
Is the beginning of more good to vs,
Then twenty thousand times their gifts to them.
My Lord, I grieve that all the setting forth,
Of our best welcome, made you more retired:
Your chamber hath been more loved then our honours;
And therefore we are glad your time of parting
Is come to set you in the ayre you love:
Commend my service to his Majesty,
And tell him that this day of peace with him
Isle hold, as holy. All your pains my Lords
I shall be always glad to gratify
With any love and honour, your own hearts
Shall do me grace to wish expressed to you.
Here hath been strange demeanour, which shall fly,
To the great author of this Embassy.
Admit no entry, I will speak with none,
Good signior de Laffin, your worth shall find,
That I will make a jewel for my cabinet,
Of that the King (in surfeit of his store)
Hath cast out, as the sweepings of his hall;
I told him, having threatened you away,
That I did wonder, this small time of peace,
Could make him cast his armour so securely
In such as you, and as it were set the head
Of one so great in counsels, on his foot,
And pitch him from him with such guardlike strength.
He may perhaps find he hath pitched away,
The Axeltree that kept him on his wheels.
I told him so, I swear, in other terms
And not with too much note of our close loves
Least so he might have smoked our practises.
To choose his time, and spit his poison on me,
Through th'eares, and eyes of strangers.
So I told him
And more then that, which now I will not tell you:
It rests now then, Noble, and worthy friend,
That to our friendship, we draw Duke Byron,
To whose attraction there is no such chain,
As you can fordge, and shake out of your brain.
I have devised the fashion and the weight;
To valures hard to draw, we use retreates;
And, to pull shaftes home, (with a good bow-arme)
We thrust hard from vs: since he came from Flanders
He heard how I was threatened with the King,
And hath been much inquisitive to know
The truth of all, and seeks to speak with me;
The means he used, I answered doubtfully;
And with an intimation that I shunt him,
Which will (I know) put more spur to his charge;
And if his haughty stomach be prepared▪
With will to any act: for the aspiring
Of his ambitious aims, I make no doubt
But I shall work him to your highness wish.
But undertake it, and I rest assured:
You are reported to have skill in Magic,
And the events of things, at which they reach
That are in nature apt to overreach:
Whom the whole circkle of the present time,
In present pleasures, fortunes, knowledges,
Can not contain: those men (as broken loose
From human limits) in all violent ends
Would fine aspire the faculties of fiends,
And in such ayre breathe his unbounded spirits,
Which therefore well will fit such conjurations,
Attempt him then by flying; close with him,
And bring him home to vs, and take my dukedom.
My best in that, and all things, vows your service.
Thanks to my dear friend; and the French Vlisses.
Here is the man; my honoured friend, Laffin?
Alone, and heavy countinanc't? on what terms
Stood the insultation of the King upon you?
Why do you ask?
Since I would know the truth.
And when you know it; what?
Isle judge betwixt you,
And (as I may) make even the excess of either.
Ah las my Lord, not all your loyalty,
Which is in you, more then hereditary,
Nor all your valor (which is more then humane)
Can do the service you may hope on me
In sounding my displeased integrity;
Stand for the King, as much in policy
As you have stirred for him in deeds of arms,
And make your self his glory, and your countries
Till you bee sucked as dry, and wrought as leave,
As my stead carcase: you shall never close
With me, as you imagine.
You much wrong me,
To think me an intelligencing Lord.
I know not now your so affected zeal,
To be reputed a true hearted subject,
May stretch or turn you; I am desperate;
If I offend you, I am in your power:
I care not how I tempt your conquering fury,
I am predestined to too base an end,
To have the honour of your wrath destroy me;
And be a worthy object for your sword:
I lay my hand, and head too at your feet,
As I have ever, here I hold it still,
End me directly, doe not go about.
How strange is this? the shame of his disgrace
Hath made him lunatic.
Since the King hath wronged me
He thinks Isle hurt my self; no, no, my Lord:
I know that all the Kings in Christendom,
(If they should join in my revenge) would prove
Weak foes to him: still having you to friend:
If you were gone (I care not if you tell him)
I might be tempted then to right my self.
He has a will to me, and dares not show it,
His state decayed, and he disgraced; distracts him.
Change not my words my Lord, I only said
I might be tempted then to right my self:
Temptation to treason, is no treason;
And that word (tempted) was conditional too,
If you were gone, I pray inform the truth.
Stay injured man, and know I am your friend,
Far from these base, and mercenary reaches,
I am I swear to you.
You may be so;
And yet you'll give me leave to be Laffin,
A poor and expuate humour of the Court:
But what good blood came out with me; what veins
And sinews of the Triumphs, now it makes;
I list not vent; yet will I now confess,
And dare assume it; I have power to add
To all his greatness; and make yet more fixed
His bold security; Tell him this my Lord;
And this (if all the spirits of earth and air,
Be able to enforce) I can make good:
If knowledge of the sure events of things,
Even from the rise of subjects into Kings:
And falls of Kings to subjects hold a power
Of strength to work it; I can make it good;
And tell him this to; if in midst of winter
To make black Groves grow greene; to still the thunder;
And cast out able flashes from mine eyes,
To beat the lightning back into the skies,
Prove power to do it, I can make it good;
And tell him this too; if to lift the Sea
Up to the Stars, when all the Wind are still;
And keep it calm, when they are most enraged:
To make earths driest palms, sweat humorous springs
To make fixed rocks walk; and loose shadows stand,
To make the dead speak. midnight see the Sun,
Mid-daie turn mid-night; to dissolve all laws
Of nature, and of order, argue power
Able to work all, I can make all good,
And all this tell the King.
Tic more then strange,
To see you stand thus at the rapiers point
With one so kind and sure a friend as I.
Who cannot friend himself, is foe to any,
And to be feared of all, and that is it,
Makes me so skornd, but make me what you can;
Never so wicked, and so full of feends,
I never yet, was traitor to my friends:
The laws of friendship I have ever held,
As my religion; and for other laws;
He is a fool that keeps them with more care,
Then they keep him, safe, rich, and popular:
For riches, and for popular respects
Take them amongst ye Minions, but for safety,
You shall not find the least flaw in mine arms,
To pierce or taint me; what will great men be,
To please the King, and bear authority.
How fic a tort were this to hansell fortune?
And I will win it though I loose my self,
Though he prove harder then Egiptian Marble,
Isle make him malleable, as th'Ophyr gold;
I am put off from this dull shore of East,
Into industrious, and high-going Seas;
Where, like Pelides in Scamanders flood,
Up to the ears in surges, I will fight,
And pluck French Ilion underneath the waives;
If to be highest still, be to be best,
All works to that end are the worthiest:
Truth is a golden Ball, cast in our way,
To make vs stripped by falsehood: And as Spain
When the hot scuffles of Barbarian arms,
Smothered the life of Don Sebastian,
To guild the leaden rumour of his death
Gave for a slaughterd body (held for his)
A hundred thousand crowns; caused all the state
Of superstitious Portugal to morn
And celebrate his solemn funerals;
The Moors to conquest, thankful feasts prefer,
And all made with the carcass of a Switzer:
So in the Giant like, and politic wars
Of barbarous greatness, raging still in peace,
Shows to aspire just objects; are laid on
With cost, with labour, and with form enough,
Which only makes our best acts brooke the light,
And their ends had, we think we have their right,
So wurst works are made good, with good success,
And so for Kings, pay subjects carcases.
Was he so courted?
As a City Dame,
Brought by her jealous husband, to the Court,
Some elder Courtiers entertaining him,
While others snatch, a favour from his wife:
One starts from this door; from that nook another,
With gifts, and junkets, and with printed phrase,
Steal her employment, shifting place by place
Still as her husband comes: so Duke Byron
Was wood, and worshipped in the Arch-dukes Court,
And as th'assistants that your Majesty,
Joint in Commission with him, or my self▪
Or any other doubted eye appeared,
He ever vanished: and as such a dame,
As we compared with him before, being wun
To break faith to her husband, loose her fame,
Stain both their progenies, and coming fresh
From underneath the burden of her shame,
Visits her husband with as chaste a brow,
As temperate, and confirmed behaviour,
As she came quited from confession.
So from his scopes, would he present a presence,
The practise of his state adultery,
And guilt that should a graceful bosom streak,
Drowned in the set lake, of a hopeless cheek.
It may be hee dissembled, or suppose,
He be a little tainted: men whom virtue
Forms with the stuff of fortune great, and gracious,
Must needs partake with fortune in her humour
Of instability: and are like to shafts
Grown crooked with standing, which to rectify,
Must twice as much be bowd another way,
He that hath borne wounds for his worthy parts,
Must for his wurst be borne with: we must fit
Our government to men, as men to it:
In old time, they that hunted savage beasts,
Are said to clothe themselves in savage skins,
They that were Fowlers when they went on fowling,
Wore garments made with wings resembling Fowls:
To Bulls, we must not show our selves in red,
Nor to the warlike Elephant in white,
In all things governed, their infirmities
Must not be stirred, nor wrought on; Duke Byron
Flows with adust, and melancholy choler,
And melancholy spirits are venomous:
Not to be touched, but as they may be cured:
I therefore mean to make him change the ayre,
And send him further from those Spanish vapors,
That still bear fighting sulphur in their breasts,
To breath a while in temperate English ayre,
Where lips are spyc•d with free and loyal counsels,
Where policies are not rumous, but saving;
Wisdom is simple, valor righteous▪
Human, and hating facts of brutish forces
And whose grave natures, scorn the scoffs of France,
The empty complements of Italy,
The any-way encroaching pride of Spain,
And love men modest, hearty, just and plain.
Isle sound him for Byron; and what I find,
In the Kings depth; isle draw up, and inform,
In excitations to the Dukes revolt,
When next I meet with him.
It must be done
With praising of the Duke; from whom the king
Will take to give himself; which told the Duke,
Will take his heart up into all ambition.
I know it (politic friend:) and tic my purpose,
Your Majesty hath mist a royal sight,
The Duke Byron▪ on his brave beast Pastrana,
Who sits him like a full-saild Argosea,
Danced with a lofty billow, and as s•ug
Plies to his bearer, both their motions mixed;
And being considerd in their site together,
They do the best present the state of man,
In his first royalty ruling; and of beasts
In their first loyalty serving; one commanding,
And no way being moved; the other serving,
And no way being compelled; of all the sights
That ever my eyes witnessed; and they make
A doctrinal and witty Hierogliphick,
O• a blessed kingdom: to express and teach,
Kings to command as they could serve, and subjects
To serve as if they had power to command.
You are a good old horseman I perceive,
And still out all the use of that good part:
Your wit is of the true Pierean spring,
That can make any thing, of any thing.
So brave a subject as the Duke, no king
Seated on earth, can vent of but your Highness,
So valiant, loyal, and so great in service.
No question he sets valour in his height,
And hath done service to an equal pitch,
Fortune attending him with fit events,
To all his venturous and well-laid attempts.
Fortune? to him was Iuno, to Alcides,
For when, or where did she but open way,
To any act of his? what stone took he
With her help or without his own lost blood?
What sort wan he by her? or was not forced?
What victory but gainstods? on what Commander
Sleepy or negligent, did he ever cha•ge?
What Summer ever made she fai•e to him?
What winter, not of one continued storm?
Fortune is so far from his Creditresse,
That she owes him much; for in him, her looks
Are lovely, modest, and magnanimous,
Constant, victorious; and in his Achieuments,
Her cheeks are drawn out with a virtuous redness,
Out of his eager spirit to victory,
And chaste contention to convince with honour;
And (I have heard) his spirits have flowd so high,
In all his conflicts against any odds,
That (in his charge) his lips have bled with teruor:
How served he at your famous siege of Dreux?
Where the enemy (assured of victory)
Drew out a body of four thousand horse,
And twice six thousand foot, and like a Crescent,
Stood for the signal, you: (that showed your self
A sound old soldier) thinking it not fit
To give your enemy the odds, and honour
Of the first stroke, commanded de la Guiche,
To let f••e all his cannans, that did pierse
The adieu•rs thickest squadrons, and had shot
Nine volleys ere the foe had once given fire:
Your troop was charged, and when your dukes old father,
Met with th'affailants, and their Grove of Reiters
Repulsed so fiercely, made them turn their beards
And rally up themselves behind their troops;
Fresh forces seeing your troops a little severed,
From that part first assaulted, gave it charge,
Which then, this duke made good, seconds his father,
Beats through and through the enemies greatest strength,
And breaks the rest like Billows against a rock
And there the heart of that huge battle broke.
The heart but now came on, in that strong body,
Of twice two thousand horse, lead by Du Maine
Which (if I would be glorious) I could say
I first encountered.
How did he take in,
Bean in view of that invincible army
Lead by the Lord great Constable of Castle?
Autun, and Nuis: in Burgundy chaste away,
Vicount l'auannes troops before Dijon,
And puts himself in, and there that was won.
If you would only give me leave my Lord,
I would do right to him, yet must not give.
A league from Fountain Francois, when you sent him,
To make discovery of the Castle army,
When he discerned it was it (with wondrous wisdom
Joint to his spirit) he seemed to make retreat,
But when they pressed him, and the Baron of Lux,
Set on their charge so hotly, that his horse,
Was slain, and he most dangerously engaged,
Then turned your brave duke head, and (with such ease
As doth an Echo beat back violent sounds,
With their own forces) he, (as if a wall
Start suddenly before them) poshed them all
Flat, as the earth, and there was that field won.
Y•are all the field wide.
O, I ask you pardon,
The strength of that field yet lay in his back,
Upon the foes part; and what is to come.
Of this your Marshal, now your worthy Duke
Is much beyond the rest: for now he sees
A sort of horse troops, issue from the woods,
In number ne'er twelve hunderd: and retiring
To tell you that the entire army followed,
Before he could relate it, he was force•t
To turn head, and receive the maine assault
Of five horse troops: only with twenty horse:
The first he met, he tumbled to the earth,
And brake through all, not daunted with two wounds,
One on his head, another on his breast,
The blood of which, drowned all the field in doubt:
Your majesty himself was then engaged,
Your power not yet arrived, and up you brought
The little strength you had: a cloud of foes,
Ready to burst in storms about your ears:
Three squadrons rushed against you, and the first,
You took so fiercely, that, you beat their thoughts
Out of their bosoms, from the urged fight:
The second, all amazed you overthrew,
The third dispersed, with five and twenty horse
Left of the fourscore that pursuit the chase:
And this brave conquest, now your Marshall seconds
Against two squadrons, but with fifty horse,
One after other he defeats them both,
And made them run, like men whose heals were tripped,
And pitch their heads, in their great generals lap:
And him he sets on, as he had been shot
Out of a Cannan: beats him into route,
And as a little brooke being overrun
With a black torrent; that bears all things down,
His fury overtakes, his fomy back,
Loded with Cattail, and with stackes of Corn,
And makes the miserable Ploughmen morn;
So was du Maine surchardgd, and so Byron
Flow d over all his forces; every drop
Of his lost blood, bought with a worthy man;
And, only with a hundred Gentlemen
He won the place, from fifteen hundred horse;
He won the place?
On my word, so tic said:
Fie you have been extremely misinformed.
I only tell your highness what I heard,
I was not there; and though I have been rude,
With wonder of his valour, and presume•d,
To keep his merit in his full carer,
Not hearing you, when yours made such a thunder;
Pardon my fault, since it was t'extoll your servant;
But, is it not most true, that twixt ye both,
So few achiu'd, the conquest of so many?
It is a truth, must make me ever thankful.
But not performed by him, was not I there?
Commanded him, and in the maine assault,
Made him but second?
Hoe's the capital soldier,
That lives this day in holy Christendom,
Except your highness, always except Plato.
We must not give to one, to take from many,
For (not to praise our countrymen) here served,
The General My Lore. Norris, sent from England:
As great a captain as the world affords:
One fit to lead, and fight for Christendom;
Of more experience; and of stronger brain;
As valiant for abiding; In Command,
On any sudden; upon any ground
And in the form of all occasions
As ready, and as profitably, dauntless;
And hear was then another; Colonel Williams,
A worthy Captain; and more like the Duke,
Because he was less temperate then the General;
And being familiar with the man you praise,
(Because he knew him haughty and incapable,
Of all comparison) would compare with him,
And hold his swelling valour to the mark,
Justice had set in him, and not his will:
And as in open vessels filled with water,
And on men's shoulders borne, they put treene cups,
To keep the wild and slippery element,
From washing over: follow all his Sways
And tickle aptness to exceed his bounds,
And at the Brim contain him: so this knight,
Swum in Byron, and held him, but to right.
But leave these hot comparisons, hoe's mine own,
And then what I possess, Isle more be known,
All this shall to the duke, I fished for this.
A fained passion in his hearing now,
(Which he thinks I perceive not) making conscience,
Of the revolt that he hath vrdgd to me,
Which now he means to prosecute would sound,
How deep he stands affected with that scruple.
As when the Moon hath comforted the Night,
And set the world in silver of her light,
The Planets, Asterisims and whole state of Heaven,
In beams of gold descending; all the winds,
Bound up in caves, charged not to drive abroad,
Their cloudy heads; an universal peace,
Proclaimed in silence of the quiet earth.
Soon as her hot and dry fumes are let loose,
Storms and clouds mixing; suddenly put out.
The eyes of all those glories: The creation,
Turned into Chaos, and we then desire,
For all our joy of life, the death of sleep;
So when the glories of our lives, men's loves,
Clear consciences, our fems, and loyalties,
That did vs worthy comfort, are eclipsed,
Grief and disgrace invade vs; and for all,
Our night of life besides, our Misery craves,
Dark earth would op and hide vs in our graves,
How Strange is this?
What? did your highness hear?
Both heard and wonderd, that your wit and spirit.
And proffit in experience of the slaueries,
Imposed on vs; in those mere politic terms,
Of love, fame, loyalty, can be carried up,
To such a height of ignorant conscience;
Of cowardice, and dissolution,
In all the free-borne powers of royal man▪
You that have made way through all the guards,
Of Ielouse State; and seen on both your sides,
The pikes points chardging heaven to let you pass,
Will you, (in flying with a Scrupulous wing,
Aboue those pikes to heauen-ward) fall on them?
This is like men, that (spirited with wine,)
Pass dangerous places safe; and die for fear,
With only thought of them, being simply sober;
We must (in passing to our wished ends,
Through things called good and bad) be like the ayre,
That evenly interposd betwixt the seas,
And the opposed Element of fire;
At either touches, but partakes with neither;
Is neither hot, nor cold, but with a slight.
And harmless temper mixed of both the exstreames;
Tic shrode.
There is no truth of any good
To be discerned on earth: and by conversion,
Nought therefore simply bad: But as the stuff,
Prepared for Arras pictures, is no Picture,
Till it be formed, and man hath cast the beams,
Of his imaginouse fancy through it,
In forming ancient Kings and conquerors,
As he conceives they looked, and were attired,
Though they were nothing so: so all things here,
Have all their price set down, from men's concepts,
Which make all terms and actions, good, or bad,
And are but pliant, and wel-coloured threads,
Put into fained images of truth:
To which, to yield, and kneel, as truth pure kings,
That pulled vs down with clear truth of their Ghospell,
Were Superstition to be hist to hell.
Believe it▪ this is reason;
It is the saith,
Of reason and of wisdom.
You persuade,
As if you could create: what man can shun,
The searches, and compressions of your graces.
We must have these lures when we hawk for friends,
And wind about them like a subtle River,
That (seeming only to run on his course)
Doth search yet, as he runs; and still finds out,
The easiest parts of entry on the shore;
Gliding so slyly by, as scarce it touched,
Yet still eats some thing in it: so must those,
That have large fields, and currants to dispose.
Come, let vs ioyue our streams, we must run far.
And have but little time: The duke Sauoy,
Is shortly to be gone, and I must needs,
Make you well known to him,
But hath your highness,
Some enterprise of value joined with him?
With him and greater persons?
I will creep.
Upon my bosom in your Princely service,
Vouch-safe to make me known. I hear there lives not,
So kind, so bounty full, and wise a Prince,
But in your own excepted excellence.
He shall both know, and love you: are you mine?
I take the honour of it, on my knee,
And hope to quite it with your Majesty.
La Fin, is in the right; and will obtain;
He draws with his weight; and like a plummet
That sways a door, with falling of, pulls after,
Thus will Laffin be brought a Stranger to you,
By him he leads; he conquers that is conquered,
Thats sought, as hard to win, that sues to be won.
But is my Painter warned to take his picture.
When he shall see me, and present Laffin?
He is (my Lord) and (as your highness willed)
All we will press about him▪ and admire,
The royal promise of his rare aspect,
As if he heard not.
Twill inflame him.
Such tricks the Arch-duke used to extol his greatness,
Which complements though plain men hold absurd,
And a mere remedy for desire of Greatness.
Yet great men use them; as they eat Potatoes,
High Coollises, and potions to excite
The lust of their ambition: and this Duke;
You know is noted in his natural garb
Extremely glorious; who will therefore bring
An appetite expecting such a bait;
He comes, go instantly, and fetch the Painter.
All honour to your heighnesse,
Tic most true▪
All honours flow to me, in you their Ocean;
As welcome worthiest duke, as if my marquisate,
Were circkl'd with you in these amorous arms;
I sorrow Sir I could not bring it with me▪
That I might so supply the fruitless complement,
Of only visiting your excellence,
With which the king now sends me to entertain you,
Which notwithstanding doth confer this good,
That it hath given me some small time to show,
My gratitude for the many secret bounties,
I have (by this your Lord Ambassador)
Felt from your heighnesse and in short, to assure you,
That all my most deserts are at your service.
Had the king sent me by you half his kingdom,
It were not half so welcome;
For defect.
Of whatsoever in my self, (my Lord,)
I here commend to your most Princely Service
This honoured friend of mine;
Your name I pray you Sir.
Laffin, my Lord
Laffin? Is this the man,
That you so recommended to my Love?
The same my Lord,
You're next my Lord the duke,
The most desired of all men. O my Lord,
The King and I, have had a mighty conflict,
About your conflicts, and your matchless worth,
In military virtues; which I put
In Balance with the continent of France,
In all the peace and fasty it enjoys.
And made even weight with all he could put in
Of all men's else; and of their own deserts,
Of all men's else? would he weigh other men's,
With my deservings,
I upon my life,
The English General, the Mylor' Norris,
That served amongst you here, he paralleled
With you, at all parts, and in some preferred him,
And Colonel Williams (a Welch Colonel)
He made a man, that at your most contained you:
Which the Welch Herald of their praise, the Cuckoo.
Would scarce have put, in his monology,
In jest, and said with reverence to his merits,
With reverence? Reverence skornes him: by the spoil,
Of all her Merits in me, he shall rue it;
Did ever Curtian Gullffe play such a part?
Had Curtius been so used, if he had brook't,
That rauenons whirlepoole, port his solide spirits,
Through earth dissolved sinews, stopped her veins,
And rose with saved Rome, upon his back,
As I swum pools of fire, and Gulfs of brass,
To save my country? thrust this venturous arm,
Beneath her ruins; took her on my neck,
And set her safe on her appeased shore?
And ops the king, a fouler bog then this,
In his so rotten bosom, to devour
Him that deuourd, what else had swalloed him
In a detraction, so with spite embrewed,
And drown such good in such ingratitude?
My spirit as yet, but stooping to his rest,
Shines hotly in him, as the Sun in clouds,
Purpled, and made proud with a peaceful Even:
But when I thoroughly set to him; his cheeks,
Will (like those clouds) forgo their colour quite,
And his whole blaze, smoke into endless night,
Nay nay, we must have no such gall my Lord,
O'reflow our friendly live•s: my relation,
Only delivers my inflamed zeal
To your religious merits; which me thinks,
Should make your highness canonizd, a Saint.
What had his arms been▪ without my arm,
That with his motion, made the whole field move?
And this held up, we still had victory.
When over charged with number, his few friends,
Retired amazed, I set them on assured,
And what rude ruin seas'd on I confirmed;
When I left leading, all his army reeled,
One fell on other foul, and as the Cyclop
That having lost his eye, struck every way,
His blows directed to no certain scope;
Or as the soul departed from the body,
The body wants coherence in his parts,
Can not consist, but sever, and dissolve;
So I removed once, all his armies shook,
Panted, and fainted, and were ever flying,
Like wandering pulses sper•t through bodies dying,
It cannot be denied, tic all so true,
That what seems arrogance, is desert in you,
What monstrous humours feed a Princes blood,
Being bad to good men, and to bad men good?
Well let these contradictions pass (my lord,)
Till they be reconciled, or put in form,
By power given to your will, and you present,
The fashion of a prefect government;
In mean space but a word, we have small time,
To spend in private, which I wish may be
With all advantage taken; Lord Laffin.
First not a face of excellent presentment,
Though not so amorous with pure white, and red,
Yet is the whole proportion singular;
That ever I beheld,
It hath good lines,
And tracts drawn through it: The purfle, rare,
I heard the famous and right learned Earl,
And Archbishop of Lions Peirse Pinac,
Who was reported to have wondrous Judgment
In men's events, and natures, by their looks:
(Upon his death bed, visited by this duke)
He told his sister, when his grace was gon,
That he had never yet observed a face,
Of worse presage then this: and I will swear,
That (something seen in Physiognomy)
I do not find in all the rules he gives
One slendrest blemish tending to mishap,
But (on the opposite part) as we may see,
On trees late blossomd, when all frosts are past,
How they are taken and what will be fruit:
So, on this tree of Scepters, I discern
How it is laden with appearances,
Rules answering Rules; and glances, crowned with glances;
What, does he take my picture?
I my Lord.
Your Highness will excuse me; I will give you
My likeness put in Statue, not in picture;
And by a Statuary of mine own,
That can in Brass express the wit of man,
And in his form, make all men see his virtues:
Others that with much strictness imitate,
The some-thing stooping carriage of my neck,
The voluble, and mild radiance of mine eyes,
Never observe my Masculine aspect,
And Lyon-like instinct, it shaddoweth:
Which Envy cannot say, is flattery:
And I will have my Image promised you,
Cut in such matter, it shall ever last;
Where it shall stand, fixed with eternal roots,
And with a most vnmooued gravity;
For I will have the famous mountain Oros,
That looks out of the Duchy where I govern,
(Into your highness Dukedom) first made yours,
And then with such inimitable art
Expressed and handled; chiefly from the place
Where most conspicuously, he shows his face,
That though it keep the true form of that hill
In all his longitudes, and latitudes,
His height, his distances, and full proportion,
Yet shall it clearly bear my counterfeit,
Both in my face and all my lineaments:
And every man shall say, this is Byron.
Within my left hand, I will hold a City,
Which is the City Amiens; at whose siege
I served so memorably: from my right,
Isle power an endless flood, into a Sea
Raging beneath me; which shall intimate
My ceaseless service, drunk up by the King
As the Ocean drinks up rivers, and makes all
Bear his proud title; Ivory, Brass and Goulde,
That thieves may purchase; and be bought and sold,
Shall not be used about me; lasting worth
Shall only set the duke of Byron forth;
O that your statuary could express you,
With any nerenesse to your own instructions;
That statue would I prise past all the jewels
Within my cabinet of Beatrice,
The memory of my Grandam Portugal;
Most royal duke: we can not lunge endure
To be thus private, let vs then conclude,
With this great resolution: that your wisdom,
Will not forget to cast a pleasing veil
Over your anger; that may hide each glance,
Of any notice taken of your wrong,
And show your self the more obsequious.
Tic but the virtue of a little patience,
There are so oft attempts made against his person,
That sometimes they may speed, for they are palnts
That spring the more for cutting, and at last
Will cast their wished shadow; mark ere long,
See who comes here my Lord, as now no more,
Now must we turn out stream another way;
My Lord, I humbly thank his majesty,
That he would grace my idle time spent here
With entertainment of your princely person;
Which, worthily, he keeps for his own bosom.
My Lord, the duke Nemours? and Count Soisson?
Your honours have been bountifully done me
In often visitation: let me pray you,
To see some jewels now, and help my choice:
In making up a present for the King.
Your highness shall much grace vs.
I am doubtful
That I have much incensed the duke Byron,
With praising the Kings worthiness in arms
So much past all men.
He deserves it, highly.
What wrongs are these, laid on me by the King,
To equal others words in war, with mine;
Endure this, and be turned into his Moil
To bear his sumptures: honoured friend be true,
And we will turn these torrents, hence.
Why suffer you that ill aboding vermin,
To breed so near your bosom? bee assured,
His hints are ominous, not the throats of Ravens,
Spent on infected house•; holes of dogs,
When no sound stirs, at mid-night; apparitions,
And strokes of spirits, clad in blackmens shapes:
Or ugly women's: the adverse decrees
Of constellations, no• security,
In vicious peace, are surer fatal ushers
Of female mischiefs, and mortallities,
Then this prodigious feend is, where he fawns:
La fiend, and not Laffin, he should be called.
Be what he will, men in themselves entire,
March safe with naked feet on coals of fire:
I build not outward, nor depend on proppes,
Nor choose my consort by the common ear:
Nor by the Moone-shine, in the grace of Kings:
So rare are true deservers, loved or known,
That men loved vulgarely, are ever none:
Nor men graced servilely, for being spots
In Princes trains, though borne even with their crowns;
The Stalion power, hath such a beesome tail,
That it sweeps all from justice, and such filth
He bears out in it, that men mere exempt,
Are merely clearest men will shortly buy
Friends from the prison, or the pillory,
Rather then honours markets. I fear none,
But foul Ingratitude, and Detraction,
In all the brood of villainy.
No? not treason?
Be circumspect, for to a credulous eye,
He comes invisible, veiled with flattery,
And flatereis look like friends, as Wolves, like Dogs.
And as a glorious Poem fronted well
With many a goodly Herald of his praise,
So far from hate of praises to his face,
That he prays men to praise him, and they ride
Before, with trumpets in their mouths, proclaiming
Life to the holy fury of his lines:
All drawn, as if with one eye he had leerd,
On his loved hand, and led it by a rule;
That his plumes only Imp the Muses wings,
He sleeps with them, his head is napt with bays,
His lips break out with Nectar, his tunde feet
Are of the great last, the perpetual motion,
And he puffed with their empty breath believes
Full merit, eased those passions of wind,
Which yet serve, but to praise, and cannot merit,
And so his fury in their ayre expires:
So de Laffin, and such corrupted Heralds,
Hired to encorage, and to glorify
May force what breath they will into their cheeks
Fitter to blow up bladders, then full men:
Yet may puff men to, with persuasions
That they a•e Gods in worth; and may rise Kings
With treading on their noises; yet the worthiest,
From only his own worth receives his spirit
And right is worthy bound to any merit;
Which right, shall you have ever; leave him then,
He follows none but marked▪ and wretched men;
And now for England you shall go my lord,
Our Lord Ambassador to that matchless Queen;
You never had a voyage of such pleasure
Honour, and worthy objects: Ther's a Queen
Where nature keeps her state, and state her Court,
Wisdom her study, Conntinence her fort,
Where Magnanimity, Humanity:
Firmness in counsel and integrity:
Grace to her porest subjects: Majesty
To awe the greatest, have respects divine,
And in her each part, all the virtues shine.
Enjoy your will a while, I may have mine.
Wherefore (before I part to this embassage)
Isle be resolved by a Magician
That dwells hereby, to whom isle go disguised,
And show him my births figure, set before:
By one of his profession, of the which
Isle crave his judgment, feigning I am sent
From some great personage, whose nativity,
He wishes should be concurred by his skill.
But on go my plots, be it good or ill.
This hour by all rules of Astrology,
Is dangerous to my person, if not deadly.
How hapless is our knowledge to fore-tel
And not be able to prevent a mischief,
O the strange difference twixt vs and the stars:
They work with inclinations strong and fatal
And nothing know; and we know all there working
And nought can do, or nothing can prevent?
Rude ignorance is beastly, knowledge wretched:
The heavenly powers envy what they Enjoin:
We are commanded t'imitate there natures,
In making all our ends eternity:
And in that imitation we are plagued,
And worse then they esteemed, that have no souls,
But in their nostrils, and like beasts expire;
As they do that are ignorant of arts,
By drowning there eternal parts in sense,
And sensual affectations: while wee live
Our good parts take away, the more they give.
The forts that favourites hold in Princes hearts,
In common subjects loves; and their own strengths
Are not so sure, and vnexpugnable,
But that the more they are presumed upon,
The more they fail; daily and hourly proof,
Tells vs prosperity is at highest degree
The founte and handle of calamity:
Like dust before a whirlwind those men fly,
That prostrate on the grounds of fortune lye:
And being great (like trees that broadest sproyte)
Their own top-heauy state grubs up their root.
These apprehensions startle all my powers,
And arm them with suspicion against them-selues,
In my late proiects; I have cast my self
Into the arms of others; and will see
It they will let me fall; or toss me up
Into th'affected compass of a throne,
God save you sir.
You're welcome friend: what would you?
I would entreat you, for some crowns I bring,
To give your judgment of this figure cast.
To know by his nativity there seen;
What sort of end the person shall endure,
Who sent me to you, and whose birth it is.
Isle herein do my best, in your desire;
The man is raised out of a good descent,
And nothing older then your self I think;
Is it not you?
I will not tell you that:
But tell me on what end he shall arrive.
My son, I see, that he whose end is cast
In this set figure, is of Noble parts,
And by his military valor raised,
To princely honours; and may be a king,
But that I see a Caput Algol here,
That hinders it I fear.
A Caput Algol?
What's that I pray?
Forbear to ask me, son,
You bid me speak, what fear bids me conceal.
You have no cause to fear, and therefore speak.
You'll rather wish you had been ignorant,
Then be instructed in a thing so ill.
Ignorance is an idle salve for ill,
And therefore do not urge me to enforce,
What I would freely know: for by the skill
Shown in thy aged haytes, isle lay thy brain
Here scattered at my feet, and seek in that,
What safely thou must utter with thy tongue,
If thou deny it.
Will you not allow me
To hold my peace? what less can I desire?
If not, be pleased with my constrained speech.
Was ever man yet punished for expressing
What he was charged? be free, and speak the wurst.
Then briefly this; the man hath lately done
An action that will make him loose his head.
Cursed be thy throat &amp; soul, Raven, Shriech-owle, hag.
O hold, for heavens sake hold.
Hold on, I will,
Vault, and contractor of all horrid sounds,
Trumpet of all the miseries in hell,
Of my confusions; of the shameful end
Of all my services; witch, fiend, accursed
For ever be the poison on thy tongue,
And let the black sum of thy venomed breath,
Infect the ayre, shrink heaven, put out the stars,
And rain so fell and blew a plague on earth,
That all the world may falter with my fall.
Pity my age, my Lord.
Out prodigy,
Remedy of pity, mine of flint,
Whence with my nails and feet, isle dig enough,
Horror, and savage cruelty, to build
Temples to Massacre: dam of devils take thee,
Had thou no better end to crown my parts.
The Bulls of Colchos, nor his triple neck,
That howls out Earthquakes; the most mortal vapors,
That ever stifled and struck dead the fowls,
That flew at never such a sightly pitch,
Could not have burnt my blood so.
I told truth,
And could have flatterd you.
O that thou had;
Would I had given thee twenty thousand crowns
That thou had flatterd me: there's no joy on earth,
Never so rational, so pure, and holy,
But is a Easter, Parasite, a Whore,
In the most worthy parts, with which they please,
A drunkenness of foul, and a disease.
I knew you not.
Peace dog of Pluto, peace,
Thou knew my end to come, not me here present:
Pox of your halting humane knowledges;
O death! how far off hast thou kilt? how soon
A man may know too much though never nothing?
Spite of the Stars, and all Astrology,
I will not loose my head: or 〈◊〉 I do,
A hundred thousand heads shall off before.
I am a nobler substance them the Stars,
And shall the baser ouer-rule the better?
Or are they better, since they are the bigger?
I have a will, and faculties of choice,
To do, or not to do: and reason why,
I doe, or not doe this; the sty•res have none,
They know not why they shine, more then this Taper,
Nor how they work, nor what: isle change my course,
Isle peece-meale pull, the frame of all my thoughts,
And cast my will into another mould:
And where are all your Caput Algols then?
Your Planets all, being underneath the earth,
At my nativity: what can they doe?
Malignant in aspects? in bloody houses?
Wilde fire consume them; one poor cup of wine,
More then I use, that my weak brain will bear,
Shall make them drunk and reel out of their spheres,
For any certain act they can enforce.
O that mine arms were wings, that I might fly,
And pluck out of their hearts, my destiny!
Isle wear those golden Spurs upon my heals,
And kick at fate; be free all worthy spirits,
And stretch your selves, for greatness and for height:
Untruss your slaueries, you have height enough,
Beneath this steep heaven to use all your reaches,
It is too far off, to let you, or respect you.
Give me a spirit that on this lifes rough sea,
Loves t'haue his sails filled with a lusty wind,
Even till his Sayle-yeards tremble; his Masts crack,
And his rapt ship run on her side so lowe
That she drinks water, and her keel plowes ayre;
There is no danger to a man, that knows
What life and death is: there's not any law,
Exceeds his knowledge; neither is it lawful
That he should stoop to any other law.
He goes before them, and commands them all,
That to him-selfe is a law rational.
The duke of Byron is returned from England,
And (as they say) was Princely entertained,
Schooled by the matchless Queen there, who I hear
Spake most divinely; and would gladly hear,
Her speech reported.
I can serve your turn,
As one that speaks from others not from her,
And thus it is reported at his parting,
THus Monsieur Du Byron you have beheld,
Our Court proportioned to our little kingdom.
In every entertainment; yet our mind,
To do you all the rites of your repair,
Is as unbounded as the ample ayre.
What idle pains have you bestowed to see
A poor old woman? who in nothing lives
More, then in true affections, borne your king;
And in the perfect knowledge she hath learned,
Of his good knights, and servants of your sort.
We thank him that he keeps the memory
Of vs and all our kindness; but must say,
That it is only kept; and not laid out
To such affectionate profit as we wish;
Being so much set on fire with his deserts,
That they consume vs; not to be restored
By your presentment of him; but his person;
And we had thought, that he whose virtues fly
So beyond wonder, and the reach of thought,
Should check at eight hours sail, and his high spirit
That stoops to fear, less then the Poles of heaven;
Should doubt an under billow of the Sea,
And (being a Sea) be sparing of his streams;
And I must blame all you that may advise him;
That (having helped him through all martial dangers)
You let him stick, at the kind rites of peace,
Considering all the forces I have sent,
To set his martial seas up in firm walls,
On both his sides for him to pass at pleasure;
Did plainly open him a guarded way
And led in Nature to this friendly shore,
But here is nothing worth his personal sight,
Here are no walled Cities; for that Crystal
Sheds with his light, his hardness, and his height
About our thankful person, and our Realm;
Whose only aid, we ever yet desired;
And now I see, the help we sent to him,
Which should have swum to him in our own blood,
Had it been needful; (our affections
Being more given to his good, then he himself)
Ends in the actual right it did his state,
And ours is slighted; all our worth is made,
The common-stock, and bank; from whence are served
All men's occasions; yet (thanks to heaven)
Their gratitudes are drawn dry; not our bounties.
And you shall tell your King, that he neglects
Old friends for new; and sets his soothed Ease
Aboue his honour; Marshals policy
In rank before his justice; and his profit
Before his royalty: his humanity gone,
To make me no repaiment of mine own.
What answered the Duke?
In this sort.
Your highness sweet speech hath no sharper end,
Then he would wish his life; if he neglected,
The least grace you have named; but to his wish,
Much power is wanting: the greene roots of war,
Not yet so close cut up, but he may dash
Against their relics to his utter ruin,
Without more near eyes, fixed upon his feet,
Then those that look out of his countries soil,
And this may well excuse his personal presence,
Which yet he oft hath longed to set by yours:
That he might imitate the Majesty,
Which so long peace hath practiced, and made full,
In your admired appearance; to illustrate
And rectify his habit in rude war.
And his will to be here, must needs be great,
Since heaven hath throned so true a royalty here,
That he thinks no king absolutely crowned,
Whose temples have not stood beneath this sky,
And whose height is not hardened with these stars,
Whose influences for this altitude,
Distild, and wrought in with this temperate ayre,
And this division of the Element
Have with your reign, brought: forth more worthy spirits,
For counsel, valour, height of wit, and art,
Then any other region of the earth:
Or were brought forth to all your ancestors,
And as a cunning Orator, reserues
His fairest similes, best-adorning figures,
Chief matter, and most moving arguments
For his conclusion; and doth then supply
His ground-streames laid before, glides over them,
Makes his full depth seen through; and so takes up,
His audience in Aplawses past the clouds.
So in your government, conclusiue nature,
(Willing to end her Excellence in earth
When your foot shall be set upon the stars)
Shows all her Sovereign Beauties, Ornaments,
Virtues, and Raptures; overtakes her works
In former Empires, makes them but your foils,
Swells to her full Sea, and again doth drown
The world, in admiration of your crown.
He did her (at all parts) confessed right.
She took it yet, but as a part of Court-ship,
And said, he was the subtle Orator,
To whom he did too gloriously resemble,
Nature in her, and in her government,
He said, he was no Orator, but a Soldier,
More then this ayre, in which you breath hath made me,
My studious love, of your rare government,
And simple truth, which is most eloquent,
Your Empire is so amply absolute,
That even your Theaters show more comely rule,
True nobles, royalty, and happiness
Then others courts: you make all state before
Utterly obsolete; all to come, twice sod.
And therefore doth my royal Sovereign wish
Your years may prove, as vital, as your virtues,
That (standing on his Turrets this way turned,
Ordering and fixing his affairs by yours)
He may at last, on firm grounds, pass your Seas,
And see that Maiden-sea of Majesty,
In whose chaste arms, so many kingdoms lye.
When came she to her touch of his ambition?
In this speech following, which I thus remember.
If I hold any merit worth his presence,
Or any part of that, your Courtship gives me,
My subjects have bestowed it; some in counsel,
In action some, and in obedience all;
For none knows, with such proof as you my Lord,
How much a subject may renown his Prince,
And how much Princes of their subjects hold;
In all the services that ever subject
Did for his Sovereign; he that best deserved
Must (in comparison) except, Byron;
And to win this prise clear; without the maims
Commonly given men by ambition,
When all their parts lye open to his view,
Shows continence, past their other excellence,
But for a subject to affect a kingdom,
Is like the Cammell, that of Jove begged horns,
And such mad-hungrie men, as well may eat,
Hot coals of fire, to feed their natural heate;
For, to aspire to competence with your king
What subject is so gross, and Gyantly?
He having now a Daulphine borne to him,
Whose birth, ten days before, was dreadfully
Ushered with Earth-quakes, in most parts of Europe,
And that gives all men, cause enough to fear
All thought of competition with him.
Commend vs good my Lord, and tell our Brother
How much we joy, in that his royal issue,
And in what prayers, we raise our heart to heaven,
That in more terror to his foes, and wonder
He may drink Earthquakes, and devour the thunder,
So we admire your valor, and your virtues,
And ever will contend, to win their honour.
Then spake she to Crequie, and Prince D' Auergne,
And gave all gracious farewells; when Byron
Was thus encountered by a Councellor▪
Of great and eminent name, and matchless merit:
I think (my Lord) your princely Daulphin bears
Orion in his Cradle, through your kingdom,
In the sweet Musique joy strikes from his birth.
He answered; and good right; the cause commands it.
But (said the other) had we a fifth Henry,
To claim his old right: and one man to friend,
Whom you well know my Lord, that for his friendship
Were promised the Vice-royaltie of France,
We would not doubt of conquest, in despite
Of all those windy Earth-quakes. He replied;
Treason was never guide to English conquests,
And therefore that doubt shall not fright our Daulphine;
Nor would I be the friend to such a foe,
For all the royalties in Christendom.
Fix there your foot (said he) I only give
False fire, and would be loathe to shoot you of:
He that wins Empire with the loss of faith,
Out-buies it; and will banck-route; you have laid
A brave foundation, by the hand of victory:
Put not the roof to fortune, foolish statuaries,
That under little Saints suppose, great bases
Make less, to sense, the Saints; and so where fortune,
Advances vile minds, to states great and noble,
She much more exposes them to shame,
Not able to make good, and fill their bases,
With a conformed structure; I have found,
(Thanks to the blesser of my search) that counsels,
Held to the lyne of Justice; still produce,
The surest states, and greatest, being sure,
Without which fit assurance, in the greatest,
As you may see a mighty promontory
More digd and vnder-eaten, then may warrant,
A safe supportance, to his hanging brows,
All passengers avoid him, shun all ground
That lies within his shadow, and bear still
A flying eye upon him, so great men
Corrupted in their ground, and building out.
Too swelling fronts, for their foundations;
When most they should be propped, are most forsaken,
And men will rather thrust into the storms
Of better grounded States, then take a shelter
Beneath their ruinous, and fearful weight;
Yet they, so oversee, their faulty bases,
That they remain securer in conceit:
And that security, doth worse presage
Their ne'er distructions, then their eaten grounds;
And therefore heaven it self is made to vs
A perfect Hierogliphick to express,
The Idleness of such security,
And the grave labour, of a wise distrust,
In both sorts of the all-enclying stars;
Where all men note this difference in their shining,
As plain as they distinguish either hand;
The •ixt stars mover, and the erring, stand.
How took he this so worthy admonition?
Gravely applied (said he) and like the man,
Whom all the world says, overrules the stars;
Which are divine books to vs; and are read
By vnderstanders only, the true objects,
And chief companions of the truest men;
And (though I need it not) I thank your counsel,
That never yet was idle, But spherelike,
Still moos about, and is the continent
To this blessed Isle.
The Circkle of this embassy is closed,
For which I long have longed, for mine own ends;
To see my faithful, and leave courtly friends,
To whom I came (me thought) with such a spirit,
As you have seen, a lusty courser show,
That hath been lunge time at his manger tied;
High fead, alone, and when (his headstall broken)•
Hee runs his prison, like a trumpet neighs,
Cuts ayre, in high curuets, and shakes his head:
(With wanton stopings, twixt his forelegs) mocking
The heavy center; spreds his flying crest,
Like to an Ensign, hedge, and ditches leaping,
Till in the fresh meat, at his natural food
He sees free fellows, and hath met them free:
And now (good friend) I would be fine informed,
What our right Princely Lord, the duke of Sauoy
Hath thought on, to employ my coming home.
To try the Kings trust in you, and withal,
How hot he trails on our conspiracy:
He first would have you, beg the government,
Of the important Citadel of Borge:
Or to place in it, any you shall name:
Which will be wondrous fit, to march before,
His other purposes; and is a fort
Hee rates, in love, aboue his patrimony;
To make which fortress worthy of your suite:
He vows (if you obtain it) to bestow
His third fair daughter, on your excellence,
And hopes the King will not deny it you.
Deny it me? deny me such a suite?
Who will he grant, if he deny it me.
He'll find some politic shift to do it, I fear.
What shift? or what evasion can he find,
What one patch is there in all policies shop,
(That botcher up of Kingdoms) that can mend
The brack betwixt vs, any way denying.
Thats at your peril:
Come, he dares not do it.
Dares not? presume not so; you know (good duke)
That all things hee thinks fit to do, he dares.
By heaven I wonder at you, I will ask it,
As sternely, and secure of all repulse
As the ancient Persians did when they implorde,
Their idol fire to grant them any boon;
With which they would descend into a flood,
And threaten there to quench it, if they failed,
Of that they asked it:
Said like your Kings King;
Cold hath no act in depth, nor are suites wrought
(Of any high price) that are coldly sought:
Isle hast, and with your courage, comfort Sauoy.
I am your friend (my Lord) and will deserve
That name, with following any course you take;
Yet (for your own sake) I could wish your spirit
Would let you spare all broad terms of the King,
Or, on my life you will at last repent it:
What can he doe?
All that you can not fear.
You fear too much, be by, when next I see him,
And see how I will urge him in this suite,
He comes, mark you, that think
He will not grant it.
I am become a suitor to your highness.
For what, my Lord, tic like you shall obtain.
I do not much doubt that; my services,
I hope have more strength in your good conceit
Then to receive repulse, in such requests.
What is it?
That you would bestow on one whom I shall name,
The keeping of the Citadel of Borge,
Excuse me sir, I must not grant you that.
Not grant me this suit?
It is not fit I should;
You are my governor in Burgundy,
And Province governors, that command in chief,
Ought not to have the charge of fortresses;
Besides, it is the chief key of my kingdom,
That opens towards Italy, and must therefore,
Be given to one that hath immediately
Dependence on vs.
These are wondrous reasons,
Is not a man depending on his merits
As fit to have the charge of such a key
As one that merely hangs upon your humours?
Do not enforce your merits so your self;
It takes away their luster, and reward.
But you will grant my suite?
I swear I cannot
Keeping the credit of my brain and place.
Will you deny me then?
I am infor•st;
I have no power, more then your self in things
That are beyond my reason.
Then my self?
That's a strange slight in your comparison;
Am I become th'example of such men
As have lest power? Such a diminutive?
I was comparative in the better sort;
And such a King as you, would say I cannot,
Do such; or such a thing; were I as great
In power as he; even that indefinite he,
Expressed me full: This Moon is strangely changed;
How can I help it? would you have a King
That hath a white beard; have so greene a brain?
A plague of brain; what doth this touch your brain?
You must give me more reason or I swear
Swear; what do you swear?
I Swear you wrong me,
And deal not like a King to jest, and slight,
A man that you should curiously reward;
Tell me of your gray beard? it is not gray
With care to recompense me, who eased your care.
You have been recompenc't, from head to foot.
With a distrusted dukedom: Take your dukedom
Bestowed on me again; It was not given
For any love, but fear, and force of shame;
Yet it was your honour; which if you respect not,
Why seek you this Adition?
Since this honour,
Would show you loved me to, in trusting me,
Without which love, and trust; honour is shame;
A very Pageant, and a property:
Honour, with all his Adiu•cts, I deserve,
And you quit my deserts, with your gray beard.
Since you expostulate the matter so;
I tell you plain; Another reason is
Why I am moved to make you this denial
That I suspect you to have had in•elegance
With my vowed enemies.
Misery of virtue,
Ill is made good, with worse? This reason pores
Poison, for Balm, into the wound you made;
You make me mad, and rob me of my soul,
To take away my tried love, and my Truth;
Which of my labours, which of all my wounds,
Which overthrow, which Battle won for you,
Breeds this suspicion? Can the blood of faith,
(Lost in all these to find it proof, and strength)
Beget disloya•tie? all my rain is fallen,
Into the horse-fayre; springing pools and mire;
And not in thankful grounds, or fields of fruit;
Fall then before vs, O thou flaming Crystal,
That art the uncorrupted Register
Of all men's merits: And remonstrate here,
The fights, the dangers, the affrights and horrors,
Whence I have r••cu'd this unthankful King:
And show (comixed with them) the joys, the glories
Of his state then: Then his kind thoughts of me:
Then my deservings: Now my infamy:
But I will be mine own King: I will see,
That all your Chronicles be filled with me,
That none but I, and my renowned Sire
Be said to win the memorable fields
Of Arques and Deep: and none b•t we of all
Kept you from dying there, in an Hospital;
None but my self, that won the day at Dreux:
A day of holy name, and needs, no night:
Nor none but I at Fountain Francois burst,
The heart strings of the leaguers; I alone,
Took Amiens in these arms and held her fast,
In spite of all the Pitchy fires she cast,
And clouds of bullets port upon my breast,
Till she shout yours; and took her natural form,
Only my self (married to victory)
Did people Artois, Dou•y, Picardie,
Bethune, and Saint Paul•, Bapaume, and Courcelles,
With her triumphant issue;
Ha ha ha,
O hold my Lord; for my sake, mighty Spirit.
Respect, Reuendge, slaughter repay for laughter,
Whats' grave in Earth, what awful? what abhord▪
If my rage be ridiculous? I will make it,
The law and rule of all things serious.
So long as such as he
Are suffered, soothed and wrest all right, to safety
So long is mischief gathering massacres,
For their cursed kingdoms; which I will prevent,
Laughter? Isle fright it from him, far as he,
Hath cast irrevocable shame; which ever,
Bring found is lost and lost returns never;
Should Kings cast of their bounties, with their dangers?
He that can warm at fi•es, where virtue burns,
Hunt pleasure through her torments; nothing feel,
Of all his subjects suffer; but (long hid)
In wants, and miseries, and having past
Through all the gravest shapes, of worth and honour,
(For all Heroiq•e fashions to be learned,
By those hard lessons) show an antique vizard,
Who would not wish him rather hewd to nothing,
Then left so monstrous? slight my services?
Drown the dead noises of my sword, in laughter?
My blows, as but the passages of shadows,
Over the highest and most barren hills,
And use me, like, no man; but as he took me
Into a desert, gashed with all my wounds,
Sustained for him, and buried me in flies;
Forth vengeance then, and open wounds in him
Shall let in Spain, and Sauoy.
O my Lord,
This is to large a licence given your fury;
Give time to it, what reason, suddenly,
Can not extend, respite doth oft supply.
While respite, holds revenge, the wrong redoubles,
And so the shame of sufferance, it torments me,
To think what I endure, at his shrunk hands,
That skornes the gift, of one pore fort to me:
That have subdued for him; O injury,
Forts, Cities, Countries, I, and yet my fury.
Byron?
My Lord? the King calls,
Turn I pray,
How now? from whence flow these distracted faces?
From what attempt return they? as disclaiming,
Their late Heroic bearer? what, a pistall?
Why, good my Lord, can mirth make you so wrathful?
Mirth? it was mockery, a contempt; a scandal
To my renown for ever: a repulse,
As miserably cold, as Stygian water,
That from sincere earth issues, and doth break
The strongest vessels, not to be contained,
But in the tough hoof of a patient Ass.
My Lord, your judgment is not competent,
In this dissention, I may say of you;
As Fame says of the ancient Elea•s,
That, in the Olimpian contentions,
They ever were the justest Arbitrators,
If none of them contended, nor were party•;
Those that will moderate disputations well,
Must not themselves affect the coronet;
For as the ayre, contained within our ears:
If it be not in quiet; nor refrains,
Troubling our hearing, with offensive sounds;
But our affected instrument of hearing,
Repl•at with noise, and singings in it self,
It faithfully receives no other voices;
So, of all judgements, if within themselves
They suffer spleen, and are tumultuous;
They can not equal differences without them;
And this wind, that doth sing so in your ears,
I know, is no disease bred in your self;
But whispered in by others; who in swelling
Your veins with empty hope of much, yet able,
To perform nothing; are like shallow streams,
That make themselves so many heavens; to sight;
Since you may see in them, the Moon, and Stars,
The blew space of the ayre; as far from vs,
(To our weak senses) in those shallow streams
As if they were as deep, as heaven is high;
Yet with your middle finger only, sound them,
And you shall pierce them to the very earth;
And therefore leave them, and be true to me
Or you'll be left by all; or be like one
That in cold nights will needs have all the fire,
And there is held by others, and embraced
Only to burn him: your fire will be inward,
Which not another deluge can put out:
O Inocence the sacred amulet,
Against all the poisons of infirmity:
Of all misfortune, injury, and death,
That makes a man, in tune still in himself;
Free from the hell to be his own accuser,
Ever in quiet, endle, joy enjoying;
No strife, nor no sedition i• his powers:
No motion in his will, against his reason,
No thought against thought, Nor (as it were in the confines
Of wishing, and repenting) doth possess
Only a way ward, and tumultuose peace,
But (all parts in him, friendly and secure,
Fruitful of all best things in all worst Seasons)
He can with every wish, be in their plenty,
When, the infectious guilt of one foul crime,
Destroys the free content of all our time.
Tic all acknowlegd, and, (though all to late)
Here the short madness of my anger ends:
If ever I did good I locked it safe
In you, th'impregnable defence of goodness:
If ill, I press it with my penitent knees
To that vnsounded depth, whence nought returns.
Tic musique to mine ears: rise then for ever,
Quit of what guilt soever, till this hour,
And nothing touched in honour or in spirit,
Rise without flattery, rise by absolute merit.
Sir if it please you to bee taught any Courthship take you to your stand: Sauoy is at it with three Mistresses at once he loves each of them best, yet All differently.
For the time he hath been here, he hath talked a Vo∣him greater then the Turks A•caron; stand up close; his lips go still
Excuse me, excuse me; The King has ye all;
True Sir, in honourable subjection.
To the which we are bound by our loyalty.
Nay your excuse, your excuse, intend me for office∣tion? you are all bearers of his favours; and deny him not your opposition by night.
You say rightly in that; for therein we oppose vs to his command.
In the which he never yet pressed vs.
Such is the be•edictio• of our •eace.
You take me still in flat misc•nstruction, and conceive
not by me.
Therein we are strong in our own purposes; for it were something scandalous for vs to conceive by you.
Though there might be question made of your fruitful∣nes, yet dry weather in harue•t dooes no harm.
They will talk him into Sauoy; he begins to hunt down.
As the King is, and hath been, a most admired, and the most unmatchable soldier, so hath he been, and is, a sole excellent, and vnp•ralelld Courtier.
Pouvre Amy Merciè.
Your highness does the king but right sir.
And heaven shall bless you for that justice,
With plentiful store of want in Ladies affections.
You are cruel, and will not vouchsafe me audience to any conclusion.
Beseech your grace conclude, that we may present our curtsies to you, and give you the adieu.
It is said, the king will bring an army into Sauoy.
Truly we are not of his counsel of war.
Nay but vouchsafe me.
Vouchsafe him▪ vouchsafe him, else there's no play in it.
Well I vouchsafe your Grace.
Let the king bring an army into Sauoy, and Isle find him sport for forty years.
Would I were sure of that, I should then have a long ga, and a merry.
I think your Grace would play with his army at Bal∣loon.
My faith, and that's a martial recreation.
It is next to impious courting.
I am not hee that can set my Squadrons ouer-night, by midnight leap my horse, curry seven miles, and by three, leap my mistress; return to mine army again, and direct as I were infatigable, I am no such tough soldier.
Your disparity is believed sir.
And tic a piece of virtue to tell true.
Gods me, the king,
Well, I have said nothing that may offend.
Tic hoped so,
If there be any mercy in laughter.
Isle take my leave.
After the tedious stay my love hath made,
(Most worthy to command our earthly zeal)
I come for pardon, and to take my leave;
Affirming though I reap no other good,
By this my voyage; but to have seen a Prince
Of greatness, in all grace so past report;
I nothing should repent me, and to show,
Some token of my gratitude, I have sent,
Into your treasury, the greatest Jewels,
In all my Cabinet of Beatrice.
And of my late-deceased wife, th'Infanta.
Which are two Basigus, and their Ours of crystal,
Never yet vallewd for their workmanship,
Nor the exceeding riches of their matter
And to your stable, (worthy duke of Byron,
I have sent in two of my fairest horses.
Sent me your horses? upon what desert?
I entertain no presents, but for merits;
Which I am far from at you• highness hands;
As being of all men to you the most stranger,
There is as ample bounty in refusing;
As in bestowing, and with this I quit you.
Then have I lost nought but my poor good will,
Well cosine, I with all thanks, welcome that;
And the rich arguments with which you prove it,
Wishing I could, to your wish welcome you;
Draw, for your marquisate, the articles;
Agreed on in our composition,
And it is yours, but where you have porpos'd,
(In your advices) my design for Millane,
I will have no war with the king of Spain,
Unless his hopes prove weary of our peace;
And (Princely cosine) it is far from me,
To think your wisdom, needful of my counsel,
Yet love, oft-times must offer things vnneedeful;
And therefore I would counsel you to hold
All good terms, with his Majesty of Spain:
If any troubles should be stirred betwixt you,
I would not stir therein, but to appease them;
I have too much care of my royal word,
To break a Peace so just and consequent,
Without force of precedent injure•e:
Endless desires are worthless of just Princes,
And only proper to the swinge of tyrants.
At al parts spoke like the most christian king,
I take my humblest leave, and pray your Highness,
To hold me a• your servant, and poor kinsman,
Who wishes no supremer happiness
Than to be yours: To you (right worthy Princes)
I wish for all your favours powered on me
The love of al these Ladies mutually,
And (so they please their Lords) that they may please
Themselves by all means. And be you assured
(Most lovely Princesses) as of your lives,
You cannot be true women, if true wives.
Is this he Espernon, that you would needs
Persuade vs courted so absurdly.
This is even he sir, howsoever he hath studied his Par∣ting Courtship.
In what one point seemed hee so ridiculous as you would present him?
Behold me sir, I beseech you behold me, I appear to you as the great Duke of Sauoy with these three Ladies.
Well sir, we grant your resemblance.
He stole a carriage sir, from Count d'Auuergne here.
From me sir?
Excuse me sir, from you I assure you: here sir, he lies at the Lady Antoniette, just thus, for the world, in the true posture of Count d'Auue•gne.
You're exceeding delightsome.
Why is not that well•it came in with the organ hose.
Organ hose? a pox ant; let it pipe it self into con∣tempt; hee hath stolen it most feloniously, and it graces him like a disease.
I think he stole it from D'Avuergne indeed.
Well, would he had robbed him of all his other diseases, He were then the soundest lord in France.
As I am sir, I shall stand all wethers with you.
But sir, he has praisd you aboue th'inuention of Rimers.
Wherein? or how?
He took upon him to describe your victories in war, and where hee should have said, you were the most absolute soldier in Christendom, (no Ass could have mist it) hee de∣liuerd you for as pretty a fellow of your hands, as any was in France.
Marry God dild him.
A pox on him.
Well, (to be serious) you know him well
To be a gallant Courtier: his great wit
Can turn him into any form he lists,
More fit to be avoided, then deluded.
For my Lord Duke of Byron here, well knows,
That it infects, where it doth affect:
And where it seems to counsel, it conspires.
With him go all our faults, and from vs fly,
(With all his counsel) all conspiracy.

BYron sallue in so tratrous a relapse,
Aleadgd for our ingratitude: what offices,
Titles of honour, and what admiration,
Could France afford him that it port not on?
When he was scarce arrived at forty years,
He ran through all chief dignities of France.
At fourteen years of age he was made Colonel
To all the Suisses serving then in Flanders;
Soon after he was marshall of the camp.
And shortly after, marshall General:
He was received high Admiral of France
In that our Parliament we held at Tours;
Marshall of France in that we held at Paris.
And at the Siege of Amiens he acknowledgd,
None his Superior but our self, the King;
Though I had there, the Princes of the blood
I made him my Lieutenant General,
Declared him Jointly the prime Peer of France,
And raised his Barony into a Duchy,
And yet (my Lord) all this could not allay
The fatal thrist of his ambition.
For some have heard him say he would not die,
Till on the wings of valour he had reached
One degree heigher; and had seen his head▪
Set on the royal Quarter of a crown;
Yea at so unbelieved a pitch he aymd,
That he hath said his heart would still complain,
Till he aspird the style of Sovereign,
And from what ground my Lord rise all the leuyes
Now made in Italy? from whence should spring
The warlike humour of the Count Fuentes?
The restless stirrings of the Duke of Sauoye?
The discontent the Spaniard entertained,
With such a threatening fury, when he heard
The prejudicial conditions,
Proposed him, in the treaty held at Veruins?
And many other beaueries, this way aiming,
But from some hope of inward aid from hence?
And that, all this directly aims at you,
Your highness hath by one intelligence,
Good cause to think; which is your late advice,
That the Sea army, now prepared at Naples,
Hath an intended Enterprise on Prouence?
Although the cunning Spaniard gives it out,
That all is for Algier.
I must believe,
That without treason bred in our own breasts,
Spaines, affairs are not in so good estate,
To aim at any action against France:
And if Byron should be their instrument,
His altered disposition could not grow,
So far wide in an instant; Nor resign,
His valor to these lawless resolutions
Upon the sudden; nor without some charms,
Of foreign hopes and flatteries sung to him:
But far it flies my thoughts, that such a spirit,
So active, valiant, and vigilant;
Can see it self transformed with such wild furies.
And like a dream it shows to my conceits,
That he who by himself hath won such honour:
And he to whom his father left so much,
He that still daily reapes so much from me,
And knows he may increase it to more proof
From me, then any other foreign King;
Should quite against the stream of all religion,
Honour, and reason, take a course so foul,
And neither keep his Oath, nor save his Soul.
Can the poor keeping of a Citadel
Which I denied, to be at his disposure,
Make him forgo the whole strength of his honours?
It is impossible, though the violence,
Of his hot spirtit made him make attempt
Upon our person for denying him;
Yet well I found his loyal judgment served,
To keep it from effect: besides being offered,
Two hundred thousand crowns in yearly pension,
And to be General of all the forces
The Spaniards had in France; they found him still,
As an unmatched Achilles in the wars,
So a most wise Vlisses to their words,
Stopping his ears at their enchanted sounds;
And plain he told them that although his blood
(Being moved) by Nature, were a very fire
And boiled in apprehension of a wrong;
Yet should his mind hold such a sceptre there,
As would contain it from all act and thought
Of treachery or ingratitude to his Prince.
Yet do I long, me thinks, to see La Fin,
Who hath his heart in keeping; since his state,
(Grown to decay and he to discontent)
Comes near the ambitious plight of Duke Byron,
My Lord Vidame, when does your Lordship think,
Your uncle of La Fin will be arrived.
I think (my Lord) he now is near arriving
For his particular journey and devotion,
Would to the holy Lady of Loretto,
Was long since past and he upon return.
In him, as in a crystal that is charmed,
I shall discern by whom and what designs,
My rule is threatened• and that sacred power
That hath enabled this defensive arm,
(When I enjoyed but in an unequal Nook,
Of that I now possess) to front a King
Far my Superior: And from twelve set battles,
March home a victor: ten of them obtained,
Without my personal service; will not see
A traitrous subject foil me, and so end
What his hand hath with such success begun.
See the young Daulphin brought to cheer your highness.
My royal blessing, and the King of heaven,
Make thee an aged, and a happy King:
Help Nurse to put my sword into his hand;
Hold Boy, by this; and with it may thy arm
Cut from thy tree of rule, all traitrous branches,
That strive to shadow and eclipse thy glories;
Have thy old fathers angel for thy guide,
Redoubled be his spirit in thy breast;
Who when this State ran like a turbulent sea,
In civil hates and bloody enmity,
Their wrathes and envies, like so many winds,
Settled and burst: and like the Halcions birth,
Be thine to bring a calm upon the shore,
In which the eyes of war may ever sleep,
As ouermacht with former massacres,
When gultie, made Nobles, feed on Nobles;
All the sweet plenty of the realm exhausted;
When the nak't merchant, was pursued for spoil,
When the pore Peasants frighted neediest thieves
With their pale lea•enesse; nothing left on them
But meager carcases sustained with ayre,
Wandering like Ghosts affrighted from their graves,
When with the often and incessant sounds
The very beasts knew the alarm bell,
And (hearing it) ran bellowing to their home:
From which unchristian broils and homicides,
Let the religious sword of justice free
Thee and thy kingdoms governed after me.
O heaven! or if th'vnsettled blood of France,
With ease, and wealth, renew he •iuill furies:
Let all my powers be emptied in my Son
To curb, and end them all, as I have done.
Let him by virtue, quite out of from fortune,
Her fetherd shoulders, and her winged shoes,
And thrust from her light feet, her turning stone▪
That she may ever tarry by his throne.
And of his worth, let after ages say,
(He fighting for the land; and bringing home
Just conquests, laden with his enemies spoils)
His father past all France in martial deeds,
But he, his father twenty times exceeds.
My dear friends D'Avuergne▪ and Laffin,
We need no conjurations to conceal:
Our close intendments, to advance our states
Even with our merits; which are now neclected;
Since Britain is reduced, and breathless war
Hath sheathed his sword, and wrapped his Ensigns up;
The King hath now no more use of my valor,
And therefore I shall now no more enjoy
The credit that my service held with him;
My service that hath driven through all extremes,
Through tempests, droughts, and through the deepest floods;
Winters of shot: and over rocks so high
That birds could scarce aspire their ridgy tops;
The world is quite inuerted: virtue thrown
At Vices feet: and sensual peace confounds,
Valor, and cowardice: Fame, and Infamy;
The rude and terrible age is turned again:
When the thick ayre hid heaven, and all the stars,
Were drowned in humour, tough, and hard to peirse,
When the red Sun held not his fix• place;
Kept not his certain course, his rise and set
Nor yet distinguished with his definite bounds;
Nor in his firm conuersions, were discerned
The fruitful distances of time and place,
In the well varied seasons of the year;
When th'incomposd incursions of floods
Wasted and eat the earth; and all things showed
Wilde and disordered: nought was worse then now;
Wee must reform and have a new creation
Of State and government; and on our Chaos
Will I sit brooding up another world.
I who through all the dangers that can siege
The life of man, have force my glorious way
To the repairing of my countries ruins,
Will ruin it again, to re-aduance it;
Romaine Camyllus, safte the State of Rome
With far less merit, then Byron hath France;
And how short of this is my recompense.
The king shall know, I will have better price
Set on my services; in spite of whom
I will proclaim and ring my discontents
Into the farthest ear of all the world.
How great a spirit he breaths? how learned? how wise?
But (worthy Prince) you must give temperate ayre,
To your unmatched, and more then human wind;
Else will our plots be frost-bit, in the flower.
Betwixt our selves we may give liberal vent
To all our fiery and displeased impressions;
Which nature could not entertain with life,
Without some exhalation; A wronged thought
Will break a rib of steel.
My Princely friend,
Enough of these eruptions; our grave Councellor
Well knows that great affairs will not be forged
But upon Anuills that are lined with wool;
We must ascend to our intentions top
Like Clouds that be not seen till they be up?
O, you do too much ravish; And my soul
Offer to Musique in your numerous breath;
Sententious, and so high, it wakens death;
It is for these parts, that the Spanish King
Hath sworn to win them to his side
At any price or peril•; That great Sauoy,
Offers his princely daughter, and a dowry,
Amounting to five hundred thousand crowns;
With full transport of all the Sovereign rights
Belonging to the State of Burgondie;
Which marriage will be made, the only Cement
T'effect and strengthen all our secret Treaties;
Instruct me thererfore, (my assured Prince)
Now I am going to resolve the King
Of his suspicions, how I shall behave me.
Go my most trusted friend, with happy feet:
Make me a sound man with him; Go to Court
But with a little train; and be prepared
To hear, at first, terms of contempt and choler,
Which you may easily calm, and turn to grace.
If you beseech his highness to believe
That your whole drift and course for Italy,
(Where he hath heard you were) was only made
Out of your long-well-knowne devotion
To our right holy Lady of Lorretto,
As you have told some of your friends in Court:
And that in passing Milan and Thurin,
They charged you to propound my marriage
With the third daughter of the Duke of Sauoy;
Which you have done, and I rejected it,
Resolved to build upon his royal care
For my bestowing, which he lately vowed.
O, you direct, as if the God of light
Sat in each nook of you; and pointed out
The path of Empire; Charming all the dangers
On both sides armed, with his harmonious finger.
Besides let me entreat you to dism•sse,
All that have made the voyage with your Lordship,
But specially the Curate: And to locke
Your papers in some place of doubtless safety;
Or sacrifice them to the God of fire;
Considering worthily that in your hands
I put my fortunes, honour, and my life.
Therein the bounty that your Grace hath shown me,
I prize past life, and all things that are mine;
And will undoubtedly preserve, and tender
The merit of it, as my hope of heaven.
I make no question; farewell worthy friend.
Are these proofs of that purely Chatholike zeal
That made him wish no other glorious title,
Then to be called the scourge of Huguenots?
No question sir he was of no religion;
But (upon false grounds, by some Courtiers laid)
Hath oft been heard to mock and jest at all.
Are not his treasons heinous?
—Most abhord;
All is confirmed that you have heard before,
And amplified with many horrors more.
Good De'Laffin; you were our golden plummet,
To sound this gulf of all ingratitude;
In which you have with excellent desert
Of loyalty and policy, expressed
Your name in action; and with such appearance
Have proved the parts of his ungrateful creasons,
That I must credit, more then I desired,
I must confess my Lord, my voyages
Made to the Duke of Sauoy and to Milan;
Were with endeavour, that the wars returned,
Might breed some trouble to your Majesty;
And profit those by whom they were procured;
But since, in their designs, your sacred person
Was not excepted (which I since have seen)
It so abhord me, that I was resolved
To give you full intelligence thereof;
And rather chose to fail in promises,
Made to the servant; then infringe my fealty
Sworn to my royal Sovereign and Moister;
I am extremely discontent to see,
This most vnaturall conspiracy;
And would not have the Marshall of Byron,
The first example or my forced Justice;
Nor that his death should be the worthy cause,
That my calm reign, (which hitherto hath held
A clea•e and cheerful sky aboue the heads
Of my dear subjects) should so suddenly
Be overcast with clouds of fire, and thunder;
Yet on submission, I vow still his pardon.
And still our humble counsels, (for his service)
Would so resolve you, if he will employ
His honoured valor as effectually,
To fortify the State, against your foes;
As he hath practised bad intendments with them.
That vow shall stand; and we will now address,
Some messengers to call him home to Court;
Without the slendrest intimation,
Of any ill we know; we will restrain
(Withal forgiveness, if he will confess)
His headlong course to ruin; and his taste,
From the sweet poison of h•s friendlike foes:
Treason hath blistered h•eels, dishonest Things
Have bitter Rive•s, though delicious Springs;
Descures haste you unto him, and inform,
That having heard by sure intelligence,
Of the great leuies made in Italy,
Of Arms and soldiers; I am resolute,
Upon my frontiers to maintain an Army;
The charge whereof I will impose on him;
And to that end, expressly have commanded,
De Vic, our Lord Ambassador in Suisse,
To demand levy of six thousand men:
Appointing them to march where Duke Byron
Shall have directions; wherein I have followed.
The counsel of my Constable his Gossip;
Whose liked advice, I made him him know by letters,
Wishing to hear his own; from his own mouth,
And by all means conjure, his speediest presence;
Do this with utmost hast.
I will my Lord.
My good Lord Chancellor, of many Pieces,
More then is here, of his conspiracies
Presented to vs, by our friend, Laffin;
You, only, shall reserve these seven and twenty,
Which are not those that must conclude against him;
But mention only him: since I am loath,
To have the rest of the conspirators, known.
My Lord, my purpose is to guard all these,
So safely from the sight of any other:
That in my doublet I will have them sowed;
Without discovering them to mine own eyes,
Till need, or opportunity requires.
You shall do well my Lord, they are of weight;
But I am doubtful; that his conscience
Will make him so suspicious of the worst,
That he will hardly be induced to come.
I much should doubt that to, but that I hope
The strength of his conspiracy, as yet
Is not so ready, that he dare presume,
By his refusal to make known so much
Of his disloyalty.
I yet conceive;
His practises are turned to no bad end,
And good Laffin, I pray you wright to him,
To hasten his repair: and make him sure,
That you have satisfied me to the full.
For all his actions, and have vtterd nought,
But what might serve to banish bad impressions.
I will not fail my Lord.
Conua•e your letters;
By some choice friend of his: or by his brother:
And for a third excitement to his presence;
Ianin, your self shall go, and with the power
That both the rest employ to make him come,
Use you the strength of your persuasions.
I will my Lord, and hope I shall present him.
Wilt please your Majesty to take your place,
The Mask is coming.
Room my Lords, stand close.
My Lord, these Nymphs, part of the scattered train,
Of friendless virtue (living in the woods
Of shady Arden: and of late not hearing
The dreadful sounds of War; but that sweet Peace,
Was by your valor lifted from her grave,
Set on your royal right hand: and all virtues
Summoned with honour, and with rich rewards,
To be her hand-maides): These I say, the virtues,
Have put their heads out of their Caves and Coverts,
To be her true attendants in your Court:
In which desire, I must relate a tale,
Of kind and worthy emulation,
Twixt these two Virtues, leaders of the train.
This on the right hand is Sophrosyne,
Or Chastity: this other Dapsyle
Or Liberality: their Emulation
Begat a jar, which thus was reconciled.
I, (having left my Goddess mothers lap,
To hawlke, and shoot at Birds in Arden groves,)
Beheld this Princely Nymph▪ with much affection,
Left killing Birds, and turned into a Bird,
Like which I flew betwixt her Ivory breasts,
As if I had been driven by some Hawlke,
To sue to her for saftety of my life;
She smiled at first, and sweetly shadowd me,
With soft protection of her silver hand;
Some-times she tied my legs in her rich hair,
And made me (past my nature, liberty)
Proud of my fetters: As I pertly sat,
On the white pillows of her naked breasts,
I sung for joy; she answered note for note,
Relish for relish, with such ease and Art,
In her divine division, that my tunes,
Shout like the God of Shepherds to the Suns,
Compared with hers: ashamed of which disgrace,
I took my true shape, Bow, and all my shafts,
And lighted all my torches at her eyes,
Which (set about her, in a golden ring)
I followed Birds again, from Tree to Tree,
Kilt, and presented, and she kindly took.
But when she handled my triumphant Bow,
And saw the beauty of my golden shafts,
She begged them of me; I, poor boy replied,
I had no other Riches; yet was pleased
To hazard all, and stake them against a kiss,
At an old game I used, called Penny-prick.
She p•ivy to her own skill in the play,
Answered my challenge, so, I lost my arms:
And now my Shafts are headed with her looks,
One of which Shafts she put into my Bow▪
And shot at this fair Nymph, with whom before
I told your Majesty, she had some jar.
The Nymph did instantly repent all parts
She played in urging that effeminate war,
Loved and submitted; which submission
This took so well, that now they both are one:
And as for your dear love, their discords grew,
So for your love, they did their loves renew.
And now to prove them capable of your court▪
In skill of such conceits, and qualities
As here are practiced; they will first submit
Their grace in dancing to your highness doom,
And pray the press to give their meisures room,
If this suffice, for one Court complement,
To make them gracious, and entertained;
Behold another parcel of their Court-ship,
Which is a rare dexterity in riddles,
Shown in one instance, which is here inscribed.
Here is a Riddle, which if any Knight
At first fight can resolve; he shall enjoy
This Jewel here annexed; which though it show
To vulgar eyes, no richer then a Pebble;
And that no Lapidary, nor great man
Will give a Soulz for it; it is worth a kingdom:
For it is an artificial stone composde,
By their great Mistress, Virtue: and will make
Him that shall wear it, live with any little,
Suffizde, and more content then any king.
If he that undertakes cannot resolve it;
And that these Nymphs can have no harbour here;
(It being considered, that so many virtues
Can never live in Court) he shall resolve
To leave the Court, and live with them in Arden,
Pronounce the riddle: I will undertake it.
It is this sir.
What's that a fair Lady, most of all likes,
Yet ever makes show she least of all seeks?
That's ever embraced and affected by her,
Yet never is seen to please or come nigh her:
Most served in her night-weeds: does her good in a corner,
But a poor mans thing▪ yet doth richly adorn her:
Most cheap, and most dear, aboue all worldly pelf,
That is hard to get in, but comes out of it self.
Let me peruse it, Cupped.
Here it is.
Your Riddle is good Fame.
Good fame? how make you that good?
Good fame is that a good Lady most likes I am sure;
Thats granted;
Yet ever makes show she least of all seeks: for she likes it only for the virtue, which is not glorious.
That holds well
Tic ever embraced and affected by her: for she must, persevere in virtue or fame vanishes.
Yet never is seen to please or come ny her for fame is Envy∣sible,
Exceeding right.
Most served in her night weeds: for Ladies that most wear their Nightweeds come left abroad, and they that come least abroad serve fame most; according to this; Non form sed fame in publicum exire de bet.
Tic very substantial,
Does her good in a corner: that is in her most retreat from the world, comforts her; but a poor mans thing: for every poor man may purchase it, yet doth richly adorn a Lady.
That all must grant.
Most cheap for it costs nothing, and most dear, for gould can not buy it; aboue all worldly pelf; for thats tran∣sitory, and fame eternal. It is hard to get in; that is hard to get: But comes out of it self; for when it is vertuosely deserved with the most inward retreat from the world, it comes out in spite of it, &amp; so Cupped your jewel is mine.
It is: and be the virtue of it, yours.
We'll now turn to our dance, and then attend,
Your heighnes will, as touching our resort,
If virtue may be entertained in Court,
This show hath pleased me well, for that it figures.
The reconcilement of my Queen and Mistress:
Come Let vs in and thank them and prepare,
To entertain our trusty friend Byron.
Dear friend, we must not be more true to kings,
Then Kings are to their subjects, there are schools,
Now broken op in all parts of the world,
First founded in ingenious Italy,
Where some conclusions of estate are held,
That for a day preserve a Prince, and ever,
Destroy him after: from thence men are taught,
To glide into degrees of height by craft,
And then lock in them-selues by villainy:
But God, who knows kings are not made by art,
But right of Nature, nor by treachery propped,
But simple virtue, once let fall from heaven,
A branch of that greene tree, whose root is yet▪
Fast fixed aboue the stars: which sacred branch,
Wee well may liken to that Laurel spray,
That from the heavenly Eagles golden seres,
Fell in the lap of great Augustus wife:
Which spray once set, grew up into a tree,
Whereof were Girlonds made, and Emperors,
Had their estates and foreheads crowned with them:
And as the arms of that tree did decay,
The race of great Augustus wore away,
Narrow being last of that imperial line,
The tree and Emperor together died.
Religion is a branch, first set and blessed
By heavens high finger in the hearts of kings,
Which whilelome grew into a goodly tree,
Bright Angels sat and sung upon the twigs,
And royal branches for the heads of Kings,
Were twisted of them but since s•uint-ey'd •nuye:
And pale suspicion, dashed the heads of kingdoms,
One against another: two abhorred twins,
With two foul tails: sterne War and Liberty,
Entered the world. The tree that grew from heaven.
Is overrun with moss; the cheerful musique,
That heretofore hath sounded out of it,
Begins to cease; and as she casts her leaves,
(By small degrees) the kingdoms of the earth
Decline and wither: and look whenever
That the pure sap in her, is dried up quite;
The lamp of all authority goes out,
And all the blaze of Princes is extinkt;
Thus as the Poet sends a messenger
Out to the stage, to show the sum of all,
That follows after: so are Kings revolts,
And playing both ways with religion,
Fore-runners of afflictions imminent,
Which (like a Chorus) subjects must lament.
My Lord I stand not on these deep discourses,
To settle my course to your fortunes; mine
Are freely and inseperablie linked:
And to your love my life.
Thanks Princely friend,
And whatsoever good shall come of me,
Pursued by al the Catholic Princes aids
With whom I join, and whose whole states proposde,
To win my valor, promise me a throne:
All shall be equal with my self; thine own.
My Lord here is D'escuris sent from the King,
Desires access to you.
Attend him in.
Health to my Lord the Duke:
Welcome D'escuris,
In what health rests our royal Sovereign.
In good health of his body, but his mind,
Is something troubled with the gathering storms,
Of foreign powers; that as he is informed
Address themselves into his frontier towns;
And therefore his intent, is to maintain:
The body of an army on those parts;
And yield their worthy conduct to your valor.
From whence hears he that any storms are rising?
From Italy; and his intelligence,
No doubt is certain, that in all those parts
Leuies are hotly made; for which respect,
He sent to his Ambassador De Vic,
To make demand in Switzerland, for the raising
With utmost diligence of six thousand men;
All which shall bee commanded to attend,
On your direction; as the Constable
Your honoured Gossip gave him in advice;
And hee sent you by wrighting: of which letters,
He would have answer, and advice from you
By your most speedy presence.
This is strange,
That when the enemy is t'attempt his frontiers,
He calls me from the frontiers; does he think,
It is an action worthy of my valor
To turn my back, to an approaching foe?
The foe is not so ne'er, but you may come,
And take more strict directions from his highness,
Then he thinks fit his letters should contain,
Without the least attainture of your valor;
And therefore good my Lord, forbear excuse
And bear your self on his direction;
Who well you know hath never made design
For your most worthy service, where he saw
That any thing but honour could succeed.
I will not come I swear:
I know your grace,
Will send no such unsavoury reply.
Tell him that I besecch his Majesty,
To pardon my repair till th'end be known
Of all these leuies now in Italy.
My Lord I know that tale will never please him;
And wish you as you love his love and pleasure▪
To satisfy his summons speedily:
And speedily I know he will return you;
By heaven it is not fit: if all my service
Makes me know any thing: beseech him therefore,
To trust my judgment in these doubtful charges,
Since in assured assaults it hath not failed him.
I would your Lordship now, would trust his judgment.
Gods precious, you're importunate past measure,
And (I know) further, then your charge extends,
Isle satisfy his highness, let that serve;
For by this flesh and blood, you shall not bear,
Any reply to him, but this from me.
Tic nought to me my Lord, I wish your good,
And for that cause have been importunate.
By no means go my Lord; but with distrust,
Of all that hath been said or can be sent;
Collect your friends, and stand upon your guard,
The Kings fair letters, and his messages
Are only Golden Pills, and comprehend
Horrible purgatiues.
I will not go,
For now I see th'instructions lately sent me,
That something is discovered, are too true,
And my head rules none of those neighbor Nobles,
That every Purse•uant brings beneath the axe:
If they bring me out, they shall see isle hatch
Like to the Black-thorne, that puts forth his leaf,
Not with the golden fawnings of the Sun,
But sharpest showers of hail, and blackest frosts:
Blows, batteries, breaches, showers of steel and blood,
Must be his doun-right messengers for me,
And not the misling breath of policy:
He, he himself, made passage to his Crown
Through no more armies, battles, massacres,
Then I will ask him to arrive at me;
He takes on him, my executions,
And on the demolitions, that this arm,
Hath shaken out of forts and Citadels,
Hath he advanced the Trophies of his valour;
Where I, in those assumptions may scorn,
And speak contemptuously of all the world,
For any equal yet, I ever found;
And in my rising, not the Syrian Star
That in the Lyons mouth, undaunted shines,
And makes his brave ascension with the Sun,
Was of the Egiptians, with more zeal beheld,
And made a rule to know the circuit▪
And compass of the year; then I was held
When I appeared from battle; the whole sphere,
And full sustainer of the state we bear;
I have Alcides-like gone under the earth
And on these shoulders borne the weight of France:
And (for the fortunes of the thankless King)
My father (all know) set him in his throne,
And if he urge me, I may pluck him out.
Here is the president Ianin, my Lord;
Sent from the King, and urges quick access.
Another Pursuivant? and one so quick?
He takes next course with me, to make him stay:
But, let him in, let's here what he importunes.
Honour, and loyal hopes to Duke Byron.
No other tooch me: say how fares the King?
Fairly my Lord; the cloud is yet far off
That aims at his obscuring, and his will,
Would gladly give the motion to your powers
That should di•perse it; but the means, himself,
Would personally relate in your direction▪
Still on that hante?
Upon my life, my Lord,
He much desires to see you, and your sight
Is now grown necessary to suppress
(As with the glorious splendour of the Sun)
The rude winds that report breaths in his ears,
Endeavouring to blast your loyalty.
Sir, if my loyalty, stick in him no faster
But that the light breath of report may loose it,
(So I rest still vnmoou'd) let him be shaken.
But these aloof abodes, my Lord bewray,
That there is rather firmness in your breath.
Then in your heart; Truth is not made of glass,
That with a small touch, it should fear to break,
And therefore should not shun it; believe me
His arm is long, and strong; and it can fetch
Any within his will, that will not come:
Not he that surfeits in his mines of gold,
And for the pride thereof, compares with God,
Calling (with almost nothing different)
His powers invincible, for omnipotent,
Can back your boldest Fort against his assaults;
It is his pride, and vain ambition,
That hath but two stairs in his high designs;
(The lowest envy, and the highest blood)
That doth abuse you; and gives minds too high,
Rather a will by guiddinesse to fall,
Then to descend by judgment.
I rely
On no mans back nor belly; but the King
Must think that merit, by ingratitude cracked,
Requires a firmer sementing then words.
And he shall find it a much harder work
To soder broken hearts▪ then shiuerd glasses.
My Lord, it is better hold a Sovereigns love
By bearing injuries; then by laying out
Stir his displeasure; Princes discontents
(Being once incensed) are like the flames of Aetna,
Not to be quenched, nor lessend: and be sure,
A subjects confidence in any merit,
Against his Sovereign, that makes him presume
To fly too high; approoues him like a cloud,
That makes a show as it did hawlke at kingdoms,
And could command, all raised beneath his vapor:
When suddenly, the Foul that hawlkt so fair,
Stoops in a puddle, or consumes in ayre.
I fly with no such aim, nor am opposde,
Against my Sovereign; but the worthy height
I have wrought by my service, I will hold,
Which if I come away, I cannot do;
For if the enemy should invade the Frontier,
Whose charge to guard, is mine, with any spoil,
(Although the King in placing of another
Might well excuse me) Yet all foreign Kings
That can take note of no such secret quittance,
Will lay the weakness here, upon my wants;
And therefore my abode is resolute.
I sorrow for your resolution,
And fear your dissolution, will succeed.
I must endure it;
Fare you well my Lord;
Farewell to you;
Captain what other news?
La Fin salutes you;
Welcome good friend; I hope your wished arrival▪
Will give some certain end to our designs;
I know not that, my Lord; reports are raised so doubt∣full and so different, that the truth of any one can hardly be assured.
Good news, D'Avuergne; our trusty friend La Fin,
Hath cleared all scruple with his Majesty,
And vtterd nothing but what served to clear
All bad Suggestions.
So he says, my Lord
But others say, La Fins assurances
Are mere deceipts; and wish you to believe;
That when the Vidame, nephew to La Fin,
Met you at Attune, to assure your doubts,
His uncle had said nothing to the King
That might offend you; all the journeys charge,
The King defraid; besides, your truest friends
Willed me to make you certain that your place
Of government is otherwise disposed;
And all advise you, for your latest hope,
To make retreat into the Fr•nch County.
I thank them all, but they touch not the depth,
Of the affairs, betwixt La Fin and me.
Who is returned contented to his house,
Quite freed, of all displeasure or distrust;
And therefore, worthy friends wele now to Court.
My Lord, I like your other friends advices,
Much better then Laffins; and on my life
You can not come to Court with any safety.
Who shall infringe it? I know, all the Court,
Have better apprehension of my valor;
Then that they dare lay violent hands on me;
If I have only means to draw this sword,
I shall have power enough to set me free,
From seasure, by my proudest enemy.
He will not come I dare engage my hand.
He will be fetched then, isle engage my head.
Come, or be fetched, he quite hath lost his honour,
In giving these suspicions of revolt
From his allegiance: that which he hath won,
With sundry wounds, and peril of his life;
With wonder of his wisdom, and his valor,
He loses with a most enchanted glory:
And admiration of his pride, and folly.
Why did you never see a fortunate man,
Suddenly raised to heaps of wealth and honour?
Nor any rarely great in gifts of nature,
As valor, wit, and smooth use of the tongue,
Set strangely to the pitch of popular likings?
But with as sudden falls the rich and honoured,
Were ouerwhelmd by poverty▪ and shame
Or had no use of both aboue the wretched.
Men never are satisfied with that they have;
But as a man, matched with a lovely wife,
When his most heavenly Theory of her beauties,
Is duld and quite exhausted with his practise:
He bring• her forth to feasts, where he alas,
Falls to his viands with no thought like others,
That •think him blessed in her, and they (poor men)
Court, and make faces, offer service, sweat,
With their desires contention, break their brains
For jests, and tales: sit mute, and loose their looks,
(Far out of wit, and out of countenance)
So all men else, do what they have transplant,
And place their wealth in thirst of that they want.
He will not come; I must both grieve and wonder,
That all my care to win my subjects love
And in one cup of friendship to comix,
Our lives and fortunes: should leave out so many
As give a man (comtemptuous of my love,
And of his own good, in the Kingdoms Peace)
Hope, in a continuance so ungrateful,
To bear out his designs in spite of me;
How should I better please all, then I do?
When they supposed, I would have given some,
Insolent garrisons; others Citadels,
And to all sorts, increase of miseries;
Province by Province, I did visit all
Whom those injurious rumours had diswaide;
And showed them how, I never sought to build,
More forts for me, then were within their hearts;
Nor use more sterne constraints then their good wills,
To succour the necessities of my crown,
That I desired to ad to their contents
By all occasions, rather then subtract;
Nor wished I, that my treasury should flow,
With gold that swum in, in my subjects tears;
And then I found no man, that did not bless,
My few years reign, and their triumphant peace,
And do they now so soon, complain of ease?
He will not come?
O madness? he is come.
The duke is come my Lord:
Oh Sir, y•are welcome,
And fitly, to conduct me to my house;
I must beseech your Majesties excuse,
That (Ielouse of mine honour) I have used,
Some of mine own commandment in my stay,
And came not with your heighnesse soonest summons.
The faithfu'l servant right in holy wri•;
That said he would not come and yet he came:
But come you hither; I must tell you now,
Not the contempt you stood to in your stay,
But the bad ground that bore up your contempt,
Makes you arrive at no port, but repentance,
Despair, and ruin;
Be what port it will,
At which your will, will make me be arrived,
I am not come to justify my self,
To ask you pardon nor accuse my friends,
I• you conceal my enemies you are one,
And then my pardon shall be worth your asking,
Or else your head be worth my cutting of.
Being friend and worthy fautor of my self,
I am no foe of yours, nor no empayrer,
Since he can no way worthily maintain
His Princes honour that neglects his own:
And if your will have been to my true reason,
(Maintaining still the truth of loyalty)
A check to my free nature and mine honour,
And that on your free justice I presume,d
To cross your will a little, I conceine,
You will not think this forfeit worth my head;
Have you maintained your truth of loyalty?
When since I pardoned foul intentions,
Resolving to forget eternally, What they appeared in,
And had welcomed you as the kind father doth his riotous son.
I can approve facts fowler then the intents,
Of deep disloyalty and highest treason;
May this right hand be thunder to my breast,
If I stand guilty of the slendrest fact,
Wherein the left of those two can be proved,
For could my tender conscience but have touched,
At any such unnatural relapse;
I would not with this confidence have run,
Thus headlong in the furnace of a wrath,
Blown, and thrice kindled: having way enough,
In my election both to shun and slight it.
You're grossly and vain gloriously abused,
There is no way in Sauoy nor in Spain,
To give a fool that hope of your escape,
And had you not (even when you did) arrived.
(With horror to the proudest hope you had)
I would have fetched you.
You must then have used.
A power beyond my knowledge, and a will,
Beyond your justice. For a little stay
More then I used would hardly have been worthy,
Of such an open expedition;
In which to all the censures of the world,
My faith and Innocence had been foully foiled;
Which (I protest) by heavens bright witnesses
That shine far, far, from mixture with our fears.
Retain as perfect roundness as their spheres;
Tic well my Lord, I thought I could have frighted
Your firmest confidence: some other time,
We will (as now in private) sift your actions.
And pour more then you think into the si•e,
Always reserving clemency and pardon
Upon confession, be you ne'er so foul,
Come lets clear up our brows shall we to tennis.
I my Lord if I may make the match.
The Duke Espernon and my self will play,
With you and Count Soissons;
I know my Lord.
You play well but you make your matches ill.
Come tic a match.
How like you my arrival?
Isle tell you as your friend in your ear.
You have given more preferment to your courage,
Then to the provident counsels of your friends.
I told him so my Lord, and much was grieved
To see his bold approach, so full of will.
Well I must bear it now, though but with th'head,
The shoulders bearing nothing.
By Saint Iohn,
Tic a good headless resolution.
O the most base fruits of a settled peace!
In men, I mean; worse then their dirty fields,
Which they manure much better them-selues:
For them they plant, and sow, and ere they grow,
Weedie, and choked with thorns, they grub and proyne,
And make them better, then when cruel war,
Frighted from thence the sweaty labourer:
But men them-selues, in steed of bearing fruits,
Grow rude, and foggy, ouer-growne with weeds,
Their spirits, and freedoms smootherd in their ease;
And as their tyrants and their ministers,
Grow wilde in prosecution of their lusts,
So they grow prostitute, and lye (like whores)
Down and take up, to their abhord dishonours:
The friendless may be injured and oppressed;
The guiltless lead to slaughter, the deserver
Given to the beggar; right be wholly wronged,
And wrong be only honoured; till the strings
Of every mans heart, crack; and who will stir,
To tell authority, that it doth err.
All men cling to it, though they see their bloods
In their most dear associates and Allies,
Poured into kennels by it: and who dares
But look well in the breast, whom that impairs?
How all the Court now looks askew on me?
Go by without saluting, shun my sight,
Which (like a march sun) agues breeds in them,
From whence of late, it was health to have a beam.
Now none will speak to vs, we thrust our selves
Into men's companies, and offer speech,
As if not made, for their diverted ears▪
Their backs turned to vs, and their words to others,
And we must like obsequious Parasites,
Follow their faces, wind about their persons,
For looks and answers: or be cast behind,
No more viewed then the wallet of their faults.
Yet here's one views me, and I think will speak▪
My Lord, if you respect your name and race,
The preservation of your former honours,
Merits and virtues; humbly cast them all,
At the kings mercy; for beyond all doubt,
Your acts have thither driven them: he hath proofs
So pregnant, and so horrid, that to hear them,
Would make your valor in your very looks,
Give up your forces, miserably guilty:
But he is most loath (for his ancient love
To your rare virtues:) and in their impair,
The full discouragement of all that live,
To trust or favour any gifts in Nature)
T'expose them to the light; when darkness may
Cover her own brood, and keep still in day,
Nothing of you but that may brooke her brightness:
You know what horrors these high strokes do bring,
Raised in the arm of an incensed King.
My Lord, be sure the King cannot complain
Of any thing in me, but my true service,
Which in so many dangers of my death,
May so approve my spotless loyalty;
That those quite opposite horrors you assure,
Must look out of his own ingratitude;
Or the malignant envies of my foes,
Who power me out in such a Styg•an flood,
To drown me in my self, since their desert•
Are far from such a deluge; and in me
Hid like so many rivers in the Sea.
You think I come to •and you; fare you well,
See see, not one of them will cast a glance
At our eclipsed faces;
They keep all to cast in admiration on the King:
For from his face are all their faces moulded.
But when a change comes; we shall see them all
Changed into water, that will instantly
Give look for look, as if it watched to greet vs;
Or else for one, they'll give vs twenty faces,
Like to the little specks on sides of glasses;
Is it not an easy loss to lose their looks,
Whose hearts so soon are melted?
But me thinks,
(Being Courtiers) they should cast best looks on men,
When they thought worst of them.
O no my Lord,
They ne'er dissemble but for some advantage;
They sell their looks, and shadows; which they rate
After their markets, kept beneath the State;
Lord what foul weather their aspects do threaten?
See in how grave a Brake he sets his vizard:
Passion of nothing; See, an excellent Gesture:
Now Courtship goes a ditching in their fore-heads;
And we are fallen into those dismal ditches;
Why even thus dreadfully would they be rapt,
If the Kings butterd eggs, were only spilt.
Lord Chancellor;
I my Lord;
And lord Vidame:
And not Byron? here's a prodigious change;
He cast no Beam on you;
Why now you see
From whence their countenances were copied.
See, here comes some news, I believe my Lord.
What says the honest captain of my guard?
I bring a letter from a friend of yours.
Tic welcome then:
Have we yet any friends?
More then ye would I think: I never saw,
Men in their right minds so unrighteous
In their own causes.
See what thou hast brought,
Hee wills vs to retire our selves my Lord,
And makes as if it were almost too late,
What says my captain; shall we go or no?
I would your daggers point had kissed my heart,
When you resolved to come.
I pray the why?
Yet, doth that senseless Apopelxy dull you?
The devil or your wicked angel blinds you,
Bereaving all your reason of a man
And leaves you but the spirit of a horse,
In your brute nostrils: only power to dare.
Why, dost thou think, my coming here hath brought me
To such an unrecoverable danger?
Judge by the strange O•tents that have succeeded,
Since your arrival: the kind foul, the wilde duck,
That came into your cabinet, so beyond
The sight of all your servants, or your self:
That flew about, and on your shoulder sat
And which you had so fed, and so attended;
For that dum love she showed you; just as soon,
As you were parted, on the sudden died.
And to make this no less then an Oftent;
Another that hath fortuned since, confirms it:
Your goodly horse Pastrana, which the Archduke,
Gave you at Bruxells; in the very hour,
You left your strength, fel-mad, and kilt himself;
••e like chance it to the horse the great duke sent you:
•nd, with both these, the horse the duke of Lorraine,
Sent you at, Vinsie made a third presage,
Of some Inevitable fate that touched you,
Who like the other pined away and died,
All these together are indeed o•tentfull,
Which by another like, I can confirm:
The matchless Earl of Essex who some make,
(In their most sure diuinings of my death)
A parallel with me in life and fortune,
Had one horse like-wise that the very hour,
He suffered death, (being well the night before)
Died in his pasture. Noble happy beasts,
That die, not having to their wills to live:
They use no deprecations, nor complaints.
Nor suit for mercy: amongst them the Lion,
Serves not the Lion; nor the horse the horse,
As man serves man: when men show most their spirits,
In valor and their utmost dares to do;
They are compared to Lions, Wolves, and Bores,
But by conversion; None will say a Lyon,
Fights as he had the Spirit of a man.
Let me then in my danger now give cause,
For all men to begin that Simile.
For all my huge engagement, I provide me,
This short sword only; which if I have time,
To show my apprehendor, he shall use,
Power of ten Lions if I get not loose.
What shall we doe with this unthankful man?
Would he (of one thing) but reveal the truth,
Which I have proof of, underneath his hand,
He should not taste my Justice. I would give,
Two hundred thousand crowns, that he would yield,
But such means for my pardon, as he should;
I never loved man like him: would have trusted,
My Son in his protection, and my Realm:
He hath deserved my love with worthy service,
Yet can he not deny, but I have thrice,
Saved him from death: I drew him of the foe.
At Fountain Francoise where he was engaged,
So wounded and so much amazed with blows,
That (as I played the soldier in his rescue,)
I was enforced to play the Marshall,
To order the retreat: because he said,
He was not fit to do it nor to serve me,
Your majesty hath used your utmost means,
Both by your own persuasions, and his friends
To bring him to submission, and confess
(With some sign of repentance) his foul fault:
Yet still he stands prefract and insolent.
You have in love and care of his recovery
Been half in labour to produce a course,
And resolution, what were fit for him.
And since so amply it concerns your crown•,
You must by law cut of, what by your grace,
You cannot bring into the state of safety,
Begin at the end my Lord and execute,
Like Alexander with Parmeni•.
Princes (you know) are Masters of their laws,
And may resolve them to what forms they please,
So all conclude in justice; in whose stroke,
There is one sort of manadge for the Great;
Another for inferior: The great Mother,
Of all productions (grave Necessity)
Commands the variation: And the profit,
So certainly fore-seene, commends the example.
I like not executions so informal,
For which my predecessors have been blamed:
My Subjects and the world shall know; my power,
And my authority by laws usual course
Dares punish; not the devilish heads of treason,
But there confederates be they ne'er so dreadful▪
The decent ceremonies of my laws,
And their solemnities shall be observed,
With all their St•means and Severity.
Where will your highness have him apprehended?
Not in the Castle (as some have advised)
But in his chamber;
Rather in your own,
Or coming out of it; for tic assured
That any other place of apprehension,
Will make the hard performance, end in blood.
To shun this likely-hood, my Lord tic best
To make the apprehension near your chamber;
For all respect and reverence given the place,
More then is needful, to chastise the person,
And save the opening of to many veins;
Is vain and dangerous.
Gather you your guard,
And I will find fit time to give the word,
When you shall seize on him and on D'Avuergne;
Wee will be ready to the death; (my Lord)
O thou that gouernst the keen swords of Kings,
Direct my arm in this important stroke,
Or hold it being advanced; the weight of blood,
Even in the basest subject, doth exact
Deep consultation, in the highest King;
For in one subject, deaths unjust affrights,
Passions, and pains, (though he be ne'er so poor)
Ask more remorse, then the voluptuous spleens
Of all Kings in the world, deserve respect;
Hee should be borne grey-headed that will bear
The sword of Empire; Judgment of the life,
Free state, and reputation of a man,
(If it be just and worthy) dwells so dark
That it denies access to Sun and Moon;
The souls eye sharpened with that sacred light,
Of whom the Sun it self is but a beam,
Must only give that judgment; O how much
Err those Kings then, that play with life and death,
And nothing put into their serious States,
But humour and their lusts! For which alone
Men long for kingdoms; whose huge counterpoise
In cares and dangers, could a fool comprise,
He would not be a King but would be wise;
Here comes the man, with whose ambitious head
(Cast in the way of Treason) we must stay
His full chase of our ruin and our Realm;
This hour shall take upon her shady wings
His latest liberty and life to Hell.
We are undone?
Whats that?
I heard him not;
Madam you're honoured much, that Duke Byron
Is so observant; Some, to cards with him,
You four, as now you come, sit to Primero;
And I will fight a battle at the Chess;
A good safe fight believe me; Other war
Thirsts blood, and wounds, and his thirst quenched, is thankless;
Lift, and then cut;
Tic right the end of lifting,
When men are lifted to their highest pitch,
They cut of those that lifted them so high.
Apply you all these sports so seriously?
They first were from our serious acts deuis'd,
The best of which, are to the best but sports;
(I mean by best, the greatest) for their ends,
In men that serve them best, are their own pleasures.
So, in those best men's services, their ends
Are their own pleasures; pass.
I vy't;
I see it;
And wonder at his frontles impudence;
How speeds your Majesty?
Well; the Duke instructs me
With such grave lessons of mortality
Forced out of our light sport; that if I loose,
I cannot but speed well.
Some idle talk.
For Courtship sake, you know does not amiss.
Would we might hear some of it.
That you shall,
I cast away a card now, makes me think,
Of the deceased worthy King of Spain.
What card was that?
The King of hearts (my Lord)
Whose name yields well the memory of that King,
Who was indeed the worthy King of hearts,
And had, both of his subjects hearts, and strangers,
Much more then all the Kings of Christendom.
He wun them with his gold.
He wun them chiefly,
With his so general Piety and Justice:
And as the little, yet great Macedon,
Was said with his humane philosophy,
To teach the rapefull Hyrcans, marriage;
And bring the barbarous Sogdians, to nourish,
Not kill their aged Parents; as before,
The incestuous Persians to reverence
Their mothers, not to use them as their wives;
The Indians to adore the Grecian Gods,
The Scythians to inter, not eat their Parents;
So he, with his divine Philosophy,
(Which I may call his, since he chiefly used it)
In Turkey, India, and through all the world,
Expelled profane idolatry; and from earth,
Raised temples to the highest: whom with the word,
He could not win, he justly put to sword,
He sought for gold, and Empire.
It was Religion,
And her full propagation that he sought;
If gold had been his end, it had been hoarded,
When he had fetched it in so many fleets:
Which he spent not on Median Luxury,
Banquets, and women; Caledonian wine,
Nor dear Hyrcanian fishes▪ but employed it,
To propagate his Empire; and his Empire
Desired t'extend so, that he might withal,
Extend Religion through it, and all nations,
Reduce to one firm constitution,
Of Piety, Justice, and one public weal;
To which end he made all his matchless subjects
Make tents their castles, and their garrisons;
True Catholikes contrimen; and their allies,
Heretikes, strangers, and their enemies.
There was in him the magnanimity.
To temper your extreme applause (my Lord)
Shorten, and answer all things in a word,
The greatest commendation we can give
To the remembrance of that King deceased;
Is, that he spared not his own eldest son,
But put him justly to a violent death,
Because, hee sought to trouble his estates.
First so?
That bit (my Lord) upon my life,
It was bitterly replied, and doth amaze him.
It is resolved,
A work shall now be done,
Which, (while learned Atlas shall with stars be crowned,
While the Ocean walks in storms his wavy round,
While Moons at full, repair they• broken rings:
While Lucifer fore-shewes Auroras springs,
And Are•tos sticks aboue the Earth vnmou'd,
Shall make my realm be blessed, and me beloved;
Call in the count D' Auuergne.
A word my Lord.
Will you become as wilful as your friend?
And draw a mortal justice on your heads,
That hangs so black and is so loath to strike?
If you would utter what I know you know,
Of his inhumaine treason; on Strong Bar,
Betwixt his will, and duty were dissolud.
For then I know he would submit himself;
Think you it not as strong a point of faith,
To rectify your loyalties to me,
As to be trusty in each others wrong?
Trust that deceives our selves in treachery,
And Truth that truth conceals an open lie;
My Lord if I could utter any thought,
Instructed with disloyalty to you,
And might light any safety to my friend;
Though mine own heart came after it should out;
I know you may, and that your faith's affected
To one another, are so vain and false,
That your own Strengths will ruin you: ye contend,
To cast up rampires to you in the sea,
And strive to stop the waives that run before you,
All this my Lord to me is misery.
It is; Isle make it plain enouge. Believe me.
Come my Lord Chancellor let vs end our mate.
You are undone my Lord;
Is it possible?
Play good my Lord: whom look you for?
Your mind,
Is not upon your Game,
Play, pray you play,
Enough, tic late, and time to leave our play,
On all hands; all forbear the room, my Lord?
Stay you with me; yet is your will resolved,
To duty, and the maine bond of your life?
I swear (of all the Intrusions I have made,
Upon your own good, and continued fortunes)
This is the last; inform me yet the truth,
And here I vow to you, (by all my love;
By all means shown you, even to this extreme,
When all men else forsake you) you are safe.
What passages have slipped twixt count Fuentes,
You, and the Duke of Sauoye?
Good my Lord.
This nail is driven already past the head,
You much have overcharged, an honest man:
And I beseech you yield my Inocence justice,
(But with my single valor) against them all,
That thus have poisoned your opinion of me,
And let me take my vengeance by my sword:
For I protest, I never thought an Action,
More then my tongue hath vtterd.
Would it were true.
And that your thoughts and deeds, had fell no fouler.
But you disdain submission, not remembering,
That (in intents vrdgd for the common good)
He that shall hold his peace being chardgd to speak:
Doth all the peace and nerues of Empire break
Which on your conscience lie, adieu, good night.
Kings hate to hear what they command men speak,
Ask life, and to desert of death ye yield.
Where Medicines loath, it yrcks men to be heald,
Resign your sword (my Lord) the King commands it▪
Me to resign my sword? what king is he,
Hath used it better for the realm then I?
My sword, that all the wars within the length,
Breadth and the whole dimensions of great France,
Hath shed betwixt his hilt and horrid point?
And fixed ye all in such a flourishing Peace?
My sword that never enemy could enforce,
Bereft me by my friends? Now, good my Lord,
Beseech the King, I may resign my sword,
To his hand only.
You must do your office,
The King commands you;
Tic in vain to strive,
For I must force it;
Have I n•ere a friend,
That bears another for me? All the Guard?
What will you kill me? will you smother here
His life that can command, and save in field,
A hundred thousand lives? For man-hood sake;
Lend something to this poor forsaken hand;
For all my service, let me have the honour
To dye defending of my innocent self,
And have some little space to pray to God.
Come, you are an Atheist Byron, and a Traitor,
Both foul and damnable; Thy innocent self?
No Leper is so buried quick in ulcers
As thy corrupted soul: Thou end the war?
And settle peace in France? what war hath raged,
Into whose fury I have not expos•d,
My person▪ which is as free a spirit as thine?
Thy worthy Father, and thy self, combined,
And arm•d in all the merits of your valors;
(Your bodies thrust amidst the thickest fight▪)
Never were bristeld with so many battles▪
Nor on the foe have broke such woods of Lances
As grew upon my thigh; and I have Marshald;
I am asham•d to brag thus; where envy
And arrogance, their opposite Bulwark raise;
Men are allowed to use their proper praise;
Away with him;
Away with him? live I?
And here my life thus slighted? cursed man,
That ever the intelligensing lights
Betrayed me to men's whorish fellowships;
To Princes Moorish slaueries; To be made
The Anvil, on which only blows, and wounds
Were made the seed, and wombs of others honours;
A property for a Tyrant, to set up,
And puff down, with the vapour of his breath;
Will you not kill me?
No; we will not hurt you,
We are commanded only to conduct you
Into your lodging;
To my lodging? where?
Within the Cabinet of Arms my Lord:
What to a prison? Death; I will not go;
Weal force you then;
And take away my sword;
A proper point of force; ye had as good,
Have robed me of my soul; Slaves of my Stars,
Partial and bloody; O that in mine eyes
Were all the Sorceress poison of my woes,
That I might witch ye headlong from your height,
And trample ou't, your excrable light.
Come will you go my Lord? this rage is vain;
And so is all your grave authority;
And that all France shall feel before I Die;
Ye see all how they use good Catholiques;
Farewell for ever; so have I desern'd
An exhalation that would be a Star
Fall when the Sun forsook it, in a sink.
Shoes ever overthrow that are too large,
And hugest canons, burst with overcharge.
My Lord I have commandment from the King,
To charge you go with me, and ask your sword;
My sword, who fears it? it was ne'er the death
Of any but wilde Bores; I prithee take it;
Had thou advertised this when last we met,
I had been in my bed, and fast asleep
Two hours a go; lead; isle go where thou wilt:
See how he bears his cross, with his small strength,
On easier shoulders then the other Atlas.
Strength to aspire, is still accompanied
With weakness to endure; All popular gifts,
Are colours, it will bear no vinegar;
And rather to adverse affy•es, betray;
Thine arm against them; his State still his best
That hath most inward worth; and that's best tried,
That neither glories, nor is glorified.
What shall we think (my Lords) of these new forces
That (from the King of Spain) hath past the Alps?
For which (I think) his Lord Ambassador,
Is come to Court, to get their pass for Flanders?
I think (my Lord) they have no end for Flanders;
Cont Maurice being already entered Brabant
To pass to Flanders, to relieve Ostend,
And th'Arch-duke full prepared to hinder him;
And sure it is that they must measure forces,
Which (ere this new force could have past the Alps)
Of force must be encountered.
Tic unlikely,
That their march hath so large an aim as Flanders;
As these times sort, they may have shorter reaches;
That would pierce further;
I have been advertised,
That Cont Fuentes (by whose means this army
Was lately levied; And whose hand was strong,
In thrusting on Byrons conspiracy)
Hath cause these cunning forces to advance,
With coullor only to set down in Flanders;
But hath intentional respect to favour
And countnance his false Partisans in Brass,
And friends in Burgondie; to give them hart
For the full taking of their hearts from me;
Be as it will; we shall prevent their worst,
And therefore call in Spaines Ambassador,
What would the Lord Ambassador of Spain?
First (in my masters name) I would beseech
Your highness hearty thought; That his true hand,
(Held in your vowed amities) hath not touched,
At any least point in Byrons offence;
Nor once had notice of a crime so foul;
Whereof, since he doubts not, you stand resolved,
He prays your Leagues continuance in this favour;
That the army he hath raised to march for Flanders,
May have safe passage by your frontier towns,
And find the River free, that runs by Rhosne.
My Lord my frontiers shall not be disarmed,
Till, by arraignment of the Duke of Byron,
My scruples are resolved; and I may know
In what account to hold your Masters faith,
For his observance of the League betwixt vs;
You wish me to believe that he is clear
From all the proiects cause by Cont Fuentes,
His special Agent; But where, deeds, pull down,
Words, may repair, no faith; I scarce can think
That his gold was so bounteously employed,
Without his special counsel, and command:
These faint proceedings in our Royal faiths,
Make subjects prove so faithless: If because,
We sit aboue the danger of the laws,
We likewise lift our Arms aboue their justice;
And that our heavenly Sovereign, bounds not vs
In those religious confines; out of which
Our justice and our true laws are informed;
In vain have we expectance that our subjects,
Should not as well presume to offend their Earthly,
As we our Heavenly Sovereign? And this breach
Made in the Forts of all Society;
Of all celestial, and humane respects,
Makes no strengths of our bounties, counsels arms,
Hold out against their treasons; and the rapes
Made of humanity, and religion,
In all men's more then Pagan liberties,
Atheismes, and sla•eries, will derive their springs
From their base Presidents, copied out of kings.
But all this, shall not make me break the commerce,
Authorisde by our treaties; let your Army
Take the directest pass, it shall go safe.
So rest your highness ever; and assured
That my true Sovereign, lothes all opposite thoughts.
Are our dispatches made to all the kings,
Princes, and Potentates, of Christendom?
Ambassadors and Province governors,
T'enforme the truth of this conspiracy?
They all are made my Lord, and some give out,
That it is a blow given to religion,
To weaken it, in ruining of him,
That said, he never wished more glorious title,
Then to be called the scourge of Hugenots.
Others that are like favourers of the fault,
Said it is a politic advise from England,
To break the feared Javelins, both together▪
Such shut their eyes to truth, we can but set
His lights before them, and his trumpet sound
Close to their ears; their partial wilfulness,
In resting blind, and deaf, or in peruerting,
What the•r most certain senses apprehend,
Shall nought discomfort our impartial Justice.
Nor clear the desperate fault that doth enforce it.
The Peers of France (my Lord) refuse t'appeare,
At the arraignment of the Duke Byron.
The Court may yet proceed; and so command it,
It is not their slackness to appear shall serve,
To let my will t'appeare in any fact.
Wherein the boldest of them tempts my justice.
I am resolved, and will no more endure,
To have my subjects make what I command,
The subject of their oppositions,
Who euer-more slack their allegiance,
As kings forbear their penance; how sustain
Your prisoners their strange durance?
One of them,
(Which is the Count D'Avuergne) hath merry spirits,
Eats well, and sleeps: and never can imagine,
That any place where he is, is a prison;
Where on the other part, the Duke Byron,
Entered his prison, as into his grave,
Reiects all food, sleeps not, nor once lies down:
Fury hath armed his thoughts so thick with thorns,
That rest can have no entry: he disdains
To grace the prison with the slendrest show,
Of any patience, least men should conceive,
He thought his sufferance in the best sort fit;
And holds his bands so worthless of his worth,
That he impairs it, to vouchsafe to them,
The best part of the peace, that freedom owes it:
That patience therein, is a willing slavery.
And (like the Cammell) stoops to take the load:
So still he walks: or rather as a Bird,
Entered a Closet, which unawares is made,
His desperate prison (being pursued) amazed,
And wrathful beats his bre•t from wall to wall,
Assaults the light strikes down himself, not our,
And being taken, struggles, gasps, and bites,
Takes all his takers strokings, to be strokes,
Abhors food, and with a savage will,
Frets, pines, and dyes, for former liberty.
So fares the wrathful Duke; and when the strength
Of these dumb rages, break out •nto sounds,
He breaths defiance▪ to the world, and bids vs,
Make our selves drunk, with the remaining blood
Of five and thirty wounds received in fight,
For v• and ours; for we shall never brag,
That we have made his spirits check at death:
This rage in walks and words; but in his looks
He cements all: and prints a world of books,
Let others learn by him to curb their spleens,
Before they be curbed; and to cease their grudges:
Now I am settled in my Sun of height,
The circula•e splendour, and full Sphere of State.
Take all place up from envy: as the sun,
At height, and passive ore the crowns of men,
His beams diffusd, and downright port on them,
Cast but a little or no shade at all,
So he that is advanced aboue the heads,
Of all his Emulators, with high light,
Prevents their envies, and deprives them quite,
I wonder at the prisoners so long stay,
I think it may be made a question,
If his impacience will let him come.
Yes, he is now well stayed: Time and his Judgment,
Have cast his passion and his fever of.
His fever may be past, but for his passions,
I fear me we shall find it spiced to hotly,
With his old poulder.
He is sure come forth;
The Carosse of the Marquis of Rhosny
Conducted him along to the Arsenal,
Close to the Riuer-side: and there I saw him,
Enter a barge covered with Tapestry,
In which the kings guards waited and received him.
Stand by there clear the place,
The prisoner comes.
My Lord Laffin forbear your sight a while,
It may incense the prisoner: who will know,
By your attendance ne'er vs, that your hand,
Was chief in his discovery; which as yet,
I think he doth not doubt,
I will forbear,
Till your good pleasures call me,
When he knows
And sees Laffin, accuse him to his face,
The Court I think will shake with his distemper.
You see my Lord, it is in the golden chamber.
The golden chamber? where the greatest Kings
Have thought them honoured to receive a place:
And I have had it; am I come to stand
In rank and habit here of men arraignd,
Where I have sat assistant, and been honoured,
With glorious title of the chiefest virtuous,
Where the Kings chief Solicitor hath said,
There was in France, no man that ever lived,
Whose parts were worth my imitation;
That, but mine own worth; I could imitate none:
And that I made my self inimitable,
To all that could come after; whom this Court
Hath seen to sit upon the Flower de Lice
In recompense of my renowned service.
Must I be sat on now, by petty Judges?
These Scarlet robes, that come to sit and fight
Against my life; dsmay my valor more,
Then all the bloody Cassocks Spain hath brought
To field against it.
To the bar my Lord.
Read the indictment.
Stay, I will invert
(For shortness sake) the form of our proceedings,
And out of all the points, the process holds,
Collect five principal, with which we charge you.
First you conferd with one, called Picote,
At Orleans borne, and into Flanders fled,
To hold intelligence by him with the Archduke,
And for two voyages to that effect,
Bestowed on him, five hundred, fifty crowns.
Next you held treaty with the Duke of Sauoy,
Without the Kings permission; offering him
All service and assistance against all men,
In hope to have in marriage, his third daughter.
Thirdly you held intelligence with the Duke,
At taking in of Borge, and other Forts;
Advising him, with all your prejudice,
Against the Kings army, and his royal person.
The fourth is; that you would have brought the King,
Before Saint Katherines Fort, to be there slain:
And to that end writ to the Governor,
In which you gave him notes to know his highness.
Fiftly, you sent Laffin to treat with Sauoy,
And with the Count Fuentes, of more plots,
Touching the ruin of the King and realm.
All this (my Lord) I answer, and deny:
And first for Picoté; he was my prisoner,
And therefore I might well confer with him:
But that our conference tended to the Arch-duke,
Is nothing so; I only did employ him
To Captain La Fortune, for the reduction
Of Sour, to the service of the King.
Who used such speedy diligence therein,
That shortly it was assut'd his Majesty,
Next, for my treaties with the Duke of Sauoy,
Roncas his Secretary, having made
A motion to me, for the Dukes third daughter,
I told it to the King; who having since,
Given me the understanding by La Force
Of his dislike; I never dreamd of it.
Thirdly, for my intelligence with the Duke,
Advising him against his Highness army:
Had this been true, I had not undertaken
Th'assault of Borge, against the Kings opinion,
Having assistance but by them about me:
And (having won it for him) had not been
Put out of such a government so easily.
Fourthly, for my advise to kill the King;
I would beseech his Highness memory,
Not to let slip, that I alone dissuaded
His viewing of that Fort; informing him,
It had go•d marke-men; and he could not go,
But in exceeding danger, which advise
Diverted him; the rather, since I said,
That if he had desire to see the place
He should receive from me a Plot of it;
Offering to take it with five hundred men,
And I my self would go to the assault.
And lastly, for intelligences held,
With Sauoy and Fuentes: I confess,
That being denied to keep the Citadel,
Which with incredible peril I had got,
And seeing another, honoured with my spoils,
I 〈◊〉 so desperate that I found my spirit,
Enraged to any act, and wished my self,
Covered with blood.
With whose blood?
With mine own;
Wishing to live no longer, being denied,
With such suspicion of me, and set will,
To rack my furious humour into blood.
And for two months space, I did speak, and wright,
More then I ought; but have done ever well,
And therefore your informers have been false.
And (with intent to tyranny•e) subornd.
What if our witnesses come face to face,
And justify much more then we allege?
They must be ••••lings then, and men corrupted.
What think you of La Fin?
I hold La Fin,
An honoured Gentleman, my friend and kinsman.
If he then aggravate, what we affirm,
With greater accusations to your face,
What will you say?
I know it cannot be.
Call in my Lord La Fin.
Is he so near?
And kept so close from me? can all the world,
Make him a treacher.
I suppose my Lord,
You have not stood within; without the ear
Of what hath here been urged against the Duke;
If you have heard it, and upon your knowledge
Can witness all is true, upon your soul;
Utter your knowledge.
I have heard my Lord,
All that hath past here; and upon my soul,
(Being charged so vrgently in such a Court)
Upon my knowledge I affirm all true;
And so much more: as had the prisoner lives
As many as his years, would make all forfeit.
O all ye virtuous powers, in earth and heaven,
That have not put on hellish flesh and blood,
From whence these monstrous issues are produced,
That cannot bear in execrable concord,
And one prodigious subject; contraries;
Nor (as the Isle that of the world admired)
Is severed from the world) can cut your selves
From the consent and sacred hermony
Of life, yet live; of honour, yet be honoured;
As this extravagant, and errant rog,
From all your fair Decorums, and just laws,
Finds power to doe: and like a loathsome wen,
Sticks to the face of nature, and this Court;
Thicken this ayre, and turn your plague rage,
Into a shape as dismal as his sin.
And with some equal horror tear him of
From sight and memory: let not such a court,
To whose fame all the Kings of Christendom,
Now laid their ears; so crack her royal Trump,
As to sound through it, that here vented justice
Was got in such an incest: is it justice
To tempt, and witch a man, to break the law,
And by that witch condemn him? let me draw
Poison into me with this cursed ayre,
If he bewitched me, and transformed me not;
He bit me by the ear, and made me drink
Enchanted waters; let me see an Image
That vtterd these distinct words; Thou shalt dye,
O wicked King; and if the devil gave him
Such power upon an Image; upon me
How might he tyrannise? that by his vows
And oaths so Stygian, had my Nerues and will,
In more awe then his own: what man is he
That is so high, but he would higher be?
So roundly sighted, but he may be found,
To have a blind side, which by craft, pursuit,
Confederacy, and simply trusted treason,
May wrest him past his Angel, and his reason?
Witchcraft can never taint an honest mind.
True gold, will any trial stand, untouched.
For colours that will stain when they are tried,
The cloth it self is ever cast aside.
Some-times, the very Gloss in any thing,
Will seem a stain; the fault not in the light,
Nor in the guilty object, but our sight.
My gloss, raised from the richness of my stuff,
Had too much splendour for the Only eye,
Of politic and thankless royalty:
I did deserve too much; a pleurisy
Of that blood in me is the cause I dye.
Virtue in great men must be small and slight:
For poor stars rule, where she is exquisite,
Tic tyrannous, and impious policy,
To put to death by fraud and treachery;
Slight is then roy•ll, when it makes men live,
And if it urge faults, urges to forgive.
He must be guiltless, that condemns the guilty,
Like things, do nourish like, and not destroy them:
Minds must be sound, that judge affairs of weight,
And seeing hands, cut corrosives from your sight.
A Lord intelligencer? hangman-like,
Thrust him from human fellowship, to the deserts
Blow him with curses; shall your justice call
Treachery her Father? would you wish her weigh
My valor with the hiss of such a viper?
What I have done to shun the mortal shame,
Of so unjust an opposition;
My envious stars cannot deny me this,
That I may make my Judges witnesses;
And that my wretched fortunes have reserved
For my last comfort; ye all know (my Lords)
This body gashed with five and thirty wounds,
Whose life and death you have in your award,
Holds not a vein that hath not opened been,
And which I would not open yet again,
For you and yours; this hand that writ the lines
Alledgd against me; hath enacted still,
More good then there it only talked of ill.
I must confess my choler hath transferd
My tender spleen to all intemperate speech:
But reason ever did my deeds attend.
In worth of praise, and imitation,
Had I borne any will to let them loose,
I could have fleshed them with bad services,
In England lately, and in Swizerland:
There are a hundred Gentlemen by name,
Can witness my demeanour in the first;
And in the last Embassage I adiure
No other testimonies then the Seigneurs
De Vio, and Sillerie; who amply know,
In what sort, and with what fidelity
I bore my self; to reconcile and knit,
In one desire so many wills disioynde,
And from the Kings allegiance quite withdrawn.
My acts ask• many men, though done by one.
And I were but one, I stood for thousands,
And still I hold my worth, though not my place:
Nor slight me, Judges, though I be but one,
One man, in one sole expedition,
Reduced into th'imperiall power of Rome,
Armenia, Pontus, and Arabia, Syria, Albany, and Iberia,
Conquered th'Hyreanians; and to Caucasus,
His arm extended; the Numidians
And Africa to the shores Meridionall,
His power subjected; and that part of Spain
Which stood from those parts that Sertorius ruled,
Even to the Atlantique Sea he conquered.
Th'Albanian kings, he from the kingdoms chased,
And at the Caspian Sea, their dwellings placed:
Of all the Earths globe, by power and his advice,
The round-eyd Ocean saw him victor thrice:
And what shall let me (but your cruel doom,)
To add as much to France, as he to Rome,
And to leave Justice neither Sword nor word,
To use against my life; this Senate knows,
That what with one victorious hand I took,
I gave to all your uses, with another:
With this I took, and propped the falling kingdom,
And gave it to the King: I have kept
Your laws of state from fire; and you your selves,
Fixed in this high Tribunal; from whose height
The vengeful Saturnals of the League
Had hurled ye head-long; doe ye then return
This retribution? can the cruel King,
The kingdom, laws, and you, (all saved by me)
Destroy their saver? what (aye me) I did
Adverse to this; this damned Enchanter did,
That took into his will, my motion;
And being banck-route both of wealth and worth,
Pursued with quarrels, and with suites in law;
Feared by the kingdom; threatened by the king;
Would raise the loathed dung-hill of his ruins,
Upon the monumental heap of mine:
Torn with possessed whirle-winds may he dye,
And dogs bark at his murthorous memory,
My Lord, our liberal sufferance of your speech,
Hath made it late; and for this Session,
We will dismiss you; take him back my Lord.
You likewise may depart.
What rests now
To be decreed against this great prisoner?
A mighty merit, and a monstrous cri••,
Are here concurrent; what by witnesses;
His letters and instructions, we have proved
Himself confesses, and excuses all
With witch-craft, and the only act of thought.
For witch-craft I esteem it a mere strength
Of rage in him conceived against his accuser;
Who being examined hath denied it all;
Suppose it true, it made him false; But wills
And worthy minds, witch-craft can never force.
And for his thoughts that brake not into deeds;
Time was the cause, not will; the minds free act
In treason still is Judged as th'outward fact.
If his deserts have had a wealthy share,
In saving of our land from civil furies:
Manlius had so that fast the Capitol;
Yet for his after traitorous factions,
They threw him head-long from the place he saved.
My definite sentence then, doth this import:
That we must quench the wilde-fire with his blood,
In which it was so traitorously inflamed;
Unless with it, we seek to incense the land,
The King can have no refuge for his life,
If his be quited: this was it that made
Lewis th'eleuenth renounce his countrymen,
And call the valiant Scots out of their kingdom,
To use their greater virtues, and their faiths,
Then his own subjects, in his royal guard:
What then conclude your censures?
He must dye.
Draw then his sentence, formally, and send him;
And so all treasons in his death attend him.
I joy you had so good a day my Lord.
I won it from them all: the Chancellor
I answered to his uttermost improuements:
I moved my other Judges to lament
My insolent misfortunes; and to loathe
The pocky soul, and state-bawde, my accuser,
I made reply to all that could be said,
So eloquently, and with such a charm,
Of grave enforcements, that me thought I sat,
Like Orpheus casting reigns on savage beasts;
At the arms end (as it were) I took my bar
And set it far aboue the high tribunal,
Where like a Cedar on Mount Lebanon,
I Grew, and made my judges show like Box-trees▪
And Boxtrees right, their wishes would have made them,
Whence boxes should have grown, till they had struck
My head into the budget: but alas,
I held their bloody arms, with such strong reasons;
And (by your leave) with such a •yrck of wit:
That I fetched blood upon the Chancelors cheeks,
Me thinks I see his countenance as he sat;
And the most lawierly delivery
Of his set speeches: shall I play his part?
For heavens sake, good my Lord.
I will in faith,
Behold a wicked man: A man debauched,
A man, contesting with his King; A man,
On whom (my Lords) we are not to connive,
Though we may condole: A man:
That Lease Maiestate sought a lease,
Of Plus quam satis. A man that vi et arms
Assailed the King; and would per fas et nefas,
Aspire the kingdom: here was lawyers learning.
He said not this my Lord, that I have heard.
This or the like, I swear▪ I pen no speeches.
Then there is good hope of your wished acquittal.
Acquittal? they have reason; were I dead
I know they can not all supply my place;
First possible the King should be so vain,
To think he can shake me with fear of death?
Or make me apprehend that he intends it?
Thinks he to make his firmest men, his clouds?
The clouds (observing their Aerial natures)
Are borne aloft, and then to moisture hanged,
Fall to the earth; where being made thick, and cold,
They loose both al their heate, and levity;
Yet then again recovering heate and lightness,
Again they are advanced: and by the Sun
Made fresh and glorious; and since clouds are rapt
With these uncertainties: now up, now down,
Am I to flit so with his smile, or froune?
I wish your comforts, and incoradgments,
May spring out of your safety; but I hear
The King hath reasond so against your life,
And made your most friends yield so to his reasons,
That your estate is fearful.
Yield to his reasons?
O how friends reasons, and their freedoms stretch,
When power sets his wide tenters to their sides!
How, like a cure, by mere opinion,
It works upon our blood? like the ancient Gods
Are Modern Kings, that lived past bounds themselves,
Yet set a measure down, to wretched men▪
By many Sophisms, they made good, deceit;
And, since they past in power, surpassed, in right:
When Kings wills pass; the stars wink, and the Sun,
Suffers eclipse: rude thunder yields to them
His horrid wings: sits smooth as glass engazd,
And lightning sticks twixt heaven and earth amazed:
Men's faiths are shaken: and the pit of truth
O'reflowes with darkness, in which Justice sits,
And keeps her vengeance tied to make it fierce;
And when it comes, the increased horrors show,
Heavens plague is sure, though full of state, and slow.
O my dear Lord and brother,
O the Duke?
What sounds are these my Lord? hark, hark, me thinks
I hear the cries of people.
Tic for one,
Wounded in fight here at Saint Anthonies Gate:
Sfoote, one cried the Duke. I pray harken,
Again, or burst your selves with silence, no:
What contriman's the common headsman here?
He's a Bourgonian.
The great devil he is,
The bitter wizard told me, a Burgonian,
Should be my headsman; strange concurrences:
S'death whose here?
O then I am but dead,
Now, now ye come all to pronounce my sentence.
I am condemned unjustly: tell my kinsfolks,
I die an innocent:
If any friend pity the ruin of the States sustainer
Proclaim my innocence; ah Lord Chancellor,
Is there no pardon? will there come no mercy?
I, put your hat on, and let me stand bare,
Show your self right a Lawyer.
I am bare,
What would you have me do?
You have not done,
Like a good justice; and one that knew
He sat upon the precious blood of virtue;
You've pleased the cruel King, and have not borne,
As great regard to save as to condemn;
You have condemned me, my Lord Chancellor,
But God acquits me; he will open lay
All your close treasons against him, to colour
Treasons laid to his truest images;
And you my Lord shall answer this injustice,
Before his judgment seat: to which I summon
In one year and a day your hot appearance;
I go before, by men's corrupted domes;
But they that cause my death, shall after come
By the imaculate justice of the highest.
Well, good my Lord▪ commend your soul to him,
And to his mercy, think of that, I pray.
Sir, I have thought of it, and every hour,
Since my affliction, asked on naked knees
Patience to bear your vnbeleeu•d Injustice:
But you, nor none of you have thought of him,
In my euiction: you're come to your benches,
With plotted judgements; your linked ears so loud,
Sing with prejudicate winds, that nought is heard,
Of all, pore prisoners urge against your award;
Passion, my Lord, transports your bitterness,
Beyond all colour; and your proper judgment:
No man hath known your merits more then I;
And would to God your great misdedes had been,
As much undone, as they have been concealed;
The cries of them for justice (in desert)
Have been so loud and piercing; that they deafened
The ears of mercy; and have labord more,
Your Judges to compresse then to enforce them.
We bring you here your sentence, will you read it.
For heavens sake, shame to use me with such rigour;
I know what it imports, and will not have,
Mine ear blown into flames with hearing it;
Have you been one of them that have condemned me?
My Lord I am your Orator: God comfort you.
Good Sir, my father loved you so entirely,
That if you have been one, my soul forgives you;
It is the King (most childish that he is
That takes what he hath given) that iniures me:
He gave grace in the first draught of my fault,
And now restaines it: grace again I ask;
Let him again vouchsafe it: send to him,
A post will soon return: the Queen of England,
Told me that if the wilful Earl of Essex,
Had used submission, and but asked her mercy,
She would have given it, past resumption;
She (like a gracious Princess) did desire
To pardon him: even as she pried to God,
He would let down a pardon unto her;
He yet was guilty, I am innocent:
He still refused grace, I importune it.
This asked in time (my Lord) while he besought it,
And ere he had made his severity known,
Had (with much joy to him) I know been granted;
No, no, his bounty, then was misery,
To offer when he knew twould be refused;
He treads the vulgar path of all advantage,
And loves men, for his vices, nor for their virtues;
My service would have quickened gratitude,
In his own death, had he been truly royal;
It would have stirred the image of a King,
Into perpetual motion; to have stood
Near the conspiracy restraind at Mantes;
And in a danger, that had then the Wolf,
To fly upon his bosom, had I only held
Intelligence with the conspirators;
Who stuck at no check but my loyalty,
Nor kept life in their hopes, but in my death;
The siege of Amiens, would have softened rocks,
Where covered all in showers of shot and fire,
I seemed to all men's eyes a fighting flame
With bullets cut, in fashion of a man;
A sacrifice to valor (impious King)
Which he will needs extinguish, with my blood;
Let him beware, justice will fall from heaven,
In the same form I served in that siege,
And by the light of that, he shall decern,
What good, my ill hath brought him; it will nothing,
Assure his State: the same quench he hath cast
Upon my life, shall quite put out his fame;
This day he loses, what he shall not find,
By all days he survives; so good a servant,
Nor Spain so great a foe; with whom, alas,
Because I treated am I put to death?
Tic put a politic gloss: my courage raised me,
For the dear price of five and thirty skarres,
And that hath ruined me, I thank my Stars▪
Come isle go where ye will, ye shall not lead me.
I fear his frenzy,
Never saw I man of such a spirit so amazed at death.
He alters every minute: what a vapor?
The strongest mind is to a storm of crosses.
O of what contraries consists a man!
Of what impossible mixtures? vice and virtue,
Corruption, and eternnesse, at one time,
And in one subject, let together, loosse?
We have not any strength but weakens vs,
No greatness but doth crush vs into ayre.
Our knowledges, do light vs but to err,
Our Ornaments are Burdens: Our delights
Are our tormentors; fiends that (raised in fears)
At parting shake our Roofs about our ears.
O virtue, thou art now far worse then Fortune▪
H•r gifts stuck by the Duke, when thine are vanished,
Thou brau'st thy friend in Need: Necessity,
That used to keep thy wealth, contempt, thy love,
Have both abandond thee in his extremes,
Thy powers are shadows, and thy comfort, dreams,
O real goodness if thou be a power!
And not a word alone, in human uses,
Appear out of this angry conflagration,
Where this great Captain (thy late Temple) burns,
And turn his vicious fury to thy flame,
From all earths hopes mere gilded with thy fame:
Let piety enter with her willing cross,
And take him on it; op his breast and arms,
To all the Storms, Necessity can breath,
And burst them all with his embraced death,
Yet are the civil tumults of his spirits,
Hot and outrageous: not resolved, Alas,
(Being but one man) render the kingdoms dome;
He doubts storms, threatens, rues, complains, imp•ores,
Grief hath brought all his forces to his looks,
And nought is left to strengthen him within,
Nor la•ts one habit of those grieved aspects:
Blood expels paleness, paleness Blood doth chase,
And sorrow errs through all forms in his face,
So furious is he, that the Politic law,
Is much to seek, how to enact her sentence:
Authority backed with arms, (though he unarmed)
Abhors his fury, and with doubtful eyes,
Views on what ground it should sustain his ruins,
And as a Savage Bore that (hunted lunge,
Assailed and set up) with his only eyes,
Swimming in fire keeps of the baying hounds,
Though sunk himself, yet holds his anger up,
And snows it foe•th in foam; holds firm his stand,
Of Batta•ouse Bristles: feeds his hate to die,
And whets his tusks with wrathful majesty.
So fares the furious Duke, and with his looks,
Doth teach death horrors; makes the hangman learn
New habits for his bloody impudence;
Which now habitual horror from him drives,
Who for his life shuns death, by which he lives,
Will not your Lordship have the Duke distinguished
From other prisoners? where the order is,
To give up men condemned into the hands
Of the executioner; he would be the death,
Of him that he should die by, ere he suffered,
Such an objection,
But to bind his hands▪
I hold it passing needful,
Tic my Lord,
And very dangerous to bring him loose.
You will in all despair and fury plunge him,
If you but offer it.
My Lord by this,
The prisoners Spirit is some-thing pacified,
And tic a fear that th'offer of those bands,
Wou•d breed fresh furies in him, and disturb,
The entry of his soul into her peace,
I would not that, for any possible danger,
That can be wrought, by his unarmed hands,
And therefore in his own form bring him in,
Where shall this weight fall? on what rhegion,
Must this declining prominent pour his lode?
Isle break my bloods high billows against my stars,
Before this •ill be shook into a flat,
All France shall feel an earthquake; with what murmur,
This world shrinks into Chaos?
Good my Lord,
Forgo it willingly; and now resign,
Your sensual powers entirely to your soul.
Horror of death, let me alone in peace,
And leave my soul to me, whom it concerns;
You have no charge of it; I feel her free,
How she doth rowze, and like a Falcon stretch
Her silver wings; as threatening death, with death;
At whom I joyfully will cast her off:
I know this body but a sink of folly,
The ground-work, and raised frame of woe and frailty▪
The bond, and bundle of corruption;
A quick corse, only sensible of grief,
A walking sepulchre, or household thief:
A glass of ayre, broken with less then breath,
A slave bound face to face, to death, till death:
And what said all you more? I know, besides
That life is but a dark and stormy night,
Of senseless dreams, terrors, and broken sleeps;
A Tyranny, devising pains to plague
And make man long in dying, racks his death;
And death is nothing, what can you say more?
I bring a long Globe, and a little earth,
Am seated like earth betwixt both the heavens:
That if I rise; to heaven I rise; if fall
I likewise fall to heaven; what stronger faith,
Hath any of your souls? what say you more?
Why lose I time in these things? talk of knowledge,
It serves for inward use. I will not die
Like to a Clergy man; but like the Captain,
That prayed on horse-back and with sword in hand,
Threatend the Sun, commanding it to stand;
These are but ropes of sand.
Desire you then,
To speak with any man?
I would speak with La Force, and Saint Blancart.
Do they fly me?
Where is Pr•u•st, controller of my house?
Gone to his house ith country three days since.
He should have stayed here, he keeps all my blancks▪
O all the world forsakes me! wretched world,
Consisting most of parts, that fly each other:
A firmness, breeding all inconstancy,
A bond of all disiunction; like a man
Long buried, is a man that long hath lived;
Touch him, he falls to ashes; for one fault,
I forfeit all the fashion of a man;
Why should I keep my soul in this dark light?
Whose black beams lighted me to loose my self.
When I have lost my arms, my fame, my wind,
Friends, brother, hopes, fortunes, and even my fury?
O happy were the man, could live alone,
To know no man, nor be of any known!
My Lord, it is the manner once again
To read the sentence?
Yet more sentences?
How often will ye make me suffer death?
As ye were proud to hear your powreful domes?
I know and feel you were the men that gave it,
And die most cruelly to hear so often
My crimes and bitter condemnation vrdg'd:
Suffice it, I am brought here; and obey,
And that all here are privy to the crimes.
It must be read my Lord, no remedy.
Read, if it must be, then, and I must talk.
The process being extraordinarily made and exa∣mined by the Court, and chambers assembled—
Condemned for depositions of a witch?
The common deposition, and her whore
To all whorish perjuries and treacheries.
Sure he called up the devil in my spirits,
And made him to usurp my faculties:
Shall I be cast away now he's cast out?
What Justice is in this? dear countrymen,
Take this true evidence, betwixt heaven and you▪
And quit me in your hearts.
Go on.
Against Charles G•ntalt of Byron: knight of both the orders; Duke of Byron, peer and marshall of France; Governor o• Burgondy, accused of treason in a sentence was given the 22. of this month, condemning the said Duke of Byron of heigh treason, for his direct conspiracies against the kings person; enterprises against his state.—
That is most false; let me for ever be,
Deprived of heaven, as I shall be of earth,
If it be true: know worthy country-men.
These two and twenty months I have been clear,
Of all attempts against the king and state.
Treaties and treacheries with his Enemies, being mar∣shall of the Kings army, for reparation of which crimes they deprived him of all his estates, honours and dignities, and con∣damned him to lose his head upon a Scaffold at the Greaue
The Greaue? had that place stood for my dispatch
I had not yielded; all your forces should not,
Stir me one foot; wild horses should have drawn,
My body peece-meale, ear you all had brought me.
Declaring all his goods moveable and inmoueable whatsoever to be confiscate to the King: the Signeury of Byron to loose the title of Duchy and Peer for ever.
Now is your form contented,
I my Lord
And I must now entreat you to deliver,
Your order up, the king demands it of you.
And I restore it, with my vow of safety,
In that world, where both he and I are one,
I never brake the oath I took to take it,
We will now my Lord we'll take our latest leaves,
Beseeching heaven to take as clear from you,
All sense of torment in your willing death:
All love and thought of what you must leave here,
As when you shall aspi•e-heauens highest sphere,
Thanks to your Lordship and let me pray to,
That you will hold good censure of my life,
By the clear witness of my soul in death,
That I have never past act against the King,
Which if my faith had let me undertake,
They had been three years since, amongst the dead;
Your soul shall find his safety in her own,
Call the executioner▪
Good sir I pray,
Go after and beseech the Chancellor
That he will let my body be entered,
Amongst my predecessors at Byron:
I go my Lord:
Go, go? can all go thus?
And no man come with comfort? farewell world:
He is at no end of his actions blessed,
Whose ends will make him greatest, and not best;
They tread no ground, but ride in ayre on storms,
That follow State, and hunt their empty forms;
Who see not that the Valleys of the world,
Make even right with the Mountains? that they grow
Greene, and lye warmer; and ever peaceful are,
When Clouds spit fire as Hills, and burn them bare?
Not Valleys part, but we should imitate Streams,
That run below the Valleys, and do yield
To every Mole-hill; every Bank embrace
That checks their Currants; and when Torrents come,
That swell and raise them past their natural height,
How mad they are, and trubl'd? like low strains
With Torrents crowned, are men with Diadems;
My Lord tic late; wilt please you to go up?
Up? tic a fair preferment, ha ha ha,
There should go shouts to vp-shots; not a breath
Of any mercy, yet? come, since we must;
Whose this?
The executioner, my Lord;
Death slave, down, or by the blood that moves me
Isle pluck thy throat out; go, Isle call you straight,
Hold boy; and this,
Soft boy isle bar you that
Take this then, yet I pray thee, that again
I do not joy in sight of such a Pageant
As presents death; Though this life have a curse;
Tic better then another, that is worse;
My Lord, now you are blind to this worlds sight,
Look upward to a world of endless light;
I, I, you talk of upward still to others,
And downwards look, with headlong eyes your selves.
Now come you up sir; But not touch me yet;
Where shall I be now?
Here my Lord;
Wheres that?
There, there, my Lord;
And where, slave, is that there?
Thou see I see not? yet I speak as I saw;
Well, now first fit?
Kneel, I beseech your Grace,
That I may do mine office with most order;
Do it, and if at one blow thou art short,
Give one and thirty, Isle endure them all.
Hold; stay a little; comes there yet no mercy?
High Heaven curse these exemplary proceedings,
When Justice fails, they sacrifice our example;
Let me beseech you, I may cut your hair;
Out ugly Image of my cruel Justice;
Yet wilt thou be before me, stay my will,
Or by the will of Heaven Isle strangle thee;
My Lord you make to much of this your body,
Which is no more your own;
Nor is it yours;
Isle take my death, with all the horrid rites
And representments, of the dread it merits;
Let tame Nobility, and numbed fools
That apprehend not what they undergo,
Be such exemplary, and formal sheep;
I will not have him touch me, till I will;
If you will needs rack me beyond my reason,
Hell take me, but Isle strangle half thats here,
And force the rest to kill me▪ Isle leap down
If but once more they tempt me to despair;
You wish my quiet, yet give cause of fury:
Think you to set rude winds upon the Sea,
Yet keep it calm? or cast me in a sleep,
With shaking of my chains about mine ears?
O honest Soldiers, you have seen me free,
From any care, of many thousand deaths!
Yet, of this one, the manner doth amaze me.
View, view, this wounded bosom, how much bound
Should that man make me, that would shoot it through;
Is it not pity I should lose my life,
By such a bloody and infamous stroke?
Now by thy spirit, and thy better Angel,
If thou were clear, the Continent of France,
Would shrink beneath the burden of thy death,
Ere it would b• are it;
Whose that?
I say well:
And clear your Justice, here is no ground shrinks,
If he were clear it would: And I say more,
Clear, or not clear, If he with all his foulness,
Stood here in one Scale, and the Kings chief Minion,
Stood in another, here: Put here a pardon,
Here lay a royal gift, this, this, in merit,
Should hoise the other Minion into ayre:
Hence with that frantic:
This is some poor witness
That my desert, might have out-weighed my forfeit:
But danger, haunts desert, when he is Greatest;
His hearty ills, are proved out of his glances,
And Kings suspicions, needs no Balances;
So her's a most decreetall end of me:
Which I desire, in me, may end my wrongs;
Commend my love, I charge you, to my brothers,
And by my love, and misery command them,
To keep their faiths that bind them to the King,
And prove no stomakers of my misfortunes;
Nor come to Court, till time hath eaten out,
The blots, and skarres of my opprobrious death;
And tell the Earl, my dear friend of D'Auergne,
That my death utterly were free from grief,
But for the sad loss of his worthy friendship;
And if I had been made for longer life,
I would have more deserved him in my service,
Beseeching him to know I have not used
One word in my arraignment; that might touch him,
Had I no other want then so ill meaning:
And so farewell for ever: never more
Shall any hope of my reuiuall see me;
Such is the endless exile of dead men.
Summer succeeds the spring; Autumn the Summer,
The Frosts of Winter, the fallen leaves of Autumn:
All these, and all fruits in them yearly fade,
And every year return: but cursed man,
Shall never more renew, his vanished face;
Fall on your knees, then Statists ere ye fall,
That you may rise again: knees bent too late,
Stick you in earth like statues: see in me
How you are powered down from your clearest heavens;
Fall lower yet: mixed with the vnmoued center,
That your own shadows may no longer mock ye▪
Struck, struck, O struck;
Fly, fly commanding soul,
And on thy wings for this thy bodies breath,
Bear the eternal victory of death.

Sons, hopeful buds of fruitful Italy,
Having banished war which like a prodigal▪
Kept wasteful revels with our subjects blond:
Since proud Anthonio our arch-enemy
Is in his journey towards th'vnderworld,
Or hovers in the shade of banishment;
Let vs in peace smile at our victory▪
And every breast pass his opinion
What pastime best becomes a conqueror.
What sport but conquest for a conqueror,
Then with our wounds undressed▪ our steeds still ••nd,
Branded with steel ere we wipe of the blood
Of conquered foes, lets with our shriller bugles
Summon the surly Landlord of the forest,
The Kingly Lyon to a bloody parley,
Combat the Hart, the Leopard or the Bore,
In single and adventurous hardyment:
The spirit of mirth in manly action rests,
Having quilt men lets now go concuer beasts.
Manly resolved; Hippolitoes advise▪
Rather like soldiers, and Octanioes sons,
Lets throw a general challenge through the world,
For a proud turney, at the which our selves
Consorted with a hundred of our knights,
Accoutred like so many Gods of war,
Will keep the lists against all adventurers,
Which like the suns light sigurd in a star,
Should be a brief Epitome of war.
Noble and royal, your opinion daughter.
Faith I shall anger soldiers, I would pour
Spirit of life▪ Aurum Potabile
Into the jaws of chap-falne scholarship,
That have since amorous Quid was exiled,
Lain in a sown, y aue many holds for war,
I would once view a garrison for wit:
It were heavenly sport to see a train of scholars
Like old trained soldiers fkit••each in the schools▪
Traverse their Ergoes and discharge their jests
Like peals of small-shot, were this motion granted
My self would be free woman of their hall,
And sit as sister at their festival•.
Have we not Padua
Yes, but the commanders
Deal with our graduates, as the general
Doth with his soldier, gives him place for favour,
Not for deserving, look intoo't your self,
You have Courts for tennis, and me thinks it were meet,
Learning should not stand balling in the street
For want of houseroome: oh tic much unfit
Courtiers should be all pleasure and small wit.
All that you speak is but what we command
But Officers fother cannot understand
Their Lords at first: were not a gallant sight,
To see wits army royal come from fight?
Some crowned with gold, others with wreath of baize,
And whilst they hold their solemn holidays,
Music should like a lover court the skies,
And from the world wrest ringing plaudities.
My sister would make a rare beggar.
True, shoe's parcel Poet, parcel fiddler already, and they commonly sing three parts in one.
Wrong neither art nor music, they are twins
Borne and begot in heate, your thought of both.
I think my Lord that music is divine,
Whose sacred strains have power to combine
The soul and body; and it reason bears,
For it is said that the Celestial spheres,
Dance to Apolloes lyre whose sprightly fires
Have tamd rude beasts and charmed men's wild desires:
The author was immortal, the first strings,
Made by a King, therefore an art for Kings:
The world's a body, every liberal art
A needful member, music the soul and hart.
Well for his sex hath Flor•mell discourse
Of heavenly music, and since all conclude
It is an art divine, we were too rude
Should we reject it, music, I take great pride,
To hear soft music and thy shrill voice chide.
To please your grace, though J want voice and skill,
Isle show my self obedient to your will.
This would have done rare at a scholars window,
How do you like it father?
Highly my boys, I relish all delight▪
For when the fiery spirit of hot youth
Kept house within me, I was all delight:
Then could I take my love, no love more fair
By the smooth hand, and gazing in loves ayre
Tell her her beauty beautified the sky,
And that the sun stole lustre from her eye.
I do admire to hear my princely father thus mertilie discourse of trifling love.
Nay more my boys, when J was at your years,
I went a pilgrimage through Italy,
to find the shrine of some loue-hallowed saint.
Devote to beauty, I would pray for love,
Desiring beauty I would sue for love,
Admiring beauty I would serve for love:
Pray, sue, and serve, till beauty granted love.
If she denied me, I would swear she granted,
If she did swear that she could never love me,
Then would I swear she could not choose but love me:
Let her swear ne'er so much, still have I sworn,
Till she had said, I should not be forsworn.
I marry brothers, here was cunning love,
Learn like good scholars, heel make you wise in love:
He was a man in love, were you such men,
Then were you men indeed, but boys till then.
To please my Father, isle inquest of beauty,
And never make return till I have found,
A love so fair, so rich, so honourable,
As fits the honour of Octanioes sons.
The like (you pleased) vows young Hippolito.
Doe boys, and I will teach you how to choose them.
Elect not amongst whole troupes of Courtly dames,
For amongst many, some must needs be ill:
The seld seen Phoenix ever sits alone,
Jove courted Danes when she was alone:
Alone my boys, that is the only way,
Ladies yield that alone, they else say nay.
An expert soldier; how shall they choose them Father?
If her bright eye dim not the Diamond,
Say it is bright, but brighter iems delight you,
If that her breath do not perfume the ayre;
Say it is sweet, but sweeter sweets content you.
If that her cheek compared to the Lily,
Make not the Lily black with whiter whiteness;
Say it is Lily white, but black to white,
When your cho••e white must have such high exceeds.
Father you do exceed things possible,
Faith say how many Ladies have you seen,
Much fairer then my self, in all your travail?
Should the Crow teach me, then no Lady fairer,
If judgment tell me, then a many fairer:
Thou art mine own, J must think well of thee,
Yet Florimella many doe excel thee.
Should the Crow teach, I am not all Crowblacke.
Though judgment; J not all perfection black,
Though you have seen Ladies that dim the day,
Yet will J think my self as fair as they.
Doe Florimella, and isle one day get,
A husband for thee that shall think thee fair.
And time in faith, that pretty sport would be,
Wive it for them, you shall not husband me.
Yet you will take my counsel in your choice.
Yes, if I had not years enough to choose,
Would you direct me as you doe your sons?
With daughter take a man with such a nose,
With such an eye, with such a colour beard,
Thus big, thus tall, with all his teeth before;
Thus leapt, thus legedd, thus handsome, thus apparrelld,
Were not this pitiful! o pitiful:
Now by the soul of soul▪commanding love,
I will not stoop to such obedience,
I must be bid to blush when I am kissed,
Bid my love welcome, and I thank you sir,
With no indeed, I know not what love is,
I never heard so much of love before,
I pray take heed, nay fie you go too far,
With such a rabble of prescriptions,
As never maid of a Conceiving spirit,
Will follow them, yet brothers go you on,
Take you good counsel, Florsmell will none.
I daughter? are you so experiened?
An elder woman might have spoken less,
Yet by your leave minion, isle watch you so,
Your I shall still be governed by my no.
But come my sons take pattern of great Jove,
Early in the morning suit your selves for love.
Go daughters with your Angels to the brooke,
And see if any siluer-coated fish,
Will nibble at your worme-emboweldhooks:
Decciue the wat•y subjects, yet the name
Of foul deceit me thinks should fray them from you,
Alack, alack, I cannot blame the world,
That in the world there is so much deceit;
When this poor simple trade must use deceit.
But with what conscience can J make this net,
Within whose meshes all are caught that come:
They cousin one at once, this cousins many,
I will vndoo't it shall not cousin any.
But daughters go practise that little sin,
Isle mend this great fault •re the fault begin.
O cozening fortune how hast thou deceived me,
Turning me out a doors to banishment,
And made another Lord of Mantua.
I that was Lord now slave to misery.
Take comfort yet dear father.
Comfort? no:
My brest's turned prison, my proud jailer woe,
Locks out all comfort: whirs your valiant brother?
All discontent like to a wounded lyon
He forages the woods, daring proud fortune
At her best weapon, he accounts this smart,
As a slight hurt, but far off from the hart.
How holds his humour?
The same fashion still:
But somewhat ••dder-colourd death may end
But never change him, see our words have raised him.
Fitly applied for a walks like a ghost▪ Why how now son?
Peace.
Brother.
Good now peace,
VVake me not as you love me.
What a sleep?
I, in a most sweet sleep, blisters o'your tongues for wa∣king me.
Thou forget thy self.
J should not be a Courtierels, me thought J was at a strange wedding?
Prithee what wedding?
Of a young Lawyer and old Madam Conscience.
I scarce believe that.
Nor J neither, because it was a dream, but me thought the young man doted on the old woman exceedingly.
That was miraculous! did they live together?
In the country they did, and agreed passing well, all the long vacation, and but for two things he would have carried her up to the •arm with him.
What things were those?
One was, because her gown was of the old fashion, the other was cause he would not have her by when he took fees▪
His reason for that?
For fear if a bribe had bin offered, she being by he should have had the bad conscience to take it.
His wife and he lived together.
Conscience and the Lawyer, as lovingly as men and their wives do, one flesh but neither meddle nor make one with another
Man and wife part, thats strange!
O lord sit, profit can part the soul and the body, and why not man and wife, now you have had my dream father, let me understand yours.
How can he dream, that never sleeps my son▪
O best of all: why, your whole world doth nothing but dream, your machiauell he dreams of state, deposing kings, grounding new monarchies: the lover hee dreams of kisses, amorous embraces: the newe-married wife dreams,
that rid of her young husband she hugs her old love, and likes her dream well enough too: the Country gentle woman dreams that when her first husband's dead, she marries a knight, and the name of Lady sticks so in her mind, that shees never at hearts∣ease till she get her husband dubbed; the Captain, he dreams of oppressing the soldiers, devising stratagēs, to keep his dream, and that dream wakes in the pate of Octauio your Arch-enemy▪ who is not content to hurl vs into the whirlepoole of banish∣meant, but binds weights at our heals leaden poverty, to sink vs to the very depth that we should never rise again.
Then since all dream, let vs dream of revenge.
I marry sister, that were a dream worth dreaming, and isle sleep out my brains but isle compass it.
Pretty content; we kill our foes in dreams.
Vds foot, isle doe it waking then.
Aspero.
At Counsel table.
Hear me.
In his Duchess arms, it were base to go disguised,
No, my revenge shall wear an open brow;
J will not play the coward, kill him first
And send my challenge after; isle make known
My name, and cause of coming, if I thought
Grief like a painter had so spoiled mmy visage
He could not know me, on my breast id write
How ere I am disfigured through woe,
J am the thing was made for Aspero.
Speak not, I am as constant as the Center,
Some fortune good or bad doth beckon me,
And I will run, bitter revenge tastes sweet,
If ne'er on earth farewell, in heaven weal meet.
Attendance sitra, your low Commedie,
Craves but few Actors, weal break company.
As many blessings as the sea hath sands
Attend thee in thine honourable journey:
Come pretty maids we have not wrought to day,
Or fish, or fast, our need must needs obey.
Now sir what have you been about?
About my living sit.
Whats that? feeding?
No sir, looking into the vnderofficers about the Court.
Can get any living out of them?
I sir, my betters get good livings out of officers, and why not I? but to be plain, I have bin seeking your good Lordship.
But your boyship hath so sought vs, that wee have found you.
Will you sell your findings my Lord?
They are scarce worth giving.
Yes, a box to keep them in, for fear you loose them a∣gain.
And I were a man as I am no woman, it pepper your box for that jest.
You jest.
In earnest law I would Madam.
Well sir, no more, here comes our royal Father.
How now my boys? provided for your journey?
Beauty conduct you: what, attired like shepherds?
I thought t'haue seen you mounted on your steeds,
Whose fiery stomachs from their nostrils breath
The smoke of courage, and whose wanton mouths
Do proudely play upon their iron bits:
And you in stead of these poor weeds in robes,
Richer then that which Ariadne wrought,
Or Cytharaes aery-mouing vestment.
Thus should you seem like lovers suited thus,
y'oude draw fair Ladies harts into their eyes,
And strike the world dead with astonishment.
Father such cost doth pass your sons revenues
We take example from immortal Jove,
Who like a shepherd would repair to love.
And gentle love conduct you both my sons,
Daughter go bring them onward in their way,
Were not we called back by important business,
We would not leave you thus: Hortensio
Is my disguise prepared, for J unknown
Will see how they behave themselves in love.
Tic done my Lord.
Once more my boys adieu:
He sends you forth that means to follow you.
Now brothers you must amongst these wenches,
Faith for a wager which shall get the fairest?
Isle gage a 100. crowns mine proves the fairest.
A match, isle venture twice so much of mine.
And isle lay against you both, that both your loves Get them when you can where you can, or how you can, shall not be able to compare with me in beauty.
That wager isle take for tic surely won.
Las thou art but a star to beauties sun.
Star me no stars, go you and stare for love,
Isle stay at home, and with my homely beauty
Purchase a love, shall think my looks as fair,
As those fair loves that you shall fetch so far;
But take your course, fate send you both fair luck.
How if it be foul?
Nay left be forked, you must bear it off with head and shoulders.
Oh stale, that jest runs oth'lees.
You must consider tic drawn out of the bottom of my wit.
O shallow wit, at the bottom so soon.
Deep enough to lay you in the mire.
Orals tic shallow indeed, for they are foundered already,
but I must play dun, and draw them all out of the mire,
Whats a clock my Lord?
Which of them dost ask? thou see they are two.
What two are they Madam?
Why two fools.
Is it not past two, doth it not come somewhat near three sister:
Show perryall and tak't, but come my Lord you have stood fooling long enough, will you about your business in good earnest?
Indeed we will.
And they are deeds you must trust too, for women will re∣spect your words but slitely without deeds.
Why, are women called Angels but because they de∣light in good deeds, and love heaven, but that it will not be won without them.
They shall have deeds.
Brother, and good deeds too:
They are tongues that men must speak with when they wo.
That tongue weel practise, sister to love we leave you.
Lovers take heed least cunning love deceive you.
NO more; thus suited isle attend my sons,
Impute it not to any ruffian vain,
But to a fathers wakeful providence,
Lovers like bees are priuiledgd to taste,
All buds of beauty: should they chance to light
Upon some worthless weed isle hinder it:
The eyes of youth will now and then dwell there,
Whereas they should not glance, this doubt I fear.
And well advised my liege should they incline
To love not fitting their estates and births,
You with your present counsel may prevent them.
Thats my intent, and further in my absence
I leave my land and daughter to thy charge,
The girl is wanton, if she gad abroad
Restrain her, bound her in his chamber door;
My word's thy warrant, let her know so much:
Farewell, at home I leave my fear with thee
And follow doubt abroad.
Isle careful be.
Now to my business, I have a strange habit, and I must cut out an humour suitable to it, and humours are picked so near the bone, a man can scarce get humour enough to give a flea his breakfast, but I am a stale ruffian, my habit is brave, and so shall my humour be, and here comes one to give me earnest of it.
Send him a letter that I come to kill him.
It were great valour but little policy my Lord.
How long have you bin a matchiauilian boy?
Ever since I practiced to play the knave my Lord,
Then policy and knavery are somewhat a kin.
As near, as penury and gentry, a degree and half removed no more.
How came in the kindred twixt gentry and penury?
Shall I tell you sir▪
First tell me what thou art?
Lyme and hair: plaster of Paris, kneaded together with rye dow and goats milk, I am of a hot constitution, wonnot freeze.
Thy profession.
A fool or a knave choose you which.
Then thou art fit for any gentleman's company.
True boy, for your sweet fool and your fine knave are like a pair of upright shoes, that gentlemen wear so long now of one foot, then of another, till they leave them never a good soale.
That makes your fool &amp; your knave have such bad soales; but what dost thou seek?
Mine own undoing sir, service.
Indeed service is like the common law, it undoes any one that follows it long, can describe service?
Yes, tic a vacant place, filled up with a complete knave, a miserable pander, or an absolute beggar.
your opinion boy.
I say a serving-man is an Antecedent.
Because he sits before a Cloakebag.
He is likewise a nominatiue Case, and goes before his mi∣stress.
Thats when the verb he goes before his mistress and he can agree together.
If not, he turns Aocusatiue and follows his master.
Wooed follow me fellow.
To a tavern, and thou wooed pay for my ordinary.
My business is more serious, thou dost not know me.
Nor my self neither so long as I have maintenance.
Did never hear of the wars betwixt Venice and Man∣tua.
I cut some few of the Mantuans throats.
And were not a knave for it.
No, J was a Venetian commander, a great man: the reason of this question.
Dost know the Duke of Venice?
I am his right hand.
Wooed do me a message to him▪
What is it?
Tell him J hate him, my name's Aspero, has banished my fa∣there, usurps his Duke dome, and I come to be revenged.
Anthonioes son? vesfoot hast any gold.
Thy reason.
Shalt be revenged, give me money, isle be thy snail &amp; score out a silver path to his confusion.
No, my revenge shall be like my fathers wrongs in Apert• lend me any honest aide.
Pox of honesty, it goes a begging upon crutches, and can get relief out of few but scholars, I shall not kill him?
Jde be thy death first.
Yet you say you hate him.
Equal with my shame.
Make him chew a bullet then.
No, though my state with poverty be tainted,
Mine acts and honour shall live still acquainted.
True moulded honour I admire the temper
Of thy mild patience, that not all the wrongs
J laid upon thee can enforce thy spleen
To foul requital, had thy coming tan
Any base level, it had cost thy life,
But being free and full of honour live,
Thy virtues teach me honour freely go,
A secret friends worse then an open for:
You are too honest for my attendance, farewell sir.
And thou too knavish for my employment.
But here comes more company.
Boy, let your attendance waite further of▪
Under this shade J mean to take a sleep.
And may you madam like a soldier sleep.
How boy in alarms.
No Lady but in arms, and you had need of them too, for see the enemy comes down, shall I sound a parley▪
Peace wag.
Peace, O coward, offer peace and but two to two of them.
Boy dost know what gentleman it is?
Gentle madam no, but he is a man.
Believe me boy he is a proper man.
Man is a proper name to a man, and so he may be a proper man.
I love him hes a very proper man.
She loves him for his properties, and indeed many women love men only to make properties of them.
Pray gentleman if no more, tell me where you were born.
Fair virgin if so much, no where some where any where, where you would have me.
Faith I would have it.
Marry and you shall have it Lady.
What shall J have sir.
Why a kiss.
Nothing else: we Courtiers▪ count them trifles, not worth taking.
Why then bestow one of me isle take it most thankfully▪
I will not stand with you for a trifle, sir pray where were you borne?
In Italy, but never yet in Venice.
You may in Venice, gentle sir adieu.
Gentle Lady thrice as much to you.
Farewell sweet heart.
God a mercy bagpudding.
You may in Venice gentle sir adieu? this begets wonder.
Yare not wise then▪ what do you take her for?
Some great woman▪
Some woman great with child, be ruled, shees a pink board her.
But how▪ the means.
Make but a shot of flattery at his broad side, and sheele strike sail presently.
Flattery▪
I flattery, women are like fiddlers, speak them fair theile play of any instrument.
I, that they can play of▪
Shees a botcher cannot play a little of all▪
And to common that will play too much of any, but come isle use means to get her.
Nay you must first have means to give her.
Why in the course of scholarship, the genitiue Case goes before the Datiue.
The Grammarians are fools that placed them so; for in Re∣rum Nature, the Datiue goes before the genetiue, you must al∣ways give before you can get, lovers are fools, and fools must be liberal.
Will not women respect a man for his good parts?
yes, some few; but all for his good gifts, a gentleman with his good gifts sit at the upper end of the table on a chair and a cushion, when a scholar with his good parts will be glad of a joined stool in the Lobby with the Chambermaids.
I will have good gifts &amp; show my self liberal to, though I beg for it.
I think that will be the end, for penury has tan a leaf of your pocket to keep Court in this Christmas.
Well, how so ere, shoe's fair and courteous,
And courteous fair, is a fair gift in Ladies:
She may bee well descend, if she be,
Shoe's sit for love, and why not then for me.
And you be not fitted in Venice tic strange, for tic counted the best flesh shambles in Italy: but heir's no notable coward, that having suffered wrong by a man, seeks to right himself of a woman.
Look you sir, I am like an irish beggar, and an English bur, will stick close where I find a good nap, I must and will dwell with you.
What can do:
Still Aquanit•, stamp Crabs, and make mustard, I can do as much as all the men you keep▪
Prithee what?
Why undo you, and twenty could do no more, but busi∣nes, come my wits grow rusty for employment.
Can keep counsel▪
My mother was a midwife.
Hast any skill in Love?
I am one of C•pids ageats, have Ouids are a••andi ad un∣gues, know 〈◊〉 and can apply •emedium, and minister effec∣tum to a hair, but why do you ask▪ have you traue•st an action in loves spiritual court▪
Not to dissemble, we have.
And without dissembling you'll never 〈◊〉 out of it, but tell me true, are you in love already▪ or ha•• you 〈◊〉 des••e to bee in love
Indeed I am in love to be in love.
And I desire to live in fond desire,
And yet I doubt to ••ch blind •ancie• f•e•.
Tic good to doubt, but t•s not good to fear,
Yet still to doubt, will at the lest prove fear;
Doubt love, tic good, but tic not good to fear it,
Love hurts them most, that least of all come near it.
Then to doubt love is the no•t way to love▪
Doubtless it is if you ••s doubt not love▪
Doubt and misdoubt? what difference is there here?
Yes, much: when men misdoubt, tic said they fear▪
But is it good in love to be in doubt▪
No not in love, doubt then i• 〈◊〉
Tic good to doubt before you be i• love,
Doubt counsel•, how 〈◊〉 loves misery.
Your doubtful counsel counsels vs to love.
To equal love, I like experience speak.
Experien•d lover, you have spoken well.
Experince wanting lovers, truth I tell,
Young wits be wife, in love live constant still,
You need nor doubt good hap not misdoubt ill.
And see your discourse has coniurd up beauty in the likeness of two countrimaides, but you shall not come in the circles of their arms if J can keep you ou•.
These are too mean for love, brother lets leave them.
What? speechless? will you make dumb virgins of them?
Oh we are sons of a great father.
So is the sun of heaven, yet hee smiles on the bramble as∣well as the Lily, kisses the check of a beggar as lovingly as a gentlewoman, and tic good to imitate, him tic good.
Say sister, had we not fine sport to day?
We had, if death may be accounted play.
Why tic accounted pleasure to kill fish.
A pleasure nothing pleasant to the fish.
Yet fishes were created to be kilt.
Cruel creation then to have lives spilled.
Their bodies being food, maintain our breath.
What bodies then have we to live by death?
Come, come, you vainly argue, it is good.
What is it good to kill? oh god oh god?
If it be sin, then you your self's a sinner.
I thank proud fortune fort, my woes beginner.
Foot are ye not asha••d to staud by like idle •iphers, &amp; such places of account void? and they had bin rich offices and you poor Courtiers, you would have bin in them in •al•e the time.
Though against stomach.—
Nothing against stomach and you love me.
Fair maids if so▪ you be you are well met.
Shepherds or be what else you are well met.
Tic well, if that well met we be to you.
If not to vs you are unto your selves.
We did not meet, you sa••vs come together.
What ere we saw▪ you •et ere you came hither.
We did, we m•t•n kindred, we are brothers.
So shepherds we did meet for we are sisters.
Then sisters, let vs brothers husbands •e.
So brothers without our leaves you well may be.
Say we desire to husband it with you.
Know we desire no husbands such as you▪
A shepheatd is an honest trade of life.
Yet honest shepherd has with honest trade some strife.
He seldom swears but by his honesty.
So honest men do too as well as he.
But will you trust a shepherd when he vows,
No never, if his oath be that he loves.
Yet if I swear, that needs must be mine oath,
Swear not, for we are misbeleeuers both.
Let vs persuade you to believe we love you.
First we entreat you give vs time to prove you.
Take time, mean time weal praise ye to our powers.
Oh time, sometime shepherds have idle hours.
Isle say thy cheek no natural beauty lacks,
Good, if it had bin spoke behind our backs.
Isle say this is the heaven of heavenly graces.
O heaven, how they can flatters to our faces. Exeunt.
Brother the last is fairest in my eye.
I but the first brother is first in beauty▪
First in your choice, but not in beauty sir.
Come ye so near as choice: then tic time for me to stop for fear the music run too far out of tune, how now gallants? in dumps.
No, but in love.
Thats a dump, loves nothing but an Jtalian dump or a
French brawl.
Me thinks tic sweeter music.
And it were in tune I confess it, but you take your parts too low, you are treble Courtiers, and will never agree with these Country Mynnikins, the musickes too base, never meddle in it.
Peace doatard, peace, thy sight of love is done,
Thou can not see the glory of loves sun.
Spent age with frosty clouds thy sight doth dim,
That thou art blind to see and apt to sin.
Is it accounted sin to speak the truth.
And worse, when age spits poison against youth.
They do not fit your callings, let them go.
Yet they are fair: we love, thou art loves foe.
J am your friend, and wish you from this love.
Can thou heave hills? then thou my thoughts moist mon•▪ but never else.
Never!
No never.
Stay.
We are bound for love.
Hate.
Hinder not our way. 
J boys? will Eagles Eaglets turn to bastards.
Then must J change my vain, and once more prove,
To teach you how to hate as well as love. 
SWeet honey candy madam, if it be no forfeit to tell tales out of Cupids free school, tell what proficient your lo∣for Aspero proves.
Now so love help me lot, a passing weak one and very unready.
The better, for women would have their lovers unready 〈◊〉 choose.
〈◊〉 ready you are to play the knave? but to Aspero•
〈◊〉 not think but theirs good music in him, your tongue harps so much upon his name▪
J shall never forget him.
I faith Lady then I know what J know▪
What do you know I prey?
Marry that if you never forget him, you shall ever remem∣ber him, was he never in your chamber▪
Yes, but he showed himself the strangest fool: And by my troth lo. J am sorry for it to, J had as good an appetite to maintain discourse; but here acomes, if ever I choose a man by the fullness of his Calfe, or a cock by the crowing, look and the •ashfull fool do not blush already.
You may do well to kiss him, and make him bold Madam.
Boy, go know what strange gentleman that is▪
Slid what a strange Lady's this• madam though I seem a stranger to you, J lay with one last night that's well acquainted with you.
Acquainted with me?
And knows you, and loves you, and you love him, &amp; have bestowed kind favours of him to.
I bestow favours? what favours?
Though it were but a trifle he took it as kindly as some would have done a kiss▪
Lord what a while this jest has bin a brooding? and it proves but addle too now it is hatched.
Tic a pig of your own sow madam, and I hope your wit will bestow the nursing of it.
So it had need, I think tic like to have but a dry nurse of yours.
O dry jest, all the wit in your head will scarce make sippits in it, what a ground? and such a fair landing place? get a shore, or be rank amongst fools for ever.
And faith first not pity such a proper man should keep com∣pany with a fool.
I keep company with none but you Lady.
You keep mine against my will.
So do I the fools I protest; but take away yours, isle soon shift away the fools.
I have not seen a fool so handsomely shifted in Ve∣nice.
But come, shall the fool and you bee friends?
The fool and J? you're too familiar.
Why, J hope a fool may be a Ladies familiar at all times▪
Come you're too saucy.
Indeed tic a fools part of Ione to be in the sauce before my
Lady; otherwise I am neither fool nor saucy.
Not, proud sir?
Not, coy Lady; come why should your tongue make so many false fierce that never come from your heart: you love me, I know you love me, your spirit, your look, your countenance be∣rays it.
You jest.
In earnest you do, and you shall know it in earnest too, lend me this jewel.
Jewel? away you sharking companion.
How?
Wandering strauagant, that like a droane flies humming from one land to another.
Slight and thou hast any wit, now show her thy sting.
And lightst upon every dairy maid and kitchen-wench.
And now and then on a Ladies lip as—
You did of mine you would say, and J am hart sorry you can say it, and when by your buzzing flattery, you have sucked the smallest favour from them, you presently make wing for ano∣there.
Marry buzz.
Double the zard and take the whole meaning for your la∣bore.
The buzzards wit's not so bald yet I trow.
A word in your ear, madam the buzzard will anger you.
With staying you do.
With going I shall.
Away.
I away, never entreat, tic too late, if you send after me, I will not come back, if you write to me, I will not answer, drown your eyes in tears, I will not wipe them, break your heart with
sighs, J will not pity you: never look, signs cannot move me, if you speak, tic too late, if you entreat, tic bootless, if you hang upon me, tic needless, I offred love &amp; you scorned it, my absence will be your death, and I am proud o•t▪
Js he gon boy?
Yes faith Madam.
Clean out of sight?
And out of mind to, or else you have not the mind of a true woman.
Thou readst a false comment boy, call him again; yet doe not, my heart shall break ere it bend.
Or else it holds not the true temper of woman▪ hood, but faith tell me Madam, do you love him?
As a Welshman doth toasted cheese, I cannot dine without him, hoe's my pillow I cannot sleep quietly without him; my rest, I cannot live without him.
O that he knew 〈◊〉 Lady.
He does, he would never have left me else, he 〈◊〉
You called him fool, but me thinks he proves a physician, has found the disease of your liver, by the complexion of your looks, but see he returns.
And now me thinks J loath him more then I loved him▪ go run for Hortensio my guardian, bid him come armed, thet's intent of treason tell him.
My Lady cannot choose but dance well, shees so full of pre∣tie changes.
I wonder you dare come in my sight, considering the wrong you did me.
I came I confess, but with no intent to see you J protest, and that shall be manifested by the shortness of my stay.
Tic too long and it were shorter then tic, will he not court me? not? no• speak to me neither? nay never ask pardon▪ tic to late, we shall ha'you come to my window one of these mornings with
music, but doe not, my patience is to much out of tune, out of my sight I hate thee, worse then I loath painting, I hate thee, out of my sight.
Enough, will you be a quiet woman yet? will you, speak a∣fore my resolve take strength? will you, do but say you are sorry I ask no mends but a kiss, kindly, come: shall I hat'e?
Isle kiss a toad first.
You will, remember this another time, a toad you will: J know thou love me, and J see the pride of thy humour; I doe, and thou shalt know I doe; half an hour hence wee shall have you weeping on your knees, with O my Aspero would I had died when I rejected thee, but doe, weep till J pity thee; a tooad! isle make thee creep on thy knees for a kiss.
you will.
Thy bare knees, J will, and go without it to.
Out humoured? O I would sell my part of immortality.
But to touch my hand, thou would, I know thou would,
O how spleen swells me? help Hortensio, creep a my knees? Hotensio.
How fares my beauteous charge? weeping Lady? the law shall fetch red water from his veins that hath drawn blood of your eyes, is this the traitor?
Traitor? in thy disloyal throat thou least.
O monstrous, a wishes you choked my Lord.
How! choked?
I choked? for a wishes the traitor in your throat, and hoe's a very small traitor that is not able to choke a wiser man then your Lordship.
Down with him.
I, down with him, if he stick in your throat, and spare not.
Do not kill him, though hee deserves death yet doe not kill him, only disweapon him; so.
But madam.
I will not hear him, keep him; but keep him safe on your
lives, if he get away or miscarry in prison: as I am heir of Venice isle have your heads for it. 
I warn you madam, if irons will hold him. 
Fie, fie, with a cord? here, bind him with my scarf, that will hold, and yet stand away, isle do it my self, I cannot trust him with you, least you should let him sometime scope free: besides, you cannot use him according to the quality of his offence, and because isle glory in his bondage my chamber shall bee his pri∣son, let him have neither light meat nor drink, but what J pro∣uide him my self.
Your will's a law, we obey it madam.
She knows me sure; well, though my joys be thrall,
My comforts this, a speedy death ends all.
Oh you are not gone then.
Heir's a new kind of courting, never seen before J think.
He would anger me.
Nay you take a course, to anger him first J think.
Should J have let him go, (as I could no other way detain him in modesty) and he had set his love on some other, t'would have fretted my hart strings a sunder.
Why did you set him so light then?
Not for any hate, but in pride of my humour.
Why did you command him close prisoner to your chamber.
That I may feed mine eye with the sight of him, and be sure no other beauty can rob me of his company: I will have it all, I will not loose an inch of him: And in this, I but imitate our Ita∣lian dames, who cause their friends to clap their jealous husbands in prison, that if they have occasion to use them within forty weeks and a day, they may surely know where to find them.
If I had any knauēry in me, as J am all honesty, I could make a notable scene of mirth betwixt these two Amorists.
Early sorrow, art got up so soon?
What? ere the Sun ascends in the East?
O what an early waker art thou grown?
But cease discourse, and close unto thy work;
Under this drooping myrtle will I sit,
And work a while upon my corded net;
And as I work, record my sorrows past,
Asking old Time, how long my woes shall last:
And first, but stay alas what do J see?
Moist gum like tears, drop from this mournful tree
And see, it sticks like birdlime; twill not part;
Sorrow is even such birdlime at my hart.
Alas poor tree, dost thou want company?
Thou dost, I see it, and J will weep with thee,
Thy sorrows make thee dumb, and so shall mine.
It shall be tongueless, and so seem like thine;
Thus will I rest my head unto thy bark,
Whilst my sighs tell my sorrows; hark tree, hark.
Fie, fie, how heavy is light love in me?
How slow runs swift desire?
This leaden ayre,
This ponderous feather, merry Melancholy.
This passion, which, but in passion
Hath not his perfect shape.
And shapeless love
Hath in his watch of love oreslept himself.
Then sleepy wakers, let these grave lets wander
And waite th'ascension of beauties wonder:
But stay, a man striving twixt life and death.
Nay then tic so, my heavenly loue's gone by,
And struck him dead with her loue-darting eye.
If speech-bereauing love will let thee speak,
Then speechless man, speak with the tongue of love,
And tell me, if thou saw not Cynthia
Seeking Endimion in these flowery dales.
Dales for Endimion and fair Cynthia fit,
But never heavenly goddess blessed this grove,
These woods are consecrate to grief, not love.
Out Atheist, thou profane▪st loves deity,
For, false-reporter, I in them have seen
A love that makes a Negro of Loves Queen:
One that when as the sun keeps holiday,
His beauty clads him in his best array,
Now truly shepherd none such sojourn here
Please you survey the Cell, go in and see,
I'm hearst, and none but sorrow lies with me.
Call you this sorrows cave?
Rather a Cell, 
Where pleasure grows, and none but Angels dwell.
To what compare shall I compare thee to?
Incomparable beauties Paragon.
I will compare her beauty to the sun,
For her bright lustre gives the morning light.
Jle say she is like Cynthia when day's done,
Or Lady to the mistress of the night.
O speak but to me, and J shall be blessed.
One smile would lay my earring thoughts at rest.
How now fair sister? you are hard beset.
Nymph.
Goddess.
Saint, once more, you're both well met.
O she is fair.
She fairer.
Both more fair
Then rocks of pearl, or the chaste evening ayre.
Say sweet, intend you not to fish to day?
No, shepherds, now fish do not bite but play.
What time, sweet love, keep fishes when they bite?
Early in the morning, or else late at night.
Come, will you talk with me till time of fishing?
My father, sir, will chide if I be missing.
The match is made, they are even upon going.
What should we do?
Why as poor parents and dutiful servants should doe, run amongst the bushes and catch flies.
Stay forward daughters whether are ye going▪
Father, I think these shepherds come a wooing.
A wooing daughters? ne'er imagine so:
What man's so mad to marry grief and woe?
Why where lives sad grief? heir's all speaking joy.
O I would live and die with such annoy.
But they are poor, and poverty is despised:
No, they are fair, beauty is highly prized.
Twill be a match, they are beating the price already.
They once were fair, sorrow from that hath changed them
They once knew wealth, but chance hath much estranged them,
Have they bin fair? what fairer then they are?
Why tic not possible, this heavenly fair
Hath only in it self beauties exceed,
O then rich, fair, and only selves exceed.
Come daughters, and come shepherds, if you please,
Isle lead you to the lodge of little ease,
Where I will feast you with what cheer I may,
Grief shall turn mirth, and keep high holiday.
A word with you, you mean to marry these wenches,
We doe.
And are going to contract your selves.
We are.
And what say you to this?
God speed you: I would have you marry on saint Lukes day.
Why?
Because J would offer at your wedding.
Come, you are all envy, feed upon thy hate,
This day our quest of love shall terminate.
Not if I live, this malady of love,
Js grown so strong, it will not be driven out.
To see the folly of a doting father;
What toil I had to fashion them to love,
And how tic doubled to misfashion them.
They shall not wed, yet how shall J prevent it?
Fearing th'euent I have forethought a means,
And here it lies, swaggering becomes not age,
Now like the Fox, isle go a pilgrimage.
Frolic my boys, I come to mar your sport,
Your Country music must not play at Court.
But first, isle write back to Hortensio
For apprehension of young Aspero:
They have not yet dynde, isle bid my self their guest
Religion beg? a fashion in request. 
Art sure she hates me boy.
More then his death, J have bin in his bosom sir, and this day she intends your execution.
My execution! the reason of his hate?
His humour, nothing but a kind of strange cross humour in that you rejected his love.
Thats not capital.
Not to cross a great ones humour? no treason more▪ great personages humours are puritans, thei'l as live endure the devil as soon as a cross, and can away with him better.
I will submit, ask pardon on my knee.
Is your proud humour come down in faith, your high humour that would not stoop an inch of the knees; isle helped up again, and't be but to uphold the jest; I must bring her as low ere I have done; O base, J would rather lay my neck under the Axe of her hate, then my sport under the feet of
his humour; but be counselld, isle teach you to prevent both, &amp; per∣chance make her upstart humour stoop gallant too.
Isle hold thee my best jewel and thou dost.
And pawn me as poor Lords do their jewels too, will you not? receive me; you shall counterfeit your self dead.
The life of that jest.
It may be she dissembles all this while, loves you, and puts on this show of hate of purpose to humble you: she may, and I believe—
What?
That most intelligencers are knaves, and some women dis∣sēblers; being thought dead (as let me alone to buzz that into the credulous ear of the Court) if she have any sparks of love, theil kindle and flame bright through the cinders of her hart.
If not,
If not, twill be a means for your escape: isle say you reque∣sted at your death to be buried at your native City: and what Courtier, if a Christian can deny that?
I am all thine, my humor's thy patient.
And if I do not kill it, I am not worthy to be your physician.
I mary Lady; why now you credit your sex: a women's ho∣nor or humour should be like a ship under sail, split her keel ere she veil. 
Isle split my heart ere my humour strike sail: here comes his Page, how now boy? how doth your master.
Well madam he.
Well?
Very well.
Where is he?
Where none of your proud sex will ever come, I think: in heaven.
Is he dead?
See madam, and seeing blush, and blushing shame, that your ungentle humour should be the death of so good and gene∣rous
a spirit.
My Aspero dead!
Boy See madam, what a mutation
I see too much, and curse my proud humour that was the cause of it: Aspero, kind soul, proud sullen Florimell, disdainful humour, that in one minute hast eternally undone me: I would not kiss the living substance, that being dead dote on thy picture: oh I loved thee ever with my soul: O let me kiss this shroud of beauty: I would not accept thee living, that being dead on my knees adore thee: could kisses recover thee, I would dwell on thy lips: kneel till my knees grew to the ground, dear gentle Aspero she that procured thy death will die with thee,
And crave no heaven, but still to lie with thee.
I take you at your word Lady:
Nay never recant, I have witness on it now: is your proud humour come down? could you not have said so at first? and saved me a la∣bore of dying?
Lives Aspero?
Live quoth? sfoot what man would bee so mad to lye in his cold grave alone, and may lie in a warm bed with such a beautiful wife as this will be? have I tan your humour napping in faith?
Am I ore reached?
In your humour Madam, nothing else, and I am as proud on it.
Do not flowt me; and you doe, I shall grow into my humour again.
In jest.
In earnest I shall, and then I know what I know.
You may▪ but and you do, I shall die again.
In jest.
Nay in earnest madam, and then—
No more, thou hast driven me clean out of conceit with my humour, I love thee, I confess it, shalt be my husband, isle live
with thee, thou art my life, and isle die with thee.
What more I mean is coated in my look,
If thou acceptst it, swear,
I kiss the book.
Boy, run to the master of my Gundelo, and will him attend me after supper at the garden stairs, I mean to take the evening ayre, tell him.
It shall be done madam. 
Nay if I say the word, it shall be done Aspero▪
Look to your •elf my Lord, I lay my life, my Lady means to steal you away to night.
Away? isle call Hortensio, isle not be accessory to your fello∣ny madam.
The fool comes without calling.
You shall know him by these signs.
Good figure, very good figure, for as the house is found out by the sign, so must this traitor be scented out by the token, up with the first sign good Assistance.
A proper man without a beard.
How? a proper man without a beard? we shall scarce find that sign in all Venice: for the propernesse of a man lives altoge∣there in the fashion of his beard, good Assistance the next.
Fair spoken and well conditioned.
More strange: you shall have many proper men fair∣spoken, but not one amongst twenty well conditioned, but soft, this should be the house by the sign, I must pick it out of him by wit.
As good say steal my Lord, what mary-bone of wit is your judgment going to pick now?
I must, like a wise Justice of peace, pick treason out of this fellow.
Treason?
I, treason madam; know you this hand?
My royal fathers:
Then whilst you and your fathers letters talk together, let
me examine this fellow: are you a proper man without a beard?
My propernes sir contents me: for my beard, indeed that was bitten the last great frost, and so were a number of Justices of peace besides.
Tic rumourd about the Court that your name is Aspero.
I am called Aspero.
Son to the Duke of Mantua that was.
The duke of Mantuaes son that is.
Then the Duke of Mantua has a traitor to his son, lay hands of him and to close prison with him.
Can he be closer then in my custody?
I do not think so madam, but your father has imposde the trust upon me.
And dare not you trust me?
With my head if you were my wife, but not with my profit, if you were my mother: will you along si•?
With all my heart sir, see what your humour's come to now go my Lord? as willingly as a slave from the galleys: for as I shall have a stronger prison, so J shall bee sure of a kinder and a wiser jailer.
Do you observe how he flouts you my Lord? that I had bin his keeper but one night longer▪ but keep him close, if he escape (though against thy will) as I am a maid,
A maid against your will.
Shalt pay as dear for it as thou did for thy office.
If he scope, hang me. 
I shall wish thee hanged, if he do not: treason! I may thank my peevish humour fort.
Madam the Gundelo is ready.
Thou bring physic when the patient's dead boy: out ieast's turned earnest.
Is a dead in earnest?
As good, or rather worse, hoe's buried quick.
O madam, many a good thing has bin buried quick and sir∣uiu'd again, I would bee buried quick my self, and I might
choose my grave.
Hoe's buried in close prison boy, hoe's known for the duke of Mantuaes son, and by my fathers letter a•••ched for a traitor.
Good gentleman, and I be not sorry for him: who is his keeper?
The testy ass Hortensio.
Vds foot lets enlarge him,
Not possible boy.
Not possible 〈◊〉 weal cousin his keeper.
We cannot.
Cannot! we can: your father made a Lord of him, but be ruled by me, his daughter shall make a fool of him: you are not the first woman has made a fool of a wiser Lord then he is.
Shall he be consent?
As palpably as at the Lottery, my brains are in labour of the stratagem already.
Sons of Octanio if your princely thoughts
Can stoop to such mean beauty, from this hand
Receive your wives, but should the Duke your father—
Fear not old man, he was the means that breathed this spirit into vs.
Wood vs to this course.
But should he prove Apostate, deny
Love which he first enforcd vs to profes,
So firm are our inseparate affections,
To win our loves weed loose the names of son•.
Your father thanks you, but hot-sprighted you that,
Take counsel from experience, ere ye tie
The gordian knot which none but heaven can loose,
Crave his consent: when an imperial 〈◊〉
Shakes a weak shed, the building 〈…〉
Not stand? it shall: not Jove• 〈…〉 the ground▪work 〈◊〉 love▪
Not Jove!
Not Jove,
Should a speak 〈…〉
Ourloue admits no 〈…〉
Then to 〈…〉 your love is 〈…〉
As 〈…〉
As 〈…〉
And your•▪
And ours,
And ours,
Then lend me all your hands,
Whilst thus a fathers tongue forbids the bands, 
Forgetful boys, but most audacious traitor,
That durst in thought consent to wrong thy Prince,
Out of my fight; no Land that calls me Lord,
Shall bear a weight so hateful as they self:
Live ever banished, if (three days expired)
Thou or these lustful strumpets.
Father.
Boys;
If you be mine show it in obedience:
If (three days past) you live within my dukedom,
Thee as a slave isle doom unto the galleys,
And these thy brats as common prostitutes▪
Shall dry their lustful veins in the 〈◊〉
Come boys, to Court; he that first 〈◊〉 lives,
Will to your births provide you equal 〈◊〉
They have our loves.
Our oaths.
Our hearts and hands.
Tut, lovers oaths, like toys writ down in 〈◊〉
Are soon blown ore, contracts are common wiles,
Tintangle fools, Jove himself sits and smiles
At lovers perjuries, bawd, strumpets hence,
My bosome's charged, give way to violence:
Come doe not mind them.
How? not mind them father?
When in your Court you courted vs to love,
You red another lecture, women then▪
Were angels.
True, but that was before Angels
Had power to make them devils; they were then
Fiend• to themselves, and Angels unto men.
W•en upon Po thou find a cole-black swan,
You have found a woman constant to a man.
And not before?
Never before.
Your tongue
V• speaks your former speech.
It doth; new theames
Must have new change of Rhetoric; all streams
Flow not alike one way; when I spake like a lover,
It was to break you from your soldiers humour;
Having made you lovers, I, like Envy, speak
To make you hate love; Art still strives to break
Bad to make better:
You have your wish.
Then onward to the Court,
Make vs of love, as schoole-boyes do of sport.
Call out the jailer boy, yet doe not; hast got a beard like Hortensio?
Yes, madam, J have got his hair, if I could come as ea∣sly by his wit.
VVouldst rob him of his wit?
If I should, he could not hang me for•▪ tic not worth thirteen pence half penny▪ but what shall I do with it?
Put it on boy.
That shall J madam, O forward age, I am a man already: how do you like me Lady?
Very ill, and my plot worse.
Then leaue't of, if you be grounded in the plot,
You will but mar the Comedy.
I purposde, thou in the habit of Hortensio, should under pretence of removing Aspero to a new prison, have freed him out of the old one.
Tut, J can tell you a trick, worth two of that: madam, your ear, take some care in the managing, and let me alone to pre∣pare it.
Vdsfoot break prison my Lord, tic but swimming the River.
Break prison? it were both dishonour to my name, and treason to my love, what benefit were it for me to free my body, &amp; leave my heart in bondage? isle die, ere isle harbour a disloyal thought.
It bears no relish of disloyalty: being in prison you live as far from love as liberty: being abroad, you may by letters, or a thousand means purchase his company, and compass your content.
Shalt be my Lawyer boy and counsel me.
Isle look for my Fee then.
If thy Counsel prospers.
Thats an exception Lawyers never respect, but come my lord, leap, as we have risen together, weal fall together,
Blame me not love,
Vdsfoot your jailer my lord▪
Am I prevented?
Yes faith, there had bin a Counsellors fee cast away now.
You have heard his usage Lady, seen his lodging, and if it please you, you both may and shall confer with him.
Prithee call him.
My Lord, your keeper hath brought a Lady or two to see you.
To see me? why am I turned monster? doth he take money to show me? what doth a take a piece trow?
Why how now gallant, not gone yet?
Not, I thank you Lady, and yet I was neer't.
How do you man?
Musty for want of airing.
VVeele have you hanged out in the fresh ayre, one of these mornings.
Your be glad to take me in then.
Yes, when you had hanged abroad a little: but my Lord Hortensio (for I think I must be your Lady when ell's done) what sport? I would be merry a purpose to make him mad; the room's private and fit for any exercise.
Vdsfoot to her, can a woman offer fairer for it?
Why shall we go to span-counter madam?
To span-counter, best ask her and sheele go to Coits.
No, I love some stirring exercise, my body's condiciond like the sun; it would never be out of motion.
I have it in faith, when I was student in Padua,
We used a most ingenious pastime.
The name my Lord.
I cannot give it a name equal to the merit.
Tic vulgarly called Blindmans buff.
Blind mans buff? ha, ha, ha,
Do you laugh at it?
At the happiness of your wit my Lord, that you should hit upon that sport, which of all other I delight in.
Will you hear an Apology I made in the commendation of it?
Weal have the thing it self first; and as we like that, weel
hear your Apology after: who shall be hud-winckt first?
Who but the Author?
I, I, none shall be blind but I; help of with my gown boy.
What shall we have to blind him?
My scarf, take my scarf my Lord.
There's a simple favour for you.
And most fit, for indeed nothing blinds lovers sooner then Ladies favours, but who shall blind me.
Mary that will I my Lord, let me alone to blind you.
Good again; for who should blind men, but beauteous women? come sweet madam.
But how if you take me? as I know that will be your aim,
If J take you prisoner madam, you must either bee hut∣winckt your self, or give your conqueror a kiss for your ran∣some.
An easy ransom: isle not be prisoner long, if a kiss will en∣large me.
Lord what scambling shift has he made for a kiss and can∣not get in neither; a little higher, so, so, so, are you blind my Lord?
As a purblind Poet: have amongst you blind Harpers.
Me thinks he looks for all the world like God Cupped.
Take heed of his dart madam, he comes upon you,
He cannot come to fast, O I am taken prisoner.
Your ransome's but a kiss.
Is that your law of arms?
Yes madam, but isle take it on your lips.
My lips like faithful Treasurers shall see it discharged.
And here are my honest receivers to take it.
Am I freed now?
As if you had served seven year for it: sweet kiss, rare lip.
Has she not a sweet breath my Lord?
As perfume.
And a soft lip?
And smooth as velvet: I could scarce discern it from
velvet: id pawn my office for the fellow on it, madam.
Here.
Here Aspero, on with this beard and gown: I think hee follows me by the sent, his hat, so: a narrow miss in faith my Lord?
Gone madam?
Even upon going, one of you counterfeit my voice, there I deceiud you my Lord.
Have you deceived me madam?
Not yet, but I will, and you look not the better too't, busy him till you think we are out of the Court, and then follow vs: you shall find vs at the south port, now or never my Lord.
Why then twill never be Lady.
Here.
Where?
Here.
Escaped again?
Shoe's escaped indeed my Lord, you may cast your cap after her, for I see you can do no other good upon his.
What have I caught you?
Kiss her and let her go.
Kings truce till I breath a little.
And you had need so, for I think you are almost out of breath, if you be not, you shall be, and thats as good, but breathe and spare not.
Did you ever converse with a more stranger dissolute, madam?
Peremptory jack, jailer, as you respect your office, lay spe∣ciall watch that none of what degree soever have access to him.
Without me.
Or your signet.
Signet me no signets, your goldsmiths shop is like your Swans nest, has a whole brood of signets, and all of a feather, &amp; amongst many, one may be like another, let none enter upon the
stage where Aspero plays the madam, without Hortensio.
Is he mad my Lord?
As the Lord that gave all to his followers, and begged more for himself.
If he call for me, tell him I scorn him.
If he counterfeit my voice (as mad fellows will counter∣fet great men's hands, and their tongues too) rate him for it, threa∣ten him with the whip.
But come not at him.
If he call for meat promise him fair;
But give him none.
If for light.
He may fire the house, let him have none.
If he chafe, laugh.
If he rail, sing.
If he speak fair, flowt him.
Do any thing to vex him.
But nothing to content him, you hear my charge, as you respect your office regard it.
I warn you my Lord, let me alone, and we knew not how to abuse a prisoner, we were not worthy to be a Jailer.
Are you in breath my Lord?
As a bruers horse, and as long-winded; look to your self madam, I come upon you.
J am ready for you sir; O for a bulrush to run a tilt it's nose.
A fair miss in faith.
Isle mend it next course you shall see.
In the corner of the left hand; vdsfoot ware shins my Lord,
Madam.
Here.
Where?
Help me up Madam,
O strange, cannot you get up without help? there's my glove, but come no nearer, as you love me.
I do love you madam.
Oh blind love.
True madam; your beauty has made me blind.
Indeed loves sons like spaniels are all borne blind,
But they will see.
Not till they be nyne days old my Lord,
But will you give me the fingers that hold this glove madam?
And the whole body to pleasure you my Lord, but let me go a little.
I will not loose you yet Lady.
But you shall my Lord; hist, then keep me still.
He fastens the glove to a post.
Faith let go my Lord, for she grows sullen, and you had as good talk to a post, and as good answer twould make you.
Nay but dear madam, doe but answer me, may I pre∣sum, upon my knees I beg it; but to take a favour from your sweet lips? shall I? las I am not the first man, that love has blinded, may I presume'• I would be loath to offend your mild patience so much, as with an unreverend touch: speak; if I shall reap the harvest of my honest defers, make me blessed in proposing the time when; what? not a word? are you displeased? or shall I take your silence for a consent? shall I? speak; or if modesty locke in your syllables, seal my assurance with a kiss: not? neither? shall I have neither your word nor your bond? nay then I must make bold with modesty; by this kiss madam, O my hard fortune? have I made suit to a post all this while? what block but I, would have bin so senseless? my excule is, it was but to make my Lady sport: and: Madam? how? Lady? madam? boy; madam, Aspero▪ but whist, I have the conceit, it was excellent in my Lady, and J ap∣plaudit, suppose my Lady and his prisoner had an intent of pri∣uate business in the next room; was it not better in her to blind me, then I should as gentlemen ushers (cases so standing) have
blinded my self? again, J applaud her, and adore my stars that made me rather a blind then a seeing dore-keeper: shall I inter∣rupt them? no: madam? they have not done yet, sure they have not: what have we here? a base viol! though J cannot tickle the mynnikyn within, isle (though it be some what base) give them a song without, and the name of the Ditty shall be;
The Gentleman Ushers Voluntary.
Peace, peace, peace, make no noise,
Pleasure and fear lie sleeping?
End, end, end your idletoyes,
Jealous eyes will be peeping.
Kiss, kiss and part, though not for hate for pity,
Ha done, ha done, ha done, for I ha done my ditty.
And if you have not done now too, let me be as base as my fid∣dl, if I rowze you not: madam for shame, what doe you mean to make of me, how? sfoote what have you made of me already? all gone? Jailer?
How now? who calls?
Why saucy knave tic J.
You, what you?
A single V, I came in double, but I thank them, they are gone out, and left me here a single.—
Fool, and so I leave you.
Knave, I am Hortensio, I charge thee let me out.
Fool, you lye, you are Aspero, and I have charge to keep you in.
From whom?
From my Lord Hortensio.
Sfoot knave J tell thee I am hee, and thou wilt not be∣leeue me, trust thine eyes, come in and see.
Twill not serve your turn, J like a whole skin better then a pinked one: content your self to night, and in the morning isle tell you more.
Whore's my Lady, send his hither,
Shoe's busy with my Lord Hortensio, but if you have any use for a woman, isle send you one of the Laundresses: fare you well sir, bee content, you shall want nothing of any thing you have.
Hortensio gone outland my Lady busy with Hortensio▪ I am gulled, palpably gulled: whilst I like a block stood courting the post, Aspero is m my appatrell escaped: villains, traitors, open the door, t•e Duke's abused, his daughter's fled: I proclaim ye all traitors that hinder me in the pursuit.
O for a reasonable audience to applaud this scene of mer∣ryment: isle go call my Lady and my Lord Hortensio.
Blindmans buff? I have buffed it fairly, and mine own gullery grieves me not half so much as the Dukes displeasure, jailer, not a word? jailer, there's no way to please a knave but fair words, and gold: honest kind jailer, here's gold for thee: doe but take pity upon me, a miserable cony-catchd Courtier: not? neither fair nor foul? thou art a degree worse then a wo∣man; what shall I doe? I can compare my fortune and my vnfor∣tunate self to nothing so fitly as my Base here, wee suffer every fool to play upon vs for their pleasure: and indeed it was the in∣tent of our Creator that made fiddles and servitors to nothing but to be played upon, and played upon wee shall be, till our heart strings crack, and then they either cast vs aside or hang vs up, as worthy no other employment; well, if I can work my means, of escape, so: if not, I must lie by it.
MY daughter fled? and with Hortensio,
It bears no formal shape of likelihood,
His Eagle spirit soard to proud a pitch,
To seixe so base a prey; let privy search
Look through the cities bosom till they find her:
For gone she is not.
Has not Anthonies son
Sent them by some base practise to their death?
His breasts too full of honour; trusty Iulio?
What weighty business draws thee from thy charge?
Came not the cause before me? the proud Man•uan•
Basely revolt, deposde me from the seat
And chair of Regentship, sending in quest
Of proud Anthonio their late-bani••• Duke,
Him if they find or Aspero his son 
Theile reinstall him in the regiment▪
Him let them seek in the vast shades of death, as for his son.
Hoe's sure enough my Lord, he was a mad kn•ue when he came in, but J think, I have made a t•me soole of him by this time: for a has neither had bread nor water these four and forty hours.
More villain thou.
My Lord, Hortensio was the villain, he left such command with me, hoe's the wheel that turns about, and I a Country Jack must strike when I am commanded.
Although my foe, hoe's honourably tempered,
Yet armed against my life go▪ call him forth,
Guard in my safety with • ring of steel,
And mark how proudly heel demean revenge.
Goblins, spirits, fury•, f•eryes, the prison is haunted.
With a knave is it not?
Yes, and an old fool my Lord, in the likeness of Hortensio.
Villain whore's Aspero.
I know not my Lord: I let him in and my Lady to laugh at him, and it seems, he consented to treason, and let him out in his apparel.
They consented together to cousin me, for taking delight (as my betters may doe) in a foolish pastime called Blindmans buff, they stole away my gown, escaped the prison, and left me in fools paradise, where, what song I have played, my Viol can witness, they made me a little better then a bawd my Lord.
In act:
Not merely in act: sed cogitation, &amp; id satis est vt inquit Suetonius.
Js hee escaped▪ and Florimell with him?
Hortensio thy head shall answerit.
I pray let my tongue be my heads Attorney, and plead my excuse.
Urge no excuse, away with him to prison.
It shall be done my Lord.
Nay you sir too, shall taste of the same sauce, away with both,
Come my sons,
Lets levy present arms against Mantua.
Being scarce come home we must abroad again,
The Common good's a catefull Princes payne.
You that in all my banished pilgrimage,
Would never alienate your natural loves,
But in desire to see me reinstalld,
Have thrust out proud Octauices substitute,
And seated me in ancient dignity,
I am yours, and ready at your best dispose.
Your own, my liege, we like inferior lights
Take life from your reflection, for like stars
Unto the sun, are Counsellours to Kings▪
He feeds their orbs with fire, and their shine
Contend to make his glory more divine.
And such are we to great Anthonio.
The veins and arteries of Anthonio
Through which the blood of greatness flows in vs.
Our life, and cause efficient of our state,
And these our pretty partners in exile.
We ha yet performed but the least part of duty,
Your reinstalment: it rests, that with our blood,
We keep out innouasiue violence.
You new-create me, and breath second life
Into my dying bosom, knew my soon
Of this vnlookt-for Fortune, but ill Fate
Has played the Traitor, and given up his life
To coward treason.
Vdsfoot what offence have I committed against the state, that these yron-handed Plebeians so applaud me for?
Tic a sign they love you▪
I had rather thy should hate me, it makes me suspect my bosom, for they love none, but the masters of factions, treasons, and innouasions.
Then you doe not love the Commons.
Yes, as wise men doe their flattering wives, only for show: the popular voice is like a cry of bawling hounds, and they get the foot of a fantastic and popular-affecting statesman, they never leave him, till they have chased him into disgrace, &amp; then, like hounds, are at a loss, and with their loss, see, I have found my father, safety attend you.
Welcome thou hope of Mantua and of vs,
We now are honours new beginners boy,
And may we better thrive then heretofore.
Never doubt it father, I hau• attractive stuff that will draw customers.
What Lady's that.
One that has played the part of a Constable, brought you home a Runaway.
A friend of mine Father, but daughter to your Arch∣enemy.
Octauioes daughter?
Yes faith, you are out with the Father, and isle see if I can fall in with the daughter.
And am I not a good child to leave my fathers love at six and seven, and hazard my honour upon your sons naked pro∣mise, and your hopeful acceptance.
She has followed me through much danger.
The better welcome, I love her for it.
Like her and you please, it have no body love her but my self.
And Lady, though your Father be our foe,
The virtuous love betwixt our son and you,
May nerethelesse retain his sympathy.
Shall nerethelesse retain his sympathy,
Anthonio know I am loves resolute,
Confirmed and grounded in affection:
I loved your son, not for he was a Prince,
But one no better then his present fortunes,
Isle love him still, since first I loved him so,
Let Father, friends, and all the world say no.
There's mettle Father, how can wee choose but get cock∣ing children, when father and mother too are both of the game.
To arms my Lord, Octauio comes in arms
To give a proud assault unto the City.
Proud his assault, as proud be our re•first,
Vie shot for shot, and stake down life for life,
Our brest's as bold as theirs, our blood as deep,
All that we'll loose, or this our gettings keep.
Come brother, talk not of devouring war,
Say messenger, comes not Octauioes sons?
They do, as proudly as the morning Sun
Beating the azured pavement of the heaven.
Then fear not father, my sister and my self,
Will be your champions and defend the City.
Why Ladies, have you such large interest in our brothers.
Princess, we have, within there: reach our shields,
When beauty fights, the God of battle yields. 
They offer parley, let me answer them.
Brothers, how now? who made you soldiers?
Faith even my father as he made you lovers▪
What? hath he changed your shepherds hooks to swords?
Of Amoradoes made you armed knights?
O seld-seene metamorphosis! J have known
Soldiers turn lovers, but for amorous lovers
To re-assume their valour, tic a change,
Like winter-thunder, and a thing as strange.
Our sister prisoner?
Tell me Florimell,
Dost thou live there enforced, or of free-will?
Free will, brothers, mine own freewill, all free in Mantua, here's freewill in faith, speak am I not a free-woman?
As if you had served for it, any man may set up under his copy without a protection.
J wag? are you there too?
Yes faith my Lord, my Lady has had my attendance to a hair.
You lie boy.
If not mine, some bodies else: there's one has done—
What have I done sir?
Nay nothing, but what my Lady was very well content with.
Why sister, shame you not to set your love
On one, that is our Fathers enemy.
Shame? not a whit: but come, your wenches brothers,
I make no question, I have won my wager:
Are they as fair as I?
Leave that to trial.
Aspero make surrender of our sister.
And have her in quiet possession? what do you think me.
We think thee a proud villain and our foe.
By heaven, they are villains all that think him so,
Why doe you love him.
I should curse my self
if I should hate him:
Bring the ladders forth,
Bravely assault to separate their lives,
As they are sealing the walls, the Ladies come forth.
Stand proud Francisco.
Sand! O excellent word in a woman!
Hold Hippolito.
Hold! up with that word, and tic as good as the other.
What nymph or god desse in my Hermiaes shape,
Stands to debar my entrance to the town:
Madam, I wonder they enter not.
Why boy it seems they dare not,
O cowards and have two such fair breaches already,
Immortal Pallas that art more divine,
In my loves beauty that thou cloth'st thee in,
With draw thy self, and give our fury limits.
I will, but first Francisco take my shield.
And mine as challenge to a single combat,
Read the conditions and return your answers.
Well done in faith wenches, O that the old gray-beard my Father were here, id have about with him as I am honour∣ble.
VVhats here!
A shepherd wooing of a Country maid,
As she sits angling by a Rivers side,
By them an aged man making a net!
The Motto▪ Sic! this Emblems moral is,
The former love I had with Lucida,
And this hope tells me that's fair▪ Lucida.
Brother, my shield the like presents to me,
But holds far more familiar reference,
Here doth the amorous shepherd kiss the Nymph;
Which she with a chaste blush consents unto:
And see, a gloomy man, clad like a pilgrim
Comes in, and separates their sweet delights:
The Motto, Sie! I so my Father came,
and banished me from beauteous Hermia,
and this hope tells me is fair Hermia.
The more I look, the more me thinks tic she.
The more I think the more I find tic she.
What should I think to prove it is not she?
Look, think, find, prove, doe what you can,
These are the wenches that you courted than:
Then honey bees lay by your smarting stings,
and buzz sweet love into your Ladies ears,
Tell them of kisses, and such pretty things,
These drumming dub adubs loves pleasure fears.
O heaven, oh fortune, and most happy stars,
Do I find love, where I expected wars?
I that but now was all for war and death,
am made all love, wars humour's out of breath.
How, my sons love the daughters of my foe! it cannot be,
Then question them your self.
Why how now sons, is this your worth in arms.
Why are we not in arms father.
Yes, and in such arms as no Coward, but would venture life to march in.
Then boys, you love the daughters of Anthonio.
We liked them first.
Well•ep• th• liking still.
And you will love them.
Fatherinfaith they will.
I, run away •are you there? whom ha• your Ladyship got to your husband?
One that I stumbled on at Blind man buff, a proper man, a man every inch of him: and you would say so, and you knew but as much as I—mean to know ere I have done with him▪
Is he not son unto Anthonio?
Great Duke I am, and prostrate on my kne•,
Ibeg a peace, which if your spleen deny,
I proudly stand where erst I mildly kneeled,
and east down bold defiance from their walls.
Nomore your loves make my proudhart ashamed,
Your consort's sweet, and isle not be a mean
To make it jar: what my sons like shall stand,
By my consent, allowed and perfected;
all hate is banished, and revenge lies dead.
Then stead of spears, let Hymens torches flame
With hallowed incense, and the God of spright,
Swell up your veins with amorous delight:
an• so that up our single Comedy,
〈◊〉 Plai•u• phrase: Si places, •landite.

Divine invention, O how I could hug,
And like an amorous Lover court thy beauty,
That crownst me King of pleasures! were my brain
Fordg'dout of vulgar metal without fire,
And sprightly motion, my big-swolne hopes,
Had been still-borne, but when dejected minds,
Out slept the golden pleasure of the night:
My serious meditations have out-watch'd,
The glorious tapers that attend the Moon:
I turned my thoughts into a thousand shapes:
Moulded the fashion of ten thousand plots,
Liked and disliked so many, that my brain
The mother of Invention grew barren,
Almost past bearing, still my laboring thoughts
Conceived a yet more strange and quaint Idea,
Gave it proportion, and I brought it forth:
And that blessed infant of Invention
Beyond all hope hath my contentment won,
And that's Loves heaven I love a face more fair
Then Cinthe as hue that seems aboue compare,
But hell, her husband with a jealous eye
Ushers her steps, oh wedded slavery!
This tender rose, whom artless marriage,
Hath grafted on a nettle (testy age)
Have I vngrafted, made himself untie
The knot of wedlock: thanks sweet industry.
And here a comes, that which most heaps my fame,
His wit's well spoken of.
This wit's a sprightly thing▪
For such as have it.
It not alone doth bring,
Public applause, but knowledge in the law▪
Teaches to speak in distance.
How the daw
Scores ore his rusty phrases? honoured Count,
How grows your plot?
My thriving fortunes mount
Aboue suppose, even to my harts content:
Wee are divorced.
My hopes are prevalent.
You know the cause on it, two sufficient men
Swore her a harlot, and the partial Bench
Inspirde by my good Angels (Angels wings
Sweep a clear passage to the seat of Kings)
Sealed our divorce.
But doth her brother swallow
This gross abuse?
Abuse, away, away.
They know me rich Horatio, chink, chink:
Whilst this holds out▪ my cause shall never sink.
See where a comes, his sad complexion wears,
Griefs mourning livery, he is clothed in tears.
Whence springs this sorrow?
For my sisters shame,
My sister, oh my sister, whose repute
Hung like a Jewel on her sexes forehead.
And what of her?
She is, o no she was
Pure as the Diamond, clear as crystal glass,
But now, O hell, her credit is more foul,
Then speckled scandal, or black murders soul.
I cannot think it.
But I know it too true,
She was my wife and by her means, my head
Was fey rely tupt and you will buy a Lantern:
Bespeak my sconce, tic ready hornd and all.
Not yet, but Isle take order that it shall.
And are ye parted?
What a question's that?
Shall I wear cracked rings, Diamonds with a flaw,
Isle carry coals and you will, no horns, I know the law.
Is this your grief?
This is enough, to make
Patience tu•nerussin, she that was the pattern,
To whose proportion all our courtly dames,
Cut out their actions, she to fall•a sign—
More will fall shortly.
Her shame—
Grows here, who ever broached the wine,
The butt stands here, my forehead bears the sign,
It merits none, the shame's nor yours nor his,
That foot's even made that never treads a miss,
Beauty came first from Heaven, Prometheus,
Stole it to make proud women beauteous,
Now, stolen goods thrive not: women steal from men
Then blame not them to seek their own again.
Kings have for this been felons, and tic proved,
He never was divine that never loved.
I find no law for this.
Custom you prove,
And what's more Ancient then to pilfer louet
A quillet well applied.
Then bury grief,
If this be felony, my self's a theife.
A nimble wit, just of the length ofmine.
But come my leidge, forget, it so will I,
Our infant griefs must be old men and die,
Not while st his fault survives,
What news with thee.
I bring your honour comfortable news,
Your sonne's returned from Pisa,
A comes ill,
And yet I hope his blessed arrive will kill
This monster grief.
He is a toward Prince.
Toward enough, and yet most strangely weaned
And wedded from this worlds society.
A pa•lous youth, sharpe and satirical,
Would a but spend some study in the law,
A would prove a passing subtle Barrister.
He's a quick wit.
And a speaks Latin too,
Truly and so few Lawyers use to doe.
Health to this honoured presence: passing good!
Welcome sweet Prince.
Thanks: superpassing good!
But honoured father, see how he proceeds:
Learning was first made pilot to the world,
And in the chair of contemplation,
Many degrees aboue the turning clouds
Held in his hand the nine-leaf'd marble book,
Drawn full of silver lines and golden Stars.
But Son?
But father, it was learnings place,
Till empty outsides, shadows daubed with gold
Plucked him down headlong, then alost his wits,
And ever since lives Zany to the world,
Turns Pageant-Poet, toiler to the press,
Makes himself cheap▪ detested, hist and stale,
To every bubble and dull Groom.
Who for his out-sides gaudy, will presume
To make poor wit a hackney to his pride.
And with blunt rolled Jests spur-gall his side
Till his soul bleed, O, I am more then mad,
To see mere shadows censure and control,
The substance, worthier both in sense and soul
Fie Polymetes, though therobe of learning,
Sit comely on a Prince, yet wean thy thoughts
From this strict contemplation, and embrace
Public assemblies, knightly exercise.
How's that? to swear and give the suntan stab?
Sell Lands to purchase fashions? O tic base!
Bought gentry, should true-borne worth disgrace.
Practise to hunt.
No, some that use that sport
Gived ore, being scarce one hair the better for it.
Then practise Revels.
Revels sprightly play,
Yet every year, some revel all away.
All these are trivial: Prince, be a Lawyer:
Of all Land monsters, some that bear that name,
Might well be spared, whose vulture Avarice
Devours men living: they of all the rest,
Deal most with Angels, &amp; yet prove least blessed.
Wrong not the Law.
I cannot, tic divine:
And isle compare it to a golden chain,
That links the body of a common-wealth,
Into a firm and formal Union.
It holds the sword, with an impartial hand,
Curbs in the rains of an unruly land,
Tic twined to Justice, and with holy zeal,
Rightly determines the poor mans appeal.
And those that are laws true administers,
Are fathers to the wronged, heauen's Justicers.
Fore-god tic true, right properties of the Law
But under favour, and with due respect
Of that unvalued perle, and the professors,
Your self and such lacke-Latin Advocates
Infect the heart, and doe their best to change
The true intent of sanctimonious law.
Turn Church yards Champions, and make the ground grown rank w th Grandsires flesh,
Bear corn to feed the Son.
Will this be suffered?
But Polymetes, in thy stay at Pisa,
When heard thou of thy Sister?
Much to late,
The reason, with your patience isle relate.
Beauteous Emilia, whom I never saw,
But in the Rhetoric of discoursiue tongues
In Sancta Monte, neighbour to Sardinia,
Where silver Arno in her Crystal bosom,
Courts the fresh banks with many an amorous kiss.
My Sister (as the country custom claimed)
With all the choicest virgins of the Land,
Met at the Temple▪ half a league remote,
From all resort of people, which was decked
With all the Relics, and the choicest lemmes,
Marcellis, Pisa, or Ligorne could yield.
What followed this rich preparation?
Whilst they securely •end their Orisons,
Three armed Galleys of the faithless Turks,
At this advantage set their men on shore,
Entered the Temple, and prophande their shrines,
On the high Altar sacrificed the Priests,
Disray'd the Temple of the golden robes,
Murdered the matrons, ravished the Maids,
And dragging them by the disheueld hair,
Did with their ravished bodies fill their boats,
Amongst the rest, Emilia whom report
Called by no name but only beautiful,
Was ravished, slain, or taken prisoner.
O Polymetes! thy discourse confounds,
Thou healst old hurts, yet giu'st vs deeper wounds,
But words are ayre, see our armed Galleys manned,
And in them place as many of our Knights
As loved Emilia and their Sovereigns health.
Isle unto Pisa, and till our return,
Because our widowed Duke-dome shall not morn.
Be thou her minion, and possess her chair,
Fill that with honour, t'will fill thee with care,
Vrgeno denials, Genowaes a dew,
Wee leave old griefs, and go in quest of new.
Better and better, now my hopes are fit,
The Duke thus gone, what tongue so bold dares say
I wronged my wife?
That dares Horatioes.
Thou art my self, we both have but one by∣some
One tongue, one soul, two bodies &amp; one heart.
I know it my Lord.
Tic true, but let that pass,
Wee two are one.
I know your honour's wise.
And I know thee
For no small fool, two's simple policy,
And not without some counsel of the law,
That not withstanding my wives near alliance
Unto the Duke, I purchased a divorce.
What was the cause?
I tell thee, the most wrong
Was this, my Avarice thought she lived too long.
I know one man hath coffind up six wives
Since she was mine, and by the poorest, pursed
A brace of thousand pounds: still good in Law,
Men must be rich, by thrift our treasures rise,
Give me the man's knave rich, take you poor wise,
But close, cock sure isle feed me fat with sport,
Gull all, f•whole all, why? I have Law-tricks for it. 
How Justice Slender glories in the plot,
Which to deceive him, my full brain begot?
But to his wife, true virtue though disgraced,
Shoe's now half wooed because shoe's thought un∣chaste
Her sexes credit, or discredit thrives
In the outward shape and fashion of their lives,
and be a women's virtues ne'er so strong.
Her honour's weighed upon discourses tongue.
Be her same sullied, were her thoughts as bright
As Innocence, the world would count her light.
For though amongst women, most are beauteous,
They that please time are counted virtuous,
And in this hope, isle to the Countess go,
Shoe's counted light, Love grant I find her so. 
Welcome to Genea Madam, and to make a short cut of our long travel, faith tell me, how doe you feel your self since you came a shore?
Feel my self? why with my hands, what an idle question's that?
Then pray bee you better occupied in your answer: but Madam, doe you remember what a multitude of fishes we saw at Sea? and I doe wonder how they can all live by one another.
Why fool, as men do on the Land, the great ones eat up the little ones, but Ioculo, I am great, pas∣sing great, and ready to lye down.
Doe Madam, and isle stand by and doe my good will to deliver you.
Mans death of what?
Why of your Maiden-head Madam &amp; if you please, or rather of the huge birth of knavery you're in travel of.
And insooth Ioculo at this time I stand in some need of a witty Mid-wif: but may I trust thee?
Aboue the girdle-stead, and below the knee Madam without any danger, why Madam, you know at our first meeting in the Turks Galleys, where we were both prisoners, and in a manner strāgers, I rested faithful when we counterfeited our∣selves lunatic to escape their fury I proved not false when wee were cast naked a shore: I stood firm to you, and never since left your company: now having had these trials of me abroad, neues
mistrust my secrecy at home.
I will credit thee, and now receive this embri∣on of knavery, briefly as I deliver it. I understand since our private arrival here at Genoa, that the Duke my father hearing of my surprise from Mon∣ta sancta, attended with a hundred Knights, is gone to seek a needle in a bottle of Hay.
Or rather to catch a quick Eel by the—
Teeth, as I have done you sir?
Nay, and you break jests a my teeth once, I have done with you.
If the breaking of the jest kept your teeth whole, it was well broken: but to the purpose; as well to try what mettle our Genow eyes wits are made of, as also to put my Brothers humour to the test, I intend to dance a pretty change with my name (for by no∣thing else I am sure they can know me, being in my infancy carried to my Aunts at Pisa) then instead of Emilia, call me Tristella.
Agreed, but what man in the mist is this?
I know not yet, lets walk, and take occasion to confer with them.
Yet keep without eye-shot so long as you can
O most Divine!
Tobacco? the best in Europe, 't cost me ten Crowns an ounce by this vapor.
Art not ashamed?
Of your foppish humour? yes by this Element villanou•lie ashamed, poxon't, leave it, you are a scholar, go but to antiquity, read the Chronicles, you may find some of your Ancestors chronicled for winning a Wenches favour for loosing their are∣more, but few for wit and Scholarship: Soldiers &amp;
Scollers could never set their horses together, especi∣ally in this kicking age: but who comes here? one she-Satyre or other to pitch up her Tent, cast down her gauntlet and proclaim thee coward for not stabbing her, when she gave thee the most plain apparent and open lye.
Ioculo, we are fallen into their eyes.
Theile hardly see their way then, for we are shrewed moats, but al's one, isle give occasion of quar∣reil, answered you as you can,
Your reason Sir?
To make thee recoil, or with the Soldier to fall off, i'st your country manner to corriue a leader, being upon or before present service as I am?
Pardon me sir, I did not see your charge.
Would I had never seen her, for her eye
Hath set my thoughts in a strange mutiny.
What, in love Iulio?
No Prince, loue's in me,
I like a slave endure loves tyranny.
Madam, your Brother.
Slave to all slaves be he that snares his eye,
In a weak Sirens Cob-web flattery.
God save fair sweet.
Amen, from such as you.
You had said for such, had your tongue gone true.
Why then belike I lye.
I would you did, within my Curtains.
Marry love forbid.
Nay, love is willing, for he cries lets go:
Then love hath two tunges, for he tells me no,
so pray let's part.
What, and our lips not meet?
Now fie upon it, like Broom-men in the street?
You're a young wooer, or else much to rude,
To show this kindness fore a multitude,
But by the blush that colours ore your face,
You would scarce do it in a more private place.
This same strāge thing in the likeness of a womā,
Tastes of much wit, though I not love her sex,
Isle arm my thoughts to crack a jest with her.
What, graueld lulio?
No, but run a Land:
Is your wits shipping any better mand?
Yes, will you board it?
No, I dare not venture:
Make but a shot in jest and you may enter.
You are a Scholar.
I have seen some Schools.
You came not ore in the last fleet of Fools.
You took my room up.
I pray tak't again,
Weal have no women fools sail amongst men.
Your wit's much currish.
Why 't bites not you,
It feeds on fools flesh, so wisemen adicu
Please you accept the curtsy of the town?
I need not, I have curtsies of mine owns
ther's one for you.
How chance your wit's so free?
Only to out-goe Iadish company.
Here are none such.
Take heed, for if you tire,
Sheele keep her pace and leave you in the mire.
A women's feature, but a Scholars tongue
In quick discourse, Philosophers ne'er wondered
More at the strange conception of the winds,
Then I admire how she attained this wit:
Did not true learning make the soul divine,
She hath spoke enough to make me conuertine.
My loves are sound, &amp; wait but your reply,
A short lined accent, either no or I.
I am not too seueare, nor yet so kind,
To fall for eucrie idle puff of wind.
But farewell, isle take counsel of my pillow,
Pity fresh youth should wither in greene willow.
Appoint the place sweet, isle not miss mine hot.
At the three fools.
Isle meet.
And make up four.
Sweet words, kind looks, what? and a par∣ting kiss.
Words, looks and lips cry all, the wench is his.
I am possessed devil, love persuades my mind,
That if to him, to me she'll prove more kind.
What's Iulio made of? had thou soul or sense,
Thou would not prentice thy affections,
Nor tie thy fortunes to a strangers love.
A little liking my Lord, a jerk a trick or so, but no pure love I protest, but be impartial, cast of the furd-gowne of hate, and fpeake out of the naked Doublet and hose of judgment: is she not worthy to be beloved? nay, might not she and I live passing well together?
Yes, if to live in bondage be no hell,
I think you two, might doe exceeding well.
Well my Lord, because isle bee no example of selfe-will, isle break off our meeting at the three Fools, and send for her to Court, where isle put al my love into one quart of Maligo, &amp; your melancholy humour into another, and he that hath done last, shall for penance give her a kick a the lips, and a pipe of Tobacco be my witness, that's all the love I bear her.
Well Iulio,
How ere you juggle, if you doe agree,
You must be pleased to wear the keepers fee. Exennt
Sir, I doe not love to double with a womā if my friend, much less with you my most upright &amp; straight Count, my young Lord (as I told you) is turned absolute prodigal.
How prodigal?
Marry thus prodigal, to frequent ordina∣ries is his ordinary practise, rubs out whole weeks together in bowling. Allies, bandies away his pocket full of French-Crownes in a morning, and counts it a pretty sport to procure heate.
Thou telst me wonders, he that but last day,
Was never seen to walk without a book,
Writ against pleasure, and make bitter jests
Of honest recreation, turned dissolute,
I see no reason for it, the law and I,
(I tell you plainly Adam) think you lye.
Think as you will sir, there's not a trick used in the town that deserves damnation, but hee desires to deal in it, tic pity a was not made a trades∣man, he loves to follow his occupation a life, &amp; that which makes him doubt most, he is in love with the Indian punk Tobacco.
Punk! how the fool that doth not know it slanders a leaf, nick-names a stranger herb.
No herb a grace I hope sir.
Nor good thrift neither,
Yet there s one dunce, a kind of plodding Poet,
S〈…〉care's it was not in the first creation,
Because he finds no ballad argument,
To prove old Adam a Tobacconist,
I think none a the name lout's it,
I have heard old Adam was an honest man, and a good Gardiner loved Lattice well, Sallets and Cab∣bag reasonable well, yet no Tobacco: Again, A∣dam Bell a substantial out-law, &amp; passing a good Are∣cher, yet no Tobaconist. Further, Diogenes, whose proper name might bee Adam for ought I know, loved Carretts well, Leek porridge▪ passing well, yet no Tobacco: to conclude, my great Grand∣fathers Grandfathersfather, and my self all Guard∣ners, yet could not abide this Chimney-sweeper To∣cause, basso.
They did not: take me with you, what's the They were al plain folks, &amp; did not know the laws.
They were plain indeed, and thereof grew the prouer be, plain dealing is a Jewel.
But he that uses it shall die a beggar.
That addition was made by some Lawyer or Poet, to avoid which, they cannot endure plaine-dea∣ling should have a hand in any of their actions.
Touch no mans functiō, there are ierks &amp; tricks
Spurn not the law, for if you doe, it kicks.
So will a spur-gald Jade sir, but to all these mis∣demeanours, a maintains a private punk, one Tris∣tella that hee had in way of reversion from Iulio, a twindger, a mere Horsleach, one that will suck out the brains of his treasury, and make a mere skin of his wealth, I, out of my Love reprehended his error, and he in a fury kick't me out of doors, and dischar∣general me of his service.
I like not this, tic neither right nor straight done with no law-trick, nor no good conceit, but here a comes.
With Autumn in his bosom, pray God she shake not down his leaves, and leave him to make the Duke his father a bald reckoning.
Peace and observe.
Though I be a stranger to you,
Yet am I well acquainted with your humour.
A Lady cannot live about the Court
Without the envy of your Epigrams,
If she be pleasant, she is counted light,
If ruddy, painted, if her ruffs be thick,
They ask much poaking.
Trust me, love hath kilt
That wormwood humour, bring th'auth oritie
Of one true tongue to prove my poise,
Ever wronged woman.
And you'll do it again?
That's a good wench.
I pray who ought that pen?
That in a stammering Iambic vain,
Glanced at Emiliaes loose and gaudie train.
And broke broad jests upon her narrow heel,
Poked her Rebatoes, and surveyed her steel,
tide her fringed garters, bought her words by weight
Still good in law, and an upright conceit.
Doe you not know that man?
Suppose I doe?
You did but flout them, and you'll flout me too
You wondered not Cornelia being so fair,
Would be beholding to her Lane dress haite.
I know not this.
True, nor that Florymell,
Became a Pages habit passing well,
Used single Rapier, took the rouse and swore,
Of all land Beasts she could not brooke the Bore,
Nor that Count Lurdo, coming to a fray,
Brought not the worth of one poor hair away.
More then his own.
That jest comes near to me,
Tic our-growne now, a wants authority.
Nor that Melina whom your Muse renowns
Wore out as many suitors as new gowns.
And the same day that she was married,
Upon her finger wore her maiden-head.
In likeness of a Diamond.
Indeed two's sed,
That for Ring Melina sold her head.
But you're all Ouids.
They are bawdy mates,
Touch Lawyers too, indeed abuse all states,
Poets are wanton, and no doubt enjoy,
Their fair Corynnaes, though perhaps less coy.
Suppose some doe?
Each one in this agrees to scandal vs.
And talk of Lawyers fees.
Grant me but love, &amp; with my utmost power,
I will defend your sexes stainless honour:
And with my pen dipped in the juice of gall,
Be his souls terror, that hereafter shall,
Cast ink at honours garments, or aspire
To name your sex with an unhallowed fire.
I take your word.
Then seal it with a kiss.
That kiss my Lord deserves an Epigram▪
Sit down good Uncle.
An unbidden guest
Should bring a stool along.
A women's jest.
You mean a lye, for women use to lye.
But not like Scholars by authority.
Yet they may produce lying authority, and so cannot Poets,
Nor Lawyers neither.
Are you a Lawyer?
In faith Madam, he hath sit on the skirts of law any time this thirty years.
Then he should bee a good Trencher-man by
his profession.
Your reason Adam.
I knew one of that faculty in one term eat up a hole Town, Church, Steeple and all.
I wonder the Bells rung not all in his belly.
No sir, he sold them to buy his wife a Taffeta
Gown, and himself a velvet Jacket.
What a proved Jack was that? but I wonder at Lawyers for one thing, many of them use to take their fees afore-hand.
For a two-folde policy, one is they were com∣monly greedy, the other for fear if their Clients follow their Counsel long, they will not be worth a fee.
Tic well said Lady, you doe well to jest with an oldeman.
A says true, for if you should jest too much with a young man, it might prove earnest, &amp; so the fruits of your jests make you both a shamed on it.
Well said Adam, but leaving at a full jest, Un∣cle, what earnest business brought you hither?
Your honours sudden Metamorphosis,
Told by your trusty Servant, and confirmed
By public rumour.
Why what says Goody Fame, and my trusty Servant
This is the worst my Lord that you expend
Your treasure on that Ladies maintenance.
S'foot say I doe, what, has the worme-eaten bawd Fame: or ere a pander-like fool else to doe with it? give her maintenance, why she is of my ne'er affinity, should I see my she affinity go in tatters? I allow my Servant rags, &amp; I were worse then a Jew, if I should suffer my she affinity to go naked.
Law takes your part, &amp; if your purse grow short
Rather then spend the public treasury,
Isle lend your Grace a brace of thousand pounds,
Provided this, that as our Bookmen write
I have security.
A Lawyer right?
Security? Leases and old rents, Castle and Towne-ships, able men, good security, Towns are no Starters, theile hold out wind and weather.
I crave no more, let me have pawns and use.
How? Lords turn Usurers? those that should
punish broke age deal upon pawns?
If it were once his own,
He would lend him money on his Duke-domes crown
But faith Uncle tell me, what think you of this
Lady? would she not make a pretty peart Duchess?
Shoe's fair, nor do I discommend your choice
I wish her yours, a private friend or so,
I know mad Ierks, and know that Law allows,
Princes their private pleasures, and my self
Will doe my best to gain your honours love,
I will not absolutely say there are,
But there may be, if so your honour please,
Sellers and Vaults, which from your private Garden
May under ground lead to your bed-chamber.
Whither, I will not name my self, but some close friend,
May unsuspected bring your beauteous Lady.
Lord what a brooking Advocate is this?
He was some Squires Scriuenor, and hath scrapped
Gentility out of Atturneys fees▪
His bastard actions prove him such a one,
For true worth scorns to turn Chameleon.
Madam▪ my Uncle out of tender-loue,
Better to shun all scandalous suspect,
That might attend on our vnsuiting Iodes
Will lodge you at his house, whither at times—
Your Grace may have access.
Tic so indeed.
Is there a back way?
And a private door,
A secret vault, and twenty odd tricks more.
A Stoue?
And Arbors with sweet violet Beds,
That have bin pressed to death with maiden-heads,
Where you may sport and breath, and take a rouse
Pe rdy, this Lawyer keeps a bawdy house,
I shall be ready to deceive you all.
My Lord, your Law-plot's, most judicial.
But who comes here? some one of your cast cly∣ants.
Gods me, the Countess.
Mum, I cannot stay,
There's a cloud rising, drives my Sun away.
Is this your wife?
Madam, tic she that was.
That was and is not? how comes that to pass?
I cannot tell, God &amp; his conscience knows
And the world sees Colossus on my brows,
Hercules Pillars, here's non ultra writ.
Not in brass Characters?
No, horns more fit.
Hath not the Law divorced and made a bar twixt our affections? were not thou content to take a pension?
Which you still detain.
Good wit, Law-trickes and firm, you may complain.
Complain I doe, I kneel before the throne and sue for Justice, but yet can purchase none.
Complain I doe Cousin.
Away.
O, as you are a Prince, and you a virgin.
I was one long since,
This is no place for passion, dry your eyes,
Grief nails me to the ground, I cannot rise,
Isle grow immodest, justice is exiled,
And so shall duty, patience turn wilde,
Come, leave the Bedlam.
Doe, for wit and Law know shoe's a fool,
A couple quoth Jackdaw.
Madam.
Who calls?
Madam.
Horatio.
In passion Lady.
Discontent or so.
Be not, be counsaild, do not let despair,
Like the rank cancker bred by sultry air.
Eat this young Rose of beauty in the bud:
But in the April Sun of youthful blood
Let the sweet blossom ripen, thrive and grow,
To those full joys which none but Lovers know.
The man talks idly, tell me I am fair,
Lovely and young.
You are, by love you are,
Not fair, you are: Lenders paramour:
Compared with you was a swarth Blackamoor
Your hair is softer then the Colchean Fleece,
Your well limed features, natures moister piece
Your eyes too Diamonds, set in purer mould
Then rocks of currall, or the Indian gold.
In thy smooth chin there is an Ivory pit,
Where blushing Ʋenus and young Cupped sit,
Feathering of golden shafts, the wounding heads,
Made of thy •mber tresses finest threads.
You will not buy me sure you praise me so.
Yet fair, isle bid fair for you ere I go,
He that bids fair for me deceives his eye.
By heaven a doth not.
Wilful perjury, what means all this?
This my discourse intends,
Were husbands Saints, some wives would have close friends.
Some bad perhaps, but—
Husbands but for it, true, wooed? prithee wooed thou?
What?
Vd's Hartlings doe?
Doe what?
Loue-tricks quickly, woo't thou prithee.
No, I prize my credit.
Credit? life a man,
What talks of credit? art not known a strumpet?
You doe me wrong.
Damnation, what a gloss,
This gilded copper, Diamond of glass,
What strange show it makes? isle give you a colot
Your face was ne'er worse painted, then isle paint
Your Wain-fcot credit, you are a private bit,
Kept for some great made Dives. Red hot scandal
Suck the native colour of your souls
As it hath scorched thy credit, shrivelled Bawed,
Sponge, Lemon-pill, and more irrelishable
Then ore-dride Stock-fish, fie.
Upon thy shame.
Thy husband, O thy husbands bow-leg'd fame
Death I shall hate thee.
O for honour doe.
Swear thou art my strumpet.
Isle endure that to.
Shalt not deny it, hart, can not.
Yes, I can.
Do it for thy life, thy soul, basse courtesan.
Farewell, if friendship be at such a rate,
Before isle purchased, isle live still in hate.
Hart, a new fashion,
A Lady poor, beautiful and chaste? clean
From the bias of Custom: to be poor, painted,
And proud is as cōmon in Genoa, as felt and feather
In the fortunate Island: but chaste and poor,
As singular and rare, as Conscience with the Ana∣baptist.
Come hither Boy, did never owe me service
Yes Madam, more then ever I paid you ho∣nestly, and were a not my Moister.
Thy Moister, who?
Horatio, he that puts chastity to the quick, &amp; honour to the stab, but isle show him the nature of a right French-man, deny him homage, for swear al∣legiance, and come behind hand in cash keeping, &amp; with his own purse maintain you against him.
Thy purpose briefly.
In bald sentences, your noted wrongs are pit∣tied.
Pitied, by whom?
By me, lodgings prepared and diet, which I humbly tender your honour, as first payment of the an∣cient debt, my service owes you.
But is the lodging private?
At mine own mothers, and though I say it, she keeps an honest house, though my father bee a Cit∣it is•n.
Of what profession?
Neither fool nor Physician, but an ingenious Apothecary.
And what resort?
Very civil and most quiet resort, patients, the
house is set round with patients twice or thrice a day, and because theile be sure not to want drink, every one brings his own water in an Urinal with him.
Doth a use physic too? that's beyond his warrant.
O Lord Madam, better men then hee strain curtis•ie with their warrants in this age, besides, you being musical, shall meet much content, for my mo∣there lodges three or four Knights &amp; Ladies Daugh∣ters that practise music and needle-work, and will no doubt be exceeding proud of your company, wilt please you walk?
Thou art the Star, by whom my fate is led, My shame's so public, id fine hide my head.
CVrrant in Law, &amp; how encountered you. Wive. Isle tell you my good Lord (I thank my bringing up, I can talk, I use not to have my tongue to seek when it should pleasure any man, especially my good Lord) I told her what a credit it was to have a man of great credit, &amp; that which is more, a skilful Lawyer that can stand out in her case at a dead life, and one that if need were, could make a crazy action sound, I put her in mind what it was to have such a one to her sweet heart.
Thou speak but right, for so I am indeed.
You are, I urged it, and she confessed to me that the very first night she saw you she dream't on you, and wished you in her bed, and her bed in the midst of the River.
How, ith the River?
Yes for sooth,
In the middle of the tide.
Yes in her dream.
Good,
But she doth love me.
Believe it my Lord she doth, martie you must think I drew her and drew her, and wrought her and wrought her, till I made her as pliant and, trac table as wax, marry with all, she is as constant as Lu∣cretia, and will not for a thousand pounds, till she hath the law of her side.
I sound her meaning, first isle gull my No∣phew.
Her intent right, she intends to make a Gull of the Prince, and an absolute Goose of you.
Still good in Law, isle fetch him ore of all,
Get all, purse all, and be possessed of all,
And then conclude the match, marry at least,
When can you tell? Isle use her as a hand
To pick the Princes coffers, and for reward
To prison, marry her, for tricks can do it, (actions.
The worlds squint-eyd, and dares not pry into our
Here lies her walk (my Lute Win) she shall see,
Youthe's leaden footed in respect of me.
Win, prithee give the Fiddler a testar and fend him packing, what a scraping the rongue keeps? doe's a think the Count keeps a Tavern or a Bow∣die-house? my good Lord! beseech your honour pardon me.
No harm sweet Love, how dost thou like this Caper?
Passing well my Lord, will you never leave these coltish tricks? but to the matter: I sent you my reason∣lution by your Maid, have you received it.
I have, and it holds currant,
Then tender me possession.
Of what?
Of thy chaste love.
Not too much hast for that, you have a wife.
I had one.
And still have.
Thy love shall quickly wed her to her grave, I ne'er did love her.
When she was a maid
You swore you did, how soon poor youth's betrayed
To helpless ruin▪ doe you love me?
I faith.
For how long?
Till death.
O deadly lye.
Isle tell you just how long, loue's bred in the blood,
Prospers as long as beauties in the bud.
When beauty withers, lustful love grows cold,
And ere it be half ripe, tic rotten old.
If you have me, you must not put on yellows,
Isle have my self, my servant and my fellows.
My love, my liking, and a second me,
I love to relish sweet variety:
Your old wife moved you, I shall vex you more.
Take Coach with Gallants even a sore your door.
Take Rings, give bracelets woven of my hair,
Which to spite you, my Servants arm shall wear.
Isle in your presence sit upon his knee,
Exchanging kisses if you speak to me.
Isle pont in scorn, cry mew, and look aside,
At which, if you but frown, isle roundly chide,
I am not as I seem, dissembling wit
Is my best means.
Square to my humour fit.
I was a Beggar borne.
And so was I.
Traded in lust and gainful brothelrie.
The fitter for my turn, I was a man
Borne to no hopes, but a few shreds of wit
A Grammar Scholar, then a Scriuenor.
Dealing for private use twixt man and man,
and by close broke age set them at debate:
Incensed them unto Law, which to maintain,
I lent them money upon Lands and Plate,
After the rate of seauen-score in the hundred.
Then did I learn to countefeit men's hands,
Noble-mens arms, interline Evidences,
Make false conveyances, yet with a trick,
Close and cock-sure, I cony-catch'd the world.
Having scraped pretty wealth, I fell in League
With my first wife, and (though I say it my self)
She had good doings, her back comings in
And private goings out, raised me aloft:
I followed cases of the law abroad,
and she woe merry with her friends at home.
Did you ne'er take her kissing?
Twenty times.
Were you not Jealous?
Never nothing less.
Yet saw her kiss with Strangers.
Kiss and play.
And were you a Cuckold.
Cuckold by this light.
What? a withal.
And a Withal too.
And know it?
And know it.
And suffered it.
I did.
It went attired in gold, a golden Crest,
Is a brave fashion, and accounted best.
Madam, my Lord.
What news?
The Prince.
The Prince.
And Iulio.
Which way?
Where?
From thence.
That way the vault, from thence the private door, as I stood Sentinel at the further end of the Vault, they being unacquainted with the turnings, came g•oping and feeling, as commonly men will do especially in a strange place, and as I am true sinner, had I not spied the Diamōd on his finger (twin, to this a my conscience) they had been upon me in the dark ere I had been aware of them.
The Prince.
And Iulio.
Quick away.
What plot?
Behind the Arras? escaped behind the Arras.
Behind the Arras.
Close, cock, sure, be wise,
They only thrine that best can temporise.
A rare vault by this light, and never deuis'd without the advice of a grand Jury of Bawds, a word with your lips Tris.
As god mend me Prince you smell bawdy.
Since I came into thy company Win. And how first Tris? fore-God a pretty lodging.
And very fair hangings.
Passing good workman-ship, what story is this Tris?
Why my Lord? the Poetical fiction of Ʋenus kissing Atones in the violet bed.
Fore-god tic true, and mark where the Cuc∣koldly knave Vulcan stands sneaking behind the
brake bush to watch a▪m.
A pretty conceit Iulio, dost see Vulcan with the horning parenthesis in his fore-head! I hit indi∣rectly upon the least pap at three passes for a hun∣dred Crowns.
Not for a hundred.
First a match?
Tic done, where will you take your stand?
Here, any where, hart has the Arras an ague, it trembles so?
No, Vulcans fearful.
And with a fear it comes, have at the Cock∣kold.
Oh!
Hark, the Arras is in labour.
Mas I heard something groan.
Isle be the Mid-wife and help to deliver it.
Sweet Prince.
Hark Wench, I smell Bores grease.
Will you but hear me?
Now excuse what trick? She whispers to him.
How? but a Picture? isle try that presently,
If you love me, disfigure it not, I esteem it only for
the lively workmanship.
Then let me have a sight on it.
Upon condition you'll neither deface it with weapon, nor soil it with your breath—
On my Virginities maiden-head wee will not discover Lurdo behind the Arras.
Hart a the Devil, your Uncle.
O forbear, fore God passing good workman indeed.
Mark but the glance of his eye.
The hanging of his neither lip.
The blush of his cheek.
The curl of his hair.
The pit of a chin.
What a smooth hand a hath?
Long fingers like a Lady.
Not so much but a seal Ring.
Arms and all, viz a tame Gudgeon.
And the fool swallows it rarely, &amp; you mark him.
Is the numb Ass insensible of Scoffs?
Isle touch him nearer, yet mine eye deceives me,
And this be not Count Lurdoes counterfeit.
You may soon know that my Lord.
As How?
If it be his, a hath the Gowte in his left foot,
The very same, his sh o is cut and all, Farewell Tris, and yet isle startle him a little better a∣fore we leave him, fore-god tic so like him, I doubt, whether it be the shadow or his substance.
A block.
A shadow.
A mere senseless stone.
Then tic a counterfeit.
An absolute counterfeit, what doe you mean?
Marry many Counterfeits walk in the like∣ness of good money, and so may this doe, which to prevent isle nail him to a post, for fear a pass currant on your lips in my absence, and so deceive me?
Isle swear a shall not, gentle Prince be short,
Length kills the heart of the most feeling sport.
Well Maiden, I am content, this jest shall re∣privy your head for this once, but beware the next en∣counter, come Ariadnes clew, will you unwind, and light vs through this vault of darkness, and theres your Naulum.
Thank you my Lord, and your business stand this way at midnight, isle let you in by this token, and take this frō me, when you come again, bring the
Lady a Diamond, or some pretty &amp; foolish stone, for I cā tel you these same paltry stones are in high request amongst Ladies, especially such old mousers as I have been in my time, &amp; as I say when you come, be not a∣shamed to knock, and if I come not knock lustily, and again, and never give over knocking till you hear my hem, did you never know Wins hem?
Never.
Why hast thou a private hem?
Have I? In faith sir I, few Gallants ith the town that are of any standing at all, but are acquainted with my hem, but come close my Lord, close, &amp; besure the next time you come you doe not forget to knock lusti∣lie,
My Lord.
My Love, my life, oh thou art made
Out of the soul of wit, and thy conceits,
Of the best fashion.
Did you taste the jest?
Divinely, oh divinely, tart and quick,
Pleasing, yet not tedious I was wrapped
In a knaves skin.
My senses were entranced.
Into a fools Paradise.
Oh my sweet Phoenix, out of thy ashes.
Is your love so hot, you mean to burn me▪
Oh fit honeyed me,
And then their numnesse, did thou never read
Of any Lawyer came to be Duke?
Never, but I have heard of a Cuckold that was an Usurper.
Why such a one would I be.
What, a Cuckold?
Yes, and an Usurper too.
So you are for you Lawyers usurp more crowns then half a Country.
Vlisses, Tully, Lawyers, but no Dukes.
Menelaus and Vulcan were Cuckolds but no Lawyers.
Fore-mee tistrue, but now I doe remember nought to that purpose:
The most lustful Goats
Wear gilded horns, and go in Velvet Coats.
Whatnewes Win?
Faith ordinary household news, yonders a wel-fac'd Gentleman craves a may change a word with you.
His name?
Horatio.
Leave vs to confer.
A trusty friends, the souls high Treasurer.
In dumps Horatio? what, my second self clouded with passion?
O my honoured Lord, Our souls and our affections are made all of one fashion now the slightest wrong that scars the reputation of my friend, stabs daggers to my heart.
I know it true, and I can proou't,
Our loves are twins,
But to the wrong, dares any idle tongue
Bark at our greatness?
Yes.
Their names?
Your wife.
My wife? the manner?
Amongst her lustful Mates,
She shame's not to give out, that by your greatness,
knowledge, credit, and friends in highest place,
You have divorced her without due desert.
We must demure of this, isle have a trick
By way of Habeas Corpus to remove
This talking Gossip, come Hotatio,
Some project, how? what course for her remove:
I cannot counsel, but fore-god my Lord,
My lodgings mightily annoyed with rats,
That eat my papers and deface my books
How should I rid them.
Easily, poison them,
And well remembered, this she Rat my wife,
That eats and tears the leaves of my repute,
Shall taste like speeding Physic in thine ear,
Can temper poison?
Yes.
And kill a Rat.
That she shall never swell on it.
Mum for that,
This she Rat is a Devil.
A Limb of Satan.
Envy.
Destruction.
Malice.
Ratsbane do it?
Ere my disgrace get age, rare tricks and I will fool the world, woo't, do it?
The Rate shall die.
Quick pretty Damsels, that your task were done The fore-noones eldest minutes almost run.
Then the glass runs to fast.
I think not so,
Had thou my cares, thoudst think it ran too slow.
I have my task forsooth.
So have not I.
Yet with these sands my sorrows run away
I turn them with the glass, the glass is run,
Yet my hudge mass of cares is scarce begun,
Here's a fault, little one what work make you.
True stitch forsooth.
Then see you work it true.
Pray madam teach me to take out this knot Of hearts ease.
Hearts ease, I have almost forgot,
I could have wrought it well when I was young:
But in good sadness, I have had none long.
What's that?
A branch of Rue.
A common weed, of all herbs else I work that well indeed, how chance your flower is behind the glass?
Indeed Isle get it up:
Indeed alas.
I cannot chide with her, yet tyrant care,
At my entreat will not one sight forbear:
Why sigh you madam?
Oh I grieve to see,
Youth run to cath at their own misery.
You are like April or Rose buds in May,
You never wither, till the wedding day,
Even so did I, so pretty souls will you,
Youth wears mild Hearts ease, marriage bitter Rue•.
Be not so sad, good madam, do b ut smile,
Weal have a song sad sorrow to beguile.
Save you fair Ladies, madam, my business leads me to you.
If in your ancient suite,
My cares are deafened and my utterance mute.
Your ear, be wood, what should beget this coins
Were I a stranger, or some City Gull
I would commend thee, but I know the world.
Lodging is costly, maintenance asks charge:
Thou art divorced and hast no other help,
But thy bare comings in: accept my Love,
I w ill allow thee twenty pound a quarter.
To buy thee Pins.
Leave this ymodest suite.
Or by my honour—
Come, these words of course
My fame, mine honour, and my dear respect:
Are but like Ignes fatui to delude,
Greene and unseasoned wits, pry thee be kind,
A gilded slip carries as fair a show,
As perfect gold, guilt honour may do so
But put your slip to trial, the slight gold,
Is soon rubbed of:
Come, thy distinctions sold
Let not thy April beauty like a Rose,
Fade in the bud, and ripened pleasures lose,
My sword thy honour: thy estate my purse,
Shall man an d strenghten,
I detest that course.
Your husband hath a sweet heart:
For his ill.
Shall I turn traitor &amp; mine own fame kill?
Tic▪ dead already, every idle tongue, Stabs it to death.
I have the greater wrong.
Thou wrongst thy self &amp; spurnst thy proper good
Am I not youthful see my wanton blood
Dances within my veins, and blushing, Courts
Thy generous beauty to more amorous sports,
You shall not choose.
hands of.
I love the e dear.
I hate thee deadly.
Dost thou?
Shall I swear?
No, isle believe thee Phoenix of thy sex,
I glory in thy virtues, and reveal,
What by my oath I promised to conceal.
Your jealous husband urged me to this try all,
Pawning his oath upon your strict deny all,
all bastard Jealousy should be exiled,
and ancient love entirely reconsilde.
I touched your heart, and now I find it true,
Isle give you notice, isle impoison you.
Thou speak all comfort.
I was made of hope. and rich performance waits upon my words.
Father of my fair fortunes, whose rich love begets this reuniting covenant,
When comes this long expected sealing day?
To morrow, the hour eight.
Certain?
As life.
Then follow me to feast,
Thy news Horatio is the Welcomest guest.
Swell heart, hold bosom, yield not to relent,
and yet her beauty, colourable trash,
Her virtues, vengeance Hypocritical,
I love her, fury, poison, Hidraes gall,
Impatience man me, black damnation
Usher my practice, poison play thy part,
and doe my latest greetings to her heart.
We all must down, yet here the difference lies.
Many for sins, she for her virtue dyes.
T Tristella.
My Lord?
Good wine needs no bush, nor a good face
payting thou art favour of thy self, and what thou cost is not under a colour.
I know no other painter but one, and her name is modesty, and she sometimes throws a blush into my face to make my pale cheeks red, but else you shall no∣for take me for an Aldermans post.
Why an Aldermans poest?
Mark but where great posts are newly pain∣ted, you shall see much egress &amp; regress in and out, &amp; where you see a face newly okered, tic a sign ther's great traffic, &amp; much stirring to and fro.
Come sit, sit, nay nearer, nearer, nearer yet.
Then I shall sit upon your skirts.
Iulio and Horatio, what shal's have to supper?
I am now in the spending vain.
Then God for me▪ what make I so near?
Good action, you shall not remove, I learnt that phrase of mine uncle, boy, know what Adam hath bespoken for our palates.
Where there a banquet to be had,
More rate and dear, then that Vitellius made:
It should be served in, but Horatio,
What shall wee eat that's costly, and that's rare?
A rooted Phoenix were excellent good for that Lady.
Andf why for that Lady.
Fare ached and dear bought, is good for you know hwo.
For Ladies.
I for Ladies.
Then the most cheap stuff, and next to hand is good for you know who.
For knaves.
I for knaves.
Adam what have you ready.
Sir you may have a Calves head.
here's a Gentleman hath one in his hat already, no more. Calves head I pray thee.
Hast any Pheasants or Partridges?
No, but if your Lordship will have a dish of Woodcocks.
No for God-sake, they are the stalest meat with me of any, for I never sit to meat with these gal∣lants, but there's Woodcocks clean through the table.
Then unless you will have a Dotrell or a Gull.
A Gull? why which of these Gent. wooed thou serve in? do you not hear how Adam flouts you?
I mean a Sea-gull bakt.
I in any case lets have that, I have fed my wit on many a land-Gull, once let me banquet my self of a Sea-gull, some Sea Captain, I lay my life that has a desire to sup with me, but such as thou hast, I prithee be brief
Lay the table in the with-drawing room.
I will sir, your honour can have no Larks Isle as∣sure you.
And why?
Two Citizens sons and a Poet bought up all ith town, flung away the bodies only to have a pie made of the brains.
A sign either they lackd brains, or else they did it because they would bear a brain.
T was told me that the young Lord Polymetes Was entered here.
He that so told thee fellow told thee true.
I cry your Lordship mercy, let this letter
Supply th▪ un willing office of my tongue,
And be the sad reporter of my news.
What ominous news can Polimetes daunt?
Have we not Hyren here?
Ouid not all thy Metam orphosis
Can show such transformation, oh my God!
It is not possible, (is this my son?)
A has mistook himself, my life a has,
For the seven liberal sciences; a reads,
The seven black deadly finns.
Must you needs son turn over these linen leaves
having such store of paper? this is miraculous.
News, news my hearts will make your jocund souls dance in your bosoms, now which joyful tongue amongst you all cries first God save the Duke? God save Duke Polymetes.
The news is not so happy.
Tush look here.
My Lord I'm sorry for your he auinesse.
Thou should have said so to a Porter that's heavy laden.
But come, sit, sit in council, let's devise
How to spend all this countless mass of wealth,
My father hath bequeathed me at his death,
Quite from the popular and vulgar garb,
We will be ode in all things, and retain
No common humour in our large expense.
An honourable mind, and were your father
A live to note these hopeful parts in you,
How would it move him and surprise his heart?
But now my lord: my message being done,
I must return i'm glad I have found your son.
For thy good news take that along with thee,
Look here Tris, would not these
Make notable states-mē? methinks state steals vpō me.
And I have known some steal state.
Then they came never trnely by it as I doe, but pergite porro, methinkes I could make an indifferent careless Duke.
And I could make a notable Courtier, methinks I am begging already.
O mine Uncle would make an Excellent Court spaniel, he would sent out offices &amp; concealed lands, a hundred mile of, and a were my cashier but twenty years, I durst change livings with him.
But what employment for Horatio?
O, he would make a good grumbling surly po∣litician, thou shalt be my politician.
I shall never be loved.
Not loved, your reason?
I hate the base and rascal multitude,
I cannot nod, ride bare-head through the streets,
Nor wreath my body like a Cable Hat-band
To every Peddler and mechanic Townsmen,
I hate the poor, am envious at the rich,
Love none.
Yes, women.
Faith after a sort, I love a good smooth face▪
Then you love mine.
And forty more.
I muse yo doe not marry.
I would to night, upon condition
That I might bury her to morrow, God Boy.
Fill him some wine.
I cannot drink, god boy.
It is not poisoned.
Hum, I cannot tell,
The Countess drunk and did.
Come, come.
Farewell.
Still in the b•gs of Melancholy, pox on it, tic staler
then Tobacco, not so much but the singing Cob∣ler is grown melancholy, and corrects shoes in hue∣more, fie ont, come sit, we must talk about many mat∣ters, Riuo, Isle bee singular, m• Royal expense shall run such a circular course that the Rascal spawn of Imitators shall split their wooden brains, and sink their wealth in the Gulf of prodigality, and yet like a bad Archers shaft, fall fixescore short of their aim, my expense shall be royal and peculiar.
Isle fashion you a course.
Divinely, come.
Divinely indeed, serve God, live honestly▪ rel∣lish not Atheism.
Thats clean out of the fashion indeed.
Then good.
Because out of the fashion, set down that Adam
Tic done▪
I have it my Lord, I have it in faith.
Nay quickly, how?
Weal keep no Pages.
Excellent, that's clean out of the fashion for Pa∣ges, that's good, that stands, down with it Adam.
Tic done sir.
Weal use no great Horses.
How shall we ride then?
On Mules and she Asses.
Down with that Adam.
But, for my train, for a Page with Pages,
Maintain a hundred Gallants at your heals,
Live in the Country, entertain again
Into the Court, long-banish'd hospitality,
Who since the first great hose with Codpieces grew out of fashion near durst show his head.
Another, set it down, isle spend after forty po d a day, isle see which of my cheverel brained immitators dares follow my fashion: sblood I cannot drink To∣basso
two days, but the third the Church wardens &amp; fidemen are at it in the Alehouse in sermon time, I can∣not wear a suit half a day but the Tailors Journey∣man creeps into it: I cannot keep a block private, but every Citizens son thrusts his head into it: I cannot keep a wench but every grand-Iurors son in the Country imitates me, I care not if I make it petty trea∣son for any man to kiss under ten pound a Kiss.
Oh my Lord, twill never pass ith the Lower∣house, they will not loose their liberty of kissing.
Then keep a leash of Wenches.
As common as cracking of nuts, not a serving∣man, but doth as much.
Fore-god I have it, peculiar I have it.
What first Iulio?
Your honour shall keep no wenches at all.
No wenches? what shall become of me then?
I must be round with you Tris, you must pack, many women they say are common, and isle entertain nothing that savours of Community, I will not divulge.
Nay, but hark you my Lord, though you main∣taine me, you doe not lye with me, and I think that's the newer fashion.
Fore-god the newest of all, for there's not a gallant maintains his wench but a will lye with her, down with that Adam.
Tic done.
My Lord my Lord, the Duke your father with a great train is coming.
From heaven or hell.
That's more then I know, but by the faith of a page, or the word of a Gent. which you will, hee is a∣riu'd and in great state entered the City.
Zounds wheres the slave that brought the falser∣port of his death?
But art sure tic my father?
Or else your Mother did you the more wrong, shift for your selves, for he is come.
My father alive and come home, hart a me what shift? come home &amp; find the Court turned Ale-house Dicing-house, Dancing school, I am undone horse and foot.
Some Rosasolis or Aqua mirabilis ho, for our ge∣nerall coward's in a swoon.
I know you are a hot shot in a feather-bed Tris, but that will vote serve turn now, therefore fall off, the enemy is too strong, deed Tris, every Lamb to his fold, and Cony to her Borough, for the old Fox is a∣broad no, wilt not bee? why then God a mercies brain.
Cedant arma togae, my gown and books boy, some sudden devise to keep him back half an hour, and win my good opinion for ever.
And I doe not, let me die of the bastina• doe.
Lords, make a stand, I wonder that our Son glads not our wished arrival with his presence.
No doubt my Lord, his honourable care,
Is not acquainted with your sudden landing.
We take it so, and whilst our self in person
Enquire the cause, attend vs in the Hall,
Little thinks he his father is so near,
But unexpected, isle go startle him,
And put his wit unto the present try all.
whore's the Prince?
my most honoured Lord?
In private conference with an English post.
An English post?
An English post my Lord: the effect of his letters I know, not but I heard him begin a most strange dis∣course.
Of what I prithee?
Please your honour take a turn or two, I shall re∣late (quickly my Lord) heereports there fell such an Inundation of waters in the month of July, about the third of dog-dayes, that the Owers and Scullers that use to work in the Thames, rowed over houses &amp; landed their fairs in the middle Isle of Paules.
First possible?
Very easily possible (sfoot quickly) and more the fishermen that rid between Dover and Calis, took red spurlin, and she Mackerel in the midst of the Exchange, which made mutton so cheepe and stale, that it is thought the better half of the towns∣men will run horn mad about it.
It cannot be.
Not be? why look you sir,
Nay.
But hear the conclusion, just on Saint Lukes day coming shall be a twelue-month, Westminster &amp; Win∣chester, drinking a quart of wine together on Salis∣bury-playne fell into hard words and strange terms, there was thou knave and I knave, and such foul words, as if tow young Barristers had been breathing their wits for a wager, (sfoot make an end) now it was thought Westminster stood most upon his terms, yet in the end Winchester got one of his best terms
from him spite on his teeth, which so vexed West∣minster, that it grew to a deadly fewd, which was so hotly pursued that the taking up of the matter cost many broken heads.
How.
So sir, (sfoot not done yet?) and had not Cha∣ring-crosse a tall bow legedd Gent: taken up the matter, tic thought Westminster stones would have bin too hot for some of them: and in parting the fray, Cha∣ring-crosse got such a box of the ear, that hee will carry it to his deathsday, some say a got a wry neck by parting the fray, marry Winchester says flatly, a got a creeck in his neck, with looking westward for Termers.
Thou should have told me.
Of the English post▪ why look you my Lord, the post coming in poast-hast to show his duty to the Prince, stumbled at a post that lay in his way and broke his sinister shanck, and so I break of my discourse and bid your honour welcome home.
What a strange tale is here? of slouds and hills of Charing-crosse, Terms▪ and I know not what? and when I loo'd for the conclusion.
A breaks of all and leaves me in a Cloud.
There is some trick in it, honoured▪Iulio?
Health to my Sovereign.
How fares our Son?
Have your inducements drawn him from his humour?
Faith my Lord I have done a childes part, and almost spent a childes part, to draw him to society, but tic labour lost.
What is his business with the English post?
The English post my Lord? your grace is
merry.
His boy informd me a held conference,
Bout serious matters with an English post.
Alas my Lord, the boy is lunatic.
How lunatic? and a foe•e god me thought
A told a mad discourse, but the occasion.
I t•ll you my Lord, coming a bruptly as your honour o• any else may do to the Princes cham∣ber, about some ordinary service, a found him in his study, and a company of botlno•'d Devils dancing the Irish hay about him, which on the sudden so startled the poor boy, as a clean lost his wits, and ever since talks thus idle, as your Excelence hath heard him
But tell me doth my son converse with Devils?
As familiarly as you and I, they are his only company keepers, when a hath been duld at his study, I have known a Devil and hee play at Ticktack for phillips, by the whole day together.
Tic passing strange, but may wee without danger go near his study?
At yonr honours spleasure,
See where a sits, be Patient and observe.
prevented still? now by Medusass snakes,
And black Erinnis ever burning lamp,
If all the skill in pyromantique rules,
Deep Eromancy, or the precious soul,
Of Ge man▪ique spells and Characters
Graven in the sir face of our mother earth,
Can work this strange achievement,
How his brain sweates in pursuit of lear∣ning
Oh attend.
The first house is vulgarised, the Horoscope or Angle of the Orient, and his Ascendant betokened beginning of life, Merchandise, marriage and—
Lets break him off.
So please your excellence.
The second and third house, the third House is cadent from the Angle of the Orient, and Ascendant to the Angle Septent•ionall, signifying Fathers Sisters and Daughters absent and lost, Daughters and fathers lost: here then I find my demand, the Maid lost my Sister, thus then I proportion my figure, there I place my witnesses, and here my Judge, and thus proceed to the Invocation.
Renowned Prince, Prince Polymetes, zounds Prince.
Discourteous Iulio, give my study leave.
Hart not a •ot, the Duke your father.
Isle make my father joyful by my toil,
Had not thy folly interiupted me,
My hopes ere this had met their period.
Your princely father.
O torment me not with his remembrance.
S'blood hoe's safe returned.
O would a were, then should not Genoaes Crown,
For want of strong supportance be pressed down.
I〈…〉 not enough, that like a harmless Prince
Spending my thou•es in Contemplation,
I let you hold the rains of government.
Unfit for me, my father hath a deep
And searching judgment that can brush and sweep
such idle brained and antique Parasites,
Forth of his presence, pray your absence,
I can but smile to sue how Protheus like,
They turn the shape of their discourse &amp; project,
Thinking to lead me in an idle maze,
after their folly, well, Isle temporise,
and note the issue, come my Lords let's in,
His humour's grounded, and like subtle fire:
The more suppressed, it mounts so much the hier.
Why so, this jest came smoothly of and was not soiled in the working
That boy is worth his weight in pearl, did mark what a tale of a Cock and a Bull, he told my father whilst I made thee and the rest away, by a bill of Convey anee at his back?
And I did simple Knights seruire in persuading the Duke the boy was lunatic.
it was admirable, doth not this jest deserve to be chronicled?
No by my troth, yet I must needs say, some as bad have bin, for how soever our practise pass currant with your father for the present, our villainies must needs break▪ forth, they are so notorious and public.
No matter let▪am, have not we brains? brains and they be well mincde are sauce for any meat, let mine uncle turn Turxe and break forth, let the whole town turn cuckold and blow their horns in our disgrace, I have brains, let the Sun and the seven Stars be opposed, I have brains for that too my present wit shall give▪am all the lye in their throats, and may ntayne it at pocket, dagger, and pi∣stole when I have done.
A mourner boy? what solemn funeral,
Hath hung that sable livery on thy back?
Her death my Lord that hath cut out the like,
For both your honours, the Countess is deceased.
Then will my uncle be a hauy mourner.
But how the manner of her death?
Isle eel your honour that hereafter and give you the ground of an admirable ie ast.
And we play not true moals and work it out of the ground, let me dye of the greene-sicknsses.
The ground then comes?
No Isle tell you that in private, the life of a jest thrives in the first revealing, it concerns the manner of your avnts death and a law-trick of your uncle.
Come to the solemperites, and weep at least those being ended wele receive y our jest. 
Solemnpe Musique to a funeral song the Herseborne over the stage, Duke Lurdo, Polymetes, Angelo, Iulio, Horatio and mouners &amp;c.
What is a man? hart a the Devil mere fools,
His rich invention, Machiuilian plots:
Idle illusiue antic fantasies.
Apelles grapes, I had as full a brain,
Fertile invention and as forward hopes,
As man could father, or his wit bring forth:
Yet in a minute in bubles age,
The venomdfury of a bitter spleen,
Confounded all, forgetful that I was,
Women are moulded out of bashfulness:
And must be drawn to kindness by degrees.
All this I knew.
Neither the Law nor I,
Know any reason why Horatio.
But mum, Law-tricks as closely as I can,
Mine ear shall drink his meditation.
Had she •uruiu'd Time—
Might have found vs out,
Good, firm in Law, I am a fool to doubt,
His constant secrecy.
But now shoe's dtad.
The deepest wit could not have bettered,
Our smooth conveyance, but upright and straight,
Unknown, unseen, isle work upon conceit.
Had she been living, golden promises,
The smooth Atturneys to a Lovers tongue
Might have in time solicited my suite,
Gifts might have pleaded, mournful Elegies,
Told her my passions, had she been composde
Of steel or flint, nay, made of women's hearts,
The most obdurate mettle, Time and Art,
But she is dead, oh hell! and in her tomb.
My hopes are buried.
My conceited brain,
Hath an odd crotchet called me back again.
To all these bad mis-fortunes should the Corn• use any tricks?
Ha? a talks of tricks,
Of count and tricks, for tricks and count are twins.
Yet I regard not.
I am right and straight.
Say a complain?
Suppose he tell the Duke he gave the poison.
He contrived her death and cannot wrong me,
Fie, I fear him not,
He doth but father, what my brain begot.
This comfort yet which many want I have,
To follow my fair fortunes to the grave.
OH, shall I venture? ha, shall I enter?
Shield me Appollo, the groūd is so hollow
That every step I tread upon it,
Methinkes it sings a dead mans Sonnet.
Fates, oh Fates be honest Drabs,
Fear gives me ten thousand stabs,
I dare not further tic wilful murder,
Thus late to tread the cloister vaults.
For though i'm small, I have great men's faults,
Then gentle Fates, take some remorse,
I watch an honest, kind, quick course.
Grant that no Hobgoblins fright me,
No hungry devils rise up and bite me:
No Vrchin, Elves, or drunkards Ghoasts,
Shove me against walls or posts,
O grant I may no black thing touch,
Though many men love to meet such.
But heere's the tomb, my hopes sufficing,
I watch a dainrie Ducks uprising,
Her cheeks now are chilly, as is the pale lily, (Roses)
But when her eye vncloses, theile look like two fair
A light my moister? or some spright,
Yet What need Devils have candle-light,
Tic he, all hid, isle not be seen,
For once this tomb shall be my screen.
I cannot rest, my guilt keeps op mine eyes.
My passion rips my bosom, and my blood
Is turned to poisoned water, and so swells,
That my vexed soul, endures a thousand hells.
If I chance slumber, then I dream of Serpents,
Toads, altogether, and such venomous evils,
As hale me from my sleep like forked Devils,
Midnight, thou Aethiope, Empress of black souls,
Thou general Bawd to the whole word, I salute thee,
Wishing thy poison dropped upon my brain,
For my so rude, so rash, so heedless murder,
In the ambition &amp; the height of lust,
Not giving my blood liberty to cool.
To poison such a beauty, O black Fate!
Thus many killed, too soon repent too late.
Soft, stay, this sames the chilly monument,
That hugs her body in his marble arms.
Thou gentle soul of my deceased love?
O, were but possible to enjoy thy voice,
Thy sweet Harmonious voice, I should be blessed,
But Even to dally with thy silables,
O tomb.
No tomb but Cistern filled with tears.
O heart!
No heart, but sink of grief and fears.
Countess, soul shadow, shadow speak again▪
Speak again.
What should I speak, my hate, or thy huge wrongs?
Hudge wrongs.
Hudge wrongs indeed, but charitable soul,
What ransom shall I pay thee for thy life?
Thy life.
My life?
〈…〉 life.
Discourteous ayre,
My blood is frozen with despair.
Despair.
Pardon forgive me, shall I go?
I go.
But shall your hate pursue me, I or no?
No.
Adieu my grief and isle go sleep.
Pray God my tongue can my hearts coūsel keep
Ha? are you vanished? let me see, a may be fallen a sleep against some pillar, for isle be sworn a talked ve∣rye idly, Abut decessit euasit erupit, I would fain know that Wag that can put me down for a women's Ghost extempore, especially if it were to be performed under a tomb cloth, but here lay the desperate venture, had she chaunc'd to have risen, and spoke before his qu, as about this time she must tise, or my sleepy drink plays, the drowsy companion with her.
Hart a me, my moister again, what cross points are these? I see I must betake me to my late refuge.
It was no Ghost, subtle opinion,
Working in mans decayed faculties,
Cuts out and shapes illusiue fantasies,
And our weak apprehensions like wax,
Receive the from, and presently convey
Unto our dull imagination.
And hereupon we ground a thousand lies,
As that we see Devils rattling their chains,
G•acts of dead men, variety of spirits,
When our own guilty conscience is the hell.
and our black thoughts, the Caverns where they dwell:
Yet sure this was her shadow, for I hear
Her last words sound still dancing in mine ear.
Then gentle soul▪ if thou be yet vnthronde,
Answer one question and no more.
No more?
May my hearts true repentance satisfy,
My wi•full▪ murder, your reply.
I.
Thanks, thousand thanks, and so farewell.
Farewell.
The bane of murder is despair and hell.
Was ever poor little knave put to his last trumps as I am? what shall I do now▪ my heart goes pit a pat in my belly like a pair of washing beetles, should a return again now, as my hand to a Lobster∣pie a will, all the Fat were in the fire, but hark tic one a clock, and just about this minute she should play the wagtail and stir.
What trance was this? where am I?
Oh she speaks, Fates and be good girls keep my moister away, and let his man have a little sport with his mistress.
What place is this? am I in heaven or no.
No.
What voice is that? is this place earth?
Earth.
Earth? how came I hither? do I live again?
Live again.
What voice is that? a woman or some youth?
Youth.
My fears will murder me, my powers are frighted.
Alas poor stirring ghost art over sprighted.
Boy.
mistress.
Tell me.
all and more anon.
The sleepy drink hath plaid the honest man,
What sleepy drink? how came I in this tomb?
Isle tell you that in a more private room,
Away Isle tell you a strange wonder,
Then wintes lightning, or Christmas thunder,
Then to my fathers trip and go,
Nimble prevention ont runs woe.
No more of mourning brother, we have laid
Our timeless sorrows in a quiet grave,
When men inter their comfort let them weep:
Not when their crying charm is laid to sleep.
Great Duke mine eyes are not thus great with tears,
For our griefs funeral, but that her shame,
And future scandal will out live her name,
Come let mirth kill it, and to your discourse,
Is our son grown unto that height of riot
Your speeches intimate.
I know the law, if I have wronged the Prince,
I stand in compass of a praemonire,
And he by writ of ad quote dampnum may,
sue his recovery, I know the law.
Nay his own letter partly grants as much,
But note his subtle reason, here a writs,
That of set purpose a laid by himself,
And plaid the part of a wilde prodigal,
Only to put your love unto the test,
On which advantage to egress his wealth,
You did indea•e him to society,
Of careless wantons and light Courtesans,
Made secret vaults and cellars under ground.
Non tenet in bocardo I demur,
Do but send out your Jterum summons,
Or capias vt legatum to attach,
And bring him viva voce tongue to tongue,
And vi &amp; arms Isle revenge this wrong.
Leave that to trial, here a further writ•,
That by his skill and practise in black Art,
He hath found out and by much toil redeemd,
My daughter from the Turkish servitude.
Redeemde your daughter▪ an apparent error,
Which you by way of melius inquiren dum.
May soon discuse, he ran some home your daughter
As sure as I made cellars under ground,
Or played his pander.
How so ere it prove,
I mean to try the utmost of his wit,
To see how quaintly he can bear himself:
But who comes here.
Marry my good Lord, this is the greene bur, that stuck so close to the young Princes sleeve, the shoemakers cutting knife, that fitted his boots to the prodigals last.
If I be Compose mantis, this is she,
Must play your daughters part, my Lord be ware,
Work close cock sure, I se the gin the snare.
Most reverend father.
Father? now it fits,
Ware an old Fox, Duke I have brains I have wits.
Immodest impudent and shameless girl,
Is it not enough thou hast mis-led my son,
And wrong his reputation?
How wronged him father? I must needs say I have played Will with the wisp with my brother and have led him up and down the maze of good fellow∣ship, till I have made his wit and his wealth both turn sick but for any other wrong, I appeal to him∣self, my uncle honest Iulio, where is a? and all the rest of this good Audience, therefore pray good father.
Out of my sight, thou art no child of mine,
You're the more beholding to some of your neigh¦bours, tut mā look on me well, here's your now no nose, and thick kissing lip up and down, and my
mother were living, she would never bus you more, till you confessed I were your daughter.
What an audatious naughty pack is this?
Have her before a Justice, Adam.
Do, with all my heart good father, send me to a Justice, for apretty woman with a smooth tongue and an Angels voice, can do much with Justice in this golden age, but thus much before I go, if Justice will not p•ouide me a better father, Isle have you, or Isle give the beadle of the ward a fee to cry, a new fa∣there a new, as they do oysters at Call•is.
Brother cre you acquainted with this woman?
I must needs say that at my nephews suite,
I gave her a months lodging and her diet.
But Nada veritate in bare truth,
&amp; bone side without circumstance,
Splendent Sole the bright Sun ne'er saw,
A wench more capable of wit and law,
And how soar she is with beauty graced,
I dare engage mine honour she is chaste,
I give your words good credit, yet tic tare,
to find a woman wanton, chaste and fair,
But now unto my son, whose powerful art,
Strives to vngiue his sisters servitude.
Thanks He eat, thou hast insphearde my hope
In a gold circle, o were my father here,
This fight would of his age bate twenty year.
What sight my son.
Lend me your watery eye,
That swims in passion for my sisters loss,
And in this book prospective, let it read,
Apleasing lecture.
I conceive two shapes.
A civil merchant and a beauteous maid.
Their pace is speedy and my slower eye,
Cannot keep way with their celerity.
That maid's my sister, whom on magiques wing,
To this fair presence, my rich Art shall bring,
Prepare to meet them, for this minutes age,
sends with my charm their airy pilgrimage.
Where are are we now? how strange 〈◊〉 were we borne
Upon the pinions of the fleeting ayre,
And where dismounted? unto what great Prince
Christian or Pagan longs this mansion.
Are we in any sociable place?
Or in the Cell of some Magician,
Who by his skill in hellish exorcisms,
Made vs his thrall?
I can forbear no longer,
Welcome thrice welcome.
Welcome?
Whence?
To whom?
to me.
Thy father.
and thy friends.
do not beguile vs, O Demetrio?
We are betrayed, see the Magtiian,
That by his cunning and strong working charms,
Brought vs unknown.
••to thy fathers arms,
Welcome Emilia, with this Ivory chain,
I sphere my hopes and in thy bosom rain,
These tears of comfort, then embrace thy friends.
Thy Brothers Art all further difference ends.
Your City.
Genoa▪
And your reverend name.
Ferneze.
Father.
Yes the very same,
I doe remember when she went to nurse,
What a cursed vixen two▪s, but now shoe's grown.
Not past all goodness, yet I hope s•r: but in faith Brother wast you that brought vs from Turkey a cock∣horse? and your Genoan hackney be so quick paced you shall have more of our Custom.
Lay by discourse, what Gentleman is that comes vninuited to our feast of joy.
Pray welcome him father, hoe's a Genoan mar∣chant, that with much suite ransomed me from the Turk.
My hopes redeemer welcome, but proceed
Unto the doubtful fortunes of my child:
It was told me she was stolen from Monte sancta.
You help my memory, thence she was stolen,
And for her beauty, chosen Concubine
To the lascivious Turk, but by much suit,
And meditation of some special friends,
I bought her freedom with a thousand marks▪
Which weal repay with ample interest,
Once more weal bid you welcome, and to set
A smoother gloss upon our merriment,
There's a quick Wench that only lives by wit,
Who understanding I had lost my Daughter,
Borrowed thy habit, and Usurps thy name,
One call her in, now Daughter make thee sit,
To combat and dismount her active wit.
A parlous Girl, her wits a mere Snaphaunce,
Goo's with a fire locke, she strikes fire from stones,
She knows the Law too, a mere murdering piece,
Fight lowe, locke close, she speaks mere▪ lightning Niece.
How now father, have you put on your cōsidering Cap, and bethought you? or shall I proceed and tra∣uerse my writ of errors?
Ha, writ of errors? Law-trickes, words of Art Demurs and quillets.
All not worth a pin, will you bethink you father?
I have bethought me, and to let thee see,
The true proportion of thy impudence,
Behold my Daughter, whom thou personat'st.
How, your Daughter?
Yes minkes, his Daughter.
My niece, and I will make it good.
Pretty in faith, have ye any more of these tricks? I may be out-fac'd of my self with a Card often, but in faith Uncle, the best knave 'ith bunch, nor all the law in your Budget cannot do it, &amp; as for you Sisley bum∣trinkets, isle have about with you at the single Stackado are you a woman?
No.
What then?
A Maid.
If his tongue falter, all our plots bewraide.
If a true maid, lend a true maid your hand.
Both hand and heart
The like of me command,
Now I conjure thee by the love
Y•u bear Dian•es frien• Grove,
By Cupids by ve, and go den arrow,
Venus Dove, and chirping Sparrow,
By all those vo〈…〉es, the listening winds,
Hear when Maids v•clasp their minds.
By those sweet oaths men use in bed,
Besieging of a Maiden head.
I doe conjure you fore these Lords,
To answer truly to my words.
By these and more, by all the scopes
Of amorous Jove and Phoebus rapes,
By Lovers sweet, and secret meetings,
Hand embracings and lip-greetings,
I promise you before these Lords,
To answer truly to your words.
Where were you borne?
In Genoa.
Your name?
Emilia.
Lye not.
It were open shame
to lye before so many.
In what Art were you instructed?
That's not in my part.
Say musique.
Quickly▪
I was taught to sing,
Unto the Lute, and Court each amorous string
With a soft finger.
Good, how many springs
Lived you in Monte Santa?
Zounds this stings.
How many?
Nine.
Zounds ten.
Ten fops.
Nay quick
Twixt nine and ten▪
Right, answer.
In the nick.
Your age?
What?
Any thing.
Come, fie, you linger.
I am just as old.
As what?
my little finger.
You dally
Sixteen.
Eighteen.
Eighteen fools,
Nay and you prompt weal hiss you forth the schools.
Come your reply, nay quick your certain age,
I am just as old as—true Emilaes page.
A page?
Disguised?
Wrapped in a women's smock?
Ime in a wood.
And I can spring a cock,
Woodcock of our side:
And you bill so fair,
Make a clear glade, Isle single forth a pair.
Fie her wit scaldes.
We shall have change of weather.
Cocks of one hen, come prince, lets hold toge∣there.
I thought we should find a Counterfeit of you
Then nail me to your lips with a kiss, and make me currant payment.
What, young Orlando? how dooes Charing-Crosse?
Is Westminster yet friends with Winchester?
Zounds Iulio now.
Alas my Lord, it was a mere device to—
Make your Highness merry, when I heard
You were returned without your wished Adventure.
Oh Moister Merchant, you aduenturd well,
To cheat your self thus of a thousand marks,
How now my Lord?
Nay, isle but see your breast, mine eyes desire,
No lower object.
Go to, read your errors.
I cannot now return, non est invent,
Brother embrace your child, your second heir,
I found firm witness in her bosom bare.
Art thou Emilia?
Emelia, your Daughter, once a Turkish prisoner
Receive a joyful blessing rise and say,
What wit or power freed thee.
Dear father, the manner both of my enlarging and captiuing isle relate, when more convenient time and place shall incite me, but upon this occasion, pray give me leave to put my brother beside his melācholy
I prithee do so.
Why how now Student? grand Magician,
Puritan, come, you never plaide the Wag,
You know not Winefrides hem, nor the Counts vault.
A'mort man? what, can Polymetes daunt?
Hath a not Hyren here?
Zounds all will out, brains—
Now for a hundred dozen of Larks to make a pie of the brains.
Well, done it was, and out it must.
Why how now Polymetes in a dump?
Wheres your Ʋenetian Merchant and your Sister?
Who? Emilia? why look you here father, doe you think I knew her not? ask the Boy and Iulio, do you think I would have maintained her as I did but only for affinities sake? what said I at first Nuncle? did I not urge affinities? and you would see me hanged say and I did not urge affinity?
And yet you pleaded hard for a nights lodging
Only to try thy honesty by this Element, ask my uncle else?
Hoe's a sweet womanised.
No more a that, niece you're a wag.
Well said old water Ratt,
But that my brother Conjurer should fail,
In the black Art.—
In the black Pudding: pish,
Of all arts else, only the law is firm.
And yet that dances changes every Term.
Well ieston gallants, and uncle, you that make a pish at the black Art, my books to the piece of Are∣ras, where Venus and Atones stood kissing and the cuckoldly pander Vulcan watched them, and all your by ways to boot, I raise up my Aunt your late wife in the same proportion, habit and gesture, she usually wore in her life time.
Do that, Isle swear there's virtue in thy Art.
And if I do not, say Philosophy is foolery, Logic legerdemain, and Conjuring mere coui∣catching, as indeed it is.
And now by virtue of this wand,
Each in his circle keep his stand,
Now Belioll and Astaroth,
Sole commanders of the North,
By H•cates head, E•innis snakes,
S•ix and all infernal Lakes,
I charge you kneel to Proserpine,
And by her licence all divine
Dismiss the Countess from those shades,
Where pleasure springs and never fades.
Festina, ci•o, c•tius, come
free Tenant of Elizium.
The Count look, pale.
why starts Horatio?
What writ the shadow?
That, these lines will show,
Horatio, base Horatto poisoned me,
I was your sister, right mine injury.
Horatio?
Yes, Horatio poisond her
Revenge it Duke be a true Irsticer.
Reueng't I will, degenerous homicide,
What reason led thee to so damned a deed?
I loved her, wood her, my hot love denied
Changed into hate, I poisoned her, she died.
Sounds this like truth.
And if you think I lye,
Ask Lurdo, his dimbed tongue will answer I.
Had he a hand in it?
No, I will demur.
Revenge it Duke, be a true Justicer.
He gave the poison.
And you laid the plot
Knit up two villains in one riding knot.
What quillet now?
At non plus.
Senseless, mute?
Silence cries guilty, a lets fall the suite.
Our sentence guilty,
Then be this your doom,
You shall be closed aline in her dead tomb.
Urge a reprieve:
Our punishment defer,
No, we must be an upright Justicer;
To the execution.
Doe, the world shall prove
My heart's as bold to die as two's to love.
Byr'lady so is not mine, id give my goods,
For a good hobos Corpus, to remove me
Into another Country.
Leave demurs,
Close them into that grave, that dead mans Inn,
Pity true virtue should be lodged with sin.
Make room dear Madam, law this leave doth¦give
To die by thee with whom I could not live,
And wronged Countess though I hated thee,
I come to take my latest sleep with thee.
Kind thou art welcome, and shalt ever have,
My arms thy winding sheet, my breast thy grave.
Sister?
Aunt?
Madam?
My much wronged wife?
Justice great Duke, give me my husbands life,
Both his and his, if your demand be why,
See she surniues for whose death they should die.
Alive.
Vnblemish't.
S'blood I gave her poison.
I could tell your honour a tale in your ear to the contratie, I must needs say your will was good, but my father being your drug-seller, instead of a deadly poi∣son, gave you a sleepy potion, doe you remember the Ass•o at the tomb? though I plaid the knave with you, I did like an honest man with her.
Thou did stiudeede, and isle requite thee well.
How now Uncle? what think you of School∣lordship now?
As of the law, good as it may be used,
But to my wife.
Brother, isle speak your part,
Receive her, love, and lodge her in your heart.
Nocte die{que}.
What shall I doe then?
Justice shall merce thee, and by our command
We banish thee the Court, though not our Land,
Your course is virtuous, let your honour grow
Till age hath clothed you in a robe of snow.
Lastly, thy merit is not trivial,
That turned to mirth a Scene so tragical.
Who would have thought, such strange events should fall
Into a course so smooth and comical?
Who would have thought such treachery could rest,
In such a smooth and virtuous seeming breast?
Who would have thought a bud of this young growth,
Should out of present wit ore-reach vs both?
And to conclude, who would have thought the ear
Of your mild patience would so gently bear
With these our weak deserts? which if they please you ought
Tic less then we desire, more then we thought.

YOur silence and attention worthy friends, (sense,
That your free spirits may with more pleasing
Relish the life of this our active scene,
To which intent, to calm this murmuring breath,
We ring this round with our invoking spells,
If that your listening ears be yet prepared
To entertain the subject of our play,
Lend vs your patience.
Tic Peter Fabell a renowned Scholar,
Whose fame hath still been hitherto forgot
By all the writers of this latter age.
In Middle-sex his birth and his abode,
Not full seven mile from this great famous City
That for his fame in sleights and magic won,
Was called the merry Fiend of Edmonton.
If any here make doubt of such a name,
In Edmonton yet fresh unto this day,
Fixed in the wall of that old ancient Church
His monument remains to be seen;
His memory yet in the mouths of men,
That whilst he lived he could deceive the Devil.
Imagine now that whilst he is retired,
From Cambridge back unto his native home,
Suppose the silent sable visagde night,
Casts her black curtain over all the world,
And whilst he sleeps within his silent bed,
Toylde with the studies of the passed day:
The very time and hour wherein that spirit
That many years attended his command;
And often times twixt Cambridge and that town,
Had in a minute borne him through the ayre,
By composition twixt the fiend and him,
Comes now to claim the Scholar for his due.
Behold him here laid on his restless couch,
His fatal chime prepared at his head,
His chamber guarded with these sable slights,
And by him stands that Necromanticke chair,
In which he makes his direful invocations,
And binds the fiends that shall obey his will,
Sit with a pleased eye until you know
The Commicke end of our sad Tragic show.
What means the tolling of this fatal chime,
O what a trembling horror strikes my hart!
My stiffened hair stands upright on my head,
As doe the bristles of a porcupine.
Fabell awake, or I will bear thee hence headlong to hell.
Ha, ha, why dost thou wake me?
Coreb, is it thou?
Tic I.
I know thee well, I hear the watchful dogs,
With hollow howling tell of thy approach,
The lights burn dim, affrighted with thy presence:
And this distempered and tempestuous night
Tells me the ayre is troubled with some Devil.
Come, art thou ready?
Whither? or to what?
Why Scholar this the hour my date expires,
I must depart and come to claim my due.
Ho, what is thy due?
Fabell, thy self,
O let not darkness hear thee speak that word,
Lest that with force it hurry hence amain,
And leave the world to look upon my woe
Yet overwhelm me with this globe of earth,
And let a little sparrow with her bill,
Take but so much as she can bear away,
That every day thus losing of my load,
I may again in time yet hope to rise.
Did thou not write thy name in thine own blood?
And drowsed the formal deed twixt thee and me,
And is it not recorded now in hell?
Why come thou in this sterne and horrid shape?
Not in familiar sort as thou wast wont.
Because the date of thy command is out,
And I am master of thy skill and thee.
Coreb, thou angry and impatient spirit,
I have earnest business for a private friend,
Reserve me spirit until some further time.
I will not for the mines of all the earth.
Then let me rise, and ere I leave the world,
Dispatch some business that I have to doe,
And in mean time repose thee in that chair.
Fabell, I will.
O that this soul that cost so great a price,
As the dear precious blood of her redeemer,
Inspirde with knowledge, should by that alone
Which makes a man so mean unto the powers,
Even lead him down into the depth of hell,
When men in their own pride strive to know more then man should know!
For this alone God cast the Angellēs down,
The infinity of Arts is like a sea,
Into which when man will take in hand to sail
Further then reason, which should be his pilot,
Hath skill to guide him, losing once his compass,
He falls to such deep and dangerous whirlpools,
As he doth lose the very sight of heaven:
The more he strives to come to quiet harbour,
The further still he finds himself from land,
Man striving still to find the depth of evil,
Seeking to be a God, becomes a Devil.
Come Pabell hast thou done?
Yes, yes, come hither.
Fabell, I cannot.
Cannot, what ails your hollowness?
Good Fabell help me.
Alas where lies your grief? some Aqua-vitae,
The Deuil's very sick, I fear he will die,
For he looks very ill.
Dare thou deride the minister of darkness?
In Lucifers dread name Coreb comures thee
To set him free.
I will not for the mines of all the earth,
Unless thou give me liberty to see,
Seven fiends more before thou seas on me.
Fabell, I give it thee.
Swear damned fiend.
Unbind me, and by hell I will not touch thee,
Till seven years from this hour be full expired.
Enough, come out.
A vengeance take thy art,
Live and convert all piety to evil,
Never did man thus ouer-reach the Devil;
No time on earth like Phaetentique flames,
Can have perpetual being. Isle return
To my infernal mansion, but be sure
Thy seven years done, no trick shall make me tarry,
But Coreb, thou to hell shalt Fabell carry.
Then thus betwixt vs two this variance ends,
Thou to thy fellow Fiends, I to my friends.
WElcome good knight to the George at Walthā,
My free-hold, my tenements, goods, &amp; chattels,
Madam heir's a room is the very Homer and Iliads of a lodge∣ing, it hath none of the four elements in it, I built it out of the
Center, and I drink near the less sack.
Welcome my little wast of maiden-heads, what?
I serve the good Duke of Norfolk.
God a mercy my good host Blague,
Thou hast a good seat here.
Tic correspondent or so, there's not a Tartarian
Nor a Carrier, shall breath upon your geldings,
They have villainous rank feet, the rogues,
And they shall not sweat in my linen.
Knights and Lords too have been drunk in my house,
I thank the destinies.
Prithee good sinful Innkeeper, will that corruption thine
Ostler look well to my geldings. Hay, a pox a these rushes.
You Saint Dennis, your geldings shall walk without doors, and cool his feet for his masters sake by the body of S George I have an excellent intellect to go steal some venison now when wast thou in the forest?
Away you stale mess of white broth: Come hither sister, let me help you.
Mine Host is not Sir Richard Mounchensey come yet according to our appointment when we last dined here?
The knight's not yet apparent marry heere's a fore∣runner that summons a parley, and saith, heel be here top and top-gallant presently.
Tic well good mine host, go down and see break∣fast be provided.
Knight, thy breath hath the force of a woman, it takes
me down, I am for the baser element of the kitchen: I retire like a valiant soldiers face point blank to the foe-man; or like a Courtier that must not show the Prince his posteriors; vanish to know my canuasadoes and my interrogatories, for I serve the good Duke of Norfolk.
How doth my Lady, are you not weary Madam?
Come hither, I must talk in private with you,
My daughter Milliscent must not ouer-heare.
I, whispring, pray God it tend my good,
Strange fear assails my heart, usurps my blood.
You know our meeting with the knight Mounehensey,
Is to assure our daughter to his heir.
Tic without question.
Two tedious winters have past ore since first,
These couple loved each other, and in passion
Glewd first their naked hands with youthful moisture,
Just so long on my knowledge.
And what of this?
This morning should my daughter lose her name,
And to Mounchenseys house convey our arms,
Quartered within his scutcheon; th'affiance made
Twixt him and her, this morning should be sealed.
I know it should.
But there are crosses wife, heere's one in Waltham,
Another at the Abbey; and the third
At Cheston, and tic ominous to pass
Any of these without a pater-noster:
Crosses of love still thwart this marriage,
Whilst that we two like spirits walk in night,
About those stony and hard hearted plots.
O God, what means my father?
For look you wife, the riotous old knight,
Hath o'rerun his annual revenue,
In keeping jolly Christmas all the year,
The nostrils of his chimney are still stuffed,
With smoke more chargeable then Cane-tobacco,
His hawks devour his fattest dogs whilst simple,
His leanest cures eato him hounds carrion
Besides, I heard of late his younger brother,
Or Turkey merchant hath sure sucked the knight,
By means of some great losses on the sea,
That you conceive me, before God all nought,
His seat is weak, thus each thing rightly scand,
You'll see a flight wife, shortly of his land.
Treason to my hearts truest sovereign,
How soon is love smothered in foggy gain?
But how shall we prevent this dangerous match?
I have a plot, a trick, and this it is,
Under this colour Isle break off the match;
Isle tell the knight that now my mind is changed
For marrying of my daughter, for I intend
To send her unto Cheston Nunnery.
O me accursed!
There to become a most religious Nun.
Isle first be buried quick.
To spend her beauty in most private prayers.
Isle sooner be a sinner in forsaking
Mother and father.
How dost like my plot?
Exceeding well, but is it your intent
She shall continue there?
Continue there? Ha, ha, that were a jest,
You know a virgin may continue there,
A twelve month and a day only on trial,
There shall my daughter sojourn some three months,
And in mean time Isle compass a fair match
Twixt youthful Ierningham, the lusty heir
Of Sir Raph Ierningham dwelling in the forest,
I think they'll both come hither with Mounchensey.
Your care argues the love you bear our child,
I will subcribe to any thing you'll have me.
You will subscribe to it, good, good, tic well,
Love hath two chairs of state, heaven and hell:
My dear Mounchensey, thou my death shalt rue,
Ere to thy heart Milliscent prove untrue.
Ostlers, you knaves and commanders, take the horses of the knights and competitors: your honourable hulks have put into harborough, theile take in fresh water here, and I have provided clean chamber-pots.
The destinies be most neat Chamberlains to these swaggering puritans, knights of the subsidy.
God a mercy good mine host.
Thanks good host Blague.
Room for my case of pistols that have Greek and Latin bullets in them, let me cling to your flanks my nimble Giberalters, and blow wind in your calves to make them swell bigger: Ha, Isle caper in mine own fee-simple, away with pun∣tillioes, and Orthography: I serve the good Duke of Norfolk. Bilbo. Tuere tu patulae recu••ns sub tegmine fagi.
Truly mine host, Bilbo, though he be somewhat out of fashion, will be your one y blade still I have a villainous sharp stomach to slice a breakfast.
Thou shalt have it without any more discontinuance, releases, or atturnement; what? we know our terms of hunting; and the sea-card.
And doe you serve the good duke of Norfolk still?
Still, and still, and still, my soldier of S Quintus, come, follow me, I have Charles wane below in a but of sack, t'will glister like your Crab•fi•h.
You have fine Scholler-like terms, your Coopers Dixionary is your only book to study in a cellar, a man shall find very strange words in it: come my host, lets serve the good duke of Norfolk.
And still, and still, and still my boy Isle serve the good duke of Norfolk.
Good Sir Arthur Clare.
What Gentleman is that? I know him not.
Tic M. Fabell Sir a Cambridge scholar,
My sons dear friend.
Sir, I entreat you know me.
Command me sir, I am affected to you
For your Mounchenseys sake.
Alas for him,
I not respect whether he sink or swim,
A word in private Sir Raph Ierningham.
Me thinks your father looks strangely on me,
Say love, why are you sad?
I am not sweet,
Passion is strong, when woe with woe doth meet.
Shall's in to breakfast, after we'll conclude
The cause of this our coming, in and feed,
And let that usher a more serious deed.
Whilst you desire his grief, my heart shall bleed.
Raymond Mounchensey come be frolic friend,
This is the day thou hast expected long.
Pray God dear Harry Clare it prove so happy.
There's nought can alter it, be merry lad.
There's nought shall alter it, be lively Raymond,
Stand any opposition against thy hope,
Art shall confront it with her largest scope.
Good old Mounchensey, is thy hap so ill,
That for thy bounty and thy royal parts,
Thy kind alliance should be held in scorn,
And after all these promises by Clare,
Refuse to give his daughter to thy son,
Only because thy Revenues cannot reach,
To make her dowage of so rich a jointure,
As can the heir of wealthy Ierningham?
And therefore is the false fox now in hand,
To strike a match betwixt her and the other,
And the old gray-beards now are close together,
Plotting it in the garden. Is it even so?
Raymond Mounchensey, boy, have thou and I
Thus long at Cambridge read the liberal Arts,
The Metaphysickes, Magic, and those parts,
Of the most secret deep philosophy?
Have I so many mclancholy nights
Watched on the top of Peter-house highest tower?
And come we back unto our native home,
For want of skill to lose the wench thou love?
Weal first hang Anvil in such rings of mist
As never rose from any dampish fen,
Isle make the brinde sea to rise at Ware,
And drown the marshes unto Stratford bridge,
Isle drive the Dear from Waltham in their walks,
And scatter them like sheep in every field:
We may perhaps be crossed, but if we be,
He shall cross the devil that but crosses me.
But here comes Raymond disconsolate &amp; sad,
And hears the gallant that must have the wench.
I prithee Raymond leave these solemn dumps,
Revive thy spirits, thou that before hast been,
More watchful then the day-proclayming cock,
As sportive as a Kid, as frank and merry
As mirth her self.
If ought in me may thy content procure,
It is thine own thou may thy self assure.
Ha Ierningham, if any but thy self
Had spoke that word, it would have come as cold
As the bleak Northern winds, upon the face
Of winter.
From thee they have some power upon my blood,
Yet being from thee, had but that hollow sound,
Come from the lips of any living man,
It might have won the credit of mine ear,
From thee it cannot.
If I understand thee, I am a villain,
What, dost thou speak in parables to thy friends?
Come boy and make me this same groaning love,
Troubled with stitches, and the cough a'th lungs,
That wept his eyes out when he was a child,
And ever since hath shot at hudman-blind,
Make her leap, caper, jerk and laugh and sing,
And play me horse-trickes,
Make Cupped wanton as his mothers dove,
But, in this sort boy I would have thee love.
Why how now mad-cap? what my lusty Frank,
So near a wife, and will not tell your friend?
But you will to this gear in hugger-mugger,
Art thou turned miser Rascal in thy loves?
Who I? z'blood, what should all you see in me,
That I should look like a married man? ha,
Am I bald? are my legs too little for my hose?
If I feel any thing in my forehead, I am
A villain, doe I wear a night-cap? doe I bend
in the hams? What dost thou see in me that I
should be towards marriage, ha?
What thou married? let me look upon thee,
Rogue, who has given out this of thee? how
came thou into this ill name? what company
Hast thou bin in Rascal?
You are the man sir, must have Millescent,
The match is making in the garden now,
Her jointure is agreed on, and th'old men
Your fathers mean to launch their busy bags,
But in mean time to thrust Mountchensey off,
For colour of this new intended match.
Fair Millescent to Cheston must be sent,
To take the approbation for a Nun.
Ne'er look upon me lad, the match is done.
Raymond Mountchensey, now I touch thy grief,
With the true feeling of a zealous friend.
And as for fair and beauteous Millescent,
With my vain breath I will not seek to ssubber,
Her angel like perfections, but thou know,
That Essex hath the Saint that I adore,
Where ere did we meet thee and wanton springs,
That like a wag thou hast not laughed at me,
And with regardless jesting mocked my love?
Now many a sad and weary summer night,
My sighs have drunk the dew from off the earth,
I have taught the watchful Niting-gale to wake,
And from the meadows spring the early lark,
An hour before she would have rose to sing,
I have loaded the poor minutes with my moans,
That I have made the heavy slow pasde hours,
To hang like heavy clogs upon the day.
But dear Mounchensey, had not my affection
Seasde on the beauty of another dame,
Before I would give o'er the chase and wrong the love,
Of one so worthy and so true a friend,
I will abjure both beauty and her sight,
And will in love become a counterfeit.
Dear Ierningham, thou hast begot my life,
And from the mouth of he I where now I sate,
I feel my spirit rebound against the stars:
Thou hast conquered me dear friend in my free soul,
Their time or death can by their power control.
Frank Ierningham, thou art a gallant boy,
And were he not my pupil I would say,
He were as fine a mottled gentleman,
Of as free spirit and of as fine a temper,
As is in England, and he is a Man,
That very richly may deserve thy love.
But noble Clare, this while of our discourse,
What may Mounchensey, honour to thy self,
Exact upon the measure of thy grace?
Raymond Mounchensey? I would have thee know,
He does not breath this ayre,
Whose love I cherish, and whose soul I love,
More then Mounchenseyes:
Nor ever in my life did see the man,
Whom for his wit and many virtuous parts,
I think more worthy of my sisters love.
But since the matter grows unto this pass,
I must not seem to cross my Fathers will.
But when thou list to visit her by night,
My horses saddled, and the stable door
Stands ready for thee, use them at thy pleasure,
In honest marriage wed her frankly boy,
And if thou get her lad, God give thee joy.
Then care away, let fates my fall pretend,
Backed with the favours of so true a friend.
Let vs alone to bussell for the set,
For age and craft, with wit and Art have met.
Isle make my spirits to dance such nightly Jigs
Along the way twixt this and Totnam cross,
The Carriers Jade shall cast their heavy packs,
And the strong hedges scarce shall keep them in:
The Milke-maides Cuts shall turn the wenches off,
And lay the Dossers tumbling in the dust:
The frank and merry London prentices,
That come for cream and lusty country cheer,
Shall lose their way, and scrambling in the ditches
All night, shall whoop and hollow, cry and call,
Yet none to other find the way at all.
Pursue the project scholar, what we can do,
To help endeavour join our lives thereto.
Take me with you good Sir Iohn; a plague on thee Smug, and thou touch liquor thou art founderd straight: what are your brains always water-milles? must they ever run round?
Banks, your ale is a Philistine fox, z'hart theres fire in the tail: out; you are a rogue to charge vs with Mugs in the rear∣ward: a plague of this wind, O it tickles our Catastrophe.
Neighbour Banks of Waltham, and Goodman Smug the honest Smith of Edmonton, as I dwell betwixt you bothat Enfield, I know the taste of both your ale houses, they are good both, smart both: Hem, Grass and hay, we are all mortal, let's
live till we die, and be merry and theres an end.
Well said sir Iohn, you are of the same humour still, and doth the water run the same way still boy?
Uulcan was a rogue to him; Sir Iohn locke, lock, lock fast sir Iohn: so sir Iohn, Isle one of these years when it shall please the Goddesses and the destinies, be drunk in your com∣pany; thats all now, and God fend vs health; shall I swear I love you?
No oaths, no oaths, good neighbour Smug,
Weel wet our lips together in hug;
Car rouse in private, and elevate the hart,
And the liver and the lights, and the lights,
Mark you me within vs, for hem,
Grass and hay, we are all mortal, lets live till we die, and be
Merry, and theirs an end.
But to our former motion about stealing some veni∣son, whither go we?
Into the forest neighbour Banks, into Brians walk the mad keeper.
Z blood, Isle tickle your keeper.
Y faith thou art always drunk when we have need of thee.
Need of me? z'hart, you shall have need of me always while theres iron in an Anvil.
M. Parson, may the Smith go think you, being in this taking?
Go, Isle go inspight of all the belles in VValtham.
The question is good neighbour Banks, let me see, the Moon shines to night, ther's not a narrow bridge betwixt this and the forest, his brain will be settled ere night, he may go, he may go neighbour Banks: Now we want none but the com∣pany of mine host Blague at the George at Waltham, if he were here, our Consort were full; look where comes my good host, the Duke of Norfolks man, and how and how? a hem, grass and hay, wee are not yet mortall' lets live till we die and be merry, and ther's an end.
Ha my Castilian dialogues, and art thou in breath still boy? Miller doth the match hold? Smith, I see by thy eyes thou
hast bin reading little Geneua print: but wend we merrily to the forest to steal some of the kings Dear. Isle meet you at the time appointed: away, I have Knights and Colonels at my house, &amp; must tend the Hungarions. If we be scard in the forest, weal meet in the Church-porch at Enfield; first Correspondent?
Tic well; but how if any of vs should be taken?
He shall have ransom by the Lord.
Tush the knave keepers are my bosonians, &amp; my pen∣sioners, nine a clock, be valiant my little Gogmagogs; Isle fence with all the Justices in Hartford shire; Isle have a Buck till I die, Isle slay a Doe while I live, hold your bow straight &amp; steady. I serve the good duke of Norfolk.
O rare! who, ho, ho boy.
Peace neighbor Smug, you see this is a Boor, a Boor of the country, an illiterate Boor, and yet the Citizen of good fellows, come lets provide a hen: Grass and hay, wee are not yet all mortal, weel live till we die, and be merry, and theres an end: come Smug.
God night VValtham, who, ho, ho boy.
Nor I for thee Clare, not of this,
What? hast thou fed me all this while wish shalles?
And come to tell me now thou lik'st it not?
I doe not hold thy offer competent.
Nor doe I like the assurance of thy love,
The title is so brangled with thy debts.
Too good for thee, and knight thou know it well,
I fawnd not on thee for thy goods, not I,
It was thine own motion, that thy wife doth know.
Husband it was so, he lies not in that.
Hold thy chat queen.
To which I hearkened willingly, and the rather,
Because I was persuaded it proceeded
From love thou bor'st to me and to my boy,
And gau'st him free access unto thy house,
Where he hath not behaude him to thy child,
But as befits a gentleman so doe:
Nor is my poor distressed state so low,
That Isle shut up my doors I warrant thee,
Let it suffice Mountchensey, I mislike it,
Nor think thy son a match fit for my child,
To tell thee Clare his blood is good and clear,
As the best drop that panted in thy veins:
But for this maid thy fair and virtuous child,
She is no more disparagd by thy baseness,
Then the most orient and the precious jewel,
Which still retains his lustre and his beauty,
Although a slave were owner of the same.
She is the last is left me to bestow,
And her I mean to dedicate to God.
You doe sir.
Sir, sir, I doe, she is mine own.
And pity she is so,
Damnation dog, thee and thy wretched pelf aside.
Not thou Mountchensey shalt bestow my child.
Neither should thou bestow her where thou
Mean.
What wilt thou doe?
No matter, let that bee,
I will doe that, perhaps shall anger thee;
Thou hast wronged my love, and by Gods blessed Angel,
Thou shalt well know it.
Tut, brave not me.
Brave thee base Churl, were it not for man-hood sake,
I say no more, but that there be some by,
Whose blood is hotter then ours is,
Which being stirred, might make vs both repent
This foolish meeting: but Raph Clare
Although thy father have abused my friendship,
Yet I love thee, I doe my noble boy,
I doe in faith.
I, doe, do, fill all the world with talk of vs, man, man.
I never looked for better at your hands.
I hope your great experience and your years,
Would have proved patience rather to your soul,
Then with this frantic and untamed passion,
To whet their skeins and but that,
I hope their friendships are too well confirmed,
And their minds tempered with more kindly heat,
Then for their froward parents soars,
That they should break forth into public brawls,
How ere the rough hand of th'untoward world,
Hath moulded your proceedings in this matter,
Yet I am sure the first intent was love:
Then since the first spring was so sweet and warm,
Let it die gently, ne'er kill it with a scorn.
O thou base world, how leprous is that soul
That is once limed in that polluted mud,
Oh sir Arthur you have startled his free active spirits,
With a too sharpe spur for his mind to bear:
Have patience sir, the remedy to woe,
Is to leave what of force we must forgo.
And I must take a twelve months approbation,
That in mean time this sole and private life,
At the years end may fashion me a wife:
But sweet Mounchensey ere this year be done,
Thou'st be a friar if that I be a Nun;
And father ere young Ierninghams Isle bee,
I will turn mad to spite both him and thee.
Wife come to horse, and housewife make you ready,
For if I live, I swear by this good light,
Isle see you lodged in Chesson house to night.
Raymond away, thou see how matters fall,
Churl, hell consume thee and thy pelf and all.
Now M. Clare, you see how matters fadge,
Your Milliscent must needs be made a Nun:
Well sir, we are the men must ply this match,
Hold you your peace and be a looker on,
And send her unto Chesson where he will,
Isle send me fellows of a handful hic,
Into the Cloisters where the Nuns frequent,
Shall make them skip like Does about the Dale,
And make the Lady prioress of the house to play
at leape-froge naked in their smocks,
Until the merry wenches at their mass,
Cry teehee weehee,
And tickling these mad lasses in their flanckes,
Shall sprawl and squeak, and pinch their fellow Nuns.
Be lively boys, before the wench we lose,
Isle make the Abbas wear the Cannons house.
Spite now hath done her worst, sister be patient,
Forewarnd poor Raymonds company to heaven,
When the composure of weak frailty meet,
Upon this mart of dirt; O then weak love,
Must in his own unhappiness be silent,
And wink on all deformities.
Tic well;
Whirs Raymond brother? whirs my dear Mounchensey?
Would wee might weep together and then part,
Our sighing parley would much ease my heart.
Sweet beauty fouled your sorrows in the thought,
Of future reconcilement; let your tears
Show you a woman; but be no farther spent
then from the eyes; for (sweet) experience says,
That love is firm thats flattered with delays.
Alas sir, think you I shall ere be his?
As sure as panting smiles on future bliss.
Yond comes my friend, see he hath doted
So long upon your beauty, that your want
Will with a pale retirement wast his blood,
For in true love, Music doth sweetly dwell,
Severed these less worlds bear within them hell.
Harry and Frank you are enioynd to wane your friendship from me, we must part the breath of all advised cor∣ruption, pardon me.
Faith I must say so, you may think I love you,
I breath not, rougher spite do fever vs,
Weal meet by steal sweet friend by stealth you twain.
Kisses are sweetest got with struggling pain.
Our friendship dies not Raymond.
Pardon me:
I am busied, I have lost my faculties,
And buried them in Milliscents clear eyes.
Alas sweet Love what shall become of me?
I must to Chesson to the Nunnery,
I shall ne'er see thee more.
How sweet!
Isle be thy votary, weal often meet,
This kiss divides vs, and breathes soft adieu,
This be a double charm to keep both true. (ting
Have done your fathers may chance spy your par-
Refuse not you by any means good sweetness,
To go unto the Nunnery, far from hence,
Must wee beget your loves sweet happiness,
You shall not stay there long, your harder bed,
Shall be more soft when Nun and maid are dead.
Now sir what's the matter?
Mary you must to horse presently, that villainous old gouty churl, Sir Richard Clare longs till he bee at the Nunnery.
How sir?
O I cry you mercy, he is your father sir indeed; but I am sure that theres less affinity betwixt your two natures, then there is between a broker and a cutpurse.
Bring my gelding sir.
Well nothing grieves me, but for the poor wench, she must now cry vale to Lobster pies, hartichokes, and all such meates of mortality; poor gentlewoman, the sign must not be in virgo any longer with her, and that me grieves full well.
Poor Milliscent
Must pray and repent:
O fatal wonder!
Sheele now be no fatter,
Love must not come at her,
Yet she shall be kept under.
Farewell dear Raymond.
Friend adieu.
Dear sweet.
No joy enjoys my heart till wee next meet.
Well Raymond now the tide of discontent,
Beats in thy face, but er't belong the wind,
Shall turn the flood, wee must to Waltham abbey,
And as fair Milliscent in Cheston lives,
A most unwilling Nun, so thou shalt there
Become a beardless Novice, to what end
Let time and future accidents declare:
Taste thou my slights, thy love isle only sha•e.
Turn friar? come my good Counsellor lets go,
Yet that disguise will hardly shroud my woe.
Madam;
The love unto this holy sisterhood,
And our confirmed opinion of your zeal
Hath truly won vs to bestow our Child,
Rather on this then any neighbouring Cell.
Ihesus daughter Maries child,
Holy matron woman mild,
For thee a mass shall still be said,
Every sister drop a bead.
And those again succeeding them
For you shall riug a Requiem.
The wench is gone Harry, she is no more a woman of this world, mark her well, she looks like a Nun already, what think on her?
By my faith her face comes handsomely to it
But peace lets hear the rest.
Madam for a tweluemonths approbation,
Wee mean to make this trial of our child.
Your care and our dear blessing in mean time,
Wee pray may prosper this intended work.
May your happy soul be blithe,
That so truly pay your tithe.
He who many children gave,
Tic fit that he one child should have.
Then fair virgin hear my spell,
For I must your duty tell.
Good men and true, stand together and hear your charge.
First a mornings take your book
The glass wherein yourself must look,
Your young thoughts so proud and jolly
Must be turned to motions holy:
For your buck, attires and toys,
Have your thoughts on heavenly joys:
And for all your follies past,
You must do penance, pray and fast.
Let her take heed of fasting, and if ever she hurt her self with praying, Isle ne'er trust beast.
This goes hard byr'lady.
You shall ring the saving bell,
Keep your hours and tell your knell,
Rise at midnight to your matins.
Read your Psalter, sing your latins,
And when your blood shall kindle pleasure,
Scourge your self in plenteous measure.
Worse and worse by Saint Mary.
Sir Hal, how does she hold his countenance? well, go thy ways, if ever thou prove a Nun, Isle build an Abbey.
She may be a Nun, but if ever she prove an An∣chores, Isle dig her grave with my nails.
To her again mother.
Hold thine own wench.
You must read the mornings mass,
You must creep unto the Cross.
Put cold ashes on your head,
Have a hair cloth for your bed.
She had rather have a man in her bed.
Bind your beads and tell your needs,
Your holy Auies and your Creeds,
Holy maid this must be done,
If you mean to live a Nun.
The holy maid will be no Nun.
Madam we have some business of import,
And must be gone.
Wilt please you take my wife into your closet,
Who further will acquaint you with my mind,
And so good madam for this time adieu.
Well now Frank Clare, how says thou? to be brief,
What wilt thou say for all this, if we two,
Thy father and my self, can bring about,
That we convert this Nun to be a wife,
And thou the husband to this pretty Nun,
How then my lad? ha Frank, it may be done.
I now it works.
O god sir, you amaze me at your words,
Think with your self sir what a thing it were,
To cause a recluse to remove her vow,
A maimed contrite, and repentant soul,
Ever mortified with fasting and with prayer,
Whose thoughts even as his eyes are fixed on heaven,
To draw a virgin thus devoured with zeal,
Back to the world! O impious deed
Nor by the Canon Law can it be done,
Without a dispensation from the Church:
Besides she is so prone unto this life,
As sheele even shriek to hear a husband named.
I a poor innocent she, well, here is no knavery, hee flouts the old fools to their teeth.
Boy I am glad to hear
Thou make such scruple of that conscience,
And in a man so young as is your self,
I promise you tic very seldom seen.
But Frank this is a trick, a mere devise,
A slight plotted betwixt her father and my self,
To thrust Mounchenseys nose besides the cushion,
That being thus debarred of all access,
Time yet may work him from her thoughts,
And give thee ample scope to thy desires.
A plague on you both for a couple of Jaws.
How now Frank, what say you to that?
Let me alone, I warrant thee:
Sir aslurde that this motion doth proceed,
From your most kind and fatherly affection,
I do dispose my liking to your pleasure,
But for it is a matter of such moment
As holy marriage, I must crave thus much,
To have some conference with my ghostly father,
Friar Hildersham here by, at Waltham Abbey,
To be absolute of things that it is fit
None only but my confessor should know.
With all my heart, he is a reverend man, and to more∣row morning wee will meet all at the Abbey, whereby th'opni∣on of that reverend man
Wee will proceed, I like it passing well:
Till then we part, boy I think of it, farewell:
A parents care no mortal tongue can tell.
Holy young Novice I have told you now,
My full intent, and doe refer the rest
To your professed secrecy and care:
And see,
Our serious speech hath stolen upon the way,
That we are come unto the Abbey gate,
Because I know Mountchensey is a fox,
That craftily doth overlook my doings,
Isle not be seen, not I; Tush I have done;
I had a daughter, but shoe's now a Nun:
Farewell dear son, farewell.
Fare you well, I you have done,
Your daughter sir, shall not be long a Nun!
O my rare Tutor, never mortal brain,
Plotted out such a mass of policy;
And my dear bosom is so great with laughter,
Begot by his simplicity and error
My soul is fallen in labour with her joy
O my true friends Frank Ierningham and Clare,
Did you now know but how this jest takes fire,
That good sir Arthur thinking me a novice,
Hath even poured himself into my bosom;
O you would vent your spleens with tickling mirth.
But Raymond peace, and have an eye about,
For fear perhaps some of the Nuns look out.
Peace and charity within,
Never touched with deadly sin:
I cast my holy water poor,
On this wall and on this door,
That from evil shall defend,
And keep you from the ugly fiend:
Evil spirit by night nor day,
Shall approach or come this way;
Elf nor Fary by this grace,
Day nor night shall haunt this place.
Who's that which knocks? ha, who's there?
Gentle Nun here is a Friar.
A Friar without, now Christ vs save,
Holy man, what would thou have?
Holy maid I hither come,
From Friar and father Hildersome.
By the favour and the grace
Of the Prioress of this place:
Amongst you all to visit one,
That's come for approbation,
Before she was as now you are,
The daughter of Sir Arthur Clare:
But since she now became a Nun,
Called Milliscent of Edmunton.
Holy man, repose you there,
This news Isle to our Abbas bear:
To tell what a man is sent,
And your message and intent.
Benedicite.
Benedicite.
Doe my good plump wench, if all fall right,
Isle make your sister-hood one less by night:
Now happy fortune speed this merry drift,
I like a wench comes roundly to her shrift.
Have Friars recourse then to the house of Nuns?
Madam it is the order of this place,
When any virgin comes for approbation,
Lest that for fear or such sinister practise,
She should be forcde to undergo this veil,
Which should proceed from conscience and devotion:
A visitor is sent from Waltham house,
To take the true confession of the maid.
Is that the order? I commend it well,
You to your shrift, Isle back unto the cell.
Life of my soul, bright Angel.
What means the Friar?
O Milliscent, tic I.
My heart misgives me, I should know that voice,
You, who are you? The holy virgin bless me,
Tell me your name, you shall ere you confess me.
Mountchensey thy true friend.
My Raymond, my dear heart,
Sweet life give leave to my distracted soul,
To wake a little from this swoon of joy,
By what means came thou to assume this shape?
By means of Peter Fabell my kind Tutor,
Who in the habit of Friar Hildersham,
Frank Ierninghams old friend and confessor,
Plotted by Frank, by Fabell and my self,
And so delivered to Sir Arthur Clare,
Who brought me here unto the Abbey gate,
To be his Nun-made daughters visitor.
You are all sweet traitors to my poor old father,
O my dear life, I was a dream't to night,
That as I was a praying in mine Psalter,
There came a spirit unto me as I kneeled,
And by his strong persuasions tempted me
To leave this Nunnery; and me thought,
He came in the most glorious Angel shape,
That mortal eye did ever look upon:
Ha, thou art sure that spirit, for theres no form,
Is in mine eye so glorious as thine own.
O thou Idolatresse that dost this worship,
To him whose likeness is but praise of thee,
Thou bright vnsetting star which through this veil,
For very envy make the Sun look pale.
Well visitor, lest that perhaps my mother
Should think the Friar too st•ickt in his decrees,
I this confess to my sweet ghostly father,
If chaste pure love be sin I must confess,
I have offended three years now with thee.
But doe you yet repent you of the same?
In faith I cannot.
Nor will I absolve thee,
Of that sweet sin, though it be venial,
Yet have the penance of a thousand kisses,
And I enjoin you to this pilgrimage,
That in the evening you bestow your self
Here in the walk near to the willow ground,
Where Isle be ready both with men and horse,
To waite your coming and convey you hence,
Unto a lodge I have in Enfield chase:
No more reply if that you yield consent,
I see more eyes upon our stay are bent.
Sweet life farewell; tic done, let that suffice,
What my tongue fails I send thee by mine eyes.
Now Visitor how does this new made Nun?
Come, come how does she noble Capouchin?
She may be poor in spirit, but for the flesh tic fat and plump boys:
Ah rogues, there is a company of girls would turn you all Friars.
But how Mountchensey? how lad for the wench?
Sound lads in faith; I thank my holy habit,
I have confessed her and the Lady prioress hath given me ghost∣lie counsel with his blessing.
And how say ye boys,
If I be chose the weekly visitor?
Z'blood sheel have ne'er a Nun vnbagd to sing mass then.
The Abbat of Waltham will have as many Children, to put to nurse, as he has calves in the Marsh.
Well to be brief, the Nun will soon at night turn lippit; if I can but devise to quit her cleanly of the Nunnery, she is mine own.
But Sir Raymond, what news of Peter Fabel at the house?
Tush hes the only man; a Necromancer, and a Conjurer that works for young Mountchensey altogether; and if it be not for Fryer Benedict, that he can cross him by his learned skill, the Wench gone.
Fabell will fetch her out by very magic.
Stands the wind there boy, keep them in that key.
The wench is ours before tomorrow day,
Well Raph and Frank, as ye are gentlemen, stick to vs close this once; you know your fathers have men and horse lie rea∣die still at Chesson, to watch the coast be clear, to scout about, &amp; have an eye unto Mountchensey walks: therefore you two may hover thereabouts, and no man will suspect you for the matters be ready but to take her at our hands, leave vs to scamble for his getting out.
Z'bloud if al Herford-shire were at our heals, weal carry her away in spite of them.
But whither Raymond?
To Brians upper lodge in Enfield Chase, he is mine honest Friend and a tall keeper, isle send my man unto him pre∣sently t'acquant him with your coming and intent.
Be brief and secret.
Soon at night remember
You bring your horses to the willow ground.
Tic done, no more.
We will not fail the hour,
My life and fortune, now lies in your power.
About our business, Raymond lets away,
Think of your hour, it draws well of the day.
Come ye Hungarian pilchers, we are once more come under the zona torrid of the forest, lets be resolute, lets fly to and again; and if the devil come, weal put him to his Interro∣gatories, and not budge a foot, what; s'foote isle put fire into you, ye shall all three serve the good Duke of Norfolk.
Mine host, my bully, my precious consul, my noble Holefernes, I have ben drunk i'thy house, twenty times and ten, ell's one for that, I was last night in the third heavens, my brain was poor, i't had yest in it; but now I am a man of act∣on, is it not so lad?
Why now thou hast two of the liberal sciences about thee, wit and reason, thou moist serve the Duke of Europe.
I will serve the Duke of Christendom, and doe him more credit in his cellar then all the plate in his buttery, is it not so lad?
Mine host and Smug, stand there Banks, you and your horse keep together; but lie close, show no tricks for fear of the keeper. If we be scard weel meet in the Church-porch at Enfeild.
Content sir Iohn.
Smug, dost not thou remember the tree thou felst out of last night?
Tush, and't had bin as high as the Abbey, I should ne'er have hurt my self I have fallen into the river coming home from Waltham, and escaped drowning.
Come sever, care no spritz, weal have a Buck pre∣sently, we have watched later then this for a Doe, mine Host.
Thou speak as true as velvet.
Why then come, Grass and hay, &amp;c.
Frank Ierningham?
Speak softly rogue, how now?
S'foot we shall lose our way, it's so dark, wherabouts are we?
Why man, at Potters gate,
The way lies right, hark the clock strikes at Enfeild; whats the hour?
Ten the bell says.
A lies in's throat, it was but eight when we set out of Chesson, Sir Iohn and his Sexton are at ale to night, the clock runs at random.
Nay, as sure as thou liu'st the villainous vicar is abroad in the chase this dark night: the stone Priest steals more veni∣son then half the country.
Milliscent, how dost thou?
Sir, very well,
I would to God we were at Brians lodge.
We shall anon, z'ounds hark,
What means this noise?
Stay, I hear horsemen.
I hear footmen too.
Nay then I have it, we have bin discovered,
And we are followed by our fathers men.
Brother and friend, alas what shall we doe?
Sister speak softly or we are descried,
They are hard upon vs what so ere they be,
Shadow your self behind this brake of fern,
Weal get into the wood and let them pass.
Grass and hay, wee are all mortal, the keepers a∣broad, and ther's an end.
Sir Iohn.
Neighbour Banks what news?
z'wounds Sir Iohn the keepers are abroad; I was hard by'am.
Grass and hay, wher's mine host Blague?
Here Metropolitan, the philistines are upon vs, be silent, let vs serve the good Duke of Norfolk; but where is Smug.
Here, a pox on ye all dogs; I have kilt the greatest Buck in Brians walk, shift for your selves, all the keepers are up, lets meet in Enfield church porch, away we are all taken else.
Raph hearst thou any stirring.
I heard one speak here hard by in the bottom; peace Moister, speak low, zownes if I did not hear a bow go off, and the Buck bray, I never heard dear in my life.
When went your fellows out into their walks?
An hour a go.
S'life is there stealers abroad, and they cannot hear of them! where the devil are my men to night! sir go up the wind towards Buckleyes lodge.
Isle cast about the bottom with my hound, and I will meet thee under Conyocke.
I will Sir.
How now? by the mass my hound stays upon some∣thing, hark, hark, Bowman, hark, hark there.
Brother Frank Ierningham, brother Clare.
Peace, thats a women's voice, stand, who's there, stand or Isle shoot.
O Lord, hold your hands, I mean no harm sir.
Speak, who are you?
I am a maid sir, who? M. Brian?
The very same, sure I should know her voice, Mistress Milliscent.
I, it is I sir.
God for his passion, what make you here alone, I looked for you at my lodge an hour ago, what means your comp∣ny to leave you thus? who brought you hither?
My brother Sir, and M. Ierningham, who hearing folks about vs in the Chase, feared it had bin sir Arthur and my father, who had pursued vs, thus dispersed our selves till they were past vs.
But where be they?
They be not far off, here about the grove.
Be not afraid man, I heard B••••es tongue, thats certain.
Call softly for your sister•
Milliscent.
I brother, here.
M. Clare.
I told you it was Brian.
Whose that? M. Ierningham, you are a couple of hot∣shots, does a man commit his wench to you, to put her to grass at this time of night?
We heard a noise about her in the chase,
And fearing that our fathers had pursued vs, severed ourselves.
Brian how hapd'st thou on her?
Seeking for stealers are abroad to night,
My hound stayed on her, and so found her out.
They were these stealers that affrighted vs,
I was hard upon them, when they horsed their Dear,
And I perceive they took me for a keeper.
Which way took they?
Towards Enfeild.
A plague upon it, thats that damned Priest, &amp; Blague of the George, he that serves the good Duke of Norfolk.
Peace, thats my fathers voice.
Zownds you suspected them, and now they are here indeed.
Alas, what shall we doe?
If you go to the lodge you are surely taken,
Strike down the wood to Enfeild presently,
And if Mounchensey come, Isle send him t'yee:
Let me alone to bustle with your father,
I warrant you that I will keep them play,
Till you have quit the chase: away, away.
Whose there?
In the kings name pursue the Ravisher.
Stand or Isle shoot.
Whose there?
I am the keeper that doe charge you stand,
You have stolen my D••••
We stolen thy Dear? we do pursue a thief.
You are arrant thieves, and ye have stolen my Dear.
We are Knights, sir Arthur Clare and sir Raph Ier∣ningham.
The more your shame that Knights should bee such thieves.
Who? or what art thou?
My name is Brian, keeper of this walk.
O Brian a villain,
Thou hast received my daughter to thy lodge.
You have stolen the best Dear in my walk to night, my Dear.
My daughter,
Stop not my way.
What make you in my walk? you have stolen the best Buck in my walk to night.
My daughter.
My Dear.
Where is Mountchensey?
Wheres my Buck.
I will complain me of thee to the King.
Isle complain unto the King you spoil his game: Tic strange that men of your account and calling, will offer it, I tell you true, Sir Arthur and sir Raph, that none but you have only spoiled my game.
I charge you stop vs not.
I charge you both ye get out of my ground. Is this a time for such as you, men of place and of your gravity, to be abroad a theeuing! tic a shame, and a fore God if I had shot at you, I had served you well enough.
S'foote hears a dark night indeed, I think I have bin in fifteen ditches between this and the forest: soft, heers Enfield Church: I am so wet with climbing over into an or∣chard for to steal some filberts: well, here Isle sit in the Church porch and wait for the rest of my consort.
Hears a sky as black as Lucifer, God bless vs, here was goodman Theophilus buried, hee was the best Nutcraker that ever dwelt in Enfeild: well, tic 9. a clock, tic time to ring cur∣few. Lord bless vs, what a white thing is that in the Church porch; O Lord my legs are too weak for my body, my hair is too stiff for my night-cap, my heart fails; this is the ghost of Theophilus, O Lord it follows me, I cannot say my prayers and one would give me a thousand pound: good spirit, I have bowld and drunk and followed the hounds with you a thousand times, though I have not the spirit now to deal with you; O Lord.
Grass and hey, we are all mortal, who's there?
We are grass and hay indeed; I know you to bee Master Parson by your phrase.
Sexton.
I Sir.
For mortalities sake, What's the matter?
O Lord I am a man of another element; Moister Theophilus Ghost is in the Church porch, there was a hundred Cats all fire dancing here even now; and they are clombe up to the top of the steeple, isle not into the belfry for a world.
O good Solomon; I have bin about a deed of darkness to night: O Lord I saw fifteen spirits in the forest, like white bulls, if I lye I am an arrant thief: mortality haunts vs; grass and hay the devils at our heals, and lets hence to the person∣nages.
What noise was that? tic the watch, sure that villa∣nous unlucky rogue Smug is taine upon my life, and then all our villainy comes out, I heard one cry sure.
If I go steal any more venison, I am a Paradox, s'foot I can scarce bear the sin of my flesh in the day, tic so heavy, if I turn not honest, and serve the good Duke of Norfolk, as true mareterraneum skinker should doe, let me never look higher then the element of a Constable.
By the Lord there are some watchmen; I hear them name Moister Constable, I would to God my Mill were an Eunuch and wanted her stones, so I were hence.
Who's there?
Tic the Constable by this light, Isle steal hence, and if I can meet mine host Blague, isle tell him how Smug is taine, and will him to look to him self.
What the devil is that white thing? this same is a Church-yard, and I have heard that ghosts, and villainous gob∣lens have been seen here.
Grass and hay, O that I could conjure, wee saw a spirit here in the Churchyard; and in the fallow field ther's the devil, with a mans body upon his back in a white sheet.
It may be a women's body Sir Iohn.
If she be a woman, the sheets damn her,
Lord bless vs, what a night of mortality is this.
Priest.
Mine host.
Did you not see a spirit all in white, cross you at the stile?
O no mine host, but there sate one in the porch, I have not breath enough left to bless me from the Devil.
Whose that?
The Sexton almost frighted out of his wits,
Did you see Banks, or Smug.
No they are gone to Waltham, sure I would fine hence, come, lets to my house, Isle ne'er serve the duke of Norfolk in this fashion again whilst I breath. If the devil be amongst vs, tic time to hoist sail, and cry roomer: Keep together Sex∣ton, thou art secret, what? lets be comfortable one to another.
We are all mortal mine host.
True, and Isle serve God in the night hereafter, before the Duke of Norfolk.
Good morrow gentle knight,
A happy day after your short nights rest,
Ha, ha, sir Raph stirring so soon indeed,
Byr'lady sir rest would have done right well,
Our riding late last night, has made me drowsy,
Go to go to those days are gone with vs.
Sir Arthur, Sir Arthur, care go with those days,
Let'am even go together, let'am go.
Tic time in faith that wee were in our graves
When Children leave obedience to their parents,
When there's no fear of God, no care, no duty.
Well, well, nay nay, it shall not doe, it shall not,
No Mountchensey, thoust hear on it, thou shalt,
Thou shalt in faith, Isle hang thy Son if there be law in England:
A mans Child ravished from a Nunnery!
This is rare; well well, ther's one gone for Friar Hildersam.
Nay gentle Knight do not vex thus,
It will but hurt your health.
You cannot grieve more then I doe, but to what end; but hark you Sir Raph, I was about to say something; it makes no matter,
But hark you in your ear; the Friar's a knave, but God for∣give me, a man cannot tel neither, s'foot I am so out of patience,
I know not what to say.
Ther's one went for the Friar an hour ago;
Comes he not yet! s'foot if I do find knavery vnders cowl; i! tickle him: isle firk him; here here hoe's here, hoe's here.
Good morrow Friar, good morrow gentle Friar.
Good morrow father Hildersham good morrow.
Good morrow reverend Knights unto you both.
Father, how now? you hear how matters go,
I am undone, my Child is cast away,
You did your best; at least I think the best,
But we are all crossed, flately all is dashed.
Alas good knights, how might the matter be?
Let me understand your grief for Charity.
Who does not understand my griefs? alas alas!
And yet ye do not, will the Church permit,
A Nun in approbation of her habit,
To be ravished.
A holy woman, benedicite; now God forfend that any should presume to touch the sister of a holy house.
Thesus deliver me.
Why Millisent the daughter of this Knight,
Is out of Chesson taken the last night.
Was that fair maiden late become a Nun!
Was she quoth? knavery, knavery, knavery; I smell it, I smell it in faith; is the wind in that door? is it even so! dost thou ask me that now!
It is the First time that I ere heard of it.
That's very strange.
Why tell me Friar; tell me, thou art counted a holy man, doe not play the hypocrite with me, nor bear with me, I cannot dissemble; did I ought but by thy own consent? by thy allowance? nay further by thy warrant?
Why Reverend knight?
Unreverend Friar.
Nay then give me leave sir to depart in quiet, I had hopd you had sent for me to some other end.
Nay stay good Friar, if any thing hath hapd,
About this matter in thy Jove to vs;
That thy strict order cannot justify,
Admit it be so, we will cover it,
Take no care man;
Disclay me not yet thy counsel and advise,
The wisest man that is may be orereacht.
Sir Arthur, by my order and my faith,
I know not what you mean.
By your order, and your faith? this is most strange of all:
Why tell me Friar; are not you Confessor to my Son Frank?
Yes that I am:
And did not this good knight here and my self,
Confess, with you being his ghostly Father,
To deal with him about th'unbanded marriage,
Betwixt him and that fair young Millisent?
I never heard of any match intended.
Did not we break our minds that very time,
That our device of making her a Nun,
was but a colour and a very plot,
To put by young Mountchensey; first not true?
The more I strive to know what you should mean, the less I understand you.
Did not you tell vs still how Peter Fabell at length would cross vs if we took not heed?
I have heard of one that is a great magician,
But hes about the University.
Did not you send your novice Benedic,
To persuade the girl to leave Mountchenseys love,
To cross that Peter Fabell in his art,
And to that purpose made him visitor?
I never sent my novice from the house,
Nor have we made our visitation yet.
Never sent him? nay, did he not go? and did not I direct him to the house, and confer with him by the way? and did he not tell me what charge he had received from you? word by word, as I requested at your hands?
That you shall know, hee came along with me, and stays without come hither Benedic.
Young Benedic, were you ere sent by me to Chesson Nunnery for a visitor?
Never sir, truly.
Stranger then all the rest.
Did not I direct you to the house?
Confer with you from Waltham Abbey
Unto Chesson wall?
I never saw you sir before this hour.
The devil thou did not, hoc Chamberlain.
Anon, anon.
Call mine host Blague hither.
I will send one over to see if he be up, I think he bee scarce stirring yet.
Why knave, did thou not tell me an hour ago
mine host was up?
I sir, my Master's up.
You knave, is a up, and is a not up?
Dost thou mock me?
I sir, my M. is up, but I think M. Blague indeed be not stirring?
Why, who's thy Master? is not the Master of the house thy Master?
Yes sir, but M. Blague dwells over the way.
Is not this the George? before God theres some vile∣lany in this.
S foot our signs remooud, this is strange.
Chamberlain, speak up to the new lodgings,
Bid Nil look well to the bakt meats,
How now my old Ienerts bank, my horse,
My castle, lie in Waltham all night, and not under the Canopy of your host Blagues house.
Mine host, mine host, we lay all night at the George in Waltham, but whether the George be your fee-simple or no, tic a doubtful question, look upon your sign.
Body of Saint George, this is mine overthwart neigh∣bore hath done this to seduce my blind customers, Isle tickle his Catastrophe for this; If I doe not indite him at next assisses for Burglary, let me die of the yellows, for I see tic no boot in these days to serve the good Duke of Norfolk, the villainous world is turned manger, one Jade deceives another, and your Ostler plays his part commonly for the fourth share, have wee Comedies in hand, you whoreson villainous male London lecher.
Mine host, we have had the moylingst night of it that ever we had in our lives.
First certain?
We have bin in the Forest all night almost.
S'foot how did I miss you? hart I was a stealing a
Buck there.
A plague on you, we were stayed for you.
Were you my noble Romans? why you shall share, the venison is a footing, Sine Cerere &amp; Baccho frigate Venus: That is, theres a good breakfast provided for a marriage, thats in my house this morning.
A marriage mine host?
A conjunction copulatiue, a gallant match between your daughter, and M. Raymond Mountchensey, young Iuuensus.
How?
Tic firm, tic done,
Weal show you a president in the civil law fort.
How I married!
Leave tricks, and admiration, theres a cleanly pair of sheets in the bed in Orchard chamber, and they shall lie there, what? Isle doe it, Isle serve the good Duke of Norfolk.
Thou shalt repent this Blague.
If any law in England will make thee smart for this, expect it with all severity.
I renounce your defiance, if you parley so roughly, Isle barricade my gates against you: stand fair bully; Priest come off from the rereward; what can you say now? it was done in my house, I have shelter in the Court for it, Dee see your bay win∣dow? I serve the good duke of Norfolk, &amp; tic his lodging, storm I care not serving the good Duke of Norfolk: thou art an actor in this, and thou shalt carry fire in thy face eternally.
Fire, s blood theres no fire in England like your Tri∣nidado sack; is any man here humorous? we stole the venison, and weal justify it: say you now.
In good sooth Smug theres more sack on the fire Smug.
I do not take any exceptions against your sack, but if you'll lend me a pick staff, isle cudgle them all hence by this hand.
I say thou shalt into the Cellar.
s'foot mine Host, shalls not grapple?
Pray pray you; I could fight now for all the world like a Cos∣katrices ege; shells not serve the Duke of Norfolk?
In skipper in.
Sir, hath young Mountchensey married your sister?
Tic Certain Sir; her's the priest that coupled them; the parties joined, and the honest witness that cried, Amen.
Sir Arthur Clare, my new created Father, I beseech you hear me.
Sir Sir, you are a foolish boy, you have done that you cannot answer; I dare be bold to cease her from you, for shoe's a professed Nun.
With pardon sir, ••at name is quite undone,
This true-loue knot cancels both maid and Nun.
When first you told me I should act that part,
How cold and bloody it crept ore my hart!
To Chesson with a smiling brow I went,
But yet, dear sir, it was to this intent,
That my sweet Raymond might find better means,
To steal me thence: in brief disguised he came,
Like Novice to old father Hildersham.
His tutor here did act that cunning part,
And in our love hath joined much wit to art.
Is it even so!
With pardon therefore wee entreat your smiles,
Love thwarted turns itself to thousand wiles.
Young Moister Ierningham, were you an actor, in your own loves abuse?
My thoughts, good sir,
Did labour seriously unto this end,
To wrong my self ere id abuse my friend.
He speaks like a Bachelor of music all in Number∣bers; knights if I had known you would have let this couy of Partridges sit thus long upon their knees under my sign post,
I would have spread my door with old Coverlets.
Well sir, for this your sign was removed, was it?
Faith wee followed the directions of the devil,
Master Peter Fabell and Smug, Lord bless vs, could never stand upright since.
You sir, it was you was his minister that married them.
Sir to prove my self an honest man, being that I was last night in the forest stealing Venison; now sir to have you stand my friend, if that matter should bee called in question, I married you daughter to this worthy gentleman.
I may chance to requite you, and make your neck crack for it.
If you doe, I am as resolute as my
Neighbour vicar of Waltham Abbey: a hem,
Grass and hay, wee are all mortal,
Lets live till we be hanged mine host,
And be merry and theres an end.
Now knights I enter, now my part begins.
To end this difference, know, at first I knew
What you intended, ere your love took flight,
From old Mountchensey: you sir Arthur Clare,
Were minded to have married this sweet beauty,
To young Frank Ierningham; to cross which match,
I used some pretty sleights, but I protest
Such as but sate upon the skirts of Art,
No conjurations, nor such weighty spells,
As tie the soul to their performance:
These for his love who once was my dear puple,
Have I effected: now me thinks tic strange,
That you being old in wisdom should thus knit,
Your forehead on this match; since reason fails,
No law can curb the lovers rash attempt,
Years in resisting this are sadly spent:
Smile then upon your daughter and kind son,
And let our toil to future ages prove,
The devil of Edmonton did good in Love.
Well tic in vain to cross the providence:
Dear Son, I take thee up into my hart,
Rise daughter, this is a kind fathers part.
Why Sir George send for Spindles noise, presently,
Ha, er t be night, isle serve the good Duke of Norfolk.
Grass and hay, mine host, lets live till we die, and be merry and there s an end.
What, is breakfast ready mine Host?
Tic my little Hebrew.
Sir ride strait to Chesson Nunnery.
Fetch thence my Lady, the house I know,
By this time misses their young votary:
Come knights lets in.
I will to horse presently sir; a plague a my Lady, I shall miss a good breakfast. Smug how chance you cut so plaguely behind Smug?
Stand away; isle founder you else.
Farewell Smug, thou art in another element.
I will be by and by, I will be Sir George again,
Take heed the fellow do not hurt himself.
Did we not last night find two S. Georges here.
Yes Knights, this martialist was one of them.
Then thus conclude your night of merriment.

YOu teach me language, sir, as one that knows
the Debt of Love I owe unto their Virtues,
wherein like a true Courtier I have fed my
self with hope of fair Success, and now at∣tend
your wished consent to my long Suit.
Believe me, youthful Lord, time could not give an op∣portunity
more fitting your desires, always provided my Daugh∣ters
love be suited with my Grant.
It is the condition
sir, her Promise sealed.
First so, Constantia?
I was content to give him words for oaths, he swore
so oft he loved me.
That thou believe him?
He is a man I hope.
That's in the trial Girl.
However I am a woman, sir.
The Law's on thy
side then, shall it have a Husband, I, and a worthy one: Take her
brave Cornwall, and make our happiness great as our wishes.
Sir, I thank you.
Double the fortunes of
the day, my Lord, and crown my wishes too: I have a son here,
who in my absence would protest no less unto your other Daugh∣la.
Ha Gloster, is it so? what says Lord Edwin? will
she protest as much to thee?
Else must she want some of her Sisters faith, Sir.
Of her credulity much rather, Sir: My Lord, you are
a Soldier, and methinks the height of that Profession should di∣minish
all heat of Loves desires, being so late employed in blood
and ruin.
The more my Conscience ties me to re∣pair
the worlds losses in a new succession.
Necessity it
seems ties your affections then, and at that rate I would unwilling∣lie
be thrust upon you, a wife is a dish soon cloys, sir.
Weak and diseased appetites it may.
Most
of your making have dull stomachs sir.
If that be all Girl,
thou shalt quicken him, be kind to him
Noble Edwin, let
it suffice what's mine in her, speaks yours;
For her consent, let your fair suit go on,
She is a woman sir, and will be won.
You give me comfort sir.
Now Toclio.
The King, my honoured Lords, requires your presence, and
calls a Council for return of answer unto the parling enemy,
whose Ambassadors are on the way to Court.
So sudden∣lie,
Chester it seems has plied them hard at war, they sue so fast for
peace, which by my advice they ne'er shall have, unless they leave
the Realm. Come noble Gloster, let's attend the King, it lies sir in
your Son to do me pleasure, and save the charges of a Wedding
Dinner,
If you'll make haste to end your Love affairs,
One cost may give discharge to both my cares.
I'll do my best.
Now Toclio, what stirring
news at Court?
Oh my Lord, the Court's all filled with
rumour, the City with news, and the Country with wonder, and all
the bells in the Kingdom must proclaim it, we have a new Holy∣day
a coming.
A holy-day! for whom? for thee?
Me, Madam! 'sfoot I'd be loath that any man should
make a holy-day for me yet: In brief it is thus, there's here arrived
at Court, sent by the Earl of Chester to the King, a man of rare e∣steam
for holiness, a reverent Hermit, that by miracle not only
saved our army, but without aid of man o'rethrew the pagan Host,
and with such wonder sir, as might confirm a Kingdom to his faith.
This is strange news indeed, where is he?
In conference with the King that much respects him.
Trust me, I long to see him.
Faith you will
find no great pleasure in him, for ought that I can see Lady, they
say he is half a Prophet too, would he could tell me any news of
the lost Prince, there's twenty Talents offered to him that finds
him.
Such news was breeding in the morning.
And now it has birth and life sir, if fortune bless me I'll
once more search those woods where then we lost him, I know not
yet what fate may follow me.
Fortune go with you sir, come fair Mistress, your Sister
and Lord Edwin are in game, and all their wits at stake to win the
Set.
My sister has the hand yet, we had best leave them,
She will be out anon as well as I,
He wants but cunning to put in a Dye.
You are a cunning Gamester, Madam.
It is a desperate Game indeed this Marriage, where
there's no winning without loss to either.
Why, what
but your perfection noble Lady, can bar the worthiness of this my
suit? if so you please I count my happiness, from difficult obtain∣ing,
you shall see my duty and observance.
There shall be place to neither, noble sir, I do beseech
you let this mild Reply give answer to your suit, for here I vow if
ever I change my Virgin name by you, it gains or looses.
My wishes have their crown.
Let them con∣fine
you then, as to my promise, you give faith and credence?
In your command my willing absence speaks it.
Noble and virtuous: could I dream of Marriage, I
should affect thee Edwin: oh my soul, here's something tells me
that these best of creatures, these models of the world, weak man
and woman, should have their souls, their making, life, and being,
to some more excellent use: if what the sense calls pleasure were
our ends, we might justly blame great natures wisdom, who reared
a building of so much art and beauty to entertain a guest so far in∣certain,
so imperfect: if only speech distinguish us from beasts,
who know no inequality of birth or place, but still to •lie from
goodness: oh, how base were life at such a rate! no, no, that
power that gave to man his being, speech, and wisdom, gave it for
thankfulness: To him alone that
Made me thus, may I whence truly know,
I'll pay to him, not man, the love I owe.
No tiding of our brother yet? It is strange, so ne'er
the Court, and in our own Land too, and yet no news of him: oh
this loss tempers the sweetness of our happy conquests, with much
untimely sorrow.
Royal sir, his safety being unque∣stion'd,
should to time leave the redress of sorrow, were he dead, or
taken by the foe, our fatal loss had wanted no quick Herald to dis∣close
it.
That hope alone sustains me, nor will we
be so ungrateful unto heaven to question what we fear, with what
we enjoy. Is answer of our message yet returned from that religi∣os
man, the holy Hermit, sent by the Earl of Chester to confirm
us in that miraculous act? For it was no less, our Army being in
rout, nay, quite o'rethrown, as Chester writes; even then this holy
man armed with his cross and staff, went smiling on, and boldly
fronts the foe; at sight of whom the Saxons stood amazed: for to
their seeming, above the Hermit head appeared such brightness, such
clear and glorious beams as if our men marched all in fire, wherewith
the Pagans fled, and by our troops were all to death pursued.
It is full of wonder sir.
Oh Gloster, he's a jewelworth a Kingdom: whore's Oswold
with his answer?
It is here my Royal Lord.
In writing, will
he not sit with us?
His Orisons performed, he bad me
say he would attend with all submission.
Proceed to
council then, and let some give order, the Ambassadors being
come, to take our answer, they have admittance. Oswold, Toclio,
be it your charge: and now my Lords, observe the holy council
of this reveren'd Hermit:  As you respect your safety, limit not
that only power that hath protected you, trust not an open enemy too far,
He's yet a looser; and knows you have won,
Mischie•s not ended, are but then begun.
Powerful and pithy, which my advice confirms, no man
leaves physic when his sickness slakes, but doubles the •eceipts: the
word of Peace seems fair to blood-shot eyes; but being applied with
such a medicine as blinds all the sight, argues desire of Cure, but
not of Art.
You argue from defects, if both the name,
and the condition of the Peace be one, it is to be preferred, and in
the offer made by the Saxon, I see nought repugnant.
The time of Truce required for thirty days, carries su∣spicion
in it, since half that space will serve to strength their weak∣ned
Regiment.
Who in less time will undertake to
free our Country from them.
Leave that unto our for∣tune.
Is not our bold, and hopeful General still Ma∣ster
of the field, their Legious fallen, the rest entrenched for fear,
half starved, and wounded, and shall we now give o'er our fair ad∣vantage?
force heaven, my Lord, the danger is far more, in trusting
to their words, then to their weapons.
The Ambassadors are come sir.
Conduct
them in, we are resolved my Lords, since policy failed in the begin∣ning,
it shall have no hand in the conclusion, that heavenly power
that hath so well begun their fatal overthrow I know can end it,
from which fair hope, my self will give them answer.
What's here, a woman Orator?
Peace Dono∣bert,
speak, what are you Lady?
The sister of the Sax∣on
General, warlike Ostorius the East Anglese King, my name Are∣tesia,
who in terms of love brings peace and health to great Aurelius,
wishing she may return as fair a present as she makes tender of.
The fairest present ever mine eyes were blessed with, com∣mand
a chair there for this Saxon Beauty: sit Lady, we will confer:
your warlike brother sues for a peace, you say?
With endless love unto your State and Person.
He's sent a moving Orator believe me, what think thou
Donobert?
Believe me sir, were I but young again this
gilded pill might take my stomach quickly.
True, thou
art old, how soon we do forget our own defects. Fair damsel, oh
my tongue turns Traitor, and will betray my heart, sister to our
enemy: 's death her beauty mazes me, I cannot speak if I but lock
on her, what's that we did conclude?
This Royal Lord.
Pish, thou can not utter it: fairest of creatures▪ tell the
King your Brother that we in love, ha! and honour to our Country,
command his Armies to depart our Realm, but if you please fair
soul-Lord Donobert, deliver you our pleasure.
I shall sir,
Lady return, and certify your brother.
Thou art t•o
blunt, and rude, return so soon, fie, let her stay, and send some
messenger to certify our pleasure.
What means your
Grace?
To give her time of rest to her long Journey,
we would not willingly be thought▪ uncivil.
Great King
of Bri••own, let 〈◊〉 not seem strange to embrace the Princely Offers
of a friend,
Whose virtues with thine own, in fairest merit
Both States in Peace and Love may now inherit.
She speaks of Love again, sure it is my fear, she knows I
do not hate her.
Be then thy self most great Aureliu•,
and let not envy, nor a deeper sin in these thy Councellors, deprive
thy goodness of that fair honour, we in seeking peace, give first to
thee, who never use to sue but force our wishes▪ yet if this seem
light, oh let my sex, though worthless your respect, take the report
of thy humanity,
Whose mild and ver•uous life loud fame displays,
As being overcome by one so worthy praise.
She has an Angels tongue, speak still.
This
flattery is gross sir, hear no more on it, Lady, these childish comple∣mints
are needless, you have your answer, and believe it, Madam,
his Grace, though young, doth wear within his breast too grave a
Councellor to be seduced by smoothing flattery, or oily words.
I come not sir, to woo him.
It were folly if
you should, you must not wed him, shame take thy tongue, being
old and weak thy self, thou doat'st, and looking on thine own de∣fects,
speak what thoud'st wish in me, do I command the deeds
of others, mine own act not free?
Be pleased to smile or frown, we respect neither,
My will and rule shall stand and fall together.
Most fair Artesia, see the King descends to give thee welcome with
these warlike Saxons, and now on equal terms both sues and grants,
in stead of Truce, let a perpetual League seal our united bloods in
holy marriage, send the East Angles King this happy news, that
thou with me hast made a League for ever, and added to his state
a friend and brother: speak dearest Love, dare you confirm this
Title?
I were no woman to deny a good so high and
noble to my fame and Country.
Live then a Queen in
Britain.
He means to marry her.
Death! he shall marry the devil first, marry a Pagan, an
Idolater.
He has won her quickly.
She was wooed before she came sure, or came of purpose
to conclude the Match.
Who dares oppose our will? my
Lord of Gloster, be you Ambassador unto our Brother, the Brother
of our Queen 〈◊〉, tell him for such our entertainment looks
him, our marriage adding to the happiness,
Of our intended joys, mans good or ill,
In this like waves agree, come double still,
Who's this, the Hermit? Welcome my happiness, our Countries
hope, most reverent holy man, I wanted but thy blessing to make
perfect the infinite sum of my felicity.
Alack sweet Prince, that happiness is yonder,
Felicity and thou art far asunder,
this world can never give it.
Thou art deceived, see
here what I have found, Beauty, Alliance, Peace, and strength of
Friends, all in this all exceeding excellence, the League's confirmed.
With whom, dear Lord?
With the great
Brother of this Beauteous woman, the Royal Saxon King.
Oh then I see, and fear thou art too near thy misery,
what magic could so link thee to this mischief by all the good
that thou hast reaped by me, stand further from destruction.
Speak as a man, and I shall hope to obey thee.
Idolaters get hence, fond King, let go,
Thou hug'st thy ruin, and thy Countries woe.
Well spoke old Father, too him, bait him soundly, now
by heavens blessed Lady, I can scarce keep patience.
What devil is this?
That
cursed Christian, by whose hellish charms our army was o'er∣thrown.
Why do you dally sir? oh tempt not heaven,
warm not a serpent in your naked bosom, discharge them from
your Court.
Thou speak like madness, command the
frozen shepherd to the shade, when he sits warm in the Sun, the fe∣ver
sick to add more heat unto his burning pain, these may obey,
it is less extremity then thou enjoynst to me: cast but thine eye upon
this beauty, do it, I'll forgive thee, though jealousy in others finds
no pardon, then say thou dost not love me, I shall then swear you are
immortal, and no earthly man, oh blame then my morta•lity; no•
me.
It is thy weakness brings thy 〈…〉
Prince.
Be milder in thy doom.
It is you that must endure heavens doom, which fallen,
remember's just.
Thou shalt not live to see it: how
fares my Lord? 〈◊〉 my poor presence breed dislike, great Prince,
I am no such neglected soul, will seek to tie you to your word.
My word dear Love, may my Religion, Crown, State,
and Kingdom fail, when I fail thee, command Earl Chester to break
up the camp, without disturbance to our Saxon friends, send every
hour swift posts to hasten on the King her Brother, to conclude
this League, this endless happy Peace of Love and Marriage, till
when provide for Revels, and give charge that nought be wanting,
which make our Triumphs
Sportful and free to all, if such fair blood
Engender ill, man must not look for good.
How much the oft report of this blessed Hermit, hath
won on my desires; I must behold him, and sure this should be he,
oh the worlds folly, proud earth and dust, how low a price bears
goodness, all that should make man absolute, shines in him: much
reverent Sir, may I without offence give interruption to your holy
thoughts?
What would you Lady?
That
which•till now ne'er found a language in me, I am in love.
In Love, with what?
With virtue?
There's no blame in that.
Nay sir, with you?
With your Religious Life? Your Virtue, Goodness, if there be
a name to express affection greater, that, that would I learn and
utter: Reverent Sir, if there be any thing to bar my suit, be chari∣table
and expose it, your prayers are the same Orisons, which I
will number. Holy Sir, keep not instruction back from willingness,
possess me of that knowledge leads you on to this humility, for
well I know were greatness good, you would not live so low.
Are you a Virgin?
Yes Sir?
Your name?
Modesta?
Your name and virtues meet, a
Modest Virgin, live ever in the sanctimonious way to Heaven
and Happiness, there's goodness in you, I must instruct you further;
come look up, behold yon firmament, there sits a power, whose
foot-stool is this earth, oh learn this lesson,
And practise it, he that will climb so high,
Must leave no joy beneath, to move his eye.
I apprehend you sir, on Heaven I fix my love,
Earth gives us grief, our joys are all above,
For this was man in innocence naked born,
To show us wealth hinders our sweet return.
AWay, follow me no further, I am none of thy brother,
what with Child, great with Child, and knows not
whose the Father on it, I am ashamed to call thee Sister.
Believe me Brother, he was a Gentleman.
Nay, I believe that, he gives arms, and legs too, and has
made you the Herald to blaze 'em, but Join, Join, sister Join,
can you tell me his name that did it: how shall we call my Cousin,
your bastard, when we have it?
Alas, I know not the
Gentleman's name Brother, I met him in these woods, the last great
hunting, he was so kind and proffered me so much, as I had not
the heart to ask him more.
Not his name, why this
shows your Country breeding now, had you been brought up in the•
City, you'd have got a Father first, and the child afterwards:
hast thou no marks to know him by.
He had most rich
Attire, a fair Hat and Feather, a gilt Sword, and most excellent
Hangers.
Pox on his Hangers, would he had bin gilt
for his labour.
Had you but heard him swear you would
have thought.
I as you did, swearing and lying goes
together still, did his Oaths get you with Child, we shall have a
roaring Boy then in faith, well sister, I must leave you.
Dear Brother stay, help me to find him out, I'll ask no
further.
'Sfoot who should I find? who should I ask for?
Alas I know not, he uses in these woods, and these are
witness of his oaths and promise.
We are like to have
a hot suit on it, when our best witness's but a Knight 'ath Post.
Do but enquire this Forest, I'll go with you, some happy
fate may guide us till we meet him.
Meet him, and
what name shall we have for h•m, when we weet him? 'Sfoot thou
neither know him, nor can tell what to call him, was ever man
tired with such a business, to have a sister got with child, and
know not who did it; well, you shall see him, I'll do my best for
you, Isle make Proclamation, if these Woods and Trees, as you
say, will bear any witness, let them answer; Oh yes: If there be
any man that wants a name, will come in for conscience sake, and
acknowledge himself to be a Whore-Master, he shall have that laid
to his charge in an hour, he shall not be rid on in an age; if he have
Lands, he shall have an heir, if he have patience, he shall have a
wife, if he have neither Lands nor patience, •e shall have a whore,
so ho boy, so ho, so, so.
So, ho, by, so, ho,
illo ho, illo ho.
Hark, hark sister, there's one hollows
to us, what a wicked world's this, a man cannot so soon name a
whore but a knave comes presently, and see where he is, stand close
a while, sister.
How like a voice that Echo spake, but oh my thoughts
are lost for ever in amazement, could I but meet a man to tell her
beauties, these trees would bend their tops to kiss the air, that
from my lips should give her praises up.
He talk's of a
woman, sister.
This may be he, brother.
View him well, you see he has a fair Sword, but his Han∣gear's
are fallen.
Here did I see her first, here view her
beauty, oh had I known her name, I had been happy.
Sister this is he sure, he knows not thy name neither, a
couple of wise fools in faith, to get children and know not one ano∣there.
You weeping leaves, upon whose tender cheeks
doth stand a flood of tears at my complaint, and heard my vows
and oaths.
Law, Law, he has been a great swearer
too, it is he sister.
For having overtook her, as I have
seen a forward blood-hound, strip the swifter of the cry ready to
seize his wished hopes, upon the sudden view struck with astonish∣meant
at his arrived prey, instead of seizure stands at fearful bay,
Or like to Marius soldiers, who o'retook
The eye sight killing Gorgon at one look,
Made everlasting stand: so feared my power
Whose cloud aspired the Sun, dissolved a shower:
Pigmalion, then I tasted thy sad fate, wh•se Ivory picture, and
my fair were one, our dotage past imagination, I saw and felt
desire.
Pox a your fingering, did he feel sister?
But enjoyed now, oh fate, thou had thy days and nights
to feed,
Or calm affection, one poor sight was all,
Converts my pleasure to perpetual thrall,
Embracing thine, thou lostest breath and desire,
So I relating mine, will here expire,
For here I vow to you mournful plants
Who were the first made happy by her fame,
Never to part hence, till I know her name.
Give me thy hand sister, The Child has found his Father,
this is he sure, as I am a man, had I been a woman these kind words
would have won me, I should have had a great belly too that's
certain; well, I'll speak to him: most honest and fleshly minded
Gentleman, give me your hand sir.
Ha, what art thou,
that thus rude and boldly, dare take notice of a wretch so much
allied to misery as I am?
Nay, Sir, for our alliance, I shall
be found to be a poor brother in Law of your worships, the Gen∣tlewoman
you spake on, is my sister, you see what a clew she
spreads, her name is Join Go-too't, I am her elder, but she has been
at it before me: it is a women's fault, pox a this bashfulness, come
forward Jug, prithee speak to him.
Have you ever seen
me Lady?
Seen ye, ha, ha, It seems she has felt you too,
here's a young Go-too't a coming sir, she is my sister, we all love to
Go-too't, as well as your worship, she's a Maid yet, but you may
make her a wife, when you please sir.
I am amazed
with wonder: Tell me woman, what sin have you committed worcester∣thy
this?
Do you not know me sir?
Know thee! as I do thunder, hell, and mischief, witch, stal∣lion,
hag.
I see he will marry her, he speaks so like a
husband.
Death, I will cut their tongues out for
this blasphemy, strumpet, villain, where have you ever seen me?
Speak for your self with a pox to ye.
Slaves, Isle make you curse your selves for this temptation.
Oh sir, if ever you did speak to me, it was in smoother
phrase, in fairer language.
Lightning consume me, if I
ever saw thee, my rage o'reflowes my blood, all patience flies me.
Hold I beseech you sir, I have nothing to
•ay to you.
Help, help, murder, murder.
Make haste Sir, this way the sound came, it was a wood.
See where she is, and the Prince, the price of all our
wishes.
The Prince say ye, he's made a poor Subject
of me I am sure.
Sweet Prince, noble Utter, speak,
how fare you sir?
Dear sir, recall your self, your
fearful absence hath won too much already on the grief of our sad
King, from whom our laboring search hath had this fair success
in meeting you.
His silence, and his looks argue di∣straction.
Nay, he's mad sure, he will not acknow∣ledge
my sister, nor the child neither.
Let us entreat
your Grac• along with us, your sight will bring new life, to the
King your Brother.
Will you go sir?
Yes, any whether, guide me, ell's hell I see,
Man may change air, but not his misery.
Lend me one word with you, sir.
Well said
sister, he has a Feather, and fair Hangers too, this may be he.
What would you fair one.
Sure I have
seen you in these woods ever this?
Trust me never, I
never saw this place, till at this time my friend conducted me.
The more's my sorrow then.
Would I
could comfort you: I am a Bachelor, but it seems you have a hus∣band,
you have been foully o'reshot else.
A women's
fault, we are all subject to go to it, sir.
Oswold away, the Prince will not stir a foot without you.
I am coming, farewell woman.
Prithee make
haste.
Good sir, but one word with you ever you leave
us.
With me fair soul?
She'll have a fling
at him too, the Child must have a Father.
Have you
ne'er seen me sir?
Seen thee, 'Sfoot I have seen many
fair faces in my time, prithee look up, and do not weep so, sure
pretty wanton, I have seen this face before.
It is enough,
though your ne'er see me more.
'Sfoot she's fallen, this place is enchanted sure, look to the
woman fellow.
Oh she's dead! she's dead, as you are a man stay and
help, sir: Join, Join, sister Join, why Join Go too't I say, will you
cast away your self, and your child, and me too, what do you
mean, sister?
Oh give me pardon sir, it was too much joy
oppressed my loving thoughts, I know you were too noble to deny
me, 〈◊〉▪ Where i• he?
Who, the Gentleman? he's gone
sister.
Oh! I am not one then, run, tell him I did but
faint for joy, dear brother haste, why dost thou stay? oh never cease,
till he give answer to thee.
He: which he? what do
you call him trow?
Unnatural brother, show me the path he
took, why dost thou d•lly? speak, oh, which way went he?
This way, that way, through the bushes there.
Were it through fire, the Journey's easy, winged with
sweet desire.
Hey day, there's some hope of this yet, Isle follow her
for kindreds sake, if she miss of her purpose now, she'll challenge all
she finds I see, for if ever we meet with a two legged creature in
the whole Kingdom, the Child shall have a Father that's
certain.
Come Gloster, I do not like this hasty Marriage.
She was quickly wooed and won, not six days since are∣rivet
an enemy to sue for Peace, and now crowned Queen of
Britain, this is strange.
Her brother too made as quick
speed in coming, leaving his Saxons, and his starved Troops, to take
the advantage whilst it was offered, fore heaven I fear the King's
too •redulous, our Army is discharged too.
Yes, and
our General commanded home, Son Edwin have you seen him
since?
He's come to Court, but will not view the pre∣sense,
nor speak unto the King, he's so discontent at this so strange
alliance with the Saxon, as nothing can persuade his patience.
You know his humour will endure▪ no check, no if the
King oppose it, all crosses feeds both his spleen, and his impatience,
those affections are in him like powder, apt to inflame with every
little spark, and blow up all his reason.
Idol of Chester is a noble Soldier.
So is he by the Rood, ever most faithful to the King and
Kingdom, how ever his passions guide him.
See where he comes, my Lord.
Welcome
to Court, brave Earl.
Do not deceive me by your flat∣teries:
Is not the Saxon here? the League confirmed? the Mar∣riage
ratified? the Court divided with Pagan Infidels? the least
part Christians, at least in their Commands? Oh the gods! it is a
thought that takes away my sleep, and 〈◊〉 my senses so I scarcely
know you: Prepare my horses, Isle away to Chester.
What shall we do with our Companies, my Lord?
Keep them at home to increase Cuckolds, and get some
C•ses for your Captainships, smooth up your brows, the wars has
spoiled your f•ccs, and few will now regard you.
Preserve you• patience, Sir.
Preserve your Honours, Lords, your Countries Safety,
your Lives, and Lands from strangers: what black devil could so
bewitch the King, so to discharge a Royal Army in the height of
conquest? nay, even already made victorious, to give such credit
to an enemy, a starved foe, a straggling fugitive, beaten beneath
our feet, so love dejected, so serve•e, and so base, as hope of life
had won them all, to leave the Land for ever?
It was the Kings will.
It was your want of wis∣doom,
that should have laid before his tender youth, the dangers
of a State, where foreign Powers bandy for Sovereignty with Law∣full
Kings, who be•ng settled once, to assure themselves, will never
fail to seek the blood and life of all competitors.
Your words sound well my Lord, and point at safety, both
for the Realm and us, but why did you within whose power it lay,
as General, with full Commission to dispose the war, lend ear to
parley with the weakened foe?
Oh the good Gods!
And on that parley came this Embassy.
You will hear me.
Your letters did declare it
to the King, both of the Peace, and all Conditions brought by this
Saxon Lady, whose fond love has thus be witched him.
I will curse you all as black as hell, unless you hear me,
your gross mistake would make wisdom her self run matting
through the streets, and quarrel with her shadow, death! why
killed ye not that woman?
Oh my Lord.
The great devil take me quick, had I been by, and all the
women of the world were barren, she should have died ever he
had married her on these condi•ions.
It is not rea∣son
that directs you thus.
Then have I none, for all
I have directs me, never was man so palpably abused, so basely
mar•ed, bought and sold to scorn, my Honour, Fame, and hopef•l
Victories, the loss of Time, Expenses, Blood and Fortunes, all
vanished into nothing.
This rage is vain my Lord, what
the King does, nor they, nor you can help.
My Sword
must fail me then.
Against whom will you expose it?
What's that to you, against all the devils in hell to guard
my country.
These are airy words.
Sir, you •read too hard upon my patience.
I speak the duty of a Subjects faith, and say again had
your been here in presence,
What the King did, you had not dared to cross it,
I will trample on his Life and Soul that says it.
My Lord.
Come, come.
Now be∣fore
heaven.
Dear sir.
Not dare? thou least be∣neath
thy lungs.
No more son Edwin.
I have done sir, I take my leave.
But thou
shall not, you shall take no leave of me Sir.
For wisdoms sake my Lord.
Sir, I'll leave him,
and you, and all of you, the Court and King, and let my Sword,
and friends, 〈◊〉 for Idol• safety: stay you here, and hug the Sa∣xons,
till they cut your throats, or b•ing the Land to servile slavery,
such yokes of baseness, Chester must not suffer,
Go, and repent bet• mes these foul misdeeds,
For in this League, all our whole Kingdom bleeds,
which Isle preve•t, or perish.
See how his rage transports him!
These passions set apart, a braver soldier breathes not
in the world this day.
I wish his own worth do not court
his ••in.
The King must Rule▪ and we must learn to obey,
True virtue 〈◊〉 direct the noble way.
Why is the Court so dull? me thinks each room, and
angle of our Palace should appear stuck full of objects fit for
〈◊〉 and triumphs, to show ou• high content. Oswold fill wine, must
we begin the Revels? be it so then, reach me the cup: Isle now begin
a Health to our loved Queen, the bright Artesia, the Royal Saxon
King, our warlike brother, go and command all the whole Court
to pledge it, fill to the Hermit there▪ most reverent Ansel••, we'll
do thee Honour first, to pledge my Queen.
I drink no healths great King, and if I did, I would be loath
to part with health, to those that have no power to give it back
again.
Mistake not, it is the argument of Love and
Duty to our Queen and us.
But he owes none it seems.
I do to virtue Madam, temperate minds covets that
health to drink, which nature gives in every spring to man, he that
doth hold
His body, but a Tenement at will
Bestows no cost, but to repair what's ill,
Ye• if your healths or heat of Wine, fair Princes,
Could this old frame, or these cras'd limbs restore,
Or keep out death, or sickness, then fill more,
I'll make fresh way for appetite, if no,
On such a prodigal who would wealth bestow?
He speaks not like a guest to grace a wedding.
No sir, but like an envious impostor.
A Christian
slave, a Cinick.
What virtue could decline your King∣lie
spirit, to such respect of him whose magic spells met with
your vanquished Troops, and turned your Arms to that necessity of
fight, which the despair of any hope to stand but by his charms, had
been defeated in a bloody conquest?
It was magic, hell∣bred
magic did it sir, and that's a course my Lord, which we esteem
in all our Saxon Wars, unto the last and lowest ebb of serve•e
treachery.
Sure you are deceived, it was the hand of
heaven, that in his virtue gave us victory, is there a power in man
that can strike fear thorough a general camp, or create spirits, in
recreant bosoms above present sense?
To blind the sense
there may with apparition of well armed troops within themselves
are air, formed into humane shapes, and such that day were by that
Sorcerer raised to cross our fortunes.
There is • law
tells u•, that words want force to make deeds void, examples must
be shown by instances alike, ever I believe it.
It is
easily performed, believe me sir, propose your own desires, and
give but way to what our Magic here shall straight perform, and
then let his or our deserts be censured.
We could not
wish a greater happiness, then what this satisfaction brings with it,
let him proceed, fair brother.
He shall sir, come learned
Proximus, this task be thine, let thy great charms confound the o∣pinion
this Christian by his spells hath falsely won.
Great King, propound your wishes then, when• persons, of
what State, what numbers, or how armed, please your own thoughts,
they shall appear before you.
Strange art! what think
thou reverent Hermit?
Let him go on sir.
Wilt thou behold his cunning?
Right gladly sir, it will be my joy to tell,
That I was here to laugh at him and hell.
I like thy confidence.
His saucy impudence,
proceed to'th' trial.
Speak your desires my Lord, and
be it placed in any angle underneath the Moon, the center of the
Earth, the Sea, the Air, the region of the fire, nay hell it self, and
I'll present it.
We'll have no sight so fearful, only
this, if all thy art can reach it, show me here the two great Cham∣peons
of the Trojan War, Achilles and brave Hector, our gre• An∣cestor,
both in their warlike habits, Armour, Shields, and Weapons
then in use for fight.
It is done, my Lord, command a
halt and silence, as each man will respect his life or danger.
Quid vis?
Attend me.
The Apparition comes, on our displeasure let all keep
place and silence.
What means this stay, bright Arm••, Pl•sg•th? why fear you
and fall back? 〈◊〉 the Alarms, and enforce the Combat, or hell•
or darkness circles you for ever
We dare not.
Ha!
Our charms are all dissolved, Armel away,
It is worse then hell to us, whiles• here we stay.
What▪ at a Non-plus fi•? command them back for shame.
What power o'er•aws my Spell! return you Hell-hounds▪
Armel, Plesgeth, double damnation seize you, by all the Infernal
powers, the prince of devils is in this Hermits habit, what else
could force my Spirits quake or tremble thus?
We•k argument to hide you• want of skill: does the devil
fear the devil, or war with hell? they have not been acquainted
long it seems. Know mis-believing Pagan, even that Power
That overthrew your Foe•ces, still lets you see,
He only can cont•whole both hell and thee.
Di•grace and mischief, Isle enforce new charms, new spells,
and spirits raised from the low Aby•s of hells unbottom'd depths.
We have enough sir, give o'er your charms, we'll find
some other time to praise your Art. I dare not but acknowledge
that heavenly Power my heart stands witness to: be not dismayed
my Lords, at this desist•r, nor thou my fairest Queen▪ we will change
the Scen• to some more pleasing spo••• ▪ Lead to your Chamber,
How•ere in this thy plea•uric find a •ross,
Our joy's too fixed here to •uffer los•.
Which I shall add to sir, with news I bring: The Prince
your Brother, lives.
〈◊〉!
And comes
to grace 〈◊〉 high and heaven-knit Marriage
Why dost thou flatter me, to make me think such hap∣pines
attends me?
His presence speaks my truth, sir.
Force me, 〈…〉
〈1 paragraph〉
〈1 paragraph〉
〈1 paragraph〉
〈1 paragraph〉
〈…〉
saw her, captived my senses, and thus many 〈◊〉 bared me •froth•
all society of men: how came she to this place, brother 〈◊〉 •
Speak that Angels name, her heaven-blest name, oh speak it 〈◊〉
Sir.
It is Artesia, the Royal Saxon Princes•.
A woman, and no Deity: no feigned shape, to mock the
reason of admiring sense, on whom a hope as low as mine may live,
love, and enjoy, dear Brother, may it not?
She is all
the Good, or Virtue thou ca•st name, my Wife, my Queen.
Ha! your wife!
Which you shall find sir,
if that time and fortune may make my love but worcester•hy of your
trial.
Oh!
What troubles you, dear Bro∣there?
Why with so strange and fixed an eye dost thou behold my
Joys?
You are not well, sir.
Yes, yes,
oh you immortal powers, why has poor man so many entrances for
sorrow to creep in at, when our sense is much too weak to hold his
happiness? Oh say I was born deaf: and let your silence confirm
in me the knowing my defect, at least be charitable to conceal my
sin, for hearing is no less in me, dear Brother.
No more, I see thou art a Rival in the Joys of my high
Bliss. Come my Artesia,
The Day's most praised when it is eclipsed by Night,
Great Good must have as great Ill opposite.
Stay, hear but a word; yet now I think on it,
This is your Wedding-night, and were it mine,
I should be angry with least loss of time.
Envy speaks no such words, has no such looks.
Sweet rest unto you both.
Lights to our Nup∣teal
Chamber.
Could you speak so, I would not fear
how much my grief did grow.
Lights to our Chamber,
on, on, set on.
Could you speak so, I would not fear how much my griefs
did grow. Those were her very words, sure I am waking, she
wrung me by the hand, and spake them to me with a most pas•io∣nate
affection, perhaps she loves, and now repents her choice, in
marriage with my brother; oh fond man, how dare thou trust
thy Traitors thoughts, thus to be•ray thy self? it was but a waking
dream wherein thou made thy wishes speak, not her, in which
thy foolish hopes strives to prolong
A wretched being, so sickly children play
With 〈…〉 toys, which for a time delay,
But do not •ur the •it: be •hen a man,
Meet that destruction which thou can not fly
From, not to live, make it thy best to die,
And call her now, whom thou did hope to wed,
Thy brothers wife, thou art too ne'er a kin,
And such an act above all name's a sin
Not to be blotted out, heaven pardon me,
She's banished from my bosom now for ever,
To lowest •bbes, men justly hope a flood,
When vice grows barren, all desires are good.
The noble Prince, I take it sir.
You speak me
what I should be, Lady.
Know by that name sir, Queen
Artesia greets you.
Alas good virtue, how is she mista∣ken.
Commending her affection in this Jewel, sir.
She binds my service to her: has a Jewel it is a fair one
trust me, and methinks it much resembles something I have seen
with her.
It is an artificial crab, Sir.
A cry∣ture
that goes backward.
True, from the way it looks.
There is no moral in it eludes to her self?
It is your construction gives you that sir, she's a woman.
And like this, may use her legs, and eyes two several ways.
Just like the Sea-crab, which on the Mussel prays,
whilst he bills at a stone.
Pretty in troth, prithee
tell me, art thou honest?
I hope I seem no other, sir.
And those that seem so, are sometimes bad enough.
If they will accuse themselves for want of witness, let them,
I am not so foolish.
I see you are wise, come speak
me truly, what is the greatest sin?
That which man never acted, what has been done
Is as the least, common to all as one.
Dost think thy Lady is of thy opinion?
She's a bad Scholar else, I have brought her up, and she
dares owe me still.
I, it is a fault in greatness, they
dare owe many ever they pay one, but dare thou ••pose thy scho∣lar
to my examining?
Yes in good troth sir, and pray
put her to it too, it is a hard lesson if she answer it not.
Thou know the hardest.
As far as a woman
may, sir.
I commend thy plainness, when wilt thou
bring me to thy Lady?
Next opportunity I attend
you, sir.
Thanks, take this, and commend me to her.
Think of your Sea-crab sir, I pray.
Oh by any means, Lady, what should all this tend to?
if it be Love or Lust that thus incites her, the sin is horrid and in∣cestuous;
if to betray my life, what hopes she by it? Yes, it may
be a practice twixt themselves, to expel the Brittains and ensure
the State through our destructions, all this may be valid with a
deeper reach in villainy, then all my thoughts can guess at, however
I will confer with her, and if I find
Lust hath given Life to Envy in her mind,
I may prevent the danger; so men wise
By the same step by which they fell, may rise.
Vices are Virtues, if so thought and seen,
And Trees with foulest roots, branch soonest green.
COme sister, thou that art all fool, all mad-woman.
Prithee have patience, we are now at Court.
At Court! ha, ha, that proves thy madness, was there
ever any woman in thy taking travelled to Court for a husband?
'slid, it is enough for them to get children, and the City to keep 'em,
and the Country to find Nurses: every thing must be done in his
due place, sister.
Be but content a while, for sure I
know this Journey will be happy. Oh dear brother, this night my
sweet Friend came to comfort me, I saw him, and embraced him in
mine arms.
Why did you not hold him, and call me
to help you?
Alas, I thought I had been with him
still, but when I waked!
Ah pox of all Loger-heads,
then you were but in a Dream all this while, and we may still go
look him: Well, since we are come to Court, cast your Cats eyes
about you, and either find him out you dreamt on, or some other,
for Isle trouble my self no further.
See, see, here comes more Courtiers, look about you, come, pray
view 'em all well; the old man has none of the marks about him,
the other have both Swords and Feathers: what think thou of
that tall young Gentleman?
He much resembles him;
but sure my friend, brother, was not so high of stature.
Oh beast, wast thou got a child with a short thing too?
Come, come, Isle hear no more on it: Go Lord Edwin, tell
her this day her sister shall be married to Cador Earl of Cornwall, so
shall she to thee brave Edwin, if she'll have my blessing.
She is addicted to a single Life, she will not hear of Mar∣riage.
Tush, fear it not: go you from me to her, use
your best skill my Lord, and if you fail, I have a trick shall do it:
haste, haste about it.
Sir, I am gone, my hope is in
your help more then my own.
And worthy Toclio, to
your care I must commend this business, for Lights and Music, and
what else is needful.
I shall my Lord.
We
would entreat a word sir, come forward sister.
What lackst thou fellow?
I lack a father
for a child, sir.
How! a God-father?
No
sir, we mean the own father: it may be you sir, for any thing we
know, I think the child is like you.
Like me! pri∣thee
where is it?
Nay, it is not born yet sir, it is forth
coming you see, the child must have a father: what do you think
of my sister?
Why I think if she ne'er had husband
she's a whore, and thou a fool, farewell.
I thank you sir: well, pull up thy heart sister, if there be
any Law in the Court this fellow shall father it, because he uses me so
scurvily. There's a great Wedding towards they say, we will amongst
them for a husband for thee.
If we miss there, Isle have another bout with him that abused me.
Seel look, there comes another Hat and Feather, this should be a
close Lecher, he's reading of a Love-letter.
Earl Cador's
Marriage, and a Masque to grace it, so, so. This night shall make
me famous for Presentiments. How now, what are you?
A couple of Great Brittains, you may see by our bellies, sir.
And what of this sir?
Why thus the matter
stands sir: There's one of your Courtiers Hunting Nags has made
a Gap through another mans Enclosure. Now sir, here's the que∣stion,
who should be at charge of a Fur-bush to stop it?
Ha, ha, this is out of my element: the Law must end it.
Your Worship says well; for surely I think some Law∣yer
had a hand in the business, we have such a troublesome Issue.
But what's thy business with me now?
Nay
sir, the business is done already, you may see by my sisters belly.
Oh, now I find thee, this Gentlewoman it seems has
been humbled.
As low as the ground would give her
leave sir, and your Worship knows this: though there be many fa∣theirs
without children, yet to have a child without a father, were
most unnatural.
That's true in faith, I never heard of
a child yet that ever begot his father.
Why true, you
say wisely sir.
And therefore I conclude, that he that
got the child, is without all question the father of it.
I, now you come to the mat•er sir: and our suit is to
your Worship for the discovery of this father.
Why,
lives he in the Court here?
Yes sir, and I desire but
Marriage.
And does the knave refuse it? Come,
come, be merry wench, he shall marry thee, and keep the child
too, if my Knighthood can do any thing; I am bound by mine Or∣ders
to help distressed Ladies, and can there be a greater injury to
a woman with child, then to lack a father for it? I am ashamed of
your simpleness: Come, come, give me a Courtiers Fee for my
pains, and Isle be thy Advocate my self, and justice shall be found,
nay Isle sue the Law for it; but give me my Fee first.
If all the money I have in the world will do it, you shall
have it sir.
An Angel does it.
Nay
there's two, for your better eye sight sir.
Why well
said: give me thy hand wench, Isle teach thee a trick for all this,
shall get a father for thy child presently, and this it is, mark now:
You meet a man, as you meet me now, thou claim Marriage of
me, and lay the child to my charge, I deny it: push, that's no∣thing,
hold thy Claim fast, thy words carries it, and no Law can
withstand it.
First possible?
Past all opposition, her own word carries it, let her
challenge any man, the child shall call him Father; there's a trick
for your money now.
Troth Sir, we thank you, we will
make use of your trick, and go no further to seek the child a Fa∣there,
for we challenge you Sir: sister lay it to him, he shall marry
thee, I shall have a worshipful old man to my brother.
Ha, ha, I like thy pleasantness,.
Nay in∣deed
Sir, I do challenge you.
You think we jest sir.
I by my troth do I, I like thy wit in faith, thou shalt live
at Court with me, did never here of Nicodemus Nothing? I am the
man.
Nothing, 'slid we are out again, thou wast no∣ver
got with child with nothing sure.
I know not what
to say.
Never grieve wench, show me the man and
process shall fly out.
It is enough for us to find the
children, we look that you should find the Father, and therefore
either do us justice, or we will stand to our first challenge.
Would you have justice without an Adversary, unless
you can show me the man, I can do you no good in it.
Why then I hope you'll do us no harm sir, you'll restore
my money.
What, my Fee? marry Law forbid it,
find out the party, and you shall have justice, your fault closed up,
and all shall be amended, the Child his Father, and the Law end∣ed.
Well, he has deserved his Fee indeed,
for he has brought our suit to a quick end, I promise you, and yet
the Child has never a Father; nor we have no more money to seek
after him, a shame of all lecherous placcats; now you look like a
Cat had newly kitten'd, what will you do now trow? Follow me no
further, lest I beat your brains out.
Impose upon me
any punishment, rather then leave me now.
Well, I think I am bewitch with thee, I cannot find in
my heart to forsake her, there was never sister would have abused
a poor brother as thou hast done, I am even pined away with fret∣ting,
there's nothing but flesh and bones about me, well and I had
my money again, it were some comfort, hark sister, Thunder.
does it not thunder?
Oh yes, most fearfully, what shall.
we do brother?
Marry e'ene get some shelter ever the
storm catch us: away, let's away I prithee.
Ha, it is he, stay brother, dear brother stay.
What's the matter now?
My love, my
friend is come, yonder he goes.
Where, where,
show me where, I'll stop him if the devil be not in him.
Look there, look yonder, oh dear friend, pity my distress,
for heaven and goodness do but speak to me.
She calls me, and yet drives me headlong from her,
Poor mortal, thou and I are much uneven,
Thou must not speak of goodness nor of heaven,
if I confer with thee: but be of comfort, whilst men do breath, and
Britiains name be known,
The fatal fruit thou bear within thy womb,
Shall here be famous till the day of doom.
'Slid who's that talks so? I can see no body.
Then art thou blind, or mad, see where he goes, and
beckons me to come, oh lead me forth, I'll follow thee in spite
of fear or death.
Oh brave, she'll run to the devil for a husband, she's
stark mad sure, and talks to a shadow, for I could see no substance:
well, I'll after her, the child was got by chance, and the father
must be found at all adventure.
Oh reverent sir, by you my heart hath reached at the
large hopes of holy Piety, and for this I craved your company,
Here in your sight religiously to vow,
My chaste thoughts up to heaven, and make you now
the witness of my faith.
Angels assist thy hopes.
What means my Love? thou art my promised wife.
To part with willingly what friends and life
Can make no good assurance of.
Oh find remorse,
fair soul, to love and merit, and yet recant thy vow.
Never: this world and I are parted now for ever.
To find the way to bliss, oh happy woman,
You have learned the hardest Lesson well I see,
Now show thy fortitude and constancy,
Let these thy friends thy sad departure weep,
Thou shalt but loose the wealth thou coldest not keep,
My contemplation calls me, I must leave ye,
O reverent Sir, persuade not her to leave me,
My Lord I do not, nor to cease to love ye,
I only pray her faith may fixed stand.
Marriage was blessed I know with heavens own hand.
You hear him Lady, it is not a virgins state but sanctity
of life, must make you happy.
Good sir, you say you
love me, gentle Edwin, even by that love I do beseech you leave me.
Think of your fathers tears, your weeping friends whom
cruel grief makes pale and bloodless for you.
Would I were dead to all.
Why do you weep?
Oh who would live to see
How men with care and cost, seek misery.
Why do you seek it then? What joy, what pleasure,
can give you comfort in a single life?
The contem∣plation
of a happy death, which is to me so pleasing that I think
no torture could diver me: What's this world wherein you'd
have me walk, but a sad passage to a dread Judgement-Seat, from
whence even now we are but bailed, upon our good abearing, till
that great Sessions come, when Death, the Crier, will surely sum∣mon
us, and all to appear, to plead us guilty or our bail to clear:
what musick's this?
Oh now resolve and think upon my love, this sounds
the Marriage of your beauteous sister, virtuous Constancy, with
the noble Cador, look, and behold this pleasure.
Cover me with night,
It is a vanity not worth the sight.
See, see, she's yonder, pass on son
Daughter Con∣stancia,
I beseech you all unless she first move speech, salute her
not. Edwin what good success?
Nothing as yet, unless this object take her.
See, see, her eye is fixed upon her sister,
seem careless all, and take no notice of her: on before there, come
my Constancy.
Not speak to me, nor dain to cast an eye,
To look on my despised poverty?
I must be more charitable, pray stay Lady, are not you she whom I
did once call sister?
I did acknowledge such a name
to one whilst she was worthy of it, in whose folly
Since you neglect your fame and friends together,
In you I drowned a sisters name for ever.
Your looks did speak no less.
It now be∣gins
to work, this sight has moved her.
I know this
trick would take, or nothing.
Though you disdain in me
a sisters name, yet charity me thinks should be so strong to instruct
ever you reject, I am a wretch even follies instance, who perhaps
have er'd, not having known the goodness bears so high and fair a
show in you, which being expressed
I may recant this low despised life,
And please those friends whom I moved to grief.
She is coming in faith, be merry Edwin.
Since you desire instruction you shall have it, what first
should make you thus desire to live vowed to a single life?
Because I know I cannot fly from death, oh my good
sister, I beseech you hear me;
This world is but a Masque, catching weak eyes,
With what is not our selves but our disguise,
A Vizard that falls off, the Dance being done,
And leaves Deaths Glass for all to look upon,
Our best happiness here, lasts but a night,
Whose burning Tapers makes false Ware seem right;
Who knows not this, and will not now provide
Some better shift before his shame be spied,
And knowing this vain world at last will leave him,
Shake off these robes that help but to deceive him.
Her words are powerful, I am amazed to hear her!
Her soul's enchanted with infected Spells.
Leave her best Girl, for now in thee
Isle seek the fruits of Age, Posterity.
Out o'my sight, sure I was half asleep, or drunk, when I begot thee.
Good sir forbear. What say you to that sister?
The joy of children, a blessed Mothers Name!
Oh who without much grief can loose such Fame?
Who can enjoy it without sorrow rather?
And that most certain where the joy's unsure,
Seeing the fruit that we beget endure
So many miseries, that oft we pray
The Heavens to shut up their afflicted day:
At best we do but bring forth Heirs to die,
And fill the Coffins of our enemy.
Oh my soul.
Hear her no more Constantia,
she's sure bewitched with Error, leave her Girl.
Then
must I leave all goodness sir: away, stand-off, I say.
How's this?
I have no father, friend, no hus∣band
now, all are but borrowed robes, in which we masque to waste
and spend the time, when all our Life is but one good betwixt two
Ague-days, which from the first, ever we have time to praise, a se∣cond
Fever takes us: Oh my best sister, my souls eternal friend,
forgive the rashness of my distempered tongue, for how could she
knew not her self, know thy felicity, from which worlds cannot
now remove me.
Art thou mad too, fond woman?
what's thy meaning?
To seek eter•al happiness in hey∣ven,
which all this world affords not.
Think of thy
Vow, thou art my promised Wife.
Pray trouble me no
further.
Strange alteration!
Why do you
stand at gaze, you sacred Priests? you holy men be equal to the
Gods, and consummate my Marriage with this woman.
Her self gives barr my Lord, to your desires, and our
performance; it is against the Law and Orders of the Church to
force a Marriage.
How am I wronged! was this your
trick, my Lord?
I am abused past sufferance; grief
and amazement strive which Sense of mine shall loose her being
first; yet let me call thee Daughter.
Me, Wife.
Your words are air, you speak of want, to wealth,
And wish her sickness, newly raised to health.
Bewitched Girls, tempt not an old mans fury, that hath
no strength to uphold his feeble age, but what your sights give life
to, oh beware, and do not make me curse you.
Kneel.
Dear father, here at your feet we kneel, grant us
but this, that in your sight and hearing the good Hermit may plead
our Cause; which if it shall not give such satisfaction as your Age
desires, we will submit to you.
You gave us life, save
not our bodies, but our souls from death.
This gives some
comfort yet: Rise with my blessings. Have patience, noble Cador,
worthy Edwin, send for the Hermit that we may confer, for sure
Religion ties you not to leave
Your careful Father thus; if so it be,
Take you content, and give all grief to me.
Mix light and darkness, earth and heaven dissolve, be of
one piece again, and turn to C•aos, break all your works you pow∣ers,
and spoil the world, or if you will maintain earth still, give
way and life to this abortive birth now coming, whose fame shall
add unto your Oracles. Lucina, Hecate, dreadful Queen of Night,
bright Proserpine, be pleased for Cerer love, from Stigian darkness,
summon up the Fates,
And in a moment bring them quickly hither,
Lest death do vent her birth and her together,
Assist you spirits of infernal deeps, squint eyed •ricth•, midinght In∣cubus.
Rise, rise to aid this birth prodigious. Thanks Hecate, hail sister
to the Gods, there lies your way, haste with the Fates, and help,
give quick dispatch unto her laboring throws, to bring this mix∣ture
of infernal seed, to humane being,
And to beguile her pains, till back you come,
Antics shall dance and Music fill the room.
Thanks Queen of Shades.
Farewell, great servant to th'infernal King,
In honour of this child, the Fates shall bring
All their assisting powers of Knowledge, Arts,
Learning, Wisdom, all the hidden parts
Of all-admiring Prophecy, to fore-see
The event of times to come, his Art shall stand
A wall of brass to guard the Britain Land,
Even from this minute, all his Arts appears
Manlike in Judgement, Person, State, and years,
Upon his breast the Fates have fixed his name,
And since his birth place war this forest here,
They now have named him Marlin Silvester.
And Marlins name in Britain shall live,
Whilst men inhabit here, or Fates can give
Power to amazing wonder, envy shall weep,
And mischief sit and shake her ebbone wings,
Whilst all the world of Marlins magic sings.
Well, I wonder how my poor sister does, after all this
thundering, I think she's dead, for I can hear no tidings of her,
those woo•s yields small comfort for her, I could meet nothing but
a swinherds wife, keeping hogs by the Forestside, but neither she nor
none of her sows would stir a foot to help us; indeed I think she
durst not trust her self amongst the trees with me, for I must needs
confess I offered some kindness to her; well, I would fain know
what's become of my sister, if she have brought me a young Cousin,
his face may be a picture to find his Father by, so oh, sister Join,
Join Go-too't, where art thou? Within Join. Here, here bro∣there,
stay but a while, I come to thee.
O brave, she's a∣live
still, I know her voice, she speaks, and speaks cheerfully me∣thinks,
how now, what Moon-calf has she got with her?
Come my dear Marlin, why dost thou six thine eye so
deeply on that book?
To sound the depth of Arts, of
Learning, Wisdom, Knowledge.
Oh my dear, dear son,
those studies fits thee when thou art a man.
Why mother, I can be but half a man at best,
And that is your mortality, the rest
In me is spirit, it is not meat, nor time,
That gives this growth and bigness, no, my years
Shall be more strange then yet my birth appears,
Look mother, there's my Uncle.
How doest thou know
him son, thou never saw him?
Yet I know him,
and know the pains he has taken for ye, to find out my Father,
give me your hand, good Uncle.
Ha, ha, I'd laugh
at that in faith, do you know me sir? Marlin, Yes, by the same
token that even now you kissed the swinherds-wife in the woods, and
would have done more, if she would have let you, Uncle.
A witch, a witch, a witch, sister: rid him out of your com∣pany,
he is either a witch or a conjurer, he could never have
known this else.
Pray love him brother, he is my son.
Ha, ha, this is worse then all the rest in faith, by his
beard he is more like your husband: let me see, is your great belly
gone?
Yes, and this the happy fruit.
What, this Hartichoke? A Child born with a beard on
his face?
Yes, and strong legs to go, and teeth to eat.
You can nurse up your self then? There's some charges
saved for Soap and Candle, 'slid I have heard of some that has been
born with teeth, but never none with such a talking tongue before?
Come, come, you must use him kindly brother, did you
but know his worth, you would make much of him.
Make
much of a Moncky? This is worse then Tom Thumb, that let a fart
in his Mothers belly, a Child to speak, eat, and go the first hour
of his birth, nay, such a Baby as had need of a Barber before he
was born too; why sister this is monstrous, and shames all our
kindred.
That thus against nature and our common births,
he comes thus furnished to salute the world, is power of Fates, and
gift of his great father.
Why, of what profession is
your father sir?
He keeps a Hot-house in the Low Coun∣tries,
will you see him sir?
See him, why sister has the
child found his father?
Yes, and Isle fetch him Uncle.
Do not Uncle me, till I know your kindred, for my
conscience some Baboon begot thee, surely thou art horribly de∣ceived
sister, this Urchin cannot be of thy breeding, I shall be a∣shamed
to call him cousin, though his father be a Gentleman.
Now my kind Uncle see;
The Child has found his Father, this is he.
The devil it is, ha, ha, is this your sweet-heart sister? have
we run through the Country, haunted the City, and examined the
Court to find out a Gallant with a Hat and Feather, and a silken
Sword, and golden Hangers, and do you now bring me to a Raga∣muffin
with a face like a Frying-pan?
Fie brother, you
mistake, behold him better.
How's this? do you juggle
with me, or are mine eyes matches? Hat and Feather, Sword, and
Hangers and all, this is a Gallant indeed sister, this has all the
marks of him we look for.
And you have found him now sir: give me your hand, I
now must call you brother.
Not till you have married
my sister, for all this while she's but your whore, sir.
Thou art too plain, Isle satisfy that wrong to her, and
thee, and all, with liberal hand: come, why art thou fearful?
Nay I am not afraid, and you were the devil, sir.
Thou need not, keep with thy sister still, and Isle sup∣ply
your wants, you shall lack nothing that gold and wealth can
purchase.
Thank you brother, we have gone many
a weary step to find you; you may be a husband for a Lady, for
you are far fetched and dear bought, I assure you: Pray how should
I call your son, my cousin here?
His name is Marlin.
Marlin! Your hand, cousin Marlin, for your fathers sake
I accept you to my kindred: if you grow in all things as your Beard
does, you will be talked on. By your Mothers side cousin, you come
of the Go-too'ts, Suffolk bred, but our standing house is at Hockly•
in the Hole, and Layton-buzzard. For your father, no doubt you may
from him claim Titles of Worship, but I cannot describe it; I think
his Ancestors came first from Hell-bree in Wales, cousin.
No matter whence we do derive our Name,
All Brittany shall ring of Marlin's fame,
And wonder at his acts. Go hence to Wales,
There live a while, there Vortiger the King
Builds Castles and strong Holds, which cannot stand
Unless supported by young Marlins hand.
There shall thy fame begin, Wars are a breeding.
The Saxons practise Treason, yet unseen,
Which shortly shall break out: Fair Love, farewell,
Dear son and brother, here must I leave you all,
Yet still I will be near at Marlins call.
Will you go Uncle?
Yes, Isle follow you,
cousin: well, I do most horribly begin to suspect my kindred; this
brother in law of mine is the Devil sure, and though he hide his
horns with his Hat and Feather, I spied his cloven foot for all his
cunning.
Come, come, time calls our close Complots to action: go
Proximus, with winged speed fly hence, hye thee to Wales, salute
great Vortig•r with these our Letters, bid the King to arms, tell
him we have new friends, more Forces landed in Norfolk and Nor∣thumberland,
bid him make haste to meet us; if he keep his word,
we'll part the Realm between us.
Bend all thine Art to
quit that late disgrace the Christian Hermit gave thee, make thy
revenge both sure and home.
That thought sir, spurs me
on, till I have wrought their swift destruction.
Go then, and prosper. Ost, be vigilant: Speak, are the
Forts possessed? the Guards made sure? Revolve I pray on how
large consequence the bare event and sequel of our hopes jointly
consists, that have embark't our lives upon the hazard of the least
miscarriage.
Ell's sure, the Queen your sister hath con∣trivet
the cunning Plot so sure, as at an instant the Brothers shall
be both surprised and taken.
And both shall die, yet
one a while must live, till we by him have gathered strength and
power to meet bold Idol their stern General, that now contrary to
the Kings command, hath re-united all his cashiered Troops, and
this way beats his drums to threaten us.
Then our Plot's
discovered.
Come, you are a fool, his Army and his life
is given unto us: where is the Queen, my sister?
In con∣ference
with the Prince.
Bring the Guards nearer, all is fair and good,
Their Conference I hope shall end in blood.
Come, come, you do but flatter, what you term Love, is
but a Dream of blood, wakes with enjoying, and with open eyes
forgot, contemned and lost.
I must be wary, her words
are dangerous. True, we will speak of Love no more then.
Nay, if you will you may,
It is but in jest, and yet so children play
With fiery flames, and covet what is bright,
But feeling his effects, abhor the light.
Pleasure is like a Building, the more high,
The narrower still it grows, Cedars do dye
Soonest at top.
How does your instanced suit?
From Art and Nature to make sure the root,
And lay a fast foundation, ever I try
The uncertain Changes of a wavering Sky.
Make your example thus.—You have a kiss.—was it not pleasing?
Above all name to express it.
Yet now the
pleasure's gone, and you have lost your joys possession.
Yet when you please this flood may ebb again.
But where it never ebbs, there runs the main.
Who can attain such hopes?
Isle show the
way to it, give me a taste once more of what you may enjoy.
Impudent whore! I were more false than Atheism can be,
Should I not call this high felicity.
If I should trust your faith, alas I fear you soon would
change belief.
I would covet Martyrdom to maked
confirmed.
Give me your hand on that, you'll keep your
word?
I will.
Enough: Help husband, king
Aurelius, help, rescue betrayed Artesia.
Nay then it is I that am betrayed I see,
Yet with thy blood Isle end thy Treachery.
How now! what troubles you? Is this you sir, that but
even now would suffer Martyrdom to win your hopes, and is there
now such terror in names of men to fright you? nay then I see
what mettle you are made on.
Ha! was it but trial?
then I ask your pardon: What a dull slave was I to be so fearful?
Isle trust her now no more, yet try the utmost. I am resolved, no
brother, no man breathing, were he my bloods begetter, should
withhold me from your love, I'd leap into his bosom, and from his
breast pull forth that happiness Heaven had reserved in you for my
enjoying.
I now you speak a Lover like a Prince: Trea∣son,
treason.
Again.
Help Saxon Princes:
Treason.
Rescue the Queen: strike down the Villain.
Call in the Guards: the Prince in danger! Fall back dear
Sir, my breast shall buckler you.
Beat down their wea∣pons.
Slave, were thou made of brass, my sword shall bite
thee.
Withdraw on pain of death, where is the Trai∣tor?
Oh save your life, my Lord, let it suffice my beau∣tie
forced mine own captivity.
Who did attempt to
wrong thee?
Here me, Sir.
Oh my sad soul!
was it thou?
Oh do not stand to speak, one minutes
stay, prevents a second speech for ever.
Make our
Guards strong: My dear Artesia, let us know thy wrongs, and our
own dangers.
The Prince your brother, with these Brit∣tain
Lords, have all agreed to take me hence by force, and marry
me to him.
The Devil shall wed thee first: thy base∣nos
and thy lust confound and rot thee.
He courted
me even now, and in mine car shamed not to plead his most disho∣nest
love, and their attempts to seize your sacred person, either to
shut you up within some prison, or which is worse, I fear to mur∣there
you.
It is all as false as hell.
And as foul as she is.
You know me, Sir?
Yes, Deadly Sin, we know you, and shall discover all
your villainy.
Chester forbear.
Their trea∣sons
sir, are plain: Why are their Soldiers lodged so near the
Court?
Nay, why came he in arms so suddenly?
You flooring Antics, do not wake my fury.
Fury!
Ratsbane, do not urge me.
Good sir, keep farther from them.
Oh my
sick heart, she is a witch by nature, devil by art.
Bite
thine own slanderous tongue, it is thou art false, I have observed
your passions long ere this.
Stand on your guard, my
Lord, we are your friends, and all our Force is yours.
To spoil and rob the Kingdom.
Sir, be silent.
Silent! how long? till Doomsday? shall I stand by, and
hear mine Honour blasted with foul Treason, the State half lost,
and your life endangered, yet be silent?
Yes, my blunt
Lord, unless you speak you• Treasons. Sir, let your Guards, as
Traitors, seize them all, and then let tortures and devulsive racks,
force a Confession from them.
Wilde-fire and Brim∣stone
eat thee. Hear me sir.
Sir, Isle not hear you.
But you shall: Not hear me I were the worlds Monarch,
Caesar, livi•g, he should hear me. I tell you Sir, these serpents
have betrayed your Life and Kingdom: does not every day bring
tidings of more swarms of lousy slaves, the offal sugitives of bar∣ren
Germany, that land upon our Coasts, and by our neglect settled
in Norfolk and Northumberland?
They come as Aids
and Safeguards to the King.
Has he not need, when
Vortiger's in arms, and you raise Powers, it is thought, to join with
him?
Peace, you pernicious Rat.
Prithee forbear.
Away, suffer a gilded rascal, a low-bred despicable creeper,
an insulting Toad, to spit his poisoned venom in my face!
Sir, sir.
Do not reply, you Cur, for by the Gods, though the Kings
presence guard thee, I shall break all patience, and like a Lion
roused to spoil, shall run foul-mouth'd upon thee, and devour thee
quick▪ Speak sir, will you forsake these scorpions, or stay till they
have stung you to the heart?
You're traitors all, this is our
wife, our Queen: brother Ostorius, troop your Saxons up, we will
hence to Winchester, raise more powers, to m•n with strength the
Castle Camilot: go hence false men, join you with Vortiger, the
murderer of our brother Constantine: we will hunt both him and you
with dreadful vengeance,
Since Britain fails, we will trust to foreign friends,
And guard our person from your traitorous ends.
He's sure bewitch.
What counsel now for
safety?
Only this sir, with all the speed we can, pre∣serve
the person of the King and Kingdom.
Which
to effect, tic best march hence to Wales, and set on Vortiger be∣fore
he join his Forces with the Saxons,
On then with
speed for Wales and Vortiger, that tempest once o'reblown, we
come Ostorius to meet thy traitorous Saxons, thee and them, that
with advantage thus have won the King, to back your factions,
and to work our ruins.
This by the Gods and my good Sword, I'll set
In bloody lines upon thy Burgonet.
HOw now Uncle, why do you search your pockets so? do
you miss any thing?
Ha, Cousin Marlin, I
hope your beard does not overgrow your honesty, I pray remem∣ber
you are made up of sisters thread, I am your mothers brother,
whosoever was your father.
Why, wherein can you
task my duty, Uncle?
Your self, or your page it
must be, I have kept no other company, since your mother bound
your head to my Protectorship, I do feel a fault of one side, either
it was that Sparrowhawk, or a Cast of Marlins, for I find a Covy
of Cardecu's sprung out of my pocket.
Why, do you
want any money U•cle? sirrah, had you any from him?
Deny it not, for my pockets are witness against you.
Yes I had, to teach you better wit to look to it.
Pray use your fingers better, and my wit may serve as
it is sir.
Well, restore it.
There it is.
I, there's some honestly in this, it was a token from your
invisible Father Cousin, which I would not have to go inv•sibly
from me again.
Well, you are sure you have it now
Uncle?
Yes, and mean to keep it now, from your pa∣ges
filching fingers too.
If you have it so sure, pray
show it me again.
Yes, my little juggler, I dare show it,
ha, cleanly conveyance again, ye have no invisible fingers have ye?
It is gone certainly.
Why sir, I touched you not.
Why look you Uncle, I have it now, how ill do you look
to it? here keep it safer.
Ha, ha, this is fine in faith, I
must keep some other company if you have these slights of hand.
Come, come, Uncle, it is all my Art which shall not offend
you sir, only I give you a taste of it, to show you sport.
Oh, but 'tls ill jesting with a mans pocket though—but I am
glad to see you cunning Cousin, for now will I warrant thee a li∣avenge
till thou die. You have heard the news in Wales here?
Uncle, let me prevent your care and counsel, twill give you
better knowledge of my cunning, you would prefer me now in
hope of gain, to Vortiger King of the Welch Brittains, to whom are
all the Artists summoned now, that seeks the secrets of futurity, the
Bards, the Druids, Wizards, Conjurers, not an Aurasper with his
Whisling spells, no Capuomanster with his musty fumes,
No Witch or Juggler, but is thither sent,
To calculate the strange and feared event
Of his prodigious Castle now in building, where all the labours of
the painful day, are ruined still in the night, and to this place you
would have me go.
Well, if thy mother were not my
sister, I would say she was a witch that begot this; but this is thy
father, not thy mother wit, thou hast taken my tale into thy mouth,
and spake my thoughts before me; therefore away, shuffle thy self
amongst the Conjurers, and be a made man before thou come to
age.
Nay, but stay Uncle, you overslip my dangers:
the Prophecies and all the cunning Wizards, have certified the
King, that this his Castle can never stand, till the foundation's laid
with Mortar tempered with the fatal blood of such a child, whose
father was no mortal.
What's this to thee? If the devil
were thy father, was not thy mother born at Carmarden? Diggon
for that then, and then it must be a childes blood, and who will
take thee for a child with such a beard of thy face? Is there not
diggon for that too Cousin?
I must not go, lend me
your ear a while, I'll give you reasons to the contrary.
Sure this is an endless piece of work the King has sent
us about!
Kings may do it, man, the like has been
done to find out the Unicorn.
Which will be sooner
found I think, then this fien'd begotten child we seek for.
Pox of those Conjurers that would speak of such a
one, and yet all their cunning could not tell us where to find him.
In Wales they say assuredly he lives, come let's enquire
further.
Uncle, your persuasions must not prevail with
me, I know mine enemies better then you do.
I say
you are a bastard then if thou disobey thine Uncle, was not Join Go-too't
thy mother, my sister? if the devil were thy father, what kin
art thou to any man alive, but Bailys and Brokers? and they are
but brothers in Law to thee neither.
How's this, I
think we shall speed here.
I, and unlooked for too, go
ne'er and listen to them.
Hast thou a beard to hide it,
will it thou show thy self a child, will it thou have more hair then
wit? Will it thou deny thy mother, b•cause no body knows thy
father? Or shall thine Uncle be an ass?
Bless ye
friend, pray what call you this small Gentleman's name?
Small, sir, a small man may be a great Gentleman, his fa∣there
may be of an ancient house, for ought we know sir.
Why? do you not know his father?
No, nor
you neither I think, unless the devil be in ye.
What is his
name sir?
His name is my Cousin sir, his education is my
sisters son, but his manners are his own.
Why ask ye Gen∣t••men?
my name is Marlin.
Yes, and a Goshawk was
his father, for ought we know, for I am sure his mother was a Wind-•ucker.
He has a mother then?
As sure
as I have a sister, sir.
But his father you leave doubt∣full.
Well Sir, as wise men as you, doubt whether he
had a father or no?
Sure this is he we seek for.
I think no less: and sir, we let you know the King hath
sent for you.
The more child he, and he had bin ruled
by me, he should have gone before he was sent for.
May we not see his mother?
Yes, and feel
her too if you anger her, a devilish thing I can tell ye she has been,
Isle go fetch her to ye.
Sir, it were fit you did resolve for speed, you must unto
the King.
My Service sir, shall need no strict com∣mand,
it shall obey most peaceably, but needless it is to fetch what
is brought home, my journey may be staid, the King is coming hi∣there
with the same quest you bore before him, hark, this drum will
tell ye.
This is some cunning indeed •r.
Still in our eye your message Proximus, we keep to spur our
speed: Ostorius, and Ost, we shall salute with succour against Prince
Utter and Aurelius, whom now we hear encamps at Winchester, there's
nothing interrupts our way so much, as doth the erection of this fa∣tal
Castle, that spite of all our Art and daily labour, the night still
ruins.
As erst I did affirm, still I maintain, the fien'd
begotten child must be found out, whose blood gives strength to
the foundation, it cannot stand else.
Ha! I'st so? then Proximus by this intelligence he should
be found: speak, is this he you tell of?
Yes Sir, and
I his Uncle, and she his mother.
And who is his father?
Why, she his mother can best tell you that, and yet I
think the child be wise enough, for he has found his father.
Woman, is this thy son?
It is, my Lord.
What was his father? Or where lives he?
Mother speak freely and unastonisht,
That which you dared to act, dread not to name.
In which I shall betray my sin and shame,
But since it must be so, then know great King, all that my self yet
knows of him, is this: In pride of blood and beauty I did live, my
glass the Altar was, my face the Idol, such was my peevish love un∣to
my self, that I did hate all other, such disdain was in my scorn∣full
eye, that I supposed no mortal creature worthy to enjoy me,
thus with the Peacock I beheld my train, but never saw the black∣nos
of my feet, oft have I child the winds for breathing on me, and
cursed the Sun, fearing to blast my beauty, in mid•t of this most lea∣prous
disease, a seeming fair young man appeared unto me, in all
things suiting m• aspiring pride, and with him brought along a
conquering power, to which my frailty yielded, from whose em∣braces
this issue came, what more he is, I know not.
Some Incubus, or Spirit of the night begot him then, for
sure no mortal did it.
No matter who my Lo•d, leave fur∣there
quest, since it is as hurtful as unnecessary more to enquire: Go
to the cause my Lord, why you have sought me thus?
I doubt not but thou know, yet to be plain, I sought
thee for thy blood.
By whose direction?
By mine, my Art infalable instructed me, upon thy blood
must the foundation rise of the Kings building, it cannot stand else.
Hast thou such leisure to enquire my Fate, and let thine
own hang careless over thee? Know thou what pendelous mis∣chief
roofs thy head, how fatal, and how sudden?
Pish, bearded abortive, thou foretell my danger my Lord,
he trifles to delay his own.
No, I yield my self: and here
before the King, make good thine Augury, as I shall mine, if thy
fate fall not, thou hast spoke all truth, and let my blood satisfy
the Kings desires: if thou thy self wilt write thine Epitaph, dis∣patch
it quickly, there's not a minutes time twixt thee and thy
death.
Ha, ha, ha.
I, so, thou may die laughing.
Ha! This is above admiration, look, is he dead?
Yes sir, here's brains to make mortar on, if you'll use
them: Cousin Marlin, there's no more of this stone fruit ready to
fall, is there? I pray give your Uncle a little fair warning.
Remove that shape of death, and now my Lord for clear
satisfaction of your doubts, Marlin will show the fatal cause that
keeps your fatal Castle down, and hinders your proceedings: Stand
there, and by an apparition see the labour and end of all your destiny.
Mother and Uncle, you must be absent.
Is your fa∣there
coming Cousin?
Nay, you must be gone.
Come, you'll offend him brother.
I would fain
see my Brother i'law, if you were married I might lawfully call him
so.
What means this stay?
Be not amazed my Lord, for on the victory
Of loss or gain, as these two Champions ends
Your fate, your life, and kingdom all depends,
therefore observe it well.
I shall, heaven be auspicious to us.
The conquest is on the white Dragons part, now Marlin
faithfully expound the meaning.
Your Grace must then
not be offended with me.
It is the weakest part I found
in thee, to doubt of me so slightly, shall I blame my prophet that
foretells me of my dangers? thy cunning I approve most excellent.
Then know my Lord, there is a dampish Cave, the night∣lie
habitation of these Dragons, vaulted beneath where you would
build your Castle, whose enmity and nightly combats there, main∣tain
a constant ruin of your labours: To make it more plain, the
Dragons then your self betoken, and the Saxon King, the vanquished
Red, is sir, your dreadful Emblem.
Oh my fate!
Nay, you must hear with patience Royal sir, you slew the
lawful King Constantius, it was a red deed, your Crown his blood
did cement, the English Saxon first brought in by you, for aid a∣against
Constantius brethren, is the white horror who now knit toge∣there,
have driven and shut you up in these wilde mountains, and
though they now seek to unite with friendship, it is to wound your
bosom, not embrace it, and with an utter extirpation to rout the
Brittains out, and plant the English. Seek for your safety Sir, and
spend no time to build the airy Castles, for Prince Utter armed with
vengeance for his brothers blood is hard upon you, if you mistrust
me, and to my words craves witness sir, then know here comes a
messenger to tell you so.
My Lord• Prince Utter•
And who else sir?
Idol, the great General.
The great Devil,
they are coming to meet us.
With a full power my
Lord.
With a full vengeance they mean to meet us,
so we are ready to their confront as full march double footing, we will
loose no ground, nor shall their numbers fright us,
If it be Fate, it cannot be withstood,
We gotour Crown so, be it lost in blood.
Stay, and advice, hold drum.
Beat slave, why do
you pause? why make a stand? where are our enemies? or do you
mean we fight amongst our selves?
Nay, noble Idol, let
us here take counsel, it cannot burred, it is the •urest Garrison to
safety.
Fie on such slow delays! so fearful men that are to
pass over a flowing river, stand on the bank to parley of the dan∣ger,
till the tide rise and then be swallowed, is not the King in field?
Proud Vortiger, the Trator is in field.
The
Murderer, and Usurper.
Let him be the devil so I may
fight with him, for heavens love sir march on, oh my patience,
will you delay until the Saxons come to aid his party? A Tucket.
There's no such fear, prithee be calm a while, hark, it
seems by this, he comes or sends to us.
If it be for parley, I
will drown the summons, if all our drums and hoarseness choke me
me not.
Nay, prithee hear, from whence art thou?
From the King Vortiger.
Traitor, there's none
such: Alarm drum, strike slave, or by mine honour I will break
thy head, and beat thy drums heads both about thine ears.
Hold noble Idol, let's hear what Articles he can enforce.
What articles, or what conditions can you expect to value
half your wrong, unless he kill himself by thousand tortures, and
send his carcase to appease your vengeance, for the foul murder of
Constantius, and that's not a tenth part neither. Prince It is true,
my brothers blood is crying to me now, I do ap•a•d thy counsel:
hence, be gone.
We will hear no parley now but by our swords.
And those shall speak home in death killing words,
Alarm to the fight, sound, sound the Alarm.
Dost follow me?
Yes, to thy death I will.
Stay, be advised, I would not be the only fall of Princes,
I slew thy brother:
Thou did black Traitor, and in
that vengeance I pursue thee.
Take mercy for thy self,
and fly my sword, save thine own life as satisfaction, which here I
give thee for thy brothers death.
Give what's thine
own: a Traitors heart and head, that's all thou art right Lord of;
the Kingdom which thou usurp, thou most unhappy Tyrant, is
leaving thee, the Saxons which thou broughtst to back thy usurp∣tions,
are grown great, and where they seat themselves, do hourly
seek to blot the Records of old Brute and Brittains, from memory
of men, calling themselves Hingest-men, and Hingest-land, that no
more the Britain name be known; all this by thee, thou base de∣stroyer
of thy Native Country.
What, stand you talking? Fight.
Hold Idol.
Hold out my sword, and listen not to King or Princes word,
There's work enough abroad, this task is mine.
Prosper thy Valour, as thy Virtues shine.
Bright Victory her self fights on our part, and buckled
in a golden Beaver, rides triumphantly before us.
Justice
is with her, who ever takes the true and rightful cause, let us not
lag behind them.
Here comes the Prince, how goes our fortunes Sir?
Hopeful, and fair, brave Cador, proud Vortiger beat down
by Idols sword, was rescued by the following multitudes, and now
for safety's fled unto a Castle here standing on the hill: but I have
sent a cry of hounds as violent as hunger, to break his stony walls,
or if they fail,
We will send in wilde fire to dislodge him thence,
Or burn them all with flaming violence.
Look Idol: still this fiery exalation shoots his frightful whore∣rors
on the amazed world, see in the beam that about his flaming ring,
a Dragons head appears, from out whose mouth two flaming flakes
of fire, stretch East and West.
And see, from forth the
body of the Star, seven smaller blazing streams, directly point on
this affrighted kingdom.
It is a dreadful Meteor.
And doth portend strange fears.
This is no
Crown of Peace, this angry fire hath something more to burn then
Vortiger; if it alone were pointed at his fall; it would pull in his
blazing Piramids, and be appeased, for Vortiger is dead.
These never come without their large effects.
The will of heaven be done, our sorrows this we want,
a mystic Pithon to expound this fiery Oracle.
Oh no my Lord, you have the best that ever Britain bred,
and durst I prophecy of your Prophet sir, none like him shall suc∣ceed
him.
You mean Marlin.
True sir,
wondrous Marlin, he met us in the way, and did foretell the for∣tunes
of this day successful to us.
He's sure about the
Camp, send for him sir.
He told the bloody Vortiger his
fate, and truly too, and if I could give faith to any Wizards skill,
it should be Marlin.
And see my Lord, as if to satisfy your Highness pleasure,
Marlin is come.
See, the Comet's in his eye, disturb
him nor.
With what a piercing judgement he beholds
it!
Whither will Heaven and Fate translate this King∣doom?
what revolutions, rise and fall of Nations
Is figured yonder in that Star, that sings
The change of Brittains State, and death of Kings?
Ha! He's dead already, how swiftly mischief creeps!
Thy fatal end sweet Prince, even Marlin weeps.
He does foresee some evil, his action shows it, for ever
he does expound, he weeps the story.
There's another
weeps too. Sirrah dost thou understand what thou lamentst for?
No sir, I am his Uncle, and weep because my Cousin
weeps, flesh and blood cannot forbear.
Gentle Marlin,
speak thy prophetic knowledge, in explanation of this fiery whore∣roar,
from which we gather from thy mournful tears, much sorrow
and disaster in it.
It is true fair Prince, but you must hear
the rest with patience.
I vow I will, though it portend my
ruin.
There's no such fear, this brought the fiery fall
of Vortiger, and yet not him alone, this day is fallen a King more
good, the glory of our Land, the mild, and gentle, sweet Aurelius.
Our brother!
Forefend it heaven.
He at his Palace Royal sir at Winchester, this day is dead
and poisoned.
By whom? Or what means Marlin?
By the Traitorous Saxons.
I ever feared as much:
that devil Os•orius, and the damned witch Artesia, sure has done it.
Poisoned! oh look further gentle Marlin, behold the Star
again, and do but find revenge for me, though it cost thousand
lives, and mine the foremost.
Comfort your self, the
heavens have given it fully, all the portentious ills to you is told,
now hear a happy story sir from me, to you and to your fair po∣sterity.
Me thinks I see something like a peeled Oinon,
it makes me weep again.
Be silent Uncle, you'll be forced
else.
Can you not find in the Star, Cousin, whether I
can hold my tongue or no?
Yes, I must cut it out.
Phu, you speak without book sir, my Cousin Marlin
knows.
True, I must tie it up, now speak your pleasure
Uncle.
Hum, hum, hum, hum.
So, so—now
observe my Lord, and there behold above yo• flame-hair'd beam
that upward shoots, appears a Dragons head, out of whose mouth
two streaming lights point their flame-feather'd darts contrary
ways, yet both shall have their aims: Again behold from the igni∣firent
body, seven splendent and illustrious rays are spread, all
speaking Heralds to this Britain Isle, and thus they are ex∣pounded:
The Dragons head is the Herogliphick that figures out
your Princely self, that here must reign a King, those by-form'd
fires that from the Dragons mouth shoot East and West, emblem
two Royal babes, which shall proceed from you, a son and daugh∣la:
her pointed constellation Northwest bending,
Crowns Her a Queen in Ireland, of whom first springs
That Kingdoms Title to the Britain Kings.
Hum, hum, hum.
But of your Son, thus Fate
and Marlin tells, all after times shall fill their Chronicles with fame
of his renown, whose warlike sword shall pass through fertile France
and Germany, nor shall his conjuring foot be forced to stand, till
Romes Imperial Wreath hath crowned his Fame with Monarch of
the West, from whose seven hills with Conquest, and contributory
Kings, he back returns to enlarge the Britain bounds, his Heral∣dry
adorned with thirteen Crowns.
Hum, hum, hum▪
He to the world shall add another Worthy, and as a Load∣stone
for his prowess, draw a train of Marshal Lovers to his Court:
It shall be then the best of Knight-hoods honour, at Winchester to
fill his Castle Hall, and at his Royal Table sit and feast in warlike
orders, all their arms round hurled, as if they meant to circumscribe
the world.
Hum, hum, hum, oh that I could speak a little.
I know your mind Uncle, again be silent.
Thou speak of wonders Marlin, prithee go on, declare
at full this Constellation.
Those seven beams pointing
downward, sir, betoken the troubles of this Land, which then shall
meet with other Fate; War and Dissension strives to make dive∣zion,
till seven Kings agree to draw this Kingdom to a Hepterchy.
Thine art hath made such proof, that we believe thy
words authentical, be ever near us, my Prophet, and the Guide of
all my actions.
My service shall be faithful to your per∣son,
and all my studies for my Countries safety.
Hum,
hum, hum.
Come, you are releast, sir.
Cousin,
pray help me to my tongue again, you do not mean I shall be dumb
still I hope?
Why, hast thou not thy tongue?
Ha! yes, I feel it now, I was so long dumb, I could not
well tell whether I spake or no.
I'st thy advice we pre∣sently
pursue the bloody Saxons, that have slain my brother?
With your best speed, my Lord, Prosperity will keep you
company.
Take then your Title with you, Royal
Prince, twill add unto our strength, Long live King Utter.
Put the Addition to it that Heaven hath given you: The
DRAGON is your Emblem, bear it bravely, and so long live and
ever happy styled Vter-Pendragon, lawful King of Britain.
Thanks Idol, we embrace the name and title, and in our
Shield and Standard shall the figure of a Red Dragon still be born
before us, to fright the bloody Saxons. Oh my Aurelius, sweet rest
thy soul; let thy disturbed spirit
Expect revenge, think what it would, it hath,
The Dragon's coming in his fiery wrath.
HEnce thou black horror, is thy lustful fire kindled again?
not thy loud throated thunder, nor thy adulterate infer∣nal
Music, shall ever bewitch me more, oh too too much is past
already.
Why dost thou fly me? I come a Lover to thee,
to embrace, and gently twine thy body in mine arms.
Out thou Hell-hound.
What hound so ever I be,
Fawning and sporting as I would with thee,
why should I not be stroked and plaid withal, will it thou not thank
the Lion might devour thee, if he shall let thee pass?
Yes, thou art he, free me, and Isle thank thee.
Why, whither would? I am at home with thee, thou
art mine own, have we not charge of family together, where is
your son?
Oh darkness cover me.
There is a pride which thou hast won by me, the mother
of a fame shall never die, Kings shall have need of written
Chronicles, to keep their names alive, but Marlin none, ages to
ages shall like Sabalists
Report the wonders of his name and glory,
While there are tongues and times to tell his story.
Oh rot my memory before my flesh, let him be called
some hell or earth-bred monster, that ne'er had hapless woman for
a mother: sweet death deliver me, hence from my sight, why
should thou now appear? I had no pride nor lustful thought about
me, to conjure and call thee to my ruin, when as at first thy cursed
person became visible.
I am the same I was.
But I am changed.
Again Isle change thee to
the same thou were, quench to my lust, come forth by thunder led,
my Coajutors in the spoils of mortals.
Clasp in your Ebon arms that prize of mine, mount her as high as
palled Hecate, and on this rock Isle stand to cast up fumes and
darkness o'er the blew faced firmament; from Britain, and from
Marlin, Isle remove her, they ne'er shall meet again.
Help me some saving hand, if not too late, I cry let mercy
come.
Stay you black slaves of night, let loose your hold, set her
down safe, or by th'i•fernal Styx, Isle bind you up with exorcisms so
strong, that all the black pentagoron of hell, shall ne'er release
you, save you selves and vanish.
Ha! What's he?
The Child has found his Fa∣there,
do you not know me?
Marlin!
Oh, help
me gentle son.
Fear not, they shall not hurt you.
Relievest thou her to disobey thy father?
Obedience is no lesson in your school, nature and kind to
her, commands my duty, the part that you begot was against kind,
so all I ow to you is to be unkind.
Isle blast thee slave
to death, and on this rock stick thee an eternal Monument.
Ha, ha, thy powers too weak, what art thou devil, but
an inferior lustful Incubus, taking advantage of the wanton flesh,
wherewith thou dost beguile the ignorant? put off the form of thy
humanity, and cral upon thy speckled belly, serpent, or Isle unclasp
the jaws of Achoron, and fix thee ever in the local fire.
Traitor to hell; curse that I ever begot thee.
Thou did beget thy scourge, storm not, nor stir, the
power of Marlins Art is all confirmed in the Fates decretals,—Isle
ransack hell, and make thy 
masters bow unto my spells, thou first shall taste it,—Tenibr arum
precis, devitiarum, &amp; infirorum, Deus, hunc Incubum in ignis eterni abi∣sum,
accipite aut in hoc carcere tenebroso, in sempeternum astringere
mando. 
So, there beget earthquakes or some noisome damps, for never
shalt thou touch a woman more: How cheer you mother?
Oh now my son is my deliverer, yet I must name him
with my deepest sorrow.
Take comfort now, past times are ne'er recal'd,
I did foresee your mischief and prevent it: hark, how the sounds
of war now call me hence to aid Pendragon, that in battle stands
against the Saxons, from whose aid Marlin must not be absent: leave
this soil, and Isle conduct you to a place retired, which I by art
have raised, called Marlins Bower, there shall you dwell with solitary
sighs, with groans and passions your companions, to weep away
this flesh you have offended with, and leave all bare unto your
aierial soul, and when you die, I will erect a Monument upon the
verdant Plains of Salisbury, no King shall have so high a sepulchre,
with pendulous stones that I will hang by art, where neither Lime
nor Mortar shall be used, a dark Enigma to the memory, for none
shall have the power to number them, a place that I will hollow
for your rest,
Where no Night-hag shall walk, nor Ware-wolf tread,
Where Marlins Mother shall be sepulcher'd.
Sincerely Gloster, I have told you all: My Daughters are
both vowed to Single Life, and this day gone unto the Nunnery,
though I begot them to another end, and fairly promised them in
Marriage, one to Earl Cador, t'other to your son, my worthy
friend, the Earl of Gloster. Those lost, I am lost: they are lost,
ell's lost. Answer me this then, First a sin to marry?
Oh no, my Lord.
Go to then, Isle go no further with you, I persuade you
to no ill, persuade you then that I persuade you well.
Twill be a good Office in you, sir.
Which since they thus neglect, my memory shall lose
them now for ever. See, see the Noble Lords, their promised
Husbands! had Fate so pleased, you might have called me Father.
Those hopes are past, my Lord, for even this minute
we saw them both enter the Monastery, secluded from the world
and men for ever.
It is both our griefs we cannot, Sir: but from the King
take you the Times joy from us; The Saxon King Os•orius slain,
and Ost fled, that Woman-fury, Queen Artesia, is fast in hold,
and forced to re-deliver London and Winchester (which she had for∣tifi'd)
to Princely Utter, lately styled Pendragon, who now trium∣phantly
is marching hither to be invested with the Britain Crown.
The joy of this, shall banish from my breast all thought
that I was Father to two Children, two stubborn Daughters, that
have left me thus: Let my old arms embrace, and call you Sons,
for by the Honour of my Fathers House, I'll part my estate most
equally betwixt you.
Sir, you're most noble!
Set up our Shield and Standard, noble Soldiers,
We have firm hope that though our Dragon sleep,
Marlin will us and our fair Kingdom keep.
As his Uncle lives, I warrant you.
Happy Re∣storer
of the Brittains fame, uprising Sun let us salute thy glory,
ride in a day perpetual about us, and no night be in thy thrones so∣diack,
why do we stay to bind those Princely brows with this
Imperial Honour?
Stay noble Gloster, that monster first
must be expel'd our eye, or we shall take no joy in it.
If that be hindrance, give her quick Judgement, and send
her hence to death, she has long deserved it.
Let my Sentence stand for all, take her hence, and stake
her carcase in the burning Sun, till it be parcht and dry, and then
fley off her wicked skin, and stuff the pelt with straw to be shown
up and down at Fairs and Markets, two pence a piece to see so
foul a Monster, will be a fair Monopoly and worth the begging.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost laugh Erictho?
Yes, at thy poor invention, is there no better, torture∣monger?
Burn her to dust.
That's a Phoenix
death, and glorious.
I, that's to good for her.
Alive she shall be buried circled in a wall, thou mur∣dress
of a King, there starve to death.
Then Isle starve death when he comes for his prey, and
in the mean time Isle live upon your curses.
I, it is diet good enough, away with her.
With joy, my best of wishes is before,
Thy brother's poisoned, but I wanted more.
Why does our Prophet Marlin stand apart, sadly obser∣avenge
these our Ceremonies, and not applaud our joys with thy hid
knowledge? Let thy divining Art now satisfy some part of my de∣sires;
for well I know it is in thy power to show the full event, that
shall both end our Reign and Chronicle: speak learned Marlin, and
resolve my feats, whether by war we shall expel the Saxons, or
govern what we hold with beauteous peace in Wales and Britain?
Long happiness attend Pendragons Reign, what Heaven
decrees, fate hath no power to alter: The Saxons, sir, will keep the
ground they have, and by supplying numbers still incease, till Brit∣tain
be no more. So please your Grace, I will in visible apparitions,
present you Prophecies which shall concern
Succeeding Princes, which my Art shall raise,
Till men shall call these times the latter days.
Do it my Marlin, and Crown me with much joy and
wonder.
This King, my Lord, presents your Royal Son, who in his
prime of years shall be so fortunate, that thirteen several Princes,
shall present their several Crowns unto him, and all Kings else
shall so admire his fame and victories, that they shall all be glad ei∣there
through fear or love, to do him homage; But death (who
neither favours the weak nor valiant) in the midst of all his
glories, soon shall seize him, scarcely permitting him to appoint one
in all his purchased Kingdoms to succeed him.
Thanks to our Prophet for this so wished for satisfaction,
and hereby now we learn that always Fate must be observed, what
ever that decree,
All future times shall still record this Story,
Of Marlin's learned worth, and Arthur's glory.

