PRay you away; why fellows? Gods so? what doe you mean?
Mary that you shall not speak the Prologue, sir.
Why? doe you hope to speak it?
I, and I think I have most right to it: I am sure I studied it first.
That's all one, if the Author think I can speak it better.
I plead possession of the cloak: Gentles, your suffrages I pray you.
¶ Why Children are you not ashamed? come in there.
Slid, I'll play nothing in the Play: unless I speak it.
Why, will you stand to most voices of the gentlemen! let that de∣cid it.
O no, sir gallant; you presume to have the start of vs there, and that makes you offer so prodigally.
No, would I were whipped, if I had any such thought: try it by lots either.
Faith, I dare tempt my fortune in a greater venture then this.
Well said, resolute Jack, I am content too: so wee draw first. Make the cuts.
But will you not snatch my cloak, while I am stooping?
No, we scorn treachery.
Which cut shall speak it?
The shortest.
Agreed.
The shortest is come to the shortest. For∣tune
was not altogether blind in this. Now, sir, I hope I shall go forward without your envy.
A spite of all mischievous luck! I was once plucking at the other.
Stay, Jack: Slid, I'll doe somewhat now before I go in, though it be nothing but to revenge my self on the Author: since I speak not his Prologue. Isle go tell all the argument of his play aforehand, and so stale his invention to the auditory before it come forth.
O, doe not so.
By no means.
First, the title of his play is CYNTHIAS Revels, as any man (that hath hope to bee saved by his book) can witness; the Scene, GARGA∣PHIE: which I doe vehemently suspect for some suction country, but let that vanish. Here, is the court of CYNTHIA, whither hee brings CV∣BID (travailing on foot) resolved to turn page. By the way, CUPID meets with MERCVRIE, (as that's a thing to be noted, take any of our play-bookes without a CUPID, or a MERCVRY in it, and burn it for an heretic in Poetry)— Pray thee let me alone. MERCVRY, he (in the nature of a conjurer) raises up ECHO, who weeps over her love, or Daffodil, NARCISSVS, a little; sings; curses the spring where∣in the pretty foolish gentleman melted himself away: and ther's an end of her.—Now I am to inform you, that CUPID, and MERCVRY doe both become pages. CUPID attends on PHILAVTIA, or selfe-Loue, a court-ladie MERCVRY follows HEDON, the voluptuous, and a courtier; one that ranks himself even with ANAIDES, or the impudent, a gallant, (and that's my part:) one that keeps laughter, GELAIA the daughter of folly, (a wench in boys attire) to waite on him—These, in the court, meet with AMORPHVS, or the deformed; a travailer that hath drunk of the fountain, and there tells the wonders of the water. They presently dispatch away their pages with bottles to fetch of it, and them∣selves go to visit the ladies. But I should have told you— (Look, these emits put me out here) that with this AMORPHVS, there comes a∣long a citizens heir, ASOTVS, or the prodigal, who (in imitation of the traveller, who hath the whetstone following him) entertains the beggar, to be his attendant.—Now, the Nymphs who are mistresses to these gal∣lants, are PHILAVTIA, selfe-Loue; PHANTASTE, a light wittiness; ARGV∣RION money; and their Guardian, mother MORI; or mistress folly.—
Pray thee no more.
There CUPID strikes money in love with the prodigal, makes her dote upon him, give him jewels, bracelets, carkenets, &amp;c. all which (hee most ingeniously departs withal) to be made known to the other ladies and gallants; and in the heat of this, increases his train with the fool to follow him, as well as the beggar.— By this time, your beggar begins to waite close, who is returned with the rest of his fellow bottle-men.— There they all drink, save ARGVRION, who is fallen into a sudden apoplexy.—
Stop his mouth.
And then, there's a retired scholar there, you would not wish a thing to be better contemned of a society of gallants, then it is: and hee applies his service (good gentleman) to the lady ARETE, or virtue, a poor Nymph of CYNTHIAS train, that's scarce able to buy her self a gown, you shall see her play in a black robe anon: A creature, that (I assure you) is no less scorned, then himself. Where am I now? at a stand?
Come, leave at last, yet.
O, the night is come, (t'was somewhat dark, me thought) and CYNTHIA intends to come forth: (That helps it a little yet.) All the courtiers must provide for revels; they conclude upon a Masque, the de∣vice of which, is—(what, will you ravish me?) that each of these vices, being to appear before CYNTHIA, would seem other then in∣deed they are: and therefore assume the most neighbouring virtues as their masking habits.— (I'd cry, a rape, but that you are i will∣drone.)
Come, we'll have no more of this anticipation: to give them the inuentorie of their cates aforehand, were the discipline of a tavern, and not fitting this presence.
Tut, this was but to show vs the happiness of his memory. I thought at first, he would have plaid the ignorant critique with every thing, along as he had gone, I expected some such device.
O, you shall see me doe that, rarely, lend me thy cloak.
Soft, sir, you'll speak my Prologue in it.
No, would I might never stir then.
Lend it him, lend it him.
Well, you have sworn.
I have. Now, sir, suppose I am one of your gentile auditors, that an come in (having paid my money at the door, with much ado) and here I take my place, and sit down: I have my three sorts of tobacco in my pocket, my sight by me, and thus I begin. By this light, I wonder that any man is so mad, to come to see these rascally Tits play here— They doe act like so many wrens, or pismires—not the fifth part of a good face amongst them all—And then their music is abomina∣ble—able to stretch a mans ears worse then ten— pillories, and their ditties—most lamentable things, like the pitiful fellows that make them—Poets. By this vapour, and it were not for tabac∣co—I think—the very stench of 'hem would poison me, I should not dare to come in at their gates—A man were better visit fifteen jails,—or a dozen or two of hospitals—then once adventure to come near them. How is it? Well?
Excellent: give me my cloak.
Stay; you shall see me doe another now: but a more sober, or bet∣ter-gather'd gallant; that is (as it may bee thought) some friend, or well∣wisher to the house: And here I enter.
What? upon the stage, too?
Yes: and I step forth like one of the children, and ask you, Would you have a stool, sir?
A stool, boy?
I, sir, if you'll give me six pence, Isle fetch you one.
For what I pray thee? what shall I doe with it?
O lord, sir! will you betray your ignorance so much? why throne your self in state on the stage, as other gentlemen use, sir.
Away, wag, what, would thou make an implement of me? Slid the boy takes me for a piece of perspective (I hold my life) or some silk cortaine, come to hang the stage here! sir crack, I am none of your fresh pictures, that use to beautify the decayed dead arras, in a public theatre.
It is a sign, sir, you put not that confidence in your good clothes, and your better face, that a gentleman should doe, sir. But I pray you sir, let me bee a suitor to you, that you will quit our stage then, and take a place, the play is instantly to begin.
Most willingly, my good wag: but I would speak with your Au∣thour, whore's he?
Not this way, I assure you, sir: wee are not so officiously befrien∣ded by him, as to have his presence in the tiring•house, to prompt vs a∣loud, stamp at the booke-holder, swear for our properties, curse the poor tire-man, rail the music out of tune, and sweat for every veni∣all trespass we commit, as some Author would, if he had such fine en∣gles as we. Well, tic but our hard fortune.
Nay, crack, be not disheartened.
Not I, sir, but if you please to confer with our Author, by attur∣ney, you may, sir: our proper self here, stands for him.
Troth, I have no such serious affair to negotiate with him, but what may very safely bee turned upon thy trust. It is in the general be∣half of this fair society here, that I am to speak, at least the more iudici∣os part of it, which seems much distasted with the immodest and obe∣scene writing of many, in their plays. Besides, they could wish, your Poets would leave to bee promoters of other men's jests, and to way-lay all the stale apophthegms, or old books, they can hear of (in print, or other∣wise) to farce their Scenes withal. That they would not so penuriously glean wit, from every laundress, or hackney-man, or derive their best grace (with servile imitation) from common stages, or observation of the company they converse with; as if their invention lived wholly upon ano∣there mans trencher. Again, that feeding their friends with nothing of their own, but what they have twice or thrice cooked, they should not want only give out, how soon they had dressed it; nor how many coaches came to carry away the broken-meat, besides hobbie-horses, and foot∣cloth nags.
So, sir, this is all the reformation you seek?
It is: doe not you think it necessary to be practised, my little wag?
Yes, where any such ill-habited custom is received.
O (I had almost forgot it too) they say, the vmbrae, or ghosts of some three or four plays, departed a dozen years since, have bin seen walking on your stage here: take heed, boy, if your house bee haunted with such hob-goblins, t'will fright away all your spectators quickly.
Good, sir, but what will you say now, if a Poet (untouched with any breath of this disease) find the tokens upon you, that are of the auditory? As some one ciuet-wit among you, that knows no other learning, then the price of satin and valets; nor other perfection, then the wearing of a neat suit; and yet will censure as desperately as the most professed cri∣tique in the house: presuming, his clothes should bear him out in it. Ano∣there (whom it hath pleased nature to furnish with more beard, then brain) prunes his mustaccio, lisps, and (with some score of affected oaths) swears down all that sit about him; That the old Hieronimo, (as it was first acted) was the only best, and judiciously pend play of Europe. A third great∣bellied juggler talks of twenty years since, and when MONSIEVR was here, and would enforce all wits to bee of that fashion, because his dou∣blet is still so. A fourth miscals all by the name of fustian, that his groan∣ded capacity cannot aspire to. A fifth, only shakes his bottle-head, and out of his cork brain, squeezeth out a pittiful-learned face, and is silent.
By my faith, Jack, you have put me down: I would I knew how to get off with any indifferent grace. Here, take your cloak, and promise some satisfaction in your Prologue, or (I'll be sworn) wee have marred all.
Tut, fear not, child, this will never distaste a true sense: Be not out, and good enough. I would thou had some sugar-candied, to sweeten thy mouth.
IF gracious silence, sweet attention,
Quick sight, and quicker apprehension,
(The lights of judgements throne) shine any where;
Our doubtful author hopes this is their sphere.
And therefore opens he himself to those;
To other weaker beams, his labours close:
As loath to prostitute their virgin strain,
To every vulgar, and adult'rate brain.
In this alone, his MVSE her sweetness hath,
She shuns the print of any beaten path;
And proves new ways to come to learned ears:
Pied ignorance she neither loves, nor fears.
Nor hunts she after popular applause,
Or some praise, that drops from common jaws:
The garland that she wears, their hands must twine,
Who can both censure, understand, define
What merit is: Then cast those piercing rays,
Round as a crown, in stead of honoured baize,
About his poesy; which (he knows) affords
Words, aboue action: matter, aboue words.
WHo goes there?
Tic I, blind archer.
Who? MERCVRIE?
I.
Farewell.
Stay, CUPID.
Not in your company, HELMES, except your hands were ri∣•etted at your back.
Why so my little rower?
Because I know, you have not a finger, but is as long as my queen∣for (cousin MERCVRIE) when you please to extend it.
Whence derive you this speech, boy?
O! tic your best polity to be ignorant. You did never steal MARS his sword out of the sheath, you? nor NEPTVNES trident? nor APOLLOES how? no, not you? Alas, your palms (IVPITER knows) they are as tender as the foot of a foundered nag, or a ladies face new mercuried, the'ile touch nothing.
Go too (infant) you'll be daring still.
Daring? O IANVS! what a word is there? why, my light fe∣ther-heel'd couss', what are you? any more then my uncle IOVES pander, a lackey, that runs on errands for him, and can whisper a light mes∣sage to a loose wench with some round volubility, wait mannerly at a ta∣ble with a trencher, and warble upon a crowd a little, fill out nectar, when Ganimed's away, one that sweeps the Gods drinking room every morning, and sets the cushions in order again, which they threw one at another headouer-night, can brush the carpets, call the stools again to their places, play the crier of the court with an audible voice, and take state of a President upon you at wrestlings, pleadings, negotiations, &amp;c. Here's the catalogue of your imploiments now. O no, I err, you have the marshaling of all the ghosts too, that pass the stygian ferry, and I suspect you for a share with the old sculler there, if the truth were known;
but let that scope. One other peculiar virtue you possess, in lifting, or lieger-du-maine, (which few of the house of heaven have else besides) I must confess. But (me thinks) that should not make you put that ex∣treme distance twixt your self and others, that we should be said to over∣dare in speaking to your nimble deity? So HERCVLES might challenge priority of vs both, because he can throw the bar farther, or lift more joined stools at the arms end, then we. If this might carry it, then wee who have made the whole body of divinity tremble at the twang of our bow, and enforced SATVRNIVS himself to lay by his curled front, thun∣der, and three-fork'd fires, and put on a masking suit, too light for a re∣ueller of eighteen, to be seen in—
How now! my dancing braggart in d•cimo sexto! charm your skipping tongue, or I'll—
What? use the virtue of your snaky tip-staffe there upon vs?
No, boy, but the smart vigour of my palm about your ears. You have forgot since I took your heals up into air (on the very hour I was borne) in sight of all the bench of deities, when the siluerroofe of the Olympi• palace rung again with applause of the fact.
O no, I remember it freshly, and by a particular instance; for my mother VENVS (at the same time) but stooped to embrace you, and (to speak by metaphor) you borrowed a girdle of hers, as you did IOVES sceptre (while hee was laughing) and would have done his thunder too, but that it was too hot for your itching fingers.
Tic well, sir.
I heard, you but looked in at VULCANS forge the other day, and entreated a pair of his new tongs along with you, for company: Tic joy on you (in faith) that you will keep your hooked talons in practice with any thing. Slight, now you are on earth, wee shall have you silch spoons and candle-s•icks, rather then fail: pray JOVE the perfumed cour∣tiers keep their casting-bottles, pick-toothes, and shittle-cocks from you; or our more ordinary gallants their tabacco-boxes, for I am strangely iea∣lous of your nails.
Ne'er trust me, CUPID, but you are turned a most acute gallant of late, the edge of my wit is clear taken off with the f••e and subtle
stroke of your thin-ground tongue, you fight with too poignant a phrase, for me to deal with.
O HARMS, your craft cannot make me confident. I know my own steel to bee almost spent, and therefore entreat my peace with you, in time: you are too cunning for me to encounter at length▪ and I think it my safest ward to close.
Well, for once, I'll suffer you to win upon me, wag, but use not these strains too often, they'll stretch my patience. Whither might you march, now?
Faith (to recover thy good thoughts) I'll discover my whole project. The Huntress, and Queen of these groves, DIANA (in regard
of some black and envious slanders hourly breathed against her, for her divine justice on ACTION, as she pretends) hath here in the vale of Gar∣gaphy, proclaimed a solemn revels, which (her god-head put off) she will descend to grace, with the full and royal expense of one of her clee∣rest moons: In which time, it shall bee lawful for all sorts of ingenuous persons, to visit her palace, to court her NYMPHS, to exercise all variety of generous and noble pastimes, as well to intimate how far she treads such malicious imputations beneath her, as also to show how clear her beauties are from the least wrinkle of austerity, they may be charged with.
But, what is all this to CUPID?
Here doe I mean to put off the title of a god, and take the ha∣bite of a page, in which disguise (during the interim of these revels) I will get to follow some one of DIANAES maids, where (if my bow hold, and my shafts fly but with half the willingness, and aim they are dire∣cted) I doubt not, but I shall really redeem the minutes I have lost, by their so long and ouer-nice proscription of my deity, from their court.
Pursue it (divine CUPID) it will be rare.
But will HARMS second me?
I am now to put in act, an especial designement from my fa∣there JOVE, but that performed, I am for any fresh action that offers it self.
Well, then we part.
Farewell, good wag.
Now, to my charge, ECHO, fair ECHO, speak,
Tic MERCVRIE, that calls thee, sorrowful Nymph,
Salute me with thy repercussiue voice,
That I may know what cavern of the earth
Contains thy airy spirit, how, or where
I may direct my speech, that thou moist hear.
HEre.
So nigh?
I.
Know (gentle soul) then, I am sent from JOVE,
Who (pitying the sad burden of thy woes,
Still growing on thee, in thy want of words,
To vent thy passion for NARCISSVS death)
Commands, that now (after three thousand years,
Which have been exercised in IVNOES spite)
Thou take a corporal figure, and ascend,
Enriched with vocal, and articulate power.
Make haste, sad Nymph, thrice shall my winged rod
Strike th'obsequious earth, to give thee way.
Arise, and speak thy sorrows, ECHO, rise,
Here, by this fountain, where thy love did pine,
Whose memory lives fresh to vulgar fame,
Shrin'd in this yellow flower, that bears his name.
His name revives, and lifts me up from earth.
O, which way shall I first convert my self?
Or in what mood shall I assay to speak,
That (in a moment) I may be delivered
Of the prodigious grief I go withal?
See, see, the mourning fount, whose springs weep yet,
The untimely fate of that too beauteous boy,
That trophy of selfe-loue, and spoil of nature,
Who (now transformed into this drooping flower)
Hangs the repentant head, back from the stream,
As if it wished, would I had never looked
In such a flattering mirror. O NARCISSVS,
Thou that wast once (and yet art) my NARCISSVS;
Had ECHO but been private with thy thoughts,
She would have dropped away her self in tears,
Till she had all turned water, that in her,
(As in a 〈◊〉 glass) thou might have gazed,
And seen thy beauties by more kind reflection:
But selfe-loue never yet could look on truth,
But with bleared beams; •leek flattery and she
Are twin borne sisters, and so mix their eyes,
As if you se•er one, the other dies.
Why did the gods give thee a heavenly form,
And earthy thoughts, to make thee proud of it?
Why, doe I ask? Tic now the known disease
That beauty hath, to bear too deep a sense
Of her own selfe-conceiued excellence.
O, had thou known the worth of heavens rich gift,
Thou would have turned it to a truer use,
And not (with starved, and covetous ignorance)
P••'d in continual eyeing that bright gem,
The glance whereof to others had been more,
Then to thy famished mind the wide worlds store:
"So wretched is it to be merely rich.
Witness thy youths dear sweets, here spent untasted,
Like a fair taper, with his own flame wasted.
ECHO, be brief, SATVRNIA is abroad,
And if she hear, sheele storm at IOVES high will.
I will (kind MERCVRIE) be brief as time.
Vouchsafe me, I may doe him these last rites,
But kiss his flower, and sing some mourning strain
Over his watery hearse.
Thou dost obtain.
I were no son to JOVE, should I deny thee.
Begin, and (more to grace thy cunning voice)
The humorous air shall mix her solemn tunes,
With thy sad words: strike music from the spheres,
And with your golden raptures swell our ears.
SLow, slow, fresh fount, keep time with my salt tears;
Yet slower, yet, • faintly gentle springs:
List to the heavy part the musique bears,
"Woe weeps out her division, when she sings.
Droop herbs, and flowers;
Fall grief in showers;
"Our beauties are not ours:
O, I could still
(Like melting snow upon some craggy hill,)
drop, drop, drop, drop,
Since natures pride is, now, a withered daffodil.
Now, have you done?
Done presently (good HARMS) bide a little,
Suffer my thirsty eye to gaze a while,
But e'ene to taste the place, and I am vanished.
Forgo thy use, and liberty of tongue,
And thou moist dwell on earth, and sport thee there.
Here young ACTION fell, pursued, and torn
By CYNTHIA'S wrath (more eager, then his hounds)
And here, (ay me, the place is fatal) see
The weeping NIOBE, translated hither
From Phrygian mountains: and by PHoeBE reared
As the proud trophy of her sharpe revenge.
Nay, but hear.
But here, O here, the Fountain of selfe-Loue,
In which LATONA, and her careless Nymphs,
(Regardless of my sorrows) bathe themselves
In hourly pleasures.
Stint thy babbling tongue;
Fond ECHO, thou prophan'st the grace is done thee:
So idle worldlings (merely made of voice)
Censure the powers aboue them. Come, away,
JOVE calls thee hence, and his will brookes no stay.
O, stay: I have but one poor thought to clothe
In airy garments, and then (faith) I go.
Henceforth, thou treacherous, and murdering spring,
Be ever called the Fountain of selfe-Loue:
And with thy water let this curse remain,
(As an inseparate plague) that who but tastes
A drop thereof, may, with the instant touch,
Grow dotingly enamoured on themselves.
Now, HARMS, I have finished.
Then thy speech,
Must here forsake thee, ECHO, and thy voice
(As it was wont) rebound but the last words.
Farewell.
Well.
Now, CUPID, I am for you, and your mirth,
To make me light before I leave the earth.
Dear spark of beauty, make not so fast away.
Away.
Stay, let me observe this portent yet.
I am neither your Minotaure, nor your Centaur, nor your Sa∣tyre, nor your Hyena, nor your Babion, but your mere travailer, believe me.
Leave me.
I guessed it should bee some travailing motion pursued EC∣CHO so.
Know you from whom you fly? or whence?
Hence.
This is somewhat aboue strange! a Nymph of her feature, and lineament, to be so preposterously rude! well, I will but cool my self at you' spring, and follow her.
Nay, then I am familiar with the issue: I'll leave you too.
I am a Rhinoceros, if I had thought a creature of her symmetry, could have dared so improportionable, and abrupt a digression. Liberal, and divine fount, suffer my profane hand to take of thy bounties. By the purity of my taste, here is most ambrosiacke water; I will sup of it a∣gain. By thy favour, sweet fount. See, the water (a more running, sub∣tile, and humorous Nymph then she) permits me to touch, and handle her. What should I infer? If my behaviours had been of a cheap or customary garb; my accent, or phrase vulgar; my garments trite; my countenance illiterate; or unpractised in the encounter of a beautiful and braue-attir'd piece; then I might (with some change of colour) have suspected my faculties: but (knowing my self an offence so sublimated, and refined by travel; of so studied, and well exercised a gesture; so alone in fashion; able to tender the face of any states-man living; and to speak the mere extraction of language; one that hath now made the sixth re∣turn upon venture; and was your first that ever enriched his country with the true laws of the duello; whose optiques have drunk the spirit of beau∣tie, in some eight score and eighteen Princes courts, where I have resided,
and been there fortunate in the amours of three hundred forty and five ladies (all nobly, if not princely descended) whose names I have in cata∣logue; to conclude, in all so happy, as even admiration her self doth seem to fasten her kisses upon me: Certes, I doe neither see, nor feel, nor taste, nor savour the least steam, or fume of a reason, that should inuit this foolish fastidious Nymph, so peevishly to abandon me. Well, let the memory of her fleet into air; my thoughts and I am for this other eel∣meant, water.
WHat! the wel-dieted AMORPHVS become a water-drinker? I see he means not to write verses then.
No, CRITIC? why?
Because—Nec placer dive, nec viuere carmine possunt, quae scri∣buntur aqua potoribus.
What say you to your HELICON?
O, the MVSES well! that's ever excepted.
Sir, your MVSES have no such water, I assure you; your no∣ctar, or the juice of your nepenthe is nothing to it; tic aboue your methe∣glen, believe it.
Metheglin! what's that, sir? may I be so audacious to demand?
A kind of greek wine I have met with, sir, in my travails: it is the same that DEMOSTHENES usually drunk, in the composure of all his exquisite, and mellifluous orations.
That's to be argued (AMORPHVS) if we may credit LVCIAN, who in his Eucomio Demosthenis affirms, hee never drunk but water in a∣ny of his compositions.
LVCIAN is absurd, he knew nothing: I will believe mine own travails, before all the LVCIANS of Europe. He doth feed you with sittons, figments, and losings.
Indeed (I think) next a travailer, he do's prettily well.
I assure you it was wine, I have tasted it, and from the hand of an Italian Antiquary, who derives it authentically from the Duke of Fer∣rara's bottles. How name you the gentleman you are in rank with there, sir?
Tic ASOTVS, son to the late deceased PHILARGYRVS the citizen.
Was his father of any eminent place, or means?
He was to have been Praetor next year.
Ha! A pretty formal young gallant, in good sooth: pity, he is not more gently propagated. Hark you, CRITIC, you may say to him, what I am, if you please: though I affect not popularity, yet I would be loath to stand out to any, whom you shall vouchsafe to call friend.
Sir, I fear I may doe wrong to your sufficiencies in the repor∣ting them, by forgetting or misplacing some one; your self can best en∣form him of your self, sir: except you had some catalogue, or list of your faculties ready drawn, which you would request me to show him, for you, and him to take notice of.
This CRITIC is sour: I will think, sir.
Doe so, sir. O heaven! that any thing (in the likeness of man) should suffer these racked extremities, for the uttering of his sophisticate good parts.
CRITIC, I have a suit to you; but you must not deny me: pray you make this gentleman and I friends.
Friends! Why? is there any difference between you?
No, I mean acquaintance, to know one another.
O, now I apprehend you; your phrase was without me, before▪
In good faith, hoe's a most excellent rare man, I warrant him!
Slight, they are mutually enamoured by this time!
Will you, sweet CRITIC?
Yes, yes.
Nay, but when? you'll defer it now, and forget it.
Why, is it a thing of such present necessity, that it requires so violent a dispatch?
No, but (would I might never stir) hoe's a most ravishing man! good CRITIC, you shall endear me to you, in good faith-law.
Well, your longing shall be satisfied, sir.
And withal, you may tell him what my father was, and how well he left me, and that I am his heir.
Leave it to me, I'll forget none of your dear graces, I war∣rant you.
Nay, I know you can better marshall these affairs then I can— O gods▪ I'd give all the world (if I had it) for abundance of such ac∣quaintance.
What ridiculous circumstance might I devise now, to bestow this reciprocal brace of butter-flies one upon another?
Since I trod on this side the Alps, I was not so frozen in my invention. Let me see: to accost him with some choice remnant of spa∣nish, or italian? that would indifferently express my languages now: ma∣ridden, if he should fall out to be ignorant, it were both hard, and harsh. How else? step into some ragioni del stato, and so make my induction? that were aboue him too; and out of his element, I fear. Fine to have seen him in Venice, or Padua? or some face near his in similitude? it is too poin∣ted, and open. No, it must be a more quaint, and collateral device. As— stay: to frame some encomiastick speech upon this our Metropolis, or the wise magistrates thereof, in which politic number, it is odds, but his fa∣there filled up a room? descend into a particular admiration of their in∣stice; for the due measuring of coals, burning of cannes, and such like?
As also their religion, in pulling down a superstitious cross, and aduan∣cing a VENVS, or PRIAPVS, in place of it? ha? twill doe well. Or to talk of some hospital, whose walls record his father a Benefactor? or of so many buckets bestowed on his parish church, in his life time, with his name at length (for want of arms) tricked upon them? Any of these? Or to praise the cleanness of the street, wherein hee dwelt? or the prove∣dent painting of his posts against hee should have been Praetor? or (lea∣uing his parent) come to some special ornament about himself, as his rapier, or some other of his accoutrements? I have it: Thanks, gracious MINERVA.
Would I had but once spoke to him, and then—Hee comes to me.
It is a most curious, and neatly-wrought band, this same, as I have scene, sir.
O god, sir.
You forgive the humour of mine eye, in observing it.
His eye waters after it, it seems.
O lord, sir, there needs no such apology, I assure you.
I am anticipated: they'll make a solemn deed of gift of them∣selves, you shall see.
Your ribbon too do's most gracefully, in troth.
Tic the most gentile, and received wear now, sir.
Believe me, sir (I speak it not to humour you) I have not seen a young gentleman (generally) put on his clothes, with more judgment.
O, tic your pleasure to say so, sir.
No, as I am virtuous (being altogether vn-trauel'd) it strikes me into wonder.
I doe purpose to travail, sir, at spring.
I think I shall affect you, sir. This last speech of yours hath begun to make you dear to me.
O god, sir. I would there were anything in me, sir, that might appear worthy the least worthiness of your worth, sir. I protest, sir, I should endeavour to show it, sir, with more then common regard, sir.
O, here's rare motley, sir.
Both your desert, and your endeavours are plentiful, suspect them not: but your sweet disposition to travail (I assure you) hath made you another myself in mine eye, and struck me enamoured on your beauties.
I would I were the fairest lady of France for your sake, sir, and yet I would travail too.
O, you should digress from your self else: for (believe it) your travail is your only thing that rectifies, or (as the Italian says) vi rendi pronto all' attioni, makes you fit for action.
I think it be great charge though, sir.
Charge? why tic nothing for a gentleman that goes private, as your self, or so; my intelligence shall quit my charge at all times. Good faith, this hat hath possessed mine eye exceedingly; tic so pretty, and fanta∣strike: what? first a beaver?
I, sir, Isle assure you tic a beaver, it cost me eight crowns but this morning.
After your French account?
Yes, sir.
And so near his head? beshrow me, dangerous.
A very pretty fashion (believe me) and a most novel kind of trim: your band is conceited too!
Sir, it is all at your service.
O, pardon me.
I beseech you, sir, if you please to wear it, you shall doe me a most infinite grace.
Slight, will he be praised out of his clothes?
By heaven, sir, I doe not offer it you after the Italian manner; I would you should conceive so of me.
Sir, I shall fear to appear rude in denying your courtesies, especially, being invited by so proper a distinction: may I pray your name, sir?
My name is ASOTVS, sir.
I take your love (gentle ASOTVS) but let me win you to re∣ceiue this, in exchange—
'Hart, they'll change doublets anon.
And (from this time) esteem your self, in the first rank, of those few, whom I profess to love. What make you in company of this scholar, here? I will bring you known to gallants, as ANAIDES of the ordinary, HEDON the courtier, and others, whose society shall render you graced, and respected: this is a trivial fellow, too mean, too cheap, too course for you to converse with.
Slid, this is not worth a crown, and mine cost me eight but this morning.
I looked when he would repent him, he he's begun to bee sad a good while.
Sir, shall I say to you for that hat? be not so sad, be not so sad: it is are lique I could not so easily have departed with, but as the hierogly∣phicke of my affection; you shall alter it to what form you please, it will take any block; I have received it varied (on record) to the three thou∣sandth time, and not so sew: It hath these virtues beside; your head shall not ache under it; nor your brain leave you, without licence; It will pre∣serve your complexion to eternity; for no beam of the sun (should your wear it under Zona torrid) hath power to approach it by two ells. It is proof against thunder, and enchantment: and was given me by a great man (in Russia) as an especiall-priz'd present; and constantly affirmed
to bee the hat, that accompanied the politic VLYSSES, in his tedious, and ten years travels.
By JOVE, I will not depart withal, whosoever would give me a million.
Save you, sweet bloods: do's any of you want a creature, or a de∣pendant?
Beshrow me, a fine blunt slave!
A page of good timber? it will now bee my grace to enter∣taine him first, though I cashier him again in private: how art thou called?
COS, sir, COS.
Cos? How happily hath fortune furnished him with a whet∣stone?
I doe entertain you, COS, conceal your quality till wee be private; if your parts be worthy of me, I will countenance you; if not, catechise you: gentles, shall we go?
Stay, sir; Isle but entertain this other fellow, and then—I have a great humour to taste of this water too, but Isle come again alone for that—mark the place. What's your name, youth?
PROSAITES, sir.
PROSAITES? A very fine name, CRITIC? first not?
Yes, and a very ancient, sir, the beggar.
Follow me, good PROSAITES: Let's talk.
He will rank even with you (er't be long)
If you hold on your course. O vanity,
How are thy painted beauties doted on,
By light, and empty idiots! how pursued
With open and extended appetite!
How they doe sweat, and run themselves from breath,
Raised on their toes, to catch thy airy forms,
Still turning giddy, till they reel like drunkards,
That buy the merry madness of one hour,
With the long irk somenesse of following time!
O how despised and base a thing is a man,
If he not strive t'erect his grovelling thoughts
Aboue the strain of flesh! But how more cheap
When, even his best and understanding part,
(The crown, and strength of all his faculties)
Floats like a dead drowned body, on the stream
Of vulgar humour, mixed with commonst dregs?
I suffer for their guilt now, and my soul
(Like one that looks on il-affected eyes)
Is hurt with mere intention on their follies:
Why will I view them then? my sense might ask me:
Or first a racitie, or some new object,
That strains my strict observance to this point?
O would it were, therein I could afford
My spirit should draw a little near to theirs,
To gaze on novelties: so vice were one.
Tut, she is stale, rank, foul, and were it not
That those (that woo her) greet her with locked eyes,
(In spite of all the impostures, paintings, drugs,
Which her bawd custom daubs her cheeks withal)
She would betray her loathed and leprous face,
And •right th'enamor'd dotards from themselves:
But such is the perverseness of our nature,
That if we once but fancy levity,
(How antike and ridiculous so ere
It suit with vs) yet will our muffled thought
Choose rather not to see it, then avoid it:
And if we can but banish our own sense,
We act our mimic tricks with that free licence,
That lust, that pleasure, that security,
As if we practised in a paste-boord case,
And no one saw the motion, but the motion.
Well, check thy passion, lest it grow too loud:
"While fools are pitied, they wax fat, and proud.
WHy, this was most unexpectedly followed (by divine deli∣cate MERCVRY) by the beard of JOVE, thou art a precious deity.
Nay, CUPID, leave to speak improperly, since wee are turned cracks, let's study to be like cracks; practise their language, and behaui∣ours, and not with a dead imitation: act freely, carelessly, and caprice∣ously, as if our veins ran with quick-siluer, and not utter a phrase, but what shall come forth steeped in the very brine of conceit, and sparkle like salt in fire.
That's not every ones happiness (HARMS) though you can presume upon the easiness and dexterity of your wit, you shall give me leave to be a little jealous of mine; and not desperately to hazard it after your capering humour.
Nay, then, CUPID, I think wee must have you hood-winkt again, for you are grown too provident, since your eyes were at liberty.
Not so (MERCVRY) I am still blind CUPID to thee.
And what to the lady Nymph you serve?
Troth, page, boy, and sirha: these are all my titles.
Then thou hast not altered thy name, with thy disguise?
O, no, that had been supererogation, you shall never hear your courtier call but by one of these three.
Faith, then both our fortunes are the same.
Why? what parcel of man hast thou lighted on for a master?
Such a one (as before I begin to decipher him) I dare not af∣firm to be any thing less then a courtier. So much hee is, during this o∣pen time of revels, and would be longer, but that his means are to leave him shortly after. His name is HEDON, a gallant wholly consecrated to his pleasures.—
HEDON? he uses much to my ladies chamber, I think.
How is she called, and then I can show thee?
Madame PHILAVTIA.
O I, he affects her very particularly indeed. These are his gre∣ces. Hee doth (besides me) keep a barber, and a monkey: Hee has a rich wrought wast•coat to entertain his visitants in, with a cap almost suitable. His curtains, and bedding are thought to bee his own: his bathing-tub is not suspected. Hee loves to have a fencer, a pedant, and a musician seen in his lodging a mornings.
And not a poet?
Fie no: himself is a rimer, and that's a thought better then a poet. He is not lightly within to his mercer, no, though he come when he takes physic, which is commonly after his play. He beats a tailor very well, but a stocking-seller admirably: and so consequently any one hee owes money too, that dares not resist him. Hee never makes general in∣ui•amened, but against the publishing of a new suit, marie then, you shall have more drawn to his lodging, then come to the launching of some three ships; especially if he be furnished with supplies for the retiring of his old ward-robe from pawn: if not, he do's hire a stock of apparel, and some forty, or fifty pound in gold, for that fore-noone to show. He's thought a very necessary perfume for the presence, and for that only cause well∣come thither: six milliners shops afford you not the like sent. He courts ladies with how many great horse he hath rid that morning, or how oft he hath done the whole, or the half pommado in a seven-night before: and sometime venters so far upon the virtue of his pomander, that he dares tell'hem, how many shirts he has sweat at tennis that week, but wisely conceals so many dozen of balls hee is on the score. Here hee comes, that is all this.
BOy.
Sir.
Are any of the ladies in the presence?
None yet, sir.
Give me some gold, more.
Is that thy boy, HEDON?
I, what think thou of him?
S'hart, Il'd geld him; I warrant he has the philosophers stone.
Well said, my good melancholy devil: Sirrah, I have devised one or two of the prettiest oaths (this morning in my bed) as ever thou heard, to protest withal in the presence.
Pray thee, let's hear 'hem.
Soft, thou'lt use 'hem before me.
No (dam' me then) I have more oaths then I know how to utter, by this ayre.
Faith, one is, by the tip of your ear, sweet lady. Is it not pretty, and gentile?
Yes, for the person it is applied to, a lady. It should bee light, and—
Nay, the other is better, exceeds it much: the invention is far∣der set too. By the white valley that lies between the Alpine hills of your bosom, I protest—&amp;c.
Well, you travelled for that, HEDON.
I, in a map, where his eyes were but blind guides to his under∣standing, it seems.
And then I have a salutation will nick all, by this caper: hay!
How is that?
You know I call madame PHILAVTIA, my Honour; and she calls me her Ambition. Now, (when I meet her in the presence anon) I will come to her, and say, sweet Honour, I have hitherto contented my sense with the lilies of your hand, but now I will taste the roses of your lip; and (withal) kiss her: to which she cannot but blushingly answer, nay, now you are too am∣bitious. And then doe I reply; I cannot bee too ambitious of honour, sweet la∣die. Will it not be good? ha? ha?
O, assure your soul.
By heaven, I think twill bee excellent, and a very politic at∣chiuement of a kiss.
I have thought upon one for MORI, of a sudden too, if it take.
What is it, my dear invention?
Mary, I will come to her, (and she always wears a muff, if
you bee remembered) and I will tell her, Madame, your whole self cannot but be perfectly wise: for your hands have wit enough to keep themselves warm.
Now, (before JOVE) admirable! look, thy page takes it too, by Ph•bus, my sweet facetious rascal, I could eat water-gruell with thee a month, for this jest, my dear rogue.
O, (by HERCVLES) it is your only dish, aboue all your pot∣to's, or oyster-pyes in the world.
I have ruminated upon a most rare wish too, and the prophecy to it, but Isle have some friend to be the prophet; as thus: I doe wish my self one of my mistress Cioppini. Another demands, Why would he be one of his Mistress Cioppini? A third answers, Because he would make her higher. A fourth shall say, That will make her proud. And a fifth shall conclude: Then doe I prophecy, pride will have a fall, and he shall give it her.
I'll be your prophet. By gods so, it will be most exquisite, thou art a fine inuentious Rogue, sirrah.
Nay, and I have poesies for rings too, and riddles that they dream not of.
Tut, they'll doe that, when they come to sleep on them time e∣nough; but were thy devices never in the presence yet, HEDON?
O, no, I disdain that.
It were good we went before then, and brought them acquainted with the room where they shall act, lest the stratagems of it put them out of countenance, when they should come forth.
Is that a courtier too?
Troth no; he has two essential parts of the courtier, pride, and ignorance; mary, the rest come somewhat after the ordinary gallant. Tic impudence it self, ANAIDES; one, that speaks all that comes in his checks, and will blush no more then a sackbut. Hee lightly occupies the easters room at the table, and keeps laughter GELAIA (a wench in pages attire) following him in place of a squire, whom he now and then tickles with some strange ridiculous stuff, uttered (as his land came to him) by chance. He will censure or discourse of any thing, but as absurdly as you would wish. His fashion is not to take knowledge of him that is beneath him in clothes. Hee never drinks below the salt. Hee do's naturally ad∣mire his wit, that wears gold-lace, or tissue. Stabs any man that speaks more contemptibly of the scholar then he. Hee is a great proficient in all the illiberal sciences, as cheating, drinking, swaggering, whoring, and such like: never kneels but to pledge healths; nor prays but for a pipe of pudding tobacco. He will blaspheme in his shirt. The oaths which hee vomits at one supper, would maintain a town of garrison in good sue∣ring a twelvemonth. One other genuine quality he has, which crowns all these, and that is this: to a friend in want, hee will not depart with the weight of a soldred great, lest the world might censure him prodigal, or report him a gull: mary, to his cockatrice or punquetto, half a dozen taffeta
gowns, or satin kirtles, in a pair or two of months, why they are nothing.
I commend him, he is one of my clients.
COme, sir. You are now within in regard of the presence, and see, the privacy of this room, how sweetly it offers it self to our re∣tired intendments. Page, cast a vigilant, and enquiring eye about, that we be not rudely surprised, by the approach of some ruder stranger.
I warrant you, sir. I'll tell your when the wolf enters, fear nothing.
O, what a mass of benefit shall we possess, in being the envy∣sible spectators of this strange show, now to be acted?
Plant your self there, sir: and observe me. You shall now, as well be the ocular, as the eare-witnesse, how clearly I can refill that para∣dox, or rather pseudodox, of those, which hold the face to be the index of the mind, which (I assure you) is not so, in any politic creature: for in∣stance. I will now give you the particular, and distinct face of every your most noted species of persons, as your merchant, your scholar, your soul∣dier, your lawyer, courtier, &amp;c. and each of these so truly, as you would swear, but that your eye shall see the variation of the lineament, it were my most proper, and genuine aspect. First, for your merchant, or citie-face, it is thus, a dull, plodding face, still looking in a direct line, forward: there is no great matter in this face. Then have you your students, or a∣cademique face, which is here, an honest, simple, and methodical face: but somewhat more spread then the former. The third is your soldiers face, a menacing, and astounding face, that looks broad, and big: the grace of this face consists much in a beard. The anti-face to this, is your lawyers face, a contracted, subtle, and intricate face, full of quirks, and turnings, a labyrinthaean face, now angularly, now circularly, every way aspected. Next is your statists face, a serious, solemn, and supercilious face, full of formal, and square gravity, the eye (for the most part) deep∣lie and artificially shadowed: there is great judgment required in the ma∣king of this face. But now, to come to your face of faces, or courtiers face, tic of three sorts, according to our subdiuision of a courtier, elementary, practique, and theoric. Your courtier theoric, is hee, that hath are∣riu'd to his fardest, and doth now know the court, rather by speculation, then practice; and this is his face: a fastidious and oblique face, that looks, as it went with a vice, and were screwed thus. Your courtier pra∣ctike, is he, that is yet in his path, his course, his way, &amp; hath not touched the puntilio, or point of his hopes; his face is here: a most promising, open,
smooth, and ouer-flowing face, that seems as it would run, and power it self into you. Somewhat a northerly face. Your courtier elementary, is one but newly entered, or as it were in the alphabet, or vt-re-mi-fa-sol-la of courtship. Note well this face, for it is this you must practice.
Isle practice 'hem all, if you please, sir.
I, hereafter you may: and it will not be altogether an vngrate∣full study. For, let your soul be assured of this (in any rank, or profess∣on what-euer) the more general, or mayor part of opinion goes with the face, and (simply) respects nothing else. Therefore, if that can be made exactly, curiously, exquisitely, thoroughly, it is enough: But (for the pre∣sent) you shall only apply your self to this face of the elementary cour∣tier, a light, revelling, and protesting face, now blushing, now smiling, which you may help much with a wanton wagging of your head, thus, (a feather will teach you) or with kissing your •inger that hath the ruby, or playing with some string of your band, which is a most quaint kind of melancholy besides: or (if among ladies) laughing loud, and crying up your own wit, though perhaps borrowed, it is not amiss. Where is your page? call for your casting-bottle, and place your mirror in your hat, as I told you: so. Come, look not pale, observe me, set your face, and enter.
O, for some excellent painter, to have tan the copy of all these faces!
PROSAITES.
Fie, I premonisht you of that: In the court, boy, lackey, or sirrah.
Master, Lupus in— O, it is PROSAITES.
Sirrha prepare my casting-bottle, I think I must be enforced to purchase me another page, you see how at hand COS waits, here.
So will he too, in time.
What's he, MERCVRIE?
A notable smelt. One, that hath newly entertained the beggar to follow him, but cannot get him to wait near enough. It is ASOTVS, the heir of PHILARGYRVS; but first I'll give ye the others character, which may make his the clearer. He that is with him, is AMORPHVS, a travailer, one so made out of the mixture and shreds of forms, that himself is truly deform•d. He walks most commonly with a clove, or pick-tooth in his mouth, hee is the very mint of complement, all his be∣hauiours are printed, his face is another volume of essays; and his beard an Aristarchus. He speaks all cream, skimd, and more affected then a dozen of waiting women. He is his own promoter in every place. The wife of the ordinary gives him his diet, to maintain her table in discourse, which (indeed) is a mere tyranny over her other guests, for hee will v∣surpe all the talk: ten constables are not so tedious. He is no great shifter, once a year his apparel is ready to revolt. He doth use much to arbitrate quarrels, and fights himself, exceeding well (out at a window.) He will
lye cheaper then any beggar, and louder then most clocks: for which he is right properly accommodated to the whetstone, his page. The other gal∣lant is his Zani, and doth most of these tricks after him; sweates to imi∣tate him in every thing (to a hair) except a beard, which is not yet ex∣tant. He doth learn to make strange sauces, to eat aenchouies, maccaroni, by∣uoli, fagioli, and cauiare, because hee loves 'hem; speaks as hee speaks, looks, walks, goes so in clothes, and fashion: is in all, as if he were mole∣ded of him. Mary (before they met) he had other very pretty sufficien∣cies, which yet he retains some light impression of: as frequenting a dan∣cing school, and grievously torturing strangers, with inquisition after his grace in his galliard. He buys a fresh acquaintance at any rate. His eye and his raiment confer much together as he goes in the street. He treads nicely, like the fellow that walks upon ropes; especially the first sunday of his silke-stockings: and when he is most neat, and new, you shall strip him with commendations.
Here comes another.
I, but one of another strain, CUPID: This fellow weighs somewhat.
His name, HARMS?
CRITIC. A creature of a most perfect and divine temper. One, in whom the humours and elements are peaceably met, without emulate∣on of precedence: he is neither to phantastikely melancholy, too slowly phlegmatic, too lightly sanguine, or too rashly choleric, but in all, so composde &amp; ordered, as it is clear, Nature went about some full work, she did more then make a man, when she made him. His discourse is like his behaviour, vncommon, but not unpleasing; hee is prodigal of ney∣there. Hee strives rather to bee that which men call judicious, then to bee thought so: and is so truly learned, that he affects not to show it. Hee will think, and speak his thought, both freely: but as distant from deprauing another mans merit, as proclaiming his own. For his valour, tic such, that he dares as little to offer an injury, as receive one. In sum, he hath a most ingenuous and sweet spirit, a sharp and seasoned wit, a straight judge∣meant, and a strong mind. Fortune could never break him, nor make him less. He counts it his pleasure, to despise pleasures, and is more delighted with good deeds, then goods. It is a competencie to him that hee can bee virtuous. He doth neither covet nor fear; hee hath too much reason to doe either: and that commends all things to him.
Not better then MERCVRY commends him.
O, CUPID, tic beyond my deity to give him his due praises: I could leave my place in heaven, to live among mortals, so I were sure to be no other then he.
S'light, I believe he is your minion, you seem to be so ravished with him.
He's one, I would not have a wry thought darted against, will∣lingly.
No, but a straight shaft in his bosom, Isle promise him, if I am CITHEREAS son.
Shall we go, CUPID?
Stay, and see the ladies now: they'll come presently. Isle help to paint them.
What! lay colour upon colour? that affords but an ill blazon.
Here comes mettle to help it, the lady ARGVRION.
Money, money.
The same. A Nymph of a most wandering and giddy deposit∣on, humorous as the air, she'll run from gallant to gallant (as they sit at primero in the presence) most strangely, and seldom stays with any. She spreads as she goes. To day you shall have her look as clear and fresh as the morning, and to morrow as melancholic as mid-night. She takes special pleasure in a close obscure lodging, and, for that cause, visits the city so often, where she has many secret true-concealing favourites. When she comes abroad, shoe's more loose and scattering then dust, and will fly from place to place, as she were rapt with a whirlwind. Your young student (for the most part) she affects not, only salutes him, and a∣way: a poet, nor a philosopher, she is hardly brought to take any notice of; no, though he be some part of an alchemist. She loves a player well, and a lawyer infinitely: but your fool aboue all. She can doe much in court for the obtaining of any suit whatsoever, no door but flies open to her, her presence is aboue a charm. The worst in her is want of keeping state, and too much descending into inferior and base offices, she's for any coorse employment you will put upon her, as to be your procurer, or pander.
Peace, CUPID, here comes more work for you, another chara∣cter or two.
STay, sweet PHILAVTIA, I'll but change my fan, and go pre∣sently.
Now (in very good serious) ladies, I will have this order reversed, the presence must be better maintained from you: a quarter past eleven, and ne'er a Nymph in prospective? beshrew my hand, there must be a reformed discipline. Is that your new ruff, sweet lady-bird? By my truth, it is most intricately rare.
Good JOVE, what reverend gentlewoman in years might this be?
This, Madam MORI, guardian of the Nymphs. One that is not now to be persuaded of her wit, she will think her self wise against all the judgements that come. A lady made all of voice, and air, talks any thing of any thing. She is like one of your ignorant Poetasters of the
time, who when they have got acquainted with a strange word, never rest till they have wrong it in, though it loosen the whole fabric of their sense.
That was pretty and sharply noted, CUPID.
She will tell you, Philosophy was a fine reveller, when she was young, and a gallant, and that then (though she say it) she was thought to be the Dame-DIDO, and HELEN of the court: As also, what a sweet dog she had this time four years, and how it was called Fortune, and that (if the sates had not cut his thread) he had been a dog to have go∣uen entertainment to any gallant in this kingdom: and, unless she had whelped it her self, she could not have loved a thing better i'this world.
O, I pray thee no more, I am full of her.
Yes (I must needs tell you) she composes a sack-posset well; and would court a young page sweetly, but that her breath is against it.
Now, her breath (or something more strong) protect me from her: the other, the other, CUPID.
O, that's my lady and mistress, Madam PHILAVTIA. She ad∣mires not her self for any one particularity, but for all: she is fair, and she knows it: she has a pretty light wit too, and she knows it: she can dance, and she knows that too: play at shuttlecock, and that too: no quality she has, but she shall take a very particular knowledge of, and most lady-like commend it to you. You shall have her at any time read you the history of her self, and very subtly run over another ladies sufficiencies, to come to her own. She has a good superficial judgment in painting; and would seem to have so in poetry. A most complete lady in the opinion of some three, beside her-selfe.
Faith, how liked you my quip to HEDON, about the garter? was it not witty?
Exceeding witty and integrate: you did so aggravate the jest withal.
And did I not dance movingly the last night?
Movingly? out of measure (in troth) sweet charge.
A happy commendation, to dance out of measure.
Save only you wanted the swim in the turn: Ô! when I was at fourteen—
Nay, that's mine own from any Nymph in the court (I am sure on it) therefore you mistake me in that, Guardian: both the swim and the trip, are properly mine, every body will affirm it, that has any judge∣meant in dancing: I assure you.
Come now, PHILAVTIA, I am for you, shall we go?
I, good PHANTASTE: What! have you changed your head-tire?
Yes faith, the other was so near the common: it had no extraor∣denariate grace; besides, I had worn it almost a day, in good troth.
I'll bee sworn, this is most excellent for the device, and rare. It is after the italian print, we looked on t'other night.
It is so: By this fan, I cannot abide any thing that savours the poor overworn cut, that has any kindred with it; I must have variety, I: this mixing in fashion I hate it worse, then to burn juniper in my cham∣ber, I protest.
And yet we cannot have a new peculiar court-tire, but these re∣tainers will have it; these Suburbe-sunday-waiters; these courtiers for high days; I know not what I should call 'hem—
O, I, they doe most pitifully imitate, but I have a tire a com∣ming (in faith) shall—
In good certain, Madam, it makes you look most heavenly; but (lay your hand on your heart) you never skinned a new beauty more prosperously in your life, nor more metaphysically: look, good lady, sweet lady, look.
Tic very clear, and well, believe me. But if you had seen mine yesterday, when t'was young, you would have— who's your Doctor, PHANTASTE?
Nay, that's counsel, PHILAVTIA, you shall pardon me: yet (I'll assure you) hoe's the most dainty, sweet, absolute rare man of the whole college. O! his very looks, his discourse, his behaviour, all hee doo's is physic, I protest.
For heavens sake, his name; good, dear PHANTASTE —
No, no, no, no, no, no, (believe me) not for a million of hey∣uens: I will not make him cheap. Fie—
There is a Nymph too, of a most curious and elaborate strain, light, all motion, an ubiquitary, she is every where, PHANTASTE—
Her very name speaks her, let her pass. But are these (CV∣BID) the stars of CYNTHIAS court? doe these Nymphs attend upon DIANA?
They are in her court (MERCVRIE) but not as stars, these never come in the presence of CYNTHIA. The Nymphs that make her train, are the divine ARETE, TIME, PHRONESIS, THAVMA, and o∣theirs of that high sort. These are privately brought in by MORI in this licentious time, against her knowledge: and (like so many meteors) will van•sh, when she appears.
COme follow me, my wags, and say as I say.
There's no riches but in rags; hey day, hey day.
You that profess this art, come away, come away,
And help to bear a part. Hey day; hey day, &amp;c.
What! those that were our fellow pages but now, so soon preferred to be yeomen of the bottles? the mystery, the mystery, good wags?
Some dyet-drinke, they have the guard of.
No, sir, we are going in quest of a strange fountain, lately found out.
By whom?
My master, or the great discoverer, AMORPHVS.
Thou hast well entitled him, COS, for hee will discover all hee knows.
I, and a little more too, when the spirit is upon him.
O, the good travailing gentleman yonder has cause such a drought in the presence, with reporting the wonders of this new water▪ that all the ladies, and gallants, lie languishing upon the rushes, like so many pounded cattle in the midst of harvest, sighing one to another, and gasping, as if each of them expected a cock from the fountain, to bee brought into his mouth: and (without we return quickly) they are all (as a youth would say) no better then a few trouts cast ashore, or a dish of eels in a sand-bagge.
Well then, you were best dispatch, and have a care of them. Come, CUPID, thou and I'll go peruse this dry wonder.
SIt, let not this dis-countenance, or dis-gallant you a whit: you must not sink under the first disaster. It is with your young grammatical courtier, as with your neophyte-player, a thing usual to bee daunted at the first presence, or enter-view: you saw, there was HEDON, and A∣NEEDS, (far more practised gallants then your self) who were both out, to comfort you. It is no disgrace, no more, then for your aduen∣trous reveller, to fall by some in-auspicious chance in his galliard, or for some subtle politic, to vnder-take the bastinado, that the state might think worthily of him, and respect him as a man well beaten to the world. What! hath your taylor provided the property (wee spake of) at your chamber, or no?
I think he has.
Nay (I entreat you) be not so flat, and melancholic. Erect your mind: you shall redeem this with the courtship I will teach you a∣against afternoon. Where eat you to day?
Where you please, sir, any where, I.
Come, let vs go and taste some light dinner, a dish of sliced c•uiare, or so, and after, you shall practise an hour at your lodging, some
few forms that I have recalled. If you had but so far gathered your spy∣ritz to you, as to have taken up a rush (when you were out) and wagg'd it thus, or clensd your teeth with it: or but turned aside, and feigned some bu∣sinesse to whisper with your page, till you had recovered your self, or but found some slight stain in your stocking, or any other pretty invention (so it had been sudden,) you might have come off with a most clear, and courtly grace.
A poison of all, I think I was forespoke, I.
No, I must tell you, you are not audacious enough, you must frequent ordinaries, a month more, to initiate your self: In which time, it will not bee amiss, if (in private) you keep good your acquaintance with CRITIC, or some other, of his poor coat; visit his lodging se∣cretly, and often: become an earnest suitor to hear some of his labours.
O JOVE! sir, I could never get him to read a line to me.
You must then wisely mix your self in rank, with such, as you know can; and, as your ears doe meet with a new phrase, or an a∣cute jest, take it in: a quick nimble memory will lift it away, and, at your next public meal, it is your own.
But I shall never utter it perfectly, sir.
No matter, let it come lame. In ordinary talk you shall play it away, as you doe your light crowns at primero: It will pass.
I shall attempt, sir.
Doe. It is your shifting age for wit, and I assure you, men must bee prudent. After this, you may to court, and there fall in, first with the wayting-woman, then with the lady. Put case they doe retain you there, as a fit property, to hire coaches some pair of months, or so; or to read them asleep in afternoons upon some pretty pamphlet, to breathe you; why, it shall in time embolden you to some farther archivement: In the interim, you may fashion your self to bee careless, and impu∣dent.—
How if they would have me to make verses? I heard Hedon spoke to for some.
Why, you must prove the aptitude of your Genius; if you find none, you must harken out a vein, and buy: provided you pay for the silence, as for the work. Then you may securely call it your own.
Yes, and I'll give out my acquaintance with all the best writers, to countenance me the more.
Rather seem not to know 'hem, it is your best. I. Be wise, that you never so much as mention the name of one, nor remember it menti∣on it, but if they be offered to you in discourse, shake your light head, make between a sad and a smiling face, pity some, rail at all, and commend your self: 't is your only safe, and unsuspected course. Come, you shall look back upon the court again to day, and be restored to your colours: I doe now partly aim at the cause of your repulse— (which was ominous indeed) for as you enter at the door, there is opposed to you the
frame of a woolfe in the hangings, which (surprising your eye suddenly) gave a false alarm to the heart; and that was it called your blood out of your face, and so routed the whole rank of your spirits: I beseech you labour to forget it. And remember (as I inculcated to you before, for your comfort) HEDON, and ANAIDES.
HArt, was there ever so prosperous an invention thus unluckily perverted, and spoiled by a whore-sonne booke-worme, a candle-waster?
Nay, be not impatient, HEDON.
S'light, I would fine know his name.
Hang him, poor grogran-rascall, pray thee think not of him: I'll send for him to my lodging, and have him blanketed when thou wilt, man.
By gods so; I would thou coldest. Look, here hee comes. Laugh at him, laugh at him, ha, ha, ha.
Faugh, he smells all lamp-oyle, with studying by candle-light.
How confidently he went by vs, and carelessly! never moved! nor stirred at any thing! did you observe him?
I, a pox on him, let him go, dormouse: he is in a dream now. He has no other time to sleep, but thus, when hee walks abroad, to take the ayre.
Gods precious, this afflicts me more then all the rest, that wee should so particularly direct our hate, and contempt against him, and hee to carry it thus without wound, or passion! it is insufferable.
S'lid, (my dear envy) if thou but say the word now, Isle un∣doe him eternally for thee.
How, sweet ANAIDES?
Mary half a score of vs get him in (one night) and make him pawn his wit for a supper.
Away, thou hast such unseasonable jests. By this heaven, I won∣der at nothing more then our gentlemen-vshers, that will suffer a piece of serge, or perpetuana, to come into the presence: me thinks they should (out of their experience) better distinguish the silken disposition of cour∣tiers, then to let such terrible coorse rags mix with vs, able to fret any smooth or gentile society to the threads with their rubbing devices.
Unless it were Lent, Ember weeks, or Fasting days, when the place is most penuriously empty of all other good outsides. Dam' me, if I should adventure on his company once more, without a suit of buff, to defend my wit; he does nothing but stab the slave: how mischievously he crossed thy device of the prophecy there? And MORI, she comes without her muff too, and there my invention was lost.
Well, I am resolved what Isle doe.
What, my good spirituous spark?
Mary, speak all the venom I can of him; and poison his re∣putation in every place, where I come.
Before god, most courtly.
And if I chance to bee present where any question is made of his sufficiencies, or of any thing he hath done private, or public, Isle cen∣sure it slightly, and ridiculously.—
At any hand beware of that, so thou moist draw thine own judgment in suspect. No, Isle instruct thee what thou shalt doe, and by a safer means: Approve any thing thou hear of his, to the received open∣neon of it; but if it bee extraordinary, give it from him to some other, whom thou more particularly affect'st. That's the way to plague him, and he shall never come to defend himself. S'lud, Isle give out, all he does is di∣ctated from other men, and swear it too (if thou'lt ha'mee) and that I know the time, and place where he stole it, though my soul bee guilty of no such thing; and that I think, out of my heart, hee hates such barren shifts: yet to doe thee a pleasure, and him a disgrace, I'll dam'my self, or doe any thing.
Gramercies, my dear devil: weal put it seriously in practice, ysaith.
DOe, good detraction, doe, and I the while
Shall shake thy spite off with a careless smile.
Poor piteous gallants! What lean idle sleights
Their thoughts suggest to flatter their starved hopes?
As if I knew not how to entertain
These straw-deuices: but, of force, must yield
To the weak stroke of their calumnious tongues.
What should I care what every dor doth buzz
In credulous cares? it is a crown to me,
That the best judgements can report me wronged;
Them liars; and their slanders impudent.
Perhaps (upon the rumour of their speeches)
Some grieved friend will whisper to me, CRITIC,
Men speak ill of thee; so they be ill men,
If they spake worse, it were better: for of such
To be dispraised, is the most perfect praise.
What can his censure hurt me, whom the world
Hath censured vile before me? If good CHRESTVS,
EVTHVS, or PHRONIMVS, had spoke the words,
They would have moved me, and I should have called
My thoughts, and actions, to a strict account
Upon the hearing: But when I remember,
It is HEDON, and ANAIDES: alas, then,
I think but what they are, and am not stirred.
The one, a light voluptuous reveller,
The other a strange arrogating puff,
Both impudent, and ignorant enough;
That talk (as they are wont) not as I merit:
Traduce by custom, as most dogs doe bark,
Doe nothing out of judgement, but disease,
Speak ill, because they never could speak well.
And who'ld be angry with this race of creatures?
What wise physician have we ever seen
Moved with a frantic man? the same affects
That he doth bear to his sick patient,
Should a right mind carry to such as these:
And I doe count it a most rare revenge,
That I can thus (with such a sweet neglect)
Pluck from them all the pleasure of their malice.
For that's the mark of all their ingenuous drifts,
To wound my patience, howsoe're they seem
To aim at other objects: which if missed,
Their enui's like an arrow, shot upright,
That, in the fall, endangers their own heads.
WHat, CRITIC! where have you drawn forth the day?
You have not visited your jealous friends?
Where I have seen (most honoured ARETE,)
The strangest pageant, fashioned like a court,
(At least I dream't I saw it) so diffused,
So painted, pied, and full of rainbow strains,
As never yet (either by time, or place)
Was made the food to my distasted sense:
Nor can my weak imperfect memory
Now render half the forms unto my tongue,
That were conuolu'd within this thrifty room.
Here, stalks me by a proud, and spangled sir,
That looks three handfuls higher then his fore-top;
Savours himself alone, is only kind
And loving to himself: one that will speak
More dark, and doubtful then six oracles;
Salutes a friend, as if he had a stitch,
Is his own chronicle, and scarce can eat
For registering himself: is waited on
By mimiques, jesters, panders, parasites,
And other such like prodigies of men.
He past, appears some mincing marmoset
Made all of clothes, and face; his limbs so set
As if they had some voluntary act
Without mans motion, and must move just so
In spite of their creation: one that weighs
His breath between his teeth, and dares not smile
Beyond a point, for fear t'vnstarch his look;
Hath travelled to make legs, and seen the cringe
Of several courts, and courtiers; knows the time
Of giving titles, and of taking walls;
Hath read court-common-places; made them his:
Studied the grammar of state, and all the rules
Each formal usher in that politic school,
Can teach a man. A third comes giving nods
To his repenting creditors, protests
To weeping suitors, takes the coming gold
Of insolent, and base ambition,
That hourly rubs his dry, and itchie palms:
Which grip't, like burning coals, he hurls away
Into the laps of bawds, and buffons mouths.
With him there meets some subtle PROTEVS, one
Can change, and vary with all forms he sees;
Be any thing but honest; serves the time;
Hovers betwixt two factions, and explores
The drifts of both; which (with cross face) he bears
To the divided heads, and is received
With mutual grace of either: one that dares
Doe deeds worthy the hurdle, or the wheel,
To be thought some body; and is (in sooth)
Such as the Satyrist points truly forth,
That only to his crimes owes all his worth.
You tell vs wonders, CRITIC.
This is nothing.
There stands a Neophyte glazing of his face,
Pruning his clothes, perfuming of his hair,
Against his idol enters; and repeats
(Like an imperfect prologue, at third music)
His part of speeches, and confederate jests,
In passion to himself. Another swears
His Scene of courtship over; bids, believe him,
Twenty times, •re they will; anon, doth seem
As he would kiss away his hand in kindness;
Then walks of melancholic, and stands wreathed,
As he were pinned up to the arras, thus.
A third is most in action, swims, and friskes,
Plays with his mistress paps, salutes her pumps,
Adores her hems, her skirts, her knots, her curls,
Will spend his patrimony for a garter,
Or the least feather in her bounteous fan.
A fourth, he only comes in for a mute:
Divides the act with a dumb show, and exit.
Then must the ladies laugh, straight comes their Scene,
A sixth times worse confusion then the rest.
Where you shall hear one talk of this mans eye;
Another, of his lip; a third, his nose;
A fourth commend his leg; a fifth his foot;
A sixth his hand; and every one a limb:
That you would think the poor distorted gallant
Must there expire. Then fall they in discourse
Of tires, and fashions, how they must take place,
Where they may kiss, and whom, when to sit down,
And with what grace to rise; if they salute,
What curtsy they must use: such cob-web stuff,
As would enforce the commonest sense abhor
The Arachnean workers.
Patience, gentle CRITIC.
This knot of spiders will be soon dissolved,
And all their webs swept out of CYNTHIAS court,
When once her glorious deity appears,
And but presents it self in her full light:
Till when, go in, and spend your hours with vs
Your honoured friends, TIME, and PHRONESIS,
In contemplation of our goddess name.
Think on some sweet, and choice invention, now,
Worthy her serious, and illustrous eyes,
That from the merit of it we may take
Desired occasion to prefer your worth,
And make your service known to CYNTHIA.
It is the pride of ARETE to grace
Her studious lovers; and (in scorn of time,
Envy, and ignorance) to lift their state
Aboue a vulgar height. True happiness
Consists not in the multitude of friends,
But in the worth, and choice. Nor would I have
Virtue a popular regard pursue:
Let them be good that love me, though but few.
I kiss thy hands, divinest ARETE,
And vow my self to thee, and CYNTHIA.
A Little more forward: So, sir. Now go in, dis-cloke your self, and come forth. Taylor, bestow thy absence upon vs; and bee not prodigal of this secret, but to a dear customer. It is well entend, sir. Stay, you come on too fast; your pace is too impetuous. I∣magine this to be the palace of your pleasure, or place, where your lady is pleased to bee seen. First, you present your self, thus: and spying her, you fall off, and walk some two turns; in which time, it is to bee sup∣posed, your passion hath sufficiently whited your face: then (stifling a sigh or two, and closing your lips) with a trembling boldness, and bold terror, you advance your self forward. Prove thus much, I pray you.
Yes, sir, (pray JOVE I can light on it) Here, I come in, you say, and present my self?
Good.
And then I spy her, and walk off?
Very good.
Now, sir, I stifle, and advance forward?
Trembling.
Yes, sir, trembling: I shall doe it better when I come to it. And what must I speak now?
Mary, you shall say: Dear beauty, or, sweet honour (or by what other title you please to remember her) me thinks you are melan∣choly. This is, if she be alone now, and discompanied.
Well, sir, Isle enter again; her title shall be, My dear LIN∣DABRIDES.
LINDABRIDES?
I, sir, the Emperor ALICANDROES daughter, and the Prince MERIDIANS sister (in the Knight of the Sun) she should have been married to him, but that the Princess CLARIDIANA—
O, you betray your reading.
Nay, sir, I have read history, I am a little humanitian. Inter∣rupt me not, good sir. My dear LINDABRIDES, My dear LINDA∣BRIDES, My dear LINDABRIDES, me thinks you are melancholy.
I, and take her by the rosie-finger'd hand.
Must I so? O, my dear LINDABRIDES, me thinks you are melancholy.
Or thus, sir. All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts at∣tend this dear beauty.
Believe me, that's pretty. All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique, rich fare, brave attires, soft beds, and silken thoughts, attend this dear beauty.
And then, offering to kiss her hand, if she shall coily recoil, and signify your repulse; you are to re-enforce your self, with, More then most fair lady, let not the rigour of your just disdain thus coursly censure of your servants zeal: and, withal, protest her, to be the only, and absolute unparalleled creature you do adore and admire, and respect, and reverence, in this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.
This is hard, by my faith. I'll begin it all, again.
Doe so, and I will act it for your lady.
Will you vouchsafe, sir? All variety of divine pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts attend this dear beauty.
So, sir, pray you away.
More then most fair lady, let not the rigour of your just dis∣deign, thus courtly censure of your servants zeal, I protest, you are the only, and absolute, vnapparelled—
Unparalleled.
Unparalleled creature, I doe adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence, in this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.
This is, if she abide you. But now, put case she should bee peasant when you enter, as thus: you are to frame your gate thereafter, and call upon her, Lady, Nymph, Sweet refuge, Star•e of our court. Then if she be guardant, here: you are to come on, and (laterally dispo∣sing your self) swear, by her blushing and well coloured cheek, the bright die of her hair, her more teeth (though they be ebony) or some such white, and innocent oath, to induce you. If reguardant, then main∣taine your station, brisk, and irpe, show the supple motion of your plian• body, but (in chief) of your knee, and hand, which cannot but arid her proud humour exceedingly.
I conceive you, sir, I shall perform all these things in good time, I doubt not, they doe so hit me.
Well, sir, I am your lady; make use of any of these beginnings, or some other out of your own invention: and prove, how you can hold up, and follow it. Say, say.
Yes, sir, my dear LINDABRIDES.—
No, you affect that LINDABRIDES too much. And (let me tell you) it is not so courtly. Your pedant should provide you some par∣cells of french, or some pretty commodity of italian to commence with, if you would be exotic, and exquisite.
Yes, sir, he was at my lodging t'other morning, I gave him a doublet.
Double your benevolence, and give him the hose too, clothe you his body, he will help to apparel your mind. But now, see what
your proper GENIVS can perform alone, without adiection of any o∣there MINERVA.
I comprehend you, sir.
I doe stand you, sir: fall back to your first place. Good, pas∣sing well: Very properly pursued.
Beautiful, ambiguous, and sufficient lady, what! are you all alone?
We would be, sir, if you would leave vs.
I am at your beauties appointment, bright angel; but—
What but?
No harm, more then most fair feature.
That touch relished well.
But, I protest—
And why should you protest?
For good will (dear esteemed Madam) and I hope, your lady∣ship will so conceive of it:
And will, in time, return from your disdain,
And rue the suffrance of our friendly pain.
O, that piece was excellent! if you could pick out more of these play-particles, and (as occasion shall salute you) embroider, or da∣mask your discourse with them, persuade your soul, it would most in∣diciously commend you. Come, this was a well discharged, and auspicious bout. Prove the second.
Lady, I cannot ruffle it in red and yellow.
Why, if you can revel it in white, sir, it is sufficient.
Say you so, sweet lady? Lan, tede, de, de, de, dant, dant, dant, dante, &amp;c. No (in good faith) Madame, whosoever told your ladyship so, abused you; but I would be glad to meet your ladyship in a measure.
Me, sir? belike you measure me by your self, then?
Would I might, fair feature.
And what were you the better, if you might?
The better it please you to ask, fair lady.
Why, this was ravishing, and most acutely continued. Well, spend not your humour too much, you have now competently exercised your conceit: This (once or twice a day) will render you an accomplished, elaborate, and well leveled gallant. Convey in your courting-stock, wee will (in the heat of this) go visit the Nymphs chamber.
I Would this water would arrive once, our travailing friend so com∣mended to vs.
So would I, for hee has left all vs in travail with expect∣tion of it.
Pray JOVE, I never rise from this couch, if ever I thirsted more for a thing, in my whole time of being a courtier.
Nor I, I'll be sworn: The very mention of it sets my lips in a worse heate, then if he had sprinkled them with MERCVRY. Reach me the glass, sirrah.
Here, lady.
They doe not peel, sweet Charge, doe they?
Yes, a little, Guardian.
O, it is an eminent good sign. Ever when my lips doe so, I am sure to have some delicious good drink, or other approaching.
Mary, and this may be good for vs ladies: for (it seems) tic far-fet by their stay.
My palate for yours (dear Honour) it shall prove most elegant, I warrant you: O, I doe fancy this gear that's long a coming, with an unmeasurable strain.
Pray thee sit down, PHILAVTIA, that rebat• becomes thee singularly.
Is it not quaint?
Yes faith. Me thinks, thy servant HEDON is nothing so obse∣quious to thee, as he was wont to be; I know not how, hoe's grown out of his garb a late, hoe's warped.
In trunesse, and so me thinks too; hoe's much converted.
Tut, let him bee what hee will, it is an animal I dream not of. This tire (me thinks) makes me look very ingeniously, quick, and spiri∣ted, I should be some LAVRA, or some DELIA, me thinks.
As I am wise (fair Honours) that title she gave him, to bee her Ambition, spoiled him: Before, hee was the most propitious and observant young novice—
No, no, you are the whole heaven awry, Guardian: it is the swag∣gering coach-horse ANAIDES, draws with him there, has been the di∣uerter of him.
For CUPIDS sake, speak no more of him; would I might no∣for dare to look in a mirror again, if I respect ere a marmoset of them al, otherwise, then I would a feather, or my shuttlecock, to make sport with, now and then.
Come, sit down; troth (and you be good Beauties) let's run over 'hem all now: Which is the properst man amongst them? I say, the travailer, AMORPHVS.
O, fie on him, he looks like a venetian trumpeter, in the bat∣tail of Lepanto, in the gallery yonder; and speaks to the tune of a coun∣trey lady, that comes ever in the rereward, or train of a fashion.
I should have judgment in a feature, sweet Beauties.
A body would think so, at these years.
And I prefer another now, far before him, a million at least.
Who might that be, Guardian?
Mary (fair Charge) ANAIDES.
ANAIDES! you talked of a tune PHILAVTIA, there's one speaks in a key: like the opening of some Justices gate, or a poste-boies horn, as if his voice feared an arrest for some ill words it should give, and were loath to come forth.
I, and he has a very imperfect face.
Like a sea-monster, that were to ravish ANDROMEDA from the rock.
His hand's too great too, by at least a straws breadth
Nay, he has a worse fault then that, too.
A long heel?
That were a fault in a lady, rather then him: No, they say, hee puts off the calves of his legs, with his stockings, every night.
Out upon him: turn to another of the pictures, for loves sake. What says ARGVRION? whom doo's she commend, before the rest?
I hope, I have instructed her sufficiently for an answer.
Troth, I made the motion to her ladyship for one to day, in the presence, but it appeared she was other-waies furnished before: She would none.
Who was that, ARGVRION?
Mary, the poor plain gentleman, in the black, there.
Who, CRITIC?
I, I, he. A fellow, that no body so much as looked upon, or re∣guarded, and she would have had me done him particular grace.
That was a true trick of your self, MORI, to persuade ARE∣GVRION, to affect the scholar.
Tut, but she shall be no chuser for me. In good faith, I like the citizens son there, ASOTVS, me thinks, none of them all come near him.
Not, HEDON?
HEDON, in troth no. HEDON'S a pretty slight courtier, and he wears his clothes well, and sometimes in fashion; Mary, his face is but indifferent, and he has no such excellent body. No, the other is a most delicate youth, a sweet face, a straight body, a well proportioned leg and foot, a white hand, a tender voice.
How now, ARGVRION?
O, you should have let her alone, she was bestowing a copy of him upon vs. Such a nose were enough to make me love a man, now.
And then his several colours he wears; wherein he flourish∣eth changeably, every day.
O, but his short hair, and his narrow eyes!
Why, she dotes more palpably upon him, then ere his father did upon her.
Believe me, the young gentleman deserves it. If she could dote more, it were not amiss. Hee is an exceeding proper youth, and
would have made a most neat barber-surgeon, if hee had been put to it in time.
Say you so? me thinks, he looks like a taylor already.
I, that had said on one of his customers suits. His face is like a squeezed orange, or—
Well, ladies, jest on: the best of you both would be glad of such a servant.
I, I'll be sworn would they, though hee be a little shame-fac'd.
Shame-fac'd, MORI! out upon him. Your shame-fac'd servant is your only gull.
Go to, Beauties, make much of time, and place, and occasion, and opportunity, and favourites, and things that belong to 'hem, for I'll ensure you, they will all relinquish; they cannot endure aboue another year; I know it out of future experience: and therefore take exhibition, and warning. I was once a reveller my self, and though I speak it (as mine own trumpet) I was then esteemed—
The very march-pane of the court, I warrant you?
And all the gallants came about you like slyes, did they not?
Go to, they did somewhat, that's no matter now.
Nay, good MORI, be not angry. Put case, that wee four now had the grant from IVNO, to wish our selves into what happy estate wee could? what would you wish to be, MORI?
Who I? Let me see now. I would wish to be a wise woman, and know all the secrets of court, city, and country. I would know what were done behind the arras, what upon the stairs, what in the garden, what in the Nymphs chamber, what by barge, &amp; what by coach. I would tel you which courtier were scabbed, and which not; which lady had her own face to lie with her a-nights, &amp; which not; who put off their teeth with their clothes in court, who their hair, who their complexion; and in which box they put it. There should not a Nymph, or a widow be got with child in the verge, but I would guess (within one or two,) who was the right father: and in what month it was gotten; with what words; and which way. I would tell you, which Madame loved a Monsieur, which a player, which a page; who slept with her husband, who with her friend, who with her gentleman-vsher, who with her horse-keeper, who with her monkey, and who with all. Yes, and who jigged the cock too.
Fie, you'd tell all,
If I should wish now, it should bee to have your tongue out. But what says PHILAVTIA? who would she be?
Troth, the very same I am. Only I would wish my self a lit∣tle more command, and sovereignty; that all the court were subject to my absolute beck, and all things in it depending on my look; as if there were no other heaven, but in my smile, nor other hell, but in my frown; that I might send for any man I list, and have his head cut off, when I have done with him; or made an eunuch, if he denied me: and if I saw a bet∣la
face then mine own, I might have my doctor to poison it. What would you wish, PHANTASTE?
Faith, I cannot (readily) tell you what▪ But (me thinks) I should wish my self all manner of creatures. Now, I would bee an em∣press; and by and by a duchess; then a great lady of state; then one of your miscelany madams; then a waiting-woman; then your citizens wife; then a course country gentlewoman; then a dairy maid; then a shepherds lass; then an empress again, or the queen of fairies: And thus I would prove the vicissitudes, and whirl of pleasures, about, and again. As I were a shepherdess, I would bee piped and sung too; as a dairy wench, I would dance at may-poles, and make sillabubbes; As a country gentlewoman, keep a good house, and come up to term, to see motions; As a citizens wife, bee troubled with a jealous husband, and put to my shifts; (others miseries should bee my pleasures) As a waiting-woman, I would taste my ladies delights to her; As a miscellany madame invent new tyres, and go visit courtiers; As a great lady, lye a bed, and have courtiers visit me; As a duchess, I would keep my state: and as an empress, I'd doe any thing. And, in all these shapes, I would ever bee followed with the affections of all that see me. Mary, I my self would af∣fact none; or if I did, it should not bee heartily, but so as I might save my self in 'hem still, and take pride in tormenting the poor wretches. Or, (now I think on it) I would, for one year, wish my self one woman, but the richest, fairest, and delicatest in a kingdom, the very center of wealth, and beauty, wherein all lines of love should meet; and in that person I would prove all manner of suitors, of all humours, and of all complexi∣once, and never have any two of a sort: I would see how Love (by the po∣were of his object) could work inwardly alike, in a choleric man, and a sanguine; in a melancholic, and a phlegmatique; in a fool, and a wise man; in a clown, and a courtier; in a valiant man, and a coward: and how he could vary outward, by letting this gallant express himself in dumb gaze; another with sighing, and rubbing his fingers; a third, with play-ends, and pitiful verses; a fourth, with stabbing himself, and drinking healths, or writing languishing letters in his blood; a fifth, in coloured ribbons, and good clothes; with this lord to smile, and that lord to court, and the t'other lord to do•e, and one lord to hang himself. And then, I to have a book made of all this, which I would call the book of humours, and every night read a little piece, ere I slept, and laugh at it. Here comes HEDON.
Save you, sweet and clear beauties: By the spirit that moves in me, you are all most pleasingly bestowed, ladies. Only, I can take it for no good omen, to find mine Honour so dejected.
You need not fear, sir, I did of purpose humble my self a∣against your coming, to decline the pride of my ambition.
Fair Honour, Ambition dares not stoop; but if it be your sweet pleasure, I shall lose that title, I will (as I am HEDON) apply my self to your bounties.
That were the next way to distitle my self of honour. O, no, rather be still ambitious, I pray you.
I will be any thing that you please, whilst it pleases you to bee your self, lady. Sweet PHANTASTE, dear MORI, most beautiful ARGVRION—
Farewell, HEDON.
ANAIDES, stay, whither go you?
S'light, what should I doe here? and you engross 'hem all for your own use, it is time for me to seek out.
I, engross 'hem? Away, mischief, this is one of your extra∣uagantiests now, because I began to •alute 'hem by their names—
Faith, you might have sp•rde vs Madame Prudence, the Guardian there, though you had more covetously aimed at the rest.
S'heart, take 'hem all, man: what speak you to me of aiming, or covetous?
I, say you so? nay, then, have at 'hem: ladies, here's one hath distinguished you by your names already. It shall only become me, to ask, How you doe?
Gods so, was this the design you travailed with?
Who answers the brazen head? it spoke to some body.
Lady Wisdom, doe you interpret for these puppets?
In truth, and sadness (Honours) you are in great offence for this, go too: the gentleman (I'll vnder-take with him) is a man of fair li∣uing, and able to maintain a lady in her two carroches a day, besides pages, munkeys, and parachitos, with such attendants as she shall think meet for her turn, and therefore there is more respect requirable, how∣soar you seem to connive. Hark you, sir, let me discourse a syllable with you. I am to say to you, these ladies are not of that close, and open behaviour, as happily you may suspend; their carriage is well known, to be such as it should be, both gentle and extraordinary.
O, here comes the other pair.
THat was your fathers love, the Nymph ARGVRION. I would have you direct all your courtship thither, if you could but en∣dear your self to her affection, you were eternally en-gallanted.
In truth, sir? pray PHOEBVS I prove fauour-some in her fair eyes.
All divine mixture, and increase of beauty to this bright bevy of ladies; and to the male-courtiers, complement, and curtsy.
In the behalf of the males, I gratify you, AMORPHVS.
And I, of the females.
Succinctly returned. I doe vale to both your thanks, and kiss them: but primarily to yours, most ingenious, acute, and polite lady.
Gods my life, how hee doe's all to bee qualify her! ingenious, acute, and polite? as if there were not others in place as ingenious, acute, and polite, as she.
Yes, but you must know, lady, hee cannot speak out of a di∣ctionarie method.
Sit down, sweet AMORPHVS: When will this water come, think you?
It cannot now belong, fair lady.
Now observe, MERCVRY.
How? most ambiguous beauty? love you? that I will by this hand-kercher.
S'lid, he draws his oaths out of his pocket.
But, will you be constant?
Constant, Madam? I will not say for constantnesse, but by this purse (which I would be loath to swear by, unless it were embroidered) I protest (more then most fair lady) you are the only, absolute, and un∣paralleled creature, I doe adore, and admire, and respect, and reverence in this court, corner of the world, or kingdom: Me thinks you are me∣lancholy.
Do's your heart speak all this?
Say you?—
O, he is groping for another oath.
Now, by this watch (I made how forward the day is) I doe unfeignedly vow my self (s'light it is deeper then I took it, past five) yours entirely addicted, Madame.
I require no more, dearest ASOTVS, hence-forth let me call you mine, and in remembrance of me, vouchsafe to wear this chain, and this diamond.
O god, sweet lady!
There are new oaths for him: what? doth HARMS taste no alteration, in all this?
Yes, thou hast struck ARGVRION enamoured on ASOTVS, the thinks.
Alas, no; I am no-body, I: I can doe nothing in this disguise.
But thou hast not wounded any of the rest, CUPID?
Not yet: it is enough that I have begun so prosperously.
Nay, these are nothing to the gems I will hourly bestow upon thee: be but faithful, and kind to me, and I will lade thee with my richest bounties: behold, here my bracelets, from mine arms.
Not so, good lady, By this diamond.
Take 'hem, wear 'hem: my jewels, chain of pearl, pendants, all I have.
Nay then, by this pearl, you make me a wanton.
Shall not she answer for this, to maintain him thus in swearing?
O, no, there is a way to wean him from this, the gentleman may be reclaimed.
I, if you had the airing of his apparel, couss', I think.
Loving? it were pity I should be living else, believe me. Save you, sir. Save you, sweet lady. Save you, Monsieur ANAIDES. Save you, dear Madame.
Dost thou know him that saluted thee, HEDON?
No, some idle FVNGOSO, that hath got aboue the cup-board, since yesterday.
S'lud, I never saw him till this morning, and he salutes me as fa∣miliarly, as if we had known together, since the deluge, or the first year of Troy-action.
A most right-handed, and auspicious encounter. Confine your self to your fortunes.
For sports sake, let's have some riddles, or purposes; hough.
No faith, your prophecies are best, the t'other are stale.
Prophecies? we cannot all sit in at them; wee shall make a con∣fusion. No; what called you that we had in the fore-noone?
Substantives, and Adiectiues. First not HEDON?
I, that, who begins?
I have thought; speak your Adiectiues, sirs.
But doe not you change, then?
Not I, who says?
Odoriferous.
Popular.
Humble.
White-liuer'd.
Barbarous.
This was not so good, now.
In good faith, these unhappy pages would be whipped, for stay∣ing thus.
Beshrew my hand, and my heart, else.
I doe wonder at their protraction!
Pray VENVS, my whore have not discovered her self to the ras∣cally hoyes, and that be the cause of their stay.
I must suit my self with another page: this idle PROSAITES will never be brought to wait well.
Sir, I have a kinsman I could willingly wish to your service, if you would deign to accept of him.
And I shall bee glad (most sweet lady) to embrace him: where is hee?
I can fetch him, sir, but I would bee loath to make you turn a∣way your other page.
You shall not, most sufficient lady, I will keep both: pray you lets go see him.
Whither goes my love?
Isle return presently, I go but to see a page, with this lady.
As sure as fate, 't is so; she has opened all: A pox of all cocka∣trices. Dam'me, if she have played loose with me, I'll cut her throat, within a hairs breadth, so it may be healed again.
What, is he jealous of his Hermaphrodite?
O, I, this will be excellent sport.
PHANTASTE! ARGVRION! what? you are suddenly struck, me thinks! for loves sake let's have some music, till they come. Ambition, reach the lyra, I pray you.
Any thing to which my Honour shall direct me.
Come, AMORPHVS, cheer up PHANTASTE.
It shall bee my pride, fair lady, to attempt all that is in my power. But here is an instrument that (alone) is able to infuse soul in the most melancholic, and dull disposed creature upon earth. O! let me kiss thy fair knees. Beauteous ears attend it.
Will you have the Kiss, Honour?
I, good Ambition.
O, That joy so soon should waste!
or so sweet a bliss
as a kiss,
Might not for ever last!
So sugared, so melting, so soft, so delicious,
The dew that lies on roses,
When the morn her self discloses,
is not so precious.
O, rather then I would it smother,
Were I to taste such another;
It should bee my wishing
That I might dye kissing.
I made this ditty, and the note to it, upon a kiss that my Ho∣nor gave me; how like you it, sir?
A pretty ayre, in general, I like it well: but in particular, your long die-note did arid me most, but it was somewhat too long. I can show one, almost of the same nature, but much before it and not so long, in a composition of mine own. I think I have both the note, and ditty a∣bout me.
Pray you, sir, see.
Yes, there is the note; and all the parts if I mis-thinke not. I will read the ditty to your beauties here, but first I am to make you fami∣liar with the occasion, which presents it self thus. Upon a time, going to take my leave of the Emperor, and kiss his great hands; there being then present, the kings of France, and Arragon, the dukes of Sauoy, Floe∣rinse▪ Orbeance, Bourbon, Brunswicke, the Lantgraue, Count Palatine, all which had severally feasted me; besides, infinite more of inferior persons, as Counts and others it was my chance the Emperor detained by some ex∣orbitant affair) to wait him the fifth part of an hour, or much near it. In which time (retiring my self into a bay-window) the beauteous lady ANNABELL, niece to the Empress, and sister to the King of Arragon, who having never before eyed me, (but only heard the common report of my virtue, learning, and travail) fell into that extremity of passion, for my love, that she there immediately swouned: physicians were sent for, she had to her chamber, so to her bed; where (languishing some few days) after many times calling upon me, with my name in her lips, she expired. As that (I must mourningly say) is the only fault of my fortune, that, as it hath ever been my hap to be sewed to, by all ladies, and beauties, where I have come, so, I never yet sojourned, or rested in that place, or part of the world, where some high-borne admirable fair feature died not for my love.
O, the sweet power of travail! are you guilty of this, CUPID?
No, MERCVRIE, and that his page (COS) knows, if he were here present to be sworn.
But, how doth this draw on the ditty, sir?
O, she is too quick with him; he hath not deuis'd that yet.
Mary, some hour before she departed, she bequeathed to me this glove; which golden legacy, the Emperor himself took care to send after me, in six coaches, covered all with black valet, attended by the state of his empire; all which he freely presented me with, and I recipro∣cally (out of the same bounty) gave to the lords that brought it: only re∣serving the gift of the deceased lady, upon which I composde this ode, and set it to my most affected instrument, the lyra.
THou more then most sweet glove,
Unto my more sweet love,
Suffer me to store with kisses
This empty lodging, that now misses
The pure rosie hand, that ware thee,
Whiter then the kid, that bare thee.
Thou art soft, but that was softer;
CUPIDS self hath kissed it ofter,
Then ever he did his mothers doves,
Supposing her the Queen of loves,
That was thy Mistress,
Best of gloves.
Blasphemy, blasphemy, CUPID.
I, I'll revenge it time enough; HARMS.
Good AMORPHVS, let's hear it sing.
I care not to admit that, since it pleases PHILAVTIA to re∣quest it.
Here, sir.
Nay, play it, I pray you, you doe well, you doe well—How like you it, sir?
Very well in troth.
But very well? O, you are a mere mammothrept in judgement then. Why, doe you not observe how excellently the ditty is affected in every place? that I doe not marry a word of short quantity to a long note? nor an ascending syllable to a descending tone? Besides, upon the word (best) there, you see how I doe enter with an odd minnum, and drive it thorough the brief, which no intelligent Musician (I know) but will affirm to be very rare, extraordinary, and pleasing.
And yet not fit to lament the death of a lady, for all this.
Tut, here be they will swallow any thing.
Pray you let me have a copy of it, AMORPHVS.
And me too, in troth, I like it exceedingly.
I have denied it to princes, nevertheless to you (the true fe∣male twins of perfection) I am won, to depart withal.
I hope I shall have my Honours copy.
You are ambitious in that, HEDON.
How now, ANAIDES! what is it hath conjured up this distem∣perature in the circle of your face?
S'lood, what have you to doe? A pox upon your filthy trauai∣ling face, hold your tongue.
Nay, dost hear, mischief?
Away, muske-cat.
I say to thee, thou art rude, debauch't, impudent, coorse, im∣polished, a frapler, and base.
Heart of my father, what a strange alteration has half a years haunting of ordinaries wrought in this fellow! that came with a tuss-taf∣fa•a jerkin to town but the other day, and a pair of penniless hose, and now he is turned HERCVLES, he wants but a club.
Sir, you with the pencil on your chin; I will garter my hose with your guts, and that shall be all.
S'lid, what rare fireworks be here? flash, flash.
What's the matter HEDON? can you tell?
Nothing, but that hee lacks crowns, and thinks weal lend him some, to be friends.
Come, sweet lady, in good truth I'll have it, you shall not de∣no me. MORVS, persuade your aunt I may have her picture, by any means.
Yes, sir: good aunt now, let him have it, hee will use me the better, if you love me, doe, good aunt.
Well, tell him, he shall have it.
Master, you shall have it, she says.
Shall I? thank her, good page.
What, has he entertained the fool?
I, heel wait close, you shall see, though the beggar hang off, a∣while.
Aunt, my master thanks you.
Call him hither.
Yes, master
Yes, in verity, and gave me this purse, and he has promised me a most fine dog; which he will have drawn, with my picture, he says: and desires most vehemently to bee known to your ladyships.
Call him hither, it is good groping such a gull.
Master ASOTVS, master ASOTVS.
For loves sake, let me go: you see, I am called to the ladies.
Wilt thou forsake me then?
God so, what would you have me doe?
Come hither, master ASOTVS. I doe ensure your ladyships, he is a gentleman of a very worthy desert: and of a most bountiful nature. You must show and insinuate your self responsible, and equivalent now to my commandment. Good Honours, grace him.
I protest (more then most fair ladies) I doe wish all variety of divine pleasures, choice sports, sweet musique, rich fare, brave attire, soft beds, and silken thoughts attend these fair beauties. Will it please your ladyship to wear this chain of pearl, and this diamond, for my sake?
O.
And you, Madame, this jewel, and pendants.
O.
Wee know not how to deserve these bounties, out of so slight merit, ASOTVS.
No, in faith, but there's my glove for a favour.
And soon, after the revels, I will bestow a garter on you.
O Lord, ladies! it is more grace then ever I could have hoped, but that it pleases your ladyships to extend. I protest, it is enough, that you but take knowledge of my—if your ladyships want embroidered gowns, tires of any fashion, rebatu's, jewels, or carkanets, any thing whatsoever, if you vouchsafe to accept.
And for it, they will help you to shooe-ties, and devices.
I cannot utter my self (dear beauties) but, you can con∣ceiue—
O.
Sir, we will acknowledge your service, doubt not: henceforth, you shall bee no more ASOTVS to vs, but our gold-finch, and wee your cages.
O VENVS, Madams! how shall I deserve this? if I were but made acquainted with HEDON, now, I'll try: pray you away.
How he prays Money to go away from him!
AMORPHVS, a word with you: here's a watch I would be∣stow upon you, pray you make me known to that gallant.
That I will, sir. Monsieur HEDON, I must entreat you to ex∣change knowledge with this gentleman.
It is a thing (next to the water we expect) I thirst after, sir▪ Good Monsieur ASOTVS.
Good Monsieur HEDON, I would be glad to be loved of men of your rank, and spirit, I protest. Please you to accept this pair of bracelets, sir: they are not worth the bestowing—
O, HERCVLES, how the gentleman purchases! this must needs bring ARGVRION to a consumption.
Sir, I shall never stand in the merit of such bounty, I fear.
O, VENVS, sir; your acquaintance shall bee sufficient. And if at any time you need my bill, or my bond.
O, Ô.
Help the lady there.
Gods dear, ARGVRION! Madame, how doe you?
Sick.
Have her forth, and give her air.
I come again strait, ladies.
Well, I doubt, all the physique hee has will scarce recover her: shoe's too far spent.
O Here's the water come: fetch glasses, page.
Heart of my body, here's a coil indeed, with your iea∣lous humours. Nothing but whore, and bitch, and all the vile∣lanous swaggering names you can think on? S'lid, take your bottle, and put it in your guts for me, I'll see you poxed ere I follow you any longer.
Nay, good punk, sweet rascal; dam' me, if I am iea∣lous now.
That's true indeed: pray let's go.
What's the matter, there?
S'light, he has me upon intergatories, (nay, my mother shall know how you use me) where I have been? and, why I should stay so long? and, how first possible? and withal, calls me at his pleasure, I know not how many cockatrices, and things.
In truth and sadness, these are no good epitaphs, ANAIDES, to bestow upon any gentlewoman; and (Isle ensure you) if I had known you would have dealt thus with my daughter, she should never have fan∣cied you so deeply, as she has done. Go too.
Why, doe you hear, mother MORI. Heart!
Nay, I pray you, sir, doe not swear.
Swear? why? S'lood, I have sworn before now, I hope. Both you and your daughter mistake me. I have not honoured ARETE, that is held the worthiest lady in court (next to CYNTHIA) with half that obe∣seruance, and respect, as I have done her in private, howsoever outward∣lie I have carried my self careless, and negligent. Come, you are a foo∣lish, punk, and know not when you are well employed. Kiss me, come on. Doe it, I say.
Nay, indeed I must confess, she is apt to misprision. But I must have you leave it, minion.
How now, ASOTVS? how do's the lady?
Faith, ill. I have left my page with her, at her lodging.
O, here's the rarest water that ever was tasted: fill him some.
What! has my master a new page?
Yes, a kinsman of the lady MORIAS: you must waite better now, or you are cashiered, PROSAITES.
Come, gallants, you must pardon my foolish humour: when I am angry, that any thing crosses me, I grow impatient straight. Here, I drink to you.
O, that we had five, or six bottles more of this liquor.
the noble, and subtle science of Courtship: For which grace, he shall this night in court, and in the long gallery, hold his public Act, by open challenge, to all Masters of the mystery whatsoever, to play at the four choice, and principal weapons thereof, viz. the bare Accost, the better Regard, the solemn Address, and the perfect Close. What say you?
Excellent, excellent, AMORPHVS.
Well, let vs then take our time by the fore-head: I will instant∣lie have bills drawn, and advanced in every angle of the court. Sir, be∣tray not your too much joy. ANAIDES, wee must mix this gentleman with you in acquaintance, Monsieur ASOTVS.
I am easily entreated to grace any of your friends, AMORPHVS.
Sir, and his friends shall likewise grace you, sir. Nay, I begin to know my self, now.
O, you must continue your bounties.
Must I? why, I'll give him this ruby on my finger. Doe you hear, sir? I doe heartily with your acquaintance, and I partly know my self worthy of it; please you, sir, to accept this poor ruby, in a ring, sir. The poesy is of my own device. Let this blush for me, sir.
So it must for me, too. For I am not ashamed to take it.
Sweet man! by my troth, master, I love you, will you love me, too? for my aunts sake? Isle waite well, you shall see. Isle still bee here. Would I might never stir, but you are a fine man in these clothes, Ma∣ster, shall I have 'hem, when you have done with them?
As for that, MORVS, thou shalt see more hereafter: in the mean time, by this air, or by this feather, Isle doe as much for thee, as a∣ny gallant shall doe for his page, whatsoever, in this court, corner of the world, or kingdom.
I wonder, this gentleman should affect to keep a fool! me thinks, he makes sport enough with himself.
Well, PROSAITES, it were good you did waite closer.
I, Isle look to it; it is time.
The revels would have been most sumptuous to night, if they had gone forward.
They must needs, when al the choicest singularities of the court were up in pantofles; ne'er a one of them, but was able to make a whole show of it self.
Sirrah, a torch, a torch.
O, what a call is there! I will have a canzonet made, with no∣thing in it, but sirrah; and the burden shall be, I come.
How now, CUPID, how doe you like this change?
Faith, the thread of my device is cracked, I may go sleep till the revelling musique awake me.
And there too, CUPID, without you had prevented the Foun∣tayne. Alas, poor god, that remembers not selfe-Loue, to bee proof
against the violence of his quiver! Well, I have a plot upon these prizers, for which, I must presently find out CRITIC, and with his assistance, pur∣sue it to a high strain of laughter, or MERCVRIE hath lost of his mettle.
IT is resolved on, CRITIC, you must doe it.
The grace divinest MERCVRIE hath done me,
In this vouchsafed discovery of himself,
Binds my observance in the utmost term
Of satisfaction, to his godly will:
Though I profess (without the affectation)
Of an enforced, and formed austerity)
I could be willing to enjoy no place
With so unequal natures.
We believe it.
But for our sake, and to inflict just pains
On their prodigious follies, aide vs now:
No man is, presently, made bad, with ill.
And good men, like the sea, should still maintain
Their noble taste, in midst of all fresh humours,
That flow about them, to corrupt their streams,
Bearing no season, much less salt of goodness.
It is our purpose, CRITIC, to correct,
And punish, with our laughter, this nights sport
Which our court-Dors so heartily intend:
And by that worthy scorn, to make them know
How far beneath the dignity of man
Their serious, and most practised actions are.
I, but though MERCVRIE can warrant out
His vnder-takings, and make all things good,
Out of the powers of his divinity,
Th'offence will be returned with weight on me,
That am a creature so despised, and poor;
When the whole Court shall take it self abused
By our ironical confederacy.
You are deceived. The better race in court
That have the true nobility, called virtue,
Will apprehend it, as a grateful right
Done to their separate merit: and approve
The fit rebuke of so ridiculous heads,
Who with their apish customs, and forced garbs,
Would bring the name of courtier in contempt,
Did it not live unblemished in some few,
Whom equal JOVE hath loved, and PHOEBVS formed
Of better mettle, and in better mould.
Well, since my leader on is MERCVRIE,
I shall not fear to follow. If I fall,
My proper virtue shall be my relief,
That followed such a cause, and such a chief.
NO more, if you love me, good master, you are incompatible to live withal: Send me for the ladies.
Nay, but intend me.
Fear me not, I warrant you, sir.
Render not your self a refractory, on the sudden. I can allow well, you should repute highly, heartily (and to the most) of your own en∣dowments; it gives you forth to the world the more assured: but with re∣seruation of an eye, to be always turned dutifully back upon your teacher.
Nay, good, sir, leave it to me. Trust me with trussing all the points of this action, I pray. S'lid, I hope we shall find wit to perform the science, as well as another.
I confess you to be of an aped, and docible humour. Yet, there are certain puntilioes, or (as I may more nakedly insinuate them) certain intrinsecate strokes, and wards, to which your activity is not yet amoun∣ted. As your gentile dor, in colours. For supposition, your mistress appears here in prize, ribbanded with greene, and yellow; now it is the part of e∣very obsequious servant, to be sure to have daily about him copy, and va∣rietie of colours, to be presently answerable to any hourly, or half-hour∣lie change in his mistress revolution.—
(I know it, sir.
Give leave, I pray you) which if your Antagonist, or player-against-you shall ignorantly be without, and your self can produce; you give him the dor.
I, I, sir.
Or, if you can possess your opposite, that the greene your mi∣stress wears, is her rejoicing or exultation in his service; the yellow, suspi∣cion of his truth, (from her height of affection:) and that he (greenly cre∣dulous) shall withdraw thus, in private, and from the abundance of his pocket (to displace her jealous conceit) steal into his hat the colour, whose bluenose doth express trueness, (she being nor so, nor so affected) you give him the dor.
Doe not I know it, sir?
Nay, good—swell not aboue your understanding. There is yet a third dor, in colours.
I know it too, I know it.
Doe you know it too? what is it? Make good your knowledge.
Why it is—no matter for that.
Doe it, on poene of the dor.
Why? what is it, say you?
Lo, you have given your self the dor. But I will remonstrate to you the third dor; which is not, as the two former dors, indicatiue, but deliberative: As how? As thus. Your Reviles, with a dutiful, and serious care, lying in his bed, meditating how to observe his mistress, dispatches his lackey to the chamber, early, to know what her colours are for the day; with purpose to apply his wear that day, accordingly: You lay wait before, preoccupy the chamber-maide, corrupt her, to return false co∣lours; He follows the fallacy; comes out accoutred to his believed instru∣ctions; your mistress smiles; and you give him the dor.
Why, so I told you, sir, I knew it.
Told me? It is a strange outrecuidance! your humour too much redounded.
Why, sir, what, doe you think you know more?
I know that a cooke may as soon, and properly be said to smell well, as you to be wise. I know these are most clear, and clean strokes. But then, you have your passages, and imbroccata's in courtship; as the bitter Rob in wit; the Reverse in face, or wry-mouth; and these more subtle, and secure offenders. I will example unto you. Your opponent makes entry, as you are engaged with your mistress. You seeing him, close in her ear, with this whisper (here comes your Babion, disgrace him) and withal, stepping off, fall on his bosom, and turning to her, politiquely, aloud say, lady, reguard this noble gentleman, a man rarely parted, second to none in this court; and then, stooping over his shoulder, your hand on his breast, your mouth on his back-side, you give him the Reverse stroke, with this Sanna, or Storkes-bill, which makes up your wits Bob, most bitter.
Nay, for heavens sake, teach me no more. I know all as well— S'lid, if I did not, why was I nominated? why did you choose me? why did the ladies prick out me? I am sure there were other gallants. But me of all the rest? By that light, and as I am a courtier, would I might never stir, but it is strange. Would to the lord, the ladies would come once.
SIgnior, the gallants and ladies are at hand. Are you ready, sir?
Instantly. Go, accomplish your attire: Cousin MORPHI∣DES, assist me, to make good the door with your officious tyranny.
By your leave my masters there, pray you let's come by.
You by? why should you come by, more then we?
Why, sir? Because he is my brother, that plays the prizes.
Your brother?
I, her brother, sir, and we must come in.
Why, what are you?
I am her husband, sir.
Then thrust forward your head.
What tumult is there?
Who's there? bear back there. Stand from the door.
Enter none but the ladies, and their hang-bies; welcome Beau∣ties, and your kind Shadows.
This country lady, my friend, good signior AMORPHVS.
And my cockatrice, here.
She is welcome.
Knock those same pages there; and goodman Cockescombe the citizen, who would you speak withal?
With whom? your brother?
Who is your brother?
Master ASOTVS? Is hee your brother? Hee is taken up with great persons. Hee is not to know you to night.
O JOVE, master! and there come ere a citizen gentlewoman in my name, let her have entrance, I pray you. It is my sister.
Brother.
Brother, master ASOTVS.
Who's there?
It is I, brother.
Gods me! There she is, good master, intrude he.
Make place. Bear back there.
Knock that simple fellow, there.
Nay, good sir; It is my husband.
The simpler fellow hee. Away, back with your head, sir.
Brother, you must pardon your non-entry: Husbands are not allowed here in truth. Isle come home soon with my sister; pray you meet vs with a lantern, brother. Be merry, sister: I shall make you laugh anon.
Your prizer is not ready AMORPHVS.
Apprehend your places, hee shall be soon; and at all points.
Is there any body come to answer him? Shall we have any sport.
Sport of importance; howsoever, give me the gloves.
Gloves! why gloves, Signior?
What's the ceremony?
Besides their received fitness, at all prizes, they are here pro∣perly accommodate to the nuptials of my scholars hauiour to the lady courtship. Please you apparel your hands. Madam PHANTASTE, madam PHILAVTIA, Guardian, Signior HEDON, Signior ANAIDES, Gentlemen all, Ladies.
Thanks, good AMORPHVS.
I will now call forth my provost, and present him.
Heart! why should not we be masters, as well as he?
That's true, and play our masters prizes, as well as the t'other?
In sadness, for using your court-weapons, me thinks, you may.
Nay, but why should not wee ladies play our prizes, I pray? I see no reason, but we should take 'hem down, at their own weapons.
Troth, and so we may, if we handle 'hem well.
I indeed, forsooth, Madame, if'twere in the city, wee would think foul scorn, but we would, forsooth.
Pray you, what shoul'd we call your name?
My name is, Downfall.
Good mistress Downfall! I am sorry, your husband could not get in.
It is no matter for him, sir.
No, no, she has the more liberty for her self.
Peace, peace: They come.
So. Keep up your ruff: the tincture of your neck is not all so pure, but it will ask it. Maintain your sprig upright; your cloak on your halfe-shoulder falling; So: I will read your bill, advance it, and present you.
Be it known to all that profess courtship, by these presents (from the white satin reveller, to the cloth of tissue, and bodkin) that we, VLYSSES-POLYTROPVS-AMORPHVS, Master of the noble, and subtle science of courtship, doe give leave and licence to our Provost, ACOLASTVS-POLYPRAGMON-ASOTVS, to play his Masters prize, against all Masters whatsoever in this subtle mystery, at these four, the choice, and most cunning weapons of court-complement, viz. the bare Accost; the better Reguard; the solemn Address; and the perfect Close. These are therefore to give notice, to all comers, that hee, •he said ACOLASTVS-POLYPRAG•ON-ASOTVS, is here present (by the help of his Mer•er, Taylor, Milla•er, Sempster, and so forth) at his designed hour, in this fair gallery, the present day of this present month, to perform, and doe his uttermost for the achievement, and bearing away of the prizes, which are these: viz. for the bare Accost, two Wall-eyes, in a face forced: For the better R•guard, a Face favourably simpering, with a Farm waving: For the solemn Address, two Lips wagging, and never a wise word: For the perfect Close, a Wring by the hand, with a Banquet in a corner. And PHOEBVS sa•e CYNTHIA.
Appears no man yet, to answer the prizer? No voice? Musique, give them their summons.
The solemnity of this is excellent.
Silence. Well, I perceive your name is their terror; and kee∣peth them back.
I faith, Master, Let's go: no body comes. Victus, vista,
victum; Vest, vista, vest—Let's bee retrograde.
Stay. That were dispunct to the ladies. Rather, our self shall be your Encounter. Take your state, up, to the wall: And, lady, may we implore you to stand forth, as first term, or bound to our courtship.
Before heaven, twill show rarely.
Sound a charge.
A pox on it. Your vulgar will count this fabulous, and im∣pudent, now: by that candle, they'll ne'er conceit it.
Excellent well! Admirable!
Peace.
Most fashionably, believe it.
O, he is a well-spoken gentleman.
Now the other.
Very good.
For a Scholar, Honour.
O, it is too d•tch. He reels too much.
This weapon is done.
No, we have our two bouts, at every weapon, expect.
WHere be these gallants, and their brave prizer here?
Who's there? bear back: Keep the door.
What are you, sir?
By your licence, grand-master. Come forward, sir.
Heart! who l•t in that rag there, amongst vs? put him out, an impecunious creature.
Out with him.
Come, sir.
You must be retrograde.
Soft, sir, I am Truchman, and doe flourish before this Monsieur, or french-behau'd gentleman, here; who is drawn hither by report of your chartells, advanced in court, to prove his fortune with your prizer, so he may have fair play shown him, and the liberty to choose his stickler.
Is he a Master?
That, sir, he has to show here; and, confirmed under the hands of the most skilful, and cunning complementaries alive: please you read, sir.
What shall we doe?
Death, disgrace this fellow in the blacke-stuffe, what ever you doe.
Why, but he comes with the stranger.
That's no matter. He is our own countryman.
I, and he is a scholar besides. You may disgrace him here, with authority.
Well, see these first.
Now shall I be observed by yon'd scholar, till I sweat again; I would to JOVE, it were over.
Sir, this is the wight of worth, that dares you to the encounter. A gentleman of so pleasing, and ridiculous a carriage; as, even standing, carries meat in the mouth, you see; and I assure you, although no bred courtling, yet a most particular man, of goodly hauings, well fashioned hauiour, and of as hard'ned, and excellent a bark, as the most naturally-qualified amongst them, informed, reformed, and transformed, from his o∣riginall citticisme, by this elixi'r, or mere magazine of man. And, for your spectators, you behold them, what they are: The most choice particulars in court: This tells tales well; This provides coaches; This repeats jests; This presents gifts▪ This holds up the arras; This takes down from horse; This protests by this light; This swears by that candle; This delights; This adores. Yet, all but three men. Then for your ladies, the most proud witty creatures, all things apprehending, nothing under∣standing, perpetually laughing, curious maintainers of fools, mercers, and minstrels, costly to be kept, miserably keeping, all disdaining, but their painter, and apothecary, twixt whom and them there is this reciprock commerce, their beauties maintain their painters, and their painters their beauties.
Sir, you have plaid the painter your self, and limbed them to the life. I desire to deserve before 'hem.
This is anthentique. Wee must resolve to entertain the Mon∣sieur, howsoever we neglect him.
Come, let's all go together, and salute him.
Content, and not look of the other.
Well deuis'd: and a most punishing disgrace.
On.
Monsieur. We must not so much betray our selves to discourt∣ship, as to suffer you to be longer unsaluted: Please you to use the state, or∣deigned for the opponent; in which nature, without envy we receive you.
And embrace you.
And commend vs to you, sir.
Believe it, he is a man of excellent silence.
He keeps all his wit for action.
This hath discountenanced our scholaris, most richly.
Out of all emphasis. The Monsieur sees, we regard him not.
Hold on: make it known how bitter a thing it is, not to bee looked on in court.
S'lud, will he call him to him yet? doe's not Monsieur perceive our disgrace?
Hart! he is a fool, I see. Wee have done our selves wrong to grace him.
S'light, what an ass was I, to embrace him?
Illustrous, and fearful judges—
Turn away, turn away.
It is the suit of the strange opponent (to whom you ought not to turn your tails, and whose noses I must follow) that he may have the justice, before hee encounter his respected adversary, to see some light stroke of his play, commenced with some other.
Answer not him, but the stranger, we will not believe him.
I will demand him my self.
O dreadful disgrace, if a man were so foolish to feel it!
Is it your suit, Monsieur, to see some praelude of my scholar? Now, sure the Monsieur wants language.
And take upon him to be one of the accomplished? S'light, that's a goodiest: would we could take him with that nullity. Non sapette voi parlar' Itagliano?
S'foot, the carpe he's no tongue.
Signior, in courtship, you are to bid your abettors forbear, and satisfy the Monsieurs request.
Well, I will strike him more silent, with admiration, and terri∣fie his daring hither. Hee shall behold my own play, with my scholar. Lady, with the touch of your white hand, let me reinstate you. Pro•oct, begin to me, at the bare Accost. Now, for the honour of my discipline.
Signior AMORPHVS, reflect, reflect: what means hee by that mouthed wave?
He is in some distaste of your fellow disciple.
Signior, your scholar might have plaid well still, if hee could have kept his fear longer: I have enough of him, now. He is a mere piece of glass, I see through him, by this time.
You come not to give vs the scorn, Monsieur?
Nor to be frighted with a face. Signior! I have seen the lyons. You must pardon me. I shall bee loath to hazard a reputation with one, that he's not a reputation to lose.
How!
Meaning your pupil, sir.
This is that black devil there.
You doe offer a strange affront, Monsieur.
Sir, he shall yield you all the honour of a competent adversary, if you please to vnder-take him—
I am pressed for the encounter.
Me? challenge me?
What! my Master, sir? S'light, Monsieur, meddle with me, doe you hear? but doe not meddle with my Master.
Peace, good squib, go out.
And stink, he bids you.
Master?
Silence, I doe accept him. Sit you down, and observe. Me? He never professed a thing at more charges. Prepare your self, sir. Chal∣lenge me? I will prosecute what disgrace my hatred can dictate to me.
How tender a travellers spleen is? comparison, to men, that deserve least, is ever most offensive.
You are instructed in our chartell, and know our weapons?
I appear not without their notice, sir.
But must I lose the prizes, Master?
I will win them for you, bee patient. Lady, vouchsafe the te∣nure of this ensign. Who shall be your stickler?
Behold him.
I would not wish you a weaker. Sound musiques. I provoke you, at the bare Accost.
Excellent comely!
And worthily studied. This is the exalted Fore-top.
O, his leg was too much produced.
And his hat was carried skiruily.
Peace; Let's see the Monsieur's Accost: Rare!
Sprightly, and short.
True, it is the french curteau: He lacks but to have his nose slit.
He do's hop. He do's bound too much.
The second bout, to conclude this weapon.
Good, believe it!
An excellent offer!
This is called the solemn band-string.
Foe, that cringe was not put home.
S'foot, he makes a face like a stabbed LVCRECE.
Well, he would needs take it upon him, but would I had done it for all this. He makes me sit still here, like a babioun as I am.
Making villainous faces.
See, the French prepares it richly.
I, this is y'cleped the serious trifle.
S'lud, it is the horse-start out of the browne study.
Rather the bird-ey'd stroke, sir. Your observance is too blunt, sir.
Judges, award the prize. Take breath, sir. This bout hath been laborious.
And yet your Critic, or your Besso'gno, will think these things sopperie, and easy, now.
Or rather mere lunacy. For, would any reasonable creature make these his serious studies, and perfections? Much less, only live to these ends? to be the false pleasure of a few, the true love of none, and the just laughter of all?
We must prefer the Monsieur, we courtiers must be partial.
Speak, Guardian. Name the prize, at the bare Accost.
A pair of wall-eyes, in a face forced.
Give the Monsieur. AMORPHVS hath lost his eyes.
I! is the palate of your judgement down? Gentles, I doe ap∣peal.
Yes master, to me. The judges be fools.
How now, sir? Tie up your tongue, Mongrel. He cannot ap∣peal.
Say you, sir?
Sir you still, sir.
Why, so I doe. Doe not I, I pray you?
Remercie, Madame, and these honourable Censors.
Well, to the second weapon, The better Reguard: I will en∣counter you better. Attempt.
Sweet Honour.
What says my good Ambition?
Which take you at this next weapon? I lay a discretion, with you, on AMORPHVS head.
Why, I take the french-behau'd gentleman.
It is done, a discretion.
A discretion? A pretty court-wager! would any discreet per∣son hazard his wit, so?
I'll lay a discretion, with you, ANAIDES.
Hang 'hem. I'll not venture a doibt of discretion, on either of their heads.—
No, he should venture all then.
I like none of their plays.
See, see, this is strange play!
It is too full of uncertain motion. He hobbles too much.
It is called your court-staggers, sir.
That same fellow talks so, now he has a place.
Hang him, neglect him.
Your good ladyships affectioned.
Gods so! they speak at this weapon, brother!
They must doe so, sister, how should it bee the better Reguard, else?
Me thinks, hee did not this respectively enough.
Why, the Monsieur but dallies with him.
Dallies? Slight see, he will put him too't, in earnest. Well done, AMORPHVS.
That puff was good indeed.
Gods me! This is desperate play. Hee hits himself of the shins.
And he make this good through, he carries it, I warrant him.
Indeed he displays his feet, rarely.
See, see; Hee do's the respective Leer damnably well.
The true idolater of your beauties, shall never pass their de•ties una∣dored: I rest your poor knight.
See, now the oblique leer, or the Ianus: He satisfies all, with that aspect, most nobly.
And most terribly he comes off: like your Rodomantada.
How like you this play, ANAIDES?
Good play; but 't is too rough, and boisterous.
I will second it with a stroke easier, wherein I will prove his language.
This is silthie, and grave, now.
O, 't is cool, and wary play. Wee must not disgrace our own comrade, too much.
Signora, ho tanto obligo per pefauore rescinto da lei; che veramente des•••ero con totto il core, • remunerarla in part: &amp; security•e signor a mea cara, chè infer sempre pronto à seruirla, &amp; honorarla. Bascio le mane de v• signory.
The veneti•• Dop this.
Most vnexspectedly excellent! The French goes down cer∣taine.
As buckets are put down into a well;
Or as a schoole-boy.—
Truss up your simile, Iacke-daw, and observe.
Now the Monsieur is moved.
Boe-peepe.
O, most antique.
The french Quirk, this sir.
Heart, he will ouer-runne her!
Mademoiselle, Ie voudroy que po•oy monstrer mon affection, maize ie suis tant mal he•reuse, ci froid, ci laid, ci—Ie no scay queen di dire—excuse moi, Ie suis tout vostre.
O brave, and spirited! Hoe's a right Iouialist.
No, no: AMORPHVS gravity outwaies it.
And yet your lady, or your feather would outweigh both.
What's the prize, lady, at this better Reguard?
A Face favourably simpering, and a fan waving.
They have done doubtfully. Divide. Give the favourable Face to the Signior, and the light wave to the Monsi•ur.
You become the simper, well, lady.
And the wag, better.
Now, to our solemn Address. Please the well-grac'd PHILAV∣TIA to relieve the lady sentinel; she hath stood long.
With all my heart, come, Guardian▪ Resign your place.
Monsieur, furnish your self with what solemnity of ornament you think fit for this third weapon; at which you are to show all the cun∣ning of stroke, your devotion can possibly devise.
Let me alone, sir. Isle sufficiently decipher your amorous so∣lemnities. CRITIC, have patience. See, if I hit not all their practicke obe∣seruance, with which they lime twigs, to catch their fantastic ladiebirds.
I, but you should doe more charitably, to doe it more openly; that they might discover themselves mocked in these monstrous affections.
Lackey, whore's the taylor?
Here, sir.
See, they have their Taylor, Barber, Perfumer, Milliner, Jew∣eller, Feather-maker, all in common!
I, this is pretty.
Here is a hair too much, take it off. Where are thy mullets?
Is this pink of equal proportion to this cut, standing of this distance from it?
That it is, sir.
Is it so, sir, you impudent Poltroon? you slave, you list, you shreds, you.—
Excellent. This was the best, yet.
S'foot, we must use our taylors thus. This is your true magna∣nimitie.
Come, go to: put on. Wee must bear with you, for the times sake.
Is the perfume rich, in this jerkin?
Taste, smell; I assure you sir, pure beniamin, the only spirited sent, that ever awaked a neapolitane nostril. You would wish your self all nose, for the love o•t. I frotted a jerkin, for a new-reuenu'd gentleman, yielded me threescore crowns, but this morning, and the same titillation.
I savour no sampsuchine, in it.
I am a nulli-fidian, if there be not three thirds of a scruple more of samp•uchinum, in this confection, then ever I put in any. Isle tell you all the ingredients, sir.
You shall be simple, to discover your simples.
Simple? why sir? what reck I to whom I discover? I have in it, musk, civet, amber, pheenicobalanus, the decoction of turmericke, sesame, nerd, spikenard, calamus odoratus, stacte, opobalsamum, amomum, storax, lad•∣number, aspalathum, opponax, oenanthe. And what of all these now? what are you the better? Tut, it is the sorting, and the dividing, and the mixing, and the tampering, and the •earcing, and the decocting, that makes the fumiga∣tion, and the •uffumigation.
Well, endue me with it.
I will, sir.
An excellent confection.
And most worthy a true voluptarie. JOVE! what a coil these mukse-wormes take, to purchase another delight? for, themselves, who bear the odours, have ever the least sense of them. Yet, I doe like better the prodigality of jewels, and clothes, whereof one passes to a mans heirs; the other, at least wears out time: This presently expires, and without continual riot in reparation is lost: which who so strives to keep, it is one special argument to me, that (affecting to smell better then other men) he doth indeed smell far worse.
I know, you will say it sits well, sir.
Good faith, if it doe not, sir, let your Mistress be judge.
By heaven, if my Mistress doe not like it, I'll make no more con∣science to undo thee, then to undo an oyster.
Believe it, sir, there's ne'er a Mistress in the world can mislike it.
No, not goodwife Taylor, your Mistress; that has only the judgment to heat your pressing tool. But for a court-Mistris, that studies these decorums, and knows the proportion of every cut, to a hair, knows why such a colour, is cut upon such a colour, and, when a satin is cut upon six taffa•aes, will look that we should dive into the depth of the cut.— Give me my scarf. Show some ribbons, sir. Ha you the feather?
I, sir.
Have you the jewel?
Yes, sir.
What must I give for the hire on it?
You'll give me six crowns, sir?
Six crowns? By heaven it were a good deed to borrow it of thee, to show: and never let thee have it again.
I hope your worship will not doe so, sir.
By JOVE, sir, there bee such tricks stirring, I can tell you, and worthily too. Extorting knaves! that live by these Court-decorums, and yet, —What's your jewel worth, I pray?
A hundred crowns, sir.
A hundred crowns? And six for the loan on it an hour? What's that? the hundred for the year? These impostors would not bee hanged? your thief is not comparable to 'hem, by HERCVLES, well▪ put it in, and the feather. You will have it, and you shall; and the pox give you good on it.
Give me my confesses, my moscardini, and place those colours in my hat.
These are •olognian ribbons, I warrant you?
In truth, sir: if they be not right granado silk—
A pox on you, you'll all say so.
You give me not a penny, sir.
Come sir, perfume my divined; May it ascend, like solemn sa∣crifice, into the nostrils of the Queen of Love.
Your french ceremonies are the best:
Monsieur, Signior, your solemn Address is too long. The la∣dies long to have you come on.
Soft, sir, our coming on is not so easily prepared. Signior Fig.
I, sir.
Can you help my complexion, here?
O yes, sir, I have an excellent mineral Fuse••, for the purpose. The gloves are right, sir, you shall bury 'hem in a mucke-hill, a draught, seven years, and take 'hem out, and wash 'hem, they shall still retain
their first sent, true spanish. There's ambre in the vmbre.
Your price, sweet Fig.
Give me what you will, sir: The Signior pays me two crowns a pair, you shall give me your love, sir.
My love? with a pox to you, goodman sassafras.
I come, sir. There's an excellent diapasme in a chain too, if you like it.
Stay, what are the ingredients to your fucus?
Nought, but sublimate, and crude mercury, sir, well prepared, and dulcified, with the jaw-bones of a sow, burnt, beaten, and searced.
I approve it. Lay it on.
Isle have your chain of pomander, sirrah; what's your price?
We'll agree, Monsieur; Isle assure you, it was both decocted, and dried, where no sun came, and kept in an onyx ever since it was balled.
Come, invert my moustache, and we have done.
It is good.
Hold still I pray you, sir.
Nay, the •ucus is exorbitant, sir.
Death! dost thou burn me, Harlot?
I beseech you, sir.
Beggar, Varlet, Poltroon?
Excellent, excellent!
Your french Beat is the most natural beat of the world.
O, that I had plaid at this weapon!
Peace, now they come on; the second part.
Madame, your beauties, being so attractive, I muse you are left thus, alone.
Better be alone, sir; then ill-accompanied.
Nought can be ill, lady, that can come near your goodness.
Sweet Madame, on what part of you soever a man casts his eye, he meets with perfection; you are the lively image of VENVS, through∣out; all the GRACES smile in your cheeks; your beauty nourishes, as well as delights; you have a tongue stooped in honey; and a breath like a pan∣there: your breasts and forehead are whiter then gotes milk, or May-blos∣somes; a cloud is not so soft as your skin.—
Well struck, Monsieur: Hee charges like a Frenchman indeed, thick, and hotly.
Your cheeks are CUPIDS baths, wherein hee uses to steep himself in milk, and nectar: Hee do's light all his torches at your eyes, and instructs you how to shoot, and wound, with their beams. Yet I love nothing, in you, more then your innocence; you retain so native a simon∣plicitie, so vnblam'd a behaviour. Me thinks, with such a love, I should find no head, nor foot of my pleasure: You are the very spirit of a lady.
Fair play, Monsieur? you are too hot on the quarry. Give your competitor audience.
Lady, how stirring soever the Monsieurs tongue is, hee will lie by your side, more dull then your eunuch.
A good stroke; That mouth was excellently put over.
You are fair, lady—
You offer foul, Signior, to close. Keep your distance; for all your Bravo rampant, here.
I say you are fair, lady, let your choice be fit, as you are fair.
I say, ladies doe never believe they are fair, till some fool be∣gins to dote upon 'hem.
You play too rough, gentlemen.
Your frenchified fool is your only fool, lady: I doe yield to this honourable Monsieur, in all civil, and humane curtsy.
Buzz.
Admirable. Give him the prize. Give him the prize; That mouth, again, was most courtly hit, and rare.
I knew, I should pass upon him with the bitter Bob.
O, but the Reverse was singular.
It was most subtle, AMORPHVS.
If I had don't, it should have been better.
How heartily they applaud this, CRITIC!
You suffer 'hem too long
I'll take off their edge instantly.
Name the prize, at the solemn Address.
Two lips wagging.
And never a wise word; I take it.
Give to AMORPHVS. And, upon him, again; let him not draw free breath.
Thanks, fair deliverer, and my honourable judges, Madame PHANTASTE, you are our worthy object at this next weapon.
Most couetingly ready, AMORPHVS.
Your Monsieur is crestfallen.
So are most of 'hem once a year.
You will see, I shall now give him the gentle dor, presently, hee forgetting to shift the colours, which are now changed, with alteration of the Mistress. At your last weapon, sir. The perfect Close. Set forward, in∣tend your approach. Monsieur.
It is yours, Signior.
With your example, sir.
Not I, sir.
It is your right.
By no possible means.
You have the way.
As I am noble—
As I am virtuous—
Pardon me, sir.
I will die first.
You are a tyranne in curtsy.
He is removed—Judges bear witness.
What of that, sir?
You are removed, sir.
Well.
I challenge you; you have received the dor. Give me the prize.
Soft, sir. How, the dor?
The common Mistress, you see, is changed.
Right, sir.
And you have still in your hat the former colours.
You lie, sir, I have none: I have pulled 'hem out. I meant to play discoloured.
The dor, the dor, the dor, the dor, the dor! the palpable dor.
Heart of my blood. AMORPHVS, what have you done? Stuck a disgrace upon vs all, and at your last weapon?
I could have done no more.
By heaven, it was most unfortunate luck.
Luck! by that candle, it was mere rashness, and ouer-sight, would any man have venterd to play so open, and forsake his ward? Dam' me if he have not eternally undone himself, in court; and discountenanced vs, that were his maine countenance, by it.
Forgive it, now. It was the solecism of my stars.
The Wring by the hand, and the Banquet is ours.
O, here's a lady, feels like a wench of the first year; you would think her hand did melt in your touch; and the bones of her fingers ran out at length, when you pressed 'hem, they are so gently delicate! Hee that had the grace to print a kiss on these lips, should taste wine, &amp; rose-leaues. O, she kisses as close as a cockle. Let's take 'hem down, as deep as our hearts, wench, till our very souls mix. Adieu, Signior. Good faith, I shall drink to you at supper, sir.
Stay, Monsieur. Who awards you the prize?
Why, his proper merit, sir: you see hee has plaid down your grand garbe-Master, here.
That's not in your logic to determine, sir: you are no cour∣tier. This is none of your seven, or nine beggarly sciences, but a cer∣taine mystery aboue 'hem, wherein wee that have skill must pronounce, and not such fresh-men as you are.
Indeed, I must declare my self to you no professed courtling; nor to have any excellent stroke, at your subtle weapons: yet if you please, I dare venture a hit with you, or your fellow, sir DAGONET, here.
With me?
Yes, sir.
Heart, I shall never have such a fortune to save my self in a fell∣low again, and your two reputations, gentlemen, as in this. I'll under∣take him.
Doe, and swinge him soundly, good ANAIDES.
Let me alone, I'll play other manner of play, then has been seen, yet. I would the prize lay on it.
It shall if you will, I forgive my right.
Are you so confident? what's your weapon?
At any, I, sir.
The perfect Close, That's now the best.
Content, I'll pay your scholaritie. Who offers?
Mary, that will I. I dare give you that advantage, too.
You dare? Well, look to your liberal skonce.
Make your play still, upon the answer, sir.
Hold your peace, you are a hobby-horse.
Sit by me, Master.
Now CRITIC, strike home.
You shall see me undo the assured swaggerer with a trick, in∣stantly: I will play all his own play before him; court the wench, in his garb, in his phrase, with his face; leave him not so much as a look, an eye, a stalk, or an imperfect oath, to express himself by, after me.
Excellent, CRITIC.
When begin you, sir? Have you consulted?
To your cost, sir; which is the Piece, stands forth to bee cour∣ted? O, are you she? Well, Madame, or sweet lady, it is so, I doe love you in some sort, doe you conceive? and though I am no Monsieur, nor no Signior, and do want (as they say) logic and sophistry, and good words, to tell you why it is so; yet by this hand, and by that candle, it is so; And though I bee no booke-worme, nor one that deals by art, to give you rhetoric, and causes, why it should be so, or make it good it is so, yet dam me, but I know it is so, and am assured it is so, and I and my sword shall make it appear it is so; and give you reason sufficient, how it can be no otherwise, but so—
S'light, ANAIDES, you are mocked; and so we are all.
How now, Signior! What, suffer your self to bee cossen'd of your courtship, before your face?
This is plain confederacy, to disgrace vs: Let's bee gone, and plot some revenge.
When men disgraces share,
The lesser is the care.
Nay stay, my dear Ambition, I can doe you over too. You that tell your Mistress, Her beauty is all composde of theft; Her hair stole from APOLLO's goldy-locks; Her white and red, lilies, and roses stolen out of paradise; Her eyes, two stars, plucked from the sky; Her nose, the gnomon of Loves dial, that tells you how the clock of your heart goes: And for her other parts, as you cannot reckon 'hem, they are so many; so you cannot recount them, they are so manifest. Yours, if his own, un∣fortunate HOYDEN, in stead of HEDON.
Sister, come away, I cannot endure 'hem longer.
Go, Dors, and you, my Madame Courting-stocks,
Follow your scorned, and derided mates;
Tell to your guilty breasts, what mere guilt blocks
You are, and how unworthy humane states.
Now, sacred god of wit, if you can make
Those, whom our sports tax in these apish graces,
Kiss (like the fighting snakes) your peaceful rod;
These times shall canonise you for a god.
Why, CRITIC, think you any noble spirit,
Or any, worth the title of a man,
Will be incensed, to see th'inchaunted veils
Of selfe-conceit, and servile flattery
(Wrapped in so many solds, by time, and custom)
Drawn from his wronged, and bewitched eyes?
Who sees not now their shape, and nakedness,
Is blinder then the son of earth, the mole:
Crowned with no more humanity, nor soul.
Though they may see it, yet the huge estate
Fancy, and form, and sensual pride have gotten,
Will make them blush for anger, not for shame;
And turn shown nakedness, to impudence.
Humour is now the test, we try things in;
All power is just: Nought that delights is sin.
And, yet the zeal of every knowing man,
(Oppressed with hills of tyranny, cast on virtue
By the light phant'sies of fools, thus transported)
Cannot but vent the Aetna of his fires,
T'enflame best bosoms, with much worthier love
Then of these outward, and effeminate shades:
That, these vain joys, in which their wills consume
Such powers of wit, and soul, as are of force
To raise their beings to aeternitie,
May be converted on works, fitting men.
And, for the practice of a forced look,
An antique gesture, or a fustian phrase,
Study the native frame of a true heart,
An inward comeliness of bounty, knowledge,
And spirit, that may conform them, actually,
To Gods high figures, which they have in power:
Which to neglect for a selfe-louing neatness,
Is sacrilege, of an vnpardon'd greatness.
Then let the truth of these things strengthen thee,
In thy exempt, and only man-like course:
Like it the more, the less it is respected;
Though men fail, virtue is by gods protected.
See, here comes ARETE, I'll with-draw my self.
CRITIC, you must provide strait for a masque,
It is CYNTHIAS pleasure.
How, bright ARETE!
Why, it were a labour more for HERCVLES.
Better, and sooner durst I vnder-take
To make the different seasons of the year,
The winds, or elements to sympathize,
Then their unmeasurable vanity
Dance truly in a measure. They agree?
What though all concord's borne of contraries?
So many follies will confusion prove,
And like a sort of jarring instruments,
All out of time: because (indeed) we see
There is not that analogy, twixt discords,
As between things but merely opposite.
There is your error. For as HARMS wand
Charms the disorders of tumultuous ghosts,
And as the strife of Chaos then did cease,
When better light then Natures did arrive:
So, what could never in it self agree,
Forgets the eccentrike property,
And at her sight, turns forth-with regular,
Whose sceptre guides the flowing Ocean.
And though it did not, yet the most of them
(Being either courtiers, or not wholly rude)
Respect of majesty, the place, and presence,
Will keep them within ring; especially
When they are not presented as themselves,
But masked like others. For (in troth) not so
T'incorporate them, could be nothing else,
Then like a state ungoverned without laws;
Or body made of nothing but diseases:
The one, through impotence poor, and wretched,
The other, for the anarchy absurd.
But, lady, for the revellers themselves,
It would be better (in my poor conceit)
That others were employed: for such as are
Unfit to be in CYNTHIAES court, can seem
No less unfit to be in CYNTHIAES sports.
That, CRITIC, is not purposed without
Particular knowledge of the Goddess mind,
(Who holding true intelligence, what follies
Had crept into her palace) she resolved,
Of sports, and triumphs, under that pretext,
To have them muster in their pomp, and fullness:
That so she might more strictly, and to root,
Effect the reformation she intends.
I now conceive her heavenly drift in all,
And will apply my spirits, to serve her will.
O thou, the very power, by which I am,
And but for which, it were in vain to be,
Chief next DIANA, virgin, heavenly fair,
Admired ARETE (of them admired,
Whose souls are not kindled by the sense)
Disdain not my chaste fire, but feed the flame
Devoted truly to thy gracious name.
Leave to suspect vs: CRITIC well shall find,
As we are now most dear, we'll prove most kind.
Hark, I am called.
I follow instantly.
PHOEBVS APOLLO: if with ancient rites,
And due devotions, I have ever hung
Elaborate p•ans, on thy golden shrine,
Or sung thy triumphs in a lofty strain,
Fit for a theater of gods to hear;
And thou, the other son of mighty JOVE,
Cyllenian MERCVRY (sweet MAIAS joy)
If in the busy tumults of the mind,
My path thou ever hast illumined,
For which, thine altars I have oft perfumed,
And decked thy statues with discoloured flowers:
Now thrine invention in this glorious court,
That not of bounty only, but of right,
CYNTHIA may grace, and give it life by sight.
QVeene, and Huntress, chaste, and fair,
Now the Sun is laid to sleep,
Seated, in thy silver chair,
State in wonted manner keep:
HESPERVS entreats thy light,
Goddess, excellently bright.
Earth, let not thy envious shade
Dare it self to interpose;
CYNTHIAS shining orb was made
Heaven to clear, when day did close:
Bless vs then with wished sight,
Goddess, excellently bright.
Lay thy bow of pearl apart,
And thy cristall-shining quiver;
Give unto the flying hart
Space to breathe, how short soever:
Thou that make a day of night,
Goddess, excellently bright.
When hath DIANA, like an envious wretch,
That glitters only to his soothed self,
Denying to the world, the precious use
Of hoarded wealth, with-held her friendly aide?
Monthly, we spend our still-repaired shine,
And not forbid our virgin-waxen torch
To burn, and blaze, while nutriment doth last:
That once consumed, out of IOVES treasury
A new we take, and stick it in our sphere,
To give the mutinous kind of wanting men,
Their looked—for light. Yet, what is their desert?
"Bounty is wronged, interpreted as due;
"Mortals can challenge not a ray, by right,
"Yet doe expect the whole of CYNTHIAS light.
But if that Deities with-drew their gifts,
For humane follies, what could men deserve
But death, and darkness? It behooves the high,
For their own sakes, to doe things worthily.
Most true, most sacred Goddess; for the heavens
Receive no good of all the good they doe.
Nor JOVE, nor you, nor other heavenly power,
Are fed with fumes, which doe from incense rise,
Or sacrifices reeking in their gore,
Yet, for the care which you of mortals have,
(Whose proper good it is, that they be so)
You well are pleased with odours redolent:
But ignorant is all the race of men,
Which still complains, not knowing why, or when.
Else, noble ARETE, they would not blame,
And tax, for or unjust, or for as proud,
Thy CYNTHIA, in the things which are indeed
The greatest glories in our starry crown;
Such is our chastity: which safely scorns
(Not Love; for who more fervently doth love
Immortal honour, and divine renown?
But) giddy CUPID, VENVS frantic son.
Yet ARETE, if by this veiled light,
Wee but discovered (what we not discern)
Any the least of imputations stand
Ready to sprinkle our unspotted fame,
With note of lightness, from these revels near:
Not, for the empire of the vniuerse,
Should night, or court, this whatsoever shine,
Or grace of ours unhappily enjoy.
"Place, and occasion are two privy thieves;
"And from poor innocent ladies often steal
"(The best of things) an honourable name:
"To stay with follies, or where faults may be,
"Infers a crime, although the party free.
How Cynthian-ly (that is, how worthily
And like herself) the matchless CYNTHIA speaks!
Infinite jealousies, infinite regards,
Doe watch about the true virginity:
But PHoeBE lives from all, not only fault,
But as from thought, so from suspicion free.
"Thy presence broad-seales our delights for pure,
"What's done in CYNTHIAS sight, is done secure.
That then so answered (dearest ARETE)
What the argument or of what sort our sports
Are like to be this night, I not demand.
Nothing which duty, and desire to please
Bears written in the forehead, comes amiss.
But unto whose invention, must we owe,
The complement of this nights furniture?
Excellent Goddess, to a mans, whose worth,
(Without hyperbole,) I thus may praise;
One (at least) studious of deserving well,
And (to speak truth) indeed deserving well:
"Potential merit stands for actual,
"Where only opportunity doth want,
"Not will, nor power: both which in him abound.
One, whom the MVSES, and MINERVA love.
For whom should they, then CRITIC, more esteem,
Whom PHOEBVS (though not Fortune) holds dear?
And (which conuinceth excellence in him▪)
A principal admirer of your self.
Even, through the ungentle injuries of fate,
And difficulties, which doe virtue choke,
Thus much of him appears. What other things
Of farther note, doe lye unborn in him,
Them I doe leave for cherishment to show,
And for a Goddess graciously to judge.
We have already judged him, ARETE:
Nor are we ignorant, how noble minds
Suffer too much through those indignities,
Which times, and vicious persons cast on them:
Our self have ever vowed to esteem▪
(As virtue, for it self, so) fortune base;
Who's first in worth, the same be first in place.
Nor farther notice (ARETE) we crave
Then thine approuals sovereign warranty:
Let'be thy care, to make vs known to him,
"CYNTHIA shall brighten, what the world made dim.
Clear pearl of heaven, and, not to bee farther ambitious in titles, CYNTHIA. The same of this illustrous night, among others, hath also drawn these four fair virgins from the palace of their Queen Perfection (a word▪ which makes no sufficient difference, twixt hers, and thine) to visit thy imperial court: for she, their sovereign, not finding where to dwell among men, before her return to heaven, advised them wholly to consecrate themselves to thy celestial service, as in whose clear spirit (the proper element, and sphere of virtues) they should behold not her alone, (their ever honoured mistress) but themselves (more truly them∣selves) to live inthroniz'd. Her self would have commended them unto thy favour more particularly, but that she knows no commendation is more available with them, then that of proper virtue. Nevertheless, she willed them to present this crystal mound, a note of monarchy, and symbol of perfection, to thy more worthy deity; which, as here by me they most humbly doe, so amongst the rarities thereof, that is the chief, to show whatsoever the world hath excellent, howsoever remote and va∣rios. But your irradiate judgment will soon discover the secrets of this little crystal world. Themselves (to appear more plainly) because they know nothing more odious, then false pretexts, have chosen to express
their several qualities, thus, in several colours.
The first, in citron colour, is natural Affection, which given vs to procure our good, is sometime called STORGE, &amp; as every one is nearest to himself, so this hand-maid of reason, allowable selfe-loue, as it is without harm, so are none without it: Her place in the court of Perfection was to quic∣ken minds in the pursuit of honour. Her device is a perpendicular Level, upon a Cube, or Square. The word, SE SVO MODVLO. Alluding to that true measure of ones self, which as every one ought to make, so is it most conspicuous in thy divine example.
The second, in greene, is AGLAIA, delectable and pleasant Conuersati∣on, whose property is to move a kindly delight, and sometime not with∣out laughter: Her office, to entertain assemblies, and keep societies to∣gether with fair familiarity. Her device within a Ring of clouds, a Heart with shine about it. The word, CVRARVM NVEILA POLO. An alle∣gorie of CYNTHIAES light, which no less clears the sky, then her fair mirth the heart.
The third, in the discoloured mantle spangled all over, is EVPHANTAS∣TE, a well conceited Wittiness, and employed in honouring the court with the riches of her pure invention. Her device, upon a Petasus, or Mercurial hat, a Crescent. The word, SIC LIVES INGENII. Inferring, that the praise and glory of wit, doth ever increase, as doth thy growing moon.
The fourth in white, is APHELEIA, a Nymph as pure and simple as the soul, or as an abrase table, and is therefore called Simplicity, without folds, without pleights, without colour, without counterfeit: and (to speak plainly) Plainness it self. Her device is no device. The word un∣der her silver Shield, OMNIS ABASED FVCVS. Alluding to thy spotless self, who art as far from impurity, as from mortality.
My self (celestial Goddess) more fit for the court of CYNTHIA, then the arbors of CYTHEREE, am called ANTEROS, or Loves enemy; the more welcome therefore to thy court, and the fitter to conduct this quaternion, who as they are thy professed votaries, and for that cause adversaries to Love, yet thee (perpetual Virgin) they both love, and vow to love eter∣nally.
NOt without wonder, nor without delight,
Mine eyes have viewed (in contemplations depth)
This work of wit, divine, and excellent:
What shape? what substance? or what unknown power
In virgins habit, crowned with laurel leaves,
And olive branches woven in between,
On sea-girt rocks, like to a Goddess shines?
O front! Ô face! Ô all celestial sure,
And more then mortal! ARETE, behold
Another CYNTHIA, and another Queen,
Whose glory (like a lasting plenilune)
Seems ignorant of what it is to wane!
Not under heaven an object could be found
More sit to please. Let CRITIC make approach.
Bounty forbids to paule our thanks with stay,
Or to defer our favour, after view:
"The time of grace is, when the cause is new.
Lo, here the man (celestial DELIA)
Who (like a circle bounded in it self)
Contains as much, as man in fullness may.
Lo, here the man, who not of usual earth,
But of that nobler, and more precious mould,
Which PHOEBVS self doth temper, is composed;
And, who (though all were wanting to reward)
Yet, to himself he would not wanting be:
Thy favours gain is his ambitions most,
And labours best; who (humble in his height)
Stands fixed silent in thy glorious sight.
With no less pleasure, then we have beheld
This precious crystal, work of rarest wit,
Our eye doth read thee (now instilled) our CRITIC;
Whom learning, virtue, and our favour last,
Exempted from the gloomy multitude.
"With common eye the supreme should not see.
Henceforth be ours, the more thy self to be.
Heavens purest light, whose orb may be eclipsed,
But not thy praise (divinest CYNTHIA)
How much too narrow for so high a grace,
Thine (save therein) the most unworthy CRITIC
Doth find himself! for ever shine thy fame;
Thine honours ever, as thy beauties doe;
In me they must, my dark worlds chiefest lights,
By whose propitious beams my powers are raised
To hope some part of those most lofty points,
Which blessed ARETE hath pleased to name,
As marks, to which m'indeuours steps should bend:
Mine, as begun at thee, in thee must end.
SIster of PHOEBVS, to whose bright orb we owe, that we not com∣plain of his absence; These four brethren (for they are brethren, and sons of EVTAXIA, a lady known, and highly beloved of your resplendent deity) not able to be absent, when CYNTHIA held a solemn∣night, officiously insinuate themselves into thy presence: For, as there are four cardinal virtues, upon which the whole frame of the court doth move, so are these the four cardinal properties, without which, the body of complement moves not. With these four silver javelins (which they bear in their hands) they support in Princes courts the state of the pre∣sense, as by office they are obliged; which, though here they may seem superfluous, yet, for honours sake, they thus presume to visit thee, having also been employed in the palace of Queen Perfection. And though to them, that would make themselves gracious to a Goddess, sacrifices were fitter then presents, or Impress, yet they both hope thy favour; and (in place of either) use several Symboles, containing the titles of thy imp∣real dignity.
First, the hethermost, in the changeable blew, and greene robe, is the commendably-fashioned gallant, EVCOSMOS; whose courtly habit is the grace of the presence, and delight of the surveying eye: whom ladies understand by the names of neat, and elegant. His symbol is, DIVAE VIRGIN, in which he would express thy deities principal glory, which hath ever been virginity.
The second, in the rich acoutrement, and robe of purple, impaled with gold, is EVPATHES; who entertains his mind with an harmless, but not incurious variety: All the objects of his senses are sumptuous, him∣self a gallant, that, without excess, can make use of superfluity: go richly in embroideries, jewels (and what not?) without vanity, and fare delicately without gluttony: and therefore not (not without cause) is universally thought to be of five humour. His Symbol is, DIVAE OP∣TIME. An attribute to express thy goodness, in which thou so resem∣blessed JOVE thy father.
The third, in the blush-colour'd suit, is, EVTOLMOS, as duly rasp∣cting others, as never neglecting himself; commonly known by the title of good as dacitie: to courts, and courtly assemblies, a guest most acceptable. His Symbol is, DIVAE VIRAGINI. To express thy hardy courage, in chase of savage beasts, which harbour in woods, and wilderness.
The fourth, in watchet tinsel, is the kind, and truly benefique EVCO∣LOS. Who imparts not without respect, but yet without difficulty; and hath the happiness to make every kindness seem double, by the
timely, and freely bestowing thereof. He is the chief of them, who (by the vulgar) are said to be of good nature. His Symbol is, DIVAE MIX∣MAE. An adjunct to signify thy greatness, which in heaven, earth, and hell is formidable.
IS not that AMORPHVS, the travailer?
As though it were not! doe you not see how his legs are in travail with a measure?
HEDON, thy master is next.
What, will CUPID turn nomendator, and cry them?
No faith, but I have a comedy toward, that would not be lost for a kingdom.
In good time, for CUPID will prove the comedy.
MERCVRY, I am studying how to match them.
How to mis-match them were harder.
They are the Nymphs must doe it, I shall sport my self with their passions aboue measure.
Those Nymphs would be tamed a little indeed, but I fear thou hast not arrows for the purpose.
O, yes, here be of all sorts, flights, rovers, and butt-shafts. But I can wound with a brandish, and never draw bow for the matter.
I cannot but believe it, my invisible archer, and yet me thinks you are tedious.
It behooves me to be somewhat circumspect, MERCVRY; for if CYNTHIA hear the twang of my bow, she'll go near to whip me with the string: therefore, to prevent that, I thus discharge a brandish upon— it makes no matter which of the couples. PHANTASTE, and AMORPHVS, at you.
Will the shaking of a shaft strike 'hem into such a fever of affection?
As well as the wink of an eye: but I pray thee, hinder me not with thy prattle.
JOVE forbid I hinder thee. Mary, all that I fear, is CYNTHI∣AS presence; which, with the cold of her chastity, casts such an antipe∣ristasis about the place, that no heate of thine will tarry with the patient.
It will tarry the rather, for the antiperistasis will keep it in.
I long to see the experiment.
Why, their marrow boils already, or they are all turned eunuchs.
Nay, and 't bee so, I'll give over speaking, and bee a specta∣tor only.
CYNTHIA (by my bright soul) is a right exquisite, and splen∣didious
lady; yet AMORPHVS, I think, hath seen more fashions, I am sure more countries: but whether I have, or not, what need wee gaze on CYNTHIA, that have our self to admire?
O, excellent CYNTHIA! yet if PHANTASTE sate where she doo's, and had such a tire on her head (for attire can doe much) I say no more—but goddesses are goddesses, and PHANTASTE is as she is! I would the revels were done once, I might go to my school of glass•e, a∣gain, and learn to doe my self right after all this ruffling.
How now, CUPID? here's a wonderful change with your brandish! doe you not hear, how they dote?
What prodigy is this? no word of love? no mention? no motion?
Not a word, my little Ignis fallen, not a word.
Are my darts enchanted? Is their vigour gone? is their ver∣tu—
What? CUPID turned jealous of himself? ha, ha, ha.
Laughs MERCVRY?
Is CUPID angry?
Hath he not cause, when his purpose is so deluded?
A rare comoedie, it shall be entitled, CUPIDS.
Doe not scorn vs, HARMS.
Choler, and CUPID, are two fiery things; I scorn 'hem not. But I see that come to pass, which I presaged in the beginning.
You cannot tell: perhaps the physic will not work so soon upon some, as upon others. It may be, the rest are not so resty.
Ex vngue, you know the old adage, as these, so are the remainder.
I'll try: this is the same shaft, with which I wounded ARE∣GVRION.
I, but let me save you a labour, CUPID: there were certain bottles of water fetched, and drunk off (since that time) by these gallants.
JOVE, strike me into earth: The Fountain of selfe-Loue!
Nay, faint not, CUPID.
I remembered it not.
Faith, it was ominous to take the name of ANTEROS upon you, you know not what charm or enchantment lies in the word: you saw, I durst not venture upon any device, in our presentment, but was con∣tent to be no other then a simple page. Your arrows properties (to keep decorum) CUPID, are suited (it should seem) to the nature of him you personate.
Indignity not to be borne.
Nay rather, an attempt to have been forborne.
How might I revenge my self on this insulting MERCVRY! there's CRITIC, his minion, he has not tasted of this water. It shall be so. Is CRITIC turned dotard on himself too?
That follows not, because the venom of your shafts cannot pierce him, CUPID.
As though there were one antidote for these, and another for him?
As though there were not! or as if one effect might not arise of divers causes? What say you to CYNTHIA, ARETE, PHRONESIS, TIME, and others there?
They are divine.
And CRITIC aspires to be so.
But that shall not serve him.
It is like to doe it, at this time. But CUPID is grown too co∣uetous, that will not spare one of a multitude.
One is more then a multitude.
ORATES favour makes any one shot-proofe against thee, CV∣BID. I pray thee, light hony-bee, remember thou art not now in ADO∣RIS garden, but in CYNTHIAS presence, where thorns lie in garrison about the roses. Soft, CYNTHIA speaks.
LAdies, and gallants of our court, to end,
And give a timely period to our sports,
Let vs conclude them with declining night;
Our empire is but of the darker half.
And if you judge it any recompense
For your fair pains, to have earned DIANAS thanks,
DIANA grants them: and bestows their crown
To gratify your acceptable zeal.
For you are they, that not (as some have done)
Doe censure vs, as too severe, and sour,
But as (more rightly) gracious to the good;
Although we not deny, unto the proud,
Or the profane, perhaps indeed austere:
For so ACTAEON, by presuming far,
Did (to our grief) incur a fatal doom;
And so, swollen NIOBE (comparing more
Then he presumed) was trophaeed into stone.
But are we therefore judged too extreme?
Seems it no crime, to enter sacred bowers,
And hallowed places, with impure aspect,
Most lewdly to pollute? Seems it no crime,
To brave a deity? Let mortals learn
To make religion of offending heaven;
And not at all to censure powers divine.
To men, this argument should stand for firm,
"A Goddess did it, therefore it was good:
"We are not cruel, nor delight in blood.
But what have serious repetitions
To doe with revels, and the sports of court
We not intend to sour your late delights
With harsh expostulation. Let 't suffice,
That we take notice, and can take revenge
Of these calumnious, and lewd blasphemies.
For we are no less CYNTHIA, then we were,
Nor is our power (but as our self) the same:
Though we have now put on no tyre of shine,
But mortal eyes vndaz'led may endure.
"Years are beneath the spheres: and time makes weak
"Things under heaven, not powers which govern heaven.
And though our self be, in our self, secure,
Yet let not mortals challenge to themselves
Immunity from thence. Lo, this is all:
"Honour hath store of spleen, but wants gall.
Once more, we cast the slumber of our thanks
On your taken toil, which here let take an end.
And that we not mis-take your several words,
Nor you our favour, from your selves remove
What makes you not your selves, those clouds of masque:
"Particular pains, particular thanks doe ask.
How! let me view you! ha? Are we contemned?
Is there so little awe of our disdain,
That any (under trust of their disguise)
Should mix themselves with others of the court?
And (without forehead) boldly press so far,
As farther none? How apt is lenity
To be abused? severity to be loathed?
And yet, how much more doth the seeming face
Of neighbour-vertues, and their borrowed names,
Add of lewd boldness, to loose vanities?
Who would have thought that PHILAVTIA durst
Or have usurped noble STORGES name?
Or with that theft have ventured, on our eyes?
Who would have thought, that all of them should hope
So much of our conniuence, as to come
To grace themselves, with titles not their own?
In stead of med'cines, have we maladies?
And such impostumes, as PHANTASTE is,
Grow in our palace? we must lance these sores,
Or all will putrefy. Nor are these all,
For we suspect a farther fraud then this:
Take off our veil, that shadows may depart,
And shapes appear, beloved ARETE—So.
Another face of things presents it self,
Then did of late: What! featherd CUPID masked?
And masked like ANTEROS? And, stay! more strange!
Dear MERCVRIE, our brother like a page,
To countenance the ambush of the boy?
Nor ends our discovery as yet:
GELAIA, like a Nymph, that but ere-while
(In male attire) did serve ANAIDES?
CUPID came hither to find sport and game,
Who, heretofore hath been too conversant
Among our train; but never felt revenge:
And MERCVRIE bare CUPID company.
CUPID, we must confess this time of mirth
(Proclaimed by vs) gave opportunity,
To thy attempts, although no privilege;
Tempt vs no farther, we cannot endure
Thy presence longer: vanish hence, away.
You, MERCVRIE, we must entreat to stay,
And hear what we determine of the rest;
For in this plot, we well perceive your hand.
But (for we mean not a censorian task,
And yet to lance these ulcers grown so ripe)
Dear ARETE, and CRITIC, to you two
We give the charge; impose what pains you please:
The incurable cut off, the rest reform,
Remembering ever what we first decreed,
Since revels were proclaimed let now none bleed.
How well DIANA can distinguish times?
And forther censures? keeping to her self
The doom of gods, leaving the rest to vs?
Come, cite them, CRITIC, first, and then proceed.
First, PHILAVTIA (for she was the first,)
Then light GELAIA, in AGLAIAS name,
Thirdly PHANTASTE, and MORI next,
Maine follies all, and of the female crew:
AMORPHVS, or EVCOSMOS conterfeit,
Voluptuous HEDON tan for EVPATHES,
Brazen ANAIDES, and ASOTVS last,
With his two pages, MORVS and PROSAITES;
And thou, the travellers evil, COS, approach,
Impostors all, and male deformities—
Nay, forward, for I delegate my power.
And will that at thy mercy they doe stand,
Whom they so oft so plainly scorned before.
"It is virtue which they want, and wanting it,
"Honour no garment to their backs can fit.
Then, CRITIC, practise thy discretion.
Adored CYNTHIA, and bright ARETE,
Another might seem fitter for this task,
Then CRITIC far, but that you judge not so:
For I (not to appear vindictive,
Or mindful of contempts, which I contemned
As done of impotence) must be remiss,
Who, as I was the author, in some sort,
To work their knowledge into CYNTHIAS sight,
So should be much severer to revenge
Th'indignitie, hence issuing to her name.
But there's not one of these, who are vnpain'd,
Or by themselves unpunished: for vice
Is like a fury to the vicious mind,
And turns delight it self to punishment.
But we must forward to design their doom,
You are offenders, that must be confessed,
Doe you confess it?
We doe.
And, that you merit sharpe correction?
Yes.
Then we (reserving unto DELIAES grace,
Her further pleasure, and to ARETE
What DELIA granted) thus doe sentence you.
That from this place (for poenance known of all,
Since you have drunk so deeply of selfe-Loue)
You (two and two) singing a palinode,
March to your several homes by NIOBES stone,
And offer up two tears apiece thereon;
That it may change the name, as you must change,
And of a stone be called weeping Cross:
Because it stands cross of CYNTHIAS way,
One of whose names is sacred TRIVIA.
And, after poenance thus performed, you pass
In like set order, not as MIDAS did,
To wash his gold off into Tagus stream,
But to the well of knowledge, Helicon;
Where purged of your present maladies,
(Which are not few, nor slender) you become
Such as you fine would seem: and then return,
Offering your service to great CYNTHIA.
This is your sentence, if the goddess please.
To ratify it with her high consent:
"The scope of wise mirth unto fruit is bent.
We doe approve thy censure, beloved CRITIC.
Which MERCVRY, thy true propitious friend,
(A deity, next JOVE, beloved of vs)
Will vnder-take to see exactly done:
And for this service of discovery
Performed by thee, in honour of our name,
We vow to guerdon it with such due grace,
As shall become our bounty, and thy place.
"Princes, that would their people should doe well,
"Must at themselves begin, as at the head;
"For men, by their example, pattern out
"Their imitations, and reguard of laws:
"A virtuous Court a world to virtue draws.
From spanish shrugs, french faces, smirks, irps, and all affe∣cted humours.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From secret friends, sweet servants, loves, doves, and such phone∣tastique humours.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From stabbing of arms, flap-dragons, healths, whiffs, and all such swaggering humours.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From waving of fans, coy glances, glickes, cringes, and all such simpering humours.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From making love by atturny, courting of puppets, and paying for new acquaintance.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From perfumed dogs, munkeyes, sparrows, dildo's, and parachito's.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From wearing bracelets of hair, shooe-ties, gloves, garters, and rings with poesies.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From pargetting, painting, slicking, glazing, and renewing old rivaled faces.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From squiring to tilt-yards, play-houses, pageants, and all such public places.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From entertaining one gallant to gull an other, and making fools of either.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
From belying ladies favours, noble-mens countenance, coining coun∣terseit employments, vaine-glorious taking to them other men's services, and all selfe-louing humours.
Good MERCVRY defend vs.
NOw each one dry his weeping eyes,
And to the well of knowledge haste;
Where purged of your maladies,
You may of sweeter waters taste:
And, with refined voice, report
The grace of CYNTHIA, and her court.
GEntles, be it known to you, since I went in
I am turned rimer; and doe thus begin.
The Author (jealous, how your sense doth take
His travails) hath enjoined me to make
Some short, and ceremonious epilogue;
But if I yet know what, I am a rogue.
He ties me to such laws, as quite distract
My thoughts; and would a year of time exact.
I neither must be faint, remiss, nor sorry,
Sour, serious, confident, nor peremptory:
But betwixt these. Let's see; to lay the blame
Upon the Childrens action, that were lame.
To crave your favour, with a begging knee,
Were to distrust the writers faculty.
To promise better at the next we bring,
Prorogues disgrace, commends not any thing.
Stiffly to stand on this, and proudly approve
The play, might tax the maker of selfe-Loue.
I'll only speak, what I have heard him say;
by (—) it is good, and if you liked, you may.
Ec•e rubied quidam, pallet, slupet, oscitat, odit.
Hoc volo: nuns nobis carmine nostra placent.

YOU woeful wights give ear a while,
And mark the tenor of my stile,
Which shall such trembling hearts unfold
As seldom hath to fore been told.
Such chances rare and doleful news
Peace a Gods name.
As may attempt your wits to muse.
A pox a God on you.
And cause such trickling tears to pass,
Except your hearts be flint or brass:
To hear the news which I shall tell,
That in Castella once befell.
Sbloud, where did thou learn to corrupt a man in the midst of a verse, ha?
Gods lid man, service is ready to go up man, you must slip on your coat and come in, we lack waiters pity∣fully.
A pitiful hearing, for now must I of a merry Cobbler become mourning creature.
Well you'll come.
Presto. Go to, a word to the wise, away, fly? vanish: Lye there the weeds that I disdain to wear.
God save you Moister Juniper.
What Signior Antonio Balladino, welcome sweet Ingle,
And how do you sir?
Faith you see, put to my shifts here as poor retainers be oftentimes, sirrah Antony ther's one of my fellows might∣lie enamoured of thee, and I faith you slave, now your come I'll bring you together, i'ts Peter Onion, the groom of the hal, do you know him.
No not yet, I assure you.
O he is one as right of thy humour as may be, a plain simple Rascal, a true dunce, marry he hath been anotable vilaine in his time: he is in love, sirrah, with awench, &amp; I have preferred thee to him, thou shalt make him some pretty Paradox or some Aligory, how does my coat sit? well.
I very well.
Na Gods so, fellow Juniper, come away.
Art thou there mad slave, I come with a powder?. Sirrah fellow Onion. I must have you peruse this Gentleman well, and doe him good offices of respect and kindness, as in∣stance shall be given.
Nay good moister Onion what do you mean, I pray you sir you are to respectue in good faith.
I would not you should think so sir, for though I have no learning, yet I honour a scholar in any ground of the earth sir,
Shall I request your name sir?
My name is Antonio Balladino.
Balladino? you are not Pageant Poet to the City of Mil∣lain sir▪ are you.
I supply the place sir: when aworse cannot be had sir.
I cry you mercy sir, I love you the better for that sir, by Iesu you must pardon me, I knew you not, but Il'd pray to be better acquainted with you sir, I have seen of your works.
I am at your service good Moister Onion, but concer∣ning this maiden that you love sir? what is she,
O did my fellow Juniper tell you? marry sir, she is
as one may say, but a poor mans child indeed, and for mine own part I am no Gentleman borne I must confess, but my mind to me a kingdom is truly.
Truly a very good saying.
It is somewhat stale, but that's no matter.
O it is the better, such things ever are like bread, which the staler it is, the more wholesome.
This is but a hungry comparison in my judgment.
Why, I'll tell you, M. Onion, I do use as much stale stuff, though I say it my self, as any man does in that kind I am sure. Did you see the last Pageant, I set forth?
No faith sir, but there goes a huge report on it.
Why, you shall be one of my Maecen-asses, I'll give you one of the books, O you'll like it admirably.
Nay that's certain, I'll get my fellow Juniper to read it.
Read it sir, I'll read it to you.
Tut then I shall not choose but like it.
Why look you sir, I write so plain, and keep that old Decorum, that you must of necessity like it; mary you shall have some now (as for example, in plays) that will have eve∣rye day new tricks, and write you nothing but humours: in∣deed this pleases the Gentlemen: but the common sort they care not for it, they know not what to make on it, they look for good matter, they, and are not edified with such toys.
You are in the right, I'll not give a halfepeny to see a thousand on'hem. I was at one the last Term, but &amp; ever I see a more roguish thing, I am a piece of cheese, &amp; no onion, nothing but kings &amp; princes in it, the fool came not out a lot.
True sir, they would have me make such plays, but as I tell hem, and they'll give me twenty pound a play, I'll not raise my vain.
No, it were a vain thing, and you should sir.
Tut give me the penny, give me the penny, I care not for the Gentlemen I, let me have a good ground, no matter for the pen the plot shall carry it.
Indeed that's right, you are in print already for the
best plotter.
I, I might as well ha been put in for a dumb show too.
I marry sir, I marle you were not, stand aside sir a while:
How now friend, what are you there? be uncovered, Would you speak with any man here?
I, or else I must Ira' returned you no answer.
Friend, you are somewhat to peremptory, let's crave your absence: nay never scorn it, I am a little your better in this place.
I do acknowledge it.
Do you acknowledge it? nay then you shall go forth, Isle teach you how shall acknowledge it another time; go to, void, I must have the hall purged, no setting up of a rest here, pack, begone.
I pray you sir is not your name Onion?
Your friend as you may use him, and M. Onion, say on.
M. Onion with a murrain, come come put off this Lyons hide, your ears have discovered you, why Peter! do not I know you Peter?
Gods so, Valentine!
O can you take knowledge of me now sir?
Good Lord, sir, how thou art altered with thy travel?
Nothing so much as thou art with thine office, but sir, Onion is the Count Ferneze at home?
I Bully, he is aboue; and the Lord Paulo Ferneze, his son, and Madam Aurelia, &amp; madam Phaenixella, his daugh∣ters, But O Valentine?
How now man, how dost thou?
Faith sad, heavy, as a man of my coat ought to be.
Why man, thou were merry enough even now.
True, but thou know
All creatures here soiorning, upon this wretched earth,
Sometimes have a fit of mourning, as well as a fit of mirth.
O Valentine, mine old Lady is dead, man.
Dead!
I faith.
When dyed she?
Mary, to morrow shall be three months, she was seen going to heaven they say, about some five weeks agony! how now? trickling tears, ha?
Faith thou hast made me weep with this news.
Faith thou hast made me weep with this news.
Why I have done but the part of an Onion, you must pardon me.
What Valentiue? fellow Onion, take my dish I prithee you rogue sirrah, tell me, how thou dost, sweet Ingle.
Faith, Juniper, the better to see thee thus frolic.
Nay, slid I am no changeling, I am Juniper still.
 I keep the pristmate ha, you mad Hierogliphick, when shall we swagger.
Hierogliphick, what meanest thou by that.
Mean? Gods so, first not a good word man? what? stand upon meaning with your friends. Puh, Abscond.
Why, but stay, stay, how long has this sprightly humour haunted thee?
Foe humour, a foolish natural gift we have in the Ae∣quinoctiall.
Natural, slid it may be supernatural, this?
Valentine, I prithee ruminate thy self welcome. What fortune de la Guerra.
O how pitifully are these words forced.
As though they were pumped out on's belly.
Sirrah Ingle, I think thou hast seen all the strange countries in Christendom since thou went?
I have seen some Juniper.
You have seen Constantinople?
I, that I have.
And Jerusalem, and the Indies, and Goodwin sands, and the tower of Babylon, and Venice and all.
I all; 〈◊◊〉 and he have a nimble tong, if he prac∣tise to vault thus from one side of the world to another.
O it's a most heavenly thing to travel, &amp; see countries, especially at sea, and a man had a patent not to be sick.
O sea sick lest, and full of the scurvy.
Valentine? welcome I faith how dost sir?
How do you good Valentine.
Troth, Valentine, I am glad to see you.
Welcome sweet rogue.
Before God he never looked better in his life.
And how first man? what, Alla Coragio.
Never better gentlemen I faith.
S'will here comes the steward.
Why how now fellows all here? and nobody to weight aboue now they are ready to rise? look up one or two Signior Francisco Colomia's man how doo's your good moister.
In health sir he will be here anon.
Is he come home, then?
I sir he is not past six miles hence, he sent me before to learn if Count Ferneze were here and return him word.
Yes, my Lord is here; and you may tel your moister he shall come very happily to take his leave of Lord Paulo Fer∣neze: who is now instantly to depart with other noble gentle∣men, upon special service.
I will tell him sir.
I pray you doe, fellows make him drink.
Sirs, what service first they are employed in?
Why against the French they mean to have a fling at Millaine again they say.
Who leads our forces, can you tell?
Marry that do's Signior Maximilian? he is aboue, now.
Who, Maximilian of Vicenza?
I he? do you know him?
Know him? O yes he's an excellent brave soldier.
I so they say, but one of the most vain glorious men in Europe.
He is indeed, marry exceeding valiant.
And that is rare.
What.
Why to see a vaineglorious man valiant.
Well he is so I assure you.
What no further yet, come on you precious rascal, sir Valentine, Isle give you a health I faith, for the heavens you mad Capriceio, hold hook and line.
Boy.
My Lord.
Sirrah go up to Signior Angelio,
And pray him (if he can) devise some means,
To leave my father, and come speak with me.
I will my Lord.
Well heaven, be auspicious in the event;
For I do this against my Genius,
And yet my thoughts cannot propose a reason.
Why I should fear, or faint thus in my hopes,
Of one so much endeared to my love.
Some spark it is, kindled within the soul:
Whose light yet breaks not to the outward sense,
That propagates this timorous suspect;
His actions never carried any face
Of change, or weakness: then I injury him?
In being thus cold conceited of his faith,
O here he comes.
How now sweet Lord, whats the matter?
Good faith his presence makes me half ashamed.
Of my strayed thoughts. Boy. Bestow your self.
Where is my father, Signior Angelio.
Marry in the gallery, where your Lordship left him.
Thats well. Then Angelio I will be brief.
Since time forbids the use of circumstance,
How well you are received in my affection,
Let it appear by this one instance, only
That now I will deliver to your trust,
The dearest secrets, treasurd in my bosom,
Dear Angelio. You are not every man,
But one, whom my election hath designed,
As the true proper object of my soul:
I urge not this t'insinuate my desert,
Or supple your tried temper, with soft phrases;
True friendship lothes such oily complement:
But from th'aboundance of that love, that flows
Through all my spirits, is my speech enforced.
Before your Lordship do proceed too far,
Let me be bold to intimate thus much;
That what so ere your wisdom hath t'expose,
Be it the weightiest and most rich affair,
That ever was included in your breast,
My faith shall poise it, if not—
O no more,
Those words have rapt me with their sweet effects,
So freely breathed, and so responsible,
To that which I endeavoured to extract,
Arguing a happy mixture of our souls.
Why were there no such sympathy sweet Lord?
Yet the impressure of those ample favours,
I have derived from your unmatched spirit,
Would bind my faith to all obseruances.
How! favours Angello, ô speak not of them,
They are mere paintings, and import no merit,
Looks my love well? thereon my hopes are placed:
Faith, that is bought with favours, cannot last.
My Lord.
How now?
You are sought for all about the house, within,
The Count your father calls for you.
God, what cross events do meet my purposes?
Now will he violently fret and grieve
That I am absent. Boy, say I come presently:
Sweet Angello, I cannot now insist
Upon particulars, I must serve the time
The maine of all this is, I am in love.
Why starts your Lordship?
I thought I heard my father coming hither ward, list, ha?
I hear not any thing, it was but your imagination sure.
No?
No, I assure your Lordship.
I would work safely.
Why, has he no knowledge of it then?
O no, no creature yet partakes it but your self
In a third person, and believe me friend,
The world contains not now another spirit,
To whom I would reueile it. Hark, hark,
A pox upon those brazen throated slaves,
What are they mad, trow?
Alas, blame not them,
Their services are (clock-like) to beset,
Backward and forward, at their Lords command,
You know my father's wayward, and his humour
Must not receive a check, for then all objects,
Feed both his grief and his impatience,
And those affections in him, are like powder,
Apt to inflame with every little spark,
And blow up reason, therefore Angelo, peace.
Why this is rare, is he not in the garden?
I know not my Lord.
See, call him?
He is coming this way, let's withdraw a little.
where should he be, trow? did you look in the armoury?
No my Lord.
No, why there? ô who would keep such drones?
 How now, ha ye found him?
No my Lord.
No my Lord, I shall have shortly all my family
Speak nought, but no my Lord, where is Christophero,
Look how he stands, you sleep y knave,
What is he not in the Garden?
No my good Lord.
Your good Lord, ô how this smells of fennel.
 You have been in the garden it appears, well, well.
We cannot find him my Lord.
He is not in the armoury.
He is not, he is no where, is he?
Count Ferneze.
Signior.
Preserve your patience honourable Count.
Patience? a Saint would loose his patience to be crossed,
As I am with a sort of motley brains,
See see, how like a nest of Rooks they stand,
Gaping on one another! now Diligence, what news bring you?
Ant please your honour.
Tut, tut, leave pleasing of my honour Diligence, you double with we, come.
How: does he find fault with Please his Honour. S'wounds it has begun a serving mans speech, ever since I be∣longed to the blew order: I know not how it may show, now I am in black, but—
Whats that, you mutter sir? will you proceed?
Ant like your good Lordship.
Yet more; Gods precious.
What, do not this like him neither?
What say you sir knave?
Mary I say your Lordship were best to set me to school again, to learn how to deliver a message.
What do you take exceptions at me then.
Exception? I take no exceptions, but by Gods so your humours—
Go to you are a Rascal, hold your tongue.
Your Lordships poor servant, I.
Tempt not my patience.
Why I hope I am no spirit, am I?
My Lord, command your Steward to correct the slave.
Correct him, S'bloud come you and correct him and you have a mind to it, correct him, that's a good jest I faith, the Steward and you both, come and correct him.
Nay see, away with him, pull his cloth over his ears.
Cloth? tell me of your cloth, here's your cloth, nay and I morn a minute longer, I am the rottenest Onion that e∣for spake with a tongue.
What call your hint's count Ferneze?
His name is Onion Signior,
I thought him some such saucy companion.
Signior Maximillian.
Sweet Lord.
Let me entreat you, you would not regard
Any contempt flowing from such a spirit,
So rude, so barbarous.
Most noble Count under your favour—
Why Isle tell you Signior,
Heel bandy with me word for word, nay more,
Put me to silence, strike me perfect dumb;
And so amaze me, that oftentimes I know not,
Whether to check or cherish his presumption:
Therefore good Signior.
Sweet Lord satisfy your self, I am not now to learn how to manage my affections, I have observed, and know the difference between a base wretch and a true man, I can distinguish them, the property of the wretch is, he would hurt and cannot, of the man, he can hurt, and will not.
Go to, my merry daughter, ô these looks,
Agree well with your habit, do they not?
Tut, let me alone. By your favour, this is the Gen∣tleman I think, Sir you appear to be an honourable Gentle∣man, I understand, and could wish (for mine own part) that things were conden't otherwise then they are: but (the world knows) a foolish fellow, somewhat procliue, and hasty, he did it in a prejudicate humour; mary now upon better com∣putation, he wanes; he melts; his poor eyes are in a cold sweat. Right noble Signior, you can have but compunction, I love the man, tender your compassion.
Doth any man here understand this fellow?
O God sir, I may say frustra to the comprehension of your intellection.
Before the Lord, he speaks all riddle, I think.
I must have a comment ere I can conceive him.
Why he sues to have his fellow Onion pardoned,
And you must grant it Signior.
O with all my soul my Lord, is that his motion?
I sir, and we shall retort these kind favours with all alacrity of spirit, we can sir, as may be most expedient, as well for the quality as the cause, till when in spite of this complement: I rest a poor Cobbler, servant to my honourable Lord here, your friend and Juniper.
How Juniper?
I Signior.
He is a sweet youth, his tongue has a happy turn when he sleeps.
I for then it rests, O Sir your welcome,
Why God be thanked you are found at last.
Signior Coloma truly you are welcome,
I am glad to see you sir so well returned.
I gladly thank your honour, yet indeed
I am sorry for such cause of heaviness,
As hath possessed your Lordship in my absence.
O Francisco' you knew her what she was!
She was a wise and honourable Lady.
I was she not! well weep not she is gone,
Persons duld eye can make two grieves of one,
Whom death mark out, virtue, nor bluod can save,
Princes, as beggars, all must feed the grave.
Are your horse ready Lord Paulo,
I signior the stay for vs at the gate.
Well tic good. Ladies I will take my leave of you,
Be your fortunes as your selves? fair. Come let vs to horse,
Count Ferneze I bear a spirit full of thanks for all your hono∣rabble courtesies.
Sir I could wish the number and value of them more in respect of your deservings. But Signior Maximillian. I pay you a word in private.
I Faith brother you are fitted for a general yonder, Beshrow my heart (If I had Fortunatus hat here) and I would not wish my self a man and go with you, only t'enioy his pre∣sense.
Why do you love him so well sister.
No by my troth, but I have such an odd pretty appre∣hension of his humour me thinks: that I am even tickled with the conceit of it.
O he is a fine man.
And me thinks another may be as fine as he.
O Angelio, do you think I do urge any comparison a∣against you? no, I am not so ill bred, as to be a deprauer of your worthiness: believe me, if I had not some hope of your abiding with vs, I should never desire to go out of black whilst I lived: but learn to speak in the nose, and turn puritan presently.
I thank you Lady: I know you can flout.
Come doe you take it so? I faith you wrong me.
I, but Madam,
Thus to disclaim in all the effects of pleasure,
May make your sadness seem to much affected,
And then the proper grace of it is lost.
Indeed sir, if I did put on this sadness
Only abroad, and in Society,
And were in private merry; and quick humoured;
Then might it seem affected and abhord:
But as my looks appear, such is my spirit,
Drowned up with confluence of grief, and melancholy,
That like to rivers run through all my veins,
Quenching the pride and fervor of my blood.
My honourable Lord? no more.
There is the honour of my blood engaged,
For your sons safety.
Signior, blame me not,
For tending his security so much,
He is mine only son, and that word only,
Hath with his strong, and reprecussiue sound,
Stroke my heart cold, and given it a deep wound.
Why but stay, I beseech you, had your Lordship ever any more sons then this.
Why have not you known it Maximilian?
Let my Sword fail me then.
I had one other younger borne then this,
By twice so many how ers as would fill
The circle of a year, his name Camillo,
Whom in that black, and fearful night I lost,
(Tic now a nineteen years agony at least,
And yet the memory of it fits as fresh
Within my brain as it were but yesterday)
It was that night wherein the great Chamont,
The general for France surprised Vicenza,
Me thinks the horror of that clamorous shout
His soldiers gave when they attained the wall,
Yet tingles in mine ear, me thinks I see
With what amazed looks, distracted thoughts,
And minds confused, we, that were citizens,
Confronted one another: every street
Was filled with bitter self tormenting cries,
And happy was that foot, that first could press,
The flowery champaign, bordering on Verona
Here I (employed about my dear wives safety)
Whose soul is now in peace) lost my Camillo.
Who sure was murdered by the barbarous Soldiers,
Or else I should have heard—my heart is great.
Sorrow is faint? and passion makes me sweat.
Grieve not sweet Count: comfort your spirits, you have a son a noble gentleman, he stands in the face of ho∣nor: For his safety let that be no question. I am moister of my fortune, and he shall share with me. Farewell my honourable Lord. Ladies once more adieu, for your self madam you are a most rare creature, I tell you so, be not proud of it, I love you: come Lord Paulo to horse.
Adieu good Signior Francisco: farewell sister.
How shall we rid him hence.
Why well enough? sweet Signior Maximilian.
I have some small occasion to stay:
If it may please you but take horse before
Isle over take you, ere your troops be ranged.
Your motion hath taste well: Lord Ferneze I go
Now if my love fair Rachel, were so happy,
But to look forth. See fortune doth me grace.
Before I can demand? how now love.
Where is your father?
Gone abroad my Lord:
Thats well,
I but I fear heel presently return,
Are you now going my most honoured Lord?
I my sweet Rachel.
Before God, she is a sweet wench.
Rachel I hope I shall not need to urge,
The sacred purity of our effects,
As if it hung in trial or suspense:
Since in our hearts, and by our mutual vows,
It is confirmed and sealed in sight of heaven.
Nay doe not weep, why start you? fear not, Love.
Your father cannot be returned so soon,
I prithee doe not look so heavily
Thou shalt want nothing
No is your presence nothing,
I shall want that, and wanting that, want all
For that is all to me.
Content thee sweet
I have Made choice here of a constant friend
This gentleman? one, whose zealous love
I doe repose more, then on all the world,
Thy beauteous self excepted: and to him,
Have I committed my dear care of thee,
As to my genius, or my other soul.
Receive hi gentle love and what deffects,
My absence proves, his presence shall supply.
The time is envious of our longer stay.
Farewell dear Rachel.
Most dear Lord, adieu,
Heaven and honour crown your deeds, and you,
Faiah tell me Angelio how dost thou like her?
Troth well my Lord, but shall I speak my mind.
I prithee doe.
She is deriud too meanly to be wife
To such a noble person, in my judgment.
Nay then thy judgment is to men, I se•
Did thou near read in difference of good
Tic more to shine in virtue then in blood.
Come you are so sententious my Lord.
Here comes her father. How dost thou good Iaques?
God save thee Iaques.
What should this mean? Rachel open the door.
Sbloud how the poor slave looks, as though
He had been hauuted by the spirit Lar,
Or seen the ghost of some great Satrapas.
In an unsavoury sheet.
I muse he spake no, belike he was amazed
Coming so suddenly and vnprepard? Well lets go:
SO now enough my heart, beat now no more;
At least for this affright, what a could sweat,
Flowed on my brows, and over all my bosom!
Had I not reason? to behold my door
Beset with unthrifts, and my self abroad?
Why Iaques? was their nothing in the house
Worth a continual eye, a vigelent thought,
Whose head should never nod, nor eyes once wink?
Look on my coat; my thoughts; worn quite thread bare,
That time could never cover with a nap,
And by it learn, never with nappes of sleep,
To smother your conceits of that you keep.
But yet, I marvel, why these gallant youths
Spokeine so fair, and I esteemed a beggar?
The end of flattery, is gain, or lechery:
If they seek gain of me, they think me rich,
But that they do not: for their other object:
Tic in my handsome daughter, if it be.
And by your leave, her handsomeness may tell them
My beggary counterfeits, and, that her neatness,
Flows from some store of wealth, that breaks my coffers,
With this same engine, love to mine own breed.
But this is answered: Beggars will keep fine,
Their daughters, being fair, though themselves pine.
Well then, it is for her, I, it is sure for her,
And I make her so brisk for some of them,
That I might live alone once with my gold.
O it is a sweet companion! kind and true,
A man may trust it when his father cheats him;
Brother, or friend, or wife, ô wondrous pelf,
"That which makes all men false, is true it self.
But now this maid, is but supposed my daughter:
For I being Steward to a Lord of France,
Of great estate, and wealth, called Lord Chammount,
He gone into the wars, I stole his treasure,
(But hear not, any thing) I stole his treasure,
And this his daughter, being but two years old,
Because it loved me so, that it would leave
The nurse her self, to come into mine arms,
And had I left it, it would sure have dyed.
Now herein I was kind, and had a conscience;
And since her Lady mother that did dye
In child-bed of her, loved me passing well,
It may be nature fashiond this affection,
Both in the child and her: but hes ill bred,
That ransackes tombs, and doth deface the dead.
I'll therefore say no more: suppose the rest,
Here have I changed my form, my name and hers.
And live obsurely, to enjoy more safe
My dearest treasure. But I must abroad, Rachel.
What is your pleasure sir?
Rachel I must abroad.
Lock thy self in, but yet take out the key,
That whosoever peepes in at the key-hole,
May yet imagine there is none at home.
I will sir.
But hark thee Rachel: say a thief should come,
And miss the key, he would resoule indeed
None were at home, and so break in the rather:
Op the door Rachel, set it open daughter;
But sit in it thy self: and talk aloud,
As if there were some more in house with thee:
Put out the fire, kill the chimneys hart,
That it may breath no more then a dead man,
The more we spare my child, the more we gain.
What says my fellow Onion? come on.
All of a house sir, but no fellows, you are my Lords Steward, but I pray you what think you of love, sir?
Of love Onion? Why it's a very honourable humour.
Nay if it be but worshipful I care not.
Go to, it's honourable, check not at the conceit of the Gentleman.
But in truth sir, you shall do well to think well of love:
For it thinks well of you, in me, I assure you.
Gramercy fellow Onion: I do think well, thou art in love, art thou?
Partly sir, but I am ashamed to say wholly.
Well, I will further it in thee to any honest woman, or maiden, the best I can.
Why now you come near him sir, he doth veil,
He doth remunerate, he doth chaw the cud in the kindness
Of an honest imperfection to your worship.
But who is it thou love fellow Onion?
Mary a poor mans daughter, but none of the honest∣est, I hope.
Why, would thou not have her honest?
O no, for then I am sure she would not have me. It is Rachel de Pry.
Why, she hath the name of a very virtuous maiden.
So she is sir, but the fellow talks in quiddits, he.
What would thou have me do in the matter?
Do nothing sir, I pray you, but speak for me.
In what manner?
My fellow Juniper can tell you sir.
Why as thus sir. Your worship may commend him for a fellow fit for consanguinity, and that he shakes with defer of procreation, or so.
That were not so good, me thinks.
No sir, why so sir? what if you should say to her, corroborate thy self sweet soul, let me distinguish thy paps with my fingers, divine Mumps, pretty Pastorella? look thou so sweet and bounteous? comfort my friend here.
Well I perceive you wish, I should say something may do him grace, and further his desires, and that be sure I will.
I thank you sir, God save your life, I pray God sir.
Your worship is too good to live long: you'll con∣taminate me no service.
Command thou would say, no good Juniper.
Health and wealth sir.
This wench will• solicit for my self,
Making my Lord and moister privy to it;
And if he second me with his consent,
I will proceed, as having long ere this,
Though her a worthy choice to make my wife.
Room for a case of matrons coloured black,
How motherly my mothers death hath made vs?
I would I had some girls now to bring up;
O I could make a wench so virtuous,
She should say grace to every bit of meat,
And gape no wider then a wafers thickness:
And she should make French curses, so most low,
That every touch should turn her over backward.
Sister, these words become not your atrire,
Nor your estate: our virtuous mothers death
Should print more deep effects of sorrow in vs,
Then may be worn out in so little time.
Sister, faith you take too much Tobacco,
It makes you black within, as you're without.
What true-stich sister? both your sides alike?
Be of a sleighter work: for of my word,
You shall be sold as dear or rather dearer?
Will you be bound to customs and to rites?
Shed profitable tears, weep for advantage;
Or else, do all things, as you are inclined.
Hate when your stomach serves (saith the Physician)
Not at eleven and six. So if your humour
Be now affected with this heaviness.
Give me the reins and spare not, as I do,
In this my pleasurable appetite,
It is Praecisianisme to alter that
With austere judgment, that is given by nature.
I wept you saw too, when my mother dyed:
For then I found it easier to do so,
And fitter with my mood, then not to weep.
But now tic otherwise, another time
Perhaps I shall have such deep thoughts of her,
That I shall weep a fresh, some twelve month hence,
And I will weep, if I be so disposed,
And put on black, as grimly then, as now;
Let the mind go still with the bodies stature,
Judgment is fit for Judges, give me nature.
See Signior Angelo here are the Ladies,
Go you and comfort one, Isle to the other.
Therefore I come sir, I'll to the eldest.
God save you Ladies, these sad moods of yours,
That make you choose these solitary walks,
Are hurtful for your beauties.
If we had them.
Come, that condition might be for your hearts,
When you protest faith, since we cannot see them.
But this same heart of beauty, your sweet face
Is in mine eye still.
O you cut my heart with your sharpe eye.
Nay Lady thats not so, your heart's to hard.
My beauties hart?
O no.
I mean that regent of affection, Madam,
That tramples on al love with such contempt •n this fair breast.
No more, your drift is savoured,
I had rather seem hard hearted
Then hard favoured,
Is that your meaning, Lady?
Go too sir.
Your wits are fresh I know, they need no spur,
And therefore you will ride them.
Say I doe.
They will not tire I hope?
No not with you, hark you sweet Lady.
Tic much pity Madam.
You should have any reason to retain
This sign of grief, much less the thing designed.
Griefs are more fit for Ladies then their pleasures.
That is for such as follow nought but pleasures.
But you that temper them so well with virtues,
Using your griefs so it would prove them pleasures.
And you would seem in cause of griefs &amp; pleasures equally pleasant.
Sir so I do now.
It is the excess of either that I strive
So much to shun in all my proved endeavours,
Although perhaps unto a general eye,
I may appear most wedded to my griefs,
Yet doth my mind forsake no taste of pleasure,
I mean that happy pleasure of the soul,
Divine and sacred contemplation
Of that eternal, and most glorious bliss.
Proposed as the crown unto our souls.
I will be silent, yet that I may serve
But as a Decade in the art of memory
To put you still in mind of your own virtues
When your too serious thoughts make you too sad)
Accept me for your servant honoured Lady.
Those ceremonies are too common signior Francis,
For your vncommon gravity, and judgment,
And fits them only, that are nought but ceremony.
Come, I will not sue, stally to be your servant,
But a new term, will you be my refuge?
Your refuge, why sir.
That I might fly to you, when all else fail me.
And you be good at flying, be my Plouer.
Nay take away the P.
Tut, then you cannot fly.
Isle warrant you. Isle borrow Cupids wings.
Mass then I fear me you'll do strange things:
I pray you blame me not, if I suspect you,
Your own confession simply doth detect you,
Nay and you be so great in Cupids books,
T'will make me Jealous. you can with your looks
(I warrant you) inflame a women's heart,
And at your pleasure take loves golden dart,
And wound the breast of any vertous maid.
Would I were hence: good Faith I am afraid,
You can constrain one ere they be aware,
To run mad for your love?
O this is rate.
Close with my daughters gentlemen? well done,
Tic like your selves: nay lusty Angelo,
Let not my presence make you bauke your sport,
I will not break a minute of discourse
Twixt you and one of your fair Mistresses.
One of my mistresses? why thinks your Lordship I have so many
Many? no Angelo.
I do not think you have many, some fourteen
I here thou hast, even of our worthiest dames,
Of any note, in Millaine:
Nay good my Lord fourteen: it is not so.
By the the Mass that first, here are their names to show
Fourteen, or fifteen t'one. Good Angelo.
You need not be ashamed of any of them,
They are gallants all.
Sbloud you are such a Lord.
Nay stay sweet Angelo, I am disposed
A little to be pleasant past my coustome,
He's gone? he's gone, I have disgraced him shrewdly,
Daughters take heed of him, he's a wild youth,
Look what he says to you believe him not,
He will swear love to every one he sees.
Francisco, give them council, good Francisco,
I dare trust thee with both, but him with neither.
Your Lordship yet may trust both them with him.
Well go your ways away; how now Christopher,
What news with you?
I have an humble suit to your good Lordship.
A suit Christopher? what suit I prithee?
I would crave pardon at your Lordships hands,
If it seem vain or simple in your sight.
Isle pardon all simplicity, Christopher,
What is thy suit?
Perhaps being now so old a bachelor,
I shall seem half unwise, to bend my self
In strict affection to a poor young maid.
What? is it touching love Christopher?
Art thou disposed to marry, why tic well.
I, but your Lordship may imagine now
That I being steward of your honours house.
If I be married once, will more regard
The maintenance of my wife and of my charge,
Then the due discharge of my place and office.
No, no, Christopher, I know thee honest.
Good faith my Lord, your honour may suspect it▪ but—
Then I should wrong thee, thou hast ever been
Honest and true, and will be still I know.
I but this marriage alters many men:
And you may fear, it will do me my Lord,
But ere it do so? I will undergo
Ten thousand several deaths.
I know it man.
Who would thou have I prithee?
Rachel de pry,
If your good Lordship, grant me your consent.
Rachel de pry? what the poor beggars daughter?
Shees a right handsome maid, how poor soever,
And thou hast my consent, with all my hart.
I humbly thank your honour. Isle now ask her father.
Do so Christofero thou shalt do well.
Tic strange (she being so poor) he should affect her,
But this is more strange that my self should love her.
I spied her, lately, at her fathers door,
And if I did not see in her sweet face
Gentry and nobleness, ne'er trust me more:
But this persuasion, fancy wrought in me,
That fancy being created with her looks,
For where love is he think his basest object
Gentle and noble: I am far in love,
And shall be forced to wrong my honest steward,
For I must sue, and seek her for my self;
How much my duty to my late dead wife,
And my own dear renown so ere it sways,
He to her father straight. Love hates delays.
Come on In faith, lets to some exercise or other my hearts: Fetch the hilts fellow Juniper, wilt thou play:
I cannot resolve you? tic as I am fitted with the inge∣nuity, quantity, or quality of the cudgel.
How dost thou bastinado the poor cudgel with terms?
O Ingle, I have the phrases man, and the Anagrams and the Epitaphs, fitting the mystery of the noble science.
Isle be hanged &amp; he were not misbegotten of some fen∣cer.
Sirrah Valentine, you can resolve me now, have they their masters of defence in other countries as we have here in Italy?
O Lord, I, especially they in Utopia, there they per∣form their prizes and chalenges, with as great ceremony as the Italian or any nation else.
Indeed? how is the manner of it (for gods love) good Valeniine?
Ingle? I prithee make recourse unto vs, wee are thy friends and familiars: sweet Ingle.
Why thus sir.
God a mercy good Valentine, nay go on.
Silentium bonus socius Onionus, good fellow Onion be not so ingenious, and turbulent: so fir? and how? how sweet Ingle?
Marry, first they are brought to the public Theater:
What? ha? they Theater there
Theaters? I and plays to: both tragedy and comedy &amp; set forth with as much state as can be imagined?
By Gods so; a man is nobody, till he has travelled.
And how are their plays? as ours are? extemporal?
O no? all premeditated things, and some of them ve∣rye good I faith, my moister used to visit them often when he was there.
Why how are they in a place where any man may see them?
I, in the common Theaters, I tell you. But the sport is at a new play to observe the sway and variety of opinion that passes it. A man shall have such a confused mixture of judgment, powered out in the throng there, as ridiculous, as laughter it self: one says he likes not the writing, another likes not the plot, another not the playing. And sometimes a fellow that comes not there past once in five year at a Parley∣amened time or so, will be as deep mired in censuring as the best, and swear by Gods foot he would never stir his foot to see a hundred such as that is.
I must travel to see these things, I shall ne'er think well of my self else.
Fellow Onion, Isle bear thy charges and thou wilt but pilgrimize it along with me, to the land of Utopia.
Why but me thinks such rooks as these should be ashamed to judge.
Not a whit? the rankest stinkard of them all, will take upon him as peremptory, as if he had writ himself in artibus magister.
And do they stand to a popular censure for any thing they present.
I ever, ever, and the people generally are very ac∣captive and apt to applaud any meritable work, but there are two sorts of persons that most commonly are infectious to a whole auditory.
What be they?
I come lets know them.
It were good they were noted.
Marry? one is the rude barbarous crew, a people that have no brains, and yet grounded judgements, these will hiss
any thing that mounts aboue their grounded capacities. But the other are worth the observation, I faith.
What be they? what be they?
Faith a few Caprichious gallants.
Caprichious? stay, that word's for me.
And they have taken such a habit of dislike in all things, that they will approve nothing, be it never so concei∣ted or elaborate, but sit dispersed, making faces, and spitting, wagging their upright ears and cry filthy, filthy. Simply vtte∣ring their own condition, and using their wried countenan∣ces in stead of a vice, to turn the good aspects of all that shall sit near them, from what they behold.
O that's well said, lay them down, come sirs.
Who plays, fellow Juniper, Sebastian, Balthazar:
Some body take them up, come.
Ingle Valentine?
Not I sir, I profess it not.
Sebastian.
Balthazar.
Who? I?
Come, but one bout, Isle give hem thee, I faith.
Why, here is Martino.
Foe he, alas he cannot play a whit, man.
That's all one: no more could you in state quo prius, Martino, play with him, every man has his beginning and conduction.
Will you not hurt me fellow Onion?
Hurt thee, no? and I do, put me among pot-hearbs, And chop me to pieces, come on?
By your favour sweet bullies give them room, back, so, Martino, do not look so thin upon the matter.
Ha, well plaid, fall over to my leg now? so, to your guard again, excellent, to my head now, make home your blow: spare not me, make it home, good, good a gain.
Why how now Peter?
Gods so, Onion has caught a bruise.
Couragio? be not caprichious? what?
Caprichious? not I, I scorn to be caprichious for a scrach, Martino must have another bout, come.
No, no, play no more, play no more.
Foe, tic nothing a philip, a devise, fellow Juniper pri∣thee get me a Plantan, I had rather play with one that had skill by half.
By my troth, fellow Onion, it was against my will.
Nay that's not so, it was against my head,
But come, weal ha one bout more.
Not a bout, not a stroke.
No more, no more.
Why Isle give you demonstration, how it came, Thou openest the dagger to falsify over with the back sword frisk, and he interrupted, before he could fall to the close.
No, no, I know best how it was better thē any man here, I felt his play presently: for look you, I gathered upon him thus, thus do you see? for the double locke, and took it single on the head.
He says very true, he took it single on the head.
Come lets go.
Here fellow Onion, here is a cob-web.
How? a cob-web Martino, I will have another bout with you? S'wounds do you first break my head, and then give me a plaster in scorn? come to it, I will have a bout.
God's my witness.
Tut! your witness cannot serve.
S'bloud? why what, thou art not lunatike, art thou? and thou be avoid Mephostophiles. Say the sign shoud be in Aries now: as it may be for all vs, where were your life? An∣swear me that?
Hee says well, Onion.
I indeed doo's he.
Come, come, you are a foolish Naturalist, go, get a white a of an egg, and a little flax, and close the breach of the
head, it is the most conducible thing that can be. Martino, do not insinuate upon your good fortune, but play an honest part and bear away the bucklers.
My young and simple friend, Paulo Ferneze,
Bound me with mighty solemn conjurations,
To be true to him, in his love, to Rachel,
And to solicit his remembrance still,
In his enforced absence, much, I faith.
True to my friend in cases of affection?
In women's cases? what a jest it is?
How silly he is, that imagines it!
He is an ass that will keep promise strictly
In any thing that checks his private pleasure;
Chiefly in love. S'bloud am not I a man?
Have I not eyes that are as free to look?
And blood to be inflamed as well as his?
And when it is so, shall I not pursue
Mine own loves longings, but prefer my friends?
I tic a good fool, do so, hang me then,
Because I swore, alas, who doo's not know,
That lovers perjuries are ridiculous?
Have at thee Rachel: Isle go court her sure:
For now I know her father is abroad.
S'bloud see, he is here, ô what damned luck is this?
This labour's lost, I must by no means see him.
Mischief and hell, what is this man a spirit,
Haunts he my houses ghost? still at my door?
He has been at my door, he has been in,
In my dear door: pray God my gold be safe.
Gods pity, here is another. Rachel, ho Rachel.
God save you honest father.
Rachel, Gods light, come to me, Rachel, Rachel!
Now in Gods name what ails he? this is strange!
He loves his daughter so, Isle lay my life,
That hoe's afraid, having been now abroad,
I come to seek her love unlawfully.
Tic safe, tic safe, they have notrob'd my treasure.
Let it not feeme offensive to you sir.
Sir, Gods my life, sir, sir, call me sir.
Good father here me.
You are most welcome sir,
I meant almost; and would your worship speak?
Would you abase your self to speak to me?
Tic no abasing father: my intent
Is to do further honour to you sir
Then only speak: which is to be your son.
My gold is in his nostrils, he has smelt it,
Break breast, break heart, fall on the earth my entrails,
With this same bursting admiration!
He knows my gold, he knows of all my treasure,
How do you know sir? whereby do you guess?
At what sir? what first you mean?
I ask, an't please your Gentle worship, how you know?
I mean, how I should make your worship know
That I have nothing —
To give with my poor daughter? I have nothing:
The very air, bounteous to every man,
Is scant to me, sir.
I do think good father, you are but poor,
He thinks so, hark, but think so:
He thinks not so, he knows of all my treasure.
Poor man he is so overjoyed to hear
His daughter may be past his hopes bestowed,
That betwixt fear and hope (if I mean simply)
He is thus passionate.
Yet all is safe within, is none without?
No body break my walls?
What say you father, shall I have your daughter?
I have no dowry to bestow upon her.
I do expect none, father.
That is well,
Then I beseech your worship make no question
Of that you wish, tic too much favour to me.
Isle leave him now to give his passions breath,
Which being settled, I will fetch his daughter:
I shall but move too much, to speak now to him.
So, hoe's gone, would all were dead and gone,
That I might live with my dear gold alone.
Here is the poor old man.
Out of my soul another, comes he hither?
Be not dismayed old man, I come to cheer you.
To me by heaven,
Turn ribs to brass, turn voice into a trumpet,
To rattle out the battles of my thoughts,
One comes to hold me talk, while the other robs me.
He has forgot me sure: what should this mean?
He fears authority, and my want of wife
Will take his daughter from him to defame her:
He that hath nought on earth but one poor daughter,
May take this ecstasy of care to keep her.
And yet tic safe: they mean not to use force,
But fawning coming. I shall easly know
By his next question, if he think me rich,
Whom see I? my good Lord?
Stand up good father, I call thee not father for thy age,
But that I gladly wish to be thy son,
In honoured marriage with thy beauteous daughter.
O, so, so, so, so, so, this is for gold,
Now it is sure, this is my daughters neatness,
Makes them believe me rich. No, my good Lord,
Isle tell you all; how my poor haplesse daughter
Got that attire she wears from top to toe.
Why father, this is nothing.
O yes, good my Lord.
Indeed it is not.
Nay sweet Lord pardon me? do not dissemble,
Hear your poor beads-man speak; tic requisite
That I (so huge a beggar) make account
Of things that pass my calling: she was borne
T'enioy nothing underneath the son:
But that, if she had more then other beggars
She should be envied: I will tell you then
How she had all she wears, her warm shoes (God wot)
A kind maid gave her, seeing her go barefoot
In a cold frosty morning; God requite her;
Her homely stockings
Father, Isle hear no more, thou mou'st too much
With thy too curious answer for thy daughter,
That doth deserve a thousand times as much,
Isle be thy Son in law, and she shall wear
Th'attire of Countesses.
O good my Lord,
Mock not the poor, remembers not your Lordship,
That poverty is the precious gift of God.
As well as riches, tread upon me, rather
Then mock my poorness.
Rise I say:
When I mock poorness, then heavens make me poor.
See here is the Count Ferneze, I will tell him
The haplesse accident of his brave son,
That hee may seek the sooner to redeem him,
God save your Lordship.
You are right welcome sir.
I would I brought such news as might deserve it.
What, bring you me ill news?
Tic ill my Lord,
Yet such as usual chance of war affords,
And for which all men are prepared that use it,
And those that use it not, but in their friends,
Or in their children.
Ill news of my son?
My dear and only son, Isle lay my soul,
Ay me accursed, thought of his death doth wound me,
And the report of it will kill me quite.
Tic not so ill my Lord.
How then?
Hoe's taken prisoner, and that's all.
That's enough, enough,
I set my thoughts on love, on servile love,
Forget my virtuous wife, feel not the dangers,
The bands and wounds of mine own flesh and blood,
And therein am a mad man: therein plagued,
With the most just affliction under heaven.
Is Maximilian taken prisoner to?
My good my Lord, he is returned with prisoners.
First possible, can Maximilian?
Return, and view my face without my son,
For whom he swore such care as for himself?
My Lord no care can change the events of war.
O! in what tempests do my fortunes sail,
Still wrecked with winds more foul and contrary,
Then any northern guest, or Southern flaw?
That ever yet enforced the sea to gape,
And swallow the poor Merchants traffic up?
First in Vieenza, lost I my first son;
Next here in Millaine my most dear loved Lady:
And now my Paulo, prisoner to the French,
Which last being printed with my other griefs,
Doth make so huge a volume, that my breast
Cannot contain them. But this is my love▪
I must make love to Rachel, heaven hath thrown,
This vengeance on me most deservedly:
Were it for nought but wronging of my steward.
My Lord since only money may redress
The worst of this misfortune, be not grieved,
Prepare his ransom and your noble son
Shall greet your cheered eyes, with the more honour.
I will prepare his ransom: gracious heaven
Grant his imprisonment may be his worst,
Honoured and soldier-like imprisonment,
And that he be not manacled and made
A drudge to his proud foe. And here I vow,
Never to dream of seeme-les amorous toys,
Nor aim at other joy on earth,
But the fruition of my only son.
He's gone: I knew it; this is our hot lover,
I will believe them! I! they may come in
Like simple wooers, and be arrant thieves,
And I not know them! tic not to be told,
What servile villainies, men will do for gold,
O it began to have a huge strong smell,
Which lying so long together in a place;
Isle give it vent, it shall ha shift enough,
And if the devil, that envies all goodness,
Have told them of my gold, and where I kept it,
Isle set his burning nose once more a work,
To smell where I removed it, here it is:
Isle hide and cover it with this horse-dung:
Who will suppose that such a precious no•t
Is crowned with such a dunghill excrement?
In my dear life, sleep sweetly my dear child.
"Scarce lawfully begotten, but yet gotten,
"And thats enough. Rot all hands that come near thee
Except mine own. Burn out all eyes that see thee,
Except mine own. All thoughts of thee be poison
To their enamoured harts, except mine own,
Isle take no leave, sweet Prince great Emperor,
But see thee every minute, King of Kings,
Isle not be rude to thee, and turn my back,
In going from thee, but go backward out:
With my face toward thee, with humble courtesies,
None is within. None overlooks my wall.
To have gold, and to have it safe, is all.
Lord Chamount and your valiant friend there, I can∣not say welcome to Millaine: your thoughts and that word are not musical, but I can say you are come to Millaine.
Mort dew.
Gar soon.
Gentlemen (I would cal an Emperor so) you are now my prisoners, I am sorry, marry this, spit in the face of your fortunes, for your usage shall be honourable.
Wee know it signior Maximilian,
The fame of al your actions sounds nought else,
But perfect honour from her swelling cheeks.
It shall do so still I assure you, and I will give you rea∣son, there is in this last action (you know) a noble gentleman of our party, &amp; a right valiant; semblably prisoner to your gene∣ral, as your honoured selfe's to me, for whose safety, this tongue hath given warrant to his honourable father, the Count Ferneze. You conceive me.
I signior.
Well? then I must tell you your ransoms be to re∣deem him, what think you? your answer.
Marry with my Lords leave here I say signior,
This free &amp; ample offer you have made,
Agrees well with your honour, but not ours:
For I think not but Chamount is as well borne
As is Ferneze, then if I mistake not,
He scorns to have his worth so vnderprised,
That it should need an adjunct, in exchange,
Of any equal fortune, Noble Signior?
I am a soldier, and I love Chamount,
Ere I would bruise his estimation,
With the least ruin of mine own respect,
In this wild kind, these legs should rot with irons,
This body pine in prison, till the flesh
Dropped from my bones in flakes, like withered leaves,
In heart of Autumn, from a stubborn Ok.
Monsieur Gasper (I take it so is your name) mis∣prise me not, I will trample on the hart, on the soul of him that shall say, I will wrong you: what I purpose, you cannot now know; but you shall know, and doubt not to your content∣meant. Lord Chamount, I will leave you, whilst I go in and present my self to the honourable Count, till my regression so please you, your noble feet may measure this private, plea∣sant and most princely walk, Soldiers regard them and re∣spect them.
O Ver bon: excellenta gull, he tak'a my Lord Chamoun• for Monsieur Gaspra, &amp; Monsieur Gaspra for my Lord Cha∣mont, ô dis be brave for make a me laugh'a, ha, ha, ha, ô my heart tickle.
I but your Lordship knows not what hard fate
Might have pursued vs, therefore howsoever
The changing of our names was necessary
And we must now be careful to maintain
This error strongly, which our own devise,
Hath thrust into their ignorant conceits,
For should we (on the taste of this good fortune)
Appear our selves, t'would both create in them
A kind of jealousy, and perchance invert
Those honourable courses they intend.
True my dear Gasper: but this hang by here,
Will (at one time or other) on my soul
Discover vs: A secret in his mouth
Is like a wild bird put into a cage,
Whose door no sooner opens, but tic out.
But sir, if I may but know
Thou vtterst it
Vtteria? vat Monsieur?
That he is Gasper, and I true Chamont.
O pardon moi, fore my tongue shall put out de secreta,
Shall breed de cankra in my mouth.
Speak not so loud Pacue.
Foe, you shall not hear fool, for all your long ear, Reguard Monsieur: you be de Chamont, Chamont be Gas∣pra.
Peace, here comes Maximilian.
O belike that's the Count Ferneze, that old man.
Are those his daughters, trow?
I sure, I think they are.
Fore God the taller is a gallant Lady.
So are they both believe me.
True my honourable Lord, that Chamont was the fa∣there of this man.
O that may be, for when I lost my son,
This was but young it seems.
Faith had Camillo lived,
He had been much about his years, my Lord.
He had indeed, well, speak no more of him.
Signior perceive you the error? it was no good of∣fice in vs to stretch the remembrance of so dear a loss. Count Ferneze, let summer sit in your eye, look cheerfully sweet Count, will you do me the honour to confine this noble spy∣rit within the circle of your arms?
Honoured Chamont reach me your valiant hand,
I could have wished some happier accident
Had made the way unto this mutual knowledge,
Which either of vs now must take of other,
But sure it is the pleasure of our fates,
That we should thus be wrack't on Fortunes wheel,
Let vs prepare with steeled patience
To tread on torment, and with minds confirmed
Welcome the worst of envy.
Noble Lord, tic thus. I have here (in mine honour) set this gentleman free, without ransom, he is now himself, his valour hath deserved it, in the eye of my judgment. Moun∣sieur Gasper you are dear to me: fortune non mutuat genus. But to the maine, if it may square with your Lordships li∣king, and his love, I could desire that he were now instant∣lie employed to your noble General in the exchange of Fer∣neze for your self, it is the business that requires the tender hand of a friend.
I, and it would be with more speed effected,
If he would undertake it.
True my Lord. Monsieur Gasper, how stand you affected to this motion?
My duty must attend his Lordships will.
What says the Lord Chamont?
My will doth then approve what these have urged.
Why there is good harmony, good music in thise Monsieur Gasper, you shall protract no time, only I will give you a bowl of rich wine to the health of your General, another to the success of your journey, and a third to the love of my sword. Pass.
Why how now sister in a motley muse?
Go to, theirs somewhat in the wind, I see.
Faith this browne study suites not with your black,
Your habit and your thoughts are of two colours.
Good faith me thinks that this young Lord Cha∣mont favours my mother, sister, does he not?
A mothelry conceit, ô blind excuse,
Blinder then love himself. Well sister, well.
Cupped hath tan his stand in both your eyes, The case is al∣terd.
And what of that?
Nay nothing but a Saint.
Another Bridget, one that for a face
Would put down Vesta, in whose looks doth swim,
The very sweetest cream of modesty.
You to turn tippet? fie, fie, will you give
A packing penny to Virginity.
I thought youl'd dwell so long in Cypress Isle,
You'd worship Madam Venus at the length;
But come, the strongest fall, and why not you?
Nay, do not frown.
Go. go, you soole. Adieu.
Well I may jest, or so: but Cupped knows
My taking is as bad, or worse then hers.
O Monsieur Gasper? if thou be a man,
Be not afraid to court me, do but speak,
Challenge thy right and wear it: for I swear
Till thou arriud'st, ne'er came affection here.
Come on my sweet finical Pacue, the very prime
Of Pages, here is an excellent place for vs to practise in,
No body fees vs here, come lets to it.
Content: Reguarde, vou le Preimer.
Sir Finio?
Mort deiu le peasant.
Did thou see Valentine?
Valentine? no.
No?
No. Sirrah Onion, whither goosed?
O I am vexed, he that would trust any of these lying travellers.
I prithee stay good Onion.
Monsieur Onion, vene ca, come hidera, Ie vou prey. By gar me ha see two, tree, four hundra thousand of your Cousin hang. Lend me your hand, shall prey for know you better.
I thank you good signior Parley vou? O that I were in an other world, in the Ingies, or some where, that I might have room to laugh.
A we fort boon: stand? you be dear now, me come, Boon jour Monsieur.
God morrow good signior.
By gar, be mush glad for see you.
I return you most kind thanks sir.
How? how? Sbloud this is rare?
Nay, shall make you say rare by and by, Reguard Monsieur Finio,
Signior Pasha.
Dieu vou guard Monsieur.
God save you sweet signior
Monsieur On ion? is not fort boon.
Bean? quoth he, would I were in debt of a pottle of beans I could do as much.
Welcome signior, whats next?
O here, Void de grand admiration, as should meet per∣chance Monsieur Finio,
Monsieur Pacue
Iesu? by Gar who think wee shall meet here?
By this hand I am not a little proud of it, sir
This trick is only for the the chamber, it cannot be cleanly done abroad,
Well what say you for dis den? Monsieur:
Nay pray, sir.
Par ma foy vou bein encounters?
What doe you mean sir, let your glove alone.
Come, se port la sante.
Faith exceeding well sir.
Trot, be mush joy for heir.
And how first with you sweet signior Pasha.
Fat comme vou voyer.
Young gentlemen? spirits of blood, if ever you'll taste of a sweet piece of mutton, do Onion a good turn now.
Que que, parley Monsieur, what first.
Faith teach me one of these tricks.
O me shall doe presently, stand you dear, you sign∣or dear, my self is here: so fort bein, now I parley to Moun∣seer Onion, Onion prattle to you, you speaka to me, so, and as you parley change the bonnet, Monsieur Onion.
Monsieur Finio.
Mounseur Pacue.
Pray be couera.
Nay I beseech you sir.
What do you mean.
Pardon moi, shall be so,
O God sir.
Not I in good faith sir.
By gar you must.
It shall be yours.
Nay then you wrong me,
Well and ever I come to be great.
You be big enough for de Onion already,
I mean a great man.
Then you would be a monster.
Well God knows not what fortune may doe, com∣maund me, use me from the soul to the crown, and the crown to the soul: meaning not only from the crown of the head, and the sole of the foot, but also the foot of the mind and the crowns of the purse, I cannot stay now young gentle∣men but — time was, time is, and time shall be.
Sweet Jasper I am sorry we must part,
But strong necessity enforces it.
Let not the time seem long unto my friend,
Till my return for by our love I swear
(The sacred sphere wherein our souls are knit)
I will endeavour to effect this business
With all industrious care and happy speed.
My Lord these circumstances would come well,
To one less capable of your desert
Then I: in whom your merit is confirmed
With such authentical and grounded proves.
Well I will use no more. Gasper adieu.
Farewell my honoured Lord.
Commend me to the Lady, my good Gasper.
I had remembered that had not you urged it.
Once more adieu sweet Gasper.
My good Lord.
Thy virtues are more precious then thy name,
Kind gentleman I would not sell thy love,
For all the earthly objects that mine eyes,
Have ever tasted, sure thou art nobly borne,
How ever fortune hath obscured thy birth:
For native honour sparkles in thine eyes,
How may I bless the time wherein Chamont
My honoured father did surprise vicenza,
Where this my friend (known by no name) was found,
Being then a child and scarce of power to speak,
To whom my father gave this name of Gasper,
And as his own respected him to death,
Since when wee two have shard our mutual fortunes,
With equal spirits, and but deaths rude hand,
No violence shall dissolve this sacred band.
Fellow Juniper, no more of thy songs and sonnets, sweet Juniper, no more of thy hymns and madrigals, thou sing, but I sigh.
Whats the matter Peter ha? what in an Academy still, still in sable, and costly black array? ha?
Prithee rise mount, mount sweet Juniper, for I go down the wind, and yet I puff: for I am vexed.
Ha Bully? vexed? what intoxicate? is thy brain in a
quintessence? an Idea? a metamorphosis? an Apology? ha rogue? come this love feeds upon thee, I see by thy cheeks, and drinks healths of vermilion, tears I see by thine eyes.
I confess Cupids carouse, he plays super negulum with my liquor of life
Tut, thou art a goose to be Cupids gull, go to, no more of this contemplations, &amp; calculations, morn not, for Rachels thine own
For that let the higher powers work: but sweet June∣per, I am not sad for her, and yet for her in a second person, or •f not so yet in a third.
How second person? away, away, in the crotchets al∣ready Longitude and Latitude? what second? what person? ha?
Juniper, Isle bewray my self before thee, for thy com∣pany is sweet unto me, but I must entreat thy helping hand in the case.
Tut? no more of this surquedry; I am thine own? ad vngem vpsie freeze: pell mell, come, what case? what case?
For the case it may be any mans case, as well as mine, Rachel I mean, but Isle meddle with her anon, in the mean time, ••lentine is the man hath wronged me.
How my Ingle wrong thee, first possible?
Your Ingle, hang him infidel, well and if I be not re∣uengd one him let Peter Onion (by the infernal Gods) be tur∣ned to al eeke or a scalion, I spake to him for a ditty for this handkerchier.
Why, has he not done it?
Done it, not a verse by this hand.
O in dichus illis, O preposterous, well come be blithe, the •est iud••… of the •l is sometimes dull, fellow Onion pardon mine Iugle: he is a man, has in pefections and declinations, as other men have, his mass sometimes cannot cornet nor prognisticat and come of, as it should, no matter, Isle hammer our a para∣l•…rase for thee my self.
No sweet Juniper, no danger 〈◊〉 breed delay, love
makes me choleric I can bear no longer.
Not bear? what my mad Meridian slave? not be are? what?
Cupids burden: tic to heavy, to tolerable, and as for the handkerchire and the posy: I will not trouble thee: but if thou wilt go with me into her fathers backside, old Iaques backside, and speak for me to Rachel, I will not being ratitude, the old man is abroad and all.
Art thou sure on it.
As sure as an obligation.
Lets away then, come we spend time in a vain cir∣cumference, trade •…cashier thee till to morrow, fellow Onion for thy sake I fine•• this workiday.
God a mercy, and for thy sake Isle at any time make a holiday.
Nay I prithee Rachel, I come to comfort thee, Be not so sad.
O signior Angelo,
No comfort but his presence can remove,
This sadness from my heart.
Nay then you're fond,
And want that strength of judgment and election,
That should be attendant on your years and form,
Will you, because your Lord is taken prisoner,
Blubber and weep and keep a peevish stir,
As though you would turn turtle with the news,
Come, come, be wise. Sblood say your Lord should die:
And you go mar your face as you begin,
What would you doe trow? who would care for you;
But this it is, when nature will bestow
Her gifts on such as know not how to use them,
You shall have some that had they but one quarter
Of your fair beauty? they would make it show
A little otherwise then you do this,
Or they would see the painter twice an hour,
And I commend them I, that can use art,
With such judicial practise.
You talk iedly,
If this be your best comfort keep it still,
My senses cannot feed on such sower cates.
And why sweet heart.
Nay leave good signior.
Come I have sweeter viands yet in store.
I in any case mistress Rachel.
Rachel?
Gods pity signior Angelo, I here my father, away for Gods sake.
S'bloud, I am betwixt, I think, this is twice now, I have been served thus.
Pray God he meet him not.
O brave? she's yonder, O terrible shoe's gone.
Yea? so nimble in your Dilemma's, and your Hiperbole's Hay my love? O my love, at the first sight: By the mass.
O how she skudded, O sweet scud, how she tripped, O delicate trip and go.
Come thou art enamoured with the influence of her profundity, but sirrah hark a little.
O rare, what? what? passing In faith, what first? what first?
What wilt thou say now, if Rachel stand now, and play hity tity through the key hole, to behold the equipage of thy person:
O sweet equipage, try good Juniper, tickle her, talk, talk, O? rare
Mistress Rachel (watch then if her father come) Rachel? Madonna? Rachel? No.
Say I am here, Onion or Peter or so.
No, Isle knock, weal not stand upon Horizons, and tricks, but fall roundly to the matter.
Well said sweet Juniper: Horizons? hang hem? knock, knock.
Whose there? father.
Father no? and yet a father, if you please to be a mo∣there.
Well said Juniper, to her again, a smack or two more of the mother
Do you here? sweet soul, sweet radamant? sweet ma∣thauell one word Melpomine? are you at leisure.
At leisure? what to doe?
To doe what, to doe nothing, but to be liable to the ecstasy of true loves exigent, or so, you smell my meaning.
Smell, filthy, fellow Juniper filthy? smell? O most odi∣os.
How filthy.
Filthy, by this finger? smell? smell a rat, smell a pudding, away these tricks are for truls, a plain wench loves plain dealing, isle upon my self, smell to march pain wench.
With all my heart, Isle be legitimate and silent as anap∣ple-squire, Isle see nothing, and say nothing.
Sweet hart, sweet hart?
And bag pudding, ha, ha, ha?
What Rachel my girl what Rachel;
Gods lid▪
What Rachel,
Here I am
What rakehell calls Rachel: O treason to my love.
Its her father on my life, how shall wee entrench and edify our selves from him?
O conni-catching▪ Cupped.
How in my back side? where? what come they for?
Where are they? Rachel? thieves, thieves?
Stay villain slave: Rachel? untie my dog.
Nay theife thou can not scope.
I pray you sir.
A pitiful Onion, that thou had a rope.
Why Rachel: when I say: let loose my dog? garlique my mastiff, let him loose I say.
For Gods sake here me speak, keep up your cur.
I fear not garlique, heel not bite Onion his kins∣man pray God he come out, and then theile not smell me.
well then deliver, come deliver slave?
What should I deliver?
O thou would have me tell thee? would thou show me thy hands, what hast thou in thy hands?
Here be my hands.
Stay are not thy fingers ends begrimd with dirt, no thou hast wiped them.
Wiped them?
I thou villain? thou art a subtle knave, put off thy shows, come I will see them, give me a knife here Rachel, Isle rip the soles.
No matter he's a cobbler, he can mend them.
What are you mad? are you detestable, would you make an Anatomy of me, think you I am not true Ortogra∣phie?
Ortographie, Anatomy?
For Gods sake be not so inviolable, I am no ambusca∣do, what predicament call you this, why do you intimate so much.
I can feel nothing.
Bear Lady but Onion feels something.
Soft sir, you are not yet gon, shake your legs, come, and your arms, be brief, stay let me see these drums, these kill∣darkens, these bombard slops, what is it crams hem so.
Nothing but hair.
Thats true, I had almost forgot this rug, this hedghogs nest, this hay mow, this bears skin, this heath, this firsbush.
O let me go, you tear my hair, you reluolue my
brains and understanding.
Heart, thou art somewhat eased? half of my fear
Hath tan his leave of my, the other half
Still keeps possession in despite of hope,
Until these amorous eyes, court my fair gold:
Dear I come to thee: friend, why art not gone?
Avoid my souls vexation, Satan hence?
Why doest thou stare on me, why doest thou stay?
Why por'st thou on the ground with thievish eyes?
What see thou there, thou cur? what gap'st thou at?
Hence from my house, Rachel, send garlic forth.
I am gone sir, I am gone, for Gods sake stay.
Pack, and thank God thou scap'st so well away.
If I scope this tree, destinies, I defy you.
I cannot see by any Characters
Writ on this earth, that any felon foot
Hath tan acquaintance of this hallowed ground.
None sees me: knees do homage to your Lord.
Tic safe, tic safe, it lies and sleeps so soundly,
Twould do one good to look on it. If this bliss
Be given to any man that hath much gold,
Justly to say tic safe, I say tic safe.
O what a heavenly round these two words dance
Within me and without me: First I think hem,
And then I speak hem, then I watch their sound,
And drink it greedily with both mine ears,
Then think, then speak, then drink their sound again,
And racket round about this bodies court.
These two sweet words: tic safe: stay I will feed
My other senses, ô how sweet it smells
I mar'le he smells not Onion, being so near it.
Down to thy grave again, thou beauteous Ghost,
Angels men say, are spirits: Spirits be
Invisible, bright angels are you so?
Be you invisible to every eye.
Save only these: Sleep, Isle not break your rest,
Though you break mine: Dear Saints adieu, adieu:
My feet part from you, but my soul dwells with you.
Is he gone? ô Fortune my friend, &amp; not fortune my foe,
I come down to embrace thee, and kiss thy great toe.
Fellow Onion? Peter.
Fellow Juniper. What's the old panurgo gone? departed, cosmografied, ha?
O I, and hark Sirrah. Shall I tell him? no.
Nay, be brief and declare, stand not upon cono∣drums now, thou know what contagious speeches I have suffered for thy sake and he should come again and invent me here.
He says true, it was for my sake, I will tell him.
Sir Juniper? and yet I will not.
What say thou sweet Onion?
And thou had smelt the sent of me when I was in the tree, thou would not have said so: but Sir, The case is al∣terd with me, my heart has given love a box of the ear, made him kick up the heals I faith.
Say thou me so, wad Greek? how haps it? how chances it.
I cannot hold it, Juniper, have an eye, look, have an eye to the door, the old prouerb's true, I see: gold is but muck. Nay Gods so Juniper to the door, an eye to the maine chance, here you slave, have an eye.
O inexorable! ô infallible! ô infricate divine, and superficial fortune.
Nay, it will be sufficient anon, here, look here.
O insolent good luck! How did thou produce th'intelligence of the gold' minerals.
Isle tell you that anon, here, make shift, convey, cram.
Isle teach you how you shall call for garlic again I faith.
S'bloud what shall we do with all this? we shall ne'er bring it to a consumption.
Consumption? why weal bee most sumptuously at∣tired, man.
By this gold, I will have three or four most stigma∣ticall suites presently.
Isle go in my foot-cloth, Isle turn Gentleman.
So will I.
But what badge shall we give, what cullison?
As for that lets use the infidelity and commiseration of some harrot of arms, he shall give vs a gudgeon.
A gudgeon? a scutheon thou would say, man.
A scutcheon or a gudgeon, all is one.
Well, our arms be good enough, lets look to our legs.
Content, weal be jogging.
Rachel? we retire: garlic God boy ye.
Farewell sweet Iaques.
Farewell sweet Rachel, sweet dog adieu.
Nay but sweet Count.
Away, Isle hear no more,
Never was man so palpably abuld,
My son so basely marted; and my self
Am made the subject of your mirth and scorn.
Count Ferneze you tread to hard upon my patience,
Do not persist I advise your Lordship.
I will persist, and unto thee I speak.
Thou. Maximilian thou hast injured me.
Before the Lord:
Sweet signior.
O my father.
Lady let your father thank your beauty.
By gar me shall be hang for tella dis same,
Metella madamoy sell, she tell her sadera.
The true Chamount set free, and one left here
Of no descent, clad barely in his name.
Sirrah boy come hither, and be sure, you speak the simple truth:
O pardon moi monsieur,
Come leave your pardons, and directly say.
What villain is the same that hath usurped,
The honoured name and person of Chamount:
O Monsieur, no point villain, brave Chevalier, Monsieur Gasper.
Monsieur Gasper, on what occasion did they change their names, what was their policy, or their pretext.
Me canoe tell, par ma foy Monsieur.
My honourable Lord.
Tut tut, be silent.
Silent? Count Ferneze, I tell thee if Amurath the great
Turk were here I would speak, and he should here me.
So will not I.
By my fathers hand, but thou shalt Count, I say till this instant, I was never touched in my reputation: here me you shall know that you have wronged me, and I will make you ac∣knowledge it, if I cannot my sword shall.
By heaven I will not, I will stop mine ears,
My senses loath the Saviour of thy breath.
Tic poison to me, I say I will not hear.
What shall I know, tic you have iniurd me,
What will you make? make me acknowledge it.
Fetch forth that Gasper, that lewd counterfeit.
Isle make him to your face approve your wrongs.
Come on false substance, shadow to Chamont:
Had you none else to work upon but me,
Was I your fittest project? well confess,
What you intended by this secret plot.
And by whose policy it was contrived,
Speak truth, and be entreated courteously,
But double with me, and resolve to prove
The extremest rigour that I can inflict.
My honoured Lord, hear me with patience,
Nor hope of favour, not the fear of torment,
Shall sway my tongue, from uttering of a truth.
Tic well, proceed then.
The morn before this battle did begin,
Wherein my Lord Chamount and I were tan,
We vowed one mutual fortune, good or bad,
That day should be embraced of vs both,
And urging that might worst succeed our vow,
We there concluded to exchange our names.
Then Maximilian took you for Chamount.
True noble Lord.
Tic false, ignoble wretch,
It was but a complot to betray my son.
Count, thou lie in thy bosom, Count▪
Lye?
Nay I beseech you honoured gentlemen,
Let not the untimely ruin of your love,
Follow these slight occurents; be assured
Chamounts return will heal these wounds again,
And break the points of your too piercing thoughts.
Return? I when? when will Chamount return?
Heel come to fetch you, will he? I tic like,
Youl'd have me think so, that's your policy.
No, no, young gallant, your device is stale,
You cannot feed me with so vain a hope.
My Lord, I feed you not with a vain hope,
I know assuredly he will return,
And bring your noble son along with him.
I, I dare pawn my soul he will return.
O impudent derision? open scorn?
Intolerable wrong? is it not enough?
That you have plaid upon me all this while;
But still to mock me, still to jest at me?
Fellows, away with him, thou ill-bred slave,
That sets no difference twixt a noble spirit,
And thy own slavish humour, do not think
But isle take worthy vengeance on thee, wretch?
Alas, these threats are idle, like the wind,
And breed no terror in a guiltless mind.
Nay, thou shalt want no torture, so resolve, bring him away.
Welcome the worst, I suffer for a friend,
Your tortures will, my love shall never end.
Alas poor gentleman, my fathers rage
Is too extreme, too sterne and violent
O that I knew with all my strongest powers,
How to remove it from thy patient breast,
But that I cannot, yet my willing heart,
Shall minister in spite of tyranny
To thy misfortune, something there is in him,
That doth enforce this strange affection,
With more then common rapture in my breast:
For being but Gasper, he is still as dear
To me, as when he did Chamount appear.
But in good sadness Signior, do you think Cha∣mount will return?
Do I see your face, Lady?
I sure, if love have not blinded you.
That is a question, but I will assure you no, I can see, and yet love is in mine eye: well, the Count your father simply hath dishonoured me: and this steel shall engrave it on his burgonet.
Nay, sweet Signior.
Lady, I do prefer my reputation to my life,
But you shall rule me, come lets march.
Isle follow Signior, ô sweet Queen of love!
Sovereign of all my thoughts, and thou fair fortune,
Who (more to honour my affections)
Hast thus translated Gasper to Chamount.
Let both your flames now burn in one bright spear;
And give true light to my a spiring hopes,
Hasten Chamounts return, let him affect me,
Though father, friends, and all the world reject me.
Sigh for a woman, would I fouled mine arms,
Rave in my sleep, talk idly being awake,
Pine and look pale, make loue-walkes in the night,
To steal cold comfort from a day-starres eyes.
Kit, thou art a fool, wilt thou be wise? then lad
Renounce this boy-gods nice idolatry,
Stand not on complement, and wooing tricks,
Thou love old Iaques daughter, doest thou?
Love her?
Come, come, I know it, be ruled and shees thine own,
Thou't say her father Iaques, the old beggar,
Hath pound his word to thee, that none but thou,
Shalt be his son in law.
He has.
He has? wilt thou believe him, and be made a kook,
To waite on such an antique whether cock;
Why he is more inconstant then the sea,
His thoughts, Cameleon-like, change every minute:
No Kit, work soundly, steal the wench away,
Wed her, and bed her, and when that is done,
Then say to Iaques, shall I be your son?
But come to our devise, where is this gold?
Here Signior Angelo.
Bestow it, bid thy hands shed golden drops,
Let these bald french crowns be uncovered,
In open sight, to do obeisance
To Iaques staring eyes when he steps forth,
The needy beggar will be glad of gold.
So, now keep thou aloose, and as he treads
This gilded path, stretch out his ambling hopes,
With scattring more &amp; more, &amp; as thou go, cry Iaques, Iaques
Tust, let me alone.
First isle play the ghost, Isle cal him out, Kit keep aloof.
But Signior Angelo. Where will your self and Rachel stay for me, after the jest is ended?
Mass, that's true, at the old Priory behind S. Foyes.
Agreed, no better place, isle meet you there.
Do good fool, do, but isle not meet you there.
Now to this gear, Iaques, Iaques, what Iaques?
Who calls? whose there?
Iaques.
Who calls?
Steward, he comes, he comes Iaques.
What voice is this? no body here, was I not called? I was.
And one cried Iaques with a hollow voice,
I was deceived, no I was not deceived,
See see, it was an Angel called me forth,
Gold, gold, man▪ making gold, another star,
Drop they from heaven, no, no, my house I hope
Is haunted with a Fairy. My dear Lar,
My household God, My Fairy on my knees.
Iaques.
My Lar doth call me, ô sweet voice.
Musical as the spheres, see, see, more gold.
Iaques.
What Rachel, Rachel, lock my door, look to my house.
Iaques.
Shut fast my door, a golden crown, Iaques shall be a king.
To a fools paradise that path will bring
Thee and thy household Lar.
What means my father, I wonder what strange humour.
Come sweet soul, leave wondering, start not, it was I laid this plot to get thy father forth.
O Angelo.
O me no oo's, but hear, my Lord your love,
Paulo Ferneze is returned from war,
Lingers at Pont Valerie, and from thence
By post at midnight last, I was conjured
To man you thither, stand not on replies,
A horse is saddled for you, will you go,
And I am for you, if you will stay, why so.
O Angelo, each minute is a day till my Ferneze come, come weal away sir.
Sweet soul I guess thy meaning by thy looks,
At po•t Valerio thou thy love shalt see,
But not Ferneze, Steward fare you well.
You wait for Rachel to, when can you tell?
O in what golden circle have I dan'st?
Millaine these od'rous and enfloured fields
Are none of thine, no here is Elizium,
Here blessed ghosts do walk, this is the Court
And glorious palace where the God of gold
Shines like the son, of sparkling majesty;
O fair fethered, my red-brested birds,
Come fly with me, isle bring you to a queer,
Whose consort being sweetened with your sound:
The musique will be fuller, and each hour
These ears shall banquet with your harmony ô, ô, ô,
At the old priory, behind Saint Foyes,
That was the place of our appointment sure:
I hope he will not make me loose my gold,
And mock me to, perhaps they are within: Isle knock.
O God, the case is altered.
Rachel?
Signior Angelo?
Angels? I where? mine Angels? wher's my gold?
Why Rachel? O thou thievish Canibal,
Thou eatest my flesh in stealing of my gold.
What gold?
What gold? Rachel call help, come forth,
Isle rip thine entrails, but isle have my gold:
Rachel why comes thou not? I am undone,
Ay me she speaks not, thou hast slain my child.
What is the man possessed trow? this is strange,
Rachel I see is gone with Angelo:
Well isle once again unto the priory,
And see if I can meet them.
Tic too true,
You have made away my child, how hast my gold:
O what Hienna called me out of doors,
The theife is gone: my gold's gone, Rachels gone,
Al's gone? save I that spend my cries in vain,
But isle hence too, and die or end this pain.
Swonds, let me go, hay catso, catch him alive,
I call, I call, boy, I come, I come sweet heart.
Page hold my rapier, while I hold my friend here.
O heir's a sweet metamorphosis, a couple of buzz∣zards turned to a pair of peacocks.
Signior Onion, lend me thy boy to vnhang my rapier. On. Signior Juniper for once or so, but troth is, you must inuei∣glee, as I have done, my Lords page here a poor folower of mine.
Hei ho, your page then sha'not be super intendent upon me? he shall not be addicted? he shall not be incident? he shall not be incident? he shall not be incident, shall he?
O sweet signior Juniper.
June Sbloud stand away princocks? do not aggravate my joy.
Nay good Moister. Onion.
Nay and he have the heart to draw my blood, let him come.
Isle slice you Onion, Isle slice you?
Isle cleave you Juniper.
Why hold, hold, hough? what do you mean?
Let him come Ingle, stand by boy, his alabaster blad
cannot fear me.
Why hear you sweet signior, let not there be any contētion, between my Moister &amp; you, about me, if you want a page sir, I can help you to a proper stripling.
Can thou? what parentage? what ancestry? what ge∣nealogy is he?
A french boy sir.
Has he his French linguist? has he?
I, sir.
Then transport him: her's a crusades for thee.
You will not, imbecell my servant with your been∣uolence will you, hold boy their's a portmantu for thee.
Lord sir.
Do take it boy, its three pounds ten shill. a portmantu.
I thank your Lordship.
Sirrah Ningle: thou art a traveller, and I honour thee.
I prithee discourse? cherish thy muse? discourse?
Of what sir?
Of what thou wilt. Sbloud? hang sorrow?
Prithee Valentine assoile me one thing.
Tic pity to soil you sir, your new apparel.
Mass thou say true, apparel makes a man forget himself.
Begin, find your tongue Ningle.
Now will gull these ganders rarely:
Gentlemen having in my peregrinatiō through Mesopotamia.
Speak legibly, this gem's gone, without the great mercy of God,
Here is a fine tragedy indeed. Theirs a Keisars royal.
By Gods lid, nor King nor Kaiser shall?
Where? where? Finio, where be they.
Go to, isle be with you anon.
O her's the page signior Juniper:
What saith monsier Onion, boy.
What say you sir.
Tread out boy.
Take up, you mean sir.
Tread out I say, so, I thank you, is this the boy.
Aue monsieur.
Who gave you that name.
Give me de name, vat name:
He thought your name had been, we young gentle∣men, you must do more then his legs can do for him, bear with him sir.
Sirrah give me instance of your carriage? you'll serve my turn, will you?
What? turn upon the toe.
O signior no.
Page will you follow me, isle give you good exhibition.
By gar, shall not alone follow you, but shall lead you to.
Plague boy, he sooths his humour? these french vile∣loins ha pocky wits.
Here? disarm me? take my semitary.
O rare, this would be a rare man, and he had a little travel, Balthazar, Martino, put off your shoes, and bid him coble them.
Friends, friends, but pardon me for fellows, no more in occupation, no more in corporation, tic so pardon me, the case is altered, this is law, but isle stand to nothing.
Fat so me think.
Well then God save the dukes Majesty, is this any harm now? speak, is this any harm now.
No nor good neither, Sbloud?
Do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me?
I sir, we do.
You do indeed?
I indeed sir.
Tic sufficient, Page carry my purse, dog me?
Gentlemen leave him not, you see in what case he is, he is not in adversity, his purse is full of money, leave him not?
Nay gentle Rachel?
Away? forbear? ungentle Angelo,
Touch not my body, with those impious hands,
That like hot Irons sear my trembling heart,
And 〈◊〉 it hiss, at your disloyalty.
Wa• 〈◊〉 your drift? to use Fernezes name?
Was he your fittest stale, ô wild dishonour!
Stay noble sir▪
Sbloud how like a puppet do you talk now?
Dishonour? what dishonour? come, come, fool,
Nay then I see you're peevish, S'heart dishonour?
To have you a topriest and marry you,
And put you in an honourable state.
To marry me? ô heaven, can it be?
That men should live with such unfeeling souls,
Without or touch or conscience of religion,
Or that their warping appetites should spoil
Those honoured forms, that the true seal of friendship
Had set upon their faces.
Do you hear? what needs all this? say, will you have me, or no?
Il'e have you gone, and leave me, if you would.
Leave you? I was accursed to bring you hither,
And make so fair an offer to a fool.
A pox upon you, why should you be coy,
What good thing have you in you to be proud of?
Are y'any other then a beggars daughter?
Because you have beauty. O Gods light a blast.
I Angelo.
You scornful baggage, I loved thee not so much, but now I hate thee.
Upon my knees, you heavenly powers, I thank you,
That thus have tamed his wild affections.
This will not do, I must to her again,
Rachel, ô that thou saw my heart, or did behold,
The place from whence that scalding figh euented.
Rachel, by Iesu I love thee as my soul, Rachel, sweet Rachel.
What again returned unto this violent passion.
Do but hear me, by heaven I love you Rachel.
Pray forbear, ô that my Lord Ferneze were but here.
Sbloud and he were, what would he do.
This would he do base villain.
My dear Lord,
Thou monster, even the soul of treachery!
O what dishonord title of reproach,
May my tongue spit in thy deserved face?
Me thinks my very presence should invert,
The steeled organs of those traytrous eyes,
To take into thy heart, and pierce it through:
Turn thou them on the ground? wretch, dig a grave,
With their sharp points, to hide th'abhorred head;
Sweet love, thy wrongs have been too violent
Since my departure from thee, I perceive:
But now true comfort shall again appear,
And like an armed angel guard thee safe
From all th'assaults of covered villainy.
Come Monsieur, let's go, &amp; leave this wretch to his despair.
My noble Ferneze.
What can thou speak to me, and not thy tongue,
Forced with the torment of thy guilty soul
Break that infected circle of thy mouth,
Like the rude clapper of a crazed bell.
I, that in thy bosom lodged my soul,
With all her train of secrets, thinking them
To be as safe, and richly entertained,
As in a Princes court, or tower of strength,
And thou to prove a traitor to my trust,
And basely to expose it, ô this world!
My honourable Lord.
The very owl, whō other birds do stare &amp; wonder at,
Shall hoot at thee, and snakes in every bush
Shall deaf thine ears with their—
Nay good my Lord, give end unto your passions.
You shall see, I will redeem your lost opinion.
My Lord believe him.
Come, be sarisfied, sweet Lord you know our haste,
Let vs to horse, the time for my engaged return is past;
Be friends again, take him along with you.
Come signior Angelo, hereafter prove more true.
Tut Maximillian, for your honoured self,
I am persuaded, but no words shall turn
The edge of purposd vengeance on that wretch,
Come, bring him forth to execution.
Isle hang him for my son, he shall not scope,
Had he an hundred lives: Tell me vile slave,
Think thou I love my son? is he my flesh?
Is he my blood, my life? and shall all these be tortured for thy
sake, and not revenged? truss up the villain.
My Lord, there is no law to confirm this action.
Tic dishonourable.
Dishonourable? Max imillian?
It is dishonourable in Chamount, the day of his prefixed return is past, and he shall pay fort.
My Lord, my Lord,
Use your extremest vengeance, isle be glad
To suffer ten times more, for such a friend.
O resolute and peremptory wretch!
My honoured Lord, let vs entreat a word.
Isle hear no more, I say he shall not live,
My self will do it. Stay, what form is this
Stands betwixt him and me, and holds my hand.
What miracle is this? tic my own fancy,
Carves this impression in me, my soft nature,
That ever hath retained such foolish pity,
Of the most abject creatures misery,
That it abhors it, what a child am I
To have a child? Ay me, my son, my son.
O my dear love, what is become of thee?
What unjust absence lay thou on my breast,
Like weights of lead, when swords are at my back,
That run me through with thy unkind flight,
My gentle disposition waxes wild,
I shall run frantic, ô my love, my love.
My gold, my gold, my life, my soul, my heaven,
What is become of thee? see, isle impart
My miserable loss to my good Lord,
Let me have search my Lord, my gold is gone.
My son, Christophero, think it possible,
I ever shall behold his face again.
O father wher's my love, were you so careless
To let an unthrift steal away your child.
I know your Lordship may find out my gold,
For Gods sake pity me, justice, sweet Lord.
Now they have young Chamount? Christophero?
Surely they never will restore my son.
Who would have thought you could have been so careless to loose your only daughter.
Who would think,
That looking to my gold with such hares eyes,
That ever open, I even when thy sleep,
I thus should loose my gold, my noble Lord, what says your
Lordship?
O my son, my son.
My dearest Rachel?
My most honey gold.
Hear me Christophero.
Nay hear me Iaques.
Hear me most honoured Lord.
What rule is here?
O God that we should let Chamount escape.
I and that Rachel, such a virtuous maid, should be thus stolen away.
And that my gold, being so hid in earth, should bee found out.
O confusion of languages, &amp; yet no tower of Babel!
Ladies, beshrew me, if you come not fit to make a ian∣gling consort, will you laugh to see three constant passions.
Stand by, I will urge them, sweet Count, will you be comforted.
It cannot be but he is handled the most cruelly,
That ever any noble prisoner was.
Steward, go cheer my Lord:
Well, if Rachel took her flight willingly?
Sirrah, speak you touching your daughters flight?
O that I could so soon forget to know the thief a∣gain, that had my gold, my gold.
Is not this pure▪
O thou base wretch, isle drag thee through the streets.
And as a monster, make thee wondered at, how now.
Sweet Gentleman? how too unworthily
Art thou thus tortured, brave Maximillian,
Pity the poor youth and appease my father,
How, my son returned? O Maximillian,
Francisco, daughters? bid him enter here.
Dost thou not mock me? O my dear Paulo welcome.
My Lord Chamount?
My Gasper.
Rachel.
My gold Rachel? my gold?
Some body bid the beggar cease his noise.
O signior Angelo, would you deceive
Your honest friend, that simply trusted you?
Well Rachel: I am glad though art here again.
I faith she is not for you steward.
I beseech you madam urge your father.
I will anon? good Iaques be content.
Now God a mercy fortune, and sweet Venus,
Let Cupped do his part, and all is well.
Me thinks my heart's in heaven with this comfort.
Is this the true Italian curtsy.
Ferneze were you tortured thus in France? by my souls safety.
My most noble Lord? I do beseech your Lordship.
Honoured Count, wrong not your age with flexure of a knee,
I do impute it to those cares and griefs,
That did torment you in your absent son.
O worthy gentlemen, I am a shamd
That my extreme affection to my son,
Should give my honour so uncured a maine,
But my first son, being in Vicenza lost.
How in Vicenza? lost you a son there?
About what time my Lord?
O the same night, wherein your noble father took the town.
How long's that since my Lord? can you remember.
Tic now well no upon the twentieth year.
And how old was he then?
I cannot tel, between the years of three and sour, I take it.
Had he no special note in his attire,
Or otherwise, that you can call to mind.
I cannot well remember his attire,
But I have often heard his mother say:
He had about his neck a tablet,
Given to him by the Emperor Sigismund.
His Godfather, with this inscription,
Under the figure of a silver Globe: En minimo, mundus.
How did you call your son my Lord?
Camillo Lord Chamount.
Then no more my Gasper? but Camillo,
Take notice of your father, gentlemen:
Stand not amazed? here is a tablet,
With that inscription? found about his neck
That night, and in Vicenza by my father,
(Who being ignorant, what name he had)
Christened him Gasper, nor did I reveal,
This secret till this hour to any man.
O happy revelation? ô blessed hour? ô my Camillo.
O strange my brother.
Maximilion? behold how the abundance of his joy Drownds him in tears of gladness.
O my boy? forgive thy fathers late austerity:
My Lord? I delivered as much before, but your ho∣nor would not be persuaded, I will hereafter give more obe∣seruance to my visions? I dreamed of this.
I can be still no longer, my good Lord,
Do a poor man some grace amongst all your joys.
Why whats the matter Iaques.
I am robbed, I am undone my Lord, robbed and undone:
A heap of thirty thousand golden crowns,
Stolen from me in one minnte, and I fear:
By her confedracy, that calls me father,
But she's none of mine, therefore sweet Lord:
Let her be tortured to confess the truth.
More wonders yet.
How Iaques is not Rachel then thy daughter.
No, I disclaim in her, I spit at her,

YOU woeful wights give ear a while,
And mark the tenor of my stile,
Which shall such trembling hearts unfold
As seldom hath to fore been told.
Such chances rare and doleful news
fellow Juniper
Peace a Gods name.
As may attempt your wits to muse.
Gods so, here man.
A pox a God on you.
And cause such trickling tears to pass,
Except your hearts be flint or brass:
Juniper, Juniper.
To hear the news which I shall tell,
That in Castella once befell.
Sbloud, where did thou learn to corrupt a man in the midst of a verse, ha?
Gods lid man, service is ready to go up man, you must slip on your coat and come in, we lack waiters pity∣fully.
A pitiful hearing, for now must I of a merry Cobbler become mourning creature.
Well you'll come.
Presto. Go to, a word to the wise, away, ••ie? vanish: Lye there the weeds that I disdain to wear.
God save you Moister Juniper.
What Signior Antonio Balladino, welcome sweet I•glee▪
And how do you sir?
Faith you see, put to my shifts here as poor retainers be oftentimes, sirrah Antony ther's one of my fellows might∣lie enamoured of thee, and I faith you slave, now your come I'll bring you together, i'ts Peter Onion, the groom of the hal, do you know him.
No not yet, I assure you.
O he is one as right of thy humour as may be, a plain simple Rascal, a true dunce, marry he hath been a notable vilaine in his time: he is in love, sirrah, with awench, &amp; I have preferred thee to him, thou shalt make him some pretty Paradox or some Aligory, how does my coat sit? well.
I very well.
Na Gods so, fellow Juniper, come away.
Art thou there mad slave, I come with a powder? Sirrah fellow Onion. I must have you peruse this Gentleman well, and doe him good offices of respect and kindness, as in∣stance shall be given.
Nay good moister Onion what do you mean, I pray you sir you are to respectu• in good faith.
I would not you should think so sir, for though I have no learning, yet I honour a scholar in any ground of the earth sir,
Shall I request your name sir?
My name is Antonio Balladino.
Balladino▪ you are not Pageant Poet to the City of Mil∣lain sir, are you.
I supply the place sir: when aworse cannot be had sir.
I cry you mercy sir, I love you the better for that sir, by Iesu you must pardon me, I knew you not, but Il'd pray to be better acquainted with you sir▪ I have seen of your works.
I am at your service good Moister Onion, but concer∣ning this maiden that you love sir? what is she,
O did my fellow Juniper tell you▪ marry sir, she is
as one may say, but a poor mans child indeed, and for mine own part I am no Gentleman borne I must confess, but my mind to me a kingdom is truly.
Truly a very good saying.
It is somewhat stale, but that's no matter.
O it is the better, such things ever are like bread, which the staler it is, the more wholesome.
This is but a hungry comparison in my judgment.
Why, I'll tell you, M. Onion, I do use as much stale stuff, though I say it my self, as any man does in that kind I am sure. Did you see the last Pageant, I set forth?
No faith sir, but there goes a huge report on it.
Why, you shall be one of my Maecen-asses, I'll give you one of the books, O you'll like it admirably.
Nay that's certain, I'll get my fellow Juniper to read it.
Read it sir, I'll read it to you.
Tut then I shall not choose but like it.
Why look you sir, I write so plain, and keep that old Decorum, that you must of necessity like it; mary you shall have some now (as for example, in plays) that will have eve∣rye day new tricks, and write you nothing but humours: in∣deed this pleases the Gentlemen: but the common sort they care not for it, they know not what to make on it, they look for good matter, they, and are not edified with such toys.
You are in the right, I'll not give a halfepeny to see a thousand on'hem. I was at one the last Term, but &amp; ever I see a more roguish thing, I am a piece of cheese, &amp; no onion, nothing but kings &amp; princes in it, the fool came not out a jot.
True sir, they would have me make such plays, but as I tell hem, and they'll give me twenty pound a play, I'll not raise my vain.
No, it were a vain thing and you should sir.
Tut give me the penny, give me the penny, I care not for the Gentlemen I, lerme have a good ground, no matter for the pen, the plot shall carry it.
Indeed that's right, you are in print already for the
best plotter.
I, I might as well ha been put in for a dumb show too.
I marry sir, I marle you were not, stand aside sir a while:
How now friend, what are you there? be uncovered, Would you speak with any man here?
I, or else I must have returned you no answer.
Friend, you are somewhat to peremptory, let's crave your absence: nay never scorn it, I am a little your better in this place.
I do acknowledge it.
Do you acknowledge it? nay then you shall go forth, Isle teach you how shall acknowledge it another time; go to, void, I must have the hall purged, no setting up of a rest here, pack, begone.
I pray you sir is not your name Onion?
Your friend as you may use him, and M. Onion, say on.
M. Onion with a murrain, come come put off this Lyons hide, your ears have discovered you, why Peter! do not I know you Peter?
Gods so, Valentine!
O can you take knowledge of me now sir?
Good Lord, sir, how thou art altered with thy travel?
Nothing so much as thou art with thine office, but sir, Onion is the Count Ferneze at home?
I Bully, he is aboue; and the Lord Paulo Ferneze, his son, and Madam Aurelia, &amp; madam Phanixella, his daugh∣ters, But O Valentine?
How now man, how dost thou?
Faith sad, heavy, as a man of my coat ought to be.
Why man, thou were merry enough even now.
True, but thou know
All creatures here soiorning, upon this wretched earth,
Sometimes have a fit of mourning, as well as a fit of mirth.
O Valentine, mine old Lady is dead, man.
Dead!
I faith.
When dyed she?
Mary, to morrow shall be three months, she was seen going to heaven they say, about some five weeks agony! how now? trickling tears, ha?
Faith thou hast made me weep with this news.
Why I have done but the part of an Onion, you must pardon me.
What Valentine? fellow Onion, take my dish I prithee you rogue sirrah, tell me, how thou dost, sweet I•glee.
Faith, Juniper, the better to see thee thus frolic.
Nay, slid I am no changeling, I am Juniper still.
I keep the pristmate ha, you mad Hierogliphick, when shall we swagger.
Hierogliphick, what meanest thou by that.
Mean? Gods so, first not a good word man? what? stand upon meaning with your friends. Puh, Abscond.
Why, but stay, stay, how long has this sprightly humour haunted thee?
Foe humour, a foolish natural gift we have in the Ae∣quinoctiall.
Natural, slid it may be supernatural, this?
Valentine, I prithee ruminate thy self welcome. What fortune de la Guerra.
O how pitifully are these words forced.
As though they were pumped out on's belly.
Sirrah Ingle, I think thou hast seen all the strange countries in Christendom since thou wen•st?
I have seen some Juniper.
You have seen Constantinople?
I, that I have.
And Jerusalem, and the Indies, and Goodwin sands, and the tower of Babylon, and Venice and all.
I all; no marle and he have a nimble tong, if he prac∣tise to vault thus from one side of the world to another.
O it's a most heavenly thing to travel, &amp; see countries, especially at sea, and a man had a patent not to be sick.
O sea sick lest, and full of the scuru•e.
Valentine? welcome I faith how dost sir?
How do you good Valentine.
Troth, Valentine, I am glad to see you.
Welcome sweet rogue.
Before God he never looked better in his life.
And how first man? what, Alla Courage•.
Never better gentlemen I faith.
S'will here comes the steward.
Why how now fellows all here? and nobody to weight aboue now they are ready to rise? look up one or two Signior Francisco Colomia's man how doo's your good moister.
In health sir he will be here anon.
Is he come home, then?
I sir he is not past six miles hence, he sent me before to learn if Count Ferneze were here and return him word.
Yes, my Lord is here; and you may tel your moister he shall come very happily to take his leave of Lord Paulo Fer∣neze: who is now instantly to depart with other noble gentle∣men, upon special service.
I will tell him sir.
I pray you doe, fellows make him drink.
Sirs, what service first they are employed in?
Why against the French they mean to have a fling at Millaine again they say.
Who leads our forces, can you tell?
Marry that do's Signior Maximilian? he is aboue, now.
Who, Maximilian of Vicenza?
I he? do you know him?
Know him? O yes he's an excellent brave soldier.
I so they say, but one of the most vain glorious men in Europe.
He is indeed, marry exceeding valiant.
And that is rare.
What.
Why to see a vaineglorious man valiant.
Well he is so I assure you.
What no further yet, come on you precious rascal, sir Valentine, Isle give you a health I faith; for the heaven• you mad Capriceio, hold hook and line.
Boy.
My Lord.
Sirrah go up to Signior Angelio,
And pray him (if he can) devise some means,
To leave my father, and come speak with me.
I will my Lord.
Well heaven, be auspicious in the event▪
For I do this against my Genius,
And yet my thoughts cannot propose a reason,
Why I should fear, or faint thus in my hopes,
Of one so much endeared to my love.
Some spark it is, kindled within the soul:
Whose light yet breaks not to the outward sense,
That propagates this timorous suspect;
His actions no•er carried any face
Of change, or weakness▪ then I injury him?
In being thus cold conceited of his faith,
O here he comes.
How now sweet Lord, whats the matter?
Good faith his presence makes me half ashamed.
Of my strayed thoughts.
Bestow your self.
Where is my father, Signior Angelio.
Marry in the gallery, where your Lordship left him.
Thats well. Then Angelio I will be brief.
Since time forbids the use of circumstance,
How well you are received in my affection,
Let it appear by this one instance, only
That now I will deliver to your trust,
The dearest secrets, treasurd in my bosom,
Dear Angelio. You are •ot every man,
〈◊〉, whom my election hath designed,
〈…〉 object of my soul:
〈…〉 my desert,
Or supple your tried temper, with soft phrases;
True friendship lothes such oily complement:
But from th'aboundance of that love, that flows
Through all my spirits, is my speech enforced.
Before your Lordship do proceed too far,
Let me be bold to intimate thus much;
That what so ere your wisdom hath t'expose,
Be it the weightiest and most rich affair,
That ever was included in your breast,
My faith shall poise it, if not—
O no more,
Those words have rapt me with their sweet effects,
So freely breathed, and so responsible,
To that which I endeavoured to extract,
Arguing a happy mixture of our souls.
Why were there no such sympathy sweet Lord?
Yet the impressure of those ample favours,
I have derived from your unmatched spirit,
Would bind my faith to all obseruances.
How! favours Angello, ô speak not of them,
They are mere paintings, and import no merit,
Looks my love well? thereon my hopes are placed:
Faith, that is bought with favours, cannot last.
My Lord.
How now?
You are sought for all about the house, within,
The Count your father calls for you.
God, what cross events do meet my purposes?
Now will he violently fret and grieve
That I am absent. Boy, say I come presently:
Sweet Angello, I cannot now insist
Upon particulars, I must serve the time
The maine of all this is▪ I am in love.
Why starts your Lordship?
I thought I heard my father coming hitherward, list▪ ha?
I hear not any thing, it was but your imagination sure.
No.
No, I assure your Lordship.
I would work safely.
Why, has he no knowledge of it then?
O no, no creature yet partakes it but your self
In a third person, and believe me friend,
The world contains not now another spirit.
To whom I would reueile it. Hark, hark,
Signior Paulo.
Lord Ferneze.
A pox upon those brazen throated slaves,
What are they mad, trow?
Alas, blame not them,
Their services are (clock-like) to be set,
Backward and forward, at their Lords command,
You know my father's wayward, and his humour
Must not receive a check, for then all objects,
Feed both his grief and his impatience,
And those affections in him, are like powder,
Apt to inflame with every little spark,
And blow up reason, therefore Angelo, peace.
Why this is rare, is he not in the garden?
I know not my Lord.
See, call him?
He is coming this way, let's withdraw a little.
Signior Paulo, Lord Ferneze, Lord Paulo.
WHere should he be, trow? did you look in the armoury?
No my Lord.
No, why there? ô who would keep such drones?
How now, ha ye found him?
No my Lord.
No my Lord, I shall have shortly all my family
Speak nought, but no my Lord, where is Christophero,
Look how he stands, your sleepy knave,
What is he not in the Garden?
No my good Lord.
Your good Lord, ô how this smells of fennel.
You have been in the garden it appears, well, well.
We cannot find him my Lord.
He is not in the armoury.
He is not, he is no where, is he?
Count Ferneze▪
Signior.
Preserve your patience honourable Count.
Patience? a Saint would loose his patience to be crossed,
As I am with a sort of motley brains,
See see, how like a nest of Rooks they stand,
Gaping on one another now Diligence, what news bring you?
Ant please your honour.
Tut, tut, leave pleasing of my honour Diligence, you double with we, come.
How: does he find fault with Please his Honour. Swounds it has begun a seruingmans speech, ever since I be∣longed to the blew order: I know not how it may show, now I am in black, but—
Whats that, you mutter sir? will you proceed?
Ant like your good Lordship.
Yet more, Gods precious.
What, do not this like him neither?
What say you sir knave?
Mary I say your Lordship were best to set me to school again, to learn how to deliver a message.
What do you take exceptions at me then.
Exception? I take no exceptions, but by Gods so your humours—
Go to you are a Rascal, hold your tongue.
Your Lordships poor servant, I.
Tempt not my patience.
Why I hope I am no spirit, am I?
My Lord, command your Steward to correct the slave.
Correct him, S'bloud come you and correct him and you have a mind to it, correct him, that's a good jest I faith, the Steward and you both, come and correct him.
Nay see, away with him, pull his cloth over his ears.
Cloth? tell me of your cloth, here's your cloth, nay and I morn a minute longer, I am the rottenest Onion that e∣for spake with a tongue.
What call your hint's count Ferneze?
His name is Onion Signior,
I thought him some such saucy companion.
Signior Maximillian.
Sweet Lord.
Let me entreat you, you would not regard
Any contempt flowing from such a spirit,
So rude, so barbarous.
Most noble Count under your favour—
Why Isle tell you Signior,
Heel bandy with me word for word, nay more,
Put me to silence, strike me perfect dumb;
And so amaze me, that oftentimes I know not,
Whether to check or cherish his presumption:
Therefore good Signior.
Sweet Lord satisfy your self, I am not now to learn how to manage my affections, I have observed, and know the difference between a base wretch and a true man, I can distinguish them, the property of the wretch is, he would hurt and cannot, of the man, he can hurt, and will not.
Go to, my merry daughter, ô these looks,
Agree well with your habit, do they not?
Tut, let me alone. By your favour, this is the Gen∣tleman I think, Sir you appear to be an honourable Gentle∣man, I understand, and could wish (for mine own part) that things were conden't otherwise then they are: but (the world knows) a foolish fellow, somewhat procliue, and hasty, he did it in a prejudicate humour; mary now upon better com∣putation, he wanes; he melts; his poor eyes are in a cold sweat. Right noble Signior, you can have but compunction, I love the man, tender your compassion.
Doth any man here understand this fellow?
O God sir, I may say frustra to the comprehension of your intellection.
Before the Lord, he speaks all riddle, I think.
I must have a comment ere I can conceive him.
Why he sues to have his fellow Onion pardoned,
And you must grant it Signior.
O withal my soul my Lord, is that his motion?
I sir, and we shall retort these kind favours with all alacrity of spirit, we can sir, as may be most expedient, as well for the quality as the cause, till when in spite of this complement: I rest a poor Cobbler, servant to my honourable Lord here, your friend and Juniper.
How Juniper?
I Signior.
He is a sweet youth, his tongue has a happy turn when he sleeps.
I for then it rests, O Sir your welcome,
Why God be thanked you are found at last:
Signior Coloma truly you are welcome,
I am glad to see you sir so well returned.
I gladly thank your honour, yet indeed
I am sorry for such cause of heaviness,
As hath possessed your Lordship in my absence.
O Francisco' you knew her what she was!
She was a wise and honourable Lady.
I was she not! well weep not she is gone,
Persons duld eye can make two grieves of one,
Whom death mark out, virtue, nor bluod can save,
Princes, as beggars, all must feed the grave.
Are your horse ready Lord Paulo,
I signior the stay for vs at the gate.
Well tic good. Ladies I will take my leave of you, Be your fortunes as your selves? fair. Come let vs to horse, Count Ferneza I bear a spirit full of thanks for all your hono∣rabble courtesies.
Sir I could wish the number and value of them more in respect of your deservings. But Signior Maximillian.
I pay you a word in private.
I Faith brother you are fitted for a general yonder, Beshrow my heart (If I had Fortnnatus hat here) and I would not wish my self a man and go with you, only t'enioy his pre∣sense.
Why do you love him so well sist•r.
No by my troth, but I have such an odd pretty appre∣hension of his humour me thinks: that I am 〈◊〉 tickled with the conceit of it.
O he is a fine man.
And me thinks another may be as fine as he.
O Angel••, do you think I do urge any comparison a∣against you? no, I am not so ill bred, as to be a deprauer of your worthiness: believe me, if I had not some hope of your abiding with vs, I should never desire to go out of black whilst I lived • but learn to speak in the nose, and turn puritan presently.
I thank you Lady: I know you can flout.
Come doe you take it so? I faith you wrong me.
I, but Madam,
Thus to disclaim in all the effects of pleasure,
May make your sadness seem to much affected,
And then the proper grace of it is lost.
Indeed sir, if I did put on this sadness
Only abroad, and in Society,
And were in private merry; and quick humoured;
Then might it seem affected and abhord:
But as my looks appear, such is my spirit,
Drowned up with confluence of grief, and melancholy▪
That like to rivers run through all my veins,
Quenching the pride and fervor of my blood.
My honourable Lord? no more:
There is the honour of my blood engaged,
For your sons safety.
Signior, blame me not,
For tending his security so much.
He is mine only son, and that word only.
Hath with his strong, and reprecussiue sound,
•troke my heart cold, and given it a deep wound.
Why but stay, I beseech you, had your Lordship ever any more sons then this.
Why have not you known it Maximilian?
Let my Sword fail me then.
I had one other younger borne then this,
By twice so many how ers as would fill
The circle of a year, his name Camillo,
Whom in that black, and fearful night I lost,
(Tic now a nineteen years agony at least,
And yet the memory of it fits as fresh
Within my brain as it were but yesterday)
It was that night wherein the great Chamont,
The general for France surprised Vicenza,
Methinks the horror of that clamorous shout
His soldiers gave when they attained the wall,
Yet tingles in mine ear, me thinks I see
With what amazed looks, distracted thoughts,
And minds confused, we, that were citizens,
Confronted one another: every street
Was filled with bitter self tormenting cries,
And happy was that foot, that first could press,
The flowery champaign, bordering on Verona.
Here I (employed about my dear wives safety)
Whose soul is now in peace) lost my Camillo.
Who sure was murdered by the barbarous Soldiers,
Or else I should have heard—my heart is great.
Sorrow is faint? and passion makes me sweat.
Grieve not sweet Count: comfort your spirits, you have a son a noble gentleman, he stands in the face of ho∣nor: For his safety let that be no question. I am moister of my fortune, and he shall share with me. Farewell my honourable Lord. Ladies once more adieu, for your self madam you are a most rare creature, I tell you so, be not proud of it, I love you: come Lord Paulo to horse.
Adieu good Signior Francisco: farewell sister.
How shall we rid him hence.
Why well enough? swe•e Sig•ior Maximilian,
I have some small occasion to stay:
If it may please you but take horse before
Isle over take you, ere your troops be ranged.
Your motion hath taste well: Lord Ferneze I go.
Now if my love fair Rachel, were so happy,
But to look forth. See fortune doth me grace.
Before I can demand? how now love.
Where is your father?
Gone abroad my Lord:
Thats well.
I but I fear heel presently return,
Are you now going my most honoured Lord?
I my sweet Rachel.
Before God, she is a sweet wench.
Rachel I hope I shall not need to urge,
The sacred purity of our effects,
As if it hung in trial or suspense:
Since in our hearts, and by our mutual vows,
It is confirmed and sealed in •ight of heaven.
Nay doe not weep, why start you? fear not, Love.
Your father cannot be returned so soon,
I prithee doe not look so heavily,
Thou shalt want nothing.
No is your presence nothing?
I shall want that, and wanting that, want all:
For that is all to me.
Content thee sweet,
I have Made choice here of a constant friend
This gentleman? one, whose zealous love
I doe repose more, then on all the world,
Thy beauteous self excepted: and to him,
Have I committed my dear care of thee,
As to my genius, or my other soul,
Receive him gentle love, and what deffects
My absence proves, his presence shall supply.
The time is envious of our longer stay.
Farewell dear Rachel.
Most dear Lord, adieu,
Heaven and honour crown your deeds, and you.
Faith tell me Angelio how dost thou like her?
Troth well my Lord, but shall I speak my mind.
I prithee doe.
She is deriud too meanly to be wife
To such a noble person, in my judgment.
Nay then thy judgment is to mean, I see▪
Did thou near read in difference of good,
Tic more to shine in virtue then in blood.
Come you are so sententious my Lord.
Here comes her father. How dost thou good Iaques?
God save thee Iaques.
What should this mean? Rachel open the door.
Sbloud how the poor slave looks, as though
He had been haunted by the spirit Lar,
Or seen the ghost of some great Satrapas
In an unsavoury sheet.
I muse he spake not, belike he was amazed
Coming so suddenly and vnprepard? Well lets go.
SO now enough my heart, beat now no more▪
At least for this affright, what a could sweat
Flowed on my brows, and over all my bosom!
Had I not reason? to behold my door
Beset with unthrifts, and my self abroad?
Why Iaques? was their nothing in the house
Worth a continual eye, a vigelent thought,
Whose head should never nod, nor eyes once wink?
Look on my coat, my thoughts worn quite thread bare,
That time could never cover with a nap,
And by it learn, never with nappes of sleep,
To smother your conceits of that you keep.
But yet, I marvel, why these gallant youths
Spoke me so fair, and I esteemed a beggar?
The end of flattery, is gain, or lechery:
If they seek gain of me, they think me rich,
But that they do not: for their other object:
Tic in my handsome daughter, if it be.
And by your leave, her handsomeness may tell them
My beggary counterfeits, and, that her neatness,
Flows from some store of wealth, that breaks my coffers,
With this same engine, love to mine own breed.
But this is answered: Beggars will keep fine,
Their daughters, being fair, though themselves 〈◊〉
Well then, it is for her, I, it is sure for her,
And I make her so brisk for some of them,
That I might live alone once with my gold.
O it is a sweet companion▪ kind and true▪
A man may trust it when his father cheats him,
Brother, or friend, or wife, ô wondrous pelf,
,,That which makes all men false, is true it self.
But now this maid, is but supposed my daughter:
For I being Steward to a Lord of France,
Of great estate, and wealth, called Lord Chammount,
He gone into the wars, I stole his treasure,
(But hear not, any thing) I stole his treasure,
And this his daughter, being but two years old,
Because it loved me so, that it would leave
The nurse her self, to come into mine arms,
And had I left it, it would sure have dyed.
Now herein I was kind, and had a conscience;
And since her Lady mother that did dye
In child-bed of her, loved me passing well,
It may be nature fashiond this affection,
Both in the child and her: but hes ill bred,
That ransackes tombs, and doth deface the dead.
I'll therefore say no more: suppose the rest,
Here have I changed my form, my name and hers.
And live obsurely, to enjoy more safe
My dearest treasure. But I must abroad, Rachel▪
What is your pleasure sir?
Rachel I must abroad.
Lock thy self in, but yet take out the key,
That whosoever peepes in at the key-hole,
May yet imagine there is none at home.
I will sir.
But hark thee Rachel: say a thief should come,
And miss the key, he would resoule indeed
None were at home, and so break in the rather:
Op the doo•• Rachel, set it open daughter;
But sit in it thy self: and tal•e aloud,
As if there were some more in house with thee:
Put out the fire, kill the chimneys hart,
That it may breath no more then a dead man,
The more we spare my child, the more we gain.
What says my fellow Onion? come on.
All of a house sir, but no fellows, you are my Lords
Steward, but I pray you what think you of love, sir?
Of love Onion? Why it's a very honourable humour.
Nay if it be but worshipful I care not.
Go to, it's honourable, chock not at the conceit of the Gentleman.
But in truth sir, you shall do well to think well of love:
For it thinks well of you, in me, I assure you.
G••mercy fellow Onion: I do 〈◊〉 well, thou are in love, art thou?
Partly sir, b•• I am ashamed to say wholly.
Well, I will further•• in thee to any honest woman, or maiden, the 〈…〉.
Why now you co•e n••re him sir, he doth veil,
He doth remuner••e, he doth •haw• he 〈◊〉 the kindness
Of an honest imperfection in your worship.
But who is it thou love fellow Onion?
Mary a poor 〈◊〉 daughter, but none of the honest∣est, I hope.
Why, would thou not have her honest?
O no, for then I am sure she would not have me▪
Tic Rachel de Pri•.
Why, she hath the name of a very vertuo•• maiden.
So she is sir, but the fellow talks in quit•s, he.
What would thou have me do in the matter?
Do nothing sir, I pray you, but speak for me.
In what manner?
My fellow Juniper can tell you sir.
Why as thus sir. Your worship may commend him for a fellow fit for consanguinity, and that he shakes with desire of procreation, or so.
That were not so good, me thinks.
No sir, why so sir? what if you should say to her, corroborate thy self sweet soul, let me distinguish thy paps with my fingers, divine Mumps, pretty Pastorella? look thou so sweet and bounteous? comfort my friend 〈◊〉
Well I perceive you wish, I should say something m•y do him grace, and further hi• desires, and that be 〈◊〉 I will.
I thank you sir, God save your life, I pray God sir.
Your worship 〈…〉 good to live long 〈◊〉 con∣taminate me no service▪
Command thou would say, no good Juniper.
Health and wealth sir.
This wench will I solicit for my self,
Making my Lord and moister privy to it;
And if he second me with his consent,
I will proceed, as having long ere this,
Thought her a worthy choice to make my wife.
Room for a case of matrons-coloured black,
How motherly my mothers death hath made vs?
I would I had some girls now to bring up;
O I could make a wench so virtuous,
She should say grace to every bit of meat,
And gape no wider then a wafers thickness:
And she should mall French cur•i••, so most low,
That every touch should turn her over backward.
Sister, these words become not your attire,
Nor your estate: our virtuous mothers death
Should print more deep effects of sorrow in vs,
Then may be worn out in so little time.
Sister, faith you take too much Tobacco,
It makes you black within, as you're without.
What true-stich sister? both your sides alike?
Be of a sleighter work: for of my word,
You shall be sold as dear or rather dearer?
Will you be bound to customs and to rites?
Shed profitable 〈◊〉, weep for advantage▪
Or else, do all things, as you are inclined,
Hate when your stomach serves (saith the Physician)
Not at eleu•• 〈◊〉 six. So if your humour
Be now 〈◊〉 with this heaviness.
Give me the reins and spare not, as I do,
In this my pleasurable appetite,
It is Pracisianisme to alter that▪
With austere judgment, that is given by nature.
I wept you saw too, when my mother dyed:
For then I found it easier to do so,
And fitter with my mood, then not to weep.
But now tic otherwise, another time
Perhaps I shall have such deep thoughts of her,
That I shall weep a fresh, some tweluemonth hence,
And I will weep, if I be so disposed,
And put on black, as grimly then, as now;
Let the mind go still with the bodies stature,
Judgment is ••t for Judges, give me nature.
See Signior Angelo here are the Ladies,
Go you and comfort one, Isle to the other.
Therefore I come sir, I'll to the eldest.
God save you Ladies, these sad moods of yours,
That make you choose these solitary walks,
Are hurtful for your beauties.
If we had them.
Come, that condition might be for your hearts,
When you protest faith, since we cannot see them.
But this same heart of beauty, your sweet face
Is in mine eye still.
O you cut my heart
with your sharpe eye.
Nay Lady thats not so, your heart's to hard.
My beauty• hart?
O no.
I mean that regent of affection, Madam,
That tramples on al love with such contempt
•n this fair breast.
No more, your drift is savoured,
I had rather seem hard hearted
Then hard favoured,
Is that your meaning, Lady?
Go too sir.
Your wits are fresh I know, they need no spur.
And therefore you will ride them.
Say I doe.
They will not tire I hope?
No not with you, hark you sweet Lady.
Tic much pity Madam.
You should have any reason to retain
This sign of grief, much less the thing difignde.
Griefs are more fit for Ladies then their pleasures.
That is for such as follow nought but pleasures.
But you that temper them so well with virtues,
Using your griefs so it would prove them pleasures.
And you would seem in cause of griefs &amp; pleasures equally pleasant.
Sir so I do now.
It is the excess of either that I strive
So much to shun in all my proved endeavours,
Although perhaps unto a general eye,
I may appear most wedded to my griefs,
Yet doth my mind forsake no taste of pleasure,
I mean that happy pleasure of the soul,
Divine and sacred contemplation
Of that eternal, and most glorious bliss,
Proposed as the crown unto our souls.
I will be silent, yet that I may serve
But as a Decade in the art of memory
To put you still in mind of your own virtues
When your too serious thoughts make you too sad)
Accept me for your servant honoured Lady.
Those ceremonies are too common signior Francis,
For your vncommon gravity, and judgment,
And fits them only, that are nought but ceremony.
Come, I will not sue, stally to be your servant,
But a new term, will you be my refuge?
Your refuge▪ why sir.
That I might fly to you, when all else fail me.
And you be good at flying, be my Plouer.
Nay take away the P.
Tut, then you cannot fly:
Isle warrant you. Isle borrow Cupids wings.
Mass then I fear me you'll do strange things:
I pray you blame me not, if I suspect you,
Your own confession simply doth detect you,
Nay and you be so great in Cupids books,
T'will make me Jealous. you can with your looks
(I warrant you) inflame a women's heart,
And at your pleasure take loves golden dart,
And wound the breast of any vertous maid.
Would I were hence: good Faith I am afraid,
You can constrain one ere they be aware,
To run mad for your love?
O this is rate.
Close with my daughters gentlemen? well done,
Tic like your selves: nay lusty Angelo,
Let not my presence make you bauke your sport,
I will not break a minute of discourse
Twixt you and one of your fair Mistresses.
One of my mistresses? why thinks your Lordship
I have so many
Many? no Angelo.
I do not think you have many, some fourteen
I here thou hast, even of our worthiest dames,
Of any note, in Millaine.
Nay good my Lord fourteen: it is not so.
By the the Mass that first, here are their names to show
Fourteen, or fifteen t'one. Good Angelo.
You need not be ashamed of any of them,
They are gallants all.
Sbloud you are such a Lord.
Nay stay sweet Angelo, I am disposed
A little to be pleasant past my coustome,
He's gone? he's gone, I have disgraced him shrewdly,
Daughters take heed of him, he's a wild youth,
Look what he says to you believe him not,
He will swear love to every one he sees.
Francisco, give them council, good Francisco,
I dare trust thee with both, but him with neither.
Your Lordship yet may trust both them with him.
Well go your ways away, how now Christopher,
What news with you?
I have an humble suit to your good Lordship.
A suit Christopher? what suit I prithee?
I would crave pardon at your Lordships hands,
If it seem vain or simple in your sight.
Isle pardon all simplicity, Christopher,
What is thy suit?
Perhaps being now so old a bachelor,
I shall seem half unwise, to bend my self
In strict affection to a poor young maid.
What? is it touching love Christopher?
Art thou disposed to marry, why tic well.
I, bu• your Lordship may imagine now
That I being steward of your honours house.
If I be married once, will more regard
The maintenance of my wife and of my charge,
Then the due discharge of my place and office:
No, no, Christopher, I know thee honest.
Good faith my Lord, your honour may suspect it▪ but—
Then I should wrong thee, thou hast ever been
Honest and true, and will be still I know.
I but this marriage alters many men:
And you may fear, it will do me my Lord,
But ere it do so? I will undergo
Ten thousand several deaths.
I know it man.
Who would thou have I prithee?
Rachel de pry,
If your good Lordship, grant me your consent.
Rachel de pry? what the poor beggars daughter?
Shees a right handsome maid, how poor soever,
And thou hast my consent, with all my hart.
I humbly thank your honour. Isle now ask her father.
Do so Christofero thou shalt do well.
Tic strange (she being so poor) he should affect her,
But this is more strange that my self should love her.
I spied her, lately, at her fathers door,
And if I did not see in her sweet face
Gentry and nobleness, ne'er trust me more:
But this persuasion, fancy wrought in me,
That fancy being created with her looks,
For where love is he think his ba•est object
Gentle and noble: I am far in love,
And shall be forced to wrong my honest steward,
For I must sat, and seek her for my self;
How much my duty to my late dead wife,
And my own dear renown so er• it sways,
Isle to her father straight. Love hates delays.
Come on Isaith, lets to some exercise or other my hearts:
Fetch the hilts fellow Juniper, wilt thou play:
I cannot resolve you? tic as I am fitted with the inge∣nuity, quantity, or quality of the cudgel.
How dost thou bastinado the poor cudgel with terms?
O Ingle, I have the phrases man, and the Anagrams and the Epitaphs, fitting the mystery of the noble science.
Isle be hanged &amp; he were not misbegotten of some fen∣cer.
Sirrah Valentine, you can resolve me now, have they their masters of defence in other countries as we have here in Italy?
O Lord, I, especially they in Utopia, there they per∣form their prizes and chalenges, with as great ceremony as the Italian or any nation else.
Indeed? how is the manner of it (for gods love) good Valentine?
Ingle? I prithee make recourse unto vs, wee are thy friends and familiars: sweet Ingle.
Why thus sir.
God a mercy good Valentine, nay go on.
Silentium bonus socius Onionus, good fellow Onion be not so ingenious, and turbulent: so sir? and how? how sweet Ingle?
Marry, first they are brought to the public Theater:
What? ha? they Theater there
Theaters? I and plays to: both tragedy and comedy &amp; set forth with as much state as can be imagined?
By Gods so; a man is nobody, till he has travelled.
And how are their plays? as ours are? extemporal?
O no? all premeditated things, and some of them ve∣rye good I faith, my moister used to visit them often when he was there.
Why how are they in a place where any man may see them?
I, in the common Theaters, I tell you. But the sport is at a new play to observe the sway and variety of opinion that passes it. A man shall have such a confused mixture of judgment, powered out in the throng there, as ridiculous, as laughter it self: one says he likes not the writing, another likes not the plot, another not the playing. And sometimes a fellow that comes not there past once in five year at a Parley∣amened time or so, will be as deep mired in censuring as the best, and swear by Gods foot he would never stir his foot to see a hundred such as that is.
I must travel to see these things, I shall ne'er think well of my self else.
Fellow Onion, Isle bear thy charges and thou wilt but pilgrimize it along with me, to the land of Utopia.
Why but me thinks such rooks as these should be ashamed to judge.
Not a whit? the rankest stinkard of them all, will take upon him as peremptory, as if he had writ himself in artibus magister.
And do they stand to a popular censure for any thing they present.
I ever, ever, and the people generally are very ac∣captive and apt to applaud any meritable work, but there are two sorts of persons that most commonly are infectious to a whole auditory.
What be they?
I come lets know them.
It were good they were noted.
Marry? one is the rude barbarous crew a people that have no brains, and yet grounded judgements, these will hiss
any thing that mounts aboue their grounded capacities. But the other are worth the observation, I faith.
What be they? what be they?
Faith a few Caprichious gallants.
Caprichious? stay, that word's for me.
And they have taken such a habit of dislike in all things, that they will approve nothing, be it never so concei∣ted or elaborate, but sit dispersed, making faces, and spitting, wagging their upright ears and cry filthy, filthy. Simply vtte∣ring their own condition, and using their wried countenan∣ces in stead of a vice, to turn the good aspects of all that shall sit near them, from what they behold.
O that's well said, lay them down, come sirs.
Who plays, fellow Juniper, Sebastian, Balthazar:
Some body take them up, come.
Ingle Valentine?
Not I sir, I profess it not.
Sebastian.
Balthazar.
Who? I?
Come, but one bout, Isle give hem thee, I faith.
Why, here is Martino.
Foe he, alas he cannot play a whit, man.
That's all one: no more could you in state quo prius, Martino, play with him, every man has his beginning and conduction.
Will you not hurt me fellow Onion?
Hurt thee, no? and I do, put me among pot-hearbs,
And chop me to pieces, come on?
By your favour sweet bullies give them room, back, so, Martino, do not look so thin upon the matter.
Ha, well plaid, fall over to my leg now? so▪ to your guard again, excellent, to my head now, make home your blow: spare not me, make it home, good, good again.
Why how now Peter?
Gods so, Onion has caught a bruise.
Couragio? be not caprichio•s? what?
Caprichio•s? not I, I scorn to be caprichious for a scrach, Martino must have another bout, come.
No, no, play no more, play no more.
Foe, tic nothing, a philip, a devise, fellow Juniper pri∣thee get me a Plantan, I had rather play with one that had skill by half.
By my troth, fellow Onion, it was against my will.
Nay that's not so, it was against my head,
But come, weal ha one bout more.
Not a bout, not a stroke.
No more, no more.
Why Isle give you demonstration, how it came, Thou openest the dagger to falsify over with the back sword frisk, and he interrupted, before he could fall to the close.
No, no, I know best how it was better thē any man here, I felt his play presently: for look you, I gathered upon him thus, thus do you see? for the double locke, and took it single on the head.
He says very true, he took it single on the head.
Come lets go.
Here fellow Onion, here is a cob-web.
How? a cob-web Martino, I will have another bout with you? S'wounds do you first break my head, and then give me a plaster in scorn? come to it, I will have a bout.
God's my witness.
Tut! your witness cannot serve.
S'bloud? why what, thou art not lunatike, art thou? and thou be avoid Mephostophiles. Say the sign should be in Aries now: as it may be for all vs, where were your life? An∣swear me that?
Hee says well, Onion.
I indeed doo's he.
Come, come, you are a foolish Naturalist, go, get a white a of an egg, and a little flax, and close the breach of the
head, it is the most conducible thing that can be. Mart••, do not insinuate upon your good fortune, but play an honest part and bear away the bucklers.
My young and simple friend, Paulo Ferneze,
Bound me with mighty solemn conjurations,
To be true to him, in his love, to Rachel,
And to solicit his remembrance still,
In his enforced absence, much, I faith.
True to my friend in cases of affection?
In women's cases? what a jest it is?
How silly he is, that imagines it!
He is an ass that will keep promise strictly
In any thing that checks his private pleasure;
Chiefly in love. S'bloud am not I a man?
Have I not eyes that are as free to look?
And blood to be inflamed as well as his?
And when it is so, shall I not pursue
Mine own loves longings, but prefer my friends?
I tic a good fool, do so, hang me then,
Because I swore, alas, who doo's not know,
That lovers perjuries are ridiculous?
Have at thee Rachel: Isle go court her sure:
For now I know her father is abroad.
S'bloud see, he is here, ô what damned luck is this?
This labour's lost, I must by no means see him.
Mischief and hell, what is this man a spirit,
Haunts he my houses ghost? still at my door?
He has been at my door, he has been in,
In my dear door: pray God my gold be safe.
Gods pity, here is another. Rachel, h• Rachel.
God save you honest father.
Rachel, Gods light, come to me, Rachel, Rachel!
Now in Gods name what ails he? this is strange!
He loves his daughter so, Isle lay my life,
That hoe's afraid, having been now abroad,
I come to seek her love unlawfully.
Tic safe, tic safe, they have not robed my treasure.
Let it not seem offensive to you sir.
Sir, Gods my life, sir, sir, call me sir.
Good father here me.
You are most welcome sir,
I meant almost; and would your worship speak?
Would you abase your self to speak to me?
Tic no abasing father: my intent
Is to do further honour to you sir
Then only speak: which is to be your son.
My gold is in his nostrils, he has smelt it,
Break breast, break heart, fall on the earth my entrails,
With this same bursting admiration!
He knows my gold, he knows of all my treasure,
How do you know sir? whereby do you guess?
At what sir? what first you mean▪
I ask, an't please your Gentle worship, how you know?
I mean, how I should make your worship know
That I have nothing—
To give with my poor daughter? I have nothing:
The very air, bounteous to every man,
Is scant to me, sir.
I do think good father, you are but poor,
He thinks so, hark, but think so:
He thinks not so, he knows of all my treasure.
Poor man he is so overjoyed to hear
His daughter may be past his hopes bestowed,
That betwixt fear and hope (if I mean simply)
He is thus passionate.
Yet all is safe within, is none without?
No body break my walls?
What say you father, shall I have your daughter?
I have no dowry to bestow upon her.
I do expect none, father.
That is well.
Then I beseech your worship make no question
Of that you wish, tic too much favour to me.
Isle leave him now to give his passions breath,
Which being settled, I will fetch his daughter:
I shall but move too much, to speak now to him.
So, hoe's gone, would all were dead and gone,
That I might live with my dear gold alone.
Here is the poor old man.
Out of my soul another, comes he hither?
Be not dismayed old man, I come to cheer you.
To me by heaven,
Turn ribs to brass, turn voice into a trumpet,
To rattle out the battles of my thoughts.
One comes to hold me talk, while the other robs me.
He has forgot me sure: what should this mean?
He fears authority, and my want of wife
Will take his daughter from him to defame her:
He that hath nought on earth but one poor daughter,
May take this ecstasy of care to keep her.
And yet tic safe: they mean not to use force,
But fawning coming. I shall easly know
By his next question, if he think me rich,
Whom see I? my good Lord?
Stand up good father, I call thee not father for thy age;
But that I gladly wish to be thy son,
In honoured marriage with thy beauteous daughter.
O, so, so, so, so, so, this is for gold,
Now it is sure, this is my daughters neatness,
Makes them believe me rich. No, my good Lord,
Isle tell you all; how my poor haplesse daughter
Got that attire she wears from top to toe.
Why father, this is nothing.
O yes, good my Lord.
Indeed it is not.
Nay sweet Lord pardon me! do not dissemble,
Hear your poor beads-man speak; tic requisite
That I (so huge a beggar) make account
Of things that pass my calling: she was borne
T'enioy nothing underneath the son:
But that, if she had more then other beggars
She should be envied: I will tell you then
How she had all she wears, her warm shoes (God wot)
A kind maid gave her, seeing her go barefoot
In a cold frosty morning; God requite her;
Her homely stockings
Father, Isle hear no more, thou mou'st too much
With thy too curious answer for thy daughter,
That doth deserve a thousand times as much,
Isle be thy Son in law, and she shall wear
Th'attire of Countesses.
O good my Lord,
Mock not the poor, remembers not your Lordship,
That poverty is the precious gift of God.
As well as riches, tread upon me, rather
Then mock my poorness.
Rise I say:
When I mock poorness, then heavens make me poor.
See here is the Count Ferneze, I will tell him
The haplesse accident of his brave son,
That hee may seek the sooner to redeem him,
God save your Lordship.
You are right welcome sir.
I would I brought such news as might deserve it.
What, bring you me ill news?
Tic ill my Lord,
Yet such as usual chance of war affords,
And for which all men are prepared that use it,
And those that use it not, but in their friends,
Or in their children.
Ill news of my son?
My dear and only son, Isle lay my soul,
Ay me accursed, thought of his death doth wound me,
And the report of it will kill me quite.
Tic not so ill my Lord.
How then?
Hoe's taken prisoner, and that's all.
That's enough, enough,
I set my thoughts on love, on servile love,
Forget my virtuous wife, feel not the dangers,
The bands and wounds of mine own flesh and blood,
And therein am a mad man: therein plagued,
With the most just affliction under heaven.
Is Maximilian taken prisoner to?
My good my Lord, he is returned with prisoners.
First possible, can Maximilian?
Return, and view my face without my son,
For whom he swore such care as for himself?
My Lord no care can change the events of war.
O! in what tempests do my fortunes sail,
Still wrecked with winds more foul and contrary,
Then any northern guest, or Southern flaw?
That ever yet enforced the sea to gape,
And swallow the poor Merchants traffic up?
First in Vicenza, lost I my first son;
Next here in Millaine my most dear loved Lady:
And now my Paulo, prisoner to the French,
Which last being printed with my other griefs,
Doth make so huge a volume, that my breast
Cannot contain them. But this is my love•
I must make love to Rachel, heaven hath thrown,
This vengeance on me most deservedly:
Were it for nought but wronging of my steward.
My Lord since only money may redress
The worst of this misfortune, be not grieved,
Prepare his ransom and your noble son
Shall greet your cheered eyes, with the more honour.
I will prepare his ransom: gracious heaven
Grant his imprisonment may be his worst,
Honoured and soldier like imprisonment,
And that he be not manacled and made
A drudge to his proud foe. And here I vow,
Never to dream of seeme-les amorous toys,
Nor aim at other joy on earth,
But the fruition of my only son.
He's gone: I knew it; this is our hot lover,
I will believe them! I• they may come in
Like simple wooers, and be arrant thieves,
And I not know them! tic not to be told,
What servile villainies, men will do for gold,
O it began to have a huge strong smell,
Which lying so long together in a place;
Isle give it vent, it shall ha shift enough,
And if the devil, that envies all goodness,
Have told them of my gold, and where I kept it,
Isle set his burning nose once more a work,
To smell where I removed it, here it is:
Isle hide and cover it with this horse-dung:
Who will suppose that such a precious no•
Is crowned with such a dunghill excrement?
In my dear life, sleep sweetly my dear child.
"Scarce lawfully begotten, but yet gotten,
"And thats enough. Rot all hands that come near thee
Except mine own. Burn out all eyes that see thee,
Except mine own. All thoughts of thee be poison
To their enamoured harts, except mine own,
Isle take no leave, sweet Prince great Emperor,
But see thee every minute, King of Kings,
Isle not be rude to thee, and turn my back,
In going from thee, but go backward out:
With my face toward thee, with humble courtesies,
None is within. None overlooks my wall.
To have gold, and to have it safe, is all.
Lord Chamount and your valiant friend there▪ I can∣not say welcome to Millaine: your thoughts and that word are not musical, but I can say you are come to Millaine.
Mort d•ew.
Gar soon.
Gentlemen (I would cal an Emperor so) you are now my prisoners, I am sorry, marry this, spit in the face of your fortunes, for your usage shall be honourable.
Wee know it signior Maximilian,
The fame of al your actions sounds nought else,
But perfect honour from her swelling cheeks.
It shall do so still I assure you, and I will give you rea∣son, there is in this last action (you know) a noble gentleman of our party, &amp; a right valiant; semblably prisoner to your gene∣ral, as your honoured selfe's to me, for whose safety, this tongue hath given warrant to his honourable father, the Count Ferneze. You conceive me.
I signior.
Well? then I must tell you your ransoms be to re∣deem him, what think you? your answer.
Marry with my Lords leave here I say signior,
This free &amp; ample offer you have made,
Agrees well with your honour, but not ours:
For I think not but Chamount is as well borne
As is Ferneze, then if I mistake not,
He scorns to have his worth so vnderprised,
That it should need an adjunct, in exchange,
Of any equal fortune. Noble Signior?
I am a soldier, and I love Chamount,
Ere I would bruise his estimation,
With the least ruin of mine own respect,
In this wild kind, these legs should rot with irons,
This body pine in prison, till the flesh
Dropped from my bones in flakes, like withered leaves,
In heart of Autumn, from a stubborn Ok.
Monsieur Gasper (I take it so is your name) mis∣prise me not, I will trample on the hart, on the soul of him that shall say, I will wrong you: what I purpose, you cannot now know; but you shall know, and doubt not to your content∣meant. Lord Chamount, I will leave you, whilst I go in and present my self to the honourable Count, till my regression so please you, your noble feet may measure this private, plea∣sant and most princely walk, Soldiers regard them and re∣spect them.
O Ver bon: excellenta gull, he tak'a my Lord Chamount for Monsieur Gaspra, &amp; Monsieur Gaspra for my Lord Cha∣mont, ô dis be brave for make a me laugh'a, ha, ha, ha, ô my heart tickle.
I but your Lordship knows not what hard fate
Might have pursued vs, therefore howsoever
The changing of our names was necessary
And we must now be careful to maintain
This error strongly, which our own devise,
Hath thrust into their ignorant conceits,
For should we (on the taste of this good fortune)
Appear our selves, t'would both create in them
A kind of jealousy, and perchance invert
Those honourable courses they intend.
True my dear Gasper: but this hangby here,
Will (at one time or other) on my soul
Discover vs: A secret in his mouth
Is like a wild bird put into a cage,
Whose door no sooner opens, but tic out.
But sir, if I may but know
Thou vtterst it
Vtteri•? vat Monsieur?
That he is Gasper, and I true Chamount.
O pardon ••y, fore my tongue shall put out de secreta,
Shall breed de •an•ra in my mouth.
Speak not so loud Pacus.
Foe, you shall not hear fool, for all your long ear,
Reguard Monsieur: you be de Chamont, Chamont be Gas∣pra.
Peace, here comes Maximilian.
O belike that's the Count Ferneze, that old man.
Are those his daughters, trow?
I sure, I think they are.
Fore God the taller is a gallant Lady.
So are they both believe me.
True my honourable Lord, that Chamont was the fa∣there of this man.
O that may be, for when I lost my son,
This was but young it seems.
Faith had Camillo lived,
He had been much about his years, my Lord.
He had indeed, well, speak no more of him.
Signior perceive you the error? it was no good of∣fice in vs to stretch the remembrance of so dear a loss. Count Ferneze, let summer sit in your eye, look cheerfully sweet Count, will you do me the honour to confine this noble spy∣rit within the circle of your arms?
Honoured Chamont reach me your valiant hand,
I could have wished some happier accident▪
Had made the way unto this mutual knowledge,
Which either of vs now must take of other,
But sure it is the pleasure of our fates,
That we should thus be wrack't on Fortunes wheel,
Let vs prepare with steeled patience
To tread on torment, and with minds confirmed
Welcome the worst of envy.
Noble Lord, tic thus. I have here (in mine honour) set this gentleman free, without ransom, he is now himself, his valour hath deserved it, in the eye of my judgment. Moun∣sieur Gasper you are dear to me: fortune non mutuat genus. But to the maine, if it may square with your Lordships li∣king, and his love, I could desire that he were now instant∣lie employed to your noble General in the exchange of Fer∣neze for your self, it is the business that requires the tender hand of a friend.
I, and it would be with more speed effected,
If he would undertake it.
True my Lord. Monsieur Gasper, how stand you affected to this motion?
My duty must attend his Lordships will.
What says the Lord Chamont?
My will doth then approve what these have urged.
Why there is good harmony, good music in this▪ Monsieur Gasper, you shall protract no time, only I will give you a bowl of rich wine to the health of your General, another to the success of your journey, and a third to the love of my sword.
Why how now sister in a motley muse?
Go to, theirs somewhat in the wind, I see.
Faith this browne study suites not with your black,
Your habit and your thoughts are of two colours.
Good faith me thinks that this young Lord Cha∣mont favours my mother, sister, does he not?
A mothelry conceit, ô blind excuse,
Blinder then love himself. Well sister, well.
Cupped hath tan his stand in both your eyes, The case is al∣terd.
And what of that?
Nay nothing but a Saint.
Another Bridget, one that for a face
Would put down Vesta, in whose looks doth swim,
The very sweetest cream of modesty.
You to turn tippet? fie, fie, will you give
A packing penny to Virginity.
I thought youl'd dwell so long in Cypress Isle,
You'd worship Madam Venus at the length;
But come, the strongest fall, and why not you?
Nay, do not frown.
Go, go, you fool. Adieu.
Well I may jest, or so: but Cupped knows
My taking is as bad, or worse then hers.
O Monsieur Gasper? if thou be•'st a man,
Be not afraid to court me, do but speak,
Challenge thy right and wear it: for I swear
Till thou arriud'st, ne'er came affection here.
Come on my sweet finical Pacus, the very prime
Of Pages, here is an excellent place for vs to practise in,
No body sees vs here, come lets to it.
Content• Reguarde, vou le Preimer.
Sir Finio?
Mort dei• le peasant.
Did thou see Valentine?
Valentine? no.
No?
No. Sirrah Onion, whither goosed?
O I am vexed, he th•e would trust any of these lying travellers.
I prithee stay good Onion.
Monsieur Onion, venice, come hidera, Ie vou prey.
By gar me ha see two, tree, four hundra thousand of your
Cousin hang, Lend me your hand, shall prey for know you better.
I thank you good signior Parley vou? O that I were in an other world, in the Ingies, or some where, that I might have room to laugh.
A we fort boon: stand? you be dear now, me come,
Boon jot Monsieur.
God morrow good signior.
By gar, be mush glad for see you.
I return you most kind thanks sir.
How? how? Sbloud this is rare?
Nay, shall make you say rare by and by, Reguard
Monsieur Finio,
Signior Pasha.
Dieu vou guard Monsieur.
God save you sweet signior.
Monsieur Onion? is not fort boon.
Bean? quoth he, would I were in debt of a pottle of beans I could do as much.
Welcome signior, whats next?
O here, Void de grand admiration, as should meet per∣chance Monsieur Finio.
Monsieur Pacus▪
Iesu? by Gar who think wee shall meet here?
By this hand I am not a little proud of it, sir
This trick is only for the the chamber, it cannot be cleanly done abroad.
Well what say you for dis den? Monsieur.
Nay pray, sir.
Par ma foy vou bein encounters?
What doe you mean sir, let your glove alone.
Come, se port la sante.
Faith exceeding well sir.
Trot, be mush joy for heir.
And how first with you sweet signior Pasha.
Fat comme vou voyer.
Young gentlemen? spirits of blood, if ever you'll taste of a sweet piece of mutton, do Onion a good turn now.
Que que, parley Monsieur, what first.
Faith teach me one of these tricks.
O me shall doe presently, stand you dear, you sign∣or dear, my self is here: so sort bein, now I parley to Moun∣seer Onion, Onion prattle to you, you speaka to me, so, and as you parley change the bonnet, Monsieur Onion.
Monsieur Finio.
Mounseur Pacue.
Pray b• couera.
Nay I beseech you sir.
What do you mean.
Pardon moi, shall be so,
O God sir.
Not I in good faith sir.
By gar you must.
It shall be yours.
Nay then you wrong me,
Well and ever I come to be great▪
You be big enough for de Onion already,
I mean a great man.
Then you would be a monster.
Well God knows not what fortune may doe, com∣maund me, use me from the soul to the crown, and the crown to the soul: meaning not only from the crown of the head, and the sole of the foot, but also the foot of the mind and the crowns of the purse, I cannot stay now young gentle∣men but—time was, time is, and time shall be.
Sweet Jasper I am sorry we must part,
But strong necessity enforces it.
Let not the time seem long unto my friend,
Till my return for by our love I swear
(The sacred sphere wherein our souls are knit)
I will endeavour to effect this business
With all industrious care and happy speed,
My Lord these circumstances would come well,
To one less capable of your desert
Then I: in whom your merit is confirmed
With such authentical and grounded proves.
Well I will use no more. Gasper adieu.
Farewell my honoured Lord.
Commend me to the Lady, my good Gasper:
I had remembered that had not you urged it.
Once more adieu sweet Gasper.
My good Lord.
Thy virtues are more precious then thy name,
Kind gentleman I would not sell thy love,
For all earthly objects that mine eyes,
Have ever tasted, sure thou art nobly borne,
How ever fortune hath obscured thy birth:
For native honour sparkles in thine eyes,
How may I bless the time wherein Ch•mont
My honoured father did surprise vicenza,
Where this my friend (known by no name) was found,
Being then a child and scarce of power to speak,
To whom my father gave this name of Gasper,
And as his own respected him to death,
Since when wee two have shard our mutual fortunes,
With equal spirits, and but deaths rude hand,
No violence shall dissolve this sacred band.
Fellow Juniper, no more of thy songs and sonnets, sweet Juniper, no more of thy hymns and madrigals, thou sing, but I sigh.
Whats the matter Peter ha? what in an Academy still, still in sable, and costly black array? ha?
Prithee rise mount, mount sweet Juniper, for I go down the wind, and yet I puff: for I am vexed.
Ha Bully? vexed? what intoxicate? is thy brain in a
quintessence? an Idea? a metamorphosis? an Apology? ha rogue? come this love feeds upon thee, I see by thy cheeks, and drinks healths of vermilion, tears I see by thine eyes.
I confess Cupids carouse, he plays super negulum with my liquor of life
Tut, thou art a goose to be Cupids gull, go to, no more of this contemplations, &amp; calculations, morn not, for Rachels thine own
For that let the higher powers work: but sweet June∣per, I am not sad for her, and yet for her in a second person, or if not so, yet in a third.
How second person? away, away, in the crotchets al∣ready Longitude and Latitude? what second? what person? ha?
Juniper, Isle bewray my self before thee, for thy com∣pany is sweet unto me, but I must entreat thy helping hand in the case.
Tut? no more of this surquedry; I am thine own? ad vngem vpsie freeze: pell mell, come, what case? what case?
For the case it may be any mans case, as well as mine, Rachel I mean, but Isle meddle with her anon, in the mean time, Valentine is the man hath wronged me.
How? my Ingle wrong thee, first possible?
Your Ingle, hang him infidel, well and if I be not re∣uengd one him let Peter Onion (by the infernal Gods) be tur∣ned to a leek or a scalion, I spake to him for a ditty for this handkerchier.
Why, has he not done it?
Done it, not a verse by this hand.
O in diebus illis, O preposterous, well come be blithe, the best inditer of thē al is sometimes dull, fellow Onion, pardon mine Ingle: he is a man, has impefections and declinations, as other men have, his mass sometimes cannot caruet nor prognisticat and come of, as it should, no matter, Isle hammer our a para∣phrase for thee my self.
No sweet Juniper, no danger doth breed delay, love
makes me choleric, I can b••re no longer.
Not bear? what my mad Meridian slave? not bear? what?
Cupids burden: tic to heavy▪ to tolerable, and as for the handkerchire and the posy: I will not trouble thee: but if thou wilt go with me into her fathers bookside, old Iaques backside, and speak for me to Rachel, I will not being ratitude, the old man is abroad and all.
Art thou sure on it.
As sure as an obligation.
Lets away then, come we spend time in a vain cir∣cumference, trade I cashier thee till to morrow, fellow Onion for thy sake I finish this workiday.
God a mercy▪ and for thy sake Isle at any time make a holiday.
Nay I prithee Rachel, I come to comfort thee▪
Be not so sad.
O signior Angelo,
No comfort but his presence can remove,
This sadness from my heart.
Nay then you're fond,
And want that strength of judgment and election,
That should be attendant on your years and form,
Will you, because your Lord is taken prisoner,
Blubber and weep and keep a peevish stir,
As though you would turn turtle with the news,
Come, come, be wise. Sblood say your Lord should die:
And you go mar your face as you begin,
What would you doe trow? who would care for you;
But this it is, when nature will bestow
Her gifts on such as know not how to use them,
You shall have some that had they but one quarter
Of your fair beauty? they would make it show
A little otherwise then you do this,
Or they would see the painter twice an hour,
And I commend them I, that can use art,
With such judicial practise.
You talk iedly,
If this be your best comfort keep it still,
My senses cannot feed on such sower cates.
And why sweet heart.
Nay leave good signior.
Come I have sweeter viands yet in store.
I in any case mistress Rachel.
Rachel?
Gods pity signior Angelo, I here my father, away for Gods sake.
S'bloud, I am betwixt, I think, this is twice now, I have been served thus.
Pray God he meet him not.
O brave? she's yonder, O terrible shoe's gone.
Yea? so nimble in your Dilemma's, and your Hiperbole's Hay my love? O my love, at the first sight: By the mass.
O how she skudded, O sweet scud, how she tripped, O delicate trip and go.
Come thou art enamoured with the influence of her profundity, but sirrah hark a little.
O rare, what? what? passing In faith, what first? what first?
What wilt thou say now, if Rachel stand now, and play hity tity through the keyhole, to behold the equipage of thy person:
O sweet equipage, try good Juniper, tickle her, talk, talk, O? rare
Mistress Rachel (watch then if her father come)
Rachel? Madonna? Rachel? No.
Say I am here, Onion or Peter or so.
No, Isle knock, weal not stand upon Horizons, and tricks, but fall roundly to the matter.
Well said sweet Juniper: Horizons? hang hem? knock, knock.
Whose there? father.
Father no? and yet a father, if you please to be a mo∣there.
Well said Juniper, to her again, a smack or two more of the mother
Do you here? sweet soul, sweet radamant? sweet ma∣thauell one word Melpomine? are you at leisure.
At leisure? what to do▪
To doe what, to doe nothing, but to be liable to the ecstasy of true loves exigent, or so, you smell my meaning.
Smell, filthy, fellow Juniper filthy? smell? O most odi∣os.
How filthy.
Filthy, by this finger? smell? smell a rat, smell a pudding, away these tricks are for truls, a plain wench loves plain dealing, isle upon my self, smell to march pain wench.
With all my heart, Isle be legitimate and silent as anap∣ple-squire, Isle see nothing, and say nothing.
Sweet hart, sweet hart?
And bag pudding, ha, ha, ha?
What Rachel my girl what Rachel;
Gods lid▪
What Rachel,
Here I am
What rakehell calls Rachel: O treason to my love.
Its her father on my life, how shall wee entrench and edify our selves from him?
O conni-catching Cupped.
How in my back side? where? what come they for?
Where are they? Rachel? thieves, thieves?
Stay villain slave: Rachel? untie my dog.
Nay theife thou can not scope.
I pray you sir.
A pitiful Onion, that thou had a rope.
Why Rachel: when I say: let loose my dog? garlique my mastiff, let him loose I say.
For Gods sake here me speak, keep up your cur.
I fear not garlique, heel not bite Onion his kins∣man, pray God he come out, and then theile not smell me.
well then deliver, come deliver slave?
What should I deliver?
O thou would have me tell thee? would thou show me thy hands, what hast thou in thy hands?
Here be my hands.
Stay are not thy fingers ends begrimd with dirt, no thou hast wiped them.
Wiped them?
I thou villain? thou art a subtle knave, put off thy shows, come I will see them, give me a knife here Rachel, Isle rip the soles.
No matter he's a cobbler, he can mend them.
What are you mad? are you detestable, would you make an Anatomy of me, think you I am not true Ortogra∣phie?
Ortographie, Anatomy?
For Gods sake be not so inviolable▪ I am no ambusca∣do, what predicament call you this, why do you intimate so much.
I can feel nothing.
Bear Lady but Onion feels something.
Soft sir, you are not yet gon, shake your legs, come, and your arms, be brief, stay let me see these drums, these kill∣darkens, these bombard slops, what is it crams hem so.
Nothing but hair.
Thats true, I had almost forgot this rug, this hedge hogs nest, this haymow, this bears skin, this heath, this firsbush.
O let me go, you tear my hair, you reluolue my
brains and understanding.
Heart, thou art somewhat eased? half of my fear
Hath tan his leave of my, the other half
Still keeps possession in despite of hope,
Until these amorous eyes, court my fair gold:
Dear I come to thee: friend, why art not gone?
Avoid my souls vexation, Satan hence?
Why doest thou stare on me, why doest thou stay?
Why pore▪st thou on the ground with thievish eyes?
What see thou there, thou cur? what gap'st thou at?
Hence from my house, Rachel, send garlic forth.
I am gone sir, I am gone, for Gods sake stay.
Pack•, and thank God thou scap'st so well away.
If I scope this tree, destinies, I defy you.
I cannot see by any Characters
Writ on this earth, that any felon foot
Hath tan acquaintance of this hallowed ground.
None sees me: knees do ho•age to your Lord.
Tic safe, tic safe, it lies and sleeps so soundly,
Twould do one good to look on it. If this bliss
Be given to any man th•t hath much gold,
Justly to say tic safe, I say tic safe.
O what a heavenly round these two words dance
Within me and without me: First I think hem,
And then I speak hem, then I watch their sound,
And drink it greedily with both r•in ears,
Then think, then speak, then drink their sound again,
And racket round about this bodies court.
These two sweet words: tic safe: stay I will feed
My other senses; ô how sweet it smells
I mar'le he smells n•t Onion, being so near it.
Down to thy grave again, thou beauteous Ghost,
Ange•s men say, are spirits: Spirits be
Invisible, bright angels are you so?
Be you invisible to every eye.
Save only these: Sleep, Isle not break your rest,
Though you break mine: Dear Saints adieu, adieu:
My feet part from you, but my soul• dwells with you.
Is he gone? ô Fortune my friend, &amp; not fortune my foe,
I come down to embrace thee, and kiss thy great toe.
Fellow Onion? Peter.
Fellow Juniper.
What's the old panurgo gone? departed, cosmografied, ha?
O I, and hark Sirrah. Shall I tell him? no.
Nay, be brief and declare, stand not upon cono∣drums now, thou know what contagious speeches I have suffered for thy sake and he should come again and invent me here.
He says true, it was for my sake, I will tell him.
Sir Juniper? and yet I will not.
What say thou sweet Onion?
And thou had smelt the sent of me when I was in the tree, thou would not have said so: but Sir, The case is al∣terd with me, my heart has given love a box of the ear, made him kick up the heals I faith.
Say thou me so, mad Greek? how haps it? how chances it.
I cannot hold it, Juniper, have an eye, look, have an eye to the door, the old prouerb's true, I see: gold is but muck. Nay Gods so Juniper to the door, an eye to the maine chance, here you slave, have an eye.
O inexorable! ô infallible! ô infricate divine, and superficial fortune.
Nay, it will be sufficient anon, here, look here.
O insolent good luck! How did thou produce th'intelligence of the gold minerals.
Isle tell you that anon, here, make shift, convey, cram.
Isle teach you how you shall call for garlic again I faith.
S'bloud what shall we do with all this? we shall ne'er bring it to a consumption.
Consumption? why weal bee most sumptuously at∣tired, man.
By this gold, I will have three or four most stigma∣ticall suites presently.
Isle go in my foot-cloth, Isle turn Gentleman:
So will I.
But what badge shall we give, what cullison?
As for that lets use the infidelity and commiseration of some harrot of arms, he shall give vs a gudgeon.
A gudgeon? a scutheon thou would say, man.
A scuicheon or a gudgeon, all is one.
Well, our arms be good enough, lets look to our legs.
Content, weal be jogging.
Rachel? we retire: garlic God boy ye.
Farewell sweet Iaques.
Farewell sweet Rachel, sweet dog adieu.
Nay but sweet Count.
Away, Isle hear no more,
Never was man so palpably abused,
My son so basely marted; and my self
Am made the subject of your mirth and scorn.
Count Ferneze you tread to hard upon my patience,
Do not persist I advise your Lordship.
I will persist, and unto thee I speak.
Thou Maximilian thou hast injured me.
Before the Lord:
Sweet signior.
O my father.
Lady let your father thank your beauty.
By gar•e shall be hang for tell• di• sam•,
Metella mademoiselle, she tell her fedora.
The true Ch•mou•t se• free, and one left here
Of no descent, clad barely in his name.
Sirrah boy come hither, and be sure, you speak the simple truth:
O pardon• ••oy monsieur.
Come leave your pardons, and directly say.
What villain is the same that hath usurped,
The honoured name and person of Cha•ount:
O Monsieur, no point villain▪ brave Che••lier, Monsieur Gasper.
Mo•usieur Gasper, on what occasion did they change their names, what was their policy, or their pre•e••.
Me canoe tell, par ma foy Monsieur.
My honourable Lord.
Tut tut, be silent.
Silent? Count Fern•ze, I tell thee if A•••ath the great Turk were here I would speak, and he should here me:
So will not I.
By my fathers hand, but thou shalt Count, I say till this instant, I was never touched in my reputation: here me you shall know that you have wronged me, and I will make you ac∣knowledge it, if I cannot my sword shall.
By heaven I will not, I will stop mine ears,
My senses loath the Saviour of thy breath.
Tic poison to me, I say I will not hear.
What shall I know, tic you have iniurd me,
What will you make? make me acknowledge it.
Fetch forth that Gasper, that lewd counterfeit.
Isle make him to your face approve your wrongs.
Come on false substance, shadow to Chamont:
Had you none else to work upon but me,
Was I your fittest project? well confess,
What you intended by this secret plot.
And by whose policy it was contrived,
Speak truth, and be entreated courteously,
But double with me, and resolve to prove
The extremest rigour that I can inflict.
My honoured Lord, hear me with patience,
Nor hope of favour, nor the fear of torment,
Shall sway my tongue, from uttering of a truth.
Tic well, proceed then.
The morn before this battle did begin.
Wherein my Lord Chamount and I were tan,
We vowed one mutual fortune, good or bad,
That day should be embraced of vs both,
And urging that might worst succeed our vow,
We there concluded to exchange our names.
Then Maximilian took you for Chamount.
True noble Lord.
Tic false, ignoble wretch,
It was but a complot to betray my son.
Count, thou lie in thy bosom, Count:
Lye?
Nay I beseech you honoured gentlemen,
Let not the untimely ruin of your love,
Follow these slight occurents; be assured
Chamounts return will heal these wounds again,
And break the points of your too piercing thoughts.
Return? I when? when will Chamount return?
Heel come to fetch you, will he? I tic like,
Youl'd have me think so, that's your policy.
No, no, young gallant, your device is stale▪
You cannot feed me with so vain a hope.
My Lord, I feed you not with a vain hope,
I know assuredly he will return,
And bring your noble son along with him.
I, I dare pawn my soul he will return.
O impudent derision? open scorn?
Intolerable wrong? is it not enough?
That you have plaid upon me all this while;
But still to mock me, still to jest at me?
Fellows, away with him, thou ill-bred slave,
That sets no difference twixt a noble spirit,
And thy own slavish humour, do not think
But isle take worthy vengeance on thee, wretch?
Alas, these threats are idle, like the wind,
And breed no terror in a guiltless mind.
Nay, thou shalt want no torture, so resolve, bring him away.
Welcome the worst, I suffer for a friend,
Your tortures will, my love shall never end.
Alas poor gentleman, my fathers rage
Is too extreme, too sterne and violent!
O that I knew with all my strongest powers,
How to remove it from thy patient breast,
But that I cannot, yet my willing heart,
Shall minister in spite of tyranny
To thy misfortune, something there is in him,
That doth enforce this strange affection,
With more then common rapture in my breast:
For being but Gasper, he is still as dear
To me, as when he did Chamount appear.
But in good sadness Signior, do you think Cha∣mount will return?
Do I see your face, Lady?
I sure, If love have not blinded you.
That is a question, but I will assure you no, I can see, and yet love is in mine eye: well, the Count your father simply hath dishonoured me: and this steel shall engrave it on his burgonet.
Nay, sweet Signior.
Lady, I do prefer my reputation to my life,
But you shall rule me, come lets march.
Isle follow Signior, ô sweet Queen of love!
Sovereign of all my thoughts, and thou fair fortune,
Who (more to honour my affections)
Hast thus translated Gasper to Chamount.
Let both your flames now burn in one bright spear▪
And give true light to my aspiring hopes,
Hasten Chamounts return, let him affect me,
Though father, friends, and all the world reject me.
Sigh for a woman, would I fouled mine arms,
Rave in my sleep, talk idly being awake,
Pine and look pale, make loue-walkes in the night,
To steal cold comfort from a day-starres eyes.
Kit, thou art a fool, wilt thou be wise? then lad
Renounce this boy-gods nice idolatry,
Stand not on complement, and wooing tricks,
Thou love old Iaques daughter, doest thou?
Love her?
Come, come, I know it, be ruled and shees thine own,
Thou't say her father Iaques, the old beggar,
Hath pound his word to thee, that none bu• thou,
Shalt be his son in law.
He has.
He has? wilt thou believe him, and be made a kook,
To waite on such an antique weathercock;
Why he is more inconstant then the sea,
His thoughts, Cameleon-like, change every minute:
No Kit, work soundly, steal the wench away,
Wed her, and bed her, and when that is done,
Then say to Iaques, shall I be your son?
But come to our devise, where is this gold?
Here Signior Angelo.
Bestow it, bid thy hands shed golden drops,
Let these bald french crowns be uncovered,
In open sight, to do obey sance
To Iaques staring eyes when he steps forth,
The needy beggar will be glad of gold.
So, now keep thou aloose, and as he treads
This gilded path, stretch out his ambling hopes,
With scattring more &amp; more, &amp; as thou go, cry Iaques, Iaques
Tush, let me alone.
First isle play the ghost, Isle cal him out, Kit keep aloo•e.
But Signior Angelo. Where will your self and Rachel stay for me, after the jest is ended?
Mass, that's true, at the old Priory behind S. Foyes.
Agreed, no better place, isle meet you there.
Do good fool, do, but isle not meet you there.
Now to this gear, Iaques, Iaques, what Iaques?
Who calls? whose there?
Iaques.
Who calls?
Steward, he comes, he comes Iaques.
What voice is this? no body here, was I not called? I was.
And one cried Iaques with a hollow voice,
I was deceived, no I was not deceived,
See see, it was an Angel called me forth,
Gold, gold, man-making gold, another star,
Drop they from heaven, no, no, my house I hope
Is haunted with a Fairy. My dear Lar,
My household God, My Fairy on my knees.
Iaques.
My Lar doth call me, ô sweet voice.
Musical as the spheres, see, see, more gold.
Iaques.
What Rachel, Rachel, lock my door, look to my house.
Iaques.
Shut fast my door, a golden crown, Iaques shall be a king.
To a fools paradise that path will bring
Thee and thy household •are.
What means my father, I wonder what strange humour.
Come sweet soul, leave wondering, start not, it was I laid this plot to get thy father forth.
O Angelo.
O me no oo's, but hear, my Lord your love,
Paulo Ferneze is returned from war,
Lingers at Pont Valerie, and from thence
By post at midnight last, I was conjured
To man you thither, stand not on replies,
A horse is saddled for you, will you go,
And I am for you, if you will stay, why so.
O Angelo, each minute is a day till my Ferneze come, come weal away sir.
Sweet soul I guess thy meaning by thy looks,
At pont Valerio thou thy love shalt see,
But not Ferneze, Steward fare you well.
You wait for Rachel to, when can you tell?
O in what golden circle have I dan'st?
Millaine these od'rous and enfloured fields
Are none of thine, no here is Elizium,
Here blessed ghosts do walk, this is the Court
And glorious palace where the God of gold
Shines like the son, of sparkling majesty;
O fair fethered, my red-brested birds,
Come fly with me, isle bring you to a queen•,
Whose consort being sweetened with your sound:
The musique will be fuller, and each hour
These ears shall banquet with your harmony ô, ô, ô,
At the old priory, behind Saint Foyes,
That was the place of our appointment sure:
I hope he will not make me loose my gold,
And mock me to, perhaps they are within: Isle knock.
O God, the case is altered.
Rachel? Angelo? Signior Angelo?
Angels? I where? mine Angels? wher's my gold?
Why Rachel? O thou thievish Canibal,
Thou eatest my flesh in stealing of my gold.
What gold?
What gold? Rachel call help, come forth,
Isle rip thine entrails, but isle have my gold:
Rachel why comes thou not? I am undone,
Ay me she speaks not, thou hast slain my child.
What is the man possessed trow? this is strange,
Rachel I see is gone with Angelo:
Well isle once again unto the priory,
And see if I can meet them.
Tic too true,
You have made away my child, how hast my golds
O what Hienna called me out of doors,
The theife is gone: my gold's gone, Rachels gone,
Al's gone? save I that spend my cries in vain,
But isle hence too, and di• or end th•s pain.
Swonds, let me go, hay catso, catch him alive,
I call, I call, boy. I come, I come sweet heart.
Page hold my rapier, while I hold my friend here.
O heir's a sweet metamorphosis, a couple of buzz∣zards turned to a pair of peacocks.
Signior Onion, lend me thy boy to vnhang my rapier:
Signior Juniper for once or so, but troth is, you must inuei∣glee, as I have done, my Lords page here a poor folower of mine.
Hell ho, •our page then sha'not be super intendent upon me? he shall not be addicted? he shall not be incident? •e shall not be incident? he shall not be incident, shall he?
O sweet signior Juniper.
Sbloud stand away princocks? do not aggravate my joy.
Nay good Moister. Onion.
Nay and he have the heart to draw my blood, let him come.
Isle slice you Onion, Isle slice you?
Isle cleave you Juniper.
Why hold, hold, •ough? what do you mean?
Let him come Ingle, stand by boy, his alabaster blad
cannot fear me.
Why hear you sweet signior, let not there be any contētion, between my Moister &amp; you, about me, if you want a page sir, I can help you to a proper stripling.
Can thou? what parentage? what ancestry? what ge∣nealogy is he?
A french boy sir.
Has he his French linguist? has he?
I, sir.
Then transport him: her's a crusades for thee.
You will not, imbecell my servant with your been∣uolence will you, hold boy their's a portmantu for thee.
Lord sir.
Do take it boy, its three pounds ten shill. a portmantu.
I thank your Lordship.
Sirrah Ningle: thou art a traveller, and I honour thee.
I prithee discourse? cherish thy muse? discourse?
Of what sir?
Of what thou wilt. Sbloud? hang sorrow?
Prithee Valentine a•loile me one thing.
Tic pity to soil you sir, your new apparel.
Mass thou say true, apparel makes a man forget himself.
Begin, find your tongue Ningle.
Now will gull these ganders rarely: Gentlemen having in my peregrinatiō through Mesopotamia.
Speak legibly, this gem's gone, without the great mercy of God,
Here is a fine tragedy indeed. Theirs a Keisars royal.
By Gods lid, nor King nor Kaiser shall?
Where? where? Finio, where be they:
Go to, isle be with you anon.
O her's the page signior Juniper.
What saith monsier Onion, boy.
What say you sir.
Tread out boy.
Take up, you mean sir.
Tread out I say, so, I thank you, is this the boy.
Aue monsieur.
Who gave you that name?
Give me do name, vat name:
He thought your name had been, we young gentle∣men, you must do more then his legs can do for him, bear with him sir.
Sirrah give me instance of your carriage? you'll serve my turn, will you?
What? turn upon the toe.
O signior no.
Page will you follow me, isle give you good exhibition.
By gar, shall not alone follow you, but shall lead you to.
Plague boy, he sooths his humour? these french vile∣loins ha pocky wits.
Here? disarm me? take my semitary.
O rare, this would be a rare man, and he had a little travel, Balthazar, Martino, put off your shoes, and bid him coble them.
Friends, friends, but pardon me for fellows, no more in occupation, no more in corporation, tic so pardon me, the case is altered, this is law, but isle stand to nothing.
Fat so me •ink.
Well then God save the dukes Majesty, is this any harm now? speak, is this any harm now.
No nor good neither, Sbloud?
Do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me? do you laugh at me?
I sir, we do.
You do indeed?
I indeed sir.
Tic sufficient, Page carry my purse, dog me?
Gentlemen leave him not, you see in what case he is, he is not in adversity, his purse is full of money, leave him not?
Nay gentle Rachel?
Away? forbear? ungentle Angelo,
Touch not my body, with those impious hands,
That like hot Iron• sear my trembling heart,
And make it hiss, at your disloyalty.
Was this your drift? to use Fernezes name?
Was he your fittest stale, ô wild dishonour!
Stay noble 〈◊〉▪
Sbloud how like a puppet do you talk now▪
Dishonour? what dishonour? come, come, fool,
Nay then I see you're peevish, S'heart dishonour?
To have you a topriest and marry you,
And put you in an honourable state.
To marry me ô heaven, can it be?
That men should live with such unfeeling souls,
Without or touch or conscience of religion,
Or that their warping appetites should spoil
Those honoured forms, that the true seal of friendship
Had set upon their faces.
Do you hear? what needs all this? say, will you ••ue me, or no?
Il'e have you gone, and leave me, if you would.
Leave you? I was accursed to bring you hither,
And make so fair an offer to a fool.
A pox upon you, why should you be coy,
What good thing have you in you to be proud of?
Are y'any other then a beggars daughter?
Because you have beauty. O Gods light a blast.
I Angelo.
You scornful baggage, I loved thee not so much, but now I hate thee.
Upon my knees, you heavenly powers, I thank you▪
That thus have tamed his wild affections.
This will not do, I must to her again,
Rachel, ô tha• •thou saw my heart, or did behold,
The place from whence that scalding sigh euented.
Rachel, by Iesu I love thee as my soul, Rachel, sweet Rachel.
What again returned unto this violent passion▪
Do but hear me, by heaven I love you Rachel.
Pray forbear, ô that my Lord Fer•••• were but here.
Sbloud and he were, what would he do.
This would he do base villain.
My dear Lord,
Thou monster, even the soul of treachery!
O what disho••rd title of reproach,
May my tongue spit in thy deserved fa•e▪
Me thin•es my very presence should invert,
The st••••d organs of those traytrous eyes,
To take into thy heart, and pierce it through:
Turn thou them on the ground? wretch, dig a grave,
With their sharp points, to hide th'abhorred head;
Sweet love, thy wrongs have been too violent
Since my departure from thee, I perceive:
But now true comfort shall again appear,
And like an armed angel guard thee safe
From all th'assaults of covered villainy.
Come Monsieur, let's go, &amp; leave this wretch to his despair.
My noble Fer•eze.
What can thou speak to me, and not thy tongue,
Forced with the torment of thy guilty soul
Break that infected circle of thy mouth,
Like the rude clapper of a crazed bell.
I, that in thy bosom lodged my soul,
With all her train of secrets, thinking them
To be as safe, and richly entertained,
As in a Princes court, or tower of strength,
And thou to prove a traitor to my trust,
And basely to expose it, ô this world!
My honourable Lord.
The very owl, whō other birds do state &amp; wonder at,
Shall hoot at thee, and snakes in every bush
Shall deaf thine ears with their—
Nay good my Lord, give end unto your passions.
You shall see, I will redeem your lost opinion.
My Lord believe him.
Come, be satisfied, sweet Lord you know our haste,
Let vs to horse, the time for my engaged return is past;
Be friends again, take him along with you.
Come signior Angelo, hereafter prove more true.
T•• Maximillian, for your honoured self,
I am persuaded, but no words shall turn
The edge of purposd vengeance on that wretch,
Come, bring him forth to execution.
Isle hang him for my son, he shall not scope,
Had he an hundred lives: Tell me vile slave,
Think thou I love my son? is he my flesh?
Is he my blood, my life? and shall all these be tortured for thy
sake, and not revenged? truss up the villain.
My Lord, there is no law to confirm this action.
Tic dishonourable.
Dishonourable? Maximillian?
It is dishonourable in Chamount, the day of his prefixed return is past, and he shall pay fort.
My Lord, my Lord,
Use your extremest vengeance, isle be glad
To suffer ten times more, for such a friend.
O resolute and peremptory wretch!
My honoured Lord, let vs entreat a word.
Isle hear no more, I say he shall not live,
My self will do it. Stay, what form is this
Stands betwixt him and me, and holds my hand.
What miracle is this? tic my own fancy,
Carves this impression in me, my soft nature,
That ever hath retained such foolish pity,
Of the most abject creatures misery,
That it abhors it, what a child am I
To have a child? Ay me, my son, my son.
O my dear love, what is become of thee?
What unjust absence lay thou on my breast,
Like weights of lead, when swords are at my back,
That run me through with thy unkind flight,
My gentle disposition waxes wild,
I shall run frantic, ô my love, my love.
My gold, my gold, my life, my soul, my heaven,
What is become of thee? see, isle impart
My miserable loss to my good Lord,
Let me have search my Lord, my gold is gone.
My son, Christophero, think it possible,
I ever shall behold his face again.
O father wher's my love, were you so careless
To let an undressed steal away your child.
I know your Lordship may find out my gold,
For Gods sake pity me, justice, sweet Lord.
Now they have young Ch•••not? Christophero?
Surely they never will restore my son.
Who would have thought you could have been so careless to loose your only daughter.
Who would think,
That looking to my gold with such hares eyes,
That ever open, I even when thy sleep,
I thus should loose my gold, my noble Lord, what says your
Lordship?
O my son, my son.
My dearest Rachel?
My most honey gold.
Hear me Christophero.
Nay hear me Iaques.
Hear me most honoured Lord.
What rule is here?
O God that we should let Chamount escape.
I and that Rachel, such a virtuous maid, should be thus stolen away.
And that my gold, being so hid in earth, should bee found out.
O confusion of languages, &amp; yet no tower of Babel!
Ladies, beshrew me, if you come not fit to make a ian∣gling consort, will you laugh to see three constant passions.
Stand by, I will urge them, sweet Count, will you be comforted.
It cannot be but he is handled the most cruelly,
That ever any noble prisoner was.
Steward, go cheer my 〈◊〉▪
Well, if Rachel took her flight willingly?
Sirrah, speak you touching your daughters flight?
O that I could so soon forget to know the thief a∣gain, that had my gold, my gold.
Is not this pure?
O thou base wretch, isle drag thee through the streets▪
And as a monster, make thee wondered at, how now.
Sweet Gentleman? how too unworthily
Art thou thus 〈◊〉, brave Maximillian,
Pity the poor youth and appease my father,
How, my son returned? O Maximillian,
Francisco, daughters? bid him enter here.
Dost thou not mock me? O my dear Paulo welcome.
My Lord Ch〈◊〉?
My Gasper.
Rachel.
My gold Rachel? my gold?
Some body bid the beggar cease his noise.
O signior Angelo, would you deceive
Your honest friend, th•• •••ply trusted you?
Well Rachel: I am glad tho'art here again.
I faith she is not for you steward.
I beseech you m•ddam urge your father.
I will anon? good Iaques be content.
Now God a mercy fortune, and sweet Venus,
Let Cupped do his part, and all is well.
Me thinks my heart's in heaven with this comfort.
Is this the true Italian curtsy.
Ferneze were you tortured thus in France? by my souls safety.
My most noble Lord? I do beseech your Lordship.
Honoured Count, wrong not your age with flexure of a knee,
I do impute it to those cares and griefs,
That did torment you in your absent son:
O worthy gentlemen, I am ashamed
That my extreme affection to my son,
Should give my honour so uncured a maine,
But my first son, being in Vicenza lost.
How in Vicenza? lost you a son there?
About what time my Lord?
O the same night, wherein your noble father took the town.
How long's that since my Lord? can you remember.
Tic now well no upon the twentieth year.
And how old was he then?
I cannot tel, between the 〈◊〉 of three and four,
I take it.
Had he no special no•e in his attire,
Or otherwise, that you can call to mind.
I cannot well remember his attire,
But I have often heard his mother say:
He had about his neck a tablet,
Given to him by the Emperor Sigismund.
His Godfather, with this inscription,
Under the figure of a silver Globe: Eu mi•imo, mundus.
How did you call your son my Lord?
Camillo Lord Chamount.
Then no more my Gasper? but Camillo,
Take notice of your father, gentlemen:
Stand not amazed? here is a tablet,
With that inscription found about his neck
That night, and in Vicenza by my father,
(Who being ignorant, what name he had)
Christened him Gasper, nor did I reveal,
This secret till this hour to any man.
O happy revelation? ô blessed hour? ô my Camillo.
O strange my brother.
Maximilian? behold how the abundance of his joy
Drownds him in tears of gladness.
O my boy? forgive thy fathers late austerity:
My Lord? I delivered as much before, but your ho∣nor would not be persuaded, I will hereafter give more obe∣seruance to my visions? I dreamed of this.
I can be still no longer, my good Lord,
Do a poor man some grace amongst all your joys.
Why whats the matter Iaques.
I am robbed, I am undone my Lord, robbed and undone:
A heap of thirty thousand golden crowns,
Stolen from me in one minute, and I fear:
By her confedracy, that calls me father,
But she's none of mine, therefore sweet Lord:
Let her be tortured to confess the •rue•h.
More wonders yet.
How I 〈…〉 not Rachel then thy daughter.
No, I dis〈…〉 in her, I spit at her,
She is a harlot, and her customers,
Your son this gallant, and your steward •ere,
Have all been partners with her in my spoil? no less then thirty thousand.
Iaques, Iaques, this is impossiole, how should thou come? to the possession of so huge a heap:
Being always a known beggar.
Out alas, I have betrayed my self with my own tongue,
The case is altered.
One stay him there.
What means he to depart, Count Ferneze, upon my soul this beggar, this beggar is a counterlait: urge him? did thou loose gold?
O no I lost no gold.
Said I not true.
How'didst thou first loose thirty thousand crowns,
And now no gold? was Rachel first thy child:
And is she now no daughter, sir Iaques,
You know how far our Millaine laws extend, for punish∣meant of liars,
I my Lord? what shall I doe? I have no starting hols?
Monsieur Chamount stand you my honoured Lord.
For what old man?
Ill gotten goods never thrive,
I plaid the thief, and now am robbed my self:
I am not as I seem, Iaques de pry,
Nor was I borne a beggar as I am:
But sometime steward to your noble father.
What Melun that robbed my fathers treasure, stole my •ester?
I, I, that treasure is lost, but Isabel your beauteous sister here seruiues in Rachel: and therefore on my kne•?
Stay Iaques stay? the case still alters?
Fai•e Rachel sister to the Lord Chamount.
Steward your cake is dow, as well as mine.
I see that honours flames cannot be hid,
No more then lightening in the blackest cloud.
Then sir tic true? you have lost this gold,
I worthy signior, thirty thousand crowns.
Mass who was it told me, that a couple of my
men, were become gallants of late.
Marry 〈◊〉 I my Lord? my man told me?
How now what pageant is this,
Come signior Onion, lets not be ashamed to appear,
Keep state? look not ambiguous now?
Not I while I am in this suit.
Lordings, equiualence to you all.
We thought good, to be so good, as see you gentlemen
What? monsieur Onion?
How dost thou good captain.
What are my hinds turned gentlemen.
Hinds sir? Sbloud and that word will bear action, it shall cost vs a thousand pound a piece, but weal be revenged.
Wilt thou sell thy Lordship Count?
What? peasants purchase Lordships?
Is that any Novels sir.
O transmutation of elements, it is certified you had pages:
I sir, but it is known they proved ridiculus, they did pilfer, they did purloin, they did procrastinate our purses, for the which wasting of our stock, we have put thē to the stocks.
And thither shall you two presently,
These be the villains, that stole Iaques gold,
Away with them, and set them with their men.
Onion you will now bee peeld.
The case is altered now
Good my Lord, good my Lord:
Away scoundrel? dost thou fear a little elocution?
Shall we be confiscate now? shall we droop now?
Shall we be now in helogabolus:
Peace, peace, leave thy gabling?
Away, away with them; whats this they prate,
Keep the knaves sure, strict inquisition
Shall presently be made for Iaques gold,
To be disposed at pleasure of Chamount.
She is 〈…〉 Lord Paul•, if your father
Give his consent.
How now Christofero? The case is altered.
With you, as well as me, I am content sir.
With all my heart? and in exchange of her,
(If with your fair acceptance it may stand)
I tender my Aurelia to your love.
I take her from your Lordship, with all thanks,
And bless the hour wherein I was made prisoner:
For the fruition of this present fortune,
So full of happy and unlooked for joys.
Melun, I pardon thee, and for the treasure,
Recover it, and hold it as thine own:
It is enough for me to see my sister:
Live in the circle of Fer••zes arms,
My friend, the son of such a noble father,
And my unworthy self rapt aboue all,
By being the Lord to so divine a dame.
Well, I will now swear the case is altered. Lady fare you well, I will subdue my aff•ctions, Madam (as for you) you are a professed virgin, and I will be silent, my honourable Lord Fern•ze▪ it shall become you at this time not be frugal, but bounteous, and open handed, your fortune hath been so to you Lord Ch••ount.
You are now no stranger, you must be welcome, you have a fair amiable and splendius Lady: but signior Paulo, signior Camillo, I know you valiant? be loving: Lady I must be better known to you, signiors for you, I pass you not: though I let you pass; for in truth I pass not of you, lovers to your nupti∣else, Lordings to your dances. March fair al, for a fair March, is worth a kings ransom.—

WEll ore tan my Lord.
Noble friend welcome, and see who encoun∣ters vs, honourable good Clerimon.
My good Lord Lyon, most happily met worcester∣thy Traefilme,
Come gallants, whats the newcs,
the season affords vs variety,
the nouilsts of our time runs on heaps,
to glut their itching ears with airy sounds,
trotting to'th burse; and in the Temple walk
with greater zeal to hear a novel lye,
then a pious Anthum tho chanted by Cherubins.
True Sir:
and holds set counsels, to vent their brain sick opinions
with presagements what all states shall design.
Thats as their intelligence serves.
And that shall serve as long as invention lastes,
there dreams they relate, as spoke from Oracles,
or if the gods should hold a synod, and make them their secretaries,
they will divine and prophecy too: but come and speak your
thoughts of the intended marriage with the Spanish Prince,
He is come you see, and bravely entertained.
Hee is so, but not married yet.
But like to be, and shall have in dowry with the Princess this Kingdom of Cecil.
Soft and fair, there is more will forbid the baines, then say amen to the marriage: though the King usurped the Kingdom, during the non-age of the Prince Phylaster, hee must not think to bereave him of it quite; hee is now come to years to claim the Crown.
And lose his headi' the asking.g.
A diadem worn by a headless King wold be wondrous, Phylaster is too weak in power.
He hath many friends.
And few helpers.
The people love him.
I grant it, that the King knows too well,
And makes this Contract to make his faction strong:
Whats a giddy-headed multitude,
That's not Disciplinde nor trained up in Arms,
To be trusted unto? No, he that will
Bandy for a Monarchy, must provide
Brave marshall troops with resolution armed,
To stand the shock of bloody doubtful war,
Not daunted though disastrous Fate doth frown,
And spit all spiteful fury in their face:
Defying horror in her ugliest form,
And grows more valiant, the more danger threats;
Or let lean famine her affliction send,
Whose pining plagues a second hell doth bring,
Thei'le hold their courage in her height of spleen,
Till valour win plenty to supply them,
What think ye, would yer feast-hunting Citizens
Endure this?
No sir, a fair march a mile out of town that their wives may bring them their dinners, is the hottest service that they are trained up to.
I could wish their experience answered their loves,
Then should the much too much wronged Phylaster,
Possess his right in spite of Don and the devil.
My heart is with your wishes.
And so is mine,
And so should all that loves their true borne Prince,
Then let vs join our Forces with our minds,
In whats our power to right this wronged Lord,
And watch advantage as best may fit the time
To stir the murmuring people up,
Who is already possessed with his wrongs,
And easily would in rebellion rise,
Which full well the King doth both know and fear,
But first our service we'll proffer to the Prince,
And set our proiects as he accepts ofvs;
But hushed, the King is coming.
Fair Prince,
Since heavens great guitar furthers our intents,
And brought you with safety here to arrive
Within our Kingdom and Court of Cecil,
We bid you most welcome, Princely Pharamont,
And that our Kingly bounty shall confirm,
Even whilst the Heavens hold so propitious aspect
We'll crown your wished desires (with our own)
Lend me your hand sweet Prince, hereby enjoy
A full fruition of your best contents,
The interest I hold I doe possess you with,
Only a fathers care and prayers retain,
That heaven may heap on blessings, take her Prince,
A sweeter Mistress then the offered Language of any dame,
were she a Queen whose eye speaks common Loves;
and comfort to her servants: Last Noble son, for so I now must call you, what I have done thus public, is not to add a comfort in parti∣cular to you or me, but all, and to confirm the Nobles and the Gentry of our Kingdom by oath to your succession: which shall be within this month at most.
This will be hardly done.
It must be ill done, if it be done.
When it is at best, twill bee but half done,
whilst so brave a gentleman is wronged and slung off.
I fear.
Who dos not?
I fear not for my self, and yet I fear too:
well, we shall see, we shall see: no more.
Kissing your white hand Mistress I take leave, to thank your royal Father: and thus far to be my own free from∣pet: understand great King, and these your subjects, mine that must be, for so deserving you have spoke me Sir: and so deserving I dare speak my self, to what a person of what Eminence, ripe expect∣tion, of what faculties, manners and virtues you would wed your Kingdoms, and in me have your wishes: oh this country, by more then all the gods, I hold it happy, happy in their door memories, that have bin Kings great and good; happy in yours that is, and from you as a Chronicle to keep your noble name from rotting Age: do I open my self most happy: Gentlemen believe me in a word, a Princes word, there shall be nothing to make up a Kingdom migh∣tie and flourishing, defenced feared equal to be commanded and o∣beyed but through the travels of my life, isle find it out, and tie it to this country. By all the gods; my Reign shall bee as easy to the subjects, that every man shall bee his Prince himself, and his own Law; Yet I his Prince and Law. And dearest Lady, to your dee∣rest self, dear in the choice of him, whose name and lustre, must make you more and mightier: Let me say you are the blessedest li∣uing: for sweet Princess, you shall enjoy a man of men, to bee your servant, you shall make him yours, for whom great Queens must d e.
Miracles!
This speech calls him Spaniard, being nothing
but a large Inuentorie of his own commendations.
I wonder whats his price?
for certainly he'll sell him, he has so be praisd his shape:
But here comes one, more worthy those large praises, then the large speaker of them; Let me bee swallowed quick, if I can find all the Anatomy of yon mans virtues unseen to sound enough, to promise for him, hee shall bee Constable by this Sun: he'll ne'er make King, unless it be of trifles in my poor judgment.
Right noble sir, as low as my obedience,
with a heart as loyal as my knee, I beg for favour.
Rise, you have it sir.
Mark but the King how pale he looks, he fears,
and this same whoreson conscience, ah how it jade vs.
Speak your intents sir.
Shall I speak on freely, be still my royal Sovereign.
As a subject we give you freedom.
Now it heats.
Then thus I turn my language to you Prince, you foreign man ne'er start, nor put on wonder; you must endure me, and you shall: This earth you tread upon, a dowry as you hope with this sweet Princess, whose memory I bow to, was not left by my dead fa∣there, O I had a father: to your inheritance, and I up and living, ha∣uing my self about me and my sword the souls of all my name and memories: these arms and some few friends besides the gods to part so calmly with it, and sit still and say I might have bin, I tell thee Pharamont, when thou art King, look I be dead and rotten, and my name ashes, as I: for hear me Pharamont, this very ground thou goosed on, this fat earth my fathers friends made fertile with their faiths: before that day of shame shall gape and swollow thee and thy nation, like a hungry grave into his hidden bowels: Prince it shall, by the just gods it shall.
Hoe's mad, beyond cure mad.
Here is a fellow has some fire in his veins,
the outlandish Prince looks like a tooth-drawer.
I Prince of popines, I will make it well appear
to you I am not mad.
You displease vs, you are too bold.
No sir, I am too tame, too much a Turcle,
A thing borne without passion, a faint shadow:
That every drunken cloud sails over,
And make nothing.
I doe not fancy this choler,
Sure hoe's somewhat tainted.
I doe not think twill prove so.
Has given him a general purge already, for all the right he
has, and now he means to let him blood: be constant
gentle heavens, I'll run his hazard although
I run my name out of the Kingdom.
Peace, we are all one soul.
What you have seen in me to stir offence,
I cannot find, unless it be this Lady offered into my arms,
with the succession which I must keep: though is hath
pleased your fure to mutiny within you, without disputing,
your Genealogies or taking knowledge whose branch you are,
the King will leave it to me,
and I dare make it mine: you have your answer.
If thou were sole inheritor to him
That made the world his,
And could see no Sun shine upon any thing but thine,
Were Pharamont as truly valiant as I feel him cold,
And ringd amongst the choicest ofhis friends: such
As would blush to talk such cerious follies,
Or back such belied commendations: and from his presence
Spit all those brags, you should hear further from me.
Sir, you wrong the Prince, I gave you not this freedom,
go to, be better tempered.
It must be sir, when I am nobliervsde.
Ladies, this would have bin a pattern of succession,
Had he never met this mischief: by my life this is
The worthiest: the true name of man this day within
My knowledge.
I cannot tell what you may call knowledge,
but i'msure tothers the man set in my eye,
Oh tic a Prince of wax.
A dog it is.
Phylaster, tell me the injuries you aim at in your riddles.
If you had my eyes sir and sufferance,
My grief upon you, and my broken fortunes,
My wants great, and now nothing hopes and fears,
My wrongs would make ill riddles to be laughed at:
Dare you be still my King, and right me.
Give me your wrongs in private.
He dares not stand the shock.
I cannot blame him, theres danger int.
Every man in this Age has a soul of Crystal, to read their actions, though men's faces are so far asunder, that they hold no intelli∣gence: but view the stranger well, and you shall see a fever throw all his braueries, and feel him shacke like a true truant, if hee give not back his Crown again, upon the report of an elder gun: I am no augery.
Go to, be more your self, as you respect our favour, you'll stir vs else: sir I must have you know, that you are, and shall be at our pleasure, what fashion we will put upon you, smooth your self, ore or by the gods
I am dead sir, you are my Fate, it was not I said I was wronged, I carry all about me, my weak stars lead me too: all my weak fortunes, who dare in all this presence speak, that is but man of flesh, and may bee mortal, tell me, I doe not most entirely love this Prince, and honour his full virtues.
Hes possessed.
Yes, with my fathers spirit is hear O king,
a dangerous spirit, and now he tells me king,
I was a kings Heir, bids me be a king, and whispers
to me, these are all my subjects, tic strange he will
not let me sleep: but dives into my fancy, and there
gives me shapes that kneel and doe me service,
cry me king, but i'll suppress him, heas a factious
spirit and will undo me: Noble sir your hand,
I am your servant.
Away I doe not like this,
I'll make you tamer, or i'll dispossess you both of your life &amp; spirit: for this time I pardon your wild speech, without so much as impri∣sonment.
I thank you sir, you dare not for the people.
Ladies what think you now of this brave fellow.
A pretty talking fellow hot at hand: but eye you stranger, is hee not a fine complete Gentleman? O these strangers, I doe af∣fact them strangely, they doe the rarest home things, and please the fullest, as I live I could love all their Nation over and over for his sake.
Gods comfort, your poor head-peece tic a weak one, and has need of an night-cap.
See how his fancy labours, has hee not spoke home and bravely, what a dangerous train did he give fire to, how hee shoke the King, made his soul melt within him, and his blood run into whey: it stood upon his brow like a cold winter dew.
Gentlemen, you have no suit to me, I am no minion, you stand me thinks, like men that would bee Courtiers, if you could well be flattered at a price not to undo your Children, you are al ho∣nest, go get you home again, and make your Country a virtuous Court, to which your great ones may, in their diseased age, retire live recluses.
How doe your worth sir.
Well, very well, and so well, that if the King please,
I may live many years.
Sir, the King must please:
Whilst we know who you are, and what you are, your wrongs and virtues shrink not worthy sir: but call your father to you, in whose name we will waken all the gods, and conjure up the rods of vengeance, the abused people, who like raging torrents shall swell hie: and so begirt the dens of these Male-dragons, that through the strongest safety they shall beg for mercy at your swords point.
Friend no more, our ears may be corrupted, tic an Age we dare not trust our wills to, doe you love me?
Doe we love heaven and honour?
My Lord Lyon you had a virtuous Gentlewoman
called you father, is she yet alive.
Most honoured sir she is, and for a penance but of an idle dream, has undertook a tedious pilgrimage.
I'st to me, or to any of these Gentlemen you come.
To you, brave Lord, the Princess would entreat your present company.
The Princess send for me, you are mistaken,
If you be called Phylaster, tic you.
Kiss her fair hand, and say I will attend her.
Doe you know what you doe?
Yes, go to see a woman.
But doe you way the danger you are in?
Danger in a sweet face: By Iubiter I must not fear a wo∣man.
But are you sure it was the Princess sent,
It may be some foul train to catch your life.
I dare not think it Gentlemen, shoe's noble, her eye may shoot me dead, or those true red and white fiend friends in her cheeks, may steal my soul out, there's all the danger int: but bee what may, her single name hath armed me.
Go on, and be as truly happy as thou art fearless:
Come Gentlemen, lets make our friends acquainted, lest the king prove false.
Comes he not.
Madame?
Will Phylaster come?
Dear Madame, you were wont to credit me at the first.
But did thou tell me so.
I am forgetful, and my women's strength is so ore charged, with dangers like to grow about my marriage, that these under things dares not abide in such a troubled sea, how looked hee when hee told thee he would come?
Why we ll.
And not a little fearful.
Fear Madame, sure he knows not what it is,
You all are of his faction, the whole Court is bold in praise of him, whilst I may live neglected, and doe noble things, as fools in strife throw gold into the sea, drowned in the doing: but I know he fears.
Madame, me thoughts his looks hid more of love then fear.
Of love, to whom: to you, did you deliver those plain words I sent, with such a wooing gesture and puicke looks that you have caught.
Madam I move to you.
Of love to me: alas, thy ignorance lets thee not see the cross∣ses of our births, nature that loves not to be questioned: why she did this, or that, but has his ends, and knows she dos well: no∣for gave the world to things so opposite, so bound to put as he and I am, if a boule of blood drawn from this arm, would poison thee, a draught ofhis would cure thee: love to me.
Madame, I think I hear him.
Bring him in: you gods that will not have your dens with. stood, whose holy wisdoms at this time it is to make the passions of a feeble maid, the way into your Justice, I obey.
Here is my Lord Phylaster.
Oh it is well, withdraw your self.
Madame, your messenger.
made me believe you wished to speak with me.
Tic true Phylaster, but the words are such I have to say,
and dos so ill become the mouth of woman,
that I wish them said, and yet am loath to speak them.
Have you known that I have ought detracted
from your worth: have I in person wronged you?
or have set my baser Instrumnts to throw disgrace
upon your virtues.
Never madame you.
Why then should you in such a public place,
Injury a Princess, and a scandal lay upon my fortunes,
found to be so great: calling a great part of my dowry in question.
Madame, this truth which I shall speakē, will be foolish: but for your fair virtuous self, I could afford my self to have no right to any thing you wished.
Phylaster, know I must enjoy these Kingdoms.
Madame both?
Both, or I do, by heaven I die Phylaster,
if I not calmly die enjoy them both,
I would doe much to save that noble life,
yet would be loath to have posterity find in our stories,
that Phylaster gave his right unto a Sceptre and a Crown,
to save a Ladies longing.
Nay then hear, I must and will have them, and more.
What more?
Or lose that little life the gods prepared,
to trouble this poor piece of earth with all.
Madame, what more?
Turn then away thy face.
No.
Doe.
I can endure it: turn away my face,
I never saw yet enemy that looked so dreadfully,
But that I thought my self as great a basilisk as he,
Or speak so horrible, but that I thought my tongue
Bore thunder underneath as much as his:
Nor beast that I could turn from, shall I then begin,
To fear sweet sounds, a women's tongue, whom I do love,
Say you would have my life, why I will give it you,
For it is of me a thing so loathed, and unto you that beg,
Of so poor use, that I shall make no price,
If youintreat, I will vnmouedly hear.
Yet for my sake a little bend thy looks.
I do.
Then know I must have them and thee.
And me!
Thy love, without which, all the land discovered yet, will serve me for no use, but to be buried in.
I'st possible.
With it, it were too little to bestow on thee, now though thy breath strike me dead, which know it may, I have unripped my breast.
Madam, you are too full of noble thoughts,
to lay a train for this contemned life,
which you might have for asking, to suspect were base, where I de∣serve no ill: love you by all my hopes, I doe aboue my life, but how this passion should proceed from you so violently, would amaze a man that would be Jealous.
Another soul into my body shot,
Could not have filled me with more strength and spirit,
Then this thy breath, but spend not hasty time
In seeking how I came thus: tic the gods that make me so,
And sure our love will be the worthier, and the better
Blessed, in that the secret justice of the gods
Is mingled with it: let vs leave, and kiss, lest some
Vnwelcom'd guest should fall betwixt vs,
And we should part without it.
T'will be ill I should abide here long.
Tic true, and worse you should come often.
How shall we devise to hold intelligence?
That our true loves, on an new occasion may agree,
What path is best to tread.
I have a boy, sent by the gods, I hope to this intent, not yet seen in the Court, hunting the buck I found him sitting by a foun∣taine side, of which he borrowed some, to quench his thirst, and paid the nymph as much again in tears: a Garland lay him by, made by himself, of many several flowers, bred in the veil, stuck in that mystic order that the rareness delighted me, but ever when he turned his tender eye upon um, he would weep as if he meant to make them grow again, seeing such pretty helpless innocence dwell in his face: I asked him all his story, he told me that his parents gentle dyed, leaving him to the mercy ofthe fields: which gave him roots, &amp; of the crystal springs, which did not stop the course, and the Sun, which still he thanked, it yielded him his life: then took hee up his garland, and did show what every flower, as country people hold, did signify, and how all ordered thus expressed his grief, and to my thoughts did read the pretiest lecture of his country art, that could be wished, so that me thoughts I could have studied it, I gladly enter∣taint him, whom was glad to follow: and have got the trustiest, lovingest, and the gentlest boy that ever moister kept, him will I send to wait on you and bear our hidden love.
Tic well, no more.
Madame, the Prince is come to doe his service.
What will you Phylaster doe with your self?
Why? that which all the gods have appointed out for me.
Dear, hide thy self, bring in the Prince.
Hide me from Pharamont:
When thunder speaks, which is the voice of God,
Though I doe reverence, yet I doe not hide my self,
And shall a stranger Prince have leave to brag
Unto a foreign Nation, that he made Phylaster
hide himself.
He cannot know it.
Though it should sleep for ever to the world,
it is a simple sin to hide my self, which will for ever
on my conscience lie.
Then good Phylaster give him scope and way
in what he says: for he is apt to speak
what you are loath to hear.
I will.
My Princely Mistress, as true lovers ought,
I come to kiss these fair hands, &amp; to show in outward ceremonies,
the dear love within my heart.
IfI shall have an answer or no, directly I am gone.
To what? what would he have answer?
To his claim unto the Kingdom.
Sira, I forbore you before the King.
Good sir doe so still, I would not talk with you.
But now the time is fitter, doe but offer to make mention of right to any kingdom, though it lie scarce habitable.
Good sir let me go.
And by the gods
Peace Pharamont, if then
Leave vs Phylaster.
I have done.
You shall not need.
What now?
Know Pharamont I loath to brawl with such a blast as thou, who are nothing but a valiant voice, but if thou shalt provoke me further, men shall say thou were, and not lament it.
Doe you slight my greatness so much,
and in the chamber ofthe Princess?
It is a place to which I must confess, I owe a reverence, but were the Church at the high Altar, there's no place so safe, where thou darstiniurie me, but I dare kill thee: and for your greatness, know I can grasp you and your greatness, thus, thus, into nothing: give not a word, not a word back, farewell.
It is an odd fellow Madame, wee must stop his mouth with some office when we are married.
You were best make him your Controller.
I think he would discharge it well.
Madame, I hope our hearts are knit, but yet so slow, the ceremonies ofstate are, that twill bee long before our hearts bee so, then if you please being agreed in heart, let vs not waite for dreaming form, but take a little stolen delights, and so prevent our joys to come.
If you dare speak your thoughts, I must with-draw in honour.
The constitution ofmy body will never hold out
till the wedding, I must seek else where.
And thou shalt find her honourable, boy full of regard
Unto thy tender youth, for thy own modesty,
And for my sake, apter to give, then thou wilt be to ask,
I or deserve.
Sir, you did take me up when I was nothing,
And I am only yet some thing, by being yours,
You trusted me unknown: and that which you were apt to con∣ster: a simple innocence in me: perhaps might have been crafty: The cunning of a boy hardened in lies: and theft: yet ventured you to part my miseries and me: For which I never can expect to serve a Lady: that bears more honour in her breast then you.
But boy, it will prefer thee, thou art young,
And bear a childish ouer-flowing love, to them that claps thy cheeks, and speak thee fair: but when judgment comes no rule those passions, thou wilt remember best those careful friends, that pla'st thee in the noblest way of life: she is a Princess I prefer thee to.
In that small time that I have seen the world,
I never knew a man hasty to part with a servant he thought trusty. I remember my father would prefer the boys he kept to gre∣la men then he, but did it not till they were too saucy for him∣self.
Why gentle boy? I find no fault at all
In thy behaviour.
Sir, if I have made a fault ofignorance,
Instruct my youth, I shall be willing: if not apt to learn,
Age and experience will adorn my mind with larger
Knowledge, and if I have done a wilful fault
Think me not past all hope: for once
What moister holds so strict a hand over his boy,
That he will part with him without one warning,
Let me be corrected, to break my stubbornenesse,
If it be so, rather then turn me off,
And I shall mend.
Thy love dos plead so prettily to stay,
That trust me I could weep to part with thee:
Alas, I do not turn thee off: thou know it is my business
That dos call thee hence, and when thou art with her,
Thou dwest with me, think so, and tic so, and when time is full
That thou hast well discharged this heavy trust,
Laid on so weak a one: I will again with joy,
Receive thee, as I live I will, nay, weep
Not, gentle boy, tic more then time thou did attend the Princess.
I am gone, but since I am to part with you my Lord, and none knows whether I shall live to doe more service for you, take this little prayer: Heaven bless your loves, your sighs, all your designs, may sick men if they have your wish, be well, and heavens hate those you curse, though I be one.
The love of boys unto their Lords is strange, I have read wonders ofit: yet this boy for my sake, if a man may judge by looks and speech, would out doe story. I must see a day to pay him for his loyalty.
Why should these Ladies stay so long, they must
Come this way, I know the Queen employs um not,
For the reverend mother sent me word,
They would all be for the garden: if they should all
Prove honest now, I were in a fair taking:
I was never so long without sport before in my life,
And in my conscience tic not my fault.
Oh for our country Ladies, here's one bolted,
I'll hound at her. Madame.
Your grace.
Shall I not be a trouble?
Not to me sir.
Nay, nay, you're too quick by this sweet hand.
You'll bee forsworn sir, tic an old glove, if you will talk at distance I am for you, but good Prince be not bawdy, nor doe not brag, those two I only bar, and then I think I shall have sense e∣nough to answer all the weighty Apophthegms your royal blood shall manage.
Dear Lady, can you love?
Dear Prince, how dear? I ne'er cost you a Couch yet, nor put you to the dear repentance of a play and a banquet, here's no Scarlet sir, to make you blush, this is my own hair, and this face has bin so far from being dear to any, that it ne'er cost a penny painting, and for the rest ofmy poor wardrobe such as you see, it leaves no hand behind it, to make the jealous silke-mans wife curse our doing.
You much mistake me Lady.
Lord I doe so, would you or I could help it.
You're very dangerous bitter, like a potion.
No sir, I do not mean to purge you, though I mean to purge a little time on you.
Do Ladies of this Country use to give no more respect to men of my full being.
Full being, I understand you not, unless your grace
Means growing to fatness: and then your only remedy
Upon my knowledge Prince, is in a morning,
A cup of neat white wine, brewd with Cardus,
Then fast till supper, about five you may eat, use exercise,
And keep a sparrow hawk, you can shoot in a Tiller,
But of all, your grace must fly Flebotamie,
Fresh pork and Conger, and clarified whey:
They are dullers ofthe vital animals.
Lady you talk of nothing all this time.
Tic very true sir, I talk ofyou.
This is a crafty wench, I like her wit well,
Twill be rare to stir up a leaden appetite,
Shoe's dainty, and must be courted with a shower of gold,
Madame look here, all these and more, then —
What ha you there my Lord, gold? now as I live tic fair gold, you'd have silver fort, to play with the Pages, you could not have ta∣ken me in a worse time sir, but ifyou have present use my Lord, I'll send my man with silver, and keep your gold safe for you.
Lady, Lady.
Shes coming sir behind,
Will ye take white money yet for all this.
If there be but two such in this Kingdom more, and near the Court, we may en hang up our harps, ten such Camphor Con∣stitutions as this would call the golden age again in question, and teach the old way for every ill fast husband, to get his own i will∣drone, and what a mischief that would breed, let all consider.
Heres's another, ifshe be of the same last, the devil shall pluck her
on: Many fair mornings Lady.
As many mornings, bring as many days,
fair, sweet, and hopeful to your grace.
She gives good words yet, sure this wench is free.
Ifyour more cerious business doe not call you Lady,
Let me hold quarter with you, we'll talk an hour
Ont quickly.
What would your grace talk of?
Ofsome such pretty subject as your self,
I'll go no further then your eye, your lip, theres time enough
For one man for an Age.
Sir, they stand right, and my lips are yet even smooth,
Young enough, ripe enough, and red enough,
Or my glass wrongs me.
O they are two twinned Cherries died in blush,
Which those fair suns aboue with their deep beams
Reflect upon, and ripen, sweetest beauty;
Bow down those branches, that the longing taste
Of the sweet looker on, may meet these blessings,
And taste and live.
O delicate sweet Prince, she that hath snow enough about her heart, to take the wanton spring of ten such lines, it may bee a number without Probatum. Sir, you have by such neat Poetry gathered a kiss, that if I had but five lines of that number, such pretty begging blanks: I should commend your forehead, or your cheeks, and kiss you too.
Doe it in prose;
you cannot miss it Madame.
I shall, I shall.
By my life but you shall not,
I'll prompt you first,
Can you doe it now?
Me thinks tic easy now you ha don't before me,
and yet I should stick at it.
Stick till to morrow, isle never part you sweetest,
but we lose time. Can you love me?
Love you my Lord 〈…〉 ye?
I'll teach you in a short sentence,
Cause I will not load your memory,
This is all: Love me and lie with me.
Was it lie with you, that you said, tic impossible.
Not to a willing mind, that will endeavour,
If I doe not teach you to doe it as easily in one night,
As you'll go to bed: I'll lose my royal blood for it.
Why Prince you have a Lady of your own,
that yet wants teaching.
I'll sooner teach a mare the old measures,
Then teach her any thing belonging to the function,
Shoe's afraid to lie with her self,
If she have but my mescaline imagination about her,
I know when we are married, I must ravish her.
By my honour thats a foul fault indeed,
But time and your good help will wear it out sir.
And for my other I see excepting your dear self,
dearest Lady I had rather be Sir Timen a schoolmaster,
and keep a darie maid.
Has your grace seen the Court star Gallatea.
Out upon her, shees as cold ofher favour,
as an appaplex: she sailed by but now.
How do you hold her wit?
I hold her wit, the strength of all the guard
Cannot hold it, if they were tied toot:
She would blow um out ofthe kingdom: they talk of Iubiter,
Hes but a squib-cracker to her, but speak sweet Lady,
Shall I be freely welcome?
Whether?
To your bed, ifyou mistrust my faith, you doe me the most vnnoblest wrong.
I dare not Prince.
Make your own conditions, my purse shall seal um,
and what you dare imagine you can want,
i'll furnish you withal, give worship to you thoughts
every morning about it, come I know you're bashful,
speak in my ear, will you be mine: keep this, and with
it me, soon I shall visit you.
My Lord, my chamber's most uncertain, but when tic night i'll find some means to slip into your lodging, till when
Till when, this and my heart go with thee.
Oh thou pernicious petticoat Prince, are these your virtues, well, if I doe not iay a train to blow your sport up, I am no woman, and Lady Dowsabell, i'll fit you for it.
Whore's the boy?
Within.
Gave you him gold to buy him clothes?
I did.
And has he don't?
Yes Madam.
Tic a pretty sad talking boy, i'st not, asked you his name?
No Madame.
O, you are welcome, what good news?
As good as any one can tell your grace,
that says, she has done that you would have wished.
Hast thou discovered?
I have strained a point of modesty for you.
I prithee how?
In listening after bawdry: I see, let a Lady live never so mo∣destly, they shall be sure to find a lawful time, to harken after bow∣dry, your Prince brave Pharamont was so hot ont.
With whom?
Why with the Lady I suspected, I can tell the time and place.
O when and where?
To night, his lodging.
Run thy self into the presents: mingle there again with other Ladies, leave the rest to me, if destiny to whom wee dare not say, why thou did this, have not decreed it so, in lasting leaves: whose smallest characters was never altered, yet this match shall break: wheres the boy.
Here Madame.
Sir, your sad to change your service, i'st not so?
Madame, I have not changed, I waite on you to doe him ser∣vice.
Then trust in me, tell me thy name.
Bellario.
Thou can sing and play.
If grief will give me leave Madame, I can.
Alas, what kind of grief can thy years know,
Had thou a cross schoolmaster when thou went to school?
Thou art not capable of other grief,
Thy brows and cheeks are smooth as water be,
When no breath troubles them: believe me boy,
Care seeks wrinkled brows, and hollow eyes,
And builds it self caves to abide in them,
Come sir, tell me truly, doth your Lord love me?
I know not Madame, what it is.
Can thou know grief, and never yet knew love,
Thou art deceiud boy, dos he speak of me,
As ifhe wished me well?
If it be love to forget all respect to his own friends, with thinking of your face: if it bee love to sit cross armed, and think away the day, with mingling starts, and crying your name as load as men in streets doe fire: if it bee love to weep himself away, when hee but hears of any woman dead or kilt, because it might have bin your chance: ifwhen hee goes to rest, which will not bee, twixt every praierhe says, to name you once as others drop beads, be to be in love, then Madame I dare swear he loves ye.
O you're a cunning boy, and taught to your Lords credit,
But thou know a lie that bears this sound,
Is welcomer to me then any truth that says
He loves me not: lead the way boy, doe you attend me too,
Tic thy Lords business hastes me thus away.
Come Ladies, shall we talk a round, as men do walk a mile,
women should talk an hour after supper, tic their exercise.
Tislate.
Tic all my eyes will doe to lead me to my bed.
I fear their so heavy you'll scarce find the way to your own lodging with um to night.
The Prince.
Not abed Ladies, yare good sitters up, what think you of a pleasing dream to last till morning?
I shall chose my Lord a pleasing wake before it.
Tic well yare courting ofthese Ladies,
i'st not late Gentlemen?
Yes madame.
Waite you there.
Shoe's jealous as I live, look my Lord,
the Princess a Hilus an Atones,
His form is angel-like.
Why this is that, must when you are wed sit by
Your pillow, like young Appollo, with his hand
and voice, binding your thoughts in sleep, the Princess
dos provide him for you, and for her self.
I find no music in these boys.
Nor I, they can doe little, and that small they doe,
they have not wit to hide it.
Serves he the Princess?
Yes.
Tic a sweet boy, how brave she keeps him.
Ladies all good rest, I mean to kill a buck,
tomorrow morning, ere you have done your dreams.
All happiness attend your grace,
Gentlemen good rest, shall we to bed?
Yes, all good night.
May your dreams be true to you,
What shall we doe Gallants? tic late.
The king is up still, see he comes,
a guard along with him.
Look your intelligence be true.
Ypon my life it is, and I doe hope your Highness will not tie me to a man, that in the heate of wooing, throws me off, and takes another.
What should this mean?
If it be true, that Lady had been better embraced cureless disea∣ses: get you to your rest, you shall be righted: Gentlemen draw near, we shall employ ye.
Is young Pharamont come to his lodging?
I saw him enter there.
Haste some of you, and cunningly discover,
if Meagre be in her lodging.
Sir she parted hence but now with other Ladies.
If she bee there, we shall not need to make a vain disco∣very of our suspicion, you gods I see, that who vnrighteously holds wealth or state from others, shall be cursed in that which meaner men are blessed withal: Ages to come, shall know no male of him, left to inherit, and his name shall be blotted from the earth, ifhee have any child, it shall be crossly matched, the gods themselves shall sow wild strife betwixt her Lord and her: yet if it be your wills forgive the sin I have committed, let it not fall upon this undeserving child, if she has not broke your laws, but how could I look to be heard of gods, that must be just, praying upon the ground, I hold in wrong.
Sir I have asked, and her women swear she is within, but they I think are bawds, I told um I must speak with her, they laughed, and said their Lady lay speechless: I said my business was important, they said their Lady was about it: I grew hot, and cri∣ed, my business was a matter that concerned life and death, they answered so was sleeping, at which their Lady was: I urged again she had scarce time to bee so, since last I saw her, they smiled again, and seemed to instruct me, that sleeping was nothing
but lying down and winking, answers more direct, I could not get from them, in short sir, shoe's not there.
Tic then no time to dally, you a'the guard, wait at the back∣door of the Princes lodging, and see that none pass thence upon your lives: Knock Gentlemen, knock load, what has your plea∣sure taken off your hearing: I'll break your meditation, knock a∣gain, and louder, not yet, I do not think he sleeps, having such la∣rums by him, once more, Pharamont.
What saucy groom knocks at this dead of night, where be our waiters, by my vexed soul he meets his death, that meets me for this boldness.
Prince, Prince, you wrong your thoughts, wee are your friends, come down.
The king?
The same sir.
Come down sir, we have cause of present counsel with you,
If your grace please to use me, i'll attend you to your chamber.
No, tic too late Prince, i'll make bold with yours.
I have certain private reasons to my self sir,
Makes me unmannerly, and say you cannot:
Nay, press not forward, he must come through my life,
That comes here.
Sir be resolved, I must come, and will come enter.
I will not be dishonoured thus, hee that enters, enters upon his death, sir tic a sign you make no stranger of me, to bring these runagates to my chamber, at these unseasoned hours.
Why, do you chafe your self: you are not wronged,
Nor shall be: only search your lodging,
For some cause to our self, Enter I say.
I so no.
Let um enter Prince, let um enter, I am up,
I know their business, tic a poor breaking of a Ladies honour, they hunt so hotly after, let um enjoy it, you have your business Gentlemen, I lay here, O my Lord the King, this is not noble in you,
To make public the weakness of a woman.
Come down.
I dare my Lord, your whoting and your clamours, your pri∣uate whispers, and your broad fleerings, can no more vex my soul, then this base carriage: but I have vengeance still in store for some, shall in the most contempt you can have ofmee, bee joy and nourish∣meant.
Will you come down?
Yes, to laugh at your worst, but I shall wring you, if my skill fail me not.
Sir, I must chide you dearly for this looseness,
You have wronged a Lady, but no more,
Conduct him to his lodging, and to bed.
Get him another wench, and you bring him to bed indeed.
Tic strange a man cannot ride a Stage or two,
To breath himself, without a warrant: if this gear hold,
That lodgings be searched thus, pray God we may lye
With our own wives in safety, that they be not
by some trick of state mistaken.
Now Lady ofhonour, whore's your honour now?
No man can fit your palate but the Prince,
Thou most ill shrouded rottenness, thou piece
Made by a Painter and Apothecaries, thou troubled sea of lust,
Thou wilderness inhabited by wild thoughts,
Thou swollen cloud of infection, thou ripe mine of all diseases,
Thou all sin and hell, and last all devils, tell me,
Had you none to pull on with your courtesies,
But he that must be mine, and wrong my daughter:
By all the gods: all these, all the Pages, and all the Court
Shall whoote thee through the Court, fling rotten oranges:
Make rebel rymes, and sear thy name with candles
Upon walls, doe you laugh Lady Venus?
Faith sir you must pardon me, I cannot choose but laugh,
To see you merry, if you do this O King;
Nay, if you dare do it, by all those gods you swore by,
And as many more of my own, I will have fellows,
And such fellows in it, that shall make noble mirth:
The Princess your dear daughter shall stand by me,
Upon walls, and sung in ballads, or any thing, urge me no more,
I know her and her haunts, her fair leaps
And out-lying, and will discover all, and will dishonour her,
I know the boy she keeps, a handsome boy, about eighteen,
Knows what she dos with him, where, when;
Come sir, you put me to a women's madness,
The glory of a fury, and if I doe not doe it to the height —
What boy is that she raves at?
Alas good minded Prince, you know not these things,
I am loath to reveal um: keep this fault
As you would keep your health from the hot ayre
Of the corrupted people, or by heaven,
I will not sink alone, what I have known,
Shall be as public as in Print, all tongues shall speak it,
As they doe the language they're borne in, as free and commonly,
I'll set it like a prodigious star, for all to gaze at,
And so high and glowing, that other kingdoms far and foreign,
Shall read it there, travail with it, till they find no tongue,
To make it more, nor no more people,
And then behold the fall of your fair Princess.
Has she a boy?
So please your grace I have seen a boy waite on her, a fair boy.
Go get you to your quarters,
for this time, i'll study to forget you.
Do so, and i'll forget your —
Heere's a male spirit fit for Hercules.
if ever there be nine worthy of women, this wench shall ride aside and be their Captain.
Sure she has a Garrison of devils in her tongue,
She uttered such balls of wild fire, she has so nettled the King,
That all the Doctors in the Country will not cure him,
That boy was a strange found out antidote to cure her infections;
That boy, that Princess boy, that chaste, brave,
virtuous Ladies boy, and a fair boy, a wel-spoken boy,
All these considered can make nothing else,
But there I leave ye Gentlemen.
Nay, we'll go wander with you.
And doubtless tic true.
I and tic the gods
That raised this punishment to scourge the King
With his own issue, is it not a shame for all vs,
That write noble in the Land for vs, that should be freemen,
To behold a man that is the bravery ofhis age,
Phylaster: pressed down from his royal right,
By this regardless King, and only look and see the Sceptre
Ready to be cast into the hands of that lascivious Lady,
That lives in lust with a smooth boy,
Now to be married to you strange thing,
Who but that people please to let him be a Prince,
Is borne a slave, in that which should be his most noble part,
His mind.
That man that would not stir with you to aide Phylaster,
Let the gods forget that such a Creature
Walks upon the earth.
The gentry do await it, and the people
against their nature, are all for him, and like a field if standing corn,
moved with a stiff gale: their heads bow al one way,
The only cause that draws Phylaster back,
From this attempt, is the fair Princess love,
Which he admires, and we can now comfort.
Perhaps he will not believe.
Why Gentlemen, tic without question so.
I tic past speech she lives dishonestly,
But how shall we: if he be curious, work
on his belief.
We all are satisfied within our selves.
Since it is true, and Lords to his own good,
I'll make this new report to be my knowledge,
I'll say I know it, i'll swear I saw it,
It will be best.
Twill move him.
Here he comes. Good morrow to your honour:
We have spent some time in seeking you.
My worthy friends, you that can keep your memories, to know your friend in miseries, and cannot frame on men disgrace for virtue, a good day attend you all, what service may I doe worthy your acceptance.
My Lord, wee come to urge that virtue which wee know
lives in your breast: forth, rise, make a head,
the nobles and the people are all dull with this usurping king,
and not a man that ever heard the word,
knows such a thing as virtue, but will second your attempts,
How honourable is this love in you to me,
That have deserved more, know my friends,
You that were borne to shame your poor Phylaster,
With too much curtsy, I could afford to melt my self
To thanks, but my designs are not yet ripe sufficient,
That ere long I shall employ your loves,
But yet the time is short of what I would.
The time is fuller then you expect,
That which hereafter perhaps be reached by violence,
May now be caught, as for the King you know
The people long have hated bim, but now
The Princess whom they loved.
Why, what ofher?
Is loathed as much as he.
By what strange means?
Shoe's known a whore.
Thou lie!
My Lord —
Thou least, and thou shalt feel it, I had thought,
Thy mind had been of honour, then to rob a Lady
Of her good name, is an infectious sin, not to be pardoned,
Be it false as hell, twill never be redeemd,
If it be sown amongst the people, faithful to increase,
All evil they shall he are. Let me alone, that I
May cut out falsehood where it grows, set hills on hills,
Betwixt me and that man that utters this, and I will scale them all,
And from the utmost top fall on his neck,
like thunder from a cloud.
This is most strange, sure he dos love her.
I doe love fair truth, she is my mistress, &amp; who injuries her, draws vengeance from me. Sirs, let go my arms.
Nay, good my Lord be patient.
Sir, remember this is your honoured friend, that comes to doe his service, and will show you why he uttered this.
I ask your pardon sir,
My zeal to truth makes me unmannerly,
Should I have heard dishonour spoke ofyou, behind your backs, un∣truly, I had been as much distempered and enraged, as now.
But this my Lord, is truth.
Oh say not so,
Good sir forbear to say so, tic then truth that women all are false, urge itno more, tic impossible, why should you think the Princess light?
Why she was taken at it.
Tic false, by heaven tic false, it cannot be,
Can it, speak Gentlemen? Can women all be damned?
Why then it cannot be.
And she was taken with her boy.
What boy?
A Page, a boy that serves her.
Oh good gods, a little boy.
I, know you him my Lord?
Hell and sin know him: Sir you are deceived,
I'll reason it a little milder with you,
If she were lustful, would she take a boy that knows not yet de∣sires,
she would have one should meet her thoughts, and know the sin sh e acts, which is the great delight of wickedness, you are abused, and so is she and I.
How, you my Lord?
Why all the worlds abused, in an unjust report.
O noble sir, your virtues cannot look
Into the subtle thoughts of women. In short my Lord,
I too ke them, I my self.
Now all the devils thou did, fly from my rage,
Would thou had tan devils engendering plagues,
When thou did take them: hide thee from mine eyes,
Would thou had taken daggers in thy breast,
When thou did take them,
Or been stuacke dumb for ever, that this fault
might have slept in silence.
Have you known him so ill tempered?
Never before.
The winds that are let loose from the four corners
Of the earth, and spreads them self all over sea and land,
Meets not a fair on, what friend bears a sword,
To run me thorough?
Why my Lord, are you so moved at this?
When any fall from virtue I am distracted,
I have interest in it.
But good my Lord recall your self,
and think what's best to be done,
I thank you, I will do it,
Please you to leave me I'll consider of it,
To morrow i'll find your lodgings, and give you answer.
All the gods direct you the readiest way.
I had forgot to ask um where he took her,
I'll follow him. Oh that I had a sea within my breast,
To quench the fire I feel, more circumstances
Would but flame this fire: it more afflicts me now,
To know by whom the deed is done, then simply,
That it is done, and he that tells me this, is honourable,
As far from lies, as she is far from truth,
O that like beasts we could not grieve our selves
With that we see not, bulls and rams will fight,
To keep their females standing in their sight,
But take them from them, and you take at once
Their spleens away, and they will fall again
Unto their pastures, growing fresh and fat,
And taste the waters ofthe springs as sweet as it was before.
Finding no start in sleep, but miserable man,
See, see, you gods he walks still, and the face you let him wear
When he was innocent, is still the same, not blush.
Is this justice? do you mean to entrap mortality,
That you allow treason so smooth a brow:
I cannot now think he is guilty.
Health to you my Lord:
The Princess doth commend her love, her life,
and this unto you.
O Bellario, now I perceive she loves me,
She dos show it in loving thee my boy,
She has made thee brave.
My Lord, she has attired me past wish,
Past my desert, more fit for her attendant,
But far unfit for me that doe attend.
Thou art grown Courtly my boy.
O let all women that love black deeds, learn to dissemble here,
Here, with this paper, she dos write to me
As if her heart were twines of Adamant
To all the world besides, but unto me a maiden snow,
That melted with my looks: tell me my boy,
How dos the Princess use thee?
Scarce like her servant, but as if I were
Something allied to her, or had preserved her life
Three times by my fidelity: as mothers fond,
Doe use their only sons, as I'd use one that's left unto my trust,
For whom my life should pay,
If he meet harm: so she dos use me.
Why tic wondrous well,
But what kind language dos she feed thee with?
Why she dos tell me she will trust my youth with al her my∣den store, and dos call me her pretty servant, bids me weep no more for leaving you, she'll see my service rewarded, &amp; such words of that soft strain, that I am nearer weeping when she ends, then ere she speaks.
This is much better still.
Are you not well my Lord?
Ill, no Bellario.
Me thinks your words fall out from your tongue, so uneven∣lie, nor is there in your looks that quickness that I was wont to see.
Thou art deceived boy. And she strokes thy head.
Yes.
And she dos clap thy cheeks.
She dos my Lord.
And she dos kiss thee boy, ha.
How my Lord?
She kisses thee.
Never my Lord, by heaven.
That's strange, I know she dos.
No by my life.
Why then she dos not love me,
Come she dos, I bid her do it: I charged her by all charms of love between vs, by the hope of peace wee should enjoy, to yield thee all delight, naked as to her Lord. I took her oath thou should in∣joy her. Tell me gentle boy, is she not paradise: is not her breath sweet as Arabian winds when fruits are ripe, are not her breasts two lickquid Ivory balls? is she not all a lasting mine of joy?
Yes, now I see why my discurled thoughts were so perplexed. When first I went to her my heart held augeries: you are abused, some villain has abused you, I doe see where you tend. Fall rocks upon his head, that put this to you, tic some subtle train to bring that noble friend of yours to nought.
Thou think I will bee angry with thee, come thou shalt know all my drift. I hate her more then I love happiness, and placed thee there to pry with sparrows eyes, into her deeds, hast thou
discovered, is she fallen to lust, as I would wish her, speak some comfort to me.
My Lord you did mistake the boy you sent,
Had she the lust of sparrows and of goats,
Had she a sin that weighed from the world, beyond the name oflust,
I would not aide her base desires,
But what I come to know as servant to her,
I would not reveal, to make my life last ages.
Oh my heart!
This is a salve worse then the maine deceit,
Tell me thy thoughts, for I will know the least
That dwells within thee, or will rip thy heart,
To know it, I will see thy thoughts as plain,
As I doe now thy face.
Why so you doe: she is for ought I know, by all the gods,
As chaste as ice: but were she foul as hell,
And I did know it thus, the breath of Kings,
The points ofswords, tortures, nor bulls of brass,
Should wrack it from me.
Then tic no time to dally with thee, I will take thy life,
For I doe hate thee, I could curse thee now.
Ifyou do hate me, you could not curse me worse,
The gods have not a punishment in store,
To me, then is your hate.
Fie, fie, so young and so dissembling, tell me when &amp; where,
Thou did enjoy her, or let plagues fall upon me,
If I destroy thee not.
By heaven I never did, and when I lie to save my life,
May I live long and loathed, hew me asunder,
And whilst I can think, i'll love those pieces you have cut away
Better then those that grow, and kiss those limbs
Because you made um so.
Fear thou not death, can boys contemn that.
Oh! what boy is he could be content to live
To be a man, that sees the best of men thus passionate,
Thus without reason.
O thou dost not know what tic to die.
Yes, I doe know my Lord tic less then to be borne,
A lasting sleep, a quiet resting from all jealousy,
A thing we all pursue: I know besides, it is but giving ore again,
That must be lost.
But there are pains false boy,
For perjured, souls: think but those, and then thy heart will melt,
And then thou wilt utter all.
May they fall all upon me, whilst I live,
If I be perjured, or have ever thought of that you charge me with,
If I be false, send me to suffer in those punishments you speak of Kill me.
Oh! What should I doe, why who can but believe him?
Hee dos swear so earnestly, that if it were not true, the gods would not endure him. Rise Bellario, thy protestaions are so deep, and thou dost look so truly when thou vtterest them, that though I knew um false, as were my hopes, I cannot urge thee further, but thou were too blame to iniuie me: for I must love thy honest looks, and take no revenge upon thy honest looks: a love from me to thee is firm, what ere thou dost, it troubles me, that I have called thy blood out of thy cheeks, that did so well become thee: But good boy let me not see thee more, something is done, that will distract me, that will make me mad, if I behold thee, if thou tenderest me, let me not see thee.
I will fly as far,
As there is morning, ere I give distaste to that most honoured frame, but through these tears shed at my haplesse parting, I can see a world of treason practised upon you, and her, and me, farewell for e∣uermore, if you shall hear that sorrows struck me dead, and after find me loyal, let there be a tear shed from you, in my memory, and I shall rest at peace.
Blessing be with thee what ere thou deserve.
O where shall I go bathe this body, nature too unkind,
That made no medicine to a troubled mind.
I marvel my boy comes not back,
But that I know my love will question him over and over,
How I slept, make talk how I remember him,
When his dear name was last spoken,
And how spoke when I sight song, and ten thousand such,
I should be angry at his stay.
What, in your meditations, who attends you?
None but my single self, I need no guard,
I doe no wrong, nor fear none.
Tell me, have you not a boy?
Yes Sir.
What kind of boy?
A page, a waiting boy.
A handsome boy?
I think he be not ugly Sir, well
qualified, and dutiful, I know him,
I took him not for beauty.
He speaks, and sings, and plays?
Yes Sir.
About eighteen?
I never asked his age.
Is he full of service?
By your pardon, why do you ask?
Put him away.
Sir.
Put him away I say, has done you that good service,
Shames me to speak off.
Good sir, let me understand you?
Ifyou fear me, show it in duty? put away that boy.
Let me have reason for it, and then your will is a command.
Do not you blush to ask it, cast him off:
ore shall do that shame to you, ye are one shame with me,
And so near my self, that by the gods,
I'd dare not tell my self, what you my self,
Have done.
What I have done?
Tic a new language, that allloue to learn:
The common people speak it well already,
They need no grammar: understand me well, there be foul
Whispers stirring, cast him off, and suddenly do it, farewell.
Where may a maid live securely free,
Keeping her honour fair, not with the living,
They feed upon opinions, errors, dreams, and make um truth,
They draw a nourishment out of defamings,
Grow upon disgraces, and when they see a virtue fortified,
Strongly aboue the battery of their tongues.
Oh how they mind to sink it, and defeated foul
Sick with poison, struck the mountains,
Where noble names be sleeping, till they sweat,
And the cold Marble melt.
Peace to your fairest thoughts, dearest mistress.
Oh my dearest servant,
I have a war within me.
He must be more then man that makes these christals run into rivers, sweetest fair the cause, and as I am your slave, tied to your goodness, your creature made again from what I was, and newly spirited, I'll right your honour.
O my best love, thatboy.
What boy?
The pretic boy you gave me,
What of him?
Must be no more mine.
Why?
They are jealous of him.
Jealous, who?
The King.
Oh my misfortune,
Then tic no idle jealousy, let him go.
O cruel, are you hard hearted too?
Who shall now tell you how much I loved you?
Who shall swear it to you, and weep the tears I send?
Who shall now bring you letters, rings, braslets,
Loose his health in service, make tedious nights,
In stories ofyour praise? Who shall now sing
Your crying Elegies, and strike a sad soul
Into senseless pictures, and make them warm?
Who shall take up his lute, and touch it,
Till he crown a silent sleep upon my eye-lids,
Make me dream and cry:
O my dear, dear Phylaster.
O my heart, would he had broken thee,
That made thee know this Lady was not loyal.
Mistress forget the boy, I'll get you a far better.
Oh never, never, such a boy again, as my Bellario.
Tic but your fond affection.
With thee, my boy, fare well for ever,
All service in servants, farewell faith and all
Desires to doe well, for thy sake, let all that
Shall succeed thee, for thy wrongs,
Sell and betray chaste love.
And all this passion for a boy.
He was your boy, and you put him unto me,
And the loss ofsuch must have a mourning for.
O thou forgetful woman.
How, my Lord?
False Arethusa.
Hast thou a medicine to restore my wits,
When I have lost um, if not,
leave to talk, and doe thus.
Doe what sir, would you sleep?
For ever Arethusa, O ye gods, ye gods:
Give me a wealthy patience, have I stood naked
Aboue the shock of many fortunes? have I seen mischief,
Numberless, and mighty, grow like a sea upon me:
Have I taken danger as deep as death, into my bosom,
And laughed upon it, made it but a mirth,
And flowing it by, do I live now like him under this tyrant King,
That languishing hear his sad bell, and sees his Mourners,
Doe I bear all this bravely? and sink at length
Under a women's falsehood, O that boy, that cursed boy,
None but a villain boy, to ease your lust.
Nay, then I am betrayed,
I feel the plot cast for my overthrow:
O I am wretched.
Now you may take that little right I have to this
Poor Kingdom, give it to your Joy, for I have no joy in it:
Some far place, where never woman kind durst set her foot,
For bursting with her poison must I seek,
And live to curse you, and there dig a Cave,
And preach to beasts and birds, what women are;
How Heaven is in your eyes, but in your hearts more hell,
Then hell has: How your tongues, like Scorpions,
Both heal and poison: How your thoughts woven,
With thousand changes in one subtle web, and worn by you:
How that foolish men that read the story of a women's face,
And dyes believing it is lost for ever: How all the good you have,
Is but a shadow, in the morning with you, and at night behind you,
Past and forgotten: How your vows are frost fast, for a night,
And with the next Sun gone; How you are,
Being taken altogether.
A mere confusion, and so dead a Chaios,
That love cannot distinguish these sad texts,
Till my last hour I am bound to utter of you,
So farewell all my wo, all my delight.
Be merciful you gods, and strike me dead.
What way have I deserved this? make my breast transparent,
That the world jealous of me,
May see the foulest thought my heart holds:
Where shall women turn their eyes to find out constancy?
Save me, how black and vile me thinks, that boy looks now!
Oh thou dissembler, that before thou spokst,
Were in thy cradle false, sent to make lies,
And to betray innocence, thy Lord and thou
Moist glory in the ashes of a maid, foold by her passion:
But the conquest is nothing so great as wicked,
Fly away, let my command force thee to that,
Which shame would doe without it, if thou vnderstoodst.
The loathed office thou hast undertook,
Why thou would hide thee under heaps of hills,
Lest we should dig and find thee.
O what god angry with me, hath sent this strange desease
Into the noblest minds, Madame this grief you add unto me,
Is no more then drops to seas, for which they are not seen to swell,
My Lord has struck his anger through my heart,
And let out all the hope of future joys,
Ye need not bid me fly, I came to part,
To take my latest leave,
Farewell for ever.
I durst not run away in honesty from such a Lady,
Like a boy that stole, or made some greater fault,
The power of gods assist you in your suffering:
Hasty time reveal the truth to your abused Lord, and mine,
That he may know your worth, whilst I go seek
Out some forgotten place to die.
Peace guide thee, thou hast overthrown me once,
But if I had another time to lose,
Thou, or another villain with thy looks,
Might take me out ofit, and send me naked,
My hair desheueld, through the fiery streets.
Madame, the king would hunt,
And calls for you with earnestness.
I am in tune to hunt: Diana if thou can
Rage with a maid, as with a man, let me discover thee
bathing, and turn me to a fearful hind,
That I may die pursued by cruel hounds,
And have my story written in my wounds.
What, are the hounds before, and all the Woodmen?
Our horses ready, and our bows bent?
All sir.
You are cloudy sir. Come we have forgotten your venial trespasses, let not that sit heavy upon your spirit,
Here is none dares utter it.
He looks like an old surfeited stallion after his leaping, Dull as a Dormouse: see how he sinckes, the wench has shot him between wind and water, and I hope sprung a lake.
He needs no teaching, he strikes sure enough,
His greatest fault is, he hunts too much in the purlewes,
Would he would leave off poaching.
And for his horn, has left it at the lodge where he lay late: Oh hoe's a pernicious limhound, turn him upon the pursue of any Lady, and if hee lose her, hang him up in the slip: when my fox bith beauty grows proud, I'll borrow him.
Is your boy turned away?
You did command sir, and I obeyed you.
Tic well done, hark ye further.
I'st possible this fellow should repent,
Me thinks that were not noble in him,
And yet he looks like a mortified member,
As if he had a sick mans salve in's mouth,
If a worse man had done this fault now,
Some physical Justice or other, would presently
Without the help of an Almanac,
Have opened the obstructions of his liver,
And let him blood with a dog-whip.
See, see, how modestly yon Lady looks,
As if she came from churching with her neighbours,
Why what a devil can you see in her face,
But that shoe's honest.
Faith no great matter to speak of: a foolish twinkling with the eye, that spoils her coat, but hee must be a cunning Herald that finds it.
See how they muster on another, O theirs a rank regient, where the devil carries the Culours, and his damned drum mayor. Now the flesh and the world come behind with the Carriage.
Sure this Lady has a good turn done against her will, before she was common talk, now none dares say Cantharides can stir her, her face looks like a warrant, willing and commanding all tongues, as they will answer it, to be tied up, and bolted, when this Lady means to let her self loose, as I live, she has got a goodly protection, and a gracious: and may use her body discreetly, for her health sake, once a week, except lent and dog-dayes. O if they were to be got for money, what a large sum would come out of the City, for these Licences.
To horse, to horse, we loose the morning Gentlemen.
What, have you lodged the Dear below?
Yes, they are ready for the bow.
Who shoots?
The Princess.
No, she'll hunt.
She'll take a stand I say.
Who else?
Why the young strange Prince.
He shall shoot in a stone bow for me,
I never loved his beyond-sea-shippe, since he forsook the Say, for paying ten shillings: he was there at the fall of a Dear, and would needs out ofhis Mightiness, give ten groats for the docets; mary his steward would have the velvet head into the bargain, to turf his hat withal, I think he should love venery: he and old Sir Tri∣strum: for ifye be remembered, hee forsook a Stag once, to strike a rascal milking in a meadow, and her hee kilt in the eye. Who shoots else?
The Lady Gallatea.
That's a good wench, an she would not chide vs for tumbling of her women in the brakes, she's liberal, and by the gods, they say honest, and whether that be a fault or no, I have nothing to do, there's all.
No, one more, Meagre.
That's a firker I'faith boy, there's a wench will ride her honchos as hard after a kennel of hounds as a hunting saddle, &amp; whē she comes home, get um clapped, and all is well again, I have known her lose her self three times in one afternoon, if the Woods had
been answerable, and has bin work enough for one man to find her, and has sweat for it: she rides well, and she pays well, hark else.
Oh that I had been nourished in the woods,
With milk of goats, and Acorns, and not known
The right of Crowns, nor the dissembling trains
Ofcruell love: but dug my self a Cave,
Where I, my fire, my Cattle and my bed,
Might have been shut together in one shed,
And then had taken me some mountain girl,
Beaten with winds, chaste as the rock whereon she dwelt,
That might have strewd my bed with leaves and reeds,
And with the skins of beasts our neighbours, and have borne
Out her big breasts, my large course ifsue:
This had bin a life free from vexation.
Oh! wicked men, aninnocent may walk safe amongst beasts,
Nothing assaults me here, I see my grieved Lord, sits as
His soul were searching out a way to leave his body.
Pardon me that brake thy last commandment, for I must speak:
You that are grieved can pity; hear my Lord.
Is there a creature yet so miserable that I can pity?
O my noble Lord, view my strange fortunes,
And bestow on me according to your bounty,
If my service can merit nothing, so much as may serve to keep
That little piece I hold of life, from cold and hunger.
Now by the gods this is unkindly done, to vex me
With thy sight, thou art fallen again to thy dissembling trade,
How should thou think to cousin me again,
Remains there yet a plague vntride for me. Even so
Thou wepst, and look, and spokst, when I first took thee,
Curse on the time. Ifthy commanding tears can work
On any other, use thy art, I'll not betray it, which way
Wilt thou take, that I may shun thee, for thine eyes are
Poison to mine, and I am loath to grow in rage:
This way or that way?
Any will serve, but I will choose to have
That path in chase, that leads unto my grave.
This is the strangest sudden chance, you Wood-man.
My Lord Leon —
Saw you a Lady come this way, on a sable horse, star∣dyed with stars of white?
Was she not young and tall?
Yes, rode she to the wood, or to the plain?
Faith my Lord, we saw none.
Pox ofyour questions then: What, is she found?
Nor will be, I think.
Let him seek his daughter himself, she cannot stray
About a little necessary natural business:
But the whole Court must be in arms,
When she has done, we shall have peace.
There's already a thousand fatherlesle tales amongst vs,
Some say, her horse run away with her; some, a wolf pursued her;
Others, it was a plot to kill her, and that armed men were seen
In the wood: but questionless, she rode away willingly.
Where is she?
Sir, I cannot tell.
Howe's that? answer me so again.
Sir, shall I lie?
Yes, lie, and dam, rather then tell me that:
I say again, where is she? mutter not,
Sir, speak you, where is she?
Sir, I doe not know.
Speak that again so boldly, and by heaven it is thy last. You fellows, answer me, where is she? mark me all, I am your king, I wish to see my daughter, show her me, I doe command you all, as you are subjects, to show her me: what, am I not your king, if I, why then, am I not to be obeyed?
Yes, if you command things possible, and honest.
Things possible, and honest, hear me then, thou traitor, that dare confine thy king, to possible and honest, thingsshew her me, or let me perish, if I cover not all Cecil with blood.
Faith I cannot, unless you'll tell me where she is.
You have betrayed me, you have let me loose the Jewel of my life, go bring her me, and set her here before me, tic the king will have it so, whose breath can still the winds, vnclowd the Sun, charm down the swelling sea, and stop the Floods of heaven: speak, can it not?
No.
No, cannot the breath of a king do this?
No more smell sweet it self, if once the lungs bee but corrupted.
Take you heed?
Take you heed, how you dare the powers
That must be just.
Alas! What are we kings, why do you gods
Place vs aboue the rest, to be ferued, flattred, and adored,
Still we believe we hold within our hands your Thunder,
And when we come to try the power we think we have,
There's not a leaf shakes at our threatenings,
I have sinned, tic true, and here I stand to be punished,
Yet would not these be punished, let me choose my way,
And lay it on.
He articles with the gods, would some body would draw bonds, for the performance of covenant betwixt them.
What, is she found?
No, we have tan her horse, hee galloped empty by, there's some treason: you Gallatea rode into the Wood with her, Why left you her?
She did command me.
Command, you should not.
It would ill become my fortunes, and my birth,
To disobey the daughter ofmy king.
O you're all cunning to obey vs, for our hurts,
But I will have her.
If I have her not, by this sword, there shall bee no more Cecil.
What, will he carry it to Spain in's pockets?
I will not leave one man alive,
But the king, a Cooke, and a Taylor.
Yes, you may do well to leave your Lady bedfellow here for a spencer.
I see the injuries I have done, must be revenged.
Sir, this is not the way to find her out.
Run all, disperse your selves, the man that finds her, or if she be kilt, the traitor, I'll make him great.
I, some would give five thousand pounds to find her.
Come, let vs seek.
Each man a several way, here I my self.
Come Gentlemen, we here.
Lady, you must go search too.
I had rather be the search my self.
Where am I now, feet find out the way, without the counsel of my troubled head, I'll follow you boldly about these woods, or mountains, through brambles, pits and fluds; Heaven I hope will ease me, I am sick.
Yonder my Lady is, gods knows, I want nothing, because I do not wish to live, yet I will try her charity. O hear you, that have plenty from that flowing store, drop some on dry grounds, see the lively red is gone to guard her heart: I fear she faints, Ma∣dame, look up: she breathes not; open once those rosie twines, and send unto my Lord your latest farewell: O she stirs; How i'st Madame? speak comfort.
Tic not gently done to put me in a miserable life, and hold me there, I prithee let me go, I shall do best without thee.
I am too blame to be so much in rage,
I'll tell her coolely, when and where I heard
This killing truth, I will be temperate in speaking,
And as just in hearing; O monstrous, tempt me not
You gods, good gods, tempt not a frail man, who's hee that has a heart, but he must ease it with his tongue.
My Lord, help, help the Princess.
I am well, forbear.
Let me love lightnings, let me be embraced and kissed
By Scorpions, or adore the eyes of Basilisks,
Rather then trust the tongues ofhell-bread women:
Some good god look down, and shrink these veins up,
Stick me here a stone, lasting to memory of this damned act.
Hear me you wicked ones, you have put hills of fire
Into my breast, not to be quenched with tears,
For which may guilt sit on your bosoms, at your meals and beds,
Despair await you, what, before my face,
Poison of Aspes between your lips, diseases bee your best issues,
Nature make a curse and throw it on you.
Dear Phylaster, leave to enrage, and hear me.
I have done,
Forgive my passion, not the calmed sea, when Eolus
Locks up his windy brood, is less disturbed then I,
I'll make you know, dear Arethusa, take this sword,
And search how temperate a heart I have, then you,
And this your boy, may live and reign in Just, without control.
Wilt thou Bellario, I prithee kill me,
Thou art poor, and moist nourish ambitious thoughts
When I am dead, thy way were freer, am I raging now?
If I were mad, I should desire to live: Sirs, feel my pulse,
Whether you have known a man in more
Equal tune to die.
Alas my Lord, your pulse keeps madmens time,
So dos your tongue.
You will not kill me then?
Kill you,
Not for the world.
I blame not thee Bellario, thou hast done but th at
Which gods would have transformed themselves to do,
Be gone, leave me without reply, this is the last
Of all our meetings, kill me with this sword, be wise,
Or worse will follow, we are two, earth cannot bear at once, resolve to do or suffer.
If my fortunes be so good to let me sall upon thy hand,
I shall have peace with earth,
Yet tell me this, there will be no slanders, no jealousy, in the other world no il here?
No.
Show me the way to joy.
Then guide my feeble hand, you that have power
To do it, for I must perform a piece of Justice:
If your youth have any way offended heaven,
Let prayers short and effectual, reconcile you to it.
I am prepared,
I will see the king if he be in the Forest,
I have hunted him this two hours, if I should come home,
And not see him, my sisters would laugh at me,
I can see nothing but people, better horsed then my self,
That out ride me, I can hear nothing but shouting,
These kings had need of strong brains,
The whooping would put a man out of his wits:
Theres a Courtier with his sword drawn, by this hand upon a wo∣man, I think.
Are you at peace?
wounds her.
With heaven and earth.
Nay, they divide thy soul and body.
Hold dastard, strike a woman, you are a craven, I warrant thee, thoud'st be loath to play half a dozen veneis at wasters with a man for a broken head.
Leave vs good friend.
What ill bred man art thou, to intrude thy self upon our private sports, our recreations.
God judge me, I understand you not,
But I know the rogue has hurt ye.
Pursue thy own affairs, it will be ill to multiply blood up∣on my head, which thou wilt force me to.
I know not your Rethrack, but I can lay it on if you touch the woman.
Slave, take what thou deserve,
Gods guard my Lord.
O, do you breath?
I hear the tread of people, I am hurt, the gods take part a∣against me, would this bore have held me thus else: I must shift for life, though I doe lose it, I would find a course,
To lose it rather by my will, then force.
I cannot follow the rogue,
I prithee wench come kiss me now.
What art thou.
Almost kilt I am, for a foolish woman,
A knave has hurt her.
The Princess Gentlemen. Wheres the wound Madame,
Is it dangerous.
He has not hurt me.
By god she lies, has hurt her in the breast, look else.
Oh secret spring ofinnocent blood.
Tic aboue wonder, who should dare this.
I felt it not.
Speak villain, who has hurt the Princess?
Is it the Princess?
I.
Then I have seen something yet.
But who has done it?
I told you a rogue, I ne'er saw him before, I.
Madame, who did it?
Some dishonest wrecth, alas I know him not,
And do forgive him.
He's hurt too, he cannot go far, I let my fathers old fox fly about's ears.
How, will you have me kill him?
Not at all, tic some distracted fellow.
By this ayre, i'll leave never a piece bigger then a nut, and bring him all in my hat.
Nay, good sir, if you do take him, bring him quick to me,
and I will study for a punishment great as his sin.
I will.
But swear.
By all my Love, I will: Wood-man, conduct the Princess unto the king, and bear that wounded fellow to dressing: Come Gentlemen, we'll follow the chase close.
I pray you friend, let me see the king.
That you shall, and receive thanks.
If I get clear of this, I'll see no more gay fights,
Oh heavens! heavy death sits on my brow,
And I must sleep, bear me thou gentle bank,
For ever if thou wilt, you sweet on all,
Let me unworthy press you, I could wish,
I rather were a Corse strewed o'er with you,
Then quick aboue you, dullness shuts my eyes, and I am giddy,
That I could take so sound a sleep,
That I might never wake.
I have done ill, my conscience calls me false,
To strike at her that would not strike at me,
When I did fight, me thought I heard her pray,
The gods to guard me, she may be abused,
And I a loathed villain if she be, she will conceal
Who hurt her, he has wounds, and cannot follow,
Neither knows he me. Who's this? Bellario sleeping,
If thou be guilty, there is no justice that thy sleep
Should be so sound, and mine whom thou hast wronged,
So broken.
Hark I am pursued, you gods I'll take
This offered means of my escape.
They have no mark to know me, but my blood,
If she be true, if false, let mischief
Light on all the world at once.
Sword print my wounds upon his sleeping body,
He has none I think are mortal,
Nor would I lay greater on thee.
O! death I hope is come, blessed be that hand, it wished me well again for pity.
I have caught my self,
The loss of blood hath stayed my flight here,
Here is he that struck thee, take thy full revenge,
Use me as I did mean thee, worse then death:
I'll teach thee to revenge. This luckless hand
Wounded the Princess, tell my followers, thou
Did receive these hurts in staying me,
And I will second thee: get a reward.
Hide, hide my Lord, and save your self.
How is this? would thou I should be safe?
Else it were vain for me to live.
These wounds I have, has not bled much,
Reach me that noble hand, I'll help to cover you.
Art thou then true to me?
Or let me perish loathed: Come my Lord,
Creep in amongst these bushes, who dos know
But that the gods may save your breeth in it, Shromd,
Then I shall die for grief, if not for this,
That I have wounded thee: What wilt thou do?
Shift for my self: Well, peace, I hear um come.
Follow, follow, that way they went.
With my own wounds I'll bloody my own sword,
I need not counterfeit to fall, heaven knows,
I can stand no longer.
To this place I tract him by his blood.
Yonder my Lord, creeps one away.
Stay sir, what are you?
A wretched creature, wounded in these woods by beasts,
Relieve me, if your names be men,
Or I shall perish.
This is he my Lord, upon my soul that hurt her,
It is the boy, that wicked boy, that served her.
O thou damned in thy creation, what cause could thou shape to strike the Princess?
Then I am betrayed,
Betrayed, no, apprehended.
I confess, urge it no more, that big with evil thoughts,
I set upon her, and did make my aim her death:
For charity let fall at once, the punishment you mean.
And do not load this weary flesh with tortour,
I will know who hired thee to this deed.
My own revenge.
Revenge, for what?
It pleased her to receive me as her Page,
And when my fortunes abed, that men strid o'er them careless.
She did shower her welcome graces on me,
And did swell my fortunes: till they ouer-flowde
Their banks, threatening the men that crossed them,
When as swift as storms arise at sea, she turned
Her eyes to burning Sins upon me, and did dry the streams
She had bestowed, leaving me worse, and more contem'd
Then other little brookes, Because I had been great,
In short, I knew I could not live:
And therefore did desire to die revenged.
If tortures can be found, long as thy natural life,
Resolve to feels utmost vigour.
Help to lead him hence.
Turn back you ravishers of innocents,
Know you the price of what you bear away
So rudely.
Who's that?
My Lord Phylaster.
Tic not the treasure of all the Kings in one,
The wealth of Tagus, nor the rocks of pearl,
That pave the Court of Neptune, can weigh down
That virtue. It was I that hurt the Princess,
Place me some god, on a Pyramids, higher then
Hills of earth: and lend a voice loud as you
Thunder to me, that from thence I may teach
The vnder-world, the worrh that dwells in him.
How's this?
My Lord, some man weary oflife that would be glad to die.
Leave this untimely curtsy Bellario.
Alas, he's mad, come, will you bear me hence?
By all the oaths that men ought most to keep,
And gods to punish most, when men do break.
He touched her nor, take heed Bellario,
How thou dost drown the virtues thou hast shown,
With perjury, by all the gods it was I,
You know she stood betwixt me and my right.
Thy own tongue be thy Judge.
It was Phylaster.
I'st not a brave boy?
Well, I fear me sir, we were deceived.
Have I no friend here?
Yes.
Then show it some good body, lend a hand to draw vs no∣rer: Would you have tears shed for you, when you die? then lay me gently on his neck, that there I may weep floods, and breath forth my spirit. Not all the wealth of Pluto, nor the gold locked in the heart of earth, can buy away this 〈◊〉 from me; this had been a ransom to have redeemed the 〈◊〉 〈◊◊〉 , had hee been taken; you hard-hearted men, more stony then these Mountains, can you see such a clear pure blood drop, and not cut your flesh to stop his life, to bind whose bitter wounds, Queens ought to tear their hairs, and with their tears bathe them: for∣give me thou that art the wealth of poor Phylaster,
Is the villain tan?
Sir, here be two confess the deed, but suit it was Phylaster.
Question it no more, it was.
The fellow that did fight with him, will tell vs that.
Ay me, I know him well.
Did not you know him?
Sir, if it were he, he was disguised.
I was so: Oh wy stars, that I should live still.
Thou ambitious fool, thou that hast laid a train for thy own life, now I doe mean to doe, I'll leave to talk, bear them to prison.
Sir, they did plot together, to take hence this harmless life, should it pass unrevenged, I should to earth, weeping. Grant me then, by all the loves a father bears his child, their custodies, that I may appoint their tortures, and their deaths.
Death, soft your law will not reach that for this fault.
Tic granted, take um to you with a guard.
Come Princely Pharamont, this business past,
We shall with more security go on
With our intended match.
I pray that this actionloose not Phylastor the hearts of the people.
Fear it not, their ouer-wise heads
Will think it but a trick.
Has the king sent for him to death?
Yes, but the king must know, it is not in his powor to war with heaven.
We linger time, the king sent for Phylastor, and the heads∣man, an hour ago.
Are all his wounds well?
All, they were but scrarches, but the loss of blood made him faint.
We dally Gentlemen.
Away.
We'll shuffle hard before he perish.
Nay, faith Phylaster, grieve not, we are well.
Nay, good my Lord forbear, we are wondrous well.
Oh Arethusa and Bellario,
Leave to be kind, I shall be shut from heaven,
If you continue so, I am a man false to a pair
Of the truest ones that ever earth bore.
Can it bear vs all? forgive me, and leave me;
But the King hath sent to call me to my death,
Oh show it me, and then forget me: and for thee my boy,
I shall deliver words, will mollify the hearts of beasts,
To spare thy innocence.
Alas, my Lord: My life is not a thing worthy
Your noble thoughts, tic not a life, tic but a piece
Of child-hood thrown away: should I out live you,
I should out live virtue and honour:
And when that day come, if ever I shall close
These eyes but once; may I live spotted for my perjury,
And waste by time to nothing.
And I the woefullest maid that ever lived,
Forced with my hands to bring my Lord to death,
Do by the honour of a Virgin swear.
To tell no hour behind it.
Make me not hated so.
Come from this prison, all joyful to our deaths.
People will tear me, when they find you true,
To such a wretch as I, I shall die loathed.
Enjoy your Kingdom peaceably, whilst I for ever sleep,
Forgotten with my faults. Every just maiden, every maid in love,
Will have a piece of me, if you be true.
My dearest, say not so.
A piece of you, he was not borne of woman, that can cut it, and look on.
Take me in tears betwixt you,
For my heart will break with shame and sorrow.
Why? tic well.
Lament no more.
Why? what would you have done?
If you had wronged me basely, and had found
My life no whit compared to yours for love,
Sirs, deal with me truly.
It was mistaken Sir.
Why, if it were?
Then sir we would have asked you pardon.
And have hope to enjoy it.
Enjoy it, I.
Would you indeed? be plain.
We would my Lord.
Forgive me then.
So, so.
Tic as it should be now.
Lead to my death.
Gentlemen, who saw the Prince?
So please you Sir, he's gone to see the City,
And the new Plot-forme, with some Gentlemen
Attending on him.
Is the Princess ready to bring her prisoner out?
She waits your grace.
Tell her we stay.
King, you may be deceived yet, the head you aim at,
Cost more setting on, then to lose it so lightly:
If it must off like a wild ouer-flow, that soopes before him,
A golden stock, and with it shakes down bridges,
Cracks the strong hearts of Pines, whose cable roots
Held out a thousand storms, a thousand thunders,
And so made weightier, takes whole villages upon his back,
And in the heate of pride charges strong Towns,
Towers, Castles, Palaces, and leaves them desolate.
So shall thy head, thy noble head, bury the lives
Of thousands, that must bleed with thee like a sacrifice,
In thy red ruins.
How now, what mask is this?
Right royal Sir,
I shall sing you an Epethelamon, but having lost my best aires with my fortunes, and wanting a celestial harp to strike this blessed union; thus in glad story I give you all these two fair Caedor branches.
The noblest of the mountains where they grew, straightest and tal∣lest, under whose still shades, the worthier beasts have made their layers, and slept free from the fervor of the Serian star, and the fell thunder-stroke, free from the Clouds, when they were big with hue∣more, and deliver in thousand spouts, that issues to the earth: O there was none but silent quiet there, till neuer-pleased fortune shot up shrubs base under branches, to devour these branches, and for a while they did so, and did reign over the Mountain, and did choke up his beauty with brakes, rud, thorns and thistles, till the Sun scorched them to the root, and dried um there, and now a gentle gail has blown again, that made these branches meet and twine together, never to be unarmed: The god that sings his Number ore marriage beds, has knit their noble hearts, and here they stand, your children, worthy king, and I have done.
How, how?
Sir, if you love it in plain truth, for now there is no mas∣king in it, this gentleman the prisoner that you gave me, is become my keeper.
And through all the bitter threats, your Jealousies, and his il fate, have wrought him, thus nobly hath hee struggled, and at length arrived here:
My dear husband.
Your dear husband. Call in the Captain of the Citadel, where you shall keep your wedding, I'll provide a mask shall make your Hymen turn his saffron into a sullen coat, and sing sad requiems to your departing souls, blood shall put out your torches, and instead of gaudy flowers about your wanton necks, an Axe shall hang, like a prodigious Motor, ready to crop your loves sweets. Hear you gods: From this time do I shake all title off of father to this woman, this base woman, and what there is of avenge∣in a Lyon chaft amongst dogs, or robed of his dear young, the same enforced more terrible, more mighty, look from me.
Sir, by that little life that I have left to swear by,
There's nothing can stir me from my self.
What I have done, I have done, without repntance,
For death to me can be no bugbare, as long as Pharamont,
Is not my heads-man.
Sweet peace upon thy soul thou worthy maid,
When ere thou die, for this time I'll excuse thee ore by thy pro∣logue.
Sir, let me speak next,
And let my dying words be better with you
Then my dull living actions: Ifyou aim at the life
Of this sweet innocent, you are a tyrant and a savage monster,
That feeds upon the blood you gave a life to,
Your memory shall be as foul behind you as you are living:
All your better deeds shall be in water writ;
But this in marble. No Chronicle shall speak you,
Though your own, but for a shame of men:
No Monument, though high and big as Pelion,
Shall be able to cover this base murder, make it rich with brass,
Gold and shining Jasper, like the Pyramids;
Lay on Epitaphs, such as make great men gods,
My little Marble, that only clothes my ashes, not my faults,
Shall far out shine it: and for after issues,
Think not so madly of the heavenly wisdoms,
That they will give you more, for your mad rage to cut off:
Unless it be some snake, or something like your self,
That in his birth shall strangle you: Remember my father king,
There was a fault, but I forgive it, let that sin
Persuade you to love this Lady, if you have a soul.
Think, save her and be saved, for my self, I have so long
Expected this glad hour, so languished under you,
And daily withered, that by the gods, it is a joy to die,
I find a recreation in it.
Whore's the King?
Here.
Get to your strength,
And rescue the Prince Pharamont from danger,
He's taken prisoner by the Citizens,
For the Lord Phylaster.
O brave fellows; Mureny my fine dear countrymen,
Mutiny. Now my brave valiant formen, show your weapons In honour of your Mistresses.
Arm, arm, arm.
A thousand devils take these Citizens.
A thousand blessings on them.
Arm, O king, the City is in Mutiny.
Led by an old gray Ruffin, who comes on
In rescue of the Lord Phylaster.
Away to the Citadel, I'll see them safe,
And then cope with these burgers, let the guard
And all the Gentlemen give strong attendance.
The City up, this was aboue our wishes.
I, and the marriage too, by al the gods, this noble Lady has deceived vs all, a plague upon my self, a thousand plagues, for ha∣uing such unworthy thoughts of her dear Honour: O, I could beat my self, or doe you beat me, and I'll beat you, for wee had all one thought.
No, no, twill but lose time.
You say true, are your swords sharpe: Well my dear
Countrymen what you lacks, ifyou continue, and fall not
Back, upon the first broken skin, I'll see you Chronicled,
And Chronicled, and cut and Chronicled, and all to be praised,
And sung in sonnets, and bathed in brave new ballads,
That all tongues shall troule you in Secula seculorum,
My kind Countrymen.
What if a toy take um i'ch hee les now, and they run all a∣way, and cry, the devil take the hindmost.
Then the same devil take the foremost too, and sauce him for his breakfast, if they all prove cowards, my curses flush a∣amongst um, and ill speeding: may they have injurious rain to keep the Gentlemen at home in rasine freeze, may the moth branch their veluets, and their silks only bee worn before sore eyes, may their false lights undo um, and discover preases, holes, staines, and oldnesse in their stuffs, and make them shop-rid, may they keep whoores, and horses, and break, and live mued up with necks ofbeefe and turnips; May they have many children, and none
like the father, and know no language but that gibberish they pra∣tle to their parcels, unless it be the gotish latin they write in their bonds, and may they write that false, and lose their debts.
Now the vengeance of all the gods confound them,
How they swarm together, what a hum they raise.
Devils choke your wide throats, if a man had need
To use your valours, we must pay a brokadge for it,
And then bring on, and you will fight like sheep:
Tic Phylaster, none but Phylaster must allay this heate,
They will not hear me speak, but fling dirt at me,
And call me tyrant. O run dear friend, and bring the Lord
Phylaster, speak him well, call him Prince,
Do him all the courtesies you can, commend me to him,
Oh! my wits, my wits.
O my brave Citizens, as I live I will not buy a pin
Out of your walls for this: nay, you shall cousin me,
And I'll thank you, and send you brawn and bakon,
Every long vocation; and foul shall come up fat
And in brave liking.
What they will do with that poor Prince, the gods know, I fear.
Why, they'll flea him, and make Church buckets on's skin, to qucnch rebellion, then clap a reuit in's sconce, and hang him up for a sign.
O worthy Sir, forgive me: Do not make your miseries
And my faults meet together, to bring a greater danger,
Be your self still sound amongst diseases, I have wronged you,
And though I find it last, and beaten to it,
Let me your goodness know, calm the people, and be
What you were born to, take your love, &amp; with her my repentance,
All my wishes, and all my prayers, by the gods,
My heart speaks all this, and if the least fall from me,
Not performed, may I be struck with thunder.
Mighty Sir, I will not doe your greatuesse so much wrong,
As not to make your word truth, free the Princess and the boy,
And let me stand the shock of this mad sea-breach,
Which I'll either turn, or perish with it.
Let your own word free her.
Then thus I take my leave, kissing your hand,
And hanging on your noble word, be Kingly,
And be not moved Sir, I shall bring you peace,
Or never bring my self back.
Now all the gods go with thee.
Come my brave Mermedons, fall on, letyour caps swarm, &amp; your nimble tongues forget your gibrish, of what you lack, and set your mouths open children, till your palates fall frighted half a fathom past the cure of bay-salt &amp; gross pepper; and then cry Phy∣laster, brave Phylaster. Let Phylaster be deep in request, my ding-a∣dings, mypaire of dear Indentures: King of clubs, thē your cut-wa∣ter-chamlets, and your painting: let not your hasty silks, dearly be∣lovers of Custards &amp; Cheescakes, or your branch cloth of bodkins, or your tyffenies, your robbin-hood scarlet and Iohns, tie your af∣fections in durance to your shops, my dainty duckers, up with your three piled spirits, that rightvalourous, and let your acute colours make the King to feel the measure of your mightiness; Phylaster, cry, myrose nobles, cry.
Phylaster, Phylaster.
How doe you like this, my Lord prisoner?
These are mad boys I can tell you,
These bee things that will not strike top-sayle to a Foist,
And let a Man of war, an Argosea,
Stoop to carry coals.
Why, you damned slaves, doe you know who I am?
Yes, my pretty Prince of puppets, we do know, and give you gentle warning, you talk no more such bugs words, lest that sod∣den
Crown should be scracht with a musket; dear Prince pip∣pin, I'll have you coddled, let him loose my spirits, and make a ring with your bills my hearts: Now let me see what this brave man dares doe: note sir, have at you with this washing blow, here I lie, doe you huff sweet Prince? I could hock your grace, and hang you cross legged, like a Hare at a Poulters stall; and do thus.
Gentlemen, honest Gentlemen —
A speaks treason Captain, shal's knock him down?
Hold, I say.
Good Captain let me have one mal it's mozart, I feel my stomach strangely provoked to bee at his Spanish pot-nowle, shal's kill him?
I, kill him, kill him.
Again I say hold.
O how rank he looks, sweet Captain let's geld him, and send his dowsets for a dish to the Burdello.
No, let's rather sell them to some woman Chemist, that extractions, she might draw an excellent provocative oil from uses them, that might be very useful.
You see, my scurvy Don, how precious you are in esteem a∣amongst vs, had you not been better kept at home, I think you had: must you needs come amongst vs, to have your saffron hide taw'd as wee intend it: My Don, Phylaster must suffer death to satisfy your melancholy spleen, he must my Don, he must; but we your Physicians, hold it fit that you bleed for it: Come my robu∣sticks, my brave regiment of rattle makers, let's cal a common cor∣nutted counsel, and like grave Senators, bear up our branched crests, in sitting upon the several tortures we shall put him to, and with as little sense as may be, put your wills in execution.
Burn him, burn him.
Hang him, hang him.
No, rather let's carbonado his cods-head, and cut him to col∣lops: shall I begin?
Stay your furies my loving Countrymen.
Phylaster is come, Phylaster, Phylaster.
My poroupines of spite, make room I say, that I may salute my brave Prince: and is Prince Phylaster at liberty?
I am, most loving countrymen.
Then give me thy Princely goll, which thus I kiss, to whom I crouch and bow; But see my royal spark, this head-strong swarm that follow me humming like a master Bee, have I led forth their Hives, and being on wing, and in our heady flight, have seized him shall suffer for thy wrongs.
I, I, let's kill him, kill him.
But hear me, Countrymen.
Hear the Prince, I say, hear Phylaster.
I, I, hear the Prince, hear the Prince.
My coming is to give you thanks, my dear Countrymen, whose powerful sway hath curbed the prosecuting fury of my foes.
We will curb um, we will curb um.
I find you will,
But if my interest in your loves be such,
As the world takes notice of, Let me crave
You would deliver Pharamont to my hand,
And from me accept this
Testimony of my love.
Which is but a pittance of those ample thanks,
Which shall redowne with showered courtesies.
Take him to thee brave Prince, and we thy bounty thank∣fully accept, and will drink thy health, thy perpetual health my Prince, whilst memory lasts amongst vs, we are thy Mermidons, my Achillis: we are those will follow thee, and in thy service will scour our rusty murins and our bill-bow-blades, most noble Phylaster, we will: Come my rowtists let's retyer till occasion calls vs to at∣tend the nohle Phylaster.
Phylaster, Phylaster, Phylaster.
Worthy sir, I owe you a life,
For but your self theres nought could have prevailed.
Tic the least of service that I owe the King,
Who was careful to preserve ye.
I ever thought the boy was honest.
Well, tic a brave boy Gentlemen.
Yet you'd not believe this.
A plague on my forwardness, what a villain was I, to wrong um so; a mischief on my muddy brains, was I mad?
A little frantic in your rash attempt, but that was your love to Phylaster, sir.
A pox on such love, have you any hope my countenance will ere serve me to look on them?
O very well Sir.
Very ill Sir, vds death, I could beat out my brains, or hang my self in revenge.
There would be little gotten by it, en keep you as ye are.
An excellent boy, Gentlemen believe it, hark the King is coming,
No news of his return,
Will not this rabble multitude be appeased?
I fear their outrage, lest it should extend
With dangering of Pharamonts life.
See Sir, Phylaster is returned.
Royal Sir,
Receive into your bosom your desired peace,
Those discontented mutineers be appeasde,
And this fortaigne Prince in safety.
How happy am I in thee Phylaster?
Whose excellent virtues begets a world of love,
I am indebted to thee for a Kingdom.
I here surrender up all Sovereignty,
Reign peacefully with thy espoused Bride,
Ashume my Son to take what is thy due.
How Sir, yer son, what am I then, your Daughter you gave to me.
But heaven hath made asignement unto him,
And brought your contract to anullity:
Sir, your entertainment hath been most fair,
Had not your hell-bred lust dried up the spring,
From whence flowed forth those favours that you found:
I am glad to see you safe, let this suffice,
Your self hath crossed your self.
They are married sir.
How married? I hope your highness will not use me so, I came not to be disgraced, and return alone.
I cannot help it sir.
To return alone, you need not sir,
Here is one will bear you company,
You know this Ladies proof, if you
Failed not in the say taging.
I hold your scoffs in vildest base contempt,
Or is there said or done, ought I repent,
But can retort even to your grinning teeth,
Your worst of spights, tho Princess lofty steps
May not be tract, yet may they tread a wry,
That boy there —
If to me ye speak Lady,
I must tell you, youhaue lost your self
In your too much forwardness, and hath forgot
Both modesty and truth, with what impudence
You have thrown most damnable aspertions
On that noble Princess and my self: witness the world;
Behold me sir.
I should know this face; my daughter.
The same sir.
How, our sometime Page, Bellario, turned woman?
Madame, the cause induced me to transform my self,
Proceeded from a respective modest
Affection I bare to my my Lord,
The Prince Phylaster, to do him service,
As far from any lascivious thought,
As that Lady is far from go oddness,
And ifmy true intents may be believed,
And from your Highness Madame, pardon find,
You have the truth.
I doe believe thee, Bellario I shall call thee still.
The faithfullest servant that ever gave attendance.
Now Lady lust, what say you to'th boy now;
Doe you hang the head, do ye, shame would flail
Into your face, if ye had grace to entertain it,
Do ye slink away?
Give present order she be banished the Court,
And straightly confined till our further
Pleasure is known.
Here is such an age of transformation, that I doe not know how to trust my self, I'll get me gone to: Sir, the disparagement you have done, must be called in question. I have power to right my self, and will.
We fear ye not sir.
Let a strong convoy guard him through the Kingdom,
With him, let's part with all our cares and fear,
And Crown with joy our happy loves success.
Which to make more full, Lady Gallatea,
Let honoured Clerimont acceptance find
In your chaste thoughts.
Tic my suit too.
Such royal spokes-men must not be denied.
Nor shall not, Madame.
Then thus I join your hands.
Our hearts were knit before.
But tic you Lady, must make all complete,
And gives a full perod to content,
Let your loves cordial again revive,
The drooping spirits of noble Trasiline.
What says Lord Leon to it?
Marry my Lord I say, I know she once loved him.
At least made show she did,
But since tic my Lord Phylasters desire,
I'll make a surrender of all the right
A father has in her; here take her sir,
With all my heart, and heaven give you joy.
Then let vs in these nuptuall feasts to hold,
Heaven hath decreed, and Fate stands uncontrolled.

I Learn in this Letter, that Don Peter of Arra∣gon, comes this night to Messina.
He is very near by this: he was not three Leagues off when I left him.
How many Gentlemen have you lost in this action?
But few of any sort, and none of name.
A victory is twice it self, when the achiever brings home full numbers: I find here, that Don Pe∣la hath bestowed much honour on a young Florentine, cal∣led Claudio.
Much deserved on his part, and equally remem∣bred by Don Pedro, he hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure of a Lamb, the feats of a Lion, he hath indeed better bettered expect∣tion, then you must expect of me to tell you how.
He hath an Uncle here in Messina, will be very much glad of it.
I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much joy in him, even so much, that joy could not show it self modest enough, without a badge of bit∣ternesse.
Did he break out into tears?
In great measure.
A kind overflow of kindness, there are no fa∣ces truer, then those that are so washed, how much bet∣la is it to weep at joy, then to joy at weeping?
I pray you, is Signior Mountant• returned from the wars, or no?
I know none of that name, Lady, there was none such in the army of any sort.
What is he that you ask for Niece?
My cousin means Signior Benedict of Padua
O he's returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.
He set up his bills here in Messina, &amp; challenged Cupped at the Flight: and my Uncles fool reading the Challenge, subscribed for Cupped, and challenged him at the Burbolt. I pray you, how many hath hee killed and eaten in these wars? But how many hath he killed? for indeed, I promised to eat all of his killing.
Faith Niece, you tax Signior Benedict too much, but he will be meet with you, I doubt it not.
He hath done good service Lady in these wars.
You had musty victual, and he hath help to ease it: he's a very valiant Trencher-man, hee hath an excellent stomach.
And a good soldier too Lady.
And a good soldier to a Lady. But what is he to a Lord?
A Lord to a Lord, a man to a man, stuffed with all honourable virtues.
It is so indeed, he is no less then a stuffed man: but for the stuffing well, we are all mortal.
You must not (sir) mistake my Niece, there is a kind of merry war betwixt Signior Benedict, &amp; her: they never meet, but there's a skirmish of wit between them.
Alas, he gets nothing by that. In our last con∣flict, four of his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man governed with one: so that if hee have wit enough to keep himself warm, let him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse: For it is all the wealth that he hath left, to be known a reason∣noble creature. Who is his companion now? He hath every month a new sworn brother.
I'st possible?
Very easily possible: he wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat, it ever changes with ye next block.
I see (Lady) the Gentleman is not in your books.
No, and he were, I would burn my study. But I pray you, who is his companion? Is there no young squarer now, that will make a voyage with him to the devil?
He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.
O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease: he is sooner caught then the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. God help the noble Claudio, if hee have caught the Benedict, it will cost him a thousand pound ere he be cured.
I will hold friends with you Lady.
Do good friend.
You'll ne'er run mad Niece.
No, not till a hot January.
Don Pedro is approached.
Good Signior Leonato, you are come to meet your trouble: the fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.
Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your Grace: for trouble being gone, comfort should remain: but when you depart from me, sorrow abides, and happiness takes his leave.
You embrace your charge too willingly: I think this is your daughter.
Her mother hath many times told me so.
Were you in doubt that you asked her?
Signior Benedict, no, for then were you a child.
You have it full Benedict, we may guess by this, what you are, being a man, truly the Lady fathers her self: be happy Lady, for you are like an honourable father.
If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not have his head on her shoulders for al Messina, as like him as she is.
I wonder that you will still be talking, signior Benedict▪ no body marks you.
What my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living?
Is it possible Disdain should die, while she hath such meet food to feed it, as Signior Benedict? Courtesy it self must convert to Disdain, if you come in her presence.
Then is courtesy a turne-coate, but it is cer∣taine I am loved of all Ladies, only you excepted: and I would I could find in my heart that I had not a hard heart, for truly I love none.
A dear happiness to women, they would else have been troubled with a pernicious Su•er, I thank God and my cold blood, I am of your humour for that, I had rather hear my Dog bark at a Crow, than a man swear he loves me.
God keep your Ladyship still in that mind, so some Gentleman or other shall scope a predestinate scratched face.
Scratching could not make it worse, and it were such a face as yours were.
Well, you are a rare Parrot teacher.
A bird of my tongue, is better than a beast of your.
I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so good a continuer, but keep your way a Gods name, I have done.
You always end with a Jade trick, I know you of old.
This is the sum of all: Leonato, signior Clau∣dio, and signior Benedict; my dear friend Leonato, hath invited you all, I tell him we shall stay here, at the least a month, and he heartily prays some occasion may de∣taine vs longer: I dare swear hee is no hypocrite, but prays from his heart.
If you swear, my Lord, you shall not be for∣sworn, let me bid you welcome, my Lord, being re∣conciled to the Prince your brother: I owe you all duty.
I thank you, I am not of many words, but I thank you.
Please it your grace lead on?
Your hand Leonato, we will go together.
Benedict, did thou note the daughter of sig∣nior Leonato?
I noted her not, but I looked on her.
Is she not a modest young Lady?
Doe you question me as an honest man should doe, for my simple true judgment? or would you have me speak after my custom, as being a professed tyrant to their sex?
No, I pray thee speak in sober judgment.
Why in faith me thinks shoe's too low for a hie praise, too browne for a fair praise, and too little for a great praise, only this commendation I can afford her, that were she other then she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other, but as she is, I doe not like her.
Thou think I am in sport, I pray thee tell me truly how thou lik'st her.
Would you buy her, that you enquier after her?
Can the world buy such a jewel?
Yea, and a case to put it into, but speak you this with a sad brow? Or doe you play the flouting jack, to tell vs Cupped is a good Hare-finder, and Vulcan a rare Carpenter: Come, in what key shall a man take you to go in the song?
In mine eye, she is the sweetest Lady that ever I looked on.
I can see yet without spectacles, and I see no such matter: there's her cousin, and she were not possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty, as the first of May doth the last of December: but I hope you have no intent to turn husband, have you?
I would scarce trust my self, though I had sworn the contrary, if Hero would be my wife.
First come to this? in faith hath not the world one man but he will wear his cap with suspicion? shall I no∣for see a bachelor of three score again? go to in faith, and thou wilt needs thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it, and sigh away sundays: look, don Pedro is returned to seek you.
What secret hath held you here, that you foal∣lowed not to Leonatoes?
I would your Grace would constrain me to tell.
I charge thee on thy allegiance.
You hear, Count Claudio, I can be secret as a dumb man, I would have you think so (but on my al∣legiance, mark you this, on my allegiance) hee is in love, With who? now that is your Graces part: mark how short his answer is, with Hero, Leonatoes short daughter.
If this were so, so were it uttered.
Like the old tale, my Lord, it is not so, nor it was not so: but indeed, God forbid it should be so.
If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be otherwise.
Amen, if you love her, for the Lady is very well worthy.
You speak this to fetch me in, my Lord.
By my troth I speak my thought.
And in faith, my Lord, I spoke mine.
And by my two faiths and troths, my Lord, I speak mine.
That I love her, I feel.
That she is worthy, I know.
That I neither feel how she should be lo∣ued, nor know how she should be worthy, is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me, I will die in it at the stake.
Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the de∣spite of Beauty.
And never could maintain his part, but in the force of his will.
That a woman conceived me, I thank her: that she brought me up, I likewise give her most humble thanks: but that I will have a •echare winded in my forehead, or hang my bugle in an invisible baldricke, all women shall pardon me: because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust any, I will doe my self the right to trust none: and the fine is, (for the which I may go the finer) I will live a Bachelor.
I shall see thee ere I die, look pale with love.
With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my Lord, not with love: prove that ever I loose more blood with love, then I will get again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a Ballet-makers pen, and hang me up at the door of a brothel-house for the sign of blind Cupped.
Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou wilt prove a notable argument.
If I do, hang me in a bottle like a Cat, &amp; shoot at me, and he that hit's me, let him be clapped on the should∣der, and called Adam.
Well, as time shall try: In time the savage Bull doth bear the yoke.
The savage bull may, but if ever the sensible Benedict bear it, pluck off the bulls horns, and set them in my forehead, and let me be vildely painted, and in such great Letters as they write, here is good horse to hire: let them signify under my sign, here you may see Benedict the married man.
If this should ever happen, thou would bee horn mad.
Nay, if Cupped have not spent all his Quiver in Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.
I look for an earthquake too then.
Well, you will temporise with the hours, in the mean time, good Signior Benedict, repair to Leo∣natoes, commend me to him, and tell him I will not fail him at supper, for indeed he hath made great prepare∣tion.
I have almost matter enough in me for such an Embassage, and so I commit you.
To the tuition of God. From my house, if I had it.
The sixth of July. Your loving friend, Benedict.
Nay mock not, mock not; the body of your discourse is sometime guarded with fragments, and the guards are but slightly basted on neither, ere you flout old ends any further, examine your conscience, and so I leave you.
My Liege, your Highness now may doe me good.
My love is thine to teach, teach it but how,
And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn
Any hard Lesson that may do thee good.
Hath Leonato any son my Lord?
No child but Hero, she's his only heir.
Dost thou affect her Claudio?
O my Lord,
When you went onward on this ended action,
I looked upon her with a soldiers eye,
That liked, but had a rougher task in hand,
Than to drive liking to the name of love:
But now I am returned, and that warre-thoughts
Have left their places vacant: in their rooms,
Come thronging soft and delicate desires,
All prompting me how fair young Hero is,
Saying I liked her ere I went to wars.
Thou wilt be like a lover presently,
And tire the hearer with a book of words:
If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it,
And I will break with her: wast not to this end,
That thou began to twist so fine a story?
How sweetly doe you minister to love,
That know loves grief by his complexion!
But lest my liking might too sudden seem,
I would have salu'd it with a longer treatise.
What need ye bridge much brother then the flood?
The fairest grant is the necessity:
Look what will serve, is fit: it is once, thou love,
And I will fit thee with the remedy,
I know we shall have revelling to night,
I will assume thy part in some disguise,
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio,
And in her bosom Isle vnclaspe my heart,
And take her hearing prisoner with the force
And strong encounter of my amorous tale:
Then after, to her father will I break,
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine,
In practise let vs put it presently.
How now brother, where is my cousin your son: hath he provided this music?
He is very busy about it, but brother, I can tell you news that you yet dreamt not of.
Are they good?
As the events stamps them, but they have • good cover: they▪ show well outward, the Prince and Count Claudio walking in a thick pleached alley in my orchard, were thus ouer-heard by a man of mine: the Prince dis∣covered to Claudio that hee loved my niece your daugh∣la, and meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, and if hee found her accordant, hee meant to take the present time by the top, and instantly break with you of it.
Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
A good sharpe fellow, I will send for him, and question him your self.
No, no; wee will hold it as a dream, till it ap∣pear it self: but I will acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better prepared for an answer, if per∣adventure this bee true: go you and tell her of it: coo∣sins, you know what you have to doe, O I cry you mer∣cie friend, go you with me and I will use your skill, good cousin have a care this busy time.
What the good year my Lord, why are you thus out of measure sad?
There is no measure in the occasion that breeds, therefore the sadness is without limit.
You should hear reason.
And when I have heard it, what blessing brine∣geth it?
If not a present remedy, yet a patient sufferance.
I wonder that thou (being as thou say thou art, borne under Saturn) goosed about to apply a moral me∣dicine, to a mortifying mischief: I cannot hide what I am: I must bee sad when I have cause, and smile at no mans jests, eat when I have stomach, and wait for no mans leisure: sleep when I am drowsy, and tend on no mans business, laugh when I am merry, and claw no man in his humour.
Yea, but you must not make the full show of this, till you may doe it without controlment, you have of
late stood out against your brother, and hee hath tan you newly into his grace, where it is impossible you should take root, but by the fair weather that you make your self, it is needful that you frame the season for your own harvest.
I had rather be a canker in a hedge, then a rose in his grace, and it better fits my blood to be disdained of all, then to fashion a carriage to rob love from any: in this (though I cannot be said to be a flattering honest man) it must not be denied but I am a plain dealing villain, I am trusted with a mussel, and enfranchisde with a clog, therefore I have decreed, not to sing in my cage: if I had my mouth, I would bite: if I had my liberty, I would do my liking: in the mean time, let me be that I am, and seek not to alter me.
Can you make no use of your discontent?
I will make all use of it, for I use it only.
Who comes here? what news Borachio?
I came yonder from a great supper, the Prince your brother is royally entertained by Leonato, and I can give you intelligence of an intended marriage.
Will it serve for any Model to build mischief on? What is hee for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness?
Mary it is your brothers right hand.
Who, the most exquisite Claudio?
Even he.
A proper squire, and who, and who, which way looks he?
Mary on Hero, the daughter and Heir of Leo∣nato.
A very forward March-chicke, how came you to this?
Being entertained for a perfumer, as I was smoa∣king a musty room, comes me the Prince and Claudio, hand in hand in sad conference: I whipped behind the Are∣ras, and there heard it agreed upon, that the Prince should woo Hero for himself, and having obtained her, give her to Count Claudio.
Come, come, let vs thither, this may prove food to my displeasure, that young start-vp hath all the glory of my overthrow: if I can cross him any way, I bless my self every way, you are both sure, and will assist me?
To the death my Lord.
Let vs to the great supper, their cheer is the greater that I am subdued, would the Cooke were of my mind: shall we go prove whats to be done?
We'll wait upon your Lordship.
Was not Count Iohn here at supper?
I saw him not.
How tartly that Gentleman looks, I never can see him, but I am heart-burn'd an hour after.
He is of a very melancholy disposition.
Hee were an excellent man that were made just in the mid-way between him and Benedict, the one is too like an image and says nothing, and the other too like my Ladies eldest son, evermore tattling.
Then half signior Benedicts tongue in Count Iohns mouth, and half Count Iohns melancholy in Sig∣nior Benedicts face.
With a good leg, and a good foot uncle, and money enough in his purse, such a man would win any woman in the world, if he could get her good will.
By my troth Niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband, if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.
Infaith shoe's too cursed.
Too cursed is more then cursed, I shall lessen Gods sending that way: for it is said, God sends a cursed Cow short horns, but to a Cow too cursed he sends none.
So, by being too cursed, God will send you no horns.
Just, if he send me no husband, for the which blessing, I am at him upon my knees every morning and evening: Lord, I could not endure a husband with a beard on his face, I had rather lie in the woollen.
You may light upon a husband that hath no beard.
What should I doe with him? dress him in my apparel, and make him my waiting gentlewoman? he that hath a beard, is more then a youth: and he that hath no beard, is less then a man: and hee that is more then a youth, is not for me: and he that is less then a man, I am not for him: therefore I will even take sixepence in ear∣nest of the Berrord, and lead his Apes into hell.
Well then, go you into hell.
No, but to the gate, and there will the Devil meet me like an old Cuckold with horns on his head, and say, get you to heaven Beatrice, get you to heaven, heere's no place for you maids, so deliver I up my Apes, and away to S. Peter: for the heavens, hee shows me where the Bachelors sit, and there live wee as merry as the day is long.
Well niece, I trust you will be ruled by your father.
Yes faith, it is my cousins duty to make curt∣sie, and say, as it please you: but yet for all that cousin, let him be a handsome fellow, or else make an other curse, and say, father, as it please me.
Well niece, I hope to see you one day sitted with a husband.
Not till God make men of some other met∣tall then earth, would it not grieve a woman to be ouer-mastred with a piece of valiant dust? to make account of her life to a clod of wayward marle? no uncle, isle none: Adams sons are my brethren, and truly I hold it a sin to match in my kindred.
Daughter, remember what I told you, if the Prince doe solicit you in that kind, you know your an∣swear.
The fault will be in the music cousin, if you be not wood in good time: if the Prince bee too impor∣tant, tell him there is measure in every thing, &amp; so dance out the answer, for hear me Hero, wooing, wedding, &amp; repenting, is as a Scotch ijgge, a measure, and a cinque-pace: the first suite is hot and hasty like a Scotch ijgge (and full as fantastical) the wedding mannerly modest, (as a measure) full of state &amp; ancientry, and then comes repentance, and with his bad legs falls into the cinque-pace faster and faster, till he sinks into his grave.
Cousin you apprehend passing shrewdly.
I have a good eye uncle, I can see a Church by daylight.
The revellers are entering brother, make good room.
Lady, will you walk about with your friend?
So you walk softly, and look sweetly, and say nothing, I am yours for the walk, and especially when I walk away.
With me in your company.
I may say so when I please.
And when please you to say so?
When I like your favour, for God defend the Lute should be like the case.
My visor is Philemons roof, within the house is Love.
Why then your visor should be thatched.
Speak low if you speak Love.
Well, I would you did like me.
So would not I for your own sake, for I have many ill qualities.
Which is one?
I say my prayers aloud.
I love you the better, the hearers may cry Amen.
God match me with a good dancer.
Amen.
And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done: answer Clarke.
No more words the Clarke is answered.
I know you well enough, you are Signior An∣thonio.
At a word, I am not.
I know you by the waggling of your head.
To tell you true, I counterfeit him.
You could never doe him so ill well, unless you were the very man: here's his dry hand up &amp; down, you are he, you are he.
At a word I am not.
Come, come, doe you think I doe not know you by your excellent wit? can virtue hide it self? go to, mum, you are he, graces will appear, and there's an end.
Will you not tell me who told you so?
No, you shall pardon me.
Nor will you not tell me who you are?
Not now.
That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit out of the hundred merry tales: well, this was Sign∣or Benedict that said so.
What's he?
I am sure you know him well enough.
Not I, believe me.
Did he never make you laugh?
I pray you what is he?
Why he is the Princes jester, a very dull fool, only his gift is, in devising impossible slanders, none but Libertines delight in him, and the commendation is not in his wit, but in his villainy, for hee both pleases men and angers them, and then they laugh at him, and beat him: I am sure he is in the Fleet, I would he had boarded me.
When I know the Gentleman, Isle tell him what you say.
Do, do, he will but break a comparison or two on me, which peradventure (not marked, or not laughed at) strikes him into melancholy, and then there's a Par∣tridge wing saved, for the fool will eat no supper that night. We must follow the Leaders.
In every good thing.
Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next turning.
Sure my brother is amorous on Hero, and hath withdrawn her father to break with him about it: the Ladies follow her, and but one visor remains.
And that is Claudio, I know him by his bea∣ring.
Are not you signior Benedict?
You know me well, I am hee.
Signior, you are very near my Brother in his love, he is enamoured on Hero, I pray you dissuade him from her, she is no equal for his birth: you may do the part of an honest man in it.
How know you he loves her?
I heard him swear his affection,
So did I too, and he swore he would marry her to night.
Come, let vs to the banquet.
Thus answer I in name of Benedict,
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio:
It is certain so, the Prince woes for himself:
Friendship is constant in all other things,
Save in the Office and affairs of love:
Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues.
Let every eye negotiate for it self,
And trust no Agent: for beauty is a witch,
Against whose charms, faith melts into blood:
This is an accident of hourly proof,
Which I mistrusted not. Farewell therefore Hero.
Count Claudio.
Yea, the same.
Come, will you go with me?
Whither?
Even to the next Willow, about your own bu∣sinesse, Count. What fashion will you wear the Gar∣land off? About your neck, like an Usurers chain? Or under your arm, like a Lieutenants scarf? You must wear it one way, for the Prince hath got your Hero.
I wish him joy of her.
Why that's spoken like an honest Drouier, so they sell Bullocks: but did you think the Prince wold have served you thus?
I pray you leave me.
Ho now you strike like the blind man, it was the boy that stole your meat, and you'll beat the post.
If it will not be, Isle leave you.
Alas poor hurt foul, now will he creep into sedges: But that my Lady Beatrice should know me, &amp; not know me: the Princes fool! Ho? It may be I go under that title, because I am merry: yea but so I am apt to do my self wrong: I am not so reputed, it is the base (though bitter) disposition of Beatrice, that putt's the world into her person, and so gives me out: well, Isle be revenged as I may.
Now Signior, whore's the Count, did you see him?
Troth my Lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame, I found him here as melancholy as a Lodge in a Warren, I told him, and I think, told him true, that your grace had got the will of this young Lady, and I offered him my company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or to bind him a rod, as be∣ing worthy to be whipped.
To be whipped, what's his fault?
The slat transgression of a Schoole-boy, who being overjoyed with finding a birds nest, shows it his companion, and he steals it.
Wilt thou make a trust, a transgression? the transgression is in the stealer.
Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the garland too, for the garland he might have worn himself, and the rod hee might have bestowed on you, who (as I take it) have stolen his birds nest.
I will but teach them to sing, and restore them to the owner.
If their singing answer your saying▪ by my faith you say honestly.
The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you, the Gentleman that danced with her, told her she is much wronged by you.
O she misusde me past the endurance of a block: an oak but with one greene leaf on it, would have an∣answered her: my very visor began to assume life, and scold with her: she told me, not thinking I had been my self, that I was the Princes Easter, and that I was duller then a great thaw, hue•ling jest upon jest, with such im∣possible conveyance upon me, that I stood like a man at a mark, with a whole army shooting at me: she speaks poynyards, and every word stabs: if her breath were as terrible as terminations, there were no living near her, she would infect to the north star: I would not marry her, though she were endowed with all that Adam had left him before he transgressed, she would have made Hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make the fire too: come, talk not of her, you shall find her the infernal Ate in good apparel. I would to God some scholar would conjure her, for certainly while she is here, a man may live as quiet in hell, as in a sanctuary, and people sin upon purpose, because they would go thither, so indeed all disquiet, horror, and perturbation follows her.
Look here she comes.
Will your Grace command me any service to the worlds end? I will go on the slightest arrand now to the Antipodes that you can devise to send me on: I will fetch you a tooth-picker now from the furthest inch of Asia: bring you the length of Proctor Iohns foot: fetch you a hair off the great Chams beard: doe you any em∣bassage to the Pigmies, rather then hold three words conference, with this Harpy: you have no employment for me?
None, but to desire your good company.
O God sir, hears a dish I love not, I cannot in∣dure this Lady tongue.
Come Lady, come, you have lost the heart of Signior Benedict.
Indeed my Lord, hee lent it me a while, and I gave him use for it, a double heart for a single one, marry once before he won it of me, with false dice, therefore your Grace may well say I have lost it.
You have put him down Lady, you have put him down.
So I would not he should do me, my Lord, lest I should prove the mother of fools: I have brought Count Claudio, whom you sent me to seek.
Why how now Count, wherefore are you sad?
Not sad my Lord.
How then? sick?
Neither, my Lord.
The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well: but civil Count, civil as an Orange, and some∣thing of a jealous complexion.
In faith Lady, I think your blazon to be true, though Isle be sworn, if hee be so, his conceit is false: here Claudio, I have wooed in thy name, and fair Hero is won, I have broke with her father, and his good will obtained, name the day of marriage, and God give thee joy.
Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes: his grace hath made the match, &amp; all grace say, Amen to it.
Speak Count, tic your Qu.
Silence is the perfectest Herald of joy, I were but little happy if I could say, how much? Lady, as you are mine, I am yours, I give away my self for you, and dote upon the exchange.
Speak cousin, or (if you cannot) stop his mouth with a kiss, and let not him speak neither.
Infaith Lady you have a merry heart.
Yea my Lord I thank it, poor fool it keeps on the windy side of Care, my cousin tells him in his ear that he is in my heart.
And so she doth cousin.
Good Lord for alliance: thus goes every one to the world but I, and I am sunburned, I may sit in a cor∣ner and cry, heigh ho for a husband.
Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.
I would rather have one of your fathers getting: hath your Grace ne'er a brother like you? your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by them.
Will you have me? Lady.
No, my Lord, unless I might have another for working days, your Grace is too costly to wear every day: but I beseech your Grace pardon me, I was borne to speak all mirth, and no matter.
Your silence most offends me, and to be mer∣rye, best becomes you, for out of question, you were born in a merry hour.
No sure my Lord, my Mother cried, but then there was a star danced, and under that was I borne: co∣sins God give you joy.
Niece, will you look to those rhings I told you of?
I cry you mercy Uncle, by your Graces pardon.
By my troth a pleasant spirited Lady.
There's little of the melancholy element in her my Lord, she is never sad, but when she sleeps, and not ever sad then: for I have heard my daughter say, she hath often dreamt of unhappiness, and waked her self with laughing.
She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.
O, by no means, she mocks all her wooers out of suite.
She were an excellent wife for Benedict.
O Lord, my Lord, if they were but a week
married, they would talk themselves mad.
Count Claudio, when mean you to go to Church?
To morrow my Lord, Time goes on crutches, till Love have all his rites.
Not till monday, my dear son, which is hence a just seven night, and a time too brief too, to have all things answer mind.
Come, you shake the head at so long a brea∣thing, but I warrant thee Claudio, the time shall not go dully by vs, I will in the interim, undertake one of Her∣cules labours, which is, to bring Signior Benedict and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of affection, the one with the other, I would fine have it a match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if you three will but minister such assi∣stance as I shall give you direction.
My Lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights watchings.
And I my Lord.
And you to gentle Hero?
I will doe any modest office, my Lord, to help my cousin to a good husband.
And Benedict is not the vnhopefullest husband that I know: thus far can I praise him, hee is of a noble strain, of approved valour, and confirmed honesty, I will teach you how to humour your cousin, that she shall fall in love with Benedict, and I, with your two helps, will so practise on Benedict, that in despite of his quick wit, and his queasy stomach, hee shall fall in love with Beatrice: if wee can doe this, Cupped is no longer an Are∣cher, his glory shall be ours, for wee are the only loue-gods, go in with me, and I will tell you my drift.
It is so, the Count Claudio shall marry the daugh∣la of Leonato.
Yea my Lord, but I can cross it.
Any bar, any cross, any impediment, will be medicinable to me, I am sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his affection, ranges evenly with mine, how can thou cross this marriage?
Not honestly my Lord, but so covertly, that no dishonesty shall appear in me.
Show me briefly how.
I think I told your Lordship a year since, how much I am in the favour of Margaret, the waiting gentle∣woman to Hero.
I remember.
I can at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her to look out at her Ladies chamber window.
What life is in that, to be the death of this mar∣riage?
The poison of that lies in you to temper, go you to the Prince your brother, spare not to tell him, that hee hath wronged his Honour in marrying the renowned Claudio, whose estimation do you mightily hold up, to a contaminated stale, such a one as Hero.
What proof shall I make of that?
Proof enough, to misuse the Prince, to vex Claudio, to undo Hero, and kill Leonato, look you for a∣ny other issue?
Only to despite them, I will endeavour any thing.
Go then, find me a meet hour, to draw on Pedro and the Count Claudio alone, tell them that you know that Hero loves me, intend a kind of zeal both to the Prince and Claudio (as in a love of your brothers honour who hath made this match) and his friends repu∣tation, who is thus like to be cozened with the semblance of a maid, that you have discovered thus: they will scarce∣lie believe this without trial: offer them instances which shall bear no less likelihood, than to see me at her chamber window, hear me call Margaret, Hero; hear Margaret term me Claudio, and bring them to see this the very night before the intended wedding, for in the mean time, I will so fashion the matter, that Hero shall be absent, and there shall appear such seeming truths of Heroes disloyalty, that jealousy shall be called assurance, and all the preparation overthrown.
Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put it in practise: be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a thousand ducats.
Be thou constant in the accusation, and my cun∣ning shall not shame me.
I will presently go learn their day of marri∣age.
Boy.
Signior.
In my chamber window lies a book, bring it hither to me in the orchard.
I am here already sir.
I know that, but I would have thee hence, and here again. I doe much wonder, that one man seeing how much another man is a fool, when he dedicates his behaviours to love, will after hee hath laughed at such shallow follies in others, become the argument of his own scorn, by falling in love, &amp; such a man is Claudio, I have known when there was no music with him but the drum and the fife, and now had hee rather hear the taber and the pipe: I have known when he would have walked ten mile afoot, to see a good armour, and now will he lie ten nights awake carving the fashion of a new dub∣let: he was wont to speak plain, &amp; to the purpose (like an honest man &amp; a soldier) and now is he turned ortho∣graphy, his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many strange dishes: may I be so converted, &amp; see with these eyes? I cannot tell, I think not: I will not bee sworn, but love may transform me to an oyster, but Isle take my oath on it, till he have made an oyster of me, he shall never make me such a fool: one woman is fair, yet I am well: another is wise, yet I am well: another virtue∣os, yet I am well: but till all graces be in one woman▪ one woman shall not come in my grace: rich she shall be, that's certain: wise, or Isle none: virtuous, or Isle no∣for cheapen her: fair, or Isle never look on her: mild, or come not near me: Noble, or not for an Angel: of good discourse: an excellent Musician, and her hair shall be of what colour it please God, ho! the Prince and Monsieur Love, I will hide me in the Arbor.
Come, shall we hear this music?
Yea my good Lord: how still the evening is,
As hushed on purpose to grace harmony.
See you where Benedict hath hid himself?
O very well my Lord: the music ended,
We'll fit the kid-foxe with a penny worth.
Come Balthazar, we'll hear that song again.
O good my Lord, tax not so bad a voice,
To slander music any more then once.
It is the witness still of excellence,
To slander Music any more then once.
It is the witness still of excellence,
To put a strange face on his own perfection,
I pray thee sing, and let me woe no more.
Because you talk of wooing, I will sing,
Since many a wooer doth commence his suit,
To her he thinks not worthy, yet he woos,
Yet will he swear he loves.
Nay pray thee come,
Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
Doe it in notes.
Note this before my notes,
Theres not a note of mine that's worth the noting.
Why these are very crotchets that he speaks,
Note notes forsooth, and nothing.
Now divine air, now is his soul ravished, is it not strange that sheep guts should hale souls out of men's bodies? well, a horn for my money when ell's done.
Sigh no more Ladies, sigh no more,
Men were deceivers ever,
One foot in Sea and one on shore,
To one thing constant never,
Then sigh not so, but let them go,
And be you blithe and bones,
Converting all your sounds of woe,
Into hey nony nony.
Sing no more ditties, sing no more,
Of dumps so dull and heavy,
The fraud of men were ever so,
Since summer first was levy,
Then sigh not so, &amp;c.
By my troth a good song.
And an ill singer, my Lord.
Ha, no, no faith, thou sing well enough for a shift.
And he had been a dog that should have howl thus, they would have hanged him, and I pray God his bad voice bode no mischief, I had as lief have heard the night-rauen, come what plague could have come af∣la it.
Yea marry, dost thou hear Balthazar? I pray thee get vs some excellent music: for to morrow night we would have it at the Lady Heroes chamber window.
The best I can, my Lord.
Do so, farewell. Come hither Leonato, what was it you told me of to day, that your Niece Beatrice was in love with signior Benedict?
O I, stalk on, stalk on, the foul sits. I did no∣for think that Lady would have loved any man.
No nor I neither, but most wonderful, that she should so dote on Signior Benedict, whom she hath in all outward behaviours seemed ever to abhor.
Is it possible? sits the wind in that corner?
By my troth my Lord, I cannot tell what to think of it, but that she loves him with an enraged affe∣ction, it is past the infinite of thought.
May be she doth but counterfeit.
Faith like enough.
O God! counterfeit? there was never counter∣feit of passion, came so near the life of passion as she dis∣covers it.
Why what effects of passion shows she?
Bait the hook well, this fish will bite.
What effects my Lord? she will sit you, you heard my daughter tell you how.
She did indeed.
How, how I pray you? you amaze me, I would have thought her spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.
I would have sworn it had, my Lord, especially against Benedict.
I should think this a gull, but that the white-bearded fellow speaks it: knavery cannot sure hide himself in such reverence.
He hath tan the infection, hold it up.
Hath she made her affection known to Been∣dicke?
No, and swears she never will, that's her torment.
It is true indeed, so your daughter says: shall I, says she, that have so oft encountered him with scorn, write to him that I love him?
This says she now when she is beginning to write to him, for she'll be up twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her smock, till she have writ a sheet of paper: my daughter tells vs all.
Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a pretty jest your daughter told vs of.
O when she had writ it, &amp; was reading it over, she found Benedict and Beatrice between the sheet.
That.
O she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence, raild at her self, that she should be so immodest to write, to one that she knew would flout her: I measure him, says she, by my own spirit, for I should flout him if hee writ to me, yea though I love him, I should.
Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs, beats her heart, tears her hair, prays, curses, O sweet Benedict, God give me patience.
She doth indeed, my daughter says so, and the ecstasy hath so much overborne her, that my daughter is sometime afraid she will doe a desperate out-rage to her self, it is very true.
It were good that Benedict knew of it by some other, if she will not discover it.
To what end? he would but make a sport of it, and torment the poor Lady worse.
And he should, it were an alms to hang him, shoe's an excellent sweet Lady, and (out of all suspicion,) she is virtuous.
And she is exceeding wise.
In every thing, but in loving Benedict.
O my Lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body, we have ten proofs to one, that blood hath the victory, I am sorry for her, as I have just cause, being her Uncle, and her Guardian.
I would she had bestowed this dotage on me, I would have daft all other respects, and made her half my self: I pray you tell Benedict of it, and hear what he will say.
Were it good think you?
Hero thinks surely she will die, for she says she will die, if hee love her not, and she will die ere she make her love known, and she will die if hee woo her, rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed crossenesse.
She doth well, if she should make tender of her
love, it is very possible he will scorn it, for the man (as you know all) hath a contemptible spirit.
He is a very proper man.
He hath indeed a good outward happiness.
Before God, and in my mind very wise.
He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.
And I take him to be valiant.
As Hector, I assure you, and in the managing of quarrels you may see hee is wise, for either hee avoids them with great discretion, or undertakes them with a Christian-like fear.
If hee doe fear God, a must necessarily keep peace, if hee break the peace, hee ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.
And so will he doe, for the man doth fear God, howsoever it seems not in him, by some large jests hee will make: well, I am sorry for your niece, shall we go see Benedict, and tell him of her love,
Never tell him, my Lord, let her wear it out with good counsel.
Nay that's impossible, she may wear her heart out first.
Well, we will hear further of it by your daugh∣la, let it cool the while, I love Benedict well, and I could wish he would modestly examine himself, to see how much he is unworthy to have so good a Lady.
My Lord, will you walk? dinner is ready.
If he do not dote on her upon this, I will never trust my expectation.
Let there be the same Net spread for her, and that must your daughter and her gentlewoman carry: the sport will be, when they hold one an opinion of ano∣theirs dotage, and no such matter, that's the Scene that I would see, which will be merely a dumb show: let vs send her to call him into dinner.
This can be no trick, the conference was sadly borne, they have the truth of this from Hero, they seem to pity the Lady: it seems her affections have the full bent: love me? why it must be requited: I hear how I am censured, they say I will bear my self proudly, if I perceive the love come from her: they say too, that she will rather die than give any sign of affection: I did no∣for think to marry, I must not seem proud, happy are they that hear their detractions, and can put them to mending: they say the Lady is fair, it is a truth, I can bear them witness: and virtuous, tic so, I cannot re∣prove it, and wise, but for loving me, by my troth it is no addition to her wit, nor no great argument of her folly; for I will be horribly in love with her, I may chance have some odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me, because I have railed so long against marriage: but doth not the appetite alter? a man loves the meat in his youth, that he cannot endure in his age. Shall quips and sentences, and these paper bullets of the brain awe a man from the career of his humour? No, the world must be peopled. When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not think I should live till I were married, here comes Beatrice: by this day, shoe's a fair Lady, I doe spy some marks of love in her.
Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.
Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.
I took no more pains for those thanks, then you take pains to thank me, if it had been painful, I would not have come.
You take pleasure then in the message.
Yea just so much as you may take upon a knives point, and choke a daw withal: you have no stomach signior, fare you well.
Ha, against my will I am sent to bid you come into dinner: there's a double meaning in that: I took no more pains for those thanks then you took pains to thank me, that's as much as to say, any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks: if I do not take pity of her I am a villain, if I doe not love her I am a Jew, I will go get her picture.
Good Margaret run thee to the parlour,
There shalt thou find my Cousin Beatrice,
Proposing with the Prince and Claudio,
Whisper her ear, and tell her I and Vrsula,
Walk in the Orchard, and our whole discourse
Is all of her, say that thou ouer-heardst vs,
And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
Where hony-suckles ripened by the sun,
Forbid the sun to enter: like favourites,
Made proud by Princes, that advance their pride,
Against that power that bred it, there will she hide her,
To listen our purpose, this is thy office,
Bear thee well in it, and leave vs alone.
Isle make her come I warrant you presently.
Now Vrsula, when Beatrice doth come,
As we do trace this alley up and down,
Our talk must only be of Benedict,
When I doe name him, let it be thy part,
To praise him more then ever man did merit,
My talk to thee must be how Benedict
Is sick in love with Beatrice: of this matter,
Is little Cupids crasty arrow made,
That only wounds by heare-say: now begin,
For look where Beatrice like a Lapwing runs
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden ores the silver stream,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait:
So angle we for Beatrice, who even now,
Is couched in the woodbine coverture,
Fear you not my part of the Dialogue.
Then go we near her that her ear loose nothing,
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it:
No truly Vrsula, she is too disdainful,
I know her spirits are as coy and wilde,
As Haggerds of the rock.
But are you sure,
That Benedict loves Beatrice so entirely?
So says the Prince, and my new trothed Lord.
And did they bid you tell her of it, Madam?
They did entreat me to acquaint her of it,
But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedict,
To wish him wrestle with affection,
And never to let Beatrice know of it.
Why did you so, doth not the Gentleman
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed,
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?
O God of love! I know he doth deserve,
As much as may be yielded to a man:
But Nature never framed a women's heart,
Of prouder stuff then that of Beatrice:
Disdain and Scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
Mis-prizing what they look on, and her wit
Values it self so highly, that to her
All matter else seems weak: she cannot love,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
She is so self endeared.
Sure I think so,
And therefore certainly it were not good
She knew his love, left she make sport at it.
Why you speak truth, I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured.
But she would spell him backward: if fair faced,
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister:
If black, why Nature drawing of an antique,
Made a foul blot: if tall, a lance ill headed:
If low, an agot very wildly cut:
If speaking, why a vane blown with all winds:
If silent, why a block moved with none.
So turns she every man the wrong side out,
And never gives to Truth and Virtue, that
Which simpleness and merit purchases.
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
No, not to be so odd, and from all fashions,
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable,
But who dare tell her so? if I should speak,
She would mock me into ayre, O she would laugh me
Out of my self, press me to death with wit,
Therefore let Benedict like covered fire,
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly:
It were a better death, to die with mocks,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.
Yet tell her of it, hear what she will say.
No, rather I will go to Benedict,
And counsel him to fight against his passion,
And truly Isle devise some honest slanders,
To stain my cousin with, one doth not know,
How much an ill word may impoison liking.
O doe not doe your cousin such a wrong,
She cannot be so much without true judgment,
Having so swift and excellent a wit
As she is prisde to have, as to refuse
So rare a Gentleman as signior Benedict.
He is the only man of Italy,
Always excepted, my dear Claudio.
I pray you be not angry with me, Madame,
Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedict,
For shape, for bearing argument and valour,
Goes foremost in report through Italy.
Indeed he hath an excellent good name.
His excellence did earn it ere he had it:
When are you married Madame?
Why every day to morrow, come go in,
Isle show thee some attires, and have thy counsel,
Which is the best to furnish me to morrow.
Shoe's tan I warrant you,
We have caught her Madame?
If it prove so, then loving goes by haps,
Some Cupped kills with arrows, some with traps.
What fire is in mine ears? can this be true?
Stand I condemned for pride and scorn so much?
Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride, adieu,
No glory lives behind the back of such.
And Benedict, love on, I will requite thee,
Taming my wilde heart to thy loving hand:
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
To bind our loves up in a holy band.
For others say thou dost deserve, and I
Believe it better then reportingly.
I doe but stay till your marriage be consume∣mate, and then go I toward Arragon.
Isle bring you thither my Lord, if you'll vouch∣safe me.
Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your marriage, as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it, I will only bee bold with Benedict for his company, for from the crown of his head, to the sole of his foot, he is all mirth, he hath twice or thrice cut Cupids bow-string, and the little hang-man dare not shoot at him, he hath a heart as sound as a bell, and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.
Gallants, I am not as I have bin.
So say I, methinkes you are sadder.
I hope he be in love.
Hang him truant, there's no true drop of blood in him to be truly touched with love, if he be sad, he wants money.
I have the tooth-ach.
Draw it.
Hang it.
You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.
What? sigh for the tooth-ach.
Where is but a humour or a worm.
Well, every one cannot master a grief, but hee that has it.
Yet say I, he is in love.
There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be a fancy that he hath to strange disguises, as to bee a Dutchman to day, a Frenchman to morrow: unless hee have a fancy to this foolery, as it appears hee hath, hee is no fool for fancy, as you would have it to appear he is.
If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing old signs, a brushes his hat a mornings, What should that bode?
Hath any man seen him at the Barbers?
No, but the Barbers man hath been seen with him, and the old ornament of his cheek hath already stuffed tennis balls.
Indeed he looks younger than hee did, by the loss of a beard.
Nay a rubs himself with Ciuit, can you smell him out by that?
That's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.
The greatest note of it is his melancholy.
And when was he vvont to wash his face?
Yea, or to paint himself? for the which I hear what they say of him.
Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is now crept into a lute-string, and now governed by stops.
Indeed that tells a heavy tale for him: conclude, he is in love.
Nay, but I know who loves him.
That would I know too, I warrant one that knows him not.
Yes, and his ill conditions, and in despite of all, dies for him.
She shall be buried with her face upwards.
Yet is this no charm for the tooth-ake, old sig∣nior, walk aside with me, I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you, which these hobby-horses must not hear.
For my life to break with him about Beatrice.
It is even so, Hero and Margaret have by this played their parts with Beatrice, and then the two Bears will not bite one another when they meet.
My Lord and brother, God save you.
Good den brother.
If your leisure served, I would speak with you.
In private?
If it please you, yet Count Claudio may hear, for what I would speak of, concerns him.
What's the matter?
Means your Lordship to be married to more∣row?
You know he does.
I know not that when he knows what I know.
If there be any impediment, I pray you disco∣for it.
You may think I love you not, let that appear hereafter, and aim better at me by that I now will ma∣nifest, for my brother (I think, he holds you well, and in dearness of heart) hath help to effect your ensuing marriage: surely suit ill spent, and labour ill bestowed.
Why, what's the matter?
I came hither to tell you, and circumstances shortened, (for she hath been too long a talking of) the Lady is disloyal.
Who Hero?
Even she, Leonatoes Hero, your Hero, every mans Hero.
Disloyal?
The word is too good to paint out her wicked∣ness, I could say she were worse, think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to it: wonder not till further war∣rant: go but with me to night, you shall see her cham∣ber window entered, even the night before her wedding day, if you love her, then to morrow wed her: But it would better fit your honour to change your mind.
May this be so?
I will not think it.
If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you know: if you will follow me, I will show you enough, and when you have seen more, &amp; heard more, proceed accordingly.
If I see any thing to night, why I should not marry her to morrow in the congregation, where I should wed, there will I shame her.
And as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with thee to disgrace her.
I will disparage her no farther, till you are my witnesses, bear it coldly but till night, and let the issue show it self.
O day untowardly turned!
O mischief strangely thwarting!
O plague right well prevented! so will you say, when you have seen the sequel.
Are you good men and true?
Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation body and soul.
Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they should have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the Princes watch.
Well, give them their charge, neighbour Dogbery.
First, who think you the most desartlesse man to be Constable?
Hugh Ote-cake sir, or George Sea-coale, for they can write and read.
Come hither neighbour Sea-coale, God hath blessed you with a good name: to be a wel-fauoured man, is the gift of Fortune, but to write and read, comes by Nature.
Both which Master Constable
You have: I knew it would be your answer: well, for your favour sir, why give God thanks, &amp; make no boast of it, and for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no need of such vanity, you are thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the Constable of the watch: therefore bear you the lan∣thorne: this is your charge: You shall comprehend all vagrom men, you are to bid any man stand in the Prin∣ces name.
How if a will not stand?
Why then take no note of him, but let him go, and presently call the rest of the Watch together, and thank God you are rid of a knave.
If he will not stand when he is bidden, hee is none of the Princes subjects.
True, and they are to meddle with none but the Princes subjects: you shall also make no noise in the streets: for, for the Watch to babble and talk, is most tolerable, and not to be endured.
We will rather sleep than talk, wee know what belongs to a Watch.
Why you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for I cannot see how sleeping should offend: only have a care that your bills be not stolen: well, you are to call at all the Alehouses, and bid them that are drunk get them to bed.
How if they will not?
Why then let them alone till they are sober, if they make you not then the better answer, you may say, they are not the men you took them for.
Well sir.
If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your office, to be no true man▪ and for such kind of men, the less you meddle or make with them, why the more is for your honesty.
If wee know him to be a thief, shall wee not lay hands on him.
Truly by your office you may, but I think they that touch pitch will be defiled: the most peaceable way for you, if you doe take a thief, is, to let him show him∣self what he is, and steal out of your company.
You have bin always called a merciful mā partner.
Truly I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who hath any honesty in him.
If you hear a child cry in the night you must call to the nurse, and bid her still it.
How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear vs?
Why then depart in peace, and let the child wake her with crying, for the ewe that will not hear her Lamb when it baes, will never answer a calfe when he bleats.
It is very true.
This is the end of the charge: you constable are to present the Princes own person, if you meet the Prince in the night, you may stay him.
Nay byr'lady that I think a cannot.
Five shillings to one on it with any man that knows the Statues, he may stay him, marry not with∣out the prince be willing, for indeed the watch ought to offend no man, and it is an offence to stay a man against his will.
Byr'lady I think it be so.
Ha, ah ha, well masters good night, and there be any matter of weight chances, call up me, keep your fellows counsels, and your own, and good night, come neighbour.
Well masters, we hear our charge, let vs go sit here upon the Church bench till two, and then all to bed.
One word more, honest neighbours. I pray you watch about signior Leonatoes door, for the wedding be∣ing there to morrow, there is a great coil to night, adieu, be vigitant I beseech you.
What, Conrad?
Peace, stir not.
Conrad I say.
Here man, I am at thy elbow.
Mas and my elbow itched, I thought there would a scab follow.
I will owe thee an answer▪ for that, and now forward with thy tale.
Stand thee close then under this penthouse, for it drizzles rain, and I will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.
Some treason masters, yet stand close.
Therefore know, I have earned of Don Iohn a thousand Ducats.
Is it possible that any villainy should be so dear?
Thou should rather ask if it were possible a∣no villainy should be so rich? for when rich villains have need of poor ones, poor ones may make what price they will.
I wonder at it.
That shows thou art vnconfirm'd, thou know that the fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is no∣thing to a man.
Yes, it is apparel.
I mean the fashion.
Yes the fashion is the fashion.
Tush, I may as well say the foole's the fool, but see thou not what a deformed thief this fashion is?
I know that deformed, a has bin a vile thief, this vii. years, a goes up and down like a gentle man: I remember his name.
Did thou not hear some body?
No, it was the vain on the house.
See thou not (I say) what a deformed thief this fashion is, how giddily a turns about all the Hot-blouds, between fourteen &amp; five &amp; thirty, sometimes fashioning them like Pharaoes soldiers in the rechie painting, sometime like god Bells priests in the old Church window, sometime like the shaven Hercules in the smirched worm eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as massy as his club.
All this I see, and see that the fashion wears out more apparel then the man; but art not thou thy self giddy with the fashion too that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion?
Not so neither, but know that I have to night wooed Margaret the Lady Heroes gentle-woman, by the name of Hero, she leanes me out at her mistress chamber-vvindow, bids me a thousand times good night: I tell this tale wildly. I should first tell thee how the Prince Claudio and my Master planted, and placed, and possessed by my Master Don Iohn, saw a far off in the Orchard this amiable encounter.
And thought thy Margaret was Hero?
Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio, but the devil my Master knew she was Margaret and partly by his oaths, which first possessed them, partly by the dark night which did deceive them, but chiefly, by my villa∣no, which did confirm any slander that Don Iohn had made, away went Claudio enraged, swore hee would meet her as he was appointed next morning at the Tem∣ple, and there, before the whole congregation shame her with what he saw o'er night, and send her home again without a husband.
We charge you in the Princes name stand.
Call up the right master Constable, we have here recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery, that ever was known in the Common-wealth.
And one Deformed is one of them, I know him, a vveares a locke.
Mast• masters.
Your be made bring deformed forth I war∣rant you,
Masters, never speak, we charge you, let vs o∣bay you to go with vs.
We are like to prove a goodly commodity, be∣ing taken up of these men's bills.
A commodity in question I warrant you, come vveele obey you.
Good Vrsula wake my cousin Beatrice, and de∣sire her to rise.
I will Lady.
And bid her come hither.
Well.
Troth I think your other rebato were better.
No pray thee good Meg, Isle vveare this.
By my troth's not so good, and I warrant your cousin will say so.
My cosin's a fool, and thou art another, isle vveare none but this.
I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a thought browner: and your gown's a most rare fashion in faith, I saw the Duchess of Millaines gown that they praise so.
O that exceeds they say.
By my troth's but a night-gowne in respect of yours, cloth a gold and cuts and laced with silver, set with pearls, down sleeves, side sleeves, and skirts, round un∣derborn with a bluish tinsel, but for a fine quaint grace∣full and excellent fashion, yours is worth ten on it.
God give me joy to wear it, for my heart is exceeding heavy.
Twill be heavier soon, by the weight of a man.
Fie upon thee, art not ashamed?
Of what Lady? of speaking honourably? is not marriage honourable in a beggar? is not your Lord honourable without marriage? I think you would have me say, saving your reverence a husband: and bad thin∣king doe not wrest true speaking, Isle offend no body, is there any harm in the heavier for a husband? none I think, and it be the right husband, and the right wife, otherwise it is light and not heavy, ask my Lady Beatrice else, here she comes.
Good morrow Cos.
Good morrow sweet Hero.
Why how now? do you speak in the sick tune?
I am out of all other tune, me thinks.
Claps into Light a love, (that goes without a burden,) do you sing it and Isle dance it.
Ye Light aloe with your heals, then if your husband have stables enough, you'll look he shall lack no barnes.
O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heals.
It is almost five a clock cousin, it is time you were ready, by my troth I am exceeding ill, hey ho.
For a hake, a horse, or a husband?
For the letter that begins them all, H.
Well, and you be not turned Turk, there's no more sailing by the star.
What means the fool trow?
Nothing I, but God send every one rheir harts desire.
These gloves the Count sent me, they are an excellent perfume.
I am stuffed cousin, I cannot smell.
A maid and stuffed! there's goodly catching of cold.
O God help me, God help me, how long have you professed apprehension?
Ever since you left it, doth not my wit become me rarely?
It is not seen enough, you should wear it in your cap, by my troth I am sick.
Get you some of this distilled carduus benedictus and lay it to your heart, it is the only thing for a qualm.
There thou prickst her with a thissell.
Benedictus, why benedictus? you have some mo∣rall in this benedictus.
Moral? no by my troth, I have no moral mea∣ning, I meant plain holy thissell, you may think per∣chance that I think you are in love, nay byr'lady I am not such a fool to think what I list, nor I list not to think what I can, nor indeed I cannot think, if I would think my hart out of thinking, that you are in love, or that you will be in love, or that you can be in love: yet Benedict was such another, and now is he become a man, he swore hee would never marry, and yet now in despite of his heart he eats his meat without grudging, and how you may be converted I know not, but me thinks you look with your eyes as other women doe.
What pace is this that thy tongue keeps.
Not a false gallop.
Madam, withdraw, the Prince, the Count, sig∣nior Benedict, Don Iohn, and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to Church.
Help to dress me good cos, good Meg, good Vrsula.
What would you with me, honest neigh∣bore?
Mary sir I would have some confidence with you, that discerns you nearly.
Brief I pray you, for you see it is a busy time with me.
Mary this it is sir.
Yes in truth it is sir.
What is it my good friends?
Goodman Verges sir speaks a little of the matter, an old man sir, and his wits are not so blunt, as God help I would desire they were, but infaith honest as the skin between his brows.
Yes I thank God, I am as honest as any man li∣uing, that is an old man, and no honester then I.
Comparisons are odorous, palabras, neigh∣bore Verges.
Neighbours, you are tedious.
It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor Dukes officers, but truly for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a King I could find in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.
All thy tediousness on me, ah?
Yea, and it were a thousand times more than it is, for I hear as good exclamation on your Worcester∣ship as of any man in the City, and though I bee but a poor man, I am glad to hear it.
And so am I.
I would fine know what you have to say.
Marry sir our watch to night, excepting your worships presence, have tan a couple of as arrant knaves as any in Messina.
A good old man sir, hee will be talking as they say, when the age is in the wit is out, God help vs, it is a world to see: well said in faith neighbour Verges, well, God's a good man, and two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind, an honest soul in faith sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke bread, but God is to bee worcester∣shipped, all men are not alike, alas good neighbour.
Indeed neighbour he comes too short of you.
Gifts that God gives.
I must leave you.
One word sir, our watch sir have indeed comprehended two aspitious persons, &amp; we would have them this morning examined before your worship.
Take their examination your self, and bring it me, I am now in great haste, as may appear unto you.
It shall be suffigance.
Drink some wine ere you go: fare you well.
My Lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband.
Isle wait upon them, I am ready.
Go good partner, go get you to Francis Sea-coale, bid him bring his pen and inkehorne to the Gaol: we are now to examine those men.
And we must doe it wisely.
Wee will spare for no wit I warrant you:
heere's that shall drive some of them to a non-come, on∣lie get the learned writer to set down our excommuni∣cation, and meet me at the Jail.
Come Friar Francis, be brief, only to the plain form of marriage, and you shall recount their par∣ticular duties afterwards.
You come hither, my Lord, to marry this Lady.
No.
To be married to her: Friar, you come to mar∣rye her.
Lady, you come hither to be married to this Count.
I doe.
If either of you know any inward impediment why you should not be conjoined, I charge you on your souls to utter it.
Know you any, Hero?
None my Lord.
Know you any, Count?
I dare make his answer, None.
O what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do!
How now! interiections? why then, some be of laughing, as ha, ha, he.
Stand thee by Friar, father, by your leave,
Will you with free and unconstrained soul
Give me this maid your daughter?
As freely son as God did give her me.
And what have I to give you back, whose worth
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?
Nothing, unless you render her again.
Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness:
There Leonato, take her back again,
Give not this rotten Orange to your friend,
Shoe's but the sign and semblance of her honour:
Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
O what authority and show of truth
Can cunning sin cover it self withal!
Comes not that blood, as modest evidence,
To witness simple Virtue? would you not swear
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
By these exterior shows? But she is none:
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed:
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.
What doe you mean, my Lord?
Not to be married,
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.
Dear my Lord, if you in your own proof,
Have vanquished the resistance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginity.
I know what you would say: if I have known her,
You will say, she did embrace me as a husband,
And so extenuate the forehand sin: No Leonato,
I never tempted her with word too large,
But as a brother to his sister, showed
Bashful sincerity and comely love.
And seemed I ever otherwise to you?
Out on thee seeming, I will write against it,
You seem to me as Diane in her Orb,
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown:
But you are more intemperate in your blood,
Than Venus, or those pampered animals,
That rage in savage sensuality.
Is my Lord well, that he doth speak so wide?
Sweet Prince, why speak not you?
What should I speak?
I stand dishonoured that have gone about,
To link my dear friend to a common stale.
Are these things spoken, or doe I but dream?
Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.
This looks not like a nuptial.
True, O God!
Leonato, stand I here?
Is this the Prince? is this the Princes brother?
Is this face Heroes? are our eyes our own?
All this is so, but what of this my Lord?
Let me but move one question to your daugh∣la,
And by that fatherly and kindly power,
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.
I charge thee doe, as thou art my child.
O God defend me how am I beset,
What kind of catechising call you this?
To make you answer truly to your name.
Is it not Hero? who can blot that name
With any just reproach?
Marry that can Hero,
Hero it self can blot out Heroes virtue.
What man was he, talked with you yesternight,
Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
Now if you are a maid, answer to this.
I talked with no man at that hour my Lord.
Why then you are no maiden. Leonato,
I am sorry you must hear: upon mine honour,
My self, my brother, and this grieved Count
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night,
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window,
Who hath indeed most like a liberal villain,
Confessed the vile encounters they have had
A thousand times in secret.
Fie, fie, they are not to be named my Lord,
Not to be spoken of,
There is not chastity enough in language,
Without offence to utter them: thus pretty Lady
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.
O Hero! what a Hero had thou been
If half thy outward graces had been placed
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart?
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair, farewell
Thou pure impiety, and impious purity,
For thee Isle locke up all the gates of Love,
And on my eie-lids shall Conjecture hang,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
And never shall it more be gracious.
Hath no mans dagger here a point for me?
Why how now cousin, wherefore sink you down?
Come, let vs go: these things come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up.
How doth the Lady?
Dead I think, help uncle,
Hero, why Hero, Uncle, Signor Benedict, Friar.
O Fate! take not away thy heavy hand,
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
That may be wished for.
How now cousin Hero?
Have comfort Lady.
Dost thou look up?
Yea, wherefore should she not?
Wherefore? Why doth not every earthly thing
Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
The story that is printed in her blood?
Do not live Hero, do not op thine eyes:
For did I think thou would not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger then thy shames,
My self would on the reward of reproaches
Strike at thy life. Grieved I, I had but one?
Chid I, for that at frugal Natures frame?
O one too much by thee: why had I one?
Why ever was it thou lovely in my eyes?
Why had I not with charitable hand
Took up a beggars issue at my gates,
Who smeared thus, and mired with infamy,
I might have said, no part of it is mine:
This shame derives it self from unknown loins,
But mine, and mine I loved, and mine I praised,
And mine that I was proud on mine so much,
That I my self, was to my self not mine:
Valuing of her, why she, O she is fallen
Into a pit of Ink, that the wide sea
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again,
And salt too little, which may season give
To her foul tainted flesh.
Sir, sir, be patient: for my part, I am so attired in wonder, I know not what to say.
O on my soul my cousin is belied.
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
No truly: not although until last night,
I have this tweluemonth bin her bedfellow.
Confirmed, confirmed, O that is stronger made
Which was before barred up with ribs of iron.
Would the Princes lie, and Claudio lie,
Who loved her so, that speaking of her foulness,
Washed it with tears? Hence from her, let her die.
Hear me a little, for I have only been silent so long, and given way unto this course of fortune, by no∣ting of the Lady, I have marked.
A thousand blushing apparitions,
To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames,
In Angel whiteness bear away those blushes,
And in her eye there hath appeared a fire
To burn the errors that these Princes hold
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool,
Trust not my reading, nor my observations,
Which with experimental seal doth warrant
The tenure of my book: trust not my age,
My reverence, calling, nor divinity,
If this sweet Lady lye not guiltless here,
Under some biting error.
Friar, it cannot be:
Thou see that all the Grace that she hath left,
Is, that she will not add to her damnation,
A sin of perjury, she not denies it:
Why seek thou then to cover with excuse,
That which appears in proper nakedness?
Lady, what man is he you are accused of?
They know that do accuse me, I know none:
If I know more of any man alive
Then that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
Let all my sins lack mercy. O my Father,
Prove you that any man with me conversed,
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
Maintained the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death.
There is some strange misprision in the Princes.
Two of them have the very bent of honour,
And if their wisdoms be misled in this:
The practise of it lives in Iohn the bastard,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.
I know not: if they speak but truth of her,
These hands shall tear her: If they wrong her honour,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
Nor age so eat up my invention,
Nor Fortune made such havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life rest me so much of friends,
But they shall find, awaked in such a kind,
Both strength of limb, and policy of mind,
Ability in means, and choice of friends,
To quit me of them thoroughly.
Pause awhile:
And let my counsel sway you in this case,
Your daughter here the Princess (left for dead)
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it, that she is dead indeed:
Maintain a mourning ostentation,
And on your Families old monument,
Hang mournful Epitaphs, and do all rites,
That appertain unto a burial.
What shall become of this? What will this do?
Marry this well carried, shall on her behalf,
Change slander to remorse, that is some good,
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
But on this travail look for greater birth:
She dying, as it must be so maintained,
Upon the instant that she was accused,
Shall be lamented, pitied, and excused
Of every hearer: for it so false out,
That what we have, we prize not to the worth,
Whiles we enjoy it; but being lacked and lost,
Why then we rack the value, then we find
The virtue that possession would not show vs
Whiles it was ours, so will it fare with Claudio:
When he shall hear she dyed upon his words,
The Idea of her life shall sweetly creep
Into his study of imagination.
And every lovely Organ of her life,
Shall come apparelled in more precious habit:
More moving delicate, and full of life,
Into the eye and prospect of his soul
Then when she lived indeed: then shall he morn,
If ever Love had interest in his Liver,
And wish he had not so accused her:
No, though he thought his accusation true:
Let this be so, and doubt not but success
Will fashion the event in better shape,
Then I can lay it down in likelihood.
But if all aim but this be leveled false,
The supposition of the Ladies death,
Will quench the wonder of her infamy.
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
As best befits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusiue and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds and injuries.
Signior Leonato, let the Friar advise you,
And though you know my inwardnesse and love
Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio.
Yet, by mine honour, I will deal in this▪
As secretly and justly, as your soul
Should with your body.
Being that I flow in grief,
The smallest twine may lead me.
It is well consented, presently away,
For to strange sores, strangely they strain the cure,
Come Lady, die to live, this wedding day
Perhaps is but prolonged, have patience &amp; endure.
Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?
Yea, and I will weep a while longer.
I will not desire that.
You have no reason, I doe it freely.
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right her!
Is there any way to show such friendship?
A very even way, but no such friend.
May a man doe it?
It is a mans office, but not yours.
I doe love nothing in the world so well as you, is not that strange?
As strange as the thing I know not, it were as possible for me to say, I loved nothing so well as you, but believe me not, and yet I lie not, I confess nothing, nor I deny nothing, I am sorry for my cousin.
By my sword Beatrice thou love me.
Doe not swear by it and eat it.
I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make him eat it that says I love not you.
Will you not eat your word?
With no sauce that can be devised to it, I pro∣test I love thee.
Why then God forgive me.
What offence sweet Beatrice?
You have stayed me in a happy hour; I was a∣bout to protest I loved you.
And doe it with all thy heart.
I love you with so much of my heart, that none is left to protest.
Come, bid me doe any thing for thee.
Kill Claudio.
Ha, not for the wide world.
You kill me to deny, farewell.
Tarry sweet Beatrice.
I am gone, though I am here, there is no love in you, nay I pray you let me go.
Beatrice.
Infaith I will go.
We'll be friends first.
You dare easier be friends with me, than fight with mine enemy.
Is Claudio thine enemy?
Is a not approved in the height a villain, that hath slandered, scorned, dishonoured my kinswoman? O that I were a man! what, bear her in hand until they come to take hands, and then with public accusation uncovered slander, vnmittigated rancour? O God that I were a man! I would eat his heart in the market-place.
Hear me Beatrice.
Talk with a man out at a window, a proper saying.
Nay but Beatrice.
Sweet Hero, she is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.
Beat?
Princes and Counties! surely a Princely testi∣money, a goodly Count, Comfect, a sweet Gallant sure∣lie, O that I were a man for his sake! or that I had any friend would be a man for my sake! But manhood is mel∣ted into curses, valour into complement, and men are only turned into tongue, and trim ones too: he is now as valiant as Hercules, that only tells a lie, and swears it: I cannot be a man with wishing, therefore I will die a wo∣man with grieving.
Tarry good Beatrice, by this hand I love thee.
Use it for my love some other way then sue∣ring by it.
Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged Hero?
Yea, as sure as I have a thought, or a soul.
Enough, I am engagde, I will challenge him, I will kiss your hand, and so leave you: by this hand Clau∣dio shall render me a dear account: as you hear of me, so think of me: go comfort your cousin, I must say she is dead, and so farewell.
Is our whole dissembly appeared?
O a stool and a cushion for the Sexton.
Which be the malefactors?
Marry that am I, and my partner.
Nay that's certain, wee have the exhibition to examine.
But which are the offenders that are to be ex∣amened, let them come before master Constable.
Yea marry, let them come before me, what is your name, friend?
Borachio.
Pray write down Borachio. Yours sir.
I am a Gentleman sir, and my name is Conrad.
Write down Master gentleman Conrad•: my∣sters, doe you serve God: masters, it is proved already that you are little better than false knaves, and it will go near to be thought so shortly, how answer you for your selves?
Marry sir, we say we are none.
A marvelous witty fellow I assure you, but I will go about with him: come you hither sir, a word in your ear sir, I say to you, it is thought you are false knaves.
Sir, I say to you, we are none.
Well, stand aside, before God they are both in a tale: have you writ down that they are none?
Master Constable, you go not the way to ex∣amin, you must call forth the watch that are their ac∣cusers.
Yea marry, that's the oftest way, let the watch come forth: masters, I charge you in the Princes name, accuse these men.
This man said sir, that Don Iohn the Princes brother was a villain.
Write down, Prince Iohn a villain: why this is flat perjury, to call a Princes brother villain.
Master Constable.
Pray thee fellow peace, I do not like thy look I promise thee.
What heard you him say else?
Mary that he had received a thousand Du∣kates of Don Iohn, for accusing the Lady Hero wrong∣fully.
Flat Burglary as ever was committed.
Yea by the mass that it is.
What else fellow?
And that Count Claudio did mean upon his words, to disgrace Hero before the whole assembly, and not marry her.
O villain! thou wilt be condemned into ever∣lasting redemption for this.
What else?
This is all.
And this is more masters then you can deny, Prince Iohn is this morning secretly stolen away: Hero was in this manner accused, in this very manner refused, and upon the grief of this suddenly died: Master Con∣stable, let these men be bound, and brought to Leonato, I will go before, and show him their examination.
Come, let them be opinioned.
Let them be in the hands of Coxcomb.
Gods my life, whore's the Sexton? let him write down the Princes Officer Coxcomb: come, bind them thou naughty varlet.
Away, you are an ass, you are an ass.
Dost thou not suspect my place? dost thou not suspect my years? O that hee were here to write me down an ass! but masters, remember that I am an ass: though it be not written down, yet forget not yt I am an ass: No thou villain, you art full of piety as shall be proved upon thee by good witness, I am a wise fellow, and which is more, an officer, and which is more, a houshoul∣der, and which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any in Messina, and one that knows the Law, go to, &amp; a rich fellow enough, go to, and a fellow that hath had losses, and one that hath two gowns, and every thing hand∣some about him: bring him away: O that I had been writ down an ass!
If you go on thus, you will kill your self,
And it is not wisdom thus to second grief,
Against your self.
I pray thee cease thy counsel,
Which falls into mine ears as profitlesse,
As water in a sieve: give not me counsel,
Nor let no comfort delight mine ear,
But such a one whose wrongs doth suit with mine.
Bring me a father that so loved his child,
Whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine,
And bid him speak of patience,
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine,
And let it answer every strain for strain,
As thus for thus, and such a grief for such,
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form:
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
And sorrow, wag, cry hem, when he should groan,
Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk,
With candle-wasters: bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience:
But there is no such man for brother, men
Can counsel, and speak comfort to that grief,
Which they themselves not feel, but to sting it,
Their counsel turns to passion, which before,
Would give preceptiall medicine to rage,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with ayre, and agony with words,
No, no, it is all men's office, to speak patience
To those that wring under the load of sorrow:
But no mans virtue nor sufficiency
To be so moral, when he shall endure
The like himself: therefore give me no counsel,
My griefs cry louder then advertisement.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
I pray thee peace, I will be flesh and blood,
For there was never yet Philosopher,
That could endure the tooth-ake patiently,
How ever they have writ the stile of gods,
And made a push at chance and sufferance.
Yet bend not all the harm upon your self,
Make those that doe offend you, suffer too.
There thou speak reason, nay I will doe so,
My soul doth tell me, Hero is belied,
And that shall Claudio know, so shall the Prince,
And all of them that thus dishonour her.
Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.
Good den, good den.
Good day to both of you.
Hear you my Lords?
We have some haste Leonato.
Some haste my Lord! well, fareyouwel my Lord,
Are you so hasty now? well, all is one.
Nay, do not quarrel with vs, good old man.
If he could rite himself with quarrelling,
Some of vs would lie low.
Who wrongs him?
Marry you dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou:
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword,
I fear thee not.
Marry beshrew my hand,
If it should give your age such cause of fear,
Infaith my hand meant nothing to my sword.
Tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me,
I speak not like a do•art, nor a fool,
As under privilege of age to brag,
What I have done being young, or what would doe,
Were I not old, know Claudio to thy head,
Thou hast so wronged my innocent child and me,
That I am forced to lay my reverence by,
And with grey hairs and bruise of many days,
Doe challenge thee to trial of a man,
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child.
Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
And she lies buried with her ancestors:
O in a tomb where never scandal slept,
Save this of hers, framed by thy villainy.
My villainy?
Thine Claudio, thine I say.
You say not right old man.
My Lord, my Lord,
Isle prove it on his body if he dare,
Despite his nice fence, and his active practise,
His May of youth, and bloom of lustihood.
Away, I will not have to do with you.
Can thou so doff me? thou hast kilt my child,
If thou kilst me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
He shall kill two of vs, and men indeed,
But that's no matter, let him kill one first:
Win me and wear me, let him answer me,
Come follow me boy, come sir boy, come follow me
Sir boy, isle whip you from your foyning fence,
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
Brother.
Content your self, God knows I loved my niece,
And she is dead, slandered to death by villains,
That dare as well answer a man indeed,
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue.
Boys, apes, braggarts, Jacks, milke-sops.
Brother Anthony.
Hold you content, what man? I know them, yea
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,
Scambling, out-facing, fashion-monging boys,
That lye, and cog, and flout, deprave, and slander,
Go antiquely, and show outward hideousness,
And speak of half a dozen dangerous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst.
And this is all.
But brother Anthony.
Come, it is no matter,
Do not you meddle, let me deal in this.
Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience
My heart is sorry for your daughters death:
But on my honour she was charged with nothing
But what was true, and very full of proof.
My Lord, my Lord.
I will not hear you.
No come brother, away, I will be heard.
And shall, or some of vs will smart for it.
See, see, here comes the man we went to seek.
Now signior, what news?
Good day my Lord.
Welcome signior, you are almost come to part almost a fray.
Wee had liked to have had our two noses snapped off with two old men without teeth.
Leonato and his brother, what think thou? had wee fought, I doubt we should have been too young for them.
In a false quarrel there is no true valour, I came to seek you both.
We have been up and down to seek thee, for we are high proof melancholy, and would fine have it beaten away, wilt thou use thy wit?
It is in my scabbard, shall I draw it?
Doest thou wear thy wit by thy side?
Never any did so, though very many have been beside their wit, I will bid thee draw, as we do the min∣strels, draw to pleasure vs.
As I am an honest man he looks pale, art thou sick, or angry?
What, courage man: what though care killed a cat, thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care.
Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, and you charge it against me, I pray you choose another sub∣jest.
Nay then give him another staff, this last was broke cross.
By this light, he changes more and more, I think he be angry indeed.
If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.
Shall I speak a word in your ear?
God bless me from a challenge.
You are a villain, I jest not, I will make it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare: do me right, or I will protest your cowardice: you have killed a sweet Lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you, let me hear from you.
Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.
What, a feast, a feast?
I faith I thank him, he hath bid me to a calves head and a Capon, the which if I doe not carve most cu∣riously, say my knife's nought, shall I not find a wood∣cock too?
Sir, your wit ambles well, it goes easily.
Isle tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the o∣there day: I said thou had a fine wit: true says she, a fine little one: no said I, a great wit: right says she, a great gross one: nay said I, a good wit: just said she, it hurts no body: nay said I, the gentleman is wise: certain said she, a wise gentleman: nay said I, he hath the tongues: that I believe said she, for hee swore a thing to me on monday night, which he forswore on tuesday morning: there's a double tongue, there's two tongues: thus did she an hour together trans-shape thy particular ver∣tues, yet at last she concluded with a sigh, thou wast the proprest man in Italy.
For the which she wept heartily, and said she cared not.
Yea that she did, but yet for all that, and if she did not hate him deadly, she would love him dearly, the old mans daughter told vs all.
All, all, and moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the garden.
But when shall we set the savage Bulls horns on the sensible Benedicts head?
Yea and text vnder-neath, here dwells Been∣dicke the married man.
Fare you well, Boy, you know my mind, I will leave you now to your gossep-like humour, you break jests as braggarts do their blades, which God be thank∣ed hurt not: my Lord, for your many courtesies I thank you, I must discontinue your company, your brother the Bastard is fled from Messina: you have among you, killed a sweet and innocent Lady: for my Lord Lack∣beard there, he and I shall meet, and till then peace be with him.
He is in earnest.
In most profound earnest, and Isle warrant you, for the love of Beatrice.
And hath challenged thee.
Most sincerely.
What a pretty thing man is, when he goes in his doublet and hose, and leaves off his wit.
He is then a Giant to an Ape, but then is an Ape a Doctor to such a man.
But soft you, let me be, pluck up my heart, and be sad, did he not say my brother was fled?
Come you sir, if justice cannot tame you, she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance, nay, and you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must be looked to.
How now, two of my brothers men bound? By∣rachio one.
Harken after their offence my Lord▪
Officers, what offence have these men done?
Marry sir, they have committed false report, moreover they have spoken untruths, secondarily they are slanders, sixth and lastly, they have belied a Lady, thirdly, they have verified unjust things, and to conclude they are lying knaves.
First I ask thee what they have done, thirdly I ask thee vvhat's their offence, sixth and lastly why they are committed, and to conclude, what you lay to their charge.
Rightly reasoned, and in his own division, and by my troth there's one meaning well suited.
Who have you offended masters, that you are thus bound to your answer? this learned Constable is too cunning to be understood, vvhat's your offence?
Sweet Prince, let me go no farther to mine an∣swear: do you hear me, and let this Count kill me: I have deceived even your very eyes: what your wise∣domes could not discover, these shallow fools have brought to light, who in the night overheard me con∣fizzing to this man, how Don Iohn your brother incensed me to slander the Lady Hero, how you were brought into the Orchard, and saw me court Margaret in Heroes garments, how you disgraced her when you should marry her: my villainy they have upon record, which I had rather seal with my death, then repeat over to my shame: the Lady is dead upon mine and my masters false accusation: and briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a villain.
Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
I have drunk poison whiles he uttered it.
But did my Brother set thee on to this?
Yea, and paid me richly for the practise of it.
He is composed and framed of treachery,
And fled he is upon this villainy.
Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appear
In the rare semblance that I loved it first.
Come, bring away the plaintiffs, by this time our Sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter: and masters, do not forget to specify when time &amp; place shall serve, that I am an Ass.
Here, here comes master Signior Leonato, and the Sexton too.
Which is the villain? let me see his eyes,
That when I note another man like him,
I may avoid him: which of these is he?
If you would know your wronger, look on me.
Art thou thou the slave that with thy breath hast kilt mine innocent child?
Yea, even I alone.
No, not so villain, thou belieft thy self,
Here stand a pair of honourable men,
A third is fled that had a hand in it:
I thank you Princes for my daughters death,
Record it with your high and worthy deeds,
It was bravely done, if you bethink you of it.
I know not how to pray your patience,
Yet I must speak, choose your revenge your self,
Impose me to what penance your invention
Can lay upon my sin, ye sinned I not,
But in mistaking.
By my soul nor I,
And yet to satisfy this good old man,
I would bend under any heavy vvaight,
That heel enjoin me to.
I cannot bid you bid my daughter live,
That were impossible, but I pray you both,
Possess the people in Messina here,
How innocent she died, and if your love
Can labour aught in sad invention,
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb,
And sing it to her bones, sing it to night:
To morrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son in law,
Be yet my Nephew: my brother hath a daughter,
Almost the copy of my child that's dead,
And she alone is heir to both of vs,
Give her the right you should have given her cousin,
And so dies my revenge.
O noble sir!
Your over kindness doth wring tears from me,
I do embrace your offer, and dispose
For henceforth of poor Claudio.
To morrow then I will expect your coming,
To night I take my leave, this naughty man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I believe was packed in all this wrong,
Hired to it by your brother.
No by my soul she was not,
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
But always hath bin just and virtuous,
In any thing that I do know by her.
Moreover sir, which indeed is not under white and black, this plaintiff here, the offender did call me ass, I beseech you let it be remembered in his punish∣meant, and also the watch heard them talk of one Defor∣med, they say he wears a key in his ear and a lock hang∣ing by it, and borrows money in Gods name, the which he hath used so long, and never paid, that now men grow hard-harted and will lend nothing for Gods sake: pray you examine him upon that point.
I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.
Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverend youth, and I praise God for you.
There's for thy pains.
God save the foundation.
Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.
I leave an arrant knave with your worship, which I beseech your worship to correct your self, for the example of others: God keep your worship, I wish your worship well, God restore you to health, I humbly give you leave to depart, and if a mer∣rye meeting may be wished, God prohibit it: come neighbour.
Until to morrow morning, Lords, farewell.
Farewell my Lords, we look for you to more∣row.
We will not fail.
To night isle morn with Hero:
Bring you these fellows on, weel talk with Margaret, how her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
Pray thee sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands, by helping me to the speech of Bea∣trice.
Will you then write me a Sonnet in praise of my beauty?
In so high a stile Margaret, that no man living shall come over it, for in most comely truth thou deser∣uest it.
To have no man come over me, why, shall I al∣ways keep below stairs?
Thy wit is as quick as the grey-hounds mouth, it catches.
And yours, as blunt as the Fencers foils, which hit, but hurt not.
A most manly wit Margaret, it will not hurt a woman: and so I pray thee call Beatrice, I give thee the bucklers.
Give vs the swords, wee have bucklers of our own.
If you use them Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a vice, and they are dangerous weapons for Maids.
Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.
And therefore will come. The God of love that sits aboue, and knows me, and knows me, how pitti∣full I deserve. I mean in singing, but in loving, Lean∣der the good swimmer, Trow•lous the first imploier of panders, and a whole book full of these quondam car∣pet-mongers, whose name yet run smoothly in the e∣uen rode of a blank verse, why they were never so true∣lie turned over and over as my poor self in love: mar∣rye I cannot show it rime, I have tried, I can find out no rime to Lady but baby, an innocent rime: for scorn, horn, a hard time: for school fool, a babbling time: very ominous endings, no, I was not borne under a ri∣ming Planet, for I cannot woo in festival terms:
sweet Beatrice would thou come when I called thee?
Yea Signior, and depart when you bid me.
O stay but till then.
Then, is spoken: fare you well now, and yet ere I go, let me go with that I came, which is, with know∣ing what hath past between you and Claudio.
Only foul words, and thereupon I will kiss thee.
Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul breath, and foul breath is noisome, there∣fore I will depart unkissed.
Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense, so forcible is thy wit, but I must tell thee plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either I must short∣lie hear from him, or I will subscribe him a coward, and I pray thee now tell me, for which of my bad parts did thou first fall in love with me?
For them all together, which maintained so politic a state of evil, that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them: but for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me?
Suffer love! a good epithet, I do suffer love in∣deed, for I love thee against my will.
In spite of your heart I think, alas poor heart, if you spite it for my sake, I will spite it for yours, for I will never love that which my friend hates.
Thou and I are too wise to woo peacea∣blie.
It appears not in this confession, there's not one wise man among twenty that will praise himself.
An old, an old instance Beatrice, that lived in the time of good neighbours, if a man doe not erect in this age his own tomb ere he dies, hee shall live no longer in monuments, then the Bells ring, &amp; the Widow weeps.
And how long is that think you?
Question, why an hour in clamour and a quar∣la in rheum, therefore is it most expedient for the wife, if Don worm (his conscience) find no impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet of his own virtues, as I am to my self so much for praising my self, who I my self will bear witness is praise worthy, and now tell me, how doth your cousin?
Very ill.
And how doe you?
Very ill too.
Serve God, love me, and mend, there will I leave you too, for here comes one in haste.
Madam, you must come to your Uncle, yon∣ders old coil at home, it is proved my Lady He∣to hath bin falsely accused, the Prince and Claudio mightily abused, and Don Iohn is the author of all, who is fled and gone: will you come presently?
Will you go hear this news Signior?
I will hue in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be bu∣ried in thy eyes: and moreover, I will go with thee to thy Uncles.
Is this the monument of Leonato?
It is my Lord.
Done to death by slanderous tongues,
Was the Hero that here lies:
Death in guerdon of her wrongs,
Gives her fame which never dies:
So the life that dyed with shame,
Lives in death with glorious fame.
Hang thou there upon the tomb,
Praising her when I am dombe.
Now music sound &amp; sing your solemn hymn
Pardon goddess of the night,
Those that slew thy virgin knight,
For the which with songs of woe,
Round about her tomb they go:
Midnight assist our moan, help vs to sigh and groan
Heavily, heavily.
Graves yawn and yield your dead,
Till death be uttered,
Heavenly, heavenly.
Now unto thy bones good night, yearly will I do this right.
Good morrow masters, put your Torches out,
The wolves have prayed, and look, the gentle day
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
Dapples the drowsy East with spots of grey:
Thanks to you all, and leave vs, fare you well.
Good morrow masters, each his several way.
Come let vs hence, and put on other weeds,
And then to Leonatoes we will go.
And Hymen now with luckier issue speeds,
Then this for whom we rendered up this woe.
Did I not tell you she was innocent?
So are the Prince and Claudio who accused her,
Upon the error that you heard debated:
But Margaret was in some fault for this,
Although against her will as it appears,
In the true course of all the question.
Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.
And so am I, being else by faith enforced
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
Well daughter, and you gentlewomen all,
Withdraw into a chamber by your selves,
And when I send for you, come hither masked:
The Prince and Claudio promised by this hour
To visit me, you know your office Brother,
You must be father to your brothers daughter,
And give her to young Claudio.
Which I will doe with confirmed countenance.
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.
To doe what Signior?
To bind me, or undo me, one of them:
Signior Leonato, truth it is good Signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favour.
That eye my daughter lent her, it is most true.
And I doe with an eye of love require her.
The sight whereof I think you had from me,
From Claudio, and the Prince, but what's your will?
Your answer sir is Enigmatical,
But for my will, my will is, your good will
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoined,
In the state of honourable marriage,
In which (good Friar) I shall desire your help.
My heart is with your liking.
And my help.
Good morrow to this fair assembly.
Good morrow Prince, good morrow Claudio:
We here attend you, are you yet determined,
To day to marry with my brothers daughter?
Isle hold my mind were she an Ethiope.
Call her forth brother, here is the Friar ready.
Good morrow Benedike, why what's the matter?
That you have such a February face,
So full of frost, of storm, and cloudiness.
I think he thinks upon the savage bull:
Tush, fear not man, we'll tip thy horns with gold,
And all Europe shall rejoice at thee,
As once Europe did at lusty Jove,
When he would play the noble beast in love.
Bull Jove sir, had an amiable low,
And some such strange bull leapt your fathers Cow,
A got a Calfe in that same noble seat,
Much like to you, for you have just his b•eat.
For this I owe you: here comes other recknings.
Which is the Lady I must seize upon?
This same is she, and I •o give you her.
Why thou she's mine, sweet let me see your face.
No that you shall not, till you take her hand,
Before this Friar, and swear to marry her.
Give me your hand before this holy Friar,
I am your husband if you like of me.
And when I lived I was your other wife,
And when you loved, you were my other husband.
Another Hero?
Nothing certain•.
One Hero died, but I doe live,
And surely as I live, I am a maid.
The former Hero, Hero that is dead.
She died my Lord, but whiles her slander lived.
All this amazement can I qualify,
When after that the holy rites are ended,
Isle tell you largely of fair Heroes death:
Mean time let wonder seem familiar,
And to the chapel let vs presently.
Soft and fair Friar, which is Beatrice?
I answer to that name, what is your will?
Doe not you love me?
Why no, no more then reason.
Why then your Uncle, and the Prince, &amp; Clau∣dio, have been deceived, they swore you did.
Doe not you love me?
Troth no, no more then reason.
Why then my Cousin Margaret and Ʋrsula
Are much deceived, for they did swear you did.
They swore you were almost sick for me.
They swore you were well-nigh dead for me.
Tic no matter, then you doe not love me?
No truly, but in friendly recompense.
Come Cousin, I am sure you love the gentlemā.
And Isle be sworn upon it, that he loves her,
For here is a paper written in his hand,
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
Fashioned to Beatrice.
And hears another,
Writ in my cousins hand, stolen from her pocket,
Containing her affection unto Benedict.
A miracle, here's our own hands against our hearts: come I will have thee, but by this light I take thee for pity.
I would not deny you, but by this good day, I yield upon great persuasion, &amp; partly to save your life, for I was told, you were in a consumption.
Peace I will stop your mouth.
How dost thou Benedict the married man?
Isle tell thee what Prince: a College of witte-crackers cannot flout me out of my humour, dost thou think I care for a Satire or an Epigram? no, if a man will be beaten with brains, a shall wear nothing handsome about him: in brief, since I do purpose to marry, I will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say a∣against it, and therefore never flout at me, for I have said against it: for man is a giddy thing, and this is my con∣clusion: for thy part Claudio, I did think to have beaten thee, but in that thou art like to be my kinsman, live un∣bruised, and love my cousin.
I had well hoped you would have denied Beatrice, yt I might have cudgeled thee out of thy single life, to make thee a double dealer, which out of questiō thou wilt be, if my Cousin do not look exceeding narrowly to thee.
Come, come, we are friends, let's have a dance ere we are married, that we may lighten our own hearts, and our wives heals.
We'll have dancing afterword.
First, of my word, therefore play music. Prince, thou art sad, get, thee a wife, get thee a wife, there is no staff more reverend then one tipped with horn.
My Lord, your brother Iohn is tan in flight,
And brought with armed men back to Messina.
Think not on him till to morrow, isle devise thee brave punishments for him: strike up Pipers.

Strew, Strew.
The Muskadine stays for the bride at Church,
The Priest and himens ceremonies tend
To make them man and wife.
By my maiden-head a joyful time, isle pave their
Way with flowers.
While I perfume.
Some say this widdow's rich.
I will not say as poor as Iob, but as bare as January, when the trees look like a girl, whose colour comes and goes as frost doos in the milk.
It was wont to be a rich widow and a poor knight, but now false, a knight rich and the widow poor.
How ever honour is most rich, no matter who is poor.
I would my fortune were no worse
Thine may be better.
So much if it be thy will, if ever knight were gul'd, be it in me, in me I pray.
What are the waits of London come?
Yes sir.
Play in their highest key then.
sound Hoboyes.
Make the Gods dance▪ cause Ioniall mirth
Music in heaven for this earths marriage
Is a triumphant concord to vs all,
To me tic seal•…d by promise for his daughter,
Who in our blood shall sympathise, says I,
She shall be ours, bedded, although some
Menace a riualship, yet the sure card
Gives the trick ours, and we shall win,
Since in my mother it doth first begin.
Good morrow sir.
A good one to thy self, to vs tic second,
A marriage sir?
I and a good one friend.
Because tic rich.
Good reach at stars, y'faith tic true.
In whom sit, if I may be bold.
A knight of More-clack to a London widow.
My burdened soul says I, a Knight of More∣clack to the widow Humil, just, tic she,
By this the blessing of the holy rights,
Relishes in them, they are married, at least
Fair for it, I must witness to it, fare-well.
How ignorance pleads nonage, in his eye
He knows me not, tic not the Lyons kind,
Whose nature challenges right property.
Of perfect being, if it were,
Humil would Humill know, that him begot,
To be what now he is married again,
And her first husband living, blame her not,
Tic my own project, thank my letters,
That falsifide our deaths black funeral,
Into her mornefull hearing, follow it,
Think on thy soul, divide that bitter band,
Knit by the closure of a mutual hand.
I rest ye sir.
At whose suit Wat?
At the bridegrooms, isle not a foot further till I have eased my shoulders.
No nor I, we are asses right, we carry pro∣uender, but are not the better for it.
As how?
Thou't not believe breads bread, till it be tasted, I say to thee, in this trunk is provender.
be an ass till thou prove it.
Here is money which will buy it.
O by a figure, I say to thee thou art an ass.
How?
By thy burden.
No otherwise, thats not so good.
Because thou hast ears.
Are all asses that have ears?
Are all trunks laden with money that are heavy?
indeed I confess in that I am an ass, but I think so.
By such a surmise thou make it provender.
We are water-men, and think because wee see a man com∣ming, and that I am his first man, heel be my first fare, when another gets him.
Come, you are bookish.
And thou blockish, say rights right, and no more.
Se sirha Mr. Tutch, what an officer?
Yes, hes booking in, Mr. Tutch, salve, sis salve.
Iubio tesalucre, aue.
He hears vs not.
Let me see Capons, Turkeys, Small-birds, Beefs,
Muttons, Partridge, Plouer, Wood cocks.
Meaning vs, good morning, and many sir.
And many Mr. Tutch.
Are ye come water-squirts, are ye come?
And why sir, water-squirts?
Because you shoot water, and so do they, but ha ye that will do it, my dainey element dashers.
Do it and stand to it Mr. Tutch. if wee might spend it sir.
Well said honest knaves, bear in, but say where•… Iohn in the hospital, and's nurse?
At hand sir.
Tic well, away, and Tutch tutch the tippes of their tongues, with our seller suckets.
Isle tutch the tippes of their tongues, &amp; their tongues tippes, isle baste their bellies and their lips till we have ierk't the cat with our three whips.
Married? tic ended, and the next pull mine.
At a fair fleece, a golden one, the eldest daughter is my hope, what then rests in it, O you winged lap-wings, farthest cry, when we come nearest to it. Quando pecus omnia sub vmbra rue∣minat antiquos paulilum vocitamus amores.
Tic done too late to ask why so.
Tardy intrusion as a Cipher placed.
Fills but up room, while substance in the other
Makes number precious, I am that round O,
Which with a sigh, as sad as is my soul,
Grieve all too late, what now befits my moan,
But black despair, and die in it do,
To make thy self known, but represents
Mellow fruit falling into danger, ô I am that
Rotten ruined, and vnrellisht substance,
Which on my own vpgrowing tree falls off,
By the times negligence, undone I am,
Would I had did indeed, and not in word.
These il tuned words like discords sounded harsh
And yet were thought true music, well, well,
Isle take my stand, and as she passes by
Note if her glories dash not all my hopes
With base forgetfulness of what she was,
My picture can she not forget, may be,
Old love may yet live in this new-born Lady.
I am wonder strocken in my self,
O you all-seeing, pardon my attempt,
My second choice hath laid siege to my soul,
And my disloyalty hath in that witness
Slain the concurrences of after joy,
Even so he looked that had my maiden heart,
Even such was he, whose far estranged death
Gave me this licence of ill liberty,
To do, and undo, O forgive me then,
Weak in my sect, my fault to the best of men.
New wedded Lady, &amp; our mornings bride,
What is it that troubles ye?
A loss but being small.
No matter for the loss.
You find a purchase, equals any cross.
Let it go then.
she knows me and this constant accident
Subscribes to it, how can she excuse,
This double deed, this false neglect of love?
O women how you dally in your trust,
How quickly you forget late living life,
And bury the remembrance in your smiles
All ye this morning for the dead to sigh,
And shed your tears in bosom of new choice
How have I sifted your loose difference,
For ever being president against all.
Glad am I at this opportunity,
Who landed me even in the jaws of fear
Swallowing my destiue happiness
To utter ruin of herself and me
If the inconstant air whistle abroad,
That Humil lives, then Humils widow dies
In desperate scandal, racked and tormented,
In the remembrance of old wretchedness,
Which to prevent, plots cunningly contrived
Must buckler my repute so weakly wived.
Lost her glove?
So she makes known.
Isle find it to my euerliuing glory,
And the next triumph, wear it in my •…elm
Daring all gallants in defence to approve,
S. William Vergirs Lady owes this glove.
If my good fortune challenge such account,
To find it by my friend or industry,
Isle prick it on a pole, and with my lance,
Curuet with nimble speed, in course of arms,
And as I snatch it by a curious pass,
Cry in loud echo, here is for her love,
Who on her wedding day did loose this glove.
The Bride, our new made mother lost her glove.
I sister, so she says.
Isle seek no further, for it is in vain.
Especially when quicker eyes then ours,
Arch in the brows of loves two votaries,
Lord how they'll brag to find it questionless,
Twill prove a ransom of a thousand kisses,
Amorous glances, modest courtesy,
O how these flatterers can insinuate,
And stretch an inch of length to an el of wide
Hears much in office for a little pay.
A glove God wot.
I sister, so they say, go to ye wanton you
He that shall marry thee, is matched y'faith,
To English rash, or to a Dutch snap-haunce,
You will strike fire with words—
Who I? now as I live sweet Moll.
If Filbon marry me, as by this light.
And wink.
Tic hard to juggle with the devil, we maids
So simper in each others quantity
As we know fashion ere it be deuized
Forswear you one, and Isle forswear—
The other, just even so,
Shall I be plain with thee—
You'll answer, no
I. Tab. No I. Mary. I no.
I know you will not, therefore let him go;
I love my Filbon as men love good clothes,
Put them on every day.
And I love Tours as I love my sleep,
Embracing thus, folding most dearly.
Your lover nightly, as you wish him yearly.
In troth in such a sort:
As children play with stones, to make them sport.
You make me blush Tabitha.
At the thing ye wish,
Plague on the cat that loves nor milk nor fish.
We are all maidens pictures, fine we would,
Yet we cry away away, whē away we should.
Yet again.
Never yet.
Ever so when so our matters fit.
They are returned, a glove or no.
No, but the glove I sought not, I ha found.
Where is it man?
You're the glove, which still I seek to wear
Make me happy, match it to a pair.
Be these for ever matches.
How can ye find the glove was never lost?
By seeking you that lost not what we find.
Indeed a willing loss, is loss of gain,
Where loving finders pity losers pain,
I will not say, enjoy so much the rather,
Because gift giver cries out on the father.
But if I durst, I would, till when.
Vnmatch our gloves, each take his own again.
It is enacted by the brides fair word,
Who finds her glove, is this days governor.
To manage all our pastimes in the house,
And thou art he, the only conqueror,
Of prize and honour, then enjoy it.
You give and I receive, is this my office?
Signed and delivered.
I take it on me, music triumphs come,
Since fortune cast her favours in my fist,
Isle be most prodigal.
Yet with modesty I am a Citizen.
Unlooked for welcome, and vnthinking come,
To receive honour in a states mans room.
Yet to this presence I will still address,
Love, pains and duty in this business.
In this is fortune blind, whose deeds are dangers,
Giving her graces not to friends but strangers.
Prove on my fortunes how so ere they stand,
I hold my fairest fortune in my hand.
The like doe I.
And all the fairest fortunes I would prove,
Is only this, to enjoy my dearest love.
The like I wish.
All happiness live in thy choice, in hers
All mischiefs, horror, les our self participate in tender of our choice, freely delivered in the fight of heaven.
What news?
The wedding dinner breaths his last.
And wee will visit it; on forward there.
So fair and fortunate to be thus false,
Wedded to two. O you all wondering eyes,
Gaze till your fire flame, your eie-balles drop
In moist imagination of this act,
Before the first be dead to wed a second. ô
Why writ you dead in your last letters?
Sick was I, and no likelihood of life.
What then, was that a just excuse
To varnish over this base counterfeiting? no,
Il'e make it known.
I care not, I will thus excuse it,
All opposite of injury was yours,
Putting to teast our weakness by your letters,
Which carrying credit, woman in her will,
Guiltless is causer of this open ill.
Had I been thus advised, but all too late
Acquainted with your speed, I had prevented what now is past and done.
Why did you not? Baud to your own misdeed,
Three quarters guilty of this accident,
That might &amp; would not stop the hazard,
Will ye now heap up miracle,
And make it worse in note, by adding too't
A bauins blaze, it is not so soon extinct,
Being fierce of flame, quenched must it be,
By water-course of sounder policy.
I am from my self in this, what shall I doe?
O I am mad, and mischief mennassis unwitting of all purpose.
Why did I cast my glove,
Proclaimed the finder stickler of our sports,
But to a point prevailing practise?
I know not how.
Leave all to me, women that wade in sin,
Have their wits-charter to authorize it,
And they have antidotes that to digest,
Which better judgements lose themselves in, let me alone.
To lie with him the while.
Tic true to lie with him, but not in sheets,
To use the flourish of a women's skill,
In winds and turnings, other lying,
My new made husband iniures not the old,
As I am simply false, I will be found
Constant to death, knowing my business
Is to heal up the fractures of the time,
And to salve virtue in her taint of ill.
I build on this.
Some month.
While I possess the glory of my name;
Attendances according, marry our son
Unto his eldest daughter, that's the point
Of all: regain my jointer next,
It is not amiss to satisfy your debts.
These two achieved, the third is bedding,
And if this brain beguile him not of that,
Say I am single: no, since blame sits no,
Behooves give care to use true policy.
Our son.
Aside.
Mother the noble guest expects ye,
The present meeting doos neglect it self
Where our fair bride is wanting,
Pray come in, you doe them wrong.
I am not well, and this commanding air
Retains my health, I came to fetch it,
Wherefore enriched with what was ours before,
We yield fresh duty and attend them.
Will you be mindful of our marriage, mother?
Begin so happily in yours.
I shall endeavour in it, come.
Close and hushed, not a fly stirring,
While they feed hungerly, we, that loves detie
Doos proclaim pardon to presume, and speak,
Challendge liberty, now by my maiden-head.
Swear not love.
Can you forbid my oath? Sir I will swear, &amp; till I lack it, say, nought shall confine me, I had rather feast in fancies pittance, then to seed gaged with attention, so∣thing every bit with curiosity: no, I can fill my belly in a minute, satisfy my stomach in a breath: Lovers digest their sighs, and chow their spleen, while other appetites fall hungry toot, and let them greedily graze on.
VVhat's all this?
Lovers talk any thing.
I understand ye not.
I would not that you should, for I speak Greek.
Regard her not, for she talks, Id'ly Filbon.
Be you advised then sister, I'm a fool.
Yet not so simple but I talk by rule,
I say, dine they that list, I will not, for my dish
Dressed to my hand is here, here let me feed,
Ti's the maids modicum, God send vs speed.
In that I claim a part,
Who ever feeds this dish hath Maries hart.
So then said I well, ye wicked thing.
Mot as I am of Lovers union,
Contracted to a solitary life.
By thus retaining singleness of heart:
Changing all doubts that the world affords
But one, so to thy sweetest self,
Which only art idea of my thoughts:
I vow a reconciled amity,
Which violated, doos command my life
To yield his interest to the shade of death,
May be, your father alienates our choice,
And shows as sunne-shine threatening rain,
To the all-hoping harvest present.
Which to make clear, the honourable word
And fatherly regard in present office
Have past their speed in our attention.
I know your father will receive their on-set
Soldier-like, joying the siege begun,
Which tho resisted, bids them gladly come.
Pause in that trust, give ear.
Sound proclamation,
It is enacted by the bride and bridegroom,
And by our self chief in authority,
That all receive their pleasures
From the most high in this assembly
To the lowest, all pastimes are made free,
Dancing, carding, dicing revelling.
And other dues oftimes fit merriments,
—Unto the bride and bridegrooms health.
The days short, and the night's
Stop there.
I will, to pleasure thee,
There take your places.
And in your sweetest key of musique strokes
Sound pleasant melody, echo those sounds
Which true-loue-hearts, in consorts chiefest grounds
Have their blessed being, use art in times,
Which may give welcome to our noblest guests.
We are betrayed, young Humill is at hand,
Dance, and excuse it so.
Sound musique there.
Content, a dance, and in again.
Content, no dance, yet in again.
It is ungently don to snatch her so.
I snatch but that which promise says is mine,
Have I offended?
I.
Right what is wrong.
Here,
Or where you dare, go seek in Brainford, go.
Brainford?
Put up, or I shall be offending unto one,
Against the brides son, dare ye?
I repent not what is done, come you with me.
So slaves by violence do hurry hence,
The rights of—
Peace, we on you do impose command.
Yield duty in it: hall, a hall there.
Musique sound, and to the bride do consecrate this round.
Squire of the day, cul out your gadding bucks.
Select your light-heel'd does, open your Labits,
Turn them to the toils; we that are Venus Huntsmen may partake the sports.
You're a gallant woodman sir.
My son for one.
And mine the other.
Good my daughters for them both,
A course or so, go too, lead on, the bucks that have employ∣meant for these does, are not these giddy gamsters, i'll be the Forester and look too't.
Hear you that?
A lightning before heat.
Your fathers air is harrald to his tongue.
A knows the coat, but thinks not who shall wear it.
Ther's two and two.
A couple more, too makes no show, our measure is for three.
Why then the bride.
And bridegroom.
O sir, pardon me.
My joints were oild to pleasure, but now, not.
Then I with her.
You! O, your authority commands her.
Hark.
It gives his luster light.
My warrant wins, where his dos loose the right.
My son in law grows bold.
Good again, here is much to do in love,
One simply stands, not challenging his own:
And reason, Mary, chance is yet unknown
No, nor in you sir, though my son,
Words past contrive, but after deeds cry done.
Brook'st thou this disgrace.
O sir, no remedy, what Justice lives so free.
And to her own is friending,
I am mad to think on it boy, but—▪
How Goddes-like the elder of the two,
Stations the measure, it is a Jovial sight,
Where beauty gilds the pavement with her light.
How sullen Saturn took her by the hand.
With frosty feeling, in whose joy touch,
She shrunk her hold, but with a jealous eye,
She glanced on me, fearful that standers by
Should be enriched with it: now she smiles me fair,
Guilding my torture with an after hope.
Thus moroliz'd, I season on my right,
Her love thus challenged by inferior might.
After this dalliance here comes other sport.
Pray ye attend him gallants: How now Iohn?
Tar di venientis Iohn, you must be whip't.
Quaeso preceptor, non est tibi quid.
This silly sot, my Lord, so please you hear him,
Utters much hope of matter, but small gain.
An old wife nursed him, which we call blind Ales.
She dying, left him to the cities keeping.
Which in their Hospital they thus nursed up.
Amongst the bounties of their other deeds:
Many besides, now you shall hear his fellow
Ask him such questions as his simpleness
Answers to any: sir let me hear ye.
Iohn, how many parts of speech be there?
Eight, the vocatiue, and ablatiue, caret nominatiuo ô,
What say you to reddish Jack?
That it does bite, Ha, ha, ha.
Where ha you been Jack?
At Powles friend.
Who saw you there?
Mr. Deane Novel, O hoe's a good man truly.
What did a give thee Jack?
A great, look here else.
What will it do with it?
Carri't home to my Nurse.
I'll give thee a point Jack, what will it do with it?
carri't home to my nurse.
I'll give thee a fools head Jack, what wilt do with it?
Carri't home to my nurse,
Carry a fools head, what a fool are thou?
Should I go home without it? whose fool now?
Who toles the bell for Iohn?
I know not,
When did a?
En now,
Hoo Jack hoo,
My Nurses chicken. Ha, ha, ha.
A silly ignorant, is a ever so?
Never otherwise, a cleanly Idiot, what's put on him in his morning ries, is as you see it. This old woman is his Nurse.
So please your honour you are sent for to the Court,
The Court goes from Richmond to White-hall.
We will attend her, kind sir William Vergir.
Our times bridegroom to your self and you.
We wish as we have ever done, all love,
And for our present entertainment rest indebted to your bounty, if a Courts amends have in it power of satisfacti∣on, you command it, this acknowledged ever, your poor acquaintance but an honourable friend.
We will attend your coach.
Sir, be mindful of our servant Filbon.
What wants in him to weie down love with gold,
Our savours shall supply.
Tic a light weight, their portions if they, poise no better, will to the worlds belief, grow less not greater, but let them pass, I weie them as they are. Come Nurse, follow vs Iohn.
Wipe your nose, fie a sloven still, look ye be man∣nearly, hold up your chin, let me see ye make your holiday leg, so my chucking, that's a good lamb, do not cry for
any thing, Iohn if ye doe.
No Nurse, grace a God, Grace a Queen.
Shriek no more in my ear, I pre-thee peace, I grant I made such promise: but what then, shall I for that so set her on the rack, when her fair fortunes look a bet∣la way, with the small proffer of your giddy son, no: you shall pardon me.
You'll let me have my jointer yet.
Yes that, three hundred by the year ti's thine,
But for your son to wed my eldest daughter.
Why, he doth merit her in my accord, and tic no wrong in you, to dip her blood in the self dye that wee are in.
I grant his merit, but her shining value made golden glittering, by my vantings looks to a higher pro∣mintoria, from which four, when your son gazes, it af∣frights him, yields him planet stroke.
He shall not have her then.
Believe it wife.
He shall.
Ha.
I will not bed with you till then.
What?
I ha said it, and when posture of our word takes his base being, I will die the death, into our wedding sheets shall mischief come, before my body break your word with me, even on your wedding day.
Nay then up with the lists, again it shall not be.
I care not, think you I doe, keep your word in that, when I break mine.
No more, be stranger to my bed, doe doe. Have
I of nothing made thee much and wilt thou—
Yes I will, have you of protestations, oaths, and vows made these loose fractures: lawful bee it then for me to shun the make-peace bed, since strife sets such dive∣zion
betwixt man and wife, I am most firm in it.
Very well, tic not amiss.
The night draws on, tic time to part.
At your pleasures gentlemen.
Your gallant daughters will be next.
Or not at all, for I am past it now.
And we are pried unto, our sons are gentlemē,
what rests then, but we sail nearer to the point?
What point?
Of marriage past, betwixt vs in our promises.
Indeed to one I promised her weight in gold, un∣to the other which I love as dear, her weight in silver, now gentlemen what goods have you to equal these large pro∣mises?
Why all we have.
But twill not serve,
The big auouchments of my promises
Controls you all, and all men's else, ye all,
Under degrees of Earls, Lords, or as Potent
To toule them on I echo these large sommes.
Unvalued must your sommes be to such choice,
Honour looks high aboue such petty price.
Look honour high as heaven,
Our earthly reach doth level in that eye,
And with the embellishment of richer worth
Isle by, and out-by the imprisoned scope,
Of reaching blood, what will not value doe
Where strong ability dos reach his hand,
And they have beauty too, which joined to riches
Will proffer fair: tho not so quaint
As courtly dames or earths bright treading stars,
They are maids of More-clacke, homely milke-bole things,
Such as I love and fine would marry well.
It was a promise in you to be kind.
Isle forward with that promise, you love
my eldest.—
With my soul.
And pity to divide that love, then hearken me,
when shees dead and lives again, shees yours, not till then,
Then never but in death.
You love my youngest daughter.
And will ever.
Pray ye doe: but when you are from your self a woman, she is yours in marriage.
Woman to woman joined it were wonderful, but in more maze of wonder I should be, what I doe chal∣lenge to participate, and from my self live to divide in other.
Faith not till such a wonder.
First not enough to scandal thy true word?
But are we slighted thus with santasies,
Impossibilities, dead and alive again,
Manhood infused in woman: tic not generous.
Come son upon my blessing
Take from thy eyes thy heart adoring shine,
Offer no more thy altar bearing thoughts
To one so gyant-like, whose reach sits hie,
Aboue the compass of a gentile eye.
you have your answers, gallants.
We like it not.
Nor will we so except it.
Fore-warnd come near my house,
Rapes, felonies, and what may else be thought on,
I will with heavy impositions
Surcharge ye with, if not with pistol shot,
I will defend my self and these I keep.
Live I to hear this?
Convey them from him, let vs.
In disguise.
Or not at all.
That way or none▪
Iames, when I put thee from my thought, let me be hut winched from all, fortune, thy partaking gentleness is such, as I doe love thee, troth I doe.
God continue this good league.
Wot what news?
No.
The lovers are expulst, and my fair hopes shine the clearer: what wilt say when I doe marry this Knights eldest daughter?
That you are then possessed.
She is mine contracted in her fathers word.
New broken sir.
Ha.
Tic true your mother challenged it: but he as an∣gry as the raging morn, whose choler breathing shakes high battlements, puts her off with a pause of contrary, I know it sir, her jointer is subscribed too, which else to doe, sooner should earth to heaven presume a progress, then the grant make firm what the antecedent challenges, your mo∣there upon this abandons from his bed, vowing bold absence, he enraged, gives way to all malign and stubborn fashion of contempt, such a close to day never had practise, such a wedding night, till this sad first never had purchase: you shall well agree them sir, to atone this jar, use means I pray you, t'will become ye, well, when wrangling wrestles with such violent injury, tic the sons office.
Tic the devils office and not mine, to hell obedi∣ence, if he break his word.
You had a father loved ye better.
He loud me as a king in a play, his servant who were seeing him gives kind applause, but small utility: my father in my child-hoode loud and left me to the worlds eye, in bold necessity, I thank him for it, since he died my mother hath her chance, mine wants the proof, stand by times minion and inconstancy, oh.
Have patience.
Yes, whereunto? sith all my hopes lie level
With despair, such milk-sops in whose breasts,
Lingers a lagging hope, to thē is patience sufferable;
But to me, horror, and hells black motions tickles
Me on to mischief, and I will—
So.
Now swims upon the maine, such shipwrack-soules,
As the winds rage splits on the rocks of danger.
I, my wife, and son all three, now heave, and
Fear of sinking, makes vs timorous.
Should we be shelving on the shallow beach,
The seas rough gusts might scatter our intents,
So idle purchase might be gathered up,
from our so sudden shipwreck: No my state
Stands yet secure: though maimed yet is not foiled:
But salu'd by wise occasion may make good
This sudden overflow of tide and flood.
Where had this bread and butter?
The crow did give it me.
But take heed the kite tak't not from thee.
I'll choke first.
Iohn shal's play at counter-hole i▪th cloister?
I ha ne'er a counter.
Isle give thee one for a point.
Do, and i'll play hose go down, O sir, Willy is a good man truly, heir's good custard and capon, and good bread and butter too.
Now Iohn, i'll cry first.
And i'll cry lag. I was in hoblies hole.
I ha won this Iohn, now for another.
I'll hate again will I will ô.
What's the matter, making my sweet lamb cry?
Come Iohn we must to London, on with your clean mucken∣der, and take leave of sir William and his Lady. Gods me your point, where is it Iohn?
The crow has it, and did win it at counter hole.
I'll whip ye for it, take him up, loose your point lamb, fie, up with him sirha.
Good Nurse now, no more truly ô, ô
Whore's this suck-egge, wheres Jack a boy:
Come ye moveable matron, wheres this tugegge,
away away.
Isle take leave of S. William and go away.
Now my Iohn juggler, your nose is like Lothbery con∣duet, that always runs waste.
Whats his name Iohn?
Sternigogilus, ha, ha.
What?
Agoggle eye, a wanton eye, a madcap, so a means.
Wat?
Hello.
Trim boat. turn head, we're at hand muschrumpe,
We come boy, we come.
Come Iohn, our leave is taken.
Have ore the sea to florida, and was not good King
Solomon, Tom Tyler.
O well sung Nightingale, a board a board there, ha rip there.
Boy, you understand me, though the liquor have rinsed me, remember your business boy.
Yes master.
Tic rare to be a tinker boy, work enough, wench enough, and drink enough, is it not boy?
I Moister.
Boy where shal's have doings, Isle clout any women's cauldron, boy.
Master, tincke on tic time, for we ha ne'er a penny.
Pawn budget boy, Isle ring in boy, hay any work for a tinker, a ti, ti, tinker.
By my maiden-head tic hee, the merry tinker of Twitnam boy, is it not?
Yes flower it'h frying pan, he stops holes well▪ tic he,
Has his old songs still, has he not?
Yes, and new to boot.
And be not these tinkers knaves? upon their backs they bear a long pick, with a staff it'h end,
He shall ha work, Isle break way for him, and
Call out the gentlewoman to hear him sing.
Let them all say what they can dainty come thou to me.
We shall ha work moister.
Draw boy, homo armatus, boy, Isle pepper your pans,
Whore's my dog boy?
your Dame has him, and will meet you at Putney.
Indeed whats a tinker with out's wench, staff and dog.
Is this the tinker you talk on?
I madame of Twitnam, I have seen him like out burning fire brands wed's tongue, drink two pens from the bottom of a full pottle of ale, fight with a Misty, &amp; stroke his moustaches with his bloody bittē fist, and sing as merrily as the sobrest Chorister.
Come tinker, stop, mend.
Isle tickle your holes.
Hoe's out of tune for singing now.
Out of tune and temper too, thus can dainty liquor do. Sing boy.
Relish moister, relish, a note aboue eta moister, Sol. fa, me, re.
A maiden sitting all alone,
Unto her self she made great moan,
Sorrow set upon her cheek,
And she looked greene as any leek:
Her friends did ask her cause of care;
But she cried out in her despair.
O stone, stone no ra, stone na no ra, stone.
Cold comfort in a stone.
Doctors came her pulse to feel,
And Surgeons with their tools of steel,
To dig, to delve, to find her pain,
But all they did it was in vain,
Still on her back this maiden lies,
And with an open throat she cries.
O stone, stone na no ra, stone no na no ra stone.
Better and better by my slipper.
Old wives they made answer thus,
Greene sickness was most dangerous.
And oate-meale eating is afoot,
That never yet did maiden good.
Tut, tut, tut, tic nothing so,
Still she cried out with pain and wo.
O stone, stone no na no ra, stone no na no ra, stone
Till she was delivered of a chopping boy, and all
was as I am, Omne been.
What a disfiguring diet, drunkenness,
Lays upon man, a beastly appetite.
Lingers the body where such glutnous means,
Swelters in surfeit of desire and ease.
I am an enemy to my self, to think,
That man is slave so to continual drink.
Knight, feast, knight, a good cellar keeper knight.
I'll cusse thy daughter knight.
Howes that?
Shells not bus knight, shells not neb?
Thou art in the straits Moll, and the pirots shot will sink thee, therefore yield.
I am thy Tours, being thus disguised,
am come to steal thee, then be sudden Moll.
Nay then y'faith.
Knight shells drink at door like beggars? no, isle in knight see thy seller, is thy seller in dept, knight dare he not show his face? your black jacks are my elder bro∣theirs, knight, shells notshake hands with our brothers knight?
Follow him, look he steal nothing.
Tinckers steal nought but drink &amp; maidenheads,
Isle watch him for one, if you allow loss of the other.
Wheres Tutch?
Sir.
Who waite you on?
On the world sir.
And what says the worcester•…d to ye?
To me sir.
To you sir, what a message? letters, ha, daughter il'e be your secretary, nay hide not, juggle not with me, isle once be secret to your thoughts, in faith I will.
Tic a card of lace sir, which he bought me.
I bone-lace sir.
Bone-lace subscribed too like a letter, lace weaved of ten bones, first so? even so.
O Tutch.
O mistress now am I tried on my own tutch,
I am true mettle one way, but counterfeit an other:
O life no life, but mess of public wrong,
Day turn to night, for I ha lived too long.
From Filbon.
Yes from Filbon, woe to the day, time, and ho∣were.
Wherefore.
That I brought this news from your lover therefore.
Pull off your coat.
I need not sir, tic ready to fall off, yet if I doe, tic the time of year, the fall of leaf sir, and serving men do drop their coats, there sir.
Begone, come no more near my house, if thou do thou art a fellone, are you the carrier, are ye indeed, must love make you his mercury, must Filbon send by you? my own betray my own, to him, your a knave, they shuffle ye about, isle deal the cards and cut ye from the deck, you un∣derstand me, go.
Gang is the word, and hang is the worst, wee are even, Jove you no service, and you owe me no wages, short tale to make, the summers day is long, the winter nights be short, and brickill beds dos hide our heads, as spittell fields report.
Wife coop up our ginnie hen, that wants this treading, you gossip, to your closer, Filbon shall, if we want will, yes yes what else.
Come daughter.
I deny Filbon to his face, bring me to him, I will justify that all his actions are like apricots, they dangle &amp; love them.
You doe.
Alas sir, mistress Marie is with the Tinker gone, and at the back door horsed, I see the gelding, it was a dapple gray.
Hell and damnation.
Death and torture.
Christmas gambuls, father, shooing the wilde mare.
Am I a jest to laugh at now, indeed, indeed.
O not so fast sir, I am for your race, and will out strip ye, if ye run no faster, speak what was this tinker?
Tinker sir.
I, thy master.
My master is a knight, who Ioue-like in the shape of such a thing, came to see Daunie in this shower of gold.
Tours was it?
Etiam, ita, ego I sir.
Now fortune at the fairest, go with thee, thou hast been coming in this stratagem, and I doe give thee joy with all my heart.
You doe huswife.
Wishing a whirlwind in the like disguise.
Fetch me hence smoothly, I am lawful price.
Wheres Iames?
At London.
I will thither too, since the devil drives I am the second, lock her up, safe be it your charge.
What for this counsellor, concealing rape and ruin of your child?
Whip him.
I shall never endure it.
Unless you doe betray this trust, and tell vs to what cabinet he hath conducted her.
To Putney, ô to Putney sir, where theile be married.
At my parsonage, God amen, no other hospital to shadow them but mine, am I the patron of so hard mis∣chance, that my own of my own shall cousin me, isle thither, son your company?
No, isle to Richmond sir, prevent them there.
No sir, you shall with me, thats the next office, for your self, delaying due, in other all things ready, you will then serve your self, nor he nor you shall carve so to your appetites.
Your pleasure sir.
For my sake turned away.
Yes, my master turns a new leaf, and so must I sir, it was for your letters sake.
Is there no hope?
What doe you call it when the ball sir hits the stool?
Why out.
Even so am I, out, out of all hope ever to come in to crum my portage at his table sir.
Welcome to mine, then honest Tutch, but speak thy mind, think thou she will continue firm?
Firm sir, yes, unless you take her for a join stool. sheele continue firm, she seeds on ye, dreams on ye, hopes on ye, and relies on ye, telling her father what a friend you are, protesting and molesting to the hole house of your good parts, vowing to God and man if she have not you, she will have nothing: for any mans pleasure, sheele not line if not for yours.
I stand resolved.
She wishes that ye should, or sheele not trust to ye.
Son feast thou young Tours?
Not since our last repulse in love, since when I stand affected unto singleness of life.
Then art thou stable in my thoughts, but let me whisper to thee boy, young Tours in a Tanckers habit hath her stolen, to whom his hearty adorations were to this hour consecrate, shees gone, and her old doting father got to complain him at the court, how twill work I know not.
Like wax; sheele take any impression, sir she.
Like a tinker say ye?
Certainly even so.
It was my own project father, hee applauded it, knowing my fashion of that counterfeit, to be so sure, as no man could forgo me.
But himself sir, tic a point of law, arraign him up∣on ipse facto.
And art thou stepped beyond me? where to night thou slepst: soft be thy pillow: easy be thy rest, &amp; may thy bed be.
Mortal down, thistle soft,
She laid her self under to keep him aloft,
And ever she said, come turn thee to me,
And was not this bonny lass Mary Ambre?
Mary indeed she hath resigned to me hard choice,
Near am I but as arrows a far of,
Seems to the shooter neighbor to the mark,
Till it prove otherwise, so I
Furthest from favour am, though seeming no.
Change your mark, shoot at a white, will say, come stick me in the clout sir, her white is black, tic crept into her eye, and wenches with black eyes the white's turned up are but as custards, though they seem stone cold, yet greedily at∣tempted, burning hot, and such a wench is she sir.
I know she loves me.
Most affectionately burns in desire for ye; but key cold through her father, she stands to freeze while others are appointed to thaw the Ice, not you.
I must use policy.
The only man, I will assist you sir,
I thank thee, and I will prevail in it.
I think sir, if I see my house to night, there will come warrants to make open way to their recovery, thinking they are with me, whom I protest I have, not seen, and un∣acquainted with her subtle stealth, am now as clear as is the babe new borne, I neither knew of it, nor where they are, I do beshrow their hearts, right I have in him for it.
sleep in my house then, so my word shall make your answer stronger, I have a son, I wish him so possessed, but not with violence, yet say he doe climb high, and retch the top bough with a stricter course, I knowing not the manner nor the means, acquits me, and God give,
them joy, my oath is clear, and that's my warrant.
Sir, I will trouble you to nigh, by this sad time his moan doth challenge comfort, and the council whose loves he hath so often visited, heartened on by the Earl of Tu∣mults means, they will add present purpose as he begs it.
but if the Earl know of my sons discharge, signed by his careless answer, t'would allay his hot endeavours with a cold responsall; but cease that, the time shall come——
Tic mine, the cause and all, pine let me in them, if the son of hope shine as a troubled meatuare in the sky; tic our fates fortune, and no matter cause no remedy.
True vantings of resolve, tic late, and custom chal∣lenges no right in me, to be so hurtful to my self, the eve∣nings air is raw and cold.
Filbon follow vs, be you more temperate.
You see what hurry threatenings this misdeed
Wounds deep are dangerous, though they hardly bleed
Sir, I am lessond,
As the boys at school?
Practise their knowledge by contrary rule.
O I am slain with wonder.
Hath this life left in it a little breath,
To blow out treason, reeke ye clouds of shame,
Putrefy all imagination, hold her at stern,
There let her sink, never to win again,
Homers recovery, shall I say and think it?
O—
Have I not been in bed to night, and so
Talk idly wanting sleep, or rose from rest,
As many troubled doe, acting like life,
Awaking dead, for in that flattering fear,
Perchance her reputation may be saved.
No I am certain in my fear, tic true,
In yond black closet lies a wicked woman,
(I will not say my mother, that names lost)
In the twinned brazings of the slave her man.
In Iames his arms, and shall I suffer it?
O—
To blab, it were to harold out my shame,
In quartered scutchin of black obloquy,
To murder one were most imparciall;
Again to turn hills on this sin,
Would write me bawd, but to be nobly satisfied
Is a content licenced from equity.
The knight shall know it, I will write to him,
Startle his bold imagination with pale fear,
Rose his revengeful spirit on them both,
And make me hopeful of his love neglected,
Forgive me world, heavens justice puts me on,
And though a son, Isle punish both or none.
You that bind up in secrets of the night,
Days benefits going to rest;
As peaceful birds, lodged in a sanctuary.
Smile at our Courtiers care, whose industry,
Rules in the silent and all shadowing night,
Suites that are breathless in a troubled day.
Have their abiding in our cares at night.
Hard censured, and atoned by late advice,
Salving the worlds scares, as we would your care
Knew we the burden of it.
With vs the morn is mated with the moon
And we are retrograde to what you doe.
Esteeming conscience, benefit and good.
Challenged in service of our country:
Sir though our blood affirm vs labour free,
It binds thee more to busy industry,
Wonder not at our late vpsitting therefore.
Your humours toil in our extremities,
But we unthankful merit contrary,
Think it a want and weakness in our kind,
I post and labour in a toil my self,
Seeking my own: midnight to me is noon,
And all the hours of dull past night,
Sun-shine eclipses, that do much molest me,
Pardon me that am so tedious.
Seeking your own.
My eldest daughter is conveyed from me,
Hurried away, as thieves by violence
Convey their booties from the true mans store.
Auditor, Tours son hath done this deed,
A rescue noble Lords.
Rescue and right, challenge the benefit.
A warrant for a general search,
Restraints for Cinck-ports, and all passages,
That theenish water doth despoil vs of.
It shall be signed in the morning,
Draw the contents as you affect the means,
And let attendance urge the early act.
Good night.
God morrow is it not?
Betwixt them both.
The moral of my misery seeking too late,
That to recover which I lost too soon.
And yet in each you stand indifferent.
I must, till perfected by you,
Either late loss, or timely victory,
Recovering what I fear is past advantage.
Hope the best sir, things at worst,
Season in their decay, as children mend,
Bent in their eye to ruin, yet they pause
Resting in grace, does reobtaine at will,
Opinion in rash judgment, dooming ill.
Good rest, for we go too't.
The peace of happiness be with ye,
I will retire me to my Inn, and wish.
Hours as short as momentary breath,
For till the morning, minutes hours be,
And hours years, such is revenged to me,
Might I enjoy it?
Sir.
My man, a midnight messenger, what is thy haste in leathe slept, speak is that all one? one all, that we call daughter, gone too, is she?
No sir.
Wherefore starest thou so wildly, say, weart thou asleep and wakened? come to vs here without thy bet∣la part? and sent abroad, leaving thy wits at home.
Your son sir, in all haste sends you his tales, wi∣shes your wit and judgment suddenly, read and regard sir.
Give the torch, if you will see my mother &amp; your wife, fellow'd in bed make haste, Iames your man writes on your pillow &amp;c. my eyes are witnesses to their adultery.
Whats the news?
Plague on these iauntings, once we shall be old, &amp; then this trotting life will linger in our bones, all hours are our nights, we dally with our own destruction.
It cannot be, or if, or if, what if? if it be so I am un∣done, poisoned am I with fair promises, no marvel tho you doe forswear my bed, if yet again, if what make I here whē treason is at home, away.
The bird that greets the dawning of the day,
Signs with his wings, the midnights parture,
And the sleety dew moistning the cheeks
Of morrows welcome: gives earnest of the morn:
Yet all secure, adultrate lust dos sleep,
And I the hatched young of this trodden hen,
Stands Sentinel to her idolatry.
Blow you swelled winds and crack the battlements,
Rouse their incestious luxury with fear
Of whats to come, yet that were my mishap,
No silent air fan on them bawdy breath.
That as they reeke in their licentious love,
Devil may seal sure, and Morpheus so pleased,
May to their pastime add affliction
Delivered by the hand of him thats wronged,
And stands indebted to his destiny:
Yet are they as the hour, whose sandy minutes
Runs out at pleasure till the period comes,
Fast sleeping, and enjoy their quiet,
Rouse the black mischief from thy ebben cell,
Land in the bosoms of this twin in lust,
Him whose heapt-wrong calls vengeance to be just.
Locke fast that door and leave me. Give me your light, Son Humil?
Father.
Thou see I am obedient at thy call. Exit servants.
I come as messengers that bring their bale,
Signed in their looks, be well advised,
Thou make a challenge goes beyond all grace,
Should it befalls.
It is my love to you that makes me step
Heart-deepe in disobedience to my mother.
Wretch that I am to think her so,
It makes me desperate of priority,
Fore thinking my beginning to be base,
Conceived in such mistrust and frailty,
My front hath that impression still,
Adding a blush to my distemperature,
And I am crest-salne in sanguinitie,
Pray ye believe me, would it were not so.
Enough watch &amp; be secret, I will enter,
Sit as the night raven or the screaking owl,
Over my portal, menacing ill chance
To all within: for death is to my blood
A blessing, while this favour kills,
Almost my intellect or better part,
Yet shees thy mother, and no son but hates
His own disgrace so highly merited,
And I believe thee.
Sir, truth is truth, my conscience and religion
Binds up in me, and since I doe proclaim
Detraction from my blood, by her misdeed,
Give me leave to report a fly a fly,
If it offend the virtue of mine eye.
Tic true.
And yet me thinks it should not be,
How hardly will this scandal take impression,
Where resolved christianity dos dwell?
But I will try the gold, perhaps tic base,
Who knows the hearts affection by the face.
Scarlet is scarlet, and her sin blood red,
Will not be washed hence with a sea of water,
Is this my hand, or is the fire fire?
whose scorching heate dissolves relēting mettle,
When as it tries the substance; yes, and I
Make known my mother is an alien,
From my blood, so to fall off, and perish
Even in her pride of bliss, damned be the slave
That so attempts her spotless chastity
To ruin, I know that yet smooth look,
Plotted, contrived, and won her with devise,
She never knew a double character till now,
But single singler she ever ruled,
Even modesty her self, Vesta resignd to her,
And virtue hand in hand at barly-breake,
Ran the swift course, none but a hound of hell,
Hunted this fawn of fortune to his kennel,
But my mother, forgetting her degree,
Dos captivate love, life and liberty,
By one deeds practise, wicked, nay far worse,
Fatal disgrace, honours created course.
Fool, fool, fool.
Ha.
Light bubble swell and break, would thou believe all this, and give a gloss to slanders cruelty: ripe∣ning reproach it self with thy fond ear, o Humil, Humil.
Sir.
Thou art villain, and hast cast up hills against heaven it self: when sons unto their mothers are so false, O where is grace? hut winekt from honour, shamed to show her face.
Is it not so?
Trust thy own eyes, go, thou shalt see a sight
Will melt thy stubborn spleen in pity,
Sweetly she sleeps, whose innocent respect
Smiles in her dreams, the childlike govern,
Laughing loud in their simplicity,
While waking, mischief seeks that to undo,
Which true required, stands sentinel unto,
Go and return with shame.
With shame, devil of mischance whats this?
Did I not see their cutted guilt look big?
Was I in trance of my belief, ha, was I?
Can be no juggling in it: can there?
No thou art constant as the northern star,
And I as giddy as the untamed Leopard,
That sees no means but dire destruction,
Flinging his foam to poison in his way
Mans mischief, plotted to his overthrow:
Heto'd me true, o that I live to think so,
Or they so wretched to deserve the thought,
Soundly they slept, whose slūbers kilt me waking,
Yet to recover half slain reputation,
Done have I, what to purpose practises
If it prevail, our honour so reserved
Will kick at all malignant cruelty
That taints our name with ever living scorn,
Fortune be for me, I will that recover,
Which devil him self cries guilty too, my fame
The flight it wings, imps feathers of renown,
That left al's lost, my birth-right tumbles down,
Sir I am sorry.
How can they excuse such wanton looseness, know they I stand here to thunder vengeance on their luxury.
My mother's fast asleep, and I awake, am in a tran∣sieve maze, unwitting how to make my peace with God her self and you.
why are they not together?
Not in bed.
Thou should with Argos hundred eyes,
Search in the chinks and corners round about,
It cannot be but she is extant there, ha, is she not?
I am confounded in the search, please your justice be my torture, I have murdered innocence, sorrow is not the way, death is the least, I challenge cruelty and urge the ex∣act point of peril, slave that I am to live.
A son, a son, to do so to a mother.
Fare ye well, rather then be a witness of my wrong,
I will not see my self in it, go thou worse then,
Isle sacrifice to the devil, that tempted thee, all thy
Distempered thoughts, cry mercy to her sectes.
To spotless innocence be free, say all thy treasons,
Build on slippery ice, and thou art frozen cruelty,
Sir, for your wrongs, if you remit black torture tic
My hell, and I appeal to sterne rigour, O you sonues,
Whose true obedience shines in majesty.
While mine more ugly then is vulcans tidy.
Smells ranker then despised Hemlock
Curse and ban him, I am your subject to it
And every mother, whose snow innocence,
Feels soft and tender, as the down on palm,
Rate my rebellion with a blisseles name,
And for my sake give misadventure aim.
Guide 'hem to me, say I am such a son,
Through whom a mother is so soon undone,
Let me not see the while thou liu'st away,
Let thy repentance show it self in this,
Not to be seen where thou hast done amiss.
Catiue depart.
I will; this tongue that slandered,
Be her slander still.
It is too much already, was I bewitched,
That thus at hud-man blind I dallied
With her I honoured? ô you times how have you
Nursed me, but no more, Humil hath branded on his
Mothers name, an Aethyops blackness, and
A spotted stain, forgive me that and all.
What need I to afflict revenge on him
That on himself exasperates, farewell thou pride
Of sons, who to a father in supposition only and
by law, art all so loving, that thy mother dalling
With wātones as girls with gads, thou not respects
The womb that brought thee forth, but ill attempting
So, and so thou rumorst, as the fault ripe in act,
Is blown to air, and though her son thou
Vtter'st what they were, thou shalt not loose by it
Now it fits, I challenge from the offence some right,
And add confine to this adultery
Wife, wife, rise and come forth.
Call ye sir?
Yes, take my closet key, let forth your lover,
Give me some ease by way of reason yet, and t'will
Allay our discontent, O God so new to marriage, and
So stale, could thou so soon revolt, so soon, ha?
I must acknowledge all.
O No, some better looze,
This will but add to mischief torture
Use patience now be reconciled to fear,
Be doue-like humble, and leave that to me.
How can I, when the brand is on my brow,
But by exclaim, give ease to torture,
My brain is scared, and I am liveless in it?
Kneel not.
A sentence, let vs die.
No marvel though you vow this abstinence
When deputed by him, you shun my bed,
You do deserve your iointer well,
To admit a fellow in a true mans place,
I thank ye for it, yes.
Sir.
No, no words I know you can allege,
The devil has scripture for his damned ill,
And this dos neighbor it, go and attire ye.
Be smilefull, and express no grief in sides,
Rather be tickling sportful, topped in pleasure.
Then daunted any way, that me concerns.
To use the mad-mans guise, but I am past it,
Since what is done, no reference hath to wish,
I am for credit sake, supportable, al's well,
Content am I to be senseable, and feel my
Fortunes as I may, ranking my self with such,
As sometime lived in my repute most base,
Faith all is well believe it, I am satisfied:
I know you do repent, and that's my remedy,
Other amends I look not for, In, and attire ye,
But stay you with me.
I am obedient.
Go thou shame, never till now possessed,
And in a breath confounded, sir, you see your wrongs
Shine through the herne, as candles in the eve,
To light out others, think you this misdeed,
Merits salvation?
I must acknowledge contrary.
Wilt thou for all this spite, yet use me kindly in the next?
Command me sir.
No•… 〈◊〉 the second, this mistake me not,
Rattle. to bind thee from it, if he•…e after,
Fashion of frailty summon vs to fear
I must be plain, and therefore thus:
Look when soever I hold up this finger,
Signing my lips with it, and cry begone,
Even then be speedy to depart the land.
If not, all power of mischief that I can, I will
and so resolve.
Sir, I am ready to the minute.
It may be, other reasons will restrain me
As causeless motives, nor seeing guiltiness.
In needy sequences perhaps our heart will in it self bake truce with this mischance, or if it doe not, yet attend our spleen, it will be better for ye,
In humble duty.
Go, give copies of good countenance to our friends, think an is well, for so it is, I that am all in grief, am all in suffering, I forgive the reason, Fare ye well.
What I will do, is ba•…d up in this closer,
The key that opens it, is my revenge.
Turned by a hand whose palm dus itch with fire
Till al consume, a cuckold, cuckold William s•…r is
Its even so, would I were yet the •…ast or least,
But not by thousands go too then, am I all alone, in this
Who is it that tongue calls man
That is assured of his wives conditions▪
None, or if any, there the Phoenix lives
Vnfellow'd, be his fate renowned while mine
Is mockery, and a Iestiue stock, to all that knows me.
O you stars blaze fire, till this abuse be quenthd
By my desire.
Hark ye Morris.
I Sir.
Where is Tailor? dudge me, will knog his pad,
What is chirken with cold button done, say you.
Excellent, this is welch indeed, O my honest Tutch.
Sauce box, roly poly, am I not your master?
You are sir, pray ye pardon me.
You must have your left eye Diameter wise,
Fixed on my right heel, and all the offices,
A servant owes in duty to his Master, perform
As naturally as if the forty shilling time
Were come, left I leave talking welch, and crack your pate in English.
I shall obey sir.
Fairest of beauties, love her seemly self,
For thy two eyes are Cupids, which doe shoot
From thy enamoured bow, shafts all of gold,
Headed with mettle of immortal proofs.
In thy fair bosom lives two hearts relenting,
Thine penetrable, through atoning pity,
Mine longing by desire to scale the fort
Of loves fair presence, make me happy,
Sign to my suit, but ye, for tic thy censure
Makes me thus bold, pronounce fair judgement,
Either of life or death, I that plead love,
Doubly devoted, challenge from thy deity
A maiden answer, let it come bright fire,
To try the substance of my loves resolve.
Sir, in sooth and verity believe me,
That I am fair tic credible, but to shoot
Arrows, whose heads have such immortal proof,
Tic most erroneous and false, sfoot your a puritan,
A citizen Ime sure, her canvas curran bags,
Stuffed with sweet sinnomon and cloves,
Good sir you are deceived in me, •…e country plain
Without this nicety, and do you love me, yes?
Then crave an answer without ceremony,
Fetched from proud Ouid in his Art amend.
I doe not like it I.
Ples you Latie.
Sir and you, tell me of Cupids eyes,
shot from inamord bows with hearts relenting, doubly de∣voted, and I know not what.
Ples you firgen.
No sir no, give me plain courtesy,
Drawing on loves white hand a glove of warmth,
Not cheverel, stretching to such profanation,
You overthrow loves deity in this,
And putrefy his altars with bad breath.
I am a dairy huswife, no such wanton,
So easily flattered with far fetched replies.
Yet I esteem this worthless person free,
And tho not fair, yet something fortunate.
Harg ye now Latie.
Sir cry you mercy.
Was a knight, merge you, of English in Wales, welse blood, and tic no mock in en to marry in welse blood, is it?
Sir all the smiles a modest maid, can in this kind make proffer of, are yours, in your fair welcome, blame me not, though his unkindness made me negligent in your kind entertain.
Neglect me so.
Wives unto Citizens are trades-mens daughters,
I am a blood of gentle composition,
My mind dos equal it, I must be coached.
Banckqueted every where, courted abroad,
At home flattered, for my private use,
I must have fancies, playfellowes, as apes,
Monkeys, baboons, mufs, fans, receipts,
Costly habiliments of several suites,
Will ye give this? twil break you sir,
And crack your credits fair condition, no,
Citizens would, but cannot answer so.
Harg you, marry with her, and God dudge me, all is yours, was a knight have land, and a great deal of ri∣shes, will maintain you well, say you.
This gentleman or this, before a Citizen, you sir pardon me I will ha none.
Then whom you will, call you this modesty to be so waspish? given to slight men off with incivility, give me leave to remember.
What you please, all the world except one or two, my eye motes that trouble but my sight. Filbon for me, man else but mere illusion and idolatry, vain worship, images of molten mettle, which to dross dissolud, appear as nothing to my judgment, but his worth beyond com∣pare, gentle and suffering as the silent air, that tho it brooke the buffets of base breath, yet in it self tic heavenly, free from earth.
Harg you, was knight in house called Sir William Perger.
Verger sir?
Morris was say true, give a ducats, look you tucke it, is mark, mark you that, and mark is 13 shillings four pence, good currants money, and how doe you? well, when was sir Robert Morgan, mike you latie, grace a God.
You sir.
Was I lye pray you?
Think you Master Auditor, knew nothing sir.
Upon my soul I think it.
I did wind him subtly as hounds the game,
New got on foot, for instance he lamented oft his sons proceedings, neglecting his own house, lest you in quest of her should search it, believe me sir I tell you what I know.
Tic likely, sons in these doting days
Will from their fathers alienate, differ still
From loves obedience, and in hearts affection,
Join hand to hād, though beggary neighbor it,
And let them go.
Sir I am free then from your fear.
I good sir Henry I was wrong informed,
I am your parron in all love.
Long may ye line, so sir I find you gentle,
And a good benefactor to poor scholars,
We ha few such, many we rather have,
That sell the Church rights, then maintain them,
And in my next stanza, I shall tickle them.
Speak conscience and no more.
Nay as for that sir pardon me,
I seldom exercise without that thought,
What my text leads me to, I will pronounce,
Maugre the devil of judgment.
Soft.
Bless you gallant knight, a merchant sir,
Of London am I, my estate secure, and so it please you co∣uet this fair maid in marriage, nothing else.
Know you him Sir Raf?
Not well sir, but by guess, he is indifferent rich, has broke three times, made his head hole by means, &amp; that say I, as this world shapes, is secure policy, what think you sir?
I doe not think it so, though common practise finds it furthering shifts, doe the devil resemble, &amp; bank∣rout baseness makes good credit tremble, like it not.
Please you Aunt, harg you now, knight was love this firgin, and God will, must make her wife, shall be her laty,
go in Wales, great worship God willing.
O know this knight, he was created tother day.
Sir Rober Morgan, ô sir, such a one, whose reputati∣on reaches to the best, merits a good conjunction, were it my daughter, she should have him, ô beware when majesty shines in a mans estate.
They long stand firm, spread wide regenerate
And though base borne, yet honour makes them swell,
Like clusterd grapes, till mature sweetness brings,
Lussio us conclusion.
I have some mind to him, sir you receive
Kind welcome, let it store your thoughts with
Those sweet motions lovers wish to enjoy, she may,
perchance, all things concluded on, before ye.
Was a clad man, Morris fetch trunk of parrel
was lye here a four week, will not out now.
Was welcome, plague on you, was love ye.
Sir, as for you, being city proud, my daughters look sits on a Courtiers brow, what say my girl?
O sir, a Courtier on my life, I love to sit up late,
Lie long it'h morning, rot with sweet meates, and
To play at shuttle-cock, me thinks the games now
In my norms, in any hand a Courtiers wife and
Why not? his black jet shows best about
Beauties neck, and I am proud of such
A suitor, if I understand not his welche, like
A good piece of ord•…nonce, I shall lie fast upon the
Bulwark, and discharge my obedient English
Must be a Lady sir.
Yet welcome sir, let it not grieve you.
Signior no, you're welcome to the wife I woo,
And mistress, might I be the man to strike the stroke.
You, or else none, sir Henry.
Troth she says true, but listen me for that, come Gallants enter with me, we will feast, theres little labour lost, where trial bids presumption scyrre the coast.
Right to a hair, tic mine, and I must do it
I see my fees, my rich advantage, sirha boy,
Shall wee have work, in faith and shall we?
Conclude, isle busy him, Sir Raf.
Son, you see to what a happy issue this disguise
Speaks fair, you know the plots, boldly proceed,
Tic ours in action, but your own the deed, I must
Shun all suspicion by my presence, look to it boy.
If thou fail now, for ever loose thy joy.
Ha, ha, master, I a Welshman, a Hangman.
A trick now on my maiden-head, I did mistrust it, Come leave the rest to me, this Priest shall marry vs incon∣tenant.
I, if I were the Welshman.
Because your father gave him light thereto.
Therefore come sirha, weal shift clothes, meet vs at Putney as my father shall mistrust ye.
I will, excusing your departure till anon,
do gentle love.
Heaven on our venture smiles, this to approve.
O it cannot choose.
Fathers are fortunate in this good news.
Go ye drones, ye do not love the hive,
Theres honey in it, tic a sweet thing to win.
I must break the ice for ye, if I slip up to the chin, now you will pull me out, save me from drowning mistress.
Fear it not.
I would bee loath betwixt Welch and English, to bee hanged, mistress, I cannot live on the bargain, come sir, Isle shift with them, and now I must shift with you.
I clothes, good Tutch.
And use me no worse being your man, then I used you, being mine.
O better, better.
O love, thou art a beggar, yet I am thy debtor.
Set down the heaviest load
That ever true affection vnderwent,
To you tic like the Anchor of your ship,
Heavy at first, but easly weighed seems light,
To me, that not supports her bodies weight,
Tic heart deep in the burden, &amp; too pōderous
Sad, heavy is that load, whose leaden poise,
Is as a sullen sorrow, too, too pressing.
Sir, I would wish you to be brief.
Dig ho this golden beach, whose glittering sands
Shows with the sun▪ as Diamonds set in gold,
Fitly entombs a jewel of much worth,
Whose living beauty stained all lapidary.
She was most gentle which was worth all riches.
And this nights tempest did a cruel deed,
To take from me a value of such price.
Sir, though our seas kill women with their frowns vs their bug-beare threats are womanish, and so we leave i'm.
Leaving your self and all, sometime,
Even so, no safer in our beds,
Or on the land, but under deaths black stroke,
And he that is the surest, sits in state,
Dyingly tended by the hand of Fate.
And yet me thinks death should not
Take her from me, being scarce mine own.
But newly wed, never bedded yet.
So that the Ceremony burning bright,
Himen yet hath his tapers flaming red.
And the bold boastings of that good mans breath.
That all religiously made one of two.
Hardly disgesled in the freezing cold,
Little I thought the priests word being, ever,
Should find his period in so short a time.
Sir, but the gift was given ye on condition,
Till death depart, better or worse,
Me thinks this Catechising little needs,
To humane guiding, and to you the less
Knowing what openly you do confess.
Bear w'e me moister, he that pines in grief,
Lives as you sailors doe, thinking at sea,
Every storm ends, when flattery flouts ye,
So to our loue-sick sorrow comes a calm,
By ease of fancies, when tic furthest,
And many times the weapon that doth wound,
Is salve, and Surgeon both, to make all sound.
Are ye ready sir?
All sitted, let me take my last farewell,
I am all gelly in my tears and sighs,
Wasted by waiting her untimely loss,
So long I did consume in drops of woe,
That contrary I laugh to think it so.
He that weeps much, having no tears to spend,
Smiles out the rest, but inwardly does rend,
O God that I venturing so hard a chance,
Should loose my dice, before my hand be out,
Tic even so, in all things man intends
The loss is ours, the winnings not our friends.
For charity be breeze, should the wind
Turn his beak into the southern side
Our ship would leave vs, dally not with grief,
Once and no more, let sorrow rule as chief.
Then thus, and this the last,
Moll, I take leave yet on thy herself self,
Dead self, and self slain. Moll d•…cest
I am thy morning music, call thee up,
To wedded rights, I lead thee to the Church,
And there receive thee, dine with thee at noon,
Dance all the after day, bring thee at night
Into the wedding chamber, this is it.
And here I leave thee to thy virgin slumber,
Never attempted, as thy birth bestowed,
Madam beginning, take it in thy end,
So live thus die, only my married friend,
And nothing else, gone art thou to a power,
Which will with welcomes take thee, left I am
To the worlds cross, thy father who enraged,
Will bitterly revenge thy death on me,
But I will prove his martyr, se-thee Moll,
Fool that I am to say so, here is all,
Gowns, tire, all habiliments of thine,
No rag shall rest remembrant in my view.
To stir the embers of thy dying fire,
I kiss thy key cold corse, and with this key,
Lock thee for ever up, farewell, farewell,
My mouth the Church, my voice thy
Parting knell. All cares that live and hear
This bell to toule, Christian-like bid peace unto
her soul.
Amen, be speedy mates, see ye not, look
The blewnesse of you cloud dos threaten wind,
If it rise fair, we shall be lodged in France,
But not where please the fates.
A board, a board, heie.
Hello, linger no time aboard, you hear
With me ho, will the rest stay? how a year?
O God that man should leave behind,
And live, the love of soul and mind.
Sir, welcome to Scillie,
Where I command my brothers friends have welcome,
But now my flattery gets you on this beach,
Where you prospectiuely see many countries,
Learn this of me, where dāger shoots her string,
We in our neighbour nearness ought to fear:
But armed by our foresight, make bold resist
Against the brags of foreign enemies.
I have not seen a better glass to look in,
What country call you you, whose cliffs are as the clouds
smoke, and all shadowing mists?
Sir that is France, a fair beseeming friend,
On yonder continent stands Ireland,
On this side Britain, and on that side Garsie,
Lands besides of much hostility,
Which are as sun-shine, sometimes splendious,
Anon disposed to altering frailty.
We that all neighbor must so strēgth our being,
As fearless we may frolic yet not seeing.
I understand ye sir.
Now let my longing have content in you,
With the report of them you lately saw,
My brother Vergir and his children,
Is he a widower still at More-clacke?
Married sir unto a London cast a way,
One whose decayed husband left to live,
(Though poorly) yet your brothers Lady.
It is his choice, and I subscribd to it,
But for his daughters sir?
Alas, in them is he unhappy,
One is held from him by stolen practises,
The other lives as though she were not his,
A goodly gentle woman, but her own in heart,
She will be gone to, for her government
Stands upon will, as men stand on the beach,
Seeing the sea wherein they must be dround,
Yet fearless venture on the ruthelesse maine,
She will regardless of her father, marry,
And dos as most, long for the misery,
Signed to them in their cradles.
Sorry am I.
Ha, what scrambled ends heap up confusedly?
New digd and ripped up is this plot of ground,
Some Shipwreck on my life, hid to deceive
The Queen and me of our advantages.
Likely sir,
And see our sudden coming scared from hence,
In the new ending, such as piled this heap,
Behind them have they left their implements
Which did the theft, what think ye sir if we
Redig the ground, should we depart &amp; leave it?
At midnight wold they fetch their borrowings.
I like your purpose, isle make one.
What doe you think it is sir?
No body buried, it is sure some goods,
wrecked on the sea, money or rich commodity.
Tobacco then.
Tic likely, for with vs men smoke there lands thorough their nostrils, shall I tell ye sir, tic a commodity may well be spared.
Good luck a gods name, sir it is a trunk.
Lift sir.
Tic quick, it heaved as I heaved it.
In faith I think so to, in heart of hope I will be all so bold, as to break way.
Ha.
If you be men and borne of that weak sex,
Which I my self profess, being woman,
Pity the living sorrow of a maid,
Buried for dead, but back again recal'd,
By the divinity of heavenly power,
Amaze not, I am creature, flesh and blood,
Not as I see me, a pale and earthly Ghost,
The story when you hear it shall make plain,
The woeful chance of life so lately slain.
I had acquaintance with this voice, my cousin.
Tic she, sir, tic Mistress Mary Virger, I know her.
My name recalles my memory,
And I am such a creature, oh,
My uncle, where am I? return again,
Death thou art wanton in a lovers pain.
Cousin I will not question the particulars,
The time calls on a present comfort,
And your life half spent,
Makes true necessity delay no longer,
Therefore come, as leisure we shall hear,
The dying story of your misery.
How ever, glad I am that such a chance,
Lāded in Scilly not in neighboring Frāce.
If ever you used speed, be swift as lightning,
Shoot as the stars in their celestial spears,
Go and return as Paris did from Greece,
With that immatchles Helen, tell the Priest
It must be done, he will believe your haste,
Because it was quickened with the former grant,
And promised by the knight himself.
Let me alone to make the way, follow you son.
And if I doe not let me loose my prize.
Wheres the knight?
Busy with one, who comes as conjured up from Cupids quiver, stricken deep in love, he is a Apothecary.
I know him his mother was a.
Peace.
Him will I busily attend, go you dispatch while I detain the father, if this prove, tic comic pleasure in the school of love.
We must be quick and sudden, come.
Slip like your Eel.
If any man know any lawful cause why these two may not marry, now speak, or else for ever mumb, I am gone y faith.
Master, remember, you ha my tongue.
yes, and thou mine, let me alone to counterseit,
Think on your oath.
Sir, if I do not, let me dye.
When I have poisoned her with this confection:
Be you cloudy kilt with sorrow, tic a skin,
Will draw to purpose on the straightest glove,
But then your promised reward.
My daughter and my goods,
I have no other son but you, all is thine,
Question not the reason, why this is,
For I have many, and amongst them one
Sites all the rest, that known to thee,
Will rather hasten death, then pity it.
Go, I will bid my guests, for to this feast:
Shall she have noble poison, twill cause fear,
Use less suspicion, and my mortal hate,
Shall it self kenuell in the pride of state.
give order for the banquet,
within there.
Sir, what is your will?
To murder thee,
She dies sir, if I live, I am a Apothecary.
And can knead the paste to purpose, she is gon
Had she a thousand lives laid up in one.
Wife, I must have thee paint,
And set a gloss upon this lovely front,
To move, and to attract all eyes look as the sonmer,
Which glads all hearts with his bloud-creasing spring:
Use thy best graces, though most proudly
I will have it so, fit thee to all state,
Decked in thy choicest ornament, shine glo-worme,
In the noon of night, for at this supper.
I will have more then all our friends,
Music several, Masques and Revellings.
In which thou shalt be mounted as the bride,
And I the jolly Bridegroom, will tend on thee,
As duty and the time commands me.
Whereof comes this cost?
Examine not, but lay your best end now to it
Council with this Apothecary which I sent for
To the business, pray ye use your art:
For I am bent to this consumption,
Wheres our servant Iames?
Within sir, shall I call him?
No, I will waite on him, for tic my duty.
Such as would spend in feasts, are but the slaves,
To attend the pleasures of consuming knaves.
And I am one of those, he is the flower
That I must crop too in this fatal hour.
Pray ye appoint sir, she will fit you well,
My purse shall purvey what you shall determine,
What we will be wistful sometime, &amp; our own,
We uncontrolled may dispose of: tic our love,
Rather our destiny, hate joined to this brow,
A horn that draws on death, no matter how.
Sir, in my closet serve your self with sugars, there are spices of the purest, use them in this cost, what else you want, please you command, they shall attend you.
I want virtue in a mother, are you one?
I am a mother to an absent son,
But not to virtue wanting, wrong me not.
Wrong not yourself.
I never will.
You have.
Humil, O my shame and not my son.
By thee a mother is made miserable.
By me black finn? no by thy own neglect, made perfect by my true intelligence, and how ever cunning masked and don'd the vizard that so mussled me, I knew not who was in the bed.
Your eyes were witnesses.
And holy ones.
Found you the man you loo'kt for?
No, it was a subtle strain, so hudwink't truth,
I am a traitor if I did not see Iames your man fast in your arms.
Thou art a traitor then, if any Iames were there, hee was no man of mine, he was thy father.
Marvel not, at leisure I will tell thee all,
His late return, the trick to place him here,
My stay, and his continuing in this house, which
Known, thou wilt no sin account, to keep our own.
O you prophetic Fairies, how dally you,
In concaues of our hearts, shamed at my error
I thought for ever to be from your sight,
But thinking, truth was blinded, I forethought
Some following business, thus I altered
Coming as one disguised to save her life,
Damned for that fact.
My life?
You must be poisoned at this feast,
Tic I must do the deed, ô mother,
How are you blessed in my return from travel,
I that to light bring your offence, so thought,
Must be the pardon at your judgment brought.
Ah me.
No more, much secrecy calls on vs,
Acquaint me with my father, plead my guilt.
We shall with cunning so unfold this business,
That our hopes shall strengthen as they perish,
No idle practise, but a serious toil,
Must bring home conquest from this long wished spoil.
If I lock up this treason, let me perish,
No sir, my breast is yet an incorrupt and holy house,
That harbors in it, nought but honesty, and to do
This wrong to my patron, per deum atque hominem fidem.
No matter if you tell it now, tic done, finis men
Say, concludes the ancient work, and this
Though newly done, cries so be it.
If keep secrets, can be but offence, and so tic now,
May be, I loose my place, but theres a friend which
Turning calls detraction, at his heals lives hope,
Whose cunning quickness every fault to favour.
Why true, and we shall as we may excuse it,
It was a deed done in welch•… you understood it not.
Let me alone to buckler thee sir Henry.
Can ye ward your self?
This was a pass, it was Fencers play, and for the after venue, let me use my skill.
How ever girl, thou art my daughter now,
What thou shalt loose in father, from thy own,
Thou uncontrolled shalt find as much in his,
And I am he.
And I acknowledge both this in my Lord, my head, my husband, at whose bed I am obedient, at whose board I am obedient: all in all, I am the wife of Filbon, whose rough Welch, hath got a constering English, parse it boy, Nounes, Pronouns, Verbs, Aduerbs, and God give thee joy.
With vocatiue ô, your father hears it.
And ablatiue caret, takes his daughter.
Then in pluraliter, ah has a son.
So singular and plural all is done.
If ever you were swift be nimble now, what hay married, tide this knot?
I, and the earnest blow given, fear it not.
Sir, I have set my hand to it, sealed the deed,
Pray God it cancel not in me.
Then part, and every one be silent.
There is a feast appointed at the knights.
Our marriage dinner, is it?
A gallant one, much cost is threatened. And the good old knight vnbuckles from his back, the lib∣rall load of honour, dos proclaim triumphs, and welcome unto all, calls for his wife, charges her care, commands his servant Iames to inuit his guests, which in a roll stands quo∣ted, theres a new come apothecary, and he bribes, even grace her self in this assembly, and dos promise his furtherance in the business, on the sudden you are mist, daggers and di∣uels the knight cries wheres my daughter? one up ascends to search the chambers, another runs to seek for this lost daughter. I knowing more then much in this her absence, singled my self to warn you of his search, hither will hee come, for he fears young Filbon, missing the futers, calling for the merchant, I answered not (being absent) in this heat: the welch man, where is he? none can be found, cries out he knows not what, and all his word is now, a plot, a plot, a plot.
What will ye doe?
Kiss and part, till fit occasion of our next salute, Filbon farewell, my husband think on me, I am thy treasure but thou bear the keie.
I will home.
And I will see the rest, what will you sir doe?
Nay I ha done enough, I am undone in my self, Hei mihi quote nullos, I must doe this deed, it was I pauca the rest, Isle home sir, I.
What rests for welch sir Robert Morgan, by God was crag de pen, and the hangman calls to me, da hum a, da hum a?
I will be at this feast in some disguise.
Isle fit ye sir, tic here, I am tutch right, hic &amp; vbique, every where.
Now smlles the instant, &amp; wrathes wrinkles seem,
As smoothed curls upon a wanton stream,
My hopes grow big, and their delivery,
Is by our midwife time brought to true birth,
I will not be a pointing stock tot'h world,
No, if this gossip rumour publish it,
It shall be christened with revenge and death,
Why when, are we grown sluggards now?
Tardy in bounty, shall we niggard it?
Be quick, carry those sweet meats in,
Bid them that in this business have to doe,
That they attend this rich confectionery,
With no common care, the cost cōmands more love
And duty, sir we are fitting to occasion,
Would all your guests were come.
Tic the feasts duty to attend,
Thou art a willing mischief, hast thou fitted
our purpose to the proof?
Have I, think you I am flacke?
Pushed on with hope of beauty and reward,
She dies had she a life more dear.
Then the last spring, sole comfort of the year.
But I will cover and prepare.
Doe, doe, my daughters thine, my goods, my all,
Blessed beginning to my sorrows fall.
Wheres my Lady?
Here.
That one so heavenly fair should earthly be,
Slave to misfortune, base in luxury.
Sir for to please your eye, I am thus quaint,
Good faith I am ashamed in my self.
How and a woman.
Come blaze thy affections to immodesty,
And tho thy virtues contradict the deed,
Be Venus wanton, smile, with Helens eye,
For I will have it so.
I was not so brought up: I shall endeavour, tho my cheeks put on sensuable die of other bashfulness.
Sir your honourable guests are come.
Nay then you wrong me most of all,
Show not these signs of fear, ell's past,
And I am dead in old remembrance,
Troth I am, forget it, as I doe, say on.
Coches so fill the pavements of your door,
That scarce can passage give the footmen way,
Tic not amiss you go to meet them sir.
Why well said, spoke with courage, &amp; I will,
Jovial like a bridegroom, Lady you see,
They waite on vs, and all attend on thee.
Worthless I am, but since it is your will,
I borrow light from sun-shine of your beams,
Who glisters so, gives splendour nothing proud,
Darkened by fear, half hidden in a cloud.
Nay hand in hand in faith Iames pardon me,
That dally with the darling of your heart.
Even so, but little thinking such a thing,
Small gain springs from that toil, where industry
Sweats in the brows of others victory.
Father be mindful, this presuming knight,
Plays with the flame, burns in the candle-light,
When we shall furnish to disfurnish him,
Of what he yet enioies.
Humil, tic cunningly contrived,
and I attend it.
For charity be swift.
Place your plate, and pile your vitriol boils
Nest upon nest, These for wines and bear,
The other tend the call of altering diet,
Sirrha, quoth he, we shall •…t I trow,
Not well, Iames be gone.
Sir, you shall pardon me, unless with her being not well.
Ha.
Think you I will; what leave my country, sir.
Upon a slight, a trifle, tic more dear to me.
Wast not thy promise?
Pooh.
Pooh.
Madame, lean on me, Isle bring you to your chamber.
Pre-thee daughter, faith I'm passing ill,
Your honour and the rest must bear with vs,
Tic nothing usual, a queasy fit.
The mother.
No, the husband.
Good faith I am not woman sick, though woman
But earnest ill, clogged at the very stomach with
A sudden calm, I fear me tic my death.
Nurse help to bring her to her closet, do.
Excellent fit, supported by •…tod.
Plague on it, shall I be left alone, master make haste? But tic my deed, I am author of this shift, hes where hee would be now, Ime where I should be too, but not well backed, yes now I am.
Besecke ye pardon me.
I am wronged, and to this company,
I make it known by coming of thy daughter:
Is my son made her indored husband, shall I
Suffer it, call you this courtesy, tic simple craft?
Cloak't under thy denial, is this well to ingrast with vs un∣known, and so to join yon•…ers to heirs, he is my only all, and married unto thy daughter?
Ha, Married? Nurse, how is it within?
Shees very ill sir, and I fear.
That your disguise is known, come juggle not, call you this Nurse? O thou dissembling boy.
Are you mar•…ied▪
Sir I must needs confess it, he's my husband, &amp; the reason?
No matter for the reason, I ha done, God boy ye, Conicatcht by a trick, and so persuaded, good.
I am abused.
Yes questionless you are, I have all right.
You have no wrong sir, I to affirm your word,
When I was woman, and from man I should, and now,
I trust my shape dos challendge but your promise.
I p•…aid but Iohn come kiss me now says she, I am Tutch your quondam servant sir, thrust out to thrust them in, a lawful marriage is no mockery sir, I counterfeited welch, to join this constring English.
What at a gaze sir William? cannot be resold.
No, no, more mischief, nay come all together, welcome.
Thank ye sir.
My son returned, surrenders to your doombe his life, for yours so lately lost, deputed in your daughter, for she is dead sir, buried in the isle of Scillie.
Not amiss, whats the next Pagan? all the craft of this is known.
Sir had I too hearts to melt this frozen fear, would thaw with passion, the drops distilled from our tormē∣ted brain, witnessed by these sailors that interred her, knows how I parted with her when she did.
Is mistress Mary dead?
She is.
Well, shall I have Justice for her death?
Command it sir.
To prison with him them, for she is murdered, Sir cause you knew your rapine and your theft, tied to your runaway legs that clog, you were uncertain of her portion and our love, therefore to rid that fear, you rid me thus of her (to me) most dear, my own, my only eldest of my
daughters, oh.
Isle be his bale.
Sir tell not me of bale, for my assurance pleads in his life, and he shall die.
You have no president for that.
Yes, remember Donningtons man, Grimes,
Who for an heir so stolen and married,
Was hanged, and the sergeant at arms
For assisting them, did loose his place,
If this were done, your theft will hardly scope.
I thought of that indeed.
Murder, murder, murder.
Ha, by whom?
By this fair counterseit of husband, here is my witness, and the deputy in such a mischief.
Nay then.
My wife is made away, poisoned here, and you that should be just are witnesses.
We follow, speak, explain this mystery.
Your wife sir.
Yes, supposed for dead, as risen from my grave,
I came to More-clacke, but a little late,
Even when the lying Priest did call her thine,
She knew it, and devised with her glove,
To repossess me of the house she chalengd.
so honoured, I slept with my own, but thought the country∣rye, you know what happened, that son that so betrayed his parents thus disguised, fearing ensuing mischief, wrought by you to have poisoned his dear mother, it was your biding, therefore murder, but the will of heaven bad otherwise, and yet she lives, wife what say you?
That al is so.
And I affirm it true, my shape cast off dos answer▪ sir in few.
Pretty in faith, no marvel you forswore my bed,
When you had substance for a property,
Sir you must have your own, who can deny it?
And I must as the story runs be mum,
Foold in my self by my own slights undone.
But whats this to my daughter, where is she?
Here sir.
Brother Vergir.
Brother George from Scillie, whats the news?
That your dear daughter dead and buried sir, by miracle was thus preserved, which at more leisure I shall manifest: pray ye forgive her fault, come theres some wanton blood left yet, says I, ye will I know, and wrongs past all remedy, the world must undergo.
My Tours, the dead do•… live, I am thy wife, Mary.
Or her ghost, a shadow or a substance.
Sister I will teach ye a medicine to make a sha∣dow substance, lie with him to night, as I will with my Fill∣bon, &amp; by the morning think but what is past, and you will reckon rightly you, heal hold you three to one my medi∣cine's true.
Me thinks I have a tickling in my blood crosses all anger, malediction hence, hence, thou ill tempered Fear, this comical event seasons the true applause; since welcome is the word, y'faith, I know not what to say, fine I would, &amp; yet a lazy lagging apprehends with doubt, but well I know not what, in me, it lies to punish or to pardō I will be general lie laughed at, once insooth I will. I am a widower, gallants, and you meet at marriages, and funerals, so think it pray ye, I abridge all complement, bar all opponents, &amp; resolve to favour you, you, you, and challenge from your lou, per∣swasion to this purpose, since our fate makes vs the worlds fond Idiot, be it so youth, and your fortune was prodigious to it, and my best of spirit, binds up in this, all is but thank∣less merit.
Then Epilogue am I,
Imagine all the world were in your house,
And hearing this report with wondering bra in,
I thus excuse it, Gentlemen you see how fortune
Favours in extremity, if any botched up ill, have
Show of good, and is not in thee sequel understood,
Yet bear with all, as this old Knight has done,
Loosing a wife redoubled in a son, what you shall
Want in idugement, seeing this, think every
Act is subject to amiss, so said, so done, will
Bring to true delight, hands meeting thus,
To sign this blessed night.

I Prithee Frank lets have thy company to supper.
With all my heart if I can but give my Father here the slip by six a clock I will not fail.
Isle talk with him, I prithee old man lends thy son to night, we'll borrow him but some two hours, and send him home again to thee presently.
Faith do Mr. Forest, he connor spend his time in better com∣pany.
Oh Gentlemen, his too much liberty breeds many strange outrageous ills in youth, and fashions them to vice.
Nay school us not old man, some of us are too old to learn, and being past whipping too, there's no hope of profiting; if we shall have him say so? if not, I prithee keep him still, and God give the good of him.
Nay will you be gone, Isle be at the heels of you as I live.
It is enough, nay come, and if we shall go, let's go:
Nay Gentlemen do not mistake me pray, I love my son, but do not dote on him; nor is he such a darling in mine eye, that I am sought to have him from my sight; yet let me tell you, had you gen∣tlemen called him to any fairer exercise, as practice of known weapons, or to back some gallant gannet; had it been to dance, leap in the fields, to wrestle, or to try masteries in any noble quality, I could have spared him to you half his age:
But call him out to drinking, of all skill
I hold that much used practice• the most ill.
I told him you would still be urging him, and see what comes on it. I Per sequar.
Sir what we doe's in love, and let you know we do not need his purse nor his acquaintance, nor if you should mistake, can we be sor∣rye nor wound to ask your pardon: fare ye well, come Gentlemen.
will you be gone? Isle come.
Oh son that thou wilt follow rioting, surfeit by drin∣king and unseasoned hours; these Gentlemen perhaps may do it they're rich, well landed, and their Fathers purchase daily, where I heaven knows the world still frowning on me, am forced to sell and Mortgage to keep you. His brother ranks himself with the best gallants that flourish in the Kingdom, thee not able to spend with them, yet for his virtuous parts he is borne out, his person wood and sought, and they more bound to him for hi• discourse then he to them for their expense and cost. Thy course is otherwise, all drinking healths, cups of muld Sack, and glasses elbow deep: drink in thy youth, maintain thee in thine age, no twill not hold out boy.
My company hath not been to your purse so chargeable; I do not spend so much.
Thou spend thy time more precious then thy coin, consume thy hopes, thy fortunes and thy after exyectations, in drow∣ning surfeits, tell me can thou cal that thrift to be in all these prodigal.
Use thy discretion, somewhat I divine,
Mine is the care, the loss or profit thine.
Brother be ruled, my Father grieves to see you given to these boundless riots, will you follow?
Lead you the way, Isle after you.
It is well, he will look for you within,
When? can you tel?
Boy my cloak.
Our cloaks sirrah.
Why Drawer.
Here Sir.
Some Canary Sack and Tobacco.
You shall Sir, wilt please you stay supper?
Yes marry will we Sir, lets have the best cheer the kitchen yields: the pipe sirrah•
Here Sir.
Will Frank be here at supper?
So Sir he promised, and presumes he will not fail his hour.
Some Sack boy, I am all lead within, ther's no mirth in me, no• was I wont to be so lumpish sad: reach me the glass: what's this?
Good Sherry Sack Sir.
I meant Canary Sir, what hast no brains?
Pox a your brains, are your fingers so light.
Say sir.
You shall have Cannary presently.
When was he wont to be in this sad strain, excepting some few sudden melanchollies, there lives not one more free and sociable.
I am too well acquainted with his humour, to stir his blood in the least distemperature; Cos Isle be with you here.
Do, come to me; have you hit upon the right Cannary now• or could your Hogshead find a Spanish But? A health.
Were it my height Isle pledge it.
How do you now man?
Well, well, exceeding well, my melancholy sadness steals away, and by degrees shrinks from my troubled heart: Come let's be merry, more Tobacco boy, and bring in supper.
Frank, welcome, welcome, wilt thou be here old lad?
Or here?
Wherefore hath nature lent me two hands but to use them both at once (my cloak) I am for you here and here.
Bid them make haste of supper; some discourse to pass away the time.
Now Frank, how stole you from your Fathers arms? you have been schooled no doubt; fie, fie upon it, ever I would live such base servitude to an old gray beard, Sfoot Id hang my self. A man cannot be merry and drink drunk, but he must be controlled by gravity.
O pardon him, you know he is my father, and what he doth is but paternal love; though I be wild, I am not so past reason, his person to despise• though I his counsel cannot severely follow.
Sfoot he's a fool.
A fool; you're a—
Nay Gentlemen.
Yet I restrain my tongue, hoping you speak out of some spleenful rashness, and no deliberate malice: And 'tmay be you are sorry that a word so unreverent to wrong so good an aged Gentleman should pass you unawares.
Sorry, Sir boy, you will not take exceptions.
Not again•• you with willingness, whom I have loved so long; yet you might think me a most dutiless and ungracious Son to give smooth countenance unto my fathers wrong; come, I dare swear it was not your malice, and I take it so; lets frame some other talk, hear Gen∣tlemen.
But hear me boy, it seems Sir you are angry.
Not thoroughly yet.
Then what would anger thee?
Nothing from you.
Of all things under heaven what would thou loathest have me do?
I would not have you wrong my reverent Father, and I hope you will not.
Thy Father's an old dotard.
I could not brook this at a Monarchs hands, much less at thine.
I boy, then take you that.
〈…〉 •ot born to brook this, oh I am slain.
••ee• Cos what have you done; shift for your self.
Away.
Stay the Gentlemen, they have kilt a man: O sweet Mr. Francis; one run to his Fathers.
Had not we Drawers enough in the house, but they must needs draw too?
They have drawn blood of this Gentleman that I have drawn many a quart of wine to: Oh sweet Mr. Francis; hark, hark, I hear his Fathers voice below, ten to one he is come to fetch him home to supper, and now he may carry him home to his grave: See here he comes.
You must take comfort, Sir.
Would heaven I could, or that I might beg patience.
Oh my brother.
Is he dead, is he dead girl.
Oh dead sir, Frank is dead.
Alas, alas my boy, I have not the heart to look upon his wide and gaping wounds: Hide them, oh hide them from me, le•t those mouths through which his life past through swallow mine: Pray tell me, Sir, doth this appear to you fearful and pitiful, to you that are a stranger to my dead boy?
How can it otherwise?
Oh me most wretched of all wretched men, if to a stranger his warm bleeding wounds appear so grisly, and so lamentable, how will they seem to me that am his Father? will they not hale my eyeballs from their rounds, and with an everlasting blindness strike 'em.
Oh Sir, look here.
Dost thou long to have me blind, then Isle behold them since I know thy mind: oh me is this my son that doth so senseless lye, and swims in blood, my soul shall fly with his
Unto the land of rest, behold I crave,
Bei•g kilt with grief we both may have one grave.
Alas my Father's dead too gentle Sir, help to retire his spirits over-travell'd with age and sorrow.
Mr. Forest.
Father.
What says my girl? good morrow; what's a clock that you are up so early? call up Frank, tell him he lies too long a bed this morning: was wont to call the Sun up, and to raise the early Lark, and mount her amongst the clouds; will he not up, rise, rise thou slug∣gish boy.
Alas he cannot Father.
Cannot, why?
Do you not see his bloodless colour fail.
Perhaps he's sickly that he looks so pale.
Do you not feel his pulse no motion keep? how still he lies.
Then is he fast asleep?
Do you not see his fatal eye-lide close.
Speak softly, hinder not his soft repose.
Oh see you not these purple conduits run, know you these wounds?
Oh me my murdered Son.
Sister.
O brother, brother.
Father, how cheer you Sir? why you were wont to store for others comfort that by sorrow were any way distressed, have you all wasted, and spared none to your self.
Oh Son, son, son, see alas, see where thy brother lies, he dined with me to day, was merry, merry, eye that course was, he that lies here, see there thy murdered brother, and my son was, see doest not thou not weep for him.
I shall find time,
When you have took some comfort Isle begin
To mourn his death, and scourge the murderers sin.
Dear father be advised, take hence his body, and let it have a solemn few∣neral.
But for the murderer, shall not he attend the sentence of the Law with all severity.
Have you but patience, should we urge the Law he hath such honourable friends to guard him, we should in that but bark against the Moon; nay do not look that way, take hence the body, let the Law sleep, the time ere it be long; may offer't self to a more just revenge:
We are poor, and the world srowns on all our fortune, with patience then bear this amongst the rest: The heavens when they be pleased may turn the wheel of Fortune round, when we that are dejected, may be a∣gain raised to our former height.
Oh when saw Father such a tragic sight,
And did outlive it, never son, ah never
From mortal breast run such a precious River.
Come Father and dear Sister join with me,
Let us all learn our sorrows to forget,
He owed a death, and he hath paid that debt.
So things are as they should be, we have attained the height of solace and true joy, sweet Na• no, sooner married but a Mother of this my hopeful Issue, cheer thoughts, for what I want in youth I will sup¦ply in true affection, and what age doth scant me in sprightly vigour, Isle make good in wealth.
Sir, you well know I was not easily won, and therefore not soon changed; advisedly, not rashly did • venture on your love. My young unsettled thoughts from their long travels have late attained unto their journeys end, and they are now at rest.
Here they have found a harbour to retire to.
It would become you to use my Father here respectively: you see how he receives you almost dowerless.
'True, where he out of his own abilities might have commanded Widows richer far, I, and perhaps each way as beautiful.
Upbraid me not, I do confess he might, nor was this match my seeking: If it hath pleased your father for some virtues known in me, to grace me with his free election: Me•thinks it worse becomes you being sons to blame a Fathers pleasure; howsoever better my self I cannot if he thought me
Worthy his bed I see small reason you
Should wrong me to him that my state best knew.
Nan•, I am pleased they shall be satisfied; and boys I tell you, though you be my sons, you much forget your duty to a Mother whom I hold worthy to be called my Wife; no more of this I charge you.
Sir, we have done.
No child to her, can be to me no Son.
I am pleased, here my spleen dyes,
Suddenly fallen as it did quickly rise.
This is the end I aimed at, were my eldest present among us much I had my height of wishes.
I have been there, Sir.
And fondest thou my Son Philip?
When you had given him me in charge, I had of him great care I have took of him great care, and I have took him napping, as you know who took his Mare: I found your son Philip like a Cocksparrow billing: if I had stayed but a little longer, I might have taken him and his h•n treading, I know not whether it be St. Valentines day or no, but I am sure they are coupled.
How coupled dost thou mean?
I see them one and one, and that you know makes two, and two makes a couple, and they well coupled, may in time make a third between 'em; I do not think but tic like to be a match.
I vow if ever he match into that family, the Kindred being all beggared, that forced union shall make a firm divorce twixt him and mine.
Here they are, Sir, coram nobis, you will find it a plain case if the matter be well searched; I have spoke but what I have seen; and now let every one answer for themselves.
What means these hands?
Nothing Sir, save a mere interchange of hearts and souls doubly made fast by vows.
•Twixt her and thee!
So, and no otherwise.
Yet thou hast time to pause, and to repeat but after this no limit to consider; cast her off, or henceforth I disclaim thee for my Son.
Yet I shall ever hold you for my father.
Then show in this thy duty, quite forsake her, and be resto∣red into my family.
O Sir she is a virgin chaste and fair, unto whose bed I am by oath engaged; that power above that heard the contract pass, both heard, approved, and still records the same: Oh Sir I am of years, oft have you wished to see me well bestowed, and now's the time your wish hath took effect: It was your prayer that heaven would send me a good Wife, and lo in her they have showed their bounty.
Thou thy baseness, take one tha•'s of my chasing.
Do men use by other hearts and eyes their wives to choose?
She's poor.
Yet virtuous.
Virtue, a sweet dower.
Yet that when Mammon fails retains her power.
Possessed of virtue then thou need ought else.
Riches may waste by fire, by sea, by stealth,
But water, •ire, nor theft can virtue waste,
When all else fails us that alone shall last.
Go to Cheapside with virtue in your purse,
And cheapen Plate, or to the Shambles hye,
And see what meat with virtue you can buy.
Will virtue make the pot •eeth, or the •ack turn a spit laden? tell me, will your Landlord at quarter day take virtue for his rent? will your Wives virtue yield you ten in the hundred? a good stock would do all this: Come, come Son, Isle find thee a rich match and turn her off.
Faith doe brother, the only way to thrive is to be ruled by my Father.
Do you think I being but the youngest, would marry under the degree of a Gentlewoman, and that without my fathers consent too?
I wish you may not, but withal advise you to make a conscience how you break a vow: And Sir, for you, with pardon, I could trace you even in that path in which I stnnd condemned: This Gentlewoman my beauteous Mother-in-law, whose virtues I both honour, and admire, whom in no kind I envy, I presume you married not for riches; for if so, Where is that wealthy Dower she brought along? being your self ex∣ample blame me not to make a father my strict president.
In viewing me bear but your self in mind,
And prove to her, as I to this like kind.
The Gentleman speaks well, pray let me mediate between you a reconcilement.
Good Sir do.
Since it is my Mothers pleasure to take it well, we'll be joint sui∣t•rs with her.
And I too good Master.
the boy's inflexible, and I obdure, he cannot be more saucy to object that which I would not hear then I perverse, in yielding to a knave so obs•inate.
He is your Son, and of your blood the first; brand him not with a name so odious, you cannot write your self a Gentleman, but l•ave him of that name inheritor, though you have power to take away his means, deprive him both your blessing and your love,
Which methinks in a Father should seem strange,
His state, you may his blood you cannot change.
Bated on all sides: have I been thus long a Father and a Master to direct, to be at these years pupil'd by a girl? a begga•, one that all the wealth she has, bears on her back, and shall I suffer this? whilst these that ought to a•m me with just rage, preach to me pati∣ence; Isle endure no more, come leave them sweet wife, gentle son•s away.
Isle have thee yet though all the world say nay.
Now which of these parties shall I cleave to and follow: we•l now I remember my self Isle show my self a true Citizen and stick to the stronger side.
Pray let me speak with you.
With me Sir?
With you.
Say on.
Do you not know me?
Keep off upon the peril of thy life, come not within my swords length least this Arm prove fatal to thee, and bereave thy life, as it hath done thy brothers.
Why now thou know me truly by that token, that thou hast slain my brother, put up, put up, so great a quarrel as a brothers life must not be made a street brawl, it is not fit that every Apprentice should with his shop-club, betwixt us play the sticklers, sheath thy sword.
Swear thou wilt act no sudden violence, or this sharp sword shall still be interposed twixt me and thy known hatred.
Sheath thy sword, by my religion and that interest I have in Gentry I will not be guilty of any base revenge.
Say on.
Let's walk, trust me let not thy guilty soul be jealous of my fury this my hand's curbed and governed by an honest heart, not by just anger, Isle not touch thee •only for all the world: let's walk.
Proceed.
Sir, you did kill my brother, had it been in fair and even en∣counter, though a child, his death I had not questioned.
Is this all?
Hoe's gone, the Law is past, your life is cleared, for none of all our kindred laid against you evidence to hang you; you're a Gen∣tleman, and pity it were a man of your descent should dye a Felons death: See Sir, thus far we have demeaned fairly like our selves: but
think you though we wink at base revenge, a brothers death can be so soon forgot, our Gentry bas•el'd and our name disgraced? no t'must not be, I am a Gentleman well known; and my demeanour hitherto hath promised somewhat: should I swallow this, the scandal would out live me: briefly then Isle fight with you.
I am loath.
Answer directly whether you dare to meet me on even terms, or mark how i'll proceed.
Say I deny it.
Then I say thou art a villain and I challenge thee, where ere I meet thee next, in field or town, thy Fathers manners or thy Tenants grange, saving the Church, there is no privilege in all this land for thy despised life; no guard of friends, no night walks, or •lie stealth, no jealous fear which in a murderers eye keeps hourly watch, shall have the privilege: this even and balanced fight body to body; Isle kill thee be it in thy bed, at meat, in thy wives arms; as thou took my bro∣there, with thy back towards me, basely: answer me.
Isle meet with thee; the hour?
By six to morrow morning, it is your privilege to appoint the place and weapon.
Hownse low the place, my choice of weapon this.
I can except at neither; fail the place, or suit your weapons length, farewell.
Yes it is thou meetest thy last farewell on earth, the appointed hour's to morrow: let the same fate obscure his desperate head that fell upon his brothers.
Now Cozen Raynsforth.
Isle so swinge my yonker.
Why who hath raised this storm Sir?
Wat'•t thou what? The elder Forest parted but even now, called me to question about his brothers death, and since hath challenged me.
Challenged?
Challenged me.
Why hoe's too wea for you.
Yes, I shall weak him, my purpose is to teach the stripling 〈◊〉 And you be honest Gentlemen stand but a aloof to morrow, and observe how I will swinge my youth about the field.
And please Heaven isle be there.
And so will I.
He seeks his fate, and murderers once being in Wad• farther till they drown; sin pulls on sin.
Tic true upon my life.
Say what thou wilt Isle not believe it boy.
Do you believe me to be your Son William.
Well.
Do you believe I stand here?
On.
That this Gentlewoman is your wife?
So.
That Jack Harding here is my brother?
Good.
That I speak to you, that you list to me? Do you believe any think that is to be believed?
What of all this?
Then believe my brother Phillip has married Mistress Susan. I saw them in the Church together; I heard them pronounce the words together, whether it be better or worse for them I know not, but they are in for better and worse, that I am sure.
As sure as thou art certain this is true, so sure Isle disinhe∣rit the proud boy: and all the Magazine that I enjoy, divide 'tween you my sons.
Not all Father, alas, allow him some small legacy to live on.
If it be but a cast Farm, or some poor Cottage rather then no∣thing, it may be he will content himself with a little, you know some∣what hath some •ivor.
He that hath set me and my love at nothing• Isle leave him worth as little.
Chide him you may, but yet not cast him off; For Fathers ought most chastise where they love; Parents as I have read, their rage should hide where children fall through weakness, not through pride.
They are none such to me, my vow is past,
My life may fade, but yet my will shall last.
See where the four bare legs that belong to a bed come, I could almost pity him.
And why pity him, all the while that marriage is the first step to our making?
See Sir it is done
And thou undone.
In losing your kind favour more undone then in your casual wealth.
By all that I enjoy.
Oh swear not, spare that oath, Isle credit you, although you speak but mildly.
So thrive I, if for this marriage made in despite of me I make thee partner of any substance that's accounted mine.
Not made in spite of you, unsay that language, and then you chide me truly as I live. And though on earth by your disherited hope to be heir to heaven; I matched with her in sincere love, but in no spleen to you, though you have sworn to give my fortunes from me; you have not sworn to reave me of your love, that let me have, let others take the land.
My love goes with my land, and in this marriage thou hast lost both.
Your substance I despise, but to lose that draws rivers from my eyes.
Oh bear a soft and more relenting soul, and look upon the virtues of your son, this Gentlewoman's birth.
Wife, wife, if he have married her for birth, then let her birth maintain him.
My kind sons speak to your fath.
Alas Mother, you hear my Father hath sworn, and do you love him, and would make him brook's oath.
Engage his soul, that were a wives part indeed.
As I live I would not wish him now he has sworn to alter his mind in the least circumstance, for more then Isle speak.
I am a kinder son then you be brothers, have you renounc't me for your son?
I have.
You see he has.
You have not yet renounc't me for your servant, that title let me bear, Isle be your man, and wear your Livery, since my poverty in∣forces me to serve, let it be you.
Grant him that good Father, when you want employment for him, I may sometimes have occasion to use him my self.
A reasonable motion, you want a serving-man, since you must hire one on force, as good him as another.
He wants a Maid too, let him hire this woman, his servant not his daughter, give us but as you would do to strangers we are pleased.
The motion's not amiss, can you milk sweet heart.
I can.
And sweep a house, serve a hog, grope a hen, feel a duck, wash and wring.
what I have used, my soft hand best can show, but what I cannot Isle be glad to learn.
A good willing mind in troth, and can you bake and brew?
I shall be easily taught.
Y'ad best look too't, for as you brew, so you're like to drink.
Sirrah, sirrah, can you hold the plough and thrash, sow, reap, load a cart, drive a Teem.
These or what else Isle practice.
Come then of with these gay clothes, no habit's fit for hyndes; help boys to suit them as their fortunes are; go search in the clowns wardrobe.
Fear not we'll fit 'em as well as if we had tan measure of 'em.
To see this misery with such patience born, makes me to pity where these others scorn.
Here Sir is that will serve the turn if you employ him in the corn fields, Isle warrant him fright the birds, here's that will make him look like a scarecrow.
And here's that will change the copy of her case, though not of her countenance.
Too good for drudges, live now by your sweat, and at your labour make account to eat.
Here's but a sorry wedding day.
My sweet Philip that thou should suffer these extremes for me, only for me.
Let that betwixt my soul and thine be witness of my constant love; Alas for thee that thou must drudge and toil, and having been a Mistress all thy life, must now become a servant.
This being the wedding day of my Masters eldest Son, I ex∣pect rare cheer. As first, the great spiced Cake to go in, Cake-bread fashion, drawn out with Currants, the Jealious Formety must put on his yellow hose again, and hot Pies come mincing after, the boiled Mutton must swim in a River of stew'h broth, where the channel's made of Prunes. Instead of pebbles, and prime reasons, and Currants in the stead of checker stones and gravel, to omit Geese and Gulls, Ducks and Do••erels• Widgins and Woodcocks, of which there will be plenty. At our wedding dinner we shall have the Bride in her tiffety taffeties most sumptuous, and the Bridegroom as well in branched Satin as branched Rosemary most courageous. Isle in and see them in all their beauty, and give them the Joy, the boon Jour, the Besilus Manus, or to be more vulgar to the Incpaable, the God give you good morrow.
Good morrow fellow simkin.
It is he, no, no, it is not he.
Good simkin.
Her face, the trick o• her eye, her leer, her blink, her askue, but to say it is she, Proh deum atque hominum fidem.
Art thou amazed to •ee me thus transformed, or her thus al∣terd, none but such a Father, such a remorseless and hard hearted Fa∣there, could so translated his children.
Oh Mr. Philip, I see your Father is no Scholar, but a mere Dun•e, • protest I never red a more wild translation.
Nor see so sudden and unmeet a change.
O young Mistress, Ovids Metamorphosis could never show the the like; but how comes this to pass• the manner, the manner, my heart begins to condole, and my conduit pipes to open, we shall have a shower presently; the manner?
This morning having married my betrothed, for could I less do having vowed so much? I came to him and most submissively entreated pardon for my self and her.
Kind young man — hold good heart.
He presently revises us, then renounced us, nor would he give us, should he see us starve and famish at his gate, no not a crust of his •ends bread, or of his smallest beer not a bare crusful should we dye for thirst.
'Twil out, 'twil out, but now for the apparel.
When he renounced us for his children, we had no means re∣served unless with baseness to beg our victuals, were resolved to work, so he at our entreaty hired us both to be his hinds and drudges.
Your apron good Mistress, and so and so, you were stripped out of your silks and sattens, and forced to put on these russets and sheepskins.
Even so.
O most tyrannical old Fornicator (old Master I would say) Well since it is so, no more young Master, but fellow servant; no more Master Philip but Phil; here's my hand Isle do two men's labours in one to save you a labour, and to spare your shoulders Isle help at many a dead li•e: Come Isle go teach ye hayte and ree, gee and who• and which i• to which hand; next Isle learn you the name of all our Teem, and •cquaint you with Jock the fore-horse, and Fibb the fil-horse, and with all the godamercy fraternity.
Succeed it as heaven please.
What must be, must be, heaven hath set it down,
At which they smile, why should we mortals frown?
To see so brave a Gentleman turn Clown.
Are we not somewhat too early think you?
It appears so, for neither challenger nor defendant are yet in field.
Which way doe you think the day will go? or whether of them do you hold to be the better man?
That I am not able to judge, but if the opinion of the world hold currant, he that kilt one brother, is thought will be the death of the other, but these things are beyond us: lye close for being seen.
Your resolution holds then?
Men that are easily moved, are soon removed from reason∣lution, but when with advice and with foresight we purpose, our intents are not without considerate reasons altered.
Thou art resolved, and I prepared for thee, yet thus much know, thy state is desperate, and thou art now in dangers throat already even half devoured; if I subdue thee, know thou art a dead man; for this fatal steel that searched thy brothers entrails is prepared to doe as much to thee; if thou survivest• and I be slain, you are dead too, my alliance and greatness in the world will not endure my slaughter unrevenged. Come, I am for thee.
I would my brother lived that this our difference might end in an embrace of folded love; but it was heavens will that for some guilt of his he should be scourged by thee, and for that guilt in scourging him thou by my vengeance punished, come I am both ways armed against thy steel, if I be pierced by it, or against thy greatness mine pierce thee.
Have at thee.
I will not bid thee hold, but if thy breath be as much short as mine look to thy weakness.
The breath thou drowsed but weakly, thou now shalt draw no more.
That heaven knows, he guard my body that my spirit owes.
My Cousins fallen, pursue the murderer.
But not too near I pray, you see he's armed, and in this deep a∣mazement may commit some desperate outrage.
Had I but known the terror o• this deed, I would have left it done imperfectly, rather then in this guilt of conscience laboured so far,
but I forget my safety, the Gentleman is dead, my desperate life, will be overswayed by his Allies and friends, and I have now no safety but by flight.
And see where my pursuers come, away,
Certain destruction hovers o'er my stay.
Come follow, see he takes towards the City, you bear the body of my Cousin hence unto the neighbour v•llage: Isle still keep
Within the murderers sight, raise Hue and cry,
He shall not scope our pursuit though he fly.
now will truss me that point Phil, I could find in my heart to beg thee of my Father to wait upon me, but that I am afraid he cannot spare thee from the plough: besides I heard him say but the last day, thou wast more fit to make a hind then a serving man.
Sir, you were once my brother.
True, but that was when you were a son to my father.
I and my younger brother, I had then priority of birth.
But now it seems we have got the start of you, for being but a servant you are taken a button-hole lower.
When will this tedious night give place to day?
I hope I may command.
I must obey.
My string Sue, are these shoes well modified, down a your ma∣ribones good Sue, I hope you are not so straight l•c'd but you can stoop: you acknowledge me one of your young Masters, if not, •tic not unknown to you that I know the way to my father.
Yes Sir, and can tell tales, I know you can, and I have felt the smart on it.
Whip me if you shall not if you begin once to grow stubborn: why when?
As humble as your feet.
Why how now need is this work fitting you? and you Sir, you are looked for in the stable, and should not loiter here, will you be gone?
I am for any service.
And I too.
We shall find other things for you to doe.
If you cannot here be they that can, a drudge, a groom, Isle send him of my errand.
And if I do not find work for her, Isle doe nothing but take To∣basso
in every room, because twice a day Isle make her make clean house the.
These think because I am their Stepmother, their chiefest torture is most my content, when I prote••, to see them thus afflicted it grates my very heart-strings every hour: For though before their Fa∣theirs rathless eye, and their remorseless brothers, I seem stern, yet pri∣vately they taste of my best bounty,
And other of my servants are by me
Hired to overcome their chiefest drudgery.
Follow• follow, follow.
I am pursued, and there is no place of refuge left to my de∣sperate life, but here's a woman, oh if she harbour soft effeminate pity she may redeem me from a shameful death.
A man thus armed to leap my garden wall; help• help.
As you are fair, and should be pitiful, a woman there∣fore to be moved; a Christian, and therefore one that should be charitable, pity a poor distressed Gentleman, who gives his desperate fortune, life and freedom into your hand.
What are you Sir, that with your weapon drawn affright me thus?
If you protect my life, fair creature, I am a free Gentleman, but if betray me, then a poor man doomed unto a shame∣full death.
What's your offence that such suspicious fear, and timorous doubts waits on your guilty steps?
I have kilt a man, but fairly as I am a Gentleman, with∣out all base advantage in even trial of both our desperate fortunes.
Fairly?
And though I say it, valiantly.
And hand to hand?
In single opposition.
In a good quarrel?
Else let the hope I have in you of safety turn to my base confusion. Gentle creature
I cannot now stand to expostulate; for hark the breath of my pursuers blow a fearful air upon my flying heel, and I am almost in their fatal gripe. Say will you save me?
I will, then climb into that hovel.
Oh any where.
Nay quickly then.
Your hand fair Lady.
Away, leave me to answer for you.
Over my garden wall, is it possible?
Over this wall I see him leap it lightly.
That shall we quickly know, see here's my wife, she can inform us best.
Saw you not Mistress Harding, a young man mount o'er this gar∣den wall with his sword drawn?
My eyes were steadfast on my work in hand, and trust me I saw none.
Perhaps he took down to the neighbour will•ge, and when he saw my wife, altered his course.
It is very like so, for I heard a bustling about that hedge, be∣sides a sudden noise of some that swiftly ran towards your fields, make haste, it was now, he cannot be far off.
Gentlemen, take my word, I am high Constable; it is part of my office, Isle be no shelter for any man that shall offend the Law: if we surprise him, I will send him bound to the next Justice, follow you your search.
Farewell good Mr. Harding.
Your word's sufficient without further Warrant,
Continue our pursuit, all ways are laid
And ere he reach the City, shall be stayed.
A dew good friends.
Pray what's the business Sir?
Two Gentlemen, went into the fields to fight,
And one hath slain another.
On what quarrel?
I had small leisure to importune that, only this much I learnt, the man that's dead was great in fault, and he that now survives, subject unto the danger of this search, bare himself fairly, and his for∣tune being to kill a man Allied to Noble men, and greatly friended: is much pitied. But Law me•t have his course.
If this be true.
I thank my fate, and bless this happy hour
To save a life within Laws griping power.
Come then the mornings bleak, and sharp the Air
Into the fire my girl, there's wholesome heat:
Isle in and see my servants set at meat.
Sir, isle but end this flower and follow you, I this should be some bloody murderer, great were my guilt to shroud him from the •awe; but if a gentleman by fortune crossed, it is pity one so valiant and so young should be given up into his enemies hands, whilst greatness may perhaps weigh down his cause and balance him to death, who thus escaping may when he hath, by means obtain his peace, Redeem his desperate fortunes, and make good the forfeit made unto the offended
Law prove as Heaven shall direct, Isle do my best,
Tic charity to succour the distressed.
Fair Mistress, are they gon, may I descend?
No safety lives abroad, then pray forbear.
To speak of scoping hence,
Oh but I fear
My life for yours.
However poor I fare
May you of this your charitable care
Taste happy fruit.
You did not kill him foully.
No I protest.
Nor willingly.
I willingly fought with him, but unwillingly
Did I become his death's man.
Could you now wish him alive again.
With his hands loose, and yet he slew my brother.
Heaven hath sent this gentleman because hoe's pe∣nitent, to me for succour, therefore till the violence of all his search be past, Isle shroud him here, and bring you meat and wine to comfort you, free I protest from all unchaste pretence, till by some means I may convey you hence.
The life you saw if I overcome this plunge shall be for ever yours, all my endeavours to your devoted service I will store, and carefully hoard up.
Sir, now no more.
COme good fellow Phil, what nothing but mourning and mowing, thy melancholy makes our teems to veil their fore∣tops, and all our Jades crest fallen, and to see thee wail in woe in the deep cart roots up to the bellies plunge in pain: my Mistress Susan shoe's in the same pitiful pickle too.
Oh if this hand could execute for her all that my cruel father hath imposed, my toil would seem a pleasure, labour ease.
Ease, what's that? there's little to be found in our house, now we have loosed the plough in the fields, they'll find work enough about home to keep us from the scurvy. Your hat Phil, see here comes our Mistress.
The place is clear, none sees me, now's the time to bear my sorrowful charge bread, meat, and wine: these six days I have kept him undiscovered, neither my husbands, nor my servants eyes have any way discovered him. How now fellows, whither so fast this way?
Nay we do not use to go too fast for falling: our business at this present is about a little household service.
What business have you this way?
We are going, as they say, to remove, or according to the vul∣gar, to make clean, where Chanticleer and Damepartlet the hen have had •ome doings.
What doest thou mean by that?
By my Masters appointment, I must not say my Fathers, he hath commanded us first to make clean this hen-roost, and after to re∣move the hay out of that hay-loft.
Oh me, I fear the Gentleman's betrayed, what shift shall I de∣vise.
By your leave Mistress, pray let's come by you.
Well double diligence your labour's saved, it is done already, go and take your pleasure. Son Philip, when I hear my Husband speak of such a base employment, I straight hired a labourer to prevent it, and it is done.
You are kinder Mother then my Father cruel, and save me ma∣ny a toil and tedious travail imposed on me by your husband.
O'er this place, Isle bear a jealous and a watchful eye to prevent this discovery; and will you be gone?
Yes sweet Mistress, if you would but give a wink, a word to the dairy maid for a mess of cream betwixt my fellow Philip and I, It's good to be doing something, for you know my Master does not love we should be idle.
Well Sir, perhaps I shall remember you.
Come Phil let's be gone, and if you chance to blush at what my Mistress hath promised, Isle tel you who cast milk in your face.
Shall I compare his present misery with the
misfortunes of this Gentleman, which might I rec∣kon greater, but leave them;
And to my charge we all must yield to fate
He casts us down that best can raise our state.
Oh through what greater plunges can I pass then I have done already; A fathers penury, the good old man dejected and cast down, my Husband even swept from the family where he was born, quite for∣sook by him, by whom he should be fostered, made a servant
Amongst his servants, and his brothers scorn,
These mischiefs make me wish my self unborn.
Again prevented.
How •ath this meditation drawn my thoughts from my intended
business I forgot what I was sent about? my Master bade me scatter this Wheat and Barley amongst the hens, and I will soon dispatch it.
What makes thee so near the place that I so strictly guard, what business have you there?
Forsooth my Master bade me go serve the poultry.
Come you shall not, for this time Isle do it for you.
Mother and Mistress too, it is curtsy in you to profer it, but should I suffer, you might hold it justly in me small manners.
I say it shall be so.
Shall any servant stand still and see her Mistress do her work• pray pardon me, I should condemn my self beyond imagination: I shall I stand idly and see the work done by your hand?
I say I will.
My words dare not say nay,
But my more forward action brooks no stay.
Then doubtless hoe's betrayed.
Oh me what's here? why here's one that's come to steal your hens, a thief who'l filch your poultry.
It is not so.
Shall I cry thieves aloud
For Heavens sake no.
Betray then hapless Forest, once more I lie
Ordained for pity, or prepared to die.
What none but women and betray me? then
I see your hearts are flintier far then men.
Think not that Isle betray you, nor shall she, if she respect my love or her own life.
Betray my brother? it shall ne'er be said I stopped his flight when he had means to scope.
Oh fortune beyond hope amazed I stand
To see my life laid in my sisters hand.
Dear brother.
My sweet sister.
A strange greeting,
And twixt two hapless creatures happy meeting.
What change hath brought you to this downcast state?
Nay what mishap hath ruinated you?
You both forget your dangers, then leave off these passive fits, and study for the safety of this distressed Gentleman your brother, now in the ratheless mercy of the Law.
Sister you have heard my fortunes.
With sad cheer, little surmising you had laid so near, dear. Mother let us crave your farther assistance in furthering his escape.
I am all yours.
My safety lies in sudden expedition, debar me I am dead.
I have a brother lives at Gravesend an Owner and a Merchant, and could we but convey you safe to him; he soon would ship you over into France.
All ways are loud, and hue and cry sent forth through e∣very hundred, how shall I reach thither withont discovery?
Here stands an empty trunk in the next room, which should be sent by water to Gravesend to your brother, what if we should lock him fast in that?
I like it well, but whom shall we employ to bear it safe?
Give it my husband and your man in charge, they two will see it carefully delivered.
By them Isle write unto him earnestly in your behalf, and doubt not of your usage.
The trunk, the trunk, Oh quickly, if you love me.
Come Isle to write.
Isle find those that shall bear it.
The plot is likely, but heaven knows I fear it.
Now boys no question but you think it long to have my state made over to your use.
Oh Lord Sir.
To have your eldest brother quite disabled of any chal∣lenge of inheritance.
We think it not long Sir, but if you should use all expedition possible, I should say beshrew their hearts that would hinder it, we do not wish our brother disinherited, but if it be your pleasure, Heaven forbid that we being your sons should any way contradict it•
We should not show our selves obedient sons to persuade you to infringe your former vow; For, Father if you remember you swore long since to do it; And heaven forbid you should break your oath.
Boys of mine own free spirit, mine one heart, and will you see him pine, beg, starve, nay perish ere you will once relieve him.
In•• be your will, we'll swear to do it.
And though the beggars brat, his Wife I mean, should for the w••• of lodge•g sleep on st••ls or lodge in stocks or cages, would you• 〈…〉 her to better harbour?
Unless too cold harbour where of twenty chimneys standing, you shall scarce in a whole winter see two smoking; we harbour her? Bridewell shall first.
Lads of my own condition, my own humour, cal me a Scrivner, reach me pen and ink Isle doe'• immediately.
Run for a Scrivener Jack.
Mean time post thou for Pen and Inck.
Stay no such haste, sweet husband there be fitter times then these made choice for such affairs, there's no enforcement to make your Will, being in such perfect health; pray if you love me do not talk of death, nor to your safety give such ill presage, besides this expedite∣on in your sons, shows that they covet more your Lands then life; de∣•er't then somewhat longer for my sake.
Then for thy sake I will, but my kind boys it is rather to sooth her, then your least wrong, I will delay a little though not long.
It hath been long a doing, I would it were once done, if he should peak over the perch now, and all fall to our elder Brother, we have used him so doggedly, the least he can do is to thrust us out of doors by head and shoulders.
Let him alone now, we'll urge him too't at more convenient leisure.
When heard you from your brother at Gravesend, or how falls out his voyage, can you tell.
I had a letter from him two days since, in which he writes me all his goods are Shipped, his wares in hold well stowed, and nothing wants save a fair gale to bring him to the Straits.
Heaven make his voyage prosperous, for thou know I have a venture of five hundred p•not enterred with him, my fortune joins with his; If he succeed it falls out well with me, if not, I am like∣lie to impart his loss.
You are well found Sir.
I what art thou fellow.
You knew me in my pride and flourishing state, have you forgot me now, as I remember we two were bred together, School fellows, boarded together in one Masters house, both of one form and like degree in School.
Oh thy name's Forest.
Then in those days your Father Mr. Hardi•g was a good
honest Farmer, Tenant too unto my Father. All the wealth he pur∣chaste, far be upbraiding from me, came from us as your first raiser; and you called me then your Landlord and young Master: then was then, but now the course of fortunes wheel is turned; you climbed, we fell, and that inconstant fate that hurled us down, hath lift you where we sate.
Well, we are Lord of all those Manors now, you then possessed. Have we not bought them dearly? Are they not ours?
I no way can deny it, I rather come as a poor suitor to you, •o entreat you for heavens sake and charities, to p•tie my lost daughter, your cast son. Sir, I in all had but three Children left me, Crutches to bear up my penurious age; one of these three was butchered cruel∣lie, his body piteously, alas pierced through. Then had I but two left, my eldest So•, and hoe's or dead, or fled to save his life; If he still live, I have wasted, •old a•d spent even all that little that my fortunes left; and now I have but one, one only daughter, and her I am not able to relieve with ought save •ears and pity, to these helps oh •end your fair as•istance; shoe's yours as well as mine.
All my part I disclaim, both in my son and her; they crossed my pleasure, and they shall taste the smart, I was derided,
They that love me, shall by my will be guided.
And that am I.
And I too Father.
Base Parasites.
You even pleased me well,
A•d you shall mount the height from which they fell.
See• see, alas• those that seven Somers since saw thy estate and look up•n thee now, would at lest pity, if not help thy wants; how happy was •hy Mother and my Wife, that slept their last sleep long be∣f•re these• 〈◊〉 take their birth.
Dear •ather succour us, help to redeem us from this cruel man that 〈…〉 upon our m•sseries.
〈◊〉 daughter add not to my tedious woes, thou bid a 〈◊〉 man go•de th•• on thy way, and ta•est a broken staff to be thy 〈◊〉.
Good Sir release us.
It m•st be then with tears, for other help I have none, and •h•y heaven knows can little ease, but never help your woes. Sir, if •our heart be not of Adamant, or some hard metal that's imp∣•••rabble, 〈◊〉 your blood and mine, so soon grown deaf. Kind Gentle∣men,
speak to your wrathless Father, show your selves brothers, do you turn aside. Fair Mistress what say you, I see your eyes in all things with our passions sympathize, and you are doubtless sprung from Gen∣tle blood:
Gentry and baseness in all ages jar,
And poverty and wealth are still at war.
Thou growest too tedious, prithee friend be gone.
I hope you do not scorn me.
The truth is, I feign would have thee leave me.
It is no disparagement unto your birth, that you converse with me, if I mistake not, sure, sure I am as well born.
And yet sure, sure, it is ten to one I shall be better buried.
I am as honest.
Nay there you are a ground.
I am honester by twenty thousand pound.
Are all such honest then that riches have.
Yes rich and good, a poor man and a knave. Away about thy business, loiter not about my gates, I shall compel thee else, for thy request my will is peremptory, thy softness makes me much more violent, whom thou the more commisseratest I contemn, they are in my deepest hate: Wife, Sons, let's go.
With eyes in tears sunk, heart circumvolved in woe.
What shall we now do?
What? but endure the worst, when comfort's b•niched, well∣come a•l extremes, yet I have sent my fellow, or my man 〈◊〉 prove some friends to help to stock a Farm, I have not yet their answer, it is the last of all our hopes, that failing we have run our latest course, out∣cast, end quite undone.
My Sister writes how your occasions stand, and how you are to use my secrecy in a strange business that concerns your life. She hath left nothing unremembered here, or slightly urged to make me provident and care•ul of your safety: gentle Sir, though I am a stran∣ger to your fortunes, y•t •or her sake whose love I tender deer•y, I am-all yours, my thou•e to entertain you, my purse to furnish you in any course, my Ship if you'll to Sea, is at your service, make choice in which of these, in all, or any you will employ my faithful industry.
Oh Sir your unexpected curtsy to a poor stranger, challenges the name of brother to the kindest Gentlewoman that ••er breathed this air, you cannot choose but be of one strain that such •end∣nos
use; you bade me to make choice of all your favours, my pover∣tie and my necessity do both of them in my axed•eams conserve to make me think the meanest of any means that can unplunge me from t•is gulf of trouble, to be much better then I can deserve, to be much gre∣la then I dare desire, being too poor to merit, too dejected to aim at any hopes.
You wrong your worth, you have desert sufficient, that she writes in your behalf, and I commend her for it, me thinks I see such honest parts in you, that upon weaker urgence then these lines, I would build much affection• on these gifts that I see nature hath endowed you with, •ndeed I flatter not, none flatter those they do not mean to gain by, it is the guise of siccophants, such great men to adore• by whom they mean to rise disdain the poor; my object is much otherwise in∣tended, I fain would lose by him whom I commended.
If ever this my weak ability grow strong age•, I will em∣ploy it solely to shun the base sin of ingratitude towards you and your fair sister.
Will you use me?
But what shall I return you in exchange of those great favours.
Come your love, your love, it is more then all I can attempt for you amounts unto, pray let me know the most of my employment.
Then will you but provide me a safe waftage over to France, to Flanders, or to Spain or any foreign coast; I dare not trust my native country with my forfeit life. Sir, this is all I would entreat of you.
You're modest in your suit, the more you use me, the more I think you love me, therefore this night •le get you waftage ore for France, such Sea apparel as I use my self, you shall accept part, here's ten pounds in gold, and wheresoever you shall live hereafter, pray let me once a year receive from you some brief or note• Isle not return your love idle• or empty handed.
My life's yours, and lesser satisfaction then my life is much too little.
Much too much, no more, no more I do entreat you, I am now upon a voyage to the Straits my self, but twill be two days hence.
Heaven be your guide, as I find you, so find friends in your need, blushing I run into your co•ntless detbts, more sums of love then all my horde can pay, but if these black adventures I survive,
E•en till this mortal body lie engraved,
You shall be Lord of that which you have saved
Only your love, come we'll provide this night
For you safe waftage, and your secret flight.
Speak with us, why what's the business?
Nay, that's more then I can resolve you upon the sudden, it may be there's some great fortune fallen to him of late, and he would impart the benefit to you.
Nay then let's go, where shall we find him?
A word to the wise, it may be that hoe's in some monstrous ex∣tream necessity, and would gladly borrow some money of you, or so.
I, said thou so? now I remember me, I needs must home, I have some business, Isle see him at some other time.
Nay but one word more.
We cannot stay now.
Nor I, a great occasio• calls me hence.
Nay then I see you are apt to take a man at the worst still, if you knew what little need he hath to borrow, borrow quoth he, a good jest, you know he and I, my fellow Phil and I amongst other works that my Master uses to put us to, we use to dig and delve; now if we have found a pot a money, and would trust you with the laying of it out, why so?
How?
Marry even so, you know his Father is such a dogged old Cor∣mudgeon, he dares not for his •ars acquaint him with.
Prithee go on.
It were kindness in him to choose you out of all the friends he hath in the world to impart this benefit to, were it not? and say true.
Troth he was always a kind honest youth, and would it lay in me to pleasure him.
In truth or me, he should command my purse and credit both.
Where might we speak with him;
Hard by Sir, hard by, but stay Gentlemen, suppose there is no such matter as finding of money, but what we mist in digging to supply his present necessities he hopes to find from you, I promise you I partly doobt such a matter.
How I forgot my self, I needs must home.
Troth nor can I stay.
In sooth nor I.
Gentlemen whither so fast, I sent to speak with you.
I can assure you Sir, they are better to speak withal then to borrow money of, one word or two with you my friends (by your leave Master) Gentlemen I love you well, and that you may know I love you, I would ma•e bold to reveal a secret to you, my young Ma∣ster here, though you see him in these homely Accoutraments, simple as you stand here, he has more to take to then Isle speak of, he might, I marry might he, he might go brave and shine in pearl and gold; he hath now in his instan• possession a thousand pound thick.
A thousand pounds?
Nay old lads, he hath learnt his 1, 2, 3, 4, &amp; 5. And never cost him ten shillings.
Five thousand pound?
You know where you hear it, Mum, here's your tale and your tales Man.
Good, good, proceed.
Now lift up your large ears and listen; to whom should he reveal all this wealth, but to some friend? and how should he know a friend but by trying of him; and how should he try a friend but by troubling of him? and how should he trouble a friend but by borrow∣ing money of him? now Gentlemen it may be at first he will make his case poor and pitiful to you.
Only to try us.
Only to try you, have you no brains? do you think we have need of money? has any of you occasion to use a hundred pound? need of money, as I said before, so I say again, only to try you, be has done the like to four or five that I know; now because they would not pity his supposed poverty, he would not acquaint them with this infi∣night mass of wealth; you have wi•s, brains, apprehension, if he makes his case known to you lay it on, if I said lay it on, lay it on, you are not every body, if I had not seen some sparks in you, you had not been the men, lay it on.
Enough, enough, I understand thee fully, kind Master Phi•ip will you use my aid in my fair employment.
Sir or mine.
Or mine.
Worthy friends, even one as all freely to speak, as you are Gentlemen, and I from my childhood have protested love, as you are Christians; therefore to the poor, such as I am, should be most charity∣ble, help with your plenty to relieve my wants, you know my labour, and have seen my need, then take some pity of my poor estate, and help to
ransom me from slavery, by lending me some money.
Did I not tell you so? Lay it on.
Sir you shall have a hundred pound of me.
What need you use him and my self so near.
Trouble not them Sir, you shall hate of me:
Take it Master, take it all.
Oh Heavens! where slept this friendship all this while? who said that charity was fled to heaven, and had no known abiding here on earth; see these that know me disinherited, and to have no means to supply my wants, strive who should most engage his purse and credit to one so much oppressed with poverty.
Alas sir, you see their kindness, I told you how strange he would make it; Lay it on.
Pray Sir accept my kindness,
Pray take mine.
Pray Master take their courtesies.
Isle use them all, and only borrow twenty pounds a pee•e to stock a poor farm for my wife and me, some threescore pounds will do it.
Now, now, lay it on.
Take it all of me.
Why all of you Sir, is not mine as ready?
When one can do it, what need you trouble three? but for the thousand pound Sir, do not think but you may trust me with the whole employment of all such moneys, and never trouble these.
What thousand pound?
Though it be six thousand I durst be steward of so great a sum.
Why Master Fellow Phil?
Do you mock me Gentlemen, my wealth amounts not to a thousand straws.
I told you he would make it strange; lay it on.
Make not your wealth so dainty, for we know you have at least six thousand pound in bank, you may impart it unto us your friends.
Who hath deluded you, derided me, and make a mockery of my poor estate, now I protest I have not in the world more riches then these garments on my back.
If possible, why here's my tale and my tales man.
No Sir you are deceived, here is your tale and you your self are your tales man, for you carry it about you; the truth is Gentlemen
that we have betwixt us both no more crosses then you see.
Only the late hope of those sixty pounds promised by you •urged and uncompelled may raise my ruined fortunes.
Will you disbursed it all that were so forward?
I have no money, do it you for me.
It is but one mans labour do it your self, if you have none I have less, God be with you, one stays for me at home.
Nay take me with you Sir:
Why Gentlemen will you revault your words.
I have no money.
But now you strived which man should lend me most.
But then we reckoned Sir without our host,
Then we supposed you rich, but being grown poor,
I have made a foolish vow to lend no more.
I have made the like, you know your father threatens
To disinherit you, and should we lend,
You being poor, should of our purses spend.
Though I be poor, heaven may enable me.
Heaven may do much• that's all the beggars saying,
Let me horde wealth, you seek for wealth by praying.
The time may come ere long, so I divine
T• punish those that at their power rapine.
Whither away so fast sirrah in the Queens name, I command you stay,
What are you that look so big?
A Pursevant.
If you be so pursey, can you lend's any money, I assure you it was the last business we were about; or else tell me the reason why you stay my passage.
Sirrah I have a Proclamation to publish, and because my self am somewhat hoarse, and thou hast a large wide mouth, and a laudable voice I charge thee for the better understanding of the multitude to speak after me word by word.
If it be nothing else, do but advance me and Isle speak high e∣nough, come now, and teach me my new lesson.
Whereas two famous Rovers on the Sea.
Whereas two famous Rogues upon the Sea.
Pus•r and Clinton:
That lost their purses at the Clink.
Long since proclaimed Pirates.
Long since proclai∣med spirits.
Notwithstanding her Majesties commission.
Notwithstanding her Majesties condition.
Still keep out.
And will not come in.
And have of late spoiled a Ship of Exet•r.
And have of late spoiled all the sheep in the Exchequer.
And thrown the chief Merchant over board.
And thrown the Merchants cheeses over-board.
I therefore in her Majesties name.
I therefore in the name of her Majesty.
Proclaim to him or them.
Proclaim to them or him.
That can bring in these Pirates Ships or Heads.
That can bring in these Pie•rusts or Sheeps-heads.
A thousand pound sterling.
A thou∣sand Stares and Starlings.
If a banished man his country.
If a man he shall be banished his country.
If a con∣damned man liberty.
I a man at liberty condemned.
Besides her Majesties especial favour.
Besides her Majesties spectacles and favour.
And so God save the Queen.
And have you done now Sir?
I have, farewell.
Farewell Mr. Pursevant: he hath so filled my head with procla∣motions.
NOw valiant mates you have maintained this fight with cou∣rage and with wonted hardiment: the spoil of this rich ship we will divide in equal shares, and not the meanest of any, but by the custom of the sea may challenge according to his place, rights in the spoil: though Out-laws, we keep laws amongst our selves, else we could have no certain government.
A gallant prize, and bravely purchased too, with loss of blood on both sides. A sea fight was never better managed nor exploited with more exchange of hostile opposition, we did not look for such a valiant spirit in any Merchants breast; nor did we think a ship of such small burden, so weakly manned, would have endured so hot and proud a fight.
Nor did I think the providence of heaven would so have favour∣ed men of base condition, such as profess wrong, piracy and theft, have spoiled my men, and ransacked every corner of my surprised bark; seized all my substance, and shared amongst you my best merchandise; and not alone undone me, and in me all that are mine, but in overwhel∣ming us shook the estate of all my creditors.
Whats that to us? men of our known condition must cast behind
our hacks all such respects, we left our consciences upon the land when we began to rob upon the sea.
We know we are Pirates, and profess to rob, and would not have us freely use our trade? If thou and thine be quite undone by us, we made by thee, impute it to thy fortune, and not to any injury in us;
For he that's born to be a beggar know
How ever he toils and trafficks must dye so.
If you must needs possess this thriving trade, yet since the seas afford such choice of store, you might methinks have spared your own countrymen.
Nay since our country have proclaimed us pirates, and cut us off from any claim in England, we will be no longer now called English men.
Clinton I know thee, and have used thy skill, ere now in a good vessel of my own, before thou took this desperate course of life, per∣haps if now thou dost me a good office, time may enable me to quit thy love.
Troth I could wish we had light of any other, but since thy fate hath cast thee upon us, we must neglect no opportunity; for they that intermit advantages, must know occasions head is bald behind. My mer∣rye mates come top your cans apace, pile up your chests with prizes to the lids, and stuff the vast hold of our empty ship with such rich wares as this our prize affords; supple your biscuits with such choice of wines
As freely come brought by the auspicious winds
To unlade themselves and seek for stowage here;
Since wine comes freely lets make spare of beer.
Let cans of wine pass round in healths through all, such golden prizes come not every day, nor can we always meet such choice of spoils: First bind the Merchant, lay him fast in hold, and having seized all his best Merchandise, pierce with your ordnance through his ships crazed keel, and sink her down into the deep abyss, whence not all the Cranes in Europe or the world can weigh her out again.
Let it be so, Lest she prove prize unto a second foe.
Be it as my fate shall please, my loss I value but as goods lent me, now to be paid back, but that which most afflicts my sorrowful soul, is that my friends have ventured largely with me, especially my Sister, who I fear will brook that ill which I with patience bear.
P•ace him below the hatches as our prisoner, and now to part our purchase bravely won, even with the hazard of our dearest lives.
The danger past still makes the purchase sue•. Come first drink round my merry mates, that done, divide in peace what we by war have 〈◊〉
Gentlemen, and my merry mates at sea, those special sa∣vours you have crowned me with, can never be deserved upon my part, so weak is my ability and knowledge in navigation and exploits at sea; yet since your loves so far exceeds my worth, that of an unexperienc•d Gentleman you have preferred me above many other, to be your Cap∣tain, and command your Ship, I hope to bear my self so even and up∣right in this my charge, that it shall not repent you of the least honour to my grace decreed.
Our Captain being lately slain in fight, we by your valour escaped our enemies, and made their ship our prize, since we first knew you all our attempts succeeded prosperously, and heaven hath better blessed us for your sake.
When first we took you to our fellowship, we had a poor bark of some fifteen tun, and that was all our riches, but since then we have took many a rich prize from Spain, and got a gallant vessel stoutly manned, and well provided of Ordnance and small shot, men and ammu∣nition, that we now dare cope with any Caressed that do's trade for Spain.
We dare do any thing that stands with justice, our countries honour, and the reputation of our own names; but amongst all our spoils I wonder we have escaped the valiant Pirats that are so much renowned upon the sea, that were a conquest worth the hazarding, besides a thou∣sand pounds reward proposed to that adventurer that can bring them in, my peace and pardon though a man condemned, is by the proclamati∣on ratified.
The ocean scarce can bear their outrages, they are so violent, confounding all, and sparing none, not their own countrymen, we could not do our country greater service then in their pursuit to en•age our lives.
I could we meet those Rovers on the sea, so famous for their piracies and thefts, so feared of all that trade for Merchandise, so proud of their strong vessels and stout ging, that man her with their proud Artillery that thunders wrack to every ship alike; oh with what ardour and inflamed desire would we in the mid sea encounter them! Climb to the main-top, boy, see what you ken there.
I shall, I shall Sir.
We seek for purchase, but we tak't from foes, and such is held amongst us lawful spoil•; but such as are our friends &amp; countrymen we succour with the best supply we have of victuals or munition being distressed.
Ho there.
Ha boy.
A sail.
Whence is she?
That I cannot ken; she appears to me out of our hemisphere no bigger then a Crow.
Descry her better, oh that it were the desperate Pirates Ship, on that condition we might grapple straight, and try our desperate fortunes on even change, but I that have been born to misery can never be so happy; oh my fate when shall I pass away this tedious night,
Or when my stars will you burn out more bright.
Boatswain, ho.
Whence comes thy ken?
She makes from South to West.
How bears she?
To the Lee ward.
Clap on more sails and quickly fetch her up. What colours bears her main-top?
She's not so near in ken.
Discover her more amply, now my mates prepare your selves, for it may be some prize; you Master Gunner load your ordnance well, and look well to your cartridges and fire; see that your gunner room be clear and free, your matches bear good coals, your priming powder pounded, not dank; next charge your Murderers for fear of boarding: Stearsman part the Helm, and bear up towards them, be they friends or foes we will hale them if heaven please; and Master you heed well your compass, Boatswain with your whistle command the Say∣lors to the upper deck to know their quarters, and to hear their charge.
Captain, ho.
The news? whence is her flag?
She bears the Cross of England and St. George.
Then she's a friend for England, and St. George our gallant vessel in her main-top bears, and all our preparations needless then.
Arm rather, for I see them from a far make all provision for a present fight, they have managed their hatches, hung their pendants out, displayed their Ensigns, up with all their feights, their matches in their cocks, their smoking Linstocks are likewise fired within their Gunners hands; and hark they shoot already.
Come descend; the Pirate, Fortune thou art then my friend. Now valiant friends and soldiers man the deck, draw up your feights, and lace your drablers on, whilst my self make good the Forecastle, and ply my Musket in the front of death, quarter your selves in order, some abaft, some in the Ships waste, all in martial order; our Spright-sayl• Top sail, and Top-gallant, our Main-sail, Boar-spright, and our Mizzen too are hue•g with waving pendants, and the colours of England and St. Goo•g ply in the Stern. We fight against the foe we all desire,
Alarm Trumpets, Gunner straight give fire.
Give them a full broad-side; oh Mr. Gunner your upper tire of Ordnance shot over; you gave not one shot betwixt wind and water in all this skirmish.
Sir, you speak not well, I pierced them with my chase piece through and through; part of their Capstring too I with a Piece abaft shot over∣board.
Oh it was a gallant shot, I saw it shatter some of their limbs in pieces: Shall we grapple, and lay their Ship aboard? where be these Irons to hook 'em fast?
I fear they are too well manned; for see the Gunner ready to give fire unto their Murderers if we stay to board 'em: Shall we set sail and leave 'em.
How can we when our Ship has sprung a leak? being ready now to founder in the sea; some ply the Pump: oh for one lucky bullet to take their Mainmast off; he that can make it shall have a treble share in this next prize.
I shall go near it from my lower tyre.
Gunner do that, it is all that we desire.
Where is the Gunner Captain?
Where he should not be, at his prayers I think: Is this a time to pray, when the Seas mouth seems to spit fire, and all the billows burn. Come hand with me, and we will board the Pirates instantly.
Hoist up more sails, and fetch 'em roundly up, and with their gallant vessel grapple straight.
I spy the Pirats in the very prow and forehead of their Ship, both wafting us with their bright swords: now Steersman take thy turn; and Boatswain with your baser trumpets sound mingle your whistles shrill, oh it is a Music the Mermaids love.
Who hates it thats a soldier?
Thy Linstock Gunner, take thy level right,
The wind is ours to help us in the fight.
It blows a stiff gale, it makes all for us, every Commander once more to his charge, he that this day shall dye dies honourably; the Canon• Basilisks, and Ordnance shall tooll his funeral peal, and some now sound, shall dye three deaths in one, shot, burnt, and drowned.
Come spare no powder till you see our Ship,
Whose hard tough ribs hewed from the heart of oak,
Now black with pitch be painted blew with smoke.
First thanks to heaven for this great victory bought with the fearful hazard of our lives, and large expense of blood on either part.
We now are captives that made others thrall,
Thus ebbs may flow, and highest tides may fall.
The latest day must come to have his date;
Stars govern all, and none can change his fate.
Such prisoners as these Pirats keep in hold, release them straight, the riches of their ship we amongst you will divide in equal shares, to every mans desert, estate, and place.
Fortune I spit defiance in thy face: Thy best we have tasted, an thy worst we know, we can but pay what we to nature owe.
Surprised again, whose prisoner am I now? I am Fortunes ball, whither am I bandied, having lost al before, is it possible that I can now be made a second prize? I lost my wealth in my first hostile strife,
And nothing now is left me save my life.
These prisoners we will at our further leisure peruse and know their fortunes and estates.
That captain I should know• that face of his is with mine eye fa∣miliar, sure it is he whose life I by my Sisters means preserved, with money and apparel furnished him, and got him place at sea and hath he now for∣got me, what not know me, the world right, when rich we honour, be•ing poor we spite: ne'er look so strange, I do not mean to claim ac∣quaintance of such men as are ingrate: All my good deeds once done I throw behind, whose meed in heaven, not earth I look to find.
That Merchant I have known, and now I better surveigh him, it is the man to whom I owe all that I have, my fortunes, nay my life; what reason have you Sir to fly me so, since unto you, and to my brothers wife, my hopes, my power, my whole estate is due,
From whom my means and all my fortunes grew.
Do you know me then.
Thin• you I can forget, or slightly cancel such a countless debt, behold my ship, my conquest, and my prize, these prisoners with my full command is yours;
Yours, only yours, they at your service rest,
Alas dear friend how came you thus distressed?
These Pirates robbed me, and have ceised my goods with which they have stuffed their hold; my brothers venture with mine own substance th•• have made their spoil.
All which behold I re-deliver you, and to the utmost far∣thing will restore; besides I make you partner in our prize, and herein am I only fortunate to prove a grateful debtor.
Your gratitude exceeds all courtesy, both of my Sisters party and my own.
It comes much short of either; oh dear Sir should I forget your friendship showed in want, and done in my extremest po∣forty, it were a sin, of heaven unpardonable; this Pirats Ship load with your merchandise you shall straight man for England; where arrived, commend me to the mirror of her sex, your Sister, in the humblest phrase you can, to whom deliver, as from me, this jewel, the best our voyage yields; tel her from me, that Gentleman whose innocent life she saved, hath by that token her remembrance craved, to my brother, and my Sister this small sum to buy their service from their fathers hand, and free them from his slavish servitude.
I shall doe all your will, and thus o'rsway'd,
Needs must report your debts are doubly paid.
Having my pardon purchased, and my prisoners delivered to the sentence of the Law, my next affairs shall be to visit her.
Our case is otherwise, our next affairs
Is to betake us to our Beads and Prayers.
Be as be may, base fortune I defy,
We bravely lived and Isle as boldly dye.
Hoist sail for England with our long wished prize,
Whilst we applaud that fortune he defies.
You're welcome Gentlemen, come take your places as your de∣grees are: wife the chair is yours; my loving boys sit, let the servants wait.
Brother, that's you.
This day I do entreat you Gentlemen after the Tables ended, to be witness unto some deeds that must inherit these, and him that is my eldest quite disable, to which I must entreat your friendly hands.
Mine still is at your service.
So is mine Sir.
O day long looked for.
Now shall we live like two young Emperors; oh day worthy to be writ in the Almanac in red Letters for a most famous holiday.
Well jest on Gentlemen, when all is tried,
I hope my patience shall exceed your pride.
Wait at my elbow with a clean trencher Phil: doe your duty, and have your due, you know your place, be ready with a glass of beer, and when I say fill, fill.
If please your worship here is a manner, or a kind of some foul desire to have some conference with you.
A sea foul?
Yes a Sea-gul, I mean a Mariner, he says he hath some news to tell you from my Mistress her brother at sea.
Touching my venture, prithee guide him in.
He smells as they say of pitch and tar, if you will have him to perfume the room with his sea musk. Isle show him the way iustantly.
I prithee do, and that with expedition.
I did not look thus soon to hear from him.
I fear some strange mishap hath late befallen him.
Now honest friend the news, how fares my brother?
How doth my venture prosper?
Sir, your Ship is taken, all your goods by Pirats seized, your bro∣there prisoner, and of all your venture there's not the value of one penny saved.
That news hath pierced my soul, and entered me quite through my heart, I am on the sudden sick, sick of I fear a mortal ma∣lady; oh, oh.
How is it with my father?
Worse and worse, the news of such a great and weighty loss kills all my vitals in me.
Father, for heavens sake father dye not yet before you have made over your land.
That were a jest indeed, why •ather, father?
Trouble me not, if I survive this nig•, you two shall be my heirs.
This night if it be thy will.
Alas, how fare you Sir?
Take courage father.
Son lead me hence, and bear me to my bed, my strength doth fail, I cannot help my self.
Run, run for the writings, they are ready drawn at the Scrive∣ners, bid him bring them quickly with a vengeance.
Let them alone, my hand hath not the strength to guide my pen, let them alone I say, support me to my bed, and my kind neighbours,
Assist me with your prayers, for I divine
My soul this night shall amongst Angels shine.
Marry heaven forbid, can he find no time to die but now? come let's in, &amp; haunt his ghost about the writings.
It is strange the bare report of such a loss should strike a man so deeply to the heart.
I oft have read the like, how some have dyed with sudden joy, some with exceeding grief.
If he should dye Intestate, all the land falls to the elder brother,
and the younger have nothing save mere from his courtesy.
I know it, neither lands nor movables. Come lets hear what further news within.
O my Master, my Master, what shall I do for my poor Master, the kind churl is departed, never did poor hard-hearted wretch part out of the world so like a lamb; alas for my poor usuring, extortioning Master, many an old widow hast thou turned into the street, and many an orphan made beg their bread; oh my sweet, crul, kind, pitiless, lo∣avenge, hard hearted Master, he's dead, he's dead, he's gone, he's fled and now full low must lye his head. Oh my sweet, wild, kind flinty, mild, un∣charitable master.
Dead on the sudden! it is exceeding strange, yet for the eldest son it happens well.
Ill for the younger brother.
Jack.
Will.
The land's gon.
Fathers dead.
We have made a fair hand on it, have we not? who shall fill the glass now, and wait upon our trenchers?
Nay who must go to plough, and make clean the hen-roust, rub horse-heels, lead the wains, remove the billets, cleanse the shoal, and and indeed who must do all the drudgery about the house?
Could he find no time to dye but now? I could even cry for an∣ger: here they come.
My fathers dead.
Alas for my dear husband.
Comfort your self, although he die intestate it shall not hurt you; we have found you kind, and shall be now as willing to requite you, as able: How now brothers, do you weep? and bear a part with us in hey∣vines? no, no, your griefs and ours is contrary; I grieve I have lost a father, she a husband, this doth not move you; you lamenting stand, not for a fathers loss, but loss of land: do you remember with what rude de∣spite, what base contempt, and slavish contumely you have despised me and my dear loved wife.
We partly remember it.
So do not I; I have forgot it quite, in sign whereof, though had you got my lands, heaven knows how ill you would have dealt with me, thus Isle use you receive your patrimony.
No more fellow Phil now, but here receive your proportions.
Your diet if you please is at my table, or where you please if you refuse my kindness.
Kindness unlooked for, thanks gentle brother. Jack, why this gold will never be spent.
Oh it is an easy thing to bring this mountain to a molehil.
This is more of your courtesy then our deserving, to trouble your table being so many Ordinaries in town, were somewhat superfluous.
Spend but in compass, rioting eschew, waste not, but seek to increase your patrimony, beware of dice and women; company with men of best desert and quality; lay but these words in your hearts enroled, you'll find them better then these bags of gold.
Thanks for your coin and counsel: Come Jack this shall be la∣visht among the suburbs; here•s drink money, dice money, and drab mo∣ny, here's money by the back, and money by the belly; here's that shall make us merry in Claret. Muskadine, and Sherrey: farewell, brother.
My most bounteous brother.
Farewell young Masters.
And now my wild friends, such as fawn on plenty, and cannot bear the very name of want.
We have found the Mine now.
You that disabled once the power of heaven, and scorned my state unable to be raised.
You see here's your Tale, and your Talesman.
Take heed lest here for your unthankfulness, that once raised, doe not remove your estates (God be with you) henceforth however you speed, trust not in riches, and despise not need.
One threescore pound will do it.
Mother, the thirds of all my Fathers lands are yours; with what∣soever you like else; and now sweet Sue it glads me I shall make thee partner of all this plenty that bore part with me in all extreme noses∣sities.
You are all my wealth, nor can I taste of want whilst I keep you; O would these fortunes raise my down cast Father, or repeal my Brother, my banished brother to his native home, I were in all my thoughts at peace with heaven.
All that I have is theirs; my only sorrow, next to my father, is in part for them, and next for your dear brother tan at Sea, whose loss if he survive we will repair even with the best of our ability; but come unto our fathers burial first, whom though his life brought sorrow, death content, we cannot but with funeral tears lament.
And now no fellows unless it be at footbal.
Heaven being just could not deal longer roughly with one so virtuous and completely honest, he merits all he hath, but to my state. I am at once doubly unfortunate, I have lost a husband and a brother •oo.
A husband, Sister, but no brother, lo that brother lives.
And can it heaven be so?
You are the cause I live.
I brother? how? tidings were brought into this place but now your ship was spoiled, you prisoner.
And it was true, yet all these losses I regained by you.
By me?
By you and Sister thus it was; you saved the life of a young Gentleman• whom for your sake I furnished out to sea, he when my ship was taken, I surprised, and bound, and cast in hold, restored my fortunes, and besides all my merchandise restored, wherein you bare chief venture, made me sharer of the rich Pirats prize.
That Gentleman!
The self same in whose life you did save your self some thousand pounds, I have as further token of his gratitude, in this choice jewel he commends to you millions of gratulations and kind thanks, besides un∣to his Sister store of gold to redeem her wretched husband and her self from my deceased brothers slavery, which now I see pale death hath done for them.
You speak of unexpected novelties, with which we will ac∣quaint their sorrowful souls; these tokens will be joyful to them both, and tidings of his safety welcomer then that great sum by him re∣gained at •ea.
We do them wrong to keep news of such joy
So long from them, which we'll no longer smother,
Two thousand pounds I bring you and a brother.
NOW how is it with thee Clinton?
Well, well.
But vvas't not bet•er when we reigned as Lords, nay Kings at Sea, the Ocean was our realm, and the light billows in the which we sayl'd our hundreds, nay our shires, and provinces, that brought us an∣nual profit, those were days.
Yes golden days, but now our last night's come, and we must sleep in darkness.
Worthy mate we have a flash left of some half hour long, that let us burn out bravely, not behind us leave a black noisome snuf of cow∣ardise in the nostrils of our noble countrymen; lets dye no base example.
Thinks Tom wanton, whom storms could never move, tempests daunt, rocks terrify nor swallowing gulphs affright, to whom the base abyss in roughest rage showed like a pleasant Garden in a calm, and the Sea-monsters but like beasts at land of profit or pleasure Clinton can be affrighted with a halter? hemp him strangle that thinks of him so basely.
In that word thou hast put a second sentence of our lives; yet Clinton never was it my thoughts of thee: oh the naval triumphs thou and I have seen, nay our selves made, when on the seas at once have been as many bonfires as in Towns, kindled upon a night of Jubilee, as many Ordnance thundering in the Clouds as a• Kings Coronations, and dead bodies heaved from the hatches, and cast over-board, as fast and thick as in some common Pest when the Plague sweeps Cities.
That it had swept us then too, so the seas had been to us a glo∣rios monument, where now the fates have cast us on the shelf to hang twixt air and water.
Gentlemen, your limited hour draws nigh.
I that's the plague we spoke of, yet no greater then some before have tasted, and hereafter many be bound to suffer (and if Purser, as dying men seldom deem amiss) presage not wrong, how many gallant spirits, equal with us in fame, shall this gulf swallow, and make this sell∣ver oar to blush in blood? how many Captains that have awed the seas shall fall on this unfortunate piece of land? some that commanded Lands, some to whom the Indian Mines paid Tribute, Turk veiled: but when we that have quaked, nay troubled floods, and made Armadoes fly be∣fore our stream, shall founder thus, be split and lost,
Then be it no impeachment to their fame,
Since Purser and bold Clinton bide the same.
What is our Ship well tackled? we may launch upon this desperate voyage.
Corded bravely.
Call up the Boatswain, soundly lash the slave with a ropes end; have him unto the Chest, or duck him at the Mainyard.
Have me to the chest, I must first have you to the Gallows, and for Ducking, I'm afraid I shall see you duckt and drakt too.
Oh you brave Navigators that have seen, or ever had your selves command aboard, that knew our Empire there, and our fall now, pity at least us that are made the scorn of a base common Hangman.
Thou doest ill to offend them in their deaths.
I have, and long to make an end of them.
Had thou but two months since wrinkled a brow, looked but askew, much less unloosed thy lips to speak, speak said I? nay but lodged a thought, or murmur of the least affront to us, thee, basest of all worms meat, I had made unwholesome food for Haddocks: but I have done.
Enough Tom Wanton, with these sheets not sails, a stiff gale blows to split us on yo• rock.
And set sail from the fatal Marshal seas, and Wapping is our har∣bore,
a quick sand that shall swallow many a brave Marine soldier, of whose valour, experience, skill, and Naval discipline, being lost, I wish this land may never have need: but what s•are must we sail by? or what compass?
I know not the star, but here's your compass.
Yes that way points the Needle, that way we steer a sad course, plague of the Pilot; hear you Mr. Sheriff, you see we wear good clothes, they are paid for, and our own, then give us leave our own amongst our friends to distrib•te: There's, Sir, for you.
And you.
The work man made them took never measure on a Hangmans back; wear them for our sakes, and remember us; there's some content for him too.
Thank your worships.
I would your knaveship had our worships place, if hanging now be held so worshipful.
But now our Sun is all setting, night comes on, the watery will∣dearness ore which we reigned, proves in our ruins peaceful, Mr. Chantes trade fearless abroad as in the rivers mouth, and free as in a harbour, then fair Thames, Queen of fresh water, famous through the world, and not the least through us, whose double tides must o'rflow our bodies, and being dead, may thy clear waves our scandals wash away, but keep our valours living; now lead on Clinton, thus arm in arm lets march to death, and wheresoever our names are memorised,
The world report two valiant Pirats fell,
Shot betwixt wind and water; so farewell.
A fathers blessing, more then all thy honours crown thee, and make thy fortunes growing still: Oh heavens I shall be too impor∣tunate to ask more earthly favours at your hands; now that you after all these miseries have still reserved my son safe and unscorn'd. Besides thy pardon and thy countries freedom, what favours hath her Grace conferred on thee?
More then my pardon and the meed proposed, to grace the re•t, she styled me with the order of Knighthood, and for the service of my country, with promise of employments of more weight: the Pirats were committed to the Marshalseas, condemned already, and this day to dye: and now as part of my neglected duty, it rests I visit that fair Gen∣tlewoman to whom I stand indebted for my life; that necessary duty once performed, out of my present fortunes to distribute some present comfort to my Sisters wants.
A grateful friend thou art, a kind dear brother, and a most loving son.
Sir, more then all these fortunes now befallen me, a fate amidst all disaster unexpected, my noble brothers late success at sea hath filled me with a surplusage of joy, nor am I least of all endeared to you, to be the first reporter.
It is most true, and I the man that in the most distress had first share of his bounty.
Of his goodness we have had sufficient taste already, but to be made more happy in his sight would plenally rejoice us.
It would prove like surfeit after sweet meats.
See all my friends, but rst let me salute her to whom I am most bouud.
My most dear father.
My blessings meeting with a husbands love make thy years long and happy.
You are most grateful, and much beyond my merit.
O sp•re me, Sir, to •y into his arms that hath so long fled from me.
My s•eet S•ster.
Bar me not all the best frui•ion of what in part you have tasted: Sir, I am one amongst the rest that love you.
I take'• my Sisters husband, unto me therefore one most intir'd.
Sir the •am•, and I though last in my acknowledge∣meant, yet first in due arrear•ge.
You I know to be a worthy Merchant and my friend, to whose, next to your sisters •urtesie I stand engaged most for a forfeit life: But he next to the powers divine above, I ever must adore; and now fai• •reature I dare more boldly look upon the face of your good man then when I saw you last.
And that's some question.
Wherefore hath that word struck you with sudden sadness.
My husband!
He's late dead, and yet hath left her none of the poorest widows.
Dead did you say, and I a Bachelor, now on whom better or just•ier can I confer my self, then to be hers by whom I have my be∣ing, and live to her that freely gave me life? there is a providence that prompts t•o't, and I will give it motion: Gentle Lady, by you I am, and what I am by you, be then to me as I have styled you last, a Lady• hey∣vans have made you my preserver, to preserve me for your self, loosing a husband, who knows but you have saved me to that end, that lost name to recover; and by me sweet interchange and double gratitude: I left you sped, but find you now d•spoiled: Married you ventured for my single life; Widowed, by me to gain the name of wife.
What, pause you at the motion? you are not my Sister if you deny him.
Let me plead for him.
O doubly link me to you, be you styled my Brother and my Fa∣there.
With you let my age join, and make me proud to say, that in my last of days, barren of issue, I have got so fair a daughter.
Sweet, your answer.
Sir, I should much mistake my own fair ends,
Should I alone withstand so many friends.
I am yours, and only so.
I yours the same, and Lady now I kiss you by that name.
What kissing already! then I smell another wedding towards, and in no fitter time then now: prepare your selves Gentlemen and Gentlewomen; make a hall; for I come to present you with a Mask.
What Mask?
Not such as Ladies wear upon their faces, to keep the foul from the fair, but a plain Mask, or rather more properly I may call it a Mum∣ing, because the presenters have scarce a word to speak for themselves.
If there be any that appear as friends, and come to grace our feast in curtsy, admit 'em prithee.
That shall I Sir, and with all expedition,
And that without drum, without fife, or musician.
These two lines shall serve for the Prologue: now enter scena prime, Dramatis personae; these be the Actors, yet let me entreat you not to condemn them before you hear them speak.
Amazement startles me: are these my brothers?
By the Fathers side it should seem; for you know he was a hard man, and it should seem it is but a hard world with them.
And these my false friends that distrusted heaven, and put their faith in riches; I pray Gentlemen how comes this change?
How comes this change say you? no change of pastors, which they say makes fat calves, but change of drink, change of women, change of ordinaries, change of gaming, and one wench in the change• all these helped to make this change in us.
And change is no robbery, I have been robbed, but not at ruff, yet they that have robbed you see what a poor stock they have left me: A whore stole away my Maidenhead, ill company my good conditions, a broker robbed me of my apparel, drink of my wits, and dice of my money.
This is no more then expectation: but how come you thus al∣tered?
If you had said hal••red, Sir, you had gone more roundly to the business.
Sir, there was coining laid to my charge, for which (though I acquit my self) I made my estate over unto a friend (for so I thought him) but now he has cozened me, and turned me out of all.
In dead of night my counting house was broke op by thieves, and all my coin (which was my whole estate, and god I then did trust in) stole away, I left a forlorn beggar.
O wondrous, why this passes.
It may pass amongst the rest for a scurvy jest, but never like Mother Passes Ale, for that was knighted.
Ale knighted! how I prithee?
You have heard of Ale Knights, therefore it is not improbable that Ale may be knighted.
Thy reason?
Why there is Ale in the town that passes from man to man, from lip to lip, and from nose to nose, but mother Passes double Ale I assure you, Sir-passes, therefore knighted.
Leave trifling, for more serious is the object offered before our eyes: In these heavens justice, in these a most remarkable president to teach within our height to know our selves; of which I make this use; you are my brothers (a name you once disdained to call me by) your wants shall be relieved: you that distrusted heavens providence, and made a mock of want and others misery, no more deride; part of your loss shall be by me supplied according to my power.
My noble brother, you teach us virtue, of which I could wish all those that see good days make happy use, so those distressed; for both theres president, but to our present nuptials; reverent Father dear Lady, Sister, Friend, nay brothers too, but you Sir, most conjoined and endeared.
In us the world may see our fates well scened,
F•rtune in me by Sea, in you by Land.

