THE Gods of Greece, whose deitles I raised
Out of the earth, gave them divinity,
The attributes of Sacrifice and Prayer
Have giuē old Homer leave to view the world
And make his own presentment. I am he
That by my pen gave heaven to Iupiter,
Made Neptunes Trident calm, the curled waives,
Gave Aeolus Lordship ore the warring winds;
Created black haired Pluto King of Ghosts,
And regent ore the Kingdoms fixed below.
By me Mars wars, and fluent Mercury
Speaks from my tongue. I placed divine Apollo
Within the Suns bright Chariot. I made Venus
Goddess of Love, and to her winged son
Gave several arrows, tipped with Gold and lead.
What hath not Homer done, to make his name
Live to eternity? I was the man
That flourished in the worlds first infancy:
When it was young, and knew not how to speak,
I taught it speech, and understanding both
Even in the Cradle: Oh then suffer me,
You that are in the worlds decrepit Age,
When it is near his universal grave,
To sing an old song; and in this Iron Age
Show you the state of the first golden world,
I was the Muses Patron, learnings spring,
And you shall once more hear blind Homer sing.
The old Vranus, son of the Air &amp; Day
Is dead, and left behind him two brave sons,
Titan and Saturn.
2. Titan is the eldest,
And should succeed by the true right of birth.
But Saturn hath the hearts of al the people,
The Kingdoms high applause, his mothers love,
The least of these are steppes unto a crown.
But how will Titan bear him in these troubles,
Being by nature proud and insolent,
To see the younger seated in his throne,
And he to whom the true right appertains,
By birth, and law of Nations quite cast off?
That either power or steel must arbitrate:
Causes best friended have the best event.
Here Saturn comes.
Behold what nature skanted me in years,
And time, below my brother; your applause,
And general love, fully supplies me with:
And make me to his crown inheritable.
I choose it as my right by gift of heaven,
The peoples suffrage, the dead Kings bequest,
And your election, our fair mother Queen,
Against all these what can twelve moons of time,
Prevail with Titan to dis-herite vs.
The Cretin people, with shrill acclamations
Pronounce thee sovereign ore their lands and lives,
Let Titan storm, and threaten strange revenge,
We are resolved thy honour to maintain.
Titan, thy ruin shall attempt in vain
Our hearts ad-here with Uestaes our late Queen,
According to our sovereigns late bequest,
To kneel to Saturn.
We accept your loves,
And we will strive by merit to exceed you.
In just requital of these favours done.
Arm Lords, I hear the voice
Of Titan storming at this strange election.
Descend proud upstart, tricked up in stolen weeds
Decked in usurped state, and borrowed honours,
Resign them to their owner, that's to me.
Titan keep off, I charge thee near me not,
Lest I thy bold presumption seal with blood.
A Crown's worth tugging for, &amp; I will have it
Though in pursuit I dare my ominous Fate.
Down with the usurper.
Saturn here shall stand,
Immovable; upheld by Vistas hand.
Am I not eldest?
Ey but youngest in brain.
Saturn the crown hath ceased, and he shall reign.
Am I a bastard, that my heritage
Is wrested from me by a younger birth?
Hath Vesta plaid th'adulteresse withsome stranger?
If I be eldest from Vranus loins,
Your molten Issue, why am I debarred
The law of Nations? am I Vistas son?
Why doth not Vesta then appear a mother?
Was younger Saturn bedded in your womb,
Nearer your heart then I, that hoe's affected
And I despised? If none of these, then grant me,
What Justice wills, my interest in the Crown:
Or if you make me out-cast, if my Mother
For get the love she owes, I shall abandon
The duty of a son. If Saturn prove
Unnatural, I'll be no more a brother,
But maugre all that have my right withstood,
Revenge my wrongs, &amp; make my way through blood.
Titan we both acknowledge thee a brother,
And Vistas son, which we'll express in love,
But since for many virtues growing in me
That have no life in you, the Queen, the Peers,
And all the people, with loud suffrages,
Have shrild their Auees high aboue the clouds,
And styled me King, we should forget their loves
Not to maintain their strange election.
Advise you therefore, since this bold adventure
Is much aboue your strength, to arm your self,
In search of future honours with our love,
For what can Titan do against a people?
Saturn advises well, list to his counsel.
If my own land prove thus unnatural,
I'll purchase foreign aid.
Rather compound.
Let Titan make demand of any thing
Saving our Crown, he shall enjoy it freely.
Titan, your brother offers royally,
Accept his love.
To loose a Crown includes
The loss of all things. What should I demand?
This grant him Saturn, since thy insinuation
Hath wrought him quite out of the Cretins hearts,
That Titans warlike issue may succeed thee.
Lycaon well advised, he during life,
Shall reign in peace, no interruption,
Shall pass from Titan to disturb his reign,
So to our Giant race thou wilt assure
The crown as due by right inheritance.
To cut off all hostile effusion
Of human blood, which by our difference
Must needs be spilt upon the barren earth,
We'll swear to this accord.
Conditiond thus,
That to deprive all future enmity
In our succeeding Issue, thy male children
Thou in their Cradle strangle.
Kill my sons?
Or swear to this, or all our warlike race,
Dispersed in several Kingdoms Il'e assemble,
To conquer thee, and from thy ambitious head,
Tear that usurped Crown.
Titan, thy friendship
We'll buy with our own blood, all our male children,
(If we hereafter shall have any borne)
Shall perish in their births, to this we swear,
As we are King and Saturn.
I the like,
As I am Titan, and Vranus son:
This league confirmed, all my Allies I'll gather
Search foreign climes, in which Il'e plant my kin,
Scorning a seat here where I am despised,
To live a subject to a younger birth.
Nor bow to that which is my own by due.
Saturn farewell, Il'e leave thee to thy state,
Whilst I in foreign Kingdoms search my Fate.
Think on thy oath.
First stay with vs and feast,
Titan this day shall be King Saturns guest.
There is no dallying, you must come with all speed,
For Madam Sibilla is grown a great woman.
That is without question, for she is now a Queen.
Nay, she is greater then many Queens are: for though you may think she is with ancient folks: yet I can assure you she is with child, you may imagine, being now but morning she is new risen, yet it is thought that ere noon she will bee brought a bed. I never heard she was committed to prison: yet it is looked every hour when she shall be delivered, and there∣fore Nurse I was sent to you in all haste.
Is she so near her time?
Yes: and yet tic thought she will notwithstanding hold out, because she is groaning.
Your reason?
Because you know the proverb: A grunting horse, and a groaning wife never deceive their Moister: say, will you make haste Nurse?
What's the best news abroad?
The best news abroad is, that the Queen is likely to keep at home: and is it not strange, that half an hours be∣ing abroad should make a woman have a months mind to keep in. But the worst news is, that if the King have a young Prince, hee is tide to kill it by oath: but if his majesty went drunk to bed, and got a girl, she hath leave to live till she dye, and dye when she can live no longer.
That covenant was the most unnatural
That ever father made: one lovely boy
Hath felt the rigour of that strict decree,
And if this second likewise be a son,
There is no way but death.
I can tell you more news: the king hath sent to the Oracle to know whether my Lady be with child of a boy or a girl, and what their fortunes shall be: the Lord that went, is looked for every day to return with his answer: it is so Gos∣sipped in the Queens chamber, I can tell you. O Nurse wee have the bravest king, if thou knew all.
Why I pray thee?
Let his virtues speak for himself: he hath taught his people to sow, to plow, to reap corn, and to scorn Ache∣horns with their heals, to bake and to brue: we that were wont to drink nothing but water, have the bravest liquor at Court as passes. Besides, he hath devised a strange engine, called a Bow and Arrow, that a man may hold in hand, and kill a wilde beast a great way off, and never come in danger of his clutches. I'll tell you a strange thing Nurse, last time the King went a hunting, he kilt a bear, brought him home to be baked and ea∣ten: A Gentlewoman of the Court, that sed hungerly upon this pie, had such a rumbling and roaring in her guts, that her In∣trails were all in a mutiny, and could not be appeased. No phi∣sick, would help her, what did the King but caused an ex∣cellent Mastiff to be knocked in the head, and dressed, gave it to the gentlewoman, of which when she had well eaten, the flesh of the Mastiff worried the bear in her belly, and ever since her guts have left rambling. But come, come, I was sent in hast, the Queen must needs speak with you.
You shall no more be lodged beneath the trees,
Nor chamber underneath the spreading Oaks:
Behold, I have deuis'd you forms for tools,
To square out timber, and perform the Art
Of Architecture, yet unknown till now.
I'll draw you forms of Cities, Towns and Towers,
For use and strength, behold the models here.
Saturnes inventions are divine, not humane,
A God-like spirit hath inspired his reign.
See here a second Art of Husbandry,
To till the earth, to plow, to sow, to plant,
Deuis'd by Saturn: here is gold refined
From Grosser metals, silver, brass, and tin,
With other minerals, extract from earth.
I likewise have found out to make your brooks,
Rivers and 〈◊〉 by practise Navigable.
Behold a form to make your Criers and Barks
To pass huge streams in safety, dangerlesse.
Saturn is a God.
The last, not least, this use of Archery,
Thostringed, bow, and nimble-fethered-shaft:
By this you may command the flying foul,
And reach her from on high: this serves for war,
To strike and wound thy foe-man from a far.
What means this acclamation?
Tic thy people,
Divinest Saturn furnished with these uses,
(More then the Gods have lent them) by thy means.
Proclaim to thee a lasting deity.
And would have Saturn honoured as a God.
We'll study future profits for their use,
And in our fresh inventions prove divine.
But Gods are never touched with my suspires,
Passions and throbs: their God-like Issue thrive,
Whilst I unmanlike must desttoy my babes.
Oh my strict oath to Titan, which confounds
All my precedent honours: one sweet babe,
My youngest Ops hath felt the bloody knife,
And perished in his swathing: And my Queen
Swells with another Infant in her womb,
Ready to taste like rigour. Is that Lord
Returned from Delphos yet?
He is.
Admit him: now what doth the Oracle
Speak by the Delphian Priest.
Thus mighty Saturn.
After our Ceremonious Rites performed,
And Sacrifice ended with reverence,
A murmuring thunder hurried through the Temple.
When fell a pleasant shower, whose silver drops.
Filed all the Altar with a roseate dew.
In this amazement, thus the Delphian God,
Spake from the Incensed Altar: Lord of Create,
Thus say to Saturn: Sibill his fair wife,
Is great with a young Prince of Noble hopes,
That shall his fathers virtues much excel,
Cease on his Crown, and drive him down to Hell.
The Gods (if there be any above our self)
Envy our greatness, and of one that seeks
To bear himself above man, makes me more wretched
Then the most slavish bruit. What shall my Sibill
Bring me a son; that shall depose me then?
He shall not; I will cross the Deities,
I'll tomb th'usurper in his Infant blood,
I'll keep my oath; Prince Titan shall succeed,
Maugre the envious Gods, the brat shall bleed.
Way for the dowager Queen,
How fares ourmother?
How i'st with fair Sibilla, our dear Queen?
Your Queens delivered.
Of some female birth,
You Deities I beg: make me oh Heavens,
No more inhumane in the tragic slaughter
Of princely Infants, fill my decreed number
With Virgins, though in them I loose my name
And kingdom, either make her barren ever
Or else all generatiue power and appetite
Deprive me: lest my purple sin be styled
Many degrees above murder. What's her birth?
Shoe's the sad mother of a second son.
Be ever dumb, let everlasting silence
Tong-tye the world, all humane voice henceforth,
Turn to confused, and vndistinguisht found,
Of barking Hounds, hoarse bears, &amp; howling wolves,
To stop all rumour that may sell the world
With Saturnes tyranies against his sons.
Ah, did but Saturn see you smiling babe,
He would give it life, and break ten thousand oaths
Rather then suffer the sweet infant dye,
His very look would beg a quick reprieve
Even of the tyrant Titan saw the uncle
With what a graceful look the Infant smiles,
He would give it life, although he purchased it with loss of a great Kingdom.
Then spare the lad: I did offend too much
To kill the first, tell Sibill he shall live,
I'll be no more so monstrous in my rigour,
Nor with the blood of Princes buy my Crown.
No more their Cradles shall be made their Tombs,
Nor their soft swathes become their winding sheets:
How can my subjects think Il'e spare their lives,
That to my own can be so tyrannous?
Tell Sibill he shall live.
Vesta will be that joyful messenger.
Stay, let me first reward the Oracle,
It told me Sibill should produce a son,
That should his Fathers virtues much excel,
Cease on my Crown, and drive me down to Hell.
Must I then give an Infant-traitor life,
To sting me to the heart? the brat shall bleed.
Sweet son.
Dear sovereign.
He that next replies,
Mother or friend, by Saturnes fury dyes.
Away, fetch me his heart, brim me a bowl
With his warm blood. Tyrant, my vow I'll keep,
Life newly wakend, shall as newly sleep.
Worse then a bruit, for bruits preserve their own
Worse then the worst of things is Saturn grown.
Command the child to death.
Tyrant, I will.
Tigers would save whom Saturn means to kill,
It is my son whom I command to death,
A Prince that may succeed me in my Throne,
And to posterity revive my name.
Call Vesta back, and bid her save the Babe.
I'll do it my Lord.
Yet stay: the lad to kill
I save my oath, and keep my kingdom still.
Post after her and charge them on their lives,
Send me the babes blood in a cup of gold,
A present which I'll offer to the Gods.
Delay not, be it our mother, nay our wife,
Forfeits her own to save the Infants life.
I shall inform them so.
Is this a deity,
To be more wretched then the worst on earth,
To be deprived, that comfort of my issue,
Which even the basest of my land enjoy:
Il'e henceforth for my rigour hate my self,
Pleasures despise, and joys abandon quite.
The purest blood that runs within my veins,
I'll dull with thick, and troubled melancholy,
Il'e war with comfort, be at odds with solace,
And league with nothing but distemprature.
Henceforth my vnkem'd lockes shall knot in curls,
Razor nor any edge shall kiss my cheek,
Until my chin appear a wilderness,
And make we wild in knowledge to the world.
Perpetual care shall cabin in my heart,
My tyranny I'll punish in my self,
And save the Gods that labour—
Saturns disturbance to the world shall be,
That planet that infuses melancholy.
Is not our mother Vesta yet returned,
That made herself th'unwilling messenger,
To bring the king news of his new-borne son?
Madam, not yet.
Mother, of all that ever mothers were
Most wretched. kiss thy sweet babe ere he dye,
That hath life only lent to suffer death.
Sweet Lad, I would thy father saw thee smile,
Thy beauty and thy pretty Infancy,
Would mollify his heart were it hewed from flint,
Or carved with Iron tools from the corsicke rock,
Thou laugh to think thou must be kilt in jest.
Oh if thou needs must dye, I'll bethy murdresse,
And kill thee with my kisses (pretty knave)
And can thou laugh to see thy mother weep?
Or art thou in thy cheerful smiles so free
In scorn of thy rude fathers tyranny?
Madam, the King hath slain his first borne son,
Whom had hee seen alive, he would not have given
For ten such Kingdoms as he now enjoys,
The death of such a fair and hopeful child,
Is full as much as Titan can demand.
He shall spare this sweet babe, I'll ransom thee
With my own life, the knife that pierces thee,
Will wound thy mothers side, and I shall feel
The least sharpe stroke from his offensive steel.
The mother Queen's returned.
How looks she Nurse?
Let her not speak, but yet a little longer
My hopes hold in suspense: oh me most wretched,
I read my Lords harsh answer in her eye,
Her very looks tell me the boy must dye.
Say, must he? must he? kill me with that word,
Which will wound deeper then King Saturnes sword.
The boy must dye.
Oh!
Look to the Queen, she faints.
Oh let's not loose the mother with her infant,
The loss of one's too much.
Oh wher's my child?
Isle hide thee in my bed, my bosom, breast,
The murderer shall not find my little son,
Thou shalt not dye, be not afraid my boy.
Go tell the King hes mine as well as his,
And I'll not kill my part: one he hath slain,
In which I had like interest: this I'll save,
And every second son keep from the grave.
Fobeare sir, for this place is privileged,
And only for free women.
Yet is the Kings command above your decree,
And I must play th'intruder against my will.
The King upon your lives hath charged you,
To see that infant Lad immediately
Receive his death, he stays for his warm blood
To offer to the Gods. To think him slain,
Sad partner of your sorrows I remain.
Madam you hear the king doth threat our lives
Let's kill him then.
Is he inexorable?
Why should not I prove as severe a mother
As he a cruel father: since the King
Hath doomed him, I the Queen will do it my self,
Give me the fatal Engine of his wrath,
Il'e play the horrid murdresse for this once.
I'll kiss thee ere I kill thee: for my life,
The Lad so smiles, I cannot hold the knife.
Then give him me, I am his Grand-mother,
And I will kill him gently: this sad office
Belongs to me, as to the next of kin.
For heavens sake when you kill him, hurt him not.
Come little knave, prepare your naked throat,
I have not heart to give thee many wounds,
My kindness is to take thy life at once. (Now.)
Alack my pretty Grand-child, smile thou still?
I have lust to kiss, but have no heart to kill.
You may be careless of the kings command,
But it concerns me, and I love my life
More then I do a sucklings, give him me,
I'll make him sure, a sharpe weapon lend,
I'll quickly bring the yongster to his end.
Alack my pretty knave, it were more then sin,
With a sharpe knife to touch thy tender skin.
On Madame, hoe's so full of Angel grace
I cannot strike, he smiles so in my face.
I'll wink &amp; strike, come once more reach him hither:
For dye he must, so Saturn hath decreed,
Alas for a world I would not see him bleed.
No shall he do, but swear me secrecy,
The babe shall live, and we be dangerlesse,
O bless me with such happiness.
Attend me.
The king of Epires daughters, two bright maids,
Owe me for many favours the like love,
These I dare trust, to them I'll send this babe
To be brought up, but not as Saturns son.
Do but provide some trusty messenger,
My honour for his safety.
But by what means shall we delude the king,
A young Kids heart, swimming in reeking blood
We'll send the King, and with such forged grief,
And counterfeit sorrow shadow it,
That this imposture never shall be found.
Oh twice my mother you bestow upon me,
A double life thus to preserve my boy.
Give me the child, I'll find a messenger,
Shall bear him safe to Melliseus Court.
The blood and heart I'll presently provide,
T'appease the rage of Saturn.
First lets swear,
To keep this secret from King Saturnes ear.
We will, and if this plot pass undiscovered
By like devise we will save all your sons.
About our tasks; you some choice friend to find,
I with my feigned tears the King to blind.
WHat cannot women's wits? they wonders can
When they intend to blind the eyes of man.
Oh lend me what old Homer wants, your eyes,
To see th'euent of what these Queens devise.
This past so currant, that the third son borne,
Called Neptune, was by like devise preserved,
And sent to Athens, where he lived unknown,
And had in time command upon the seas.
Pluto the youngest was sent to Tartary,
Where he in process a strange City built
And called it Hell, his subjects for their rapine,
Their spoils and theft, are Devils termed abroad.
Thus melancholy Saturn hath surviving
Three Noble sons in several confines placed
And yet himself thinks sonne-lesse: one fair daughter
Hight Iuno is his sole delight on earth.
Think kind spectators seventeen summers past,
Till these be grown to years, and Iupiter
Found in a cave by the great Epyre King,
(where by his daughters he before was hid.)
Of him and of his fortunes we proceed,
My iournie's long, and I my eye-sight want.
Courteous spectators, left blind Homer stray,
Lend me your hands to guide me on your way.
After long war, and tedious differences,
Betwixt King Melliseus and our self,
What crave the Epyre Lords?
This King Lycaon,
Since truce and hostage hath tan up these broils,
And ended them in peaceful amity,
Since all the damadge by the Epyrians done,
Is on our part abundantly made good:
We come Lycaon to demand the like
Of thee and of thy Kingdom, and for proof,
That all our malice is extinct and dead,
We bring thy hostage back, demanding ours.
Receive him Lords, a Banquet instantly,
You shall this day brave Epyre feast with vs,
And to your board your hostage shall be brought,
There to receive him freely, mean time sit,
And taste the royal welcomes of our Court.
Lycaon's just in keeping these conditions
So strictly with a reconciled foe.
But fair prince, tell me whence you are derived,
I never heard King Melliseus had
A Prince of your perfections?
This demand
Startles my blood, being borne I know not where,
Yet that I am of gentry at the least,
My Spirtt prompts me, and my noble thoughts
Give me approved warrant, being an infant
Two beauteous Ladies found me in a cave,
Where from their voluntary charity,
Bees fed me with their honey, for that cause
The two bright Ladies called me Iupiter,
And to their Father Melliseus brought me,
My Foster-father, who hath trained my youth,
In feats of Arms, and military prowess,
And as an instance of his dearest love,
Hath honoured me with this late Embassy.
We are satisfied: Princes sit round and feast,
You are this day Lycaons welcom'st guest.
This meat distastes me, doth Lycaon feast vs
Like Cannibals? feed vs with humane flesh?
Whence is this portent?
Feed Epyrians, eat,
Lycaon feasts you with no common meat.
But wher's the Epyre Lord we left as hostage?
Behold him here, hoe's at the table with you,
This is the Epyres head, and these his limbs,
Thinks Melliseus that Lycaon can
(Descend of the valiant Tytanoys)
Bury his hatred, and intoombe his spleen
Without revenge? blood in these wars was shed,
And for that blood your hostage lost his head.
Bear wrong that list, &amp; those can brooke it best,
I was not borne to suffrance: thoughts mount hye,
A King hath wronged me, and a King shall dye.
Treason, treason.
Down with the tyrant, and that hateful crew,
And in their murdrous breasts your blades imbrue.
Our guard.
Iupiter and the Epyriens beat off Lycaon and his followers.
Lycaon's fled, make good the palace gates,
And to the amazed City bear these limbs,
So basely by the tyrant massacred.
Happily his subjects by our words prepared
May shake their bondage off, and make this war,
The happy means to rid a tyrant thence.
Bear in your left hands these dismembered limbs,
And in your right your swords, with which make way,
Courage brave Epyres, and a glorious day,
Lycaon's once more fled, we by the help
Of these his people, have confined him hence,
To whom belongs this Crown?
To Iupiter.
None shall protect our lives, but Iupiter.
A Iupiter, A Iupiter.
Nay we are far from such ambition, Lords,
Nor will we entertain such royalty.
Fair Prince, whō heaven hath sent by miracle,
To save vs from the bloudyest tyrannies,
That ere were practised by a mortal prince,
We tender thee our fortunes: oh vouchsafe
To be our Lord, our Governor, and King,
Since all thy people jointly have agreed,
None of that tyrants issue shall succeed.
A Iupiter, A Iupiter.
We not refuse the bounty of the Heavens
Expressed in these your voices; we accept
Your patronage, and against Lycaons tyrannies
Henceforth protect you: but our conquest yet
Is all uncertain, second vs dear subjects,
To assure our conquests: first we must provide
Our safety, ere attempt the helm to guide.
What mean these horrid &amp; these shrill alarms
That fright the peaceful Court with hostle cries?
Fear and amazement hurry through each chamber;
Th'affrighted Ladies light the darkest rooms
With their bright beauties: whence (ô whence ye Gods)
Are all you groans, cries, and inhumane sounds
Of blood and death: Licaon, where is he?
Why in this dire and sad astonishment
Appears not he to comfort my sad fears,
And cheer me in this dull distemprature?
The Iron bared doors, &amp; the suspected vaults,
The Barricaded gates, and every room,
That boasted of his strength, is forced to obey
To our free entrance: nothing can withstand
Our opposite fury. Come, let's ransack further,
But stay, what strange dejected beauty's this
That on the sudden hath surprised my heart,
And made me sick with passion?
Hence away,
When we command, who dares presume to stay?
Bright Lady.
You affright me with your steel.
These weapons Lady come to grace your beauty
And these my arms shall be your sanctuary
From all offensive danger: cheer your sorrow,
Let your bright beauty shoot out of this cloud,
To search my heart, as it hath dazed my eyes.
Are you a Queen enthroned aboue the Elements,
Made of divine composure, or of earth,
Which I can scarce believe?
I am my self.
Uncivil stranger, you are much to rude,
Into my private chamber to intrude:
Go call the King my father.
Are you their•
Lycaons daughter? (wonder without end,
That from a Fiend an Angel should descend.)
Oh Love, till now I never felt thy dart:
But now her painted eye hath pierced my heart.
Fair, can you love?
To be alone I can.
Women, fair Queen, are nothing without men:
You are but ciphers, empty rooms to fill,
And till men's figures come, vncounted still.
Shall I sweet Lady, add unto your grace,
And but for number-sake supply that place.
You're one too many, and of all the rest,
That bear men's figure, we can spare you best.
What are you sir?
We are Pelasge's King,
And these our subjects.
These did of late belong
To King Lycaon (Oh injurious wrong)
Oh suit your pity with your Angell-beauty,
And live Pelasge's Queen.
Give me a funeral garland to lament,
That best becomes my wretched discontent.
The sun-shine of my smiles and iocond love,
Shall from your brows bright azure Elements,
Disperse all clouds: behold my crown is yours.
My sword, my conquest, I am of my self,
Nothing without your soft compassionate love?
For proof, ask what the heaven, earth, air, or sea
Can yield to men by power or orison,
And it is yours.
Sir, I shall prove your love.
Pray use me Lady.
You'll grant it me my Lord.
By all my honours, and by all the sweets
I hope for in your loves fruition,
Your wil's your own.
You'll not revoke your word?
Be it to invest whom I did late degrade,
I'll do it for you, bright and divinest maid.
This only freedom to your captive give
That I a Nun and professed maid may live.
More cruel then the tyrant that begat thee,
Had thou asked love, gold, service, Empery,
This sword had purchased for Calisto all.
Oh most unkind, in all this vniuerse,
Ther's but one jewel that I value hye,
And that (unkind) you will notlet me buy:
To live a maid, what first? it is to live nothing:
It is like a covetous man to hoard up treasure,
Bared from your own use, and from others pleasure.
Oh think fair creature, that you had a mother,
One that bore you, that you might bear another:
Be you as she was, of an Infant glad,
Since you from her, have all things that she had.
Should all affect the strict life you desire,
The world it self should end when we expire:
Posterity is all, heavens number fill,
Which by your help may be increased still,
What is it when you loose your mayden-head,
But make your beauty live when you be dead
In your fair issue?
Tush, it is all in vain,
Dian I am now a servant of thy train.
Her order is mere heresy, her sect
A schism, amongst maids not worthy your respect.
Men were got to get; you borne others to bear.
Wrong not the world so much: (nay sweet your ear)
This flower will wither, not being cropped in time,
Age is too late, then do not loose your prime.
Sport whilst you may, before your youth be past.
Loose not this mowld that may such fair ones cast,
Leave to the world your like for face and stature,
That the next age may praise your gifts of nature.
Calisto if you still grow thus precise,
In your strict vow, succeeding beauty dies.
I claim your oath, all love with men adieu,
Dianae's Cloister I will next pursue.
And there all beauty shall be kept in jail,
Which with my sword: Ey with my life I'd bail:
What's that Diana?
She is the daughter of an ancient King,
That swayed the Attic sceptre, who being tempted
By many suitors, first began this vow:
And leaving Court betook her to the forests.
Her beauteous train are virgins of best rank,
Daughters of Kings, and Princes, all devoted
To abandon men, and choose virginity.
All these being first to her strict orders sworn,
Acknowledge her their Queen and Empress.
By all my hopes Calistoe's love to gain,
I'd wish my self one of Dianae's train.
Concerning your state business.
Well remembered.
Posts of these news shall be to Epyre sent,
Of vs, and of our new establishment.
Next for Calisto, (but of that no more.)
We must take firm possession of this state,
Our sword hath won, Licaon lost so late.
Hail beauteous Dian, Queen of shades,
That dwells beneath these shadowy glades,
Mistress of all those beauteous maids,
That are by her allowed.
Virginity we all profess,
Abjure the worldly vain excess,
And will to Diane yield no less
Then we to her have vowed.
The Shepherds, Satires, Nymphs, and Fawns,
For thee will trip it ore the lawns.
Come to the Forest let vs go,
And trip it like the barren Doe,
The Fawns and Satires still do so,
And freely thus they may do.
The Fairies dance, and Satires sing,
And on the grass tread many a ring,
And to their caves their ven'son bring,
And we will do as they do,
The Shepherds, &amp;c.
Our food is honey from the Bees,
And mellow fruits that drop from trees,
In chase we clime the high degrees
Of every steepy mountain,
And when the weary day is past,
We at the evening hie vs fast,
And after this our field repast,
We drink the pleasant fountain.
The Shepherds, &amp;c.
These sports, our Fawns, our Satyrs and our selves;
Make (fair Calisto) for your entertain:
Pan the great God of Shepherds, and the Nymphs
Of Meads and Fountains, that inhabit here,
All give you welcome, with their Rural sports,
Glad to behold a Princess of your birth
A happy Citizen of these Meads and Groves.
These Satyrs are our neighbours, and live here,
With whom we have confirmed a friendly league
And dwell in peace. Here is no City-craft.
Here's no Court-flattery simpleness and sooth
The harmless Chase, and strict Virginity
Is all our practise. You have read our orders,
And you have sworn to keep them,
Fair Calisto.
Speak, how esteem you them?
With reverence.
Great Queen, I am sequestered from the world,
Even in my soul hate mans society,
And all their lusts, suggestions, all Court-pleasures,
And City-curiosities are vain,
And with my finer temper ill agree,
That now have vowed sacred virginity.
We will not of your sorrows make recital
So lately suffered by the hand of chance:
We are from the world, &amp; the blind Goddess Fortune
We dare to do her worst, as living here
Out of her reach: Vs, she of force must spare,
They can loose nothing, that for nothing care.
Madam, devotion drew me to your service,
And I am now your hand-maid.
Wher's Atlanta?
Madame.
Is there no princess in our train,
As yet unmatched to be her Cabin-fellow,
And sleep by her?
Madam, we all are cuppled
And twined in love, and hardly is there any
That will be won to change her bed-fellow.
You must be single till the next arrive,
She that is next admitted of our train,
Must be her bed-companion, so tic lotted.
Come Fawns, and Nymphs, and Satyrs, girt vs round
Whilst we ascend our state, and here proclaim
A general hunting in Dianaes name.
There I strid too wide. That step was too large for one that professes the straight order: what a pitiful coil
shall I have to counterfeit this woman, to lisp (forsooth) to simper and set my face like a sweet Gentlewoman's made out of ginger-bread? shall I venture or no? My face I fear not: for my beard being in the nonage durst never yet look a Barber in the face. And for my complexion, I have known as browne Lasses as my self have gone for currant. And for my stature, I am not yet of that Giant size, but I may pass for a bone Robe, a Ronnceual a Virago, or a good manly Lass. If they should put me to spin, or to sow, or any such Gentlewomanlike exercise, how should I excuse my bringing up? Tush, the hazard is nothing, comp∣red with the value of the gain. Could I manadge this business with Art, I should come to a hundred pretty sights in a year, as in the Summer when we come to flea our smocks, &amp;c. I hope Diana doth not use to search her maids before she entertains them. But howsoever
Be my loss certain, and my profit none,
Tic for Calisto's love, and I will on.
We'll chase the Stag, and with our Beagles shrill,
The neighbouring Forests with loud eccho's fill.
Is this a heaven terrestrial that contains
So many earthly Angels? (O amazement)
Diana with these beauties circled round,
Pal'd in with these bright pales, bears more state,
Then Gods have lent them by the power of fate.
I am destroyed,
Soft, what intruder's that?
Command her hither.
Hail divinest Queen,
I come to do thee service.
A manly Lass, a stout Virago,
Were all our train proportioned to thy size,
We need not fear men's subtle treacheries.
Thy birth and fortunes?
Madam, I derive
My birth from noble and high parentage:
Respect of your rare beauty, with my love
And zeal I still bear to a virgins life,
Have drawn me to your service.
Welcome Lady. Her largeness pleases me, if she have courage proportioned with her limbs, she shall be Cham∣peon to all our wronged Ladies. You Atlanta, present her oath,
Madam you must be true
To bright Diana and her Virgin crew.
To bright Diana and her train I'll stand.
What can you do?
More then the best here can.
You shall vow chastity:
That's more then I can promise (well proceed
You never shall with hated man atone,
But lie with woman or else lie alone.
Make my oath strong, my protestation deep,
For this I vow by all the Gods to keep.
With Ladies you shall only sport and play,
And in their fellowship spend night and day.
I shall.
Consort with them at board and bed,
And swear no man shall have your maiden-head.
By all the powers both earthly and divine,
If ere I loos't, a woman shall have mine.
Now your're ours, you're welcome, kiss our hand,
You promise well, wee like you, and will grace you.
And if with our election yours agree.
Calisto here your bed-fellow shall be.
You Gods your will eternize me to your choice,
Madam I seal both with my soul and voice
Then hand each other and acquaint your self
And now let vs proceed in the pursuit,
Of our determined pastimes, dedicate
To the entertainment of these beauteous maids.
Satyrs and fawns ring out your pleasing quire,
This done, our Bugles shall to heaven aspire.
Follow, pursue, the Stag hath took the Mountain,
Come let vs climb the steep clefts after him,
Let through the air your nimble iauelinges sing.
And our free spoils home with the evening bring.
Follow, follow, follow.
The nimble Ladies have out-stript vs quite,
Unless we speed we shall not see him fall.
Wee are too slow in pursuit of our game;
Let's after tho; since they out-strip our eyes,
Run by their notes, that from their Bugles rise.
Hast gentle Lady, we shall loose our train,
And miss Dianai's pastime in the chase,
Hie then to stain our Iauelings gilded points
In blood of yon swift Stag, so hot pursued.
Will you keep pace with me?
I am tired already.
Nor have I yet been to these pastimes breathed,
Sweet shall wee here repose our selves a little?
And loose the honour to be first at fall?
Fear not, you shall come time enough to fall.
Either you must be so unkind to me,
As leave me to these deserts solitary,
Or stay till I have rest, for I am breathless
And cannot hold it out, behold a place
Remote, an Arbor seated naturally,
Trimmed by the hand of nature for a bower,
Screened by the shadowy leaves from the Suns eye.
Sweet will you sit, or on the verdure lye?
Rather then leave you, I will loose the sport
I'll find you pastime, fear not, Oh my Angel,
Whether wilt thou transport me, grant me measure.
Of joy, be free, I surfeit on this pleasure.
Come shal's lye down a little.
South I will.
I thirst in seas and cannot quaff my fill,
Behold before me a rich Table spread.
And yet poor I am forced to starve for bread:
We be alone, the Ladies far in chase,
And may I dye an Eunuch by my vow,
If bright Calisto you escape me now.
Sweet bed-fellow your hand, what have I felt,
Unless blancht snow, of substance not to melt?
You gripe too hard.
Good sooth I shall not rest
Until my head be pillowed on thy breast.
Lean on me then.
So shall I wrong mine eyes,
To leave your face to look upon the skies.
O how I love the, come let's kiss and play.
How?
So a woman with a woman may.
I do not like this kissing.
Sweet sit still,
Lend me thy lips, that I may taste my fill.
You kiss too wantonly.
Thy bosom lend•
And by thy soft paps let my hand descend.
Nay fie what mean you?
Prithee let me toy,
I would the Gods would shape thee to a boy,
Or me into a man.
A man, how then?
My sweet lye still, for we are far from men,
Lye down again. Your foot I oft have praised,
Ey and your leg: (nay let your skirt be raised)
I'll measure for the wager of a fall,
Who hath the greatest great, or smallest small.
You are too wanton, and your hand too free.
You need not blush to let a woman see.
My bareness I have hid from sight of skies,
Therefore may bar it any Ladies eyes.
Me thinks you should be fat, pray let me feel,
Oh God you tickle me.
Lend me your hand,
And freely taste me, note how I will stand,
I am not ticklish.
Lord how you woo,
We maids may wish much, but can nothing do.
I am weary of this toying.
Oh but I
In this Elisium could both live and dye.
I can forbear no longer, though my rape
Be punished with my head, she shall not scope.
Say sweet I were a man.
Thus would I rise,
And fill the Dales and mountains with my cries.
A man! (Oh heaven) to gain Elisiums bliss,
I'd not be said that I a man should kiss.
Come, lets go wound the Stag.
Stay ere you go,
Here stands one ready that must strike a doe.
And thou art she, I am Pelagius King,
That thus have singled thee, mine thou shalt be.
Gods, Angels, men, help all a maid to free.
Maugre them all you are mine.
To do me right,
Help fingers, feet, nails, teeth, and all to fight.
Not they, nor all Dianae's Angell-traine,
Were they in sight, this prize away should gain.
Young Iupiter doth force this beauteous maid,
And after would have made her his bright Queen.
But discontent she in the Forest staid,
Loath of Diana's virgins to be seen.
Oft did she write, oft send, but all in vain,
She never will return to Court again.
Eight moons are filled &amp; waned when she grows great
And young Ioues issue in her womb doth spring.
This day Diana doth her Nymphs entreat,
Unto a solemn bathing, where they bring
Deflowered Calisto, note how she would hide
That which time found, and great Diana spied.
Her crime thus found, shoe's banished from their crew,
And in a cave she child's a valiant son,
Called Arches, who doth noble deeds pursue,
And by Ioues gift Pelagia's seat hath won,
Which after by his worth, and glorious fame,
He hath trans-stil'd Archadia by his name.
But we return to Titan, who by spies
Hath learned, that Saturn hath kept sons alive.
He now assembles all his strange allies,
And for the crown of Create intends to strive.
Of their success, and fortunes we proceed,
Where Titans sons by youthful Jove must bleed.
Now are we strong, our giant Issue grown,
Our sons in several kingdoms we have planted,
From whence they have derived vs brave supplies,
From Sicily, and from the Aegean sea,
That of our son Aegeon bears the name.
We have assembled infinites of men,
To avenge vs on proud Saturnes perjury.
What I have said to Titan, Il'e make good,
Tic rumor'd Melliseus Foster-child
He that expulst me from Pelagia's Crown.
And in my high tribunal sits enthroned,
Is Saturnes son, and stiled Iupiter,
(Besides my daughter by his lust deflowered)
On vs the poor distressed Tytanoyes
He hath committed many out-rages.
All which we'll punish on K. Saturnes head,
I that have made the Aegean confines shake,
And with my powerful voice affrighted Heaven:
From whose enraged eyes the darkened skies
Have borrowed lustre, and Promethian fire,
Will fright from Create the proud Saturnian troop,
And thousand hack't and mangled soldiers bring
To entomb the glories of the Cretin King.
That must be left to great Enceladus,
The pride and glory of the Titans host.
I that have curbed the billows with a frown,
And with a smile have made the Ocean calm,
Spurned down huge mountains with my armed foot,
And with my shoulders lift the valleys high,
Will in the wrinkles of my stormy brow,
Bury the glories of the Cretin King,
And on his slaughtered bulk brain all his sons.
And what shall I do then?
Do thou stand still,
Whilst I the foes of Titan posh and kill.
Am I not eldest from great Titans loins,
The Saturnists hereditary scurdge?
Leave all these deeds of horror to my hand,
I like a Trophy ore their spoils will stand.
Why breath we then?
Come arm your sinewy limbs,
With rage and fury fright pale pity hence,
And drown him in the sweat your bodies still.
With hostile industry toss flaming brands
About your fleecy lockes, to threat their Cities
With death and desolation, let your steel
Glistering against the sun, daze their bright eyes,
That with the dread of our astonishment
They may be sunk in Lethe, and their grave
May be the dark vault, called oblivious Cave,
Are our Ambassadors to Saturn gone,
To let him know whence this our war proceeds?
Your message hath by this startled th'vsurper,
Set on them, waste their confines as we march,
And let them taste the rage of sword and fire,
Th'Alarm's given, and hath by this arriú'd
Even at the walls of Create, the citadel
Where the Cathedral Saturn is enthroned.
Warlike Aegeon and Enceladus,
Noble Lycaon lend vs your assistance
To forradge as we march, plant desolation
Through all this fertile soil, be this your cry;
Reuendge on Saturn for his perjury.
None speak, let no harsh voice presume to iarr
In our distressed care, I am all sad,
All horrout and afrightment, since the slaughter
And tragic murder of my first borne Ops,
Continued in the vnnat urall massacre
Of three young Princes: not a day hath left me
Without distaste, no night but double darkened
With terror and confused melancholy:
No hour but hath had care and discontent
Proportioned to his minutes not an instant:
Without remorse and anguish. Oh you crowns,
Why are you made, and mettald out of cares?
I am overgrown with sorrow, circumuailed
With multiplicity of distempratures,
And Saturn is a King of nothing else,
But woes, vexations, sorrows, and laments.
To add to these the threatenings of red war,
As if the murder of my Princely babes
Were not enough to plague an usurpation,
But they must add the rage of sword and fire,
To affright my people: these are miseries,
Able to be comprised in no dimension.
My father shall not macerate himself,
Isle dare to interrupt his passions,
Although I buy it dearly with his hate.
My Lord you are a King of a great people,
Your power sufficient to repulse a foe
Greater then Titan. Though my brothers births
Be crowned in blood, yet am I still reserved
To be the hopeful comfort of your age.
My dearest Iuno, beautiful remainder
Of Saturnes royal issue, but for thee
I had ere this with these my fingers torn
A grave out of the rocks, to have entombed
The wretched carcass of a caitiff King:
And I will live, be it but to make thee Queen
Of all the triumphs and the spoils I win.
Speak, what's the project of their invasion?
That the King of Create,
Hath not (according to his vows and oaths)
Slain his male issue.
Have I not their bloods
Already quaft to angry Nemesis?
Have not these ruthless and remorseless eyes,
(Vn-father-like) beheld their panting hearts
Swimming in bowls of blood? Am I not sonne-lesse?
Nay child-lesse too, save Iuno whom I love:
And dare they then? Come, our continued sorrow
Shall into scarlet indignation turn,
And my sons blood shall crown their guilty heads
With purple vengeance. Valiant Lords, set on,
And meet them to their last destruction.
March forward.
Stay, because we'll ground our wars
On justice: Fair Sibilla, on thy life,
I charge thee tell me, and dissemble not,
By all the hopes in Saturn thou hast stored,
Our nuptial pleasures, and affairs of love,
As thou esteem our grace, or vengeance fear,
Resolve me truly. Hast thou sons alive?
These tears, and that deiection on thy knee,
Accompanied with dumbness, argue guilt.
Arise and speak.
Let Saturn know, I am a Woman then,
And more, I am a Mother: would you have me
A monster, to exceed in cruelty
The sauadgest of Sauadges? Bears, Tigers, Wolves,
All feed their young: would Saturn have his Queen
More fierce then these? Think you Sibilla dare
Murder her young, whom cruel beasts would spare?
Let me be held a mother, not a murdresse:
For Saturn, thou hast living three brave sonncs.
But where? rather then to reveal to thee,
That thou may send, their guiltless blood to spill,
Here cease my life, for them thou shalt not kill.
Amazement, war, the threatening Oracle,
All muster strange perplexions about my brain,
And rob me of the true ability
Of my direct conceiuements. Doubt, and war.
Titans invasion, and my jealousy;
Make me unfit for answer.
Royal Saturn,
It was pity in the Queen so to preserve them.
Your strictness slew them, they are dead in you,
And in the pity of your Queen survive.
Divine assistance plunge me from these troubles,
Mortality here fails me, I am wrapped
In millions of confusions.
Arm, great Saturn,
Thy Cities burn: a general massacre
Threatens thy people. The big Tytanoys
Plow up thy Land with their inuasiue steel.
A huge vn-numbred army is at hand,
To set upon thy Camp.
All my disturbances
Convert to rage, and make my spleen as high
As is their topless fury, to encounter
With equal force and vengeance. Go Sibilla,
Convey my beauteous Iuno to the place
Of our best strength, whilst we contend in Arms
For this rich Cretin wreath: the battle done,
And they confined, we'll treat of these affairs.
Perhaps our love may with this breach dispense,,
But first to Arms, to beat th'intruders hence.
Enter Titan, Lycaon, Enceladus, Egeon.
Saturn gives back, and gins to leave the field.
Pursue him then unto that place of strength,
Which the proud Cretins hold impregnable.
This Gigomantichia be eternized
For our affright and terror: If they fly,
Toss rockkes, and tops of Mountains after them
To stumble them, or else entomb them quick.
They have already got into the town,
And barricadoed' against vs their Iron gates.
What means then shall we find to startle them?
What, but to spurn down their offenciue mures?
To shake in two their Adamantine gates,
Their marble columns by the ground sills tear,
And kick their ruined walls as high as heaven?
Pursue them to their gates, and about their City
Plant a strong siege. Now Saturn all my suffrances
Shall on thy head fall heavy, we'll not spare
Old man or babe. The Titans all things dare.
The heavens have for our barbarous cruelty
Done in the murder of our first borne Ops,
Powered on our head this vengeance. Where, oh where
Shall we find rcscue?
Patience royal Saturn.
Bid Wolves be mild, and Tigers pitiful,
Command the Lybian Lions abstinence,
Teach me to mollify the Corsicke rock,
Or make the Mount Chimera passable.
What Monarch wrapped in my confusions,
Can tell what patience means?
Oh royal Father!
Oh either teach me rescue from these troubles,
Or bid me everlastingly, ey ever
Sink in despair and horror,
Oh my Lord,
You have from your own loins issue reserved, that may redeem all these calamities.
Issue from vs?
From Saturn and Sybilla.
That royal Prince King of Pelagia,
And famous Melliseus foster-child,
Whom all the world stiles by the noble name
Of Iupiter, hee is King Saturnes son.
Thou hast Sybilla kept that son alive
That only can redeem me from this thraldom,
Oh how shall we acquaint young Iupiter,
With this his fathers hard success in Arms.
My care did ever these events foresee.
And I have sent to your surviving son,
To come unto your rescue; Then great Saturn,
In your wives pity seem to applaud the heavens,
That make me their relentfull minister,
In the repairing of your down cast-state.
If royal Iupiter be Saturnes son,
We shall be either rescued or revenged,
And now I shall not dread those Tytanois,
That threaten fire and steel.
Trust your Sybilla.
Thou art my anchor, and the only column
That supports Saturnes glory, Oh my Iupiter,
On thee the basis of my hopes I erect,
And in thy life King Saturnes fame survives.
Are messengers dispatched to signify
My son of our distress.
As far as Epire.
Where as we understand, Jove now remains,
Then Titan, and the proud Enceladus,
Hyperion and Aegeon with the rest,
Of all the earth-bread race we way you not,
Threaten your worst, let all your eyes spark fire.
Your flaming nostrils like Auernus smoke,
Your tongues speak thunder, &amp; your armed hands
Fling Trisulke lightning: Be you Gods aboue,
Or come you with infernal hatred armed,
We dread you not: we have a son survives,
Shall calm your tempests: beauteous Iuno comfort,
And cheer Sybilla, if he undertake
Our rescue, we from danger are secure,
Wee in his valour all our lives assure.
Fair Prince, for less by your deserts and honour.
You cannot be: your fortunes and your birth
Are both unknown to me: my two fair daughters
As a swathed infant brought you to my Court,
But whence, or of what parents you proceed
I am merely ignorant.
Then am I nothing,
And till I know whence my descent hath been,
Or from what house derived, I am but air,
And no essential substance of a man.
Help, help, for heaven sake help, I am pursued,
And by my son, that seems to threat my life,
Stay that bold lad.
What's he? false Iupiter?
Calisto, or I much deceive my self.
Oh thou most false, most treacherous, and unkind,
Behold Calisto by her son pursued,
Indeed thy son: this little savage youth
Hath liued' amongst Tigers, Lyons, Wolves, and Bears,
And since his birth partakes their cruelty.
Arches his name: since I Diana left,
And from her chaste train was diuorc't, this youth
I childed in a cave remote and silent.
His nurture was amongst the sauadges.
This day I by misfortune moved his spleen,
And he pursued me with revenge and fury,
And had I not forsook the shades and forests,
And fled for rescue to these walled Towns,
He had slain me in his fury: save me then,
Let not the son the mother sacrifice
Before the fathers eye.
Arches my son, my young son Arches, Iupiters first borne
Oh let me hug thee, and a thousand times
Embrace thee in mine arms. Lycaons grand-child
Calisto's son; Oh will you beauteous Lady
Forsake the forests and yet live with vs?
No thou false man, for thy periurious lusts
I have abandoned human subtelties:
There take thy son, and use him like a Prince,
Being son unto a Princess. Teach him Arts,
And honoured arms. For me: I have abjured
All peopled Cities, and betook my self
To solitary desetts. Jove adieu.
Thou proving false, no mortal can be ttue
Since she will needs be gone, be pleased then,
Wearied with beasts, I long to live amongst men.
Yet stay Calisto, why wilt thou out-runne
Thy Iupiter? She gone, welcome my son.
My dear son Arches, whom if fortune smile,
I will create Lord of a greater stile.
Save you sir, is your name K. Melliseus
We are Melliseus, and the Epire King,
Then this letter is to you, but is there not one in your
Court, called (let me see) have you here never a gibbit-maker?
Sir, here's one called Iupiter.
Ey Iupiter, that's he that I would speak with. Here's another letter to you, but ere you read it, pray let me ask you one question.
What's that?
Whether you, be a wise child or no?
Your reason?
Because I would know whether you know your own
father, but if you do not, hoping you are in good health, as your father scarce was, at the making hereof, These are to certify you.
News of a father! never could such tidings
Have glutted me with gladness.
For mine own part, though I know not what be∣longs to the getting of cbildren, yet I know how to father a child, &amp; because I would be loath to have this Parish troubled with you, I bring you news where you were borne. I was the man that laid you at this mans door, &amp; if you will not go home quietly, you shall be sent from Constable to Constable, till you come to the place where you were begot. Read further &amp; tell me more.
Is Iupiter then mighty Saturns son?
Am I the son of Saturn, King of Create?
My father baffled by the Tytanoys?
May all my toward hopes die in my birth,
Nor let me ever worthily inherit
The name of royalty, if by my valour
I prove me not descend royally,
I was the man that took pains with you, it was I that brought you in the hand-basket.
Should I have wished a father through the world,
It had been Saturn, or a royal mother,
It had been fair Sybilla, Queen of Create.
Great Epires King, peruse these tragic lines,
And in thy wonted bounty grant supplies
To free my noble father.
Iupiter, as I am Melliseus Epyres King,
Thou shalt have free assistance.
Come then, Arm,
Assemble all the powers that we can levy.
Arches, we make thee of Pelagia King,
As King Lycaons Gran-childe, and the son
Of fair Calisto. Let that Clime henceforth
Be called Arcadia, and usurp thy name.
Go then and press th'Arcadians to the rescue
Of royal Saturn, this great King and I
Will lead th'Epyrians. Fail me not to meet,
To redeem Saturn, and to rescue Create.
I have no mind to this buffeting: Il'e walk after fair and softly, in hope that all the buffeting may be done before I come. Whether had I better go home by land, or by sea? If I go by land, and mis-carry, then I go the way of all flesh. If I go by sea and mis-carry, then I go the way of all fish: I am not yet resolved. But howsoever, I have done my message so cleanly, that they cannot say, the messenger is bereaved of any thing that belongs to his message.
Down treacherous Lord, and be our foot-pace now
To ascend our high tribunal. Wher's that God-head
With which the people Auee'd thee to heaven?
It is sunk into the deep Abysme of hell.
Tear from his head the golden wreath of Create.
Tread on his captive bulk, and with thy weight
Great Titan, sink him to the infernal shades,
So low, that with his trunk, his memory
May be extinct in Lethe.
More then tyrannous
To triumph over the weak, and to oppress
The low dejected. Let your cruelty
Be the sad period of my wretchedness:
Only preserve my lovely Iuno's life,
And give Sibilla freedom,
By these Gods.
We neither fear nor value, but contend
To equal in our actions: both shall dye.
There shall no proud Saturnian live, to brave
The meanest of the high-borne Tytanoyes.
Raze from the earth their hateful memory,
And let the blood of Titan sway the earth.
Speak, are the ports and confines strongly armed
Against all invasions?
Who dares damadge vs?
Let all the passages be open left,
Unguarded let our ports and havens lye.
All danger we despise, mischance or dread
We hold in base contempt.
Conquest is ours.
Maugre divine, or base terrestrial powers.
Arm royal Titan, Arm Enceladus,
A pale of brandished steel hath girt thy land.
From the earths Caverns break infernal fires,
To make thy villages and hamlets burn.
Tempestuous ruin in the shape of war
Clouds all thy populous kingdom, At my heals
Confusion dogs me, and the voice of death
Still thunders in mine ears.
First possible? Bear Saturn first to prison
We'll after parley them.
Come Angels armed, or Diuels'clad in flames,
Our fury shall repell them. Come they girt
With power celestial, or infernal rage,
We'll stand their fierce opposure. Royal Titan,
Aegeon and Hyperion, d'on your arms,
Bravely advance your strong orbicular shields,
And in your right hands brandish your bright steel.
Drown your affrightments in the amazed sounds
Of martial thunder (Diapason'd deep)
We'll stand them, be they Gods; (if men,) expel
Their strengthless force, and stownd them low as hell,
Whence are you that intrude upon our confines?
Or what portend you in these hostile sounds
Of clamorous war?
Titans destruction,
With all the ruin of his giant race.
By what pretence or claim?
In right of Saturn:
Whom against law the Titans have deposed.
What art thou speak it?
I am Iupiter.
King Saturnes son, immediate heir to Create.
There pause, that word disturbs all thy claim,
And proves that Titan seats him in his own.
If Saturn (as thou say) hath sons alive,
His oath is broken, and we are justly seized
Of Crate's Crown by his late forfeiture.
Thy tongue hath spoke thy own destruction,
Since whom K. Saturn spared, our swords must kill,
And he is come to offer up that life
Which hath so long been forfeit.
Tyrants no:
The heavens preserved me for a further use,
To plague your Off-spring that afflict the earth,
And with your threatenings spurn against the Gods.
Now shalt thou pay me for Calisto's wrong,
Exiling me, and for dishonouring her.
Are you there Caniball? Man-eating woolfe?
Lycaon, thou art much beholding to me,
I womaned first Calisto, and made thee
A grand-father. Dost not thank me for it?
See heir's the Boy, this is Archadia's King.
No more Pelagia now, since thy exile.
To thee that stil'st thy self K. Saturnes son:
Know thou wast doomed before thy birth to dye,
Thy claim disabled, and in saving thee
Thy father hath made forfeit of his Crown.
Know Titan I was borne free, as my father,
Nor had he power to take that life away
That the Gods freely gave me. Tyrants see,
Here is that life you by Indenture claim,
Seize it, and take it: but before I fall,
Death and destruction shall confound you all.
Destruction is our vassal, and attends
Upon the threatening of our stormy brows.
We trifle hours. Arm all your fronts with horror,
Your hearts with fury, and your hands with death.
Thunder meet thunder, tempests storms defy,
Saturn and all his issue this day dye.
Wher's now the high and proud Enceladus,
To stop the fury of the Adverse foe,
Or stay the base flight of our dastard troupes?
Titan is slain, Hyperion strowes the earth,
And thousands by the hand of Iupiter
Are sent into black darkness. All that stand
Sink in the weight of his high Jovial hand.
To shun whose rage, Aegeon thou must fly.
Create with our hoped conquests all adieu.
We must propose new quests, since Saturnes son
Hath by his puissance all our camp ore-runne.
None stir, be all your arms cramp't &amp; diseased
Your swords vn-vsefull, may your steely glaues
Command your hands, and not your sinews them,
Till I by single valour have subdued
This murderer of my father.
Here he stands,
That must for death have honour at thy hands.
None interrupt vs, singly we'll contend,
And'twixt vs two give these rude factions end.
Two royal armies then on both sides stand,
To view this strange and dreadful Monomachy.
Thy fall, Saturnian, adds to my renown:
For by thy death I gain the Cretin Crown.
Death is thy due, I find it in thy stars,
Whilst our high name gives period to these wars.
Never was Saturn deified till now,
Nor found that perfectness the Gods enjoy.
Heaven can assure no greater happiness
Then I attain in sight of Iupiter,
Oh my dear son, borne with my painful throws,
And with the hazard of my life preserved,
How well hast thou acquitted all my travels,
In this thy last and famous victory?
This tells me, that you royal King of Create
My father is: and that renowned Queen
My mother: all which proves by circumstance,
That it is but duty, that by me's achieved.
Only you beauteous Lady stands apart,
I know not how to stile.
It is Iuno, and thy sister.
Oh my stars!
You seek to make immortal, Iupiter.
Iuno is only happy in the fortunes,
Of her renowned brother.
Royal Saturn,
If ever I deserved well as a victor,
Or if my warlike deeds, yet bleeding new,
And perfect both in eyes and memory
May plead for me: Oh if I may obtain,
As one that merits, or entreat of you,
As one that owes; being titled now your son,
Let me espouse fair Iuno: and bright Lady
Let me exchange the name of sister with you
And stile you by a nearer name of wife.
Oh be my spouse fair Iuno:
It is a name,
I prise'boue sister, if these grace the same.
What is it I'll deny my Iupiter?
She is thy own. I'll royalise thy nuptials
With all the solemn triumphs Create can yield.
Epyre shall add to these solemnities,
And with a bounteous hand support these triumphs
So all Archadia shall.
Then to our Palace
Pass on in state, let all rareties
Shower down from heaven a lardges, that these bridals may exceed mortal pomp. March, March, and leave me
To contemplate these joys, and to devise,
How with best state this night to solemnise.
Saturn at length is happy by his son,
Whose matchless and vnriual'd dignities
Are without peer on earth, Oh joy, joy? cursive
Worse then the throws of child-birth, or the tortures
Of black Cimmerian darkness. Saturn, now
Bethink thee of the Delphiun Oracle:
He shall his fathers virtue first excel,
Seize Create, and after drive him down to hell.
The first is past: my virtues are exceeded:
The last I will prevent, by force or treason.
I'll work his ruin here he grow too high.
His stars have cast it, and the boy shall die.
More sons I have, more crowns I cannot win,
The Gods say he must die, and tic no sin.
O blind ambition and desire of rain,
What horri'd mischief wilt not thou devise?
The appetite of rule, and thirst of reign
Besots the foolish, and corrupts the wise.
Behold a King suspicious of his son,
Pursues his innocent life, and without cause.
Oh blind ambition what hast thou not done
Against religion, zeal and natures laws?
But men are borne their own fates to pursue,
Gods will be Gods, and Saturn finds it true.
Saturn against his son his force extended,
And would have slain him by his tyrannous hand,
Whilst Iupiter alone his life defended.
But when no prayers his fury could withstand,
Hee used his force, his father drove from Create,
And as the Oracle before had told
Usurped the Crown, the Lords kneel at his feet,
And Saturnes fortunes are to exile sold.
But leaving him, of Dane that bright lass,
How amorous Jove first wrought her to his power,
How she was closed in a fort of brass,
And how he skal'd it in a golden shower,
Of these we next must speak, courteous and wise,
Help with your hands, for Homer wants his eyes.
Our unkind father double tyrannous,
To prosecute the virtues of his son,
Hath sought his own Fate, and by his ingratitude
Left to our head th'Imperiall wreath of Create:
Which gladly we receive. Neptune from Athens,
And Pluto from the lower Tartarie
Both welcome to the Cretin Iupiter.
Those Stars that governed our nativity,
And stripped our fortunes from the hand of death,
Shall guard vs and maintain vs.
Noble Saturn,
Famous in all things, and degenerate only,
In that inhumaine practise'gainst his sons,
Is fled vs, whom we came to visit freely,
And filial duties to express. Great Athens
The nurse and fostresse os my infancy,
I have instructed in the sea-mans craft.
And taught them truly how to sail by stars
Besides the unruly Jennet I have tamed
And trained him to the saddle for my practise.
The horse to me is soly consecrate.
I from the bounds of lower Tartarie
Have travelled to the fertile plains of Create.
Nor am I less in lustre of my same,
Then Neptune, or renowned Iupiter.
Those barren Kingdoms I have richt with spoils,
And not a people trafficks in those worlds,
For wealth or treasure, but we custom them,
And they enrich our coffers: our armed guards
Prey on their Camels, and their laden Mules,
And Pluto's through the world renowned &amp; feared.
And since we have mist of Saturn lately fled,
It glads me yet, I freely may survey
The honours of my brother Iupiter.
And beauteous Iuno, Empress of all hearts
Whom Neptune thus embraces.
So doth Pluto.
All divine honours crown the royal temples
Of my two famous brothers.
King Melliseus welcome them to Create.
Arches do you the like.
Princes your hands.
You are my royal uncles.
Nay hand him Lords, he is your kinsman too.
Arches my son, of fair Calisto borne,
I hope fair Iuno it offends not you,
It was before your time.
She was a strumpet.
She shall be a Star.
And all the Qeenes and beauteous maids on earth
That are renowned for high perfections,
We will woe and win, wee were borne to sway and rule.
Nor shall the name of wife be curb to vs.
Or snaffle in our pleasures. Beauteous Io,
And fair Europe, have by out transhapes,
And guiles of love already been deflowered,
Nor lives she that is worthy our desires,
But we can charm with court-ship. Royal brothers
what news of note is rumor'd in those Realms,
Through which you made your travels?
Have you heard
Of great Acrisius, the brave Arges King,
And of his daughter Dane.
His renown,
And her fair beauty oft hath pierced our ears.
Nor can we be at peace, till we behold
That face fame hath so blast on. What of her?
Of her enclosure in the Darreine Tower,
Guirt with a triple Mure of shining brass.
Have you not heard?
But we desire it highly.
What marble wall, or Adamantine gate,
What Fort of steel, or Castle forged from brass,
Love cannot scale? or beauty not break through?
Discourse the novel Neptune.
Thus it was.
The Queen of Arges going great, the King
Sends (as the custom is) to th'Oracle,
To know what fortunes shall betide the babe.
Answer's returned by Phoebus and his Priests:
The Queen shall child a daughter beautiful,
Who when she grows to years, shall then bring forth
A valiant Princely boy, yet such a one
That shall the King his grandsire turn to stone.
Dane is borne, and as she grows to ripeness,
So grew her fathers fear: and to prevent
His ominous fate pronounced by th'Otacle,
He mowlds this brazen Tower, impregnable
Both for the seat and guard: yet beautiful
As is the gorgeous palace of the Sun.
Ill doth Acrisius to contend and war
Against th'unchanging Fates, Il'e scale that Towers:
Or rain down millions in a golden shower.
I long to be the father of that babe,
Begot on Dane, that shall prove so brave,
And turn the dotard to his marble grave.
Tic cast already: Fate be thou my guide,
Whilst for this amorous journey I provide.
But is the Lady there immured, and closed
From all society and sight of man?
So full of jealous fears is King Acrisius,
That, save himself, no man must near the Fort.
Only a guard of Beldams past their lusts,
Unsensible of love, or amorous pity,
Partly by bribes hired, partly curbed with threats,
Are guard unto this bright imprisoned dame.
Too pitiless, and too obdur's the King,
To cloister beauty from the sight of man.
But this concerns not vs.
That fort I'll scale,
Though in attempting it be death to fail.
Brothers and Princes, all our Courts rarities
Lye open to your royal'st entertainment
Yet pardon me, since vrgence calls me hence
To an enforced absence. Nay Queen Iuno
You must be pleased, the cause imports vs highly.
Feast with these Princes till our free return.
Attendance Lords, we must descend in gold.
Or you imprisoned beauty ne'er behold.
Heir's a coil to keep fire and tow a sunder. I won∣der the King should shut his daughter up so close: for any thing I see, she hath no mind to a man.
Content your self, you speak according to your age and appetite. We that are full fed may praise fast. We that in our heate of youth have drunk our bellyfuls, may deride those that in the heate of their bloods are athirst. I measure her by what I was, not by what I am. Appetite to love never fails an old woman, till cracking of nuts leaves her. When Dane hath no more teeth in her head then you and I, Il'e trust a man in her company, and scarce then: for if we examine our selves, wee have even at these years, qualms, and rhumes, and devises comes over our stomachs, when we but look on a proper man.
That's no question, I know it by my self, and whilst I stand sentinel, I'll watch her for that I warrant her.
And have we not reason, considering the penalty?
If any stand sentinel in her quarters, we shall keep quar∣la here no longer. If the Princess miscarry we shall make gun∣powder, and they say an old woman is better for that then Salt∣peter.
The larme bell rings,
It should be K. Acrisius by the sound of the clapper.
Then clap close to the gate and let him in.
Ladies well done: I like this providence
And careful watch ore Dane: let me find you
Faithless, you dye, be faithful and you live
Eternized in our love. Go call her hither,
Be that your charge: the rest keep watchful eye
On your percullist entrance, which forbids
All men, save vs, free passage to this place.
See! Dane is descended. Fair daughter
How do you brook this palace?
Like a prison:
What is it else? you give me golden fetters,
As if their value could my bondage lessen.
The architectur's sumptuous, and the building
Of cost inualuable, so rich a structure
For beauty, or for state, the world affords not.
Is not thy attendance princely, like a Queens?
Are not all these thy vassails to attend?
Are not thy chambers fair, and richly hung?
The walks within this barricaded mure
Full of delight and pleasure for thy taste
And curious palate, all the chiefest cates
Are from the furthest verges of the earth
Fetched to content thee. What dictates thee then?
That which alone is better then all these,
My liberty. Why am I cloistered thus,
And kept a prisoner from the sight of man?
What hath my innocence and infancy
Deserved to be immured in brazen walls?
Can you accuse my faith, or modesty?
Hath any loose demeanour in my carriage
Bred this distrust? hath my eye plaid the rioter?
Or hath my tongue been lavish? have my favours
Vn-virginlike to any been profuse,
That it should breed in you such jealousy,
Or bring me to this durance?
None of these.
I love my Dane. But when I record
The Oracle, it breeds such fear in me,
That makes this thy reteinement.
The Oracle?
Wherein unto the least of all the Gods
Hath Dane been unthankful, or profane,
To bondage me that am a princess free,
And votaress to every deity?
Il'e tell thee Lady. The vnchanging mouth
Of Phoebus, hath this Oracle pronoun'st,
That Dane shall in time child such a son
That shall Acrisius change into a stone.
See your vain fears. What less could Phoebus say?
Or what hath Danae's fate deserved in this?
To turn you into stone; that's to prepare
Your monument, and marble sepulchre.
The meaning is, that I a son shall have,
That when you dye shall bear you to your grave.
Are you not mortal? would you ever live?
Your father died, and to his Monument
You like a mourner did attend his hearse.
What you did to your father, let my son
Perform to you, prepare your sepulchre.
Or shall a stranger bear you to your tomb,
When from your own blood you may store a Prince
To do those sacred rights: or shall vain fears
Cloister my beauty, and consume my years?
Our fears are certain, and our doom as fixed
As the decrees of Gods. Thy durance here
Is with limit endless. Go attend her
Unto her chamber, there to live an Ankresse
And changelesse virgin, to the period
Of her last hour. And you, to whom this charge
Solely belongs, banish all womanish pity:
Be deaf unto her prayers, blind to her tears,
Obdure to her relenting passions.
Should she (as heaven and th'Oracle forbid)
By your corrupting loose that precious Gem
We have such care to keep and locke safe up:
Your lives are doomed. Be faithful we desire,
And keep your bodies from the threatened fire.
Heaven be as chary of your Highness life, As we of Dana's honour. Now if she bee a right woman, she will have a mind only to loose that, which her father hath such care to keep. There is a thing that commonly sticks under a women's stomach.
What do we talking of things? there must be no med∣ling with things in this place, come let vs set our watch, and take our lodgings before the Princess chamber,
Sirrah, now I have sworn you to secrecy attend your (charge
Charge me to the mouth, and till you give fire I'll not of.
Thou know I have stuffed my pack with rich jewels, to purchase one jewel worth all these.
If your precious stones were set in that Jewel it would be brave wearing.
If we get entrance, sooth me up in all things: &amp; if I have recourse to the Princess, if at any time thou see me whisper to her, find some trick or other to blind the Beldams eyes.
She that hath the best eyes of them all, I have a trick to make her nose stand in her light.
No more K. Iupiter but goodman Peddler, remember that
I have my memorandums about me. As I can bear a pack, so I can bear a brain, &amp; now I talk of a pack, though I know not of the death of any of your friends, I am sorry for your heaviness.
Love and my hopes doe make my load seem light,
This wealth I will unburden in the purchase
Of you rich beauty. Prithee ring the bell,
Nay do you take the rope in your hand for luck sake. The moral is, because you shall ring all-in.
I care not if I take thy counsel.
To the gate, to the gate, and know who it is ere you open.
I learned that in my youth, still to know who knocked before I would open.
Save you gentle Matrons: may a man be so bold as ask what he may call this rich and stately Tower?
Thou seem a stranger to ask such a question,
For where is not the tower of Darreine known?
It may be called the tower of Barren for ought I see, for here is none but are past children.
This is the rich and famous Darreine Tower,
Where King Acrisius hath enclosed his daughter,
The beauteous Dane, famous through the world
For all perfections.
Oh then it is here; I here I must unload.
Coming through Create, the great King Iupiter
Entreated me to call here at this Tower,
And to deliver you some special Jewels,
Of high prised worth, for he would have his bounty
Renowned through all the earth. Down with your pack,
For here must wee unload.
Jewels to vs?
And from Iupiter?
Now gold prove thy true virtue. Thou can all things and therefore this.
Comes he wlth presents, and shall he vnpacke at the gate? nay come into the Porters lodge good Peddlers.
That Lady hath some manners, she hath been well brought up I warrant her.
And I can tell thee peddler, thou hast that courtesy that never any man yet found but the King Acrisius.
You shall be well paid for your courtesy,
Here's first for you, for you, for, for you, for you.
Rare!
Admirable!
The best that ever I saw!
I'll run and show mine to my Lady.
Shut the gate for fear the King come, and if he ring clap the Peddlers into some of you old rotten corners. And hath K. Iupiter been at all this cost? hoe's a courteous Prince, &amp; boun∣tifull. Keep you the peddler cōpany, my Lady shall see mine too.
Mean you the Princess Dane? I have tokens from Iupiter to her too.
Run, run, you that have the best legs, and tell my Lady. But have you any more of the same?
Have we quoth he? We have things about vs, wee have not showed yet, and that every one must not see, would make those few teeth in your head to water, I would have you think, I have ware too as well as my Master.
Yonder's my Lady. Nay never bee abashed Peddler,
There's a face will become thy jewels, as well as any face in
Create or Arges either. Now your token.
I have lost it. Tic my heart, beauty of Angels,
Thou art o'er matched, earth may contend with heaven,
Nature thou hast to make one complete creature
Cheated even all mortality. This face
Hath robed the morning of her blush, the lily
Of her blanch't witness, and like theft committed
Upon my soul: she is all admiration.
But in her eyes I ne'er saw perfect lustre.
There is no treasure upon earth but yonder.
She is! (oh I shall loose my self)
Nay Sir, take heed you be not smelt out.
I am my self again.
Did hee bestow these freely? Dana's guard
Are much indebted to King Iupiter.
If he have store we'll buy some for our use,
And wearing. They are wondrous beautiful,
Whore's the man that brought them?
Here forsooth Lady, hold up your head and blush not, my Lady will not hurt thee, I warrant thee.
This jewel Madam did King Iupiter
Command me to leave here for Dane.
Are you so sti'ld?
If sent to Dane,
It is due to me. And would the King of Create,
Knew with what gratitude we take his gift.
Madame he shall. Sirrah set op your pack,
And what the Ladies like let them take freely.
Much have I heard of his renown in arms,
His generousnesse, his virtues, and his fullness
Of all that Nature can bequeath to man.
His bounty I now taste, and I could wish,
Your ear were his, that I might let him know
What interest he hath in me to command,
His ear is mine, let me command you then.
Behold I am the Cretin, Iupiter,
That rate your beauty aboue all these gems.
What cannot love, what dares not love attempt?
Despite Acrisius and his armed guards,
Hither my love hath brought me to receive
Or life or death from you, only from you.
We are amazed, and the large difference
Betwixt your name and habit, breeds in vs
Fear and distrust. Yet if I censure freely
I needs must think that face and personage
Was ne'er derived from baseness. And the spirit
To venture and to dare to court a Queen
I cannot stile less then to be a Kings.
Say that we grant you to be Iupiter,
What thence infer you?
To love Iupiter.
So far as Iupiter loves Dana's honour,
So far will Dane love Iupiter.
We weight well upon my Lady.
Madam you have not seen a clear stone,
For colour or for quickness.
Beware your ruin, if you Beldams hear.
Sirrah show all your wares, and let those Ladies best please themselves.
Not all at these years. I spy his knavery. Now would he have me keep them busied, whilst he courts the Lady.
Doth my Lady want nothing?
As for example, heir's a silner bodkin, this is to re∣move dandruff, and dig about the roots of your siluer-hair'd fur. This is a tooth-picker, but you having no teeth, here is for you a corrall to rub your gums. This is called a Mask.
Gramercy for this, this is good to hide my wrinkles, I never see of these before.
Then you have one wrinkle more behind. You that are dim eyed put this pitiful spectacle upon your nose.
As I am son of Saturn, you have wrong
To be coop't up within a prison strong.
Your father like a miser cloisters you,
But to save cost: hoe's loath to pay your dower,
And therefore keeps you in this brazen Tower.
What are you better to be beautiful,
When no mans eye can come to censure it?
What are sweet cates untasted? gorgeous clothes
Vnworne? or beauty not beheld? yon Beldams
With all the furrows in their wrinkled fronts
May claim with you like worth; ey and compare.
For eye to censure you none can, none dare.
All this is true.
Oh think you I would lye
(With any save Dane.) Let me buy
This jewel, your bright love, though rated higher
Then Gods can give, or men in prayers desire.
You covet that, which save the Prince of Create
None dares.
That shows how much I love you (sweet)
I come this beauty, this rare face to save,
And to redeem it from this brazen grave.
Oh do not from mans eye this beauty screen,
These rare perfections, which no earthly Queen
Enjoys save you: it was made to be admired.
The Gods, the Fates, and all things have conspired
With Iupiter, this prison to invade,
And bring it forth to that for which it was made.
Love Iupiter, whose love with yours shall meet,
And having borne you hence, make at your feet
Kings lay their crowns, &amp; mighty Emperors kneel:
Oh had you but a touch of what I feel,
You would both love and pity.
Both I do.
But all things hinder, yet were Dane free,
She could affect the Cretin.
Now by thee
(For what I most affect, by that I swear)
I from this prison will bright Dane bear,
And in thy chamber will this night fast seal
This covenant made.
Which Dane must repeal.
You shall not, by this kiss.
Tic good to have an eye.
Your nose hath not had these spectacles on yet.
Oh Iupiter.
Oh Dane.
I must hence:
For if I stay, I yield: Il'e hence, no more.
Expect me for I come.
Yon is my door,
Dare not to enter there. I will to rest.
Attendance.
Come I will.
You had not best.
My Lady calls. Wee have trifled the night till bed∣time. Some attend the Princess: others see the Peddlers packed out of the gate.
Will you thrust vs out to seek our lodging at Mid∣night. We have paid for our lodging, a man would think, we might have lain cheaper in any Inn in Arges?
This castle stands remote, no lodging near,
Spare vs but any corner here below,
Be it but the Inner porch, or the least staire-case,
And we will begone as early as you please.
Consider all things, we have no reason to deny that.
What need we fear? alas they are but Peddlers, and the greatest Prince that breathes would be advised ere he durst presume to court the princess Dane.
He court a princess? hee looks not with the face. Well peddlers, for this night take a nap upon some bench or o∣there, and in the morning be ready to take thy yard in thy hand to measure me some stuff, and so to be gone before day. Well, good-night, we must attend our princess.
Gold and reward, thou art mighty, and hast power
O'er aged, young, the foolish, and the wise,
The chaste, and wanton, foul, and beautiful:
Thou art a God on earth, and can all things.
Not all things, by your leave. All the gold in Create cannot get one of you old Crones with child. But shall we go sleep?
Sleep thou, for I must wake for Dane.
Hence cloud of baseness, thou hast done enough
To blear you Beldams. When I next appear
To you bright Goddess, I will shine in gold,
Decked in the high Imperial robes of Create,
And on my head the wreath of Majesty:
For Ornament is a prevailing thing,
And you bright Queen I'll now court like a King.
Command our Eunuch's with their pleasingest tunes
To charm our eyes to rest. Leave vs all, leave vs.
The God of dreams hath with his downy fan
Swept over our eye-lids, and sits heavy on them.
Hey-ho, Sleep may enter in at my mouth, if he be no bigger then a two-peny-loafe.
Then to your chambers, &amp; let wakelesse slūbers
Charm you in depth of silence and repose.
Good night to thee fair Dane.
Let music through this brazen fortress sound
Till all our hearts in depth of sleep be drowned.
Silence that now hath empire through the world
Express thy power and Princedome. Charming sleep
Deaths younger brother, show thy self as still-lesse
As death himself. None seem this night to live,
Save Jove and Dane. But that Goddess won
Give them new life breathed with the morning sun,
You is the door, that in forbidding me
She bad me enter. Women's tongues and hearts
Have different tunes: for where they most desire,
Their hearts cry on. when their tongues bid retire.
Al's whist, I hear the snorting Beldams breathe
Soundness of sleep, none wakes save Love and we
You bright imprisoned beauty to set free.
Oh thou more beauteous in thy nakedness
Then ornament can add to—
How sweetly doth she breath? how well become
Imaginary deadness? But Il'e wake her
Unto new life. This purchase I must win,
Heavens gates stand op, and Iupiter will in.
Dane?
Who's that?
It is I, K. Iupiter.
What mean you Prince? how dare you enter here?
Knowing if I but call, your life is doomed,
And all Creates treasure cannot guard your person.
You tell me now how much I rate your beauty,
Which to attain, I cast my life behind me,
As loved much less then you.
Il'e love you too,
Would you but leave me.
Repentance I'd not buy
At that high rate, ten thousand times to dye.
You are mine own, so all the Fates have sed.
And by their guidance come I to your bed.
The night, the time, the place, and all conspire
To make me happy in my long desire.
Acrisius eyes are charmed in golden sleep,
Those Beldams that were placed your bed to keep,
All drowned in Lethe (save your downy bed,
White sheets, and pillow where you rest your head)
None hears or sees; and what can they devise,
When they (heaven knows) have neither ears nor eyes.
Beshrow you sir, that for your amorous pleasure
Could thus sort all things, person, place and leisure.
Exclaim I could, and a loud uproar keep,
But that you say the Crones are all a sleep:
And to what purpose should I raise such fear,
My voice being soft, they fast, and cannot hear?
They are deaf in rest, then gentle sweetly further,
If you should call, I thus your voice would murder,
And strangle with my kisses.
Kisses, tush.
I'll sink into my sheets, for I shall blush.
I'll dive into my bed.
And I behind?
No: were it the Ocean, such a gem to find,
I would dive after.
Good my Lord forbear
What do you mean? (oh heaven) is no man near,
If you will needs, for modesties chaste law,
Before you come to bed, the curtains draw,
But do not come, you shall not by this light,
If you but offer't, I shall cry out right.
Oh God, how hoarse am I, and cannot? fie
Dane thus naked and a man so ny.
Pray leave me sir: he makes unready still,
Well I'll even wink, and then do what you will.
I would I were out of this tower of Brass, &amp; from all these brazen faced Beldams: if we should fall asleep, and the King come and take vs napping, where were we? My Lord stays long, &amp; the night grows short, the thing you wot of hath cost him a simple sort of Jewels. But if after all this cost, the thing you wot of would not do: If the peddler should show himself
a peddler, he hath brought his hog's to a fair market. Fie upon it, what a snorting forward and backward these Beldams keep? But let them sleep on, some in the house I am sure are awake, and stirring too, or I miss my aim. Well, here must I sit and waite the good hour, till the gate be open, and suffer my eyes to do that, which I am sure my cloak never will, that is, to take nap.
Alas my Lord I never loved till now,
And will you leave me?
Beauteous Queen I must,
But thus conditioned; to return again,
With a strong army to redeem you hence,
In spite of Arges, and Acrisius,
That doom's you to this bondage.
Then fare-well,
No sooner meet but part? Remember me:
For you great Prince I never shall forget!
I fear you have left too sure a token with me
Of your remembrance.
Dane, be it a son,
It shall be ours when we have Arges won.
But should you fail?
I sooner should forget
My name, my state, then fail to pay this debt,
The day-starre' gins t'appeare, the Beldams stir,
Ready t'vnlocke the gate, fair Queen adieu.
All men prove false, if Jove be found untrue.
My man?
My Lord.
Some cloud to cover me, throw over my shoulders
Some shadow for this state, the Crones are up,
And waite t'vnprison vs, nay quickly fellow.
Here My Lord, cast your old cloak about you.
Where be these Peddlers? nay quickly, for heaven sake: the gate is open, nay when? fare-well my honest friends,
and do our humble duties to the great King Iupiter.
King Iupiter shall know your gratitude, Farewell.
Nay, when I say fare-well, fare-well.
Farewell good Miniuers.
Fair Dane doth his richest Jewel wear.
That son of whom the Oracle foretold
Which cost both mother and the grand-sire dear
Whose fortunes further leisure shall unfold:
Think Iupiter returned to Create in hast,
To levy arms for Danes free release,
(But hindered) till the time be fully past,
For Saturn once more will disturb his peace.
The exiled Saturn by King Troos is aided,
Troos that gave Troy her name, and there reigned King,
Create by the help of Ganimed's invaded,
Even at that time when Jove should succours bring
To rescue Dane, and that warlike power,
Must now his native Territories guard,
Which should have brought her from the brazen tower,
(For to that end his forces were prepared)
We grow now towards our port and wished bay,
Gentles your love, and Homer cannot stray.
Whence are these warlike preparations,
Made by the King our brother.
It is given out,
To conquer Arges. But my sister Iuno
Suspects some amorous purpose in the King?
And blame her not, the fair Europaes rape,
Brought from Aegenor, and the Cadmian rape,
Io the daughter of old Inachus,
Deflowered by him; the lovely Simile,
Fair Laeda daughter to King Tyndarus
With many more, may breed a just suspect,
Nor hath hee spared fair Ceres Queen of Grain,
Who bare to him the bright Proserpina. (she
Such scopes may breed just fears, &amp; what knows
But these are to surprise fair Dane.
Arm royal brothers, Creet's too small an Isle,
To comprehend our greatness, we must add
Arges and Greece to our Dominions.
And all the petty Kingdoms of the earth,
Shall pay their homage unto Saturnes son,
This day we'll take a muster of our forces,
And forward make for Arges.
All Archadia
Assemble to this purpose.
Then set on.
The Eagle in our ensign we'll display,
Jove and his fortunes guide vs in our way.
Whether intends the King this warlike (march?
For Arges and Acrisius.
Rather guard,
Your native confines, see upon your Coast,
Saturn with thirty thousand Troians landed
And in his aid King Troos and Ganimed.
In never worse time could the Tyrant come
Then now, to break my faith with Dane.
Oh beauteous love, I fear Acrisius ire
Will with severest censure chastise thee,
And thou wilt deem me faithless and unkind
For promise-breach, (but what we must we must)
Come valiant Lords, we'll first our own defend
Ere against foreign climes our arm extend.
Degenerate boys, base bastards, not my sons,
Behold the death we threatened in your Cradles
We come to give you now. See here King Troos
In pity of deposed Saturnes wrongs,
Is come in person to chastise your pride,
And be the heavens relentless Justicer.
Not against Saturn as a Father, we,
But as a murderer, lift our opposite hands.
Nature and heaven gives vs this privilege,
To guard our lives against tyrants and inuaders,
That claim we, as we're men, we would but live:
Then take not from vs, what you cannot give.
Where hath not Saturns fame abroad been spread
For many uses he hath given to man;
As Navigation, Tillage, Archery,
Weapons and gold? yet you for all these uses
Deprive him of his kingdom.
We but save
Our Innocent bodies from th'abortiue grave,
We are his sons, let Saturn be content
To let vs keep what Heaven and Nature lent.
Those filial duties you so much forget
We come to teach you. Royal Kings to arms,
Give Ganimed the onset of this battle,
That being a son knows how to lecture them,
And chastise their transgressions.
Ganimed,
It shall be so, power out your spleen and rage
On our proud Issue. Let the thirsty soil
Of barren Create quaff their degenerate bloods,
And surfeit in their sins. All Saturnes hopes
And fortunes are engaged upon this day.
It is our last, and all, be it our endeavour
To win't for ay, or else to loose it ever.
Our Troians are repul'st, wher's Ganimed?
Amidst the throng of weapons, acting wonders.
Twice did I call aloud to have him fly,
And twice he swore he had vowed this day to dye.
Let's make up to his rescue.
Tush, tic vain.
To seek to save him we shall loose our selves.
The day is lost, and Ganimed lost too
Without divine assistance. Hye my Lord
Unto your ships, no safety lives a land,
Even to the Oceans ma•gent we are pursued,
Then save your self by sea.
Create thou hast won
My thirty thousand Soldiers, and my Son.
Come, let's to sea.
To sea must Saturn too,
To whom all good stars are still opposite.
My Crown I first bought with my infants blood,
Not long enjoyed, till Titan wrested it;
Re-purchast, and re-lost by Iupiter.
These horrid mischiefs that have crowned our brows,
Have bred in vs such strange distemprature,
That we are grown dejected and forlorn.
Our blood is changed to Ink, our hairs to quills,
Our eyes half buried in our quechy plots.
Consumptions and cold agues have devoured
And eat up all our flesh, leaving behind
Nought save the Image of despair and death:
And Saturn shall to after ages be
That star, that shall infuse dull melancholy.
To Italy I'll fly, and there abide,
Till divine powers my place aboue provide.
Yield noble Trojan, ther's not in the field
One of thy Nation lifts a hand save thee.
Why that's my honour, when alone I stand
Against thee and all the forces of thy land.
I love thy valour, and would woo thy friendship,
Go freely where thou wilt, and ransomless.
Why that's no gift: I am no prisoner,
And therefore owe no ransom, having breath,
Know I have vowed to yield to none save death.
I wish thee nobly Trojan, and since favour
Cannot attain thy love, I'll try conclusions,
And see if I can purchase it with blows.
Now speak thou like the noblest of my foes.
Stand all apart, and Princes girt vs round.
I love him best, whose strokes can loudest sound.
I have thee, and will keep thee.
Not as prisoner.
A prisoner to my love, else thou art free,
My bosom friend, for so I honour thee.
I am conquered both by Arms and Curtsy.
The day is ours, Troos and K. Saturn's fled,
And Iupiter remains sole conqueror.
Peace with her golden wings hovers ore Create,
Frighting hence discord, and remorseless war:
Will Iupiter make up for Arges now?
Winter draws on, the sea's vn-nauigable,
To transport an Army. There attends without
A Lord of Arges.
Bring him to our presence.
How stands it with the beauteous Dane?
As one distressed by Fate, and miserable.
Of K. Acrisius, and his Fort of brass,
Danes enclosure, and her Beldam guard,
Who but hath heard? yet through these brazen walls
Love hath broke in, and made the maid a mother
Of a fair son, which when Acrisius heard,
Her female guard unto the fire hee dooms,
His daughter, and the infant prince her son,
He puts into a mastles boat to sea,
To prove the rigour of the stormy waives.
Acrisius, Arges, and the world shall know
Jove hath been wronged in this: her further fortunes
Can thou relate?
I can. As far as Naples
The friendly winds her mastlesse boat transports,
There succourd by a courteous Fisher-man
Shoe's first relieved, and after that presented
To King Pelonnus, who at this time reigns:
Who ravished with her beauty, crowns her Queen,
And decks her with th'Imperiall robes' of state.
What we have scanted is supplied by fate.
Here then cease Arms, and now court amorous peace
With solemn triumphs, and dear Ganimed,
Be henceforth called The• friend of Iupiter.
And if the Fates hereafter crown our brows
With divine honours, as we hope they shall,
We'll style thee by the name of Cup-bearer,
To fill vs heavenly Nectar, as fair Hebe
Shall do the like to Iuno our bright Queen.
Here end the pride of our mortality.
Opinion, that makes Gods, must style vs higher.
The next you see vs, we in state must shine,
Eternized with honours more divine.
Of Dane Perseus was that night be got,
Perseus that fought with the Gorgonian shield,
Whose fortunes to pursue Time suffers not.
For that, we have prepared an ampler field.
Likewise how Jove with fair Alcmena lay:
Of Hercules, and of his famous deeds:
How Pluto did fair Proserpine betray:
Of these my Muse (now travelled) next proceeds.
Yet to keep promise, ere we further wade,
The ground of ancient Poems you shall see:
And how these (first borne mortal) Gods were made,
By virtue of divinest Poesy.
The Fates, to whom the Heathen yield all power,
Whose dooms are writ in marble, to endure,
Have summoned Saturnes three sons to their Tower,
To them the three Dominions to assure
Of Heaven, of Sea, of Hell. How these are scand,
Let none decide but such as understand.
To Iupiter doth high Olimpus fall.
Who thunder and the trisulke lightning bears
Dreaded of all the rest in general:
He on a Princely Eagle mounts the Spheres,
Neptune is made the Lord of all the Seas,
His Mace a Trident, and his habit blew.
Hee can make Tempests, or the waives appease,
And unto him the Sea-men are still true.
And for the winds, these brothers that still war,
Should not disturb his Empire, the three Fates
Bring them to Aeolus, chained as they are,
To be enclosed in caves with brazen gates.
Pluto's made Emperor of the Ghosts below.
Where with his black guard he in darkness reigns,
Commanding hell, where Styx and Lethe flow,
And murderers are hanged up in burning chains.
But leaving these: to your judicial spirits
I must appeal, and to your wonted grace,
To know from you, what ey-lesse Homer merits,
Whom you have power to banish from this place,
But if you send me hence vncheckt with fear,
Once more I'll dare upon this Stage t'appeare.

Unmask thy face thou minister of Time
Look forth bright mirror, let thy golded hand,
Ride (with distinctlesse motion) on the eyes
Of this fair Chorus, till the Reign of Peace,
Hath propagated Plenty, and increase.
Now sit wee high (triumphant in our sway,)
Encircled with the seven-fold flower of Art,
To tread on Barbarism with silver feet;
These, these are adiuncts fit to waite on Peace,
Who being courted by most searching spirits,
Have always borne themselves in God-like state,
With lofty foreheads, higher then the stars.
Draw near fair Daughters of eternity,
Your Fostresse Peace, is (like the aged Nurse)
Grown proud to see her Children flourish thus.
We know not how to turn these bounties back,
But with continuance of obsequious love,
Whilst Peace triumphs, it lies in Grammars might,
To make the rudest brain both speak and write.
Logic shall furnish them with Argument,
And make them apt and able to dispute;
The theme shall be of Peace, and her sweet name,
And every Sillogism' shall prove her fame.
Rhetoric will put her richest habit on,
Of gestures, Voice, and exornation,
Her Tropes and Schemes, shall dignify her sense.
And Honours Peace, with clearest eloquence.
Her graces in my numbers shall be seen,
So full that nothing can be added more,
Nor ought subtracted: true Arithmetic
Will multiply and make them infinite.
Music shall feast the bounteous ears of Peace,
Whilst she inspires her numme conceit with life,
Varying each concord, mood and faculty,
In flowing strains, and rapting Symphony,
The motions of the Planets and their Spheres,
The Stars, their influence, quantities, consents,
All that Astronomy can teach or know,
She doth profess from sacred Peace to flow.
And I will make her powers demonstrative,
In all my angles, circles, cubes, or squares,
The very state of Peace shall seem to shine,
In every figure or dimensiue lyne.
Enough fair Virgins Time shall prove this true,
Whilst you do honour Peace she'll cheerish you.
Honour and safety, still attend fair Peace
Thanks noble Lords and worthy Gentlemen:
But wherefore look you so ask ounce on these,
As if they were not worthy your salutes?
Because wee knew them not.
The more your blame.
O pitied state! most weak, where nobles want
The love and knowledge of the liberal Arts;
Are you the men (for birth and place) admired?
By whose great motions, lesser wheels turn round?
And shall your minds affect so dull a course?
As if your sense where most irrational?
What is a man superior to a beast
But for his mind? nor that ennobles him,
While hee deiects his reason; making it
The slave unto his brutish appetite.
Make then your minds illustrious in your deeds
And each choose (in this troupe) a spousal mate,
Wee doe obey: And I choose Music first.
I Geometry.
I Rhetoric.
And I Astronomy.
And I to be a servant unto all.
But now beware ye injure not the fame
Of these bright Virgins with adulterate love,
Mean time their servant (here) Chrisoganus
Shall teach of every Art the mystery.
But if (by Art) as all our Artist• say,
There is no real truth to be attained,
Why should wee labour in their loves bestow?
The wisest said: I know I nothing know,
The wisest was a fool for saying so:
That Oracle pronounced wise Socrates:
For doe I know I see you, or the light?
Or do you know you here me, or I touch you?
All this wee needs must know assuredly.
If this bee certain then which comes from sense,
The knowledge proper to the soul is truer;
For that pure knowledge by the which wee know
A thing to bee, with true cause how it is,
Is more exact then that which knows it is,
And reaches not to knowledge of the cause.
Besides; that knowledge (that considers things
Abiunct from senciue matter) is exacter
Then that which joins it self with elements;
Arithmetic ever considers numbers
Abstract from senciue matter: Music still
Considers it with sense, as mixed with sound:
Therefore Arithmeticque is more exact,
And more exact then is Geometry:
Since vnitas is still simplicior puncto,
And number simpler then is magnitude.
For Vnitas may still be sine puncto,
But Punctus never without Unity,
Nor; Magnitudo sine Numero.
Dum (enim) punctus ponitur, ponitur (ex necessitate) vnitas.
But all this proves not wee may know a truth.
If wee have this wee call Scientia,
We must have truth of mere necessity,
For Acriueia doth not signify,
Only a certainty in that wee know,
But certainty with all perfection.
Although I am not satisfied in this,
It doth me good to hear him thus discourse.
My Lords, let's betake vs to our studies.
In nothing am I better pleased, let's go.
The nut-brwne ale, the nut-browne ale,
Puts down all drink when it is stale,
The toast, the Nut-meg, and the ginger,
Will make a sighing man a singer.
Ale gives a buffet in the head,
But ginger vnder-proppes the brain:
When ale would strike a strong man dead,
Then nut-megge tempers it again,
The nut-browne ale, the nut-browne ale,
Puts down all drink when it is stale.
This Peace breeds such Plenty, trades serve no tu•nes
The more sooles wee to follow them.
Let's make up a company of Players,
For we can all sing and say,
And so (with practise) soon may learn to play.
True, could our action answer your extempore.
I'll teach ye to play true Politicians.
Why those are th'falsest subtle fellows lives.
I pray sir, what titles have travailing Players?
Why proper-fellowes, they play Lords and Kings,
What parts would best become vs (sir) I pray?
Faith to play Rogues, till wee bee bound for running away.
Content; Scrivener, hoe,
You must tie a knott of Knaves together.
Your appellations?
Your names he means; the man's learned.
I Belch the Beard-maker.
I Gut the Fiddle-string-maker.
I Incle the Peddler.
I Moister Posthaste the Poet.
Your nomenclature?
O stately Scrivener, thats where dwell ye?
Townsmen, townsmen all.
The Obligatories Condition?
Politician Players.
But whose men are wee all this while:
Whose but the merry Knight's, sir Oliuer Owlets,
There was never a better man to Players.
If our parrell be not poynt-deuice the fatt's in the fire.
What a greazie phrase: This playing will furnish ye.
What hoe Moister Bougle, a word.
Hears half a dozen good fellows.
Soft sir, wee are but four or five.
The liker to thrive.
What saucy knaves are these?
A speaks to you players; I am the poet.
As concerning the King and the Clown.
Will you have rich stuff indeed?
Tic not to be dealt on without store of drink.
Store of money you would say.
Nay tic well said, for drink must clap up the bargain.
Lets away.
Moister Fourcher, how fares your body sir? come
you from your book?
Troth Master Lyon-rash, this Peace gives Lawyers
leave to play.
Moister Vourcher? you are very well encountered sir?
Moister Valor, I value your frienship at as high
a price, as any mans.
Gentlemen, how shall wee spend this afternoon?
Faith lets go see a Play.
See a Play, a proper pastime indeed: to here a deal
of prating to so little purpose.
Why this going to a play is now all in the fashion.
Why then lets go where wee may hear sweet mu∣sick
and delicate songs, for the Harmony of music is so Hey∣uenlike
that I love it with my life.
Nay faith this afternoon weal spend in hearing
the Mathematickes read.
Why then lets to the Academy to hear Crisoganus.
content.
Moister Chrisoganus: by your leave sir.
Gentlemen you are welcome.
I pray sir what were the best course for a scholar?
Why no man can attain to any truth,
But he must seek it Mathematicé.
Which are the Mathematicque sciences?
Arithmetic and Geometry are chief.
What difference is there twixt philosophy
And knowledge which is Mathematical?
This sir: the natural Philosopher
Considers, things as merely sensible;
The Mathematician; vt mente abiunctas a materia sensibili,
But this requires time to satisfy;
For it is an Axiom with all men of Art,
Mathematicum abstrahentem non comittere mendacium:
And (for the beauty of it,) what can be
Urged (more extractiue) then the face of heaven?
The mysteries that Art hath found therein:
It is distinguished into Regions,
Those Regions filed with sundry sorts of stars:
They (likewise) christened with peculiar names,
To see a daily use wrought out of them,
With demonstrations so infallible,
The pleasure cannot bee, but ravishing.
The very thought thereof enflames me.
Why you shall meet with proiects so removed
From vulgar apprehension, (as for instance,)
The Sun here rises in the East with vs,
But not of his own proper motion,
As being turned by primum mobile,
(The heaven aboue Coelum stellatum)
Whereas his true asscent is in the West,
And so hee consummates his circled course
In the Ecliptic line, which parts the Zodiac,
Being borne from Tropic to Tropic: this time
Wee call a year; whose Hierocliphick was
(Amongst the Egyptians figured in a Snake
Wreathed circular, the tail within his mouth:
As (happily) the •atines (since) did call,
A Ring, (of the word Annus) Annulus,
I apprehend not in my ablest powers,
That once in every four and twenty hours,
The Sun should rise and set; yet bee a year
In finishing his own designed course.
Why that I will demonstrate to you, thus;
Turn a huge wheel: contrary to the sway
Place me a fly vppon't: the fly (before
It can arrive the point from whence it went)
Shall sundry times be circumuolu'd about;
Even so the Sun and the affinities:
For if you wonder how at one self hour,
Two of discordant natures may be borne,
As one a King, another some base Swain,
One valiant, and the other timorous,
Let but two drops of ink or water fall
Directly on so swift a turning wheel,
And you shall find them both cast far in sunder.
Even so the heavenly Orbs, whirling so fast
And so impetuously (project men's fates)
Most full of change and contrariety.
Cood faith these knowledges are very rare,
And full of admiration; are they not?
The Mathematicques are the strength of truth,
A Magazine of all perfection.
Shall wee design some place for exercise,
And every morning have a Lecture read.
Content, (if so Chrisoganus stand pleased)
His exhibition shall be competent: we'll all be Patrons.
To make you Artists, answers my desire,
Rather then hope or mercenary hire.
Holiday, O blessed morn,
This day Plenty hath been borne,
Plenty is the child of Peace;
To her birth the Gods do press,
Full crowned Mazors Bacchus brings,
With liquor which from grapes hee wrings:
Holiday, O blessed morn;
This day Plenty hath bin borne,
Holiday let's loudly cry,
For joy of her nativity.
Ceres with a bounteous hand,
Doth at Plenties elbo stand:
Binding mixed Coronets,
Of wheat which on her head she sets.
Holiday, O blessed morn,
This day Plenty hath bin borne,
Holiday lets loudly cry,
For joy of her nativity.
Reach me the bowl with rich Autumnian Juice,
That I may drink a health to your new Queen.
Times winged hours (that pointed out my reign,)
Are fled; I am no more your Sovereign.
Wound Ayre with shrill tuned Canzonets,
I rob my self to make my Daughter rich,
Peace doth resign her pure imperial Crown,
(Wrought by the Muses) in whose Circle grow
All flowers that are to Phoebus consecrate.
What heavenly sovereignty supports my state
That Plenty reigns (as Princess) after Peace?
Then if this powerful arm can turn the hour,
It is my will, (and that shall stand for law)
That all things on the earth bee plentiful.
I crush out bounty from the amber grape,
And fill your barnes with swelling sheaves of Corn,
How can this, but engender blessed thought,
Especially when Gods our good have sought?
For thee, thy servants captivate the Earth,
Her fruitfulness false down at Plentyes feet.
Bachus will cheer her melancholy sense,
With drops of Nectar from this Crimson Juice.
Her body shall sustain ten thousand wounds,
And swarthy India be transformed to Sea,
Disgorging golden choler to the waives,
Before sweet Plenty find the least defect.
For this abundance powered at Plenties feet,
You shall be Tetrarch's of this petty world.
What dullards thus, would dote in rusty Art?
Plod ding upon a book to dull the sense,
And see the world become a treasure-house,
Where Angels swarm like Bees in Plenties streets,
And every Peasant surfeits on their sweets?
Give me a season that will stir the blood
I like not Nigardice to hungar-starue,
Tic good when pooremen frolic in the hall,
The whilst our fathers in the Chambers feast,
And none ripens at any stranger-guest.
Who was the author of this store, but Peace?
That common-welth is never well at ease,
Where Parchment skins, whose use should bear records,
Must head their brawling Drums and keep a coil,
As if they threatened Plenty with a spoil.
Your houses must bee open to the poor,
Your dusty Tables filled with store of meat,
Let goodly yeomen at your elboes stand,
Swords by their sides and trenchers in their hand:
Long-skirted coats, wide-sleeues with cloth' enough:
Thus Lords, you shall my government enlarge,
Reverence your Queen, by practising her charge.
Ours be the charge and thine the Empire.
Gallants let vs invent some pleasing sports,
To fit the Plentuous humour of the Time,
What better recreations can you find,
Then sacred knowledge in divinest things.
Your books are Adamants and you the Iron
That cleaves to them till you confound your self
Poor Scholar spend thy spirits so and dye.
Let them doe so that list, so will not!.
I cannot feed my appetite with Ayre,
I must pursue my pleasures royally,
That spunged in sweat, I may return from sport,
Mount me on horse-back, keep the Hounds and Hawk,
And leave this Idle contemplation,
To rugged Stoical Morosophists.
O! did you but your own true glories know,
Your judgements would not then decline so low.
What Moister Pedant, pray forbear, forbear.
Tic you my Lord that must forbear to err.
It is still safe erring with the multitude:
A wretched moral; more then barbarous rude.
How you translating-scholler? you can make
A stabbing Satire, or an Epigram,
And think you carry just Ramnusia's whip
To lash the patient; go, get you clothes,
Our free-borne blood such apprehension lothes.
Proud Lord, poor Art shall wear a glorious crown,
When her despisers die to all renown.
Wher's this drunkard Clarke to ring the bell?
Heigho, bottle Ale has buttond my cap.
Whats a quarter of Corn?
Two and six-pence.
Ty't up tic mine.
ha'y' any Potatoes?
Th'aboundance will not quite-cost the bringing.
What's your Cock-sparrowes a dozen?
A penny Mistress.
Ther's for a dozen; hold.
All they that can sing and say,
Come to the Towne-house and see a Play,
At three a clock it shall begin,
The finest play that ever was seen.
Yet there is one thing more in my mind,
Take heed you leave not your purses behind.
What's your plays name? Masters whose men are ye?
how the sign of the Owl ith luy bush? Ser Oliuer Owlets.
Tic a sign ye are not blind Sir.
The best that ever trod on stage.
The Lascivious Knight, and Lady Nature.
Have you cried the Play, masters?
I, I, I, no doubt we shall have good doings, but
How proceed you in the new plot of the prodigal child?
O sirs, my wit's grown no less plentiful then the time.
Ther's two sheets done in folio, will cost two shillings in time.
Shall we here a flourish before the audience come.
I that you shall, I swear by the Sunne-sit down sirs,
When Authors quill, in quivering hand,
His tyred arm did take:
His wearied Muse, bad him devise,
Some fine play for to make.
And now my Masters in this bravado,
I can read no more without Canadoe.
What hoe? some Canadoe quickly,
Enter the Prodigal Child; fill the pot I would say,
Huff, huff, who callis for me?
I play the Prodigal child in jollity.
O detestable good.
Enter to him Dame Virtue:
My Son thou art a lost child,
(This is a passion, note you the passion?)
And hath many poor men of their goods beguiled:
O prodigal child, and child prodigal.
Read the rest sirs, I cannot read for tears,
Fill me the pot I prethe fellow Gulch.
Faith we can read nothing but riddles.
My masters, what tire wears your lady on her head?
Four Squirrels tails ti'de in a true loves knot.
O amiable good, it is excellent.
But how shall we doe for a Prologue for lords?
I'll do it extempore.
O might we here a spurt if need require.
Why Lords we are here to show you what we are,
Lords wee are here although our cloths be bare,
In steed of flowers, in season, ye shall gather Rime and Reason?
I never pleased my self better, it comes off with such suavity.
Well fellows, I never heard happier stuff,
Heir's no new luxury or blandishment,
But plenty of old Englands mothers words.
I st not pity this fellow's not employed in matters of State,
But wher's the Epilogue must beg the plaudit?
Why man?
The glass is run our play is done,
Hence Time doth call, wee thank you all.
I but how if they doe not clap their hands.
No matter so they thump vs not,
Come, come, we poets have the kindest wretches to our Ingles
Why whats an Ingle man?
One whose hands are hard as battledores with clap∣ping
at baldness.
Then we shall have rare Ingling at the prodigal child.
I a•t be played upon a good night—lets give it out for Friday.
Content.
My masters; my Lord Mauortius is disposed to here
what you can doe.
What fellows, shall we refuse the Towne-play?
Why his reward is worth the Mayor &amp; all the town.
Weal make him merry in faith, weal be there.
Come sirs, how shall we recreate our selves,
This plenteous time forbids abode at home.
Let's Duck it with our Dogs to make vs sport,
And cross the water to eat some Cream;
What hoe? Sculler.
You doe forget; Plenty affords vs Oars.
What shall we shoot for a greene Goose sir?
Ther's a wise match.
Faith we may take our bows and shafts and sleep,
This dreaming long vacation gives vs leave.
Gentlemen, well met, what? Pancrace Knights?
The bounty of the time will have it so.
You are prepared for sport, as well as we.
One of the goodliest Spaniels I have seen.
And heere's the very quintessence of Ducks.
For diving mean ye?
I, and thriving too.
For I have won three wagers this last week;
What? will you go with vs and see our sport?
No faith sir, Isle go ride and breath my horse.
Why whether ride you? we will all go with you.
Lets meet some ten miles hence to hawk &amp; hunt.
Content: this plenty yields vs choice of sports.
Our trades and we are now no fit consorts.
Moister Clarke of the Kitchen; faith what's your
daily expense.
Two beef, a score of Muttons;
Hogsheads of Wine, and Beer, a dozen a day.
Never was Age more plentiful.
Usher, it is my Lords pleasure, all comer, bee boun∣teously
entertained.
I but first my Ladies pleasure.
What else? She scorns to wear cloth-breeches man.
A Morrice-daunce of neighbours crave admittance.
Porter, let them in man.
Butler, make them drink their skins full.
God bless the sounder.
Porter, are these Players come?
Half an hour a go sir.
Bid them come in and sing the meat's going up.
Gentlemen, and yeomen, attend upon the Sewer.
Sir Oliuer Owlets men welcome, by Gods will,
It is my Lords pleasure it should be so.
Sir, we have caroused like Kings,
For here is plenty of all things.
Look about you Masters; be uncovered.
Brave lads come forth and chant it, and chant it,
for now it is supper time.
See how the dishes flaunt it, and flaunt it,
with meat to make up rime.
Pray for his honour truly, and truly,
in all hee undertakes;
He seru's the poor most duly, and duly,
as all the country speaks.
God bless my Lord Mauortius, &amp; his merry men all,
To make his honour merry, we sing in the hall.
My Masters, for that we are not only (for causes)
Come new to the house; but also (for causes)
I matuaile where you will lodge.
We hope (for causes) in the house, though drink be in our heads.
Because to Plenty we carouse, for beef and beer, and beds.
Sed like honest men: what plays have you?
Here's a Gentleman scholar writes for vs:
I pray Moister Post-hast, declare for our credits.
For mine own part, though this summer season
I am desperate of a horse.
It is well; but what plays have you?
A Gentleman's a Gentleman, that hath a clean shirt
on, with some learning, and so have I.
One of you answer the names of your plays,
Mother Gurtons neadle; (a Tragedy.)
The Devil and Dives; (a Comedy.)
Arusset coat, and a Knaves cap; (an Infernal)
A proud heart and a beggars purse; (a pastoral.)
The Widows apron-strings; (a nocturnal.)
I premise ye, pretty names,
I pray what ye want in any thing,
To take it out in drink.
And so go make ye ready masters.
My Lords, your entertainment i• but base,
Courser your cates, but welcome with the best.
Fellows some Cushions; place fa re Ladies here,
Seignior Landulpho; pray be merry sir.
I'st th'Italian guise to be so sad?
When Love and Fancy should be banqueting?
Madam, your kindness hath full power to command.
These admirable wits of Italy,
That court with looks, and speak in syllables,
Are curious seperuisours over strangers,
And when wee covet so to frame our selves,
(Like ouer-nice portraying picturers,)
We spoil the counterfeit in colouring;
England is plain and loves her mothers guise,
Enriched with cunning, as her parents rise.
Lady, these eyes did ever hate to scorn,
This toung's vnur'd to carpe or contrary,
The bosom where this heart hath residence,
I wish may seem the seat of courtesy.
Room my Masters take your places,
Hold up your torches for dropping there.
Usher are the Players ready? bid them begin.
Some up and some down, ther's Players in the town,
You wot well who they bee:
The sum doth arise, to three companies,
One, two, three, four, make wee.
Besides we that travel, with pumps full of gravel,
Made all of such running leather:
That once in a week, new masters wee seek,
And never can hold together.
Phillida was a fair maid; I know one fairer then she,
Troylus was a true lover; I know one truer then he:
And Cressida that dainty dame, whose beauty fair &amp; sweet,
Was clear as is ye Crystal stream, that runs along ye street.
How Troyll he that noble knight, was drunk in love and bad goodnight
So bending leg likewise; do you not vs despise.
Most ugly lines and base-browne-paper-stuffe▪
Thus to abuse our heavenly poesy,
That sacred off-spring from the brain of Jove,
Thus to be mangled with profane absurds,
Strangled and chok't with lawless bastards words
I see (my Lord this home-spun country stuff,
Brings little liking to your curious ear,
Be patient for perhaps the play will mend.
Come Cresida my Cresset light,
Thy face doth shine both day and night,
Behold, behold, thy garter blue,
Thy knight his valiant elboe wears,
That When he shakes his furious Spear,
The foe in shivering fearful sort,
May lay him down in death to snort.
O knight with valour in thy face,
Here take my screen wear it for grace,
Within thy Helmet put the same,
Therewith to make thine enemies lame.
Lame stuff indeed the like was never heard.
Passion of me sir, puff puff how I sweat sir,
The dust out of your coat sir, I intend for to beat sir.
I am the prodigal child, I that I am,
Who says I am not, I say he is too blame.
And I likewise am Iniquity
Beloved of many alas for pity.
Ho ho ho, these babes mine are all,
The Vice, Iniquity and child Prodigal.
Fie what unworthy foolish foppery,
Presents such buzzardly simplicity.
No more, no more, unless it were better,
And for the rest ye shall be our debtor.
My Lords, of your accords, some better pleasure for
to bring, if you a theme affords, you shall know it, that I
Post-hast the Poet, extempore can sing.
I pray my Lord let's ha•te, the Play is so good,
That this must needs be excellent.
Content (my Lord) pray give a theme.
Your Poets and your Pots,
Are knit in true-Loue knots.
Give your Scholar degrees, and your Lawyer his fees
And some dice for Sir Petronell flash:
Give your Courtier grace, and your Knight a new case,
And empty their purses of cash.
Give your play-gull a stool, and my Lady her fool,
And her usher potatoes and marrow
But your Poet were he dead, set a pot to his head,
And he rises as peart a sparrow.
O delicate wine with thy power so divine,
Full of ravishing sweet inspiration,
Yet a verse may run clear that is tapped out of bear:
Especially in the vacation.
But when the term comes, that with trumpets and drums,
Our play houses ringe in confusion,
Then Bacchus me murder, but rime we no further,
Some sack now, upon the conclusion.
Give them forty pence let them go,
How likes Landulpho this extempore song?
I blush in your behalfes at this base trasn;
In honour of our Italy we sport,
As if a Synod of the holly Gods▪
Came to triumph within our Theaters,
(Always commending English courtesy.)
Our Amphitheaters and Pyramids▪
Are situate like three-headded Dindymus,
Where stand the Statues of three striving Queens,
That once contended for the golden ball,
(Always commending English courtesy.)
Are not your curious •ames of sharper spirit?
I have a mistress whose •ntangling wit,
Will turn and wind more cunning arguments,
Then could the Craetan Labyrinth ingyre.
(Always commending English curtsy,)
Good sir, you give our English Ladies cause,
Respectively to applaud the Italian guise,
Which proudly hence-forth we will prosecute.
Command what fashion Italy affords.
By'r Lady sir, I like not of this pride,
Give me the ancient hospitality,
They say it is merry in hall, when beards wag all.
The Italian Lord is an Ass, the song is a good song,
Brave minds, now beautify your thoughts with pomp,
Send forth your Ships unto the furthest Seas,
Fetch me the feathers of the Arabian Birds,
Bring Mermaids combs, and glasses for my gaze:
Let all your sundry imitating shapes,
Make this your native soil, the land of Apes.
Then Ladies trick your trains with Turkish pride,
Plate your disheau led hair with ropes of Pearl,
Wear sparkling Diamonds like twinkling stars,
And let your spangled crowns shine like the Sun,
"If you will sit in throne of state with Pride,
"The newest fashion (still) must be your guide.
Vain. Vaine-glory vows to lackey by thy foot,
Till she hath swollen men's hearts with Arrogance.
In like designs, twofac'd Hypocrisy,
Is pressed to spend her deepest industry.
And (till her sovereignty decline and bow)
Contempt shall be enthroned in every brow.
Then thus, (as sovereign Empress of all sins)
Pride turns her hour and here her Scene begins.
How shall we best employ this idle time?
Lets argue on some case for exercise.
You see the full gorged world securely sleeps,
And sweet contention (Lawyers best content)
Is sent by drowsy Peace to banishment.
O these be Lawyers! Consorts enemies,
Prides fuel shall their fire of strife increase.
Signior Vourcher, know you those Citizens?
They are two wealthy Merchants and our friends.
Yt may be they have brought vs welcome fees.
Lawyers and Merchants met! bestir thee Pride.
In faith no suit sir, quiet, quiet all.
Fortune and health attend you Gentlemen.
We thank you Lady; may we crave your name?
Men call me Pride, and I am Plenties heir:
Immortal, though I bear a mortal show.
Are not you Lawyers, from whose reverend lips
Th'amaxed multitude learn Oracles?
Are not you Merchants, that from East to West.
From the antartieke to the Arctic Poles,
Bringing all treasure that the earth can yield?
We are, (most worthy Lady)
Then use your wisdom to enrich your selves,
Make deep success high Steward of your store.
Enlarge your mighty spirits, strive to exceed,
In buildings, riot, garments gallantry.
For take this note: The world the show affects,
Plain Virtue, (vilely clad) is counted Vice,
And makes high blood endure base praeiudice.
But wee have Laws to limit our attire.
Broke with the least touch of a golden wire.
Yet wisdom still commands to keep a mean,
True, had you no means to excel the same,
But having power, labour to ascend,
The fems of mighty men do never end,
Is not Ambition an aspiring sin?
Yes for blind bats and birds of lazy wing.
Me seems ti's good to keep within our bounds,
Why beasts themselves, of bounds are discontent,
Spend me your studies to get offices,
Then stooping suitors with uncovered heads
May groaning come, vnbowelling the bags,
Of their rich burdens, in your wide mouthed deskes.
But men will tax vs to want charity.
True charity begins first at home,
Here in your bosoms dwell your deere-lou'd hearts,
Feed them with joy; first crown their appetites,
And then cast water on the care-scorch't face,
Let your own longings first be satisfied,
All other pity is but foolish pride.
Sweet council; worthy of most high regard,
All our endeavours shall be to aspire.
Ours to be rich and gallant in attire.
All to be brave, else all of no respect,
It is the habit, doth the mind deject.
Lets brave it out, since Pride hath made vs know,
Nothing is graced that wants a glorious show.
The puffed up spirits of the greater sort.
Shall make them scorn the abject and the base;
The impatient spirit of the wretched sort,
Shall think imposed duties their disgrace,
Poor naked need shall be as full of pride,
As he that for his wealth is Deified.
No Steward with discharge shall vs disgrace,
Why all the Lords have now cashiered their trains.
But we have served his father in the field.
What, think they boys can serve to beard their foes?
Be patient fellow, see thou not my Lord?
What an I see him? puppet prating ape?
We are no stocks, but we can feel disgrace.
Not tonglesse blocks, but since we feel, weal speak.
What a coil keeps those fellows there?
These impudent audatious serving-men,
Scarcely believe your honours late discharge.
Believe it? by this sword and buckler no,
Stripped of our liveries, and discharged thus?
Walk sirs, nay walk; awake ye drowsy drones,
That long have sucked the honey from my hives;
Be gone ye greedy beefe-eaters y' are best:
The Callis Cormorants from Dover road,
Are not so chargeable as you to feed.
It is true my Lord, they carelessly devour.
In faith good fellows get some other trade,
Ye live but idle in the common-wealth.
Broke we not house up, you would break our backs.
We break your backs? no it is your rich laced suits,
And straight laced mutton; those break all your backs.
Cease Ruffians, with your swords and bucklers, hence.
For service, this is savage recompense.
Your Fathers bought lands and maintained men?
You sell your lands, and scarce keep rascal boys,
Who Ape-like jet, in guarded coats; are whipped
For mocking men? though with a shameless face,
Yet graceless boys can neuermen disgrace.
Desertfull virtue: O impiety! 
My Lord Philarchus, follow all my course,
I keep a Taylor, Coach-man, and a Cooke,
The rest for their boord-wages may go look,
A thousand pound a year, will so be saved
For revelling, and banqueting and plays.
Plays, well remembered, we will have a play,
Steward lets have Sir Olliuer Owlets men,
Philarchus, I mislike your fashion?
Faith Isle fly intoo't with a sweeping wing,
Me thinks your honours hose sit very well,
And yet this fashion is grown so stale;
Your hat is of a better block then mine.
Is on a better block, your Lordship means;
Without all question tic, he that denies,
Either he hath no judgment or no eyes.
Your Lord-ships doublet-skirt is short and neat,
Who sits there, finds the more uneasy seat;
My Lords, your Supper stays; tic eight a clock,
What, is it so late, that fashion's not so good. 
Of our three Jewels (sir) which likes you best?
An excellent piece, this those excels as sarre,
As glorious Titan staines a silly Start;
Tush, be not partial, but peruse mine well,
See you not proud Vlisses carrying spoils;
The rest are but (to this) in sooth base foils,
And yet they all are rich and wondrous fair,
But trash; Isle have a Jewel Amatist,
Whose beauty shall strike blind the gazers Eye;
Isle put it down, one promised to devise
A Globelike Jewel cut transparently,
And in the place of fixed stars, to set
The richest stones that mightiest sums could get.
Nay Isle be matchless for a carckanet,
Whose Pearls and Diamonds placed with ruly rocks
Shall circle this fair neck to set it forth,
Well Goldsmith, now you may begone.—Taylor,
Isle have a purfled Robe, loose boddied-wise.
That shall enjoy my jewels may denhead.
The loosest bodies are in fashion most,
We better know what likes vs best, then you,
Let me have flaring fashions, tuck't and pinned
That powerful winds may heave it all a huff,
True measure of my body shall be tan,
Plain dealing is the best when all is done,
That fall Pride taught vs when we first begun.
Isle have a rich embossed embroidery,
On which invaluable precious Robe,
Isle hang the glorious brightness of my Globe.
Mistress Pinckanie is my new ruff done?
Believe me Madam tic but new begun.
Let pinching citty-dames orecloud their Eyes,
Our breasts lie forth like conduicts of delight
Able to tice the nicest appetite,
Mistress Pinckanie, shall I have this Fan,
Madam not this week doe what I can,
Pleasure as bond slave, to our wills is tied,
We Ladies cannot be defamed with Pride,
Come, let's have a play, let poor slaves prate
Rank pride in meanest sort, in vs is state,
Remember promise mistress Pinkanie.
Well Ladies, though with work I am oppressed,
Workwoman always live by doing, best.
Chrisoganus faith what's the lowest price,
You know as well as I; ten pound a play.
Our Companie's hard of hearing of that side,
And will not this book pass, alas for pride,
I hope to see you starve and storm for books,
And in the dearth of rich invention,
When sweet smooth lines are held for precious
Then will you fawn and crouch to Poesy,
Not while goosequillian Posthaste holds his pen.
Will not our own stuff serve the multitude?
Write on, cry on, yawle to the common sort
Of thickskin'd auditors: such rotten stuffs,
More fit to fill the pauneh of Esquiline,
Then feed the hearings of judicial ears,
Ye shades triumph, while foggy Ignorance
Clouds bright Apollos beauty: Time will clear,
The misty dullness of Spectators Eeys,
Then woeful hisses to your fopperies,
O age when every Scriveners boy shall dip?
Profaning quills into Thessaliaes Spring,
When every artist prentice that hath read
The pleasant pantry of conceits, shall dare,
To write as confident as Hercules.
When every Ballad-monger boldly writes:
And windy forth of bottle-ale doth fill
Their purest organ of invention:
Yet all applauded and puffed up with pride,
Swell in conceit, and load the Stage with stuff,
Raked from the rotten embers of stall jests:
Which basest lines best please the vulgar sense
Make truest rapture lose pre-eminence.
The fellow doth talk like one that can talk,
Is this the well-learn'd man Chrissganus,
He beats the Ayre the best that ere I heard,
Ye scraps of wit, base Echoes to our voice,
Take heed ye siumble not with stalking hie?
Though fortune reels with strong prosperity.
Farewell the Muses, poor Poet adieu,
When we have need't may be weal send for you.
My Lord hath sent request to see a play.
Your Lord? what, shall our pains be soundly recom∣penc'd?
With open hand of honours srancke reward?
Ye shall have four fair Angels gentlemen,
Fair Ladies mean you? we have four in the play
Nay (my good friends) I mean in fair pure gold.
Fie tic to much, too long ere it be told,
Mas these are single jests indeed,
But I will double it once, ye shall have eight.
But are you sure that none will want the weight?
To way down our expense in sumptuous Clothes?
Well, pleasures pride shall mount to higher rate,
Ten pound a play will scarce maintain our state,
Fat Plenty brings in Pride and Idleness:
The world doth turn a Maze in giddy round:
This time doth raise, what other times confound.
O sir, your moral lines were better spent,
In matters of more worthy consequent.
Well, whilst occasion helps to clime alofft,
We'll mount Promotions highest battlement.
And break your necks I hope; clime not too fast,
A heady course, confusion ends at last.
Preach to the poor; look Steward, to your count,
Direct your household, teach not vs to mount:
Farewell ye proud (I hope they hear me not)
Proud Statute Rogues.
Faith husband, Isle have one to bear my train,
Another bare before to usher me.
Nay I my self will learn the Courtly grace,
Honour shall give my wealth a higher place.
Out on these velvet guards, and black laced sleeves,
These simpering fashions simply followed.
Well, through the streets in thundering coach Isle ride,
Why serves our wealth, but to maintain our pride?
Law, Arms, and Merchandise, these are three heads,
From whence Nobility first took his spring.
Then let our haughty minds our fortunes spend,
Pleasure and honour shall our wealth attend.
Nay I will have it, I that I will.
Contain your speech, within your private thoughts,
Wee are encountered with the honoured train.
Fair Ladies, could these times afford you cates,
You should be feasted in Apolloes hall;
But (Lords) the chaps of wide-pancht gluttony,
Have wasted all the dainties of the land.
Servant Philarchus, what, no mask too night?
A Play, a Mask, a Banquet, weal have all.
My Lord, the Players now are grown so proud,
Ten pound a play, or no point Comedy.
What? insolent with glib prosperity?
Faith Gentlemen no Players will appear:
Gallants, to your Mask.
How soon they can remember to forget,
Their undeserved Fortunes and esteem;
Blush not the peasants at their pedigree?
Sucked pale with lust; what, bladders swollen with pride,
To strout in shreds of nitty brogerie?
Well, though the penny raised them to the pound,
Just Envy, causeless Pride doth still confound.
Well let them blase, ther's none so blind but sees,
Prides fall is still frost-bit with miseries.
What, come they in so blunt without devise?
The night is dead before the sport be borne.
Cease Music there, prepare to banquet sirs.
Ceres and Bacchus tickled Venus stirs.
Gallants unmask, and fall to banqueting,
A health about, carouse shall feed carouse.
The first is pledge•d, and here begins a fresh.
This royal health of welcome greetes you all.
Bacchus begins to reel with going round.
The grape begins to fume.
Why let it fret: not pledge a Nobleman.
I like this Jewel, Isle have his fellow.
How? you? what fellow it? gip Velvet guards.
Insolent for-beare.
A pettifoggers whoodded wise so perched?
Why not proud Lord? then bid your mincks come down.
Dishonourable Lord, I say thou li'st.
I challenge thee on that disgraceful word,
Here answer I thy challenge in this wine.
I will confirm thy pledge, and meet thee too.
Down climbing Pride to Stygian Tartarie,
The breath of Envy fills the empty world,
Envy, whose nature is to work alone,
As hating any Agent but her self,
Turn, turn, thou Lackey to the winged Time,
I envy thee in that thou art so slow,
And I so swift to mischief: So, now stand,
Peace, Plenty, Pride, had their competitors,
But I enjoy my Sovereignty alone.
Now shall proud Nobles, Law, and Merchandise,
Each swell at other, as their veins would break,
Fat Ignorance, and rammish Barbarism,
Shall spit and drivel in sweet Learnings face,
Whilst he half starved in Envy of their power,
Shall eat his marrow, and him-selfe devour,
Awake ye Brawne-fed Epicures, look up,
And when you think your clearest eyes to find.
Be all their Organs struck with Envy blind.
O pallid Envy how thou suck my blood,
And wastes my vital spirits: I could rave,
Run mad with anguish, for my slight respect,
O wher's the honour to my high borne blood!
When every peasant, each Plebeian,
Sits in the throne of undeserved repute,
When every Pedlers-French is termed Monsignuer,
When broad-cloathd trades-man, and what lack you sir.
Is wrapped in rich habiliments of silk,
Whilst urgent need makes Princes bend their knee,
As servile as the ignobilitie,
To crouch for coin, whilst flaues tie fast our Lands,
In Statute Staple, or these Merchants bands.
Wan ghostlike Envy, spungeth up my blood,
Whilst I behold yon halfe-fac'd Minion,
The daughter of some Cloves and Cinnamon,
To equal me in rich accoutrements.
O, wher's the outward difference of our birth!
When each odde-mincing mistress Citty-Dame,
Shall dare to bee as sumptuously adorned
With Jewels, chains, and richest ornaments,
As wee from whom their Fathers held their land
In bond slaves Tenure, and base villianage.
Why should yon bubble of Nobility,
Yon shade of Man appropriate Epithets
Of noble, and right honourable, Sir,
To the blind Fortune of his happy birth?
Why should this reeling world (drunk with the juice
Of Plenties bounty) give such attribute
Of sovereign title, place and dignity,
To that same swollen up Lord, whom blinded chance,
Aboue his virtues merit doth advance,
To high exalted state, whilst all rapine,
To see our sweat rewarded, and our pain
Guerdond but with a single fee, an Angels gain.
God for his mercy, how yon Lady jets,
And swoops along in Persian royalty.
O, I could pine with Envy, and consume
My heart in foul disdain, that she should strout,
And swell in ostentation of her birth,
Decking the curled tresses of her hair
With glittering ornaments, whilst I am pent
In nice respect of civil modesty:
Isle not endure it, Lawyers wives shall shine,
Spite of the law, and all that dare rapine.
Drops of cold sweat hang on my fretting brow,
O, I could gnash my teeth, and whip my self,
Parboil my liver in this envious heate
Of deep ripening Malice! I am vexed,
Stung with a Viperous impatience,
That yon Nobility, yon Iohn a Stile,
Should sole possess the throne of dignity,
Whilst wee fat Burgomasters of the State,
Rich treasuries of gold, full stuffed up trunks,
With all the fattest marrow of the land
Should be debarred from types Majestic,
And live like Aesops Ass: whilst our mean birth
Curbs our aspiring humours from the seat,
Of honours mounted state; I cannot sleep,
My entrails burn with scorn, that Merchandise,
Should stand and lick the pavement with his knee,
Bare-head and crouching to Nobility,
Though forfeited to vs be all their state,
Yet Envy (still) my heart doth macerate.
Gip Mistress Madam, and French-hood intaild
Unto a Habeas Corpus: Iesu God,
How proud they jet it, and must I give wall?
And bend my body to their Mistresse-ships,
O husband, I am sick, my cheek is pale
With—
With what my sweet?
With Envy, which no Physic can prevent;
Shall I still stand an abject in the eye,
Of fair respect, not mounted to the height
To the top gallant of o're-peering state,
That with Elated looks of Majesty,
I may out face the proud pild Eminence,
Of this same gilded Madam Bellula,
And yon same Ione a Noke, chained Champerty?
Content thee wife; the tide of Royalty,
Shall only flow into our Merchandise,
The gulf of our Ambition shall devour
All the supports of honour, lands and plate,
Rich mineral Jewels, sumptuous palaces,
All shall be swallowed by the yawning mouth
Of hungry Avarice. Thus I plotted it,
You see Mauortius stormy brow portends,
Tempestuous whirle-windes of tumultuous arms,
Now when the breath of war is once denounced,
Then troupe the gallants to our wealthy shops.
To take up rich apparel, pawn their land,
To puff up Prides swollen bulk with plumy shows,
Then, when the Actions expectation flags,
And fills not up the mouth of gaping hope,
To vs returns the mal' contented youth,
And for the furnishment of one suite more,
All, all, is ours, Jewels, plate and Lands,
Al take career into the Merchants hands,
Then come, withdraw, and cool thy envious heate,
My policy shall make thy hopes replete.
And shall I still (dear Vourcher) sit below,
Give place to Madams and these city dames,
O, how my envy at their glory flames.
Be patient but a while (sweet Campertie,)
And I will make the world doe fealty,
To thy exalted State: the Law shall stand,
Like to a waxen nose, or Lesbian rule.
A dial Gnomon, or a weathercock,
Turned with the breath of greatness every way,
On whose incertainty, our certain ground
Of towering hight shall stand invincible:
The Dubious Law shall nurse dissention,
Which being pampered with our feeding helps,
We'll swell in greatness and our palace Towers
Shall prick the ribs of Heaven with proud height:
Then let thy Envy cease, since thy high fate,
Shall not discern a fortune more Elate.
Se with what slight respect they pass from vs,
Not giving to our birth's their due saluts,
O Dearest Lord! shall high borne Bellula?
Be sunk, and thus obscured by the proud shine,
Of yon sophisticate base Alcumie,
You b•llion stuff: O noble bloods rapine!
That dirt usurps the orb, where you should shine.
Content thee sweet, the lightning of my arms,
Shall purge the air of these gross foggy clouds,
That doe obscure our births bright radiance,
When Iron Mars mounts up his plumy Crest,
The Law and Merchandise in rust may rest,
Then Euy cease; for ever the Son shall set,
Isle buckle on Mauortius burganet.
Snmma petit liuor, perflant altissima vent,
Then poor Chrisoganus, whole envy thee,
Whose dusky fortune hath no shining gloss
That Envies breath can blast? O I could curse
This idiot world! This ill nursed age of Peace,
That foster all save virtue; comforts all
Saving industrious art, the souls bright gem,
That crussheth down the sprouting stemmes of Art,
Blasts forward wits with frosty cold contempt,
Crowning dull clodds of earth with honours,
Wreath guilding the rotten face of barbarism
With the unworthy shine of Eminence.
O! I could wish my self consumed in air,
When I behold these huge fat lumps of flesh,
These big-bulkt painted posts, that senseless
Ssand, to have their backs pasted with dignity,
Quite choking up all passage to respect:
These huge Colossi that roll up and down,
And fill up all the seat of man with froth
Of outward semblance, whilst pale Artisans.
Pine in the shades of gloomy Academic,
Faint in pursuit of virtue, and quite tierd
For want of liberal food▪ for liberal Art
Give up the goal to sluggish Ignorance.
O whether doth my passion carry me?
Poor fool, leave prating, envy not their shine,
Who still will flourish, though great Fate rapine.
Jack of the Clock-house, wher's Moister Post-hast?
In my book for Slow-pace, twelue-pence on'spate, for staying so late.
Prologue begin; rehearse, &amp;c.
Gentlemen in this envious age we bring Bayard
For Bucephalus: if mierd, bogged,
Draw him forth with your favours,
So promising that we never mean to perform
Our Prologue peaceth.
Peaceth? what peaking Page•nter pend that?
Who but Moister Post-hast.
It is as dangerous to read his name at a playe-dore
As a printed bill on a plague door.
You wear the hansom'st compassed hilt I have seen;
Doth this fashion like my friend so well.
So well I mean to wear it for your sake.
I can deny thee nothing if I would.
Fie how this Ingling troubles our rehearsal: say on.
Fellow Belch you have found a haunt at my house
You must belch and breath your spirits some, where else.
Jealous of me with your seat for Moister Iohn,
When the door's shut the signe's in Capricorn
Then you might heave the latch up with your horn
This Cockoldly coil hinders our rehearsal.
Isle tear their turret tops,
Isle beat their Bulwarcks down,
Isle rend such Raskalls form their rags,
And whip them out of town.
Patience (my Lord) your fury strays too far.
Stay sirs, rehearse no farther then you are
For here be huffing parts in this new book;
Have Ier'e a good humour in my part?
Thou hast near a good one out of thy part;
Isle play the conquering King that likes me best,
Thou play the cowardly knave; thou dost but jest,
Half a share, half a shirt, a Comedian
A hole share, or turn Chameleon.
Well sirs, the gentlemen see into our trade,
We cannot gull them with browne-paper stucco,
And the best Poets grown so envious
They'll starve rather then we get store of money.
Since dearth of Poets lets not players live by wit
To spite them lets to wars, and learn to use a spit.
O excellent ill a spit to roast a rime.
Twill serve you to remember dinner time.
Thats true tic time, let's away.
Rule fier-eied War, revel in blood and flames,
Envy, whose breath hath poisoned all estates,
Hath now resigned her spiteful throne to vs:
Stand forth Ambition; fly through the land,
And enter every breast of noble blood,
Infect their honoured minds with factious thoughts,
And make them glister in opposed arms:
Let unjust force and scarlet Tyranny
Wait on their Actions till their ulcers break,
Or else be lauced by the hand of War,
Which cannot be without a lasting scarre,
Ambition like a Pestilence doth fly,
To poison Honour and Nobility.
Fury, thy turn is next, go now and fill
The trunk of Peasants with thy dangerous breath,
Inspire them with the spirit of Mutiny,
Rage, and rebellion, make them desperate
Hurry them headlong unto every ill,
Like dust raised with a whirl wind; let their eyes,
Be ever fixed upon the bruised prints
Made in their state by wilde oppression,
And (after all) possess them with this fire,
That only War must purchase their desire.
Fury shall shine amongst this multitude,
Like a bright Meteor in the darkest cloud.
Horror shall greet the bosom of greene youth,
The melting liver of pied gallantry,
The wrinkled vizard of Devotion,
The cheverel conscience of corrupted law,
And frozen heart of gouty Merchandise,
Horror wound these, strike palsies in their limbs,
And as thou stalk'st (in thy prodigious shape,)
And meet a fellow swollen with mounted place;
Shake him with glances of thy hollow eyes,
And let thy vigour live as his heart dies.
Enough, ere long, the ayre shall ring with shrikes.
And sad lament of those, whom Horror strikes.
Horror adieu,
These three, are Ushers to our Deity,
Only vast Ruin here attends on vs,
And is a follower of our high designs:
Ruin thou faithful servant to grimm War,
Now teach thy murdering shot to tear men's limm's,
Thy brazen Cannos how to make a breach,
In a fair Cities bosom; teach thy fierce
To climb the tops of houses; and thy mines,
To blow up Churches in th'offended sky.
Consume whole groves and standing fields of Corn
In thy wild age, and make the proud earth groan,
Under the weight of thy confusion.
This and much more shall Ruin execute.
Mean while weal steep our sinewy feet in blood
And dance unto the Music of the field,
Trumpets for trebles, bases, bellowing drnmmes.
Broils Envy bred, but War shall end those brawls,
Deaf war that will not hear a word of Peace:
Sharpe pikes shall serve for subtle lawyers pens
The Merchants silks shall turn to shining steel,
In steed of false-yard sticks, large horseman's staves,
Shall measure out true pattern's of their graves.
Sir what set you up there?
Text bills for Plays.
What Plays in time of Wars? hold sirta
Ther's a new plot.
How many mean you shall come in for this?
Player tic press money.
Press money, press money, alas sir press me,
I am no fit Actor for th action.
Text bills must now be turned to Iron bills.
And please you let them be dagger pies.
Sir Oliuers men; the last Players took the
Towns reward like honest men.
Those were a couple of Cunnicatchers that
Cousin Majors, and have no consort but themselves,
But we are a full company, and our credit with our
Moister known.
Mean while ther's presse-mony, for your reward,
No (I thank your worship) we mean not to trow∣ble
your town at this time.
Well Masters, you that are maister-sharers,
Must provide you upon your own purses,
Alas sir, we Players are priuieldg'd,
Tic our Audience must fight in the field for vs,
And we upon the stage for them.
Sir as concerning half a score angels
Or such a matter for a man in my place.
Those days are out of date.
The more's the pity sir,
Well, I have a Brewer to my Ingle,
Heel furnish me with a horse great enough.
Faith Isle even past all my ballads together,
And make a coat to hold out pistoll-proofe;
I marvel what use I should make of my Ingle,
The hobby-horse-seller.
Fa•th make him sell a whole troupe of horse
To buy thee one.
Sirs, if these soldiers light upon our playing parrell,
they'll strout it in the field, and flaunt it out.
Well sirs, I have no stomach to these wars,
Faith, I have a better stomach to my breakfast.
A shrewd mornings work for Players,
Let's be gon?
Have patience worthy Lords, and calm your spirits.
Peace prating Scholar: bid the Sea be still,
When powerful winds doc toss the raging waives,
Or stay the winged lightning in his course;
When thou dost this, thy words shall charm me too.
Till then preserve thy breath.
Mauortius, dare thou maintain thy words?
How? dare Philarchus? yes, I dare doe more;
In blood or fire; or where thou dare not come;
In the numme fingers of cold death I dare.
Swallow those words, or thou shalt eat my sword.
He is no Ostrich sir he loves no iron.
And yet me thinks he should be by his plume.
What are you playing with my feather too?
O stay your rages,
Let not Ambition captivate your blood,
Make not your hates objects for vulgar eyes.
A pox upon this linguist, take him hence;
Philarchus, I defy thee, and in scorn,
Spit on thy bosom: vowing here by heaven,
If either sword, or fire, or strength of men,
Or any other steeled violence,
Can bring to swift confusion what is thine,
Upon this grateful soil; it shall be done.
And when 'ts done, I will restore my wrongs
Out of thy Forts, thy Castles and thy lands.
My lands?
I, factious Lord, till then adieu,
Weal shine like Commits in next enter-view.
My soul is big in travail with revenge,
And I could rip her womb up with a stab,
To free the imprisoned issue of my thought.
O, how this vulture, (vile Ambition,)
Tiers on the heart of greatness, and devours,
Their bleeding honours, whilst their empty names,
Lye chained unto the hill of infamy:
Now is the time wherein a melting eye
May spend it self in tears, and with salt drops,
Write woe, and desolation in the dust,
Upon the frighted bosom of our land,
Pity and Piety are both exiled,
Religion buried with our Fathers bones,
In the cold earth; and nothing but her face,
Left to adorn these gross and impious times.
Liberty, liberty, liberty.
Nay but stay, stay, my Masters: we have not insulted yet
who shall be our Captain.
Mass that's true: faith let's all be Captains.
Content, so wee shall bee sure to have no equality
amongst vs.
O, it's best, for, (for mine own part)
I scorn to have an equal.
Well then: what exploit shall we do first?
Marry Isle tell you:
Let's pluck down the Church, and set up an Ale-house.
O excellent, excellent, excellent, a rare exploit, a
rare exploit.
Good: this is for exploit: but then there's a thing
called Action.
O, that's going to Sea; that, we have nothing to do with∣all,
No, we are all for the land, wee.
Land, I: weal pluck down all the noble houses in the
land, ever we have done.
It were a most noble service, and most worthy of the
Chronicle.
Slid, these Lords are grown so proud,
Nay, weal have a fling at the Lawyers too.
O, I, first of all at the Lawyers.
True, that we may have the law in our own hands.
O then we may take up what we will of the Merchants.
I and forfet our bonds at pleasure, no body can sue vs.
O, twill be rare: I wonder how much Velvet will ••∣apparel
me and my horse.
Talk not of that man, weal have enough:
All shall be common.
Wives and all: what, Halter, skelter.
Slid, we are men as well as they are.
And we came all of our Father Adam.
Go to then, why should we be their slaves?
Liberty, liberty, liberty.
See, see, this common beast the multitude,
(Transported thus with fury) how it raves;
Threatening all states with ruin, to englut
Their bestial and more brutish appetites.
O you auspicious, and divinest powers,
(That in your wisdoms suffer such dread plagues
To flow and cover a rebellious land)
Give end unto their furies! and drive back
The roaring torrent on the Authors heads,
That (in their pride of Rage) all eyes may see.
Justice hath whips to scourge impiety.
Good morrow moister Fourcher.
Moister Lyon-rash you are welcome:
How fare you sir, in these prodigious times?
Troth like a man grown wilde and desperate,
E'ene spent with horror of their strange effects.
I fear they will be much more stranger yet.
And you have cause to fear sir.
So have you: if wealth may make a man suspect his state,
What news hear you sir? sit down I pray you.
I wonder how you dare keep open shop,
Considering the tumults are abroad:
They say the Nobles all are up in arms,
And the rude commons in discovered troupes
Have gathered dangerous head, and make such spoil,
As would strike dead a true reporters tongue.
Faith I am ignorant what course to take,
Wee in the City here are so distracted
As if our spirits were all earth and ayre,
I know not how: each hour here comes fresh news,
And nothing certain
Well if this be true,
The issue cannot be but dangerous,
O they have made the violent'st attempts
That ere were heard of: ruined Churches, Towns,
Burned goodly Manors, and indeed laid wast.
All the whole Country as they pass along.
Ther's no prevention if they once come here
But that our City must endure the sack.
I fear it sir.
Faith we are sure to feel
The fury of the tempest when it comes.
The Law and Merchandise may both go beg.
Where are you husband, do you here the news?
What news on Gods name?
O the enemies.! Four. What of the enemies?
They are entered into the city.
Adieu good moister Fourcher.
Lord have mercy upon vs,
O good Moister Lyon-rash go pray.
How now, what noise is this?
They cry arm arm me thinks.
O sweet heart the Spaniards are come,
We shall all be kilt they say.
Moister Vourcher what shall we doe? O Lord.
Arm, arm, arm.
Come on Players, now we are the Sharers
And you the hired men: Nay you must take patience,
Slid how do you march?
Sirha is this you would rend and tear the Cat
Upon a Stage, and now march like a drowned rat?
Look up and play the Tamburlaine: you rogue you.
Thus Heaven (in spite of fury) can preserve,
The trustful innocent, and guiltless Soul;
O, what a thing is man, that thus forgets
The end of his creation; and each hour
Strikes at the glory of his maker thus?
What brazen visage, or black iron soul
Hath strength to Justify so Godless deeds?
Hee that is most infeoft to Tyranny,
The man whose Jaws burn most with thirst of blood,
What colours or thin cobweb can he weave,
To cover so abhorred iniquities?
If then there be no shadow, no pretext,
To veil their loathed bodies; what should make
Men so enamoured on this Strumpet war.
To dote upon her form? when (in her self)
Shoe's made of nothing, but infectious plagues.
Witness the present Chaos of our Scene,
Where every street is chained with linckes of spoil,
Here proud Ambition rides; there Fury flies,
Here Horror; and there ruthless Murder stalks,
Led on by Ruin, and in Steel and fire,
That now on tops of houses; now in vaults,
Now in the sacred Temples; here, and there
Runs wilde.
Reign Poverty in spite of tragic war,
And tiumph over glittering vanity,
Though want be never void of bitter woes,
Yet slow-pac'd remedy, true patience shows,
See worldling worlds of Virtue lined within,
Though sinners all; yet least replete with sin.
I scorn a scoffing fool about my Throne,
An Artless Idiot; that (like Esops Dawe,
Plumes fairer fether'd birds: no, Poverty,
Will dignify her chair with deep Divines,
Philosophers and Scholars feast with me,
As well as Martialists in misery.
First change the hour from five to fatal six,
Then ring forth knells of heavy discontent,
With fighes and groans whilst I have government.
Thin Famine needs must follow Poverty.
My bones lye open, like a withered tree
By storms disbarkt of her defending skin,
So near the heart the weather beats within.
O end thy Age! that we may end our days,
Once Objects, now all Abjects to the world,
For after feeble Sickness death ensues,
And ends grief that happy joy renews.
Then Bondage shall vnbolt those cruel bars,
That thralls fair honour in obscure reproach,
And sauage-like yokes up humanity,
To bind in chains true-borne civility.
Though Sluttishnesse be loathsome to her self,
Penurious time must be obscene and base,
Who hates the rich must dwell with Poverty,
Since rule in any thing, is Sovereignty.
Were Poverty a word more miserable
Then Mans austere invention could propound,
Yet is poor Honesty rich Honours ground:
Whose eyes vnuail'd like to th'vnhoodded Hawk,
Look straight on high, and in the end aspire,
To feel the warmth of Princes holy fire.
Yet Honour, Wealth, Lands, and who wins the prize,
Obtains but Vanity of Vanities.
Come follow me my never failing friend.
The broils of war wherein I gloried more
Then Priams Hector, who by burning walls,
Was traild along (dread victories deep fall)
So from these gates my self in mean disgrace
Am banished forth, pinch't through with poverty.
Who tells vs all it is true that she hath sed,
Poor flies will tickle Lyons being dead.
The thirst of Honour called me to the wars,
Where I have drunk a health (too deep a draught)
My full-mouthd bags may now be filled with ayre,
The Devil and Ambition taught it me.
Is that Philarchus that complains? it is so,
See how Mauortius turns away his face,
To seek to friends it is holden for disgrace.
Time was, I could have dined amongst my friends,
Now stands at every door a lack and Apes
And tells me it is too late, his Lord hath dined.
This miserable world would make one mad;
I stepped unto a Vintner at the Bar,
And offered him my Rapier for a pawn;
The saucy slave took it in such a scorn,
And flung it in the streets, replying thus,
Mere want brings weapons out of use with vs.
See poor Philarchus pouring out his plaints,
To unrelenting walls, relentless men.
Are wounds rewards for Soldiers in the field?
What? sell our lands, are these the fruits of War?
Then dye Philarchus, let not shame survive,
Thy fainting honour, dead and yet alive.
Here come our wives, how wretchedly they look.
My Jewels pound, my rings are gone to wrack,
The greedy Usurer hath gotten all.
I am a prey to wretched Poverty,
Ill featured Famine will devour vs up,
Whose wrinkled face, is like pale deaths aspect.
Behold my wife like Winters paramour,
Robed and bereaved of nuptial Ornaments.
"Hide thee Philarchus lower then the grave,
"The Earth will cover though it cannot save.
If men lament, whose wonted yron-hearts,
Were harder then the Armour they have worn,
And wail the Agent of a women's voice,
What shall weak women and poor Ladies doe?
Fall to those tears, that we were borne unto.
Could I but learn (with Croesus) to endure
The falling sickness of sad Poverty,
Who lost a rich commanding Empery
Patience would prove a tutor to my grieves.
Thou wont's a Solan to consort with thee,
To prove affliction is the perfect way
That leads to Ioues tribunal dignity;
Ill hast thou governed thy prosperity,
That can not smile in mere adversity.
Look upon me (the poorest slave in show,
That ever fortune buried in mishap:)
Yet this is Natures richest lewell-house
And teaches me to weep at all your wants.
Why, thou art far more wretcheder then wee,
How can thou teach vs then tranquillity?
See thou this poor and naked bosom here?
Dost thou behold this scorned uncovered head?
When thou wast rich and Peerless in thy pride,
Content did never harbour in thy breast,
Nor ere had love, her residence in thee,
(I mean the love of perfect happiness)
But skilless grudging from a haughty spirit
Did blind thy senses with a slender merit.
Whilst I (poor man) not subject to such thought
Gave entertain to those sweet blessed babes,
Which Sapience brought from Wisdoms holy breast,
And thought me rich to have their company.
By nursing them in Peace I shunned all Sloth,
Nor yet did Plenty make me prodigal:
Pride I abhorred and termed the Beggars shield:
Nor ever did base Euuie touch my heart.
Yet always loved to bear (as Solon sed,)
A Turtles eye within an Aspicks head:
Nor could the rattling fury of fierce war
Astonish me more then the mid-night clock,
The Trumpeter to Contemplation:
For Poverty, I shake her by the hand,
As welcome Lady to this woeful Land.
How might we tread the path's to happy ends,
Since foes to Learning are not Virtues friends.
First entertain submission in your souls
To frame true concord in one unity.
Behold the fair proportion of a man,
Whom heavens have created so complete,
Yet if the arm make war against the head,
Or that the heart rebel against the brain,
This elemental body (thus compact,)
Is but a scattred Chaos of revenge;
Your laws appointed to be positive,
(By War confounded) must be brought again.
For law is that which Love and Peace maintain.
Thou Son of knowledge (richer then a man)
We censure thy advise as oracles.
Follow, and Isle instruct you what I can:
We followed beasts before but now a man.
O Heavens pouring high-pryzd savours forth,
Like to the honey dew that sweets the Leaves,
Once send vs Peace, that fairest Palme-crownd Queen.
Ruin and War the precedents of Wrath,
That crop't the fifty Sons of Hecuba,
Have rid their circuit through this fertile soil,
And quite transformed it to a Wilderness.
Come let vs sit and morn with sad laments,
The heavy burdens of our discontents.
To wail our want let speaking slack the pain,
For words of grief divide the grief in twain.
Our Shops (sometimes) were stuffed with cloth of gold,
But War hath emptied them, and Spiders build
Their Cob-web-tents; weaving foul dusty lawn
For poor woe-working Poverty to wear.
O woes! behold our poor distressed wives.
From Poverty to Famine, worse and worse
The scourge of Pride, and Heavens detested curse.
Wher's that excess consumed upon the back?
Sunk down to Hell whilst hunger feels the lack.
Who now will pity vs, that scorned the poor?
Pity is past when Peace is out of door.
Drink thou my tears and I will drink up thine,
For nought but tears is miseries salt wine.
We that have scorned to dress our meat our selves,
Now would be glad if we had meat to dress.
And if Lament were remedy for want
Their cates wear course that in Lament were scant,
Comfort sweet wife, ill lasts not always so:
And good (some-times) makes end of lingering woe.
My grief is thine,
And mine is most for thee.
My care is thine.
Be mine for thee and me.
Faith Poverty hath paid my wife on the petticoat.
From these devouring woormes, eat men alive,
And swollow up whole Manors at a bit
The whilst our hungry bodies die for lack,
And honest husbandy must go to wrack.
Pray sirs for Peace, that best may please vs all.
From cities Pride the country takes his fall.
Tic Time, for plough-shares (now) are turned to bills,
Carte-horses pressed to cary Cavaliers,
True laboring servants counted Soldiers slaves,
Though Famine hungerstarue yet heaven saves.
Then let vs pray to heaven all for Peace.
For thence comes comfort, plenty and increase.
Post me no posting; pay me the shot,
You live by wit; but we must live by money.
Goody sharpe, be not so short,
Isle pay you, when I give you money.
When you give me money? go to, Isle bear no
Longer.
What and be under fifty?
Moister Cunstable hoe, these Players will not pay their
shot.
Faith sir, War hath so pinch't vs we must pawn.
Alas poor Players: hostess; what comes it to?
The Sharers dinners six pence a piece, the hirelings
pence.
What sixepence an Egg, and two and two at an
Egg.
Faith Famine affords no more.
Fellows bring out the hamper choose somew-what
out of the Stock.
What will you have this cloak to pawn,
what think you it's worth?
Some four groats,
The pox is in this age, heir's a brave world fellows.
You may see what it is to laugh at the Audience.
Well it shall serve for a pane.
Soft sirs I must talk with you for tax money,
To relieve the poor, not a penny paid yet,
Sir, (at few words we shared but xv. pence last week.
But tic well known, that each maintains his Puncke,
And taverns it with druncken suppers still.
Alas they are our wives.
Ye are not all married.
Who are not are glad to bring such as they can get.
Before Isle give such a president, Isle leave playing.
Faith and I too: Isle rather fall to work.
Fall to work after playing unpossible.
Sirs, will you here the truth.
Sir you may choose,
But you must all choose
Whither you'll be shipped and set a shore no man
Knows where as the Romaines did:
Or play for the maintenance of the poor;
And your selves kept like honest men.
We choose neither.
Saving your sad tale, will you take a pot or two.
The dearth of Malt denies it
Its a hard world if the Constable despise it.
Must we be shipped in earnest,
Or doe you make vs Sheep in jest,
Ass signum.
Cunstable doe you know what you doe.
I, banish idle fellows out o'th'land,
Why Cunstable doe you know what you see.
I, I see a Madge howlet: and she sees not see.
Know you our credit with Sir Oliuer?
True, but your boasting hath cracked it, (I fear.)
Faith I must fall to making fiddle strings again.
And I to curl horse tails to make fools beards.
Isle boldly fall to balloting again.
Sirs, those prouisoes will not serve the turn,
What hoe, Sailors, ship away these players.
The wind blows fair, and we are ready sir.
No matter where it blows; away with them.
It's an ill wind blows a man thus clean out
of balloting.
Bondage, wan Sickness, and bare Poverty,
Vanish like clouds before the Eastern light,
Now Peace appears, hence all to endless night,
And you dejected spirits, crushed with want,
Mount up your minds unto the fairest hope,
Need hath nursed Peace within your Horoscope,
The warm reflection of whose cheering beams,
Makes you as rich as bright Pactolus streams.
Shine plentuous Bounty, crown the naked world,
With odorous wreaths of thy abundant sweets,
Laborious Artisans, now bustle up,
Your drooping spirits with alacrity.
Peace gives your toiling sweat a due regard,
Crowning your labour with a rich reward.
Ceres be lavish, Bacchus swell to brim,
And all to Peace sing a propitious himne,
With Laurel shall our Altars flame,
In honour of thy sacred name.
No more:
Be dumb in hushed observance at this sight,
Here comes Amazements object, wonders height,
Peaces patronise, Heavens miracle,
Virtues honour, Earths admiration,
Chastities Crown, Justice perfection,
Whose train is vnpolute Virginity,
Whose Diadem of bright immortal Fame,
Is burnished with vnvalued respect,
Ineffable wonder of remotest lands;
Still sway thy gracious Sceptre, I resign;
What I am is by Thee, my self am thine,
Astray mounts unto the Throne.
Mount Empress, whose praise for Peace shall mount,
Whose glory, which thy solid virtues won,
Shall honour Europe whilst there shines a Sun.
Crowned with Heavens inward beauties, worlds applause,
Throned and reposed within the loving fear
Of thy adoring Subjects: live as long
As Time hath life, and Fame a worthy tongue.
Still breath our glory, the worlds Empress,
Religions Guardian, Peaces patronise;
Now flourish Arts, the Queen of Peace doth reign,
Virtue triumph, now she doth sway the stem,
Who gives to Virtue, honours Diadem.
All sing Paeans to her sacred worth,
Which none but Angels tongues can warble forth:
Yet sing, for though we cannot light the Sun,
Yet utmost might hath kind acceptance won.
Religion, Arts, and Merchandise,
triumph, triumph:
Astray rules, whose gracious eyes,
triumph, triumph.
O'er Vices conquest, whose desires,
triumph, triumph:
Whose all to chiefest good aspires,
then all triumph.

The rest are making ready sir,
So let them, theres time enough.
You are brother to the King my Lord, we'll take your word.
Strato thou hast some skill in poetry,
What think thou of a mask, will it be well?
As well as masks can be.
As masks can be.
Yes, they must commend, and speak in praise of the assembly, bless the Bride and groom, in person of some god, there tied to rules of flattery.
See good my Lord who is returned.
Noble Melantius,
the land by me welcomes thy virtues home, thou that with blows abroad bring vs our peace at home, the breath of Kings is like the breath of gods, my brother wished thee here, and thou art here, he will be kind; and weary thee with often welcome, but the time doth give thee a well∣come, aboue his, or all the world.
My Lord, my thanks, but these scratched limbs of mine, have spoke my love and truth unto my friends, more then my tongue ere could, my mind's the same it e∣for
was to you; where I find worth
I love the keeper, till he let it go,
And then I follow it.
Hail worthy brother,
He that rejoices not at your return
In safari, is mine enemy for ever.
I thank thee Diphilus: but thou art foul•ie,
I sent for thee to exercise thine arms
With me at Patria, thou came not Diphilus:
It was ill.
My noble brother my excuse
Is my Kings straight command, which you my Lord
Can witness with me.
Tic most true Mel•ntius,
He might not come till the solemnities
Of this great match were past.
Have you heard of it.
Yes, and have given cause to those, that here
Envy my deeds abroad, to call me gamesome,
I have no other business here at Rhodes.
We have a mask to night,
And you must tread a soldiers measure.
These soft and silken wars are not for me,
The music must be shrill and all confused
That stirs my blood, and then I dance,
But is Amintor wed?
This day?
All joys upon him, for he is my friend,
Wonder not that I call a man so young;
His worth is great, valiant he is,
And one that never thinks his life his own,
If his friend need it, when he was a boy,
As oft as I returned (as without boast)
I brought home conquest, he would gaze upon me,
And view me round, to •iude in what one limb
The virtue lay to doe those things he heard,
Then would he wish to see my sword, and feel
The quickness of the edge, and in his hand
Weighs it, he oft would make me smile at this;
His youth did promise much, and his ripe years
Will see it all performed.
Hail Maid and Wife.
Thou fair Aspatia, may the holy knot,
That thou hast tied to day, last till the hand
Of age vndoe't, may thou bring a race
Unto Amintor, that may fill the world
Successively with soldiers.
My hard fortunes
Deserve not scorn, for I was never proud
When they were good.
Howes this.
You are mistaken sir, she is not married.
You said Amintor was.
Tic true, but
Pardon me, I did receive
Letters at Patria from my Amintor
That he should marie her.
And so it stood,
In all opinion long, but your arrival
Made me imagine you had heard the change.
Who has he taken then?
A Lady sir,
That bears the light aboue her, and strikes dead
With flashes of her eye, the fair Euadne
Your virtuous sister.
Peace of heart betwixt them,
But this is strange.
The King my brother did it
To honour you, and these solemnities
Are at his charge.
Tic royal like himself,
But I am sad, my speech bears so unfortunate a sound
To beautiful Aspatia, there is rage
Hid in her fathers breast Calianax,
Bent long against me and he should not think,
Could I but call it back, that I would take
Such base revenges as to scorn the state
Of his neglected daughter.
O it were pity, for this Lady sir,
Sits discontented with her watery eyes bent on the ear
In unfrequented woods are her delight,
Where when she sees a bank stuck full of flowers,
Then she will sit, and sigh, and tell
Her servants, what a pretty place it were
To bury lovers in, and make her maids
Pluck'em, and strew them over her like a corse,
She carries with her an infectious grief,
That strikes all her beholders, she will sing
The mourn•ulst things that ever ear hath heard,
And swooned, and sing again, and when the r•st
Of your young Ladies in their wanton blood,
Tell mirthful tales in course that fills the room
With laughter, she will with so sad a look
Bring forth a story of the silent death
Of some forsaken virgin, which her grief
Will put in such a phrase, that ere she end
She'll send them weeping one by one away.
She has a brother under my command
Like her, a face as womanish as hers,
But with a spirit that hath much outgrown
The number of his years.
My Lord the Bridegroom.
I might run fiercely, not more ha•tily,
Upon my foe, I love thee well Amintor,
My mouth is much too narrow for my heart,
I joy to look upon those eyes of thine,
Thou art my friend, but my disordered speech
Cuts off my love.
Thou art Melantius,
All love is spoke in that, a sacrifice
To thank the gods, Melantius is returned
In safety, victory sits on his sword
As she was wont, may she build there, and dwell,
And may thy armour be as it hath been,
Only thy valour and thine innocence,
What endless treasures would our enemies give,
That I might hold thee •till thus.
I am poor in words, but credit me young man
Thy mother could do no more but weep, for joy to see thee
After long absence, all the wound• I have,
Fetched not so much away, nor all the cries
Of widowed mothers: But this is peace
And that was war.
Pardon thou holy god
Of marriage bed, and frown not, I am for'st
In answer of such noble tears as these,
To weep upon my weding day.
I fear thou art grown• too •ruell, for I hear
A Lady mourns for thee, men say to death,
•orsaken of thee, on what terms I know not.
She had my promise, but the King foe•bad it,
And made me make this worthy change, thy sister
Accompanied with graces about her,
With whom I long to loose my lusty youth,
And grow old in her arms.
Be prosperous.
My Lord the mask•s rage for you.
We are gone,
Cleon, Strato, Diphilus.
Weal all attend you, we shall trouble you
With our solemnities.
Not so Amintor.
But if you laugh at my rude carriage
In sports, il'e doe as much for you in war
When you come thither, but I have a mistress
To bring to your delights, rough though I am,
I have a mistress and she has a heart
She says, but trust me, it is stone, no better,
There is no place that I can challenge gentlemen,
But you stand still, and here my way lies.
Diagoras look to the doors better for shame, you let in all the world, and anon the King will be angry with me, why very well said, by Jove the King will have the show •'th the Court;
Why doe you swear so my Lord,
You know heel have it here.
By this light if he be wise, he will not.
And if he will not be wise, you are forsworn.
One must sweat out his heart with swearing, &amp; get
Thanks on no side, isle be gone, look too't who will.
My Lord I shall never keep them out,
Your looks will terrify them.
My looks terrify them, you coxcomely ass, •le be judge by all the company, whether thou hast not a worse face then I.
I mean because they know you, and your office.
Office, I would I could put it off, I am sure I sweat quite through in my office, I might have made room at my daughters wedding, they ha near kilt her amongst them. But now I must doe service for him that hath forsaken her, serve that will.
Hoe's so humorous since his daughter was forsa∣ken? hark, hark, whose there, codes, codes, What now?
Open the door.
Who i'st.
Melantius.
I hope your Lord-ship brings no troop, for i• you doe, I must return them.
None but this Lady sir.
The Ladies are all placed aboue, save those that come in the Kings troop, the best of Rhodes sit there,
••ere is no room.
I thank you sir, when I have seen you placed ma∣dam, I must attend the King, but the mask done, isle waite on you again.
Stand back there, room for my Lord Melanti∣us, pray bear back, •his is no place for such youths and their truls, let the doors shut again, no; do your heads itch, isle scratch them, so now thrust and hang, again, who i'st now, I cannot blame my Lord Calianax for giving way, would he were here, he would run raging amongst them, and break a dozen heads in the twinkling of an eye, what's the news now?
I pray you can you help me to the speech of the moister Cooke?
If I open the door isle cooke some of your calves heads. Peace rogues? — again, — who i'st?
Melantius?
Let him not in.
O my Lord a must, make room there for my Lord, is your Lady placed.
Yes sir, I thank you, my Lord Calianax, well met,
Your causeless hate to me I hope is buried.
Yes I doe service for your sister here,
That brings mine own poor child to timeless death,
She loves your friend Amintor, such another false hearted
Lord as you.
You doe me wrong,
A most unmanly one, and I am slow
In taking vengeance, be well advised.
It may be so, who placed the Lady there.
I did.
My Lord she must not sit there.
Why?
The place is kept for women of more worth.
More worth then she, it misbecomes your age,
And place to be so womanish, forbear,
What you have spoke I am content to think
The palsy •hook your tongue to.
Tic well if I stand here to place men's wenches.
I shall quite forget this place, thy age, my safety, and through all cut that poor sickly week thou hast to live, away from thee.
Nay I know you can fight for your whore.
Bate me the King, and be of flesh and blood
A lies that says it, thy mother at fifteen
Was black and sinful to her.
Good my Lord.
Some god pluck threescore years from that fond man,
That I may kill him, and not stain mine honour,
It is the curse of soldiers that in peace,
They shall be braved by such ignoble men,
As (if the land were troubled,) would with tears
And knees beg succour from 'em, would the blood
(That sea of blood) that I have lost in fight,
Were running in thy veins, that it might make thee
Apt to say less, and able to maintain,
Should thou say more,— This Rhodes I see is nought
But a place privileged to doe men wrong.
I, you may talk your pleasure.
What wild wrong
Has stirred my worthy friend, who is as slow
To sight with words as he is quick of hands,
That heap of age, which I should reverence,
If it were temperate, but testy years
Are most contemptible.
Good sir forbear.
There is just such another as your self.
He will wrong you, or me, or any man,
And talk as if he had no life to loose
Since this our match: the King is come in,
I would not for more wealth then I enjoy
He should perceive you raging, he did hear
You were at difference now, which hastened him.
Make room there.
Melantius thou art welcome, and thy love
Is with me still; but this is not a place
To brable in, Calianax, join hands.
He shall not have mine hand.
This is no time
To force you too't I doe love you both,
Calianax you look well to your office,
And you Melantius are welcome home,
Begin the mask.
Sister I joy to see you, and your choice,
You looked with my eyes when you took that man,
Be happy in him.
O my dearest brother,
Your presence is more joyful then this day,
Our reign is now, for in the quenching sea
The Sun is drowned, and with him fell the day,
Bright Cynthia hear my voice, I am the night
For whom thou bear about, thy borrowed light,
Appear, no longer thy pale visage shroud,
But strike thy silver horns quite through a cloud,
And send a beam upon my swarthy face,
By which I may discover all the place
And persons that have many longing eyes,
Are come to waite on our solemnities.
How dull and black am I, can I not find
This beauty without thee, am I so blind,
Me thinks they show like to those eastern streaks,
That warn vs hence before the morning breaks,
Back my pale servant, for these eyes know how,
To shoot far more and quicker rays then thou.
Great Queen they be a troop for whom alone,
One of my clearest moons I have put on,
A troop that looks as if thy self and I,
Had plucked our reins in, and our whips laid by
To gaze upon those, that appear
Brighter then we.
Then let vs keep 'em here,
And never more our chariots drive away,
But hold our places and out-shine the day.
Great Queen of shadows you are pleased to speak,
Of more then may be done, we may not break
The gods decrees, but when our time is come,
Must drive away and give the day our room.
Then shine at full pale Queen, &amp; by that power,
Produce a birth to fill this happy hour,
Of Nymphs and shepherds, and let their songs discover,
Easy and sweet who is a happy lover,
Or if thou w'oot thine own Endimion
From the sweet •lower bank he lies upon,
On La•mus brow thy pale beams drawn away•
And of his long night let him make thy day.
Thou dreamst dark power, that fair boy was not mine,
Not went I down to kiss him, ease and wind,
Have bred these bold tales, poets when they rage
Turns gods to men, and make an hour an age,
But I will give a greater state and glory,
And raise to time a nobler memory
Of what these lovers are, rise, rise, I say,
Thou power of deeps, thy surges laid away,
Neptune great King of waters, and by me
Be proud to be commanded.
Cynthia see,
Thy word hath force me hither, let me know
Why I ascend.
Doth this majestic show
Give thee no knowledge ye•.
Yes, now I see,
Something en••nded Cynthia worthy thee,
Go on, isle be a helper.
Hie thee then,
And charge the wind go from his rocky den,
Let loose his subjects, only Bores
Too foul for our intentions as he was,
Still keep him fast chained, we must have none here
But vera•ll blasts and gentle winds appear,
Such as blow flowers, and through the glad bows sing,
Many soft welcome to the lusty spring.
Bid them draw near to have thy wa••ie race
Led on in couples, we are pleased to grace
This noble night each in their richest things,
Your own deeps or the broken vessels brings,
Be prodigal and I shall be as kind,
And shine at full upon you.
See the wind
Commanding Eolus.
Great Neptune.
He.
What is thy will.
We doe command thee free,
Fanonius and thy milder winds to waite
Upon our Cynthia, but tie Bores straight,
Hoe's rebellious.
I shall doe it.
Doe moister of the flould, and all below
Thy full command has taken
O! the Maine
Neptune.
Here.
Bores has broke his chain,
And struggling with the rest has got away.
Let him alone isle take him up at sea,
I will not be long thence, go hence again
And bid the other call out of the Maine,
Bl•w Prot•us, and the rest, charge them put on
Their great•t pearls and the most sparkling stone
The beaten rock breeds, till this night is done,
By me a solemn honour to the Moon,
Fly like a full sail.
I am gone.
Dark night
S•eke a full s•ilence, doe a thorough right
To this great Chorus, that our musique may
Touch high as heaven, and make the East break day
At mid-night.
Cynthia to thy power and thee
we obey,
Joy to this great company
and no day,
Come to steal this night away
Till the rights of love are ended,
And the lusty Bridegroom say,
Welcome light of all befriended.
Pace out you watery powers below,
let your feet
Like the galleys when they row
even beat.
Let your unknown measures set
To the still winds, tell to all,
That gods are come immortal great,
To honour this great Nuptuall.
Hold back thy hours old night till we have done,
The day will come too soon,
Young Maids will curse thee if thou steal away,
And leave their losses open to the day,
Stay, Stay, and hide
the blushes of the Bride.
Stay gentle night and with thy darkness cover•
the kisses of her lover.
Stay and confound her tears and her loud cryings,
Her weak denials vows and often dyings,
Stay and hide all,
but help not if she call.
Ho Neptune.
Eolus.
The sea goes hie,
Bores has raised a storm, go and apply
Thy trident, else I prophecy •re day,
Many a tall ship will be cast away,
desend with all the gods, and all their power
To strike a calm.
We thank you for this hour,
My favour to you all to gratulate
So great a service done at my desire,
Ye shall have many floods fuller and higher
Then you have wished for, and no eb shall dare,
To let the day see where your dwellings are.
Now back unto your governments in hast,
Least your proud waters should swell aboue the wa•t,
And win upon the Island.
We obey.
Hold up thy head dead night see thou not day,
The East begins to lighten I must do•no
And give my brother place.
Oh I could frown
To see the day, the day that flings his light
Upon my kingdom, and contemns old night,
Let him go on, and •lame, I hope to see
Another wild fire in his ax•l•ree,
And all fall drenched, but I forget, speak Queen,
The day grows on, I dare no more be seen.
Once heave thy drowsy head again and •ee
A greater light a greater May•tie
Between our sect and vs, lash up thy team
The day breaks here, and yon sun flaring stream
Shot from the south, say which way wilt thou go.
Isle vanish into mists.
Adieu.
Take light their Ladies, get the Bride to bed,
We will not see you laid, good night Amintor,
Weal ease you of that tedious ceremony,
Were it my case I should think time run slow
If thou be noble youth, get me a boy
That may defend my Kingdoms from my foes.
All happiness to you.
Good night Melantius.
Madame shall we undress you for this fight,
The wars are nak't that you must make to night.
You are merry Duly.
I should be far merrier Madame, if it were with me
As it is with you.
Howes that•
That I might go to bed with him with credit that you doe.
Why how now wench.
Come Ladies, will you help.
I am soon undone.
And as soon done,
Good store of clothes will trouble you at both.
Art thou drunk Duly.
Why here is none but we.
Thou think belike there is no modesty
When we'are alone.
I by my troth, you hit my thoughts right.
You prick me Madame.
Tic against my will.
Anon you must endure more and lie still,
Tic best to practise.
Sure this wench is mad.
No faith, this is a trick that I have had
Since I was fourteen.
Tic time to leave it.
Nay now isle keep it till the trick leave me,
A dozen wanton words put in your head,
Will make you livelier in your husbands bed.
Nay faith then take it.
Take it Madame, where,
We all will take it I hope that are here.
Nay then isle give you ore.
So will I make
The ablest man in Rhodes or his heart ache.
Wilt lie in my place to night.
Isle hold your cards against any two I know.
What wilt thou doe.
Madame weal do it and make'm leave play too.
Aspatia take her part.
I will refuse it,
She will pluck down aside, she does not use it.
Do• I prithee.
You will find the play
Quickly, because your head lies well that way.
I thank thee Duly, would thou coulst instill
Some of thy mirth into Aspatia,
Nothing but sad thoughts in her breast doe dwell,
Me thinks a mean betwixt you would doe well.
She is in love, hang me if I were so,
But I could run my Country I love too,
To doe those things that people in love doe.
It were a timeless smile should prove my cheek,
It were a fitter hour for me to laugh,
When at the Alter the religious Priest,
Were passifying the offended powers,
With sacrifice, then now, this should have been
My right, and all your hands have bin employed,
In giving me a spotless offering
To young Amintors bed, as we are now,
For you pardon Euadne, would my worth
Were great as yours, or that the King or he
Or both thought so, perhaps he found me worthless,
But till he did so, in these ears of mine,
These credulons ears, he powered the sweetest words
That art or love could frame, if he were false
Pardon it heaven, and if I did want
Virtue, you safely may forgive that too,
For I have lost none that I had from you.
Nay leave this sad talk Madame.
Would I could, then I should leave the cause.
Lo if you have not spoiled all Dulas mirth.
Thou think thy heart hard, but if thou be caught remember me; thou shalt perceive a fire shot suddenly unto thee.
Thats not so good, let'em shoot any thing but sire, and I feare'm not.
Well wench thou must be taken.
Ladies good night, Isle doe the rest my self.
Nay let your Lord d•e some.
Madame good night, may all the marriage joys
That longing maids imagine in their beds
Prove so unto you, may not discontent
Grow twixt your love and you, but if there doe,
Enquire of me and I will guide your moan,
And teach you an artificial way to grieve,
To keep your sorrow waking, love your Lord
No worse then I, but if you love so well,
Alas you may displease him, so did I,
This is the last time you shall look on me:
Ladies farewell, as soon as I am dead,
Come all and watch one night about my hearse.
Bring each a mournful sto•ie and a tear,
To offer at it when I go to earth;
With flattering Ivy clasp my coffin round,
Write on my brow my fortune, let my beer
Be borne by Virgins that shall sing by course,
The truth of maids, and perjuries of men.
Alas I pity thee.
Madame good night.
Come weal let in the Bridegroom.
Whore's my Lord?
Here take this light,
Heel find her in the dark.
Your Ladye's scarce a bed, you must help her.
Go and be happy in your Ladies love,
May all the wrongs that you have done to me,
Be utterly forgotten in my death,
Isle trouble you no more, yet I will take
A parting kiss, and will not be denied,
You'll come my Lord and see the virgins weep,
When I am laid in earth; though you your self
Can know no pity, thus I wind my self
Into this willow garland, and am prouder
That I was once your love, (though now refused)
Then to have had another true to me.
So with prayers I leave you, and must try
Some yet vnpractis'd way to grieve and die,
Come Ladies will you go.
Good night my Lord.
Much happiness unto you all.
I did that Lady wrong, me thinks I feel
A grief shoot suddenly through all my veins,
Mine eyes rain, this is strange at such a time,
It was the King first moved me too't, but he
Has not my will in keeping, — why did I
perplex my self thus; something whispers me,
Go not to bed, my guilt is not so great
as mine own conscience, too sensible
Would make me think, I only break a promise,
And it was the King enforced me, timorous flesh,
Why shakst thou so, away my idle fears,
Yonder is she, the l•ster of whose eye,
Can blot away the sad remembrance
Of all these things: — oh my Euadne spare
That tender body, let it not take cold,
The vapors of the night shall not fall here,
To bed my love, Hymen will punish vs,
For being slack performers of his rights,
Came thou to call me.
No?
Come, come, my love,
And let vs loose our selves to one another,
Why art thou up so long.
I am not well.
To bed, then let me wind thee in these arms,
Till I have banished sickness.
Good my Lord I cannot sleep.
Euadne weal watch, I mean no sleeping.
Isle not go to bed.
I prithee doe.
I will not for the world.
Why my dear love.
Why? I have sworn I will not.
Sworn!
I?
How? Sworn Euadne.
Yes, sworn Amintor, and will swear again.
If you will wish to hear me.
To whom have you sworn this.
If I should name him the matter were not great.
Come, this is but the coyness of a bride.
The coyness of a bride.
How prettily that frown becomes thee.
Doe you like it so.
Thou can not dress thy face in such a look,
But I shall like it.
What look will like you best.
Why doe you ask.
That I may show you one less pleasing to you,
Howes that.
That I may show you one less pleasing to you.
I prithee put thy lests in milder looks,
It shows as thou were angry.
So perhaps I am indeed.
Why, who has done thee wrong,
Name me the man, and by thy self sweet love,
Thy yet unconquered self, I will revenge it.
Now I shall try thy truth, if thou doest love me.
Thou waighst not any thing compared to me,
Life, hono•r, joys eternal, all delights
The world can yield, are light as air
To a true lover when his Lady frowns,
And bids him doe this, wilt thou kill this man,
Swear my Amintor, and isle kiss the sun
Of thy lips.
I wonnot swear sweet love, till I know the cause.
I wood thou would,
Why, it is thou that wrongst me, I hate thee,
Thou should have kilt thy self.
If I should know that, I should quickly kill
The man you hated.
Know it, and do it.
Oh no, what look so ere thou should put on,
To try my faith, I cannot think thee false,
I cannot find one blemish in thy face
Where falsehood should abide, leave, and to bed,
If you have sworn to any of the virgins
That were your old companion•s to preserve
Your maidenhead a night, it may be done
Without this means.
A maidenhead Amintor at my years.
Sure she raves, this cannot be,
Her natural temper, shall I call thy maids,
Either thy healthful sleep hath left thee long,
Or else some fever rages in thy blood.
Neither of these, what think you I am mad,
Because I speak the truth.
Is this the truth, will you not lie with me to night.
You talk as if you thought I would hereafter.
Hereafter, yes I doe.
You are deceived, put off amazement &amp; with pati∣ence mark,
What I shall utter, for the Oracle
Knows nothing truer• tic not for a night
Or two that I forbear your bed, but ever.
I dream,—awake Amintor.
You hear right,
I sooner would find out the beds of Snakes,
And with my youthful blood warm their cold flesh,
Letting them curl themselves about my limbs,
then sleep one night with thee; this is not faind,
Nor sounds it like the kisses of a bride.
Is flesh so earthly to endure all this,
Are these the joys of marriage, Hymen keep
This story (that will make succeeding youth
Neglect thy ceremonies) from all ears.
Let it not rise up for thy shame and mine
To after ages, we will scorn thy laws,
If thou no better bless them, touch the heart
Of her whom thou hast sent me, or the world
Shall know this, not an altar then will smoke
In praise of thee, we will adopt vs sons,
Then virtue shall inherit and not blood,
If we doe lust, we will take the next we meet;
Serving our selves as other creatures do•,
And never take note of the female more,
Nor of her issue: I doe rage in vain,
She cannot jest; Oh pardon me my love,
So dear the thoughts are which I hold of thee,
That I must break forth; satisfy my fear,
It is a pain beyond the pain of death,
To be in doubt; confirm it with an oath,
If this be true.
Doe you invent the form,
Let there be in it all the binding words
Devils and conjurers can put together,
And I will take it, I have sworn before,
And here by all things holy doe again,
Never to be acquainted with thy bed,
Is your doubt over now.
I know too much, would I had doubted still,
Was ever such a marriage night as this:
You powers aboue, if you did ever mean
Man should be used thus, you have thought a way
How he may bear himself, and save his honour:
Instant me with it, for to my dull eyes
There is no mean, no moderate course to run,
I must live scorned or be a murderer:
Is there a third, why is this night so calm,
Why does not heaven speak in thundet to vs,
And drown their voice.
This rage will doe no good.
Euadne, hear me, thou hast tan an oath,
But such a rash one, that to keep it were
Worse then to swear it, call it back to thee,
Such vows as that never ascend the heaven,
A tear or two will wash it quite away,
Have mercy on my youth, my hopeful youth,
If thou be pitiful, for without boast
This land was proud of me, what Lady was there
That men eld fair, and virtuous in this I•le
That would have shunt my love, it is in thee
To make me hold this worth—Oh we vain men
That trust all our reputation
To rest upon the weak and yielding hand
Of feeble woman, but thou art not stone,
Thy flesh is soft, and in thine eyes doe dwell
The spirit of love, thy heart cannot be hard,
Come lead me from the bottom of despair,
To a•• the joys thou hast, I know thou wilt.
An• make me careful least the sudden change
Ore-come my spirits.
When I call back this oath, the pains of hell environ me.
I sleep and am to temporate, come to bed,
Or by those hairs which if thou hast a soul; like to thy locks,
Were threads for Kings to wear
About their arms.
Why so perhaps they are.
Isle drag thee to my bed, and make thy tongue•
Undo this wicked oath, or on thy flesh
Isle print a thousand wounds to let out life.
I fear thee not, doe what thou dare to me,
Every ill sounding word, or threatening look
Thou show to me, will be revenged at full.
It will not sure Euadne.
Doe not you hazard that.
Ha ye your Champions.
Alas Amintor think thou I forbear
To sleep with thee, because I have put on
A maidens strictness, look upon these cheeks,
And thou shalt find the hot and rising blood
Unapt for such a vow, no, in this heart
There dwells as much desire, and as much will,
To put that wished act, as ever yet
Was known to woman, and they have been shown
Both, but it was the folly of thy youth,
To think this beauty, to what land so ever
It shall be called, shall stoop to any second,
I doe enjoy the best, and in that height
Have sworn to stand or die, you guess the man.
No, let me know the man that wrongs me so•
That I may cut his body into motes,
And scatter it before the Northern wind.
You dare not strike him.
Doe not wrong me so,
Yes, if his body were a poisonous plant,
That it were death to touch, I have a soul
Will throw me on him.
Why tic the King.
The King.
What will you doe now?
It is not the King.
What did he make this match for dull Amintor.
Oh thou hast named a word that wipes away
All thoughts revengeful, in that sacred word,
The King, there lies a terror, what frail man
Dares lift his hand against it, let the Gods
Speak to him when they please, till when let vs
Suffer, and wai•e.
Why should you fill your self so full of heate,
And haste so to my bed, I am no virgin.
What Devil hath put it in thy fancy then
To mary me.
Alas, I must have one
To father children, and to bea•e the name
Of husband to me, that my sin may be
More honourable.
What strange thing am I?
A miserable one, one that my self
Am sorry for.
Why show it then in this,
If thou hast pity, though thy love be none,
Kill me, and all true lovers that shall love
In after ages crossed in their desires,
Shall bless thy memory, and call thee good,
Because such mercy in thy breast was found,
To rid a lingering wretch.
I must have one
To fill thy room again if thou were dead,
Else by this night I could, I pi••y thee.
These strange and sudden injuries have felon
So thick upon me, that I lose all sense
Of what they are, me thinks I am not wronged,
Nor is it ought, if from the censuring world
I can but hide it—reputation
Thou art a word, no more, but thou hast shown
An impudence so high, that to the world
I fear thou wilt betray or shame thy self.
To cover shame, I took thee never fear,
That I would blaze my self.
Nor let the King
Know I conceive he wrongs me, then mine honour
Will thrust me into action, that my flesh
Could bear with patience, and it is some ease
To me in these extremes, that I know this
Before I touched thee, else had all the sins
Of mankind stood betwixt me and the King,
I had gone through, even to his hart and thine
I have left one desire, tic not his crown
Shall buy me to thy bed, now I resolve
He has dishonoured thee, give me thy hand,
Be careful of thy credit, and sin close
Tic all I wish, upon thy chamber flower
Isle rest to night, that morning visitors
May think we did as married people use,
And prithee smile upon me when they come,
And seem to toy as if thou had been pleased
With what I did.
Fear not, I will doe this.
Come let vs practise, and as wantonly
As ever longing bride and bridegroom met,
Lets laugh and enter here.
I am content.
Down all the swellings of my troubled heart,
When we walk thus intwind let all eyes see,
If ever lovers better did agree.
Away you are not, force it no further,
Good, good, how well you look, such a full colour
Young bashful brides put on, sure you are new married.
Yes Madame to your grief.
Alas poor wentches
Go learn to love •erst, learn to lose your selves,
Learn to be flattered, and believe and bless
The double tongue that did it,
Did you ere love yet wenches, speak Olimpas,
Thou hast a mottled temper, fit for stamp.
Never.
Nor you Antiphila.
Ne'er I.
Then my good girls be more then women wi•e•
At least, be more then I was, come le•s be sad my girls,
That down cast of thine eye Olimpias,
Shows a faind sorrow; mark Antiphila,
Just such another was the Nymph Oenes,
When Paris brought home Helen, now a tear,
And then thou art a piece expressing few•ie,
The Carthage Queen when from a cold Sea rock,
Full with her sorrow, she tied fast her eyes,
To the fair Trojan ships, having lost them,
Just as thine does, down stole a tear! Antiphila,
What would this wench doe if she were Aspatia,
Here she would stand, till some more, pitying god
Turned her to Marble, tic enough my wench,
Show me the piece of needl• work you wrought.
Of Ariadne Madame?
Yes that piece,
This should be Theseus, has a cozening face,
You meant him for a man.
He was so Madame.
Why then tic well enough, never look black,
You have a full wind, and a false heart Theseus,
Does not the story say, his Keel was split,
Or his masts spent, or some kind rock or other
Met with his vessel.
Not as I remember.
It should ha been so, could the Gods know this,
And none of all their number raise a storm,
But they are all as ill, this false smile was expressed well,
Just such another caught me, you shall not go so
Antiphila, in this place work a quick-sand,
And over it a shallow smiling water,
And over it a shallow smiling water,
And his ship plowing it, and then a fear,
Doe that fear bravely wench.
Twill wrong the story.
Twill make the story, wronged by wanton Poets,
Live long and be believed, but wheres the Lady.
There Madame.
Fie, you have mist it there Antipila,
You are much mistaken wench:
These colours are not dull and pale enough,
To show a soul so full of misery
As this poor Ladies was, doe it by me,
Doe it again, by me the lost Aspatia,
And you will find all true but the wilde Island,
Suppose I stand upon the Sea, breach now
Mine arms thus, and mine hair blown with the wind,
Wilde as the place she was in, let all about me
Be tears of my story, doe my face,
If thou had ever feeling of a sorrow,
Thus, thus, Antiphila make me look good go•le
Like sorrows mount, and the trees about me
Let them be dry and leauelesse, let the rocks
Groan with contiunall •urges, and behind me
Make all a desolation, see, see wenches,
A miserable life of this poor picture.
Dear Madame.
I have done, sit down, and let v•
Upon •hat point fix all our eyes, •hat point there•
Make a dumb silence till you feel a sudden sadness
Give vs new souls.
The King may doe this, and he may not doe it,
My child is wronged, disgraced, well, how now housewives,
What at your ease, is this a time to sit still, up you young
Lazy whores, up or isle swenge you.
Nay good my Lord.
You'll lie down shortly, in and whine there,
What are you grown so rue•tie you want hey•e•,
We shall have some of the Court boys heat you shortly.
Good my Lord be not angry, we doe nothing
But what my Ladies pleasure is, we are thus in grief,
She is forsaken.•
Theres a rogue too,
A sly dissembling slave, well? get you in,
Isle have about with that boy, tic hie time
Now to be valiant, I confess my youth
Was never prone that way,
A Court stale, well I must be valiant,
And beat some dozen of these whelps, and theres
Another of'em, a trim cheating soldier,
Isle maule that raschall, has out-brau'd me twice,
But now I thank the Gods I am valiant,
Go, get you in, isle take a course with all.
Your sister is not up yet.
Our brides must take their mornings rest,
The night is troublesome.
But not tedious,
What odds, hee has not my sisters maiden-head to night.
None, its odds against any bridegroom living, he ne'er gets it while he lives.
You're merry with my sister, you'll please to al∣low me the same freedom with your mother.
Shees at your service.
Then shees merry enough of herself, she needs no tickling, knock at the door.
We shall interrupt them.
No matter they have the year before them, good morrow sister, spare your self to day, the night will come again.
Whose there my brother, I am no readier yet, your sister is but now up.
You look as you had lost your eyes to night, I
think you ha not slept.
I faith I did not.
You have done better then.
We have ventured for a boy, when hee is twelve, a shall command against the foes of Rhodes, shall we be merry.
You cannot, you want sleep,
Tic true, but she
As if she had drunk Lethe, or had made
Even with heaven, did fetch so still a sleep,
So sweet and sound.
Whats that?
Your sister frets this morning, and doth turn her eyes upon me, as people on the heads∣man, she does chafe, and kiss and chafe, and clap my cheeks, shees in another world.
Then I had lost, I was about to lay, you had not got• her maiden head to night.
Ha, does hee not mock me, y'ad lost indeed I doe not bungle.
You doe deserve her.
I •a•d my lips to hers, and that wilde breach
That was so rude and rough to me, last night
Was sweet as April, isle be guilty too,
If these be the effects.
Good day Amintor, for to me the name
Of brother is too distant, we are friends,
And that is nearer.
Dear Melantius,
Let me behold thee, is it possible.
What sudden gaze is this.
Tic wondrous strange.
Why does thine eye desire so strict a view
Of that it knows so well? theres nothing here
That is not thine.
I wonder much Melantius.
To see those noble looks that make mo think,
How virtuous thou art, and on this sudden
Tic strange to me, thou should have worth and honour,
Or not be base and false, and treacherous,
And every ill.
Say, stay my friend,
I fear this sound will not become our loves, no more em∣brace me.
Oh mistake me not,
I know thee to be full of all those deeds,
That we frail men call good, but by the course
Of nature thou should be as quickly changed,
As are the winds dissembling, as the Sea,
That now wears brows as smooth as virgins be,
Tempting the Merchant to invade his face.
And in an hour call his billows up,
And shoot em at the Sun, destroying all
A carries on him, Oh how near am I
To utter my sick thoughts.
Why, my friend, should I be so by nature?
I have wed thy sister, who hath virtuous thoughts •now for one whole family, and it is strange,
That you should feel no want.
Believe me this is cōplement too cunning for me.
What should I be then by the course of nature,
They having both robbed me of so much virtue.
Oh call the bride my Lord Amintor, that wee may see her blush, and turn her eyes down, it is the pr•itie•t sport.
Euadne.
My Lord.
Come forth my love,
Your brothers doe attend to wish you joy.
I am not ready yet.
Enough, enough,
They'll mock me.
Faith thou shalt come in.
Good morrow sister, he that understands
Whom you have wed, need not to wish you joy,
You have enough, take heed you be not proud.
O sister what have you done.
Why what have I done?
My Lord Amintor swears you are no maid now.
Push.
I faith he does.
I knew I should be mocked.
With a truth.
If it were to do again, in faith I would not mary.
Nor I by heaven.
Sister, Duly swears she heard you cry two rooms off.
Fi• how you talk.
Lets see you walk.
By my troth you're spoiled.
Amintor.
H•.
Thou art sad.
Who I, I thank you for that, shall Diphilus thou and I sing a catch.
How?
Prithee l•t•.
Nay that• too much the other way•
I am so heighned with my happiness, how dost thou love, kiss me.
I connote love you, you tell tales of me.
Nothing but what becomes vs, Gentlemen
Would you had all such wives, and all the world,
That I might be no wonder, you're all sad,
What doe you envy me, I walk me thinks
On water, and ne'er sink I am so light.
Tic well you are so.
Well? can you be other when she looks thus,
Is there no music there, lets dance.
Why? this is strange.
I do not know my self, yet I could wish my joy were le•se.
Isle marry if it will make one thus
Amintor, hark.
What says my love I must obey.
You doe it scuru•lie, •will be perceived.
My Lord the King is here.
Where.
And his brother.
Good morrow all.
Amintor joy on joy fall thick upon thee,
But Madame you are altered since I saw you,
I must salute you, you are now another,
How liked you your nights rest.
Ill sir.
Indeed she took but little.
You'll let her take more, &amp;c thank her too shortly.
Amintor were thou truly honost till thou were married.
Yes sir.
Tell me how then shows the sport to you.
Why well?
What did you doe.
no more nor less then other couples use,
You know what tic, it has but a course name•
But prithee I should think by her black eye
And her red cheek, she should be quick and stirring
In this same business; ha?
I cannot tell I ne'er tried other sir, but I perceive
She is as quick as you delivered.
Well you'll trust me then Amintor,
To choose a wife for you again.
No never sir.
Why? like you this so ill.
So well I like her,
For this I bow my knee in thanks to you,
And unto heaven will pay my grateful tribute
Hourly, and doe hope we shall draw out,
A long contented life together here,
And die both full of gray hairs in one day,
for which the thanks is yours, but if the powers
That rule vs, please to call her first away,
Without pride spoke, this world holds not a wife
Worthy to take her room.
I doe not like this; all forbear the room
But you Amintor and your Lady, I have some speech that may
Concern your after living well•
A will not tell me that he lies with her, if hee doe,
For it is apt to thrust this arm of mine to acts unlawful.
You will suffer me to talk with her Amintor,
And not have jealous pangs.
Sir, I dare trust my wife,
When she dares to talk, and not be jealous•
How doe you like Amintor.
As I did sir.
Howes that?
As one that to fulfil your pleasure,
I have given leave to call me wife and love.
I see there is no lasting faith in sin,
They that break word with heaven, will break again
With all the world, and so doest thou with me.
How sir.
This subtle women's ignorance
Will not excuse you, thou hast taken oaths
So great, that me thought they did misbecome
A women's mouth, that thou would ne'er enjoy
A man but me.
I never did swear so, you doe me wrong.
Day and night have heard it.
I swore indeed that I would never love
A man of lower place, but if your fortune
Should throw you from this hight, I bad you trust
I would forsake you, and would bend to him
That won your throne, I love with my ambition,
Not with my eyes, but if I ever yet
Touched any other, Leprosy light here
Upon my face, which for your rioyaltie
I would not stain.
Why thou dissemble, and it is in me
To punish thee.
Why, it is in me then, not to love you, which will
More afflict your body, then your punishment can mine.
But thou hast let Amintor lie with thee.
I hannot.
Impudence, he says himself so.
A lies.
A does not.
By this light he does, strangely and basely, and
Isle prove it so, I did not only shun him for a night,
But told him I would never close with him.
Speak lower, tic false.
I am no man to answer with a blow,
Or if I were, you are the King, but urge not, tic most true.
Doe not I know the uncontrolled thoughts,
That youth brings with him, when his blood is high,
With expectation and desire of that
He long hath waited for, is not his spirit
Though he be temperate, of a valiant •train
As this our age hath known, what could he doe
If such a sudden speech had met his blood,
But ruin thee for ever, if he had not kilt thee
He could not bear it thus, he is as we
Or any other wronged man.
This is dissembling,
Amintor, thou hast an ingenious look,
And should be virtuous, it amazes me
That thou should make such base malicious lies.
What my dear wife.
Dear wife, I doe despise thee,
Why nothing can be baser then to sow
Dissention amongst lovers,
Lovers? who.
The King and I.
Oh God.
Who should live long and love without distaste,
Were it not for such pickthanks as thy self,
Did you lie with me, swear now, and be punished in hell
For this.
The faithless sin I made
To fair Aspati•, is not yet revenged,
It follows me, I will not loose a word
To this wilde woman, but to you my King,
The anguish of my soul thrusts out this truth,
You're a tyrant, and not so much to wrong
An honest man thus, as to take a pride
In talking with him of it.
Now sir, see how loud this fellow lies.
You that can know to wrong, should know how
Men must right themselves, what punishment is due,
From me to him that shall abuse my bed,
It is not death, nor can that satisfy,
Unless I show how nobly I have freed my self.
Draw not thy sword, thou know I cannot fear
A subjects hand, but thou shalt feel the weight
Of this if thou doest rage.
The waite of that,
If you have any worth, for heavens sake think
I fear not swords, for as you are mere man,
I dare as easily kill you for this deed,
As you dare think to doe it, but there is.
Divinity about you, that strikes dead
My rising passions, as you are my King,
I fall before you and present my sword,
To cut mine own •lesh if it be your will,
Alas! I am nothing but a multitude of
walking griefs, yet should I murder you,
I might before the world take the excuse
Of madness, for compare my iniuri•s,
And they will well appear too sad a weight
For reason to endure, but fall I first
Amongst my sorrows, ere my treacherous sword
Touch holy things, but why? I know not what
I have to say, why did you choose out me
To make thus wretched, there are thousands
Easy to work on, and of state enough
Within the Land.
I wold not have a fool, it were no credit for me•
Worse and worse,
Thou that dare talk unto thy husband thus,
Profess thy self a whore, and more then so,
Resoule to be so still, is it my fault,
To bear and bow beneath a thousand griefs,
To keep that little credit with the world,
But there were wise ones to, you might have tan another.
No, for I believe thee honest, as thou were valiant.
All the happiness
Bestowed upon me turns into disgrace,
Gods take your honesty again, for I
Am laden with it, good my Lord the King
Be private in it.
Thou moist live Amintor,
Free as thy King, if thou wilt wink at this,
And be a means that we may meet in secret,
A baud, hold, hold my breast, a bitter curse
Cease me, if I forget not all respects
That are religious, on an other word
Seconded like that, and through a Sea of sins
Will wade to my revenge, though I should call
Plagues here, and after life, upon my soul.
Well, I am resolute, you lay with her,
And so I leave you.
You must needs be prating, and see what follows.
Prithee vex me not,
Leave me, I am afraid some sudden start
Will pull a murder on me.
I am gone, I love my life well.
I hate mine as much,
This tic to break a troth, I should be glad,
If all this tide of grief would make me mad.
Isle know the cause of all Amintors griefs,
Or friendship shall be idle.
O Melantius, my daughter will die.
Trust me I am sorry, would thou had tan her part.
Thou art a slave, a cut-throat slave, a bloody—
Take heed old man, thou wilt be heard to rave,
And lose thine office.
I am valiant grown,
At all these years, and thou art but a slave.
Some company will come, and I respect
Thy years, not thee so much, that I could wish
To laugh at thee alone.
Isle spoil your mirth, I mean to fight with thee,
There lie my cloak, this was my fathers sword,
And he durst fight, are you prepared?
Why? wilt thou dote thy self out of thy life, hence get thee to bed, have careful looking to, and eat warm things, and trouble not me, my head is full of thoughts, more weighty then thy life or death can be.
You have a name in war, where you stand safe•
Amongst a multitude, but I will try,
What you dare doe unto a weak old man•
In single fight you'll give ground I fear,
Come draw.
I will not draw, unless thou pulsed thy death
Upon thee with a stroke, there•s no on• blow
That thou can give hast ••rength enough can kill me,
Tempt me not so far then, the power of earth
Shall not redeem thee.
I must let him alone,
Hes stout, and able, and to say the truth,
How ever I may set a face and talk,
I am not valiant, when I was a youth
I kept my credit with a testy trick,
I had amongst cowards, but durst never fight.
I will not promise to preserve your life if you doe stay.
I would give half my land that I durst fight with that proud man a little, if I had men to hold• him, I would beat him, till hee asked me• m•r∣cie.
Sir will you begone?
I dare not stay, but I will beat my servants all
over •or this.
This old fellow haunts me,
But the distracted carriage of mine Amintor,
Takes deeply on me, I will find the cause,
I fear his conscience cries, he wronged Aspatia.
Mans eyes are not subtle to perceive
My inward misery, I bear my grief
Hid from the world, how art thou wretched then,
For ought I know all husbands are like me,
And every one I talk with of his wife,
Is but a well dissembler of his woes
As I am, would I knew it for the rareness
Afflicts me now.
Amintor, we have not enjoyed our friendship of late, for we were wont to charge our souls in talk.
Melantius, I can tell the a good •est of Strato, and a Lady the last day.
How wast;
Why such an odd one.
I have longed to speak with you, not of an idle i•st thats forced, but of matter you are bound to utter to me.
What is that my friend?
I have observed your words fall from your tongue
Wildely, and all your carriage
Like one that strives to show his merry mood,
When he were ill disposed, you were not wont
To put such scorue into your speech—you wear
Upon your face ridiculous jollity,
Some sadness sits here, which your tongue would
Cover ore with smiles, and twill not be,
What is it?
A sadness here, what cause
Can Fate provide for me to make me so,
Am I not loved through all this Isle, the King
Rains greatness on me, have I not received
A Lady to my bed, that in her eye
Keeps mounting fire, and on her tender cheeks
Immutable colour, in her heart
A prison for all virtue, are not you,
Which is aboue all joys, my constant friend:
What sadness can I have, no, I am light,
And feel the courses of my blood more warm
And stirring then they were; faith marry too,
And you will feel so vnexprest a joy
In chaste embraces, that you will indeed
Appear another.
You may shape Amintor
Causes to cozen the whole world withal,
And yourself too, and tic not like a friend,
To hide your soul from me, tic not your nature
To be thus idle, I have seen you stand,
As you were blasted midst of all your mirth,
Call thrice aloud, and then start, feigning joy
So coldly, world? what doe I here, a friend
Is nothing, heaven I would ha told that man
My secret •innes, isle search an unknown •and,
And there plant friendship, all is withered here,
Come with a complement, I would have fought,
Or told my friends a lied, ere soothd him so;
Out of my bosom.
But there is nothing.
Worse and worse, farewell;
From this time have acquaintance, but no friend.
Melantius, stay, you shall know what that is.
See how you plead with friendship, be advised
How you give cause unto your self to say,
You ha lost a friend.
Forgive what I ha done,
For I am so ore-gon with miseries,
Unheard of, that I lose consideration
Of what I ought to do,—oh—oh.
Doe not weep, what first?
May I once but know the man
Hath turned my friend thus.
I had spoke at first, but that,
But what?
I held it most unfit
For you to know, faith doe not know it yet.
Thou see my love, that will keep company
With thee in tears, hide nothing then from me,
For when I know the cause of thy distemper,
With mine old armour isle adorn my self,
My resolution, and cut through thy foes
Unto thy quiet, till I place thy heart
As peaceable as spotless innocence.
What is it?
Why tic this,—it is too big
To get out, let my tears make way awhile.
Punish me strangely heaven, if he scope
Of life or fame, that brought this youth to this.
Your sister.
Well said.
You'll wished unknown when you have heard it.
No.
Is much to blame,
And to the King has given her honour up,
And lives in whoredom with him.
How's this?
Thou art run mad with injury indeed,
Thou could not utter this, else speak again,
For I forgive it freely, tell thy griefs.
shees wanton, I am loath to say a whore,
Though it be true.
Speak yet again, before mine anger grow
Up beyond throwing down, what are thy griefs?
By all our friendship, these.
What, am I •an,
After mine actions, shall the name of friend
Blot all our family, and stick the brand
Of whore upon my sister unrevenged•
My shaking flesh be thou a witness for me,
With what unwillingness I go to scourge
This rayler, whom my folly hath called friend,
I will not take thee basely, thy sword
Hangs near thy hand, draw it, that I may whip
Thy rashness to repentance, draw thy sword.
Not on thee, did thine anger go as high
As troubled waters, thou should• doe me ease,
Here, and eternally, if thy noble hand,
Would cut me from my sorrows.
This is base,
And fearful, they that use to utter lies,
Provide not blows, but words to qualify
The men they wronged, thou hast a guilty cause.
Thou please me, for so much more like this,
Will raise my anger up aboue my griefs,
Which is a passion easier to be known,
And I shall then be blessed.
Take then more, to raise thine anger, tic mere
Cowardice makes thee not draw, &amp; I will leave thee dead
How ever, but if thou art so much pressed,
With guilt and fear, as not to dare to fight,
Isle make thy memory loathed, and fix a farewell
Upon thy name for ever.
Then I draw,
As justly as our Magistrates their swords,
To cut offenders off; I knew before,
Twould grate your ears, but it was base in you
To urge a weighty secret from your friend,
And then rage at it, I shall be at ease
If I be kilt, and if you fall by me,
I shall not long out live you.
Stay a while,
The name of friend, is more then family,
Or all the world besides; I was a fool,
Thou searching humane nature, that did make
To doe me wrong thou art inquisitive,
And thrusts me upon questions that will take
My sleep away, would I had died ere known
This sad dishonour, pardon me my friend,
If thou wilt strike, here is a faithful heart,
Pearce it, for I will never heave my hand
To thine, behold the power thou hast in me,
I doe believe my sister is a whore,
A leprous one, put up thy sword young man.
How should I bear it then she being so,
I fear my friend that you will loose me shortly,
And I shall doe a foul act on my self
Through these disgraces.
Better half the la•d
Were buried quick together, no Amintor,
Thou shalt have ease of this adulterous King
That drew her too't, where got he the spirit
To wrong me so.
What is it then to me?
If it be wrong to you.
Why not so much, the credit of our house
Is thrown away,
But from his iron den isle waken death,
And hurl him on this King, my honesty
shall steel my sword, and on my horrid point
Isle wear my cause, that shall amaze the eyes
Of this proud man, and be to glittering
For him to look on.
I have quite undone my fame.
D•ie up thy watery eyes,
And cast a manly look upon my face,
For nothing is so wilde as I thy friend
Till I have freed thee, still this swelling breast,
I go thus from thee, and will never cease
My vengeance till I find thy heart at peace.
It must not be so, stay, mine eyes would tell
How loath I am to this, but love and tears
Leave me a while, for I have hazarded
All that this world calls happy, thou hast wrought
A secret from me under name of friend,
Which art could ne'er have found, nor torture wrong
From out this bosom, give it me again,
For I will find it where so ere it lies
Hid in the mortal'st part, invent a way
To give it back.
Why? would you have it back,
I will to death pursue him with revenge.
Therefore I call it frō thee, for I know
Thy blood so high, that thou wilt stir in this, take to thy weapon
Hear thy friend that bears more years then thou.
I will not hear, but draw, or I —
Amintor?
Draw then, for I am full as resolute
As fame, and honour can enforce me,
I cannot linger, draw?
I doe, — but is not
My share of credit equal with thine
If I doe stir.
No? for it will be called
Honour in thee to spill thy sisters blood,
If she her birth abuse, and on the King
A brave revenge, but on me that have walked
With patience in it, it will fix the name
Of fearful cuckold, — O that word,
Be quick.
Then join with me.
I dare not doe a sin, or else I would be speedy.
Then dare not fight with me, for that's a sin,
His grief distracts him, call thy thoughts again,
And to thy self pronounce the name of friend,
And see what that will work, I will not fight.
You must?
I will be kilt first, though my passions
Offered the like to you, tic not this earth
Shall by my reason to it, think awhile
For you are, (I must weep when I speak it,)
All most besides your self.
Oh my soft temper,
So many sweet words from thy sisters mouth,
I am afraid would make me take her,
To embrace and pardon her, I am mad indeed,
And know not what I doe, but have a care
Of me in what thou doest.
Why thinks my friend I will forget his honour, or to save
The bravery of your house, will loose his fame
And fear to touch the throne of Majesty.
A curse will follow that, but rather live
And suffer with me.
I will doe what worth shall bid me.
Faith I am sick, and desperately I hope,
Yet leaning thus I feel a kind of ease.
Come take again your mirth about you.
I shall never do it.
I warrant you, look up, weal walk together,
Put thine arm here, all shall be well again.
Thy love, o wretched, I thy love Melantius, why I
Have nothing else.
Be merry then.
This worthy young man may doe violence
Upon himself, but I have cherished him
As well as I could, and sent him s•iling from me
To counterfeit again, sword hold thine edge,
My heart will never fail me? Diphilus,
Thou come as sent.
Yonder has bin such laughing.
Betwixt whom?
Why our sister and the King,
I thought their spleens would break,
They laughed vs all out of the room.
They must weep Diphilus.
Must they?
They must? thou art my brother, &amp; if I did believe,
Thou had a base thought, I would •ip it out,
Lie where it durst.
You should not, I would first mangle my self &amp; find it.
That was spoke according to our strain, come join thy hands,
And swear a fiermenesse to what project •
Shall lay before thee.
You doe wrong vs both,
People hereafter shall not say there past
A bond more then our loves to tie our lives
And deaths together.
It is as nobly said as I would wish,
Anon isle tell you wonders, we are wronged.
But I will tell you now, weal right our selves.
Stay not, prepare the armour in my house,
And what friends you can draw unto our side,
Not knowing of the cause, make ready too,
Hast Diph: the time requires it, hast.
I hope my cause is just, I know my blood
Tells me it is, and I will credit it,
To take revenge and loose my self withal,
Were idle, and to scope, impossible,
Without I had the •ort, which misery
Remaining in the hands of my old enemy
Calianax, but I must have it, see
Where he comes shaking by me, good my Lord
Forget your spleen to me, I never wronged you,
But would have peac• with every man.
Tic well?
If I durst •ight, your tongue would lie at quiet.
You're touchy without all cause.
Doe? mock me.
By mine honour I speak truth.
Honour? where first.
See what starts you make into your idle hatred.
I am come with resolution to obtain a suit
Of you.
A suit of me, tic very like it should be granted sir.
Nay, go not hence,
Tic this, you have the keeping of the fort,
And I would wish you by the love you ought
To bear unto me to deliver it
Into my hands.
I am in hope thou art mad, to talk to me thus.
But there is a reason to move you to it, I would
Kill the King, that wronged you and your daughter.
Out traitor.
Nay but stay, I cannot scope the deed once done
Without I have this fort.
And should I help thee, now thy treacherous mind betrays it self.
Come delay me not,
Give me a sudden answer, already,
The last is spoke, refuse my offered love,
When it comes clad in secrets.
If I say I will not, he will kill me, I doe see it writ
In his looks, and should I say I will, heel run and tell the
King: I doe not shun your friendship dear Melantius,
But this cause is weighty, give me but an hour to think.
Take it, — I know this goes unto the King,
But I am armed.
Me thinks I feel my self
But twenty now again, this fighting fool
Wants policy, I shall revenge my girl,
And make her red again, I pray, my legs
Will last that pace that I will carry them,
I shall want breath before I find the King,
God save you.
Save you sweet brother,
In my blunt eye me thinks you look Euadn•.
Come, you would make, me blush.
I would Euadne, I shall displease my ends else.
You shall if you command me, I am bashful,
Come sir, how doe I look.
I would not have your women hear me
Break into a commendations of you, it is not seemly.
Go waite me in the gallery, — now speak.
Isle lock your doors first.
Why?
I will not have your gilded things that dance
In visitation with their millan skins
Choke up my business.
You are strangely disposed sir.
Good Madame, not to make you merry.
No, if you praise me twill make me sad.
Such a sad commendations I have for you.
Brother, the Court has made you witty,
And learn to riddle.
I praise the Court for it, has learned you nothing.
Me?
I Euadne, thou art young and handsome,
A Lady of a sweet complexion,
And such a flowing carriage, that it cannot
Choose but inflame a Kingdom.
Gentle brother.
Tic yet in thy repentance, foolish woman,
To make me gentle.
How is this.
Tic base,
And I could blush at these years, through all
My honoured scars: to come to such a parley.
I understand ye not.
You dare not fool,
They that commit thy faults fly the remembrance.
My faults sir, I would have you know I care not
If they were writ• here, here in my forehead.
Thy body is to little for the story,
The lusts of which would fill another woman,
Though she had twins within her.
This is saucy,
Look you intrude no more, theres your way.
Thou art my way, and I will tread upon thee,
Till I find truth out.
What truth is that you look for?
Thy long lost honour, would the gods had set me
Rather to grapple with the plague, or stand
One of their loudest bolts, come tell me quickly,
Do• it without enforcement, and take heed
You swell me not aboue my temper.
How sir? where got you this report.
Where there was people in every place.
They and the seconds of it are base people,
Believe them not, theile lie.
Doe not play with mine anger, doe not wretch,
I come to know that desperate fool, that drew thee
From thy fair life, be wise and lay him open.
Vnhand me and learn manners, such another
Forgetfulness foe• fits your life.
Quench me this mighty humour, and then tell me
Whose whore you are, for you are one, I know it,
Let all mine honours perish but isle find him,
Though he lie locked up in thy blood, come tell me,
There is no facing it, and be not flattered,
The burnt air when the dog rains, is not fouler
Then thy contagious name, till thy repentance,
If the gods grant thee any, purge thy sickness.
Begone, you are my brother thats your safety.
Isle be a wolf first, tic to be thy brother
An infamy below the sin of coward,
I am as far from being part of thee,
As thou art from thy virtue, seek a kindred
Amongst sensual beasts, and make a goat thy father,
A goat is cooler, will you tell me yet.
If you stay here and rail thus, I shall tell you,
Isle ha you whipped, get you to your command,
And there preach to your Sentinels,
And tell thē what a brave man you are, I shall laugh at you.
You're grown a glorious whore, where bee your
Fighters, what mortal fool durst raise thee to this daring,
And I alive, by my just sword, •'ad Safer
Bestride a billow when the angry North
Plowes up the sea, or made heavens fire his foe,
Work me no hier, will you discovery yet.
The fellows mad, sleep and speak sense.
Force my swollen heart no further, I would save thee, your great maintain•s are not here, they dare not, would they were al, and armed, I would speak loud, here is one should thunder to'em, will you tell me.
Let me consider.
Doe, whose child thou were,
Whose honour thou hast murdered, whose grave opened,
And so pulled on the god•, that in their justice
They must restore him flesh again and life,
And raise his dry bones to revenge this scandal.
The gods are not of my mind, they had better
Let'em lie sweet still in the earth, theile stink here.
Doe you raise mirth out of my easiness,
Forsake me then all weaknesses of nature,
That make men women, speak you whore, speak truth,
Or by the dear soul of thy sleeping father,
This sword shall be thy lover, tell or isle kill thee,
And when thou hast told all, thou wilt deserve it.
You will not murder me.
No, tic a justice and a noble one,
To put the light out of such base offenders.
Help?
By thy foul self, no human help shall help thee,
If thou cry, when I have kilt thee, as I have
Vowed to doe, if thou confess not, naked as thou hast left
Thine honour, will I leave thee,
That on thy branded flesh the world may read
Thy black shame and my justice, wilt thou bend yet?
Yes.
Up and begin your story.
Oh I am miserable.
Tic true, thou art, speak truth still.
I have offended, noble Sir forgive me.
With what secure slave?
Doe not ask me Sir,
Mine own remembrance is a misery
Too mighty for me.
Doe not fall back again• my sword's unsheathed yet.
What shall I doe?
Be true, and make your fault less.
I dare not tell.
Tell, or isle be this day a killing thee.
Will you forgive me then?
Stay I must ask mine honour first, I have too much foolish nature in me, speak.
Is there no more here?
None but a fearful conscience, that's too many.
Who first?
The King.
My worthy fathers and my services
Are liberally rewarded, King I thank thee:
For all my dangers and my wounds thou hast paid me
In my own metal, these are soldiers thanks.
How long have you lived thus Euadne?
Too long, too late I find it.
Can you be very sorry?
Would I were half as blameless.
Woman thou wilt not to thy trade again.
First to my grave.
Would gods thou had been so blessed.
Dost thou not hate this King now? prithee hate him.
Has sunk thy fair soul, I command thee curse him,
Curse till the gods hear and deliver him
To thy just wishes, yet I fear Euadne
You had rather play your game out.
No I feel
Too many sad confusions here to let in
Any loose flame hereafter.
Dost thou not feel amongst al those one brave anger
That breaks out nobly, and directs thin• arm
To kill this base King?
All the gods forbid it.
No al the gods require it, they are dishonoured in him.
Tic too fearful.
You're valiant in his bed, and bold enough
To be a stale whore, and have your Madams name,
Discourse for grooms and pages, and hereafter
When his cool Majesty hath laid you by
To be at pension with some needy Sir
For meat and courser clothes, thus far you had no fear.
Come you shall kill him.
Good Sir.
And it were to kiss him dead, thoudst smother him.
Be wise and kill him, can thou live and know
What noble minds shall make thee see thy self,
Found out with every finger, made the shame
Of all successions, and in this thy ruin
Thy brother and thy noble husband broken?
Thou shalt not live thus, kneel and swear to help me
When I shall call thee to it, or by all
Holy in heaven and earth thou shalt not live
To breathe a foul hour longer, not a thought.
Come tic a righteous oath, give me thy hand,
And both to heaven held up, swear by that wealth
This lustful thief stole from thee, when I say it,
To let his foul soul out.
Here I swear it,
And all you spirits of abused Ladies,
Help me in this performance.
Enough, this must be known to none
But you and I Euadne, not to your Lord,
Though he be wise and noble, and a fellow
Dare step as far into a worthy action,
As the most daring, I as far as justice.
Ask me not why. Farewell.
Would I could say so to my black disgrace,
Gods where have I been all this time; how friended,
That I should lose my self thus desperately,
And none for pit•ie show me how I wandered.
There is not in the compass of the light
A more unhappy creature, sure I am monstrous,
For I have done those follies those mad mischiefs
Would dare a woman. O my laden soul,
Be not so cruel to me, choke not up
The way to my repentance. O my Lord.
How now?
My much abused Lord.
This cannot be.
I doe not kneel to live, I dare not hope it,
The wrongs I did are greater, look upon me
Though I appear with all my faults.
Stand up.
This is a new way to beget more sorrows,
Heaven knows I have too many, doe not mock me,
Though I am tame and bred up with my wrongs•
Which are my foster-brothers, I may leap
Like a hand-wolfe into my natural wildness,
And doe an outrage, prithee doe not mock me.
My whole life is so leprous it infects
All my repentance, I would buy your pardon•
Though at the highest set, even with my life,
That slight contrition, that; no sacrifice
For what I have committed.
Sure I dazzle.
There cannot be A faith in that foul woman
That know• no God more mighty then her mischiefs,
Thou doest still worse, s•i•l number on thy faults,
To press my poor heart thus. Can I believe
Theres any seed of virtue in that woman
Left to shoot up, that dares go in sin
Known and so known as thine is, O Euadne,
Would there were any safety in thy sex,
That I might put a thousand sorrows off,
And credit thy repentance, but I must not,
Thou hast brought me to that dull calamity,
To that strange misbeleefe of all the world,
And all things that are in it, that I fear
I shall fall like a tree, and find my grave,
Only remembering that I grieve.
My Lord,
Give me your griefs, you are an innocent,
A soul as white as heaven, let not my sins
Perish your noble youth, I doe not fall here
To shadow by dissembling with my tears
As all say women can, or to make less
What my hot will hath done, which heaven and you
Knows to be tougher then the hand of time
Shall cut from mans remembrance, no I doe not,
I doe appear the same, the same Euadne,
Dressed in the shames I lived in, the same monster.
But these are names of honour to what I am,
I doe present my self the foulest creature,
Most poisonous, dangerous, and despised of men
Lerna ere bred or Nilus, I am hell,
Till you my dear Lord shoot your light into me,
The beams of your forgiveness, I am soul sick,
And wither with the fear of one condemned,
Till I have got your pardon.
Rise Euadne.
Those heavenly powers that put this good into thee
Grant a continuance of it, I forgive thee
Make thyself worthy of it, and take heed
Take heed Euadne this be serious
Mock not the powers aboue that can, and dare
Give thee a great example of their justice
To all ensuing e•es, if thou plai'st
With thy repentance, the best sacrifice.
I have done nothing good to get belief,
My life hath been so faithless, all the Creatures
Made for heavens honours have their ends, and good ones
Al but the cozening Crocodiles false women.
They reign here like those plagues, those killing soars
Men pray against, and when they die; like tales
Ill told, and unbelieved they pass away,
And go to dust forgotten: But my Lord
Those short days I shall number to my rest,
(As many must not see me,) shall though too late,
Though in my evening, yet perceive a will
Since I can doe no good because a woman,
Reach constantly at something that is near it,
I will redeem one minute of my age,
Or like another Niobe isle weep•
Till I am water.
I am dissolved.
My frozen soul melts, may each sin thou hast,
Find a new mercy, rise, I am at peace:
Had thou been thus, thus excellently good
Before that devil King tempted thy frailty
Sure thou had made a Star, give me thy hand
From this time I will know thee, and as far
As honour gives me leave, be thy Amintor,
When we meet next I will salute thee fairly,
And pray the gods to give thee happy days,
My Charity shall go along with thee
Though my embraces must be far from thee,
I should ha'kild thee, but this sweet repentance
Lockes up my vengeance, for which, thus I kiss thee
The last kiss we must take, and would to heaven
The holy Priest that gave our hands together,
Had given vs equal virtues, go Euadne
The gods thus part our bodies, have a care
My honour falls no further, I am well then.
All the dear joys here, and aboue hereafter
Crown thy fair soul, thus I take leave my Lord,
And never shall you see the foul Euadne
Till she have tried all honoured means that may
Set her in rest, and wash her slaines away.
I cannot tell how I should credit this
From you that are his enemy.
I am sure he said it to me, and isle justify it
What way he dares oppose, but with my sword.
But did he break without all circumstance
To you his Foe, that he would have the fort
To kill me, and then scope.
If he deny it, isle make him blush.
It sounds incredibly.
I so does every thing I say of late.
Not so Callian•x.
Yes I should sit
Mute whilst a Rogue with strong arms cuts your throat.
Well I will try him, and if this be true
Isle pawn my life isle find it, left be false
And that you cloth your hate in such a lie
You shall hereafter dote, in your own house,
Not in the Court.
Why if it be a lie
Mine ears are false, for I besworn I heard it,
Old men are good for nothing, you were best
Put me to dea•h for hearing, and free him
For meaning it, you would a trusted me
Once, but the time is altered.
And will still where I may doe with justice to the world, you have no witness.
Yes my self.
No more I mean there were that heard it.
How no more? would you have more? why am not
I enough to hang a thousand Rogues.
But so you may hang honest men too if you please.
I may, tic like I will doe so, there are a hundred will swear it for a need too, if I say it.
Such witnesses we need not.
And tic hard if my word cannot hang a boisterous knave.
Enough, whore's Strato.
Sir
Why wheres all the Company? call Amintor in
Euadne, wheres my brother, and Melantius,
Bid him come too, and Diphilus, call all
That are without there, if he should desire
The combat of you, tic not in the power
Of all our laws to hinder it, unless
We mean to quit 'em.
Why if you doe think
Tic fit an old man, and a Counsellor
To fight for what he says, then you may grant it.
Come sirs, Amintor thou art yet a Bridegroom,
And I will use thee so, thou shalt sit down,
Euadne sit, and you Amened•r too
This banquet is for you sir, who has brought
A merry tale about him, to raise laughter
Amongst our wine, why Strato where art thou
Thou wilt chopped out with them unseasonably
When I desire 'em not.
Tic my ill luck Sir, so to spend them then.
Reach me a boule of wine, Melantius thou art sad.
I should be Sir the merriest here,
But I ha ne'er a story of mine own
worth telling at this time.
Give me the wine.
Melantius I am now considering
How easy it were for any man we trust
To poison one of vs in such a boule.
I think it were not ha•d Sir, for a Knave.
Such as you are.
I faith it were easy, it becomes vs well
To get plain dealing men about our selves,
Such as you all are here, Amintor to thee
And to thy fair Euadne.
Have you thought of this Callianax.
Yes marry have I.
And whats your resolution?
Ye shall have it soundly I warrant you.
Reach to Amintor, Strato.
Here my love,
This wine will doe thee wrong, for it will set
Blushes upon thy cheeks, and till thou dost
A fault it were pity.
Yet I wonder much
Of the strange desperation of these men
That dare attempt such acts here in our state,
He could not scope that did it.
Were he known, unpossible.
It would be known Melantius.
It ought to be, if he got then away
He must wear all our lives upon his sword,
He need not fly the Island, he must leave
No one alive.
No I should think no man
Could kill me and scope clear but that old man.
But I? heaven bless me, I, should I my liege?
I doe not think thou would but yet thou might,
For thou hast in thy hands the means to scope,
By keeping of the fort, he has Melantius,
And he has kept it well.
From Cobwebs Sir,
Tic clean swept, I can find no other Art
In keeping of it now, it was ne'er besiege
Since he commanded.
I shall be sure of your good word,
But I have kept it safe from such as you.
Keep your ill temper in,
I speak no malice, had my brother kept it
I should ha sed as much.
You are not merry, brother drink wine,
Sit you all still, Callianax
I cannot trust thus, I have thrown out words,
That would have fetched warm blood upon the cheeks
Of guilty men, and he is never moved,
He knows no such thing.
Impudence may scope, when feeble virtue is accuse•d.
A must if he were guilty feel an alteration
At this our whisper, whilst we point at him,
You see he does not.
Let him hang himself,
What care I what he does, this he did say•
Melant. you can easily conceive
What I have meant, for men that are in faults
Can subtly apprehend when others aim
At what they doe amiss, but I forgive
Freely before this man, heaven doe so too;
I will not touch thee so much as with shame
Of telling it, let it be so no more.
Why this is very fine.
I cannot tell
What tic you mean, but I am apt enough
Rudely to thrust into ignorant fault,
But let me know it, happily tic nought
But misconstruction, and where I am clear
I will not take forgiveness of the gods,
Much less of you.
Nay if you stand so stiff, I shall call back my mercy.
I want smoothness
To thank a man for pardoning of a crime
I never knew.
Not to instruct your knowledge, but to show you my ears are every where, you meant to kill me, and get the fort to scope.
Pardon me Sir, my bluntness will be pardoned, you preserve
A race of idle people here about you,
Facers, and talkers to defame the world
Of those that doe things worthy, the man that uttered this
Had perished without food, be it who it will,
But for this arm that fenced him from the Foe.
And if I thought you gave a faith to this,
The plainness•e of my nature would speak more,
Give me a pardon, for you ought to do it
To kill him that spake this.
I that will be the end of all,
Then I am fairly paid for all my care and service.
That old man, who calls my enemy, and of whom I
(Though I will never match my hate so low,)
Have no good thought, would yet I think excuse me,
And swear he thought me wronged in this.
Who I, thou shameless Fellow that hast spoke to me
Of it thy self.
O then it came from him.
From me, who should it come from but from me?
Nay I believe your malice is enough,
But I ha lost my anger, Sir I hope
You are well satisfied.
Licip: cheer Amintor and his Lady, theres no sound
Comes from you, I will come and do it my self.
You have done all ready Sir for me I thank you.
Melantius I doe credit this from him,
How slight so ere you maked.
Tic strange you should.
Tic strange a should believe an old mans word,
That never lied ins life.
I talk not to thee.
Shall the wilde word• of this distempered man;
Frantic with age and sorrow make a breach
Betwixt your Majesty and me, it was wrong
To harken to him, but to credit him
As much, at least, as I have power to bear.
But pardon me, whilst I speak only truth,
I may commend my self — I have bestowed
My careless blood with you, and should be loath
To think a• action that would make me loose
That, and my thanks too: when I was a boy
I thrust my self into my Countries cause,
And did a deed, that plucked five years from time
And styled me man then, and for you my king
Your Subjects all have fed by virtue of my arm,
And you your self have lived at home in ease,
So terrible I grew that without swords
My name hath fetched you conquest, and my heart
And limbs are still the same, my will as great
To doe you service: let me not be paid
With such a strange distrust.
Melantius I held it great injustice to believe
Thine enemy, and did, if I did,
I doe not, let that satisfy, what struck
With sadness all• more wine.
A few fine words have overthrown my truth, a you are a Villain.
Why, thou were better let me have the fort,
Dotard, I will disgrace thee thus for ever,
There shall no credit lie upon thy words,
Think better and deliver it.
My liege, hes at me now again to doe it, speak
Deny it if thou can, examine him
Whilst he is hot, for if hee cool again,
He will forswear it.
This is lunacy I hope, Melantius.
He hath lost himself
Much since his daughter mist the happiness
My sister gained, and though he call me Foe,
I pity him.
A pity a pox upon you.
Mark his disordered words, and at the Mask
Diagoras knows he raged, and raild at me,
And called a Lady Whore so innocent
She understood him not, but it becomes
Both you and me to forgive distraction,
Pardon him as I doe.
Isle not speak for thee, for all thy cunning, if you will be safe chop off his head, for there was never known so impudent a Rascal.
Some that love him get him to bed, why? pity should not let age make it self contemptible, we must be all old, have him away.
Callianax the King believes you, come, you shall go home, and rest, you ha done well, you'll give it up When I have used you thus a month, I hope.
Now, now, tic plain Sir, he does move me still,
He says he knows isle give him up the fort
When he has used me thus a month, I am mad
Am I not still?
Ha ha ha.
I shall be mad indeed if you doe thus,
Why should you true•t a sturdy fellow there,
(That has no virtue in him, alls in his sword)
before me; doe but take his weapons from him
And hes an Ass, and I am a very fool
Both with him, and without him, as you use me.
Ha ha ha.
Too well, Cal: but if you use
This once again I shall entreat some other
To see your offices be well discharged.
Be merry Gentlemen it grows somewhat late,
Amintor thou would be a bed again.
Yes Sir.
And you Euadne let me take thee in my arm, Me∣lantius thou art as thou deserve to be, my friend,
Still, and for ever good Call:
Sleep soundly, it will bring thee to thy self.
Sleep soundly! I sleep soundly now I hope,
I could not be thus else. How dare thou stay
Alone with me, knowing how thou hast used me?
You cannot blast me with your tongue, and thats the strongest
Part you have about ye.
Dost not thou look for some great punishment for this? I feel
My self begin to forget all my hate,
And tak't unkindly that mine enemy
Should use me so extremely scurvily.
I shall meet too, if you begin to take
Unkindness, I never meant you hurt.
Thoult anger me again; thou wretched rogue,
Meant me no wrong! disgrace me with the King,
Lose all my offices, this is no hurt
Is it, I prithee what dost thou call hurt?
To poison men because they love me not,
To call the credit of men's wives in question,
To murder children, betwixt me and Land,
This I call hurt.
All this thou think st is sport,
For mine is worse, but use thy will with me,
For betwixt grief and anger I could cry.
Be wise then and be safe, thou moist revenge.
I of the the King, I would revenge of thee.
That you must plot your self.
I am a •in plotter.
The short is, I will hold thee with the King
In this perplexity till peevishness
And his disgrace have laid thee in thy grave.
But if thou wilt deliver up the fort,
Isle take thy trembling body in my arms,
And bear thee over dangers, thou shalt hold
Thy wonted state.
If I should tell the King, can thou done it again?
Try and believe.
Nay then thou can bring any thing about,
Melantius, thou shalt have the fort.
Why well, here let our hate be buried, and
This hand shall right vs both, give me thy aged breast
To compass.
Nay I doe not love thee yet,
I cannot well endure to look on thee,
And if I thought it were a courtesy,
Thou should not have it, but I am disgrac't,
My offices are to be tan away,
And if I did but hold this fort a day,
I doe believe the King would take it from me,
And give it thee, things are so strangely carried,
Ne'er thank me fort, but yet the King shall know
There was some such thing int I told him of,
And that I was an honest man.
Heel buy that knowledge very dearly: Diph.
What news with thee?
This were a night indeed to doe it in,
The King hath sent for her.
She shall perform it then, go Diph.
And take from this good man my worthy friend
The fort, heel give it thee.
Ha you got that?
Art thou of the same breed? can thou deny
This to the King too?
With a confidence as great as his.
Faith like enough.
Away and use him kindly.
Touch not me, I hate the whole strain, if thou follow me a great way off, Isle give thee up the fort, and hang your selves.
Be gone.
Hes finely wrought.
This is a night spite of Astronomers
To doe the deed in, I will wash the stain
That rests upon our house, off with his blood.
Melantius now assist me if thou be
That which thou say, assist me, I have lost
All my distempers, and have found a rage
So pleasing, help me.
Who can see him thus,
And not swear vengeance? whats the matter friend?
Out with thy sword, and hand in hand with me
Rush to the chamber of this hated King,
And sink him with the weight of all his sins
To hell for ever.
It were a rash attempt,
Not to be done with safety, let your reason
Plot your revenge, and not your passion.
If thou refuse me in these extremes,
Thou art no friend, he sent for her to me,
By heaven to me, my self, and I must tell ye
I love her as a stranger, there is worth
In that wild woman, worcester•hy things Melantius,
And she repents, Isle do it my self alone,
Though I be slain, farewell.
Heel overthrow my whole design with madne•, Amintor.
Think what thou doest, I dare as much as valour,
But tic the King, the King, the King, Amintor,
With whom thou fight, I know hes honest.
And this will work with him.
I cannot tell
What thou hast said, but thou hast charmed my sword
Out of my hand, and left me shaking here
Defenceless.
I will take it up for thee.
What a wilde beast is vncollected man!
The thing that we call honour bears vs all
Headlong unto sin, and yet it self is nothing.
Alas how variable are thy thoughts?
Just like my fortunes, I was run to that,
I purposd to have •hid thee for some plot
I did distrust thou had against the King
By that old fellows carriage, but take heed,
Theres not the least limb growing to a King
But carries thunder in it.
I have none against him.
Why come then, and still remember wee may not think revenge.
I will remember.
Sir is the King abed?
Madam an hour ago.
Give me the key then, and Sir let none be near.
Tic the Kings pleasure.
I understand you Madam, would it were mine,
I must not wish good rest unto your Ladyship.
You talk, you talk.
Tic all I dare doe Madam, but the King will wake, and then me thinks.
Saving your imagination, pray good night Sir.
A good night be it then, and a long one Madam, I am gone.
The night grows horrible, and all about me
Like my black purpose, O the conscience
Of a lost virtue, whither wilt thou pull me?
To what things dismal, as the depth of hell,
Wilt thou provoke me? Let no woman dare
From this hour be disloyal, if her heart
Be flesh; if she have blood and can fear, tic a madness
Aboue that desperate mans that left his peace,
And went to sea to fight, tic so many sins,
An age cannot repent 'em, and so great,
The gods want mercy for, yet I must through 'em,
I have begun a slaughter on my honour,
And I must end it there, a sleeps, oh God,
Why give you peace to this intemperate beast,
That has so far transgressed you? I must kill him,
And I will do it bravely: the mere joy
Confirms me that I merit, yet I must not
Thus tamely doe it as he sleeps, that were
To rake him to another world, my vengeance
Shall seize him waking, and then •ay before him
The number of his wrongs and punishments.
Isle shape his sins like furies till I waken
His evil Angel, his sick conscience,
And then I strike him dead. King by your leave,
I dare not trust your strength, your Grace and I
M•st grapple upon even terms no more.
So, if he rail me not from my resolution,
As I believe I shall not, I shall fit him.
My Lord the King, my Lord, a sleeps
As if he meant to wake no more, my Lord,
Is he not dead already? Sir, my Lord.
Whose that?
O you sleep soundly Sir.
My dear Euadne,
I have been dreaming of thee, come to bed.
I am come at length Sir, but how welcome?
What pretty new device is this Euadne?
What, doe you tie me to you by my love?
This is a quaint one: come my dear and kiss me,
Isle be thy Mars, to bed my Queen of love,
Let vs be caught together, that the gods may look,
And envy our embraces.
Stay Sir, stay,
You are too hot, and I have brought you physic,
To temper your high veins.
Prithee to bed then, let me take it warm,
Here thou shalt know the state of my body better.
I know you have a surfeited foul body,
And you must bleed.
Bleed!
I you shall bleed, lie still, and if the devil
Your lust will give you leave, repent, this steel
Comes to redeem the honour that you stole
King, my fair name, which nothing but thy death
Can answer to the world.
How Euadne?
I am not she, nor bear I in this breast
So much cold spirit to be called a woman,
I am a Tiger, I am any thing
That knows not pity, stir not, if thou doest,
Isle take thee unprepared, thy fears upon thee,
That make thy sins look double, and so s•nd thee
(By my revenge I will) to look those torments
Prepared for such black souls.
Thou doest not mean this, tic impossible,
Thou art too sweet and gentle.
No I am not,
I am as foul as thou art, and can number
As many such hells here: I was once fair•
Once I was lovely, not a blowing rose
More chastely sweet, till thou, thou, thou foul canker,
(Stir not) did poison me, I was a world of virtue,
Till your cursed Court and you (hell bless you for'•)
With your temptatio•s on temptations
Made me give up mine honour, for which (King)
I am come to kill thee.
No.
I am.
Thou art not.
I prithee speak not these things, thou art gentle,
And w•rt not meant thus rugged.
Peace and hear me.
Stir nothing but your tongue, and that for mercy,
To those aboue vs, by whose lights I vow,
Those blessed fires, that shot to see our sin,
If thy hot soul had substance with thy blood,
I would kill that too, which being past my steel,
My tongue shall reach: Thou art a shameless villain,
A thing out of the overcharge of nature,
Sent like a thick cloud to disperse a plague
Upon weak catching women, such a tyrant,
That for his lust would sell away his subjects,
I all his heaven hereafter.
Hear Euadne,
Thou soul of sweetness, hear, I am thy King.
Thou art my shame, lie still, theres none about you
Within your cries, all promises of safety
Are but deluding dreams, thus, thus thou foul man,
Thus I begin my vengeance.
Hold Euadne,
I doe command thee, hold.
I doe not mean Sir
To part so fairly with you, we must change
More of these loue-trickes yet.
What bloody villainy
Provoked thee to this murder?
Thou, thou monster.
Oh.
Thou keptst me brave at Court, and whorde me, King,
Then married me to a young noble Gentleman,
And whorde me still.
Euadne, pity me.
Hell take me then, this for my Lord Amintor,
This for my noble brother, and this stroke
For the most wronged of women.
Oh I die.
Die all our faults together, I forgive thee.
Come now shees gone, lets enter, the King expects it, and will be angry.
Tic a fine wench, weal have a snap at her one of these nights as she goes from him.
Content: how quickly he had done with her, I see Kings can doe no more that way then other mortal people.
How fast he is! I cannot hear him breathe.
Either the tapers give a feeble light, or he looks very pale.
Lets look: Alas, hes stiff, wounded and dead.
Treason.
Run forth and call.
Treason, treason.
This will be laid on vs: who can believe
A woman could doe this?
How now? wheres the traitor?
Fled, fled away, but there her woeful act
Lies still.
Her act! a woman!
Wheres the body?
There.
Farewell thou worthy man, there were two bonds
That tied our loves, a brother and a King,
The least of which might fetch a flood of tears:
But such the misery of greatness is,
They have no time to morn, then pardon me.
Sirs, which way went she?
Never follow her,
For she alas was but the instrument.
News is now brought in that Melantius
Has got the Fort, and stands upon the wall,
And with a loud voice calls to those few that pass
At this dead time of night, delivering
The innocence of this act.
Gentlemen• I am your King.
We doe acknowledge it.
I would I were not: follow all, for this must have a sudden stop.
If the dull people can believe I am armed,
Be constant Diph. now we have time,
Either to bring our banished honours home,
Or to create new ones in our ends.
I fear not,
My spirit lies not that way. Courage Callianax.
Would I had any, you should quickly know it.
Speak to the people, thou art eloquent.
Tic a fine eloquence to come to the gallows,
You were borne to be my end, the devil take you,
Now must I hang for company, tic strange
I should be old, and neither wise, nor valiant.
See where he stands as boldly confident,
As if he had his full command about him.
He looks as if he had the better cause, Sir,
Under your gracious pardon let me speak it,
Though he be mighty spirited and forward
To all great things, to all things of that danger
Wo•se men shake at the telling of, yet certain
I doe believe him noble, and this action
Rather pulled on then sought, his mind was ever
As worthy as his hand.
Tic my fear too,
Heaven forgive all: summon him Lord Cleon.
Ho from the walls there.
Worthy Cleon welcome,
We could a wished you here Lord, you are honest.
Well thou art as flattering a knave, though I dare not tell thee so.
Melantius.
Sir.
I am sorry that we meet thus, our old love
Never required such distance, pray to heaven
You have not left your self, and sought this safety
More out of fear then honour, you have lost
A noble master, which your faith, Melantius,
I'm sure might have preserved.
Royal young man, those tears look lovely on thee,
Had they been shed for a deserving one,
They had been lasting monuments: Thy brother,
Whilst he was good, I called him King, and served him,
With that strong faith, that most vnwearied valour,
Pulled people from the farthest sun to seek him,
And beg his friendship, I was then his soldier,
But since his hot pride drew him to disgrace me,
And brand my noble actions with his lust,
(That neuer-cur'd dishonour of my sister,
Base stain of whore, and which is worse,
The joy to make it still so, like my self)
Thus I have flung him off with my allegiance,
And stand here mine own justice for revenge,
What I have suffered in him, and this old man
Wronged almost to lunacy.
Who I? You wud draw me in, I have had no wrong,
I doe disclaim ye all.
The short is this,
Tic no ambition to lift up my self
Urges me thus, I doe desire again
To be a subject, so I may be free;
If not, I know my strength, and will vnbuild
This goodly town, be speedy, and be wise, in a reply.
Be sudden Sir to tie
All up again, what's done is past recall,
And past you to revenge, and there are thousands
That wait for such a troubled hour as this.
Throw him the blank.
Melantius, write in that thy choice,
My seal is at it.
It was our honours drew vs to this act,
No gain, and we will only work our pardons.
Put my name in too.
You disclaimed vs all but now Callianax.
Thats all one,
Isle not be hanged hereafter by a trick,
Isle have it in.
You shall, you shall:
Come to the back gate, and weal call the King,
An• give you up the Fort.
Away, away.
This is my fatal hour, heaven may forgive
My rash attempt that causelessly hath laid
Griefs on me that will never let me rest,
And put a women's heart into my breast,
It is more honour for you that I doe,
For she that can endure the misery
That I have on me, and be patient too,
May live and laugh at all that you can doe.
God save you Sir.
And you Sir, whats your business?
With you Sir now, to doe me the fair office
To help me to your Lord.
What would you serve him?
Isle doe him any service, but to haste,
For my affairs are earnest, I desire
To speak with him.
Sir because you are in such haste, I would be loath to delay you longer: you cannot.
It shall become you though to tell your Lord.
S•r he will speak with no body, but in particular, I have in charge about no weighty matters.
This is most strange: art thou gold proof? theres for thee• help me to him.
Pray be not angry Sir, Isle doe my best.
How stubbornly this fellow answered me!
There is a wild dishonest trick in man,
More then in women: all the men I meet
Appear thus to me, are harsh and rude,
And have a subtlety in every thing,
Which love could never know; but we fond women
Harbour the easiest and the smoothest thoughts,
And think all shall go so, it is unjust
That men and women should be matched together.
Where is he?
There my Lord.
What would you Sir?
Please it your Lordship to command your man
Out of the room, I shall deliver things
Worthy your hearing.
Leave vs.
O that that shape should bury falsehood in it.
Now your will Sir.
When you know me, my Lord, you needs must guess
My business, and I am not hard to know.
For till the chance of war marked this smooth face
With these few blemishes, people would call me
My sisters picture, and her mine: in short,
I am the brother to the wronged Aspatia.
The wronged A•patia, would thou were so too
Unto the wronged Amintor, let me kiss
That hand of thine in honour that I bear
Unto the wronged Aspatia, here I stand
That did it, would he could not, gentle youth
Leave me, for there is something in thy looks
That calls my sins in a most odious form
Into my mind, and I have grief enough
Without thy help.
I would I could with credit.
Since I was twelve years old I had not seen
My sister till this hour, I now arrived,
She sent for me to see her marriage,
A woeful one, but they that are aboue
Have ends in every thing, she used few words,
But yet enough to make me understand
The baseness of the injuries you did her,
That little training I have had, is war,
I may behave my self rudely in peace,
I would not though, I shall not need to tell you
I am but young, and would be loath to loose
Honour that is not easily gained again,
Fairly I mean to deal, the age is strict
For single combats, and we shall be stopped
If it be published, if you like your sword
Use it, if mine appear a better to you,
Change, for the ground is this, and this the time
To end our difference.
Charitable youth,
If thou be such, think not I will maintain
So strange a wrong, and for thy sisters sake,
Know, that I could not think that desperate thing
I durst not doe, yet to enjoy this world
I would not see her, for beholding thee,
I am I know not what, if I have ought
That may content thee, take it, and be gone,
For death is not so terrible as thou,
Thine eyes shoot guilt into me.
Thus she swore,
Thou would behave thy self and give me words
That would fetch tears into my eyes, and so
Thou doest indeed, but yet she bad me watch,
Least I were consent, and be sure to fight
Ere I returned.
That must not be with me,
For her isle die directly, but against her
Will never hazard it.
You must be urged, I doe not deal uncivilly with those that dare to fight, but such a one as you
M•st be used thus.
I prithee youth take heed,
Thy sister is a thing to me so much
Aboue mine honour, that I can endure
All this, good gods — a blow I can endure,
But stay not, least thou draw a timeless death
Upon thy self.
Thou art some prating Fellow,
One that has studied out a trick to talk
And move soft hearted people; to be kicked
Thus to be kicked — why should he be so slow
In giving me my death.
A man can bear
No more and keep his flesh, forgive me then,
I would endure yet if I could, now show
The spirit thou pretend, and understand
Thou hast no hour to live, what dost thou mean,
Thou ca•st not fight, the blows thou makst at me
Are quite besides, and those I offer at thee
Thou spreadst thine arms, and takst upon thine breast
Alas defencele••e.
I have got enough,
And my desire, there is no place so fit
For me to die as here.
Amintor I am laden with events
That fly to make thee happy, I have joys
That in a moment can call back thy wrongs
And settle thee in thy free state again,
It is Euadne still that follows thee
But not her mischiefs.
Thou can not fool me to believe again,
But thou hast books and things so full of news
That I am stald.
Noble Amened•r put off thy amaze,
Let thine eyes loose, and speak, am I not fair,
Looks not Euad: beatious with these rites now
Were those hours half so lovely in thine eyes
When our hands met before the holy man,
I was too foul within, to look fair then•
Since I knew ill I was not free till now.
There is presage of some important thing
About thee which it seems thy tongue hath lost,
Thy hands are bloody, and thou hast a knife.
In this consists thy happiness and mine,
Joy to Amintor for the King is dead.
Those have most power to hurt vs, that we love
We lay our sleeping lives within their arms,
Why thou hast raised up mischief to his height
And found one, to out-name thy other faults,
Thou hast no intermission of thy sins,
But all thy life is a continued ill,
Black is thy coulor now, disease thy nature
Joy to Amintor, thou hast touched a life
The very name of which had power to chain
Up all my rage, and tame my wildest wrongs.
Tic done, and since I could not find away
To meet thy love so clear, as through his life
I cannot now repent it.
Cudst thou procure the gods to speak to me,
To bid me love this woman, and forgive,
I think I should fall out with them, behold
Here lies a youth whose wounds bleed in my breast,
Sent by his violent Fate to fetch his death
From my slow hand, this keeps night here
And throws an unknown Wilderness about me.
Oh oh oh.
No more pursue me not.
Forgive me then and take me to thy bed,
We may not part.
Forbear be wise, and let my rage go this way.
Tic you that I would stay, not it.
Take heed it will return with me.
If it must be I shall not fear to meet it,
Take me home.
Thou Monster of cruelty, forbear.
For heavens sake look more calm,
Thine eyes are crueler, then thou can make thy sword.
Away, away thy knees are more to me then vio∣lence,
I am worse then sick to see knees follow me,
For that I must not grant, for Gods sake stand,
Receive me then.
I dare not stay, thy language,
In midst of all my anger, and my grief,
Thou doest awake some thing that troubles me,
And says I loved thee once, I dare not stay,
There is no end of women's reasoning.
Amintor thou shalt love me now again,
Go I am calm, farewell, And peace for ever.
Euadne whom thou hatst will die for thee.
I have a little humane nature yet
Thats lest for thee, that bids me stay thy hand.
Thy hand was welcome but it came too late,
Oh I am lost the heavy sleep makes hast.
Oh oh oh.
This earth of mine doth tremble, and I feel
A •tarke affrighted motion in my blood,
My soul grows weary of her house, and I
All over am a trouble to my self,
There is some hidden power in these dead things
That calls myself vnto'em, I am cold,
Be resolute, and beare'em company,
Theres something yet which I am loath to leave,
Theres man enough in me to meet the fears
That death can bring, and yet would it were done,
I can find nothing in the whole discourse
Of death I durst not meet the boldest way,
Yet still betwixt the reason and the act
The wrong I to Aspatia did stands up,
I have not such another fault to answer,
Though she may justly arm her self with scorn
And hate of me, my soul will part less troubled,
When I have paid to her in tears my sorrow,
I will not leave this act unsatisfied,
If all thats left in me can answer it.
Was it a dream? There stands Amintor still,
Or I dream still.
How doest thou? speak, receive my love &amp; help:
Thy blood climbs up to his old place again,
Theres hope of thy recovery.
Did you not name A•patia?
I did.
And talked of tears and sorrow unto her.
Tic true, and till these happy signs in thee
Staid my course, it was thither I was going.
Thou art there already, and these wounds are her•:
Those threats I brought with me, sought not revenge,
But came to fetch this blessing from thy hand.
I am Aspatia yet.
Dare my soul ever look abroad again?
•I shall sure live Amintor, I am well,
A kind of healthful joy wanders within me.
The world wants lines to excuse thy loss,
Come let me bear thee to some place of help.
Amintor thou must stay, I must rest here,
My strength begins to disobey my will.
How dost thou my best soul? I would fine live,
Now if I could, would thou have loved me then?
Alas, all that I ems not worth a hair
From thee.
Give me thine hand, mine eyes grow up &amp; down,
And cannot find thee, I am wondrous sick.
Have I thy hand, Amintor?
Thou greatest blessing of the world, thou hast.
I doe believe thee better then my sense,
Oh I must go, farewell.
She sounds: Aspatia. Help, for Gods sake: water,
Such as may chain life ever to this frame.
Aspatia, speak: what no help? yet I fool,
Isle chafe her temples, yet there nothing stirs.
Some hidden power tell her Amintor calls,
And let her answer me: Aspatia speak.
I have heard, if there be any life, but bow
The body thus, and it will show it self.
Oh she is gone, I will not leave her yet.
Since out of justice we must challenge nothing,
Isle call it mercy if you'll pity me,
You heavenly powers, and lend forth some few years
The blessed soul to this fair seat again.
No comfort comes, the gods deuie me too.
Isle bow the body once again: Aspatia.
The soul is fled for ever, and I wrong
My self, so long to loose her company.
Must I talk now? Here is to be with thee love,
This is a great grace to my Lord to have the new King come to him, I must tell him he is entering. Oh God, help, help.
Wheres Amintor?
O there, there.
How strange is this?
What should we doe here?
These deaths are such acquainted things with me,
That yet my heart dissolves not. May I stand
Stiff here for ever: eyes call up your tears,
This is Amintor: heart, he was my friend,
Melt, now it flows, Amintor give a word
To call me to thee.
Oh.
Melantius calls his friend Amintor, oh thy arms
Are kinder to me then thy tongue,
Speak, speak.
What?
That little word was worth all the sounds
That ever I shall hear again.
Oh brother here lies your sister slain,
You loose your self in sorrow there.
Why Dip. it is
A thing to laugh at in respect of this,
Here was my Sister, Father, Brother, Son,
All that I had, speak once again
What youth lies slain there by thee.
Tic Aspatia,
My last is said, let me give up my soul
Into thy bosom.
Whats that, whats that Aspatia?
I never did repent the greatness of heart till now,
It will not burst at need.
My daughter, dead here too, and you have all fine new trice•es to grieve, but I ne'er knew any but direct crying.
I am a Prattler, but no more.
Hold Brother.
Stop him.
Fie how unmanly was this offer in you,
Does this become our strain.
I know not what the matter is, but I am
Grown very kind, and am friends with you all now
You have given me that among you will kill me
Quickly, but Isle go home and live as long as I can.
His spirit is but poor, that can be kept.
From dea•h for want of weapons,
Is not my hands a weapon sha•pe enough
To stop my breath, or if you tie down those,
I vow Amintor I will never eat
Or drink, or sl•epe, or have to doe with that
That may prese•ue life, this I swear to keep.
Look to him tho, and bear those bodies in
May this a fair example be •• me.
To rule with temper, for on lu••f•ll Kings
Unlooked for sudden deaths from God are sent,
But cursed is he that is their instrument.

THe marks and notions extant in each spirit,
Sealed by th'industrious hand of art &amp; merit,
Me thinks appear transparent (as the mind
By sense were bounded and might seem confined
In th'externall eye) nor shall our tragic muse,
(If strong hope fail not) need a kind excuse
But to those marginal notes of yours do bring
(In following nombers from the learned spring)
Matter instructive to enrich their parts
Where knowledge reigns crowned with it own deserts,
Let such with serious and impartial hearing
Sound sense, quick sight and judgment never erring:
Survey and censure the mineruall frame
Of his elaborate work: and if his name
Merit regard, and you vouchsafe to grace him
With eminent love, or amongst those laureates place him,
That with the magic of sweet poesy,
Transfer Pernassus into Brittany,
He shall digest the Chaos of his brain,
To tuneful order and acquire a strain,
Near to the music of the heavenly spheres,
To fit Times guard and ravish choicest ears.
FAme and Opinion like the two vvingd cap
On Harms head, do lift all Poets up:
Some, though deserving, yet oboe•e the Sphere
Of true impartial censure, whose tuned ear
Listens to all and can with judgment say,
Others sing well, though Thracian Orpheus play.
Our Muse affects no excellence: if Fame tell
And through her shrill tromp at the Muses well
(Where the thrice trebled bench of learning sits
In strict examination of others wits)
Sound ours, though humbly strains, whose infant growth
Nor dares, nor will, with times hugd darlings quarrel,
Nor stand the lightning with the sacred Laurel)
We rest content: yet thus far may conceit
Carry each labouring Artist, where the weight
Of his ovld task is over, that his tongue
May like a father of his tender young
Speak natures lauguage and not be withstood,
When with our Muse he saith, that This is good.
HOw sweet are things known in their contraries
When only apprehension, and sick thoughts
Foster a greedy longing Amada?
Madame you breath: no covetous hand
Takes the air from you: no contrariety
Bandy's against your rest: as I am modest,
My fathers seeming harsh ungentleness
Is but a misty policy, to be guile some time.
Then be your self• and Iomiall:
Yet why should I rapine,
At this my foret restraint of liberty?
Our life is but a sailing to our death,
Through the worlds Ocean: it makes no matter then
Whether we put into the worlds vast Sea,
Shipped in a Pinasse or an Argosy:
No Matter: when we hope for change of vessels Lady
And in that hope beguile your passions:
Give your sight freedom o'er the city walls
And see what worthy obiectsmeete your eyes:
See where two Dukes, each like a god of war,
Lye both entrenched against the gates of Florence
To gain your love: on the west side, ther's
Ferrari hangs his scarlet ensigns forth
And woos in blood: then from the East behold
In a white ensign filed with stars of gould,
Burns the Venitians love: the morning Sun
Courts not the world more amorously: he as mild
As Mi••has boy doth prove that lou's a child,
Not techy if not wronged. The other like Mars
Hams in his Venus in his arms of steel.
And vows a conquest: Se where they appear:
Madame your love, which hand for a Dukedom?
Were I an Orator I could praise Ferrari,
He like the marble statue of some God,
Carries command in his proportion,
In him love seems a warrior for the fire,
Of best affection burns in hot desire.
And yet me thinks the smooth Venetian
Should more content Venus:
In him love seems as he is, calm and mild,
Pleasing and sportful: things rough and violent
Dye like abortive fruit before perf•ction.
They are pursy and short breathed: th'ardor of true love
Burns in a calm breast: in him affections
Are not like tempests raging: yet of force
Like an even gale of wind to bear loves ship
Unto the port of happiness: his fire
Burns, and consumes no•, but maintain desire.
Give o'er my claim: that should argue,
A too cold temperature in love: basis
It would disable the Venetian power
Not to make good his challenge: I dare not.
Why she is mine by promise.
I grant, that Borgias her Uncle and Protector
Promised you that which he cannot perform.
But know Ferrari that my claim takes root
And grows upon the promise of the State,
I by the Senate was assured her love,
And on that ground the justice of my cause
Pleads. Thus in arms against the city walls.
Herein you err: for know the Florentine
Dying a Prince powerful and absolute
(Not countermanded by a popular voice
Or by th'ambitious factions of a Senate)
Leaves the Protector in his daughters nonage
Free like himself, and absolute: of power
To promise and perform: on his assurance
Lives my loves right: then were you both
Direct opposers of what I claim, by heaven
And by that influence that made me great
I would pursue my challenge through your bloods.
Give not such passage to your heat my Lord
Then give my power a passage to my Love:
That I demand of you.
And I command:
That without stay you raise your powers
And leave this cities siege unto our arms,
Or what we aimd at them we will turn on you.
Although your power we're equal with your pride
I would dare stay Ferrari, and proclaim
Thy title weak, thy claim litigious:
Mine only just, apparent, righteous.
Yet let not fury so impeach our wisdoms
To jar for her another doth possess,
And make our follies laughter to our foes:
Will then Ferrari make his passions subject
To an indifference that I shall propound?
If the indifference you shall propound
Divides not me from Iulia:
She's the maine claim of both our armed loves.
And with out her ther's no indifference.
You're •riuolous:
Why know Ferrari, thy prerogative
Extends no further then thy sword can reach:
Then when thy conquests hath confirmed thy will
Thou moist capitulate with •ude commands,
Ti•l when proud Prince, stoup at imperious chance:
For did no other title then my sword
Make my claim righteous: yet the doubtful lot
Cast on the ends of war, carries my fate
Even with thy pride: the Lady as mine own
To show an eminence that o'er looks thy hope,
I chalendge and aver the right of war
Due to my sword.
Unsheathe it then.
Yes at thy bosom.
What means •his sudden parley from the walls?
What are the Dukes at odd•?
Hark Madam from the walls—
A sudden parley speaks unto the Dukes
Was that that staid their swords.
I would fine have seen,
how like Esops warrior they could have fought,
For that a third carries away.
Some new devise of policy hath cau•d
This vnexepected change: not long since
I• was resolved in council to maintain
The siege against the hottest opposition.
Did I not think my fortunes ebb at lowest?
It might amaze me.
My liberty
May soon give notice to you: then lets away:
A Sun may rise to maked a happy day.
To whom speaks Borgias?
Dukes to you both.
The present and unlooked for cause of grief,
That now hath took possession on our breasts,
Cuts of the feeling of all outward fear:
Our private griefs were desperate: did there not
A pubike care of others burden vs
We think you wronged, I and the Senate here,
Causes of both the nonsuites of your loves,
Appeal unto remission.
But whether bends your far-fetcht Oratory?
Restore the Lady unto me: and on my honours pawn
Isle free your City from the arms of V•nice.
Senate, and you on whose authority,
And pawn of honour I engagde my love,
Slau'd my affections, and did prostitute
The freedom of my soul to Iulia:
Slight not your wisdoms and your words in counsel•
To serve the ends of hidden policy:
Make good your words engagde, and as I live
A Prince unstained in honour, I will free
Your City from Ferraras hottest fury.
Alas my gracious and renowned Lords,
I grieve to see your passions,
Emptied of th'obiects that •hey wrought upon:
I am the Ambassador of heavy news,
To you I am sure as heavy as to vs.
Speak it.
O it doth press the Organs of my speech,
And like a lethargy doth numb those motions
should give it utterance.
Hold the Protector there from falling.
Some standersby help to unlade his bur•hen.
The Camel else will sink down under it.
Scoff not my gracious Prince: the grief I see•
Will be as heavy on •hy now light head,
As tic on mine: the Lady whom you love—
Why what of her?
Where is she? speak:
Singing with Angels in the quire of heaven,
The Requiem o• Saints.
Shoe's dead!
Shoe's dead!
I Lords unto your loves.
O my Loves hard fate.
Dead!
And now my Lords, seeing that she is dead,
For whom you raised these arms against our walls,
I hope your furious angers live no longer.
We are appeasd: Venice I thus salute thee,
and reconcile my fury in thy arms.
S'death dead?
Descend Protector, with her our arms are dead.
I am amazed: possess me patience,
Credulity F•rrara is a virtue,
I believe it: Borgias: oh my sple•no,
That he should think me so ridiculous,
To fasten any faith on policy,
The stateliest general prop is jealousy,
On all men &amp; their actions: I know it not.
Should I think her murdered, or that she still doth live?
And feed some hope by deeming him a villain,
That sooths this sorrowful news into our ears?
I might herein seem politic, and nurse
Some mischief in my bosom for revenge,
Of that wherein I b•t suspect a wrong.
The tricks of State-moules that work under Princes,
Are at the best, but like the vipers young,
That how-so-ere prodigious and hurtful,
To many open and secure passengers,
Yet do they never live: without the death
Of him that first gave motion to their breath.
This keeps me honest still, the heavens and fate
Are the best guardians to a wronged s•ate.
Laying aside all fear of what you may,
Thus to your powers we do •xpose our lives,
Your wrongs we do confess might speak revenge,
Did not this flood of sudden grief, take up
All passion in it self: speak mighty Dukes,
Lives Florence in your loves? with Iulias death
Dies the memorial of your former wrongs?
I forget them all.
I take no pleasure in revenge.
Then are our City gates op to your loves,
And beg a favour due unto the dead:
This night the funeral hearse of Iulia,
(I know that name is dear unto you both)
Returns again to her creation.
This night the ravenous mother of the world,
(The all corrupting earth that eats her young)
Swallows the body of your Iulia.
This night she takes a farewell of vs all:
Then let it be a witness of your loves,
To give her hearse an honour with your presence.
Should we not grant this, we might be taxed
Of much dishonour.
I were not worthy that it should be said
I levied arms for love of Iulia,
Should I deny my presence at her hearse.
My love, the near alliance to her blood,
The dear remembrance of my Sovereign dead,
Whose love committed her unto my care,
Makes me accept this honour done to me:
And I stand bound in bonds of gratitude
To both yo•r princely words: in lieu of which,
Let my emboldened weakness mighty Lords,
Presume t'inuite you to a funeral supper,
A banquet forced by ceremonius custom,
As a due obsequy.
The love of Iulia
Exacts f•om me all rights of custom.
I yield my presence.
Your guards shall be my honour for this night,
Your several armies during your stay in Florence,
Shall be maintained at our Cities charge,
In recompense of love to Iulia.
We thank you.
We thank yous
Nor give we expectation of proud pomp,
Of shows, or Pageants, for your entertainment:
Our bells ring forth our sorrows in sad peals,
No pleasant changes to give Princes welcome,
Our Churches stand not garnished with pictures,
To please devoted superstition with,
But morn in black. Our Church men
Leave their chanting Anthems, &amp; their daily Mass,
To sing continual requiems to her soul.
Sorrow sits sad and weeping in our streets,
All eyes are wet with tears, save those where grief
Hath dried all moisture up. Our sucking infants
Are pale and lean with hang•ng on the breasts,
Of griefe-spent mothers: If these may welcome you,
W•i'll give you prodigal welcome to our City.
Such welcome fits the death of Iulia.
So should all morn and weep for Iulia.
So doe we morn and weep for Iulia.
Lead on unto the City: how slow paced is sorrow?
Grief is a Tortoise to the nimble sense,
And chils their motions, the officers of love,
Live at our funeral, and in death do move.
Eunuchu•?
Madam.
What solemnity is that the City celebrates?
The Dukes of Venice and Ferrari,
Are with your father entered the walls
Unto the funerals of Iulia.
Why, is Iulia dead?
I hope your Ladyship—
I cry thee mercy: the remembrance of her
Makes me still think she lives.
And thats the cause they parleyed on the walls.
True Madam.
Remove a while.
At your service Lady.
Iulia given out for dead,
And live in durance at my fathers will?
Tic strange: the Dukes invited to her few•nerall.
More mists of policy? O simplicity!
The clue of reason cannot guide the fate,
Of this Dedalion maze: were it not profane
In me to question nature for my birth,
And quarrel with my stars for being daughter
To him whom I suspect to be a villain:
Some inspiration of religious thoughts,
Make nature less in me, and bear my duty
Even with his awe whose uncontrolled command,
Frees our obedience from our impious parents.
My father Borgias left in charge with me,
That I should keep fair Iulia: I am her Jailer,
To whom, both he and I do owe allegiance.
Distracted du•y, how should I bestow thee?
On the right owner, Justice I adore thee.
Amada.
My love and duty.
Alone?
My mothers Eunuch•
How fares Iulia?
Lives as you cōmanded, unseen &amp; private.
Thy mothers dead.
Defend it heavens•
Dead: no more: Eunuchus?
My love and service.
You gave it out last night as I commanded
Timoclea my wife was sick.
I did and't like your grace.
When sets the Sun?
Some six hours hence.
To night will be to soon: to morrow morning
Rumour't about the City, my wife is dead,
Say abroad she is dead.
It shall be done.
So shall thy duty keep me bound to thee.
Amada: some thing more I have to say,
Prepare for marriage.
For marriage?
Question me not, thou must be married,
Mulleasses is thy husband, my word hath sealed it.
Be still my Argus, and keep Iulia.
Death to my soul! Eunuc•us
Can thou unknown (to any save thy self)
Poison a groom to stuff a coffin with?
I can to please your Lordship:
O thou shalt please vs highly! I have great use
Of such a thing, I prithee do it:
My wife last night was poisoned, her body
The world believes is Iulias, supposed dead.
Now for the second funeral of my wife.
Her coffin must be filled up with some slave,
He shall be hono•d princely to his grave.
The funeral stays my presence: Amada
See to my Iulia, if Mulleasses move,
Be kind and gentle to his proffered love.
Heere's a distracted labori•th of wit,
Iulia alive, and yet her funeral kept:
My mother dead and never Sick: tic true:
To many, death is sudden and unlooked for:
So't was to her: and in the midst of death,
I must be married: death take me to,
Let me not live to see those tapers burn,
That lead me to his bed: whore's sanctity?
Religion is the fools bridle, worn by policy:
As horse wear trappers to seem fair in sh•w,
And make the worlds eye dote on what we seem.
Be silent yet for duty stops thy mouth,
Isle in to Iulia, it is she and I,
That must be Chorus in this Tragedy.
How so'ere my fortunes make me now a slave
I was a free borne Christians son in Cyprus,
When Famagusta by the Turk was sacked:
In the division of which City spoils,
My fortunes fell to Mulleasses lot:
Nor was it Tyranny enough that I was Captive,
My parents robbed of me, and I of them,
But they wronged nature in me, made me an Eunuch,
Disabled of those masculine functions,
Due from our sex: and thus subjected,
These sixteen years unto the wild command,
Of an imperious Turk, I now am given
To serve the hidden secre•s of his lust,
Unto Timocl•a, the wife of Borgias,
Whose private mixtures I am guilty of:
Betwixt •hese three I stand as in a maze,
I• aged to al their sins, and made a baud
To lust and murder: Mulleasses first
Gives me unto Timoclea, that without suspect
I might procure their loves sec•rity:
For which they promise me my liberty.
Eut Borgias whether jealous of his wife,
Of reaching at some further policy,
Binds me with golden offers to his trust,
And first commands me rumour it abroad
Timoclea his wife was sick, when at that instant
She was in health and dancing with her Turk•.
Now I must second that report with death,
And say abroad Timoclea is dead:
Short warning for a journey unto heaven:
But (which amaze•th most) I must provide
The body of some groom to stop a coffin with.
This is a riddle of some Sphinx, let Oedipus
Unfold the meaning: I leave it to th'euent,
And think most safety in not knowing it.
I must provide some groom, thats my command.
Prosper me Saturn, and those stars of sin,
Whose influence makes villains fortunate.
•He kills by law that kills men for a state.
But who comes here? oh my spruce he—lecher
That makes his boy save him the charges of a bawdy house,
Fore Mahomet an excellent fellow for my Lords coffin:
Assist me power of wit.
Pantofle.
At your pleasure sir?
Thou hast been at my pleasure indeed P•ntofle, I will retreat into the country, hate this amorous, Court •nd betake my self to obscurity: I tel thee boy I will return by this Ci•cyan Isle without transformation since Hebe hath discovered her secrets I will turn I•p•la, hate the whole sex of women, and only embrace thee my Gammede.
Sfoot sir you are as passionate for the disloyalty of your Sempstresse as some needy knight would be for the loss of some rich magnificos widow: doe you not see how the supporters of the Court, the Lady of the lobby gape after your good parts like so many grigges after fresh water, and can you withhold the dew of your moister element?
I tel thee should the Lady Iulia when she was alive have proffered me her cheek to kiss, I would not have bowed to that painted image for her whole D•kedome: Mercury h•d no good aspect in the horoscope of my nativity: women and lotium are recipe•ocall, their savour is noisome.
Why her's a slave in folio will seem to slight the love of a P•inc•sse, when he would willingly spend his talent on an oy∣ster wi•e.
Sir Pantofle truss up my wardrobe: but withal publish my departure, I would willingly put my creditors to the chardge of guarding me out of town.
• •ill much scandalise your reputation for to depart indebted: you will be cursed heavily.
To depart in debted boy, is the only way to be pried for, seeing they know it is my prosperity and welfare that must make them satisfaction.
Before heaven an excellent reason.
Pray Sir make even with your Taylor, he is poor.
Most willingly, for I am not possessed of a pennikin, and if he be not before with me, I take it we are even, and may walk in campage. Pantofle vanish.
I go Sir.
I have it, thanks sweet Thalia, thou hast begot a child of mirth in my brain, I will put it to this creature of Floe∣rinse to n•rs: Saucy Seignior.
Eunuchus, Venus restore thee to thy generation: what doings are now in your quarters?
Doings: in faith courtly and weak: Cupped help the poor Ladies.
you are aboue me, I mean not their ingenys or upper galleries:
Nor I neither: and yet I speak of their understandings, which by reason of a general spring, halt and debility in their hams (heavens know) are most falteringly feeble: but to pre∣sent the message I am sent for: to your worthiest self, from my La∣die and mistress the protectors wife: you are intelligent?
The beauteous Timoclea.
Heavens grant she may have the virtue of attraction: for she hath laid open, the luster of her best parts to your grace Sir: nay make not retreat Sir: she knows you disdain her love.
The truth is I am earthly, and like not to participate with the element of the fire: good Eunuchus commend me to your Lady, and tell her by importuning my affection, she seeks the fall of an innocent.
True Sir, but with a firm belief of your rising a∣gain.
I see no hope of it.
The harder is her fortune: but hear me, me thinks reward should prick you on with more courage, to such an hono∣rabble encounter.
Faith Eunuch I have made a vow not to uncase my self to any of that sex.
It may be you grounded your oath upon the vncleanes of your shirt.
Verily since the relapse of my Sempstresse, I have not
addicted my self to that neat &amp; cleanly carriage•
Sfoot I thought some soul cause or other, interposed it self twixt you and my Lady: But sir, Isle see all wants supplied, thy debts satisfied, thy fortunes eternally mounted: only bee tractable to my poor loue-sicke Lady and mistress, just and lo∣uing.
As I am, so fates assist me: and Eunuchus here's my hand thou shalt have ample share in my fortunes.
By this hand sir but I will not: doe not fail sir at eight of the clock to meet me here, where Isle deliver you the key of my Ladies chamber: with further instructions in the business, and with assuredness of preferment and promotion.
Dear Eunuch let me hug thee: how I long to ma∣nifest thy service to my Lady Timoclea. You will meet?
My hand and promise for it.
It shall suffice.
By women man first fell, by them Isle rise.
Ha ha ha: Protector, here's a slave
Shall stuff thy coffin: him thou shalt sacrifice
Unto Timocleas ghost, whose humorous soul
Shall in his passage over Acheron
Make Charon laugh, and the sterne judge of hell
Smile at his folly: this is the fatal key
Conducts him to those shades by Borgias hand.
Thus fools must fall, that wise men firm my stand.
SEt down that heavy load of misery,
SO would the easing you, might ease my heart!
Pure virgin Hark: O let it not impeach
The gravity of age to let some tears
Fall at thy funeral: true relic of that love
I did inherit from thy fathers mouth,
When to my charge he left his heir and Dukedom
In thee I am deprived of all that honour
I should have purchased by that thankful care
Was due unto thy fathers memory:
Did not my grief load all my powers of speech,
Oh I could spend my age in commenting
Of those •rue virtues dyed with him and thee,
But sorrow shuts my breast: Prier, thine office.
By that great power is given to me
The gates of heaven I op to thee,
When amongst the Angels thou shalt sing
The song of Saints before a King,
That sits for ever on his throne,
And gives light to every one:
To him thy soul we doe bequeath,
Thy body to the earth beneath:
And so we close thy tomb again,
And pray thy soul be free from pain.
Look from thy holy mansion sacred maid
And see how prostrate I adore thy bliss:
These arms in hope of conquest of thy love
That rolled themselue• in ste•le, shall clasp the air,
And in their empty foldings live still ba••en
Of all the comfort my you•hs hope did promise.
And since thy death takes my loves joy from me,
Isle die a virgin-Saint and live with thee.
I cannot vent my breast in love sick terms,
Nor call to record all the gods of love
For my integrity: nor prostitute,
An oily pas•ion curiously composed
Of riming numb•s at my mistress hearse:
Or tell her dead tree•ncke my true love in vearse:
But since by death her love I am denied,
To say I loud her is Ferraraes pride.
My honour, and that weak ability
Our state affords, to doe your graces service,
Lies at your princely feet, for this your love
Done to the dead: now is Iulia shut
For ever from your eyes: save that she lives
Like a pure relic of some holy Saint,
Shrind in our breasts for ever: let me now renew
My first request, to sup with vs to night,
A ceremony due at funerals.
So shall you double honour unto me,
In doing double honour unto her.
Isle do all honour both to her and you.
Isle break no custom.
I humbly thank your graces, please you lead?
Here lives a lasting memory of the dead.
Thus far my pioning policies run even,
And level with my aims: Iulia lives,
And in her hearse Timoclea my wife,
Deludes the credulous Dukes: poisoned last night
By Mulleasses, to make way for me,
To marry Iulia my brothers daughter,
For which the Cardinal of Aniou my kinsman
Solicits daily with his holiness,
For dispensation with our bloods alliance:
As for these weak men, whose pursuits in love,
Dies with my strong averring of her death,
I can command their lives: and then maintain
My actions with the sword: for which the Turk
By Mulleasses made unto my purpose,
Offers me forty thousand Janissaries
To be my guard, against foreign outrages:
And more: he will make me king of Italy,
To give him but command upon the straights,
And land his force on this side Christendom
And I will do it: on my faith to God
And loyalty I owe unto the stars,
Should there depend all Europe and the states
Christened thereon: Id sink them all,
To gain those ends I have proposd my aims•
Religion (thou that ridst the backs of Slaves
Into weak minds insinuating fear
And superstitious cowardn•s•e) thou robst
Man of his chief bliss by bewitching reason.
Nature at these my brows bend: thy mysteries
Wrought by thine own hands in our active brains,
Give vs the use of good: thou art my God,
If what I have of thee, or wit or art,
Or Serpent sliding through the minds of men,
Cunning confusion of all obstacles,
Be they my childrens lives, my dearest friends
May gain me what I wish, I stoop at thy renown•
And think al's vacuum aboue a crown,
For they that have the sovereignty of things,
Do know no God at all, are none but Kings.
Eternal substitute to the first that moved
And gave the Chaos form. Thou at whose nod
Whole Nations stooped, and hold thee still a God:
Whose holy-customd-ceremonious rites,
Live vnprophan'd in our posterity:
Thou God of Mecha, mighty Mahomet•
Thus Mulleasses at thy memory
Discends: accept his prone humility,
Great Prophet: let thy influence be free
Vncheckt by danger: mew not up my soul,
In the pent room of conscience:
Make me not moral Mahomet, cooped up
And fettered in the fools philosophy,
That points our actions unto honesty.
Give my plots fortune: let my hope but touch
The mark I aim at: then the gazing time
Shall in the present hide my former ill
Success like I•the to •he souls in bliss
Makes men forget things past and crowns our sins
With name of valour, be we impious.
A Scelus felix styles vs virtuous.
My honoured Lord:
What devil interrupts m?
My duty.
Your duty is too diligent that dares
P•ere into my retreats: now should I kill thee.
The Lord Protector Borgias my moister—
Age and diseases breed consumptions
And rot him. What craves he?
Your instant presence.
I have instant business whose high import
Detains my speed: know you the matter?
A tumult amongst the fearful multitude,
Caused by an ominous terror in the heavens,
Is as I guess the reason of your want.
What heavens? what terror?
The Sun on sudden feels a dark eclipse
And hides his silver face behind the moon,
As loath to see some prodigies appear.
Make that eclipse eternal Mahomet.
Rise, rise ye mistie-footed Jade of night,
Draw your dark mistress with her sable veil,
Like a black Negro in an Ebony chair,
Athwart the wo•lds eye: from your foggy breaths
Hurl an Egiptian grossenes through the ayre,
That none may see my plots: Hast any greater news?
The days eyes out, a thousand little stars
Spread like so many torches, about the sky,
Make the world show like Churches hung with black,
And set with tapers at some funeral:
Amongst these stars directly from the East,
A fiery meteor points a burning rod
At Florence.
Perhaps tic thirsty for the blood of Princes,
Blase out prodigious star, and let the fire
Dart soul amazing terror to all eyes:
Be like the Basilisk fatal to behold:
Isle fat the slimy earth more then the plague,
And from her bosom send the blood of Kings
Stilt into oily vapours &amp; borne on high,
To expiate those flames that else would die.
What answer shall I return unto my Lord?
That I will see him presently, be gone: Borgias,
Thou art no tutored Pollitition
To lay another in thy bosom.
Know a stat•villain must be like the wind,
That flies unseen yet life•s an Ocean,
Into a mountains height. That on the sands
Whole Navies may be split in their descent.
I stand aboue thee, and as from a rock
Whose eminence outswelles the raging flood,
See thy hopes shipwrecked: O credulity,
Securities blind nurse• the dream of fools:
The drunkards Ape, that feeling for his way
Even when he thinks in his deluded sense,
To snatch at safety, false without defence.
Twice hath the Nemean Lyon breathed, forth fire,
And made the scalded Dogge-star pant with heate.
Twice the days planet through the burning signs
Hurred his fiery chariot since the time
I came to Florence in exchange for Iulia.
The son of Borgias here to learn the tongues,
The fashions and the arts of Ch•istendome:
Now by my sly and affable intrusion
I am made intimate with Borgias:
He thinks my thoughts are Osiers to be wrought
In any form: the Dukes (that claimed
The love of Iulia) he hath deluded
By a feigned rumour of a sudden death:
Her he detains until he fits his time
By murder of the Dukes to be secure,
In his own power to dacke his marriage:
Timoclea his wife (the death of all his plots
If she survives) he now beleues is dead
Poisoned by me: in lieu of which he grants
His daughter Amada to me for wife:
As if my hopes flew not as high as his:
Now to secure my flight and make my wings
Stronger then his that melted in the Sun,
His wife Timoclea lives within this tomb
Made seeming liveless•e by a sleepy juice
Infused in stead of poison in her cup:
Here I must wake her and in her stir up
Revenge against Borgias.
Image of death and daughter of the night,
Sister to Lethe all oppressing sl•epe,
Thou that amongst a hundred thousand dreams
Crowned with a wreath of mandrakes set as Queen•
To whom a million of care-clogged souls,
Lye quaffing juice of Poppy at thy feet,
Refigne thy vsurpassion, and dislodge,
Hang on the eyes of sloth and make them sleep
Whose hearts are heavy, or whose sorrows weep,
Give way to motion: and thou whose blood
Stands in thy full veins like a charmed flood
Receive the air again: survive his hate
That on thy grave again climbs high to reach his fate.
Who speaks so loud?
He •hat speaks life Timoclea.
You wake me.
Such power I challenge Lady in my voice,
To wake you from your grave.
Where am I?
In your grave.
Ho, my grave!
Be not amassed madame: you are safe.
Who speaks unto me? oh forbear:
I am not for your presence: see my bed
Lies much unseemly: who attends me there?
What means this impudent intrusion?
Take time to your amazement: know where you are
Tic Mulleasses speaks to you: him you once lou`d:
Tic not now time to fear.
I know your face and yet I fear my being
Gives cause of fear.
Give your self, to me and on those rites
Due to the sweets of love, here is no danger.
Accept me in your arms.
See where you are, know you this place?
Some Church I think.
And these the Trophies of your Ancestors.
This is the buriail common to your blood.
Oh free me from amazement, what strange accident
Brought me so n•ere my death? I am now my self
And truly capable of a discourse.
Then know madame your life hath been pursued,
And my self bribed to be your poisoner,
But that my love turned death unto a sleep,
And brought you thus alive unto your grave:
Say on my dearest Lord, who bribed thy love?
What barbarism, or what desert of mine
Moved this attempt against my life?
My soul durst justify your innocence,
But that desease that bred in Paradise,
Swells like the Proctors poison in our veins
(To which al men are heirs ambition)
Desire to be like God: t'was that corruption
Gave me occasion thus to show my love
On your lives safety:
My love and life are thine: speak openly,
What breast could be so cruelly ambitious?
Whose honour or whose fortunes could my life
Eclipse or darken?
First madame you must swear,
By life, by love, and by that happiness
Your •whole assures you in the faith you hold
With me, this night to prosecute revenge
On your lives enemy.
By life, by love and by that happiness,
My soul assures me in the faith I hold,
By that which binds me more—by this
I swear this night to prosecute revenge
On my lives enemy.
Enough: thy resolution like a fire,
Makes my warm blood boyle: Borgias.
My husband.
Your husband: start not Lady,
It was he that by a promise of your daughter
The fairest Amada to me for wife
Made my tongue say, that I would poison you:
Silence dear Lady: choke all passion,
And feminine complaints in thoughts of vengeance.
Forget you are a woman: and be like your wrongs
Full swollen with death: let your inventive brains
Carry more fate in their conception,
Then Hecubas womb to Troy: my plots are yours,
Are you revengeful?
As full as Jealousy: or the wife of Iason
Robed by the fair Corinthian of her love.
Then thus we seal our resolution—
Thus I ascend, and from proud Fortunes wheel,
Pu•l my own fate: forgiveness Mahomet
My hopes make me profane; and my proud thoughts
Usurp aboue thy greatness: Apprehension?
Thou that gives food unto the soul of man,
The best companion to relieve the mind.
What sweet suggestions of my future bliss
Have I from thee? O I am transported
Beyond the power of reason! the present time
Craves a more sober temper. Madam this disguise
Must carry you unknown unto my chamber
Where we have much to do: release your thoughts,
Give freedom to those faculties of nature,
That made your sex first dare to reach at pleasure.
Be proud and lustful, let ambition sway
The power of action in you: murder and blood
Are the two pillars of a States-mans good. 
A A Politician Proteus-like must alter
His face and habit, and like water seem
Of the same colour that the vessel is
That doth contain it, varying his form
With the Chameleon at each objects change.
Twice like a Serpent have I cast my skin,
Once when with mourning sighs I wept for Iulia,
And made the two Dukes weep for Iulia,
That coat is cast: now like an Amorist,
I come in loving terms to court my Iulia,
And seem a lover• but of all shapes
This sits me worst: whose constellation
Stamped in my rugged brow the signs of death,
Envy and ruin: strong Antipa•hies
Against love and pleasure: yet must my tongue
with passionate oaths and protestations,
With sighs, smooth glances, and officious terms,
Spread artificial mists before the eyes
Of credulous simplieity: he that will be high,
Must be a Parasite, to fawn and lye.
Your pleasure.
How stand your thoughts affected to the marriage
I lately did acquaint you with, are you resolved?
I am Rather to dye then live to see that hour
I would see Iulia, pray her company?
I will.
Your presence is most welcome:
What business of import?
Nought for the instant but a wooing scene,
Prepare your wit my Lord to fight with words.
The Champions straight approach, but two to two.
My loved dear Lady.
Beauteous Madam.
Fair as the morning•
Be as thy beauty seems, propitious, loving:
Attractive Sunshine: all affections moving.
More then a subject, and more humbly bent.
How supple seems ambition? Uncle you're too low:
Divinest fair to whom all hearts should bow.
Fit attributes for heaven: my Lord, my feature
Is but earthmould, the weak frame of nature.
Yet graced with heavenly virtue, it seems divine
I know your lights aboue me, yet let it shine
Like the days beauty on the lowly plains.
Subjects are no fit loves for Sovereigns.
High comets from the earth draw up then nurture.
Yet from the Sun true stars have all their lustre.
True star on earth:
You flatter, pray forbear.
Love Madam is importunate, you must hear:
Your niceness makes me be abrupt: I love
And must enjoy you.
Hell to my love: Borgias I'll prevent you.
I must be plain: love you me my Lord?
I by that power that made me.
Restore then that, that you have robbed me of,
My honour and my life: for I am dead,
So thought of in the world: give me what I am:
Return the title due unto my birth
Du••hesse of Florence, and thy Sovereign.
Make me as free as I was borne, and give my love
The liberty of nature: then shall I believe
And think you love me.
I will restore your honours and your life,
I will return the duties of your birth:
Duchess of Florence and my Sovereign,
The Sovereign of my heart: and kneel to you,
And make my thoughts as humble as my knees:
See: I am not ambitious, tic not a crown
The gorgeous title of a Sovereign,
Makes me so evil in your thoughts: the poise of love
Whom some term light, and gives him wings
To soar al oft in me is but the same
And makes me stoop thus low to Iulia.
Uncle I am a•ham'd that any blood of mine
Should harbour such an incest: you have an easier way
To gain what you desire: make good the fame
The world is now possessed of: murder me,
Then are you heir to Florence: tic not half so ill,
As this incestuous mixture you so plead for,
Against nature and the law of heaven: but on,
Use your usurped power; be still a villain:
My life is the utmost, and you may command it,
But my bloods vessel given unto my soul,
As a pure mansion to inhabit in
Shall while I am and breath, be vnprophan'd.
Isle be more cha•t then Lucrece, dye unstained.
You are a woman Lady, and will change:
The Protector's at a nonsuit in his love,
How now my Lord?
Thus crossed by superstitious obstinacy,
Isle use the power I have, and make—How thrives your suit?
Vnthriftily like yours: we are no Venus darlings,
No delight for women: she cannot love.
She cannot love? your reason Lady
Is your blood holy? are you a sanctuary
That none may violate. What ease of conscience
Keeps you vnprophand? know that religion
Binds your obedience minion to my will.
Love him or Isle hate thee.
I tender up the duty of a child
And yield a fathers high prerogative
Ore what I am: yet for that affection
That you would have me captive in his breast,
Know it is prisoner at so dear a rate,
As all my strength can no way ransom it.
Isle use no rhetoric Lady to your ears:
But hear what I command• and do my will,
Or thou shalt hear what will displease thy will.
Be these the precepts Christians give their children?
But Madam for your love.
I would forsake a God.
A more soft style beseems a subjects tongue,
Isle be no higher then my self: and not commaun'd
Whats in my power. Will you resign your love?
I to that God that thou hast so prophand,
Detested Atheist.
Be religious Madam still and rail not,
Think of my honest suit: and think what power
This hand doth gripe: we are troublesome
And leave you to your thoughts: these fits must end,
Trees are as easy broke that will not bend.
THis is the hour I should meet my catamite Signior Bordello: I cannot but laugh to see the slave make a lecherous progress to Lucifer. The moral will hold rarely: he shall have his brains fly about his ears in the hight of his vene∣rye: this instead of going to Tymoclea shall conduct him to the
bed of Borgias: a midst whose waking plots &amp; state volutiōs, the amorous youth must needs be heartily welcome: for mine own part, my handshall be clear from the blood of the goat• &amp; yet I could account it happiness to be within ear shot of his depar∣ture, to here how lamentably the coxcomb would sigh out Tie∣moclea: but the best is, neither Court nor country will much miss the fool: there are elder brothers enough to supply his room:
And see where the Cocoloch appears: he passes as if he would steal to hell without company: whist Signeor.
Eunuchus?
The same: now I see thou wilt stand to thy word.
Thy Lady shall see that in my deeds Eunuchus if all the sweet meates in Florence be provocative.
I Sir, but Ladies are of the nature of Idols and will be served on your knees.
True, were I not a man of war whose valour &amp; mag∣nanimious courage is not to be dejected so long as his weapon holds.
Then I perceive you will shortly be at my Ladies mercy
If I should, doubt not her gracious hand in my erection: but gentle Eunucus, the key that opens to the Via last:
H•ere Sir, and look your entrance be wary, soft and circumspect.
I had thought an entrance rough, manly and boistrou• had been more pleasing to Ladies:
But see Eunuchus I shall be troubled I shall be tormented with this court owl if you assist me not: sfoote the flesh-fly hath espied me, she will never linne sucking at me so long as I have any matter for her to work upon.
Who, Madam Fulsome the Governess of the maids? she is a good creature and very musical: she sets mo•e instruments a-worke then a Fiddler: thou must needs love her if it were
but for her humility: she will bend her self to the meanest page of the Scullery: and she hates the pride of the flesh exceedingly, and is known to be a mortifier of carnality.
I verily believe it, for her very countenance and com∣plexion shows she is able to allay any mans courage living with a breath.
Phego doe you espy no motions behind the arras, no squals, musslings, or pages standing sentinel? or because our head the Lady Iulia is dead, are al her servants that is her members in the same predicament?
Surely I see no body stirring Lady: it is supper time and every man is providing for the belly.
It will be shortly time for every woman to provide for the belly too, P•ego a word with you.
What is that Ph•go Eunuchus• doe you know him?
How, know him, can I mistake him sir, that is never hoodwinckt? he is an extreme enemy to Haberdashers: affecting no block, but that which nature bestowed on him: and of that he hath been so curious that it is not a hair amiss: he is sir the •reface to your compoundresse of mans flesh, and Ushers her to •mployment: and is a creature of singular patience; contenting himself with the Theory, when others are the Practique. In his pace he imitates Fencers, and stands much upon distance: He is partly an Astronomer too, being much given to observation of signs: for when the Sun is in Gemini the Dog-starre attends without doors: he is a great friend to Aries but naturally hates Pisces for it is a chill sign and cools his toes ouer-vehemently: in brief sir he is a Gentleman Usher.
Sure Phego that should be sig•ior Bordello: I pray you in∣treat his approach: of all our Courtiers I love men of his coun∣try and breeding, they are the louingst, best spoken, well gract
creatures in these parts extant: I think it be given to those that be borne under your northern climb, to thaw and melt away at the Sun-shine of beauty: you shall read in very late stories that many of them have lost their best members in the service of La∣dyes and distressed waiting Gentlewomen.
I should account it none of my nearest mishaps, being interdicted so worthy a presence by more then urgent affairs. Sweet Sir bear my excuse with all respective desire of pardon.
Whether Signior Bordello in such post-hast: you forget your old friends: when you came first to Court, you and I were more inward man.
Being upon my departure Lady, I am enforced to see to the conveying of my goods, and the trussing away of my baggage.
And that word baggage (I will besworn) had been an apt phrase for his bringing in, but you purpose not I hope signior to depart Fl•rinse altogether.
Oh no: his flight Lady is like the Ravens, that having spied a fat carckase, romes about to calmore of her fellows to the prey.
But signior, have you so fully furnished your discourse• with observation, as with so slight a view of our Gentlewomen to make a departure? indeed seignior the Ladies of your country will exact some obseruatiue relate of your travels upon your re∣turn.
For our Ladies Madam they are few or none, our coun∣trey men are not so addicted to titles of honour: they use knight∣hood as rich Jewellers desire Iemms rather for traficque then or∣nament.
Is there any commodity to be had in the purchase •ir?
Great Commodity, and that is the reason so many mar∣chants and yeomen sons hunt after it.
Belike this is one of your observations: pray sir be more open: I see you have profited much since your coming.
For the bettring of mine inward parts, some few notions I have committed to memory.
Impart them S•gn•or: it may be I shall add to your store: these La•yes will n•t discover vs for intelligencers: they are na∣turally given to the concealment of private actions.
Since my coming to Florence I have seen ignorance in the shape of a Ci•tizen muffled in the scarlet of magistracy that could• not write his own name. Generally I have noted through the whole Country great enmity between wit and cloaks lined through with velvet: and yet beggars &amp; gallants agree together very f•miliarly. There is no thriving but by impudence and pan∣•arisme: he that is furnished with one of these two qualities shall beg more of a foolish Lord at a mar•bone breakfast, then all the Poets in the whole town shall rime out of him in an age:
•ut th•se are but petty observations: I have seen since my coming to Florence the son of a Peddler mounted on a foot cloth: a fellow created a Lord for the sm•othn•sse of his chin: and which is more; I have seen a capp most my racu∣lously turned into a beaver hat without either trimming or dres∣sing.
That is strange indeed: Signior and Eunuchus, we are to press you to a further courtesy in meeting vs in the lobby some two hours hence at a posit.
You shall find vs as forward in as hot a service in the Lobby or elsewhere at your Ladyships appoint, but—
We must have no denial.
Cans• not say the Court-grace? promise man promise.
Your Ladyship shall find vs ready to put in— our spoons.
Till then adieu Signior and Eunuchus. Phego forward.
So long as my ham-strings hold.
You see Eunuchus, familliarity and courtesy hath en∣wrapped me in the knowledge of these meanest vassals of honour: but henceforth my countenance shall be estranged, and I will bury my acquaintance in silence.
I think the Cuckoo foresings his own dirdge: Sign∣or, you shall need no further prescriptions: in the career of your delight, vouchsafe a thought of Eunchus, you conceive me
Sir, manifest my service to Timoclea.
I were inhumaine if I should forget you the latest mi∣nut of my life: pray heavens my Page Pantofle have procured in my absence the embroidered shirt I gave directions for upon both our wardrops: that care once over, I shall never henceforth taste of lousy misfortune.
Venus supplying what Bordello most lacks,
Courtiers and Porters live by able backs.
THus our presumption hath prolongd your stay
At a ch•ape banquet: did not the rites of love
Exact your presence as a debt to Iulia,
Our boldness might have wanted an excuse
Thus to detain you.
You are too full of ceremony my Lord,
Knowing your welcome prodigal, and full of state,
And such as fits our mournful accidents.
The better part of love due to the living,
Appears in friends even when their friends are dead,
And think my Lord Protector that our love,
For which we came in arms against your walls,
Would not be wanting in one ceremony
Due unto Iulia at her obsequy.
Is Prusias returned from our Camp?
I my gracious Lord.
Doth our Liefetenant keep a careful watch
Are Sentinels set out?
They are and it like your grace.
Where is Philenzo?
Here my Sovereign.
Are all in safety at our Camp?
Safe and in quiet.
The night is old,
And drowsy sleep hangs heavy on our eyes:
Conduct vs to our rest.
Never till now was Borgias fully blessed:
To lodge two mighty Princes in one night
Under his roof: where my sons son may say,
Here might• Venice• and F•rrara lay.
My Lord •hese Tapers lead you to your chamber,
These great Ferrari unto yours.
Rest to you all.
Good night and sleep unto your sorrows.
Sweet quiet be a guard v•to you both,
So may you sleep for ever. June•c•us:
Remove with our attendance from our ears.
Now my hearts treasurer• what now remains?
My resolution holds to murder them,
And with that force the town may now afford,
Practise some sudden stratagem on their powers.
That were too violent: things done for state,
Must carry for me, and with an outward gloss,
Varnish and cover what would else seem gross,
Should they be murdered in their beds, or die,
Having your promise for their guard: th'offence
Could have no safety but in violence.
No let them sleep secure, and this nights safety
Will make them fearless, easy to be trapt
In a more cunning net.
To morrow at a banquet they shall drink
A drug, whose working in their breast shall sleep
Twice fifteen days, until their absence hence
May give you colour from suspicion.
But then dissolving like a fire that's hid,
Spreading a burning poison through the blood,
It scalds the heart, and through the body runs:
Turns to a hot quotidian and, doth leese
Although of poison in a mad desease:
So dying, no impute can touch your name:
Things are undone that are vnspoke by fame.
My fortunes on thy council noble Turk.
We will clime together: my daughters heady will
Shall stoop unto thy pleasure: as for Iulias love
She must or yield or dye: he that is wise,
Will tread on any that may make him rise.
BLush not thou chaste and modest Queen of night,
Nor hide thy silver crescent in a cloud,
To see me thus Rhamnusia like attired:
Stare on ye Argus eyed heavens and se a woman
More full of vengeance, then your jealous Queen.
Medusa sometime the love of Neptune,
(But after for thy lust transformed a monster)
Lend me those serpents that about thy head
Curl up like Else-knots, at whose horrid sight
The Sun may vanish or stand still aff•ight.
Or you you Furies ministers of fear,
(That at Astreas feet lye bound in snakes
Attending her just sentence to begin
Terror of conscience in the breast of sin)
This night be powerful in me and inspire
My face with fear, my heart with rancke-swolne ire•
Venice, Venice, great Venice:
Who speaks to Venice?
Iulia thy love.
Delusiue voice, why dost renew my grief
By naming Iulia?
Did thou love Iulia?
Thou wrongst me to make question of my love.
Whatsoere thou art.
Then see thy Iulia and revenge her wrongs.
Dissolve ye glassy pearls and melt in drops,
Or with the teare-spent mother Niobe
Turn into stones: shall I believe my thoughts,
And credit what thy shape presents to me?
Thou art the Ghost of murdered Iulia.
I am.
Immortal essence Virgin-element
So may I term thy airy substance freed
From the gross mixture of our earthly load:
Oh I am thronged with passions &amp; each craving vent
None can have passage till some tears be spent,
Fall fall ye silver pearls, and of the ear•h
Purchase a soft relenting at my griefs.
Shower down like rainy drops, and pearce the stones
Make them receive my sorrows, or from mine eyes
Run like to crystal rivers through the world,
Slyde ore the flowery meadows that the Nymphs
Dancing in feary rings upon the grass,
May leave their sport, and weep to see you pass,
Where by the doleful murmur as you go,
The hills may here you morn and sound my woe,
Pardon: if I be tedious virgin spirit,
Or if my grief be too effeminate:
Thy habit is an Index to revenge,
Which thy wrongs seem to plead for of my love,
Speak them, or deal them through the yielding air
Into my ears, and they shall be to me
Like the sterne drum, or musique of the war
Unto the coward, or the fainting soldier.
Venice I was murdered.
Murder is open mouthed, and as the Sea
Whose covetous waives in prisond by thy land,
Bellow for grief and roar upon the sand.
So from the earth it cries, and like a child
Wronged by his careless nurse will not be stilt:
Are ye then deaf yea gods, ye cannot hear it?
Or is just Libra fallen out of your Spheres,
That wronged States must to the earth appeal
For justice and revenge. Then tic not profane
T'usurpe your functions: my hand shall be as just
As my soul loving: and they both shall leave
A story to the world of my revenge.
Nor in succeeding times shall be forgot.
Venice revenged those wrongs the heavens would not.
I interrupt what that would say, and seem
To crown all vengeance in a passion.
Speak but his name.
My uncle Borgias.
Enough.
O that the genius that attends on man,
Should be a doubtful Oracle to the soul
And whispering to our intellect what fate
Hangs like a falling tower upon his state,
Yet be no more of force to length our joy•
Then were Cassandras prophecies to Troy.
Disloyal treacherous villain Borgias,
Some Hydras poison, or the blood of Nessus
Cleave to thy flesh:
Oh my blood swells beyond my power: my voice
Louder then his that thunders through the clouds,
Shall speak this monstrous murder to the world,
Isle be thy Orator wronged spirit and plead
Blood and revenge for thee though thou best dead.
Stay.
What would thou more?
Hear and be advised:
To morrow when the Senate sits be there,
And in the ears of the whole state proclaim,
And justify my words against Borgias:
In this alone I will great Venice prove,
Do it as ever thou did Iulia love.
I will.
Whilst I borne upon air attend my bliss.
Peace to thy soul• Adieu.
Remember Iulia.
Y•t prosper and go on, for Iulias ghost
My false shape takes: th'abused Duke's afire,
Through Borgias blood I'll run to my desire.
Whom have we here?
Priapus thou women's God assist me with a Jovial abi∣lity: this night I may beget a Hercules: Fortune I must con∣fesse thou hast turned up thy muffler, and cast a gracious aspect on Bordello: for I am not only in the state of clean linen; but also thou hast made me gracious in the eye of Signior Diaspermaton my Apothecary, who hath furnished me with this receipt: here is a compound of Cantharid•s Diositerion, marrow of an Ox, hairs of a Lyon, stones of a Goat, Cock-sparrowes brains, and such like this after an hours receipt, hath a fourefold operation: and least I should be like a Peacock all tail and no heart, here is a distillation of ten pound a pint, that comforts the inward, fires the brains, cheers up the spirit, and makes a man lay about him like a dutchman. Let me see, it is more then time that I commit this divine pill to his hopeful working: least my staff be out of the rest when my adversary is in the career. So Cupids fair mother be thy mid wife: out and alas I am mare rid, what Some∣ners Ghost or limb of Lucifer, puts poor Bordello in mind of penance before he hath trespassed?
I am espied: his fear doth apprehend me for a ghost,
And I must feed it.
Se, it makes toward me: unfortunate Bordello that the de∣will should be an enemy to lechery.
Come let vs set to our business, Phego,
Lend vs your wind to cool this posit.
It is not the first time I have been constrained to puff and blow in your Ladyships service.
It hath oft come in my mind to know the derivation and denomination of this word posit?
I take it that it comes of the Latin word posse to make a man able: and that's the reason ever after eating them, men de∣sire to make experience of their forces.
I rather conceive it comes of the word pono of putting together, for that your posits are the usual means of congregating, putting and combining your Court creatures to∣gether.
And that may well be: for I remember that reverent pedagoge William Lily, brings in gigno, pono, can•, one in the neck of another, gigno to beget, pono to put in, and canoe to sing.
That Lily was a beastly knave to put pono behind gigno there is no musique in it: but all this time we miss not Signior Bordello, it hath not be his custom to be absent where his chops might have had employment.
You speak of the days of hunger, when the slave was a stranger in the land of Hauilah: but the word is retrograde: the last age is a golden age with him.
See where the son of Saturn appears.
S•oot I thought the Dog-fish had been baiting Cerberus ere this time.
Ladies did you not see a spirit pass this way?
Thou see we are feeding the flesh man, what dost thou talk of the spirit?
Without jest a mere Ghost, standing bolt upright at Timocleas chamber, so ny Court Incubus on my life.
Were you not much terrified Signior with the appear∣tion?
How: terrified? I no sooner beheld it, but drawing my better parts together
Help, help!
Fear and suspicion, two night-waking charms,
Banish all sleep, suggesting in my thoughts,
Falsehood and treason: I am slow and dull,
Descending like the earth: yet I know not what
Pricks like the thorne of Phil•mel at my breast:
And tells me there• is danger in my rest.
Sometime I think of Iulia: and that thought
Presents her loves in a living shape.
When not remembering death, I op my arms,
To tie a Gordian knot about her waste
And bid her welcome: but that empty clasp,
Deluding my false hopes with nought but ayre,
Makes my blood angry, and doth turn my passion
To seek a subject fit for my revenge:
And then I ever think of Borgias.
As if my love were wronged by Borgias.
What means these sudden tumults in mine ears?
Save me eternal guard of innocence:
Treason, treason, villain thou shalt buy my blood.
O spare me.
Distraction of my brain, what shape art thou?
Iulia•
Iulia: ho: stay tic gone: did I see?
Or did my fear and fancy frame this form?
Villain thou art some instrument of falsehood
Confess thy treason.
You are secure: that shape that named your love
Pursued me through the court, till for my rescue
Fear made me use this violence at your chamber.
O I am slain, and dye a causeles death,
I ne'er liud false to thee: all thou hast gained
Is that my soul dyes clear and leaves thine stained. He dyes.
To doe thee good my soul shall say as much
And witness it before the Judge of souls,
When at the general Bar we meet together.
But I must use thy shape: this night Isle walk
Hid in thy habit from discerning eyes:
Isle pry about the Court, perhaps I may
Once more see Iulias ghost, and learn her wrongs,
By them to aim aright in my revenge.
My hand first dyes the scene: and it shall fill
The stage with vengeance: Nemesis shall wade
Up to the chin and bath herself in blood,
The dangling snakes that hang about her neck
Shall suck like Lethe of the purple gore
Shed for my Iulias death.
Isle feast the ravenous people of the air,
And fill the hungry wolves with sl•ughtered men.
The streets of Florence like t•e streets of Rome
(When dea•h &amp; S•ll• raingd) •hal• run with blood•
Their swelling channels with a scarlet tide
Shall wash the stores, and for my Iuli•• dea•h
The angry gods of wr•th shall smile• as pleased
To s• me so re•engd: Eunuchu, thy death
Is but a prologue to induce a plot,
Moist •h•u be blessed, you are not w•rth my hate
I must reach higher, and on thy disguise,
Lay but the ground-worke for revenge to rise.
BE pleased ye powers of might, and bout me skip
Your antique measures: like to cole black moors,
Dancing their •igh La•oltos to the Sun
Circle me round: and in the midst Isle stand•
And crack my sides with laughter at your sports.
Oh my hopes fat me: nor shall time grow old,
Or weary with attending my success.
One night shall crown me happy: Borgias wife
Appears unto the Dukes for In•ease ghost,
To breed suspit•on in them of her murder,
So that if Borgias chau•ce survive this night
(As he must dye if all my plots hi•s right)
The Dukes to morrow when the Senate sits
May prove what isle affirm against his life.
Nor to redeem his sa•ety shall he bring
The Lady to disprove what we aver.
Here will I cease, and in some strange disguise
Keep till my growing faction be of force
To second my ambition for the crown.
If I plot well fair Amada must dye,
And by her mothers hand: she must not live
To speak her fathers wrongs. Timoclea
Thou, thou art next: I took thee from thy grave
Not for the love I bore Timoclea,
But to suck from thy use the sweets of love
I bore to Iulia: it was love and state.
•aue thee this time of life to str•ngth my fate:
But blab not: silence tongue: she comes.
My Lord, what, drowned in contemplation?
Mull•asses: love.
Heavenly creation, beauties abstract, natures wonder.
What means my Lord? awake, Timoclea speaks.
I must enjoy thee Amada: strong force of passion.
Ha: Amada: dearest Lord: your sense
And know me.
Ha Timoclea: thy love and pardon, I was oreborne,
And carried from my self with iole thoughts
Of what sad melancholy suggested in me:
What comfort bring thou? hath thy dead shape
Been powerful unto fear? stood they a mazd?
Their eyes like fired stars set on thy face:
Their speech abrupt and short: their hair upright?
Stiff like the quills of Porcupines? art blessed?
I am: if what you speak may make me blessed.
It makes vs happy: gives our hope true life.
Neither my life nor hope to be so blessed
Makes me so happy as thy love dear Turk.
Were I a Venus thou should be my Mars,
And I would court thee even in Phebus sight,
Although it moved an envy in the gods.
Be Io•eel: &amp; like Salmecis, thy love
Shall cling about thy neck.
I am not sportful:
Isle dance before thee like a faiery Nymph,
And with my pleasing motions make thee spore•:
Isle court thee naked, as did the Queen of thoughts
Her sullen boy, and all to make thee sport.
You are not pleasing.
Not pleasing gentle Turk?
Time hath not set the characters of age
On my smooth brow: my pulses beat as high,
As when my first youth lifted up my blood,
I buy no beauty: nor hath nature been
A niggard in my face: I am yet young
Fresh and delight some, as the checkerd spring,
The Lily and the Rose grow in my che•kes,
And make a bed for love to rest him on.
But I am restless.
Rest thee on my breast.
No I must pilgrine to a love divine.
Love me and unto love Isle build a shrine
And on an Altar offer to our loves,
The thighs of Sparrows and of Turtle Doves.
You are importunate.
Yield then and I have done.
No more:
Fair Amada's the saint that I adore.
Amada: minion is it you?
Makes me thus sue unheard? my daughter Amada
Have I in my bosom nursed a snake:
No fierce streamd torrent• nor no storm at Sea,
No stepdame is half so raging: my blood was not so strong,
When thou were got: now us like the Sea,
My soul a Bark that runs with wind and tide
And cannot stop: the Anchor of my thoughts
(Reason) is lost, and like the vine-gods pries•s
Running down No•a or from Pindus top,
I am unstaid and doubtful in my cou•se.
O the strong power of sense: I must do that
Which all succeeding times to come shall speak
Ye• not believe; all say it was done, yet none
Say it was well done. Love is a God,
Strong, free, unbounded, and as some define,
Fears nothing, pities none: such love is mine.
O Had our souls no deeper sense then flesh,
Were they like waxen pictures formable:
Obsequiously to take impression
From every rude hand, and be like this will,
That wills vs unto some defo•mity,
I should not Amada complain of wrong
But make religion of my forced restraint:
I then should sleep and pray: and on my beads
Number deuo•ion: my environed spirit
Shoe•lt not thus swell beyond my present freedom:
Whisper my wrongs, and prompt my weaker powers
To prone impatience
Madam I am yours.
Let not the name of daughter unto him
That hath confined your hope, be prejudice
To those affections I bear your state:
Isle prove against reason and received truth,
Like breeds not like, in breeding every thing:
Clear streams may flow even from a troubled spring.
I am no infidel to thy posi•ion,
Sad thoughts oppress me: may I have no musique?
Yes Madam.
Some say that when the Thracian entered hell,
The to•tu•'d souls enchanted with his tunes,
Felt not their torments: Syciphus sate down,
Ixions wheel s•ood still: the thirsty son of Jove,
Forgot to drink, and all the r•st did stand
Ca•ching the air from his delicious hand:
I would I might partake their happiness.
Madam you shall: go•e your ears a while,
And you shall hear such music as would make
The greedy wolf forsake the tender lamb,
And listen to it: such as the son of Neptune
Played to the Dolphins: when they in a ring
Danced their crooked measures but to hear him sing.
Madam how fare you now•
Even as the labouring dayman after sleep.
Refreshed and cherished: ha but Amada.
Some better Geniu• assist my fear.
What would it Amada, it beckons to thee?
My mothers troubled spirit: O defend me heavens.
Away: Amada.
It commands my absence.
O for heavens sake stay.
Away.
S•mething it would unfold to thee: I go.
Contain thy fear, I live.
Such terror lives not in a living eye,
Death is not sha•per then those pointed beams
That pierce unto my heart.
Would they were poniards digging at thy breast.
Keep in thy short-drawne accents: let not the air
Carry the softest clamour to the ear
Of waking Iealo•sie: if it do—
How Lust and Nature do divide my soul?
The one doth plead prescription in my blood,
And sues as plaintive with such clamorous spells,
As might conjure the violent rape of Lust
To modest continence: O but it is a vice
Sooner condemned then banished: easily spoke against
But yet t'wil fawn as smoothly on our flesh,
As Circa on the Grecian travellers,
When she detained them in the shape of beasts.
Amada know thou my face?
I knew that outward Character of her
That sometimes I called mother.
Dost think I have no life?
Se•st not my blood in a continual pulse
Beat through the azure conduits of my flesh?
Feel how I burn: what star'•t thou on me?
Am I transparent? can see from my heart
Death in the shape of jealousy: stand
Like a chief organ guiding all my frame,
Unto some tragic action?
O give my sense some freedom
From fear and terror, that I may distinguish
Betwixt the credulous rumour of your death,
And what I see.
I live, the time befits not inquisition
Of tedious circumstance: Amada I live:
But thou must dye, and by thy mothers hand.
O be not a Medea.
Why like Creusa hast thou stolen my Iasen?
My Mulleasses he d•tes upon thee:
I am debarred his breast,
Robbed of his love by thy alluring looks.
Sad discontent wound in his folded arms,
Sighs nought but Amada: but by my better hopes
My blood shall like Medusas first turn to serpe•ts
And taint thy flesh, ere it shall loose that fire
Which makes it boyle and burn• in his desire.
Deform my beauty fill my face with scars,
Make me more loath some then a dead mans scull:
Wash me with spiders blood, that I may swell,
And be more ugly then a Gorgons head,
That he may fear to see me: only let me live,
And spare me that that only you did give.
My pleasure gave thee life, and it resumes
That life again, because it kills my pleasure:
You are like an Ivy nourished at the root
Of some proud oak: that not content to creep
And feed upon the sap, but stretching up,
Proudly presumst to overlook the top:
So that the verdure of the ambitious imp,
Detains all admiration: the Oak wants grace,
Only because the Ivy is in place.
But Isle displant thee for no weed shall grow
So near the root f•om whence my sap doth flow.
Cruel unnatural: heaven my hopes in thee
If virgin pureness please, accept of me.
What, do you Christians sacrifice with flesh?
Or like the Laodiceans unto Pallas, offer
The blood of virgins? O inhumane deed,
Ungentle monster, beauteous Amada!
It was her beauty that I offered up
Unto thy love my dearest Mulleasses.
Worse then a Cammel in her time of lust,
Cruel unto thy child: loose thy snaky arms
O thou hast done
As Lucius Catalline
Romes terror did for Orestilla, kilt
My child: no more: for Mulleasses love,
I would outgo examples, and exceed
As in desire, all others so indeed.
And yet I love thy cruelty: for this night thou must
Discard the timorous pity of thy Sex:
Be a Semiramis: let thy husbands death
Give thy hopes life: feed, feed upon his blood,
And let thy veins swell: now he prepares to bed
Be thine own ghost: and like the apparition
Of his be•eeu'd-dead wife call for revenge:
Incite his timorous conscience to despair,
Speak of damnanion: let one word contain
A hell of torments. But time slides.
I run.
Much ere the morning rises must be done,
Isle bear this body hence: ha ha ha,
O now me thinks I gin out-reach my self,
Now like some huge Colossus cold I strut,
And stride that Ok of Mahomet: that bears up
The ponderous center: whose divided horns
Measuring the passing of a thousand years,
Touch at both Polles, and toss the massy ball:
Makes mountains nod and curled Cedars reel
On Syrian Lybanus. But soft me thinks I hear
Some mutinous and distracted tumult.
Guard me ye just and intellectual powers
Thou triple &amp; eternal essence.
Borgias.
What dreadful summons calls on Borgias?
What art thou?
Timoclea thy poisoned wife.
What would thou, Ho.
Revenge and horror.
Terror to my soul: forbear those looks.
Despair and vengeance.
Moist thou be peaceful, in my prayers I wish it,
Let them expiate my sin: if thou be a spirit
Blessed and celestial: change that face of fear,
Or leave th'infectious grossness of our air,
And like an Angel dance about the Spheres,
Play with the Moon and make the Sun thy glass,
To see thy beauty as thy heavy pass.
Or if thou be—
A messenger of death.
Then like a Fury post to Tartarus,
Fetch up the snackie curled Eumenides:
From Orcus bottom where revengeful cares
Grief, pale diseases, sad and crooked age
Are ever resident: let them and their effects
Let fierce Erennis with her brazen feet,
Seize me at once, and strike me in my fall,
Lower then him that durst ascend the Sun.
Only be thou appeasd.
Not till I meet thee in the shades of death.
Which thou deny me: for thy fears keep in
My trembling soul: it dares not leave my breast,
Mount to the flaming girdle of the world,
And fetch me lightnings, I will swallow it.
Snatch from the Ciclops balls of Etnean fire
And I will eat them: steal thunder from the clouds
And dart it at me: quaff Stigian Nonocris
I will pledge thee.
Isle haunt thee to despair.
Pursue his fear to some effect of death,
Whilst I like stars that spread their sparkling fires
Beyond an usual light fore-shewe a tempest
Of the whole state of Florence. Amadas removed
Her near alliance unto Iulias blood,
Shall not distaste my hopes: Timocleas fear
Works death on Borgias: up Mulleasses
Sit like Saturnus on the highest orb,
And let starre-gazing wizards from thy fear,
Buzz sad Astrology in the peoples ear.
What night or what darcke Chaos can conceal•
My conscience horror? rather let me see
The fear of Hercules: let the Creation Bull
Bellow and burst my brains: only may my ears
Be deaf to thy exclaims.
Thou art at farthest.
Then I can but fall.
Like Lucifer from heaven.
Oh now me thinks a Chorus all of Angels
Clad with the Sun and crowned with golden stars,
Should make more heavenly musique at thy fall
Then all the Spheres that dance about the ball:
Now should they poetize in verse for joy,
And out-sing Homer in the fall of Troy.
Villain triumphst thou?
O ye strong power of superstitious faith
It reigns on fools: that men of wit and state,
Men that like Eagles climb to be aboue,
And shroud themselves between the knees of Jove••
Should be struke down by apparitions.
Delve•iue counterfeit.
Conterfeit!
I Valentine I live•
And am the actor of mine own revenge.
That cup of poison made against my life,
Was by my dearest Mulleasses love
Turned to a philter: and my working sense,
Charmed in the silence of a quiet sleep,
Showed as if death had locked my pulses up,
But posting time brought motion on my blood.
And now my full veins like a water-brooke,
Tha• sliding gently at some proud hills foot,
In pipes of lead are carried to the top,
And the•e in amorous branches spreading forth,
Courts the curled mountain thus, thus, and thus:
Lascivious strumpet.
My beloved Turk.
Incestuous Phedra.
Love Hipolitus.
Cruel Medea.
My kind Iason.
Whirl me ye just &amp; more au•piteous powers,
Amongst the thick and thunder darting clouds,
That being wrapped in flames I may be thrown,
Like Aetnean balls from heaven and strike you down:
Or would my dying breath were• more infectious
Then half rot bodies digd up from their graves,
Or then those mists felt by the souls of men,
When they descend••th Acharusian fen.
It should not strive within me, or be loath
To leave my body might it blast you both.
So with thy death the Embri•m of my love
Takes perfect shape. Now like the Section maid
May I court Lender swimming in my arms•
And with our pleasing motions mock the seas
That rose and fell to wanton with his thighs:
Now ther's no Hellespont betwixt our loves:
I am not jealous: Agamemnons dead,
And Clitemnestra with A•g•sthus plays:
Pleasure is free.
Come ther's no pleasure in you:
You're a lustful time sp•ned murderous strumpet,
The prostitution of your known Bordellos,
Where every itching lecher •ants his blood,
Is not so loathsome.
You speak not like a lover.
No, for thou hast kilt my love Amada:
And now thy husbands blood bids me beware
Of some new lust and third adulterer:
Such is your love to me.
Oh stop those killing accents, be more mild
I doe forgive what you did speak: and ask
But a kind thought for all my loving task.
These eyes have seen you smile: look gently on me,
And let me read some milder characters:
Hence with thy Serpent twines.
I am no Lamia nor no Lostrigon,
No high-prizd Lais: that thou should esteem
Repentance purchased at too dear a rate:
Kings shall not come to Corinth where thou moist,
Not with a common Ephereian ••ull,
Purchase a minutes pleasure: but with me
(As fair but yet more chaste by far then she)
Spend years of sweet content.
Siren mine ears are stopped I will not hear thee.
Oh would I had a Sirens charming voice,
I'd use no incantations but to thy ears,
Or were my tongue like Orpheus golden lyre,
To which the winds were hushed and heard it play•
It should be silent but to please thy ears,
Or like the dying swan, would I might sing
A funeral elegy to my parting soul,
So that the musique might but please thy ears:
What should I say?
Be dumb and leave me.
Not till thou love, or else of life bereave me.
Ha,
Are ye gone: all clear, damnation cease ye,
I, a known practiced politician,
And thus outreached: O my shallow brains.
Fell I so high? would I had fallen from heaven:
So, like a Phaeton I had fired the world:
Or like a flash of lightning on your heads,
Consumed you for these tricks: I dyed in time•
Like a true coward, counterfeited death,
For fear to die indeed: well then for my life
I am beholding yet unto my wit:
But for my legs I know not how they stand,
Are my bonesstiffe still, not broken?
Ha?
I am at last freed of my lustful love,
My hope is yet despair will arm her hands
To her own death, and save my sword a labour:
If not, tic but the taking back of what I gave,
And send her once again into her grave.
Now for my Iulia, she is the maine of all,
Her will I cease and keep, until the Fleet
Now under sail for Florence be arrived,
From the grand Signior sent to make me strong,
And get command upon the straights: how soar
It was promised Borgias to make strong his part,
Against the Dukes: she being had,
My title's firm for Florence, their claime's bad.
Eunuch.
Your pleasure.
See you this body?
I doe.
Convey it to his bed there let it lye,
The murder I'll transport upon the Dukes,
Or on some treason by their means contrived:
See it be done.
It shall.
Now unto Iulia, on her lies my state,
If she consents: why so: if not I know
Death and command makes women's hearts to bow.
The death of slaves pursue thee. ho Borgias,
Protector: true true: clap clap ye furies,
Dance your black rounds, and with your iron whips,
Fetching eternal lashes as you skip
Strike a loud sounding music through the ayre,
And make the night Queen pale to hear your noise.
Be peaceful wronged Ghost where soar thou be,
Post to the blessed fields where souls take rest:
Drink Lethe freely for thou art revenged.
Come thou enclosure of a damned soul,
Isle be obedient bear to thy bed,
Then in my chamber laugh that thou art dead.
What sudden pain assaults my yielding heart?
Ha ha, ha, you'll bear me to my bed,
Then in your chamber laugh that I am dead.
Lives thou damned villain?
I live, and laugh wild slave to see thy fall,
This is the enclosure of a damned soul,
Villain thou shalt not breath another word.
Stay but a minute longer, know that I have
Thy promise and thy oath to be my guard,
Thy slave I murdered and assumed his shape,
I am Ferrari.
Ferrari, ha? true true, clap clap ye furies
Dance your black rounds, and with your iron whips,
Fetching eternal lashes as ye skip,
Strike a loud sounding music through the air
And make the nights Queen pale to hear your noise:
You have my oath and promise for your guard:
So wise men promise fools, but their reward
Like thine Ferrari is the loss of breath.
Justice I thee implore, revenge my death
Mulleasses thinks me dead, and in his plots
Goes on securely: Isle return his policies,
And upon him transport Ferraras murder.
My wife he hath forsook: that sweetens danger
That I but live to see revenge on her.
My weak force built upon the Turkish fleet,
I see is ruined, and I but undermined:
No hope is left save in mine own command
And power with the state: whose light credulity,
I easily did delude with Iulias death.
But yet Timoclea lives, and may perhaps
Escape her false loves hate: which if she do,
This black nights horror falls like thunder on me:
She must not live till day: be ever dark.
Stand night upon the noonestead: and attend
My fates security: if ever blackness pleased
Or deeds to which men may resemble thee,
Turn then thy sooty horse, and with their feet,
Beat at the rising morn: &amp; force the Sun,
Forbear his lustre till this black deed's done.
HEll and ye furies wheresoever you be,
show me your tortures, and present your selves
Or let the burning monarch clad in flame,
Make an infernal echo to my name.
I know not what I say: Timoclea wronged,
Loue-slighted and contemned: O my wish!
That like the crosse-eyd witch of Thessaly
My voice could through the rivets of the earth
Hello and call revenge: or rather: what?
My dangerous ghost attired like Nemesis
About her middle for a virgin Zone
Girt with a forckt-tooth'd serpent, vent at my breast
That did exceed a stepdame in my lust.
Forbear yet gentle maid; thy fathers soul
Kneels at the brazen Throne of Radamanth
And craves that office: Whither am I borne?
Despair, thou art a false glass to the soul,
And in the conscience dazeld with thy guilt
Of many sins, dost vary forms of fear.
I not believe thy forced suggestions,
I am seduced by passion: death and terror.
Error,
False air thou least I err not: my loves wrong
Isle tear out of my breast: forget those hopes
Made my hands bloody: I am clear• unstained:
Stained:
Forbear thy thunder gentle, gentle voice,
Beat not my conscience torments against the walls,
To make the Court ring with thy clamorous answers:
Heavens let my tears redeem me unto life.
Life.
Of my terror: I desire not: speak of death.
Death.
Of my daughter: how easy through the air
Our sins are hurried: thou can tell of murder.
Murder.
I of my husband: night thy cole-blacke wings
Though darker then the Moons eclipsed brow
Are not fit Canopies for sin.
Timoclea.
Distraction of my soul, who breathes my name!
The airy breath of him that sometime lived
A tenant in the breast of Borgias,
By thee driven out the frame and house of life.
By me
And now like one whom sterne oppression throws
Naked out of all he did possess: being tobd and spoiled
Of the warm covert he inhabited,
I sigh my helpless wrongs• and in the air
Counting all hope I had, find all despair.
Despair.
And empty longings for an end of pain,
Which I still wish and crave.
But never gain.
Never.
Forgive me.
Ask it of the heavens,
To whom my blood with ceaseless clamours calls
For Justice and revenge.
Justice in heaven is like my sin against thee
Cruel: and sooner may I with my knees
Eat through the center: from these pearly eyes
Should there fall down more tears of penitence
Then the clouds drop to purchase a new spring
I could not be forgiven.
Death is the winter dombd unto thy soul
Disrobe it of that warm and wanton flesh,
The mouth of Justice bids Timoclea dye.
Be thou then justice executioner
Revengeful spirit: in this flesh of mine
Carve thy revenge in characters of blood
Blast me: or from the centers hollow deep
Let loose some conjured tempests: whose loud storms
Driven through the ayre sings horror to the world,
And let them hurl me against the labouring clouds
Sink to the brazen-gated deep Abisse,
Where furies sit curling their snakes in knots,
And pull a viper from Alectos head,
And on these breasts that in thy heat of life,
Have been as pillows to advance thy lust
Let it suck freely: the Egyptian Queen
Ne'er dyed more daring.
And to the sterne commissioners of blood,
Be a glad Harms: tell them, Timoclea
Takes vengeance on her self• dull Element be gone.
The mornings saffron horse breathes from the East
Their spicy vapors, sucked from th'ndian plains
And through the gentle ayre hurl their perfumes.
I hear the Suns steeds trot towards the milky way,
And in a Coach of flames draw up the day:
Aurorat usher to the stars of night,
Tells the approaching of the God of light:
They gin to twinckle and take in their fires
At their eclipse we spirits leave the air,
And in a dismal vale of darkness groan,
Under the burden of a thousand chains:
I must away, thou only dost detain me,
With want of vengeance, which thy death must gain me.
It shall, it shall:
Hard hap of misery, it hath many hands,
That like the windings of a labyrinth,
Leads the despairing wretch into a maze:
But not an Ariadn• in the world,
That lends a clew to led vs out the world.
The very maze of horror.
Cease thou that stands first mover of the Spheres
From whose high concave all inferior fires
Derive successive motion.
Stand ye night-wandring planets in a maze,
And from your hollow Fabrics view Timoclea,
Or else ye heavens put in your flaring lights,
And on your azure-seiled arches hang
A rauen-blacke Canopy of congealed clouds
That you may seem a Chaos to the world,
And boade eternal darkness: thou were not made to kill,
Nor was the Diadem of her Ponticke Queen
Made as a fatal instrument of death,
And yet it was the engine stop her breath
As thou must mine. Soul of Borgias
Thus to thy ghost I sacrifice my life,
To buy thy requiem.
I accept it wife.
And thus return the fall of Borgias.
Nay nay repent not dear Timoclea,
You're caught in faith: th•n like a Lioness
Snar'd in the wary hunters tangled toils,
Grind the thin air: swell higher till thou burst,
And let the breath that like a vapour pressed
Struggle within thy bosom, hurl the up.
Soft—the time spends fast, &amp; I have much to think of
Before the tell-tale god displays his light,
To show the world the horror of this night.
First for thy death the lustful Turk must dye,
My rival in the love of Iulia.
Him Isle accuse• for murdering thee. The Dukes
Because his claim may alienate my hopes
Him in my accusation I will join
As joint coagent in the Turk devises.
As for that rumour of fair Iulias death,
I'll first proclaim her life: and on Mulleasses
(Who now detains her) will transfer the falsehood,
As if my self had been by him deluded:
These mazes when like Theseus I have trod•
Fortune shall spread her wings to make me sails,
And with a strong ayre cut the angry tide,
That into mountains swells to stay my pride.
H•h! what heavy noise beats through my ears?
Hang heavy Morpheus on the eyes of men,
And make suspicion sleep.
The rumours strange I pray possess me with your proper knowledge.
You shall understand Sir, that according to my funct∣ion, giving near attendance to my Lady, she being fervently employed in the Lobby, •bout a mixture or composure of (as we vulgarly term it) a posit: upon our first entrance, ere we had relished the sweet of her sweet, that is the fruit of her labours, we were suddenly assailed by a she-goblin: to describe it Sir I am not able, for my eye-sight turned inward to look after my heart that was running from my heals, yet thanks to the lancknesse of my calfe they made reasonable haste.
Heart of all mischief see the Court is up,
Hell and the darkness keep me from their sight.
At midnight did Ferrari leave his chamber,
Heavens be his safety.
A ghost a ghost.
Pursue it where it goes: fear shall not stop me.
Follow me sir, Isle speak to it, though death
Cease on my life: it shall not loose mine eyes
Unless it sink into the earth.
S'foot my office is italianated, I am fine to come be∣hind.
Was ever man thus distracted between the flesh and the spirit? s'foot this Pill hath so fired my mansion that unless I light on some water-worke, I shall loose the rain•s like a second Phaeton, and burn my Fabric. Surely I am that Tantalus the hungry Poets talk of, and am as dry as an Eel in a sand-bagge, and yet want water for the reaching: Let me see, why should I fear spirits that have raised up such an able one at my pleasure, that like a bold Orator stands on tip-toes to speak in Bar: and yet me thinks he should be no good pleader, he was so suddenly dejected and out of countenance with an apparition. I would the case were laid open, that I might see how my young mooter would bestir himself: Ha: who is this? no more ghosts I hope: if it be it is the more womanly of the two. She lies as if she knew the end of her creation. On my life some waiting maid that hath a Court Epilepsy come upon her: Isle see if she some at the mouth. Out &amp; alas, the heavens have conspired poor Bordellos overthrow. The virtuous Timoclea wretched and most accursed hands, that have trust up my fortunes in thy Elfe-knot.
THese apparitions doe import more weight
Then our distracted judgements can yet poise,
Yet mighty Duke suspend a while all fear
If both my power in state and worth in honour
May be sufficient gage to be your guard
Then think you are in safety.
Sir we thank you: neither is there one
Known unto vs in Florence, on whose worth,
I dard assure such safety as from you,
And to that end I brought this gentleman,
As well to acquaint you with this deep occurrence,
That much concerns your present state, as crave
A guard for our security against danger.
Respect your guard great Duke. Villain what art thou
A most dejected parcel of mans flesh.
Lend your eyes and see
A deed as black as is the time that hides it:
A murdered gentlewoman.
Ignoble villain, could thy coward-arme
Presume the least wrong to her feeble sex?
Wrong: heavens know I meant to have done her a• much right as could have been done to one of her sex.
Death hath not changed her form: see her face,
You may discern her by her character.
She bears the image of Timocl••
Wife hnto Borgias.
Soul of delusion, in this very shape
The ghost of Iulia was presented unto me.
Amazement and the giddy thought of fear
Run an unsteady circuit through my brain:
Thy fear and trembling doth proclaim thy guilt.
Alas Sir my shaking proceeds of a standing ague I have had this two hours.
The time importunates and craves sudden counsel.
Guard cease him safe, some bear this body hence,
We'll unto Borgias chamber, him we'll wake,
Acquaint him with the ground of our suspicion:
Mean time be safe in me: nor love nor life
Shall turn mine honours current: Isle be your guard:
This hand seems your person, or my sword
Shall in the Traitors heart make good my word.
IF thou be humane, then forsake thy suit
Your words are strange to me: my virgin ears
Ne'er knew such sound: desist I will not bow.
We loose all pleasure that we do not know
Then like Pandora view those heavenly gifts.
The Gods have decked thee with: See but thy self
And taste more pleasure from thy proper good
Then from the full horn of the Protean flood:
Elisium is in thee, and I implore—
Sirens have left the Sea and sing on shore.
Could I out•ing those Sirens Iulia,
Or were my voice as tuneful as that harp
That now vies music with the harmonious orbs,
To which each learned Sister naild a star,
Thou might with safety hear me: thy Uncles love
Cold as the white head of the Apennine
feels not my fire: ambition of rule
Tu•nes al the heate is left in him to incest.
If thy warm blood (that dallies in thy veins,
And through thy flesh like wanton riuile•s plays)
Desires with Nyle to rise aboue her banks,
And vent in pleasure on the neighbouring plains;
A carpet richer then the breast of Tempe,
Or Tagus yellow channel, shall be spread
And pr•st with Iulias weight.
Nor the blew Sea-god when in storms he treads
On pea•les as Orient as the rising East,
For which the toiling Negro dives in vain,
Are boasted of such wealth: thy bed as •oft
As down feathers plucked from Ledas swans,
Shall yield unto thy dalliance,
A hundred boys like winged Cherubins
As fair as Psiches love shall—
Enough, too much: I am not fit for pleasure
Or if I were thy Mermaid eloquence
Sounds harsher in my ears then Sillas dogs
Unto the frighted Sea-man.
Lady.
Heathen profane.
Be gentle Madam.
If thou be gentle leave me Mahomet
Our loves like our religio•s are at wars
And I disclaim all peace.
And I a lovers smoothness: your Uncles dead
His power is mine, and you must go.
Soul of wrongs: whither? you're both to weak
Ther's more then woman in me: villain, slave:
You urge me unto violence come to my chamber.
In hell or in my grave: a rape, treason: treason.
A guard, a guard.
Dea•h of my hope the Court is up.
From hence the voice was heard, be circumpect.
Treason, treason.
Who speaks that word?
Iulia your Sovereign.
Silence or thou die.
Error of darkness in what Labyrinth
Our souls are plunged: raise the Court: Iulia?
I.
Iulia and Mulleasses?
Iulia and Mulleasses fond Venetian
Prevented at the point of happiness:
Thus I redeem her.
And like Cephalus kill thine own Procris.
Save me.
Thy death shall be her freedom infidel.
Why stop you in your courses short breathed Christians?
Nail vs together. Now me thinks I stand
L•k• a pro•d Lyon with a richer prize
Then N•ssus would have stolen from Hercules
And dare your envies: my dea•h unto your state
S•alb as ominous as his poisoned shirt:
Your false Protec•or's dead: •e mocked your griefs
And made you we•pe at Iulias f•nerall,
Who•e hope I vnderwrought, and now had worn
The wreath of Florence: Love and ambition,
Kindled my cold brain from their mutual heate
Sprung my aspiring aim: nor shall it sink
But in the dea•h of Iulia: since I cannot
Quench my hot thy•st of Lust, and cool the heat
That hotter then the coals of Parta
Burn in my liver: like the snowy Dragon,
Tangling the El•phoned in his snarled orbs:
Isle dye in the pursuit of my desire,
And mix our bloods in death to sate my fire,
Hold monster.
Damnation on thy soul.
Thy death shall ransom her.
Death double thy feared force, and it some form
Affright pale Hecate darken the Moon,
I like the Sun, backed on th'Arcadian beast,
When in his burning progress he did singe
Atones gardens: from my souls fair light
Chase cloudy fear: and like Thetis son,
When he was oynted with Ambrosia•
Am more then fireproof: lives Iulia yet?
She lives damned villain and out-liues thy hate.
Death had been kind in her: with her I might
Under the cool shades of Elisium
Played before Pluto and made Proserpine
As jealous as Iuno of my love—
But since I must not
Up from the dark earths exhalations
Thicker then Lernas foggy mists and hide me:
I cannot loose their sight, hell of fear!
It flies our eager steps: follow, follow.
What means these clamours: Borgias?
Ho, Borgias:
Horror of •oules I am surprised.
Illusiue ayre, false shape of Borgias,
Could thy vain shadow work a fear in him
That like an Atlas vnderwent the earth
When with a firm and constant eye he saw
Hells fifty headed Porter: thus I'd prove
Thy apparition idle:—runs at Borgias.
Treason: I live: Devils and Furies I am slain.
Wonder of admiration: what distraction is this?
Ha ha, ha: climb high my mounting spirit
And when thou hast aspird to thy full hight
Like a Colossus on a base of clouds
Stand and applaud thy fortunes: Borgias
Grin'st hellish Antique?
Should the Cecropian thief stretch my torn flesh
Racked on his bed of steel: if on Caucasus
My growing liver were exposd a prey
To ravening Vultures: I would still laugh
To see thee like a falling Pine-tree reel
In a rough tempest.
Hold up ye broken organs of my soul
Carry me high and make me stand as firm
As Oaks on Ossa: that advance their tops
Even till their roots break. Timoclea
For love of me kilt her own child
Thy daughter Amada.
Amazement!
Blessed fates I thank you: I shall dye revenged
Fly, Jove loved Nemesis and at Justice feet
Shake thy triumphal Ash: I slue Timoclea
By thee before thought dead
I took her from the hearse of Iulia,
When in the habit of a murdered ghost,
This night she appeared to the Duke, to breed
Suspect in them of thee, and arm their hate
Unto my plotted faction.
Damned illusion.
Where is Ferrari?
Heavens be his guard.
So they are. He kilt my sl•ue
And in his habit by this hand he dyed.
False periurd villain.
Sink, sink Cytheron, high P•ll•no tremble
Greene Tempe wither, and with me forgo
Your place and being, this whole world of flesh
With •atoll earth-quakes totters.
False Turk thy fate be but as cruel as is Borgias hate.
Stoop down thou Lydian mount, bend thy cold head
And hide it in thy brackish fathers waives
That as thou shrinkst, thy starry load may nod
At Mulleasses fall: or ever shroud
Those joyful bonfires in a mourning cloud.
Just end of treason.
Madame our duties joy your life
And wish your happiness.
As the just reward of danger.
My Lord I claim her love.
Not without Justice brave Venecian
She is herself and free.
And thus I give my self.
Heavens seal it for the the good of both our states.
Philenzo:
We can but grieve at great Ferraras loss:
Ambassadors from vs shall plead our sorrows
Even to your Sonnets: mean time his obsequies
Shall want no honour: Signior Bordello
We give you liberty: what remains undone
Shall by the Senate be confirmed: lead on.

HEnce: home you idle Creatures, get you home:
Is this a Holiday? What, know you not
(Being Mechanical) you ought not walk
Upon a labouring day, without the sign
Of your Profession? Speak, what Trade art thou?
Why Sir, a Carpenter.
Where is thy Leather Apron, and thy Rule?
What dost thou with thy best Apparel on?
You sir, what Trade are you?
Truly Sir, in respect of a fine Workman, I am but as you would say, a Cobbler.
But what Trade art thou? Answer me directly.
A Trade Sir, that I hope I may use, with a safe Conscience, which is indeed Sir, a Mender of bad souls.
What Trade thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what Trade?
Nay I beseech you Sir, be not out with me: yet if you be out Sir, I can mend you.
What mean thou by that? Mend me, thou saucy Fellow?
Why sir, Cobble you.
Thou art a Cobbler, art thou?
Truly sir, all that I live by, is with the Aule: I meddle with no Tradesmen's matters, nor women's mat∣ters; but withal I am indeed Sir, a Surgeon to old shoes: when they are in great danger, I recover them. As pro∣per men as ever trod upon Nets Leather, have gone up∣on my handy-worke.
But wherefore art not in thy Shop to day?
Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
Truly sir, to wear out their shoes, to get my self into more work. But indeed sir, we make Holy∣day to see Caesar, and to rejoice in his Triumph.
Wherefore rejoice?
What Conquest brings he home?
What Tributaries follow him to Rome,
To grace in Captive bonds his Chariot Wheels?
You Blocks, you stones, you worse then senseless things:
O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
Knew you not Pompey many a time and oft?
Have you climbed up to Walls and Battlements,
To Towers and Windows? Yea, to Chimney tops,
Your Infants in your Arms, and there have sate
The liue-long day, with patient expectation,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome:
And when you saw his Chariot but appear,
Have you not made an Universal shout,
That Tyber trembled underneath her banks
To hear the replication of your sounds,
Made in her Concave Shores?
And do you now put on your best attire?
And do you now cull out a Holiday?
And do you now strew Flowers in his way,
That comes in Triumph over Pompeyes blood?
Be gone,
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
Pray to the Gods to intermit the plague
That needs must light on this Ingratitude.
Go, go, good Countrymen, and for this fault
Assemble all the poor men of your sort;
Draw them to Tyber banks, and weep your tears
Into the Channel, till the lowest stream
Do kiss the most exalted Shores of all.
See where their basest mettle be not moved,
They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness:
Go you down that way towards the Capitol,
This way will I: Disrobe the Images,
If you do find them decked with Ceremonies.
May we do so?
You know it is the Feast of Lupercall.
It is no matter, let no Images
Be hung with Caesars Trophies: Isle about,
And drive away the Vulgar from the streets;
So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
These growing Feathers, plucked from Caesars wing,
Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
Who else would soar aboue the view of men,
And keep vs all in servile fearfulness.
Calphurnia.
Peace ho, Caesar speaks.
Calphurnia.
Here my Lord.
Stand you directly in Antonio's way,
When he doth run his course. Antonio.
Caesar, my Lord.
Forget not in your speed Antonio,
To touch Calphurnia: for our Elders say,
The Barren touched in this holy chase,
Shake off their sterile curse.
I shall remember,
When Caesar says, Do this; it is performed.
Set on, and leave no Ceremony out.
Caesar.
Ha? Who calls?
Bid every noise be still: peace yet again.
Who is it in the press, that calls on me?
I hear a Tongue shriller then all the Music
Cry, Caesar: Speak, Caesar is turned to hear.
Beware the Ides of March.
What man is that?
A Sooth-sayer bids you beware the Ides of March
Set him before me, let me see his face.
Fellow, come from the throng, look upon Caesar.
What say thou to me now? Speak once again.
Beware the Ides of March.
He is a Dreamer, let vs leave him: Pass.
Will you go see the order of the course?
Not I.
I pray you do.
I am not Gamesom: I do lack some part
Of that quick Spirit that is in Antony:
Let me not hinder Cassius your desires;
Isle leave you.
Brutus, I do observe you now of late:
I have not from your eyes, that gentleness
And show of Love, as I was wont to have:
You bear too stubborn, and too strange a hand
Over your Friend, that loves you.
Cassius,
Be not deceived: If I have veiled my look,
I turn the trouble of my Countenance
Merely upon my self. Vexed I am
Of late, with passions of some difference,
Conceptions only proper to my self,
Which give some soil (perhaps) to my Behaviours:
But let not therefore my good Friends be grieved
(Among which number Cassius be you one)
Nor construe any further my neglect,
Then that poor Brutus with himself at war,
Forgets the shows of Love to other men.
Then Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,
By means whereof, this Breast of mine hath buried
Thoughts of great value, worthy Cogitations.
Tell me good Brutus, Can you see your face?
No Cassius:
For the eye sees not it self but by reflection,
By some other things.
It is just,
And it is very much lamented Brutus,
That you have no such Mirrors, as will turn
Your hidden worthiness into your eye,
That you might see your shadow:
I have heard,
Where many of the best respect in Rome,
(Except immortal Caesar) speaking of Brutus,
And groaning underneath this Ages yoke,
Have wished, that Noble Brutus had his eyes.
Into what dangers, would you
Lead me Cassius?
That you would have me seek into my self,
For that which is not in me?
Therefore good Brutus, be prepared to hear:
And since you know, you cannot see your self
So well as by Reflection; I your Glass,
Will modestly discover to your self
That of your self, which you yet know not of.
And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus:
Were I a common Laughter, or did use
To stale with ordinary Oaths my love
To every new Protester: if you know,
That I do fawn on men, and hug them hard,
And after scandal them: Or if you know,
That I profess my self in Banqueting
To all the Rout, then hold me dangerous.
What means this Shouting?
I do fear, the People choose Caesar
For their King.
I, do you fear it?
Then must I think you would not have it so.
I would not Cassius, yet I love him well:
But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
What is it, that you would impart to me?
If it be ought toward the general good,
Set Honour in one eye, and Death in th other,
And I will look on both indifferently:
For let the Gods so speed me, as I love
The name of Honour, more then I fear death.
I know that virtue to be in you Brutus,
As well as I do know your outward favour.
Well, Honour is the subject of my Story:
I cannot tell, what you and other men
Think of this life: But for my single self,
I had as lief not be, as live to be▪
In awe of such a Thing, as I my self.
I was borne free as Caesar, so were you,
We both have fed as well, and we can both
Endure the Winters cold, as well as hee.
For once, upon a Raw and Gusty day,
The troubled Tyber, chasing with her Shores,
Caesar said to me, Dare thou Cassius now
Leap in with me into this angry Flood,
And swim to yonder Point? Upon the word,
Accoutred as I was, I plunged in,
And bad him follow: so indeed he did.
The Torrent roared, and we did buffet it
With lusty Sinews, throwing it aside,
And stemming it with hearts of Controversy.
But ere we could arrive the Point proposed,
Caesar cried, Help me Cassius, or I sink.
I (as Aeneas, our great Ancestor,
Did from the Flames of Troy, upon his shoulder
The old Anchyses bear) so, from the waives of Tyber
Did I the tyred Caesar: And this Man,
Is now become a God, and Cassius is
A wretched Creature, and must bend his body,
If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
He had a Fever when he was in Spain,
And when the Fit was on him, I did mark
How he did shake: Tic true, this God did shake,
His Coward lips did from their colour fly,
And that same Eye, whose bend doth awe the World,
Did loose his Lustre: I did hear him groan:
I, and that Tongue of his, that bad the Romans
Mark him, and write his Speeches in their Books,
Alas, it cried, Give me some drink Titinius,
As a sick Girl: Ye Gods, it doth amaze me,
A man of such a feeble temper should
So get the start of the Majestic world,
And bear the Palm alone.
Another general shout?
I do believe, that these applauses are
For some new Honours, that are heaped on Caesar.
Why man, he doth bestride the narrow world
Like a Colossus, and we petty men
Walk under his huge legs, and peep about
To find our selves dishonourable Graves.
Men at sometime, are Masters of their Fates.
The fault (dear Brutus) is not in our Stars,
But in our Selves, that we are underlings.
Brutus and Caesar: What should be in that Caesar?
Why should that name be sounded more then yours?
Write them together: Yours, is as fair a Name:
Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well:
Weigh them, it is as heavy: Conjure with 'em,
Brutus will start a Spirit as soon as Caesar.
Now in the names of all the Gods at once,
Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed,
That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed.
Rome, thou hast lost the breed of Noble Bloods.
When went there by an Age, since the great Flood,
But it was famed with more then with one man?
When could they say (till now) that talked of Rome,
That her wide Walks encompassed but one man?
Now is it Rome indeed, and Room enough
When there is in it but one only man.
O! you and I, have heard our Fathers say,
There was a Brutus once, that would have brooked
The eternal Devil to keep his State in Rome,
As easily as a King.
That you do love me, I am nothing jealous:
What you would work me too, I have some aim:
How I have thought of this, and of these times
I shall recount hereafter. For this present,
I would not so (with love I might entreat you)
Be any further moved: What you have said,
I will consider: what you have to say
I will with patience hear; and find a time
Both meet to hear, and answer such high things.
Till then, my Noble Friend, chew upon this:
Brutus had rather be a Villager,
Then to repute himself a Son of Rome
Under these hard Conditions, as this time
Is like to lay upon vs.
I am glad that my weak words
Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.
The Games are done,
And Caesar is returning.
As they pass by▪
Pluck Cask by the Sleeve,
And he will (after his sour fashion) tell you
What hath proceeded worthy note to day.
I will do so: but look you Cassius,
The angry spot doth glow on Caesars brow,
And all the rest look like a chi•den Train;
Calphurni• Cheek• is pale, and Cicero
Looks with such •er•▪ and such fiery eyes
As we have seen him in the Capitol
Being crossed in Conference, by some Senators.
Cask will tell vs what the matter is.
Antonio.
Caesar.
Let me have men about me, that are fat,
Sleeke-headed men, and such as sleep a-nights:
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look,
He thinks too much: such men are dangerous.
Fear him not Caesar, he's not dangerous,
He is a Noble Roman, and well given.
Would he were fatter; But I fear him not:
Yet if my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I should avoid
So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,
He is a great Observer, and he looks
Quite through the Deeds of men. He loves no Plays,
As thou dost Antony: he hears no Music;
Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
As if he mocked himself, and scorned his spirit
That could be moved to smile at any thing.
Such men as he, be never at hearts ease,
Whiles they behold a greater then themselves,
And therefore are they very dangerous.
I rather tell thee what is to be feared,
Then what I fear: for always I am Caesar.
Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
And tell me truly, what thou think of him.
You pulled me by the cloak, would you speak with me?
I Cask, tell vs what hath chanced to day
That Caesar looks so sad.
Why you were with him, were you not?
I should not then ask Cask what had chanced.
Why there was a Crown offered him; &amp; being offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand thus, and then the people fell a shouting.
What was the second noise for?
Why for that too.
They shouted thrice: what was the last cry for?
Why for that too.
Was the Crown offered him thrice?
I marry was it, and hee put it by thrice, every time gentler then other; and at every putting by, mine honest Neighbours shouted.
Who offered him the Crown?
Why Antony.
Tell vs the manner of it, gentle Cask.
I can as well bee hanged as tell the manner of it: It was mere Foolery, I did not mark it. I saw Mark Antony offer him a Crown, yet it was not a Crown neither, it was one of these Coronets: and as I told you, hee put it by once: but for all that, to my thin∣king, he would fine have had it. Then hee offered it to him again: then hee put it by again: but to my think∣ing, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it. And then he offered it the third time; hee put it the third time by, and still as hee refused it, the rabblement howted, and clapped their chopped hands, and threw up their sweaty Night-cappes, and uttered such a deal of stinking breath, because Caesar refused the Crown, that it had (almost) choked Caesar: for hee swooned, and fell down at it: And for mine own part, I durst not laugh, for fear of opening my Lips, and receiving the bad Ayre.
But soft I pray you: what, did Caesar swooned?
He fell down in the Market-place, and foamed at mouth, and was speechless.
It is very like he hath the Falling sickness.
No, Caesar hath it not: but you, and I,
And honest Cask, we have the Falling sickness.
I know not what you mean by that, but I am sure Caesar fell down. If the tag-ragge people did not clap him, and hiss him, according as he pleased, and dis∣pleased them, as they use to doe the Players in the Thea∣tree, I am no true man.
What said he, when he came unto himself?
Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common Heard was glad he refused the Crown, he plucked me op his Doublet, and offered them his Throat to cut: and I had been a man of any Occupation, if I would not have taken him at a word, I would I might go to Hell among the Rogues, and so hee fell. When he came to himself again, hee said, If hee had done, or said any thing amiss, he desired their Worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or four Wenches where I stood, cried, Alas good Soul, and forgave him with all their hearts: But there's no heed to be taken of them; if Caesar had stabbed their Mothers, they would have done no less.
And after that, he came thus sad away.
I.
Did Cicero say any thing?
I, he spoke Greek.
To what effect?
Nay, and I tell you that, Isle ne'er look you in the face again. But those that understood him, smiled at one another, and shook their heads: but for mine own part, it was Greek to me. I could tell you more news too: Murrellus and Flauius, for pulling Scarves off Caesars Images, are put to silence. Fare you well. There was more Foolery yet, if I could remem∣ber it.
Will you sup with me to Night, Cask?
No, I am promised forth.
Will you Dine with me to morrow?
I, if I be alive, and your mind hold, and your
Dinner worth the eating.
Good, I will expect you.
Doe so: farewell both.
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be?
He was quick Mettle, when he went to School.
So is he now, in execution
Of any bold, or Noble Enterprise,
How-euer he puts on this tardy form:
This Rudeness is a Sauce to his good Wit,
Which gives men stomach to digest his words
With better Appetite.
And so it is:
For this time I will leave you:
To morrow, if you please to speak with me,
I will come home to you or if you will,
Come home to me, and I will wait for you.
I will doe so: till then, think of the World.
Well Brutus, thou art Noble: yet I see,
Thy Honourable Mettle may be wrought
From that it is disposed▪ therefore it is meet,
That Noble minds keep ever with their likes:
For who so firm, that cannot be seduced?
Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.
If I were Brutus now, and he were Cassius,
He should not humour me. I will this Night,
In several Hands, in at his Windows throw,
As if they came from several Citizens,
Writings, all tending to the great opinion
That Rome holds of his Name: wherein obscurely
Caesars Ambition shall be glanced at.
And after this, let Caesar seat him sure,
For wee will shake him, or worse days endure.
Good even, Cask: brought you Caesar home?
Why are you breathless, and why stare you so?
Are not you moved, when all the sway of Earth
Shakes, like a thing vnfirme? O Cicero,
I have seen Tempests, when the scolding Winds
Have riu'd the knotty Oaks, and I have seen
The ambitious Ocean swell, and rage and foam,
To be exalted with the threatening Clouds:
But never till to Night, never till now,
Did I go through a Tempest-dropping-fire.
Either there is a Civil strife in Heaven,
Or else the World, too saucy with the Gods,
Incenses them to send destruction.
Why, saw you any thing more wonderful?
A common slave, you know him well by sight,
Held up his left Hand, which did flame and burn
Like twenty Torches joined; and yet his Hand,
Not sensible of fire, remained vnscorch'd.
Besides, I haven't since put up my Sword,
Against the Capitol I met a Lyon,
Who glazed upon me, and went surly by,
Without annoying me. And there were drawn
Upon a heap, a hundred ghastly Women,
Transformed with their fear, who swore, they saw
Men, all in fire, walk up and down the streets.
And yesterday, the Bird of Night did sit.
Even at Noone-day, upon the Market place,
Howting, and shrieking. When these Prodigies
Doe so conjointly meet, let not men say,
These are their Reasons, they are Natural:
For I believe, they are portentous things
Unto the Climate, that they point upon.
Indeed, it is a strange disposed time:
But men may construe things after their fashion,
Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
Comes Caesar to the Capitol to morrow?
He doth: for he did bid Antonio
Send word to you, he would be there to morrow.
Good-night then, Cask:
This disturbed Sky is not walk in.
Farewell Cicero.
Who's there?
A Roman▪
Cask▪ by your Voice.
Your Ear is good.
Cassius, what Night is this?
A very pleasing Night 〈◊〉 s•en▪
Who ever knew the Heavens menace so?
Those that have known the Earth so full of faults.
For my part, I have walked about the streets,
Submitting me unto the perilous Night;
And thus unbraced, Cask, as you see,
Have bared my Bosom to the Thunder-stone:
And when the cross blew Lightning seemed to open
The Breast of Heaven, I did present my self
Even in the aim, and very flash of it.
But wherefore did you so much tempt the Hey∣uens?
It is the part of men, to fear and tremble,
When the most mighty Gods, by tokens send
Such dreadful Heralds, to astonish vs.
You are dull, Cask:
And those sparks of Life, that should be in a Roman,
You doe want, or else you use not.
You look pale, and gaze, and put on fear,
And cast your self in wonder,
To see the strange impatience of the Heavens:
But if you would consider the true cause,
Why all these Fires, why all these gliding Ghosts,
Why Birds and Beasts, from quality and kind,
Why Old men, Fools, and Children calculate,
Why all these things change from their Ordinance,
Their Natures, and pre-formed Faculties,
To monstrous quality; why you shall find,
That Heaven hath infused them with these Spirits,
To make them Instruments of fear, and warning,
Unto some monstrous State.
Now could I (Cask) name to thee a man,
Most like this dreadful Night,
That Thunders, Lightens, opens Graves, and roars,
As doth the Lyon in the Capitol:
A man no mightier then thy self, or me,
In personal action; yet prodigious grown,
And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.
It is Caesar that you mean:
It is not, Cassius?
Let it be who it is: for Romans now
Have Thewes, and Limbs, like to their Ancestors;
But woe the while, our Fathers minds are dead,
And we are governed with our Mothers spirits,
Our yoke, and sufferance, show vs Womanish.
Indeed, they say, the Senators to morrow
Mean to establish Caesar as a King:
And he shall wear his Crown by Sea, and Land,
In every place, save here in Italy.
I know where I will wear this Dagger then;
Cassius from Bondage will deliver Cassius:
Therein, ye Gods, you make the weak most strong;
Therein, ye Gods, you Tyrants doe defeat.
Nor Stony Tower, nor Walls of beaten Brass,
Nor ayre-lesse Dungeon, nor strong Links of Iron,
Can be retentive to the strength of spirit:
But Life being weary of these worldly Bars,
Never lacks power to dismiss it self.
If I know this, know all the World besides,
That part of Tyranny that I doe bear,
I can shake off at pleasure.
So can I:
So every Bond-man in his own hand bears
The power to cancel his Captivity.
And why should Caesar be a Tyrant then?
Poor man, I know he would not be a Wolf,
But that he sees the Romans are but Sheep:
He were no Lyon, were not Romans Hinds.
Those that with haste will make a mighty fire,
Begin it with weak Straws. What trash is Rome?
What Rubbish, and what Offal? when it serves
For the base matter, to illuminate
So vile a thing as Caesar. But oh Grief,
Where hast-thou led me? I (perhaps) speak this
Before a willing Bond-man: then I know
My answer must be made. But I am armed,
And dangers are to me indifferent.
You speak to Cask, and to such a man,
That is no flooring Tell-tale. Hold, my Hand:
Be factious for redress of all these Griefs,
And I will set this foot of mine as far,
As who goes farthest.
There's a Bargain made.
Now know you, Cask, I have moved already
Some certain of the Noblest minded Romans
To vnder-goe, with me, an Enterprise,
Of Honourable dangerous consequence;
And I doe know by this, they stay for me
In Pompeyes Porch: for now this fearful Night,
There is no stir, or walking in the streets;
And the Complexion of the Element
Is Favours, like the Work we have in hand,
Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.
Stand close a while, for here comes one in haste.
It is Cinna, I doe know him by his Gate,
He is a friend. Cinna, where haste you so?
To find out you: Who's that, Metellus Cymber?
No, it is Cask, one incorporate
To our Attempts. Am I not stayed for, Cinna?
I am glad on it.
What a fearful Night is this?
There's two or three of vs have seen strange sights.
Am I not stayed for? tell me.
Yes, you are. O Cassius,
If you could but win the Noble Brutus
To our party—
Be you content. Good Cinna, take this Paper,
And look you lay it in the Pretors Chair,
Where Brutus may but find it: and throw this
In at his Window; set this up with Wax
Upon old Brutus Statue: all this done,
Repair to Pompeyes Porch, where you shall find vs.
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
All, but Metellus Cymber, and hoe's gone
To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie,
And so bestow these Papers as you bad me.
That done, repair to Pompeyes Theater.
Come Cask, you and I will yet, ere day,
See Brutus at his house: three parts of him
Is ours already, and the man entire
Upon the next encounter, yields him ours.
O, he sits high in all the Peoples hearts:
And that which would appear Offence in vs,
His Countenance, like richest Alchemy,
Will change to Virtue, and to Worthiness.
Him, and his worth, and our great need of him,
You have right well conceited: let vs go,
For it is after Mid-night, and ere day,
We will awake him, and be sure of him.
What Lucius, hoe?
I cannot, by the progress of the Stars,
Give guess how near to day—Lucius, I say?
I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.
When Lucius, when? awake, I say: what Lucius?
Called you, my Lord?
Get me a Tapor in my Study, Lucius:
When it is lighted, come and call me here.
I will, my Lord.
It must be by his death: and for my part,
I know no personal cause, to spurn at him,
But for the general. He would be crowned:
How that might change his nature, there's the question?
It is the bright day, that brings forth the Adder,
And that craves wary walking: Crown him that,
And then I grant we put a Sting in him,
That at his will he may doe danger with.
The abuse of Greatness, is, when it dis-ioynes
Remorse from Power: And to speak truth of Caesar,
I have not known, when his Affections swayed
More then his Reason. But it is a common proof,
That Lowliness is young Ambitions Ladder,
Whereto the Climber upward turns his Face:
But when he once attains the vpmost Round,
He then unto the Ladder turns his Back,
Looks in the Clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend: so Caesar may;
Then least he may, prevent. And since the Quarrel
Will bear no colour, for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus; that what he is, augmented,
Would run to these, and these extremities:
And therefore think him as a Serpents egg,
Which hatched, would as his kind grow mischievous;
And kill him in the shell.
The Taper burns in your Closet, Sir:
Searching the Window for a Flint, I found
This Paper, thus sealed up, and I am sure
It did not lye there when I went to Bed.
Get you to Bed again, it is not day:
Is not to morrow (Boy) the first of March?
I know not, Sir.
Look in the Calender, and bring me word.
I will, Sir.
The exhalations, whizzing in the ayre,
Give so much light, that I may read by them.
Brutus thou sleep; awake, and see thy self:
Shall Rome, &amp;c. speak, strike, redress.
Brutus, thou sleep: awake.
Such instigations have been often dropped,
Where I have took them up:
Shall Rome, &amp;c. Thus must I piece it out:
Shall Rome stand under one mans awe? What Rome?
My Ancestors did from the streets of Rome
The Tarquin drive, when he was called a King.
Speak, strike, redress. Am I entreated
To speak, and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
If the redress will follow, thou receive
Thy full Petition at the hand of Brutus.
Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.
It is good. Go to the Gate, some body knocks:
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
I have not slept.
Between the acting of a dreadful thing▪
And the first motion, all the Interim is
Like a Phantasm, or a hideous Dream:
The Genius, and the mortal Instruments
Are then in council; and the state of a man,
Like to a little Kingdom, suffers then
The nature of an Insurrection.
Sir, it is your Brother Cassius at the Door,
Who doth desire to see you.
Is he alone?
No, Sir, there are more with him.
Doe you know them?
No, Sir, their Hats are plucked about their Ears,
And half their Faces buried in their Cloaks,
That by no means I may discover them,
By any mark of favour.
Let 'em enter:
They are the Faction. O Conspiracy,
Sham'st thou to show thy dangerous Brow by Night,
When evils are most free? O then, by day
Where wilt thou find a Cavern dark enough,
To mask thy monstrous Visage? Seek none Conspiracy,
Hide it in Smiles, and Affability:
For if thou path thy native semblance on,
Not Erebus it self were dim enough,
To hide thee from prevention.
I think we are too bold upon your Rest:
Good morrow Brutus, doe we trouble you?
I have been up this hour, awake all Night:
Know I these men, that come along with you?
Yes, every man of them; and no man here
But honours you: and every one doth wish,
You had but that opinion of your self,
Which every Noble Roman bears of you.
This is Trebonius.
He is welcome hither.
This, Decius Brutus.
He is welcome too.
This, Cask; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cymber.
They are all welcome.
What watchful Cares doe interpose themselves
Betwixt your Eyes, and Night?
Shall I entreat a word?
Here lies the East: doth not the Day break here?
No.
O pardon, Sir, it doth; and you grey Lines,
That fret the Clouds, are Messengers of Day.
You shall confess, that you are both deceived:
Here, as I point my Sword, the Sun arises,
Which is a great way growing on the South,
Weighing the youthful Season of the year.
Some two months hence, up higher toward the North
He first presents his fire, and the high East
Stands as the Capitol, directly here.
Give me your hands all over, one by one.
And let vs swear our Resolution.
No, not an Oath: if not the Face of men,
The sufferance of our Souls, the times Abuse;
If these be Motives weak, break off betimes,
And every man hence, to his idle bed:
So let high-sighted-Tyranny range on,
Till each man drop by Lottery. But if these
(As I am sure they do) bear fire enough
To kindle Cowards, and to steel with valour
The melting Spirits of women. Then Countrymen,
What need we any spur, but our own cause,
To prick vs to redress? What other Bond,
Then secret Romans, that have spoke the word,
And will not palter? And what other Oath,
Then Honesty to Honesty engaged,
That this shall be, or we will fall for it.
Swear Priests and Cowards, and men Cautelous
Old feeble Carrions, and such suffering Souls
That welcome wrongs: Unto bad causes, swear
Such Creatures as men doubt; but do not stain
The even virtue of our Enterprise,
Nor the insuppressiue Mettle of our Spirits,
To think, that or our Cause, or our Performance
Did need an Oath. When every drop of blood
That every Roman bears, and Nobly bears
Is guilty of a several Bastordie,
If he do break the smallest Particle
Of any promise that hath past from him.
But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
I think he will stand very strong with vs.
Let vs not leave him out.
No, by no means.
O let vs have him, for his Silver hairs
Will purchase vs a good opinion:
And buy men's voices, to commend our deeds:
It shall be said, his judgment ruled our hands,
Our youths, and wildenesse, shall no whit appear,
But all be buried in his Gravity.
O name him not; let vs not break with him,
For he will never follow any thing
That other men begin.
Then leave him out.
Indeed, he is not fit.
Shall no man else be touched, but only Caesar?
Decius well urged: I think it is not meet,
Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar,
Should out-liue Caesar, we shall find of him
A shrewed Contriver. And you know, his means
If he improve them, may well stretch so far
As to annoy vs all: which to prevent,
Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
To cut the Head off, and then hack the Limbs:
Like Wrath in death, and Envy afterwards:
For Antony, is but a Limb of Caesar.
Let's be Sacrificers, but not Butchers Caius:
We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
And in the Spirit of men, there is no blood:
O that we then could come by Caesars Spirit,
And not dismember Caesar! But (alas)
Caesar must bleed for it. And gentle Friends,
Let's kill him Boldly, but not Wrathfully:
Let's carve him, as a Dish fit for the Gods,
Not hew him as a Carcass fit for Hounds:
And let our Hearts, as subtle Masters do,
Stir up their Servants to an act of Rage,
And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make
Our purpose Necessary, and not Envious.
Which so appearing to the common eyes,
We shall be called Purgers, not Murderers.
And for Mark Antony, think not of him:
For he can do no more then Caesars Arm,
When Caesars head is off.
Yet I fear him,
For in the ingrafted love he bears to Caesar.
Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him:
If he love Caesar, all that he can do
Is to himself; take thought, and dye for Caesar,
And that were much he should: for he is given
To sports, to wildenesse, and much company.
There is no fear in him; let him not dye,
For he will live, and laugh at this hereafter.
Peace, count the Clock.
The Clock hath stricken three.
It is time to part.
But it is doubtful yet,
Whether Caesar will come forth to day, or no:
For he is Superstitious grown of late,
Quite from the maine Opinion he held once,
Of Fantasy, of Dreams, and Ceremonies:
It may be, these apparent Prodigies,
The unaccustomed Terror of this night,
And the persuasion of his Augurers,
May hold him from the Capitol to day.
Never fear that: If he be so resolved,
I can ore-sway him: For he loves to hear,
That Unicorns may be betrayed with Trees,
And Bears with Glasses, Elephants with Holes,
Lyons with Toils, and men with Flatterers.
But, when I tell him, he hates Flatterers,
He says, he does; being then most flattered.
Let me work:
For I can give his humour the true bent;
And I will bring him to the Capitol.
Nay, we will all of vs, be there to fetch him▪
By the eight hour, is that the uttermost?
Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey;
I wonder none of you have thought of him.
Now good Metellus go along by him:
He loves me well, and I have given him Reasons,
Send him but hither, and Isle fashion him.
The morning comes vpon's:
We'll leave you Brutus,
And Friends disperse your selves; but all remember
What you have said, and show your selves true Romans.
Good Gentlemen, look fresh and merrily,
Let not our looks put on our purposes,
But bear it as our Roman Actors do,
With vntyr'd Spirits, and formal Constancy,
And so good morrow to you every one.
Boy: Lucius: Fast asleep? It is no matter,
Enjoy the hony-heauy-Dew of Slumber:
Thou hast no Figures, nor no Fantasies,
Which busy care draws, in the brains of men;
Therefore thou sleep so sound.
Brutus, my Lord.
Portia: What mean you? wherefore rise you now?
It is not for your health, thus to commit
Your weak condition, to the raw cold morning.
Nor for yours neither. Y' have ungently Brutus
Stole from my bed: and yesternight at Supper
You suddenly arose, and walked about,
Musing, and sighing, with your arms across:
And when I asked you what the matter was,
You stared upon me, with ungentle looks.
I urged you further, then you scratched your head,
And too impatiently stamped with your foot:
Yet I insisted, yet you answered not,
But with an angry wafter of your hand
Gave sign for me to leave you: So I did,
Fearing to strengthen that impatience
Which seemed too much kindled; and withal,
Hoping it was but an effect of Humour,
Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep;
And could it work so much upon your shape.
As it hath much prevailed on your Cond•tion,
I should not know you Brutus. Dear my Lord,
Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
I am not well in health, and that is all.
Brutus is wise, and were he not in health,
He would embrace the means to come by it.
Why so I do: good Portia go to bed.
Is Brutus sick? And is it Physical
To walk unbraced, and suck up the humours
Of the dank Morning? What, is Brutus sick?
And will he steal out of his wholesome bed
To dare the vile contagion of the Night?
And tempt the Rheumy, and unpurged Ayre,
To add unto hit sickness? No my Brutus,
You have some sick Offence within your mind,
Which by the Right and Virtue of my place
I ought to know of: And upon my knees,
I charm you, by my once commended Beauty,
By all your vows of Love, and that great Vow
Which did incorporate and make vs one,
That you unfold to me, your self; your half
Why you are heavy: and what men to night
Have had resort to you: for here have been
Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
Even from darkness.
Kneel not gentle Portia.
I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus.
Within tho Bond of Marriage, tell me Brutus,
Is it excepted, I should know no Secrets
That appertain to you? Am I your Self,
But as it were in sort, or limitation?
To keep with you at Meals, comfort your Bed,
And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the Suburbs
Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
Portia is Brutus Harlot, not his Wife.
You are my true and honourable Wife,
As dear to me, as are the ruddy drops
That visit my sad heart.
If this were true, then should I know this secret.
I grant I am a Woman; but withal,
A Woman that Lord Brutus took to Wife:
I grant I am a Woman; but withal,
A Woman well reputed: Cato's Daughter.
Think you, I am no stronger then my Sex
Being so Fathered, and so Husbanded?
Tell me your Counsels, I will not disclose 'em:
I have made strong proof of my Constancy,
Giving my self a voluntary wound
Here, in the Thigh: Can I bear that with patience,
And not my Husbands Secrets?
O ye Gods!
Render me worthy of this Noble Wife.
Hark, hark, one knocks: Portia go in a while,
And by and by thy bosom shall partake
The secrets of my Heart.
All my engagements, I will construe to thee,
All the Charractery of my sad brows:
Leave me with hast.
Lucius, who's that knocks.
Here is a sick man that would speak with you.
Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.
Boy, stand aside. Caius Ligarius, how?
Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
O what a time have you chose out brave Caius
To wear a Kerchief? Would you were not sick.
I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand
Any exploit worthy the name of Honour.
Such an exploit have I in hand Ligarius,
Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
By all the Gods that Romans bow before,
I here discard my sickness. Soul of Rome,
Brave Son, derived from Honourable Loins,
Thou like an Exorcist, hast conjured up
My mortified Spirit. Now bid me run,
And I will strive with things impossible,
Yea get the better of them. What's to do?
A piece of work,
That will make sick men whole.
But are not some whole▪ that we must make sick?
That must we also. What it is my Caius,
I shall unfold to thee, as we are going,
To whom it must be done.
Set on your foot,
And with a heart new-fir'd, I follow you,
To do I know not what: but it suffices
That Brutus leads me on.
Follow me then.
Nor Heaven, nor Earth,
Have been at peace to night:
Thrice hath Calphurnia, in her sleep cried out,
Help, ho: They murder Caesar. Who's within?
My Lord.
Go bid the Priests do present Sacrifice,
And bring me their opinions of Success.
I will my Lord.
What mean you Caesar? Think you to walk forth?
You shall not stir out of your house to day.
Caesar shall forth; the things that threatened me,
Ne'er looked but on my back: When they shall see
The face of Caesar, they are vanished.
Caesar, I never stood on Ceremonies,
Yet now they fright me: There is one within,
Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
Recounts most horrid sights seen by the Watch.
A Lioness hath whelped in the streets,
And Graves have yawned, and yielded up their dead;
Fierce fiery Warriors fight upon the Clouds
In Ranks and Squadrons, and right form of War
Which drizel'd blood upon the Capitol:
The noise of Battle hurtled in the Ayre:
Horses do neigh, and dying men did groan,
And Ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
O Caesar, these things are beyond all use.
And I do fear them.
What can be avoided
Whose end is purposed by the mighty Gods?
Yet Caesar shall go sorth: for these Predictions
Are to the world in general, as to Caesar.
When Beggars dye, there are no Comets seen,
The Heavens themselves blaze forth the death of Princes
Cowards dye many times before their deaths,
The valiant never taste of death but once:
Of all the Wonders that I yet have heard,
It seems to me most strange that men should fear,
Seeing that death, a necessary end
Will come, when it will come.
What say the Augurers?
They would not have you to stir forth to day.
Plucking the entrails of an Offering forth,
They could not find a heart within the beast.
The Gods do this in shame of Cowardice:
Caesar should be a Beast without a heart
If he should stay at home to day sor fear:
No Caesar shall not; Danger knows full well
That Caesar is more dangerous then he.
We hear two Lyons littered in one day,
And I the elder and more terrible,
And Caesar shall go forth.
Alas my Lord,
Your wisdom is consumed in confidence:
Do not go forth to day: Call it my fear,
That keeps you in the house, and not your own.
We'll send Mark Antony to the Senate house,
And he shall say; you are not well to day:
Let me upon my knee, prevail in this.
Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
And for thy humour, I will stay at home.
Heere's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.
Caesar, all hail: Good morrow worthy Caesar,
I come to fetch you to the Senate house.
And you are come in very happy time,
To bear my greeting to the Senators,
And tell them that I will not come to day:
Cannot, is false: and that I dare not, falser:
I will not come to day, tell them so Decius.
Say he is sick.
Shall Caesar send a Lye?
Have I in Conquest stretched mine Arm so far,
To be afeared to tell Gray-beards the truth:
Decius, go tell them, Caesar will not come.
Most mighty Caesar let me know some cause,
Lest I be laughed at when I tell them so.
The cause is in my Will, I will not come,
That is enough to satisfy the Senate
But for your private satisfaction,
Because I love you, I will let you know.
Calphurnia here my wife, stays me at home:
She dreamt to night, she saw my Statue,
Which like a Fountain, with an hundred spouts
Did run pure blood: and many lusty Romans
Came smiling, &amp; did bathe their hands in it:
And these does she apply, for warnings and portents,
And evils imminent; and on her knee
Hath begged, that I will stay at home to day.
This Dream is all amiss interpreted,
It was a vision, fair and fortunate:
Your Statue spouting blood in many pipes,
In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
Signifies, that from you great Rome shall suck
Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
For Tinctures, Staines, Relics, and Cognisance.
This by Calphurnia's Dream is signified.
And this way have you well expounded it.
I have, when you have heard what I can say:
And know it now, the Senate have concluded
To give this day, a Crown to mighty Caesar.
If you shall send them word you will not come,
Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
Apt to be rendered, for some one to say,
Break up the Senate, till another time:
When Caesars wife shall meet with better Dreams.
If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
Lo Caesar is afraid?
Pardon me Caesar, for my dear dear love
To your proceeding, bids me tell you this:
And reason to my love is liable.
How foolish do your fears seem now Calphurnia?
I am ashamed I did yield to them.
Give me my Robe, for I will go.
And look where Publius is come to fetch me.
Good morrow Caesar.
Welcome Publius.
What Brutus, are you stirred so early too?
Good morrow Cask: Caius Ligarius,
Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy,
As that same Ague which hath made you lean.
What is it a Clock?
Caesar, it is stricken eight.
I thank you for your pains and courtesy.
See, Antony that Revels long a-nights
Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow Antony.
So to most Noble Caesar.
Bid them prepare within:
I am too blame to be thus waited for.
Now Cynna▪ now Metellus: what Trebonius,
I have an hours talk in store for you:
Remember that you call on me to day:
Be near me, that I may remember you.
Caesar I will: and so near will I be,
That your best Friends shall wish I had been further.
Good Friends go in, and taste some wine with me
And we (like Friends) will straight way go together.
That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
The heart of Brutus earns to think upon.
Caesar, beware of Brutus, take heed of Cassius; come not
near Cask, have an eye to Cynna, trust not Trebonius, mark well Metellus Cymber, Decius Brutus loves thee not: Thou hast wronged Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent against Caesar: If thou be not Im∣mortal, look about you: Security gives way to Conspiracy. The mighty Gods defend thee.
Thy Lover, Artemidorus.
Here will I stand, till Caesar pass along,
And as a Suitor will I give him this:
My heart laments, that Virtue cannot live
Out of the teeth of Emulation.
If thou read this, O Caesar, thou may live;
If not, the Fates with Traitors do contrive.
I prithee Boy, run to the Senate-house,
Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
Why doest thou stay?
To know my errand Madam.
I would have had thee there and here again
Ere I can tell thee what thou should do there:
O Constancy, be strong upon my side,
Set a huge Mountain 'tweene my Heart and Tongue:
I have a mans mind, but a women's might:
How hard it is for women to keep counsel.
Art thou here yet?
Madam, what should I do?
Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
And so return to you, and nothing else?
Yes, bring me word Boy, if thy Lord look well,
For he went sickly forth: and take good note
What Caesar doth, what Suitors press to him.
Hark Boy, what noise is that?
I hear none Madam.
Prithee listen well:
I heard a bustling Rumour like a Fray,
And the wind brings it from the Capitol.
Sooth Madam, I hear nothing.
Come hither Fellow, which way hast thou bin?
At mine own house, good Lady.
What is it a clock?
About the ninth hour Lady.
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
Madam not yet, I go to take my stand,
To see him pass on to the Capitol.
Thou hast some suite to Caesar, hast thou not?
That I have Lady, if it will please Caesar
To b• so good to Caesar, as to hear me:
I shall beseech him to befriend himself.
Why know thou any harme's intended to∣wards him?
None that I know will be,
Much that I fear may chance:
Good morrow to you, here the street is narrow:
The throng that follows Caesar at the heals,
Of Senators, of Praetors, common Suitors,
Will crowd a feeble man (almost) to death:
Isle get me to a place more void, and there
Speak to great Caesar as he comes along.
I must go in:
Aye me! How weak a thing
The heart of woman is? O Brutus,
The Heavens speed thee in thine enterprise.
Sure the Boy heard me▪ Brutus hath a suite
That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint:
Run Lucius, and commend me to my Lord,
Say I am merry; Come to me again,
And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
The Ides of March are come.
I Caesar, but not gone.
Hail Caesar: Read this Schedule.
Trebonius doth desire you to ore-read
(At your best leisure) this his humble suite.
O Caesar, read mine first: for mine's a suite
That touches Caesar nearer. Read it great Caesar.
What touches vs our self, shall be last served.
Delay not Caesar, read it instantly.
What, is the fellow mad?
Sir, give place.
What, urge you your Petitions in the street?
Come to the Capitol.
I wish your enterprise to day may thrive.
What enterprise Popillius?
Fare you well.
What said Popillius Lena?
He wished to day our enterprise might thrive:
I fear our purpose is discovered.
Look how he makes to Caesar: mark him.
Cask be sudden, for we fear prevention.
Brutus what shall be done? If this be known,
Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
For I will slay my self.
Cassius be constant:
Popillius Lena speaks not of our purposes,
For look he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
Trebonius knows his time: for look you Brutus
He draws Mark Antony out of the way.
Where is Metellus Cimber, let him go,
And presently prefer his suite to Caesar.
He is addressed: press near, and second him.
Cask, you are the first that reares your hand.
Are we all ready? What is now amiss,
That Caesar and his Senate must redress?
Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar
Metellus Cymber throws before thy Seat
An humble heart.
I must prevent thee Cymber:
These couchings, and these lowly courtesies
Might fire the blood of ordinary men,
And turn pre-Ordinance, and first Decree▪
Into the lane of Children. Be not fond.
To think that Caesar bears such Rebel blood
That will be thawed from the true quality
With that which melts Fools, I mean sweet words,
Low-crooked-curtsies, and base Spaniel fawning:
Thy Brother by decree is banished:
If thou doest bend, and pray, and fawn for him,
I spurn thee like a Cur out of my way.
Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
Will he be satisfied.
Is there no voice more worthy then my own,
To sound more sweetly in great Caesars ear,
For the repealing of my banished Brother?
I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery Caesar:
Desiring thee, that Publius Cymber may
Have an immediate freedom of repeal.
What Brutus?
Pardon Caesar: Caesar pardon:
As lowe as to thy foot doth Cassius fall,
To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cymber.
I could be well moved, if I were as you,
If I could pray to move, Prayers would move me:
But I am constant as the Northern Star,
Of whose true fixed, and resting quality,
There is no fellow in the Firmament.
The Skies are painted with vnnumbred sparks,
They are all Fire, and every one doth shine:
But, there's but one in all doth hold his place.
So, in the World; It is furnished well with Men,
And Men are Flesh and Blood, and apprehensive;
Yet in the number, I do know but One
That vnassayleable holds on his Rank,
Unshaked of Motion: and that I am he,
Let me a little show it, even in this:
That I was constant Cymber should be banished,
And constant do remain to keep him so.
O Caesar.
Hence: Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
Great Caesar.
Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?
Speak hands for me.
Et Tu Brutè?—Then fall Caesar.
Liberty, Freedom; Tyranny is dead,
Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the Streets.
Some to the common Pulpits, and cry out
Liberty, Freedom, and Enfranchisement.
People and Senators, be not affrighted:
Fly not, stand still: Ambitions debt is paid.
Go to the Pulpit Brutus.
And Cassius too.
Whore's Publius?
Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
Stand fast together, least some Friend of Caesars
Should chance —
Talk not of standing. Publius good cheer,
There is no harm intended to your person,
Nor to no Roman else: so tell them Publius.
And leave vs Publius, least that the people
Rushing on vs, should do your Age some mischief.
Do so, and let no man abide this deed,
But we the Doers.
Where is Antony?
Fled to his House amazed:
Men, Wives, and Children, stare, cry out, and run,
As it were Doomsday.
Fates, we will know your pleasures:
That we shall dye we know, it is but the time
And drawing days out, that men stand upon.
Why he that cuts off twenty years of life,
Cuts off so many years of fearing death.
Grant that, and then is Death a Benefit:
So are we Caesars Friends, that have abridged
His time of fearing death. Stoop Romans, stoop,
And let vs bathe our hands in Caesars blood
Up to the Elbows, and besmear our Swords:
Then walk we forth, even to the Market place,
And waving our red Weapons o'er our heads,
Let's all cry Peace, Freedom, and Liberty.
Stoop then, and wash. How many Ages hence
Shall this our lofty Scene be acted over,
In State unborn, and Accents yet unknown?
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
That now on Pompeyes Basis lye along,
No worthier then the dust?
So oft as that shall be,
So often shall the knot of vs be called,
The Men that gave their Country liberty.
What, shall we forth?
I, every man away.
Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heals
With the most boldest, and best hearts of Rome.
Soft, who comes here? A friend of Antonies.
Thus Brutus did my Master bid me kneel;
Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
And being prostrate, thus he bad me say:
Brutus is Noble, Wise, Valiant, and Honest;
Caesar was Mighty, Bold, Royal, and Loving:
Say, I love Brutus, and I honour him;
Say, I feared Caesar, honoured him, and loved him.
If Brutus will vouchsafe, that Antony
May safely come to him, and be resolved
How Caesar hath deserved to lye in death,
Mark Antony, shall not love Caesar dead
So well as Brutus living; but will follow
The Fortunes and Affairs of Noble Brutus,
Thorough the hazards of this vntrod State,
With all true Faith. So says my Master Antony.
Thy Master is a Wise and Valiant Roman,
I never thought him worse:
Tell him, so please him come unto this place
He shall be satisfied: and by my Honour
Depart untouched.
Isle fetch him presently.
I know that we shall have him well to Friend.
I wish we may: But yet have I a mind
That fears him much: and my misgiving still
Falls shrewdly to the purpose.
But here comes Antony:
Welcome Mark Antony.
O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lye so lowe?
Are all thy Conquests, Glories, Triumphs, Spoils,
Shrunk to this little Measure? Fare thee well.
I know not Gentlemen what you intend,
Who else must be let blood, who else is rank:
If I my self, there is no hour so fit
As Caesars deaths hour; nor no Instrument
Of half that worth, as those your Swords; made rich
With the most Noble blood of all this World.
I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
Now, whilst your purpled hands do reeke and smoke,
Fulfil your pleasure. Live a thousand years,
I shall not find my self so apt to dye.
No place will please me so, no mean of death,
As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
The Choice and Master Spirits of this Age.
O Antony! Beg not your death of vs:
Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
As by our hands, and this our present Act
You see we do: Yet see you but our hands,
And this, the bleeding business they have do•e:
Our hearts you see not, they are pitiful:
And pity to the general wrong of Rome,
As fire drives out fire, so pity; pity
Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
To you, our Swords have leaden points Mark Antony:
Our Arms in strength of malice, and our Hearts
Of Brothers temper, do receive you in,
With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
Your voice shall be as strong as any mans,
In the disposing of new Dignities.
Only be patient, till we have appeased
The Multitude, beside themselves with fear,
And then, we will deliver you the cause,
Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
Have thus proceeded.
I doubt not of your Wisdom:
Let each man render me his bloody hand.
F•rst Marcus Brutus will I shake with you;
Next Caius Cassius do I take your hand;
Now Decius Brutus yours; now yours Metellus;
Yours Cinna; and my valiant Cask, yours;
Though last, not least in love, yours good Trebonius
Gentlemen all: Alas, what shall I say,
My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
Either a Coward, or a Flatterer.
That I did love thee Caesar, O it is true:
If then thy Spirit look upon vs now,
Shall it not grieve thee dearer then thy death,
To see thy Antony making his peace,
Shaking the bloody fingers of thy Foes?
Most Noble, in the presence of thy Coarse,
Had I as many eyes, as thou hast wounds,
Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
It would become me better, then to close
In terms of Friendship with thine enemies.
Pardon me Iulius, here was it thou bay'd brave Hart,
Here did thou fall, and here thy Hunters stand
Signed in thy Spoil, and Crimsoned in thy Lethee.
O World! thou wast the Forest to this Hart,
And this indeed, O World, the Hart of thee.
How like a Dear, stricken by many Princes,
Dost thou here lye?
Mark Antony.
Pardon me Caius Cassius:
The Enemies of Caesar, shall say this:
Then, in a Friend, it is cold Modesty.
I blame you not for praising Caesar so,
But what compact mean you to have with vs?
Will you be pricked in number of our Friends,
Or shall we on, and not depend on you?
Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed
Swayed from the point, by looking down on Caesar.
Friends am I with you all, and love you all,
Upon this hope, that you shall give me Reasons,
Why, and wherein, Caesar was dangerous.
Or else were this a savage Spectacle:
Our Reasons are so full of good regard,
That were you Antony, the Son of Caesar,
You should be satisfied.
That's all I seek,
And am moreover suitor, that I may
Produce his body to the Market-place,
And in the Pulpit as becomes a Friend,
Speak in the Order of his Funeral.
You shall Mark Antony.
Brutus, a word with you:
You know not what you do; Do not consent
That Antony speak in his Funeral:
Know you how much the people may be moved
By that which he will utter.
By your pardon:
I will my self into the Pulpit first,
And show the reason of our Caesars death.
What Antony shall speak, I will protest
He speaks by leave, and by permission:
And that we are contented Caesar shall
Have all true Rites, and lawful Ceremonies,
It shall advantage more, then do vs wrong.
I know not what may fall, I like it not.
Mark Antony, here take you Caesars body:
You shall not in your Funeral speech blame vs,
But speak all good you can devise of Caesar,
And say you do it by our permission:
Else shall you not have any hand at all
About his Funeral. And you shall speak
In the same Pulpit whereto I am going,
After my speech is ended.
Be it so:
I do desire no more.
Prepare the body then, and follow vs.
O pardon me, thou bleeding piece of Earth:
That I am meek and gentle with these Butchers.
Thou art the Ruins of the Noblest man
That ever lived in the Tide of Times.
Woe to the hand that shed this costly Blood.
Over thy wounds, now do I Prophecy,
(Which like dumb mouths do op their Ruby lips,
To beg the voice and utterance of my Tongue)
A Curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
Domestic Fury, and fierce Civil strife,
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy:
Blood and destruction shall be so in use,
And dreadful Objects so familiar,
That Mothers shall but smile, when they behold
Their Infants quartered with the hands of War:
All pity choked with custom of fell deeds,
And Caesars Spirit ranging for Revenge,
With Ate by his side, come hot from Hell,
Shall in these Confines, with a Monarchs voice,
Cry havoc, and let slip the Dogs of War,
That this foul deed, shall smell aboue the earth
With Carrion men, groaning for Burial.
You serve Octauius Caesar, do you not?
I do Mark Antony.
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
He did receive his Letters, and is coming,
And bid me say to you by word of mouth—
O Caesar!
Thy heart is big: get thee apart and weep:
Passion I see is catching from mine eyes,
Seeing those Beads of sorrow stand in thine,
Began to water. Is thy Master coming?
He lies to night within seven Leagues of Rome.
Post back with speed,
And tell him what hath chanced:
Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
No Rome of safety for Octauius yet,
Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet stay awhile,
Thou shalt not back, till I have borne this course
Into the Market place: There shall I try
In my Oration, how the People take
The cruel issue of these bloody men,
According to the which, thou shalt discourse
To young Octauius, of the state of things.
Lend me your hand.
We will be satisfied: let vs be satisfied▪
Then follow me, and give me Audience friends.
Cassius go you into the other street,
And part the Numbers:
Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
Those that will follow Cassius, go with him,
And public Reasons shall be rendered
Of Caesars death.
I will hear Brutus speak.
I will hear Cassius, and compare their Reasons,
When severally we hear them rendered.
The Noble Brutus is ascended: Silence.
Be patient till the last. Romans, Countrymen, and Lovers, hear me for my cause, and be silent, that you may hear. Believe me for mine Honour, and have respect to mine Honour, that you may believe. Censure me in your Wisdom, and awake your Senses, that you may the better Judge. If there bee any in this Assembly, any dear Friend of Caesars, to him I say, that Brutus love to Caesar, was no less then his. If then, that Friend demand, why Brutus rose against Cae∣sar, this is my answer: Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more. Had you rather Caesar were li∣uing, and dye all Slaves; then that Caesar were dead, to live all Free-men? As Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was Fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was Valiant, I honour him: But, as he was Ambitious, I slew him. There is Tears, for his Love: Joy, for his Fortune: Honour, for his Valour: and Death, for his Ambition. Who is here so base, that would be a Bondsman? If any, speak, for him have I offended. Who is here so rude, that would not be a Roman? If any, speak, for him have I offended. Who is here so vile, that will not love his Country? If any, speak, for him have I offended. I pause for a Reply.
None Brutus, none.
Then none have I offended. I have done no more to Caesar, then you shall do to Brutus. The Quest∣on of his death, is enrolled in the Capitol: his Glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor his offences en∣forced, for which he suffered death.
Here comes his Body, mourned by Mark Antony, who though he had no hand in his death, shall receive the be∣nefit of his dying, a place in the Cōmonwealth, as which of you shall not. With this I depart, that as I slew my best Lover for the good of Rome, I have the same Dag∣ger for my self, when it shall please my Country to need my death.
Live Brutus, live, live.
Bring him with Triumph home unto his house.
Give him a Statue with his Ancestors.
Let him be Caesar.
Caesars better parts,
Shall be Crowned in Brutus.
We'll bring him to his House,
With Shouts and Clamours.
My Country-men.
Peace, silence, Brutus speaks.
Peace ho.
Good Countrymen, let me depart alone,
And (for my sake) stay here with Antony:
Do grace to Caesars Corpse, and grace his Speech
Tending to Caesars Glories, which Mark Antony
(By our permission) is allowed to make.
I do entreat you, not a man depart,
Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.
Stay ho, and let vs hear Mark Antony.
Let him go up into the public Chair,
We'll hear him: Noble Antony go up.
For Brutus sake, I am beholding to you.
What does he say of Brutus?
He says, for Brutus sake
He finds himself beholding to vs all.
It were best he speak no harm of Brutus here?
This Caesar was a Tyrant.
Nay that's certain:
We are blessed that Rome is rid of him.
Peace, let vs hear what Antony can say.
You gentle Romans.
Peace hoe, let vs hear him.
Friends, Romans, Countrymen, lend me your ears:
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him:
The evil that men do, lives after them,
The good is oft enterred with their bones,
So let it be with Caesar. The Noble Brutus,
Hath told you Caesar was Ambitious:
If it were so, it was a grievous Fault,
And grievously hath Caesar answered it.
Here, under leave of Brutus, and the rest
(For Brutus is an Honourable man,
So are they all; all Honourable m•n)
Come I to speak in Caesars Funeral.
He was my Friend, faithful, and just to me;
But Brutus says; he was Ambitious,
And Brutus is an Honourable man.
He hath brought many Captives home to Rome▪
Whose Ransoms, did the general Coffers fill:
Did this in Caesar seem Ambitious?
When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept:
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff,
Yet Brutus says, he was Ambitious:
And Brutus is an Honourable man.
You all did see, that on the Lupercall,
I thrice presented him a Kingly Crown,
Which he did thrice refuse. Was this Ambition?
Yet Brutus says, he was Ambitious:
And sure he is an Honourable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
But here I am, to speak what I do know;
You all did love him once, not without cause,
What cause with-holds you then, to morn for him?
O Judgment! thou are fled to brutish Beasts,
And Men have lost their Reason. Bear with me,
My heart is in the Coffin there with Caesar,
And I must pause, till it come back to me.
Me thinks there is much reason in his sayings.
If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar he's had great wrong.
He's hee Masters? I fear there will a worse come in his place.
Marked ye his words? he would not take ye Crown,
Therefore it is certain, he was not Ambitious.
If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
Poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
There's not a Nobler man in Rome then Antony.
Now mark him, he begins again to speak.
But yesterday, the word of Caesar might
Have stood against the World: Now lies he there,
And none so poor to do him reverence.
O Masters! If I were disposed to stir
Your hearts and minds to Mutiny and Rage,
I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong:
Who (you all know) are Honourable men.
I will not do them wrong: I rather choose
To wrong the dead, to wrong my self and you,
Then I will wrong such Honourable men,
But heere's a Parchment, with the Seal of Caesar,
I found it in his Closet, it is his Will:
Let but the Commons hear this Testament:
(Which pardon me) I do not mean to read,
And they would go and kiss dead Caesars wounds.
And dip their Napkins in his Sacred Blood;
Yea, beg a hair of him for Memory,
And dying, mention it within their Wills,
Bequeathing it as a rich Legacy
Unto their issue.
We'll hear the Will, read it Mark Antony.
The Will, the Will; we will hear Caesars Will.
Have patience gentle Friends, I must not read it.
It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you:
You are not Wood, you are not Stones▪ but men:
And being men, hearing the Will of Caesar,
It will inflame you, it will make you mad:
It is good you know not that you are his Heirs,
For if you should, O what would come of it?
Read the Will, we'll hear it Antony:
You shall read vs the Will, Caesars Will.
Will you be Patient? Will you stay awhile?
I have o're-shot my self to tell you of it,
I fear I wrong the Honourable men,
Whose Daggers have stabbed Caesar: I do fear it.
They were Traitors: Honourable men?
The Will, the Testament.
They were Villains, Murderers: the Will, read the Will.
You will compel me then to read the Will:
Then make a Ring about the Corpse of Caesar,
And let me show you him that made the Will:
Shall I descend? And will you give me leave?
Come down.
Descend.
You shall have leave.
A Ring, stand round.
Stand from the Hearse, stand from the Body.
Room for Antony, most Noble Antony.
Nay press not so upon me, stand far off.
Stand back: room, bear back.
If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this Mantle, I remember
The first time ever Caesar put it on,
It was on a Summers Evening in his Tent,
That day he overcame the Neruij.
Look, in this place ran Cassius Dagger through:
See what a rent the envious Cask made:
Through this, the well-beloved Brutus stabbed,
And as he plucked his cursed Steel away:
Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it,
As rushing out of doors, to be resolved
If Brutus so unkindly knocked, or no:
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesars Angel.
Judge, O you Gods, how dearly Caesar loved him:
This was the most unkindest cut of all.
For when the Noble Caesar saw him stab,
Ingratitude, more strong then Traitors arms,
Quite vanquished him: then burst his Mighty heart,
And in his Mantle, muffling up his face,
Even at the Base of Pompeyes Statue
(Which all the while ran blood) great Caesar fell.
O what a fall was there, my Countrymen?
Then I, and you, and all of vs fell down,
Whilst bloody Treason flourished over vs.
O now you weep, and I perceive you feel
The dint of pity: These are gracious drops.
Kind Souls, what weep you, when you but behold
Our Caesars Vesture wounded? Look you here,
Here is Himself, marred as you see with Traitors.
O piteous spectacle!
O Noble Caesar!
O woeful day!
O Traitors, Villains!
O most bloody sight!
We will be revenged: Revenge
About, seek, burn, fire, kill, slay,
Let not a Traitor live.
Stay Country-men.
Peace there, hear the Noble Antony.
We'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die with him.
Good Friends, sweet Friends, let me not stir you up
To such a sudden Flood of Mutiny:
They that have done this Deed, are honourable.
What private griefs they have, alas I know not,
That made them do it: They are Wise and Honourable,
And will no doubt with Reasons answer you.
I come not (Friends) to steal away your hearts,
I am no Orator, as Brutus is;
But (as you know me all) a plain blunt man
That love my Friend, and that they know full well,
That gave me public leave to speak of him:
For I have neither writ nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor Utterance, nor the power of Speech,
To stir men's Blood. I only speak right on:
I tell you that, which you your selves do know,
Show you sweet Caesars wounds, poor poor dum mouths
And bid them speak for me: But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle up your Spirits, and put a Tongue
In every Wound of Caesar, that should move
The stones of Rome, to rise and Mutiny.
We'll Mutiny.
We'll burn the house of Brutus.
Away then, come, seek the Conspirators.
Yet hear me Countrymen, yet hear me speak
Peace hoe, hear Antony, most Noble Antony.
Why Friends, you go to do you know not what:
Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
Alas you know not, I must tell you then:
You have forgot the Will I told you of.
Most true, the Will, let's stay and hear the Will.
Here is the Will, and under Caesars Seal:
To every Roman Citizen he gives,
To every several man, seventy five Drachmas.
Most Noble Caesar, we'll revenge his death.
O Royal Caesar.
Hear me with patience.
Peace hoe
Moreover, he hath left you all his Walks,
His private Arbors, and new-planted Orchards,
On this side Tyber, he hath left them you,
And to your heirs for ever: common pleasures
To walk abroad, and recreate your selves.
Here was a Caesar: when comes such another?
Never, never: come, away, away:
We'll burn his body in the holy place,
And with the Brands fire the Traitors houses.
Take up the body.
Go fetch fire.
Pluck down Benches.
Pluck down Forms, Windows, any thing.
Now let it work: Mischief thou art afoot,
Take thou what course thou wilt.
How now Fellow?
Sir, Octauius is already come to Rome.
Where is hee?
He and Lepidus are at Caesars house.
And thither will I straight, to visit him:
He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,
And in this mood will give vs any thing.
I heard him say, Brutus and Cassius
Are rid like Madmen through the Gates of Rome.
Belike they had some notice of the people
How I had moved them. Bring me to Octauius.
I dreamt to night, that I did feast with Caesar,
And things unluckily charge my Fantasy:
I have no will to wander forth of doors,
Yet something leads me forth.
What is your name?
Whether are you going?
Where do you dwell?
Are you a married man, or a Bachelor?
Answer every man directly.
I, and briefly.
I, and wisely.
I, and truly, you were best.
What is my name? Whether am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I a married man, or a Bachelor? Then to answer every man, directly and briefly, wisely and truly: wisely I say, I am a Bachelor.
That's as much as to say, they are fools that mar∣rye: you'll bear me a bang for that I fear: proceed di∣rectly.
Directly I am going to Caesars Funeral.
As a Friend, or an Enemy?
As a friend.
That matter is answered directly.
For your dwelling: briefly.
Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
Your name sir, truly.
Truly, my name is Cinna.
Tear him to pieces, hoe's a Conspirator.
I am Cinna the Poet I am Cinna the Poet.
Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad Verses.
I am not Cinna the Conspirator.
It is no matter, his name's Cinna, pluck but his name out of his heart, and turn him going.
Tear him, tear him; Come Brands hoe, Firebrands: to Brutus, to Cassius, burn all. Some to Decius House, and some to Caska's; some to Ligarius: Away, go.
These many then shall die, their names are pricked
Your Brother too must dye: consent you Lepidus?
I do consent.
Prick him down Antony.
Upon condition Publius shall not live,
Who is your Sisters son, Mark Antony.
He shall not live; look, with a spot I dam him.
But Lepidus, go you to Caesars house:
Fetch the Will hither, and we shall determine
How to cut off some charge in Legacies.
What? shall I find you here?
Or here, or at the Capitol.
This is a slight vnmeritable man,
Meet to be sent on Errands: is it fit
The three-fold World divided, he should stand
One of the three to share it?
So you thought him,
And took his voice who should be pricked to dye
In our black Sentence and Proscription.
Octauius, I have seen more days then you,
And though we lay these Honours on this man,
To ease our selves of divers slanderous loads,
He shall but bear them, as the Ass bears Gold,
To groan and sweat under the Business,
Either led or driven, as we point the way:
And having brought our Treasure, where we will,
Then take we down his Load, and turn him off
(Like to the empty Ass) to shake his ears,
And graze in Commons.
You may do your will:
But hoe's a tried, and valiant Soldier.
So is my Horse Octauius, and for that
I do appoint him store of Provender.
It is a Creature that I teach to fight,
To wind, to stop, to run directly on:
His corporal Motion, governed by my Spirit,
And in some taste, is Lepidus but so:
He must be taught, and trained, and bid go forth:
A barren spirited Fellow; one that feeds
On Objects, Arts, and Imitations.
Which out of use, and stal'de by other men
Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him,
But as a property: and now Octauius,
Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
Are levying Powers; We must straight make head:
Therefore let our Alliance be combined.
Our best Friends made, our means stretched,
And let vs presently go sit in Council,
How covert matters may be best disclosed,
And open Perils surest answered.
Let vs do so: for we are at the stake,
And bayed about with many Enemies,
And some that smile have in their hearts I fear
Millions of Mischiefs.
Stand ho.
Give the word ho, and Stand.
What now Lucillius, is Cassius near?
He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
To do you salutation from his Master.
He greets me well. Your Master Pindarus
In his own change, or by ill Officers,
Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
Things done, undone: But if he be at hand
I shall be satisfied.
I do not doubt
But that my Noble Master will appear
Such as he is, full of regard, and Honour.
He is not doubted. A word Lucillius
How he received you: let me be resolved.
With curtsy, and with respect enough,
But not with such familiar instances,
Nor with such free and friendly Conference
As he hath used of old.
Thou hast described
A hot Friend, cooling: Ever note Lucillius,
When Love begins to sicken and decay
It uses an enforced Ceremony.
There are no tricks, in plain and simple Faith:
But hollow men, like Horses hot at hand,
Make gallant show, and promise of their Mettle:
But when they should endure the bloody Spur,
They fall their Crests, and like deceitful Jade
Sink in the Trial. Comes his Army on?
They mean this night in Sardis to be quartered:
The greater part, the Horse in general
Are come with Cassius.
Hark, he is arrived:
March gently on to meet him.
Stand ho.
Stand ho, speak the word along.
Stand.
Stand.
Stand.
Most Noble Brother, you have done me wrong.
Judge me you Gods; wrong I mine Enemies?
And if not so, how should I wrong a Brother.
Brutus, this sober form of yours, hides wrongs,
And when you do them—
Cassius, be content,
Speak your griefs softly, I do know you well.
Before the eyes of both our Armies here
(Which should perceive nothing but Love from vs)
Let vs not wrangle. Bid them move away:
Then in my Tent Cassius enlarge your Griefs,
And I will give you Audience.
Pindarus,
Bid our Commanders lead their Charges off
A little from this ground.
Lucillius, do you the like, and let no man
Come to our Tent, till we have done our Conference.
Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door.
That you have wronged me, doth appear in this▪
You have condemned, and noted Lucius Pella
For taking Bribes here of the Sardians;
Wherein my Letters, praying on his side,
Because I knew the man was slighted off.
You wronged your self to write in such a case.
In such a time as this, it is not meet
That every nice offence should bear his Comment.
Let me tell you Cassius, you your self
Are much condemned to have an itching Palm,
To sell, and Mart your Offices for Gold
To Vndeseruers.
I, an itching Palm?
You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
Or by the Gods, this speech were else your last.
The name of Cassius Honours this corruption,
And Chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
Chastisement?
Remember March, the Ides of March remēber:
Did not great Iulius bleed for Justice sake?
What Villain touched his body, that did stab,
And not for Justice? What? Shall one of Vs,
That struck the Foremost man of all this World,
But for supporting Robbers: shall we now,
Contaminate our fingers, with base Bribes?
And sell the mighty space of our large Honours
For so much trash, as may be grasped thus?
I had rather be a Dog, and bay the Moon,
Then such a Roman.
Brutus, bait not me,
Isle not endure it: you forget your self
To hedge me in. I am a Soldier, I,
Older in practice, Abler then your self
To make Conditions.
Go too: you are not Cassius.
I am.
I say, you are not.
Urge me no more, I shall forget my self:
Have mind upon your health: Tempt me no farther.
Away slight man.
Is it possible?
Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way, and room to your rash Choler?
Shall I be frighted, when a Madman stares?
O ye Gods, ye Gods, Must I endure all this?
All this? I more: Fret till your proud hart break.
Go show your Slaves how Choleric you are,
And make your Bondsman tremble. Must I bouge?
Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
Under your Testy Humour? By the Gods,
You shall digest the Venom of your Spleen
Though it do Split you. For, from this day forth,
Isle use you for my Mirth, yea for my Laughter
When you are Waspish.
Is it come to this?
You say, you are a better Soldier:
Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
I shall be glad to learn of Noble men.
You wrong me every way:
You wrong me Brutus:
I said, an Elder Soldier, not a Better.
Did I say Better?
If you did, I care not.
When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
Peace, peace, you durst not so have tempted him.
I durst not.
No.
What? durst not tempt him?
For your life you durst not.
Do not presume too much upon my Love,
I may do that I shall be sorry for.
You have done that you should be sorry for.
There is no terror Cassius in your threats:
For I am Armed so strong in Honesty,
That they pass by me, as the idle wind,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certain sums of Gold, which you denied me,
For I can raise no money by vile means:
By Heaven, I had rather Coin my Heart,
And drop my blood for Drachmas, then to wring
From the hard hands of Peasants, their vile trash
By any indirection. I did send
To you for Gold to pay my Legions,
Which you denied me: was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answered Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows so Covetous,
To locke such Rascal Counters from his Friends,
Be ready Gods with all your Thunder-bolts,
Dash him to pieces.
I denied you not.
You did.
I did not. He was but a Fool
That brought my answer back. Brutus hath riu'd my hart:
A Friend should bear his Friends infirmities;
But Brutus makes mine greater then they are.
I do not, till you practice them on me.
You love me not.
I do not like your faults.
A friendly eye could never see such faults.
A Flatterers would not, though they do appear
As huge as high Olympus.
Come Antony, and young Octauius come,
Revenge your selves alone on Cassius,
For Cassius is weary of the World:
Hated by one he loves, braved by his Brother,
Checked like a bondsman, all his faults observed,
Set in a Note-booke, learned, and coned by rote
To cast into my Teeth. O I could weep
My Spirit from mine eyes. There is my Dagger,
And here my naked Breast: Within, a Heart
Dearer then Pluto's Mine, Richer then Gold:
If that thou be a Roman, take it forth.
I that denied thee Gold, will give my Heart:
Strike as thou did at Caesar: For I know,
When thou did hate him worst, you loued'st him better
Then ever thou loued'st Cassius.
Sheath your Dagger:
Be angry when you will, it shall have scope:
Do what you will, Dishonour, shall be Humour.
O Cassius, you are yoked with a Lamb
That carries Anger, as the Flint bears fire,
Who much enforced, shows a hasty Spark,
And strait is cold again.
Hath Cassius lived
To be but Mirth and Laughter to his Brutus.
When grief and blood ill tempered, vexes him?
When I spoke that, I was ill tempered too.
Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
And my heart too.
O Brutus!
What's the matter?
Have not you love enough to bear with me,
When that rash humour which my Mother gave me
Makes me forgetful.
Yes Cassius, and from henceforth
When you are ouer-earnest with your Brutus,
He will think your Mother chides, and leave you so.
Let me go in to see the Generals,
There is some grudge between 'em, it is not meet
They be alone.
You shall not come to them.
Nothing but death shall stay me.
How now? What's the matter?
For shame you Generals; what do you mean?
Love, and be Friends, as two such men should bee,
For I have seen more years I'm sure then ye.
Ha, ha, how vildely doth this Cynic rime?
Get you hence sir: Saucy Fellow, hence.
Bear with him Brutus, it is his fashion.
Isle know his humour, when he knows his time:
What should the Wars do with these legging Fools?
Companion, hence.
Away, away be gone.
Lucillius and Titinius bid the Commanders
Prepare to lodge their Companies to night.
And come your selves, &amp; bring Messala with you Immediately to vs.
Lucius, a bowl of Wine.
I did not think you could have bin so angry.
O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.
Of your Philosophy you make no use,
If you give place to accidental evils.
No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.
Ha? Portia?
She is dead.
How escaped I killing, when I croft you so?
O insupportable, and touching loss!
Upon what sickness?
Impatient of my absence▪
And grief, that young Octauius with Mark Antony
Have made themselves so strong: For with her death
That tidings came. With this she fell distract,
And (her Attendants absent) swallowed fire.
And died so?
Even so.
O ye immortal Gods!
Speak no more of her: Give me a bowl of wine,
In this I bury all unkindness Cassius.
My heart is thirsty for that Noble pledge.
Fill Lucius, till the Wine ore-swell the Cup:
I cannot drink too much of Brutus love.
Come in Titinius:
Welcome good Messala:
Now sit we close about this Taper here,
And call in question our necessities.
Portia, art thou gone?
No more I pray you
Messala, I have here received Letters,
That young Octauius, and Mark Antony
Come down upon vs with a mighty power,
Bending their Expedition toward Philippe.
My self have Letters of the selfsame Tenure.
With what Addition.
That by proscription, and bills of Outlarie,
Octauius, Antony, and Lepidus,
Have put to death, an hundred Senators.
Therein our Letters do not well agree:
Mine speak of seventy Senators, that dyed
By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
Cicero one?
Cicero is dead, and by that order of proscription
Had you your Letters from your wife, my Lord?
No Messala.
Nor nothing in your Letters writ of her?
Nothing Messala.
That me thinks is strange.
Why ask you?
Hear you ought of her, in yours?
No my Lord.
Now as you are a Roman tell me true.
Then like a Roman, bear the truth I tell,
For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
Why farewell Portia: We must die Messala:
With meditating that she must dye once,
I have the patience to endure it now.
Even so great men, great losses should endure.
I have as much of this in Art as you,
But yet my Nature could not bear it so.
Well, to our work alive. What do you think
Of marching to Philippe presently.
I do not think it good.
Your reason?
This it is:
It is better that the Enemy seek vs,
So shall he waste his means, weary his Soldiers,
Doing himself offence, whilst we lying still,
Are full of rest, defence, and nimbleness.
Good reasons must of force give place to better:
The people twixt Philippe, and this ground
Do stand but in a forced affection:
For they have grug'd vs Contribution.
The Enemy, marching along by them,
By them shall make a fuller number up,
Come on refreshed, new added, and encouraged:
From which advantage shall we cut him off.
If at Philippe we do face him there,
These people at our back.
Hear me good Brother.
Under your pardon. You must note beside,
That we have tried the utmost of our Friends:
O• Legions are brim full, our cause is ripe,
The Enemy increases every day,
We at the height, are ready to decline.
There is a Tide in the affairs of men,
Which taken at the Flood, leads on to Fortune:
Omitted, all the voyage of their life,
Is bound in Shallows, and in Miseries.
On such a full Sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or loose our Ventures.
Then with your will go on: we'll along
Our selves, and meet them at Philippe.
The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
And Nature must obey Necessity,
Which we will niggard with a little rest:
There is no more to say.
No more, good night,
Early to morrow will we rise, and hence.
Lucius my Gown: farewell good Messala,
Good night Titinius: Noble, Noble Cassius,
Good night, and good repose.
O my dear Brother:
This was an ill beginning of the night:
Never come such division 'tweene our souls:
Let it not Brutus.
Every thing is well.
Good night my Lord.
Good night good Brother.
Good night Lord Brutus.
Farewell every one.
Give me the Gown. Where is thy Instrument?
Here in the Tent.
What, thou speak drowsily?
Poor knave I blame thee not, thou art ore-watch'd.
Call Claudio, and some other of my men,
Isle have them sleep on Cushions in my Tent.
Virus, and Claudio.
Calls my Lord?
I pray you sirs, lye in my Tent and sleep,
It may be I shall raise you by and by
On business to my Brother Cassius.
So please you, we will stand,
And watch your pleasure.
I will it not have it so: Lye down good sirs,
It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
Look Lucius, heere's the book I sought for so:
I put it in the pocket of my Gown.
I was sure your Lordship did not give it me.
Bear with me good Boy, I am much forgetful.
Can thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,
And touch thy Instrument a strain or two.
I my Lord, an't please you.
It does my Boy:
I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
It is my duty Sir.
I should not urge thy duty past thy might,
I know young bloods look for a time of rest.
I have slept my Lord already.
It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again:
I will not hold thee long. If I do live,
I will be good to thee.
This is a sleepy Tune: O Murderous slumbler!
Lay thou thy Leaden Mace upon my Boy,
That plays thee Music? Gentle knave good night:
I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee:
If thou dost nod, thou break thy Instrument,
Isle take it from thee, and (good Boy) good night.
Let me see, let me see; is not the Leaf turned down
Where I left reading? Here it is I think.
How ill this Taper burns. Ha! Who comes here?
I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
That shapes this monstrous Apparition.
It comes upon me: Art thou any thing?
Art thou some God, some Angel, or some Devil,
That make my blood cold, and my hair to stare?
Speak to me, what thou art.
Thy evil Spirit Brutus?
Why come thou?
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippe.
Well: then I shall see thee again?
I, at Philippe.
Why I will see thee at Philippe then:
Now I have taken heart, thou vanish.
Ill Spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
Boy, Lucius, Virus, Claudio, Sirs: Awake:
Claudio.
The strings my Lord, are false.
He thinks he still is at his Instrument▪
Lucius, awake.
My Lord.
Did thou dream Lucus, that thou so cried out?
My Lord, I do not know that I did cry.
Yes that thou did: Did thou see any thing?
Nothing my Lord.
Sleep again Lucius: Sir Claudio, Fellow,
Thou: Awake.
My Lord.
My Lord.
Why did you so cry out sirs, in your sleep?
Did we my Lord?
I: saw you any thing?
No my Lord, I saw nothing.
Nor I my Lord.
Go, and commend me to my Brother Cassius:
Bid him set on his Powers betimes before,
And we will follow.
It shall be done my Lord.
Now Antony, our hopes are answered,
You said the Enemy would not come down,
But keep the Hills and upper Regions:
It proves not so: their battles are at hand,
They mean to warn vs at Philippe here:
Answering before we do demand of them.
Tut I am in their bosoms, and I know
Wherefore they do it: They could be content
To visit other places, and come down
With fearful bravery: thinking by this face
To fasten in our thoughts that they have Courage;
But it is not so.
Prepare you Generals,
The Enemy comes on in gallant show:
Their bloody sign of Battle is hung out,
And something to be done immediately.
Octauius, lead your Battle softly on
Upon the left hand of the even Field.
Upon the right hand I, keep thou the left.
Why do you cross me in this exigent.
I do not cross you: but I will do so.
They stand, and would have parley.
〈◊〉 fast Titinius, we must out and talk.
Mark Antony, shall we give sign of Battle?
No Caesar, we will answer on their Charge.
Make forth, the Generals would have some words.
Stir not until the Signal.
Words before blows: is it so Countrymen?
Not that we love words better, as you do.
Good words are better then bad strokes Octauius.
In your bad strokes Brutus, you give good words
Witness the hole you made in Caesars heart,
Crying long live, Hail Caesar.
Antony,
The posture of your blows are yet unknown;
But for your words, they rob the Hibla Bees,
And leave them Hony-lesse.
Not stinglesse too.
O yes, and soundless too:
For you have stolen their buzzing Antony,
And very wisely threat before you sting.
Villains: you did not so, when your vile daggers
Hacked one another in the sides of Caesar:
You showed your teethes like Apes,
And fawned like Hounds,
And bowed like Bondsman, kissing Caesars feet;
Whilst damned Cask, like a Cur, behind
Struck Caesar on the neck. O you Flatterers.
Flatterers? Now Brutus thank your self,
This tongue had not offended so to day,
If Cassius might have ruled.
Come, come, the cause. If arguing make vs sweat,
The proof of it will turn to redder drops:
Look, I draw a Sword against Conspirators,
When think you that the Sword goes up again?
Never till Caesars three and thirty wounds
Be well avenged; or till another Caesar
Have added slaughter to the Sword of Traitors.
Caesar, thou can not dye by Traitors hands,
Unless thou bring them with thee.
So I hope:
I was not borne to dye on Brutus Sword.
O if thou were it the Noblest of thy Strain,
Young man, thou coldest not dye more honourable.
A peevish School-boy, worthless of such Honour
Joined with a Mocker, and a Reveller.
Old Cassius still.
Come Antony: away:
Defiance Traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
If you dare fight to day, come to the Field;
If not, when you have stomachs.
Why now blow wind, swell Billow,
And swim Bark:
The Storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
Ho Lucillius, hark, a word with you.
My Lord.
Messala.
What says my General?
Messala, this is my Birth-day: as this very day
Was Cassius borne. Give me thy hand Messala:
Be thou my witness, that against my will
(As Pompey was) am I compelled to set
Upon one Battle all our Liberties.
You know, that I held Epicurus strong,
And his Opinion: Now I change my mind,
And partly credit things that do presage.
Coming from Sardis, on our former Ensign
Two mighty Eagles fell, and there they perched,
Gorging and feeding from our Soldiers hands,
Who to Philippe here consorted vs:
This Morning are they fled away, and gone,
And in their steeds, do Ravens, Crows, and Kites
Fly ore our heads, and downward look on vs
As we were sickly prey; their shadows seem
A Canopy most fatal, under which
Our Army lies, ready to give up the Ghost.
Believe not so.
I but believe it partly,
For I am fresh of spirit, and resolved
To meet all perils, very constantly.
Even so Lucillius.
Now most Noble Brutus,
The Gods to day stand friendly, that we may
Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age.
But since the affairs of men rests still uncertain,
Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
If we do lose this Battle, then is this
The very last time we shall speak together:
What are you then determined to do?
Even by the rule of that Philosophy,
By which I did blame Cato, for the death
Which he did give himself, I know not how:
But I do find it Cowardly, and vile,
For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
The time of life, arming my self with patience,
To stay the providence of some high Powers,
That govern vs below.
Then, if we loose this Battle,
You are contented to be led in Triumph
Thorough the streets of Rome.
No Cassius, no:
Think not thou Noble Roman,
That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome,
He bears too great a mind. But this same day
Must end that work, the Ides of March begun.
And whether we shall meet again, I know not:
Therefore our everlasting farewell take:
For ever, and for ever, farewell Cassius,
If we do meet again, why we shall smile;
If not, why then this parting was well made.
For ever, and for ever, farewell Brutus:
If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
If not, it is true, this parting was well made.
Why then lead on. O that a man might know
The end of this days business, ere it come:
But it suffices, that the day will end,
And then the end is known. Come ho, away.
Ride, ride Messala, ride and give these Bills
Unto the Legions, on the other side.
Let them set on at once: for I perceive
But cold demeanour in Octauio's wing:
And sudden push gives them the overthrow:
Ride, ride Messala, let them all come down.
O look Titinius, look, the Villains fly:
My self have to mine own turned Enemy:
This Ensign here of mine was turning back,
I slew the Coward, and did take it from him.
O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
Who having some advantage on Octauius,
Took it too eagerly: his Soldiers fell to spoil,
Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.
Fly further off my Lord: fly further off,
Mark Antony is in your Tents my Lord:
Fly therefore Noble Cassius, fly far off.
This Hill is far enough. Look, look Titinius
Are those my Tents where I perceive the fire?
They are, my Lord.
Titinius, if thou love me,
Mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurs in him,
Till he have brought thee up to yonder Troops
And here again, that I may rest assured
Whether yond Troops, are Friend or Enemy.
I will be here again, even with a thought.
Go Pindarus, get higher on that hill,
My sight was ever thick: regard Titinius,
And tell me what thou not'st about the Field.
This day I breathed first, Time is come round,
And where I did begin, there shall I end,
My life is run his compass. Sir, what news?
Aboue. O my Lord.
What news?
Titinius is enclosed round about
With Horsemen, that make to him on the Spur,
Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him:
Now Titinius. Now some light: O he lights too.
Hoe's tan.
And hark, they shout for joy.
Come down, behold no more:
O Coward that I am, to live so long,
To see my best Friend tan before my face.
Come hither sirrah: In Parthia did I take thee Prisoner,
And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
Thou should attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath,
Now be a Free-man, and with this good Sword
That ran through Caesars bowels, search this bosom.
Stand not to answer: Here, take thou the Hilts,
And when my face is covered, as it is now,
Guide thou the Sword — Caesar, thou art revenged,
Even with the Sword that killed thee.
So, I am free,
Yet would not so have been
Durst I have done my will. O Cassius,
Far from this Country Pindarus shall run,
Where never Roman shall take note of him.
It is but change, Titinius: for Octauius
Is overthrown by Noble Brutus power,
As Cassius Legions are by Antony.
These tidings will well comfort Cassius.
Where did you leave him.
All disconsolate,
With Pindarus his Bondsman, on this Hill.
Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
He lies not like the Living. O my heart!
Is not that hee?
No, this was he Messala,
But Cassius is no more. O setting Sun:
As in thy red Rays thou doest sink to night;
So in his red blood Cassius day is set.
The Sun of Rome is set. Our day is gone,
Clouds, Dews, and Dangers come; our deeds are done:
Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
O hateful Error, Melancholies Child:
Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men▪
The things that are not? O Error soon conceived,
Thou never come unto a happy birth,
But kil'st the Mother that engendered thee.
What Pindarus? Where art thou Pindarus?
Seek him Titinius, whilst I go to meet
The Noble Brutus, thrusting this report
Into his ears; I may say thrusting it:
For piercing Steel, and Darts inuenomed,
Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus,
As tidings of this sight.
Hye you Messala,
And I will seek for Pindarus the while:
Why did thou send me forth brave Cassius?
Did I not meet thy Friends, and did not they
Put on my Brows this wreath of Victory,
And bid me give it thee? Did thou not hear their shouts?
Alas, thou hast misconstrued every thing.
But hold thee, take this Garland on thy Brow,
Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
And see how I regarded Caius Cassius:
By your leave Gods: This is a Romans part,
Come Cassius Sword, and find Titinius hart.
Where, where Messala, doth his body lye?
Lo yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
Titinius face is upward.
He is slain.
O Iulius Caesar, thou art mighty yet,
Thy Spirit walks abroad, and turns our Swords
In our own proper Entrails.
Brave Titinius,
Look where he have not crowned dead Cassius.
Are yet two Romans living such as these?
The last of all the Romans, far thee well:
It is impossible, that ever Rome
Should breed thy fellow. Friends I owe mo tears
To this dead man, then you shall see me pay.
I shall find time, Cassius: I shall find time.
Come therefore, and to Tharsus send his body,
His Funerals shall not be in our Camp,
Least it discomfort vs. Lucillius come,
And come young Cato, let vs to the Field,
Labio and Flauio set our Battles on:
It is three a clock, and Romans yet ere night,
We shall try Fortune in a second fight.
Yet Country-men: O yet, hold up your heads.
What Bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
I will proclaim my name about the Field.
I am the Son of Marcus Cato, hoe.
A Foe to Tyrants, and my Countries Friend.
I am the Son of Marcus Cato, hoe.
And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I,
Brutus my Countries Friend: Know me for Brutus.
O young and Noble Cato, art thou down?
Why now thou die, as bravely as Titinius,
And may be honoured, being Cato's Son.
Yield, or thou die.
Only I yield to dye:
There is so much, that thou wilt kill me straight:
Kill Brutus, and be honoured in his death.
We must not: a Noble Prisoner.
Room hoe: tell Antony, Brutus is tan.
Isle tell thee news. Here comes the General,
Brutus is tan, Brutus is tan my Lord.
Where is hee?
Safe Antony, Brutus is safe enough:
I dare assure thee, that no Enemy
Shall ever take alive the Noble Brutus:
The Gods defend him from so great a shame,
When you do find him, or alive, or dead,
He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
This is not Brutus friend, but I assure you,
A prize no less in worth; keep this man safe,
Give him all kindness. I had rather have
Such men my Friends, then Enemies. Go on,
And see where Brutus be alive or dead,
And bring vs word, unto Octauius Tent:
How every thing is chanced.
Come poor remains of friends, rest on this Rock.
Statillius showed the Torch-light, but my Lord
He came not back: he is or tan, or slain.
Sit thee down, Clitus: slaying is the word,
It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.
What I, my Lord? No, not for all the World.
Peace then, no words.
Isle rather kill my self.
Hark thee, Dardanius.
Shall I doe such a deed?
O Dardanius.
O Clitus.
What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
To kill him, Clitus: look he meditates.
Now is that Noble Vessel full of grief,
That it runs over even at his eyes.
Come hither, good Ʋolumnius, list a word.
What says my Lord?
Why this, Volumnius:
The Ghost of Caesar hath appeared to me
Two several times by Night: at Sardis, once;
And this last Night, here in Philippe fields:
I know my hour is come.
Not so, my Lord.
Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius.
Thou see the World, Volumnius, how it goes,
Our Enemies have beat vs to the Pit:
It is more worthy, to leap in our selves,
Then tarry till they push vs. Good Volumnius,
Thou know, that we two went to School together:
Even for that our love of old, I prithee
Hold thou my Sword Hilts, whilst I run on it.
That's not an Office for a friend, my Lord.
Fly, fly my Lord, there is no tarrying here.
Farewell to you, and you, and you Volumnius.
Strato, thou hast bin all this while asleep:
Farewell to thee, to Strato, Countrymen:
My heart doth joy, that yet in all my life,
I found no man, but he was true to me.
I shall have glory by this loosing day
More then Octauius, and Mark Antony,
By this vile Conquest shall attain unto.
So fare you well at once, for Brutus tongue
Hath almost ended his lives History:
Night hangs upon mine eyes, my Bones would rest,
That have but laboured, to attain this hour.
Fly my Lord, fly.
Hence: I will follow:
I prithee Strato, stay thou by thy Lord,
Thou art a Fellow of a good respect:
Thy life hath had some smatch of Honour in it,
Hold then my Sword, and turn away thy face,
While I do run upon it. Wilt thou Strato?
Give me your hand first. Fare you well my Lord.
Farewell good Strato. —Caesar, now be still,
I killed not thee with half so good a will.
What man is that?
My Masters man. Strato, where is thy Master?
Free from the Bondage you are in Messala,
The Conquerors can but make a fire of him:
For Brutus only overcame himself,
And no man else hath Honour by his death.
So Brutus should be found. I thank thee Brutus
That thou hast proved Lucillius saying true,
All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.
Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
I, if Messala will prefer me to you.
Do so, good Messala.
How dyed my Master Strato?
I held the Sword, and he did run on it.
Octauius, then take him to follow thee,
That did the latest service to my Master.
This was the Noblest Roman of them all:
All the Conspirators save only hee,
Did that they did, in envy of great Caesar:
He, only in a general honest thought,
And common good to all, made one of them.
His life was gentle, and the Elements
So mixed in him, that Nature might stand up,
And say to all the world; This was a man.
According to his Virtue, let vs use him
Withal Respect, and Rites of Burial.
Within my Tent his bones to night shall lie▪
Most like a Soldier ordered Honourably:
So call the Field to rest, and let's away,
To part the glories of this happy day.

TO what will this declining Kingdom turn,
Swinging in every license, as in this
Stupid permission of brave D' Ambois Murder?
Murder made parallel with Law? Murder used
To serve the Kingdom, given by suit to men
For their advancement? suffered scarcrow-like
To fright adultery? what will policy
At length bring under his capacity?
All things: for as when the high births of Kings
Deliuerances, and Coronations,
We celebrate with all the Cities Bells
(Jangling together in untuned confusion:)
All ordered Clocks are tied up: so when Glory,
Flattery, and smooth applauses of things ill,
Uphold the•ordinate swindge of downright power,
Justice, and truth, that tell th• bounded use,
Virtuous, and well distinguished forms of Time,
Are gaged and tongue-tide, but wee have observed
Rule in more regular motion: things most lawful
Were once most royal, Kings sought common good
Men's manly liberties, though ne'er so mean,
And had their own swindge so▪ more free, and more,
But when pride entered them, and Rule by power,
All brows that smiled beneath them, frowned; hearts grieved,
By imitation; virtue quite was vanished,
And all men stud•'d selfe-loue, fraud, and vice,
Then no man could be good but he was punished:
Tyrants being still more fearful of the good
Then of the bad; their subjects virtues ever
Managed with curbs, and dangers, and esteemed
As shadows, and detractions to their own.
Now all is peace, no danger: now what follows?
Idleness rusts vs; since no virtuous labour
Ends oug•t rewarded: Ease, Security
Now all the Palm wears, wee made war before
So to prevent war, men with giving gifts
More then receiving, made our Country strong;
Our matchless race of Soldiers then would spend
In public wars, not private brawls, their spirits;
In daring Enemies, armed with meanest arms;
Not courting strumpets, and consuming birth-rights
In Apishnesse, and envy of attire.
No labour then was harsh, no way so deep,
No rock so steep, but if a Bird could scale it,
Up would our youth fly to. A Foe in arms
Stirred up a much more lust of his encounter,
Then of a Mistress never so be-painted:
Ambition then, was only scaling walls;
And ouer-topping turrets: Fame was wealth;
Best parts, best deeds, were best Nobility;
Honour with worth; and wealth well got or none.
Countries we won with as few men as Countries.
Virtue subdued all.
Just: and then our Nobles
Loved virtue so, they praised and used it to;
Had rather doe, then say; their own deeds hearing
By others glorified, then be so barren,
That their parts only stood in praising others.
Who could not doe, yet praised, and envied not;
Civil behaviour flourished; Bounty flowed,
Avarice to vpland Boors, slaves hang-men banished.
Tic now quite otherwise; but to note the cause
Of all these foul digressions, and revolts
From our first natures, this tic in a word:
Since good Arts fail, crafts and deceits are used:
Men ignorant are idle; idle men
Most practise what they most may doe with ease,
Fashion, and favour; all their studies aiming
At getting money, which no wise man ever
Fed his desires with.
Yet now none are wise
That think not heavens true foolish, weighed with that.
Well thou most worthy to be greatest Guise,
Make with thy greatness a new world arise.
Such d•pressed Nobles (followers of his)
As you, my self, my Lord will find a time
When to revenge your wrongs.
I make no doubt:
In mean time, I could wish, the wrong were righted
Of your slain Brother in law, brave Busy D' Ambois.
That one accident was made my charge.
My Brother Bussy's Sister (now my wife)
By no suite would consent to satisfy
My love of her, with marriage, till I •owed,
To use my utmost to revenge my Brother:
But Clermont D' Ambois (Bussy's second Brother)
Had (since) his apparition, and excitement,
To suffer none but his hand in his wreak,
Which hee hath vowed, and so will needs acquit
Me of my vow, made to my wife, his Sister,
And undertake himself Bussy's revenge;
Yet loathing any way to give it act,
But in the noblest and most manly course.
(If th'Earle dares take it) he resolves to send
A Challenge to him, and my self must bear i•,
To which delivery I can use no means;
He is so barricaded in his house,
And armed with guard still.
That means lay on me,
Which I can strangely make. My last lands sale,
By his great suite, stands now on price with him,
And hee (as you know) passing covetous,
(With that blind greediness that follows gain)
Will cast no danger, where her sweet feet tread.
Besides, you know, his Lady by his suite,
(Wooing as freshly, as when first love shot
His faultless arrows from her rosie eyes)
Now lives with him again, and she, I know,
Will join with all helps, in her friends revenge.
No doubt (my Lord) and therefore let me pray you
To use all speed; for so on needels points
My wives heart stands with haste of the revenge:
Being (as you know) full of her brothers fire,
That she imagines I neglect my vow;
Keeps off her kind embraces, and still asks;
When, when, will this revenge come? when performed
Will this dull vow be? And I vow to Heaven
So sternely, and so past her sex she urges
My vows performance; that I almost fear
To see her, when I have a while been absent,
Not showing her before I speak, the blood
S•e so much thirsts for, freckling hands and face,
Get you the Challenge writ, and look from me,
To hear your passage cleared no long time after.
All restitution to your worthiest Lordship,
Whose errand I must carry to the King,
As having sworn my service in the search
Of all such Malcontents, and their designs,
By seeming one affected with their faction,
And discontented humours against the state:
Nor doth my brother Clermont scope my counsel
Given to the King, about his Guisean greatness,
Which (as I spice it) hath possessed the King
(Knowing his daring spirit) of much danger:
Charged in it to his person: though my conscience
Dare swear him clear of any power to be
Infected with the least dishonesty:
Yet that sincerity, wee Politicians
Must say, grows out of envy, since it cannot
Aspire to policies greatness: and the more
We work on all respects of kind, and virtue,
The more our service to the King seems great,
In sparing no good that seems bad to him:
And the more bad, we make the most of good,
The more our policy searches; and our service
Is wondered at for wisdom and sincerenesse.
Tic easy to make good suspected still,
Where good, and God, are made but cloaks for ill.
See Monsieur taking now his leave for Brabant,
The Guise, &amp; his dear Minion, Clermont D'Ambois,
Whispering together, not of state affairs
I durst lay wagers, (though the Guise be now
In chief heate of his faction) but of some thing,
Savouring of that which all men else despise,
How to be truly noble, truly wise.
See how hee hangs upon the ear of Guise,
Like to his Jewel.
Hoe's now whispering in
Some doctrine of stability, and freedom,
Contempt of outward greatness, and the guises
That vulgar great ones make their pride and zeal,
Being only servile trains, and sumptuous houses,
High places, offices.
Contempt of these
Does he read to the Guise? Tic passing needful,
And hee, I think, makes show t'affect his doctrine.
Commends, admires it.
And pursues another,
Tic fine hypocrisy, and cheap, and vulgar,
Known for a covert practise, yet believed
(By those abused souls, that they teach and govern)
No more then Wives adulteries, by their Husbands,
They bearing it with so vnmou'd aspects,
Hot coming from it; as it were not all,
Or made by custom nothing. This same D'Ambois
Hath gotten such opinion of his virtues,
(Holding all learning but an Art to live well,)
And showing hee hath learned it, in his life,
Being thereby strong in his persuading others;
That this ambitious Guise, embracing him,
Is thought t'mbrace his virtues.
Yet in some
His virtues are held false for th'others vices:
For tic more cunning held, and much more common,
To suspect truth then falsehood: and of both,
Truth still fares worse; as hardly being believed,
As tic unusual, and rarely known.
Isle part engendering virtue. Men affirm
Though this same Clermont hath a D'Ambois spirit,
And breathes his brothers valour; yet his temper
Is so much past his, that you cannot move him:
Isle try that temper in him, Come, you two
Devour each other with your virtues zeal,
And leave for other friends, no fragment of ye:
I wonder Guise, you will thus ravish him
Out of my bosom, that first gave the life
His manhood breathes, spirit, and means and luster.
What doe men think of me, I pray thee Clermont?
Once give me leave (for trial of that love
That from thy brother Busy thou inherit'st)
T'vnclaspe thy bosom.
As how sir?
Be a true glass to me, in which I may
Behold what thoughts the many headed-beast,
And thou thy self breathes out concerning me,
My ends, and new vpstarted state in Brabant,
For which I now am bound, my higher aims,
Imagined here in France: speak man, and let
Thy words be borne as naked as thy thoughts:
O were brave Busy living!
Living my Lord?
Tic true, thou art his brother, but durst thou
Have braved the Guise: maugre his presence, courted
His wedded Lady; emptied even the dregs
Of his worst thoughts of me, even to my te•th;
Discerned not me his rising sovereign
From any common groom: but let me hear
My grossest faults, as grosse-full as they were.
Durst thou doe this?
I cannot tell: A man
Does never know the goodness of his stomach
Till hee sees meat before him. Were I dared,
Perhaps as he was, I durst doe like him.
Dare then to pour out here thy freest soul,
Of what I am.
Tic stale, he told you it.
He only jested, spake of spline and envy;
Thy soul more learned, is more ingenuous,
Searching, judicial; let me then from thee
Hear what I am.
What but the sole support,
And most expectant hope of all our France,
The toward victor of the whole low Countries?
Tush, thou wilt sing Encomions of my praise,
Is this like D'Ambois? I must vex the Guise,
Or never look to hear free truth; tell me,
For Busy lives not: hee durst anger me,
Yet for my love, would not have feared to anger
The King himself. Thou understand me, dost not?
I shall my Lord, with study.
Dost understand thy self? I pray thee tell me,
Dost never search thy thoughts, what my design
Might be to entertain thee and thy brother?
What turn I meant to serve with you?
Even what you please to think.
But what think thou?
Had I no end in it think?
I think you ha•
When I took in such two as you two were,
A ragged couple of deceit Commanders,
When a French-crowne would plentifully serve
To buy you both to any thing in the earth.
So it would you:
Nay bought you both out-right,
You and your Trunks: I fear me, I offend thee.
No not a jot.
The most renowned Soldier
Epaminondas (as good Authors say)
Had no more suites then backs, but you two shared
But one suite twixt you both, when both your studies
Were not what meat to dine with; if your Partridge,
Your S•ipe, your Wood-cocke, Lark, or your red Hearing,
But where to beg it, whether at my house,
Or at the Guises (for you know you were
Ambitious beggars,) or at some Cookes-shop,
To eternize the Cooks trust, and score it up.
Dost not offend thee?
No sir. Pray proceed.
As for thy Gentry, I dare boldly take
Thy honourable other: and yet some say
Thou and thy most renowned noble Brother,
Came to the Court first in a Keel of Sea-coale;
Dost not offend thee?
Never doubt it, sir.
Why doe I love thee then? why have I raked thee
Out of the dung-hill? cast my cast Ward-robe on thee?
Brought thee to Court to, as I did thy Brother?
Made ye my saucy bon companions?
Taught ye to call our greatest Noble men
By the corruption of their names; Jack, Tom?
Have I blown both for nothing to this bubble?
Though thou art learned; thast no enchanting wit▪
Or were thy wit good, am I therefore bound
To keep thee for my Table?
Well Sir, it were
A good Knights place. Many a proud dubbed Gallant
Seeks out a poor Knights living from such Emrods.
Or what use else should I design thee to?
Perhaps you'll answer me, to be my Pander.
Perhaps I shall.
Or did the s•ie Guise put thee
Into my bosom, t'vndermine my proiects?
I fear thee not; for though I be not sure
I have thy heart, I know thy braine-pan yet
To be as empty a dull piece of wainscot
As ever armed the scalp of any Courtier;
A fellow only that consists of sinews;
Mere Swisser, apt for any execution.
But killing of the King.
Right: now I see
Thou understand thy self.
I▪ and you better.
You are a Kings son borne.
Right.
And a Kings brother.
True.
And might not any fool have been so too,
As well as you?
A pox upon you.
You did no Princely deeds
Ere you're borne (I take it) to deserve it;
Nor did you any sinc• that I have heard;
Nor will doe ever any, as all think.
The Devil take him. Isle no more of him.
Nay: stay my Lord and hear him answer you.
No more I swear. Farewell.
No more: Ill f••tune.
I▪ would have given a million to have heard
His scoffs retorted: and the insolence
Of his high birth and greatness (which were never
Effects of his deserts, but of his fortune)
Made show to his dull eyes, beneath the worth
That men aspire to by their knowing virtues,
Without which Greatness is a shade, a bubble.
But what one great man dreams of that, but you?
All take their births and birth-rights left to them
(Acquired by others) for their own words purchase,
When many a fool in both, is great as they:
And who would think they could win with their words
Wealthy possessions, when won to their hands▪
They neither can judge justly of their value,
Nor know their use; and therefore they are puffed
With such proud tumours as this Monsieur is:
Enabled only by the goods they have,
To scorn all goodness: none great, fill their fortunes,
But as those men that make their houses greater,
Their households being less, so Fortune raises
Huge heaps of out-side in these mighty men,
And gives them nothing in them.
True as truth:
And therefore they had rather drown their substance
In superfluities of brickes and stones;
(Like Sysiphus, advancing of them ever,
And ever pulling down) then lay the cost
Of any sluttish corner, on a man,
Built with Gods finger, and instilled his Temple.
Tic nobly said, my Lord.
I would have these things
Brought upon Stages, to let mighty Misers
See all their grave and serious miseries, plaid,
As once they were in Athens, and old Rome.
Nay, we must now have nothing brought on Stages,
But puppetry, and pied ridiculous Antiques:
Men thither come, to laugh, and feed foole-fat,
Check at all goodness there, as •ing profaned:
When wheresoever goodness comes, she makes
The place still sacred; though with other feet
Never so much tic scandal'd, and polluted.
Let me learn any thing that fits a man,
In any Stables shown, as well as Stages.
Why? is not all the world esteemed a Stage?
Yes: and right worthily: and Stages too
Have a respect due to them: if but only,
For what the good Greek Moralists says of them;
Is a man proud of greatness, or of riches?
Give me an expert Actor; Isle show all,
That can within his greatest glory fall.
Is a man afraid with poverty and lowness?
Give me an Actor, Isle show every eye
What hee laments so, and so much doth fly,
The best and worst of both: if but for this then,
To make the proudest out-side that most swells,
With things without him, and aboue his worth,
See how small cause hee has to be so blown up;
And the most poor man, to be grieved with poorness,
Both being so easily borne by expert Actors.
The Stage and Actors are not so contemptfull,
As every innouating Puritan,
And ignorant sweater out of zealous envy,
Would have the world imagine. And besides,
That all things have been likened to the mirth,
Used upon Stages, and for Stages fitted.
The splenatiue Philosopher that ever
Laughed at them all, were worthy the enstaging:
All objects, were they ne'er so full of tears,
He so conceited, that he could distill thence
Matter that still fed his ridiculous humour.
Heard he a Lawyer, never so vehement pleading,
Hee stood and laughed. Heard hee a Trades-man swearing
Never so thriftily (selling of his wares;)
Hee stood and laughed. Heard hee an holy brother,
For hollow o•tentation at his prayers
Ne'er so impetuously; hee stood and laughed.
Saw hee a great man never so insulting,
Severely inflicting, gravely giving laws,
Not for their good, but his; hee stood and laughed.
Saw hee a youthful widow
Never so weeping, wringing of her hands,
For her lost Lord, still the Philosopher laughed:
Now whether hee supposed all these presentiments,
Were only mockeries, and wore false faces:
Or else were simply vain, I take no care,
But still hee laughed, how grave soar they were.
And might right well (my Clermont) and for this
Virtuous digression, wee will thank the scoffs
Of vicious Monsieur. But now for the maine point
Of your late resolution for revenge
Of your slain friend.
I have here my Challenge,
Which I will pray my Brother Baligny
To bear the murderous Earl.
I have prepared
Means for access to him, through all his Guard.
About it then, my worthy Baligny,
And bring vs the success.
I will my Lord.
Revenge, that ever red •itt'st in the eyes
Of injured Ladies, till we crown thy brows
With bloody Laurel; and receive from thee
Justice for all our humours injury,
Whose wings none fly, that Wrath or Tyranny
Have ruthless made, and bloody. Enter here,
Enter, O enter: and, though length of time
Never lets any scope thy constant justice,
Yet now prevent that length. Fly, fly, and here
Fix thy steel foot-steps: Here, O here, where still
Earth (moved with pity) yielded and embraced
My Loves fair figure, drawn in his dear blood,
And marked the place, to show thee where was done
The cruellest murder that ere fled the Sun.
O Earth! why keep thou not as well his spirit,
To give his form life? No, that was not earthly:
That (rarefying the thin and yielding ayre)
Flew sparkling up into the Sphere of fire,
Whence endless flames it sheds in my desire:
Here be my daily pallet, here all nights
That can be wrested from thy rivals arms;
(O my dear Busy) I will lye, and kiss
Spirit into thy blood, or breathe out mine
In sighs, and kisses, and sad tunes to thine.
Still on this hant? Still shall adulterous blood
Affect thy spirits? Think, for shame, but this,
This blood that Cockatrice-like thus thou brood'st
To dry is to breed any quench to thine.
And therefore now (if only for thy lust
A little covered with a veil of shame)
Look out for fresh life, rather then witch-like,
Learn to kiss horror, and with death engender.
Strange cross in nature, purest virgin shame
Lies in the blood, as lust lies; and together
Many times mix too: and in none more shameful
Then in the shamefaced. Who can then distinguish
Twixt their affections; or tell when hee meets
With one not common? Yet, as worthiest Poets
Shun common and plebeian forms of speech,
Every illiberal and affected phrase
To clothe their matter: and together tie
Matter and form, with Art and decency.
So worthiest women should shun vulgar guises,
And though they cannot but fly out for change,
Yet modesty, the matter of their lives,
Be it adulterate, should be painted true
With modest out-parts; what they should doe still
Graced with good show, though deeds be ne'er so ill.
That is so far from all ye seek of vs,
That (though your selves be common as the ayre)
We must not take the ayre, wee must not fit
Our actions to our own affectons:
But as Geometricians (you still say)
Teach that no lines, nor superficies,
Doe move themselves, but still accompany
The motions of their bodies; so poor wives
Must not pursue, nor have their own affections,
But to their husbands earnests, and their jests,
To their austerities of looks, and laughters,
(Though ne'er so foolish and injurious)
Like Parasites and slaves, fit their disposures.
I used thee as my soul, to move and rule me.
So said you, when you wooed. So Soldiers tortured
Withtedious sieges of some wel-wall'd Town,
Propound conditions of most large contents,
Freedom of Laws, all former government;
But having once set foot within the Walls,
And got the reins of power into their hands,
Then doe they tyrannise at their own rude swindges,
Seize all their goods, their liberties, and lives,
And make advantage, and their lusts, their laws.
But love me, and perform a Wives part yet,
(With all my love before) I swear forgiveness.
Forgiveness! that grace you should seek of me:
These tortured fingers, and these stab'd-through arms
Keep that law in their wounds yet, vnobseru'd,
And ever shall.
Remember their deserts.
Those with fair warnings might have been reformed,
Not these unmanly rages. You have heard
The fiction of the North wind and the Sun,
Both working on a Traveller, and contending
Which had most power to take his cloak from him:
Which when the Wind attempted, hee roared out
Outrageous blasts at him to force it off,
That wrapped it closer on. When the calm Sun
(The Wind once leaving) charged him with still beams,
Quiet, and fervent, and therein was constant,
Which made him cast off both his cloak and coat:
Like whom should men doe. If ye wish your Wives
Should leave disliked things, seek it not with rage;
For that enrages: what ye give, ye have:
But use calm warnings, and kind manly means,
And that in Wives most prostitute will win
Not only sure amends; but make vs Wives
Better then those that ne'er led faulty lives.
My Lord.
How now; would any speak with me?
I, Sir.
Perverse, and traitorous miscreant:
Where are your other fellows of my Guard?
Have I not told you, I will speak with none,
But Lord Renal?
And tic hee that stays you.
O, is it he? Tic well: attend him in.
I must be vigilant: the Furies haunt me.
Doe you hear dame?
Be true now, for your Ladies injured sake,
Whose bounty you have so much cause to honour:
For her respect is chief in this design,
And therefore serve it, call out of the way
All your confederate fellows of his Guard,
Till Monsieur Baligny be entered here.
Upon your honour, my Lord shall be free
From any hurt you say.
Free as my self. Watch then, and clear his entry.
I will not fail, my Lord.
God save your Lordship.
My noblest Lord Renal! past all men welcome.
Wife, welcome his Lordship.
I much joy in your return here.
You doe more then I.
Shoe's passionate still, to think we ever parted,
By my too sterne injurious Jealousy.
Tic well your Lordship will confess your error
In so good time yet.
Death! Who have wee here?
Ho! Guard! Villains!
Why exclaim you so.
Negligent Traitors! Murder, murder, murder.
Ye'are mad. Had mine intent been so, like yours,
It had been done ere this.
Sir, your intent,
And action too▪ was rude to enter thus.
You're a deceit Lord to tell me of rudeness,
As much deceit in manners as in means.
You talk of manners, that thus rudely thrust
Upon a man that's busy with his Wife.
And kept your Lordship then the door.
The door?
Sweet Lord forbear. Show, show your purpose sir.
To move such bold feet into others roofs.
This is my purpose sir, from Clermont D'Ambois
I bring this Challenge.
Challenge! Isle touch none.
Isle leave it here then.
Thou shalt leave thy life first.
Murder, murder!
Retire my Lord; get off.
Hold, or thy death shall hold thee. Hence my Lord.
There lye the Challenge.
Was not this well handled?
Nobly my Lord. All thanks.
Isle make him read it.
This was a slight well•maskt.
O what is man,
Unless he be a Politician!
COme Baligny, we now are private: Say,
What service bring thou? make it short; the Guise
(Whose friend thou seem) is now in Court, and near,
And may observe vs.
This sir, then in short.
The faction of the Guise (with which my policy,
For service to your Highness seems to •oyne)
Grows ripe, and must be gathered into hold;
Of which my Brother Clermont being a part
Exceeding capital, deserves to have
A capital eye on him. And (as you may
With best advantage, and your speediest charge,)
Command his apprehension: which (because
The Court, you know, is strong in his defence)
Wee must ask Country swindge and open fields.
And therefore I have wrought him to go down
To Cambray with me (of which Government
Your Highness bounty made me your Lieutenant)
Where when I have him, I will leave my house,
And fine some service out about the confines,
When in the mean time, if you please to give
Command to my Lieutenant, by your Letters,
To train him to some muster, where he may
(Much to his honour) see for him, your forces
Put into Battle; when hee comes, hee may
With some close stratagem be apprehended:
For otherwise your whole powers there will fail
To work his apprehension: and with that
My hand needs never be discerned therein.
Thanks honest Baligny.
Your Highness knows
I will be honest; and betray for you
Brother and Father: for, I know (my Lord)
Treachery for Kings is truest Loyalty;
Nor is to bear the name of Treachery,
But grave, deep Policy. All acts that seem
Ill in particular respects, are good
As they respect your universal Rule.
As in the maine sway of the vniuerse
The supreme Rectors general decrees,
To guard the mighty Globes of Earth and Heaven,
Since they make good that guard to preservation
Of both those in their order and first end,
No mans particular (as hee thinks) wrong
Must hold him wronged: no, not though all men's reasons,
All Law, all conscience, concludes it wrong.
Nor is comparison a flatterer
To liken you here to the King of kings;
Nor any mans particular offence
Against the worlds sway; to offence at yours
In any subject; who as little may
Grudge at their particular wrong; if so it seem
For th'vniuersall right of your estate.
As (being a Subject of the Worlds whole sway
As well as yours; and being a righteous man
To whom Heaven promises defence, and blessing,
Brought to decay, disgrace, and quite defenceless)
Hee may complain of Heaven for wrong to him.
Tic true: the Simile at all parts holds,
As all good Subjects hold, that love our favour.
Which is our Heaven here; and a misery
Incomparable, and most truly Hellish
To live deprived of our Kings grace and countenance,
Without which best conditions are most cursed:
Life of that nature, howsoever short,
Is a most lingering, and tedious life;
Or rather no life, but a languishing,
And an abuse of life.
Tic well conceited.
I thought it not amiss to yield your Highness
A reason of my speeches; lest perhaps
You might conceive I flattered: which (I know)
Of all else under heaven you most abhor.
Still thou art right, my virtuous Baligny,
For which I thank and love thee. Thy advise
Isle not forget: Haste to thy Government,
And carry D'Ambois with thee. So farewell.
Your Majesty fare ever like it self.
My sure Friend Baligny!
Noblest of Princes!
How stands the State of Cambray?
Strong, my Lord,
And fit for service: for whose readiness
Your creature Clermont D'Ambois, and my self
Ride shortly down.
That Clermont is my love;
France never bred a nobler Gentleman
For all parts: he exceeds his Brother Busy.
I, my Lord?
Far: because (besides his valour)
Hee hath the crown of man, and all his parts,
Which Learning is; and that so true and virtuous,
That it gives power to doe, as well as say
What ever fits a most accomplished man;
Which Busy, for his valours season, lacked;
And so was rapt with outrage oftentimes
Beyond Decorum; where this absolute Clermont,
Though (only for his natural zeal to right)
Hee will be fiery, when hee sees it crossed;
And in defence of it; yet when he lists
Hee can contain that fire, as hid in Embers.
No question, hoe's a true, learned, Gentleman.
He is as true as Tides, or any Star
Is in his motion: And for his rare learning,
Hee is not (as all else are that seek knowledge)
Of taste so much deprau'd, that they had rather
Delight, and satisfy themselves to drink
Of the stream troubled, wandering ne'er so far
From the clear fount, then of the fount it self.
In all; Romes Brutus is revived in him,
Whom hee of industry doth imitate.
Or rather, as great Troys Euphorbus was
After Pithagoras; so is Brutus, Clermont.
And (were not Brutus a Conspirator)
Conspirator, my Lord? Doth that impair him?
Caesar began to tyrannise; and when virtue,
Nor the religion of the Gods could serve
To curb the insolence of his proud Laws,
Brutus would be the Gods just instrument.
What said the Princess (sweet Antigone)
In the grave Greek Tragedian, when the question
Twixt her and Croon is, for laws of Kings?
Which when he urges, she replies on him;
Though his Laws were a Kings, they were not Gods;
Nor would she value Croons written Laws
With Gods vnwrit Edicts: since they last not
This day and the next, but every day and ever;
Where Kings Laws alter every day and hour,
And in that change imply a bounded power.
Well, let vs leave these vain disputings what
Is to be done, and fall to doing something.
When are you for your Government in Cambray?
When you command, my Lord.
Nay, that's not fit.
Continue your designments with the King,
With all your service; only if I send
Respect me as your friend, and love my Clermont.
Your Highness knows my vows.
I, tic enough.
Thus must wee play on both sides, and thus horton
In any ill those men whose good wee hate.
Kings may doe what they list: and for Kings, Subjects,
Either exempt from censure or exception:
For, as no mans worth can be justly judged
But when he shines in some authority;
So no authority should suffer censure
But by a man of more authority.
Great vessels into less are emptied never,
There's a redoundance past their continent ever.
These virtuosi are the poorest creatures;
For look how Spinners weave out of themselves
Webs, whose strange matter none before can see;
So these, out of an unseen good in virtue,
Make arguments of right, and comfort, in her,
That clothe them like the poor web of a Spinner.
Now, to my Challenge. What's the place, the weapon?
Soft sir: let first your Challenge be received.
Hee would not touch, nor see it.
Possible!
How did you then?
Left it, in his despite.
But when hee saw me enter so expectlesse,
To hear his base exclaims of murder, murder,
Made me think Nobles lost, in him quick buried.
They are the breathing Sepulchres of Nobles:
No trulier noble men, then Lions pictures
Hung up for signs, are Lions. Who knows not,
That Lyons the more soft kept, are more servile?
And look how Lyons close kept, fed by hand,
Lose quite th'innatiue fire of spirit and greatness
That Lyons free breathe, foraging for prey;
And grow so gross, that mastifes, curs, and mungrils
Have spirit to cow them: So our soft French Nobles
Chained up in ease and numbed security,
Their spirits shrunk up like their covetous fists,
And never opened but Domitian-like,
And all his base obsequious minions
When they were catching, though it were but flies.
Besotted with their pezzants love of gain,
Rusting at home, and on each other preying,
Are for their greatness but the greater slaves,
And none is noble but who scrapes and saves.
Tic base, tic base; and yet they think them high.
So Children mounted on their hobby-horse,
Think they are riding, when with wanton toil
They bear what should bear them. A man may well
Compare them to those foolish great-spleen'd Camels,
That to their high heads, begged of Jove horns higher;
Whose most uncomely, and ridiculous pride
When hee had satisfied, they could not use,
But where they went upright before, they stooped,
And bore their heads much lower for their horns.
As these high men doe▪ low in all true grace,
Their height being privilege to all things base.
And as the foolish Poet that still writ
All his most selfe-lou'd verse in paper royal,
Or Partchment ruled with Lead, smoothed with the Pum•ce;
Bound richly up, and strung with Crimson strings;
Never so blessed as when hee writ and read
The Ape-lou'd issue of his brain; and never
But joying in himself; admiring ever:
Yet in his works behold him, and hee showed
Like to a ditcher. So these painted men,
All set on out-side, look upon within,
And not a pezzants entrails you shall find
More foul and mezel'd, nor more starved of mind.
That makes their bodies fat. I fine would know
How many millions of our other Nobles
Would make one Guise. There is a true tenth Worthy▪
Who (did not one act only blemish him.)
One act? what one?
One, that (though years past done)
Sticks by him still, and will distain him ever.
Good Heaven! wherein? what one act can you name
Supposed his stain, that Isle not prove his luster?
To satisfy you, it was the Massacre.
The Massacre? I thought it was some such blemish.
O it was heinous.
To a brutish sense,
But not a manly reason. Wee so tender
The vile part in vs, that the part divine
We see in hell, and shrink not. Who was first
Head of that Massacre?
The Guise.
Tic nothing so.
Who was in fault for all the slaughters made
In Ilion, and about it? Were the Greeks?
Was it not Paris ravishing the Queen
Of Lacaedemon? Breach of shame and faith?
And all the laws of Hospitality?
This is the Beastly slaughter made of men,
When Truth is ouer-throwne, his Laws corrupted;
When souls are smothered in the flattered flesh,
Slain bodies are no more then Oxen slain.
Differ not men from Oxen?
Who says so?
But see wherein; In the understanding rules
Of their opinions, lives, and actions;
In their communities of faith and reason.
Was not the Wolf that nourished Romulus
More humane then the men that did expose him?
That makes against you.
Not sir, if you note
That by that deed, the actions difference make
Twixt men and beasts, and not their names nor forms.
Had faith, nor shame, all hospitable rights
Be•no broke by Troy, Greece had not made that slaughter.
Had that been saved (says a Philosopher)
The Iliads and Odysses had been lost,
Had Faith and true Religion been preferred,
Religious Guise had never massacerd,
Well sir, I cannot when I meet with you
But thus digress a little, for my learning,
From any other business I entend.
But now the voyage, we resolved for Cambray,
I told the Guise begins; and wee must haste.
And till the Lord Renal hath found some mean
(Conspiring with the Countess) to make sure
Your sworn wreak on her Husband (though this failed)
In my so brave Command, we'll spend the time,
Sometimes in training out in Skirmishes,
And Battles, all our Troops and Companies;
And sometimes breathe your brave Scotch running horse,
That great Guise gave you, that all th'horse in France
Far ouer-runnes at every race and hunting
Both of the Hare and Dear. You shall be honoured
Like the great Guise himself, aboue the King.
And (can you but appease your great-spleen'd Sister,
For our delayed wreak of your Brothers slaughter)
At all parts you'll be welcomed to your wonder.
Isle see my Lord the Guise again before
Wee take our journey.
O sir, by all means,
You cannot be too careful of his love,
That ever takes occasion to be raising
Your virtues, past the reaches of this age,
And ranks you with the best of th'ancient Romans.
That praise at no part moves me, but the worth
Of all hee can give others sphered in him.
Hee yet is thought to entertain strange aims.
He may be well; yet not as you think strange,
His strange Aims are to cross the common Custom
Of Servile Nobles; in which hoe's so ravished,
That quite the Earth he leaves, and up hee leaps,
On Atlas shoulders, and from thence looks down,
Viewing how far off other high ones creep:
Rich, poor of reason, wander; All pale looking,
And trembling but to think of their sure deaths,
Their lives so base are, and so rank their breaths.
Which I teach Guise to heighten, and make sweet
With lifes dear odors, a good mind and name;
For which, hee only loves me, and deserves
My love and life, which through all deaths I vow:
Resolving this, (what ever change can be)
Thou hast created, thou hast ruined me.
THese Troops and companies come in with wings:
So many men, so armed, so gallant Horse,
I think no other Government in France
So soon could bring together. With such men
Me thinks a man might pass th'insulting Pillars
Of Bacchus and Alcides.
I much wonder
Our Lord Lieutenant brought his brother down
To feast and honour him, and yet now leaves him
At such an instance.
It was the Kings Command:
For whom he must leave Brother, Wife, friend, all things.
The confines of his Government, whose view
Is the pretext of his Command, hath need
Of no such sudden expedition.
Wee must not argue that. The Kings Command
Is need and right enough: and that he serves,
(As all true Subjects should) without disputing.
But knows not hee of your Command to take
His Brother Clermont?
No: the Kings will is
Expressly to conceal his apprehension
From my Lord Governor. Observed ye not?
Again peruse the Letters. Both you are
Made my assistants, and have right and trust
In all the weighty secrets like my self.
Tic strange a man that had, through his life past,
So sure a foot in virtue and true knowledge,
As Clermont D'Ambois, should be now found tripping,
And taken up thus, so to make his fall
More steep and head-long.
It is Virtues fortune,
To keep her low, and in her proper place.
Height hath no room for her: But as a man
That hath a fruitful wife, and every year
A child by her, hath every year a month,
To breathe himself: where hee that gets no child
Hath not a nights rest (if he will doe well.)
So, let one marry this same barren Virtue,
She never lets him rest: where fruitful vice
Spares her rich drudge, gives him in labour breath;
Feeds him with bane, and makes him fat with death,
I see that good lives never can secure
Men from bad livers. Worst men will have best
As ill as they, or heaven to hell they'll wrest.
There was a merit for this, in the fault
That Busy made, for which he (doing penance)
Proves that these foul adulterous guilts will run
Through the whole blood, which not the clear can shun.
Isle therefore take heed of the bastarding
Whole innocent races; tic a fearful thing.
And as I am true Bachelor, I swear,
To touch no woman (to the coupling ends)
Unless it be mine own wife or my friends.
I may make bold with him.
Tic safe and common.
The more your friend dares trust, the more deceive him.
And as through dewy vapors the Suns form
Makes the gay Rainbow, girdle to a storm,
So in hearts hollow, Friendship (even the Sun
To all good growing in society)
Makes his so glorious and divine name hold
Colours for all the ill that can be told.
Hark, our last Troops are come.
Hark, our last foot.
Come, let vs put all quickly into battle,
And send for Clermont, in whose honour, all
This mart•all preparation wee pretend.
Wee must bethink vs ere wee apprehend him,
(Besides our maine strength) of some stratagem
To make good our severe Command on him;
As well to save blood, as to make him sure:
For if hee come on his Scotch horse, all France
Put at the heals of him, will fail to take him.
What think you if wee should disguise a brace
Of our best Soldiers in fair Lackeys coats,
And send them for him, running by his side,
Till they have brought him in some ambuscado
We close may lodge for him; and suddenly
Lay sure hand on him, plucking him from horse.
It must be sure and strong hand: for if once
H•e feels the touch of such a stratagem,
Tic not the choicest brace of all our Bands
Can ma•isle, or quench his •ery hands.
When they have seized him, the ambush shall make in.
Doe as you please; his blameless spirit deserves
(I dare engage my life) of all this, nothing.
Why should all this stir be then?
Who knows not
The bombast polity thrusts into his Giant,
To make his wisdom seem of size as huge,
And all for slight encounter of a shade,
So hee be touched, hee would have heinous made?
It may be once so; but so ever, never;
Ambition is abroad, on foot, on horse;
Faction chokes every corner, street, the Court,
Whose faction tic you know: and who is held
The fautors right hand: how high his aims reach,
Nought but a Crown can measure. This must fall
Past shadows weights; and is most capital.
No question; for since hee is come to Cambray
The malecontent, deceit Marquess Renal,
Is come, and new arrived; and made partaker
Of all the entertaining Shows and Feasts
That welcomed Clermont to the brave Virago
His manly Sister. Such wee are esteemed
As are our conforts. Marquess malecontent
Comes where hee knows his vain hath safest vent.
Let him come at his will, and go as free,
Let vs ply Clermont, our whole charge is hee.
This for your Lordships welcome into Cambray.
Noblest of Ladies, tic beyond all power
(Were my estate at first full) in my means
To quit or merit.
You come something latter
From Court my Lord then I: And since news there
Is every day increasing with th'affaires,
Must I not ask now, what the news is there?
Where the Court lies? what stir? change? what auise
From England, Italy.
You must doe so▪
If you'll be called a Gentleman well qualified,
And wear your time and wits in those discourses.
The Locrian Princes therefore were brave Rubers;
For whosoever there came new from Country,
And in the City asked, what news? was punished:
Since commonly such brains are most delighted
With innovations, Gossips tales, and mischiefs:
But as of Lyons it is said and Eagles,
That when they go, they draw their seeres and talons
Close up, to shun rebating of their sharpness:
So our wits sharpness, which wee should employ
In noblest knowledge, wee should never waste
In vile and vulgar admirations.
Tic right: but who, save only you, performs it,
And your great brother? Madame, where is he?
Gone a day since, into the Countries confines,
To see their strength, and readiness for service.
Tic well: his favour with the King hath made him
Most worthily great, and live right royally.
I: Would hee would not doe so. Honour never
Should be esteemed with wise men, as the price
And value of their virtuous Services,
But as their sign or Badge: for that betrays
More glory in the outward grace of goodness,
Then in the good it self; and then tic said:
Who more joy takes, that men his good advance,
Then in the good it self, does it by chance.
My brother speaks all principle; what man
Is moved with your soul? or hath such a thought
In any rate of goodness?
Tic their fault.
We have examples of it, clear and many.
Them•trius Phalerius, an Orator,
And (which not o•t meet) a Philosopher,
So great in Athens grew, that he er•cted
Three hundred Statues of him; of all which,
No rust▪ nor length of time corrupted one;
But in his life time, all were overthrown.
And Demotes (that past Demosthenes
For all extemporal Orations)
Erected many Statues, which (he living)
Were broke, and melted into Chamber-pots.
Many such ends have fallen on such proud honours,
No more because the men on whom they fell
Grew insolent, and left their virtues state;
Then for their hugeness, that procured their hate:
And therefore little pomp in men most great,
Makes mightily and strongly to the guard
Of what they win by chance, or just reward.
Great and immodest braueries again,
Like Statues, much too high made for their bases,
Are overturned as soon, as given their places.
Here is a Letter sir delivered me,
Now at the fore-gate by a Gentleman.
What Gentleman?
Hee would not tell his name;
Hee said, hee had not time enough to tell it,
And say the little rest hee had to say.
That was a merry saying; he took measure
Of his dear time like a most thri•tie husband.
What news?
Strange ones, and fit for a Nouation;
Weighty, unheard of, mischievous enough.
Heaven shield: what are they?
Read them, good my Lord.
You are betrayed into this Country. Monstrous!
How's that?
Read on.
Maillard▪ you brothers Lieutenant, that yesterday
inu•ted you to see his Musters; hath Letters and strict
Charge from the King to appr•hend you.
To apprehend him?
Your Brother absents himself of purpose.
That's a sound one.
That's a lye.
Get on your Scotch horse, and retire to your strength;
you know where it is, and there it expects you: Believe this
as your best friend had sworn it. Fare-well if you will. Ano∣nymos.
What's that?
Without a name.
And all his notice too, without all truth.
So I conceive it Sister: isle not wrong
My well known Brother for Anonymos,
Some fool hath put this trick on you, yet more
T'vncouer your defect of spirit and valour.
First shown in lingering my dear Brothers wreak.
See what it is to give the envious World
Advantage to diminish eminent virtue.
Send him a Challenge? Take a noble course
To wreak a murder, done so like a villain?
Shall we revenge a villainy with villainy?
Is it not equal?
Shall wee equal be
With villains?
Is that your reason?
Cowardice evermore
Flies to the shield of Reason.
Nought that is
Approved by Reason, can be Cowardice.
Dispute when you should fight. Wrong wreaklesse
Makes men dye honorlesse: One borne, another (sleeping,
Leaps on our shoulders.
Wee must wreak our wrongs
So, as wee take not more.
One wreaked in time
Prevents all other. Then shines virtue most
When time is found for facts; and found, not lost.
No time occurs to Kings, much less to Virtue;
Not can we call it Virtue that proceeds
From vicious Fury. I repent that ever
(By any instigation in th'appearance
My Brothers spirit made, as I imagined)
That ever I yielded to revenge his murder.
All worthy men should ever bring their blood
To bear all ill, not to be wreaked with good:
Doe ill for no ill: Never private cause
Should take on it the part of public Laws.
A D'Ambois bear in wrong so tame a spirit!
Madame, besure there will be time enough
For all the vengeance your great spirit can wish.
The course yet taken is allowed by all,
Which being noble, and refused by th'Earle,
Now makes him worthy of your worst advantage:
And I have cast a project with the Countess
To watch a time when all his wariest Guards
Shall not exempt him. Therefore give him breath;
Sure Death delayed is a redoubled Death.
Good Sister trouble not your self with this:
Take other Ladies care; practise your face.
There's the chaste Matron, Madame Perigot,
Dwells not far hence, Isle ride and send her to you,
She did live by retailing maiden•heads
In her minority: but now she deals
In whole-sale altogether for the Court.
I tell you, shoe's the only fashion-monger,
For your complexion, powdering of your hair,
Shadows, Rebatoes, Wires, Tyres, and such tricks,
That Cambray, or I think, the Court affords:
She shall attend you Sister, and with these
Womanly practises employ your spirit;
This other suites you not, nor fits the fashion.
Though she be dear, lay it on, spare for no cost,
Ladies in these have all their bounties lost.
Madame, you see, his spirit will not check
At any single danger; when it stands
Thus merrily firm against an host of men,
Threat•'d to be arms for his surprise.
That's a mere Bugge-beare, an impossible mock,
If hee, and him I bound by nuptial faith
Had not been dull and drossy in performing
Wreak of the dear blood of my matchless Brother,
What Prince? what King? which of the desperat'st Ruffings,
Outlaws in Acton, durst have tempted thus
One of our blood and name, be it true or false.
This is not cause by that: •twill be as sure
As yet it is not, though this should be true.
True? tic past thought false.
I suppose the worst,
Which far I am from thinking; and despise
The Army now in battle that should act it.
I would not let my blood up to that thought,
But it should cost the dearest blood in France.
Sweet Sister,  fa•re be both off as the fact
Of my feigned apprehension.
I would once
Strip off my shame with my attire, and try
If a poor woman, votist of revenge
Would not perform it, with a president
To all you bungling foggy-spirited men;
But for our birth-rights honour, doe not mention
One syllable of any word may go
To the begetting of an act so tender,
And full of sulphur as this Letters truth:
It comprehends so black a circumstance
Not to be named; that but to form one thought,
It is, or can be so; would make me mad:
Come my Lord, you and I will fight this dream
Out at the Chess.
Most gladly, worthiest Lady.
Sir, my Lord Governors Lieutenant prays
Access to you.
Himself alone?
Alone, sir.
Attend him in.  Now comes this plot to trial,
I shall discern (if it be true as rare)
Some sparks will fly from his dissembling eyes.
Isle sound his depth.
Honour, and all things noble.
As much to you good Captain. What's th'affaire.
Sir, the poor honour we can add to all
Your studied welcome to this martial place,
In presentation of what strength consists
My Lord your Brothers Government is ready.
I have made all his Troops and Companies
Advance, and put themselves randg'd in Battailia,
That you may see, both how well armed they are;
How strong is every Troop and Company;
How ready, and how well prepared for service,
And must they take me?
Take you, sir? O Heaven!
Believe it sir, his countenance changed in turning.
What doe you mean sir?
If you have charged them,
You being charged your self, to apprehend me,
Turn not your face: throw not your looks about so.
Pardon me sir. You amaze me to conceive
From whence our wills to honour you, should turn
To such dishonour of my Lord your Brother.
Dare I, without him, vendertake your taking?
Why not? by your direct charge from the King?
By my charge from the King? would he so much
Disgrace my Lord, his own Lieutenant here,
To give me his Command without his forfeit?
Acts that are done by Kings, are not asked why.
Isle not dispute the case, but I will search you.
Search me? for what?
For Letters.
I beseech you,
Doe not admit one thought of such a sham•
To a Commander.
Go to: I must do it.
Stand and be searched; you know me.
You forget
What tic to be a Captain, and your self.
Stand, or I vow to heaven, Isle make you lie
Never to rise more.
If a man be mad
Reason must bear him.
So coy to be searched?
Stead sir, use a Captain like a Carrier.
Come, be not furious; when I have done
You shall make such a Carrier of me
If it be your pleasure: you're my friend I know,
And so am bold with you.
You'll nothing find
Where nothing is.
Swear you have nothing.
Nothing you seek, I swear, I beseech you,
Know I desired this out of great affection,
To th'end my Lord may know out of your witness,
His Forces are not in so bad estate
As hee esteemed them lately in your hearing:
For which he would not trust me with the Confines;
But went himself to witness their estate.
I heard him make that reason, and am sorry
I had no thought of it before I made
Thus bold with you; since tic such Ruberb to you.
Isle therefore search no more. If you are charged
(By Letters from the King, or otherwise)
To apprehend me; never spice it more
With forced terms of your love, but say: I yield;
Hold; take my sword; here; I forgive thee freely;
Take; doe thine office.
Sfoote, you make m'a hang-man:
By all my faith to you, there's no such thing.
Your faith to me?
My faith to God: Ell's one,
Who hath no faith to men, to God hath none.
In that sense I accept your other, and thank you.
I gave my word to go, and I will go.
Isle watch you whither.
If hee goes, hee proves
How vain are men's fore knowledges of things,
When heaven strikes blind their powers of note and use;
And makes their way to ruin seem more right,
Then that which safety opens to their sight.
Cassandra's prophecy had no more profit
With Troys blind Citizens, when she fore-tolde
Troys ruin: which succeeding, made her use
This sacred Inclamation; God (said she)
Would have me utter things vncredited:
For which now they approve what I presaged;
They count me wise, that said before I raged.
Come Soldiers: you are downwards fit for lackeys;
Give me your Pieces, and take you these Coats,
To make you complete foot-men: in whose forms
You must be complete Soldiers: you two only
Stand for our Army.
That were much.
Tic true,
You two must doe, or enter, what our Army
Is now in field for.
I see then our guerdon
Must be the deed it self, twill be such honour:
What fight Soldiers most for?
Honour only.
Yet here are crowns beside.
We thank you Captain.
Now sir, how show wee?
As you should at all parts.
Go now to Clermont D'Ambois, and inform him,
Two Battles are set ready in his honour,
And stay his presence only for their signal,
When they shall join: and that t'attend him hither,
Like one wee so much honour, wee have sent him
Vs two in person.
Well sir, say it so.
And having brought him to the field, when I
Fall in with him, saluting, get you both
Of one side of his horse, and pluck him down,
And I with •h'ambush laid, will second you.
Nay, we shall lay on hands of too much strength
To need your secondings.
I hope, we shall.
Two are enough •o encounter Hercules.
Tic well said worthy Soldiers: hast, and hast him.
My Scotch horse to their Army.
Please you sir?
Sd•ath you're passing diligent.
Of my soul
Tic only in my love to honour you
With what would grace the King: but since I see
You still sustain a jealous eye on me,
Isle go before.
Tic well; Isle come; my hand.
Your hand sir? Come, your word, your choice be used.
I had an auersation to this voyage,
When first my Brother moved it; and have found
That native power in me was never vain;
Y•t now neglected it. I wonder much
At my inconstancy in these decrees,
I eu•rye hour set down to guide my life.
When Homer made Achilles passionate,
Wra•h•ull, revengeful▪ and insatiate
In his aff•ctions; what man will deny,
He did compose it all of industry,
To let men see▪ that men of most renown,
Strong'st, noblest, fairest, if they set not down
Decrees within them, for disposing these,
Of •udgement, Resolution, Uprightness,
And certain knowledge, of their use and ends
Mishap and misery no less extends
To their destruction; with all that they prised,
Then to the poorest, and the most despised.
Why▪ how now friend? retired? take heed you prove not
Dismayed with this strange fortune: all observe you.
Your gouernment's as much marked as the Kings.
What said a friend to Pompey?
What?
The people
Will never know, unless in death thou try,
That thou know how to bear adversity.
I shall approve how vile I value fear
Of death at all times: but to be too rash,
Without both will and care to shun the worst,
(It being in power to doe, well and with cheer)
Is stupid negligence, and worse then fear.
Suppose this true now.
No, I cannot do it.
My sister truly said; there hung a tail
Of circumstance so black on that supposure,
That to sustain it thus, abhorred our mettle.
And I can shun it too, in spite of all:
Not going to field: and there to, being so mounted
As I will, since I go.
You will then go?
I am engaged both in my word, and hand;
But this is it, that makes me thus retired,
To call my self t'account, how this affair
Is to be managed if the worst should chance:
With which I note, how dangerous it is,
For any man to press beyond the place,
To which his birth, or means, or knowledge ties him;
For my part, though of noble birth my birth-right
Had little left it, and I know tic better
To live with little; and to keep within
A mans own strength still, and in mans true end,
Then run a mixed course. Good and bad hold never
Any thing common: you can never find
Things outward care, but you neglect your mind.
God hath the whole world perfect made and free;
His parts to th'vse of th'all; men then that are
Parts of that all, must as the general sway
Of that imports, willingly obey
In every thing without their power to change.
Hee that vnpleas'd▪ to hold his place, will range,
Can in no other be contained that's fit,
And so re•isting th'All, is crushed with it.
But he that knowing how divine a Frame
The whole world is: and of it all, can name
(Without selfe-flatterie) no part so divine,
As hee himself; and therefore will confine
Freely, his whole powers, in his proper part,
Goes on most God-like. Hee that strives t'inuert
The Vniuersals course with his poor way,
Not only dust-like shivers with the sway,
But crossing God in his great work; all earth
Bears not so cursed, and so damned a birth.
Go, on; Isle take no care what comes of you;
Heaven will not see it ill, how ere it show:
But the pretext to see these Battles ranged
Is much your honour.
As the world esteems it.
But to decide that; you make me remember
An accident of high and noble note,
And fits the subject of my late discourse,
Of holding on our free and proper way.
I ouer-tooke, coming from Italy,
In Germanie, a great and famous Earl
Of England; the most goodly fashioned man
I ever •awe: from head to foot in form
Rare, and most absolute; hee had a face
Like one of the most ancient honoured Romans,
From whence his noblest Family was derived;
He was beside of spirit passing great,
Valiant, and learned, and liberal as the Sun,
Spoke and writ sweetly, or of learned subjects,
Or of the discipline of public weals;
And t'was the Earl of Oxford: and being offered
At that time, by Duke Cassimere, the view
Of his right royal Army then in field;
Refused it, and no foot was moved, to stir
Out of his own free fore-determin'd course:
I wondering at it, asked for it his reason,
It being an offer so much for his honour.
Hee, all acknowledging, said, t'was not fit
To take those honours that one cannot quit.
It was answered like the man you have described.
And yet he cast it only in the way,
To stay and serve the world. Nor did it fit
His own true estimate how much it weighed,
For hee despised it; and esteemed it freer
To keep his own way straight, and swore that hee
Had rather make away his whole estate
In things that crossed the vulgar, then he would
Be frozen up, stiff, like a sir Iohn Smith
(His Countrey-man) in common Nobles fashions;
Affecting, as the end of Nobles were
Those servile observations▪
It was strange.
O tic a vexing sight to see a man
Out of his way, stalk, proud as hee were in;
Out of his way to be officious,
Observant, wary, serious, and grave,
Fearful, and passionate, insulting, raging,
Labour with iron Flails, to thresh down feathers
Flitting in ayre.
What one considers this,
Of all that are thus out? or once endeavours,
Erring to enter, on mans Right-hand path?
These are too grave for brave wits: give them toys,
Labour bestowed on these is harsh and thriftless.
If you would Consul be (says one) of Rome,
You must be watching, starting out of sleeps;
Every way whisking; glorifying Plebeians,
K•ssing Patricians hands, Rot at their doors;
Speak and doe basely; eu••y day bestow
Gifts and observance upon one or other:
And what's the•uent of all? Twelve Rods before thee,
Three or f•ur times sit for the whole Tribunal.
Exhibit Circean Games; make public feasts,
And f•r these idle outward things (says he)
Would thou lay on such cost, toil, spend thy spirits.
And to be void of perturbation
For constancy: sleep when thou would have sleep,
Wake wh•n thou would wake, fear nought, vex for nought,
No pains wilt thou bestow? no cost? no thought?
What should I say? as good consort with you,
As with an Angel: I cou•d hear you ever.
W•ll; in, my Lord, and spend time with my Sister;
And keep her from the Field with all endeavour;
The Soldiers love her so; and she so madly
Would take my apprehension, if it chance,
That blood would flow in rivers.
Heaven forbid;
And all with honour your arrival speed.
Here are two Lackeys sir, have message to you.
What is your message? and from whom, my friends?
From the Lieutenant Colonel, and the Captains,
Who sent vs to inform you, that the Battles
Stand ready ranged, expecting but your presence,
To be their honoured signal when to join,
And we are charged to run by, and attend you.
I come. I pray you see my running horse
Brought to the backe-gate to me.
Instantly.
Chance what can chance me; well or ill is equal
In my acceptance, since I joy in neither;
B•t go with sway of all the world together.
In all successes, Fortune and the day
To me alike are; I am fixed, be she
Never so fickle; and will there repose,
Far past the reach of any Dye she throws.
Villains, not hold him when ye had him down.
Who can hold lightning? Stead a man as well
Might catch a Canon Bullet in his mouth,
And spit it in your hands, as take and hold him.
Pursue; enclose him; stand, or fall on him,
And ye may take him. Stead, they make him guards.
Stand Cowards, stand, strike, send your bullets at him▪
Wee came to entertain him sir, for honour.
Did ye not say so?
Slaves, hee is a traitor;
Command the horse troops to ouer-runne the traitor.
What spirit breathes thus, in this more then man,
Turns flesh to ayre possessed, and in a storm,
Tears men about the field like Autumn leaves?
He turned wilde lightning in the Lackeys hands,
Who, though their sudden violent twitch unhorsed him,
Yet when he bore himself, their saucy fingers
Flew as too hot off, as hee had been fire.
The ambush then made in, through all whose force,
Hee drove as if a fierce and fire• given Canon
Had spit his iron vomit out amongst them.
The Battles then, in two halfe-moones enclosed him,
In which he showed, as if he were the light,
And they but earth, who wondering what hee was;
Shruncke their steel horns, and gave him glorious pass,
And as a great shot from a town besieged,
At foes before it, flies forth black and roaring,
But they too far, and that with weight oppressed,
(As if disdaining earth) doth only grass,
Strike earth, and up again into the ayre;
Again sinks to it, and again doth rise,
And keeps such strength that when it softliest moves,
It piece-meale shivers any let it proves:
So flew brave Clermont forth, till breath forsook him,
Then fell to earth, and yet (sweet man) even then
His spirits conuulsions made him bound again,
Past all their reaches; till all motion spent,
His fixed eyes cast a blaze of such disdain,
All stood and stared, and untouched let him lie,
As something sacred fallen out of the sky.
O now some rude hand hath laid hold on him!
See, prisoner led, with his bands honoured more,
Then all the freedom he enjoyed before.
At length wee have you sir.
You have much joy too,
I made you sport yet, but I pray you tell me,
Are not you perjured?
No: I swore for the King.
Yet perjury I hope is perjury.
But thus forswearing is not perjury;
You are no Politician: not a fault,
How foul soever, done for private ends,
Is fault in vs sworn to the public good:
Wee never can be of the damned crew,
Wee may impolitique our selves (as it were)
Into the Kingdoms body politic,
Whereof indeed we'are members: you miss term▪
The things are yet the same.
Tic nothing so: the property is altered:
You're no Lawyer. Or say that other and other
Are still the same in number, yet their species
Differ extremely, as for flat example,
When politic widows try men for their turn,
Before they wed them, they are harlots then,
But when they wed them, they are honest women▪
So, private men, when they forswear, betray,
Are perjured treachers, but being public once,
That is, sworne-married to the public good.
Are married women public?
Public good,
For marriage makes them, being the public good,
And could not be without them. So I say
Men public, that is, being sworne-married
To the good public, being one body made
With the Realms body politic, are no more
Private, nor can be perjured, though forsworn,
More then a widow married, for the act
Of generation is for that an harlot,
Because for that she was so, being unmarried:
An argument a paribus.
Tic a shrow'd one.
Who hath no faith to men, to God hath none:
Retain you that Sir? who said so?
It was I.
Thy own tongue damn thy infidelity.
But Captains all you know me nobly borne,
Use ye t'assault such men as I with Lackeys.
They are no Lackeys sir, but Soldiers,
Disguised in Lackeys coats.
Sir, wee have seen the enemy.
Avaunt ye Rascols, hence.
Now leave your coats.
Let me not see them more.
I grieve that virtue lives so vndistinguisht
From vice in any ill, and though the crown
Of Sovereign Law; she should be yet her footstool,
Subject to censure, all the shame and pain
Of all her rigour.
Yet false policy
Would cover all, being like offenders hid,
That (after notice taken where they hide)
The more they crouch and stir, the more are spied.
I wonder how this chanced you.
Some informer,
Blood hound to mischief, usher to the Hangman,
Thy•sty of honour for some huge state act▪
Perceiving me great with the worthy Guise:
And he (I know not why) held dangerous,
Made me the desperate organ of his danger,
Only with that poor colour: tic the common
And more then vvhore-like trick of treachery,
And vermin bred to rapine, and to ruin:
For which this▪ fault is still to be accused,
Since good acts fail, crafts and deceits are used.
If it be other never pity me.
Sir, we are glad, believe it, and have hope
The King will so conceit it.
At his pleasure.
In mean time, vvhat's your will Lord Lieutenant?
To leave your own horse, and to mount the trumpets.
It shall be done: this heavily prevents
My purposed recreation in these parts;
Which now I think on: let me beg you sir,
To lend me some one Captain of your Troops,
To bear the message of my haplesse service,
And mis•rye, to my most noble mistress,
Countess of Cambray: to whose house this night
I promised my repair, and know most truly,
With all the ceremonies of her favour,
She sure expects me.
Think you now on that?
On that, sir? I, and that so worthily,
That if the King▪ in spite of your great service,
Would send me instant promise of enlargement,
Condition I would set this message by,
I would not take it, but had rather die.
Your message shall be done sir: I my self
Will be for you a messenger of ill.
I thank you sir, and doubt not yet to live
To quite your kindness.
Mean space use your spirit
And knowledge for the cheerful patience
Of this so strange and sudden consequence.
Good sir, believe that no particular torture
Can force me from my glad obedience
To any thing the high and general cause,
To match with his whole Fabric, hath ordained,
And know ye all (though far from all your aims,
Yet worth them all, and all men's endless studies)
That in this one thing, all the discipline
Of manners, and of manhood is contained;
A man to join himself with th'Vniuerse,
In his maine sway, and make (in all things fit)
One with that all, and go on, round as it;
Not plucking from the whole his wretched part,
And into stray•es, or into nought revert,
Wishing the complete Vniuerse might be
Subject to such a rag of it as hee:
But to consider great necessity
All things as well refract, as voluntary
Reduces to the prime celestial cause,
Which he that yields to with a mans applause,
And cheek, by cheek, goes; crossing it, no breath,
But like Gods Image, follows to the death,
That man is truly wise, and every thing,
(Each cause, and every part distinguishing)
In Nature, with enough Art understands,
And that full glory merits at all hands,
That doth the whole world at all parts adorn,
And appe•taines to one celestial borne.
So foul a scandal never man sustained,
Which cause by the King, is rude and tyrannous:
Give• me a place, and my Lieutenant make
The filler of it.
I should never look
For better of him; never trust a man,
For any Justice, that is rapt with pleasure:
To order arms well, that makes smocks his ensigns,
And his whole Governments sails: you heard of late,
Hee had the four and twenty ways of Venery
Done all before him.
It was abhorred and beastly.
Tic more then natures mighty hand can do•
To make one humane and a Lecher too.
Look how a Wolf doth like a Dog appear,
So, like a friend is an Adulterer,
Voluptuaries, and these belly-gods;
No more true men are, then so many Toads.
A good man happy, is a common good;
Vile men advanced live of the common blood.
Give and then take like children.
Bounties are
As soon repented as they happen rare.
What should Kings doe, and men of eminent places;
But as they gather, sow gifts to the graces,
And where they have given, rather give again,
(Being given for virtue) then like Babes and fools,
Take and repent Gifts; why are wealth and power?
Power and wealth move to tyranny, not bounty;
The Merchant for his wealth is swollen in mind,
When yet the chief Lord of it is the Wind.
That may so chance to our State-Merchants too:
Something performed, that hath not far to go.
That's the maine point, my Lord; insist on that.
But doth this fire rage further? hath it taken
The tender tynder of my wives sere blood?
Is she so passionate?
So wilde, so mad,
She cannot live, and this vnwreakt sustain.
The woes are bloody that in women reign.
The Sicile gulf keeps fear in less degree;
There is no Tiger, not more tame then she.
There is no looking home then?
Home? Medea
With all her herbs, charms, thunders, lightning,
Made not her presence, and black hints more dreadful.
Come, to the King▪ if he reform not all,
Mark the event, none stand where that must fall.
Madame, a Captain come from Clermont D'Ambois
Desires access to you.
And not himself?
No, Madame.
That's not well. Attend him in.
The last hour of his promise now run out
And hee break, some brack in the frame of nature
That forces his breach.
Save your Ladyship.
All welcome. Come you from my worthy servant?
I, Madame, and confer such news from him.
Such news? what news?
News that I wish some other had had the charge of.
O what charge? what news?
Your Ladyship must use some patience
Or else I cannot doe him that desire,
He urged with such affection to your Graces.
Doe it; for heavens love doe it, if you serve
His kind desires, I will have patience.
Is hee in health?
He is.
Why, that's the ground
Of all the good estate wee hold in earth;
All our ill built upon that, is no more
Then wee may bear, and should express it all.
Madame, tic only this; his liberty.
His liberty• Without that health is nothing.
Why live I, but to ask in doubt of that,
Is that bear•t him?
You'll again prevent me.
No more, I swear, I must hear, and together
Come all my misery. Isle hold though I burst.
Then madame, thus it fares; he was invited
By way of honour to him, to take view
Of all the Powers his brother Baligny
Hath in his you•rnment; which ranged in battles,
Mail•art, Lieutenant to the Governor,
Having re••iu'd strict Letters from the King,
To tree•in him to the musters, and betray him,
To their surprise, which, with Chalon in chief,
And other Captains (all the field put hard
By his incredible valour for his s••pe)
They haplesly and guiltlesly performed,
And to Bastile hoe's now led prisoner.
What change is here? how are my hopes prevented?
O my most faithful servant; thou betrayed?
Will Kings make treason lawful? Is Society
(To keep which only Kings were first ordained)
Less broke in breaking faith twixt friend and friend,
Then twixt the King and Subject? let them fear,
Kings Presidents in licence lack no danger.
Kings are compared to Gods, and should be like them,
F•ll in all right, in nought superfluous;
Nor nothing straining past right, for their right:
Reign justly, and reign safely. Policy
Is but a Guard corrupted, and a way
Ventured in Deserts, without guide or path.
Kings punish Subjects errors with their own.
Kings are like Archers, and their Subjects, shafts:
For as when Archers let their arrows fly,
They call to them, and bid them fly or fall,
As if it were in the free power of the shaft
To fly or fall, when only tic the strength,
Straight shooting, compass given it by the Archer,
That makes it hit or miss; and doing either,
Hee•s to be praised or blamed, and not the shaft:
So Kings to Subjects crying, doe, doe not this;
Must to them by their own examples strength,
The straightness of their acts, and equal compass,
Give Subjects power to obey them in the like;
Not shoot them forth with faulty aim and strength,
And lay the fault in them for flying amiss,
But for your servant, I dare swear him guiltless.
Hee would not for his Kingdom traitor be;
His Laws are not so true to him, as he.
O knew I how to free him, by way forced
Through all their army, I would fly, and doe it:
And had I, of my courage and resolve,
But ten such more, they should not all retain him;
But I will never die, before I give
Maillard an hundred slashes with a sword,
Chalon an hundred breaches with a Pistol.
They could not all have taken Clermont D'Ambois,
Without their treachery; he had bought his bands out
With their slave bloods: but he was credulous;
Hee would believe, since he would be believed;
Your noblest natures are most credulous.
Who gives no trust, all trust is apt to break;
Hate like hell mouth, who think not what they speak.
Well, Madame, I must tender my attendance
On him again. Will it please you to return
No service to him by me?
Fetch me straight
My little Cabinet.  Tic little tell him,
And much too little for his matchless love:
But as in him the words of many men
Are close contracted;  so in this are Jewels
Worth many Cabinets. Here, with this (good sir)
Commend my kindest service to my servant,
Thank him, with all my comforts; and, in them
With all my life for them: all sent from him
•n his remembrance of me, and true love:
And look you tell him, tell him how I lye
Prostrate at feet of his accursed misfortune,
Pouring my tears out, which shall ever fall,
Till I have poured for him out eyes and all.
O Madame, this will kill him: comfort you
With full assurance of his quick acquittal;
Be not so passionate: rise▪ cease your tears.
Then must my life cease. Tears are all the vent
My life hath to scope death: Tears please me better,
Then all lifes comforts, being the natural seed
Of hearty sorrow. As a tree fruit bears,
So doth an vndissembled sorrow, tears.
This might have been before, and saved much charge.
Now sir, I hope you're much abused Eyes see
In my word for my Clermont, what a villain
Hee was that whispered in your jealous ear
His own black treason in suggesting Clermonts:
Coloured with nothing but being great with me,
Sign then this writ for his delivery,
Your hand was never urged with worthier boldness:
Come, pray sir, sign it: why should Kings be pried
To acts of Justice? tic a reverence
Makes them despised, and shows they stick and tyre
In what their free powers should be hot as fire.
Well, take your will sir, Isle have mine ere long.
But wherein is this Clermont such a rare one?
In his most gentle, and vnwearied mind,
Rightly to virtue framed; in very nature;
In his most firm inexorable spirit,
To be removed from any thing hee chooses
For worthiness; or bear the lest persuasion
To what is base, or fitteth not his object;
In his contempt of riches and of greatness;
In •stimation of th'Idolatrous vulgar;
His scorn of all things servile and ignoble,
Though they could gain him never such advancement;
His liberal kind of speaking what is truth,
In spite of temporising; the great rising,
and learning of his soul, so much the more
Against ill fortune, as she set her self
Sharpe against him, or would present most hard,
To shun the malice of her deadliest charge;
His detestation of his special friends,
When he perceived their tyrannous will to doe,
Or their objection basely to sustain
Any injustice that they could revenge;
The flexibility of his most anger,
Even in the maine career and fury of it,
When any object of desertfull pity
Offers it self to him; his sweet disposure
As much abhorring to behold, as doe
Any unnatural and bloody action;
His just •ontempt of •esters, Parasites,
Servile observers, and polluted tongues:
In shoe••, this Cynical man is found in him,
Hee may with heavens immortal powers compare,
〈…〉 the day and fortune equal are,
Come fair or foul, what ever chance can fall,
Fix• 〈◊〉 himself, hee still is one to all.
Shows he to others thus?
To all that know him.
And apprehend I this man for a traitor?
These are your Macheuilian Villains,
Your bastard Teucers, that their mischiefs done,
Run to your shield for shelter: Caucuses,
That cut their too large murderous theueries,
To their dens length still: woe be to that state
Where treachery guards, and ruin makes men gre•.
Go, take my Letters for him, and release him.
Thanks to your Highness, ever live your Highness.
Better a man were buried quick, then live
A property for state, and spoil, to thrive.
Wee joy you take a chance so ill, so well.
Who ever saw me differ in acceptance
Of either fortune?
What, love bad, like good?
How should one learn that?
To love nothing outward,
Or not within our own powers to command;
And so being sure of every thing we love,
Who cares to lose the rest: if any man
Would neither live nor dye in his free choice,
But as hee sees necessity will have it,
(Which if hee would resist, hee strives in vain)
What can come near him, that hee doth not well,
And if in worst events, his will be done;
How can the best be better? all is one.
Me thinks tic pretty.
Put no difference
If you have this, or not this; but as children
Playing at co•tes, ever regard their game,
And care not for their coites; so let a man
The things themselves that touch him not esteem,
But his free power in well disposing them.
Pretty from toys.
Me thinks this double distich
Seems prettily too, to stay superfluous longings:
Not to have want, what riches doth exceed?
Not to be subject, what superior thing?
He that to nought aspires, doth nothing need;
Who breaks no Law is subject to no King.
This goes to mine ear well I promise you.
O, but tic passing hard to stay one thus.
Tic so; rank custom raps men so beyond it,
And as tic hard, so well men's doors to bar
To keep the cat out, and th'adulterer;
So tic as hard to curb affections so,
Wee let in nought to make them ouer-flow.
And as of Homers verses, many Critickes
On those stand, of which times old moth hath eaten,
The first or last feet, and the perfect parts,
of his unmatched Poem sink beneath,
With upright gasping, and sloth dull as death:
So the unprofitable things of life,
And those we cannot compass, we affect;
All that doth profit, and wee have, neglect,
Like covetous, and basely getting men,
That gathering much, use never what they keep;
But for the least they loose, extremely weep,
This pretty talking and our horses walking
Down this steep hill, spends time with equal profit.
Tic well bestowed on ye, meat and men sick
Agree like this, and you; and yet even this
Is th'end of all skill, power, wealth, all that is.
I long to hear sir, how your Mistress takes this.
Wee soon shall know it: see Aumall returned.
Ease to your bands sir.
Welcome worthy friend.
How took his noblest Mistress your sad message?
As great rich men take sudden poverty,
I never witnessed a more noble love,
Nor a more ruthful sorrow: I well wished
Some other had been master of my message.
You're happy sir, in all things, but this one,
Of your unhappy apprehension.
This is to me, compared with her much moan,
As one tear is to her whole passion.
Sir, she commends her kindest service to you,
And this rich Cabinet.
O happy man.
This may enough hold to redeem your bands.
These clouds I doubt not, will be soon blown over.
Your hope is just and happy, see sir both
In both the looks of these.
Here's a discharge
For this your prisoner, my good Lord Lieutenant.
Alas, sir, I usurp that stile enforced,
And hope you know it was not my aspiring.
Well sir, my wrong aspired past all men's hopes.
I sorrow for it sir.
You see sir there
Your prisoners discharge autenticall.
It is sir, and I yield it him with gladness.
Brother, I brought you down to much good purpose.
Repeat not that sir: the amends makes all:
I joy in it, my best and worthiest friend,
O you've a princely fautor of the Guise.
I think I did my part to.
Well, sir; all
Is in the issue well: and (vvorthiest Friend)
Here's from your friend the Guise; here from the Countess,
Your Brothers Mistress, the contents whereof
I know, and must prepare you now to please
Th'vnrested spirit of your slaughtered brother,
If it be true, as you imagined once,
His apparition showed it▪ the complot
Is now laid sure betwixt vs; therefore haste
Both to your great friend (who hath some use vvaightie
For your repair to him) and to the Countess,
Whose satisfaction is no less important.
I see all, and will haste as it imports.
And good friend, since I must delay a little
My wished attendance on my noblest Mistress,
Excuse me to her, with return of this,
And endless protestation of my service;
And now become as glad a messenger,
As you were late a vvofull.
Happy change,
I •for will salute thee with my service
Yet more news Brother; the late jesting Monsieur
Makes now your Brothers dying prophecy equal
At all parts, being dead as he presaged.
Heaven shield the Guise from seconding that truth,
With what he likewise prophesied on him.
It hath enough, it was graced with truth in one,
To'th other falsehood and confusion.
Lead to'th Court sir.
You Isle lead no more,
It was to ominous and foul before.
UP from the Chaos of eternal night,
(To which the whole digestion of the world
Is now returning) once more I ascend,
And bide the cold damp of this piercing ayre.
To urge the justice, whose almighty word
Measures the bloody acts of impious men,
With equal penance, who in you have it self
Includes th'infliction, which like chained shot
Batter together still; though (as the thunder
Seems, by men's duller hearing then their sight,
To break a great time after lightning forth,
Yet both at one time tear the labouring cloud,)
So men think penance of their else is slow,
Though the isle and penance still together go.
Reform ye ignorant men, your manlesse lives
Whose laws ye think are nothing but your lusts▪
When leaving but for supposition sake,
The body of felicity (Religion)
Set in the midst of Christendom, and her head
Cleft to her bosom; one half one way swaying
Another the other: all the Christian world
And all her laws, whose observation,
Stands upon faith, aboue the power of reason:
Leaving (I say) all these, this might suffice,
To fray ye from your vicious swindge in ill,
And set you more on fire to doe more good:
That since the world (as which of you denies)
Stands by proportion, all may the•ce conclude,
That all the joints and nerues sustaining nature,
As well may break, and yet the world abide,
As any one good unrewarded die,
Or any one ill scope his penalty.
Thus (friend) thou see how all good men would thrive,
Did not the good thou prompt'st me with prevent,
The jealous ill pursuing them in others.
But now thy dangers are dispatc•t, note mine:
Hast thou not heard of that admired voice,
That at the Barricadoes spake to me,
(No person seen) Let's lead (my Lord) to Reimes?
Nor could you learn the person?
By no means.
It was but your fancy then a waking dream:
For as in sleep, which binds both the outward senses,
And the sense common to; th'imagining power
(Stirred up by forms hid in the memories store,
Or by the vapours of overflowing humours
In bodies full and foul; and mixed with spirits,)
Fains many strange, miraculous images,
In which act, it so painfully applies
It self to those forms, that the common sense
It actuates with his motion; and thereby
Those fictions true seem, and have real act:
So, in the strength of our conceits, awake,
The cause alike, doth of like fictions make.
Be what it will, it was a presage of something
Weighty and secret, which th'aduertisements
I have received from all parts, both without,
And in this Kingdom, as from Rome and Spain
Soccaine and Sauoye, gives me cause to think,
All writing that our plots Catastrophe,
For propagation of the Catholic cause,
Will bloody prove, dissolving all our counsels▪
Retire then from them all.
I must not doe so.
The Arch-Bishop of Lyons tells me plain
I shall be said then to abandon France
In so important an occasion:
And that mine enemies (their profit making
Of my faint absence) soon would let that fall,
That all my pains did to this height exhale.
Let all fall that would rise unlawfully:
Make not your forward spirit in virtues right,
A property for vice, by thrusting on
Further then all your powers can fetch you off.
It is enough, your will is infinite
To all things virtuous and religious,
Which within limits kept, may without danger,
Let virtue some good from your Graces gather,
Avarice of all is ever nothings father.
Danger (the spur of all great minds) is ever
The curb to your tame spirits; you respect not
(With all your holiness of life and learning)
More then the present, like illiterate vulgars,
Your mind (you say) kept in your fleshes bounds,
Shows that mans will must ruled be by his power:
When (by true doctrine) you are taught to live
Rather without the body, then within;
And rather to your God still then your self:
To live to him, is to doe all things fitting
His Image, in which, like himself we live;
To be his Image, is to doe those things,
That make vs deathless, which by death is only;
Doing those deeds that fit eternity,
And those deeds are the perfecting that Justice,
That makes the world last, which proportion is
Of punishment and wreak for every wrong,
As well as for right a reward as strong:
Away then, use the means thou hast to right
The wrong I suffered. What corrupted Law
Leaves unperformed in Kings, doe thou supply,
And be aboue them all in dignity.
Why stand thou still thus, and applyest thine ears,
And eyes to nothing?
Saw you nothing here?
Thou dream, awake now; what was here to see?
My Brothers spirit, urging his revenge.
Thy Brothers spirit! pray thee mock me not.
No, by my love and service.
Would he rise,
And not be thundering threats against the Guise?
You make amends for enmity to him,
With ten parts more love, and desert of me;
And as you make your hate to him, no let
Of any love to me; no more bears hee
(Since you to me supply it) hate to you,
Which reason and which Justice is performed
In Spirits ten parts more then fleshy men.
To whose fore-sights our acts and thoughts lie open:
And therefore since hee saw the treachery
Late practised by my brother Baligny,
Hee would not honour his hand with the justice
(As hee esteems it) of his bloods revenge,
To which my Sister needs would have him sworn,
Before she would consent to marry him.
O Baligny, who would believe there were
A man, that (only since his looks are raised
Upwards, and have but sacred heaven in sight)
Could bear a mind so more then devilish?
As for the painted glory of the countenance,
Flitting in Kings, doth good for nought esteem,
And the more ill hee does, the better seem.
Wee easily may believe it, since we see
In this worlds practise few men better be.
Justice to live doth nought but Justice need,
But Policy must still on mischief feed.
Untruth for all his ends, truths name doth sue in;
None safely live, but those that study ruin.
A good man happy, is a common good;
Ill men advanced live of the common blood.
But this thy brothers spirit startles me,
These spirits seld or never hinting men,
But some mishap ensues.
Ensue what can:
Tyrants may kill, but never hurt a man;
All to his good makes, spite of death and hell.
All the desert of good, renown your Highness.
Welcome Aumall.
My good friend, friendly welcome.
How took my noblest mistress the changed news?
It came too late sir, for those loveliest eyes
(Through which a soul looked so divinely loving,
Tears nothing uttering her distress enough)
She wept quite out, and like two falling Stars
Their dearest sights quite vanished with her tears.
All good forbid it.
What events are these?
All must be borne my Lord: and yet this chance
Would willingly enforce a man to cast off
All power to bear with comfort, since hee sees
In this, our comforts made our miseries.
How strangely thou art loved of both the sexes;
Yet thou love neither, but the good of both.
In love of women, my affection first
Takes fire out of the frail parts of my blood;
Which till I have enjoyed, is passionate,
Like other lovers: but fruition past▪
I then love out of judgment; the desert
Of her I love, still sticking in my heart,
Though the desire, and the delight be gone,
Which must chance still, since the comparison
Made upon trial twixt what reason loves,
And what affection, makes in me the best
Ever preferred; what most love, valuing lest.
Thy love being judgment then, and of the mind,
Marry thy worthiest mistress now being blind.
If there were love in marriage so I would;
But I deny that any man doth love,
Affecting wives, maids, widows, any women:
For neither Fly•s love milk, although they drown
In greedy search thereof; nor doth the Bee
Love honey, though the labour of her life
Is spent in gathering it; nor those that fat
Or beasts▪ or fowls, doe any thing therein
For any love: for as when only nature
Moves men to meat, as far as her power rules,
She doth it with a temperate appetite,
The too much men devour, abhorring nature;
And in our most health, is our most disease:
So, when humanity rules men and women.
Tic for society confined in reason.
But what excites the beds desire in blood,
By no means justly can be construed love;
For when love kindles any knowing spirit,
It ends in virtue and effects divine;
And is in friendship chaste, and masculine.
Thou shalt my Mistress be; me thinks my blood
Is taken up to all love with thy virtues.
And howsoever other men despise
These Paradoxes strange, and too precise,
Since they hold on the right way of our reason,
I could attend them ever. Come, away;
Perform thy brothers thus importuned wreak;
And I will see what great affairs the King
Hath to employ my counsel, which he seems
Much to desire, and more and more esteems.
Saw you his saucy forcing of my hand
To D'Ambois freedom?
Saw, and through mine eyes
Le• •ire into my heart, that burned to bear
An insolence so Giantly austere.
The more Kings bear at Subjects hands, the more
Their lingering Justice gathers; that resembles
The weighty, and the goodly-bodied Eagle,
Who (being on earth) before her shady wings
Can raise her into ayre, a mighty way
Close by the ground she runs; but being aloft,
All she commands, she flies at; and the more
Death in her Seres bears, the more time she stays
Her thundry stoop from that on which she preys.
You must be then more secret in the weight
Of these your shady counsels, who will else
Bear (where such sparks fly as the Guise and D'Ambois)
Powder about them. Counsels (as your en••ails)
Should be vnpierst and sound kept; for not those,
Whom you discover, you neglect; but op
A ruinous passage to your own best hope.
Wee have Spies set on vs, as we on others;
And therefore they that serve vs must excuse vs,
If what wee most hold in our hearts, take wind,
Deceit hath eyes that see into the mind.
But this plot shall be quicker then their twinkling,
On whose lids Fate, with her dead weight shall lie,
And Confidence that lightens ere she die.
Friends of my Guard, as ye gave other to be
True to your Sovereign, keep it manfully:
Your eyes have witnessed oft th'Ambition
That never made access to me in Guise
But Treason ever sparkled in his eyes:
Which if you free vs of, our safety shall
You not our Subjects, but our Patrons call.
Our duties bind vs, hee is now but dead.
Wee trust in it, and thank ye. Baligny,
Go lodge their ambush, and thou God that art
Fautor of Princes▪ thunder from the skies,
Beneath his hill of pride this Giant Guise.
I see you're Servant, sir, to my dear sister,
The Lady of her loved Baligny.
Madame I am bound to her virtuous bounties,
For that li•e which I offer in her virtuous service,
To the revenge of her renowned brother.
She writes to me as much, and much desires,
That you may be the man, whose spirit she knows
Will cut short off these long and dull delays,
Hitherto to bribing the eternal Justice:
Which I believe, since her unmatched spirit
Can judge of spirits, that have her sulphur in them;
But I must tell you, that I make no doubt,
Her living brother will revenge her dead,
On whom the dead imposed the task▪ and hee,
I know, will come t'effect it instantly.
They are but words in him; believe them not.
See; this is the vault, where he must enter:
Where now I think hee is.
God save you Lady.
What Gentleman is this, with whom you trust
The deadly weighty secret of this hour?
One that your self will say, I well may trust.
Then come up Madame.
See here honoured Lady,
A Countess that in loves mishap doth equal
At all parts▪ your wronged self; and is the mistress
Of your slain servants brother; in whose love
For his late treachrous apprehension,
She wept her fair eyes from her luory brows,
And would have wept her soul out, had not I
Promised to bring her to this mortal quarry,
That by her lost eyes for her servants love,
She might conjure him from this sterne attempt,
In which, (by a most ominous dream she had)
She knows his death fixed, and that never more
Out of this place the Sun shall see him live.
I am provided then to take his place,
And undertaking on me.
You sir, why?
Since I am charged so by my mistress,
His mournful sister.
See her Letter sir.
Good Madame, I rue your fate, more then mine,
And know not how to order these affairs,
They stand on such occurrents.
This indeed,
I know to be your Lady mistress hand,
And know besides, his brother will, and must
Endure no hand in this revenge but his.
Away, dispute no more; get up, and see,
Clermont must auchthor this just Tragedy.
Who's that?
The spirit of Busy.
O my servant! let vs embrace.
Forbear. The ayre, in which
My figures liknesse is impressed, will blast,
Let my revenge for all loves satisfy,
In which (dame) fear not, Clermont shall not dye:
No word dispute more, up, and see th'euent.
Make the Guard sure Renal; and then the doors
Command to make fast, when the Earl is in.
The black soft-footed hour is now on wing,
Which for my just wreak, Ghosts shall celebrate,
With dances dire, and of infernal state.
Who says that death is natural, when nature•
Is with the only thought of it, dismayed?
I have had Lotteries set up for my death,
And I have drawn beneath my trencher one,
Knit in my hand-kerchiefe another lot,
The word being; You're a dead man if you enter,
And these words, this imperfect blood and flesh,
Shrincke at in spite of me; their solidst part
Melting like snow within me, with cold fire:
I hate my self, that seeking to rule Kings,
I cannot curb my slave. Would any spirit
F•ee, manly, Princely, wish to live to be
Commanded by this mass of slavery,
Since Reason, Judgment, Resolution,
And scorn of what we fear, will yield to fear?
While this same sink of sensuality swells,
Who would live sinking in it? and not spring
Up to the Stars, and leave this carrion here,
For Wolfs, and Vultures, and for Dogs to tear?
O Clermont D'Ambois, were thou here to chide
This softness from my flesh, far as my reason,
Far as my resolution, not to stir
One foot out of the way, for death and hell.
Let my •alse man by falsehood perish here,
There's no way else to set my true man clear.
The King desires your Grace to come to Council.
I come. It cannot be: hee will not dare
To touch me with a treachery so profane.
Would Clermont now were here, to try how hee
Would lay about him, if this plot should be:
Here would be tossing souls into the sky.
Who ever knew blood saved by treachery?
Well, I must on, and will; what should I fear?
Not against two, Alcides? against two
And Hercules to friend, the Guise will go.
Hold murderers.
So then, this is confidence
In greatness, not in goodness: where is the king?
Let him appear to justify his deed.
In spite of my betrayed wounds; ere my soul
Take her flight through them, and my tongue hath strength
To urge his tyranny.
See sir▪ I am come
To justify it before men, and God,
Who knows with what wounds in my heart for woe
Of your so wounded faith, I made these wounds,
Forced to it by an insolence of force
To stir a stone, nor is a rock opposed
To all the billows of the churlish sea,
More beat, and eaten with them, then was I
With your ambitious mad Idolatry;
And this blood I shed, is to save the blood
Of many thousands.
That's your white pretext,
But you will find one drop of blood shed lawless,
Will be the fountain to a purple sea:
The present lust, and shift made for Kings lives
Against the pure form, and just power of Law,
Will thrive like shifters purchases; there hangs
A black Star in the skies, to which the Sun
Gives yet no light, will rain a poisoned shower
Into your entrails, that will make you feel
How little safety lies in treacherous steel.
Well sir, Isle bear it; you've a Brother to,
Bursts with like threats, the scarlet Cardinal:
Seek, and lay hands on him; and take this hence,
Their bloods, for all you, on my conscience.
So sir, your full swindge take; mine, death hath curbed.
Clermont, farewell: O did thou see but this:
But it is better, see by this the Ice
Broke to thine own blood, which thou wilt despise,
When thou hear mine shed. Is there no friend here
Will bear my love to him?
I will, my Lord.
Thanks with my last breath: recommend •e then
To the most worthy of the race of men.
Who have you let into my house?
I, none.
Tic false, I savour the rank blood of foes
In every corner.
That you may doe well,
It is the blood you lately shed, you smell.
Stead the vault ops.
What vault? hold your sword.
No, let him use it.
Treason, murder, murder.
Exclaim not; tic in vain, and base in you,
Being one, to only one.
O bloody strumpet!
With what blood charge you her? it may be mine
As well as yours; there shall not any else
Enter or touch you: I confer no guards,
Nor imitate the murderous course you took;
But single here, will have my former challenge,
Now answered single, not a minute more
My brothers blood shall stay for his revenge,
If I can act it; if not, mine shall add
A double conquest to you, that alone
Put it to fortune now, and use no odds.
Storm not, nor beat your self thus against the doors,
Like to a savage vermin in a trap:
All doors are sure made, and you cannot scope,
But by your valour,
No, no, come and kill me•.
If you will die so like a beast, you shall,
But when the spirit of a man may save you,
Doe not so shame man, and a Noble man.
I doe not show this baseness, that I fear thee,
But to prevent and shame thy victory,
Which of one base is base, and so Isle die.
Here then.
Stay, hold, one thought hath hardened me,
And since I must afford thee victory,
It shall be great and brave, if one request
Thou wilt admit me.
What's that?
Give me leave
To fetch and use the sword thy Brother gave me
When he was bravely giving up his life.
No, Isle not fight against my brothers sword,
Not that I fear it, but since tic a trick,
For you to show your back.
By all truth, no:
Take but my honourable other, I will not.
Your honourable other, plain truth no place ha•
Where oaths are honourable.
Trust not his other.
Hee will lie like a Lapwing, when she flies
Far from her sought nest, still here tic she cries.
Out on thee damme of Devils, I will quite
Disgrace thy braves conquest, die, not fight.
Out on my fortune to wed such an abject.
Now is the peoples voice, the voice of God;
Hee that to wound a woman vents so much,
(As hee did me) a man dares never touch.
Revenge your wounds now madame, I resign him
Up to your full will, since hee will not fight.
First you shall torture him (as hee did you,
And Justice wills) and then pay I my vow.
Here, take this Poniard.
Sink Earth, open Heaven,
And let fall vengeance.
Come sir, good sir hold him.
O shame of women, whither art thou fled!
Why (good my Lord) is it a greater shame
For her then you? come, I will be the bands
You used to her, profaning her fair hands.
No sir, Isle fight now, and the terror be
Of all you Champions to such as she.
I did but thus far dally: now observe,
O all you eking fore-heads that have robed,
Your hands of weapons, and your hearts of valour,
Join in me all your rages, and rebutters,
And into dust ram this same race of Furies,
In this one relic of the Ambois gall,
In his one purple soul shed, drown it all.
Now give me breath a while.
Receive it freely.
What think y'a this now?
It is very noble.
Had it be•no free (at least) and of your self,
And thus wee see (where valour most doth vant)
What tic to make a coward valiant.
Now I shall grace your conquest.
That you shall.
If you obtain it.
True sir, tic in fortune.
If you were not a D'Ambois, I would scarce
Change lives with you, I feel so great a change
In my tall spirits breathed, I think, with the breath
A D'Ambois breathes here, and necessity
(With whose point now pricked on, and so, whose help
My hands may challege, that doth all men conquer,
If she except not you, of all men only)
May change the case here.
True as you are changed,
Her power in me urged, makes y'another man,
Then yet you ever were.
Well, I must on.
Your Lordship must by all means.
Then at all.
Death of my father: what a shame is this,
Stick in his hands thus?
Gentle sir forbear.
Is he not slain yet?
No Madame, but hurt in divers parts of him.
You've given it me,
And yet I feel life for another venue,
What would you sir?
I would perform this Combat.
Against which of vs?
I care not much if it were
Against thy self: thy sister would have shamed,
To have thy Brothers wreak with any man
(In single combat) stick so in her fingers.
My Sister? know you her?
I sir, she sent him,
With this kind Letter, to perform the vvreake
Of my dear Servant.
Now alas good sir,
Think you you could doe more?
Alas? I doe,
And were it not, I, fresh, sound, should charge a man
Weary, and wounded, I would long ere this,
Have proved what I presume on.
You've a mind
Like to my Sister, but have patience now,
If next charge speed not, Isle resign to you.
Pray thee let him decide it.
No, my Lord,
I am the man in fate, and since so bravely
Your Lordship stands me, scope but one more charge,
And on my life, Isle set your life at large.
Said like a D'Ambois, and if now I die,
Sit joy and all good on thy victory.
Farewell, I heartily forgive thee. Wife,
And thee, let penitence spend thy rest of life.
Noble and Christian.
O it breaks my heart.
And should, for all faults found in him before,
These words, this end, makes full amends and more.
Rest worthy soul, and with it the dear spirit
Of my loved Brother, rest in endless peace:
Soft lie thy bones Heaven be your souls abode,
And to your ashes be the earth no lode.
How strange is this? the Guise amongst these spirits,
And his great Brother Cardinal, both yet living,
And that the rest with them, with joy thus celebrate
This our revenge? This certainly presages
Some instant death both to the Guise and Cardinal.
That the Shattilians Ghost to should thus join
In celebration of this just revenge,
With Guise, that bore a chief stroke in his death,
It seems that now he doth approve the act,
And these true shadows of the Guise and Cardinal,
Fore-running thus their bodies, may approve
That all things to be done, as here wee live,
Are done before all times in the other life.
That Spirits should rise in these times yet are fables;
Though learned men hold that our sensiue spirits
A little time abide about the graves
Of their deceased bodies; and can take
In cold condensed ayre, the same forms they had,
When they were shut up in this bodies shade.
O Sir, the Guise is slain.
Avert it Heaven.
Sent for to Council, by the King, an ambush
(Lodged for the purpose) rushed•on him, and took
His Princely life; who sent (in dying then)
His love to you, as to the best of men.
The worst, and most accursed of things creeping
On earths sad bosom. Let me pray ye all
A little to forbear, and let me use
Freely mine own mind in lamenting him.
Isle call ye straight again.
We will forbear, and leave you free sir.
Shall I live, and hee
Dead, that alone gave means of life to me?
There's no disputing with the acts of Kings,
Revenge is impious on their sacred persons:
And could I play the worldling (no man loving
Longer then gain is reaped, or grace from him)
I should survive, and shall be wondered at,
(Though in mine own hands being) I end with him:
But Friendship is the Sement of two minds,
As of one man the soul and body is,
Of which one cannot sever, but the other
Suffers a needful separation.
I fear your servant, Madame: let's descend.
Since I could skill of man, I never lived
To please men worldly, and shall I in death,
Respect their pleasures, making such a jar
•etwixt my death and life, when death should make
The consort sweetest; th'end being proof and crown
To all the skill and worth wee truly own?
Guise, O my Lord, how shall I cast from me
The bands and coverts hindering me from thee?
The garment or the cover of the mind,
The humane soul is; of the soul, the spirit
The proper robe is; of the spirit, the blood;
And of the blood, the body is the shroud.
With that must I begin then to unclothe,
And come at the other. Now then as a ship,
Touching at strange, and far removed shores;
Her men a shore go, for their several ends,
Fresh water, victuals, precious stones, and pearl,
All yet intent when (the master calls,
The Ship to put off ready) to leave all
Their greediest labours, lest they there be left,
To the•ues, or beasts▪ or be the Countries slaves:
So, now my master calls, my ship, my venture
All in one bottom put, all quite put off,
Gone under sail, and I left negligent,
To all the horrors of the vicious time,
The far removed shores to all virtuous aims;
None favouring goodness; none but he respecting
Piety or man-hood. Shall I here survive,
Not cast me after him into the sea,
Rather then here live, ready every hour
To feed thieves, beasts, and be the slave of power?
I come my Lord, Clermont thy creature comes.
What? lye and languish, Clermont? Cursed man
To leave him here thus: hee hath slain himself.
Misery on misery! O me wretched Dame
Of all that breath, all heaven turn all his eyes,
In hearty envy, thus on one poor dame.
Well done my Brother: I did love thee ever,
But now adore thee: loss of such a friend
None should survive, of such a Brother;
With my false husband live, and both these slain:
Ere I return to him, Isle turn to earth.
Horror of humane ey•s, O Clermont D'Ambois!
Madame, wee staid too long, your seruant's slain.
It must be so, he lived but in the Guise,
As I in him. O follow life mine eyes.
Hide, hide thy snaky head, to Cloisters fly,
In penance pine, too easy tic to die.
It is. In Cloisters then let's all survive.
Madame, since wrath nor grief can help these fortunes,
Let vs forsake the world, in which they reign,
And for their wished amends to God complain.
Tic fit and only needful: lead me on,
In heavens course comfort seek, in earth is none.
Wee came indeed too late, which much I •ue,
And would have kept this Clermont as my crown.
Take in the dead, and make this fatal room
(The house shut up) the famous D'Ambois Tomb.

FRom blissful Bowers of fair Elision fields,
(The happy harbour of Ioues dearest Dear)
From thence these Worthies (noted by their shields
Are (by my conduct) thus arrived here.
I Fame that with a trice, doe ouer-fill
The Worlds wide ears with what I please to say,
Have brought them thus, as it were against the hill
Of highest Lets, to celebrate this Day!
This Day, that I so far have famouzed
That not a nook of Earths huge Globe but knows,
How in great Britain it is solemnised
With divine Offices, and glorious Shows.
Then for th'encrease of this triumphant Mirth,
I'll invoke the Gods Ambassador,
To be the President of Heaven to Earth;
And, from the Gods, salute your Governor.
Then come great Nuntius of th'immortall Gods,
From that all-swaying Senate of their State;
Come, I invoke thee, with thy charming-rod
In glory come, this Day to celebrate.
The nine-fold Orbs of Heaven, my words doe pierce;
Descend then, Tongues-man of the Vniuerse.
COme down thou mighty messenger of bliss,
Come: we implore thee,
Let not thy glory be obscured from vs
Who most adore thee:
Then come, O come great spirit
That we may joyful sing,
Welcome, O welcome to earth
Ioues dearest darling.
Lighten the eyes thou great Mercurian Prince,
Of all that view thee,
That by the lustre of their optic sense
They may pursue thee:
Whilst with their voices
Thy praise they shall sing,
Come away
Ioues dearest darling.
Down from the Throne of the immortal Gods,
From out the glorious euer-during Heavens,
And from the sacred Powers celestial
From thence I come, commanded by them all
To visit Him whose rare report hath rung
His earned fame on earth hath pierced the sky,
Ascending up unto the highest Heavens;
And therewithal procured the sacred Senate
In great regard to hold his worthiness:
For which intent, They all (with one accord)
To manifest the Love to Him they owe,
Have sent me Mercury, their Messenger,
To bring him joyful tidings of the same.
And to this place, directed by their Powers,
I am arrived (in happy time I hope)
To find this happy God-beloued Man.
And lo behold on sudden where I spy
This Favourite so fauor'd of the Gods:
I will salute him with such curtsy
As best beseems a wight of such account.
All hail to thee high Justice Officer;
Mercury, Nuntius to the Powers divine,
Hath brought thee greetings from their Deities.
And know (dear Sir) thy deeds and good deserts,
Thy well disposed Nature, Mind, and thought,
Thy zealous care to keep their Laws divine,
Thy great compassion on poor wights distressed,
Thy prudence, justice, temp'rance, and thy truth,
And, to be brief, thy virtues general,
Have moved them all from Heaven, with one assent,
To send Me down, to let thee understand
That thou art highly in their Favours placed:
And, for the more assurance of the same,
Lo here a Favour favourably sent
From them, by me, to thee, that thou moist know
Thy virtues here shall there rewarded bee
With endless joy, and perfect happiness.
Receive the same, returning nought but thanks,
Which is as much as they require of thee,
My message done, my task thus brought to end,
I must return and to the Heavens ascend.
Hail sage Spectators, hail ye reverend Sires,
Hail younger Brutes, whose worth self Worth admires.
Whose ardent Loves both to the place, and vs,
Constrains our Loves to entertain ye thus.
Welcome ten thousand times ye blissful criew,
Whose light lends luster to the vulgar view.
Whose several virtues, linked with several Graces,
Deserves the Best, of our best Loves embraces.
The Romaine Curtius Romes great Favourite,
(Whose daring Death did her from scathe acquit)
Was ne'er more Welcome to the Romans sights,
Then are your selves, to these our choice delights.
To which kind purpose our desire intends
To entertain you as our fastest friends,
With such Olympian sports as shall approve
Our Best devotion, and sincerest Love.
Such entertain as best beseems your Ranks,
We'll strive to give you with our hartiest thanks.
And so, to please your nicer appetietes,
VVee'le feast your pains with Pleasures honied Sweets.
The rarest viands Choice it self affords,
Shall o'er abound upon our bounteous bords,
And in the midst of all our Jovial solace,
VVee'le suck sweet Nectar from the Paps of Pallas.
VVee'le cozen France of those delicious Vines,
VVhere-hence they drain their brain-enchanting Wines
To cheer our hearts, and make you frolic so
As you shall swim in joy, though sunk in woe.
VVee'le Banquet you with such variety
Of dulcet Fruits, whose sweet Satiety
Shall seem so pleasing; as it shall entice
The Gods themselves to surfeit on their juice.
Our best Pavilions, in their best attire,
Remonstrate shall how much we doe desire,
To satisfy your Expectations eyes,
With all that Art can possibly devise.
VVee'le pave our Streets, with that Eye-pleasing sand,
Which is of power whole Kingdoms to command:
And for your more delight perfume we will
The Air: nay, it sweet Aires shall ouer-fill.
Our verdant Pastures three piled greene in grain
Shall wear, to honour so your entertain.
And round about the Meadows as ye go,
For peeping flowers the Grass shall scarcely show
What may be done, and willing hearts can doe
Shall be effected with advantage too.
We'll furrow up those pety hills or heights,
That lie but in the way of our delights:
And with the Surplusse of this surquedrie,
Fill up the places that too lowly lie
Within the list or prospect of that place,
Assigned this Triumph and triumphant Race.
What ever our more then strained vtmost-All,
Can possibly perform; perform we shall.
ILlustrious Britain, stately Seat of Kings,
Whose boundless glories inequiualent,
Doe so reflect on Fems oriental wings.
That o'er the world they spread their blandishment.
Whose influence (past compass of conceit)
Endarts such Sun-beames to obscurer places,
That all the world by that resplendent light,
Derives from her their most peculiar graces.
Whose royal, clement, chaste, and bounteous King,
(King; O too base a stile for his great worth)
Such radiant luster to the Earth doth bring,
That like the Sun it cheers the total North.
Then yield him honour Kings that glorious be;
Veil to this (next the high'st) great King of Kings:
Who by his virtues graces your degree,
And to the same immortal glory brings.
Great Britains Greatness (wonder of the North:
Admired of All whom virtues height admires)
We doe ascribe unto thy Match-lesse worth,
Surmounting praise, to mount thy virtues higher.
And while me (Britain) Neptune shall embrace,
Isle ruin those, that spite thee, or thy Race.
Renowned Camber, Britains true repose,
Whose ardent zeal to her admired Prince,
Hath ever been approved to friends and foes
To sacrifice her blood in his defence.
With high-swolne words of vaunt to thunder forth
How much we dare to doe in this respect,
Were more then merely idle; since our worth
Shall show it self in such words true effect.
Our hopeful Prince whilst Cambers Race doth Breath,
Shall they with fast united might,
In his just cause will their best Swords unsheathe
Against the stout'st Opposer of his Right.
We scorn that Wales such weaklings should afford,
That dare not bravely front the eagerst foe
At any Weapon (Pistol, Pike, or Sword)
And (like stout Warriors) give him blue for blue.
But to our Prince (Great Britains matchless Heir)
As humbly low, as is his Greatness high,
Our lives we'll prostrate with our best Deuoire,
To doe what may undo the Enemy.
Whose Grace is thought upon this present day,
Which day Saint George hath blissfully created,
To take his Birth-right; with such great joy,
As such a day was never consecrated.
To memorise which more then blissful Feast,
We are incited by the love we owe him,
The same to celebrate, or at the least
Our great, great joy most thankfully to show him.
Then nought remains but that we all doe pray,
God bless Prince HENRY Prop of Englands joy.
SAint George for England, is the Patron Knight,
Whose euer-conquering, and all-daring hand,
Did put whole Hoists of Heathens foes to flight,
That did the vigour of his strength with-stand.
He that did ever live (a Champion stout)
With such undaunted holy-high resolve,
That through the earth his fame did fly about,
Which shall not die till heaven and earth dissolve.
Against the Heathen folk his force he proved,
By which he did decline their highest pride:
For which of heaven and earth he was beloved,
And made a glorious Saint when as he did,
Upon a hideous Dragon (whose thick scales
Like shields, that nought could pierce by force nor Art
Did Bulwark him) so fast his Falchion falls,
That he through them made way unto his heart.
Whose rare achievements and whose rich renown
(Flowing from matchless Magnanimity)
Still makes them owners of great Britains Crown,
As in this day to crown his memory.
Whose Fems bright Splendour, rarely to depaint
In colours rich according to his worth,
Would try the tongue of Harms, sith this Saint
Thus travels Britains glory to bring forth,
Many a Monster he by force subdued,
And many a fiend incarnate he suppressed,
Whose Sword did still mow down their multitude,
So to imbarne them in hells restless rest.
When lo at length returning to the soil,
Wherein he first received his vital breath,
He spent his time religiously awhile,
Till Death had slain him, who now conquers Death:
So, Britains when they fight with cheer, they say,
God and Saint George for England to this day.
TO bring glad news of future happy years,
Peace is the Nuntius that such tidings bears.
Who while the Scotch the English fair entreat,
And me embrace withal, I'll make them great.
No foreign Nation shall affront their force
As long as I direct them in that course.
All rash dissentions and litigious brawls,
I shall expel from their unshaken walls.
All civil Mutinies shall then surcease,
And Peace shall bring them everlasting Peace.
Inveterate hate so will I turn to love,
As with one motion both shall jointly move.
Brother with brother, nay, the foe with friend,
For mine and thine shall never more contend.
No massacre nor bloody stratagem,
Shall stir in Peaces new Jerusalem.
No civil Discord, nor Domestic strife
Shall ever annoy their Peace, much less their life,
For (like to Olive branches) they shall bear
Fruit that gives love an appetite to bear.
Which mutual concord dateless shall endure
As long as love can Peace to love procure.
I'll bind their Loves with true Loves Gordian knot,
That rude Dissentions hands undo it not:
And with a VVreath of euer-during Bays,
Crown all your brows with peace-procured praise,
I'll rend the closemouthed rage of emulous strife,
And wound Distraction, with Connexions knife.
And when damned Malice comes but once in sight
I, with a vengeance, will suppress her straight.
I'll send pale Envy down to hell with speed,
Where she upon her Snakes shall only feed.
And with some pois'nous and inuenom'd Toad,
Her much more poisonous self shall make abode.
Which being done I'll send that base infection
(Whose only virtue is but base) Detraction
Her to associate; where they both shall live
As long as hell can life with horror give:
And thus shall Peace their joy perpetuate,
That love (in love) to stay this blessed State.
SInce Plenty still co-operates with Peace,
Plenty shall bless your basket of increase.
From whose abundant ne'er exhausted store,
You shall receive much more then had before,
I'll stuff your Barnes up to the throat with grain,
Which shall all yours, and others still sustain.
I'll fructify the earth with rarest fruits
Of sundry shapes, and several kind of suites,
So as the Soil (that bears seed timely sown)
Under the burden of their weight, shall groan.
In all abundance I will rear your Beasts,
Which shall maintain your o'er abounding Feasts,
Fish, foul, herbs, grass, and all things whatsoere,
Shall at your door be cheap, and nothing dear
I'll sink into the concaues of earths mould,
And there hence pull and cull her purest gold,
And then will dive into the Ocean Deeps,
To raise the Treasure which their Neptune keeps.
I'll freight your ships with such o're-fraighting store,
That greediness her self shall seek no more.
No scarcity shall in your Land be found,
As long as I with Nature till your ground.
What shall I say? your life-supporting staff,
The staff of bread; I'll throw abroad like chafe.
Then see how graciously the High'st hath sent ye
Peace, in all fullness, in all fullness Plenty.
Hiss.
Why how now Envy? dost thou hiss at Phoe???bus?
Yes; and at Cynthia too, if she anger vs.
Your reason Envy?
Why? My reason's this,
To hear a Cat cry mew, who can but hiss.
Out hissing Scorpion:
Out ye filthy Fool,
Envy hath wit, to set such Apes to school.
Malicious Monster, thou incarnate Diu'll,
Whose base condition, is the source of evil.
Thou envious Bandogge, speak and doe thy worst,
He that regards it; is the most accursed
And he that thinks that Love can ever be wise,
Hath neither judgment, wisdom, wit, nor eyes.
Say thou abortive, men-detested slave,
Whose only virtue is, but to deprave
Mans best proceedings, speak thou squint-eide Monster,
What is the cause which makes thee still misconstrue?
Because I hate to hear a want-wit preach
Beyond wits bounds, and wisdoms boundless reach:
To see a superficial Sot make show
Of deeper skill then wit it self doth know.
What is the solace Envy counts deep?
Marie to see a VVolfe devour a Sheep.
To see men-diuels breeding still dissention
Is sport (me thinks) beyond all comprehension:
Or else a rich man hunger-pin'd with want,
To see an Army (when their food is scant)
Eat their own excrements; O this is sport
For Envy, that without this is all amort.
To see a drove of Drunkards like to Swine
Swilling their souls, in soule-o're-whelming wine.
To see a City burnt, or Barnes on fire,
To see a Son the Butcher of his Sire.
To see two Swaggerars eagerly to strive,
Which of them both shall make the Hang-man thrive.
To see a good man poor, or wise man bare,
To see dame Virtue overwhelmed with care.
To see a ruined Church, a Preacher dumb,
A Kings child perish in the Mothers womb.
To see a Miser, who to have his pelf,
Will take a rope and (desperate) hang him self:
To see a virgin by a varlet used,
Till she by him to death be so abused.
Or else to see a Father suck the blood
Of his own Spawn, O! these would doe me good.
But to behold a rank of rustic Boys
Showing as childish people childish toys
To grace a day with; O it grates my gall
To hear an apish Kitling catterwall.
Is it not harsh to hear a Marmoset squeak
Upon a stage a most anointed speak?
And then to hear some ignorant Baboon,
Swear that this Monkey did surmount the Moon.
When as the Infants best is too too bad,
And which to hear would make a wise-man mad.
Thou damned Infection; damned from thy birth.
Abhorred of heaven, and odious to the earth,
How can thou ever hope to merit grace,
When thy delight is but detraction base?
But since there is no sign of grace in that
Damned face of thine, which hell doth wonder at,
Love shall conjure thee; that from this time forth,
Thou ne'er frequent this Island of the North.
Dive to the depth of deepest Stigian flood;
There suck thou Snakes, and Snakes there suck thy blood.
Or sink thou quite to the infernal deep,
Where crawling Scorpions may about thee creep.
And there among those vermin vile beneath,
Belk up that poison which thou here dost breath.
Go, I conjure thee, least I make thee feel
The keenest edge of Wraths revenging steel.
Burden the earth no more, thou hateful Toad
With such a ponderous earth-anoying load,
Go with a vengeance go, and ne'er retire,
But we are out Time in everlasting fire.
O I could grind and grate thee with my teeth,
No more thou Monster; hence be gone forthwith;
Confusion, death, plague, pestilence, and piles,
Confound their souls who at mine anguish smiles,
Yet, ere I go, I'll bid the best farewell,
Hoping ere long to meet their Ghosts in hell.
Go ugly Monster, Loves Misanthropos,
Sink down to tortour and continual woes.
Heaven excludes thee; Earth abhors thy sight,
And grieves to bear the burden of thy weight.
Sink to her center, there's thy Native rest,
And never more be seen to spot her breast:
So, hast thee hence; and hence-forth I'll direct
My speech to those, whom I doe best affect:
Love bids you welcome that are come in love,
To see our sports that Envy doth reprove.
Envy avaunt, thou art no fit Compeere
T'associate these our sweet Consociats here.
Joy doth exclude thee, who (to thy disgrace)
Here spets Defiance in thy ugly face.
And that is more; thy everlasting shame
Shall be still blasted by the Trump of Fame:
The powerful tongue of fecund Mercury,
Shall to the world display thy Infamy.
Chester abhors thy presence; Britain hates thee;
And for a damned fury, Camber takes thee.
Peace, as a Herald, shall proclaim to All,
That thou art damned by Iustice-Generall.
Plenty detests thy base Society,
Who scorns thy hell-bred gross impiety.
And last of all; My Love, in Loves defence
In spite of Envy, shall send Envy hence.
Wherefore avaunt; that all the I'll may sing,
Now Envies gone, in peace w'enioy our King.
WIth rich Characters of resplendent gold,
Fame hath your names within her book enroled:
Which till Time stays his course shall glitter bright,
Maugre Detractiou and fell Envies spite.
IN sign of victory which thou hast gained,
This VVreath by thy fair front shall be sustained.
Whose greene leaved branches unto Fame shall tell
That thou did best deserve the better Bell.
TO crown thy Temples with a second vvreath,
Lo here doth Camber unto thee bequeath
This fragrant Garland: sith thou did excel
The best that ran but at the second Bell.
THou that by either cunning, or by chance,
Did take the Ring with thy thrice happy Lance:
Here take of me (to raise thy virtues up)
This vvreath of Balm, and polished silver cup.
And so we all in all your several Graces,
Will with fems o're-fill all times and places.
NO Action, though admired for Excellence,
No Practise, though of high'st pre-eminence
That can escape the Poliphemian eye
Of Envy, that for ever looks awry:
Yet notwithstanding on your Loves depending,
Whose patient ears excludes all reprehending.
We here submit our selves in humblest wise,
Before the bar of your judicious eyes,
What we present unto your dainty ears
Is freed from scandals: so is free from fears.
Only your Loves which are our fairest marks,
Must muzzle Envy, when the Fury barks
Unto the best, we doubt not but our best
May purchase favour; and for all the rest
We doe expect but this poor kindness from them,
That they would speak but what shall well become them.
This being granted: Chester doth inuit
Each noble worthy, and each worthy Knight,
To close their stomach with a small repast,
Which may content a temperate curious taste.
Measure our ardent Loves, with such kind measure,
As we afford you sport, and give you pleasure:
And so we'll leave you with this solemn vow,
That whilst we breath, our hearts shall honour you.
IF any Reader shall desire to know
Who was the Author of this pleasing show:
Let him receive advertisement hereby
A Sheriff (late of Chester) EMERY.
Did thus perform it; who for his reward,
Desires but Love, and competent regard.

