Jack.
What wind brought thee hither?
In what old hollow tree, or rotten wall
Hast thou been like a Swallow all this Winter,
Where hast thou been man?
Following the Plow.
What Plow? Thou hast no Land,
Stealing's thy own purchase.
The best inheritance.
Not in my opinion,
Thou had five hundred pound a year.
Tic gone,
Prithee no more on it, have I not told thee,
And oftentimes, nature made all men equal,
Her distribution to each child alike;
Till labour came and thrust a new Will in,
Which I allow not: till men won a privilege
By that they call endeavour, which indeed
Is nothing but a lawful Cosenage,
An allowed wayto cheat, why should my neighbour
That hath no more soul then his Horsekeeper,
Nor bounteous faculties above a Broom man,
Have forty thousand pound, and I four groats;
Why should he keep it?
Thy old opinion still.
Why should that Scrivener
That ne'er writ reason in his life, nor any thing
That time ever gloried in, that never knew
How to keep any courtesy concealed
But Noverint universt must proclaim it,
Purchase perpetually, and I a rascal:
Consider this, why should that mouldy Cobbler
Marry his daughter to a wealthy Merchant,
And give five thousand pound, is this good justice?
Because he has a tougher constitution;
Can feed upon old songs, and save his money,
Therefore must I go beg?
What's this to thee?
Thou can not mend it, if thou be determind
To roball like a tyrant, yet take heed
A keener justice doe not overtake thee,
And catch you in a Noose.
I am no Woodcock,
He that shall sit down frighted with that foolery
Is not worth pity, let me alone to shuffle;
Thou art for winching.
For beauty I, a safe course,
No halter hangs in my way, I defy it.
But a worse fate, a wilful poverty,
For where thou against by one that indeed loves thee,
A thousand will draw from thee, tic thy destiny;
One is a kind of weeping cross Jack,
A gentle purgatory, doe not fling at all,
You'll pay the Box so often, till thou perish.
Take you no care for that Sir, tic my pleasure,
I will employ my wits a great deal faster
Then you shall doe your fingers, and my Loves,
If I mistake not, shall prove riper harvest
And handsomer, and come within less danger.
Whore's thy young sister?
I know not where she is, she is not worth caring for,
She has no wit.
Oh you'd be nibbling with her,
Shoe's far enough I hope, I know not where,
Shoe's not worth caring for, a sullenthing
She wot not take my counsel Jack,
And so I parted from her.
Leave her to her wants?
I gave her a little money what I could spare,
She had a mind toth country, she is turned
By this some Farriers dairy maid, I may meet her
Riding from market one day twixt her Dorsers;
If I doe, by this hand I wonnot spare
Her butter pence.
Thou wilt not rob thy Sister.
She shall account me for her Eggs and Cheeses.
A pretty Girl, did not old Algripe love her,
A very pretty Girl she was.
Some such thing,
But he was too wise to fasten; let her pass.
Then whore's thy Mistress?
Where you shannot find her,
Nor know what stuff she is made on, no indeed Sir,
I chose her not for your use.
Sure she is handsome.
Yes indeed is she, she is very handsome, but that's all one
You'll come toth marriage.
Is it to day.
Now, now, they are come from Church now.
Any great preparation,
Does Justice Algripe show his power.
Very glorious, and glorious people there.
I may meet with him yet ever I die as cunning as he is.
You may doe good Tom at the marriage,
We have Plate and dainty things.
Doe you no harm Sir,
For yet me thinks the marriage should be mared
If thou moist have thy will, farewell, say nothing.
You are welcome noble friends.
I thank you Sir,
Nephew to the old Lady, his name is Wildbraine,
And wild his best condition.
I have heard of him,
I pray ye tell me Sir, is young Maria merry
After her marriage rites? does she look lively?
How does she like her man?
Very scurvely,
And as untowardly she prepares herself,
But tic mine Ants will, that this dull mettle
Must be mixed with her to allay her handsomeness.
Had Hartlove no fast friends?
His means are little,
And where those littles are, as little comforts
Ever keep company: I know she loves him,
His memory beyond the hopes of ???
Beyond the Indies in his mouldy Cabinets,
But tic her unhansome fate.
I am sorry fort,
Here comes poor Frank, nay we are friends, start not Sir,
We see your willow and are sorry for,
And though it be a wedding we are half mourners.
Good Gentlemen remember not my fortunes.
They are not to be helped with words.
Look up man,
A proper sensible fellow and shrink for a Wench,
Are there no more? or is she all the hansomnesse?
Prithee leave fooling.
Prithee leave thou whining,
Have maids forgot to love?
You are injurious.
Let 'em alone a while, thei'le follow thee.
Come good Frank,
Forget now, since there is no remedy,
And show a merry face, as wise men would doe.
Be a free guest, and think not of those passages.
Think how to nick him home, thou know she dotes on thee;
Graffe me a dainty meddler on his crabstocke;
Pay me the dreaming puppy.
Well, make your mirth, the whilst I bear my misery;
Honest minds would ha better thoughts.
I am her kinsman,
And love her well, am tender of her youth,
Yet honest Frank, before I would have that stinkard,
That walking rotten tomb, enjoy her maidenhead.
Prithee leave mocking.
Prithee Frank believe me,
Go to consider, hark, they knock to dinner,
Come wo't thou go?
I prithee Frank go with us,
And laugh and dance as we doe.
You are light Gentlemen,
Nothing to weigh your hearts, pray give me leave,
Isle come and see, and take my leave.
We'll look for you,
Doe not despair, I have a trick yet.
Yes,
When I am mischievous I will believe your projects:
She is gone, for ever gone, I cannot help it,
My hopes and all my happiness gone with her.
Gone like a pleasing dream: what mirth and jollity
Reigns round about this house? how every office
Swetes with new joys, can she be merry too?
Is all this pleasure set by her appointment?
Sure she has a false heart then; still they grow louder
The old mans god, his gold, has won upon her
(Light hearted Cordial gold) and all my services
That offred naked truth, are clean forgotten:
Yet if she were compelled, but it cannot be,
If I could but imagine her will mine,
Although he had her body.
He shall come in.
Walk without doors of this day, though an enemy,
It must not be.
You must compel him Madam.
No she shall fetch him in, Nephew it shall be so.
It will be fittest.
Can fair Maria look again upon me?
Can there be so much impudence in sweetness?
Or has she got a strong heart to defy me?
She comes her self: how rich she is in Jewels!
Me thinks they show like frozen Icicles,
Cold winter had hung on her, how the Roses
That kept continual spring within her cheeks
Are withered with the old mans dull embraces?
She would speak to me. I can sigh too Lady
But from a sounder heart: yes, and can weep too
But tic for you, that ever I believed you,
Tears of more pious value then your marriage;
You would encase your self, and I must credit you,
So much my old obedience compels from me;
Go, and forget me, and my poverty,
I need not bid you, you're too perfect that way:
But still remember that I loved Maria,
Loved with a loyal love, nay turn not from me,
I will not ask a treare more, you are bountiful,
Go and rejoice, and I will waite upon you
That little of my life left.
Good Sir hear me,
What has been done, was the act of my obedience
And not my will: forced from me by my parents,
Now tic done, doe as I doe, bear it handsomely
And if there can be more society
Without dishonour to my tie of marriage
Or place for noble love, I shall love you still,
You had the first, the last, had my will prospered;
You talk of little time of life: dear Frank,
Certain I am not married for eternity,
The joy my marriage brings tells me I am mortal
And shorter lived then you, else I were miserable;
Nor can the gold and ease his age hath brought me
Add what I coveted, content, go with me,
They seek a day of joy, prithee let's show it
Though it beforc'd, and by this kiss believe me
How ever, I must live at his command now,
Isle dye at yours.
I have enough, Isle honour ye.
Here are my trinkets, and this lusty marriage
I mean to visit, I have shift of all sorts,
And here are thousand wheels to set 'em working,
I am very merry, for I know this wedding
Will yield me lusty pillage, if mad Wildgoose
That debauched rogue keep but his ancient revels
And breed a hubbub in the house I am happy.
Now what are you?
A poor distressed boy Sir,
Friendless and comfortless, that would entreat
Some charity and kindness from your worship,
I would fine serve Sir, and as fine endeavour
With duteous labour to deserve the love
Of that good Gentleman shall entertain me.
A pretty Boy, but of too mild a breeding,
Too tender and too bashful a behaviour,
What can thou doe?
I can learn any thing
That's good and honest, and shall please Master.
He blushes as he speaks, and that I like not,
I love a bold and secure confidence,
An impudence that one may trust, this boy now
Had I instructed him had been a Jewel,
A treasure for my use, thou can not lye.
I would not willingly.
Nor thou hast no wit
To dissemble neatly.
Doe you love such boys, Sir?
Oh mainly, mainly, I would have my boy impudent,
Outface all truth, yet doe it piously:
Like Proteus, cast himself into all forms,
As sudden and as nimble as his thoughts,
Blench at no danger, though it be the Gallows,
Nor make no conscience of a cosonage
Though it be ith Church; your soft, demure, still children ???
Are good for nothing, but to get long graces ???
And sing songs to dull tunes; I would keep thee
And cherish thee, had thou any active quality,
And be a tender master to thy knavery,
But thou art not for my use.
Doe you speak this seriously?
Yes indeed doe I.
Would you have your Boy Sir
Read in these moral mischiefs?
Now thou move me.
And be a well trained youth in all activities?
By any means.
Or doe you this to try me,
Fearing a proneness.
I speak this to make thee.
Then take me Sir, and cherish me and love me;
You have me what you would: believe me Sir
I can doe any thing for your advantage,
I guess at what you mean; I can lie naturally,
As easily, as I can sleep Sir, and securely:
As naturally I can steal too.
That I am glad on,
Right heartily glad on, hold thee there, thou art excellent.
Steal any thing from any body living.
Not from thy Master.
That's mine own body.
And must not be.
The Boy mends mightily.
A rich man, that like snow, heaps up his moneys
I have a kind of pious zeal to meet still;
A fool that not deserves 'em, I take pity on,
For fear he should run mad, and so I ease him.
Excellent boy, and able to instruct me,
Of my own nature just.
I scorn all hazard,
And on the edge of danger I doe best sir,
I have a thousand faces to deceive,
And to those twice so many tongues to flatter,
An impudence no brass was ever tougher,
And for my conscience.
Peace, I ha found a Jewel,
A Jewel all the Indies cannot match,
And thou shat feel ???
This title, and I ha done sir;
I never can confess, I ha that spell on me;
And such rare modesties before a Magistate,
Such Innocence to catch a Judge, such ignorance.
Isle learn of thee, thou art my own, come Boy
Isle give thee action presently.
Have at you.
What must I call thee
Snap sir.
Tic most natural
A name borne to thee, sure thou art a Fairy,
Show but thy skill, and I shall make thee happy.
Where be these knaves? who strues up all the liveries,
Is the brides bed made?
Yes Madam and a bell
Hung under it artificially.
Out knave out
Must we have larums now?
A little warning
That we may know when to begin our healths Madam,
The Justice is a kind of old Jade Madam,
That will go merriest with a bell.
All the house drunk.
This is a day of Jubilee.
Are the best hangings up, and the plate set out?
Who makes the Posit, Nurse?
The dairy maid,
And sheele put that in will make him caper:
Well Madam, well, you might ha chose another,
A handsomer for your years.
Peace he is rich Nurse,
He is rich, and thats beauty.
I am sure he is rotten,
Would he had been hanged when he first saw her. Termagant!
What an angry queen is this, where,
Who looks to him?
He is very merry Madam
M. Wildbraine, has him in hand, in the bottom of the Cellar
He sighs and tipples.
Alas good Gentleman,
My hearts sore for thee.
Sorrow must have his course, sir
Give him some Sack to dry up his remembrance,
How does the Bridegroom, I am afraid of him.
He is a trim youth to be tender of, hemp take him.
Must my sweet new blown Rose find such a winter
Before her spring be near.
Peace, peace, thou art foolish.
And dances like a Town top: and reels, and hobbles.
Alas, good Gentleman, give him not much wine.
He shall ha none by my consent.
Are the women comforting my daughter?
Yes, yes, Madam,
And reading to her a pattern of true patience,
They read and pray for her too.
They had need,
Ye had better marry her to her grave a great deal:
There will be peace and rest, alas poor gentlewoman,
Must she become a Nurse now in her tenderness?
Well Madam well my heart bleeds.
Thou art a fool still
Pray heaven I be.
And an old fool to be vexed thus.
Tic late she must to bed, go knave be merry,
Drink for a Boy, away to all your charges.
Doe as thou wot, but if thou dost refuse it
Thou art the stupid'st ass, there's no long arguing,
Time is too precious Frank.
I am hot with wine,
And apt now to believe, but if thou dost this
Out of a villainy, to make me wrong her,
As thou art prone enough.
Does she not love thee?
Did she not cry down right even now to part with thee?
Had she not sounded if I had not caught her?
Can thou have more?
I must confess all this.
Doe not stand prating, and misdoubting, casting,
If she go from thee now, she's lost for ever;
Now now she's going, she that loves thee going,
She whom thou lov st.
Pray let me think a little.
There is no leisure; think when thou hast embraced her
Can she imagine thou did ever honour her,
Ever believe thy oaths, that tamely sufferst
An old dry ham of horse flesh to enjoy her
Enjoy her Maiden head; take but that from her
That we may tell posterity a man had it,
A handsome man, a gentleman, a young man,
To save the honour of our house, the credit,
Tic no great matter I desire.
I hear you.
Free us both from the fear of breeding fowls
And ophs, got by this shadow: we talk too long.
She is going now to bed, among the women
What opportunity can I have to meet her?
Let me alone, hast thou a will? speak soundly,
Speak discreetly, speak home and handsomely,
First not pity, nay misery, nay infamy to leave
So rare a pie to be cut up by a rascal.
I will go presently, now, now, I stay thee.
Such a dainty Doe, to be taken
By one that knows not neck beef from a Pheasant,
Nor cannot relish Braggat from Ambrofia.
Is it not conscience.
Yes, yes, now I feel it.
A meritorious thing.
Good Father Wildgoose,
I doe confess it.
Come then follow me
And pluck a mans heart up, Isle locke thee privately
Where she alone shall presently pass by,
None near to interupt thee but be sure;
I shall be sure enough, lead on, and crown me.
No wringings in your mind now as you love me.
Tic time you were a bed.
I prithee sweet heart
Consider my necessity, why art sad?
I must tell you a tale in your ear anon.
Of Tom Thumb.
I believe that will prove your stiffest story.
I pity the young wench.
And so doe I too.
Come, old sticks take fire.
But the Plague is, heel burn out instantly;
Give him another cup.
Those are but flashes,
A run of sack wonot set him high enough.
Will ye to bed?
I must.
Come have a good heart,
And win him like a bowl to lye close to you,
Make your best use.
Nay prithee Duck go instantly,
Isle dance a Jig or two to warm my body.
Tic almost midnight.
Prithee to bed Maria.
Go you before, and let the Ladies follow,
And leave her to her thoughts a while, there must be
A time of taking leave of the same fooleries
Bewailing others maiden-heads.
Come then,
Weal waite in the next room.
Doe not tarry
For if thou dost, by my troth I shall fall asleep Mall.
Doe, doe, and dream of Dotrells, get you to bed quickly
And let us ha no more stir, come no crying
Tic too late now, carry your self discreetly,
The old thief loves thee dearly, thats the benefit.
For the rest you must make your own play, Nay not that way,
Theile pull ye all to pieces, for your whim whams,
Your garters and your gloves, go modestly
And privately steal to bed, tic very late Mall,
For if you go by them such a new larum.
I know not which way to avoid em.
This way
This through the Cloisters: and so steal to bed,
When you are there once, all will separate
And give ye rest, I came out of my pity
To show you this.
I thank you.
Here's the keys
Go presently and locke the doors fast after ye,
That none shall follow.
Good night.
Good-night sweet Cousin,
A good, and sweet night, or Isle curse thee Frank.
She stays long, sure young Wildgoose has abused me,
He has made sport wi'me, I may yet get out again,
And I may see his face once more, I ha soul intentions,
But they are drawn on by a fouler dealing.
Hark, hark, it was the door,
Something comes this way, wondrous still, and stealing
May be some walking spirit to affright me.
Oh heaven my fortune.
Tic her voice, stay.
Save me
Bless me you better powers.
I am no Devil.
Yare little better to disturb me now.
My name is Hartlove
Fie, fie, worthy friend,
Fie noble sir.
I must talk farther with ye
You know my fair affection.
So preserve it,
You know I am married now, for shame be civiller,
Not all the earth shall make me.
Pray walk this way,
And if you ever loved me.
Take heed Frank
How you divert that love to hate, go home prithee.
Shall he enjoy that sweet?
Nay pray unhand me.
He that ne'er felt what love was.
Then I charge you
Stand further off.
I am tame, but let me walk we'yee,
Talk but a minute.
So your talk be honest
And my untainted honour suffer not
Isle walk a turn or two.
Give me your hand then.
Shoe's not in her Chamber.
She is not here.
And Isle tell you what I dreamed
Give me a Torch.
Be not too hasty sir.
Nay let him go,
For if my dream be true, he must be speedy,
He will be tricked, and blazed else.
As I am a woman
I cannot blame her if she take her liberty,
Would she would make thee cuckold thou old bully,
A notorious cuckold for tormenting her.
Isle hang her then.
Isle bless her then, she does Justice,
Is this old stinking dogs flesh for her diet?
Prithee honest Nurse doe not fret too much
For fear I dream you'll hang your self too.
The Cloister?
Such was my fancy, I doe not say tic true,
Nor doe Ibid you be too confident.
Where are the keys, the keys I say.
I dreamed she had 'em to locke her self in.
What a devil doe you mean?
No harm good Nurse be patient
They are not in the window, where they use to be.
What foolish dreams are these?
I am mad.
I hope so.
If you be not mad, Isle doe my best to make ye.
This is some trick.
I smell the Wildgoose.
Come gentlemen, come quickly I beseech you,
Quick as you can, this may be your case Gentlemen.
And bring some lights, some lights.
Move faster, faster, you'll come too late else.
Isle stay behind and pray for ye, I had rather she were dishonest,
Than thou should have her.
You're most unmanly, yet I have some breath lest;
And this steel to defend me, come not near me,
For if you offer but another violence,
As I have life Isle kill you, if I miss that,
Upon my own heart will I execute,
And let that fair belief out, I had of you.
Most virtuous Maid, I have done, forgive my follies:
Pardon, O pardon, I now see my wickedness,
And what a monstrous shape it puts upon me,
On your fair hand I seal.
Down with the door.
We are betrayed, oh Frank, Frank.
Isle dye for ye
Rather than you shall suffer, Isle ??? ???
Now Enter.
Enter sweet Gentlemen, mine eyes, mine eyes,
Oh how my head aches.
Is it possible?
Hold her, she sinks.
A plot upon my honour
To poison my fair name, a studied villainy,
Farewell, as I have hope of peace, I am honest,
My brains, my brains, my monstrous brains, they bud sure.
She is gone, she is gone.
A handsome riddance of her.
Would I could as easily lose her memory.
Is this the sweet of Marriage, have I bred thee
For this reward?
Hold, hold, he's desperate too.
Be sure ye hold him fast, weal bind him over
To the next Sessions, and if I can Isle hang him.
Nay then Isle live to be a terror to thee,
Sweet Virgin Rose farewell: heaven has thy beauty,
Thats only fit for heaven. Isle live a little
To find the villain out that wrought this injury,
And then most blessed soul, Isle climb up to thee.
Farewell, I feel my self another creature.
Oh misery of miseries.
I told ye Madam.
Carry her in, you will pay back her portion.
No not a penny, pay me back my credit
And Isle condition way.
A sad wedding
Her grave must be her Bridal bed, oh Mall,
Would I had wed thee to thy own content
Then I had had thee still.
I am mad, farewell,
Another wanton wife will prove a hell.
What hast thou done?
I have walked through all the lodgings.
A silence as if death dwelt there inhabits.
What hast thou seen?
Nought but a sad confusion thing
Every left in such a loose disorder
That were there twenty thieves, they would be laden.
Tic very well, I like thy care, but tic strange
A wedding night should be so solitary.
Certainly there is some cause, some death or sickness
Is fallen suddenly upon some friend,
Or some strange news is come.
Are they all a bed?
I think so, and sound a sleep, unless it be
Some women that keep watch in a low parlour,
And drink, and weep, I know not to what end.
Whore's all the plate?
Why locked up in that room.
I saw the old Lady, ere she went to bed
Put up her plate, and some of the rich hangings
In a small long chest, her chain and rings are there too,
It stands close by the Table on a form.
T was a good notice, did thou see the men.
I saw them sad too, and all take their leaves,
But what they said I was too far to hear sir.
Tic daintily discovered, we shall certainly
Have a most prosperous night, which way.
A close one,
A back door, that the women have left open,
To go in and out to fetch necessaries,
Close on the Garden side.
I love thy diligence,
Were thou not fearful.
Fearful? Isle be hanged first.
Say they had spied thee.
I was then determain'd
To have cried down right too, and have kept 'em company,
As one that had an interest in their sadness,
Or made an errand to I know not whom sir.
My dainty Boy, let us discharge, that plate
Makes a perpetual motion in my fingers
Till I have fast hold of it.
Pray be wise sir, do it handsomely, be not greedy,
Lets handle it with such an excellence
As if we would bring thieving into honour:
We must disguise, to fright these reverend watches.
Still my blessed Boy.
And clear the Room of drunken Jealousies,
The chest is of some weight, and we may make
Such noise ith carriage we may be snapped.
Come open, here is a devils face.
No, no, sir, weal have no shape so terrible,
We will not doe the devil so much pleasure,
To have him face our plot.
A winding sheet then.
Thats too cold a shift,
I would not wear the reward of my wickedness,
I wonder you are an old thief, and no cunninger,
Whore's the long cloak?
Here, here.
Give me the Turban
And the false beard, I hear some coming this way,
Stoop, stoop, and let me sit upon your shoulders
And now as I direct: stay let 'em enter,
And when I touch move forward, make no noise.
Oh tic a sad time, all the burnt wine is drunk Nick.
We may thank your dry chaps for it, the Canaries gone too
No substance for a sorrowful mind to work upon,
I cannot morn in beer, if she should walk now
As discontented spirits are wont to doe.
And meet us in the Cellar.
What sense have we with single beer against her?
What heart can we defy the devil with?
The March Beere's open.
A fortification of March Beer will doe well,
I must confess tic a most mighty Armour,
For I presume I cannot pray.
Why Nicholas?
We Coachmen have such tumbling faiths, no prayers
Can go an even pace.
Hold up your candle.
Verily Nurse, I have cried so much
For my young Mistress, that is mortified,
That if I have not more sack to support me,
I shall even sleep, heigho, for another flagon;
These burials and Christnings are the mournefulst matters,
And they ask more drink.
Drink to a sad heart's needful.
Mine's ever sad, for I am ever dry Nurse.
Me thinks the light burns blew, I prithee snuff it
There's a thief in it I think.
There may be one near it.
Whats that that moves there, in the name of ??? Nicholas?
That thing that walks.
Would I had a ladder to behold it,
Mercy upon me, the Ghost of one of the Guard sure,
Tic the Devil by his claws, he smells of Brimstone,
Sure he farts fire, what an earth-quake I have in me;
Out with thy prayer book Nurse.
It fell ithe frying-pan, and the Cats eat it.
J have no power to pray, it grows still longer,
Tic Steeple high now, and it sails away Nurse,
Lets call the Butler up, for he speaks Latin,
And that will daunt the Devil: I am blasted,
My bellies grown to nothing.
Fie, fly, Toby.
So let them go, and whilst they are astonished
Let us presently upon the rest now suddenly.
Off, off, and up again, when we are near the Parlour,
Art sure thou know the Chest?
Though it were in the dark sir,
I can go to it.
On then and be happy.
How my haunches quake? is the thing here still
Now can I out-doe any Button maker, at his ownetrade,
I have fifteen fits of an Ague, Nurse, tic gone I hope
The hard hearted woman has left me alone. Nurse ???
And she knows too I ha but a lean Conscience to keep me company.
The Devils among em in the parlour sure,
The Ghost three stories high, he has the Nurse sure,
He is boiling of her bones now, hark how she whistles:
There's gentlewomen within too, how will they doe?
Isle to the Cooke, for he was drunk last night,
And now he is valiant, he's a kin to the Devil too
And fears no fire,
No light?
Noneleft sir,
They are gone, and carried all the candles with 'em
Their fright is infinite, lets make good use on it
We must be quick sir, quick, or the house will rise else.
Was this the Chest?
Yes, yes.
There was two of 'em
Or I mistake.
I know the right, no stay sir,
Nor no discourse, but to our labour Iustily,
Put to your strength and make as little noise,
Then presently out at: the back door.
Come Boy.
Come happy child and let me hug thy excellence.
What thousand noises pass through all the rooms?
What cries and hurries? sure the Devils drunk.
And tumbles through the house, my villainies
That never made me apprehend before
Danger or fear, a little now molest me;
My Cousins death sits heavy o'my conscience,
Would I had been half hanged when I hammered it.
I aimed at a living divorce, not a burial
That Frank might have had some hope: hark still
In every room confusion, they are all mad,
Most certain all stark mad within the house
A punishment inflicted for my lewdness,
That I might have the more sense of my mischief
And run the more mad too, my Aunt is hanged sure,
Sure hanged her self, or else the fiend has fetched her;
I heard a hundred cries, the Devil, the Devil,
Then roaring and then tumbling, all the chambers
Are a mere babel, or another bedlam.
What should I think? I shake my self too:
Can the Devil find no time, but when we are merry,
Here's something comes.
Oh that I had some company,
I care not what they were, to ease my misery,
To comfort me,
Whose that?
Again? nay then receive
Hold, hold I am no fury.
The Merchants wife.
Are ye a man? pray heaven you be.
I am.
Alas I have met sir
The strangest things too night.
Why doe you stare.
Pray comfort me, and put your candle out
For if I see the Spirit again I dye fort.
And hold me fast, for I shall shake to pieces else.
Isle warrant you, Isle hold ye,
Hold ye as tenderly; I have put the light out,
Retire into my Chamber, there Isle watch we ye,
Isle keep you from all frights.
And will ye keep me.
Keep you as secure Lady.
You must not wrong me then, the devil will have us.
No, no, Isle love you, then the devil will fear us.
For he fears all that love, pray come in quickly,
For this is the malicious house he walks in,
The hour he blasts sweet faces, lame the limbs in,
Depraves the senses, now within this half hour
He will have power to turn all Citizens wives
Into strange creatures, Owls, and long-taild Monkeys
Jayes, Pies, and Parrots, quickly, I smell his brimstone.
It comes again I am gone, shift for your self sir.
Sure this whole night is nothing but illusion,
Here's nothing comes, all they are mad, damned devil
To drive her back again, 't had been thy policy
To have let us alone, we might have done some fine thing
To have made thy hel-hood laugh, tic a dainty wench
If I had her again, not all your fellow goblins
Nor all their claws should scratch her hence, Isle stay still,
May be her fright will bring her back again,
Yet I will hope.
I can find no bed, no body, nor no chamber,
Sure they are all in the cellar, and I cannot find that neither,
I am led up, and down like a tame ass, my light's out
And I grope up and down like blind-man buff
And break my face, and break my pate.
It comes again sure
I see the shadow, Isle have faster hold now,
Sure she is mad, I long to lye with a mad-woman,
She must needs have rare new tricks.
I hear one whisper
If it be the devil now to allure me into his clutches,
For Devils have a kind of tone like crickets,
I have a glimpse of her guise, tic she would steal by me,
But Isle stand sure.
I have but a dram of wit left,
And thats even ready to run, oh for my bed now.
She named a bed, I like that, she repents sure,
Where is she now.
Who's that.
Are you there, In, In, In presently.
I feel his talents through me
Tic an old haggard devil, what will he doe with me?
Let me kiss thee first, quick, quick.
A lecherous Devil.
What a hairy whore tic, sure she has a muffler.
If I should have a young Satan by him, for I dare not de???ny him,
In what case were I? who durst deliver me?
Tic but my fancy, she is the same, in quickly, gently my
Sweet girl.
Sweet Devil be good to me.
Wheres my love Boy.
Shees coming with a Candle
To see our happy prize.
I am cruel weary.
I cannot blame ye, plate is very heavy
To carry without light or help.
The fear too
At every stumble to be discovered boy,
At every cough to raise a Constable,
Well, we'll be merry now.
We have some reason;
Things compasd without feat or eminent danger
Are too luxurious sir to live upon.
Money and wealth got thus are as full venture,
And carry in their natures as much merit
As his, that digs em out 'oth mine, they last too
Seasoned with doubts and dangers most deliciously,
Riches that fall upon us are too ripe,
And dull our appetites.
Most learned child.
You're welcome, where have you left it.
In the next room, hard by.
Is it plate all.
All, all, and Jewels, I am monstrous weary,
Prithee lets go to bed.
Prithee lets see it first.
To morrows a new sweet.
Yes to melt it,
But lets agree to night, how it shall be handled
Isle have a new gown.
Shat have any thing.
And such a riding suite as Mistress Newloves,
What though I be no gentlewoman borne,
I hope I may achieve it by my carriage.
Thou say right.
You promised me a horse too, and a lackey.
Thou shat have horses six, and a postilion.
That will be stately sweet heart, a postilion.
Nay weal be in fashion, he shall ride before us
In winter, with as much dirt would damp a musket,
The inside of our coach shall be of scarlet.
That will be dear.
There is a dye projecting
Will make it cheap wench, come thou shalt have any thing.
Where is this chest, I long sweet to behold
Our Jndies.
Mistress lets melt it first, and then tic fit
You should dispose it, then tic safe from danger.
Isle be a loving Mistress to my boy too.
Now fetch it in and lets rejoice upon it.
Hold your light Mistress, we may see to enter.
Ha whats h ere? call you this a chest?
We ha mist sir.
Our hast and want of light made us mistake?
A very Coffin.
How, a Coffin? Boy, Tic very like one.
The devil owed us a shame, and now he has paid us.
Is this your Treasure?
Bury me alive in it.
It may be there is no room.
Nay, I will search it,
Isle see what wealth's within, ??? ??? a women's face,
And a fair women's.
I cannot tell sir,
Belike this was the sadness that possessed 'em;
The plate stood next, I'm sure.
I shake, I shake Boy, what a cold sweat ???
This may work, what will become on's sir?
She is cold, dead cold: de'e find 'your conscience,
De'e bring your Gillians hither ??? nay, shoe's punished,
Your concealed love's cased up?
Tic Maria, the very same, the Bride, new horror!
These are fine tricks, you hope shoe's in a sound,
But Isle take order she shall ne'er recover
To bore my nose, come, take her up and bury her
Quickly, or Isle cry out; take her up instantly.
Be not so hasty fool, that may undo us;
Wee may be in for murder so; be patient,
Thou see shoe's dead, and cannot injure thee.
I am sure she shall not.
Be not sir dejected,
Too much a strange mistake! this had not been else,
It makes me almost weep to think upon it.
What an unlucky thief am I?
Isle no considering, either bestir your self, or ???
Hold.
Let it not stay to smell then, I will not
Endure the stink of a Rival.
Would it were there again.
We must bury her.
But where of the sudden, or with what providence,
That no eyes watch us.
Take a Spade and follow me.
The next fair ground we meet, make the Church yard;
As I live, Isle see her lodged.
It must be so,
How heavy my heart is, I ha no life left.
I am past thinking too, no understanding,
That I should miss the right Chest.
The happy Chest.
That, which I saw and marked too.
Well passion wo'not help us,
Had I twenty falls for this?
It was my fault sir.
And twenty thousand fears for this, oth'devill,
Now could I curse, well, we have her now,
And must dispose her.
Hang both for two blind buzzards, here's a Spade
Quickly or Isle call the neighbours.
There's no remedy,
Would the poor hungry prisoners had this pastie.
It was a strange mischance sir.
Mischance, say? No it was happiness to me,
There's so much charge saved, I have her portion,
Isle marry twenty more on such conditions.
Did it not trouble you sir,
To see her dead?
Not much, I thank my conscience;
I was tormented till that happened, furies
Were in my brain to think my self a Cuekold
At that time of the night:
When I come home, I charge you shut my doors,
Locks, bolts, and bars, are little enough to secure me,
Why, and please you?
Fool to ask that question;
To keep out women, I expect her mother
Will visit me with her clamours, oh I hate
Their noise, and doe abhor the whole sex heartlly;
They are all walking Devils, Harpies, I will study
A week together how to rail sufficiently,
Upon i'm all, and that I may be furnished,
Thou shat buy all the railing Books and Ballads,
That Malice hath invented against women,
I will read nothing else, and practise 'em,
Till I grow fat with curses.
If you'll go
To th'charge, let me alone to find you Books.
They come near us.
Whats that?
Where? hold up the Torch Knave.
Did you hear nothing? it is a ???
Why dost make a stand?
Whats that?
Where, where, dost see any thing?
We are hard by the Church-yard, and I was never
Valiant at midnight in such irksome places;
They say Ghosts walk sometimes, hark, de'e hear nothing?
No further, dig here, and lay her in quickly.
What light is that Boy, we shall be discovered;
Set the Coffin up an end, and get behind me,
There's no avoiding.
Oh.
Whore's that groan? I begin to be afraid.
What shall we doe sir?
We are almost at home now, thou must go forward;
Perhaps it was my imagination.
Tic he?
I know him too, let me alone.
Oh sir, a Ghost, the very Ghost of Mistress Bride.
I have no power to run away.
Cursed Ghost; bless me, preserve me,
I doe command thee what so ere thou art,
I doe conjure thee leave me; doe not fright me;
If thou be a devil vex me not so soon,
If thou be
The spirit of my wife.
Thy wife.
I shall be tormented.
Thy abused wife, that cannot peaceably
Enjoy her death, thou hast an evil conscience.
I know it.
Among thy other sins which black thy soul,
Call to thy mind thy vow made to another,
Whom thou hast wronged, and make her satisfaction
Now I am dead, thou perjured man, or else
A thousand black tormentors shall pursue thee,
Until thou leap into eternal flames;
Where gold which thou adore here on earth
Melted, the Fiends shall power into thy throat;
For this time pass, go home, and think upon me,
A way.
There are more spirits.
Thank you dear wife,
Isle bestow twenty nobles of a Tomb for thee,
Thou shalt not walk and catch cold after death.
So, so, they are gone, it was my ingenious rascal:
But how dost know he made vows to another?
I over-heard the women talk to night on it;
But now lets lose no time sir, pray lets bury
This Gentlewoman, whore's my Mistress?
Here, I durst not tarry.
We ha so cozened the old forty in the hundred,
And the devil hinder him not, he will go a pilgrimage;
But come, about our business, set her down again.
Oh.
She groans, ha.
Oh.
Again, she stirs.
Lets fly, or else we shall be torn in pieces.
And you be good at that, bury your self,
Or let the Sexton take ye for his fee,
Away boy.
I am very cold, dead cold;
Where am I? What's this? a Coffin? where have I been?
Mercy defend me: Ha, I doe remember
I was betrayed, and sounded; my heart aches,
I am wondrous hungry too, dead bodies eat not;
Sure I was meant for burial, I am frozen;
Death, like a cake of Ice dwells round about me,
Darkness spreads o'er the world too, where? what path,
Best providence direct me.
THou art the most unfortunate fellow;
Why Aunt, what have I done?
The most malicious varlet,
Thy wicked head never at rest, but hammering,
And hatching hellish things, and to no purpose,
So thou moist have thy base will.
Why doe you rail thus?
Cannot a scurvy accident fall out,
But I must be at one end on it?
Thou art at both ends.
Cannot young sullen wenches play the sooles,
And marry, and die, but I must be the agent?
All that I did (and if that be an injury,
Let the world judge it) was but to persuade her
(And as I take it) I was bound to it too,
To make the reverend coxcomb her husband Cuckold:
What else could I advise her, was there harm i'this?
You are of years, and have run through experience,
Would you be content if you were young again,
To have a continual cough grow to your pillow,
A rottenness, that vaults are perfumes to
Hang in your roof, and like a fog infect you;
Anointed hams to keep his hinges turning
Reeke ever in your nose, and twenty nightcaps,
With twenty several sweats.
Some Jew, some Justice,
A thousand heathen smells to say truth Madam,
And would you mellow my young pretty Mistress
In such a mis-ken?
Sir,
Whore's the body of my Girl?
I know not,
I am no Conjurer, you may look the body,
I was like to be stolen away my self, the Spirit
Had like to ha surprised me in the shape of a woman,
Of a young woman, and you know those are dangerous.
So had I Madam, simply though I stand here,
I had been ravished too: I had twenty Spirits
In every corner of the house a Fiend met me.
You lie like raskalls,
Was Mistress Newlove such a Spirit sir
To fright your worship;
Well, I discharge you sir, ye'are now at liberty,
Live where you please, and doe what pranks you fancy,
You know your substance, though you are my Nephew,
I am no way bound sir to protect your mischief;
So fare you well.
Farewell good Aunt, I thank you,
Adieu honest Nick, the devil if he have power,
Will persecute your old bones, for this marriage,
Fare well Mistress Win.
And shall we part with dry lips;
Shall we that have been fellow devils together
Flinch for an old women's fart?
Tic a fine time a night too, but we must part Nick.
Shall we never ring again? ne'er toss the tenor,
And roll the changes in a Cup of Claret?
You shall not want what ere I lay my hands on,
As I am sure Automaton the Coachman,
Shall be distributed; bear up, I say, hang sorrow,
Give me that bird abroad that lives at pleasure,
Sam the Butlers true, the Cooke a reverend Trojan,
The Faulkner shall sell his Hawks, and swear they were rotten,
There be some wandering spoons, that may be met with,
Isle pawn a Coach horse, peace, utter no sentences.
The harness shall be used in our wars also;
Or shall I drive her (tell me but your will now,
Say but the word) over some rotten bridge,
Or by a Marle pit side, she may slip in daintily,
Let me alone for my self.
No, no, farewell Toby,
Farewell spinie Nicholas, no such thing,
There be ways in the world, if you see me
A day or two hence, may be we'll crack a quart yet,
And pull a bell, commend to the household;
Nay, cry not Toby twill make thy head giddy.
Sweet Master Wildbraine.
No more Toby go, the times may alter ???
But whore's the coarse of my dead cousin,
(If she be dead) I hoped 'thad but dissembled
That sits heavy here: Toby, honest Toby,
Lend me thy Lantern, I forgot it was dark,
I had need look to my ways now.
Take a lodging with me to night in the Stable,
And ride away to morrow with one of the horses
Next your heart, pray doe.
No, good night good neighbour Toby, I will wander,
I scorn to submit my self, ere I have rambled,
But whether, or with what, thats more material;
No matter, and the worst come it is but stealing,
And my Aunt won'ot see me hanged for her own credit,
And farewell in a halter costs me nothing.
The night, and all the evils the night covers,
The Goblins, Hags, and the black spawn of darkness
Cannot fright me, no death, I dare thy cruelty,
For I am weary both of life and light too;
Keep my wits heaven, they say spirits appear
To melancholy minds, and the graves open,
I would fine see the fair Marries shadow,
But speak unto her spirit ere I died,
But ask upon my knees a mercy from her:
I was a villain, but her wretched Kinsman,
That set his plot, shall with his heart blood satisfy
Her injured life and honour, what lights this?
It is but melancholy walking thus;
The Tavern doors are barricaded too,
Where I might drink till morn, in expectation;
I cannot meet the Watch neither; nothing in
The likeness of a Constable, whom I might
In my distress abuse, and so be carried,
For want of other lodging to the Counter.
Tic his voice, Fate, I thank thee.
Ha, who's that, and thou be a man speak?
Frank Heartlove, then I bare my destinies,
Thou art the man of all the world I wished for;
My Aunt has turned me out a doors, she has,
At this unchristian hour, and I doe walk,
Me thinks, like Guido Fax with my dark Lantern,
Stealing to set the town a fire; in the country
I should be tan for William of the Wisp,
Or Robin Goodfellow, and how dost Frank?
The worse for you.
Come, thar't a fool, art going to thy lodging?
Isle lie with thee to night, and tell thee stories,
How many devils we ha met withal;
Our house is haunted Frank, whole legions,
I saw fifty for my share.
Did not fright i'm?
How, fright i'm? no, they frighted me sufficiently.
Thou had wickedness enough to make them stare,
And be afraid of the, malicious devil;
And draw thy sword, for by Marries soul;
I will not let thee scope to doe more mischief.
Thou art mad, what dost mean?
To kill thee, nothing else will ease my anger,
The injury is fresh, I bleed with all,
Nor can that word express it, there's no peace in it,
Nor must it be forgiven but in death;
Therefore call up thy valour if thou'st any,
And summon up thy spirits to defend thee;
Thy heart must suffer for thy damned practises,
Against thy noble co??????n, and my innocence.
Hold, hear a word; did I doe any thing
But for your good, that you might have her,
That in that desperate time I might redeem her,
Although with show of loss.
Out ugly villain,
Fling on her the most hated name of Whore
To the worlds eye, and face it out in curtsy,
Bring him to see it, and make me drunk to attempt it.
I hear some voices this way.
No more, if you can pray, doe it as you fight.
What new frights oppose me? I have heard that tongue.
Tic my fortune,
You could not take me in a better time sir,
I ha nothing to lose, but the love I lent thee,
My life my sword protect.
I know 'em both, but to prevent their ruins,
Must not discover ??? ??? stay men most desperate;
The mischief you are forward to commit
Will keep me from my grave, and tie my spirit
To endless troubles else.
Ha, tic her Ghost. Fr. Maria.
Hear me both, each wound you make
Runs through my soul, and is a new death to me,
Each threatening danger will affright my rest;
Look on me Hartlove, and my kinsman view me;
Was I not late in my unhappy marriage,
Sufficient miserable? full of all misfortunes?
But you must add with your most impious angers
Unto my sleeping dust this insolence?
Would you teach time to speak eternally
Of my disgraces; make Records to keep 'em,
Keep them in brass? fight then, and kill my honour;
Fight deadly both, and let your bloody swords,
Through my revived, and reeking infamy
(That never shall be purged) find your own ruins:
Hartlove, I loved thee once, and hoped again
In a more blessed love to meet thy spirit,
If thou kilst him, thou art a murderer,
And murder shall never inherit heaven:
My time is come, my concealed grave expects me,
Farewell, and follow not, your feet are bloody,
And will pollute my peace: I hope they are melted,
This is my way sure.
Stay blessed souls.
Would she had come sooner, and ha saved some blood.
Dost bleed?
Yes certainly, I can both see and feel it.
Now I well hope it is not dangerous;
Give me thy hand, as far as honour guides me,
Isle know thee again.
I thank thee heartily;
I know not where to get a Surgeon;
This vision troubles me, sure she is living,
And I was foolish blind, I could not find it;
I bleed apace still, and my heart grows heavy,
If I go far I faint, Isle knock at this house,
They may be charitable, would it were perfect day.
Tic not he? What would you sir?
I would crave a little rest Lady,
And for my hurts some Surgery, I am a Gentleman
That Fortune of a fight ???
A handsome Gentleman,
Alas he bleeds, a very handsome gentleman,
A sweet young wench, beshrow my heart a fair one;
Fortune has made me some recompense.
Pray come in, the air is hurtful for you;
Pray let me lead you, Isle have a bed for you presently,
Isle be your Surgeon too, alas sweet gentleman.
I feel no hurts, the morning comes too fast now.
Softly I beseech you.
He is not up yet Madam, what meaned you
To come forth so early?
You block head;
Your eyes are sowed up still, they cannot see
When it is day: oh my poor Maria,
Where be the women?
They said they would follow us.
He shall not laugh thus at my misery,
And kill my child, and steal away her body,
And keep her Portion too.
Let him be hanged fort,
You have my voice.
These women not come yet?
A son in law, Isle keep a Conjurer,
But Isle find out his knavery.
Doe, and Isle help him;
And if he were here this whip should conjure him,
Here's a capias, and it catch hold on's breech,
Id make him soon believe the devil were there.
An old Usurer.
He married the money, thats all he looked for,
For your daughter, let her sink or swim.
Isle swim him;
This is his house, I wonder they stay thus,
That we might rail him out on's wits.
They'll come,
Fear not Madam, and bring Clappers with 'em,
Or some have lost their old wont, I have heard
No disparagement to your Ladyship, some o'their tongues
Like Tom a Lincoln three miles off.
Oh fie,
How tedious are they?
What and we lost no time,
You and I shall make a shift to begin with him,
And tune our Instruments, till the confort come
To make up the full noise, Isle knock.
Who's that? raps so saucily?
Tic I, Toby, come down, or else we will fetch you down,
Alas, this is but the Sauncebell, here's a Gentlewoman
Will ring you another peal, come down, I say.
Some new fortifications, look to my doors,
Put double bars, I will not have her enter,
Nor any of her Tribe, they come to terrify me?
Keep out her tongue too if you can.
I hear you,
And I will send my tongue up to your worship,
The Echo of it shall fly o'er the street;
My Daughter, that thou killed with kindness (Jew)
That thou betrayed to death, thou double Jew,
And after stol'st her body.
Iew's too good for him.
I defy you both;
Thy daughter plaid the villain and betrayed me.
Betrayed my honour.
Honour, Rascal,
And let that bear an action, Isle try it with thee,
Honour?
Oh Reprobate!
Thou musty Justice,
Buy an honourable halter, and hang thy self.
A worshipful ropes end is to good for him.
Get honour that way, thou wot die a dog else.
Come and be whipped first.
Where is her Porrion.
Where Isle keep it safely.
Traitor, thou shalt not keep it.
More of the kennel? put more bolts to'th doors there,
And arm your selves, hell is broke loose upon us.
I am glad you're come, wele blow the house down.
Oh Nurse, I have such cause ???
Vilaine, viper, although you had no cause, we are bound
To help.
Yes, and believe, we come not here to examine,
And if you please weal fire the house.
Call the Constable.
A charitable motion, fire is comfortable.
No, no, wele only let him know our minds,
We will commit no outrage, he's a Lawyer.
Give me my Musket.
Wheer's my daughters body,
That I may bury it?
Speak, or weal bury thee,
Alive weal bury thee, speak old Iniquity.
Bury him alive by all means for a testimony.
Their voices make my house reel, oh for Officers,
I am in a dream, thy daughters spirit
Walks a nights, and troubles all the neighbours;
Go hire a conjurer, Isle say no more.
The Law shall say more.
We are witnesses,
And if thou be not hanged ???
Buy a Book of good manners,
A short book of good manners.
Buy a ballad, a ballad of the maid was got with child.
That might ha been my case last night,
Isle have it what ere it cost me.
A ballad of the Witches hanged at Ludlow.
I will have taht too;
There wasan Aunt of mine, I think amongst i'm,
I would be glad to hear her Testament.
A new book of women.
The thunders laid, how they stare at him.
A new book of fools, a strange book,
Very strange fools.
Isle owe thee a good turn what ever thou art.
A book of walking spirits.
That I like not.
Nor I, they walked me the fools morris.
A book of wicked women.
Thats well thought on.
Of rude malicious women, of proud women,
Of scolding women, we shall ne'er get in.
A ballad of wronged Maids.
Isle buy that.
A little, very little book
Of good and godly women, a very little one,
So little, you may put it in a nutshell.
With a small print, that no body can read it.
Peace firra, or Isle tear your books.
Open the door, and let him in, I love him.
A book of evil Magistrates.
I marry, dee here that Justice.
And their eviller wives,
That we are their places in their peticotes.
Dee you hear that Lady.
A book new Printed, against Playing,
Dancing, Masking, May-poles; a zealous Brothers book,
And full of fables.
Another book of women, of mad women,
Women that were borne in March.
Are you got in?
We would ha pulled your knaves hide else; this fellow
Was sent to abuse us, but we shall have time
To talk more with this Justice.
Farewell Madam, as you like this come visit me again,
You and your treble strings, now scold your hearts out ???
Shall he carry it thus away?
Go to the Judge, and what you'll have us swear ???
I thank ye heartily,
Isle keep that for the last, I will go home,
And leave him to his Conscience for a while,
If it sleep long, Isle wake it with a vengeance.
What book has he given thee?
A dainty book, a book of the great Navy,
Of fifteen hundred ships of Cannon proof,
Built upon Whales to keep their Keels from sinking;
And Dragons in 'em, that spit fire ten mile;
And Elephants that carry goodly castles.
Dost thou believe it?
Shall we not believe books in Print?
I have John Taylors book of Hempeseede too,
Which for two lines I happened on by chance,
I reverence.
I prithee what are they?
They are so put upon the time, as if
He studied to answer the late Histriomastix,
Talking of change and transformations,
That wittily, and learnedly he bangs him,
So may a Puritans ruff, though starched in Print,
Be turned to Paper, and a Play writ in it:
A Play in the Puritans ruff? Isle buy his Works for it,
And confute Horace with a Water Poet:
What hast there, a ballad too?
This? This is a piece of Poetry indeed;
What noise is that?
Some cry in the streets; prithee sing on.
Again, dost not hear? it is ith'house certainly?
Tic a strange noise? and has a tang of the Justice.
Lets see?
Untie his feet, pull out his gag, he will choke else;
What desperate rogues were these.
Give him fresh air.
I will never study books more;
I am undone, these villains have undone me,
Rifled my Desk, they have undone me learnedly;
A fire take all their books, Isle burn my Study:
Where were you rascals when the villains bound me,
You could not hear.
He gave us books sir, dainty books to busy us;
And we were reading in that which was the Brewhouse;
A great way off, we were finging ballads too,
And could not hear.
This was a precious thief,
A subtle trick to keep my servants safe.
What ha you lost fir?
They ransacked all before my face, and threatened
To kill me, if I coughed, they have a chain,
My rings, my box of casting gold, my purse too,
They robed me miserably; but that which most grieves me,
They took away some writings; it was a Rogue
That knew me, and set on by the old Lady,
I will indite her for it.
Shall we pursue 'em?
Run, run, cursed raskalls,
I am out of my wits, let not a creature in,
No not with necessaries.
We shall be starved.
Isle buy my meat at window, as they pass by;
I wonot trust my Scrivenor, he has books too;
And bread Isle ha flung up; I charge ye all
Burn all the books i th house.
Your little Prayer book?
Isle never pray again, isle have my doors
Made, up nothing but walls, and thick ones too;
No sound shall tempt me again, remember I
Have forswoare books.
If you should be called to take you oath.
I will forswear all oaths, rather than see
A thing but in the likeness of a book:
And I were condemned, Isle rather choose to hang,
Than read again; come in, and search all places,
They may be about the house, were the doors locked?
But the keys in 'em, and if they be gone,
They could not want wit to locke us in sir.
Never was man so miserably undone,
I would lose a limb to see their rogueships totter.
Thy brothers daughter, say, and borne in Wales?
I have long time desired to see her, and I hope
Your Ladyship will not be offended.
No, no.
I should be happy if she might be serviceable
To you Madam.
Beshrow me, but at first, she took me much,
Is she not like Maria? setting aside
Her language very like her, and I love her
The bettet for it, I prithee call her hither,
She speaks feat English.
Why, Guennith, Guennith, du hummah Guenneth;
She is course Madam, after her country guise,
And were she in fine clothes ???
Isle have her handsome:
What part of Wales were you borne in?
In Abehundis Madams.
She speaks that name in Welsh, which we call Brick
What can you doe? neck.
Her was toe many tings in Walls, know not the fashion in Londons; her was milk the Cowes, make seeze and butters, and spin very well the Welsh freeze, her was Cooke to te Mou taine cots, and sing very fine prittish tunes, was mage good ales and breds, and her know to dance on Sundays, merge you now Madams.
A pretty innocence, I doe like her infinitely, Nurse.
And if I live ???
Here is Mr. Hartlove, Madame, come to see you:
Alas poor Gentleman, prithee admit him.
Madame, I am come to take my last leave.
How sir?
Of all my home affections, and my friends,
For the interest you had once in Maria,
I would acquaint you when I leave the kingdom.
Would there were any thing in my poor power
That might divert your will, and make you happy;
I am sure I have wronged her too, but let your pardon
Assure me you are charitable; shoe's dead
Which makes us both sad: What doe you look on?
The likest face ???
Plesse us awl, why does that sentilman make such unders and mazements at her, I know her not.
Be not offended maid.
How the Wench blushes, she represents Marries loss to him.
Will the sentillman hurt her, pray you be her defences, was have mad phisnomies, is her troubled with Lunatics in her praine pans, bless us awl.
Where had you this face?
Her faces be our none I warrant her.
I wonot hurt you, all the lineaments
That built Maria up; all those springing beauties
Dwell on this thing, change but her tongue, I know her:
Let me see your hand.
Du Guin, was never thieves, and robberies; here is no singe in her hands warrant her.
Trust me, the selfsame white,
And softness, prithee speak our English Dialect.
Haleggs? what does her speage hard urds to her, to make poor Guennith ridicles, was no mannerly sentilman to a???buse her.
By the love,
That everlasting love I bare Maria
Mariai, her name was Guenith, and good names, was poor else, omen maid, her have no fine kanags to madge her tricksie, yet in her own countries was held a fine ense her can tell her, and honest ense too, merge you dat now, her can keep her little legs close enough warrant her.
How prettily this anger shows.
She gabbles innocently.
Madam, farewell, and all good fortune dwell w'ee,
With me my own affections; farewell maid,
Fair gentle maid.
She sighs.
Du cat a whee.
I cannot go, theres somewhat calls me back.
Poor Frank,
How gladly would I entertain thy love,
And meet thy worthy flame, but shame forbids me:
If please her Ladyships dwell here with Guenneth, and learn to spin and card ??????ll, to mage flannels, and linseyes ulseis, sall tawg coed urds to her Ladyships urships for her.
The tears of true affection, woe is me,
O cursed love that glories in maids miseries,
And true men's broken hearts.
Alas I pity him, the wench is rude, and knows you not, forgive her.
Wine your nyes pray you, though was porne in Walls among craggy rocks, and mountains, yet heart is soft, look you, her can weep too, when her see men mage prinie tears and la???mentations.
How hard she holds me?
Just as Maria did, weeps the same drops,
Now as I have a living soul, her sigh too;
What shall I think, is not your name Maria,
If it be not, delude me with so much charity
To say it is.
Upon her life, you was mighty deal in love with some pods, your pale seeks and hollow nyes, and pantings upon her posome, know very well, because look you, her think her honest sentilman, you sall call her Maria.
Good Madam, think not ill I am thus saucy.
Oh no sir, be you not angry with the wench.
I am most pleased.
Lets interrupt him, he will be mad our right else.
Observe a little more.
Would I could in your language beg a kiss.
If her have necessities of a kiss, look you, dere is one in sarities.
Let me suffer death,
If in my apprehension, two twinned cherries
Be more a kin, than her lips to Marries;
And if this harsh illusion would but leave her,
She were the same; good Madam, shall I have
Your consent now.
To what?
To give this Virgin to me.
Shees not mine, this is her Kiswoman,
And has more power to dispose; alas, I pity him.
Pray gentlemen prevail with him to go;
More that I wish his comfort than his absence.
You have been always kind to me, will you
Deny me your fair Chosen.
It were fit you first obtained her own consent.
He is no friend that wishes my departure,
I doe not trouble you.
Tic not Maria.
Her shadow is enough, Isle dwell with that,
Pursue your own ways, shall we live together?
If her will come to morrow and tauge to her, her will tell her more of her meanings, and then if her be melancholy, her will sing her a Welch song too, to make her merries, but Guenneth was very honest; her was never love but one sentleman, and he was bear her great teale of goodills too, was marry one day, S. Davy her give her five pair of white gloves, if her will dance at her weddings.
All I am worth,
And all my hopes, this strange voice would forsake her,
For then she shut be ??? prithee stay a little,
Hark in thine ear, dissemble not, but tell me,
And save my life; I know you are Maria:
Speak but as I doe ten words to confirm me;
You have an English soul, doe not disguise it
From me with these strange accents ??? She pinched hard
Again, and figh'd.
What ails the Wench?
Why, Gunith.
She's gone too.
Come leave this dream.
A dream? I think so;
But it was a pleasing one, now Isle obey,
And forget all these wonders, lead the way.
HOnest Toby?
Sweet Mr. Wildbraine, ??? I am glad I ha met way.
Why did my Aunt send for me?
Your Aunt's a mortal, and thinks not on you
For ought I can perceive.
Is my Cousin alive again?
Neither, and yet we doe not hear
That she's buried.
What should make thee glad then?
What should make me glad? have I not cause,
To see your Princely body well, and walk thus,
Look blithe and bonny, and your wardrobe whole still.
The Case is clear, and I ha found a Mine,
A perfect Indie, since my Aunt cashiered me;
What think'sts of this?
Oh delicate bells.
Thou put me in mind,
We are to ring anon, I meant to send for thee;
Meet me at the old Parish Church.
Say no more.
When thy Lady is a bed, we ha conspired
A midnight peal for joy.
If I fail hang me in the bell-ropes.
And how? and how does my Aunt?
She's up to'th ears in Law;
I doe so whirl her to the Counsellors chambers,
And back again, and bounce her for more money,
And too again, I know not what they doe with her,
But she's the merriest thing among these Lawdrivers;
And in their studies half a day together;
If they doe get her with Magna Charta, she swears,
By all the ability of her old body,
She will so claw the Justice, she will sell
The tiles of the house she vows, and sack out of the cellar
(That she worships to Idolatry) but she'll hang him.
I would she could: but hark thee honest Toby,
If a man have a Mistress, may we not
Without my Aunts leave, borrow now and than
A coach to tumble in, toward the Exchange,
And so forth?
A Mistress.
She may be thine when we are married.
Command, Isle carry you both in pomp;
And let my Lady go a foot a Law-catching,
And exercise her corns: where is she Master Iohn?
Shat see her.
Shall we ring for her?
And drink her health.
Drink stiffly for five hours.
Weal drink fifteen.
To night? we will ha twenty torches then,
And through the streets drive on triumphantly;
Triumphantly weal drive, by my Ladies door,
As I am a Christian Coachman, I will rattle you
And urine in her Porch, and she shall fear me:
If you say more, I shall run mad outright,
I will drink sack and surfeit instantly;
I know not where I am now.
Hold for thy buttons sake, the knave's transported.
Jacke Wildbraine?
Honest Tom, how thrives the felonious world with thee now?
You look and talk as you were much exalted.
Thar't 'ithe right
Isle te ll thee first,
I ha shook off my Aunt, and yet I live still,
And drink, and sing; her house had like to ha spoiled me;
I keep no hours now;
Nor need any false key
To the old women's Cabinets, I ha money
Upon my word, and pawn no oaths to the Butler;
No matrimonial protestations;
Our sack posits to the Chambermaid,
I praise my Fate, there be more ways to the wood Tom.
Prithee release my wonder.
Isle increase it, wipe thine eyes,
Here is a chain worth money and some man had it,
A foolish Diamond, and other trifles ???
The very same, oh Gypsy! Infidel!
All that I sweat, and ventured me neck for,
He has got already; who would trust a strumpet.
This? This is nothing to what I possess
At home.
What home?
A house that shall be nameless;
The Mistress of it mine too, such a piece
For flesh and blood, added to that so loving ???
Is, she married?
I know not, nor I care not;
But such a prize, so mounting, so delicious,
Thou wilt run mad, Isle tell thee more hereafter.
Nay, prithee a word more.
I took no pains to find out all this Paradise,
My Destiny threw me upon it in the dark, I found it
Wanting a lodging too.
No old acquaintance?
Never, never saw her;
But these things happen not in every age,
I cannot stay, If thou wilt meet anon
At my own randevow, thou know the Tavern,
Weal sup together, after that, a company
Of merry lads have made a match to ring.
You keep your exercise, in the old Church?
No other,
There is no music to the bells, we wo'd
Have bonfires if we durst, and thou wo'd come
It shall cost thee nothing Tom, hang pilfering.
And keep me company, in time I may
Show thee my Wench too.
I cannot promise; but you will be there?
Weal toss the bells, and make the steeple
Roar boy, but come to supper then.
My hand, and expect me:
Yes I will come or send, and to some purpose;
Art come boy?
Excellent, Knave, how did thou purchase these?
The staff I stole last night from a sleeping Constable;
The rest I borrowed by my acquaintance with
The Players boys; you were best to lose no time sir.
So, so, help boy, tic very well, doe I not look
Like one that breaks the Kings peace with authority?
You know your charge, prepare things handsomely,
My diligent boy, and leave me to my office.
There wants nothing already; but I fly sir.
Now Fortune prove no slut, and Isle adore thee.
Within. Ser. Whose there?
A friend wo'd speak with Master Justice.
Who are you?
I am the Constable.
My Master is not at leisure to hear business.
How? Not at leisure to doe the king service;
Take heed what you say sir; I know his worship,
If he knew my business, would no excuse.
You must go to another Justice, Isle assure
My Master is not well in health.
I know not,
But if your worshipful be not at leisure
To doe him self a benefit, I am gone sir,
An infinite benefit, and the State shall thank him for;
Thank him, and think on him too; I am an Officer,
And know my place, but I doe love the Justice;
I honour any authority above me:
Beside, he is my neighbour, and I worship him.
You have no books for ballads Mr. Constable
About you?
What should I doe with books does it become
A man of my place to understand such matters?
Pray call your Master, if he please to follow me,
I shall discover to him such a plot,
Shall get him everlasting fame, Isle be hanged for it
And he be not knighted instantly, and for reward
Have some of the malefactors lands Isle bring him too;
But I cannot dally time.
Who's that?
A Constable sir, would speak about some business,
He says, will bring you fame, and mighty profit.
Please your worship, come down, Isle make you happy;
The notabl'st piece of villainy I have in hand sir,
And you shall find it out; I ha made choice
To bring your worship to the first knowledge, and
Thank me, as you find the good on it afterwards.
What is it? Treason?
Tic little better, I can tell you, I have lodged
A crew of the most rank and desperate villains:
They talk of robberies, and ways they did 'em;
And how they left men bound in their studies.
With books and ballads?
That sir? that, and murders,
And thousand knaveries more, tha're very rich sir,
In money, jewels, chains,, and a hundred more
Devices.
Happy, happy Constable, I meet ye
At the back door, get ready knaves.
Not a man I beseech you,
I have privately appointed strength about me,
They cannot start, your men would breed suspicion;
All my desire is you would come alone;
That you might have the hope of the enterprise,
That you might hear i'm first, and then proceed sir,
I come, I come.
Tic very well.
Keep all my doors fast, tic something late.
So, so, and please your worship Isle direct you.
My Master stays, I doubt his lime-twigges catch not,
If they doe, alls provided; but I all
This while forget my own state, fair Maria
Is certainly alive, I met her in
Another habit, with her Nurse, it was she:
There is some trick in it, but when this is over,
Isle find it out, this project for the Usurer
May have good effect; however' twill be sport
To mortify him a little;
He's come without him:
Have you failed sir?
Prospered? my little engineer; away,
He is in the next room, be not you seen sir.
The pitfalls ready, never Justice
Was caught in such a noose, ere he get out,
Hee shall run through a scouring purgatory,
Shall purge him to the quick, tic night already.
Come softly, yet sir softly, are you not weary?
Tha'st brought me into a melancholy place,
I see no creature.
This is, sir, their den
Where they suppose themselves secure, I am saint,
With making hast; but I must be thus troubled,
And therefore never go without a cordial;
Without this I should die;
How it refreshes me
Already? wilt please your worship? I might have had
The manners to halet you drink before me;
Now am I lusty.
Thas a good taste.
Taste? how dee find the virtue, nay sir spare it not:
My wife has the receipt, dos it not stir
Your worships body? when you come to examine,
'Till make you speak like Thunder.
Hoy he.
It works already.
Is there never a chair, I was wearier than I thought,
But who shall we have to take 'em, Mr. Constable?
Let me alone, when I but give the watch word
We will have men enough to surprise an army.
I begin to be sleepy; what, hast a chair?
They doe not dream of us, tic early rising;
Care, care, and early rising, common welds men
Are ever subjects to the nods; sit down sir,
A short nap is not much amiss; so, so, he's fast;
Fast as a fish in the net, he has winking powder
Shall work upon him to our wish, remove him,
Nay, we may cut him into collops now
And he n're feel; have you prepared the vault sir?
Yes, yes, sir, every thing ins place.
When we ha placed him, you an I boy
Must about another project hard by, his potion
Will bind him sure enough till we return,
This villainy weighs mainly, but wele purge ye.
Now for mine ears, mine ears be constant to me;
They ring a wager, and I must deal justly, ha boys.
Dost here 'em, hark, these be the Ringers?
Are you sure the same?
Or my directions fail;
The coast is clear:
How the bells go? how daintily they tumble?
And me thinks they seem to say; Fine fools Isle fit you.
Excellent again, good boys ??? oh that was nought.
Who's that?
Be you concealed by any moans yet, hark,
They stop, I hope theile too't again, close sir.
A palpable knock.
It was none.
Be Judged by the Sexton then,
If I have ears.
A Knock, a knock, a gross one.
Carman, your gallon of wine, you ring most impiously,
Art thou of the worshipful company of the knights of the West,
And handle a bell with no more dexterity;
You think you are in Thames street
Justling the carts: oh a clean hands a jewel.
Good speed to your good exercise.
Y' are welcome.
I come sir from a gentleman, and neighbour hard by,
One that loves your music well.
He may have more on it,
Handle a bell, as you were haling timber;
Gross, gross, and base, absurd.
Isle mend it next peal.
To entreat a knowledge of you, whether it be
By the Ear you ring thus cunningly or by the Eye;
For to be plain, he has laid ten pounds upon it.
But which way has he laid?
That your Ear guides you,
And not your Eye.
Has won, has won, the Ear's our only instument:
But how shall we be sure on it.
Put all the lights out, to what end serve our Eyes then,
A plain Case.
You say true, tic a fine cunning thing to ring by th'eare sure:
And can you ring in the dark so?
All night long boy.
It is wonderful, let this be certain gentlemen,
And half his wager he allows among ye;
First possible you should ring so?
Possible, thou art a child, Isle ring when I am dead drunk;
Out with the lights, no twinkling of a candle,
I know my rope to, as I know my nose,
And can bang it soundly in the dark, I warrant you.
Come lets confirm him straight and win the wager.
Let me hear to strengthen me;
And when you've rungile bring the money to you.
So so, follow 'em;
They shall have a cool reward, one hath gold of mine,
Good store in's pocket,
But this will be revenged in a short warning.
They are at it Iustily; hay, how wantonly
They ring away their clothes, how it delights me;
Here, here, sir.
Hast Wildbraines?
His whole case sir; I felt it out, and by the guards
This should be the Coachman's, another suit too.
Away Boy, quickly now to the Usurer,
His hour to wake approaches.
That once finished,
You'll give me leave to play sir: here they come.
I am monstrous weary,
Fie, how I sweat? Reach me my cloak to cover me,
I run to oil like a Propise; it was a brave peal.
Let me light my candle first, then Isle waite on you:
A very brave peal.
Carman, you came in close now.
Sure it is past midnight.
No stirring in the streets I hear,
Walk further, was that a pillar? tic harder than my nose.
Whore's the Boy promised us five pound?
Room, I sweat still; come, come, my cloak,
I shall take cold
Where lies it?
Here, here, and all our clothes.
Where, where?
In the corner.
Is thy candle blind too, give me the bottle,
I can drink like a Fish now, like an Elephant.
Here are the corners, but here are no clothes;
Yes, here is a cuff.
A cuff? give me the candle.
Cuffs wo'not cover me ??? I smell a knavery.
First come to a cuff? my whole suit turned to a button?
Now am I as cold again as though it were Christmas;
Cold with my fear, Isle never ring by the ear more.
My new clothes vanished?
My all clothes Toby.
Here's none.
Not one of my dragons wings left to adorn me
Have I muted all my feathers?
Cheated by the ear; a plot to put out the candle;
I could be mad; my chain, my rings, the gold, the gold.
The cold, the cold I cry, and I cry truly,
Not one sleeve, nor a cape of a cloak to warm me.
What miserable fools were we?
We had even best, gentlemen,
Every man choose his rope again, and fasten it,
And take a short turn to a better fortune
To be bawds to our miseries, and put our own lights out?
Prithee Sexton lets have a fire at thy house,
A good fire, weal pay thee some way for it, I am stone cold.
Alas I pity you, come quickly gentlemen.
Sure I ha been in a dream, I had no mistress,
Nor gold, nor clothes, but am a ringing rascal.
Fellows in affliction, lets take hands all,
Now are we fit for tumblers.
So, so, presently his sleep will leave him.
And wonder seize upon him,
Bid 'em within be ready.
What sound's this?
What horrid din? what dismal place is this?
I never saw before, and now behold it;
But by the half light of a lamp, that burns here:
My spirits shake, tremble through my body;
Help, help,
Mercy, protect me, my soul quakes,
What dreadful apparitions! how I shudder!
Algripe.
What are you?
We are helhounds helhounds, that have commission
From the Prince of darkness,
To fetch thy black soul to him.
Am I not alive still?
Thou art, but we have brought thee instruments
Will quickly rid thy miserable life, Stab,
Poison.
Hang thy self, this choice is offered
Thou can not hope for heaven; thy base soul is
Lost to all hope of mercy.
Quickly, quickly.
The torments cool
And all the Fiends expect thee.
Come with us to that pit of endless horror,
Or we will force thee.
Oh, oh oh.
Groans are too late, sooner the ravisher,
Whose soul is hurled into eternal frost,
Stung with the force of twenty thousand Winters
To punish the distempers of his blood,
Shall hope to get from thence, then thou avoid
The certainty of meeting hell where he is.
Shall murderers be there for ever dying,
Their souls shot through with adders, torn on Engines,
Dying as many deaths for killing one,
Could any imagination number them,
As there be moments in eternity:
And shall that Justice spare thee, that hast slain,
Murdered by thy extortion so many?
Oh, oh.
Doe execution quickly, or weal carry thee alive to hell.
Gently, gentle devils, doe not force me
To kill my self, nor doe not you do it for me;
Oh let me live, Isle make amends for all.
Tell us of thy repentance? perjured villain,
Pinch off his flesh, he must be whipped, salted and whipped.
Oh misery of miseries!
Tear his accursed limbs, to hell with him, ha.
A mischief on that innocent face, away.
Malicious furies hence, choke not the seeds
Of holy penitence.
This must be an Angel,
How at his presence the fiends crawl away!
Here is some light of mercy.
Be thou wise,
And entertain it, wretched, wretched man;
What poor defence hath all thy wealth been to thee?
What says thy conscience now?
Be my good Angel, here I promise thee,
To become honest, and renounce all villainy;
Enjoin me any penance, isle build Churches;
A whole city of Hospitals.
Take heed,
There is no dallying, nor are these imposed.
Name any thing within my power, sweet Angel;
And if I doe not faithfully perform it,
Then whip me every day, burn me each minute,
Whole years together, let me freeze to Icicles.
In the number of thy soul oppressions;
Thou hast undone a faithful gentleman,
By taking forfeit of his land.
Young Lurcher,
I doe confess.
He lives most miserable,
And in despair may hang or drown himself;
Prevent his ruin, or his blood will be
More sin in thy account: hast thou forgotten
He had a sister?
I doe well remember it.
Could thou for Mammon break thy solemn vow.
Made once to that unhappy maid, that weeps
A thousand tears a day for thy unkindness,
Was not thy faith contracted, and thy heart?
And could thou marry another?
But she's dead,
And I will make true satisfaction.
What doe I instance these, that hast been false
To all the world.
I know it, and will henceforth
Practise repentance, doe not frown sweet Angel;
I will restore all mortgages, forswear
Abominable Usury, live chaste;
For I have been wanton in my shroud, my age;
And if that poor innocent maid, I so abused
Be living, I will marry her, and spend
My days to come religiously.
I was commanded but a messenger
To tell thee this, and rescue thee from those,
Whose malice would have dredged thee quick to hell,
If thou abuse this mercy and repent not,
Double damnation will expect thee for it;
But if thy life be virtuous hereafter,
A blessedness shall reward thy good example,
Thy fright hath much diftracted thy weak senses,
Drink of this viol, and renew thy spirits,
I ha done my office, think on it and be happy.
So, so, He gapes already, now he's fast;
Thou hast acted rarely; but this is not all;
First, help to convey him out of the vault.
You will dispense with me now, as you promised sir.
We will make shift without thee, tha'st done well,
By our device this bandoge may scope hell.
Did think Maria, this poor outside, and
Dissembling of thy voice could hide thee from
A mothers searching eye, though too much fear,
Lest thou we'rt not the same, might blind a lover
That thought thee dead too; oh my dear Maria,
I hardly kept my joys in from betraying thee:
Welcome again to life, we shall find out
The mystery of thy absence; conceal
Thy person still, for Algripe must not know thee:
And exercise this pretty dialect;
If there be any course in Law to free thee,
Thou shalt not be so miserable; be silent
Good Nurse.
You shall not need to fear me Madam,
I doe not love the usuring Jew so well;
Beside, it was my trick to disguise her so.
Be not dejected Mall.
Your care may comfort me;
But I despair of happiness.
Hartlove, I dare not see him
Wele withdraw.
I shall but grieve to see his passions too,
Since there's no possibility to relieve him.
The worlds a Labyrinth, where unguided men
Walk up and down to find their weariness;
No sooner have we measured with much toil
One crooked path, with hope to gain our freedom,
But it betrays us to a new affliction;
What a strange mockery will man become
Shortly to all the creatures?
Oh Mariah!
If thou be dead, why does thy shadow fright me I
Sure tic because I live; were I but certain
To meet thee in one grave, and that our dust
Might have the privilege to mix in silence,
How quickly should my soul shake off this burden!
Thus far my wishes have success, Isle lose
No time: Sir, are not you called Mr. Hartlove?
Pardon my rudeness.
What does that concern
Thee Boy, tic a name cannot advantage thee,
And I am weary on it.
Had you concealed,
Or I forgot it sir, so large were my
Directions, that you could not speak this language,
But I should know you by your sorrow.
Thou
Were well informed, it seems; well, whats your business I
I come to bring you comfort.
Is Maria
Alive again? thats somewhat, and yet not
Enough to make my expectation rise, to
Past half a blessing, since we cannot meet
To make it up a full one; you are mistaken.
When you have heard me, you'll think otherwise;
In vain I should report Maria living:
The comfort that I bring you must depend
Upon her death.
You are a dissembling boy,
Some one has sent thee to mock me, though my anger
Stoop not to punish thy greene years, unripe
For malice; did I know what person sent thee
To tempt my sorrow thus, I should revenge it.
Indeed I have no thought so uncharitable,
Nor am I sent to grieve you, let me suffer
More punishment than ever boy deserved,
If you doe find me false; I serve a Mistress
Would rather dye than play with your misfortunes;
Then good sir hear me out.
Who is your Mistress?
Before I name her, give me some encouragement,
That you receive her message, she is one
That is full acquainted with your misery,
And can bring such a portion of her sorrow
In every circumstance so like your own,
You'll love and pity her, and wish your griefs
Might marry one another.
Thou art wilde.
Can thou bring comfort from so sad a creature?
Her miserable story can at best,
But swell my Volume, large enough already.
She was late beloved, as you were, promised faith,
And marriage, and was worthy of a better
Than he, that stole Marries heart.
How's that?
Just as Maria dealt with your affection;
Did he that married her, deal with my Mistress,
When careless both of honour and Religion;
They cruelly gave away their hearts to strangers.
Part of this truth I know, but prithee boy
Proceed to that thou came for; thou did promise
Something, thy language cannot hitherto
Encourage me to hope for.
That I come to,
My Mistress thus unkindly dealt with all,
You may imagine, wanted no affliction;
And had ere this, wept her self dry as marble,
Had not your fortune come to her relief,
And twin to her own sorrow brought her comfort.
Could the condition of my fate so equal,
Lessen her sufferings?
I know not how
Companions in grief sometimes diminish,
And make the pressure easy, by degrees:
She threw her troubles off, remembering yours,
And from her pity of your wrongs, there grew
Affection to your person thus increased,
And with it, confidence, that those whom Nature
Had made so even in their weight of sorrow,
Could not but love as equally one another,
Were things but well prepared, this gave her boldness
To employ me thus far.
A strange message boy.
If you incline to meet my Mistress love,
It may beget your comforts; besides that,
Tic some revenge, that you above their scorn
And pride, can laugh at them, whose perjury
Hath made you happy, and undone themselves.
Have you done boy.
Only this little more;
When you but see, and know my Mistress well,
You will forgive my tediousness, shoe's fair,
Fair as Maria was.
Isle hear no more,
Go foolish boy, and tell thy fonder Mistress
She has no second faith to give away;
And mine; was given to Maria, though her death,
Allow me freedom, see the Picture of her,
I would give ten thousand Empires for the substance;
Yet for Marries sake, whose divine Figure
That rude frame carries, I will love this counterfeit
Above all the world, and had thy Mistress all
The grace and blossom of her sex; now she
Is gone, that was a walking Spring of beauty,
I would not look upon her.
Sir, your pardon,
I have but done a message; as becomes
A servant, nor did she on whose commands
I gladly waited, bid me urge her love
To your disquiet, she would chide my diligence
If I should make you angry.
Pretty Boy.
Indeed I fear I have offended you:
Pray if I have, enjoin me any penhance for it;
I have performed one duty, and could as willingly
To purge my fault, and show I suffer with you,
Plead your cause to another.
And Isle take thee
At thy word boy, thou hast a moving language,
That pretty innocent, Copy of Maria
Is all I love, I know not how to speak,
Win her to think well of me, and I will
Reward thee to thy wishes.
I undertake
Nothing for gain, but since you have resolved
To love no other, Isle be faithful to you,
And my prophetic thoughts bid me already
Say I shall prosper.
Thou were sent to bless me.
Pray give us opportunity.
Be happy.
Hoe's gone.
With your fair leave Mistress
Have you pusinesse with her pray you?
I have a message from a gentleman,
Please you vouchsafe your ear more private.
You shall have my absence Niece.
Was the sentleman afraid to declare his matters openly, here was no bodies was not very honest, if her like not her er???rands the petter, was wist to kept her preathes to cool her porridges, can tell her that now for aule her private hearings, and tawgings.
You may, if please you, find another language,
And with less pains be understood.
What is her meaning?
Come, pray speak your own English.
Have boys lost her i???ts and memories? plesse us aule.
I must be plain then, come, I know you are
Maria, this thin veil cannot obscure you:
Isle tell the world you live, I have not lost ye,
Since first with griese and shame to be surprised,
A violent trance took away show of life;
I could discover by what accident
You were conveyed away at midnight, in
Your coffin, could declare the place, and minute,
When you revived, and what you have done since as perfectly ???
Alas, I am betrayed to new misfortunes.
You are not for my knowledge, Isle be dumb
For ever, rather than be such a traitor;
Indeed I pity you, and bring no thoughts,
But full of peace, call home your modest blood,
Pale hath too long usurped upon your face;
Think upon love again, and the possession
Of full blown joys, now ready to salute you.
These words undo me more than my own greases.
I see how fear would play the tyrant with you,
But Isle remove suspicion; have you in
Your heart an entertainment for his love,
To whom your Virgin faith made the first promise?
If thou mean Hartlove, thou dost wound me still,
I have no life without his memory,
Nor with it any hope to keep it long,
Thou see I walk in darkness like a thief,
That fears to see the world in his own shape,
My very shadow frights me, tic a death
To live thus, and not look day in the face,
Away, I know thee not.
You shall hereafter know, and thank me Lady,
Isle bring you a discharge at my next visit,
Of all your fears, be content fair Maria,
Tic worth your wonder
Impossible.
Be wise and silent,
Dress your self, you shall be what you wish.
Doe this, and be
My better Angel.
All your cares on me.
I Must applaud thy diligence.
It had been nothing
To ha left him in the Porch; I called his Servants,
With wonders they acknowledged him, I pretended
It was some spice sure of the falling sickness,
And that was charity to bring him home;
They rubbed and chafed him, plied him with strong water,
Still he was senseless, clamours could not wake him;
I wished 'em then get him to bed, they did so,
And almost smothered him with rugs and pillows;
And cause they should have no cause to suspect me,
I watched them till he waked.
It was excellent.
When his time came to yawn, and stretch himself,
I bid em not be hasty to discover
How he was brought home, his eyes fully open,
With trembling he began to call his servants,
And told 'em he had seen strange visions,
That should convert him from his Heathen courses;
They wondered, and were silent, there he preached
How sweet the air of a contented conscience
Smelt in his nose now, asked 'em all forgiveness
For their hard pasture since they lived with him;
Bid 'em believe, and fetch out the cold sur-loine:
Pierce the strong beer and let the neighbours joy in it:
The concealed Muskadine should now lye open
To every mouth; that he would give to the poor,
And mend their wages; that his doors should be
Open to every miserable suitor.
What said his servants then?
They durst not speak,
But blessed themselves, and the strange' means that had
Made him a Christian in this over-joy,
I took my leave, and bad 'em say their prayers,
And humour him, lest he turned Jew again.
Enough, enough. Whose this?
Tic one of my ringers; stand close, my Ladies Coachman.
Buy a mat for a bed, buy a mat;
Would I were at rack and manger among my horses;
We have divided the Sextons
Household stuff amongst us, one has the rug, and hoe's
Turned Irish, another has a blanket, and he must beg in it,
The sheets serve another for a frock, and with the bed-cord,
He may pass for a Porter, nothing but the mat would fall
To my share, which with the help of a tune and a hassock
Out of the Church may disguise me till I get home;
A pox a bell-ringing by the Ear, if any man take me
At it again, let him pull mine to the Pillory, I could wish
I had lost mine Ears, so I had my clothes again;
The weather w'onot allow this fashion,
I doe look for an ague besides.
How the Rascal shakes?
Here are company:
Buy a mat for a bed, but a mat,
A hassock for your feet, or a Peace clean and sweet;
Buy a mat for a bed, by a ma:
Ringing, I renounce thee, Isle never come to Church more.
You with a mat?
I am called.
If any one should offer to buy my mat, what a case were I in?
Oh that I were in my oat tubbe with a horse-loafe,
Something to hearten me:
I dare not hear 'em;
Buy a mat for a bed, buy a mat:
Hoe's deaf.
I am glad I am: buy a mat for a bed.
How the Rascal sweats? What a pickle he's in?
Every street he goes through will be a new torment,
If ever I meet at midnight more a jangling:
I am cold, and yet I drop; buy a mat for a bed buy a mat.
He has punishment enough.
Who's this, my tother youth? he is turned Bear.
I am half a afraid of my self: this poor shift
I got of the Sexton to convey me handsomely
To some harbour, the wench will hardly know me;
They'll take me for some Watchman of the parish;
I ha ne'er a penny left me, thats one comfort;
And ringing has begot a monstrous stomach,
And that's another mischief, I were best go home,
For every thing will scorn me in this habit.
Besides, I am so full of these young bell-ringers;
If I get in adoores, not the power of the country,
Nor all my Aunts curses shall disembogue me.
Bid her come hither presently, ??? hum, tic he.
I am betrayed to one that will eternally laugh at me,
Three of these rouges will Jeer a horse to death.
Tic Mr. Wildbraine sure, and yet me thinks
His fashion's strangely altered; sir watchman,
You rugamuffin, turn you lousy bears skin:
You with the bed-rid bill.
He's found me out;
There's no avoiding him, I had rather now
Be arraigned at Newgate for a robbery
Than answer to his Articles: your will sir,
I am in haste.
Nay then I will make bold wo'yee;
A Watchman and ashamed to show his countenance,
His face of authority; I have seen that physiognomy;
Were you never in prison for pilfering?
How the rouge worries me.
Why may not this
Be the villain rob d my house last night,
And walks disguised in this malignant rug,
Armed with a tun of Iron, I will have you
Before a Magistrate.
What will become of me?
What art thou? speak.
I am the wandering Jew, and please your worship.
By your leave Rabbi, I will show you then
A Synagogue, iclip't Bridewell, where you
Under correction may rest your self;
You have brought a bill to guard you, there be dog whips
To firk such rugged cures, whips without bells
Indeed.
Bells.
How he sweets?
I must be known, as good at first; now, jeer on,
But doe not anger me too impudently,
The Rabbi will be moved then.
How? Jacks Wildebraim
What time of the Moon man, ha? what strange bells
Hast in thy brains.
No more bells,
No more bells, they ring backwards.
Why, whore's the Wench, the blessing that befell thee?
The unexpected happiness? wher's that Jacke?
Where are thy golden days?
It was his trick as sure as I am lousy,
But how to be revenged ???
Fie, fie, Jack,
Marry a Watchmans widow in thy young days,
With a revenue of old Iron, and a rug,
Is this the Paragon, the dainty Piece,
The delicate divine Rogue?
Tic euough I am undone,
Marked for a misery, and so leave prating;
Give me my bill,
You need not ask your Taylors,
Unless you had better linings; it may be
To avoid suspicion you are going thus
Disguised to your fair Mistress.
Mock no further,
Or as I live Isle lay my bill o'thy pate,
Isle take a Watchmans fury into my fingers,
To ha no judgement to distinguish persons
And knock thee down.
Come, I ha done, and now
Will speak some comfort to thee, I will lead thee
Now to my Mistress hither to concealed;
She shall take pity on thee too, she loves
A handsome man; thy misery invites me
To doe thee good, Isle not be jealous Jack;
Her beauty shall commend it self; but doe not
When I have brought you into grace supplant me.
Art thou in earnest, by this cold Iron ???
No oaths, I am not costive; here she comes:
Sweet heart, I have brought a gentleman,
A friend of mine to be acquainted with you,
He's other than he seems; why do ye stare thus?
Oh sir, forgive me, I have done you wrong.
Whats the matter? did ever see her af re Jack?
Prithee doe what thou wo't wo'mee, if thou hast
A mind, hang me up quickly.
Never despair, Isle give thee my share rather,
Take her, I hope she loves thee at first sight,
She has Petticoats will patch thee up a suit;
I resign all, only Isle keep these trifles,
I took some pains for 'em, I take it Jack;
What think you pink of beauty, come let me
Counsel you both to marry, she has a trade,
If you have audacity to hook in Gamsters:
Let's ha a wedding, you will be wondrous rich;
For she is impudent, and thou art miserable;
Twill be a rare match.
As you are a man forgive me, Isle redeem all.
You wo'not to these gear of marriage then?
No, no, I thank you Tom, I can watch for
A great a night, and be every gentleman's fellow.
Rise, and be good, keep home and tend your business.
Thou hast don't to purpose, give me thy hand Tom;
Shall we be friends? thou see what state I am in,
Isle undertake this penance to my Aunt,
Just as I am, and openly Isle go;
Where, if I be received again for currant,
And fortune smile once more ???
Nay, nay, I me satisfied, so farewell honest lousy Jack.
I cannot help it, some men meet with strange destinies.
If things go right thou moist be hanged, and I
May live to see it, and purchase thy apparel:
So farewell Tom, commend me to thy Polcat.
Now that I have my counsel ready, and my cause ripe;
The Judges all informed of the abuses;
Now that he should be gone.
No man knows whether,
And yet they talk he went forth with a Constable
That told him of strange business, that would bring him
Money and lands, and heaven knows what; but they
Have searched, and can not find out such an Officer:
And as a secret, Madam, they told your man
Nicholas, whom you sent thither as a spy,
They had a shrewd suspicion it was the devil
In the likeness of a Constable, that has tempted him
By this time to strange things; there have been men
As rich as he, have met convenient rivers,
And so forth; many trees have borne strange fruits:
De'e think he has not hanged himself?
If he be hanged, who he's his goods?
They are forfeited, they say.
He has hanged himself for certain then,
Only to cousin me of my Girls portion.
Very likely.
Or did not the Constable carry him to some prison?
They thought on that too, and searched every where.
He may be close for treason, perhaps executed.
Nay, they did look among the quarters too,
And mustered all the bridge-house for his night-cap.
Madam, here is the gentleman again.
What gentleman?
He that loved my young Mistress.
Alas, tic Heartlove, twill but feed his melancholy,
To let him see Maria, since we dare not
Yet tell the world she lives; and certainly,
Did not the violence of h?????? passion blind him,
He would see past her borrowed tongue and habit.
Please you entertain him a while Madam,
Isle cast about for some thing with your daughter.
Do what thou wot, pray Mr. Hartlove enter.
Madam, I come to ask your gentle pardon.
Pardon, for what? you ne'er offended me,
Yes, if you be the mother of Maria.
I was her mother, but that word is canceled,
And buried with her in that very minute
Her soul fled from her, we lost both our names
Of mother and of daughter.
Alas, Madam,
If your relation did consist but in
Those naked terms, I had a title nearer,
Since love unites more than the tie of blood;
No matter for the empty voice of mother;
Your nature still is left, which in her absence
Must love Maria, and not see her ashes
And memory polluted.
You amaze me, by whom?
By me, I am the vile profaner.
Why doe you speak thus indiscreetly sir?
You ever honoured her.
I did alive,
But since she died, I ha been a villain to her.
I doe beseech you say not so; all this
Is but to make me know, how much I sinned
In forcing her to marry.
Doe not mock me,
I charge you by the Virgin you have wept for;
For I have done an impious act against her,
A deed able to fright her from her sleep,
And through her marble, oft to be revenged;
A wickedness, that if I should be filent,
You as a witness must accuse me for it.
Was I a witness?
Yes, you knew I loved
Maria once; or grant, you did but think so,
By what I ha professed, or she has told you,
Was it not a fault unpardonable in me,
When I should drop my tears upon her grave.
Yes, and proofs sufficient.
To what?
That I forgetful of my fame and vows
To fair Maria, ere the worm could pierce
Her tender shroud, had changed her for an other;
Did you not blush to see me turn a Rebel?
So soon to court a shadow, a strange thing,
Without a name? Did you not curse my levity,
Or think upon her death with the less sorrow
That she had escaped a punishment more killing,
Oh how I shame to think on it.
Sir in my
Opinion, it was an argument of love
To your Maria, for whose sake you could
Affect one that but carried her small likeness.
No more, you are too charitable, but
I know my guilt, and will from henceforth never
Change words with that strange maid, whose innocent face
Like your Marries won so late upon me,
My passions are corrected, and I can
Look on her now, and woman kind, without
Love in a thought; it is thus, I came to tell you.
If after this acknowledgement, youl'e be
So kind to show me in what filent grave
You have disposed your daughter, I will ask
Forgiveness of all her dust, and never leave,
Till with the loud confession of my shame
I wake her ghost, and that pronounce my pardon:
Will you deny this favour? then farewell,
Isle never see you more: ha!
Be not deluded sir, upon my life
This is the soul whom you but thought Maria
In my daughters habit; what did you mean Nurse?
I knew she would but cozen you, is she not like now?
One dew unto another is not nearer.
She thinks she is a gentlewoman;
And that imagination has so taken her,
She scorns to speak, how handsomely she carries it,
As if she were a well bread thing, her body?
And I warrant you, what looks?
Pray be not foolish.
I disturb no body, speak but half a word
And I am satisfied, but what needs that?
Isle swear tic she.
But doe not, I beseech you,
For trust me sir, you know not what I know.
Peace then,
And let me pray, she holds up her hands with me.
This will betray all.
Love ever honoured,
And ever young, thou Sovereign of all hearts,
Of all our sorrows, the sweet ease,
Does she still cozen me?
You will see anon,
It was her desire, expect the issue Madam.
My souls so big, I cannot pray; tic she,
I will go nearer.
Here's Mr. Algripe and other strangers Madam.
Here good Lady,
Upon my knees I ask thy worships pardon;
Here is the whole sum I had with thy fair daughter;
Would she were living, I might have her peace too,
And yield her up again to her old liberty:
I had a wife before, and could not marry;
My penance shall be on that man that honoured her
To confer some land.
This is incredible.
Tic truth.
Doe you know me sir?
Ha, the gentleman I deceived.
My name is Lurcher.
'Shat have thy mortgage.
I ha that already, no matter for the deed
If you release it.
Isle do it before thy witness;
But whore's thy sister? if she live I am happy, though
I conceal our contract, which was
Stolen from me with the evidence of this land.
Your daughter smiles.
I hope she lives, but where, I cannot tell sir.
Even here, and please you sir.
How?
Nay, tic she;
To work thy fair way, I preserved you brother,
That would have lost me willingly, and served ye
Thus like a Boy; I served you faithfully,
And cast your plots but to preserve your credit;
Your foul ones I diverted to fair uses;
So far as you would hearken to my counsel;
That all the world may know how much you owe me.
Welcome entirely, welcome my dear Alathe,
And when I lose the again, blessing forsake me:
Nay, let me kiss thee in these clothes.
And I too,
And bless the time I had so wise a sister, were it thou the little thief?
I stole the contract, I must confess,
And kept it to my self, it most concern me.
Contracted? this destroys his after marriage.
Dare you give this hand
To this young gentleman, my heart goes with it.
Maria alive I how my hearts exalted, tic my duty;
Take her Frank Hartlove, take her; and all joys
With her; besides some land to advance her Jointure.
What I have is your own, and blessings crown ye.
Give me room,
And fresh air to confider, gentlemen,
My hopes are too high.
Be more temperate,
Or Isle be Welsh again.
A day of wonder.
Lady, your love, I ha kept my word; there was
A time, when my much sufferings made me hate you,
And to that end I did my best to cross you:
And fearing you were dead I stole your Coffin,
That you might never more usurp my office:
Many more knacks I did, which at the Weddings
Shall be told of as harmless tales.
Hallow your throats a pieces, I am at home;
If you can roar me out again ???
What thing is this?
A continent of fleas: room for the Pageant;
Make room asore there; your kinsman Madam.
My kinsman? let me wonder!
Do, an Isle wonder too, to see this company
At peace one with another; tic not worth
Your admiration, I was never dead yet;
Ye're merry Aunt, I see, and all your company:
If ye be not, Isle fool up, and provoke ye;
I will doe any thing to get your love again:
Isle forswear midnight Taverns and remptations;
Give good example to your Grooms, the maids
Shall go to bed and take their rest this year;
None shall appear with blisters in their bellies.
And when you will fool again, you may go ring.
Madam, have mercy.
Your submission sir,
I gladly take, we will
Enquire the reason of this habit afterwards;
Now you are soundly shamed, well wi restore you:
Wheres Toby?
Wheres the Coachman?
Hoe's a bed, Madam,
And has an ague, he says.
Isle be his Physician.
We must a foot then.
Ere the Priest ha done
Toby shall waite upon you with his Coach,
And make your Flanders Mares dance back again we'yee,
I warrant you Madam you are mortified,
Your suit shall be granted too.
Make, make room before there.
Home forward with glad hearts, home child.
I waite you.
On joyfully, the cure of all our grief,
Is owing to this pretty little These.

AS the world grows in years (it is the Heavens curse)
Men's sins increase; the pristine times were best:
The Ages in their growth wax worse &amp; worse.
The first was precious, full of golden rest.
Silver sussded; good, but not so pure:
Then love and harmless lusts might currant pass:
The third that follows we find more obdure,
And that we title by the Age of Brass.
In this more gross and courser mettled Age,
Tyrants and fierce oppressors we present.
Nephews that against their Uncles wreak their rag,
Mothers against their children discontent,
A sister with her brother at firee war,
(Things in our former times not seen or known)
But vice with virtue now begins to jar,
And sins (though not at height) yet great are grown.
Still with our history we shall proceed,
And Hercules victorious acts relate:
His marriage first, next many a noble deed
Performed by him: last how he yields to Fate.
And these, I hope, may (with some mixtures) pass,
So you sit pleased in this our Age of Brass.
Thus midst our brothers, daughter, Queen and son,
Sits Oeneus crowned in fertll Cadon
Whose age and weakness is supported only,
In those ripe joys that I receive from you.
May we long ftand supporters of your royalties,
And glad spectators of your age and peace.
The like I wish.
We have found you brothers royal,
And subjects loyal.
They are of our line,
Of which no branch did ever perish yet,
By Cankers, blastings, or dry barrenness.
But Meleager let me turn to thee,
Whose birth the Fates themselves did calculate,
Pray mother how was that? I have heard you say
Somewhat about my birth miaculous,
But never yet knew the true circumstance.
It was thus: the very instant thou wast borne,
The sisters, that draw, spin, and clip our lives,
Entered my chamber with a fatal brand,
Which hurling in the fire, thus said: One day, one date,
Betide this brand and child, even be their fate.
So parted they, the brand begins to burn:
And as it wasted, so did thou consume;
Which I perceiving, leaped unto the flame,
And quenching that, stayed thy consumption.
The brand I (as a jewel) have reserved,
And keep it in a casket, locked as safe
As in thy bosom thou maintainst thy heart.
Pray keep it well: for if not with my mother,
With whom dare Meleager trust his life?
But sister Deianeira, now to you.
Two worthy Champions must this day contend,
And try their eminnce in Arms for you,
Great Achelous, and strong Hercules.
We know it: my love must be bought with blows,
Not Oratory wins me, but the sword:
He that can braueliest in the lists contend,
Must Deianeira's nuptial bed ascend.
Brothers, conduct these Champions to the lists,
Mean time Althea state thee on that hand,
On this side Deianeira the rich prize
Of their contention.
Clamours from a far,
Tell vs these Champions are a dressed for war.
Stand forth you warlike Champions, and express
Your loves to Deianeira, in your valours.
As we are Oeneus the Aetolians King,
And under vs command whole Calidon.
So we contest we make her here the prize
Of the proud victor:
Dares the Theban bastard
Contend with vs, as we are eldest son
Unto the grave and old Oceanus,
And the Nymph Nais, borne on Pindus mount,
From whence our broad and spacious currents rise?
So are we proud to coape with Hercules.
Ne'er let my streams wash Aarnania's banks,
Or we confined in Thous, our grand seat,
Till (by the ruin of Alcmena's son)
We lodge bright Deianeira in our arms.
Have we the Cleonean Lyons torn?
And decked our shoulders in their honoured spoils?
The Calidoni Boar crushed with our Club?
The rude Thessalian Centaurs sunk beneath
Our Iuiall hand? pierced hell? bound Cerber?
And buffeted so long, till from the some
The dog belch forth strong Aconitum spring?
And shall a petty river make our way
To Deianeira's bed impassable?
Know then the pettiest stream that flows through Greece,
Il'e make thee run thy head below thy banks,
Make red thy waters with thy vital blood,
And spill thy waives in drops as small as tears,
If thou presum'st to coape with Hercules.
What's Hercules that I should dread his name?
Or what's he greater then Amphitri's son?
When we assume the name of Demi-god
Not Protes can trans-shape himself like vs,
For we command our figure when we please.
Sometimes we like a serpent run along
Our medowy banks: and sometimes like a Bull
Graze on these strands we water with our streams.
We can translate our fury to a fire,
And when we swell, in our fierce torrents swallow
The Champion plains, and flow aboue the hills,
Drown all the continents by which we run;
Yea Hercules himself.
Me Achelous!
I can do more then this: love Deianeira,
Swine with her on my shoulders through thy streams,
And with my huge Club beat thy torrents back,
With thine own waters quench the infernal fires
Thy figure serpentine, flat on the earth:
And when you are Bull, catch fast hold by thy horns,
And whirl thee about my head thus into ayre.
Thou fair Aetolian dame, I cannot woo,
Nor paint my passions in smooth Oratory,
But fight for thee I can, against Achelous,
Or all the horrid monsters of the earth.
When gins your proud and hostile enmity?
Behold the prize proposed, the victors meed,
Champions your spirits enkindle at her eyes.
It is for her this bastard I despise.
Prepare thee Theban.
See, I am addressed
With this to thunder on thy captive crest.
I cannot bellow in thy bombast phrase;
Nor deaf these free spectators with my braves.
I cut off words with deeds, and now behold
For me, the echo of my blows thus scold.
Be thou a God or hell-hound thus transhap't,
Thy terror frights not me, serpent or devil Il'e posh thee.
Fright vs with fire? our Club shall quench thy flame,
And beat it down to hell, from whence it came.
What, yet more monsters? Serpent, Bull, and Fire,
Shall all alike taste great Alcides ire.
No more, I am thy Captive, thou my Conqueror:
I see, no Magic, or enchanting spell
Have power on virtue and true fortitude.
No slight Illusion can deceive the eyes
Of him that is divinely resolute.
I lay me at thy feet, a lowly vassal,
Since thou hast reft me of that prccious horn,
Which tearing from my head in shape of Bull,
Thus wounded me. Take Deianeira freely,
Only restore me that rich spoil thou hast won,
Which all the Nymphs and graces dwelling near,
Shall fill with redolent flowers, and delicate fruits,
And call it Cornucopia, plenties horn,
In memory of Achlous loss,
And this high conqust won by Hercules.
Had thou not stooped thy horrid Taurine shape
I would have peece-meale rent, and thy tough hide
Torn into rags as thick as Autumn leaves:
Take thee thy life, and with thy life that spoil
Plucked from thy mangled front, give me my love,
I'll stoare no horns at winning of a wife.
Give me bright Deyanira, take that horn,
So late from thy disfigured Temples torn.
I have my prayers, Alcides his desires,
Both meet in love.
Receive her Hercules,
The conquest of thy warlike fortitude.
Wee take but what our valour purchased vs,
And beauteous Queen thou shalt assure his love,
Whose puissant arm shall awe the triple world,
And make the greatest Monarchs of the earth
To thy divinest beauty tributary.
Will Hercules stay here in Calidon,
To solemnise the nuptials of our sister?
I Meleager, rich Aetolians heir,
Whose large Dominions stretch to Oeta Mount,
And to the bounds of fertile Thessaly
Will grace thy Bridals with the greatest pomp
Greece can afford, nor is it my meanest honour
To be the brother to great Hercules.
Thanks Meleager, sojourn here we cannot,
My step-dame luno tasks me to more dangers:
Wee take thy beauteous sister in our guard,
Whom by Ioues aide wee straight will bear to Thebes.
A fathers wishes crown the happiness
Of his fair daughter.
And a brothers love
Comfort thee where thou goosed: If not with Hercules
Whom dare we trust thy safety.
Not loves guard
Can circle her with more security.
Time calls vs hence, Aetolian Lords farewell.
Adieu brave son, and daughter, only happy
In being thus bestowed, come Achelous,
With you we will feast, nor let your foil deject you,
Or Deyaniraes loss; he's more then man,
And needs must he do this, that all things can.
Dares Deyaneira trust her persons safety
With vs a stranger, only known by Fame.
Were it against the Lyons in Chimera bred,
Or those rude Bears that breed in Caucasus:
The Hyrcan Tigers or the Syrian Wolves,
Nay against the Giants that assaulted heaven
And with their shoulders made those bases shake
That prop Olimpus: lived Enceladus
With whom love wrestled: even against those monsters,
I'd think me safe encircled in these arms.
Thou art as safe as if immured in heaven,
Pal'd with that Crystal wall that girts loves house,
Where all the Gods inhabit, built by fate,
Stay, I should know that Centaur.
That's Hercules I know him by his Club,
Whose ponderous weight I felt upon my Skull
At the great Bridal of the Lapithes.
What lovely Laddie's she that in her beauty
So much exceeds fair Hypodamia?
Oh Nessus, thou of all thy cloud-bred race,
Alone did scope by trusting to thy heals
At Hypodamia's Bridals, but we now
Are friends, are wee not Nessus?
Yes great Hercules,
(Till I can find fit time for just reuendge)
Methinkes my brains still rattle in my skull)
What Laddie's that in great Alcides Guard?
Deyaneira, daughter to the Aetolian King,
Sister to Meleager, now our Bride;
Won by the force of arms from Achelous,
The boisterous flood that flows through Calidon.
A double envy burns in all my veins,
First for revenge; next, that he should enjoy
That beauteous maid whom Nessus dearly loves.
Will Hercules command me? or his Bride?
I'll lackey by thee wheresoer'e thou goosed,
And be the vassal to great Hercules.
We are bound for Thebes, but soft, what torrent's this
That intercepts our way? How shall we pass
These raging streams?
This is Euenus flood,
A dangerous current, full of whirlpools deep,
And yet vnsounded: dare thou trust thy Bride
On Nessus back? I'll undertake to swim her
Unto the furthest strond, upon my shoulders,
And yet not lave her shoe.
I'll pay thee for thy waftage Centaur, well,
And make thee Prince of all thy by-form'd race,
If thou willt do this grace to Hercules:
But ferry her with safety, for by Jove,
If thou but make her tremble in these streams,
Or let the least wave dash against her skirt;
If the least fear of drowning pale her cheek,
I'll pound thee smaller then the Autumn dust
Tossed by the warring winds?
Have I not swam
The Hellesepont, when waives high as yon hills
Tossed by the winds, have crowned me, yet in spite
Of all their briny weight I have wrought my self
Aboue the topmost billow to ore-looke
The troubled maine: come beauteous Deyaneira,
Not Charon with more safety ferries souls,
Then I will thee through this impetuous ford,
Receive her Centaur, and in her the wealth
And potency of mighty Hercules.
Now my revenge for that inhumaine banquet,
In which so many of the Centaurs fell,
I'll rape this Princess, having past the flood
Come beauteous Deyaneira, mount my shoulders,
And fear not your safe wastage.
That done return for vs: fair Deianeira,
White as the garden lily, pyren snow,
Or rocks of Crystal hardened by the Sun:
Thou shalt be made the potent Queen of Thebes,
And all my Jovial labours shall to thee
Be consecrate, as to Alcides love.
Well plundge bold Centaur, how thy boisterous breast
Plowes up the streams: thou through the swelling tides,
Sail'st with a freight more rich and beautiful,
Then the best ship crammed with Pangeous gold:
With what a swift dexterity he parts
The mutinous waives, whose waters clasp him round,
Hee plays and wantons on the curled streams,
And Deyanira on his shoulders fits
As safe, as if she steered a pine-tree bark.
They grow now towards the shore: my club and arms
I'll first cast over the deep Euenus ford,
But from my side my quiver shall not part,
Nor this my trusty bow.
Help Herles.
It was Deyaneiraes voice.
The Traitor Nessus
Seeks to despoil mine honour, Jove, you Gods:
Out traitorous Centaur: Help great Hercules.
Hold, lust-burnt Centaur, it is Alcides calls
Or swifter then Ioues lightning, my fierce vengeance
Shall cross Euenus.
Oh, oh.
Dare thou devil?
Could thou clime Heaven or sink below the Center
So high, so low, my vengeance should pursue thee,
Hold; if I could but fix thee in my gripes,
I de tear thy limbs into more Atoms
Then in the Summer play before the Sun.
Help Hercules (out dog) Alcides help.
I'll send till I can come, this poisonous shaft
Shall speak my fury and extract thy blood,
Till I my self can cross this raging flood.
Thy beauty Deyaneira is my death,
And yet that Nessus dies embracing thee
Takes from my senses all those torturing pangs
That should associate death: to show I loved thee,
I'll leave thee, in my will, a legacy;
Shall stead thee more, then should thy father give thee
Unto thy Dower the Crown of Calidon.
Of such great virtue is my living blood,
And of such prize, that could thou value it,
Thou would not let one drop fall to the ground:
But oh I die.
Teach me to rate it truly.
Now Nessus, in thy death be avenged on him
On whom in life thou could not wreak thy rage:
(My blood is poison) all these pure drops save,
Which I bequeath thee ere I take my grave:
I know thy Lord lascivious, bent to lust,
Witness the fifty daughters of King Thespeius,
Whom in one night he did adulterate:
And of those fifty begot fifty sons:
Now if in all his quests, he be with-held
By any Ladies love, and stay from thee,
Such is the virtue of my blood now shed,
That if thou dipst a shirt, steeped in the least
Of all these drops, and sendst it to thy Lord,
No sooner shall it touch him, but his love
Shall die to strangers, and revive to thee,
Make use of this my love.
Centaur, I will.
And so, whom Nessus cannot, do thou kill;
Still dying men speak true: it is my last cry,
Save of my blood, may steed thee ere thou die.
Though I my love mistrust not, yet this counsel
I'lenot despise: this if my Lord should stray,
Shall to my desolate bed teach him the way.
After long struggling with Euenus streams,
I forced the river bear me on her breast,
And land me safely on this further strond,
To make an end of what my shaft begun,
The life of Nessus, lives the Centaur yet?
Behold him grovelling on the senseless earth,
His wounded breast transfixed by Hercules.
That the luxurious slave were sensible
Of torture; not th'infernals with more pangs
Could plague the villain then Alcides should.
Ixions bones racked on the torturing wheel
Should be a pastime: the three snake-hair'd sisters,
That lah offenders with their whips of steel,
Should seem to dally, when with every string
They cut the flesh like razors: but the dead
Wee hate to touch, as cowardly and base,
And avengece not becoming Herculs.
Come Theyeira, first to consummate
Our high owsals in triumphant Thebes,
That don, our future labours we'll pursue,
And by the assistance of the powers Divine,
Strive to act more then luno can assign.
Fair Deyaneira unto, Thees being guided,
And Hercules espousals solemnised.
Hee for his further labours soon provided,
As Iuno by Euritius had devised.
The Apples of Hesperia first he wan,
Maugre huge Atlas that supports the spheres:
And whilst the Giant on his business ran;
Alcides takes his place, and proudly bears
The heavens huge frame: thence into Scithia hies,
And their the Amazonian Baldricke gains,
By conquering Menalip (a bre prise)
The warlike Queen that re the Scithians reigns.
That hee supported heaven, doth well express
His Astronomicke skill, knowledge in tarres:
They that such practise know, what do they less
Then bear heavens weight so of the Lernean wars.
Where he the many-headed Hydra slew,
A Serpent of that nature, when his sword
Par'd off one head, from that another grew.
This showed his Logic skill: from every word
And argument confuted, there arise
From one a multiplicity, therefore we
Poets and such as are esteeed wise,
Instruct the world by such rality.
To conquer Hydra showed his powerful skill
In disputation, how to argue well.
(By all that understand in custom still)
And in this Art did Hercules excel.
Now we the Egyptian tyrant must present,
Bloody Busiris, a king fell and rude,
One that in murder placed his sole content,
With whose sad death our first Act we conclude.
In Egypt there of long time fellnoraine,
For which unto the Oracle they sent:
Answers reurned, that till one stranger slain,
Immou'd shall be the Marble frmament.
Therefore the Tyrant all these strangers kills
That enter Egypt, till Alcides came
And with the tyrants bulk the Altar fills:
At whose red slaughter fell a plenteous rain.
For he that stranger and usurper was,
Whose bloody fate the Oracle forespake.
But for a while we let Alcides pass,
Whom these of Egypt would their souer aigne make,
For freeing them from such a tyrants rage;
Now Meleager next must fill our stage.
Why doth Atones fly the Queen of love?
And shun this Ivory girdle of my arms?
To be thus scarfed the dreadful God of war
Would give me conquered kingdoms: For a kiss
(But half like this) I could command the Sun
Rise before his hour, to bed before his time:
And (being loue-sicke) change his golden beams,
And make his face pale, as his sifter Moon.
Come, let vs tumble on this violet bank:
Prithee be wanton; let vs toy and play,
Thy Icy fingers warm between my breasts;
Look on me Adon with a steadfast eye,
That in these Crystal glasses I may see
My beauty, that charms Gods, makes men amazed,
And stownd with wonder: doth this roseate pillow
Offend my love? come, wallow in my lap,
With my white fingers I will clap thy cheek,
Whisper a thousand pleasures in thine ear.
Madame, you are not modest: I affect
The unseen beauty that adorns the mind.
This looseness makes you foul in Adons eye:
If you will tempt me, let me in your face
Read blushfulnesse, and fear; a modest blush
Would make your cheek seem much more beautiful.
If you will whisper pleasure in mine ear,
Praise chastity, or with your loud voice shrill
The tunes of horns, and hunting; they please best:
Il'e to the chase, and leave you to the rest.
Thou art not man; yet were it thou made of stone,
I have heate to melt thee. I am Queen of love,
There is no practiue art of dalliance
Of which I am not Mistress, and can use.
I have kisses that can murder unkind words,
And strangle hatred, that the gall sends forth:
Touches to raise thee, were thy spirits half dead:
Words that can power affection down thine ears.
Love me! thou can not choose, thou shalt not choose.
Am I not Venus? Had thou Cupids arrows,
I should have took thee to have been my son:
Art thou so like him, and yet can not love?
I think you are brothers.
Madame, you woo not well, men covet not
These proffered pleasures; but loue-sweets denied:
What I command, that cloys my appetite;
But what I cannot come by I adore.
These prostituted pleasures surfeit still,
Wheres fear, or doubt, men sue with best good will.
Thou can instruct the Queen of love in love.
Thou shalt not (Adon) take me by the hand;
Yet if thou needs wilt force me, theres my palm.
Il'e frown on him (alas! my brow's so smooth
It will not bear a wrinkle:) hye thee hence
Unto the chase, and leave me: but not yet,
Il'e sleep this night upon Endimions bank,
On which the Swain was courted by the Moon.
Dare not to come, thou art in our disgrace;
(Yet if thou come I can afford thee place.)
I must begone.
Sue whither?
To the Chase.
What does thou hunt?
The Caledonian Boar,
To which the Princes and best spirits of Greece
Are now assembled.
I beshrew thee boy,
That very word struck from my heart all joy:
It startled me, me thinks I see thee dye
By that rude Boar. Hunt thou the bests that fly,
The wanton Squirell, or the trembling Hare,
The crafty Fox: these pastimes fea clesse are.
The greedy Wolves, and fierce Bears armed with claws,
Rough shouldered Lyons, such as glut their jaws
With herds at once, Fell Boars, let them pass by,
Adon, these look not with thy Venus ye.
They judge not beauty, nor distinguish youh,
These are their prey; My pity, love and ruth
Lives not in them. Oh to thy self be kind,
Thou from their mouths, my kisses shalt not find.
The summons to the chase, Venus adieu.
Leave those, turn head, choose those thou moist pursue
I am resolved, Il'e help to rouse yon beast.
Thou art to de his savage throat to feast.
Forbear.
In vain.
Appoint when we shall meet.
After the chase. Farewell then.
Farewell sweet.
This kissing.
Adon, guard thee well, express
Thy love to me, in being of thy self
Careful and chary: they that raze thy skin
Wound me. Be wise my Adon.
Never doubt. So then
But lip-labour, yet ill left out.
The cause of this conuention (Lords of Greece)
Needs no expression; and yet briefly thus:
Oeneus our father, the Aetolians King,
Of all his fruits and plenty, gave due rights
To all the Gods and Goddesses, Jove, Ceres,
Bacchus, and Pallas; but among the rest,
Diana he neglects: for which enraged,
She hath sent (to plague vs) a huge savage Boar,
Of an vn-measured height and magnitude.
What better can describe his shape and terror
Then all the piteous clamours shrild through Greece?
Of his depopulations, spoils, and preys?
His flaming eyes they sparkle blood and fire,
His bristles pointed like a range of pikes
Ranck't on his back: his foam snows where he feeds
His tusks are like the Indian Oliphants.
Out of his jaws (as if Ioues lightning flew)
He scortches all the branches in his way,
Plowes up the fields, treads flat the fields of grain.
In vain the Shepherd or his dog secures
Their harmless fowlds. In vain the furious Bull
Strives to defend the heard ore which he Lords.
The Colonies into the Cities fly,
And till immured, they think themselves not safe.
To chase this beast we have met on Oeta mount,
Attended by the noblest spirits of Greece.
From populous Salamine I Telan
Am at thy fair request, King Meleager,
Come to behold this beast of Calidon,
And prove my virtue in his sterne pursuit.
Not Meleagers love, more then the zeal
I bear my honour, hath drawn Iason hither,
To this adventure, yet both forcible
To make me try strange masteries against that monster,
Whose fury hath so much amazed all Greece.
That was the cause I Castor, with my brother
Pollux, arrived, and left our sister Helen
Embraced by our old father Tyndarus,
To rouse this beast.
Let vs no more be held
The sons of Lda, and be got by Jove,
Brothers, and called the two Tyndarian twins
If we return not crimsoned in the spoils
Of this fierce Boar.
To that end Nestor came.
Nestor, that hath already lived one age,
And entered on the second, to the third
May I ne'er reach, if part of that wilde swine
I bring not home to Pylos where I reign.
My young son Agamemnon, and his brother
Prince Menclaus in his swathes at home,
Without some honour purchased on this Boar,
May I no more see, or Myeenes visit.
Well speaks Atreus, and his noble acts
Still equalise his language. Shall not Theseus
Veoter as far as any? heavens you know
I dare as much against any mortal foe.
Wher's Hercules, that at this noble business
He is not present, being near allied
To Meleager, having late espoused
His sister Deianeira?
He's for Busiris, that Aegytian tyrant,
Else noble valour, he would have bin first
To have purchased honour in this haughty quest.
Hail princes, let it not offend this troop,
That I a Princess and Atlanta called,
A virgin Huntress, press into the field,
In hope to double guild my Javelins point
In blood of yon wilde swine.
Virgineam in puero, puerilem in virgin vultum
Oh you Gods! or make her mine,
Stated with vs the Caledonian Queen,
Or let this monstrous beefed confound me quite,
And in his vast womb bury all my fe.
Beauteous Atlanta welcome, grace her princes
For Meleagers honour.
Come, shal's vncupple Lords,
Some plant the toils, others bravely mount,
To unen this savage.
Time and my bashful love
Admits no courtship, Lady rank with vs.
Il'e be this day your guardian, and a shield
Between you and all danger.
We are free,
And in the chase will our own guardian be.
Shells to the field, my Javelin and these shafts,
Pointed with death, shall with the foremost fly,
And by a women's hand the beast shall dye.
As bold as fair; but soft, whose bugle's that
Which calls vs to the chase? Adnis yours?
Mine oh you noble Greeks, we have discovered
The dreadful monster wallowing in his den:
The toils are fixed, the huntsmen placed on hills
Pressed for the charge, the fierce Tbessalian hounds
With their flag ears, ready to sweep the dew
From the moist earth: their breasts are armed with steel,
Against the encounter of so grim a beast:
The hunters long to vncupple, and attend
Your presence in the field.
Follow Atlanta.
Il'e try what prince will second me in field,
And make his Javelins point shake even with mine.
That Meleagers shall.
Nor Telamon
Will come behind Atlanta, or the Prince.
Charge bravely then your Javelins, send them singing
Through the clear air, and aim them at yon fiend,
Den'd in the quechy bog, the signal Lords.
charge, charge.
Princes, shrill your Bugles free.
And all Atlanta's danger fall on me.
This way, this way, renowned Telamon,
The Boar makes through yon glade, and from the hills
He hurries like a tempest: In his way
He prostrates trees, and like the bolt of Jove,
Shatters where ere he comes.
Diana's wrath
Sparkles grim terror from his fiery eyes:
One Javelin pointed with the purest brass,
I have blunted against his ribs, yet he vnscar'd,
The head, as darted against a rock of marble,
Rebounded back.
He shakes off from his head
Our best Thessalian dogs, like Summer flies:
Nor can their sharpe fangs fasten on his hide.
Follow the cry.
Wher's noble Telamon?
Or warlike Iason?
Here you Tyndarides,
Speak, which way bends this plague of Calidon?
Here may you stand him, for behold he comes
Like a rough torrent, swallowing where he spreads,
Over his head a cloud of terror hangs
In which lean death (as in a Chariot) rides,
Darting his shafts on all sides: amongst the Princes
Of fertile Gree, Anceus bowels lye
Strewd on the earth, torn by his ravenous tusks:
And had not Nestor (by his Javelins help)
Leap'up into an Ok to have escaped his rage,
He had now perished in his second Age.
Peleus is wounded, Pelegon lies slain,
Eupalemon hath all his body rent
With an oblique wound: yet Meleager still,
And Theseus, and Atreus, with the rest,
Pursue the chase, with Boare-speares cast so thick,
That where they fly, they seem to dark the ayre,
And where they fall, they treaten imminent ruin.
To these wee' add our fury, and our fire,
And front him, though his bow bare figured hell,
And every wrinkle were the gulf of Styx
By which the Gods contest: Come noble Telamon,
Diana's monster by our hands shall fall,
Or (with the Princes slain) let's perish all.
Thou beauteous Nonacris, Arcadia's pride,
How hath thy valour with thy fortune joined,
To make thee stain the general fortitude
Of all the Princes we derive from Greece,
Thy lances point hath on yon armed monster,
Made the first wound, and the first crimson drop
Fell from his side, thy aim and arm extracted,
Thy fame shall never dye in Calidon.
We trifle here, what shall Atlanta gain
The first wounds honour, and be absent from
The monfters death, we must have hand in both.
Thou hast purchased honour and renown enough,
Oh stain not all the general youth of Greece,
By thy too forward spirit. Come not near
Yon rude blood-thirsty savage, lest he prey
On thee, as on Anceus, and the rest,
Let me between thee and all dangers stand.
Fight, but fight safe beneath our puissant hand.
The cry comes this way, all my shafts Il'e spend.
To give the fury that affrights vs, end.
And ere that monster on Atlanta pray,
This point of steel shall through his hart make way.
Atones, thou that make Venus a Huntress,
Leave Paphos, Gnidon, Eryx, Erecine,
And Amathon, with precious metals big,
May thou this day live bucklerd in our wing,
And shadowed in the amorous power of love:
My swans I have vnyoakt, and from their necks
Tan of their bridles made of twisted silk.
And from my chariot stuck with Doves white plumes
Lighted upon this verdure, where the Boar
Hath in his fury snowed his scattered foam.
What cry was that? It was Atones sure.
That piercesant shrike shrild through the musical pipes
Of his sweet voices organs, thou Diana
If thou hast sent this fiend to ruin love,
Or print the least scar in my Adons flesh
Thy chastity I will abandon quite,
And with my looseness, blast thy Cinthian light.
There lie most beauteous of the youths of Greece,
Whoe death I will not morn, ere I revenge.
I'll second thee, thou pride of Greece adieu,
Whom too much valour in thy prime ore-threw.
You're not mine eyes, for they to fee him dead
Would from their soft beds drop upon the earth:
Or in their own warm liquid moisture drown
Their native brightness: you are not Venus heart,
For were it thou mine, at this sad spectacle
Th'dst break these ribs though they were made of brass,
And leap out of my bosom instantly.
My sorrows like a populous throng, all striving
At once to pass through some enforced breach,
In stead of winning passage stop the way,
And so the greatest hast, breeds the most stay.
Oh me! my multiplicity of sorrows,
Makes me almost forget to grieve at all.
Speak, speak, my Adon, thou whom death hath fed on
Ere thou wast yet full ripe; and this thy beauty's
Devoured ere tasted. Eye, whore's now thy brightness?
Or hand thy warmth? Oh that such lovely parts
Should be by death thus made vnseruiceable.
That (lives then) had the power to entrance Jove:
Ravish, amaze, and surfeit, all these pleasures
Venus hath lost by thy untimely fall.
And therefore for thy death eternally
Venus shall morn; Earth shall thy trunk devour,
But thy lives blood I'll turn into a flower,
And every Month in solemn rights deplore,
This beauteous Greek slain by Dianaes Boar.
Thus lies the terror that but once to day
Awed all the boldest hearts of Calidon
Wallowing and weltering in his native blood,
Transfixed by vs, but bravely seconded,
By noble Iason, Theseus, Peleus,
Telamon, Nestor, the Tyndarides,
And our bold uncles, al our bore-speares stained
And gory hands lau'd in his reeking blood,
To whom belongs this brave victorious spoil?
To Meleager Prince of Calidon.
Is that your general suffrage?
Let not Greece
Suffer such merit unregarded pass,
Or valour live vnguerdon'd, that fell Swine
Whom yet, even dead, the amazed people fear,
And dare not touch but with astonishent
Fell by thy hand.
Thou stodst his violence,
Tl thy sharpe Javelin grated against his broines,
Beneath his shield thou entred'st to his heart.
At that we guirt him till a thousand wounds,
Hee from a thousand hands received at once:
And in his fall it seemed the earth did groan,
And the fixed Center tremble under him.
The spoil is thine, the young Atones death,
Anceus slaughter, and the massacre
Of Arches, Pelagon, Eupateinon
And all the Grecian Printes lost this day,
Thou hast revenged, therefore be thine the fame,
Which with a general voice Greece shall proclaim.
Princes wee thank you, it is mine given me free.
Which fair Atlanta we bestow on thee.
Ha, to a woman.
And so many men,
Engaged in it, call back thy gift again.
Greece is by this disparaged, and our fame
Foully eclipsed.
Snatched from that emulous Dame.
Murmur you Lords at Meleagers bounty,
We first bestowed it as our own by gift,
Yea, and by right, but now we render it
To bright Atlanta, as her own by due
As she that from the Boar the first blood drew.
We must not suffer this disgrace to Greece.
Let women claim amongst women eminence,
Our Lofty spirits, that honour have in chase,
Cannot digest wrongs womanish and base.
Restore this woman and thy sex envy
For fortitude, aim not at quests so hye.
Castor forbear.
Hee gives but what's his own.
Tic the Kings bounty,
By the immortal Gods,
That gave vs this days honour, the same hand
By which the Caledonian terror fell,
Shall him that frowns or murmurs launch to hell.
That will we try.
Then reskue for Atlanta,
This day shall all for thee, that art divine,
Monsters more savage then Dianaes wine.
No more, no more, behold your uncles slain,
Save in this act two Noble Gentlemen,
Pursue not frye to the spoil of Greece,
And death of more brave Princes: let your rage
Be here confined, cut off this purple stream
In his mid course, and turn this torrent back
Which in his fury else may drowned vs all.
I second Iason and expose my self,
Between these factions to compose a peace.
Wee have done too much already, mpious fury,
How boundless is thy power: vncircumscribed
By thought or reason, you are all violence,
Thy end repentance, sorrow and distaste:
How will Althea take her brothers death
From her sons hand, but rash deeds executed
May be lamented, never be recal'd
Shall the survivors bee atoned?
So it be done with honour on both parts
Wee have swords to guard our fortunes and our lives,
And but an equal language will keep both
Thus at the point.
Join hands renowned Princes,
The fury of the Prince of Calidon
Hath preyed but on his own, there let it end,
No further by your urgent spleens extend.
We are appeased.
Lords freely then embrace.
First then, we'll royally inter our uncles,
And spend some tears upon their funeral rites,
That done we will in our Palace feast these Princes,
With bright Atlanta, whom we'll make our Queen.
Our Uncles once bestow'de into the earth,
Our mornings shall expire in Bridal mirth.
Come to the Temple there to sacrifice
For these glad tidings, since the Boar lies dead,
That filed our kingdom with such awe and dread.
What joy names Oeneus in this spectacle?
This of a thousand the most sad and tragic,
Whose murdered trunks be these?
Your royal brothers, Prince Toxeus and Plexippus,
Speak, how slain?
Not by the Boar, but by your sons own hand.
By Meleagers, how? upon what quarrel?
Could the proud boy ground such a damned act.
Your son to fair Atlanta gave the prise
Of this days travel, which for, they with-stood
In mutinous arms they loss their vital bloods.
Shall I revenge or morn them.
O strange fate.
An object that must shorten Oeneus days,
And bring these winter hairs to a sad Tomb
Long  there da; I sink beneath these sorrows
Into my black and timeless monument.
My sorrows turn to rage, my tears to fire,
My prayers to curses, vows into revenge.
Peace, peace my Queen, let's bear the Gods vinediction
With patience, as wee did Dianaes wrath:
Where Gods are bent to punish, we may grieve
But can our selves nor succour, nor relieve.
Come, let vs do to them their latest rites,
Wait on their Hearses in our mourning black;
Their happy souls are mounted above the spheres,
We will wash their bodies in our funeral tears.
Althea what distraction's this within thee?
A sister or a mother wilt thou bee?
Since both I cannot, (for these Princes slain)
Sister I choose, a mothers name disdain:
The fatal brand in which the murderers life
Securely lies, I'll hurl into the fire
And as it flames, so shall the slave expire.
Mischief I'll heap on mischief, bad on ill,
Wrong pay with wrongs, and slaughter these that kill.
And since the Gods would all our glories thrall,
I will with them have chief hand in our fall.
But hoe's my son: oh pardon me dear brothers,
Being a mother if I spare his life,
Though it bee fit his sin be plaug'd with death,
And that his life lie in yon fatal brand,
'T will not come fitly from a mothers hand.
Is this the hope of all my ten months pain,
Must he by th'hand of him that nursed him now be slain?
Would he had perished in his cradle, when
I gave him twice life: in his birth, and then
When I the brand snatched from the ravenous flame,
And for this double good, hast thou with shame
And injury repaid me? I will now
A sister be, no mother, for I vow
Revenge and death; Furies, assist my hand
Whilst in red flames I cast his vital brand.
For fair Atlanta, and your Honours, Lords
We banquet you this day: and to begin
Our festivals we will crown this Jovial health
Unto our brother, Theban Hercules
And Deyaneira, will you pledge it Lords?
None but admire and love their matchless words,
Not fair Atlanta will refuse this health.
You beg of me a pledge, I'll take it lesson,
As well for his sake that begins the round,
As those to whom it is vowed.
Well spoke Atlanta, but I wonder Lords
What Province now holds Theban Hercules?
He is the mirror and the pride of Greece,
And shall in after ages be renowned,
But we forget his health, come Tellamon
Aim it at me.
Assist my rage you sterne Eumenides,
To you this black deed will I consecrate.
Pity away, hence thou consanguine love,
Maternal zeal, peccentall piety.
All cares, loves, duties, offices, affections,
That grow 'tweene sons and mothers, leave this place;
Let none but furies, murders, paracides,
Be my assistants in this damned attempt:
All that's good and honest, I confine,
Black is my purpose; Hell my thoughts are thine.
To bright Atlanta this loud music sown'd,
Her health shall with our loftiest strains be crowned.
Drink, quaff, be blithe; oh how this festiue joy
Stirs up my fury to revenge and death,
Thus, thus, (you Gods aboue, abject your eyes
From this unnatural act) the murderer dies.
Oh, oh.
My Lord.
I burn, I burn.
What sudden passion's this?
The flames of hell, and Pluto's fightlesse fires,
Are through my entrails and my veins dispierst, oh!
My Lord take courage.
Courage Tellamon?
I have a heart dares threat or challenge hell,
A brow front heaven; a hand to challenge both:
But this my paine's beyond all humane sufferance,
Or mortal patience.
What hast thou done Althea? stay thy fury,
And bring not these strange torments on thine own
Thou hast too much already, back my hand,
And save his life as thou conferust this brand.
How cheers the warlike Prince of Calidon?
Well now, I am at ease and peace within,
Whither's my torture fled? that with such suddenness
Hath freed me from disturbance, were we ill?
Come sit again to banquet, music sound,
Till this to Deyaneiraes health go round.
Shall mirth and joy crown his degenerate head?
Whilst his cold Uncles on the earth lie spread?
No, wretehed youth whilst this hand can destroy,
I'll cut thee off in midst of all thy joy.
Again, Again.
Burn, perish, wast, fire, sparkle, and consume
And all thy vital spirits fly with this fume.
still, still, there is an Aetna in my bosom
The flames of Styx, and fires of Acheron
Are from the black Chimerian shades removed,
And fixed here, here; oh for Euenus flood,
Or some cool stream, to shoot his currents through
My flaming body, make thy channel here
Thou mighty flood that streamest through Calidon
And quench me, all you springs of Thessaly
Remove your heads, and fix them in my veins
To cool me, oh!
Defend vs heaven, what fuddaine ecstasy
Or unexpected torture hath disturbed
His health and mirth?
Worse then my torment,
That I must die thus, thus, that the Boar had slain me,
Happy Anceus and Atones blessed,
You died with fame, and honour crowns your rest;
My flame increases still, oh father Oeneus
And you Althea, whom I would call mother
But that my genius prompts me you are unkind,
And yet farewell, Atlanta beauteous maid,
I cannot speak my thoughts for torture, death,
Anguish and pains, all that Promethean fire
Was stolen from heaven, the Thief left in my bosom.
The Sun hath cast his element on me,
And in my entrails hath he fixed his Sphere,
His pointed beams he hath darted through my heart,
And I am still on flame.
So, now'tis done,
The brand consumed, his vital thread quite spun.
Now'gins my fire waste, and my natural heat
To change to Ice, and my scortch't blood to freeze.
Farewell, since his black ensign death displays,
I dye, cut off thus in my best of days.
Dead is the flower and pride of Calidon.
Who would displease the Gods? Diana's wrath
Hath stretched even to the death, and tragic ruin
Of this fair hopeful Prince, here stay thy vengeance
Goddess of chastity, and let it hang
No longer ore the house of Calidon:
Since thou hast cropped the young, spare these old branches
That yet survive.
She shall not, Iason no,
She shall not. Do you wonder Lords of Greece,
To see this Prince lye dead? why that's no novel,
All men must dye, thou, he, and every one,
Yea I my self must: but Il'e tell you that
Shall stiff your hair, your eyes start from heads,
Print fixed amazement in your wondering fronts,
Yea and astonish all: This was my son,
Borne with sick throws, nursed from my tender breast
Brought up with famine care, cherished with love:
His youth, my pride; his honour all my wishes,
So dear, that little less he was then life.
But will you know the wonder ('lasse) too true,
Him (all my sons) this my enraged hand slue,
This hand, that Deans quenchless rage to fill,
Shall with the slain sons sword the mother kill.
The Queen hath slain herself: who'l bear these news to the sad King?
That labour may be spared:
The King no sooner heard of his sons death,
(wrought by his mother in the fatal brand)
But he sunk dead: sorrow so changed his weakness,
And without word or motion he expired.
We'll see them (ere we part from Calidon)
Interred with honour: But we sojourn long
In this cursed Clime; oh let vs not incurro
Diana's fury, our next expedition
Shall be for Colchos, and the golden Fleece,
Unto which (Princes) we inuit you all.
Our stately Ergo we have rigged and trimmed,
And in it we will bear the best of Greece,
Styled from our ship by name of Argonauts.
Great Hercules will with his company,
Grace our adventure, and renown all Greece,
By the rich purchase of the Colchian Fleece.
Let not even Kings against the Gods cotest,
Lest in this fall their ruins be expressed.
Think Hercules, from cleansing the foul stall
And stable of Augeus, in which fed
Three hundred Oxen, (never freed at all,
Till his arrive) returned where he was bred,
To Thebes; there Deianeira him receives
With glad embraces, but he stays not long,
Iason the Lady of her Lord bereaves:
For in the new-rig'd Ergo, with the young
And sprighly Heroes, he at Colchos aims,
Where the rich Fleece must publish their high fems.
Imagine now these Princes under sail,
Steering their course as far as high-rear'd Troy,
Where King Laomedon doth much bewail
His daughter, whom a Sea-whale must destroy.
Observe this well: for here begins the jar
Made Troy rack't after in a ten years war.
Hesione, this is thy last on earth,
Whose fortunes we may morn, though not prevent:
Would Troy, whose walls I did attempt to rear,
Had ne'er grown higher then their ground-fils, or
In their soundation buried been, and lost,
Since their high structure must be thus maintained,
With blood of our bright Ladies: Oh Hesione!
Th'onely remainder of these female dames
Begot by vs, I must be queath thy body
To be the food of Neptunes monstrous Whale.
Had you kept troth and promise with the Gods,
This had not champion't: You borrowed of the Priests
Of Neptune and Apollo, Sea, and Sun,
That quantity of gold, which to this height
And spacious compass, hath immured great Troy;
But the work finished, you denied to pay
The Priests their due, for which enraged Nptune
Assembled his high tides, thinking to drown
Our lofty buildings, and to ruin Troy:
But when the Moon, by which the Seas are governed,
Retired his waters by her powerful wane,
He left behind him such infectious slime,
Which the Sun poisoning by his percent beams.
They by their mutual power, raised a hot plague,
To slack this hot pest, Neptune made demand,
Monthly a Lady to be chose by lot,
To glut his huge Sea-mosters raueno us jaws:
The lot this day fell on Hesione
Our beauteous sister.
Priam it is too true,
Till now Laomedon ne'er knew his guilt,
Or thought the Gods could punish.
Royal father,
Morn not for me, the Gods must be appeased,
And I in this am happy, that my death
Is made th'attonement 'tweene those angry powers
And your afflicted people, though my Innocence
Never deserved such rigour from the Gods.
Come good Anchises, bind me to this rock,
And let my body glut th'insatiate fury
Of angry Neptune, and th'offended Sun.
A more unwilling monster never past
Anchises hand.
Now, now the time draws ny,
That my sweet child by Neptunes whale must dye,
The very thought of it swallows my heart
As deep in sorrow, as the monster can
Bury my fester.
Soft, what clamor's that?
A stately ship, well rigged with swelling fails,
Enters the harbour, bound (by their report)
For Colchos but when they beheld the shores
Covered with multitudes, and spied from far,
Your beauteous daughter fastened to the rock,
They made to know the cause; which certified,
One noble Greek amongst these Heroes stands,
And offers to encounter Neptunes whale,
And free from death the bright Hesione.
Thou hast (Aeneas) quickened me from death,
And added to my date a second Age.
Admit them.
It is told vs that thy name's Laomedon,
And that thy beauteous daughter must this day
Feed a sea-monster: how wilt thou reward
The man that shall encounter Neptunes whale?
Tug with that fiend upon thy populous strond,
And with my club sows on his armed scales?
Hast thou not heard of Theban Hercules?
I that have awed the earth, and ransacked hell,
Will through the Ocean hunt the God of streams,
And chase him from the deep Abismes below.
Il'e dare the Sea-god from his watery deeps
If he take part with this Leuiathan.
Thy name and courage warlike Hercules
Assures her life, if thou wilt undertake
This haughty quest: two milk white steeds, the best
Asia ere bred, shall be thy valours prize,
We accept them; keep thy faith Laomedon,
If thou but break with Ioue-borne Hercules,
These marble structures, built with virgins blood,
Il'e raze even with the earth. When comes the monster?
Now, now, help Jove.
I see him sweep the sea's along.
Blow rivers through his nostrils as he glides,
As if he meant to quench the Suns brightfire,
And bring a palped darkness ore the earth:
He ops his jaws as if to swallow Troy,
And at one yawn whole thousands to destroy.
Fly, fly into the City.
Take along
This beauteous Lady, if he must have pray,
In stead of her Alcides here will stay.
The heartless Troians fly into the town
At fight of yon sea-diuell: here we'll stand
To wait the conquest of thy Jovial hand.
Gramercy Iason, see he comes in tempest,
Il'e meet him in a storm as violent,
And with one stroke which this right hand shall aim,
Ding him into th'abisse from whence he came.
The monster's slain, my beautuous sister freed.
Be ever for this noble deed renowned,
Let Asia speak thy praise.
The Argonauts
Ae glorified by this victorious act.
All Troy shall consecrate to Hercules
Temples and Altars: lets descend and meet him.
Stay, none presume to stir, we'll parley them
First from the walls.
Why doth not Troy's King from those walls descend?
And since I have redeemed Hesione,
Present my travels with two milke-white steeds,
The prize of my endeavours?
Hercules we owe thee none, none will we tender thee,
Thou hast won thee honour, a reward sufficient
For thy attempt: our gates are shut against thee,
Nor shall you enter, you are Greekish spies,
And come to pry but where our land is weak.
Oh royal father!
Peace boy: Greeks away:
For imminent death attends on your delay.
The Sea ne'er bred a monster half so vile
As this Land-fiend. Darft threaten Hercules?
Would universal Troy were in one frame,
That I might whelm it on thy cursed head,
And crown thee in thy ruin. Menace vs?
Depart our walls, or we will fir your Ergo,
Lying in our harbour, and prevent your purpose
In the achievement of the golden fleece,
Loomdon, Il'e toss thee from thy walls,
Batter thy gates to shivers with my Club,
Nor will I leave these broad Scamander plains,
Till thy aspiring Towers of Illium
Lye level with the place on which we stand.
Great Hercules, th'aduenture false to me,
Our voyage bent for Colchos, not for Troy,
The golden fleece, and not Lamedon:
Why should we hazard here our Argonauts?
Or spend our selves on accidental wrongs?
Iason advises well, great Hercules,
We should dishonour him, and th'expectation
Greece hath of vs, delude by this delay.
Then let vs from this harbour launch our Ergo,
To Colchos first, and in our voyage home
Revenge vs on this false Laomedon.
You sway me princes: farewell treacherous King,
Nought, save thy blood, shall satisfy this wrong
And base dishonour done to Hercules.
Expect me; for by Olimpicke Ie I swear.
Ne'er to set foot within my native Thebes,
See Deianeira, or to touch in Greecs,
Till I'haue scaled these mures, invaded Troy,
Ransacked thy City, slain Laomedon,
And avenge the Gods that govern Sea and Sun.
Come valiant Heroes, first the fleece to enjoy,
And in our back return to ransack Troy.
We dread you not, we'll answer what is done.
As well as stand against Neptune and the Sun.
How may we glory aboue other kings
Being (by our birth) descended from the Gods?
Our wealth renowned through the world tripartite,
Most in the riches of the golden fleece,
And not the least of all our happiness,
Medea for her powerful magic skill,
And Negromanticke exorcisms admired,
And dreaded through the Colchian territories.
I can by Art make rivers retrograde,
Alter their channels, run back to their heads,
And hide them in the springs from whence they grew.
The curled Ocean with a word Il'e smooth,
(Or being calm) raise waives as high as hills,
Threatening to swallow the vast continent.
With powerful charms Il'e make the Sun stand still,
Or call the Moon down from her arched sphere.
What cannot I by power of Hecate?
Discourse (fair sister) how the golden fleece
Came first to Colchos.
Let Absyrtus know,
Phrixus the son of Theban Athamas,
And his fair sister Hells, being betrayed
By their cursed step-dame , fled from Greece,
Their Innocence pitied by Mercury,
He gave to them a golden-fleeced Ram,
Which bore them safe to the Siegean sea,
Which swimming, beauteous Hells there was drowned,
And gave that sea the name of Hellespont,
That which parts Sestus and Abidos still:
Phrixus arrives at Colchos, and to Mars
There sacrificed his Ram in memory
Of his safe waftage, favoured by the Gods.
The golden Fleece was by the Oracle
Commanded to be fixed there, kept and guarded
By two fierce Bulls, that breath insernall fires,
And by a wakeful Dragon, in whose eyes
Never came sleep: for in the safe conserving
Of this divine and worthy monument,
Our kingdoms weal and safety most consists.
And he that strives by purchase of this fleece,
To weaken vs, or shake our Royalty,
Must taste the fury of these fiery fiends,
The novel: speak.
Upon the Cholchian shores
A stately vessel, manned it seems from Greece
Is newly launched, full fraught with Gentlemen
Of brave aspects and presence.
Whose their General?
Iason, he stiles himself a Prince of Greece
And Captain o'er the noble Argonautes.
Usher them in, that we may know their quest
And what adventure drew them to these shores.
Hail king of Colchos, thou behold in vs
The noblest Heroes that inhabit Greece
Of whom I, though unworthiest, stile my self
The General; the intent of this our voyage
Is to reduce the rich and golden prise
To Greece, from whence it came, know I am come
To tug and wrestle with the infernal Bulls,
And in their hot fierce double guild my arms
To place upon their necks the feruile yoke,
And bondage, force them plow the field of Mars,
Till in the furrows I have sowed the teeth
Of vipers, from which men in armour grow
To enter combat with the sleepelesse Dragon,
And maugre him fetch thence the golden Fleece.
All this Oats, I am pressed to achieve
Against these horrid tasks my life to engage
Bulls fury, Vipers poison, Dragons rage.
Such a bold spirit, and noble presence linked,
Never before were seen in Phases Isle,
Colchos be proud, a Prince demands thy Fleece,
Richer then that he comes for; let the Greeks
Our Phasian wealth and Oats treasure bear,
So they in lieu will leave me Iason here.
Princes, you aim at dangers more in proffe
Then in report, which if you should behold
In their true figure, would amaze your spirits:
Yea, terrify the Gods; let me advise you,
As one that knows their terror, to desist
Ere you enwrap your seffe into these perils,
Whence there is no euafion.
Oats, know
Peril's a babe, the greater dangers threaten
The greater is his honour that breaks through.
Have we in the Ago rowed with sixty oars
And at each Oar a Prince; pierced Samo-thrace,
The Chersoneson sea, the Hellespont;
Even to the waives that break on Colchos shoeres?
And Shall we with dishonour turn to Greece?
Know Oats, not the least of sixty Heroes
That now are in thy Confines, but thy monsters
Dare quell and baffle.
Much more Hercules.
Hercules.
Starts Oats at the name of Hercules,
What would he do to see him in his eminence;
But leaving that, this must be Iasons quest,
A work not worthy him; where be these monsters?
May all enchantments be confined to hell,
Rather then he encounter fiends so fell.
Princes, since you will needs attempt these dangers
You shall; and if achieve the Golden Fleece
Transport it where you please, mean time, this day
Repose your selves, wl'e feast you in our Palace.
To morrow morning with the rising Sun,
Our golden prise shall be conseru'd or won.
If he attempts he dies, what's that to me?
Why should Medea fear a strangers life?
Or what's that Iason I should dread his fall?
If , my fathers glory wains,
And all our fortunes must reward his pains.
Let lesson perish then, and Colchos flourish.
Our pristine glories let vs still enjoy,
And these our brasse-head bulls the Prince destroy.
Oh! what distraction's this within me bred,
Although he die, I would not see him dead?
The best I see, the worst I follow still,
Hee ne'er wronged me, why should I wish him ill?
Shall the Bulls toss him whom Medea loves,
A Tigress, not a Princess, should I prove?
To see him tortured whom I dearly love?
Bee then a torteresse to thy fathers life,
A robber of the clime where thou wast bred,
And for some straggler that hath lost his way,
Thy fathers Kingdom and his State betray.
Tush, these are nothing, first his faith I'll crave,
That covenant made, him by enchantments faue
My task is aboue strength, Duke Peleus sent me
Not to achieve, but die in this pursuit,
And to prevent the Oracle that told him
I must succeed; Iason bethink thee then
Thou come to execution, not to act
Things aboue man; I have observed Medea
Retort upon me many an amorous look,
Of which I'll study to make prosperous use.
If by her art the Enchantments I can bind
Immured with death, I certain safety find.
Shall I o're-whelme upon my captive head,
The curse of all our Nation, the Crowns ruin?
Clamours of men, and woman's loud exclaims.
Burnings of children; the universal curse
Of a great people, all to save one man,
A straggler (God knows whence derived, where borne,
Or hither where Noble? let the proud Greek die,
Wee still in Colchos sit instated hye
Oh me! that look upon Medea cast
Drowns all these fears, and hath the rest surpassed.
Madam, because I love I pity you,
That you a beauteous Lady, art-full wise,
Should have your beauty and your wisdom both
Enveloped in a cloud of Barbarism:
That on these barren Confines you should live,
Confined into an Angle of the world.
And ne'er see that which is the world indeed,
Fertile and populous Greece, Greece that bears men,
Such as resemble Gods, of which in vs
You see the most dejected, and the meanest.
How harshly doth your wisdom sound in th'eares
Of these Barbarians, dull, vnapprehenfible,
And such, in not conceiving your hid Arts,
Deprive them of their honour; In Greece springs
The fountains of Divine Philosophy,
They are all vnderstanders; I would have you
Bright Lady with vs, enter to that world
Of which this Colchos is no part at all.
Show then your beauty to these judging eyes,
Your wisdom to these understanding ears.
In which they shall receive their merited grace,
And leave this barren, cold, and stirrill place.
His presence without all this Oratory
Did much with vs, but where they both conjoin
To entrap Medea, she must needs bee caught.
I long to see this Colchian Lady clad
In Hymens stateliest robes, whom the glad Matrons,
Bright Ldies, and Imperial Queens of Greece
Shall welcome and applaud, and with rich gifts
Present, for saving of their sons and kinsmen
From these infernal monsters: As for Iason
If you Medea shall despise his love,
He craves no other life then to die so,
Since life without you is but torturing pain,
And death to men distressed is double gain.
That tongue more then Medias spells enchants,
And not a word, but like our exoreismes
And power of charms prevails, Oh lone! thy Majesty
Is greater then the triple Hecates,
Bewitching Circes, or these hidden skils,
Ascribed unto the infernal Proserpine.
I that by incantations can remove
Hills from their syts, and make huge mountains shake,
Darken the Sun at noon, call from their graves
Ghosts long since dead, that can command the earth,
And affright heaven, no spell at all can find
To bondage love, or free a captive mind.
Love Iason then, and by thy Divine aide,
Give me such power, that I may tug vnscorcht
Amidst the flames with these thy fiery fiends,
That I vnuenom'd may these Vipers teeth
Cast from my hand, through Morpheus leaden charms,
Over that wakeful snake that guards the Fleece,
For which live Iasons happy Bride in Greece.
A match, what herbs or spells, what Magic can
Command in heaven, earth, or in hell below,
What either air, or sea can minister,
To guard thy person, all these helps I'll gather
To girdle thee with saftie.
Be thou then
For ever Iasons, and through Greece renowned
In whom our Heroes have such safety found,
Our bargain thus I seal.
Which I'll make good
With Colchos fall, and with my fathers blood.
Prince Iason, all the Heroes at the banquet
Inquire for you, twice hath my father Oats
Made search for you; Oh sister!
No word you saw vs two in conference.
Do you take me to be a woman, to tell all I see,
And blab all I know, I that am in hope one day to
Lie with a woman, will once lie for a woman,
Sister, I saw you not.
Remember; come Prince, will you lead the way?
I have parted you that never parted fray
Come sir will you follow.
The night grows on, and now to my black Arts,
Goddess of witchcraft and dark ceremony,
To whom the elves of Hills, of Brookes, of Groves,
Of standing lakes, and caverns vaulted deep
Are ministers; three-headed Hecate
Lend me thy Chariot drawn with winged snakes,
For I this night must progress through the Air.
What simples grow in Tempe of Thessaly,
Mount Pindus, Otheris, Ossa, Appida,
Olimpus, Caucas. or high Teneriff.
I must select to finish this great work,
Thence must I fly unto Amphrisus Fords,
And gather plants by the swift Sperchius streams,
Where rushy Bebes, and Anthedon flow,
Where herbs of bitter juice and strong sent grow;
These must I with the hairs of Mandrakes use,
Temper with Poppy-seeds and Hlocke juice:
With Aconitum that in Tartar springs,
With Cypress, E, and Veruin, and these mix
With Incantations, Spells, and 
Of wondrous power and virtue; oh thou night,
Mother of dark Arts hide me in thy veil,
Whilst I those banks search, and these mountains scale.
Upon the safeguard of this golden Fleece
Colchos depends, and he that bears it hence
Bears with it all our fortunes; the Argonautes
Have it in quest, if Lesson scope our monsters
I'll rather at some banquet poison him,
And quaff to him his death, or in the night
Set fire upon his Ergo, and in flames
Consume the happy hope of his return,
This purpose we, as we are Colchos King,
Absyrtus whore's your sister?
In her chamber.
When you next see her give to her this noate,
The manner of our practise, her fell hand
Cannot be mist in this, but it shall fall
Heavy on these that Colchos seeks to thrall.
The hour draws nigh, the people throng on heaps,
To this adventure in the field of Mars,
And noble Iason armed with his good hield,
Is up already and demands the field.
Oats, I come thus armed, demanding combat
Of all those monsters that defend thy Fleece:
And to these dangers singly, I oppose
My person as thou see, when set thou op
The gates of hell to let thy devils out?
Glad would I wrestle with thy fiery Bulls,
And from their throats the flaming dewlops tear.
Vnchaine them, and to Iason turn them loose,
That as Alcides did to Achelous;
So from their hard fronts I may tear there horns,
And lay the yoke upon their untamed necks.
Yet valiant Greek desist, I, though a stranger
Pity thy youth, or if thou wilt persist
So dreadful is the adventure thou persuest,
That thou wilt think I shall vnbowell hell,
Vnmacle the fiends, and make a passage
Free for the Infernals.
I shall welcome all.
Medea now if there be power in love;
Or force in Magic; if thou hast or will
Or Art, try all the power of Characters,
Virtue of Simples, Stones, or hidden spells,
If earth Elves, or nimble airy Spirits,
Charms, Incantations, or dark Exorcisms.
If any strength remain in Pyromancy,
Or the hid secrets of the air or fire.
If the Moons sphere can any help infuse,
Or any influent Star, collect them all
That I by thy aide may these monsters thrall.
Discover them.
The hidden power of Earth, Air, Water, Fire,
Shall from this place to Iasons help conspire.
Fire withstand fire, and magic temper flame,
By my strong spells the savage monster's tame:
So, that's performed, now take the Vipers teeth
And sow them in the furrowed field of Mars.
Of which strange seed, men ready armed must grow
To assault Iason. Already from beneath
Their deadly pointed weapons gin to appear,
And now their heads, thus moulded in the earth,
Straight way shall teem; and having fred their fate
(The stalks by which they grow) all violently
Pursue the valiant Greek, but by my sorcery
I'll turn their armed points against themselves
And all these slaves that would on Iason fly
Shall wound themselves and by sedition die.
Yet thrives the Greek, now kill the sleeping snake
Which I have charmed, and thence the Trophy take,
These shouts witness his conquest, Isle descend,
Hear Iasons fears and all my charms take end.
Oats, ow is this rich and precious Fleece,
By Iasons sword repurchast, and must turn
Unto the place whence Phrixus brought his Ram.
That practise by your ruins; Isle prevent,
And sooner then with that return to Greece,
Your slaughtered bodies leave with this rich fleece.
Since our adventure is achieved and done,
The prize is ours, we ceize what we have won.
Enjoy it Iason, I admire thy worth,
Which as it hath exceeded admiration,
So must we needs applaud it. Noble gentlemen.
Depart not Colchos, ere your words and valour
We with some rich and worthy gifts present.
The conquest of our Bulls, and Dragons death,
(Though we esteemed them) yet they sad vs not,
Since we behold the safety of this prince.
Enter our palace, and your praise sound hye,
Where you shall feast, (or all by treafon dye.)
I have not seeene my sister to day, I muse she hath not been at this solemnity, me thinks she should not have lost this triumph; I have a note to deliver her from my fathere. Here she comes.
Sister, peruse this brief, you know the character,
It is my fathers. This is all.
Iason with his Argonauts this night must perish, the fleece not be trasported to GreeceMedea, your assistance.
This is my fathers plot to overthrow
Prince Iason, and the noble Argonauts,
Which Il'e prevent: I know the King is sudden,
And if prevention be delayed, they dye:
I that have ventured thus far for a love,
Even to these arts that Nature would have hid
As dangerous and forbidden, shall I now
Undo what I have done, through womanish fear,
Paternal duty, or for filial love?
No Iason, thou art mine, and my desire,
Shall wade with thee through blood, through seas, through fire.
Madam.
My Lord, I know what you would say,
Think now upon your life, the King my father
Intends your ruin, to redeem the fleece,
And it repurchase with your tragic deaths:
Therefore assemble all your Argonauts,
And let them (in the silence of the night)
Launch from the Colchian harbour; Il'e associate you
As Iasons bride.
You are my patronise,
And under you I triumph: when the least
Of all these graces I forget, the Gods
Revenge on me my hated perjury.
Must we then launch this night? you are my directress,
And by your art Il'e manage all my actions.
Then fly, Il'e send to see your Ergo trimmed,
Rigged and made tight: night comes, the time grows on:
Hye then aboard.
I shall.
Now populous Greece,
Thank vs (not Iason) for this conquered fleece.
Medea, we are robed, despoiled, dishonoured,
Our Fleece raped hence, we must not suffer it,
Since all our ominous fortunes it includes,
I am resolved Iason this night shall dye.
Should he survive, you might be held unworthy
The name of King; my hand shall be as deep
As yours in his destruction.
A strong guard
I will select, and in the dead of night,
When they are sunk in Leth, set upon them,
And kill them in their beds.
Il'e second you,
And lave my stained hands in their reeking bloods
That practise your dishonour.
Iason then dyes,
When he most hopes for this rich Colchian prize.
But ere the least of all these else betide,
This Colchian strond shall with thy blood be died.
For Iason and his Argonauts I stand,
And will protect them with my art and hand.
Madam Medea
Leave circumstance, away,
Hoise up your sails, death and destruction
Attends you on the shore.
You'll follow Madam.
Instantly: Blow gentle gales, assist them winds and tide,
That I may Greece see, &amp; live Iasons bride.
How now ester, so solitary?
Oh happy met, though it be late Absyrtus,
You must along with me.
Whither pray?
Il'e tell you as we walk.
This lad between me and all harm shall stand;
And if the King pursue vs with his Fleet,
His mangled limbs shall (scattered in the way)
Work our escape, and the Kings speed delay.
Come brother.
Any where with you sister.
Let none to whom true Art is not denied,
Our monstrous Bulls, and magic Snakes deride.
Some think this rich Fleece was a golden Book,
The leaves of parchment, or the skins of Rams,
Which did incl the Art of making gold
By Chimeke skill, and therefore rightly stilt,
The Golden Fleece, which to attain and compass,
Includes as many travels, mysteries,
Changes and Chymicke bodes, fires and monsters,
As ever Iason could in Colchos meet.
The sages, and the wise, to keep their Art
From being vulgar: yet to have them tasted
With appetite and longing, give those glosses,
And flourishes to shadow what they write,
Which might (at once) breed wonder and delight.
So did the Egyptians in the Arts best tried,
In Hieroglyphics all their Science hide.
But to proceed, the Argonauts are fled,
Whom the enraged Oats doth pursue,
And being in sight, Mdea takes the head
Of young Absyrtus, whom (unkind) she slue,
And all his other limbs straws in the way
Of the old father, his pursuit to stay.
In memory of this inhumane deed,
These Islands where his ughtered limbs lye spread,
Were called Absyrtides: But we proceed
With King Laomedon, against whom are led
The Argonauts, Troy by Alcides raced,
Asks the next place, and must in rank be placed.
The Argonauts returned?
They are my Lord:
And landed?
Landed.
Where?
At Tenedos.
Could not those Colchian monsters in their bowels
Bury the Greeks, but must they all survive
To threat vs with invasion. Speak Anchises,
March they towards Troy?
In conduct of the mighty Hercules,
Wasting with sword and fire where ere they march:
Scamander fields they have strewed with carcasses,
And Simois streams already purpled are
With blood of Troians.
Let vs give them battle.
In vain, our forces are dispersed abroad,
Nor have we order to withstand their fury:
Best were we to immure our selves in Troy,
And trust unto the virtue of our walls.
Do not delay your safety, you may hear
Their cries, and lofty clamours, threatening Troy:
They dog vs to our gates, and without speed
And expedition, they will enter with vs.
Come then, our threatened lives we will immure,
And think vs in our strong built walls secure.
Pursue the chase even to the gates of Troy,
Then call th'ingrate Loamedon to parley.
The perjured King shall pay vs for the wrong
Done to Alcides in his promised steeds.
Better he had the monster had devoured
His beauteous daughter, then t'abide our furies.
He did exclude our virtue from the City,
And now therefore he shall admit our fury.
These walls first reared at the great Gods expense,
We'll ruin to the earth: let's summon him.
We will call him to parley.
Laomedon, we do not summon thee
To parley, but to warn thee guard thy walls,
Which (without pause) we now intend to scale.
Wilt hear me Hercules?
I listened thy periurious tongue too late.
Scale, batter, mount, assault, sack, and deface,
And leave (of Troy) nought save the name and place.
Thus is the tyrant, that but late awed Troy,
Buried amidst his ruins; he chastised,
And we revenged: the spoil of this rich Town
Rated as high as Iasons Colchian prize,
You shall divide: but first these lofty walls,
Builded by perjury, and maintained by pride,
We'll ruin to the earth: Who saw young Priam?
Hoe's fled, and took the way to Samo-thrace,
With him Anchises, that on Venus got
The young Aeneas, they are fled together,
And left the spoil of all the town to vs.
Which shall enrich Thebes, and the towns of Greece,
And Telamon, to do thy valour right,
For mounting first over the walls of Troy,
The first and choice of all the spoil be thine.
Then let Alcides honour Telamon
With this bright Lady, fair Hesione,
Sister to Priam, daughter to Laomedon,
Whose beauty I prefer before the state
And wealth of Troy.
Receive her Telamon,
She is thine own by gift of Hercules.
A present more delighting Telamon,
Then were I made Lord of high Illiums Towers,
And heir unto the dead Laomedon.
I am a Princess, shall my fathers else
Fall on my head? If he offended Hercules,
He hath made satisfaction with his life.
Oh be not so severe, to stretch his punishment
Even after life; hast thou from death redeemed me,
To give me captive, and to slave my youth?
Things worse then death: rather let Hercules
Expose me to the rock, where first he found me,
To abide the wrath both of the Sea and Sun.
Oh! rather make my body food for monsters,
Then brand my birth with bondage.
Fair Hesione,
I will not loose thy beauty, nor thy youth,
Nor part with this my honour, could thou give me
For ransom of them, both our Argoes crammed
With gold and gems; you are my valours prize,
And shall with me to populous Salamine.
Can you so wrong the daughter of a king,
To give her as a Dukes base Concubine?
Touch me not Telamon, for I divine,
Ifere my brother Priam re-build Troy,
And be the king of Asia, he will revenge
This base dishonour done Hesione;
And for his sister, ravished hence perforce,
Do the like out-rage on some Grecian Queen,
In just revenge of my injurious wrong.
Should all the kings in Asia, or the world,
Take part with Priam in that proud design,
Like fate, like fortune with Laomedon
They shall abide: renowned Telamon,
She is the warlike purchase of thy sword,
Enjoy her as the gift of Hercules.
And now brave Grecian Hero's, lets towards Greece
With al these honoured spoils from Colchos brought
And from the treasures of defaced Troy.
Fair Deianeira longs for vs in Thebes,
Whom we will visit next, and thence proceed
Unto our future labours. Cacus lives
A bloody tyrant, whom we must remove:
And the three-headed Gerion sways in Spain,
Notorious for his rapes and out-rages;
Both these must perish by Alcides hand,
And when we can the earth from tyrants clear,
In the worlds utmost bounds our pillars rear. ex
Loath are we (courteous auditors) to cloy
Your appetites with viands of one taste,
The beauteous Venus we must next employ,
Whom we saw mourning for Atones last.
Suppose her still for the young Adon sad,
But cheered by Mars, their old loves they renew,
And she, that (whilst he lived) preferred the Lad,
Hath quite forgot him, since the Boar him slue.
Mars is in grace, a meeting they devise,
Jealous of all, but fearing most the Sun,
Hee that sees all things from his first vp-rise,
And like a blab, tells all that hee knows done.
Our mortals must a while their spleens assuage,
And to the Gods, for this Act, leave the Stage.
I knew loves Queen could not be long unkind,
Though (whilst I absent, to teach Arms in Thrice)
You took th'aduangtage to forget your Mars,
To dote on Adon, and Anchises too;
Yet (those worn out) let vs renew our loves,
And practise our first amorous dalliance.
How can I hate; that am the Queen of love?
Or practise ought against my native power?
As I one day, played with my Cupids shafts,
The wanton with his arrow razed my skin.
Trust me, at first I did neglect the smart:
At length it rankled, and it grew unsound,
Till he that now lies wounded, cut'd my wound.
Come shall we now, whilst Vulcan plies his forge,
Sweats at his Anvil, chokes himself with dust,
And labours at his bellows, kiss and toy?
Why met we else? Here is a place remote,
An obscure cave, fit for our amorous sport:
In this dark cavern we'll securely rest,
And Mars shall add unto my Vulcans crest.
But how if we be spied?
Whom need we fear?
Unless the Sun, who now the lower world
Lights with his beams; I mean the Antipodes,
The tell-tale blab is busy now else-where:
And I will set to watch at the caves door,
My trusty groom, who (ere the Sun shall rise
With his bright beams to light our Hemisphere)
Shall waken vs.
For all the world I would not have the Sun
Discover our sweet sport, or see whats done.
Be that my charge. Wher's Gallus?
At hand fir: I am not that Gallows that is made of three trees, or one that is never without hangers on: nor that Gallus that is latin for a French-man; but your own Gallus gallinacius, servant and true squire to God Mars.
Syrrah, you know this Lady.
Yes, Mistress Vulcan, she is as well known in Paphos here for her Meretrix, as any Lady in the land, she was the first that deuis'd stewed meat, and proclaimed pickle-oysters to bee good for the back; she is the first that taught wenches the trade of Venery, and such as were borne to nothing but beauty, she taught them how to use their Talent: Yes, I know her I warrant you.
Syrrah attend, this night yon Queen and I
Must have some private conference, in yon cave,
Where whilst we stay, 'tmust be thy care to watch
That no suspicious eye pry through these chinks,
Especially I warn thee of the Suns.
I smell knavery, if my Lady Venus play the whore
What am I that keep the door?
See thou do call vs, ever the Sun uprise,
But sleep not for by all my Arms I swear,
If by thy careless floth, or negligence
We be describe, thy body I'll translate,
To some strange Monster.
I'm hard fauor'd enough already, you need not
Make my face worse then it is.
Com enter then fair Queen, we are secure,
Now safely moist thou clasp the God of war,
Spite of Sun, Moon, or a jealous star.
Love answers love, desire with ardor meets,
Both which this night shall taste a thousand sweets.
I see you can make shift to go too't without sheets: How shall I pass this night away till morning, I am as drowsy as a dormouse, the very thought that I must wake, charms me a sleep already, I would I durst venture on a nap; Hey ho, sure I may wake again before they rise, and never the wiser, I will stand to it, there is not a more sleepy trade in the world then a watchman, nor one that is more acquainted with deeds of darkness, tell me of the Sun! the Sun will not rise this two hours; well, let them watch that will, or can, I must have a nod or two, God night to you
all, for here am I fast till morning.
The day-starre shines and calls me blushing up.
From Tithons bed to harness Phoebus Steeds.
My roseate fingers have already stroked
The element where light begins to appear,
And straight Apollo with his glistening beams,
Will guild the East, the Seasons, Months, and Dai
Attend him in the palace of the Sun.
The Hours have brought his Chariot to the gate
Of Crystal, where the Sunne-God mounts his throne,
His fiery Steeds have all their traces fet,
Th'vnruly stalions fed with Ambrosy
(With their round hooves shod with the purest gold)
Thunder against the Marble floors of Heaven,
And waite till Phoebus hath but don'd his beams,
Which I the blushing Morning still put on.
And now's the hour (for thus time fleets still)
That the Suns up to clime the Eastern hill.
Beauteous Aurora, for full twice twelve hours
Till in my sphere I have compassed round the world
Farewell, I with my beams will dry these tears
Thou shedst at parting; we have chac't hence night,
And frighted all the twinkling stars from heaven,
And now the steep Olimpus we must clime,
Till from the high Meridian we peruse
The spacious bounds of this large vniuerse,
And thence decline our Chariot towards the West,
Till we have washed our Coach-steeds and our self
In Esters icy streams: Wee with this eye
Can all things see that mortals do on earth,
And what wee find inhumane, or to offend,
Wee tell to Jove, that he may punish sins.
For this I am termed a tel-tale and a blab,
And that I nothing can conceal abroad.
But let spite spit the worst and wrong me still,
Day hates sins, and light despises ill.
And now behold a most abhorred deed,
Mars beds with Venus, shall not Vulcan know it?
By my light hee shall; I have seen, and I will tell,
The Sun hates sin but crowns them that do well.
Venus awake, wee have ore-slept our selves,
The Sunne's aboue in his diurnal task,
I saw his piercing beams pry through a cranny,
And cast his right eye full upon our bed.
We are betrayed, the blab will tell the Smith,
Our love will come to th'eare of upiter
And all the other Gods, what will Diana
Say when she hears of our inchastity?
Or how will Iuno take this spouse-breach from vs?
Nay rather, how will Vulcan taste our sport?
He might suspect, but never prove till now,
Where is the villain Gallus set to watch?
See where he snorts, the slave is dead asleep.
Awake thou drowsy Groom, thy chaflisement
Shall exceed torture.
Hey ho, what's the matter there, ha?
Look, hast thou eyes? is not the Sun two hours
Mounted aloft? hath he not seen theesleeping
At the Caves door, Yea beheld vs too?
More shame for him to look in at any bodies window.
Speak, how can thou excuse this?
Oh great God Mars.
Behold, this is thy doom, thy negligence
Thus I'll chastise, thou shalt thy humane shape
Henceforth forgo, I will translate thy body
Into a bird shall ever bear thy name,
Bee Gallus still, a Cock, and be thy nature
Ever hereafter this; to watch the Sun,
And by thy crows and clamours warn the world
Two hours before he rise, that the Sun comes
Clap with thy wings, and with thy shrieking loud,
Proclaim his coming when thou thrice hast crowed.
The slaves right served, let this his punishment
Live to all ages, and let Galls name
Thy just revenge to all the world proclaim.
But whither shall we now?
I will to Thrice, go you to Lemnos.
Will you leave me then
To Vulcans rage, no let vs once more meet
In Paphos, and if Vulcan needs will chide
Give him some cause.
Content fair Queen of love.
For more, he cannot be much more displeased,
Let's score on still, and make our reckoning full,
As yet alas fair Queen, the debts but small,
Make up the sum, and answer once for all.
Content sweet Mars, and since that he was borne
To be a Cuckold, let's augment his horn.
Make hast with that shield, see hammered well,
For when it is done I'll giue't my father Jove,
It is of the purest mettle Lemnos yields.
I shall sir, must the plate of two cubes high,
Be put into the Forge?
Pyragmon yes, that mass must be wrought well
And soundly tempered, bid your fellow Cyclops
Work lustily, it must be soon dispatcht.
When saw you my Lady Venus?
No matter when, the Huswiffe's too fine fingered,
And saith, the very smoke my Fordge doth cast
Chokes her, the very air of Lemnos (man)
Blasts her white cheeks, she scarce will let me kiss her,
But she makes vergisse faces, saith my visadge
Smug'd thus with cole-dust, doth infect her beauty,
And makes her wear a beard, shoe's, sure, in Paphos,
Cypress, or Candy, shoe's all for play
Whilst we Ioues thunders hammer hard all day.
I heard her once mock that polt-foote of yours
How came it pray?
I'll tell thee man, I was when I was borne
A pretty smug knave, and my father Jove
Delighted much to dance me in his lap.
Upon a time as hee was toying with me
In his high house aboue, that Phaeton
Had at that instant set the world a fire,
My father when he saw heavens bases smoke,
Th'earth burn, and Neptunes broth to sees with heate;
But startles up to thunder-strike the lad,
And lets me fall: down tumbled I towards the earth:
I fell through all the Planets by degrees,
From Saturn first, so by the Moon at last:
And from the Moon down into Lemnos Isle
Where I still live, and halt upon my fall,
No marvel if it lamed me, for, Pyragmon.
How high I tumbled, who can guess aright,
Falling a Summers day from morn to night?
It was marvel you did not break your neck.
Had I not been derived from God-like seed,
Trust me Pyragmon I had don't indeed.
But to the Forge, for I Appollo spy,
Hee that sees all things with the days bright eye.
Good morrow Phoebus, what's the news abroad
For thou see all things in the world are done,
Men act by day-light, or the sight of Sun.
Sometime I cast mine eye upon the sea,
To see the tumbling Seal, or Porpoise play,
There see I Merchants trading, and their sails
Big bellied with the wind; sea fights some times
Rise with their smoke, thick clouds to dark my beams.
Sometimes, I fix my face upon the earth
With my warm fervor, to give metals, trees,
Herbs, plants, and flowers life; here in gardens walk
Loose Ladies with their lovers arm in arm,
Yonder the labouring Ploughmen drives his Teem.
Further, I may behold maine battles pitched,
And whom I favour most (by the winds help)
I can assist with my transparent rays.
Here, spy I Cattle feeding, Forests there
Stored with wilde beasts; here Shepeheards with their lasses
Piping beneath the trees, whilst their flocks graze.
In Cities, I see trading, walking, bargening,
Buying, and selling, goodness, badness, all things.
And shine alike on all.
Thrice happy Phoebus,
That whilst poor Vulcan is confined to Lemnos
Hast every da these pleasures. What news else.
No Emperor walks forth, but I see his State,
Nor sports, but I his pastimes can behold,
I see all Coronations, Funerals,
Marts, Fairs, Assemblies, Pageants, Sights; and Shows.
No hunting, but I better see the chase
Then they that rouse the game, what see not I?
There's not a window but my beams breaks in,
No think or cranny but my rays pierce through,
And there I see (oh Vlcan) wondrous things.
Things that thy self nor any God besides
Would give belief to.
What, good Phoebus speak.
Here, wantons on their day-beds, I see spread
Clasping their amorous lovers in their arms,
Who even before my face, are not sometimes
Ashamed to show all.
Could not god Phoebus bring me to see this pastem.
Sometimes even mean fellows
A bed with noble Ladies whom they serve,
Servant with servant, married men with maids,
And wives with Bachelors.
There's simple doing.
And shall I tell thee Vulcan, tother day
What I beheld, I saw the great God Mars.
God Mars.
As I was peeping through a cranny; a bed.
A bed; with whom? some pretty wench I warrant.
She was a pretty wench.
Tell me good Phoebus,
That when I meet him I may flout God Mars,
Tell me, but tell me truly on thy life.
Not to dissemble Vulcan, it was thy wife!
Out on her whore, out on him Cuckold-maker,
Phoebus I'll be reuendge on great God Mars,
Who, whilst I hammer here his swords and shields,
Hammers upon my head, I will complain
To Jove, and all the Gods, and tell them flat
I am a Cuckold.
Vulcan be advised,
I have had notice where they use to meet,
Could not devise to catch them by some wile?
And lay their guilt, wide open to the Gods,
Then might thou have fit colour of complaint.
Enough, I have deuis'd a secret snare,
A draw-net, which I'll place upon the Couch
Where they still use to bed, a wire so tempered,
And of such fineness to deceive the eye.
So catch them when they are at it, and by this
I may presume, and be sure I am Cuckold.
That's the way to be satisfied.
If I can catch them, all the Gods I'll call
To see my wrongs, there sports I'll near to mar,
And avenge me on that lecherous God of war.
Cloris, you are the Nymph whose office is
To strew fair Venus bed with herbs and flowers,
Here is the place she means to sport her self.
I am the hand-maide to the Queen of love,
And unto all her pleasures minister,
When she drinks Nectar, it is from Cloris hand,
If feed on sweet Ambrotia, or those fruits
That Cornucopia yields, I serve them up,
Come let vs with fresh Roses strew her Couch
With pence and the buds of Eglantine,
Her pillow is the purple Violet bank,
About whose verges the blancht Lilies grow,
Whose bodies twined about with woodbine leaves
Make a confused sweetness, so it is well,
Come Venus when she please to take her rest,
Her Arbour's dight, and all things well addressed.
By her baud Charis, this I know the place,
Which with adulterate pastimes they pollute.
Here will I set my pit-fall for these birds,
And catch them in the closure of this wire,
So, so, al's fit, my snare in order placed,
Happy the time, that I this Charis trac't.
Once more in spite of Phoebus and these eyes,
That dog our pastimes, we are closely met,
And whilst the Cuckold Vulcan blows the fire,
Our amorous souls their sportive bliss conspire.
Hoe's limping thus, and like a cripple halts
From Forge to Fornace; where were Venus eyes,
When she made choice of that foul polt-foote Smith,
He smells all smoke, and with his nasty sweat
Tawnies my skin, out on him ugly knave,
Mars is my love, and he my sweets shall have.
Gramercy my kind wife.
Come God of war,
I'll teach thee a new skirmish, better far
Then thy sterne battles, meet me with a kiss
Which I retort thus, there's spirit in this,
What's he would play the coward and turn face,
When such sweet amorous combats are in place?
My hot encounters, leave me wound nor skarr
Yet naked I dare meet the God of War.
Out of her Whore.
I am armed for thee, prepare thee, for this night
Il'e breast to breast dare thee to single fight.
Come tumble in my lap, great Mars I dare
To do his worst.
It is well, your sports are fair.
Betrayed? bound? caught? release me, or by Jove,
Thou dy'st what ere thou art.
God Mars, good words;
This is a fight in which you use no swords.
You have left your steel behind.
Sweet vulcan.
No more.
Can thou use Venus thus?
Away you whore,
Il'e keep you fast, and call the Gods to see
Your practise, Neptune, Jove, and Mercury,
Phoebus and Iuno, from your spheres look down,
And see the cause I wear a forked crown.
The Gods are all spectators of our shame,
And laugh at vs.
Oh! I could cry for anger.
Sweet Vulcan let me loose. Vulc. When Gods and men
Have seen thy shame, but (strumpet) not till then.
See how Mars chafes.
But Venus weeps for rage
Why should Mars fret? if it so tedious be,
Good God of war bestow thy place on me.
By all the Gods, would she do me that grace,
I would fall too't even before Vulcans face.
To Gods and men let it be fully known
I am a Cuckold.
Vulcan is no less.
Now since red shame your cheeks with blood hath died,
I am revenged, and see my net's untied.
The Gods have laughed their fill, Vulcan's revenged,
And now all friends: speak, are we?
Mars still frowns,
And Venus scarce well pleased.
For my part (oh you Gods!) what's past is past,
And what is once done, cannot be resold:
If Vulcan in this jest hath pleased the Gods,
All his own wrongs he freely can forgive.
Venus we are friends, to Lemno we will hast,
And never more record what's done and past.
No fool, before I did offend with fear,
My guilt was but suspected, but not proved:
And therefore I selected privacy,
Closeness of place, and bashfully transgressed;
But since both Gods and men now know my sin,
Why should I dread to say I love God Mars?
What help hast thou in proving thy wife false?
Only to make me doe with impudence,
What I before with fear did, on thy self
Brought a most certain shame, where it before
Was but suspected.
Venus speaks good sense,
That's certain now, which was before suspense.
Now fare well jealous fool, for my disgrace,
Him whom I love, I blushless thus embrace,
And may all such as would their wives so take,
(Although they might) be served thus for thy sake.
I am undone, be warned by me oh men,
Although you know your wives false, where and when,
Take them not in the manner, though you may:
They that with fear before, now blushless stray,
Their guilt it is better to suspect then know,
So you may take some part of that you owe.
Where I by seeking her good name to thrall,
Have made my self a scorn, and quite left all.
To Lemnos then, to make our Thunders fit,
Which against mortals we have cause to use,
Mars, you to Thrice, Venus in Paphos stay,
Or where you please, we to our several spheres.
Vulcan, thy moral this good use contrives,
None search too far th'offences of their wives.
Our last Act comes, which lest it tedious grow,
What is too long in word, asspt in show.
Think Hercules his labours having ended,
The Spanish Gerion kilt, and Cacus slain,
As far as Lydia he his palm extended,
Where beauteous Omphale this time doth reign.
He that before to Deianeira sent,
As presents, all the spoils that he could win,
Now fills her heart with jealous discontent,
She hears how Hercules doth card and spin
With Omphale, and serves her as a slave.
(She quite forgot in Thebes) her grief to cheer,
Th'assembled Princes with their Counsels grave,
Are come to comfort and remove her fear.
By these all his stored labours he hath sent
To call him home, to free her discontent.
Iason, and the other Hero's for her sake,
Travel to Lydia, to persuade him thence
And by his twelve known labours, undertake
To move him, quite t'abandon his fair wench.
Further then this her jealousy extends,
Afar worse present she by Lychas sends.
Madam, these sorrows are too violent
For your weak sex, I do not think tic true,
Your husband can prefer that Omphale
Before your beauty.
Hoe's forgot in Greece.
Greece that was wont to clangor with his fame,
Is now all silent, who but Iason now,
And Telamon, that scaled the walls of Troy,
Alcides is a name for got amongst vs,
And Deianeira too forgot with him.
Oh! that I had the tempting strumpet here
That keeps my Lord away, confining me
Unto the coldness of a widowed bed.
Madam, these presents sent, &amp; so well known
Coming from you, must needs prevail with him.
These Princes have great interest in his love,
And can persuade much.
But that strumpet more.
Lychas, he dotes upon her tempting looks,
And is so much with her enchantments bleared,
That hoe's turned woman: woman Lychas, spinnes,
Cards, and doth chare-worke, whilst his mistress sits
And makes a cushion of his Lyons skin,
Makes of his club a rock. I loose my self
In thismy sorrow, and forget the means;
I still keep by my me, to restore my love,
Lychas, fetch me the shirt within my chamber,
I have bethought me now.
Madam I shall.
This shirt (in blood of Centaur Nessus dipped,
And since washed out) Il'e send my Hercules,
Which hath the power to make his hot love dye
To any stranger, and revive to me.
This (as his last) the dying Centaur spake,
To this Il'e trust, all other hopes forsake.
Madam the shirt.
This as my best and dearest,
Present me (trusty Lychas) to my Lord,
Entreat withal, that if he have not quite
Put off my love, he will deign to put on this.
If he despise my gift, return it back,
And in it my death.
Fear not fair Princess,
I hope to prove as fortunate as faithful.
Farewell, prove as thou speak. If my gift fail,
I have sentenced all my sorrows to one death,
Whilst Deianeira hath a hand to use,
She'll not live hated where she once did choose.
Why so, this is a power infused in love,
Beyond all magic; Is it not strange to see
A women's beauty tame the Tyrant-tamer?
And the great Monster-maister ouer-match?
Have you done your task?
Beauteous Queen, not yet.
Then I shall frown.
Before that (lovely fair)
Augment my task, unto a treble chare.
For one sweet smile from beauteous Omphale,
Il'e lay before thee all the monstrous heads
Of the grim tyrants that oppress the earth.
I that before, at Iuno's strict behest,
The hundred giants of Cremona slue,
Will twice five hundred kill for Omphale.
Find me a Cacus in a cave of fire,
Il'e drag him from the mountain Auentine,
And lay his bulk at thy victorious feet.
Find me me another Gerion to captive,
All his three heads Il'e tumble in thy skirt.
Bid me once more sack hell, to bind the furies,
Or to present thee with the Gods in chains,
It shall be done for beauteous Omphale.
Leave prating, ply your work.
Oh what a sweetness
Lives in her looks! no bondage, or base slavery
Seems servitude, whilst I may freely gaze
(And uncontrolled) on her: but for one smile,
Il'e make her Empress ore the triple world,
And all the beauteous Queens from East to West,
The Lydians vassails, and my fellow-slaues.
There is no Lord but Love, no vassailage
But in affection, and th'Emperious Queen
Doth tyrannize ore captive Hercules.
Madam, some Dukes of Greece attend without,
And crave to see your captive Theban here.
Admit them, they shall see what pomp we have,
And that our beauty can the loftiest slave.
Our business was to Thehan Hercules,
It was told vs he remained with Omphale,
The Lydian Queen.
Speak, which is Omphale? or which Alcides?
We are queen of Lydia,
And this our vassal. Do you know him Lords?
Stoop slave, and kiss the foot of Omphale.
I shall.
Oh wondrous alteration!
Till now I trusted this report was false,
And scarcely can I yet believe mine eyes.
Lady, our purpose was to Hercules,
Show vs the man.
Behold him Greeks there.
Where?
There at his task.
Alas! This Hercules?
This is some base effeminate groom, not hee
That with his puissance frighted all the earth:
This is some woman, some Hermophrodite.
Hath Iason, Nestor, Castor, Telamon,
Atreus, Pollux, all forgot their friend?
We are the man.
Woman we know thee not.
We came to seek the Ioue-borne Hercules,
That in his cradle strangled Iuno's snakes,
And triumphed in the brave Olimpicke games.
He that the Cleonean Lyon slue,
The Eremanthian Boar, the Bull of Marathon,
The Lernean Hydra, and the winged Hart.
He that dragged Cerberus from hell in chains,
And stownded Pluto in his Ebon Chair.
That Hercules, by whom the Centaurs fell
Great Achelous, the Stymphalides,
And the Cremona giants? Where is he?
That traitorous Nessus with a shaft transfixed,
Strangled Antheus, purged Augeus stalls,
Wan the bright Apples of the Hesperides,
And whilst the Giant Atlas eased his limbs,
Bore on his shoulders the huge frame of heaven.
And are not we the man? see Telamon,
A woman do this? we would see the Theban,
That Cacus slue, Busiris sacrificed,
And to his horses hurled sterne Diomed
To be devoured.
That freed Hesione
From the Sea-whale, and after ransacked Troy,
And with his own hand slue Lamedon.
He by whom Dercilus and Albion fell,
He that Oecalia and Betricia wan.
That monstrous Gerion with his three heads vanquished
With Linus, Lichas that usurped in Thebes,
And captived there his beauteous Megara.
He that the Amazonian Baldricke wan,
That Achelous with his club subdued,
And wan from him the pride of Calidon
Bright Deianeira, that now mourns in Thebes
For absence of that noble Hercules.
To him we came, but since he lives not here,
Come Lords, we will return these presents back
Unto the constant Lady, whence they came.
Stay Lords.
Amongst women?
For that Thebans sake
Whom you profess to love, and came to seek,
Abide awhile, and by my love to Greece,
Il'e bring before you that lost Hercules,
For whom you came to enquire.
On that condition (Princes) lets stay a little.
It works, it works.
How have I lost my self?
Did we all this? where is that spirit become
That was in vs? no marvel Hercules,
If thou be strange to them, that thus disguised,
Art to thy self unknown. Hence with this distaff
And base effeminate chares.
How slave? submit and to thy task again.
Dare thou rebel?
Pardon great Omphale.
Will Telamon persuade me this is Hercules
The Lybian Conqueror, now a ssaues slave.
He lived in midst of battles, this amongst truls:
This welds a distaff, he a conquering Club.
Shall we bestow fair Deianeiraes presents
On this (heaven knows) whether man or woman?
Who named my Deianeira? Iason you?
How fares my love? how fares my beauteous wife?
I know these presents, did they come from her?
What strumpet's this that hath detained my soul?
Captived my fame, trans-shap't me to a fool?
Made me (of late) but little less then God,
Now scarce a man? Hence with these womanish tyres,
And let me once more be my self again.
Keep from him Omphale, be that your charge,
We'll second these good thoughts.
Alcid s hear me.
By your favour madam.
Who spake?
Think that was Deianeira's voice,
Tha calls thee home to dry her widowed tears,
And to bring comfort to her deolate bed.
Oh Deianeira.
Hear me Hercules.
Ha Omphale?
You shall not trouble him.
It was she that made Alcides womanish,
But Deianeira to be more then man.
For thy wives sake thou art renowned in Greece,
This Strumpet hath made Greece forget thee quite,
And scarce remember there was such a man.
Thebes that was wont to triumph in thy glories,
Is now all silent. Tyrants every where
Begin to oppress, thinking Alcides dead
For so the fame's already. Shall a Strumpet
Do this upon the Theban Hercules?
And Deyaneira, fair, chaste absolute
In all perfections, live despised in Thebes?
By Jove she shall not, first I'll rend these eyes out,
That sotted with the love of Omphale
Hath transhapt me, and deeply injured her.
Come we will shake off this effeminacy
And by our deeds repurchase our renown.
Iason and you brave Greeks, I know you now,
And in your honours I behold my self
What I have been, hence Strumpet Omphale,
I cast thee off, and once more will resume
My native virtues, and to prove this good
This day unto the Gods I'll sacrifice
To grace which pomp, and that we may appear
The same we were, before vs shall be borne
These of our labours twelve, the memory,
Unto Ioues Temple, grace vs worthy Heroes
To assist vs in this high sollemnity.
Whilst we upon our manly shoulders bear
These massy pillars we in Gades must rear.
We have lost our servant, never yet had Lady
One of the like rank. All King Thespius daughters,
Fifty in number, childed all one night,
Could not prevail so much with Hercules
As we have done; no not fair Yole
Daughter to Cacus, beauteous Megara,
Nor all the fair and amorous queens of Greece,
Could slave him like the Lydian Omphale.
Therefore where ever his labours be renowned,
Let not our beauty pass vnregistred.
Bondaging him that captived all the earth,
Nor will we leave him, or yet loose him thus
What either beauty, cunning, flattery, tears
Or women's Art can, we will practise on him.
But now the Priests and Princes are prepared
For the great sacrifice, which we will grace
With our high presence, and behold aloof
These rights unto the gods performed and dno
We will gain by Art, what we with beauty won.
Now Jove behold vs from thy sphere of Stars,
And shame not to acknowledge vs thy sons.
Thus should Alcides march amidst his spoils,
Inguirt with slaughtered Lyons, Hydras, Whales,
Boars, Bulls, grim Tyrants, Hel-hounds, Monsters, Furies,
And Princes his spectators: oh you Gods,
To whom this day we consecrate your prayers,
And dedicate our sacred orisons,
Deign vs your cies, behold these sholders bear
Two brazen pillars, trophies of our fame,
That have eased Atlas, and supported heaven,
And had we shrunk beneath that heavenly structure
The Spheres, Orbs, Planets, Zeniths, Signs, and Stars,
With loves high Palace, all confusedly
Had shattered, fallen, and o're-whelm'd earth and sea,
Wee have done that, and all these labours else,
Which we this day make sacred, lune see
These we surrender to thy love and thee.
From Deianera I present this gift,
Wrought with her own hand, with more kind commends
Then I have measured steps to Lydia
From Thebes, which she entreats you wear for her.
More welcome is this gift to Hercules
Then Iason's Fleece, Laomedon's white Steeds,
Or should Jove grace me with eternity,
Here stand our pillars, with non ultra insculpt,
Which we must rear beyond the Pyrene Hills
At Gades in Spain (Alcides utmost bounds)
Whilst we put on this shirt, the welcome present
Of Deyianeira, whom we dearly love,
Lychas thy hand, In this we'll sacrifice
And make our peace with her and Iupiter.
Never was Hercules so much himself,
How will this news glad Deyaneiraes heart,
Or how this sight enrage fair Omphale?
All his dead honours he revives in this,
And Greece shall once more echo with his fame.
With this her present, I put on her love,
Witness heaven, earth, and all you Peers of Greece,
I wed her once more in this ornament,
Her love and her remembrance sit to me
More near by thousands then this robe can cleave.
So now before Ioues Altar let vs kneel,
And make our peace with heaven, atone our self
With beauteous Dyaneira our chaste wife
And cast away the love of Omphale.
Princes of Greece assist vs with your thoughts,
And let your prayers with ours ascend the Spears,
For mortals oreonce are sons to Jove,
And when none else can, they have free access
Unto there fathers ear, hail son of Saturn,
To whom when the three lots of heaven, of sea,
And hell were cast, the high Olimpus fell.
Oh, oh.
That with a nod can make heavens collomes bend,
And th'earths Center tremble, whose right hand
Is armed with lightning, and the left with fear.
No more, are all the furies with their tortures,
Their whips and lashes crept into my skin?
Hath any sightless and infernal fire
Laid hold upon my flesh? when did Alcides
Thus shake with anguish? thus change face, thus shrink?
Shall torture pale our cheek? no, Priest proceed,
We will not feel the pain, thou shalt not breed,
What alteration's this? a thousand pangs
I see even in his visage, in his silence
He doth express even hell.
Thou sacred Jove
Behold vs at thy Altar prostrate here
To beg atonement 'tweene our sins and thee,
Lend vs a gracious ear and eye.
Priest no more,
I'll rend thy Typet, hurl Ioues Altars down,
Havoc his Offerings, all his Lamps extinguish,
Raze his high Temples, and scale heaven it self
Unless he stay my tortures.
VVarlike Theban,
Whence comes this fury? is this madness forced,
That makes Alcides thus blaspheme the Gods.
Patient your self.
I will not Iason, cannot Tellamon,
A stipticke poison boils within my veins,
Hell is within me, for my marrow fries,
A vulture worse then that Promotheus feels,
Fers on my entrails, and my bulk in flames.
Yet be your self, renowned Hercules,
Strive with your torture, with yourrage contend
Seek to ore-come this anguish.
Well, I will,
See Iason, see renowned Tellamon
I will be well, I'll feel no poison boyle,
Though my blood skal'd me, though my hot suspires,
Blast where I breath like lightning, though my lungs
Sees in my blood, I will not pale a cheek,
Nor change a brow, I will not, spite of torture
Anguish, and pain, I will not.
What strange fury
Hath late possessed him to be thus disturbed?
Why this is well, once more repair Ioues Altar.
Kindle these holy Tapers and proceed.
To pluck the Thunderer from his Crystal thron
And throw the Gallaxia, by the locks,
And amber tresses, drag the Queen of heaven.
Alcides.
Princes, Iason, Tellamon,
Help me to tear of this infernal shirt,
Which rawes me where it cleaves, vnskin my browns,
And like one nak't rolled in a Tun of spikes
Of thousands, make one universal wound,
And such is mine: oh Deyaneira false,
Treacherous, unkind, disloyal; pluck, tear, rend
Though you my bones leave naked, and my flesh
Frying with poison you cast hence to dogs.
Dread Neptune, let me plundge me in thy seas,
To cool my body, that is all on flame.
Or with thy tri-sulke thunder strike me Jove,
And so let fire quench fire, vnhand me Lords,
Let me spurn mountains down, and tear up rock
Rend by the roots huge Oaks, till I have dug
Away to hell, or found a scale to heaven.
Something I must, my torments are so great,
To quench this flame and qualify this heate.
Let vs not leave him Princes least this out-rage
Make him lay violent hands upon him self.
If Deyaneiraes heart, were with her hand,
She is her sexes scandal, and her shame
Even whilst Time lives, shall every tongue proclaim.
I'll follow to, and with what Art I can,
Strive this his rage and torture to allay.
What's in this shirt unknown to me that brought it?
Or what hath jealous Deyaneira done?
To employ me, an unwilling messenger,
In her Lords death: well, whosoe're it prove
My innocence I know, I'll, if I may
Look to my life, and keep out of his way.
Lychas, Lychas, whore's he that brought this poisoned shirt,
That I may tear the villain limb from limb.
And flake his body small as Winters snow,
His shattered flesh shall play like parched leaves,
And dance in th'aire, tossed by the summer winds.
Defend me heaven.
Oh that with stamping thus,
I could my self beneath the Center sink,
And tomb my tortured body beneath hell.
Had I heavens massy columns in my gripes,
Then with one sway I would or'e-turne yon frame,
And make the marble Elemental sky
My Tombe-stone to enter dead Hercules.
Oh father Jove thou lie upon thy son
Torments aboue supporture, Lichas, oh!
I'll chase the villain o'er Oetaes rocks,
Till I have nak't those hills, and left no shade
To hide the Traitor.
Which way shall I fly
To scope his fury? if I stay I dye.
Stay, stay, what's he that creeps into yon cave?
Is not that Lycas Dyaneiraes squire,
That brought this poisoned shirt to Hercules?
I thank thee Jove, yet this is some allayment
And moderation to the pangs I feel,
Nay, you shall out fir Lychas by the heals.
Thus, thus, thy limbs about my head I twine,
Eubaean sea receive him, for he's thine.
Princes, his torments are above Physic help,
And they that wish him well, must wish his death,
For that alone gives period to his anguish.
In vain we follow and pursue his rage,
There's danger in his madness.
Yet aloof,
Let's observe him, and great Jove implore
To qualify his pains.
As I am Philoctetes I'll not leave him,
Until he be immortal, Princes hark,
Cannot these groans pierce heaven and move to pity
The obdure Iuno.
Beneath this rock where we have often kissed,
I will lament the noble Thebans fall,
The Lydian Omphale will be to him
A truer Mistress, then his wife, whose hate
Hath brought on him this sad and ominous fate.
Nor hence, for any force or prayer remove,
But die with him whom I so dearly love.
His torments still increase, hear oh you Gods,
And hearing pity.
Down, down, you shadows that crown Oeta Mount,
And as you tumble bear the Rocks along.
I will not leave an Oak or standing Pine
But all these mountains with the dales make even,
That Oetaes self may morn with Hercules.
Ho! what art thou?
I am thy Omphale.
Art thou not Deyaneira come to mock
Alcides madness, and his pangs deride?
Yes, thou art she, thou, thou hast fier'd my bones,
And make me boyle in poison, for which (minion)
And for (by fate) thou hast shortened my renown,
Behold, this monstrous rock thy death shall crown,
So Deyaneira and her squire are now
Both in their sins extinct.
What hath Alcides done? slain Omphale,
A guiltless queen that came to morn his death.
Torment on torment. But shall Hercules
Dye by a women's hand? No, aid me Princes,
(If you have in you any generous thoughts)
In my last fabric: Come, toss trees on trees,
Till you have reared me up a funeral pile,
Which all that's mortal in me shall consume.
Princes, let none deny their free assistance,
In his release of torture. Ther's for me.
My hand shall likewise help to bury him,
And of his torments give him ease by death.
Thanks, thus I throne me in the midst of fire,
And with a dreadlesse brow confront my death.
Olimpicke thunderer now behold thy son,
Of whose divine parts make a star, that Atlas
May shrink beneath the weight of Hercules.
And step-dame , glut thy hatred now,
That hast been weary to command, when we
Have not been weary to perform and act.
I that Busiris slue, Antheus strangled,
And conquered still at thy unkind behest,
The three-shap't Gerion, and the dog of hell,
The Bull of Candy, and the golden Hart,
Augeus and the fowls of Stymphaly,
The Hesperian fruit, and bolt of Thermidon,
The Lernean Hydra, and Arcadian Boar,
The Lyon of Naemea, Steeds of Thrice,
The monster Cacus; thousands more then these,
That Hercules in death dares thee to chide,
And shows his spirit, which torments cannot hide.
Lye there thou dread of Tyrants, and thou skin,
Invulner'd still, burn with thy masters bones:
For these be arms which none but we can wield.
My bow and arrows Philoctetes take,
Reserve them as a token of our love,
For these include the utmost fate of Troy,
Which without these; the Greeks can ne'er destroy.
You Hero's all fare-well, heap fire on fire,
And pile on pile, till you have made a structure
To flame as high as heaven, and record this
Though by the Gods and Fates we are ore-throwne,
Alcides dies by no hand but his own.
Iuno thou hast done thy worst; he now defies
What thou can more, his fame shall mount the skies.
What heavenly musicke's this?
His soul is made a star, and mounted heaven,
I see great Jove hath not forgot his son:
All that his mothers was is changed by fire,
But what he took of Jove, and was divine,
Now a bright star in the high heavens must shine.
We all have seen Alcides deified.
But what news brings Atreus?
A true report of Deianeira's death,
Who when she heard the tortures of her Lord,
And what effect her fatal present took,
Exclaimed on Nessus, and to prove herself
Guiltless of treason in her husbands death,
Witth her own hand she boldly slue herselse.
That noble act proclaimed her innocent,
And clears all black suspicion: but fair princes,
Let universal Greece in funeral black,
Morn for the death of Theban Hercules.
Who now shall monsters qual, or tyrants tame?
Th'oppressed free, or fill Grec with their fame.
Princes your hands, take up these monuments
Of his twelve labours in a marble Temple
(We will erect and dedicate to him)
Reserve them to his lasting memory:
His brazen pillars shall be fixed in Gades,
On which his monumental deeds we'll grave.
Armed with these worthy Trophies lets march on
Towards Thebes, that claims the honour of his birth.
His body's dead, his fame shall ne'er expire,
Earth claims his earth, heaven shows his heavenly fire.
He that expects five short Acts can contain
Each circumstance of these things we present,
Me thinks should show more barrenness then hraine:
All we have done we aim at your content,
Striving to illustrate things not known to all,
In which the learned can only censure right:
The rest we , whom we unlettered call,
Rather to attend then judge: for more then sight
We seek to please. The erstanding ear
Which we have hitherto most gracious found,
Your general love, we rather hope then fear:
For that of all our labours is the ground.
If from your love in any point we stray,
Think HOMER blind, and blind men miss their way.

LIght, I salute thee, but with wounded nerues:
Wishing thy golden splendour, pitchy darkness.
What's here? TH'ARRAIGNMENT? I: This, this is it,
That our sunk eyes have waked for, all this while:
Here will be subject for my snakes, and me.
Cling to my neck, and wrists, my loving worms,
And cast you round, in soft, and amorous folds,
Till I doe bid, vncurle: Then, break your knots,
Shoot out your selves at length, as your forced stings
Would hide themselves within his malic't sides,
To whom I shall apply you. Stay! the shine
Of this assembly here offends my sight,
I'll darken that first, and out-face their grace.
Wonder not, if I stare: these fifteen weeks
(So long as since the plot was but an embrion)
Have I, with burning lights, mixed vigilant thoughts,
In expectation of this hated play:
To which (at last) I am arrived as Prologue.
Nor would I, you should look for other looks,
Gesture, or complement from me, then what
Th'infected bulk of ENVY can afford:
For I am rise here with a covetous hope,
To blast your pleasures, and destroy your sports,
With wrestings, comments, applications,
Spie-like suggestions, privy whisperings,
And thousand such promooting sleights as these.
Mark, how I will begin: The Scene is, ha!
ROME? ROME? and ROME? Crack ey-strings, and your balls
Drop into earth; let me be ever blind.
I am prevented; all my hopes are crossed,
Checked, and abated; fie, a freezing sweat
Flows forth at all my pores, my entrails burn:
What should I doe? ROME? ROME? O my vexed soul,
How might I force this to the present state?
Are there no players here? no poet-apes,
That come with basilisks eyes, whose forked tongues
Are steeped in venom, as their hearts in gall?
Either of these would help me; they could wrest,
Peruer, and poison all they hear, or see,
With senseless glosses, and allusions.
Now if you be good devils, fly me not.
You know what dear, and ample faculties
I have endowed you with: Isle lend you more.
Here, take my snakes among you, come, and eat,
And while the squeezed juice flows in your black jaws,
Help me to damn the Author. Spit it forth
Upon his lines, and show your rusty teeth
At every word, or accent: or else choose
Out of my longest vipers, to stick down
In your deep throats; and let the heads come forth
At your rank mouths; that he may see you armed
With triple malice, to hiss, sting, and tear
His work, and him; to forge, and then declaim,
Traduce, corrupt, apply, inform, suggest:
O, these are gifts wherein your souls are blessed.
What? doe you hide your selves? will none appear?
None answer? what, doth this calm troupe affright you?
Nay, then I doe despair: down, sink again.
This travail is all lost with my dead hopes.
If in such bosoms, spite have left to dwell,
Envy is not on earth, nor scarce in hell.
STay, Monster, ere thou sink, thus on thy head
Set we our bolder foot; with which we tread
Thy malice into earth: So spite should die,
Despised and scorned by noble industry.
If any muse why I salute the stage,
An armed Prologue; know, 't is a dangerous age:
Wherein, who writes, had need present his Scenes
Forty sold proof against the conjuring means
Of base detractors, and illiterate apes,
That fill up rooms in fair and formal shapes.
Against these, have we put on this forced defence:
Whereof the allegory and hid sense
Is, that a well erected confidence
Can fright their pride, and laugh their folly hence.
Here now, put case our Author should, once more,
Swear that his play were good; he doth implore,
You would not argue him of arrogance:
How ere that common spawn of ignorance,
Our fry of writers, may beslime his fame,
And give his action that adulterate name.
Such ful-blowne vanity he more doth loathe,
Then base deiection: There's a mean twixt both.
Which with a constant firmness he pursues,
As one, that knows the strength of his own muse.
And this he hopes all free souls will allow,
Others, that take it with a rugged brow,
Their moods he rather pities, then envies:
His mind it is aboue their injuries.
THen, when this body falls in funeral fire,
My name shall live, and my best part aspire.
It shall go so.
Young master, master OVID, doe you hear? gods a me! away with your songs, and sonnets; and on with your gown and cap, quickly: here, here, your father will be a man of this room presently. Come, nay, nay, nay, nay, be brief. These verses too, a poison on 'hem, I cannot abide 'hem, they make me ready to cast, by the banks of helicon. Nay look, what a rascally untoward thing this poetry is; I could tear 'hem now.
Give me, how neere's my father?
Hart a'man: get a law-booke in your hand, I will not answer you else. Why so: now there's some formality in you. By JOVE, and three or four of the gods more, I am right of mine old masters humour for that; this villainous poetry will undo you, by the welkin.
What, hast thou buskins on, LVSCVS, that thou swear so tragically, and high?
No, but I have boots on, sir, and so he's your father too by this time: for he called for 'hem, ere I came from the lodging.
Why? was he no readier?
O no; and there was the mad skeldring captain, with the velvet arms, ready to lay hold on him as hee comes down: he that presses every man he meets, with an oath, to lend him money, and cries; (Thou must doo'r, old boy, as thou art a man, a man of worship.)
Who? PANTILIVS TVCCA?
I, hee: and I met little master LUPUS, the Tribune, going thythere too.
Nay, and he be under their arrest, I may (with safety enough) read over my elegy, before he come.
Gods a me! What'll you doe? why, young master, you are not castalian mad, lunatike, frantic, desperate? ha?
What ail thou, LVSCVS?
God be with you, sir, I'll leave you to your poetical fancies, and furies. I'll not be guilty, I.
Be not, good ignorance: I'm glad you are gone:
For thus alone, our ear shall better judge
The hasty errors of our morning muse.
Envy, why twitst thou me, my time's spent ill?
And call my verse, fruits of an idle quill?
Or that (unlike the line from whence I sprung)
Wars dusty honours I pursue not young?
Or that I study not the tedious laws;
And prostitute my voice to every cause?
Thy scope is mortal; mine eternal am:
Which through the world shall ever chant my name.
HOMER will live, whilst TENEDOS stands, and ID,
Or, to the sea, sleet SIMOS doth slide:
And so shall HESIOD too, while vines doe bear,
Or crooked sickles crop the ripened care.
CALLIMACHVS, though in invention lowe,
Shall still be sung: since he in art doth flow.
No loss shall come to SOPHOCLES proud vain.
With sun, and moon, ARATVS shall remain.
Whilst slaves be false, fathers hard, and bawds be whorish,
Whilst harlots flatter, shall MENANDER flourish.
ENNIVS, though rude, and ACCIVS high-reard strain,
A fresh applause in every age shall gain.
Of VARRO'S name, what ear shall not be told?
Of IASONS ERGO? and the fleece of gold?
Then shall LVCRETIVS lofty numbers die,
When earth, and seas in fire and flames shall fry.
TYTIRVS, Tillage, EVEN shall be read,
Whilst ROME of all the conquered world is head.
Till CUPIDS fires be out, and his bow broken,
Thy verses (neat TIBVLLVS) shall be spoken.
Our GALLVS shall be known from east to west:
So shall LYCORIS, whom he now loves best.
The suffering plough-share, or the flint may wear:
But heavenly poesy no death can fear.
Kings shall give place to it, and kingly shows,
The banks ore which gold-bearing Tagus flows.
Kneel hinds to trash: me let bright PHOEBVS swell,
With cups full flowing from the MVSES well.
Frost-fearing myrtle shall impale my head,
And of sad lovers Isle be often read.
"Envy, the living, not the dead, doth bite:
"For after death all men receive their right.
Then, when this body false in funeral fire,
My name shall live, and my best part aspire.
YOur name shall live indeed, sir; you say true: but how infomously, how scorned and contemned in the eyes and ears of the best and gravest Romans, that you think not on: you never so much as dream of that. Are these the fruits of all my travail and expenses? is this the scope and aim of thy studies? are these the hopeful courses, wherewith I have so long flattered my expectation from thee? verses? poetry? OVID, whom I thought to see the pleader, become OVID the play-maker?
No, sir.
Yes, sir. I hear of a tragoedie of yours coming forth for the common players there, called MEDEA. By my houshold-gods, if I come to the acting of it, Isle add one tragic part, more then is yet expected, to it: believe me when I promise it. What? shall I have my son a stager now? an enghle for players? a gull? a rooke? a shot-clogge? to make suppers, and bee laughed at? PVBLIVS, I will set thee on the funeral pile, first.
Sir, I beseech you to have patience.
Nay, this tic to have your ears dammed up to good counsel. I did angure all this to him afore-hand, without poring into an oxes paunch for the matter, and yet he would not be scrupulous.
How now, good man slave? what, roll powle? all rivals, rascall? why my Master, of worship, dost hear? Are these thy best proiects? is this thy designs and thy discipline, to suffer knaves to bee competitors with commanders and gentlemen? are wee paralells, rascal? are wee paralells?
Sirrah, go get my horses ready. You'll still be prating.
Doe, you perpetual stinkard, doe, go, talk to tipsters and ostlers, you slave, they are in your element, go: here bee the Emperors captains, you ragamuffin rascal; and not your cam'rades.
Indeed, MARCVS OVID, these players are an idle generation, and doe much harm in a state, corrupt young gentry very much, I know it: I have not been a Tribune thus long, and observed nothing: besides, they will rob vs, vs, that are magistrates, of our respect, bring vs upon their stages, and make vs ridiculous to the plebeians; they will play you, or me, the wisest men they can come by still; me: only to bring vs in contempt with the vulgar, and make vs cheap.
You are in the right, my venerable cropshin, they will indeed: the tongue of the oracle never twanged truer. Your courtier cannot kiss his mistress slippers, in quiet, for 'hem: nor your white innocent gallant pawn his revelling suit, to make his punk a supper. An honest decayed commander, cannot skelder, cheat, nor be seen in a bawdy house, but he shall be straight in one of their worm wood comoedies. They are grown licentious, the rogues; libertines, flat libertines. They forget they are in the statute, the rascals, they are blazond there, there they are tricked, they and their pedigrees; they need no other heralds, I wise.
Me thinks, if nothing else, yet this alone the very reading of the public edicts should fright thee from commerce with them; and give thee distaste enough of their actions. But this betrays what a student you are: this argues your proficiency in the law.
They wrong me, sir, and doe abuse you more,
That blow your ears with these untrue reports.
I am not known unto the open stage,
Nor doe I traffic in their theaters.
Indeed, I doe acknowledge, at request
Of some near friends, and honourable Romans,
I have begun a poem of that nature.
You have, sir, a poem? and where is it? that's tho law you study.
CORNELIVS GALLVS borrowed it to read.
CORNELIVS GALLVS? There's another gallant, too, hath drunk of the same poison: and TIBVLLVS, and PROPERTIVS. But these are gentlemen of means, and revenue now. Thou art a yonger brother, and hast nothing, but thy bare exhibition: which I protest shall bee bare indeed, if thou forsake not these unprofitable by-courses, and that timely too. Name me a professed poet, that his poetry did ever afford
him so much as a competencie. I, your god of poets there (whom all of you admire and reverence so much) HOMER, he whose worme-eaten statue must not bee spout against, but with hallowed lips, and grovelling adoration, what was he? what was he?
Mary, I'll tell thee, old swagger; He was a poor, blind, riming rascal, that lived obscurely up and down in booths, and tap-houses, and scarce ever made a good meal in his sleep, the whoorson hungry beggar.
He says well: Nay, I know this nettles you now, but answear me; Is it not true? you'll tell me his name shall live; and that (now being dead) his works have eternized him, and made him divine But could this divinity feed him, while he lived? could his name feast him?
Or purchase him a Senators revenue? could it?
I, or give him place in the common-wealth? worship, or attendants? make him be carried in his litter?
Thou speak sentences, old BIAS.
All this the law will doe, young sir, if you'll follow it.
If he be mine, hee shall follow and observe, what I will apt him too, or, I profess here openly, and utterly to disclaim in him.
Sir, let me crave you will, forgo these moods;
I will be any thing, or study any thing:
I'll prove the unfashioned body of the law
Pure elegance, and make her ruggedst strains
Ruin smoothly, as PROPERTIVS elegies.
PROPERTIVS elegies? good!
Nay, you take him too quickly, MARCVS.
Why, he cannot speak, he cannot think out of poetry, he is bewitched with it.
Come, doe not mis-prize him.
Mis-prize? I, mary, I would have him use some such words now: They have some touch, some taste of the law. Hee should make himself a stile out of these, and let his PROPERTIVS elegies go by.
Indeed, young PVBLIVS, he that will now hit the mark, must shoot thorough the law we have no other planet reigns, &amp; in that sphere, you may sit, and sing with angels. Why, the law makes a man happy, without respecting any other merit: a simple scholar, or none at all may be a lawyer.
He tells thee true, my noble Neophyte; my little Grammaticaster, he do's: It shall never put thee to thy Mathematiques, Metaphysiques, Philosophie, and I know not what supposed sufficiencies; If thou can but have the patience to plod enough, talk, and make noise enough, be impudent enough, and it is enough.
Three books will furnish you.
And the less art, the better: Besides, when it shall be in the power of thy chen rill conscience, to doe right, or wrong, at thy pleasure, my pretty ALCIBIADES.
I, and to have better men then himself, by many thousand degrees, to observe him, and stand bare.
True, and he to carry himself proud, and stately, and have the law on his side for it, old boy.
Well, the day grows old, gentlemen, and I must leave you. PVBLIVS, if thou wilt hold my favour, abandon these idle fruitless studies that so bewitch thee. Send IANVS home his back-face again, and look only forward to the law: Intend that. I will allow thee, what shall suit thee in the rank of gentlemen, and maintain thy society with the best: and under these conditions, I leave thee. My blessings light upon thee, if thou respect them: if not, mine eyes may drop for thee, but thine own heart will ache for it self; and so farewell. What, are my horses come?
Yes, sir, they are at the gate without.
That's well. ASINIVS LUPUS, a word. Captain, I shall take my leave of you?
No, my little old boy, dispatch with COTHVRNVS there: I'll attend thee, I
To borrow some ten drachmas, I know his project.
Sir, you shall make me beholding to you. Now Captain TVCCA, what say you?
Why, what should I say? or what can I say, my flower of the order? Should I say, thou art rich? or that thou art honourable? or wise? or valiant? or learned? or liberal? Why, thou art all these, and thou know it (my noble LVCVLLVS) thou know it: come, bee not ashamed of thy virtues, old stump. Honour's a good brooch to wear in a mans hat, at all times. Thou art the man of wars MECOENAS, old boy. Why should not thou bee graced then by them, as well as hee is by his poets? How now, my carrier, what news?
The boy has stayed within for his cue, this half hour.
Come, doe not whisper to me, but speak it out: what? it is no treason against the state, I hope, is it?
Yes, against the state of my masters purse.
Sir, AGRIPPA desires you to forbear him till the next week: his moyles are not yet come up.
His moyles? now the bots, the spain, and the glanders, and some dozen diseases more, light on him, and his moyles. What have they the yellows, his moyles, that they come no faster? or are they foundered? ha? his moyles have the staggers belike: have they?
O no, sir: then your tongue might be suspected for one of his moyles.
Hee owes me almost a talent, and hee thinks to bear it away with his moyles, does hee? Sirrah, you, nut-cracker, go your ways to him again, and tell him I must have money, I: I cannot eat stones and turses, say. What, will he clem me, and my followers? Ask him, and he will clem me: doe, go. He would have me fry my jerkin, would hee?
Away, setter, away. Yet, stay, my little tumbler: this old boy shall supply now. I will not trouble him, I cannot bee importunate, I: I cannot bee impudent.
Alas, sir, no: you are the most maidenly blushing creature upon the earth.
Dost thou hear, my little six and fifty, or thereabouts? Thou art not to learn the humours and tricks of that old bald cheater, Time: thou had not this chain for nothing. Men of worth have their chymaera's, as well as other creatures: and they doe see monsters, sometimes: they doe, they doe, brave boy.
Better cheap then he shall see you, I warrant him.
Thou must let me have six, six, drachmas, I mean, old boy; thou shalt doe it: I tell thee, old boy, thou shalt, and in private too, dost thou see? Go, walk off: there, there. Six is the sum. Thy sonn's a gallant spark, and must not be put out of a sudden: come hither, CALLINACHVS, thy father tells me thou art too poetical, boy, thou must not be so, thou must leave them, young novice, thou must, they are a sort of poor starved rascals; that are ever wrapped up in foul linen; and can boast of nothing but a lean visage, peering out of a seame-rent suit; the very emblems of beggary. No, dost hear? turn lawyer, Thou shalt be my solicitor: Tic right, old boy, first?
You were best tell it, Captain.
No: fare thou well mine honest horse-man, and thou old befor. Pray thee Roman, when thou comes to town, see me at my lodgeing, visit me sometimes: thou shalt be welcome, old boy. Doe not balke me, good swaggerer. JOVE keep thy chain from pawning, go thy ways, if thou lack money, I'll lend thee some: I'll leave thee to thy horse, now. Adieu.
Farewell, good Captain.
Boy, you can have but half a share now, boy.
It is a strange boldness, that accompanies this fellow: Come.
I'll give attendance on you, to your horse, sir, please you
No: keep your chamber, and fall to your studies; doe so: the gods of Rome bless thee.
And give me stomach to digest this law,
That should have followed sure, had I been he.
O sacred poesy, thou spirit of arts,
The soul of science, and the queen of souls,
What profane violence, almost sacrilege,
Hath here been offered thy divinities!
That thine own guiltless poverty should arm
Prodigious ignorance to wound thee thus!
For thence, is all their force of argument
Drawn forth against thee; or from the abuse
Of thy great powers in a dultrate brains:
When, would men learn but to distinguish spirits,
And set true difference twixt those jaded wits
That run a broken pace for common hire,
And the high raptures of a happy Muse
Borne on the wings of her immortal thought,
That kicks at earth with a disdainful heel,
And bears at heaven gates with her bright hooves;
They would not then with such distorted faces,
And desperate censures stab at poesy.
They would admire bright knowledge, and their minds
Should ne'er descend on so unworthy objects,
As gold, or titles: they would dread far more,
To be thought ignorant, then be known poor.
"The time was once, when wit drowned wealth: but now,
"Your only barbarism is t'haue wit, and want.
"No matter now in virtue who excels,
"He, that hath coin, hath all perfection else.
OVID?
Who's there? Come in.
Good morerow, Lawyer.
Good morrow (dear TIBVLLVS) welcome: sit down.
Not I. What: so hard at it? Let's see, what's here?
Nay, I will see it
Pray thee away
If thrice in field, a man vanquish his foe,
It is after in his choice to serve, or no.
How now OVID! Lawcases in verse?
In troth, I know not: they run from my pen
Unwittingly, if they be verse. What's the news abroad?
Off with this gown, I come to have thee walk.
No, good TIBVLLVS, I'm not now in case,
Pray let me alone.
How? not in case!
S'light you're in too much case, by all this law.
Troth, if I live, I will new dress the law,
In sprightly poesies habiliments.
The hell thou wilt. What, turn law into verse?
Thy father has schooled thee, I see. Here, read that same.
There's subject for you: and if I mistake not,
A Supersedes to your melancholy.
How! subscribed IVLIA! , my life, my heaven!
Is the mood changed?
Musique of wit! Note for the harmonious spheres!
Celestial accents, how you ravish me!
What is it, OVID?
That I must meet my IVLIA, the Princess IVLIA.
Where?
Why, athart, I have forgot: my passion so tranceports me.
Isle save your pains: it is at ALBIVS house,
The jewellers, where the fair LYCORIS lies.
Who? CYTHERIS, CORNELIVS GALLVS love?
I, heel be there too, and my PLAVTIA.
And why not your DELIA?
Yes, and your CORINNA.
True, but my sweet TIBVLLVS, keep that secret:
I would not, for all ROME, it should be thought,
I veil bright IVLIA underneath that name:
IVLIA the gem, and jewel of my soul,
That takes her honours from the golden sky,
As beauty doth all lustre, from her eye.
The ayre respires the pure elyzian sweets,
In which she breathes: and from her looks descend
The glories of the summer. Heaven she is,
Praised in her self aboue all praise: and he,
Which hears her speak, would swear the tune-full orbs
Turned in his zenith only.
PVBLIVS, thou'lt lose thy self.
O, in no labyrinth, can I safelier err,
Then when I lose my self in praising her.
Hence Law, and welcome, Muses; though not rich,
Yet are you pleasing: let's be reconcilde,
And now made one. Henceforth, I promise faith,
And all my serious hours to spend with you:
With you, whose music strikes on my heart,
And with bewitching tones steals forth my spirit,
In IVLIAS name; fair IVLIA: IVLIAS love
Shall be a law, and that sweet law I'll study,
The law, and art of sacred IVLIAS love:
All other objects will but abjects prove.
Come, wee shall have thee as passionate, as PROPERTIVS, anon.
O, how does my SEXTVS?
Faith, full of sorrow, for his CYNTHIAS death.
What, still?
Still, and still more, his grieves doe grow upon him,
As doe his hours. Never did I know
An understanding spirit so take to heart
The common work of fate.
O my TIBVLLVS,
Let vs not blame him: for, against such chances,
The heartiest strife of virtue is not proof.
We may read constancy, and fortitude,
To other souls: but had our selves been struck
With the like planet, had our loves (like his)
Been ravished from vs, by injurious death,
And in the height, and heat of our best days,
It would have cracked our sinews, shrunk our veins,
And made our very heart-strings jar, like his.
Come, let's go take him forth, and prove, if mirth
Or company will but abate his passion.
Content, and I implore the gods, it may.
MAster CRISPINVS, you are welcome: Pray, use a stool, sir. Your cousin CYTHERIS will come down presently. Wee are so busy for the receiving of these courtiers here, that I can scarce be a minute with my self, for thinking of them: Pray you sit, sir, Pray you sit, sir.
I am very well, sir. Ne'er trust me, but you are most delicately seated here, full of sweet delight and blandishment! an excellent ayre, an excellent ayre!
I, sir, it is pretty ayre. These courtiers run in my mind still; I must look out: for IVPITERS sake, sit, sir. Or please you walk into the garden? There's a garden on the back-side.
I am most strenuously well, I thank you, sir.
Much good doe you, sir.
Come, bring those perfumes forward a little, and strew some roses, and violets here; Fie, here bee rooms savour the most pitifully rank that ever I felt: I cry the gods mercy, my husband's in the wind of vs.
Why, this is good, excellent, excellent: well said, my sweet CHLOE. Trim up your house most obsequiously.
For VVLCANVS sake, breathe somewhere else: in troth you overcome our perfumes exceedingly, you are too predominant.
Hear but my opinion, sweet wife.
A pin for your pinion. In sincerity, if you be thus fullsome to me in every thing, I'll bee diuore't; Gods my body? you know what you were, before I married you; I was a gentlewoman borne, I; I lost all my friends to be a citizens wife; because I heard indeed, they kept their wives as fine as ladies; and that wee might rule our husbands, like ladies; and doe what wee listed: doe you think I would have married you, else?
I acknowledge, sweet wife, she speaks the best of any woman in Italy, and moos as mightily: which makes me, I had rather she should make bumps on my head, as big as my two singers, then I would offend her. But sweet wife
Yet again? I'st not grace enough for you, that I call you husband, and you call me wife: but you must still bee poking me, against my will, to things?
But you know, wife; here are the greatest ladies, and gallontest gentlemen of ROME, to bee entertained in our house now: and I would fine advise thee, to entertain them in the best sort, in faith wife.
In sincerity, did you ever hear a man talk so idly? You would seem to be master? You would have your spoke in my cart? you would advise me to entertain ladies, and gentlemen? because you can marshall your pack-needles, horse-combes, hobby-horses, and wall-candlestickes in your ware-house better then I; therefore you can tell how to entertain ladies, and gentle-folkes better then I?
O my sweet wife, upbraid me not with that: "Gain savours sweetly from any thing; He that respects to get, must relish all commonditties alike; and admit no difference betwixt oat, and frankincense; or the most precious balsamum, and a tar-barrell.
Mary faugh: You sell snuffers too, if you be remembered, but I pray you let me buy them out of your hand; for I tell you true, I take it highly in snuff, to learn how to entertain gentlefolkes, of you, at these years, I faith. Alas man; there was not a gentleman came to your house in your tother wives time, I hope? nor a lady? nor musique? nor masques? Nor you, nor your house were so much as spoken of, before I disbast my self, from my hood and my fartingall, to these bumrowles, and your whale-bone-bodies.
Look here, my sweet wife; I am mum, my dear mummy, my balsamum, my spermacete, and my very city ofshe has the most best, true, feminine wit in ROME!
I have heard so, sir; and doe most vehemently desire to participate the knowledge of her fair features.
Ah, peace; you shall hear more anon: bee not seen yet, I pray you; not yet: Observe.
'Sbodie, give husbands the head a little more, and they'll bee nothing but head shortly; whats he there?
I know not forsooth.
Who would you speak with, sir?
I would speak with my cousin CYTHERIS.
Hee is one forsooth would speak with his cousin CYTHERIS.
Is she your cousin, sir?
Yes in truth, forsooth, for fault of a better.
She is a gentlewoman?
Or else she should not be my cousin, I assure you.
Are you a gentleman borne?
That I am, lady; you shall see mine arms, if 't please you.
No, your legs doe sufficiently show you are a gentleman borne, sir: for a man borne upon little legs, is always a gentleman borne.
Yet, I pray you, vouchsafe the sight of my arms, Mistress; for I bear them about me, to have 'hem seen: my name is CRISPINVS, or CRI-SPINAS indeed; which is well expressed in my arms, (a Face crying in chief; and beneath it a blouddie Toe, between three Thorns pungent.)
Then you are welcome, sir; now you are a gentleman borne, I can find in my heart to welcome you: for I am a gentlewoman borne too; and will bear my head high enough, though it were my fortune to marry a trades-man.
No doubt of that, sweet feature, your carriage shows it in any mans eye, that is carried upon you with judgment.
Dear wife, be not angry.
God's my passion!
Hear me but one thing; let not your maids set cushions in the parlour windows; nor in the dining chamber windows; nor upon stools, in either of them, in any case; for it is tauerne-like; but lay them one upon another, in some out-roome, or corner of the dining chamber.
Go, go, meddle with your bed-chamber only, or rather with your bed in your chamber, only; or rather with your wife in your bed only; or on my faith, I'll not be pleased with you only.
Look here, my dear wife, entertain that gentleman kindly, I pre' thee,mum.
Go, I need your instructions indeed; anger me no more, I advise you. Citi-sin, quoth'a! she's a wise gentlewoman in faith, will marrye her self to the sin of the city.
But this time, and no more (by heaven) wife: hang no pictures in the hall, nor in the dining chamber, in any case, but in the gallery only, for it is not courtly else, of my word, wife.
'Sprecious, never have done!
Wife.
Doe I not bear a reasonable corrigible hand over him, CRISPINVS?
By this hand, lady, you hold a most sweet hand over him.
And then for the great gilt andirons?
Again! would the andirons were in your great guts, for me.
I doe vanish, wife.
How shall I doe, Master CRISPINVS? here will bee all the bravest ladies in court presently, to see your cousin CYTHERIS:  the
gods! how might I behave my self now, as to entertain them most courtly?
Mary, lady, if you will entertain them most courtly, you must doe thus: as soon as ever your maid, or your man brings you word they are come; you must say (A pox on 'hem, what doe they here.) And yet when they come, speak them as fair, and give them the kindest wellcome in words, that can be.
Is that the fashion of courtiers, CRISPINVS?
I assure you, it is, lady, I have observed it.
For your pox, sir, it is easily hit on; but, it is not so easily to speak fair after, me thinks?
O wife, the coaches are come, on my word, a number of coaches, and courtiers.
A pox on them: what doe they here?
How now wife! would thou not have 'hem come?
Come? come, you are a fool, you: He knows not the trick on it. Call CYTHERIS, I pray you: and good master CRISPINVS, you can observe, you say; let me entreat you for all the ladies behaviours, iewels, jests, and attires, that you marking as well as I, we may put both our marks together, when they are gone, and confer of them.
I warrant you, sweet lady; let me alone to observe, till I turn my self to nothing but observation. Good morrow cousin CYTHERIS.
Welcome kind cousin. What? are they come?
I, your friend CORNELIVS GALLVS, OVID, TIBVLLVS, PROPERTIVS, with IVLIA the Emperors daughter, and the lady PLAVTIA, are lighted at the door; and with them HERMOGENES TIGELLIVES, the excellent musician.
Come, let vs go meet them, CHLOE.
Observe, CRISPINVS.
At a hairs breadth, lady, I warrant you.
HEalth to the lovely CHLOE: you must pardon me, Mistress, that I prefer this fair gentlewoman.
I pardon, and praise you for it, sir; and I beseech your Excellence, receive her beauties into your knowledge and favour.
CYTHERIS, she hath favour, and behaviour, that commands as much of me: and sweet CHLOE, know I doe exceedingly love you, and
that I will approve in any grace my father the Emperor may show you. Is this your husband?
For fault of a better, if it please your highness.
Gods my life! how hee shames me!
Not a whit, CHLOE, they all think you politic, and witty; wise women choose not husbands for the eye, merit, or birth, but wealth, and sovereignty.
Sir, we all come to gratulate, for the good report of you.
And would be glad to deserve your love, sir.
My wife will answer you all, gentlemen; I'll come to you again presently.
You have chosen you a most fair companion here, CYTHERIS, and a very fair house.
To both which, you and all my friends, are very welcome, PLAVTIA.
With all my heart, I assure your ladyship.
Thanks, sweet Mistress CHLOE.
You must needs come to court, lady, in faith, and there bee sure your welcome shall be as great to vs.
She will well deserve it, Madame. I see, even in her looks, gentry, and general worthiness.
I have not seen a more certain character of an excellent disposition.
Wife.
O, they doe so commend me here, the courtiers! what's the matter now?
For the banquet, sweet wife.
Yes; and I must needs come to court, and bee welcome, the Princess says.
OVID, and TIBVLLVS, you may bee bold to welcome your Mistresses here.
We find it so, sir.
And thank CORNELIVS GALLVS.
Nay, my sweet SEXTVS, in faith thou art not sociable.
In faith, I am not, PVBLIVS; nor I cannot.
Sick minds, are like sick men that burn with fevers,
Who when they drink, please but a present taste,
And after bear a more impatient fit.
Pray, let me leave you; I offend you all,
And my self most.
Stay, sweet PROPERTIVS.
You yield too much unto your grieves, and sate,
Which never hurts, but when we say it hurts vs.
O peace, TIBVLLVS; your philosophy
Lends you too rough a hand to search my wounds.
Speak they of griefs, that know to sigh, and grieve;
The free and unconstrained spirit feels
No weight of my oppression.
Worthy Roman!
Me thinks I taste his misery; and could
Sit down, and chide at his malignant stars.
Me thinks I love him, that he loves so truly.
This is the perfect'st love, lives after death.
Such is the constant ground of virtue still.
It puts on an inseparable face.
Have you marked every thing, CRISPINVS?
Every thing, I warrant you.
What gentlemen are these? doe you know them?
I, they are poets, lady.
Poets? they did not talk of me since I went, did they?
O yes, and extolled your perfections to the heavens.
Now in sincerity, they be the finest kind of men, that ever I knew: Poets? Could not one get the Emperor to make my husband a Poet, think you?
No, lady, it is love, and beauty make Poets: and since you like Poets so well, your love, and beauties shall make me a Poet.
What shall they? and such a one as these?
I, and a better then these: I would be sorry else.
And shall your looks change? and your hair change? and all, like these?
Why, a man may be a Poet, and yet not change his hair, lady.
Well, wee shall see your cunning: yet if you can change your hair, I pray, doe.
Ladies, and lordings, there's a slight banquet stays within for you, please you draw near, and accost it.
We thank you, good ALBIVS: but when shall wee see those excellent jewels you are commended to have?
At your ladyships service. I got that speech by seeing a play last-day, and it did me some grace now: I see, it is good to collect sometimes; I'll frequent these plays more then I have done, now I come to be familiar with courtiers.
Why, how now, HERMOGENES? what ail thou trow?
A little melancholy, let me alone, pray thee.
Melancholy! how so?
With riding: a plague on all coaches for me.
Is that hard-fauour'd gentleman a poet too; CYTHERIS?
No; this is HERMOGENES, as humorous as a poet though: he is at Musician.
A Musician? then he can sing.
That he can excellently; did you never hear him?
O no: will he be entreated, think you?
I know not. Friend, Mistress CHLOE would fine hear
1 page duplicate
1 page duplicate
HERMOGENES sing: are you interested in him?
No doubt, his own humanity will command him so far, to the satisfaction of so fair a beauty; but rather then fail, weal all bee suitors to him.
Cannot sing.
Pray thee, HERMOGENES.
Cannot sing.
For honour of this gentlewoman, to whose house, I know thou moist be ever welcome.
That he shall in truth, sir, if he can sing.
What's that?
This gentlewoman is wooing HERMOGENES for a song.
A song come, he shall not deny her. HERMOGENES?
Cannot sing.
No, the ladies must doe it, hee stays but to have their thanks acknowledged as a debt to his cunning.
That shall not want: our self will be the first shall promise to pay him more then thanks, upon a favour so worthily vouchsafed.
Thank you, Madame, but 'will not sing.
Tut, the only way to win him, is to abstain from intreating him.
Doe you love singing, lady?
O, passingly.
Entreat the ladies, to entreat me to sing then, I beseech you.
I beseech your grace, entreat this gentleman to sing.
That we will CHLOE; can he sing excellently?
I think so, Madame: for he entreated me, to entreat you, to entreat him to sing.
Heaven, and earth! would you tell that?
Good sir, let's entreat you to use your voice.
Alas, Madame, I cannot in truth.
The gentleman is modest: I warrant you, he sings excellently.
HERMOGENES, clear your throat: I see by him, here's a gentleman will worthily challenge you.
Not I, sir, I'll challenge no man.
That's your modesty, sir: but wee, out of an assurance of your excellence, challenge him in your behalf.
I thank you, gentlemen, I'll doe my best.
Let that best be good, sir, you were best.
O, this contention is excellent. What is it you sing, sir?
If I freely may discover, &amp;c. Sir, I'll sing that.
One of your own compositions, HERMOGENES.
He offers you vantage enough.
Nay truly, gentlemen, I'll challenge no man: I can sing but one staff of the ditty neither.
The better: HERMOGENES himself will bee entreated to sing the other.
IF I freely may discover,
What would please me in my lover:
I would have her fair, and witty,
Savouring more of court, then city;
A little proud, but full of pity:
Light, and humorous in her toying.
Oft building hopes, and soon destroying,
Long, but sweet in the enjoying,
Neither too easy, nor too hard:
All extremes I would have bard.
Believe me, sir, you sing most excellently.
If there were a praise aboue excellence, the gentleman highly deserves it.
Sir, all this doth not yet make me envy you: for I know I sing better then you.
Attend HERMOGENES, now.
She should be allowed her passions,
So they were but used as fashions;
Sometimes froward, and then frowning,
Sometimes sickish, and then swowning,
Every it, with change, still crowning.
Purely jealous, I would have her,
Then only constant when I crave her.
It is a virtue should not save her.
Thus, nor her delicates would cloy me,
Neither her peenishnesse annoy me.
Nay, HERMOGENES, your merit hath long since been both known, and admired of vs.
You shall hear me sing another: now will I begin.
We shall doe this gentleman's banquet too much wrong, that stays for vs, ladies.
It is true: and well thought on, CORNELIVS GALLVS.
Why it is but a short air, twill be done presently, pray stay; strike musique.
No, good HERMOGENES: we'll end this difference within.
It is the common disease of all your musicians, hat they know no mean, to be entreated, either to begin, or end.
Please you lead the way, gentles?
Thanks, good ALBIVS.
O, what a charm of thanks was here put upon me! O JOVE, what a setting forth it is to a man, to have many courtiers come to his house! Sweetly was it said of a good old house-keeper; I had rather want meat, then want ghosts: specially, if they be courtly ghosts. For, never trust me, if one of their good legs made in a house, be not worth all the good cheer, a man can make them. Hee that would have fine ghosts, let him have a no wife; he that would have a fine wife, let him come to me.
By your kind leave, Master ALBIVS.
What, you are not gone, Master CRISPINVS?
Yes faith, I have a desseigne draws me hence: pray sir, fashion mean excuse to the ladies.
Will you not stay? and see the jewels, sir? I pay you stay.
Not for a million, sir, now; Let it suffice, I must relinquish; and so in a word, please you to expiate this complement.
Mum.
He presently go and enghle some broker, for a Poets gown, and bespeak a garland: and then jeweller, look to your best jewel ysaith.
HMh? yes; I will begin an ode so: and it shall be to MECOENAS.
'Slid, yonder's HORACE! they say hoe's an excellen Poet: MECOENAS loves him. Isle fall into his acquaintance, if I can; I think he be composing, as he goes in the street! ha? 't is a good huemore, and he be: Isle compose too.
Swell me a bowl with lusti wine,
Till I may see the plump LYaeVS swim
Aboue the brim:
I drink, as I would wright,
In slowing measure, filled with flame, and spright.
Sweet HORACE, MINERVA, and the Muses stand auspicious to thy designs. How far'st thou, sweet man? frolic? rich? gallant? ha?
Not greatly gallant, sir, like my fortunes; well.
I'm bold to take my leave, sir, you'd nought else, sir, would you?
Troth, no, but I could wish thou did know vs, HORACE, we are a scholar, I assure thee.
A scholar, sir? I shall bee covetous of your fair knowledge.
Gramercy, good HORACE. Nay, we are new turned Poet too, which is more; and a Satyrist too, which is more then that: I write just in thy vein, I. I am for your odes or your sermons, or any thing indeed; wee are a gentleman besides: our name is RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, wear a pretty stoic too.
To the proportion of your beard, I think it, sir.
By PHOEBVS, here's a most neat fine street, is it not? I protest to thee, I am enamoured of this street now, more then of half the streets of ome, again; it is so polite, and terse! There's the front of a building now. I study architecture too: if ever I should build, I'd have a house just of that prospective.
Doubtless, this gallants tongue has a good turn, when hee sleeps.
I doe make verses, when I come in such a street as this: O your city-ladies, you shall ha'hem it in every shop like the Musesoffering you the cslian dews, and the thespian liquors, to as many as have but the sweet grace and audacity to sip of their lips. Did you never hear any of my verses?
No, sir (but I am in some are, I must, now.)
I'll tell thee some (if I can but recover 'hem) I composed even now of a dressing, I saw a jewellers wife wear, who indeed was a jewel herself: I prefer that kind of tire now, what's thy opinion, HORACE?
With your silver bodkin, it does well, sir.
I cannot tell, but it stirs me more then all your court-curles, or your spangles, or your tricks: I affect not these high gable-ends, these tuscane-tops, nor your coronets, nor your arches, nor your pyramids; give me a fine sweet little delicate dressing, with a bodkin, as you say: and a mushrome, for all your other ornatures.
Is it not possible to make an escape from him?
I have remitted my verses, all this while, I think I have forget 'hem.
Here's he, could wish you had else.
Pray JOVE, I can entreat 'hem of my memory.
You put your memory to too much trouble, sir.
No, sweet HORACE, we must not have thee think so.
I cry you mercy; then, they are my ears
That must be tortured: well, you must have patience, ears.
Pray thee, HORACE, observe.
Yes, sir: your satin sleeve begins to fret at the rug that is underneath it, I doe observe: And your ample velvet bases are not without evident staines of a hot disposition, naturally.
O I'll die them into another colour, at pleasure: how many yards of velvet dost thou think they contain?
Hart! I have put him now in a fresh way
To vex me more: Faith, sir, your mercers book
Will tell you with more patience, then I can;
(For I am crossed, and so's not that, I think.)
S'light, these verses have lost me again: I shall not inuit 'hem to mind, now.
Rack not your thoughts, good sir; rather, defer it
To a new time; I'll meet you at your lodging,
Or where you please: Till then, JOVE keep you, sir.
Nay, gentle HORACE, stay: I have it, now.
Yes, sir. APOLLO, HARMS, IVPITER, look down upon me.
Rich was thy hap, sweet, dainty cap,
There to be placed:
Where thy smooth black, sleek white may smack,
And both be graced.
white, is there usurped for her brow; her forehead: and then sleek, as the parallel to smooth, that went before. A kind of Paranomasie, or Ignominytion: doe you conceive, sir?
Excellent. Troth, sir, I must be abrupt, and leave you.
Why, what haste hast thou? pray thee, stay a little: thou shalt not go yet, by PHOEBVS.
I shall not? what remedy? Fie, how I sweat with suffering!
And then
Pray, sir, give me leave to wipe my face a little.
Yes, doe, good HORACE.
Thank you, sir.
Death! I must crave his leave to peace anon;
Or that I may go hence with half my teeth:
I am in some such fear. This tyranny
Is strange, to take mine ears up by commission,
(Whether I will or no) and make them stalls
To his lewd soloecismes, and worded trash.
Happy thou, bold BOLANVS, now, I say;
Whose freedom, and impatience of this fellow,
Would, long ere this, have called him fool, and fool,
And rank, and tedious fool, and have flung jests
As hard as stones, till thou had pelted him
Out of the place: whilst my tame modesty
Suffers my wit be made a solemn ass
To bear his fopperies
HORACE, thou art miserably affected to be gone, I see. But pray thee, let's prove, to enjoy thee awhile: Thou hast no business, I assure me. Whether is thy journey directed? ha?
Sir, I am going to visit a friend, that's sick.
A friend? What's he? doe not I know him?
No, sir, you doe not know him; and it is not the worse for him.
What's his name? whore's he lodged?
Where, I shall be fearful to draw you out of your way, sir; a great way hence: Pray, sir, let's part.
Nay, but where is it? I pray thee, say.
On the far side of all Tyber yonder, by CAESARS gardens.
O, that's my course directly; I am for you. Come, go: why stand thou?
Yes, sir: marry, the plague is in that part of the city; I had almost forgot to tell you, sir.
Fow: It's no matter, I fear no pestilence, I have not offended PHOEBVS.
I have, it seems; or else this heavy scourge
Could ne'er have lighted on me
Come, along.
I am to go down some half mile, this way, sir, first, to speak with his physician: And from thence to his apothecary, where I shall stay the mixing of divers drugs
Why, it's all one. I have nothing to doe, and I love not to be idle, I'll bear thee company. How call thou the apothecary?
O, that I knew a name would fright him now. Sir RHADAMANTHVS, RHADAMANTHVS, sir.
There's one so called, is a just judge, in hell,
And doth inflict strange vengeance on all those,
That (here on earth) torment poor patient spirits.
He dwells at the three Faries, by IANVS Temple?
Your apothecary does, sir.
Hart, Jove him money for sweet meates, and hee has laid to arrest me, I hear: but
Sir, I have made a most solemn vow: I will never bail any man.
Well then, I'll swear, and speak him fair, if the worst come. But his name is MINOS, not RHADAMANTHVS, HORACE.
That may bee, sir: I but guest at his name by his sign. But your MINOS is a judge too, sir?
I protest to thee, HORACE (doe but taste me once) if I doe know my self, and mine own virtues truly, thou wilt not make that esteam of VARIVS, or VIRGIL, or TIBVLLVS, or any of 'hem indeed, as now in thy ignorance thou dost; which I am content to forgive: I would fine see, which of these could pen more verses in a day, or with more facilitie then I; or that could court his mistress, kiss her hand, make better sport with her fan, or her dog
I cannot bail you yet, sir.
Or that could move his body more gracefully, or dance betla you shoo'd see me, were it not in the street
Nor yet.
Why, I have been a reveller, and at my cloth of silver suit, and my long stocking, in my time, and will be again
If you may be trusted, sir.
And then for my singing, HERMOGENES himself envies me; that is your only Master of musique you have in Rome.
Is your mother living, sir?
Au: Convert thy thoughts to somewhat else, I pray thee.
You have much of the mother in you, sir: your father is dead?
I, I thank JOVE, and my grand-father too and all my kinsfolks, and well composed in their vrnes.
The more their happiness; that rest in peace,
Free from th'abundant torture of thy tongue;
Would I were with them too.
What's that, HORACE?
I now remember me, sir, of a sad fate
A cunning woman, one SABELLA sung,
When in her rne, she cast my destiny,
I being but a child
What was it I pray thee?
She told me, I should surely never perish
By famine, poison, or the enemies sword;
The hectic fever, cough, or pleurisy,
Should never hurt me; nor the tardy gout:
But in my time, I should be once surprised,
By a strong tedious talker, that should vex
And almost bring me to consumption.
Therefore (if I were wise) she warned me shun
All such long-winded monsters, as my bane:
For if I could but scope that one discourser,
I might (no doubt) prove an old aged man.
By your leave, sir?
Tut, tut: abandon this idle humour, it is nothing but melancholy. Fore JOVE, now I think ot, I am to appear in court here, to answer to one that has me in suit; sweet HORACE, go with me, this is my hour: if I neglect it, the law proceeds against me. Thou art familiar with these things, pray thee, if thou love me, go.
Now, let me dye, sir, if I know your laws;
Or have the power to stand still half so long
In their loud courts, as while a case is Argued.
Besides, you know, sir, where I am to go,
And the necessity
It is true:
I hope the hour of my release be come: Hee will (upon this consideration) discharge me, sure.
Troth, I am doubtful, what I may best doe; whether to leave thee, or my affairs, HORACE?
O IVPITER, me, sir; me, by any means: I beseech you, me, sir.
No saith, I'll venture those now: Thou shalt see I love thee, come HORACE.
Nay then, I am desperate: I follow you, sir. It is hard
contending with a man that ouer-comes thus.
And how deals MECOENAS with thee? liberally? ha?
Is he open-handed? bountiful?
Hoe's still himself, sir.
Troth, HORACE, thou art exceeding happy in thy friends and acquaintance; they are all most choice spirits, and of the first rank of Romans: I doe not know that poet, I protest, he's used his fortune more prosperously, then thou hast. If thou would bring me known to MEcoins, I should second thy desert well; thou should find a good sure assistant of me: one, that would speak all good of thee in thy absence, and be content with the next place, not envying thy reputation with thy patron. Let me not live, but I think thou and I (in a small time) should list them all out of favour, both VIRGIL, VARIVS, and the best of them; and enjoy him wholly to our selves.
Gods, you doe know it, I can hold no longer;
This brize hath pricked my patience: Sir, your silkenesse
Clearly mistakes MECOENAS, and his house;
To think, there breathes a spirit beneath his roof,
Subject unto those poor affections
Of vnder-mining envy, and detraction,
Moods, only proper to base grovelling minds:
That place is not in Rome, I dare affirm,
More pure, or free, from such low common evils.
There's no man grieved, that this is thought more rich,
Or this more learned; each man hath his place,
And to his merit, his reward of grace:
Which with a mutual love they all embrace.
You report a wonder! it is scarce credible, this.
I am no torture, to enforce you to believe it, but it is so.
Why, this inflames me with a more ardent desire to bee his, then before: but, I doubt I shall find the entrance, to his familiarity, somewhat more then difficult, HORACE.
Tut, you'll conquer him, as you have done me; There's no standing out against you, sir, I see that. Either your importunity, or the intimation of your good parts; or
Nay, I'll bribe his porter, and the grooms of his chamber; make his doors open to me that way, first: and then, I'll observe my times. Say, he should extrude me his house to day; shall I therefore desist, or let fall my suite, to morrow? No: I'll attend him, follow him, meet him? in the street, the high ways, run by his coach, never leave him. What? Man hath nothing given him, in this life, without much labour.
And impudence.
Archer of heaven, PHOEBVS, take thy bow,
And with a full drawn shaft, nail to the earth
This PYTHON; that I may yet run hence, and live:
Or brawny HERCVLES, doe thou come down,
And (though thou make it up thy thirteenth labour)
Rescue me from this HYDRA of discourse, here.
HORACE, well met.
O welcome, my reliever,
ARISTIVS, As thou love me, ransom me.
What ail thou, man?
'Death, I am seized on here
By a Land-Rmora, I cannot stir;
Not move, but as he please.
Wilt thou go, HORACE?
'Hart! he cleaves to me like ALCIDES shirt,
Tearing my flesh, and sinews; , I have been vexed
And tortured with him, beyond forty fevers.
For IOVES sake, find some means, to take me from him.
Yes, I will: but I'll go first, and tell MECOENAS.
Come, shall we go?
The jest will make his eyes run, in faith.
Nay, ARISTIVS?
Farewell, HORACE.
'Death! will a' leave me? FVSCVS ARISTIVS, doe you hear? Gods of Rome! you said, you had somewhat to say to me, in private.
I, but I see, you are now employed with that gentleman: it were offence to trouble you. I'll take some fitter opportunity, farewell.
Mischief, and torment! , my soul, and heart,
How are you cramped with anguish! Death it self
Brings not the like convulsions. , this day,
That ever I should view thy tedious face
HORACE, what passion? what humour is this?
Away, good prodigy, afflict me not.
(A friend, and mock me thus!) never was man
So left under the axehow now.
THat's he, in the embroidered hat, there, with the ash-colour'd feathere: his name is LABERIVS CRISPINVS.
LABERIVS CRISPINVS; I arrest you in the Emperours name.
Me, sir? doe you arrest me?
I, sir, at the suit of Master MINOS the apothecary.
Thanks, great APOLLO: I will not slip thy favour offered me in my escape, for my fortunes.
Master MINOS? I know no master MINOS. Whore's HORACE? HORACE? HORACE?
Sir, doe not you know me?
O yes; I know you, master MINOS: cry you mercy. But HORACE? Gods me, is he gone?
I, and so would you too, if you knew how. Officer, look to him.
Doe you hear, master MINOS? pray let's be used like a man of our own fashion. By IANVS, and IVPITER, I meant to have paid you next week, every drachma. Seek not to eclipse my reputation, thus vulgarly.
Sir, your oaths cannot serve you, you know I have forborne you long.
I am conscious of it, sir. Nay, I beseech you, gentlemen, doe not exhale me thus; remember it is but for sweet meates
Sweet meat must have sour sauce, sir. Come along.
Sweet, master MINOS: I am forfeited to eternal disgrace, if you doe not commiserate. Good officer, be not so officious.
WHy, how now, my good brace of bloud-hounds? whither doe you drag the gent'man? you mungrels, you cures, you bandogs, wee are Captain TVCCA, that talk to you, you inhumane pilchers.
Sir, he is their prisoner.
Their pestilence. What are you, sir?
A citizen of Rome, sir.
Then you are not far distant from a fool, sir.
A apothecary, sir.
I knew thou wast not a physician; faugh: out of my nostrils, thou stink'st of lom, and the syringe: away, quack-saluer. Follower, my sword.
Here, noble leader, you'll doe no harm with it: I'll trust you.
Doe you hear, you, good-man slave? hook, ram, rogue, catch-pole, lose the gent'man, or by my velvet arms
What will you doe, sir?
Kiss thy hand, my honourable active varlet: and embrace thee, thus.
O patient metamorphosis!
My sword, my tall rascal.
Nay, soft, sir: Some wiser then some.
What? and a wit to! By PLVTO, thou must bee cherished, slave; here's three drachmas for thee: hold.
There's half his landings gone.
Give me.
No, sir, your first word shall stand: I'll hold all.
Nay, but, rogue
You would make a rescue of our prisoner, sir, you?
I, a rescue? away inhumane varlet. Come, come, I never rellish aboue one jest at most; doe not disgust me: Sir, doe not. Rogue, I tell thee, rogue, doe not.
How, sir? rogue?
I, why! thou art not angry, rascal? art thou?
I cannot tell, sir, I am little better, upon these terms.
Ha! gods, and fiends! why, dost hear? rogue, thou, give me thy hand; I say unto thee, thy hand: rogue. What? dost not thou know me? not me, rogue? not Captain TVCCA, rogue?
Come: pra' surrender the gentleman his sword, officer; we'll have no fighting here.
What's thy name?
MINOS, an't please you.
MINOS? come, hither, MINOS; Thou art a wise fellow, it seems: Let me talk with thee.
Was ever wretch so wretched, as unfortunate I?
Thou art one of the centum-viri, old boy, art' not?
No, indeed, master Captain.
Go to, thou shalt be, then: I'll have thee one, MINOS. Take my sword from those rascals, dost thou see? go, doe it: I cannot attempt with patience. What does this gentleman owe thee, little MINOS?
Fourscore sesterties, sir.
What? no more? Come, thou shalt release him, MINOS: what, I'll bee his bail, thou shalt take my word, old boy, and cashier these furies: thou shalt do it, I say, thou shalt, little MINOS, thou shalt.
Yes, and as I am a gentleman, and a reveller, I'll make a piece of poetry, and absolve all, within these five days.
Come, MINOS is not to learn how to use a gent'man of quality, I know; My sword: If hee pay thee not, I will, and I must, old boy. Thou shalt bee my apothecary too: hast good eringo's, MINOS?
The best in Rome, sir.
Go too then Vermin, know the house.
I warrant you, Colonel.
For this gentleman, MINOS?
I'll take your word, Captain.
Thou hast it, my sword
Yes, sir: but you must discharge the arrest, Master CRISPINVS.
How, MINOS? look in the gentleman's face, and but read his silence. Pay, pay; it is honour, MINOS.
By JOVE, sweet Captain, you doe most infinitely endear, and oblige me to you.
Tut, I cannot complement, by MARS: but IVPITER love me, as I love good words, and good clothes, and there's an end. Thou shalt give my boy that girdle, and hangers, when thou hast worn them a little more
O IVPITER! Captain, he 'shall have them now, presently: please you to be acceptiue, young gentleman.
Yes, sir, fear not; I shall accept: I have a pretty foolish huemore of taking, if you knew all.
Not now, you shall not take, boy.
By my truth, and earnest, but hee shall, Captain, by your leave.
Nay, and a 'sweare by his truth, and earnest, take it boy: doe not make a gent'man forsworn.
Well, sir, there is your sword; but thank master MINOS: you had not carried it as you doe, else.
MINOS is just, and you are knaves, and
What say you, sir?
Pass on, my good scoundrel, pass on, I honour thee: But, that I hate to have action with such base rogues as these; you should have seen me unrip their noses now, and have sent 'hem to the next barbers, to stitching: for, doe you see I am a man of humour, and I doe love the varlets, the honest varlets; they have wit, and valour: and are indeed good profitable errant rogues, as any live in an empire. Doest thou hear, POETASTER? second me. Stand up (MINOS) close, gather, yet, so. Sir (thou shalt have a quarter share, bee resolute) you shall, at my request, take MINOS by the hand, here, little MINOS, I will have it so; all friends, and a health: Be not inexorable. And thou shalt impart the wine, old boy, thou shalt do it, little MINOS, thou shalt: make vs pay it in our physic. What? we must live, and honour the gods, sometimes; now BACCHVS, now COMVS, now PRIAPVS: every god, a little. What's he, that stalks by, there? boy, PYRGVS, you were best let him pass, sirrah; doe, ferret, let him pass, doe.
It is a player, sir.
A player? Call him, call the lousy slave hither: what, will he sail by, and not once strike, or veil to a Man of war? ha? doe you
hear? you, player, rogue, stalker, come back here: no respect to men of worship, you slave? What, you are proud, you rascal, are you proud? ha? you grow rich, doe you? and purchase, you two-penny teare-mouth? you have fortune, and the good year on your side, you stinkard? you have? you have?
Nay, sweet Captain, be confined to some reason; I protest I saw you not, sir.
You did not? where was your sight, OEDIPVS? you walk with hares eyes, doe you? I'll have 'hem glas'd, rogue; and you say the word, they shall be glazed for you: come, we must have you turn fiddler again, slave, 'get a base violin at your back, and march in a tawny coat, with one sleeve, to Goose-faire, and then you'll know vs; you'll see vs then; you will, gulch, you will? Then, will it please your worship to have any music, Captain?
Nay, good Captain.
What? doe you laugh, Owleglas? death, you perstemptuous varlet, I am none of your fellows: I have commanded a hundred and fifetie such rogues, I.
I, and most of that hundred and fifty, have been leaders of a legion.
If I have exhibited wrong, I'll tender satisfaction, Captain.
Sai'st thou so, honest vermin? Give me thy hand, thou shalt make vs a supper one of these nights.
When you please, by JOVE, Captain, most willingly.
Doest thou 'sweare? to morrow then; say, and hold slave. There are some of you players honest gent'man-like scoundrels, and suspected to have some wit, as well as your poets; both at drinking, and breaking of jests: and are companions for gallants. A man may skelder ye, now and then, of half a dozen shillings, or so. Doest thou not know that PANTALABVS there?
No, I assure you, Captain.
Go, and bee acquainted with him, then; hee is a gent'man, parcell-poet, you slave: his father was a man of worship, I tell thee. Go, he pens high, lofty, in a new stalking strain; bigger then half the rimers in the town, again: he was borne to fill thy mouth, MINOTAVRVS, he was: hee will teach thee to tear, and rand, Rascal, to him, cherish his muse, go: thou hast forty, forty, shillings, I mean, stinkard, give him in earnest, doe, he shall write for thee, slave. If hee pen for thee once, thou shalt not need to travel, with thy pumps full of gravel, any more, after a blind jade and a hamper: and stalk upon boards, and barrel heads, to an old cracked trumpet
Troth, I think I have not so much about me, Captain.
It's no matter: give him what thou hast: Stiff o, I'll give my word for the rest: though it lack a shilling, or two, it skils not: Go, thou art an honest shifter, I'll have the statute repealed for thee. MINOS,
must tell thee, MINOS, thou hast dejected you gent'mans spirit exceedingly: dost observe? dost note, little MINOS?
Yes, sir.
Go to then, raise; recover, doe. Suffer him not to droop, in prospect of a player, a rogue, a stager: put twenty into his hand, twenty, esterces, I mean, and let no body see: go, doe it, the work shall commend it self, be MINOS, I'll pay.
Yes forsooth, Captain.
Doe not we serve a notable shark?
And what new matters have you now afoot, sirrah? ha? I would fine come with my cockatrice one day, and see a play; if I knew when there were a good bawdy one: but they say, you have nothing but humours, revels, and satyrs, that gird, and fart at the time, you slave.
No, I assure you, Captain, not wee. They are on the other side of Tyber: we have as much ribaldry in our plays, as can bee, as you would wish, Captain: All the sinners, in the suburbs, come, and applaud our action, daily.
I hear, you'll bring me of the stage there; you'll play me, they say: I shall be presented by a sort of copper-lac't scoundrels of you: life of PLVTO, and you stage me, stinkard; your mansions shall sweat for it, your tabernacles, varlets, your Globes, and your Triumphs.
Not we, by PHOEBVS, Captain doe not doe vs imputation without desert.
I wu' not, my good two-penny rascal: reach me thy neufe. Dost hear? What wilt thou give me a week, for my brace of beagles, here, my little point-trussers? you shall have them act among ye. Sirrah, you, pronounce. Thou shalt hear him speak, in king DARIVS dolefull strain.
O doleful days! O direful deadly dump!
O wicked world! and worldly wickedness!
How can I hold my fist from crying, thump,
In rue of this right rascal wretchedness!
In an amorous vain now, sirrah, peace.
O, she is wilder, and more hard, withal,
Then beast, or bird, or tree, or stony wall.
Yet might she love me, to uproar her state:
I, but perhaps, she hopes some nobler mate.
Yet might she love me, to content her sire:
I, but her reason masters her desire.
Yet might she love me as her beauties thrall:
I, but I fear, she cannot love at all.
Now, the horrible fierce Soldier, you, sirrah.
What? will I brave thee? I, and beard thee too.
A roman spirit scorns to bear a brain,
So full of base pusillanimity.
Excellent.
Nay, thou shalt see that, shall ravish thee anon: prick up thine ears, stinkard: the Ghost, boys.
Vindicta.
Timoria.
Vindicta.
Timoria.
Veni.
Veni.
Now, thunder, sirrah, you, the rumbling plaier.
I, but some body must cry (murder) then, in a small voice.
Your fellow-sharer, there, shall do it; Cry, sirrah, cry.
Murder, murder.
Who calls out murder? lady, was it you?
O, admirable good, I protest.
Sirrah, boy, brace your drum a little straighter, and doe the t'other fellow there, hee in the what sha' call him and yet, stay too.
Nay, and thou dalliest, then I am thy foe,
And fear shall force, what friendship cannot win;
Thy death shall bury what thy life conceals,
Villain! thou die, for more respecting her
O, stay my Lord.
Then me: yet speak the truth, and I will guerdon thee:
But if thou dally once again, thou die.
Enough of this, boy.
Why then lament therefore: damned be thy guts unto king PLVTOES hell, and princely EREBVS; for sparrows must have food.
'Pray, sweet Captain, let one of them doe a little of a lady.
O! he will make thee eternally enamoured of him, there: doe, sirrah, doe: twill allay your fellows fury a little.
Master, mock on: the scorn thou gives me,
Pray JOVE, some lady may return on thee.
No: you shall see me doe the Moore: Master, lend me your scarf a little.
Here, it is at thy service, boy.
You, master MINOS, hark hither a little.
How dost like him? art not rapt? art not tickled now? dost not applaud, rascal? dost not applaud?
Yes: what will you ask for 'hem a week, Captain?
No, you mangonizing slave, I will not part from 'hem: you'll sell 'hem for enghles you: let's have good cheer to morrow-night at supper, stalker, and then we'll talk, good capon, and plouer, doe you hear, sirrah? and doe not bring your eating plaier with you there; I cannot away with him: He will eat a leg of mutton, while I am in my porridge,
the lean POLVPHAGVS, his belly is like Barathrum, he looks like a midwife in mans apparel, the slave. Nor the villanous-out-of-tune fiddler AENOARBVS, bring not him. What hast thou there? six and theirtie? ha?
No, here's all I have (Captain) some five and twenty. Pray, sir, will you present, and accommodate it unto the gentleman: for mine own part, I am a mere stranger to his humour: besides, I have some business invites me hence, with Master ASINIVS LUPUS, the tribune.
Well: go thy ways: pursue thy proiects, let me alone with this desseigne; my POETASTER shall make thee a play, and thou shalt be a man of good parts, in it. But stay, let me see: Doe not bring your AESOPE, your politician; unless you can ram up his mouth with cloves: the slave smells ranker then some sixteen dung-hills, and is seventeen times more rotten: Mary, you may bring FRISKER, my zany: Hoe's a good skipping swaggerer; and your fat fool there, my MANGO, bring him too: but let him not beg rapiers, nor scarfs, in his ouer-familiar playing face, nor roar out his barren bold jests, with a tormenting laughla, between drunk, and dry. Doe you hear, stiffe-toe? Give him warning, admonition, to forsake his sawy glauering grace, and his goggle eye: it does not become him, sirrah: tell him so. I have stood up and defended you I, to gent'men, when you have been said to prey upon pu'nees, and honest citizens, for socks, or buskins: or when they have called you usurers, or brokers, or said, you were able to help to a piece of flesh I have sworn, I did not think so. Nor that you were the common retreats for punkes decayed in their practice. I cannot believe it of you
Thank you, Captain: IVPITER, and the rest of the gods confine your modern delights, without disgust.
Stay, thou shalt see the Moore, ere thou goosed: what's he, with the halfe-armes there, that salutes vs out of his cloak, like a motion? ha?
O, sir, his dubblet's a little decayed; hee is otherwise a very simple honest fellow, sir, one DEMETRIVS, a dresser of plays about the town, here; we have hired him to abuse HORACE, and bring him in, in a play, with all his gallants: as, TIBVLLVS, MECOENAS, CORNELIVS GALLVS, and the rest.
And: why so, stinkard?
O, it will get vs a huge deal of money (Captain) and wee have need on it; for this winter he's made vs all poorer, then so many starved snakes: No body comes at vs; not a gentleman, nor a
But, you know nothing by him, doe you, to make a play of?
Faith, not much, Captain: but our Author will devise, that, that shall serve in some sort.
Why, my PARNASSVS, here, shall help him, if thou wilt: Can thy Author doe it impudently enough?
O, I warrant you, Captain, and spitefully enough, too; hee he's one of the most ouer-flowing rank wits, in Rome. He will slander any man that breathes, if he disgust him.
I'll know the poor, egregious, nitty rascal, and he have these commendable qualities, I'll cherish him (stay, here comes the Tartar) I'll make a gathering for him, I: a purse, and put the poor slave in fresh rags. Tell him so, to comfort him: well said, boy.
Where art thou, boy? where is CALIPOLIS?
Fight earth-quakes, in the entrails of the earth,
And eastern whirle-windes in the hellish shades:
Some foul contagion of th'infected heavens
Blast all the trees; and in their cursed tops
The dismal night-rauen, and tragic owl
Breed, and become fore-runners of my fall.
Well, now fare thee well, my honest penny-biter: Commend me to seuen-shares and a half, and remember to morrow if you lack a service, you shall play in my name, rascals, but you shall buy your own cloth, and I'll have two shares for my countenance. Let thy author stay with me.
Yes, sir.
It was well done, little MINOS, thou did stalk well; forgive me that I said thou stunkst, MINOS: it was the savour of a poet, I met sueting in the street, hangs yet in my nostrils.
Who? HORACE?
I; he, dost thou know him?
O, he forsook me most barbarously, I protest.
Hang him fusty satire, he smells all goat; hee carries a ram, under his arme-holes, the slave: I am the worse when I see him. Did not MINOS impart?
Yes, here are twenty drachmas, he did convey.
Well said, keep 'hem, we'll share anon; come, little MINOS.
Faith, Captain, I'll be bold to show you a mistress of mine, a jewellers wife, a gallant, as we go along.
There spoke my Genius. MINOS, some of thy eringoes, little MINOS; send: come hither, PARNASSVS, I must have thee familiar with my little locust, here, it is a good vermin, they say. See, here's HORACE, and old TREBATIVS, the great lawyer, in his company; let's avoid him, now: He is too well seconded.
THere are, to whom I seem excessive sower;
And past a satyrs law, t'extend my power:
Others, that think what ever I have writ
Wants pith, and matter to eternise it;
And that they could, in one days light, disclose
A thousand verses, such as I compose.
What shall I doe, TREBATIVS? say.
Surcease.
And shall my Muse admit no more increase?
So I advise.
An ill death let me die.
If it were not best; but sleep avoids mine eye:
And I use these, lest nights should tedious seem.
Rather, contend to sleep, and live like them,
That holding golden sleep in special price,
Rubbed with sweet oils, swim silver Tyber thrice,
And every eu'en, with neat wine steeped be:
Or, if such love of writing ravish thee,
Then dare to sing unconquered CAESARS deeds;
Who cheers such actions, with abundant meeds.
That, father, I desire; but when I try,
I feel defects in every faculty:
Nor is it a labour fit for every pen,
To paint the horrid troops of armed men;
The lances burst, in GALLIA'S slaughtered forces;
Or wounded Parthians, tumbled from their horses:
Great CAESARS wars cannot be fought with words.
Yet, what his virtue in his peace affords,
His fortitude, and justice thou can show;
As wise LVCILIVS, honoured SCIPIO.
Of that, my powers shall suffer no neglect,
When such slight labours may aspire respect:
But, if watch not a most chosen time,
The humble words of FLACCVS cannot clime
The attentive ear of CAESAR; nor must I
With less observance shun gross flattery:
For he, reposed safe in his own merit,
Spurns back the glosses of a fawning spirit.
But, how much better would such accents sound,
Then, with a sad, and serious verse to wound
PANTOLABVS, railing in his saucy jests?
Or NOMENTANVS spent in riotous feasts?
"In satyrs, each man (though untouched) complains
"As he were hurt; and hates such biting strains.
What shall I doe? MILONIVS shakes his heals
In ceaslesse dances, when his brain once feels
The stirring fervor of the wine ascend;
And that his eyes false number apprehend.
CASTOR his horse; POLLVX loves handy fights:
Thousand heads, a thousand choice delights.
My pleasure is in feet, my words to close,
As, both our better, old LVCILIVS does:
He, as his trusty friends, his books did trust
With all his secrets; nor, in things unjust,
Or actions lawful, ran to other men:
So, that the old mans life, described was seen
As in a votiue table in his lines;
And to his steps my Genius inclines,
Lucanian, or Apulian, I not whether;
For the Venusian colony plowes either:
Sent thither, when the Sabines were forced thence
(As old fame sings) to give the place defence
Against such, as seeing it empty, might make rode
Upon the empire; or there six abode:
Whether the Apulian borderer it were,
Or the Lucanian violence they fear.
But this my stile no living man shall touch,
If first I be not forced by base reproach;
But, like a sheathed sword, it shall defend
My innocent life; for, why should I contend
To draw it out, when no malicious thief
Robs my good name, the treasure of my life?
O IVPITER, let it with rust be eaten,
Before it touch, or insolently threaten
The life of any with the least disease;
So much I love, and woe a general peace.
But, he that wrongs me (better, I proclaim,
He never had assayed to touch my fame.)
For he shall weep, and walk with every tongue
Throughout the city, infamously song.
SERVIVS, the Praetor, threats the laws, and urn,
If any at his deeds rapine or spurn;
The witch, CANIDIA, that ALBVCIVS got,
Denounces witch-craft, where she loves not:
THVRIVS, the judge, doth thunder worlds of ill,
To such, as strive with his judicial will;
"All men affright their foes in what they may,
"Nature commands it, and men must obey.
Observe with me; "The wolf his tooth doth use:
"The bull his horn. And, who doth this infuse,
"But nature? There's luxurious SCAEVA; Trust
His long-liu'd mother with him; His so just
And scrupulous right hand no mischief will;
No more, then with his heel a wolf will kill,
Or Ox with iaw: Mary, let him alone
With tempered poison to remove the croon.
But, briefly, if to age I destined bee,
Or that quick deaths black wings environ me;
If rich, or poor; at Rome; or fate command
I shall be banished to some other land;
What hew soever, my whole state shall bear,
I will write satyrs still, in spite of fear.
HORACE; I fear, thou draw no lasting breath:
And that some great mans friend will be thy death.
What? when the man that first did satyrise,
Durst pull the skin over the ears of vice;
And make, who stood in outward fashion clear,
Give place, as foul within; shall I forbear?
Did LAELIVS, or the man, so great with fame,
That from sacked Carthage fetched his worthy name,
Storm, that LVCILIVS did METELLVS pierce?
Or bury LUPUS quick, in famous verse?
Rulers, and subjects, by whole tribes he checked;
But virtue, and her friends did still protect:
And when from sight, or from the judgment seat,
The virtuous SCIPIO, and wise LAELIVS met,
Vnbrac't, with him in all light sports, they shared;
Till, their most frugal suppers were prepared.
What ever I am, though both for wealth, and wit;
Beneath LVCILIVS, I am pleased to sit,
Yet, envy (spite of her empoisoned breast)
Shall say, I lived in grace here, with the best;
And, seeking in weak trash to make her wound,
Shall find me solid, and her teeth unsound:
'Lesse, learned TREBATIVS censure disagree.
No, HORACE, I of force must yield to thee,
Only, take heed, as being advised by me,
Lest thou incur some danger: Better pause
Then rue thy ignorance of the sacred laws;
There's justice, and great action may be sued
Against such, as wrong men's fems with verses lewd.
I, with lewd verses; such as libels bee,
And aimed at persons of good quality.
I reverence and adore that just decree:
But if they shall be sharp, yet modest rimes
That spare men's persons, and but tax their crimes,
Such, shall in open court, find currant pass
Were CAESAR judge, and with the makers grace.
Nay, I'll add more; if thou thy self being clear,
Shalt tax in person a man, fit to boar
Shame, and reproach; his suit shall quickly bee
Dissolved in laughter, and thou thence sit free.
But, sweet lady, say: am I well enough attired for the court, in sadness?
Well enough? excellent well, sweet Mistress CHLOE, this straight-bodied city attire (I can tell you) will stir a courtiers blood, more, then the finest loose sacks the ladies use to be put in; and then you are as well iewell'd as any of them, your ruff, and linen about you, is much more pure then theirs: And for your beauty, I can tell you, there's many of them would defy the painter, if they could change with you. Mary, the worst is, you must look to be envied, and endure a few courtfrumps for it.
O JOVE, Madam, I shall buy them too cheap! Give me my muff, and my dog there. And will the ladies be any thing familiar with me, think you?
O IVNO! why, you shall see 'hem flock about you with their puff wings, and ask you, where you bought your lawn? and what you paid for it? who starches you? and entreat you to help 'hem to some pure laundresses, out of the city.
O CUPID! give me my fan, and my masque too: And will the lords, and the poets there, use one well too, lady?
Doubt not of that: you shall have kisses from them, go pit-pat, pit-pat, pit-pat, upon your lips, as thick as stones out of slings, at the assault of a city. And then your ears will be so furd with the breath of their complements, that you cannot catch cold of your head (if you would) in three winters after.
Thank you, sweet lady. O heaven! And how must one behave her self amongst 'hem? you know all.
Faith, impudently enough, mistress CHLOE, and well enough. Carry not too much vnder-thought betwixt your self and them; nor your city mannerly word (forsooth) use it not too often in any case; but plain, I, Madam; and, No, Madam: Nor never say, your Lordship, nor your Honour; but, you, and you my Lord, and my Lady: the other, they count too simple, and minsitiue. And though they desire to kiss heaven with their titles, yet they will count them fools that give them too humbly.
O intolerable, IVPITER! By my troth, lady, I would not for a world, but you had lain in my house: and in faith you shall not pay a
farthing, for your board, nor your chambers.
O, sweet Mistress CHLOE!
I faith, you shall not lady, nay, good lady, doe not offer it.
COme, where be these ladies? By your leave, bright stars, this gentleman and I are come to man you to court: where your late kind entertainment is now to bee requited with a heavenlie banquet.
A heavenly banquet, Gallus?
No less, my dear, CYTHERIS.
That were not strange, lady, if the epithet were only given for the company invited thither; your self, and this fair gentlewoman.
Are we invited to court, sir?
You are, lady, by the great Princess, IVLIA: who longs to greet you with any favours, that may worthily make you an often courtier.
In sincerity, I thank her, sir. You have a coach? have you not?
The Princess hath sent her own, lady.
O VENVS! that's well: I doe long to ride in a coach most vehemently.
But, sweet GALLVS, pray you, resolve me, why you give that heavenly praise, to this earthly banquet?
Because (CYTHERIS) it must bee celebrated by the heavenly powers: All the Gods, and Goddesses will bee there; to two of which, you two must be exalted.
A pretty fiction in truth.
A fiction indeed, CHLOE, and fit, for the fit of a poet.
Why, CYTHERIS, may not poets (from whose divine spirits, all the honours of the gods have been deduc't) entreat so much honour of the gods, to have their divine presence at a poetical banquet?
Suppose that no fiction: yet, where are your habilities to make vs two goddesses, at your feast?
Who knows not (CYTHERIS) that the sacred breath of a true poet, can blow any virtuous humanity, up to deity?
To tell you the female truth (which is the simple truth) ladies; and to show that poets (in spite of the world) are able to deify themselves: At this banquet, to which you are invited, wee intend to assume the figures of the Gods; and to give our several Loves the forms of Goddesses. OVID will be IVPITER; the Princess IVLIA, IVNO; GALLVS here APOLLO; you CYTHERIS, PALLAS; I will bee BACCHVS; and my Love PLAVTIA, CERES: And to install you, and your husband,
fair CHLOE, in honours, equal with ours; you shall be a Goddess, and your husband a God.
A God? O my god!
A God, but a lame God, lady: for he shall be VULCAN, and you VENVS. And this will make our banquet no less then heavenly.
In sincerity, it will bee sugared. Good JOVE, what a pretty foolish thing it is to be a poet! But hark you, sweet CYTHERIS; could they not possibly leave out my husband? me thinks, a bodies husband do's not so well at Court: A bodies friend, or sobut husband, it is like your clog to your marmoset, for all the world, and the heavens.
Tut, never fear, CHLOE: your husband will be left without in the lobby, or the great chamber, when you shall be put in, in the closet, by this lord, and by that lady.
Nay, then I am certified: he shall go.
HORACE! Welcome.
Gentlemen, hear you the news?
What news, my QVINTVS?
Our melancholic friend, PROPERTIVS,
Hath closed himself, up, in his CYNTHIAS tomb;
And will by no entreaties be drawn thence.
Nay, good master CRISPINVS, pray you, bring near the gentleman.
CRISPINVS? Hide me, good GALLVS: TIBVLLVS, shellla me.
Make your approach, sweet Captain.
What means this, HORACE?
I am surprised again, farewell.
Stay, HORACE.
What, and be tired on, by yond' vulture? No:
PHoeVS defend me.
Slight! I hold my life,
This same is he met him in holy street.
Troth, it is like enough. This act of PROPERTIVS relishes very strange, with me.
By thy leave, my neat scoundrel: what, is this the mad boy you talked on?
I: this is master ALBIVS, Captain.
Give me thy hand, AGAMEMNON; we hear abroad, thou art the HECTOR of citizens: what say thou? are we welcome to thee, noble NEOPTOLEMVS?
Welcome, Captain? by JOVE, and all the Gods in the capitoll
No more, we conceive thee. Which of these is thy wedlock, MENELAVS? thy HELEN? thy LVCRECE? that wee may doe her honor; mad boy?
She in the little fine dressing, sir, is my Mistress.
For fault of a better, sir.
A better, profane rascal? I cry thee mercy (my good scroile) was it thou?
No harm, Captain.
She is a VENVS, a VESTA, a MELPOMENE: Come hither, PENELOPE; what's thy name, IRIS?
My name is CHLOE, sir; I am a gentlewoman.
Thou art in merit to be an empress (CHLOE) for an eye, and a lip; thou hast an emperors nose: kiss me again: it is a virtuous punk, So. Before JOVE, the gods were a sort of goslings, when they suffered so sweet a breath, to perfume the bed of a stinkard: thou had ill fortune, THISBE; the fates were infatuate; they were, punk; they were.
That's sure, sir: let me crave your name, I pray you, sir.
I am know'n by the name of Captain TVCCA, punk; the noble Roman, punk: a gent'man, and a commander, punk.
In good time: a gentleman, and a commander? that's as good as a poet, me thinks.
A pretty instrument! It's my cousin CYTHERIS viol, this: is it not?
Nay, play cousin, it wants but such a voice, and hand, to grace it, as yours is.
Alas, cousin, you are merrily inspired.
'Pray you play, if you love me.
Yes, cousin: you know, I doe not hate you.
A most subtle wench! How she hath baited him with a viol yonder, for a song!
Cousin, 'pray you call mistress CHLOE; she shall hear an essay of my poetry.
I'll call her. Come hither, cockatrice: here's one, will set thee up, my sweet punk; set thee up.
Are you a puet, so soon, sir?
Wife: mum.
Love is blind, and a wanton;
In the whole world, there is scant
one such another:
No, not his Mother.
He hath plucked her doves, and sparrows,
To feather his sharpe arrows,
And alone prevails,
Whilst sick VENVS waileth.
But if CYPRESS once recover
The wag; it shall behove her
To look better to him:
Or she will undo him.
O, most odoriferous music!
A, ha! stinkard. Another ORPHEVS, you slave, another ORPHEVS! an ORION, riding on the back of a dolphin, rascal!
Have you a copy of this ditty, sir?
Master ALBIVS he's.
I, but in truth, they are my wives verses; I must not show 'hem.
Show 'hem, bankerupt, show 'hem; they have salt in 'hem, and will brooke the air, stinkard.
How? to his bright mistress, CANIDIA?
I, sir, that's but a borrowed name; as OVIDS CORINNA, or PROPERTIVS his CYNTHIA, or your NEMESIS, or DELIA, TIBVLLVS.
It's the name of HORACE his witch, as I remember.
Why? the ditt'is all borrowed; it is HORACES: hang him plagiary.
How? he borrow of HORACE? hee shall pawn himself to ten brokers, first. Doe you hear, POETASTERS? I know you to be men of worship He shall write with HORACE, for a talent: and let MEcoins, and his whole college of critics take his part: thou shalt do it, young PHOEBVS: thou shalt, PHAETON; thou shalt.
Alas, sir, HORACE! hee is a mere sponge; nothing but huemorse, and observation, he goes up and down sucking from every societie, and when hee comes home, squeezes himself dry again. I know him, I.
Thou says true, my poor poetical Fury, hee will pen all hee knows. A sharpe thornie-tooth'd satirical rascal, fly him; hee carries hey in his horn: he will sooner lose his best friend, then his least jest. What he once drops upon paper, against a man, lives eternally to upbraid him in the mouth of every slave tankerd-bearer, or water-man; not a bawd, or a boy that comes from the bake-house, but shall point at him: it is all dog, and scorpion; he carries poison in his teeth, and a sting in his tail. Faugh, body of JOVE! I'll have the slave whipped one of these days for his satyrs, and his humours, by one cashiered clarke, or another.
We'll vnder-take him, Captain.
I, and tickle him in faith, for his arrogance, and his impudence, in commending his own things; and for his translating: I can trace him in faith. O, he is the most open fellow, living; I had as lieve as a new suit, I were at it.
Say no more then, but doe it; it is the only way to get thee a new suit; sting him my little neufts; I'll give you instructions: I'll bee
your intelligencer, we'll all join, and hang upon him like so many horse-leaches, the players and all. We shall sup together, soon; and then we'll conspire, in faith.
O, that HORACE had stayed still, here.
So would not I: for both these would have turned Pythagoreans, then.
What, mute?
I, as fishes i'faith: come, ladies, shall we go?
We await you, sir. But mistress CHLOE asks, if you have not a god to spare, for this gentleman.
Who, Captain TVCCA?
I; hee.
Yes, if we can inuit him along, he shall be MARS.
He's MARS any thing to doe with VENVS?
O, most of all, lady.
Nay, then, I pray let him bee invited: and what shall CRISPINVS be?
MERCVRY, mistress CHLOE.
MERCVRY? that's a Poet? is it?
No, lady; but somewhat inclining that way: hee is a Herald at arms.
A Herald at arms? good: and MERCVRY? pretty: hee he's to doe with VENVS, too?
A little, with her face, lady; or so.
It is very well; pray let's go, I long to be at it.
Gentlemen, shall we'pray your companies along?
You shall not only pray, but prevail, lady. Come, sweet Captain.
Yes, I follow: but thou must not talk of this now, my little bankerupt.
Captain, look here: mum.
I'll go write, sir.
Doe, doe, stay: there's a drachma, to purchase ginger-bread, for thy muse.
COme, let vs talk, here; here we may bee private: shut the door,
You are a plaier, you say.
I, and't please your worship.
Good: and how are you able to give this intelligence?
Mary, sir, they directed a letter to me, and my fellow-sharers.
Speak lower, you are not now i'your theater, Stager: my
sword, knave. They directed a letter to you, and your fellow-sharers: forward.
Yes, sir; to hire some of our properties; as a sceptre, and a crown, for JOVE; and a caduceus for MERCVRY: and a petasus
Caduceus? and petasus? Let me see your letter. This is a coniuration; a conspiracy, this. Quickly, on with my buskins: I'll act a tragoedie, in faith. Will nothing but our gods serve these poets to profane? dispatch. Plaier, I thank thee. The Emperor shall take knowledge of thy good service. Who's there now? Look, knave. A crown, and a sceptre? this is good: rebellion, now?
It is your apothecary, sir, master MINOS.
What tell thou me of apothecaries, knave? Tell him; I have affairs of state, in hand; I can talk to no apothecaries, now. Heart of me! Stay the apothecary there.
You shall see, I have fish't out a cunning piece of plot now: They have had some intelligence, that their project is discovered, and now have they dealt with my apothecary, to poison me; it is so; knowing, that I meant to take physic to day: As sure as death, it is there. IVPITER, I thank thee, that thou hast yet made me so much of a politician. You are welcome, sir; take the potion from him there; I have an antidote more then you wot off, sir; throw it on the ground there: So. Now fetch in the dog; And yet we cannot tarry to try experiments, now: arrest him, you shall go with me, sir; I'll tickle you, apothecary; I'll give you a glister, in faith. Have I the letter? I it is here. Come, your fasces, LICTORS: The half pikes, and the halberds, take them down from the lares, there. Plaier, assist me.
Whither now, ASINIVS LUPUS, with this armoury?
I cannot talk now; I charge you, assist me: Treason, treason.
How? treason?
I: if you love the Emperor, and the state, follow me.
GOds, and Goddesses, take your several seats. Now, MRCVRY, move your caduceus, and in IVPITERS name command silence.
In the name of IVPITER; silence.
The crier of the court hath too clarified a voice.
Peace, Momus.
Oh, he is the God of reprehension; let him alone. It is his office. MERCVRY, go forward, and proclaim after PHOEBVS, our high
pleasure, to all the Deities that shall partake this high banquet.
Yes, sir.
The great God, IVPITER,
Of his licentious goodness,
Willing to make this feast, no fast
From any manner of pleasure;
Nor to bind any God or Goddess,
To be any thing the more god or goddess, for their names:
He gives them all free licence,
To speak no wiser, then persons of baser titles;
And to be nothing better then common men, or women.
And therefore no God
Shall need to keep himself more strictly to his Goddess,
Then any man do's to his wife.
Nor any Goddess
Shall need to keep her self more strictly to her God,
Then any woman do's to her husband.
But, since it is no part of wisdom,
In these days, to come into bonds;
It shall be lawful for every lover,
To break loving oaths,
To change their lovers, and make love to others,
As the heate of every ones blood,
And the spirit of our nectar shall inspire.
And IVPITER, save IVPITER.
The great, &amp;c.
Of his, &amp;c.
Willing, &amp;c.
From any, &amp;c.
Nor to, &amp;c.
To be, &amp;c.
He gives, &amp;c.
To speak, &amp;c.
And to, &amp;c.
And there, &amp;c.
Shall need, &amp;c.
Then any &amp;c.
Nor any, &amp;c.
Shall need, &amp;c.
Then any, &amp;c.
But, since, &amp;c.
In these, &amp;c.
It shall, &amp;c.
To break, &amp;c.
To change, &amp;c.
As the, &amp;c.
And the, &amp;c.
And IVPI. &amp;c.
So: now we may play the fools, by authority.
To play the fool by authority, is wisdom.
Away with your matterie sentences, Momus; they are too grave, and wise, for this meeting.
MERCVRY, give our easter a stool, let him sit by; and reach him of our cates.
Dost hear, mad IVPITER? We'll have it enacted; He, that speaks the first wise word, shall be made cuckold. What sai'st thou? Is it not a good motion?
Deities, are you all agreed?
Agreed, great IVPITER.
I have read in a book, that to play the fool wisely, is high wisdom.
How now, VULCAN! will you be the first wizard?
Take his wife, MARS, and make him cuckold, quickly.
Come, cockatrice.
No, let me alone with him, IVPITER: I'll make you take heed, sir, while you live again; if there be twelve in a company, that you bee not the wisest of 'hem.
No more, I will not indeed, wife, hereafter; I'll be here: mum.
Fill vs a bowl of nectar, GANYMEDE: we will drink to our daughter VENVS.
Look to your wife, VULCAN: IVPITER begins to court her.
Nay, let MARS look to it: VULCAN must doe, as VENVS doe's, bear.
Sirrah, boy: catamite. Look, you play GANYMEDE well now, you slave. Doe not spill your nectar; Carry your cup even: so. You should have rubbed your face, with whites of eggs, you rascal; till your brows had shone like our sooty brothers here, as sleek as a horn-booke: or have steeped your lips in wine, till you made 'hem so plump, that IVNO might have been jealous of'hem. Punk, kiss me, punk.
Here, daughter VENVS, I drink to thee.
'Thanke you, good father IVPITER.
Why, mother IVNO! gods and fiends! what, wilt thou suffer this ocular temptation?
MARS is enraged, hee looks big, and begins to stut, for anger.
Well plaid, Captain MARS.
Well said, minstrel MOMVS: I must put you in? must I? When will you be in good fooling of your self, fiddler? never?
O, it is our fashion, to be silent, when there is a better fool in place, ever.
'Thanke you, rascal.
Fill to our daughter VENVS, GANYMEDE, who fills her fathere with affection.
Wilt thou be ranging, IVPITER, before my face?
Why not, IVNO? why should IVPITER stand in awe of thy face, IVNO?
Because it is thy wives face, IVPITER.
What, shall a husband be afraid of his wives face? will she paint it so horribly? Wee are a King, cot-queane; and we will reign in our pleasures; and wee will cudgel thee to death, if thou find fault with vs.
I will find fault with thee, King cuckold-maker: what, shall the King of gods turn the King of good fellows, and have no fellow in wickedness? This makes our poets, that know our profaneness, live as profane, as we: By my god-head, IVPITER; I will join with all the other gods, here; bind thee hand and foot; throw thee down into earth; and make a poor poet of thee, if thou abuse me thus.
A good smart-tongu'd Goddess; a right IVNO.
IVNO, we will cudgel thee, IVNO: we told thee so yesterday, when thou were jealous of vs, for THETIS.
Nay, to day she had me in inquisition too.
Well said, my sine Phrygian fry, inform, inform. Give me some wine (King of Heralds) I may drink to my cockatrice.
No more, GANYMEDE, wee will cudgel thee, IVNO: by SYX, we will.
I, it is well, Gods may grow impudent in iniquity, and they must not be told of it
Yea, we will knock our chin against our breast; and shake thee out of Olympus, into an oyster-bote, for thy scolding.
Your nose is not long enough to doe it, IVPITER, if all thy strumpets, thou hast among the stars, took thy part. And there is never a star in thy fore-head, but shall be a horn, if thou persist to abuse me.
A good jest, in faith.
We tell thee, thou anger'st vs, cot-queane; and we will thunder thee in pieces, for thy cot-queanitie.
Another good jest.
O, my hammers, and my Cyclops! this boy fills not wine enough, to make vs kind enough, to one another.
Nor thou hast not collied thy face enough, stinkard.
I'll ply the table with nectar, and make them friends.
Heaven is like to have but a lame skinker, then.
"Wine, and good livers, make true lovers: I'll sentence them together. Here father, here mother, for shame, drink your selves drunk, and forget this dissention: you two should cling together, before our faces, and give vs example of unity.
O, excellently spoken, VULCAN, on the sudden!
IVPITER, may doe well to prefer his tongue to some office, for his eloquence.
His tongue shall bee gent'man usher to his wit, and still go before it.
An excellent fit office!
I, and an excellent good jest, besides.
What, have you hired MERCVRY, to cry your jests you make?
MOMVS, you are envious.
Why, you whoreson block-head, it is your only block of wit in fashion (now adays) to applaud other folks jests.
True: with those that are not artificers themselves. VULCAN, you nod; and the mirth of the jest droops.
He he's filled nectar so long, till his brain swims in it.
What, doe we nod, fellow Gods? sound music, and let vs startle our spirits with a song.
Doe, APOLLO: thou art a good musician.
What says IVPITER?
Ha? ha?
A song.
Why, doe, doe, sing.
BACCHVS, what say you?
CERES?
But, to this song?
Sing, for my part.
Your belly weighs down your head, BACCHVS: here's a song toward.
Begin, VULCAN
What else? what else?
Say, IVPITER
MERCVRY
I, say, say
WAke, our mirth begins to die:
Quicken it with tunes, and wine:
Raise your notes, you're out: fie, fie,
This drowsiness is an ill sign.
We banish him the queer of Gods,
That droops again:
Then all are men,
For here's not one, but nods.
I like not this sudden and general heaviness, amongst our Godheads: It is somewhat ominous. APOLLO, command vs louder music, and let MERCVRY, and MOMVS contend to please, and revive our senses.
THen, in a free and lofty strain,
Our broken tunes we thus repair;
And we answer them again,
Running division on the panting air:
To celebrate this feast of sense,
As free from scandal, as offence.
Here is beauty, for the eye;
For the ear, sweet melody;
Ambrosiack odours, for the smell;
Delicious nectar, for the taste;
For the touch, a ladies waste;
Which doth all the rest excel!
I: This hath waked vs. MERCVRY, our Herald; Go from our self, the great God IVPITER, to the great Emperor, AVGVSTVS CAESAR: And command him, from vs (of whose bounty he hath receiued his sir-name, AVGVSTVS) that for a thanke-offring to our beneficence, he presently sacrifice as a dish to this banquet, his beautiful and wanton daughter IVLIA. Shoe's a cursed queen, tell him; and plays the scold behind his back: Therefore, let her be sacrificed. Command him this, MERCVRY, in our high name of IVPITER ALTITONANS.
Stay, feather-footed MERCVRY, and tell AVGVSTVS, from vs, the great IVNO SATVRNIA; if he think it hard to doe, as IVPITER
hath commanded him, and sacrifice his daughter, that hee had better to doe so ten times, then suffer her to love the well-nos'd poet, OVID: whom he shall doe well to whip, or cause to bee whipped, about the capitol, for soothing her, in her follies.
WHat sight is this? MECOENAS! HORACE! say!
Have we our senses? Doe we hear? and see?
Or, are these but imaginary objects
Drawn by our fantasy? Why speak you not?
Let vs doe sacrifice? Are they the Gods?
Reverence, amaze, and fury fight in me.
What? doe they kneel? Nay, then I see it is true
I thought impossible: , impious sight!
Let me divert mine eyes; the very thought
Averts my soul, with passion: look not, man.
There is a panther, whose unnatural eyes
Will strike thee dead: turn then, and die on her
With her own death.
HORACE. What means imperial CAESAR?
What, would you have me let the strumpet live,
That, for this pageant, earns so many deaths?
Boy, slink boy.
'Pray IVPITER, we be not followed by the sent, Master.
Say, sir, what are you?
I play VULCAN, sir.
But, what are you sir?
Your citizen, and jeweller, sir.
And what are you, dame?
I play VENVS, forsooth.
I ask not, what you play? but, what you are?
Your citizen, and jewellers wife, sir.
And you, good sir?
Your gentleman, parcell-poet, sir.
O, that profaned name!
And are these seemly company for thee,
Degenerate monster? all the rest I know,
And hate all knowledge, for their hateful sakes.
Are you, that first the deities inspired
With skill of their high natures, and their powers,
The first abusers of their vse-full light;
Profaning thus their dignities, in their forms:
And making them like you, but counterfeits?
O, who shall follow virtue, and embrace her,
When her false bosom is found nought but air?
And yet, of those embraces, centaurs spring,
That war with humane peace, and poison men.
Who shall, with greater comforts, comprehend
Her unseen being, and her excellence;
When you, that teach, and should eternize her,
Live, as she were no law unto your lives:
Nor lived her self, but with your idle breaths?
If you think gods but feigned, and virtue painted,
Know, we sustain an actual residence;
And, with the title of an Emperor,
Retain his spirit, and imperial power:
By which (in imposition too remiss,
Licentious NASO, for thy violent wrong,
In soothing the declined affections
Of our base daughter) we exile thy feet
From all approach, to our imperial court,
On pain of death: and thy mis-gotten love
Commit to patronage of iron doors;
Since her soft-hearted ire cannot contain her.
O, good my lord; forgive: be like the Gods.
Let royal bounty (CAESAR) mediate.
There is no bounty to be showed to such,
As have no real goodness: Bounty is
A spice of virtue: and what virtuous act
Can take effect on them, that have no power
Of equal habitude to apprehend it,
But live in worship of that idol vice,
As if there were no virtue, but in shade
Of strong imagination, merely enforced?
This shows, their knowledge is mere ignorance;
Their farre-fetcht dignity of soul, a fancy;
And all their square pretext of gravity
A mere vain glory: hence, away with 'hem.
I will prefer for knowledge, none, but such
As rule their lives by it, and can becalme
All sea of humour, with the marble trident
Of their strong spirits: Others fight below
With gnats, and shadows, others nothing know.
WHat's become of my little punk, VENVS! and the poult-foot stinkard, her husband? ha?
O, they are rid home in the coach, as fast as the wheels can run.
God IVPITER is banished, I hear: and his cockatrice, IVNO, locked up: 'Hart; and and all the poetry in Parnassus get me to bee a player again, I'll sell 'hem my share for a sesterce. But this is humours, HORACE, that goat-footed envious slave; hoe's turned fawn now, an informer, the rogue: it is hee has betrayed vs all. Did you not see him, with the Emperor, crouching?
Yes.
Well, follow me. Thou shalt libel, and I'll cudgel the rascall. Boy, provide me a truncheon; Revenge shall gratulate him, tam MART, qum MERCVRIO.
I, but Master; take heed how you give this out, HORACE is a man of the sword.
It is true, in troth: they say, he's valiant.
Valiant? so is mine arse, gods, and fiends! I'll blow him into air, when I meet him next: He dares not fight with a puck-fist.
Master, here he comes.
Where? IVPITER save thee, my good poet; my noble prophet; my little fat HORACE. I scorn to beat the rogue in the court; and I saluted him, thus fair, because hee should suspect nothing, the rascal: Come, we'll go see how forward our iourney-man is toward the untrussing of him.
Doe you hear, Captain? I'll write nothing in it but innocence: because I may swear I am innocent.
Nay, why pursue you not the Emperor for your reward, now, LUPUS?
Stay, ASINIVS; you, and your stager, and your band of LICTORS:
I hope your service merits more respect,
Then thus, without a thanks, to be sent hence?
Well, well, jest on, jest on.
Thou base unworthy groom.
I, I, it is good.
Was this the treason? this, the dangerous plot,
Thy clamorous tongue so bellowed through the court?
Had thou no other project to increase
Thy grace with CAESAR, but this wolfish train;
To prey upon the life of innocent mirth,
And harmless pleasures, bred, of noble wit?
Away, I loathe thy presence: such as thou,
They are the moths, and scarabs of a state;
The bane of empires; and the dregs of courts;
Who (to endear themselves to any employment)
Care not, whose fame they blast; whose life they endanger:
And under a disguised, and cob-web masque
Of love, unto their sovereign, vomit forth
Their own prodigious malice; and pretending
To be the props, and columns of his safety,
The guards unto his person, and his peace,
Disturb it most, with their false lapwing-cries.
Good. CAESAR shall know of this; believe it.
CAESAR doth know it (wolf) and to his knowledge,
Hee will (I hope) reward your base endeavours.
"Princes that will but hear, or give access
"To such officious spies, can ne'er be safe:
"They take in poison, with an open care,
"And, free from danger, become slaves to fear.
Banished the court? Let me be banished life;
Since the chief end of life is there concluded:
Within the court, is all the kingdom bounded,
And as her sacred sphere doth comprehend
Ten thousand times so much, as so much place
In any part of all the empire else;
So every body, mooing in her sphere,
Contains ten thousand times as much in him,
As any other, her choice orb excludes.
As in a circle, a magician, then
Is safe, against the spirit, he excites;
But out of it, is subject to his rage,
And loses all the virtue of his art:
So I, exiled the circle of the court,
Lose all the good gifts, that in it I joyed.
"No virtue currant is, but with her stamp:
"And no vice vicious, blaunch't with her white hand.
The court's the abstract of all Romes desert;
And my dear IVLIA, th'abstract of the court.
Me thinks, now I come near her, I respire
Some air of that late comfort, I received:
And while the evening, with her modest veil,
Gives leave to such poor shadows as my self,
To steal abroad, I, like a heart-lesse ghost,
Without the living body of my love,
Will here walk, and attend her. For I know,
Not far from hence, she is imprisoned,
And hopes, of her strict guardian, to bribe
So much admittance, as to speak to me,
And cheer my fainting spirits, with her breath.
OVID? my love?
Here, heavenly IVLIA.
Here? and not here? O, how that word doth play
With both our fortunes, differing, like our selves,
Both one; and yet divided, as opposed?
I high, thou low? , this our plight of place
Doubly presents the two lets of our love,
Local, and ceremonial height, and lowness:
Both ways, I am too high, and thou too low.
Our minds are even, yet: , why should our bodies,
That are their slaves, be so without their rule?
I'll cast my self down to thee; If I die,
I'll ever live with thee: no height of birth,
Of place, of duty, or of cruel power,
Shall keep me from thee; should my father locke
This body up within a tomb of brass,
Yet I'll be with thee. If the forms, I hold
Now in my soul, be made one substance with it;
That soul immortal; and the same it is now;
Death cannot raze th'affects, she now retains:
And then, may she be any where she will.
The souls of parents rule not childrens souls,
When death sets both in their dissolved estates;
Then is no child, nor father: then eternity
Frees all, from any temporal respect.
I come, my OVID, take me in thine arms:
And let me breathe my soul into thy breast.
O, stay, my love: the hopes thou dost conceive
Of thy quick death, and of thy future life,
Are not autenticall. Thou choose death,
So thou might joy thy love, in the other life.
But know (my princely love) when thou art dead,
Thou only must survive in perfect soul;
And in the soul, are no affections:
We power out our affections with our blood;
And with our bloods affections, fade our loves.
"No life hath love in such sweet state, as this;
"No essence is so dear to moody sense,
"As flesh, and blood; whose quintessence is sense.
"Beauty, composed of blood, and flesh, moves more,
"And is more plausible to blood, and flesh,
"Then spiritual beauty can be to the spirit.
Such apprehension, as we have in dreams
(When sleep, the bond of senses, locks them up)
Such shall we have, when death destroys them quite.
If love be then thy object, change not life;
Live high, and happy still: I still below,
Close with my fortunes, in thy height, shall joy.
Ay me, that virtue, whose brave eagles wings
With every stroke, blow stars, in burning heaven;
Should like a swallow (preying toward storms)
Fly close to earth: and with an eager plume,
Pursue those objects, which none else can see,
But seem to all the world, the empty air.
Thus thou (poor OVID) and all virtuous men
Must prey like swallows, on invisible food;
Pursuing flies, or nothing: and thus love,
And every worldly fancy, is transposed,
By worldly tyranny, to what plight it list.
O, father, since thou gau'st me not my mind,
Strive not to rule it: Take, but what thou gau'st
To thy disposure. Thy affections
Rule not in me; I must bear all my griefs,
Let me use all my pleasures: virtuous love
Was never scandal to a Goddess state.
But, hoe's inflexible! and, my dear love,
Thy life may chance be shortened, by the length
Of my unwilling speeches to depart.
Farewell, sweet life: though thou be yet exiled
Th'officious court, enjoy me amply, still:
My soul, in this my breath, enters thine ears,
And on this turrets floor, will I lie dead,
Till we may meet again. In this proud height,
I kneel beneath thee, in my prostrate love,
And kiss the happy sands, that kiss thy feet.
"Great JOVE submits a sceptre, to a cell;
"And lovers, ere they part, will meet in hell.
Farewell, all company; and if I could
All light with thee: hells shade should hide my brows,
Till thy dear beauties beams redeemed my vows.
OVID, my love: alas, may we not stay
A little longer (think thou) undiscerned?
For thine own good, fair Goddess, doe not stay:
Who would engage a firmament of fires,
Shining in thee, for me, a falling star?
Be gone, sweet life-bloud: if I should discern
Thy self but touched, for my sake, I should die.
I will be gone, then; and not heaven it self
Shall draw me back.
Yet IVLIA, if thou wilt,
A little longer, stay.
I am content.
O, mighty OVID! what the sway of heaven
Could not retire, my breath hath turned back.
Who shall go first, my love? my passionate eyes
Will not endure to see thee turn from me.
If thou go first, my soul will follow thee.
Then we must stay.
Ay me, there is no stay
In amorous pleasures: if both stay, both die.
I hear thy father, hence, my deity.
Fear forges sounds in my deluded ears;
I did not hear him: I am mad with love.
There is no spirit, under heaven, that works
With such illusion: yet such witchcraft kill me,
Ere a sound mind, without it, save my life.
Here, on my knees, I worship the blessed place
That held my goddess; and the loving air,
That closed her body in his silken arms:
Vain OVID! kneel not to the place, nor air;
Shoe's in thy heart: rise then, and worship there
"The truest wisdom silly men can have,
"Is dotage, on the follies of their flesh.
WE, that have conquered still, to save the conquered,
And loved to make inflections feared, not felt;
Grieved to reprove, and joyful to reward,
More proud of reconcilement, then revenge,
Resume into the late state of our love,
Worthy CORNELIVS GALLVS, and TIBVLLVS:
You both are gentlemen, you, CORNELIVS,
A soldier of renown; and the first provost,
That ever let our Roman eagles fly
On swarthy Egypt, quarried with her spoils.
Yet (not to bear cold forms, nor men's out-termes,
Without the inward fires, and lives of men)
You both have virtues, shining through your shapes;
To show, your titles are not writ on posts,
Or hollow statues, which the best men are,
Without Promethean stuffings reached from heaven!
Sweet poesies sacred garlands crown your gentry:
Which is, of all the faculties on earth,
The most abstract, and perfect; if she bee
True borne, and nursed with all the sciences.
She can so mould Rome, and her monuments,
Within the liquid marble of her lines,
That they shall stand fresh, and miraculous,
Even, when they mix with innouating dust;
In her sweet streams shall our brave Roman spirits
Chase, and swim after death, with their choice deeds
Shining on their white shoulders; and therein
Shall Tyber, and our famous rivers fall
With such attraction, that th'ambitious line
Of the round world shall to her center shrink,
To hear their music: And, for these high parts,
CAESAR shall reverence the Pierian arts.
Your Majesties high grace to poesy,
Shall stand against all the dull detractions
Of leaden souls; who (for the vain assumings
Of some, quite worthless of her sovereign wreaths)
Contain her worthiest prophets in contempt.
Happy is Rome of all earths other states,
To have so true, and great a president,
For her inferior spirits to imitate,
As CAESAR is; who adds to the sun,
Influence, and lustre: in increasing thus
His inspirations, kindling fire in vs.
PHOEBVS himself shall kneel at CAESARS shrine,
And deck it with bay-garlands dewed with wine,
To quite the worship CAESAR does to him:
Where other Princes, hoisted to their thrones
By fortunes passionate and disordered power,
Sit in their height, like clouds, before the sun,
Hindering his comforts; and (by their excess
Of cold in virtue, and cross heate in vice)
Thunder, and tempest, on those learned heads,
Whom CAESAR with such honour doth advance.
All humane business fortune doth command
Without all order; and with her blind hand,
She, blind, bestows blind gifts: that still have nursed
They see not who, nor how, but still, the worst.
CAESAR, for his rule, and for so much stuff
As fortune puts in his hand, shall dispose it
(As if his hand had eyes, and soul, in it)
With worth and judgment. "Hands, that part with gifts,
"Or will restrain their use, without desert;
"Or with a misery, numbed to virtues right,
"Work, as they had no soul to govern them,
"And quite reject her: seu'ring their estates
"From humane order. Whosoever can,
"And will not cherish virtue, is no man.
VIRGIL is now at hand, imperial CAESAR.
Romes honour is at hand then. Fetch a chair,
And set it on our right hand; where it is fit.
Romes honour, and our own, should ever sit.
Now he is come out of Companion,
I doubt not, he hath finished all his Aeneids,
Which, like another soul, I long t'enioy.
What think  you three, of VIRGIL, gentlemen,
(That are of his profession, though ranked higher)
Or HORACE, what say thou, that art the poorest,
And like least to envy, or to detract?
CAESAR speaks after common men, in this,
To make a difference of me, for my poorness:
As if the filth of poverty sunk as deep
Into a knowing spirit, as the bane
Of riches doth, into an ignorant soul.
No, CAESAR, they be path-lesse, moorish minds,
That being once made rotten with the dung
Of damned riches, ever after sink
Beneath the steps of any villainy.
But knowledge is the nectar, that keeps sweet
A perfect soul, even in this grave of sin;
And for my soul, it is as free, as CAESARS:
For, what I know is due, I'll give to all.
"He that detracts, or envies virtuous merit,
"Is still the covetous, and the ignorant spirit.
Thanks, HORACE, for thy free, and wholesome sharpness:
Which pleases CAESAR more, then servile fawns.
"A flatterd prince soon turns the prince of fools.
And for thy sake, we'll put no difference more
Between the great, and good, for being poor.
Say then, loved HORACE, thy true thought of VIRGIL.
I judge him of a rectified spirit,
By many revolutions of discourse
(In his bright reasons influence) refined
From all the tartarus moods of common men;
Bearing the nature, and similitude
Of a right heavenly body: most severe
In fashion, and collection of himself,
And then as clear, and confident, as JOVE.
And yet so chaste, and tender is his ear
In suffering any syllable to pass,
That, he thinks, may become the honoured name
Of issue to his so examined self;
That all the lasting fruits of his full merit
In his own poems, he doth still distaste:
As if his minds piece, which he strove to paint,
Could not with fleshly pencils have her right.
But, to approve his works of sovereign worth,
This observation (me thinks) more then serves:
And is not vulgar. That, which he hath writ,
Is with such judgment, laboured, and distilled
Through all the needful uses of our lives,
That could a man remember but his lines,
He should not touch at any serious point,
But he might breathe his spirit out of him.
You mean, he might repeat part of his works,
As fit for any conference, he can use?
True, royal CAESAR.
Worthily observed:
And a most worthy virtue in his works.
What thinks material HORACE, of his learning?
His learning labours not the schoole-like gloss,
That most consists in echoing words, and terms,
And soonest wins a man an empty name;
Nor any long, or far-fetcht circumstance,
Wrapped in the curious generalties of arts:
But a direct, and analyticke sum
Of all the worth and first effects of arts.
And for his poesy, it is so rammed with life,
That it shall gather strength of life, with being,
And live hereafter, more admired, then now.
This one consent, in all your dooms of him,
And mutual loves of all your several merits,
Argues a truth of merit in you all.
SEe, here comes VIRGIL; we will rise and greet him:
Welcome to CAESAR, VIRGIL. CAESAR, and VIRGIL
Shall differ but in sound; to CAESAR, VIRGIL
(Of his expressed greatness) shall be made
A second sur-name, and to VIRGIL, CAESAR.
Where are thy famous Aeneids? doe vs grace
To let vs see, and surfeit on their sight.
Worthless they are of CAESARS gracious eyes,
If they were perfect; much more with their wants:
Which yet are more, then my time could supply.
And, could great CAESARS expectation
Be satisfied with any other service,
I would not show them.
VIRGIL is too modest;
Or seeks, in vain, to make our longings more.
Show them, sweet VIRGIL.
Then, in such due fear,
As fits presenters of great works, to CAESAR,
I humbly show them.
Let vs now behold
A humane soul made visible in life;
And more refulgent in a senseless paper,
Then in the sensual complement of Kings.
Read, read, thy self, dear VIRGIL, let not me
Profane one accent, with an untuned tongue:
"Best matter, badly shown, shows worse, then bad.
See then, this chair, or purpose set for thee
To read thy poem in: refuse it not.
"Virtue, without presumption, place may take
"Aboue best Kings, whom only she should make.
It will be thought a thing ridiculous
To present eyes, and to all future times
A gross untruth; that any poet (void
Of birth, or wealth, or temporal dignity)
Should, with decorum, transcend CAESARS chair.
"Poor virtue raised, high birth and wealth set under,
"Crosses heavens courses, and makes worldlings wonder.
The course of heaven, and fate it self, in this
Will CAESAR cross; much more all worldly custom.
"Custom, in course of honour, ever erres:
"And they are best, whom fortune least prefers.
HORACE hath (but more strictly) spoke our thoughts.
The vast rude swinge of general confluence
Is, in particular ends, exempt from sense:
And therefore reason (which in right should be
The special rector of all harmony)
Shall show we are a man, distinct by it,
From those, whom custom rapteth in her press.
Ascend then, VIRGIL: and where first by chance
We here have turned thy book, doe thou first read.
Great CAESAR hath his will: I will ascend.
It were simple injury to his free hand,
That sweeps the cobwebs, from vn-vsed virtue,
And makes her shine proportioned, to her worth.
To be more nice to entertain his grace;
Then he is choice and liberal to afford it.
Gentlemen of our chamber, guard the doors,
And let none enter, peace. Begin, good VIRGIL.
Mean while, the skies 'gan thunder; and in tail
Of that, fell pouring storms of sleet, and hail:
The Tyrian lords, and Trojan youth, each where
With VENVS Dardane  nephew, now, in fear
Seek out for several shelter through the plain;
Whilst floods come rolling from the hills amain.
DIDO a cave, The Trojan  Prince the same
Lighted upon. There, earth, and heavens great  dame,
That hath the charge of marriage, first gave sign
Unto this contract; fire, and air did shine,
As guilty of the match; and from the hill
The nymphs, with shreekings, doe the region fill.
Here first began their bane; This day was ground
Of all their ills: For now, nor rumours sound,
Nor nice respect of state moos DIDO ought;
Her love, no longer now, by stealth is sought:
She calls this wedlock, and with that fair name
Covers her fault. Forth-with the bruit, and fame,
Through all the greatest Lybian towns, is gone;
Fame, a fleet evil, then which is swifter none:
That moving grows, and flying gathers strength;
Little at first, and fearful; but at length
She dares attempt the skies, and stalking proud
With feet on ground, her head doth pierce a cloud!
This child, our parent earth, stirred up with spite
Of all the gods, brought forth; and, as some wright,
She was last sister of that Giant  race,
That thought to scale IOVES court; right swift of pace,
And swifter, far, of wing: a monster vast,
And dreadful. Look, how many plumes are placed
On her huge corps, so many waking eyes
Stick underneath: and (which may stranger rise
In the report) as many tongues she bears,
As many mouths, as many listening ears.
Nightly, in midst of all the heaven, she flies,
And through the earths dark shadow, shrieking, cries;
Nor doe her eyes once bend, to taste sweet sleep:
By day, on tops of houses, she doth keep,
Or on high towers; and doth thence affright
Cities, and towns of most conspicuous site.
As covetous she is of tales, and lies,
As prodigal of truth: This monster, &amp;c.
COme, follow me, assist me, second me: whore's the Emperor?
Sir, you must pardon vs.
CAESAR is private now, you may not enter.
Not enter? Charge 'hem, upon their allegiance, crop-shin.
We have a charge to the contrary, sir.
I pronounce you all traitors, horrible traitors:
What? doe you know my affairs?
I have matter of danger, and state, to impart to CAESAR.
What noise is there? who's that names CAESAR?
A friend to CAESAR. One that for CAESARS good, would speak with CAESAR.
Who is it? look, CORNELIVS.
ASINIVS LUPUS.
O, bid the turbulent informer hence;
We have no vacant ear, now, to receive
The unseasoned fruits of his officious tongue.
You must avoid him there.
I conjure thee, as thou art CAESAR, or respect thine own safety; or the safety of the state, CAESAR: Hear me, speak with me,
CAESAR; it is no common business, I come about; but such as, being neglected, may concern the life of CAESAR.
The life of CAESAR? Let him enter. VIRGIL, keep thy seat.
Bear back there: whither will you? keep back.
By thy leave good man usher: mend thy peruke, so.
Lay hold on HORACE there; and on MECOENAS, LICTORS. Romans, offer no receive, upon your allegiance: Read, royal CAESAR; I'll tickle you, Satire.
He will, humours, he will: He will squeeze you, Poet puckfist.
I'll lop you off, for an unprofitable branch, you satirical varlet.
I, and EPAMINONDAS your patron, here, with his flagon chain; Come, resign: Though it were your great grand-fathers, the law he's made it mine now, sir. Look to him, my party-colour'd rascals; look to him.
What is this, ASINIVS LUPUS? I understand it not.
Not understand it? A libel, CAESAR. A dangerous, seditious libel. A libel in picture.
A libel?
I, I found it in this HORACE his study, in MECOENAS his house, here; I challenge the penalty of the laws against 'hem.
I, and remember to beg their land betimes; before some of these hungry court-hounds sent it out.
Show it to HORACE: Ask him, if he know it.
Know it? His hand is at it, CAESAR.
Then it is no libel.
It is the imperfect body of an emblem, CAESAR, I began for MECOENAS.
An emblem? right: That's greek for a libel.
Doe but mark, how confident he is.
A just man cannot fear, thou foolish Tribune;
Not, though the malice of traducing tongues,
The open vastness of a tyrannes ear,
The senseless rigour of the wrested laws,
Or the red eyes of strained authority
Should, in a point, meet all to take his life.
His innocence is armour against all these.
Innocence? , impudence! Let me see, let me see. Is not here an Eagle? And is not that Eagle meant by CAESAR? ha? Do's not CAESAR give the eagle? Answer me; what say thou?
Hast thou any evasion, stinkard?
Now hoe's turned dumb. I'll tickle you, Satire.
Pish. Ha, ha.
Dost thou pish me? Give me my long-sword.
With reverence to great CAESAR, worthy Romans,
Observe but this ridiculous commenter:
The soul to my device, was in this distich.
Thus, oft, the base and ravenous multitude
Survive, to share the spoils of fortitude.
Which in this body, I have figured here,
A VULTVRE 
A Vulture? I; now, it is a Vulture. O, abominable! monstrous monstrous! he's not your Vulture a beak? he's it not legs? and talons? and wings? and feathers?
Touch him, old Buskins.
And therefore must it be an Eagle?
Respect him not, good HORACE: Say your device.
A VULTVRE, and a WOLF 
A Wolf? good. That's I; I am the wolf. My name's LVPVS, I am meant by the wolf. On, on, a Vulture, and a Wolf 
Preying upon the carcass of an ASS 
An Ass? Good still: That's I, too. I am the ass.
You mean me by the ass
'Pray thee, leave braying then.
If you will needs take it, I cannot with modesty give it from you.
But, by that beast, the old Egyptians
Were wont to figure in their hieroglyphics,
Patience, frugality, and fortitude;
For none of which, we can suspect you, Tribune.
Who was it, LUPUS, that informed you first,
This should be meant by vs? or was it your comment?
No, CAESAR: A player gave me the first light of it, indeed.
I, an honest sycophant-like slave, and a politician, besides.
Where is that player?
He is without, here.
Call him in.
Call in the player, there: Master AESOPE, call him.
Player? where is the player? Bear back: None, but the player, enter.
Yes: this gent'man, and his Achates must.
'Pray you, master usher; we'll stand close, here.
It is a gent'man of quality, this; though he be somewhat out of clothes, I tell ye. Come AESOPE: hast a bay-leafe in thy mouth? Well said, be not out, stinkard. Thou shalt have a monopoly of playing, confirmed to thee and thy covey, under the Emperors broad seal, for this service.
Is this hee?
I, CAESAR: this is hee.
Let him be whipped. LICTORS, go take him hence.
And LUPUS, for your fierce credulity,
One fit him with a pair of larger ears:
It is CAESARS doom, and must not be reuok't.
We hate, to have our court, and peace disturbed
With these quotidian clamours. See it done.
CAESAR.
Gag him, we may have his silence.
CAESAR hath done like CAESAR. Fair, and just
Is his award, against these brainelesse creatures.
It is not the wholesome sharpe morality,
Or modest anger of a satyricke spirit,
That hurts, or wounds the body of a state;
But the sinister application
Of the malicious, ignorant, and base
Interpreter: who will distort, and strain
The general scope and purpose of an author,
To his particular, and private spleen.
We know it, our dear VIRGIL, and esteem it
A most dishonest practice, in that man,
Will seem too witty in another work.
What would CORNELIVS GALLVS, and TIBVLLVS?
Nay, but as thou art a man, dost hear? a man of worship; and honourable: Hold, here, take thy chain again. Resume, mad MEcoins. What? dost thou think, I meant to have kept it, bold boy? No; I did it but to fright thee, I, to try how thou would take it. What? will I turn shark, upon my friends? or my friends friends? I scorn it with my three souls. Come, I love bully HORACE, as well as thou dost, I: it is an honest hieroglyphic. Give me thy wrist, Helicon. Dost thou think, I'll second ever a rhinoceros of them all, against thee? ha? or thy noble Hippocrene, here? I'll turn stager first, and be whipped too: dost thou see, bully?
You have your will of CAESAR: use it Romans.
VIRGIL shall be your Praetor; and our self
Will here sit by, spectator of your sports;
And think it no impeach of royalty.
Our ear is now too much profaned (grave MARO)
With these distastes, to take thy sacred lines:
Put up thy book, till both the time and wee
Be sitted with more hallowed circumstance
For the receiving so divine a work.
Proceed with your desseigne.
Thanks, to great CAESAR.
TIBVLLVS, draw you the indictment then, whilst HORACE arrests them, on the statute of Calumny: MECOENAS, and I, will take our places here. Lictors, assist him.
I am the worst accuser, under heaven.
Tut, you must do it: Twill be noble mirth.
I take no knowledge, that they doe malign me.
I, but the world takes knowledge.
'Would the world knew,
How heartily I wish, a fool should hate me.
Body of IVPITER! What? Will they arraign my brisk POETASTER, and his poor iourney-man, ha? Would I were abroad skeldring for a drachma, so I were out of this labyrinth again: I doe feel my self turn stinkard, already. But I must set the best face I have, upon it now: well said, my divine, deft HORACE, bring the whoreson detracting slaves to the bar, doe. Make 'hem hold up their spread golls: I'll give in evidence for thee, if thou wilt. Take courage, CRISPINVS, would thy man had a clean band.
What must we doe, Captain?
Thou shalt see anon: Doe not make division with thy legs, so.
What's he, HORACE?
I only know him for a motion, CAESAR.
I am one of thy Commanders, CAESAR; A man of service, and action; My name is PANTILIVS TVCCA: I have served in thy wars against MARK ANTONY, I.
Doe you know him, CORNELIVS?
Hoe's one, that hath had the mustering, or convoy of a companie, now, and then: I never noted him by any other employment.
We will observe him better.
LICTOR, proclaim silence, in the court.
In the name of CAESAR, silence.
Let the parties, the accuser, and the accused, present themselves.
The accuser, and the accused; present your selves in court.
Here.
Read the indictment.
RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIVS FANIVS, hold up your hands. You are, before this time, jointly and severally indited, and here presently to be arraigned, upon the Statute of Calumny, or Lex Remmia (The one by the name of RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, alis CRISPINAS, Poetaster, and plagiary: the other, by the name of DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, play-dresser, and plagiary) That you (not having the fear of PHOEBVS, or his shafts, before your eyes) contrary to the peace of our liege lord, AVGVSTVS CAESAR, his crown and dignity, and against the form of a Statute, in that case made, and provided; have most ignorantly, foolishly, and (more like your selves) maliciously, gone about to deprave, and calumniate the person and writings of QVINTVS HORACIVS FLACCVS, here present, poet, and priest to the Muses: and to that end have mutually conspired, and plotted, at sundry times, as by several means, and in sundry places, for the
better accomplishing your base and envious purpose; taxing him, falsely, of selfe-loue, arrogance, impudence, railing, filching by translation, &amp;c. Of all which calumnies, and every of them, in manner and form aforesaid, what answear you? Are you guilty, or not guilty?
Not guilty, say.
Not guilty.
How will you be tried?
By the Roman Gods, and the noblest Romans.
By the Roman Gods, and the noblest Romans.
Here sits MECOENAS, and CORNELIVS GALLVS:
Are you contented to be tried by these?
I, so the noble Captain may bee joined with them in comeszion, say.
I, so the noble Captain may bee joined with them in commission.
What says the plaintiff?
I am content.
Captain, then take your place.
Alas, my worshipful Praetor! it is more of thy gent'nesse, then of my deserving, I wuss. But, since it hath pleased the court to make choice of my wisdom, and gravity, come, my calumnious varlets: Let's hear you talk for your selves, now, an hour or two. What can you say? Make a noise. Act, act.
Stay, turn, and take an oath first. You shall swear,
By thunder-darting JOVE, the King of gods,
And by the Genius of AVGVSTVS CAESAR;
By your own white, and uncorrupted souls;
And the deep reverence of our Roman justice;
To judge this case, with truth and equity:
As bound by your religion, and your laws.
Now read the evidence: But first demand
Of either prisoner, if that writ be theirs.
Show this unto CRISPINVS. Is it yours?
Say I: what? dost thou stand upon it, pimp? Doe not deny thine own MINERVA, thy PALLAS, the issue of thy brain.
Yes, it is mine.
Show that unto DEMETRIVS. Is it yours?
It is.
There's a father, will not deny his own bastard, now, I warrant thee.
Read them aloud.
Ramp up, my genius; be not retrograde:
But boldly nominate a spade, a spade.
What, shall thy lubricall and glibberie Muse
Live, as she were defunct, like punk in stews?
Alas! That were no modern consequence,
To have cotburnall buskins frighted hence.
No, teach thy incubus to poetize;
And throw abroad thy spurious snotteries,
Upon that puft-vp lump of barmy froth,
Or clumsy chil-blain'd indgement: that, with oath,
Magnificates his merit; and bespawles
The conscious time, with humorous some, and brawls,
As if his organons of sense would crack
The sinews of my patience. Break his back,
O Poets all, and some: For now we list
Of strenuous vengeance to clutch the fist.
I mary, this was written like a HERCVLES in poetry, now.
Excellently well threatened!
I, and as strangely worded, CAESAR.
We observe it.
The other, now.
This's a fellow of a good prodigal tongue too, this'll doe well.
Our Muse is in mind for th'vntrussing a poet,
I slip by his name; for most men doe know it:
A critic, that all the world be scumbers
With satirical humours, and lyrical numbers.
And for the most part, himself doth advance
With much selfe-loue, and more arrogance.
And (but that I would not be thought a praetor)
I could tell you, he were a translator.
I know the authors from whence he he's stole,
And could trace him too, but that I understand 'hem not full and whole.
The best note I can give you to know him by,
Is, that he keeps gallants company;
Whom I would wish, in time should him fear,
Lest after they buy repentance too dear.
Well said. This carries palm with it.
And why, thou motley gull? why should they fear?
When hast thou known vs wrong, or tax a friend?
I dare malice, to betray it. Speak.
Now thou curl'st up, thou poor, and nasty snake,
And shrink'st thy poys'nous head into thy bosom:
Out viper, thou that eat'st thy parents, hence.
Rather, such speckled creatures, as thy self,
Should be eschewed, and shunt: such, as will bite
And gnaw their absent friends, not cure their fame,
Catch at the loosest laughters, and affect
To be thought easters, such, as can devise
Things never seen, or heard, t'impaire men's names,
And gratify their credulous adversaries,
Will carry tales, doe basest offices,
Cherish divided fires, and still increase
New flames, out of old embers, will reveal
Each secret that's committed to their trust,
These be black slaves: Romans, take heed of these.
Thou twang'st right, little HORACE, they be indeed:
A couple of chap-falne cures. Come, We of the bench,
Let's rise to the urn, and condemn 'hem, quickly.
Before you go together (worthy Romans)
We are to tender our opinion;
And give you those instructions, that may add
Unto your even judgment in the cause:
Which thus we doe commence. First you must know
That where there is a true and perfect merit,
There can bee no deiection; and the scorn
Of humble baseness, oftentimes, so works
In a high soul upon the grosser spirit,
That to his bleared, and offended sense,
There seems a hideous fault blazed in the object;
When only the disease in his eyes.
Here-hence it comes, our HORACE now stands taxed
Of impudence, selfe-loue, and arrogance,
By these, who share no merit in themselves;
And therefore, think his portion is as small.
For they, from their own guilt, assure their souls,
If they should confidently praise their works,
In them it would appear inflation:
Which, in a full, and wel-digested man,
Cannot receive that foul abusiue name,
But the fair title of erection.
And, for his true use of translating men,
It still hath bin a work of as much palm
In clearest judgements, as t'inuent, or make.
His sharpness, that is most excusable;
As being forced out of a suffering virtue,
Oppressed with the licence of the time:
And howsoever fools, or ierking pedants,
Players, or such like buffon, barking wits,
May with their beggarly, and barren trash,
Tickle base vulgar ears, in their despite;
This (like IOVES thunder) shall their pride control,
"The honest Satire hath the happiest soul.
Now, Romans, you have heard our thoughts, With-draw, when you please.
Remove the accused from the bar.
Who holds the urn to vs? ha? Fear nothing: I'll quit you, mine honest pitiful stinkards. I'll do it.
Captain, you shall eternally girt me to you, as I am generous.
Go to.
TIBVLLVS, let there be a case of vizards privately provided: we have found a subject to bestow them on.
It shall be done, CAESAR.
Here be words, HORACE, able to bastinado a mans ears.
I. Please it great CAESAR, I have pills about me
(Mixed with the whitest kind of ellebore)
Would give him a light vomit; that should purge
His brain, and stomach of those tumorous heats:
Might I have leave to minister unto him.
O! be his AESCVLAPIVS, gentle HORACE;
You shall have leave, and he shall be your patient.
VIRGIL, use your authority, command him forth.
CAESAR is careful of your health, CRISPINVS;
And hath himself chose a physician
To minister unto you: take his pills.
They are somewhat bitter, sir, but very wholesome;
Take yet another, so: Stand by, they'll work anon.
Romans, return to your several seats: Lictors, bring forward the urn; and set the accused at the bar.
Quickly, you whoreson egregious varlets; Come forward. What? shall we sit all day upon you? you make no more haste, now, then a beggar upon patterns: or a physician to a patient that has no money, you pilchers.
RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, hold up your hands. You have (according to the Roman custom) put your selves upon trial to the urn, for divers and sundry calumnies, whereof, you have before this time been indicted, and are now presently arraigned: Prepare your selves to arken to the verdict of your Triers. CAIVS CILNIVS MECOENAS pronounces you, by this hand-writing, Guilty. CORNELIVS GALLVS, Guilty. PANTILIVS TVCCA
Parcell-guiltie, I.
He means himself for it was he indeed,
Suborned vs to the calumny.
I, you whoreson cantharides? was it I?
I appeal to your conscience, Captain.
Then, you confess it, now.
I doe, and crave the mercy of the court.
What saith CRISPINVS?
O, the Captain, the Captain
My physic begins to work with my patient, I see.
Captain, stand forth and answer.
Hold thy peace, Poet Praetor: I appeal from thee, to CAESAR,
I. Doe me right, royal CAESAR.
Mary, and I will, sir. Lictors, gag him: doe.
And put a case of vizards o'er his head,
That he may look bi-fronted, as he speaks.
Gods, and fiends! CAESAR! thou wilt not, CAESAR? wilt thou? Away, you whoreson vultures; away. You think I am a dead corps now, because CAESAR is disposed to jest with a man of mark, or so. Hold your hook't talons out of my flesh, you inhumane Harpies. Go to, do it. What? will the royal AVGVSTVS cast away a gent'man of worship, a Captain, and a Commander, for a couple of condemned caitiue calumnious Cargo's?
Dispatch, Lictors.
CAESAR.
Forward, TIBVLLVS.
Demand, what cause they had to malign HORACE.
In troth, no great cause, not I; I must confess: but that hee kept better company (for the most part) then I: and that better men loved him, then loved me: and that his writings thrived better then mine, and were better liked, and graced: nothing else.
Thus, envious souls rapine at others good.
If this be all; faith, I forgive thee freely.
Envy me still, so long as VIRGIL loves me,
GALLVS, TIBVLLVS, and the best-best CAESAR,
My dear MECOENAS: while these, with many more
(Whose names I wisely slip) shall think me worthy
Their honoured, and adored society,
And read, and love, prove, and applaud my poems;
I would not wish but such as you should spite them.
O
How now, CRISPINVS?
O, I am sick
A basin, a basin, quickly; our physic works. Faint not, man.
OretrogradereciprocalIncubus.
What's that, HORACE?
Retrograde, and reciprocal Incubus are come up.
Thanks be to IVPITER.
Oglibberylubricalldefunct
Well said: here's some store.
What are they?
Glibbery, lubricall, and defunct.
O, they came up easy.
O
What's that?
Nothing, yet.
Magnificate.
Magnificate? that came up somewhat hard.
I. What cheer, CRISPINVS?
O, I shall cast up myspurioussnotteries
Good. Again.
Chilblaindclumsy
That clumsy stuck terribly.
What's all that, HORACE?
Spurious snotteries, chilblain'd, clumsy.
O IVPITER!
Who would have thought, there should have been such a deal of filth in a poet?
Obarmy froth
What's that?
Puffyinflateturgidousventositous.
Barmy froth, puffy, inflate, turgidous, and ventositous are come up.
O, terrible, windy words!
A sign of a windy brain.
Ooblatrantfuribundfatuatestrenuous
Here's a deal: oblatrant, furibund, fatuate, strenuous.
Now, ell's come up, I trow. What a tumult hee had in his belly!
No: there's the often conscious damp behind, still.
Oconsciousdamp.
It's come up, thanks to APOLLO, and AESCVLAPIVS:
Yet, there's another; you were best take a pill more?
O, no: .
Force your self then, a little with your finger.
Oprorumped.
Prorumped? What a noise it made! as if his spirit would have prorumpt with it.
O.
Help him: it sticks strangely, what ever it is.
Oclutched.
Now it's come: clutched.
Clutched? It's well, that's come up! It had but a narrow passage.
O
Again, hold him: hold his head there.
Snarling gustsquaking custard.
How now, CRISPINVS?
Oobstupefact.
Nay: that are all we, I assure you.
How doe you feel your self?
Pretty, and well, I thank you.
These pills can but restore him for a time;
Not cure him quite of such a malady,
Caught by so many surfeits; which have filled
His blood, and brain, thus full of crudities:
It is necessary, therefore, he observe
A strict and wholesome diet. Look, you take
Each morning, of old CATOES principles
A good draught, next your heart; that walk upon,
Till it be well digested: Then come home,
And taste a piece of TERENCE, suck his phrase
In stead of licorice; and, at any hand,
Shun PLAVTVS, and old ENNIVS, they are meates
Too harsh for a weak stomach. Use to read
(But not without a tutor) the best Greeks:
As ORPHEVS, MVSAEVS, PINDARVS,
HESIOD, CALLIMACHVS, and THEOCRITE,
High HOMER, but beware of LYCOPHRON:
He is too dark, and dangerous a dish.
You must not hunt for wild, outlandish terms,
To stuff out a peculiar dialect;
But let your matter run before your words:
And if, at any time, you chance to meet
Some Gallo-belgick phrase, you shall not straight
Rack your poor verse to give it entertainment;
But let it pass: and doe not think your self
Much damnified, if you doe leave it out;
When, nor your understanding, nor the sense
Could well receive it. This fair abstinence,
In time, will render you more sound, and clear;
And this have I prescribed to you, in place
Of a strict sentence: which till he perform,
Attire him in that robe. And hence-forth, learn
To bear your self more humbly; not to swell,
Or breathe your insolent, and idle spite,
On him, whose laughter, can your worst affright.
Take him away. CRIS. IVPITER guard CAE
And, for a week, or two, see him locked up
In some dark place, removed from company:
He will talk idly else after his physic.
Now, to you, sir. Th'extremitie of law
Awards you to be branded in the front,
For this your calumny; But, since it pleases
HORACE (the party wronged) t'intreat, of CAESAR,
A mitigation of that juster doom;
With CAESARS tongue, thus we pronounce your sentence.
DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, thou shalt here put on
That coat, and cap; and henceforth, think thy self
No other, then they make thee: vow to wear them
In every fair, and generous assembly,
Till the best sort of minds shall take to knowledge
As well thy satisfaction, as thy wrongs.
Only (grave Praetor) here, in open court,
I crave the oath, for good behaviour,
May be administered unto them both.
HORACE, it shall: TIBVLLVS, give it them.
RVFVS LABERIVS CRISPINVS, and DEMETRIVS FANNIVS, Lay your hands on your hearts. You shall here solemnly attest, and swear; That never (after this instant) either, at Booke-sellers stalls, in tauernes, two-penny rooms, 'tyring-houses, noble-mens buttries, puisne's chambers (the best, and farthest places, where you are admitted to come) you shall once offer, or dare (thereby to endear your self the more to any player, enghle, or guilty gull, in your company) to malign, traduce, or detract the person, or writings of QVINTVS HORACIVS FLACCVS; or any other eminent man, transcending you in merit, whom your envy shall find cause to work upon, either, for that, or for keeping himself in better acquaintance, or enjoying better friends: Or if (transported by any sudden and desperate resolution) you doe; That then, you shall not under the boston, or in the next presence, being an honourable assembly of his favourers, bee brought as voluntary gent. to undertake the for-swearing of it. Neither shall you at any time (ambitiously, affecting the title of the vntrussers, or whippers of the age) suffer the itch of writing to ouer-run your performance in libel; upon pain of being taken up for lepers in wit, and (losing both your time, and your papers) bee irrecouerably forfeited to the hospital of Fools. So help you our Roman gods, and the Genius of great CAESAR.
So: now dissolve the court.
And thanks to CAESAR,
That thus hath exercised his patience.
We have, indeed, you worthiest friends of CAESAR.
It is the bane, and torment of our ears,
To hear the discords of those jangling rimers,
That, with their bad and scandalous practices,
Bring all true arts, and learning in contempt.
But let not your high thoughts descend so low,
As these despised objects; Let them fall,
With their flat grovelling souls: Be you your selves.
And as with our best favours you stand crowned:
So let your mutual loves be still renowned.
Envy will dwell, where there is want of merit,
Though the deserving man should crack his spirit.
BLush, folly, blush: here's none that fears
The wagging of an asses ears,
Although a wooluish case he wears.
Detraction is but baseness varlet;
And apes are apes, though clothed in scarlet.

Dost thou not feel me, Rome? not yet? Is night
So heavy on thee, and my weight so light?
Can SYLLA'S Ghost arise within thy walls,
Less threatening, then an earth-quake, the quick falls
Of thee, and thine? shake not the frighted heads
Of thy steep towers? or shrink to their first beds?
Or, as their ruin the large Tyber fills,
Make that swell up, and drown thy seven proud hills?
What sleep is this doth seize thee, so like death,
And is not it? Wake, feel her, in my breath:
Behold, I come, sent from the Stygian sound,
As a dire vapor, that had cleft the ground,
T'ingender with the night, and blast the day;
Or like a pestilence, that should display
Infection through the world: which, thus, I doe.
PLVTO be at thy counsels; and into
Thy darker bosom enter SYLLA'S spirit:
All, that was mine, and bad, thy breast inherit.
Alas, how weak is that, for CATILINE!
Did I but say (vain voice!) all that was mine?
All, that the GRACCHI, CINNA, MARIVS would;
What now, had I a body again, I could,
Coming from hell; what Fiends would wish should be;
And HANNIBAL could not have wished to see:
Think thou, and practice. Let the long-hid seeds
Of treason, in thee, now shoot forth in deeds,
Ranker then horror; and thy former facts
Not fall in mention, but to urge new acts:
Conscience of them provoke thee on to more.
Be still thy incests, murders, rapes before
Thy sense; thy forcing first a Vestal nun;
Thy parricide, late, on thine own only son,
After his mother; to make empty way
For thy last wicked nuptials; worse, then they,
That blaze that act of thy incestuous life,
Which got thee, at once, a daughter, and a wife.
I leave the slaughters that thou did for me,
Of Senators; for which, I hid for thee
Thy murder of thy brother, (being so bribed)
And writ him in the list of my proscribed
After thy fact, to save thy little shame:
Thy incest, with thy sister, I not name.
These are too light. Fate will have thee pursue
Deeds, after which, no mischief can be new;
The ruin of thy country: thou were built
For such a work, and borne for no less guilt.
What though defeated once th'hast been, and known,
Tempt it again: That is thy act, or none.
What all the several ills, that visit earth,
(Brought forth by night, with a sinister birth)
Plagues, famine, fire could not reach unto,
The sword, nor surfeits; let thy fury doe:
Make all past, present, future ill thine own;
And conquer all example, in thy one.
Nor let thy thought find any vacant time
To hate an old, but still a fresher crime
Drown the remembrance: let not mischief cease,
But, while it is in punishing, increase.
Conscience, and care die in thee; and be free
Not heaven it self from thy impiety:
Let night grow blacker with thy plots; and day,
At showing but thy head forth, start away
From this halfe-spheare: and leave Romes blinded walls
To embrace lusts, hatreds, slaughters, funerals,
And not recover sight, till their own flames
Doe light them to their ruins. All the names
Of thy confederates, too, be no less great
In hell, then here: that, when we would repeat
Our strengths in muster, we may name you all,
And Furies, upon you, for Furies, call.
Whilst, what you doe, may strike them into fears,
Or make them grieve, and wish your mischief theirs.
IT is decreed. Nor shall thy Fate,  Rome,
Resist my vow. Though hills were set on hills,
And seas met seas, to guard thee; I would through:
I, plough up rocks, steep as the Alps, in dust;
And lave the Tyrrhene waters, into clouds;
But I would reach thy head, thy head, proud city.
The ills, that I have done, cannot be safe
But by attempting greater; and I feel
A spirit, within me, chides my sluggish hands,
And says, they have been innocent too long.
Was I a man, bred great, as Rome her self?
One, formed for all her honours, all her glories?
Equal to all her titles? that could stand
Close up, with ATLAS; and sustain her name
As strong, as he doth heaven? And, was I,
Of all her brood, marked out for the repulse
By her no voice, when I stood Candidate,
To be commander in the Pontick war?
I will, hereafter, call her step-dame, ever.
If she can loose her nature, I can loose
My piety and in her stony entrails
Dig me a seat: where, I will live again,
The labour of her womb, and be a burden,
Weighter then all the prodigies, and monsters,
That she hath teem'd with, since she first knew MARS.
WHo's there?
It is I.
AVRELIA?
Yes.
Appear,
And break, like day, my beauty, to this circle:
Upbraid thy Phoebus, that he is so long
In mounting to that point, which should give thee
Thy proper splendour. Wherefore frowns my sweet?
Have  too long been absent from these lips,
This cheek, these eyes? What is my trespass? speak.
It seems, you know, that can accuse your self.
IT is, me thinks, a morning, full of fate!
It rises slowly, as her sollen carre
Had all the weights of sleep, and death hung at it!
She is not rosy-finger'd, but swollen black!
Her face is like a water, turned to blood,
And her sick head is bound about with clouds,
As if she threatened night, ere noon of day!
It does not look, as it would have a hail,
Or health, wished in it, as on other morns.
Why, all the fitter, LENTVLVS: our coming
Is not for salutation, we have business.
Said nobly, brave CETHEGVS. Whore's AVTRONIVS?
Is he not come?
Not here.
Nor VARGVNTEIVS?
Neither.
A fire in their beds, and bosoms,
That so will serve their sloth, rather then virtue.
They are no Romans, and at such high need
As now.
Both they, LONGINVS, LESS, CVRIVS,
FVLVIVS, GABINIVS, gave me word, last night,
By LVC'IVS BESTIA, they would all be here,
And early.
Yes? As you, had I not called you.
Come, we all sleep, and are mere dormice; flies,
A little less then dead: more dullness hangs
On vs, then on the morn. W'are spirit-bound,
In ribs of ice; our whole bloods are one stone;
And honour cannot thaw vs; nor our wants:
Though they burn, hot a fevers, to our states.
I muse they would be tardy, at an hour
Of so great purpose.
If the gods had called
Them, to a purpose, they would just have come
With the same tortoise speed! that are thus slow
To such an action, which the gods will envy:
As asking no less means, then all their powers
Conjoined, t'effect. I would have seen Rome burned,
By this time; and her ashes in an urn:
The kingdom of the Senate, rent asunder;
And the degenerate, talking gown run frighted,
Out of the air of Italy.
Spirit of men!
Thou, heart of our great enterprise! how much
I love these voices in thee!
O, the days
Of SYLLA'S sway, when the free sword took leave
To act all that it would!
And was familiar
With entrails, as our Augurs!
Sons kilt fathers,
Brothers their brothers.
And had price, and praise.
All hate had licence given it: all rage rains.
Slaughter bestride the streets, and stretched himself
To seem more huge; whilst to his stained thighs
The gore he drew flowed up: and carried down
Whole heaps of limbs, and bodies, through his arch.
No age was spared, no sex.
Nay, no degree.
Not infants, in the porch of life were free.
The sick, the old, that could but hope a day
Longer, by natures bounty, not let stay.
Virgins, and widows, matrons, pregnant wives,
All dyed.
It was crime enough, that they had lives.
To strike but only those, that could doe hurt,
Was dull, and poor. Some fell to make the number,
As some the prey.
The rugged CHARON fainted,
And asked a navy, rather then a boat,
To ferry over the sad world that came:
The mawes, and dens of beasts could not receive
The bodies, that those souls were frighted from;
And even the graves were silt with men, yet living,
Whose flight, and fear had mixed them, with the dead.
And this shall be again, and more, and more,
Now LENTVLVS, the third CORNELIVS,
Is to stand up in Rome.
Nay, urge not that
Is so uncertain.
How!
I mean, not cleared.
And, therefore, not to be reflected on.
The SYBILL'S leaves uncertain? or the comments
Of our grave, deep, divining men not clear?
All prophecies, you know, suffer the torture.
But this, already, hath confessed, without.
And so been weighed, examined, and compared,
As 't were malicious ignorance in him,
Would faint in the belief.
Doe you believe it?
Doe I love LENTVLVS? or pray to see it?
The Augurs all are constant, I am meant.
They'had lost their science else.
They count from CINNA.
And SYLLA next, and so make you the third;
All that can say the sun is ris'n, must think it.
Men mark me more, of late, as I come forth!
Why, what can they doe less? CINNA, and SYLLA
Are set, and gone: and we must turn our eyes
On him that is, and shines. Noble CETHEGVS,
But view him with me, here! He looks, already,
As if he shook a sceptre, o'er the Senate,
And the awed purple dropped their rods, and axes!
The dangers, the repulses, judgements, wants:
Which how long will you bear, most valiant spirits?
Were we not better to fall, once, with virtue,
Then draw a wretched, and dishonoured breath,
To loose with shame, when these men's pride will laugh?
I call the faith of gods, and men to question,
The power is in our hands; our bodies able;
Our minds as strong; of the contrary, in them,
All things grown aged, with their wealth, and years:
There wants, but only to begin the business,
The issue is certain.
On, let vs go on.
Go on, brave SERGIVS.
It doth strike my soul,
(And, who can scope the stroke, that hath a soul,
Or, but the smallest air of man within him?
To see them swell with treasure; which they power
Out in their riots, eating, drinking, building,
I, in the sea! planing of hills with valleys;
And raising valleys aboue hills! whilst we
Have not, to give our bodies necessaries.
They have their change of houses, manors, lordships;
We scarce a fire, or poor household Lar!
They buy rare Attic statues, Tyrian hangings,
Ephesian pictures, and Corinthian plate,
Attalicke garments, and now, new-found gems,
Since POMPEY went for Asia, which they purchase
At price of provinces! The river Phases
Cannot afford 'hem foul; nor Lucrine lake
Oysters enough: Circei, too, is searched
To please the witty gluttony of a meal!
Their ancient habitations they neglect,
And set up new; then, if the echo like not
In such a room, they pluck down those, build newer,
Alter them too: and, by all frantic ways,
Vex their wild wealth, as they molest the people,
From whom they force it! yet, they cannot tame,
Or ouer-come their riches! Not, by making
Bathes, orchards, fish-pooles! letting in of seas
Here! and, then there, forcing 'hem out again,
With mountainous heaps, for which the earth hath lost
Most of her ribs, as entrails! being now
Wounded no less for marble, then for gold.
We, all this while, like calm, benumbed Spectators,
Sit, till our seats doe crack; and doe not hear
The thundering ruins: whilst, at home, our wants,
Abroad, our debts doe urge vs; our states daily
Bending to bad, our hopes to worse: and, what
Is left, but to be crushed? Wake, wake brave friends,
And meet the liberty you oft have wished for.
Behold, renown, riches, and glory court you.
Fortune holds out these to you, as rewards.
Me thinks (though I were dumb) th'affaire it self
The opportunity, your needs, and dangers,
With the brave spoil the war brings, should inuit you.
Use me your general, or soldier: neither,
My mind, nor body shall be wanting to you.
And, being Consul, I not doubt t'effect,
All that you wish, if trust not flatter me,
And you'd not rather still be slaves, then free.
Free, free.
It is freedom.
Freedom we all stand for.
Why, these are noble voices! Nothing wants then,
But that we take a solemn sacrament,
To strengthen our design.
And so to act it.
Differing hurts, where powers are so prepared.
Yet, ere we enter into open act,
(With favour) it were no loss, if 't might be enquired,
What the condition of these arms would be?
I, and the means, to carry vs through?
How, friends!
Think you, that I would bid you, grasp the wind?
Or call you to th'embracing of a cloud?
Put your known valures on so dear a business,
And have no other second then the danger,
Nor other gyrlond then the loss? Become
Your own assurances. And, for the means,
Consider, first, the stark security
The common wealth is in now; the whole Senate
Sleepy, and dreaming no such violent blow;
Their forces all abroad; of which the greatest,
That might annoy vs most, is fardest off,
In Asia, under POMPEY: those, near hand,
Commanded, by our friends; one army' in Spain,
By CNEVS PESO; the other in Mauritania,
By NVCERINVS; both which I have firm,
And fast unto our plot. My self, then, standing
Now to be Consul; with my hoped Colleague
CAIVS ANTONIVS; one, no less engaged
By'his wants then we: and, whom I'haue power to melt,
And cast in any mould. Beside, some others
That will not yet be named, (both sure, and great ones)
Who, when the time comes, shall declare themselves,
Strong, for our party: so, that no resistance
Her round about? Or, are they none,
Except she first become her own?
O wretchedness of greatest states,
To be obnoxious to these fates:
That cannot keep, what they doe gain;
And what they raise so ill sustain!
Rome, now, is Mistress of the whole
World, sea, and land, to either pole;
And even that fortune will destroy
The power that made it: she doth joy
So much in plenty, wealth, and ease,
As, now, th'excesse is her disease.
She builds in gold; and, to the stars;
As, if she threatened heaven with wars:
And seeks for hell, in quarries deep,
Giving the fiends, that there doe keep,
A hope of day. Her women wear
The spoils of nations, in an ear,
Changed for the treasure of a shell;
And, in their loose attires, doe swell
More light then sails, when all winds play:
Yet, are the men more loose then they!
More combed, and bathed, and rubbed, and trimmed,
More sleeked, more soft, and slacker limm'd;
As prostitute: so much, that kind
May seek it self there, and not find.
They eat on beds of silk, and gold;
At ivory tables; or, wood sold
Dearer then it: and, leaving plate,
Doe drink in stone of higher rate.
They hunt all grounds; and draw all seas;
Foul every brooke, and bush; to please
Their wanton tastes: and, in request
Have new, and rare things; not the best!
Hence comes that wild, and vast expense,
That hath enforced Romes virtue, thence,
Which simple poverty first made:
And, now, ambition doth invade
Her state, with eating avarice,
Riot, and every other vice.
Decrees are bought, and laws are sold,
Honours, and offices for gold;
The peoples voices: and the free
Tongues, in the Senate, bribed bee.
Such ruin of her manners Rome
Doth suffer now, as shoe's become
(Without the gods it soon gainsay)
Both her own spoiler, and own prey.
So, Asia, 'art thou cru'lly even
With vs, for all the blows thee given;
When we, whose virtue conquered thee,
Thus, by thy vices, ruined bee.
THose rooms doe smell extremely. Bring my glass,
And table hither. GALLA.
Madame.
Look
Within, in my blew cabinet, for the pearl
I'had sent me last, and bring it.
That from CLODIVS?
From CAIVS CAESAR. You'are for CLODIVS, still.
Or CVRIVS. Sirrha, if QVINTVS CVRIVS come,
I am not in fit mood; I keep my chamber:
Give warning so, without.
Is this it? madame.
Yes, help to hang it in mine ear.
Believe me,
It is a rich one, madame.
I hope so:
It should not be worn there else. Make an end,
And bind my hair up.
As it was yesterday?
No, nor the t'other day. When knew you me
Appear, two days together, in one dressing?
Will you have it in the globe, or spire?
How thou wilt;
Any way, so thou wilt doe it, good impertinence.
Thy company, if I slept not very well
A nights, would make me, an errant fool, with questions.
Alas, madame
Nay, gentle half of the dialogue, cease.
I doe it, indeed, but for your exercise,
As your physician bids me.
How! Do's he bid you
To anger me for exercise?
Not to anger you,
But stir your blood a little: There's difference
Between luke-warme, and boiling, madame.
JOVE!
She means to cooke me, I think? Pray you, have done.
I mean to dress you, madame.
O, my IVNO,
Be friend to me! Offering at wit, too? Why, GALLA!
Where hast thou been?
Why? madam!
What hast thou done
With thy poor innocent self?
Wherefore? sweet madame!
Thus to come forth, so suddenly, a wit-worme?
It pleases you to flout one. I did dream
Of lady SEMPRONIA
O, the wonder is out.
That has no pedigree, no house, no coat,
No ensigns of a family?
He'has virtue.
Hang virtue, where there is no blood: it is vice,
And, in him, sauciness. Why should he presume
To be more learned, or more eloquent,
Then the nobility? or boast any quality
Worthy a noble man, himself not noble?
It was virtue only, at first, made all men noble.
I yield you, it might, at first, in Romes poor age;
When both her Kings, and Consuls held the plough,
Or gardened well: But, now, we have no need,
To dig, or loose our sweat for it. We have wealth,
Fortune and ease, and then their stock, to spend on,
Of name, for virtue; which will bear vs out
Against all new comers: and can never fail vs,
While the succession stays. And, we must glorify,
A mushrome? one of yesterday? a fine speaker?
Because he has sucked at Athens? and advance him,
To our own loss? No, FVLVIA. There are they
Can speak greek too, if need were. CAESAR, and I,
Have sate upon him; so hath CRASSVS, too:
And others. We have all decreed his rest,
For rising farther.
Excellent rare lady!
SEMPRONIA, you are beholden to my woman, here.
She do's admire you.
O good GALLA, how dost thou?
The better, for your learned ladyship.
Is this grey poulder, a good dentifrice?
You see I use it.
I have one is whiter.
It may be so.
Yet this smells well.
And cleanses
Very well, madame, and resists the crudities.
FVLVIA, I pray thee, who comes to thee, now?
Which of our great Patricians?
Faith, I keep
No catalogue of'hem. Sometimes I have one,
Sometimes another, as the toy takes their bloods.
Thou hast them all. Faith, when was QVINTVS CVRIVS,
Thy special servant, here?
My special servant?
Yes, thy idolater, I call him.
He may be yours,
If you doe like him.
How!
He comes, not, here,
I have forbid him, hence.
VENVS forbid!
Why?
Your so constant lover.
So much the rather.
I would have change. So would you too, I am sure.
And now, you may have him.
Hoe's fresh yet, FVLVIA:
Beware, how you doe tempt me.
Faith, for me,
Have is somewhat too fresh, indeed. The salt is gone,
That gave him season. His good gifts are done.
He do's not yield the crop that he was wont.
And, for the act, I can have secret fellows,
With backs worth ten of him, and shall please me
(Now that the land is fled) a myriad better.
And those one may command.
It is true: these Lordings,
Your noble Fauns, they are so imperious, saucy.
Rude, and as boisterous as Centaurs, leaping
A lady, at first sight.
And must be borne
Both with, and out, they think.
Tut, Isle observe
None of 'hem all: nor humour 'hem a jot
Longer, then they come laden in the hand,
And say, here's t'one, for th'tother.
Do's CAESAR give well?
They shall all give, and pay well, that come here,
If they will have it: and that jewels, pearl,
Plate, or round sums, to buy these. I'am not taken
With a cob-swan, or a high-mounting bull,
As foolish LEDA, and EVROPA were,
But the bright gold, with DANE. For such price,
I would endure, a rough, harsh IVPITER,
Or ten such thundering gamsters: and refrain
To laugh at 'hem, till they are gone, with my much suffering.
You are a most happy wench, that thus can make
Use of thy youth, and freshness, in the season:
And hast it, to make use of.
(Which is the happiness.)
I am, now, fine to give to them, and keep
Musique, and a continual table, to inuite'hem;
(Yes, and they study your kitchen, more then you)
Eat my self out with usury, and my lord, too,
And all my officers, and friends beside,
To procure monies, for the needful charge
I must be at, to haue'hem: and, yet, scarce
Can I atchieue'hem, so.
Why, that's because
You affect young faces only, and smooth chins,
If youl'd love beards, and bristles,
(One with another, as others doe) or wrinkles
Who's that? Look GALLA.
It is the party, madame.
What party? Has he no name?
It is QVINTVS CVRIVS.
Did I not bid'hem, say, I kept my chamber?
Why, so they doe.
Isle leave you, FVLVIA.
Nay, good SEMPRONIA, stay.
In faith, I will not.
By IVNO, I would not see him.
Isle not hinder you.
You know, he will not be kept out, madame.
No,
Nor shall not, careful GALLA, by my means.
As I doe live, SEMPRONIA 
What needs this?
Go, say, I am asleep, and ill at ease.
So do's the Senate, too, know, you can bear.
By all the gods, that Senate will smart deep
For your upbraidings. I should be right sorry
To have the means so to be veng'd on you,
(At least, the will) as I shall shortly on them.
But, go you on still; fare you well, dear lady:
You could not still be faire'vnlesse you were proud.
You will repent these moods, and ere't be long, too.
I shall have you come about, again.
Doe you think so?
Yes, and I know so.
By what augury?
By the fair entrails of the matrons chests,
Gold, pearl, and jewels, here in Rome, which FVLVIA
Will then (but late) say that she might have shared:
And, grieving, miss.
Tut, all your promised mountains,
And seas, I am so stalely acquainted with
But, when you see the universal flood
Run by your coffers; that my lords, the Senators,
Are sold for slaves, their wives for bond-women,
Their houses, and fine gardens given away,
And all their goods, under the spear, at out cry,
And you have none of this; but are still FVLVIA,
Or perhaps less, while you are thinking of it:
You will advise then, Coyness, with your cushion.
And look of your fingers; say, how you were wished;
And so, he left you.
Call him again, GALLA:
This is not usual! something hangs on this
That I must win out of him.
How now, melt you?
Come, you will laugh, now, at my easiness!
But, it is no miracle: Doves, they say, will bill,
After their pecking, and their murmuring.
Yes,
And then it is kindly. I would have my love
Angry, sometimes, to sweeten off the rest
Of her behaviour.
You doe see, I study
How I may please you, then. But you think, CVRIVS,
It is covets hath wrought me: if you love me,
Change that unkind conceit.
By my loved soul,
I love thee, like to it; and it is my study,
More then mine own revenge, to make thee happy.
And it is that just revenge doth make me happy
To hear you prosequute: and which, indeed,
Hath won me, to you, more, then all the hope
Of what can else be promised. I love valour
Better, then any lady loves her face,
Or dressing: then my self do's. Let me grow
Still, where I doe embrace. But, what good means
Ha'you t'effect it? Shall I know your project?
Thou shalt, if thou'lt be gracious.
As I can be.
And wilt thou kiss me, then?
As close as shells
Of cockles meet.
And print 'hem deep?
Quite through
Our subtle lips.
And often?
I will sow 'hem,
Faster, then you can reap. What is your plot?
Why, now my FVLVIA looks, like her bright name!
And is her self!
Nay, answer me, your plot:
I pray thee tell me, QVINTVS.
I, these sounds
Become a mistress. Here is harmony!
When you are harsh, I see, the way to bend you
Is not with violence, but service. Cruel,
A lady is a fire: gentle, a light.
Will you not tell me, what I ask you?
All,
That I can think, sweet love, or my breast holds,
Isle pour into thee.
What is your design, then?
Isle tell thee; CATILINE shall now be Consul:
But, you will hear more, shortly.
Nay, dear love
Isle speak it, in thine arms, let vs go in.
Rome will be sacked, her wealth will be our prize;
By public ruin, private spirits must rise.
GReat father MARS, and greater JOVE,
By whose high auspice, Rome hath stood
So long; and, first, was built in blood
Of your great nephew, that then strove
Not with his brother, but your rites:
Be present to her now, as then,
And let not proud, and factious men
Against your wills oppose their mights.
Our Consuls, now, are to be made;
O, put it in the public voice
To make a free, and worthy choice:
Excluding such as would invade
The common wealth. Let whom we name
Have wisdom, fore-sight, fortitude,
Be more with faith, then face endued,
And study conscience, aboue fame.
Such, as not seek to get the start
In state, by power, parts, or bribes,
Ambition's bawds: but move the tribes
By virtue, modesty, desert.
Our need made thee our Consul, and thy virtue.
CATO, you will vn-doe him, with your praise.
CAESAR will hurt himself, with his own envy
The voice of CATO is the voice of Rome.
The voice of Rome is the consent of heaven!
And that hath placed thee, CICERO, at the helm,
Where thou must render, now, thy self a man,
And master of thy art. Each petty hand
Can steer a ship becalmed; but he that will
Govern, and carry her to her ends, must know
His tides, his currents; how to shift his sails;
What she will bear in foul, what in fair weathers;
Where her springs are, her leaks; and how to stop 'hem;
What sands, what shelves, what rocks doe threaten her;
The forces, and the natures of all winds,
Gusts, storms, and tempests; when her keel ploughs hell,
And deck knocks heaven: then, to manage her,
Becomes the name, and office of a pilot.
Which I'll perform, with all the diligence,
And fortitude I have; not for my year,
But for my life; except my life be less,
And that my year conclude it: if it must,
Your will, loved gods. This heart shall yet employ
A day, an hour is left me, so, for Rome,
As it shall spring a life, out of my death,
To shine, for ever glorious in my facts.
The vicious count their years, virtuous their acts.
Most noble Consul! Let vs wait him home.
Most popular Consul he is grown, me thinks!
How the rout cling to him!
And CATO leads 'hem!
You, his colleague, ANTONIVS, are not looked on.
Not I, nor doe I care.
He enjoys rest,
And ease, the while. Let th'others spirit toil,
And wake it out, that was inspired for turmoil.
If all reports be true, yet, CAIVS CAESAR,
The time hath need of such a watch, and spirit.
Reports? Doe you believe 'hem CATVLVS,
Why, he do's make, and breed'hem for the people;
T'endeare his service to 'hem. Doe you not taste
An art, that is so common? Popular men,
They must create strange monsters, and then quell'hem;
To make their arts seem something. Would you have
Such an HERCVLEAN actor in the scene,
And not his HYDRA? They must sweat no less
To fit their properties, then t'expresse their parts.
Treasons, and guilty men are made in states
Too oft, to dignify the magistrates.
Those states be wretched, that are forced to buy
Their rulers fame, with their own infamy.
We therefore, should provide that ours doe not.
That will ANTONIVS make his care.
I shall.
And watch the watcher.
Here comes CATILINE.
How do's he brooke his late repulse?
I know not.
But hardly sure.
LONGINVS, too, did stand?
At first: but he gave way unto his friend.
Who's that come? LENTVLVS?
Yes. He is again
Taken into the Senate.
And made Praetor.
I know it. He had my suffrage, next the Consuls;
True, you were there, Prince of the Senate, then.
Hail noblest Romans. The most worthy Consul,
I gratulate your honour.
I could wish
It had been happier, by your fellowship,
Most noble SERGIVS, had it pleased the people.
It did not please the gods; who'instruct the people:
And their unquestioned pleasures must be served.
They know what's fitter for vs, then our selves;
And it were impiety, to think against them.
You bear it rightly, LVCIVS; and, it glads me,
To find your thoughts so even.
I shall still
Study to make them such to Rome, and heaven.
(I would with-draw with you, a little, IVLIVS.
Isle come home to you: CRASSVS would not have you
To speak to him, before QVINTVS CATVLVS.
I apprehend you.) No, when they shall judge
Honours convenient for me, I shall have 'hem,
With a full hand: I know it. In mean time,
They are no less part of the common-wealth,
That doe obey, then those, that doe command.
O, let me kiss your fore-head, LVCIVS.
How are you wronged!
By whom?
Public report.
That gives you out, to stomach your repulse;
And brooke it deadly.
Sir, she brookes not me.
Believe me rather, and your self, now, of me:
It is a kind of slander, to trust rumour.
And some small flattery of the Senate more,
Will make him to forget.
You wrong me, LVCIVS.
He will not need these spurs.
The action needs'hem.
These things, when they proceed not, they go backward.
Let vs consult then.
Let vs, first, take arms.
They that deny vs just things, now, will give
All that we ask; if once they see our swords.
Our objects must be sought with wounds, not words.
IS there a heaven? and gods? and can it be
They should so slowly hear, so slowly see!
Hath JOVE no thunder? or is JOVE become
Stupid as thou art?  neere-wretched Rome,
When both thy Senate, and thy gods doe sleep,
And neither thine, nor their own states doe keep!
What will awake thee, heaven? what can excite
Thine anger, if this practice be too light?
His former drifts partake of former times,
But this last plot was only CATILINES.
O, that it were his last. But he, before
Hath safely done so much, he will still dare more.
Ambition, like a torrent, ne'er looks back;
And is a swelling, and the last affection
A high mind can put off: being both a rebel
Unto the soul, and reason, and enforces
All laws, all conscience, treads upon religion,
And offered violence to natures self.
But, here, is that transcends it! A black purpose
To confound nature: and to ruin that,
Which never age, nor mankind can repair!
Sit down, good lady; CICERO is lost
In this your fable: for, to think it true
Tempted my reason. It so far exceeds
All insolent fictions of the tragic scene!
The common-wealth, yet panting, vnder-neath
The stripes, and wounds of a late civil war,
Gasping for life, and scarce restored to hope;
To seek t'oppresse her, with new cruelty,
And utterly extinguish her long name,
With so prodigious, and vnheard-of fierceness!
What sink of monsters, wretches of lost minds,
Mad after change, and desperate in their states,
Wearied, and galled with their necessities,
(For all this I allow them) durst have thought it?
Would not the barbarous deeds have been believed,
Of MARIVS, and SYLLA, by our children,
Without this fact had rise forth greater, for them?
All, that they did, was piety, to this!
They, yet, but murdered kinsfolk, brothers, parents,
Ravished the virgins, and, perhaps, some matrons;
They left the city standing, and the temples:
The gods, and majesty of Rome were safe yet!
These purpose to fire it, to despoil them,
(Beyond the other evils) and lay wast
The farre-triumphed world: for, unto whom
Rome is too little, what can be enough?
It is true, my lord, I had the same discourse.
And, then, to take a horrid sacrament
In humane blood, for execution
Of this their dire design; which might be called
The height of wickedness: but that, that was higher,
For which they did it!
I assure your lordship,
The extreme horror of it almost turned me
To air, when first I heard it; I was all
A vapor, when it was told me: and I longed
To vent it any where. It was such a secret,
I thought, it would have burnt me up.
Good FVLVIA,
Fear not your act; and less repent you of it.
I doe not, my good lord. I know to whom
I have uttered it.
You have discharged it, safely.
Should Rome, for whom you have done the happy service,
Turn most ingrate; yet were your virtue paid
In conscience of the fact: so much good deeds
Reward themselves.
My lord, I did it not
To any other aim, but for it self.
To no ambition.
You have learned the difference
Of doing office to the public weal,
And private friendship: and have shown it, lady.
Be still your self. I have sent for QVINTVS CVRIVS,
And (for your virtuous sake) if I can win him,
Yet, to the common-wealth; he shall be safe too.
Isle vnder-take, my lord, he shall be won.
Pray you, join with me, then: and help to work him.
I see your nature's right; you shall no more
Be mentioned with them: I will call you mine,
And trouble this good shame, no farther. Stand
Firm for your country; and become a man
Honoured, and loved. It were a noble life,
To be found dead, embracing her. Know you,
What thanks, what titles, what rewards the Senate
Will heap upon you, certain, for your service?
Let not a desperate action more engage you,
Then safety should: and wicked friendship force
What honesty, and virtue cannot work.
He tells you right, sweet friend: It is saving counsel.
Most noble Consul, I am yours, and hers;
I mean my countries: you' have formed me new.
Inspiring me, with what I should be, truly.
And I entreat, my faith may not seem cheaper
For springing out of penitence.
Good CVRIVS,
It shall be dearer rather, and because
Il'd make it such, hear, how I trust you more.
Keep still your former face: and mix again
With these lost spirits. Run all their mazes with 'hem:
For such are treasons. Find their windings out,
And subtle turnings, watch their snaky ways,
Through brakes, and hedges, into woods of darkness,
Where they are fine to creep upon their breasts
In paths ne'er trod by men, but wolves, and panthers.
Learn, beside CATILINE, LENTVLVS, and those,
Whose names I have; what new ones they draw in;
Who else are likely; what those great ones are,
They doe not name; what ways they mean to take;
And whither their hopes point: to war, or ruin,
By some surprise. Explore all their intents,
And what you find may profit the republique,
Acquaint me with it, either, by your self,
Or this your virtuous friend, on whom I lay
The care of urging you. Isle see, that Rome
Shall prove a thankful, and a bounteous mother:
Be secret as the night.
And constant, sir.
I doe not doubt it. Though the time cut off
All vows. The dignity of truth is lost,
With much protesting. Who is there! This way,
Lest you be seen, and met. And when you come,
Be this your token, to this fellow. Light 'hem.
O Rome, in what a sickness art thou fallen!
How dangerous, and deadly! when thy head
Is drowned in sleep, and all thy body feu'ry!
No noise, no pulling, no vexation wakes thee,
Thy lethargy is such: or if, by chance,
Thou heau'st thy eye-lids up, thou dost forget
Sooner, then thou were told, thy proper danger.
I did irreverently, to blame the gods,
Who wake for thee, though thou snore to thy self.
Is it not strange, thou should be so diseased,
And so secure? But more, that the first symptoms
Of such a malady, should not rise out
From any worthy member, but a base
And common strumpet, worthless to be named
A hair, or part of thee? Think, think, hereafter,
What thy needs were, when thou must use such means:
And lay it to thy breast, how much the gods
Upbraid thy foul neglect of them; by making
So vile a thing, the author of thy safety.
They could have wrought by nobler ways: have struck
Thy foes with forked lightning; or rammed thunder;
Thrown hills upon 'hem, in the act; have sent
Death, like a damp, to all their families;
Or cause their consciences to burst 'hem. But,
When they will show thee what thou art, and make
A scornful difference twixt their power, and thee,
They help thee by such aides, as geese, and harlots.
How now? What answer? Is he come?
Your brother,
Will straight be here; and your colleague ANTONIVS
Said, coldly, he would follow me.
I, that
Troubles me somewhat, and is worth my fear.
He is a man, against whom I must provide,
That (as he will doe no good) he doe no harm.
He, though he be not of the plot, will like it,
And wish it should proceed: for, unto men,
Pressed with their wants, all change is ever welcome.
I must with offices, and patience win him;
Make him, by art, that which he is not borne,
A friend unto the public; and bestow
The province on him; which is by the Senate
Decreed to me: that benefit will bind him.
It is well, if some men will doe well, for price:
So few are virtuous, when the reward's away.
Nor must I be unmindful of my private;
For which I have called my brother, and the tribunes,
My kins-folke, and my clients to be near me:
With the old needy troops, that followed SYLLA:
And all doe but expect, when we will give
The blow at home. Behold this silver eagle,
It was MARIVS standard, in the Cimbrian war,
Fatal to Rome; and, as our augurs tell me,
Shall still be so: for which one ominous cause,
I'haue kept it safe, and done it sacred rites,
As to a god-head, in a chapel built
Of purpose to it. Pledge then all your hands,
To follow it, with vows of death, and ruin,
Struck silently, and home. So waters speak
When they run deepest. Now's the time, this year,
The twenti'th, from the firing of the Capitol,
As fatal too, to Rome, by all predictions:
And, in which, honoured LENTVLVS must rise
A king, if he pursue it.
If he doe not,
He is not worthy the great destiny.
It is too great for me, but what the gods,
And their great loves decree me, I must not
Seem careless of.
No, nor we envious.
We have enough beside, all Galley, Belgia,
Greece, Spain, and Africa.
I, and Asia too,
Now POMPEY is returning.
Noblest Romans,
Me thinks our looks, are not so quick and high,
As they were wont.
No? whose is not?
We have
No anger in our eyes, no storm, no lightning:
Our hate is spent, and fumed away in vapor,
Before our hands be' at work. I can accuse
Not any one, but all of slackness.
Yes,
And be your self such, while you doe it.
Ha?
It is sharply answered, CAIVS.
Truly, truly.
Come, let vs each one know his part to doe,
And then be accused. Leave these untimely quarrels.
I would there were more Romes then one, to ruin.
More Romes? More worlds.
Nay, then, more gods, and natures,
If they took part.
When shall the time be, first?
I think the Saturnalls.
Twill be too long.
They are not now far off, it is not a month.
A week, a day, an hour is too far off,
Now, were the fittest time.
We have not laid
All things so safe, and ready.
While we'are laying,
We shall all lye; and grow to earth. Would I
Were nothing in it, if not now. These things
They should be done, ever thought.
Nay, now your reason
Forsakes you, CAIVS. Think, but what commodity
That time will minister; the cities custom
Of being, then, in mirth, and feast
Loosed whole
In pleasure and security
Each house
Resolved in freedom
Every slave a master
And they too no mean aides
Made from their hope
Of liberty
Or hate unto their lords.
It is sure, there cannot be a time found out
More apt, and natural.
Nay, good CETHEGVS,
Why doe your passions, now, disturb our hopes?
Why doe your hopes delude your certainties?
You must lend him his way. Think, for the order,
And process of it.
Yes.
I like not fire:
Twill too much wast my city.
Were it embers,
There will be wealth enough, raked out of them,
To spring a new. It must be fire, or nothing.
What else should fright, or terrify 'hem?
True.
In that confusion, must be the chief slaughter.
Then we shall kill 'hem bravest.
And in heaps.
Strew sacrifices.
Make the earth an altar.
And Rome the fire.
Twill be a noble night.
And worth all SYLA'S days.
When husbands, wives,
Grandfires, and nephews, servants, and their lords,
Virgins, and priests, the infant, and the nurse
Go all to hell, together, in a fleet.
I would have you, LONGINVS, and STATILIVS,
To take the charge of the firing, which must be,
At a sign given with a trumpet, done
In twelve chief places of the city, at once.
The flax, and sulphur, are already laid
In, at CETHEGVS house. So are the weapons.
GABINIVS, you, with other force, shall stop
The pipes, and conduits: and kill those that come
For water.
What shall I doe?
All will have
Employment, fear not: Ply the execution.
For that, trust me, and CETHEGVS.
I will be
At hand, with the army, to meet those that scope.
And LENTVLVS, begirt you POMPEY'S house,
To seize his sons alive: for they are they
Must make our peace with him. All else cut off,
As TARQVINE did the poppy heads: or mowers
A field of thistles; or else, up, as ploughs
Doe barren lands; and strike together flints,
And clods; th'vngratefull Senate, and the people:
Till no rage, gone before or coming after,
May weigh with yours, though horror leapt her self
So much his lord in mischief? when all these,
Shall, like the brethren sprung of dragons teeth,
Ruin each other; and he fall amongst 'hem:
With CRASSVS, POMPEY, or who else appears,
But like, or near a great one. May my brain
esolue to water, and my blood turn phlegm,
My hands drop off, unworthy of my sword,
And that b'inspired, of it self, to rip
My breast, for my lost entrails; when I leave
A soul, that will not serve: and who will, are
The same with slaves, such clay I dare not fear.
The cruelty, I mean to act, I wish
Should be called mine, and tarry in my name;
Whilst, after-ages doe toil out themselves,
In thinking for the like, but doe it less:
And, were the power of all the fiends let loose,
With fate to boot, it should be, still, example.
When, what the Gaul, or Moore could not effect,
Nor emulous Carthage, with their length of spite,
Shall be the work of one, and that my night.
I Thank your vigilance. Whore's my brother, QVINTVS?
Call all my servants up. Tell noble CVRIVS,
And say it to your self, you are my savers;
But that's too little for you, you are Romes:
What could I then, hope less? O brother! now,
The engines I told you of, are working;
The machine 'gin's to move. Where are your weapons?
Arm all my house-hold presently. And charge
The porter, he let no man in, till day.
Not clients, and your friends?
They wear those names,
That come to murder me. Yet send for CATO,
And QVINTVS CATVLVS; those I dare trust:
And FLACCVS, and POMTINIVS, the Praetors,
By the back way.
Take care, good brother MARCVS,
Your fears be not formed greater, then they should;
And make your friends grieve, while your enemies laugh.
It is brothers counsel, and worth thanks. But doe
As I entreat you. I provide, not fear.
Was CAESAR there, say you?
CVRIVS says, he met him,
Coming from thence.
O, so. And, had you a counsel
Of ladies too? Who was your speaker, madame?
She that would be, had there been forty more;
SEMPRONIA, who had both her greek, and figures;
And ever and anon, would ask vs, if
The witty Consul could have mended that?
Or Orator CICERO could have said it better?
Shoe's my gentle enemy. Would CETHEGVS
Had no more danger in him. But, my guards
Are you, great powers; and th'vnbated strengths
Of a firm conscience, which shall arm each step
Tan for the state: and teach me slack no pace
For fear of malice. How now, brother?
CATO,
And QVINTVS CATVLVS were coming to you,
And CRASSVS with 'hem. I have let 'hem in,
By the garden.
What would CRASSVS have?
I hear
Some whispering about the gate; and making doubt,
Whether it be not yet too early, or no?
But I doe think, they are your friends, and clients,
Are fearful to disturb you.
You will change
To another thought anon. Have you given the porter
The charge, I willed you?
Yes.
With-draw, and hearken.
THe dore's not open, yet.
You'were best to knock.
Let them stand close, then: And, when we are in,
Rush after vs.
But whore's CETHEGVS?
He
Has left it, since he might not do it his way.
Who's there?
A friend, or more.
I may not let
Any man in, till day.
No? why?
Thy reason?
I am commanded so.
By whom?
I hope
We are not discovered.
Yes, by revelation.
Pray thee, good slave, who has commanded thee?
He that may best, the Consul.
We are his friends.
Ell's one.
Best give your name.
Dost thou hear, fellow?
I have some instant business with the Consul.
My name is VARGVNTEIVS.
True, he knows it;
And for what friendly office you are sent.
CORNELIVS, too, is there?
We are betrayed.
And desperate CETHEGVS, is he not?
Speak you, he knows my voice.
What say you to it?
You are deceived, sir.
No, it is you are so;
Poor, misse-led men. Your states are yet worth pity,
If you would hear, and change your savage minds.
Leave to be mad; forsake your purposes
DOe; urge thine anger, still: good heaven, and just.
Tell guilty men, what powers are aboue them.
In such a confidence of wickedness,
It was time, they should know something fit to fear.
I never saw a morn morefull of horror.
To CATILINE, and his: But, to just men,
Though heaven should speak, with all his wrath at once,
That, with his breath, the hinges of the world
Did crack, we should stand upright, and vnfear'd.
Why, so we doe, good CATO. Who be these?
Ambassadors, from the ALLOBROGES,
I take 'hem, by their habits.
I, these men
Seem of another race; let's sue to these,
There's hope of justice, with their fortitude.
Friends of the Senate, and of Rome, to day
We pray you to forbear vs: on the morrow
What suit you have, let vs, by FABIVS SANGA,
(Whose patronage your state doth use) but know it,
And, on the Consul's word, you shall receive
Dispatch, or else an answer, worth your patience.
We could not hope for more, most worthy Consul.
This magistrate hath struck an awe into me,
And, by his sweetness, won a more reguard
Unto his place, then all the boisterous moods
That ignorant greatness practises, to fill
The large, unfit authority it wears.
How easy is a noble spirit discerned
From harsh, and sulphurous matter, that flies out
In contumelies, makes a noise, and stinks!
May we find good, and great men: that know how
To stoup to wants, and meet necessities,
And will not turn from any equal suites.
Such men, they doe not succour more the cause,
They vnder-take, with favour, and success;
Then, by it, their own judgements they doe raise,
In turning just men's needs, into their praise.
Room for the Consuls. Fathers, take your places.
Here, in the house of IVPITER, the STAYER,
By edict from the Consul, MARCVS TVLLIVS.
You'are met, a frequent Senate. Hear him speak.
What may be happy, and auspicious still
To Rome, and hers. Honoured, and conscript Fathers,
If I were silent, and that all the dangers
Threatening the state, and you, were yet so hid
In night, or darkness thicker in their breasts,
That are the black contrivers; so, that no
Beam of the light could pierce hem: yet the voice
Of heaven, this morning, hath spoke loud enough,
T'instruct you with a feeling of the horror;
And wake you from a sleep, as stark, as death.
I have, of late, spoke often in this Senate,
Touching this argument, but still have wanted
Either your ears, or faith: so'incredible
Their plots have seemed, or I so vain, to make
These things for mine own glory, and false greatness,
As hath been given out. But be it so.
When they break forth, and shall declare themselves,
By their too foul effects, then, then, the envy
Of my just cares will find another name.
For me, I am but one: and this poor life,
So lately aimed at, not an hour yet since,
They cannot with more eagerness pursue,
Then I with gladness would lay down, and loose,
To buy Romes peace, if that would purchase it.
But when I see, they'ld make it but the step
To more, and greater; unto yours, Romes, all:
I would with those preserve it, or then fall.
I, I, let you alone, cunning artificer!
See, how his gorget 'peeres aboue his gown;
To tell the people, in what danger he was.
It was absurdly done of VARGVNTEIVS,
To name himself, before he was got in.
It matters not, so they deny it all:
And can but carry the lye constantly.
Will CATILINE be here?
I'haue sent for him.
And have you bid him to be confident?
To that his own necessity will prompt him.
Seem to believe nothing at all, that CICERO
Relates vs.
It will mad him.
O, and help
The other party. Who is that? his brother?
What new intelligence he's he brought him now?
Some cautions from his wife, how to behave him.
Place some of them without, and some bring in.
Thank their kind loves. It is a comfort yet,
That all depart not from their countries cause.
How now, what means this muster? Consul, ANTONIVS?
I doe not know, ask my colleague, he will tell you.
There is some reason in state, that I must yield to;
And I have promised him: Indeed he has bought it,
With giving me the Province.
I profess,
It grieves me, Fathers, that I am compelled
To draw these arms, and aides for your defence;
And, more, against a citizen of Rome,
Borne here amongst you, a Patrician,
A man, I must confess, of no mean house,
Nor no small virtue, if he had employed
Those excellent gifts of fortune, and of nature,
Unto the good, not ruin of the state.
But, being bred in's fathers needy fortunes,
Brought up in's sisters prostitution,
Confirmed in civil slaughter, entering first
The common-wealth, with murder of the gentry;
Since, both by study, and custom, conversant
With all licentiousness: what could be hoped
In such a field of riot, but a course
Extreme pernicious? Though, I must protest,
I found his mischiefs, sooner, with mine eyes,
Then with my thought; and with these hands of mine,
Before they touched, at my suspicion.
What are his mischiefs, Consul? you declaim
Against his manners, and corrupt your own:
No wiseman should, for hate of guilty men,
Loose his own innocence.
The noble CAESAR
Speaks god-like truth. But, when he hears, I can
Convince him, by his manners, of his mischiefs,
He might be silent: and not cast away
His sentences in vain, where they scarce look
Toward his subject.
Here he comes himself.
If he be worthy any good mans voice,
That good man sit down by him: CATO will not.
If CATO leave him, I'll not keep aside.
What face is this, the Senate here puts on,
Against me, Fathers! Give my modesty
Leave, to demand the cause of so much strangeness.
It is reported here, you are the head
To a strange faction, LVCIVS.
I, and will
Be proved against him.
Let it be. Why, Consul,
If in the common-wealth, there be two bodies,
One lean, weak, rotten, and that hath a head;
The other strong, and healthful, but hath none:
If I doe give it one, doe I offend?
Restore your selves, unto your temper, Fathers;
And, without perturbation, hear me speak.
Remember who I am, and of what place,
What petty fellow this is, that opposes;
One, that hath exercised his eloquence,
Still to the bane of the nobility:
A boasting, insolent tongue-man.
Peace, lewd traitor,
Or wash thy mouth. He is an honest man
And loves his country, would thou did so, too.
CATO, you are too zealous for him.
No;
Thou art too impudent.
CATILINE, be silent.
Nay then, I easily fear, my just defence
Will come too late, to so much prejudice.
Will he sit down?)
Yet, let the world forsake me,
My innocence must not.
Thou innocent?
So are the Furies.
Yes, and Ate, too.
Dost thou not blush, pernicious. CATILINE?
Or, hath the paleness of thy guilt drunk up
Thy blood, and drawn thy veins, as dry of that,
As is thy heart of truth, thy breast of virtue?
Whither at length wilt thou abuse our patience?
Still shall thy fury mock vs? To what licence
Dares thy unbridled boldness run it self?
Doe all the nightly guards, kept on the palace,
The cities watches, with the peoples fears,
The concourse of all good men, this so strong
And fortified seat here of the Senate,
The present looks upon thee, strike thee nothing?
Dost thou not feel thy counsels all laid open?
And see thy wild conspiracy bound in
With each mans knowledge? which of all this order
Can thou think ignorant (if they'll but utter
Their conscience to the right) of what thou did
Last night, what on the former, where thou were,
Whom thou did call together, what your plots were?
O age, and manners! This the Consul sees,
The Senate understands, yet this man lives!
Lives? I, and comes here into counsel with vs;
Partakes the public cares: and with his eye
Marks, and points out each man of vs to slaughter.
And we, good men, doe satisfy the state,
If we can shun but this mans sword, and madness.
There was that virtue, once, in Rome, when good men
Would, with more sharpe corcion, have restrained
A wicked citizen, then the deadliest foe.
We have that law still, CATILINE, for thee;
An act as grave, as sharpe: The state's not wanting,
Nor the authority of this Senate; we,
We, that are Consuls, only fail our selves.
This twenty days, the edge of that decree
We have let dull, and rust; kept it shut up,
As in a sheath, which drawn should take thy head.
Yet still thou liu'st: and liu'st not to lay by
Thy wicked confidence, but to confirm it.
I could desire, Fathers, to be found
Still merciful, to seem, in these maine perils
Grasping the state, a man remiss, and slack;
But then, I should condemn my self of sloth,
And treachery. Their campe's in Italy,
Pitched in the jaws, here, of Hetruria;
Their numbers daily increasing, and their general
Within our walls: nay, in our counsel! plotting
Hourly some fatal mischief to the public.
If, CATILINE, I should command thee, now,
Here, to be taken, killed; I make just doubt,
Whether all good men would not think it done
Rather too late, then any man too cruel.
Except he were of the same meal, and batch.
But that, which ought to have been done long since,
I will, and (for good reason) yet forbear.
Then will I take thee, when no man is found
So lost, so wicked, nay so like thy self,
But shall profess, it is done of need, and right.
While there is one, that dares defend thee, live;
Thou shalt have leave; but so, as now thou liu'st:
Watched at a hand, besieged, and oppressed
From working least commotion to the state.
I have those eyes, and ears, shall still keep guard,
And spiel on thee, as they have ever done,
And thou not feel it. What, then, can thou hope?
If neither night can, with her darkness, hide
Thy wicked meetings; nor a private house
Can, in her walls, contain the guilty whispers
Of thy conspiracy: if all break out,
All be discovered, change thy mind at last,
And loose thy thoughts of ruin flame, and slaughter.
Remember, how I told, here, to the Senate,
That such a day, thy Lictor, CAIVS MANLIVS,
Would be in arms. Was I deceived, CATILINE?
Or in the fact, or in the time? the hour?
I told too, in this Senate, that thy purpose
Was, on the fifth (the kalends of November)
T'haue slaughtered this whole order: which my caution
Made many leave the city. Can thou here
Deny, but this thy black design was hindered,
That very day, by me? thy self closed in
Within my strengths, so that thou coldest not move
Against a public reed? when thou were heard
To say, upon the parting of the rest,
Thou would content thee, with the murder of vs,
That did remain. Had thou not hope, beside,
By a surprise, by night, to take Praeneste?
Where when thou came, did thou not find the place
Made good against thee, with my aides, my watches?
My garrisons fortified it. Thou dost nothing, SERGIVS,
Thou can endeavour nothing, nay not think,
But I both see, and hear it; and am with thee,
By, and before, about, and in thee, too.
Call but to mind thy last nights business. Come,
Isle use no circumstance: at LECCA'S house,
The shop, and mint of your conspiracy,
Among your sword-men, where so many associates
Both of thy mischief, and thy madness, met.
Dare thou deny this? wherefore art thou silent?
Speak, and this shall convince thee: Here they are,
I see 'hem, in this Senate, that were with thee.
O, you immortal gods! in what clime are we?
What region doe we live in? in what ayre?
What common-wealth, or state is this we have?
Here, here, amongst vs, our own number, Fathers,
In this most holy counsel of the world,
They are, that seek the spoil of me, of you,
Of ours, of all; what I can name's too narrow:
Follow the sun, and find not their ambition.
These I behold, being Consul; nay, I ask
Their counsels of the state, as from good Patriots:
Whom it were fit the axe should hew in pieces,
I not so much as wound, yet, with my voice.
Thou wast, last night, with LESS, CATILINE,
Your shares, of Italy, you there divided;
Appointed who, and whither, each should go;
What men should stay behind, in Rome, were chosen;
Your offices set down; the parts marked out,
And places of the city, for the fire;
Thy self (though affirmd'st) wast ready to depart,
Only, a little let there was, that stayed thee,
That I yet lived. Upon the word, stepped forth
Three of thy crew, to rid thee of that care;
Two vnder-tooke this morning, before day,
To kill me in my bed. All this I knew,
Your convent scarce dismissed, armed all my servants,
Called both my brother, and friends, shut out your clients,
You sent to visit me; whose names I told
To some there, of good place, before they came.
Yes, I, and QVINTVS CATVLVS can affirm it.
He's lost, and gone. His spirits have forsook him.
If this be so, why, CATILINE, dost thou stay?
Go, where thou mean. The ports are open; forth.
The camp abroad wants thee, their chief, too long.
Lead with thee all thy troupes out. Purge the city.
Draw dry that noisome, and pernicious sink,
Which left, behind thee, would infect the world.
Thou wilt free me of all my fears, at once,
To see a wall between vs. Dost thou stop
To doe that now, commanded; which before,
Of thine own choice, you're prone to? Go. The Consul
Bids thee, an enemy, to depart the city.
Whither, thou'lt ask? to exile? I not bid
Thee that. But ask my counsel, I persuade it.
What is there, here, in Rome, that can delight thee?
Where not a soul, without thine own foul knot,
But fears, and hates thee. What domestic note
Of private filthiness, but is burnt in
Into thy life? What close, and secret shame,
But is grown one, with thy known infamy?
What lust was ever absent from thine eyes?
What lewd fact from thy hands? what wickedness
From thy whole body? whore's that youth drawn in
Within thy nets, or caught up with thy baits,
Before whose rage, thou hast not borne a sword,
And to whose lusts thou hast not 'held a torch?
Thy latter nuptials I let pass in silence;
Where sins incredible on sins were hooped:
Which I not name, lest, in a civil state,
So monstrous facts should either appear to be,
Or not to be revenged. Thy fortunes, too,
I glance not a, which hang but till next Ides.
I come to that which is more known, more public;
The life, and safety of vs all, by thee
Threatened, and sought. Stood'st thou not in the field,
When LEPIDVS, and TVLLVS were our Consuls,
Upon the day of choice, armed, and with forces,
To take their lives, and our chief citizens?
When, not thy fear, nor conscience changed thy mind,
But the mere fortune of the common-wealth
With-stood thy active malice? Speak but right.
How often hast thou made attempt on me?
How many of thy assaults have I declined
With shifting but my body (as wee'ld say)
Wrested thy dagger from thy hand, how oft?
How often hath it fallen, or slip't by chance?
Yet, can thy side not want it: which, how vowed,
Or with what rites, it is sacred of thee, I know not,
That still thou make it a necessity,
To fix it in the body of a Consul.
But let me loose this way, and speak to thee,
Not as one moved with hatred, which I ought,
But pity, of which none is owing thee.
No more then unto TANTALVS, or TITYVS.
Thou came, e're-while, into this Senate. Who
Of such a frequency, so many friends,
And kindred thou hast here, saluted thee?
Were not the seats made bare, upon thy entrance?
Riss'not the consular men? and left their places,
So soon as thou sat'st down? and fled thy side,
Like to a plague, or ruin? knowing, how oft
They had been, by thee, marked out for the shambles?
How dost thou bear this? Surely, if my slaves
At home feared me, with half th'affright, and horror,
That, here, thy fellow-citizens doe thee,
I should soon quit my house, and think it need too.
Yet thou dare tarry here? Go forth, at last;
Condemn thy self to flight, and solitude.
Discharge the common-wealth, of her deep fear.
Go; into banishment, if thou wait'st the word.
Why dost thou look? They all consent unto it.
Dost thou expect th'authoritie of their voices,
Whose silent wills condemn thee? While they sit,
They approve it; while they suffer it, they decree it;
And while they'are silent to it, they proclaim it.
Prove thou there honest, Isle endure the envy.
But there's no thought, thou should be ever he,
Whom either shame should call from filthiness,
Terror from danger, or discourse from fury.
Go; I entreat thee: yet, why doe I so?
When I already know, they'are sent before,
That tarry for thee'in arms, and doe expect thee
On th'AVRELIAN way. I know the day
Set down, twixt thee, and MANLIVS; unto whom
The silver eagle too is sent, before:
Which I doe hope shall prove, to thee as baneful,
As thou conceiu'st it to the common-wealth.
But, may this wise, and sacred Senate say,
What mean thou MARCVS TVLLIVS? If thou know
That CATILINE be looked for, to be chief
Of an intestine war; that he'is the author
Of such a wickedness; the caller out
Of men of mark in mischief, to an action
Of so much horror; Prince of such a treason;
Why dost thou send him forth? why let him scope?
This is, to give him liberty, and power:
Rather, thou should lay hold upon him, send him
To deserved death, and a just punishment.
To these so holy voices, thus I answer.
If I did think it timely, Gonscript Fathers,
To punish him with death, I would not give
The Fencer use of one short hour, to breath;
But when there are in this grave order, some,
Who, with soft censures, still doe nurse his hopes;
Some, that with not believing, have confirmed
His designs more, and whose authority
The weaker, as the worst men, too, have followed:
I would now send him, where they all should see
Clear, as the light, his heart shine; where no man
Could be so wickedly, or fondly stupid,
But should cry out, he saw, touched, felt, and grasp't it.
Then, when he hath run out himself; led forth
His desperate party with him; blown together
Aides of all kinds, both shipwrecked minds and fortunes:
Not only the grown evil, that now is sprung,
And sprouted forth, would be plucked up, and weeded;
But the stock, root, and seed of all the mischiefs,
Choking the common-wealth. Where, should we take,
Of such a swarm of traitors, only him,
Our cares, and fears might seem a while relieved,
But the maine peril would bide still enclosed
Deep, in the veins, and bowels of the state.
As humane bodies, labouring with fevers,
While they are tossed with heate, if they doe take
Cold water, seem for that short space much eased,
But afterword, are ten times more afflicted.
Wherefore, I say, let all this wicked crew
Depart, divide themselves from good men, gather
Their forces to one head; as I said oft,
Let'hem be severed from vs with a wall;
Let'hem leave off attempts, upon the Consul,
In his own house; to circle in the Praetor;
To girt the court with weapons; to prepare
Fire, and balls, swords, torches, sulphur, brands:
In short, let it be writ in each mans fore-head
What thoughts he bears the public. I here promise,
Fathers Conscript, to you, and to my self,
That diligence in vs Consuls, for my honoured
Colleague, abroad, and for my self, at home;
So great authority in you; so much
Virtue, in these, the gentlemen of Rome;
Whom I could scarce restrain to day, in zeal,
From seeking out the parricide, to slaughter;
So much consent in all good men, and minds,
As, on the going out of this one CATILINE,
All shall be clear, made plain, oppressed, revenged.
And, with this omen, go, pernicious plague,
Out of the city, to the wished destruction
Of thee, and those, that, to the ruin of her,
Have tan that bloody, and black sacrament.
Thou IVPITER, whom we doe call the STAYER,
Both of this city, and this empire, wilt
(With the same auspice thou did raise it first)
Drive from thy altars, and all other temples,
And buildings of this city; from our walls;
Lives, states, and fortunes of our citizens;
This fiend, this fury, with his accomplices.
And all the'offence of good men (these known traitors
Unto their country, thieves of Italy,
Joined in so damned a league of mischief) thou
Wilt with perpetual plagues, alive, and dead,
Punish for Rome, and save her innocent head.
If an oration, or high language, Fathers,
Could make me guilty, here is one, hath done it:
H' has strove to emulate this mornings thunder,
With his prodigious rhetoric. But I hope,
This Senate is more grave, then to give credit
Rashly to all he vomits, against a man
Of your own order, a Patrician;
And one, whose ancestors have more deserved
Of Rome, then this mans eloquence could utter,
Turned the best way: as still, it is the worst.
His eloquence hath more deserved to day,
Speaking thy ill, then all thy ancestors
Did, in their good: and, that the state will find,
Which he hath saved.
How, he? were I that enemy,
That he would make me: Il'd not wish the state
More wretched, then to need his preservation.
What doe you make him, CATO, such a HERCVLES?
An ATLAS? A poor petty in-mate!
Traitor.
He save the state? A burgess son of Arpinum.
The gods would rather twenty Romes should perish,
Then have that contumely stuck upon 'hem,
That he should share with them, in the preserving
A shed, or signpost.
Peace, thou prodigy.
They would be forced themselves, again, and lost
In the first, rude, and indigested heap;
Ere such a wretched name, as CICERO,
Should found with theirs.
Away, thou impudent head.
Doe you all back him? are you silent too?
Well, I will leave you, Fathers; I will go.
Butmy fine dainty speaker
What now, Fury?
Wilt thou assault me here?
Help, aide the Consul.)
See, Fathers, laugh you not? who threatened him?
In vain thou dost conceive, ambitious orator,
Hope of so brave a death, as by this hand.
Out, of the court, with the pernicious traitor.)
There is no title, that this flattering Senate,
Nor honour, the base multitude can give thee,
Shall make thee worthy CATILINES anger.
Stop,
Stop that portentous mouth.)
Or, when it shall,
Isle look thee dead.
Will none restrain the monster?
Parricide.
Butcher, traitor, leave the Senate.
I'am gone, to banishment, to please you, Fathers.
Thrust head-long forth?
Still, dost thou murmur, monster?
Since, I am thus put out, and made a
What?
Not guiltier then thou art.
I will not burn
Without my funeral pile.
What says the fiend?
I will have matter, timber.
Sing out scrich-owle.
It shall be in
Speak thy imperfect thoughts.
The common fire, rather then mine own.
For fall I will with all, ere fall alone.
H'is lost, there is no hope of him.
Unless
He presently take arms; and give a blow,
Before the Consuls forces can be leui'd.
What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?
See, that the common-wealth receive no loss.
Commit the care thereof unto the Consuls.
It is time.
And need.
Thanks to this frequent Senate.
But what decree they, unto CVRIVS,
And FVLVIA?
What the Consul shall think meet.
They must receive reward, though 't be not known;
Lest when a state needs ministers, they have none.
Yet, MARCVS TVLLIVS, doe not I believe,
But CRASSVS, and this CAESAR here ring hollow.
And would appear so, if that we durst prove 'hem.
Why dare we not? What honest act is that,
The Roman Senate should not dare, and doe?
Not an unprofitable, dangerous act,
To stir too many serpents up at once.
CAESAR, and CRASSVS, if they be ill men,
Are mighty ones; and, we must so provide,
That, while we take one head, from this foul Hydra,
There spring not twenty more.
In prove your counsel.
They shall be watched, and looked too. Till they doe
Declare themselves, I will not put 'hem out
By any question. There they stand. Isle make
My self no enemies, nor the state no traitors.
FAlse to our selves? All our designs discovered
To this state-cat?
I, had I had my way,
Have had mewed in flames, at home, not in the Senate:
In had singed his furs, by this time.
Well, there's, now,
No time of calling back, or standing still.
Friends, be your selves; keep the same Roman hearts,
And ready minds, you' had yesternight. Prepare
To execute, what we resolved. And let not
Labour, or danger, or discovery fright you.
Isle to the army: you (the while) mature
Things, here, at home. Draw to you any aides,
That you think fit, of men of all conditions,
Or any fortunes, that may help a war.
Isle bleed a life, or win an empire for you.
Within these few days, look to see my ensigns,
All may begin a war, but few can end it.
The Senate have decreed, that my colleague
Shall lead their army, against CATILINE,
And have declared both him, and MANLIVS traitors.
METELLVS CELER hath already given
Part of their troops defeat. Honours are promised
To all, will quit 'hem; and rewards proposed
Even to slaves, that can detect their courses.
Here, in the city, I have by the Praetors,
And Tribunes, placed my guards, and watches so,
That not a foot can tread, a breath can whisper,
But I have knowledge. And be sure, the Senate,
And people of Rome, of their accustomed greatness,
Will sharply, and severely vindicate,
Not only any fact, but any practice,
Or purpose, against the state. Therefore, my lords,
Consult of your own ways, and think which hand
Is best to take. You, now, are present suitors
For some redress of wrongs; Isle vnder-take
Not only that shall be assured you: but
What grace, or privilege else, Senate, or people,
Can cast upon you, worthy such a service,
As you have now the way, and means, to doe 'hem,
If but your wills consent, with my designs.
We covet nothing more, most worthy Consul.
And how so ever have been tempted lately,
To a defection, that not makes vs guilty:
We are not yet so wretched in our fortunes,
Nor in our wills so lost, as to abandon
A friendship, prodigally, of that price,
As is the Senate, and the people of Romes,
For hopes, that doe precipitate themselves.
You then are wise, and honest. Doe but this, then:
(When shall you speak with LENTVLVS, and the rest?
We are to meet anon, at BRVTVS house.
Who? DECIVS BRVTVS? He is not in Rome.
O, but his wife SEMPRONIA.
You instruct me,
She is a chief.) Well, fail not you to meet 'hem,
And to express the best affection
You can put on, to all that they intend.
Like it, applaud it, give the common-wealth,
And Senate lost to 'hem. Promise any aides
By arms, or counsel. What they can desire,
I would have you prevent. Only, say this,
You'haue had dispatch, in private, by the Consul,
Of your affairs, and for the many fears
The state's now in, you are willed by him, this evening,
To depart Rome: which you, by all sought means,
Will doe, of reason to decline suspicion.
Now, for the more authority of the business
They' have trusted to you, and to give it credit
With your own state, at home, you would desire
Their letters to your Senate, and your people,
Which shown, you durst engage both life, and honour,
The rest should every way answer their hopes.
Those had, pretend sudden departure, you,
And, as you give me notice, at what port
You will go out, Isle have you intercepted,
And all the letters taken with you: So
As you shall be redeemed in all opinions,
And they convicted of their manifest treason.
Ill deeds are well turned back, upon their authors:
And against an iniurer, the revenge is just.
This must be done, now.
Cheerfully, and firmly.
We'are they, would rather hast to undertake it,
Then stay, to say so.
With that confidence, go:
Make your selves happy, while you make Rome so.
By SANGA, let me have notice from you.
Yes.
WHen come these creatures, the Ambassadors?
I would fine see 'hem. Are they any scholars?
I think not, madame.
Have they no greek?
No surely.
Fie, what doe I here, waiting on 'hem then?
If they be nothing but mere states-men.
Yes,
Your ladyship shall observe their gravity,
And their reservedness, their many cautions,
Fitting their persons.
I doe wonder much,
That states, and commonwealths employ not women,
To be Ambassadors, sometimes! we should
Doe as good public service, and could make
As honourable spies (for so THVCIDIDES
Calls all Ambassadors.) Are they come, CETHEGVS?
Doe you ask me? Am I your scout, or baud?
O, CAIVS, it is no such business.
No?
What do's a woman at it then?
Good sir,
There are of vs can be as exquisite traitors,
By several messengers: who no doubt will come,
Without sense, or suspicion. Prodigal men
Feel not their own stock wasting. When I have 'hem,
Isle place those guards, upon 'hem, that they start not,
But what 'll you doe with SEMPRONIA?
A states anger
Should not take knowledge either of fools, or women.
I do not know whether my joy or care
Ought to be greater; that I have discovered
So foul a treason: or must undergo
The envy of so many great men's fate.
But, happen what there can, I will be just,
My fortune may forsake me, not my virtue:
That shall go with me, and before me, still,
And glad me, doing well, though I hear ill.
Stand, who goes there?
We are the ALLOBROGES
And friends of Rome.
If you be so, then yield
Your selves unto the Praetors, who in name
Of the whole Senate, and the people of Rome,
Yet, till you clear your selves, charge you of practise
Against the State.
Die friends, and be not taken.
What voice is that? Down with 'hem all.
We yield.
What's he stands out? Kill him there.
Hold, hold, hold.
I yield upon conditions.
We give none
To traitors, strike him down.
My name's VOLTVRTIVS
I know POMTINIVS.
But he knows not you,
While you stand out upon these traitorous terms.
I'll yield upon the safety of my life.
If it be forfeited, we cannot save it.
Promise to doe your best. I 'am not so guilty,
As many others, I can name; and will:
If you will grant me favour.
All we can
Is to deliver you to the Consul. Take him,
And thank the gods, that thus have saved Rome.
NOw, do our ears, before our eyes,
Like men in mists,
Discover, who'ld the state surprise,
And who resists?
And, as these clouds doe yield to light,
Now, do we see,
Our thoughts of things, how they did fight,
Which seemed to agree?
Of what strange pieces are we made,
Who nothing know;
But, as new airs our ears invade,
Still censure so?
That now doe hope, and now doe fear,
And now envy;
And then doe hate, and then love dear,
But know not, why:
Or, if we doe, it is so late,
As our best mood,
Though true, is then thought out of date,
And empty of good.
How have we changed, and come about
In every doom,
Since wicked CATILINE went out,
And quited Rome?
One while, we thought him innocent;
And, then, w' accused
The Consul, for his malice spent;
And power abused.
Since, that we hear, he is in arms,
We think not so:
Yet charge the Consul, with our harms,
That let him go.
So, in our censure of the state,
We still doe wander;
And make the careful magistrate
The mark of slander.
What age is this, where honest men,
Placed at the helm,
A sea of some foul mouth, or pen,
Shall overwhelm?
And call their diligence, deceit;
Their virtue, vice;
Their watchfulness, but lying in wait;
And blood, the price.
O, let vs pluck this evil seed
Out of our spirits;
And give, to every noble deed,
The name it merits.
Lest we seem fallen (if this endures)
Into those times,
To love disease: and brooke the cures
Worse, then the crimes.
I would fine help these wretched men.
You cannot.
Who would save them, that have betrayed themselves?
I Will not be wrought to it, brother QVINTVS.
There's no mans private enmity shall make
Me violate the dignity of another.
If there were proof against CAESAR, or who ever,
To speak him guilty, I would so declare him.
But QVINTVS CATVLVS, and PESO both,
Shall know, the Consul will not, for their grudge,
Have any man accused, or named falsely.
Not falsely: but if any circumstance,
By the ALLOBROGES, or from VOLTVRTIVS,
Would carry it.
That shall not be sought by me.
If it reveal it self, I would not spare
You, brother, if it pointed at you, trust me.
Good MARCVS TVLLIVS (which is more, then great)
Thou had thy education, with the gods.
Send LENTVLVS forth, and bring away the rest.
This office, I am sorry, sir, to doe you.
WHat may be happy still, and fortunate,
To Rome, and to this Senate: Please you, Fathers,
To break these letters, and to view them round.
If that be not found in them, which I fear,
I, yet, entreat, at such a time, as this,
My diligence be not contemned. Have you brought
The weapons hither, from CETHEGVS house?
They are without.
Be ready, with VOLTVRTIVS,
To bring him, when the Senate calls; and see
None of the rest, confer together. Fathers,
What doe you read? Is it yet worth your care,
If not your fear, what you find practised there?
It hath a face of horror!
I'am amazed!
Look there.
Gods! Can such men draw comon air?
Although the greatness of the mischief, Fathers,
Hath often made my faith small, in this Senate,
Yet since my casting CATILINE out (for now
I doe not fear the envy of the word,
Unless the deed be rather to be feared,
That he went hence alive; when those I meant
Should follow him, did not) I have spent both days,
And nights, in watching, what their fury' and rage
Was bent on, that so staid, against my thought:
And that I might but take 'hem in that light,
Where, when you met their treason, with your eyes,
Your minds, at length, would think for your own safety.
And, now, it is done. There are their hands, and seals.
Their persons, too, are safe, thanks to the gods.
Bring in VOLTVRTIVS, and the ALLOBROGES.
These be the men, were trusted with their letters.
Fathers, believe me, I knew nothing: I
Was travailing for Galley, and am sorry
Quake not, VOLTVRTIVS, speak the truth, and hope
Well of this Senate, on the Consuls word.
Then, I knew all. But truly I was drawn in
But t'other day.
Say, what thou know, and fear not.
Thou hast the Senate faith, and Consuls word,
To fortify thee.
I was sent with letters
And had a message toofrom LENTVLVS
To CATILINEthat he should use all aides
Servants, or othersand come with his army,
As soon, unto the city as he could
For they were ready, and but staid for him
To intercept those, that should flee the fire
These men (the ALLOBROGES) did hear it too.
Yes, Fathers, and they took an oath, to vs.
Besides their letters, that we should be free;
And urged vs, for some present aide of horse.
Nay, here be other testimonies, Fathers,
CETHEGVS armourie.
What, not all these?
Here's not the hundred part. Call in the Fencer,
That we may know the arms to all these weapons.
Come, my brave sword-player, to what active use,
Was all this steel provided?
Had you asked
In SYLLA's days, it had been to cut throats;
But, now, it was to look on, only: I loved
To see good blades, and feel their edge, and points.
To put a helm upon a block, and cleave it,
And, now and then, to stab an armour through.
Know you that paper? That will stab you through.
Is it your hand? Hold, save the pieces. Traitor,
Hath thy guilt waked thy fury?
I did write,
I know not what; nor care not: That fool LENTVLVS
Did dictate, and I t'other fool, did sign it.
Bring in STATILIVS: Do's he know his hand too?
And LENTVLVS. Reach him that letter.
I
Confess it all.
Know you that seal yet, PVBLIVS?
Yes, it is mine.
Whose image is that, on it?
My grand-fathers.
What, that renowned good man,
That did so only embrace his country, and loved
His fellow citizens! Was not his picture,
Though mute, of power to call thee from a fact,
So foul
As what, impetuous CICERO?
As thou art, for I doe not know what's fouler.
Look upon these. Doe not these faces argue
Thy guilt, and impudence?
What are these to me?
I know 'hem not.
No PVBLIVS? we were with you,
At BRVTVS house.
Last night.
What did you there?
Who sent for you?
Your self did. We had letters
From you, CETHEOVS, this STATILIVS here,
GABINIVS CIMBER, all, but from LONGINVS,
Who would not write, because he was to come
Shortly, in person, after vs (he said)
To take the charge of the horse, which we should levy.
And he is fled, to CATILINE, I hear.
Spies? spies?
You told vs too, of the SIBYLS books,
And how you were to be a king, this year,
The twentieth, from the burning of the Capitol.
That three CORNELII were to reign, in Rome,
Of which you were the last: and praised CETHEGVS,
And the great spirits, were with you, in the action.
These are your honourable Ambassadors,
My sovereign lord.
Peace, that too bold CETHEGVS.
Besides GABINIVS, your agent, named
AVTRONIVS, SERVIVS SVLLA, VARGVNTEIVS,
And divers others.
I had letters from you,
To CATILINE, and a message, which I'haue told
Unto the Senate, truly, word for word:
For which, I hope, they will be gracious to me.
I was drawn in, by that same wicked CIMBER,
And thought no hurt at all.
VOLTVRTIVS, peace.
Where is thy visor, or thy voice, now, LENTVLVS?
Art thou confounded? Wherefore speak thou not?
Is all so clear, so plain, so manifest,
That both thy eloquence, and impudence,
And thy ill nature, too, have left thee, at once?
Take him aside. There's yet one more, GABINIVS,
The enginer of all. Show him that paper,
If he doe know it?
I know nothing.
No?
No. Neither will I know.
Impudent head!
Stick it into his throat; were I the Consul,
Il'd make thee eat the mischief, thou hast vented.
Is there a law for it, CATO?
Dost thou ask
After a law, that would have broke all laws,
Of nature, manhood, conscience, and religion?
Yes, I may ask for it.
No, pernicious CIMBER.
Th'inquiring after good, do's not belong
Unto a wicked person.
I but CATO
Do's nothing, but by law.
Take him aside.
There's proof enough, though he confess not.
Stay,
I will confess. Ell's true, your spies have told you.
Make much of 'hem.
Yes, and reward 'hem well,
For fear you get no more such. See, they doe not
Die in a ditch, and stink, now you have done with 'hem;
Or beg, of the bridges, here in Rome, whose arches
Their active industry hath saved.
See, Fathers,
What minds, and spirits these are, that, being convicted
Of such a treason, and by such a cloud
Of witnesses, dare yet retain their boldness?
What would their rage have done, if they had conquered?
I thought, when I had thrust out CATILINE,
Neither the state, nor I, should need t'haue feared
LENTVLVS sleep here, or LONGINVS fat,
Or this CETHEGVS rashness; it was he,
I only watched, while he was in our walls,
As one, that had the brain, the hand, the heart.
But now, we find the contrary! Where was there
A people grieved, or a state discontent,
Able to make, or help a war against Rome,
But these, the ALLOBROGES, and those they found?
Whom had not the just gods been pleased to make
More friends unto our safety, then their own,
As it then seemed, neglecting these men's offers,
Where had we been? or where the common-wealth?
When their great Chief had been called home? this man,
Their absolute king (whose noble grand-father,
Armed in pursuit of the seditious GRACCHVS,
Took a brave wound, for dear defence of that,
Which he would spoil) had gathered all his aides
Of ruffians, slaves, and other slaughter-men?
Given vs up for murder, to CETHEGVS?
The other rank of citizens, to GABINIVS?
The city, to be fired by CASSIVS?
And Italy, nay the world, to be laid wast
By cursed CATILINE, and his accomplices?
Lay but the thought of it, before you, Fathers,
Think but with me you saw this glorious city,
The light of all the earth, tower of all nations,
Suddenly falling in one flame. Imagine,
You viewed your country buried with the heaps
Of slaughtered citizens, that had no grave;
This LENTVLVS here, reigning, (as he dreamt)
And those his purple Senate; CATILINE come
With his fierce army; and the cries of matrons,
The flight of children, and the rape of virgins,
Shrieks of the living, with the dying groans
On every side t'inuade your sense; until
The blood of Rome, were mixed with her ashes!
This was the spectacle these fiends intended
To please their malice.
I, and it would
Have been a brave one, Consul. But your part
Had not then been so long, as now it is:
I should have quite defeated your oration;
And slit that fine rhetorical pipe of yours,
In the first Scene.
Insolent monster!
Fathers,
Is it your pleasures, they shall be committed
Unto some safe, but a free custody,
Until the Senate can determine farther?
It pleases well.
Then, MARCVS CRASSVS,
Take you charge of GABINIVS: send him home
Unto your house. You CAESAR, of STATILIVS.
CETHEGVS shall be sent to CORNIFICIVS;
And LENTVLVS, to PVBLIVS LENTVLVS SPENDER,
Who now is Aedile.
It were best, the Praetors
Carried 'hem to their houses, and delivered 'hem.
Let it be so. Take 'hem from hence.
But, first,
Let LENTVLVS put off his Praetor-ship.
I doe resign it here unto the Senate.
So, now, there's no offence done to religion.
CAESAR, it was piously, and timely urged.
What doe you decree to the ALLOBROGES?
That were the lights to this discovery?
A free grant, from the state, of all their suites.
And a reward, out of the public treasure.
I, and the title of honest men, to crown 'hem.
What to VOLTVRTIVS?
Life, and fauour's well.
I ask no more.
Yes, yes, some money, thou need it.
Twill keep thee honest: want made thee a knave.
Let FLACCVS, and POMTINIVS, the Praetors,
Have public thanks, and QVINTVS FABIVS SANGA,
For their good service.
They deserve it all.
But what doe we decree unto the Consul,
Whose virtue, counsel, watchfulness, and wisdom,
Hath freed the common-wealth, and without tumult,
Slaughter, or blood, or scarce raising a force,
Rescued vs all out of the jaws of fate?
We owe our lives unto him, and our fortunes.
Our wives, our children, parents, and our gods.
We all are saved, by his fortitude.
The common-wealth owes him a ciuicke gyrland.
He is the only father of his country.
Let there be public prayer, to all the gods,
Made in that name, for him.
And in these words.
For that he hath, by his vigilance, preserved
Rome from the flame, the Senate from the sword,
And all her citizens from massacre.
How are my labours more then paid, grave Fathers,
In these great titles, and decreed honours!
Such, as to me, first, of the civil robe,
Of any man, since Rome was Rome, have happened;
And from this frequent Senate: which more glads me,
That I now see, yo'haue sense of your own safety.
If those good days come no less grateful to vs,
Wherein we are preserved from some great danger,
Then those, wherein w'are borne, and brought, to light,
Because the gladness of our safety is certain,
But the condition of our birth not so;
And that we are saved with pleasure, but are borne
Without the sense of joy: why should not, then,
This day, to vs, and all posterity
Of ours, be had in equal fame, and honour,
With that, when ROMVLVS first reared these walls,
When so much more is saved, then he built?
It ought.
Let it be added to our Fasti.
What tumult's that?
Here's one TARQVINIVS taken,
Going to CATILINE; and says he was sent
By MARCVS CRASSVS: whom he names, to be
Guilty of the conspiracy.
Some lying varlet.
Take him away, to prison.
Bring him in,
And let me see him.
He is not worth it, CRASSVS.
Keep him up close, and hungry, till he tell,
By whose pernicious counsel, he durst slander
So great, and good a citizen.
By yours
I fear, twill prove.)
Some of the traitors, sure,
To give their action the more credit, bid him
Name you, or any man.
I know my self,
By all the tracts, and courses of this business,
CRASSVS is noble, just, and loves his country.
Here is a libel too, accusing CAESAR,
From LVCIVS VECTIVS, and confirmed by CVRIVS.
Away with all, throw it out of the court.
A trick on me, too?
It is some men's malice.
I said to CVRIVS, I did not believe him.
Was not that CVRIVS your spy, that had
Reward decreed unto him, the last Senate,
With FVLVIA, upon your private motion?
Yes.
But, he has not that reward, yet?
No.
Let not this trouble you, CAESAR, none believes it.
It shall not, if that he have no reward.
But if he have, sure I shall think my self
Very untimely, and vnsafely honest,
Where such, as he is, may have pay t'accuse me.
You shall have no wrong done you, noble CAESAR,
But all contentment.
Consul, I am silent.
I Never yet knew, Soldiers, that, in fight,
Words added virtue unto valiant men;
Or, that a generals oration made
An army fall, or stand: but how much prowess
Habitual, or natural each mans breast
Was owner of, so much in act it showed.
Whom neither glory' or danger can excite,
It is vain t'attempt with speech: for the minds fear
Keeps all brave sounds from entering at that ear.
I, yet, would warn you some few things, my friends,
And give you reason of my present counsels.
You know, no less then I, what state, what point
Our affairs stand in; and you all have heard,
What a calamitous misery the sloth,
And sleepiness of LENTVLVS, hath plucked
Both on himself, and vs: how, whilst our aides
There, in the citie-look'd for, are defeated,
Our entrance into Galley, too, is stopped.
Two armies wait vs: one from Rome, the other
From the Gaule-Prouinces. And, where we are,
(Although I most desire it) the great want
Of corn, and victual, forbids longer stay.
So that, of need, we must remove, but whither
The sword must both direct, and cut the passage.
I only, therefore, wish you, when you strike,
To have your valours, and your souls, about you;
And think, you carry in your labouring hands
The things you seek, glory, and liberty,
Your country, which you want now, with the Fates,
That are to be instructed, by our swords.
If we can give the blow, all will be safe to vs.
We shall not want provision, nor supplies.
The colonies, and free towns will lye open.
Where, if we yield to fear, expect no place,
Nor friend, to shelter those, whom their own fortune,
And ill used arms have left without protection.
You might have lived in servitude, or exile,
Or safe at Rome, depending on the great ones;
But that you thought those things unfit for men.
And, in that thought, you then were valiant.
For no man ever yet changed peace for war,
But he, that meant to conquer. Hold that purpose.
There's more necessity, you should be such,
In fighting for your selves, then they for others.
Hoe's base, that trusts his feet, whose hands are armed.
Me thinks, I see Death, and the Furies, waiting
What we will doe; and all the heauen' at leisure
For the great spectacle. Draw, then, your swords:
And, if our destiny envy our virtue
The honour of the day, yet let vs care
To sell our selves, at such a price, as may
Vn-doe the world, to buy vs; and make Fate,
While she tempts ours, fear her own estate.
What means this hasty calling of the Senate?
We shall know straight. Wait, till the Consul speaks.
Fathers Conscript, bethink you of your safeties,
And what to doe, with these conspirators;
Some of their clients, their freed men, and slaves
Gin to make head: there is one of LENTVLVS bawds
Runs up and down the shops, through every street,
With money to corrupt, the poor artificers,
And needy tradesmen, to their aide. CETHEGVS
Hath sent, too, to his servants; who are many,
Chosen, and exercised in bold attemptings,
That forth-with they should arm themselves, and prove
His rescue: All will be in instant uproar,
If you prevent it not, with present counsels.
We have done what we can, to meet the fury,
And will doe more. Be you good to your selves.
What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?
SYLLANVS, you are Consul next designed.
Your sentence, of these men.
It is short, and this.
Since they have sought to blot the name of Rome,
Out of the world; and raze this glorious empire
With her own hands, and arms, turned on her self:
I think it fit they die. And, could my breath
Now, execute 'hem, they should not enjoy
An article of time, or eye of light,
Longer, to poison this our common ayre.
I think so too.
And I.
And I.
And I.
Your sentence, CAIVS CAESAR.
Conscript Fathers,
In great affairs, and doubtful, it behooves
Men, that are asked their sentence, to be free
From either hate, or love, anger, or pity:
For, where the least of these doehinder, there
The mind not easily discerns the truth.
I speak this to you, in the name of Rome,
For whom you stand; and to the present cause:
That this foul fact of LENTVLVS, and the rest,
Weigh not more with you, then your dignity;
And you be more indulgent to your passion,
Then to your honour. If there could be found
A pain, or punishment, equal to their crimes,
I would devise, and help: but, if the greatness
Of what they have done, exceed all mans invention,
I think it fit, to stay, where our laws doe.
Poor petty states may alter, upon humour,
Where, if they' offend with anger, few doe know it,
Because they are obscure; their fame, and fortune
Is equal, and the same. But they, that are
Head of the world, and live in that seen height,
All mankind knows their actions. So wee see,
The greater fortune hath the lesser licence.
They must nor favour, hate, and least be angry:
For what with others is called anger, there,
Is cruelty, and pride. I know SYLLANVS,
Who spoke before me, a just, valiant man,
A lover of the state, and one that would not,
In such a business, use or grace, or hatred;
I know, too, well, his manners, and modesty:
Nor doe I think his sentence cruel (for
Against such delinquents, what can be too bloody?)
But that it is abhorring from our state;
Since to a citizen of Rome, offending,
Our laws give exile, and not death. Why then
Decrees he that? It were vain to think, for fear;
When, by the diligence of so worthy a Consul,
All is made safe, and certain. Is it for punishment?
Why, death's the end of evils, and a rest,
Rather then torment: It dissolves all griefs.
And beyond that, is neither care, nor joy.
You hear, my sentence would not have 'hem die.
How then? set free, and increase CATILINES army?
So will they, being but banished. No, grave Fathers,
I judge 'hem, first, to have their states confiscate,
Then, that their persons remain prisoners
In the free towns, far off from Rome, and severed:
Where they might neither have relation,
Hereafter, to the Senate, or the people.
Or, if they had, those towns, then to be mulcted,
As enemies to the state, that had their guard.
It is good, and honourable, CAESAR, hath vtterd.
Fathers, I see your faces, and your eyes
All bent on me, to note of these two censures,
Which I incline to. Either of them are grave,
And answering the dignity of the speakers,
The greatness of th'affaire, and both severe.
One urges death: and he may well remember
This state hath punished wicked citizens so.
The other bonds: and those perpetual, which
He thinks found out for the more singular plague.
Decree, which you shall please. You have a Consul,
Not readier to obey, then to defend,
What ever you shall act, for the republique;
And meet with willing shoulders any burden,
Or any fortune, with an even face,
Though it were death: which to a valiant man
Can never happen foul, nor to a Consul
Be immature, or to a wise man wretched.
Fathers, I spake, but as I thought: the needs
Of th'common-wealth required.
Excuse it not.
CATO, speak you your sentence.
This it is.
You here dispute, on kinds of punishment,
And stand consulting, what you should decree
Against those, of whom, you rather should beware,
This mischief is not like those common facts,
Which, when they are done, the laws may prosequute.
But this, if you provide not, ere it happen,
When it is happened, will not wait your judgment.
Good CAIVS CAESAR, here, hath very well,
And subtly discoursed of life, and death,
As if he thought those things, a pretty fable,
That are delivered vs of hell, and furies,
Or of the divers way, that ill men go
From good, to filthy, dark, and ugly places.
And therefore, he would have these live; and long too;
But far from Rome, and in the small free towns,
Lest, here, they might have rescue: As if men,
Fit for such acts, were only in the city,
And not throughout all Italy? or, that boldness
Could not doe more, where it found least resistance?
It is a vain counsel, if he think them dangerous.
Which, if he doe not, but that he alone,
In so great fear of all men, stand vn-frighted,
He gives me cause, and you, more to fear him.
I am plain, Fathers. Here you look about,
One at another, doubting what to doe;
With faces, as you trusted to the gods,
That still have saved you; and they can do it: But,
They are not wishings, or base womanish prayers,
Can draw their aides; but vigilance, counsel, action:
Which they will be ashamed to forsake.
It is sloth they hate, and cowardice. Here, you have
The traitors in your houses, yet, you stand,
Fearing what to doe with 'hem; Let 'hem loose,
And send 'hem hence with arms, too; that your mercy
May turn your misery, as soon is it can.
O, but they, are great men, and have offended,
But, through ambition. We would spare their honour:
I, if themselves had spared it, or their fame,
Or modesty, or either god, or man:
Then I would spare 'hem. But, as things now stand,
Fathers, to spare these men, were to commit
A greater wickedness, then you would revenge.
If there had been but time, and place, for you,
To have repaired this fault, you should have made it;
It should have been your punishment, to'haue felt
Your tardy error: but necessity,
Now, bids me say, let 'hem not live an hour,
If you mean Rome should live a day. I have done.
CATO hath spoken like an oracle.
Let it be so decreed.
We are all fearful.
And had been base, had not his virtue raised vs.
Go forth, most worthy Consul, we'll assist you.
I'am not yet changed in my sentence, Fathers.
No matter. What be those?
Letters, for CAESAR.
From whom? let 'hem be read, in open Senate;
Fathers, they come from the conspirators.
I crave to have 'hem read, for the republique.
CATO, read you it. It is a loue-letter,
From your dear sister, to me: though you hate me.
Doe not discover it.
Hold thee, drunkard. Consul.
Go forth, and confidently.
You'll repent
This rashness, CICERO.
CAESAR shall repent it.
Hold friends.
Hoe's scarce a friend unto the public.
No violence. CAESAR, be safe. Lead on:
Where are the public executioners?
Bid 'hem wait on vs. On, to SPENDERS house.
Bring LENTVLVS forth. Here, you, the sad revengers
Of capital crimes, against the public, take
This man unto your justice: strangle him.
Thou dost well, Consul. It was a cast at dice,
In FORTUNES hand, not long since, that thy self
Should have heard these, or other words as fatal.
Lead on, to QVINTVS CORNIFICIVS house.
Bring forth CETHEGVS. Take him to the due
Death, that he hath deserved: and let it be
Said, He was once.
A beast, or, what is worse,
A slave, CETHEGVS. Let that be the name
For all that's base, hereafter: That would let
This worm pronounce on him; and not have trampled
His body into Ha! Art thou not moved?
Justice is never angry: Take him hence.
O, the whore FORTUNE! and her bawds the Fates!
That put these tricks on men, which knew the way
To death by' a sword. Strangle me, I may sleep:
I shall grow angry with the gods, else.
Lead
To CAIVS, CAESAR, for STATILIVS.
Bring him, and rude GABINIVS, out. Here, take 'hem
To your cold hands, and let 'hem feel death from you.
I thank you, you doe me a pleasure.
And me too.
So, MARCVS TVLLIVS, thou moist now stand up,
And call it happy Rome, thou being Consul.
Great parent of thy country, go, and let
The old men of the city, ere they die,
Kiss thee; the matrons dwell about thy neck;
The youths, and maids, lay up, against they are old,
What kind of man thou were, to tell their nephews,
When, such a year, they read, within our Fasti,
Thy Consul-ship. Who's this? PETREIVS?
Welcome,
Welcome, renowned soldier. What's the news?
This face can bring no ill with it, unto Rome.
How do's the worthy Consul, my colleague?
As well as victory can make him, sir.
He greets the Fathers, and to me hath trusted
The sad relation of the civil strife;
For, in such war, the conquest still is black.
Shall we with-draw into the house of Concord?
No, happy Consul, here; let all ears take
The benefit of this tale. If he had voice,
To spread unto the poles, and strike it through
The center, to the Antipodes; It would ask it.
The straights, and needs of CATILINE being such,
As he must fight with one of the two armies,
That then had near enclosed him; It pleased Fate,
To make vs th'obiect of his desperate choice,
Wherein the danger almost poised the honour:
And as he riss', the day grew black with him;
And Fate descended nearer to the earth,
As if she meant, to hide the name of things,
Under her wings, and make the world her quarry.
At this we roused, lest one small minutes stay
Had left it to be' enquired, what Rome was.
And (as we ought) armed in the confidence
Of our great cause, in form of battle, stood.
Whilst CATILINE came on, not with the face
Of any man, but of a public ruin:
His countenance was a civil war it self.
And all his host had standing in their looks,
The paleness of the death, that was to come.
Yet cried they out like vultures, and urged on,
As if they would precipitate our fates.
Nor staid we longer for 'hem; But himself
Struck the first stroke: And, with it, fled a life.
Which cut, it seemed, a narrow neck of land,
Had broke between two mighty seas; and either
Flowed into other; for so did the slaughter:
And whirled about, as when two violent tides
Meet, and not yield. The Furies stood, on hills,
Circling the place, and trembled to see men
Doe more, then they: whilst piety left the field,
Grieved for that side, that, in so bad a cause,
They knew not, what a crime their valour was.
The sun stood still, and was, behind the cloud
The battle made, seen sweating, to drive up
His frighted horse, whom still the noise drove backward.
And now had fierce ENYO, like a flame,
Consumed all it could reach, and then it self;
Had not the fortune of the common-wealth
Come PALLAS-like, to every Roman thought.
Which CATILINE seeing, and that now his troops
Covered that earth, they' had fought on, with their trunks,
Ambitious of great fame, to crown his ill,
Collected all his fury, and ran in
(Armed with a glory, high as his despair)
Into our battle, like a Lybian lyon,
Upon his hunters, scornful of our weapons,
Careless of wounds, plucking down lives about him,
Till he had circled in himself with death:
Then fell he too, to embrace it where it lay.
And as, in that rebellion against the gods,
MINERVA holding forth MEDVSA'S head,
One of the giant brethren felt himself
Grow marble at the killing sight, and now,
Almost made stone, began t'inquire, what flint,
What rock it was, that crept through all his limbs,
And, ere he could think more, was that he feared;
So CATILINE, at the sight of Rome in vs,
Became his tomb: yet did his look retain
Some of his fierceness, and his hands still moved,
As if he laboured, yet, to grasp the state,
With those rebellious parts.
A brave bad death.
Had this been honest now, and for his country,
As it was against it, who had ere fallen greater?
Honoured PETREIVS, Rome, not I, must thank you.
How modestly has he spoken of himself!
He did the more.
Thanks to the immortal gods,
Romans, I now am paid for all my labours,
My watchings, and my dangers. Here conclude
Your praises, triumphs, honours, and rewards,
Decreed to me: only the memory
Of this glad day, if I may know it live
Within your thoughts, shall much affect my conscience,
Which I must always study before fame.
Though both be good, the latter yet is worst,
And ever is ill got, without the first.

Dost thou not feel me, Rome? Not yet? Is night
So heavy on thee, and my weight so light?
Can Sylla's Ghost arise within thy walls,
Less threatening, then an earth-quake, the quick falls
Of thee, and thine? shake not the frighted heads
Of thy steep towers? or shrink to their first beds?
Or, as their ruin the large Tyber fills,
Make that swell up, and drown thy seven proud hills?
What sleep is this doth seize thee, so like death,
And is not it? Wake, feel her, in my breath.
Behold, I come, sent from the Stygian Sound,
As a dire Vapor, that had cleft the ground,
T'ingender with the night, and blast the day;
Or like a Pestilence, that should display
Infection through the world: which, thus, I doe.
Pluto be at thy councels; and into
Thy darker bosom enter Sylla's spirit:
All, that was mine, and bad, thy breast inherit.
Alas, how weak is that, for Catiline!
Did I but say (vain voice) all that was mine?
All, that the Gracchi, Cinna, Marius would;
What now, had I a body again, I could,
Coming from hell; what Fiends would wish should be;
And Hannibal could not have wished to see:
Think thou, and practise. Let the long-hid seeds
Of treason, in thee, now shoot forth in deeds,
Ranker then horror; and thy former facts
Not fall in mention, but to urge new acts:
Conscience of them provoke thee on to more.
Be still thy Incsts, Murders, Rapes before
Thy sense; thy forcing first a Vestal Nun;
Thy parricide, late, on thine own natural Son,
After his Moher, to make empty way
For thy last wicked Nuptials; worse, then they,
That fame that act of thy incestuous life,
Which got thee, at once, a Daughter, and a Wife.
I leave the slaughters, that thou did for me,
Of Senators; for which, I hid for thee
Thy murder of thy Brother, (being so bribed)
And writ him in the list of my proscribed
After thy fact, to save thy little shame:
Thy incest, with thy Sister, I not name.
These are too light. Fate will have thee pursue
Deeds, after which no Mischief can be new;
The ruin of thy Country: Thou were built
For such a work, and borne for no less guilt:
What though defeated once th'hast been, and known,
Tempt it again; That is thy act, or none.
What all the several Ills, that visit earth,
(Brought forth by night, with a sinister birth)
Plagues, Famine, Fire could not reach unto,
The Sword, nor Surfeits; let thy fury doe:
Make all past, present, future ill thine own;
And conquer all example, in thy one.
Nor let thy thought find any vacant time
To hate an old, but still a fresher crime
Drown the remembrance; Let not mischief cease,
But, while it is in punishing, increase.
Conscience, and care die in thee; And be free
Not Heaven it self from thy impiety:
Let Night grow blacker with thy plots; and Day,
At showing but thy head forth, start away
From this halfe-Spheare: and leave Romes blinded walls
To embrace lusts, hatreds, slaughters, funerals,
And not recover sight, till their own flames
Doe light them to their ruins. All the names
Of thy Confederates, too, be no less great
In hell, then here; That, when we would repeat
Our strengths in Muster, we may name you all,
And Furies, upon you, for Furies, call.
Whilst, what you doe, doth strike them into fears,
Or make them grieve, and wish your mischief theirs.
IT is decreed. Nor shall thy Fate,  Rome,
Resist my vow. Though Hills were set on Hills,
And Seas met Seas, to guard thee; I would through:
I, plough up rocks, steep as the Alps, in dust;
And lave the Tyrrhene waters, into clouds;
But I would reach thy head, thy head, proud City:
The ills, that I have done, cannot be safe
But by attempting greater; and I feel
A spirit, within me, chides my sluggish hands.
And says, they have been innocent too long.
Was I a Man, bred great, as Rome her self?
One, formed for all her honours, all her glories?
Equal to all her titles? That could stand
Close up, with Atlas; and sustain her name
As strong, as he doth Heaven? And, was I,
Of all her brood, marked out for the repulse
By her no voice, when I stood Candidate,
To be Commander in the Ponticke war?
I will, hereafter, call her Stepdame, ever.
If she can loose her nature, I can loose
My piety; and in her stony entrails
Dig me a seat: where, I will live, again,
The labour of her womb, and be a burden
Weightier then all the Prodigies, and Monsters,
That she hath teem'd with, since she first knew Mars.
WHo's there?
Tic I.
Aurelia?
Yes.
Appear,
And break, like day, my beauty, to this circle:
Upbraid thy Phoebus, that he is so long
In mounting to that point, which should give thee
Thy prper splendour. Wherefore frowns my sweet?
Have I too long been absent from these lips,
This cheek, these eyes? what is my trepase? speak.
It seems, you know, that can accuse your self.
I will redeem it.
Still, you say so. When?
When Orestilla by her bearing well
These my retirements, and stolen times for thought
Shall give their effects leave to call her Queen
Or all the world, in place of humbled Rome.
You court me, now.
As I would always, Love,
By  Ambrosiacke kisse, and this of Nectar,
Would thou but hear as gladly, as I speak.
Could my Aurelia think, I meant her less;
When, wooing her, I first removed a Wife,
And then a Son, to make my bed, and house
Spacious, and sir to embrace her? These were deeds
Not t'haue begun with, but to end with more,
And greatr: " He that, building, stays at one
" Floor, or the second, hath erected none.
It was how to raise thee, I was meditating;
To make some act of mine answer thy love:
That love, that, when my state was now quite sunk,
Came with thy wealth, and weight it up again,
And made my emergent Fortune once more look
Aboue the maine; which, now, shall hit the stars,
And stick my Orestilla, there, amongst 'hem,
If any tempest can but make the billow,
And any billow can but lift her greatness.
But, I must pray my love, she will put on
Like habits with my self. I have to doe
With many men, and many natures. Some,
That must be blown, and soothed; as Lentulus,
Whom I have heaved, with magnifying his blood,
And a vain dream, out of the Sybill's books,
That a third man, of that great family
Whereof he is descended, the Cornelij,
Should be a King in Rome: which I have hired
The flattering Augurs to interpret him,
Cinna, and Sylla dead. Then, bold Cethegus,
Whose valour I have turned into his poison,
And praised so into daring, as he would
Go on upon the Gods, kisse lightning, wrest
The engine from the Cyclop's, and give fire
At face of a full cloud, and stand his ire,
When I would bid him move. Others there are
Whom envy to the state draws, and pus on,
For contumelies received, (and such are sure ones)
As Curius, and the fore-nam'd Lentulus,
Both which have been degraded, in the Senate,
And must have their disgraces, still, new rubbed,
To make 'hem smart, and labour of revenge.
Others, whom mere ambition fires, and dole
Of Provinces abroad, which they have faind
To their crude hopes, and I as amply promised:
Thee, Less Vargunteius, Bestia, Autronius,
Some, whom their wants oppress, as th'idle Captains
Of Sylla's troops; and divers Roman Knights
(The profuse wasters of their patrimonies)
So threatened with debts, as they will, now,
Run any desperate fortune, for a change.
These, for a time, we must rlieve, Aurelia,
And make our house their saue-gard. Like, for those,
That fear the law, or stand within her gripe,
For any act past, or to come. Such will
From their own crimes, be factious, as from ours.
Some more there be flight Ayrelings, will be won,
With dogs, and horses; or, perhaps, a whore;
Which must be had: And, if they venture lives,
For vs Aurelia, we must hazard honours
A little. Get thee store, and change of women,
As I have boys; and give 'hem time, and place,
And all conniuence: Be thy self, too, courtly;
And entertain, and feast, sit up, and revel;
Call all the great, the fair, and spirited Dames
Of Rome about thee, and begin a fashion
Of freedom, &amp; community. Some will thank thee,
Though the sour Senate frown, whose heads must ache
In fear, and feeling too. We must not spare
Or cost, or modesty. It can but show
Like one of Iuno's, or of Ioue's disguises
In either thee, or me; and will as soon,
When things succeed, be thrown by, or let fall;
As is a veil put of, a visor changed,
Or the Scene shifted, in our Theaters.
Who's that? It is the voice of Lentulus.
Or of Cethegus.
In, my fair Aurelia,
And think upon these arts: They must not see,
How far you are trusted with these privacies;
Though, by their shoulders, necks, &amp; heads you rise.
IT is, me thinks, a Morning, full of Fate.
It rises slowly, as her sollen carre
Had all the weights of sleep, and death hung at it.
She is not rosy-fingerd, but swollen black.
Her face is like a water, turned to blood,
And her sick head is bound about with clouds,
As if she threatened night, ere noon of day.
It does not look, as it would have a Hail
Or Health, wished in it, as on other Morns.
Why, all the fitter, Lentulus: Our coming
Is not for salutation, we have business.
Said nobly, brave Cethegus. Whore's Autronius?
Is he not come?
Not here.
Nor Vargunteius?
Neither.
A fire in their beds, and bosoms,
That so will serve their sloth, rather then virtue.
They are no Romans, and at such high need
As now.
Both they, Longinus, Less, Curius,
Fuluius, Gabinius, gave me word, last night,
By Lucius Bestia, they would all be here,
And early.
Yes. As you, had I not called you.
Come, we all sleep, and are mere Dormice; Flies,
A little less then dead: More dullness hangs
On vs, then on the Morn. W'are spirit-bound,
In ribs of ice; our whole bloods are one stone;
And Honour cannot thaw vs; nor our wants,
Though they burn, hot as fevers, to our states.
I muse they would be tardy, at an hour
Of so great purpose.
If the Gods had called
Them, to a purpose, they would just have come
With the same Tortoise speed, that are thus sloe
To such an action, which the Gods will envy.
As asking no less means, then all their powers
Conjoined, t'effect. I would have seen Rome burned,
By this time; and her ashes in an Urn:
The Kingdom of the Senate, rent asunder;
And the degenerate, talking Gown, run frighted,
Out of the ayre of Italy.
Spirit of men!
Thou, heart of our great enterprise! how much
I lou these voices in thee!
O the days
Of Sylla's sway, when the free sword took leave
To act all that it would!
And was familiar
With entrails, as our Augurs!
Sons kilt Fathers,
Brothers their Brothers.
And had price and praise.
All hate had licence given it; all rage raynes.
Slaughter bestride the streets, and stretched himself
To seem more huge; whilst to his stained thighs
The gore he drew flowed up: and carried down
Whole heaps of limbs, and bodies, through his arch.
No Age was spared, no Sex.
Nay, no Degree.
Not Infants, in the poch of life were free.
The Sick, the Old, that could but hope a day
Longer, by natures bounty, not let stay.
Virgins, and Widows, Matrons, prognant Wives,
All dyed.
It was crime enough, that they had lives.
To strike but only those, that could doe hurt,
Was dull, and poor. Some fell to make the number
As some the prey.
The rugged Charon fainted,
Ad asked a naue, rather then a boat,
To ferry over the sad world that came:
The mawes, ad dens of beasts could not receive
The bodies, that those souls were frighted from;
Ad even te graves were filled with men yet living,
Whose flight, and fear had mixed them, with the dead.
And this shall be again, and more, and more,
Now Lentulus, the third Cornelius,
Is to stand up in Rome.
Nay, urge not that
Is so uncertain.
How!
I mean, not cleared.
And, therefore, not to be reflected on.
The Sybill's leaves uncertain? or the Comments
Of our grave, deep, divining men no clear?
All Prophecies, you know, suffer the torture.
But this, already, hath confessed without.
And so been weighed, examined, and compared,
As 't were malicious ignorance in him,
Woud aint in the belief.
Doe you believe it?
Doe I love Lentulus? or pray to see it?
The Augurs all are constant, I am meant.
They had lost their science else.
They count from Cinna.
And Sylla nix, and so make you the third;
All that can say the Sun is ris'n, must think it.
Men mark me more, of late, as I come forth.
Why, what can they doe less? Cinna, and Sylla
Are set, and gone: And we must turn our eyes
On him that is, and shines. Noble Cethegus,
But view him with me, here: He looks, already,
As if he shook a Sceptre, o'er the Senate,
And the awed purple dropped their rods, and axes.
The Statues melt again; and household Gods
In groans confess the travail of the City;
The very walls sweat blood before the change;
And stones start out to ruin, ere it comes.
But he, and we, and all are idle still.
I am your creature, Sergius: And what ere
The great Cornelian Name shall win to be,
It is not Augury, nor the Sybils Books,
But Catiline that makes it.
I am shadow
To honoured Lentulus, and Cethegus here,
Who are the heirs of Mars.
By Mars himself,
Catiline is more my parent: For whose virtue
Earth cannot make a shadow great enough,
Though Envy should come too. O, there they'are.
Now we shall talk more, though we yet doe nothing.
Hail Lucius Catiline.
Hail noble Sergius.
Hail Publius Lentulus.
Hail the third Cornelius.
Caius Cethegus hail.
Hail sloth, and words,
In steed of Men, and Spirits.
Nay, dear Caius;
Are your eyes yet uneel'd? Dare they look day
In the dull face?
Hoe's zealous, for the'affaire;
And blames your tardy coming, Gentlemen.
Unless, we had sold our selves to sleep, and ease,
And would be our slaves slaves.
Pray you forbear.
The North is not so stark, and cold.
Cethegus.
We shall redeem all, if your fire will let vs.
You are too full of lightning, noble Caius.
Boy, see all doors be shut, that none approach vs,
On this part of the house. Go you, and bid
The Priest, he kill the slave I marked last night;
And bring me of his blood, when I shall call him:
Till then, waite all without.
How is it, Autronius!
Longinus?
Curius?
Less?
Feel you nothing?
A strange, unwonted horror doth invade me,
I know not what it is!
The day goes back,
Or else my senses!
As at Atreus feast!
Darkness grows more &amp; more!
The Vest all flame,
I think, be out.
What groan was that?
Our phant'sies.
Strike fire, out of our selves, and force a day.
Again it sounds! BES. As all the City gave it!
We fear what our selves fine.
What light is this?
Look forth. Len. It still grows greater.
From whece comes it?
A Bloody arm it is, that holds a pine
Lighted, aboue the Capitol: And, now,
It waives unto vs.
Brave, and ominous!
Our enterprise is sealed.
In spite of darkness,
That would discountenance it. Look no more;
We loose time, and our selves: To what we came for,
Speak Lucius, we attend you.
Noblest Romans,
If you were less, or, that your faith, and virtue
Did not hold good that title, with your blood,
I should not, now, unprofitably spend
My self in words, or catch at empty hopes,
By airy ways, for solide certainties.
But since in many, and the greatest dangers,
I still have known you no less true, then valiant,
And that I taste, in you, the same affections,
To will, or nill, to think things good, or bad,
Alike with me: (which argues your firm friendship)
I dare the boldlier, with you, set on foot,
Or lead, unto this great, and goodliest action.
What I have thought of it before, you all
Have heard apart; I then expressed my zeal
Unto the glory; Now, the need inflames me:
When I fore-thinke the hard conditions,
Our states must undergo, except, in time,
We do redeem our selves to liberty,
And break the iron yoke, forged for our necks.
For, what less can we call it? when we see
The common-wealth engrossed so by a few,
The Giants of the state, that do, by turns,
Enjoy her, and defile her. All the Earth,
Her Kings, and Tetrarchs, are their tributaries;
People, and Nations pay them hourly stipends:
The riches of the world flows to their coffers,
And not, to Romes. While (but those few) the rest,
How ever great we are, honest, and valiant,
Are hearded with the vulgar; and so kept,
As we were only bred, to consume corn,
Or wear out wool, to drink the Cities water:
Vngrac'd, without authority, or mark,
Trembling beneath their rods, to whom, (if all
Were well in Rome) we should come forth bright axes.
All Places, Honours, Offices are theirs;
Or where they will confer 'hem: They leave vs
The dangers, the repulses, judgements, wants;
Which how long will you bear most valiant spirits?
Were we not better to fall, once, with virtue,
Then draw a wretched, and dishonoured breath
To loose with shame, when these men's pride will laugh?
I call the faith of Gods, and Men to question;
The power is in our hands; our bodies able;
Our minds as strong; Of the contrary, in them,
All things grown aged, with their wealth, and years.
There wants, but only to begin the business,
The issue is certain.
LONE. On, Let vs go on.
BES. Go on, brave Sergius.
It doth strike my soul,
(And, who can scope the stroke, that hath a soul,
Or, but the smallest ayre of Man within him?)
To see them swell with treasure; which they pour
Out i'their riots, eating, drinking, building,
I, in the sea: planing of Hills with Valleys;
And raising Valleys aboue Hills, whilst wee
Have not, to give our Bodies Necessaries.
They have their change of Houses, Manors, Lordships;
We scarce a fire, or poor household Lar.
They buy rare Attic statues, Tyrian hangings,
Ephesian pictures, and Corinthian plate,
Attalicke garments, and, now new-found, Gems
Since Pompey went for Asia; which they purchase
At price of Provinces. The River Phases
Cannot afford 'hem Foul; nor Lucrine Lake
Oysters enough: Circei, too, is searched
To please the witty Gluttony of a meal.
Their ancient Habitations they neglect,
And set up new; Then, if the Echo like not
In such a room, they pluck down those; build newer,
Alter them too; and, by all frantic ways,
Vex their wild wealth, as they molest the people,
From whom they force it; Yet, they cannot tame,
Or overcome their riches: Not, by making,
Bathes, Orchards, Fish-pooles, letting in of seas,
Here; and, then there, forcing 'hem out again,
With mountainous heaps; for which the Earth hath lost
Most of her ribs, as entrails, being now
Wounded no less for Marble, then for gold.
We, all this while, like calm, benumbed Spectators,
Sit, till our seats do crack; and doe not hear
The thundering ruins, whilst, at home, our wants,
Abroad, our debts do urge vs, our states daily
Bending to bad, our hopes to worse: And, what
Is left, but to be crushed? Wake, wake brave Friends,
And meet the liberty you oft have wished for.
Behold, renown, riches, and glory court you.
Fortune holds out these to you, as rewards.
Me thinks (though I were dumb) th'affaire it self
The opportunity, your needs, and dangers,
With the brave spoil the war brings, should inuit you.
Use me your General, or Soldier: Neither,
My Mind, nor Body shall be wanting to you.
And, being Consul, I not doubt t'effect,
All that you wish: If Trust not flatter me,
And you had, rather, still be slaves, then free.
Free, free.
Tic freedom.
Freedom we all stand for.
Why, these are noble voices. Nothing wants then,
But that we take a solemn Sacrament,
To strengthen our design.
And so to act it.
Differing hurts, where powers are most prepared.
Yet, ere we enter into open act,
(With favour) 't were no loss, if it might be enquired
What the Condition of these Arms would be?
I, and the means, to carry vs through.
How, Friends!
Think you, that I would bid you, grasp the wind?
Or call you to th'embracing of a cloud?
Put your known valures on so dear a business,
And have no other second then the Danger,
Nor other Gyrlond then the loss? Become
Your own assurances. And, for the means,
Consider, first, the stark security
The common wealth is in, now; the whole Senate
Sleepy, and dreaming no such violent blow;
Their forces all abroad; of which the greatest,
That might annoy vs most, is fardest off,
In Asia, under Pompey: Those, near hand,
Commanded, by our friends; one Army' in Spain,
By Cneus Peso; the other in Mauritania,
By Nucerins; both which I have firm,
And fast unto our Plot. My self, then, standing
Now to be Consul; with my hoped Colleague
Caius Antonius, one, no less engaged
By his wants then we: And whom I'haue power to melt,
And cast in any mould. Beside, some others
That will not yet be named, (both sure, and Great ones)
Who, when the time comes, shall declare themselves,
Strong, for our party; so, that no resistance
In nature can be thought. For our reward, then;
First, all our Debts are paid; Dangers of Law,
Actions, Decrees, Judgments against vs quited;
The rich Men, as in Sylla's times, proscribed,
And Publication made of all their goods;
That House is yours; That Land is his; Those Waters,
Orchards, and wakes a third's: He'has that Honour,
And he that Office. Such a Province false
To Vargunleius: This to Autronius: That
To bold Cethegus: Rome to Lentulus:
You share the World, her Magistracies, Priest-hoods,
Wealth, and Felicity amongst you, Friends;
And Catiline your servant. Would you, Curius,
Revenge the Contumely stuck upon you,
In being removed from the Senate? Now,
Now, is your time. Would Publius Lentulus
Strike, for the like disgrace? Now, is his time.
Would stout Longinus walk the streets of Rome,
Facing the Praetor? Now, has he a time
To spurn, and tread the Fasces, into dirt
Made of the Usurers, and the Lictors brains.
Is there a Beauty, here in Rome, you love?
An Enemy you would kill? What Head's not yours?
Whose Wife, which Boy, whose Daughter, of what race,
That th'Husband, or glad Parents shall not bring you,
And boasting of the office? Only, spare
Your selves, and you have all the earth beside,
A field, to exercise your longings in.
I see you raised, and read your forward minds
High, in your faces. Bring the wine, and blood
You have prepared there.
How!
I have killed a slave,
And of his blood cause to be mixed with wine.
Fill every man his bowl. There cannot be
A fitter drink, to make this Sanction in.
Here, I begin the Sacrament to all.
O, for a clap of thunder now, as loud,
As to be heard through-out the Vniuerse,
To tell the world the fact, and to applaud it.
Be firm, my hand; not shed a drop: but pour
Fiercenesse into me, with it; and fell thirst
Of more, and more: Till Rome be left as blood-lesse,
As ever her fears made her, or the sword.
And, when I leave to wish this to thee, Stepdame
Or stop, to effect it, with my powers fainting;
So may my blood be drawn, and so drunk up
As is this slaves.
And so be mine.
And mine.
And mine.
And mine.
Cown me my bowl yet fuller.
Here, I doe drink this, as I would doe Cato's,
Or the new fellow Cicero's: with that vow
Which Catiline hath given.
So doe I.
And I.
And I.
And I.
And all of vs.
Why, now's the business safe, &amp; each man strengthened.
Sirah, what ail you?
Nothing.
Somewhat modest.
Slave, I will strike your soul out, with my foot,
Let me but find you again with such a face:
You Whelp.
Nay Lucius.
Are you coying it,
When I command you to be free, and general
To all?
You'll be observed.
Arise, and show
But any least aversion in your look
To him that bourdes you next, and your throat opens.
Noble Confederates, thus far is perfect.
Only your suffrages I will expect,
At the assembly for the choosing Consuls,
And all the voices you can make by friends
To my election. Then let me work out
Your fortunes, and mine own. Mean while, all rest
Sealed up, and silent, as when rigid frosts
Have bound up Brookes, and Rivers, forced wild beasts
Unto their caves, and birds into the woods,
Clowns to their houses, and the Country sleeps;
That, when the sudden thaw comes, we may break
Upon 'hem like a deluge, bearing down
Half Rome before vs, and invade the rest
With cries, and noise able to wake the Vrnes
Of those are dead, and make their ashes fare.
" The horrors, that doe strike the world, should come
" Loud, and unlooked for; Till they strike, be dumb.
Oraculous Sergius.
God-like Catiline.
CAn nothing great, and at the height
Remain so long? but it's own weight
Will ruin it? Or, is it blind Chance,
That still desires new States t'aduance,
And quit the old? Else, why must Rome
Be by it self; now, overcome?
Hath she not foes enough of those,
Whom she hath made such, and enclose
Her round about? Or, are they none,
Except she first become her own?
O wretchedness of greatest States,
To be obnoxious to these Fates:
That cannot keep, what they doe gain;
And what they raise so ill sustain.
Rome, now, is Mistress of the whole
World, Sea, and Land, to either Pole;
And even that Fortune will destroy
The power that made it. She doth joy
So  plenty, wealth, and ease,
As, now, th'excesse is her disease.
She builds in gold; And, to the Stars:
As, if she threatened Heaven with wars;
And seeks for Hell, in quarries deep,
Giving the fiends, that there doe keep,
A hope of day. Her Women wear
The spoils of Nations, in an ear,
Changed for the treasure of a shell;
And, in their loose attires, doe swell
More light then sails, when all winds play:
Yet, are the men more loose then they,
More combed, and bathed, and rubbed, and trimmed,
More sleeked, more soft, and slacker limm'd;
As prostitute: so much, that kind
May seek it self there, and not find.
They eat on beds of silk, and gold;
At ivory tables; or, wood sold
Dearer then it: and, leaving plate,
Doe drink in stone of higher rate.
They hunt all grounds; and draw all seas;
Foul every brooke, and bush; to please
Their wanton tastes: and, in request
Have new, and rare things; not the best.
Hence comes that wild, and vast expense,
That hath enforced Romes virtue, thence,
Which simple poverty first made;
And, now, ambition doth invade
Her state, with eating avarice,
Riot, and every other vice.
Decrees are bought, and Laws are sold,
Honours, and Offices for gold;
The peoples voices: And the free
Tongues, in the Senate, bribed bee.
Such ruin of her manners Rome
Doth suffer now, as shoe's become
(Without the Gods it soon gainsay)
Both her own spoiler, and own pray.
So, Asia, 'art thou cru'lly even.
With vs, for all the blows thee given;
When we, whose virtue conquered thee,
Thus, by thy vices, ruined bee.
THose Romes doe smell extremely; Bring my glass,
And table hither, Galla.
Madame.
Look
Within, i'my blew Cabinet, for the pearl
I'had sent me last, and bring it.
That from Clodius?
From Caius Caesar. You'are for Clodius, still.
Or Curius. Sirha, if Quintus Curius come,
I am not in fit mood; I keep my Chamber:
Give warning so, without.
Is this it? Madame.
Yes, help to hang it in mine ear.
Believe me,
It is a rich one, Madame.
I hope so:
It should not be worn there else. Make an end,
And bind my hair up.
As it was yesterday?
No, nor the t'other day. When knew you me
Appear, two days together, in one dressing?
Will you have it in the globe, or spire?
How thou wilt;
Any way, so thou wilt doe it, good Impertinence.
Thy company, if I slept not very well
A nights, would make me, an errant fool, with questions.
Alas Madam.
Nay gentle half of the Dialogue, cease.
I doe it, indeed, but for your exercise,
As your Physician bids me.
How! Do's he bid you
To anger me for exercise?
Not to anger you,
But stir your blood a little: There's difference
Between luke-warme, and boiling, Madame.
Jove!
She means to cooke me, I think? Pray you, ha'done.
I mean to dress you, Madame.
O my Iuno,
Be friend to me! Offering at wit, too? Why, Galla!
Where hast thou been?
Why, Madame?
What hast thou done
With thy poor innocent self?
Wherefore, sweet Madam?
Thus to come forth, so suddenly, a wit-worme?
It pleases you to flout one. I did dream
Of Lady Sempronia.
O, the wonder is out.
That did infect thee? Well, and how?
Me thought,
She did discourse the best.
That ever thou heard?
Yes.
In thy sleep? Of what was her discourse?
Of the Republic, Madame, and the State,
And how she was in debt, and where she meant
To raise fresh sums: Shoe's a great States-woman.
Thou dreamp'tst all this?
No, but you know she is Madame,
And both a Mistress of the Latin tongue,
And of the Greek.
I, but I never dreamt it, Galla,
As thou hast done, and therefore you must pardon me.
Indeed, you mock me, Madame.
Indeed, no.
Forth with your learned Lady: She has a wit, too?
A very masculine one.
A shee-Criticke, Galla?
And can compose, in verse, and make quick jests,
Modest, or otherwise?
Yes Madame.
She can sing, too?
And play on Instruments?
Of all kinds, they say.
And doth dance rarely?
Excellent. So well,
As a bald Senator made a jest, and said,
It was better, then an honest woman need.
Tut, she may bear that. Few wise women's honesties
Will doe their courtship hurt.
Shoe's liberal too, Madam.
What of her money, or her honor, pray thee?
Of both, you know not which she doth spare least.
A comely commendation.
Troth, tic pity
She is in years.
Why Galla?
For it is.
O, is that all? I thought though had had a reason.
Why so I have. She has been a fine Lady,
And, yet, she dresses herself, (except you Madame)
One of the best in Rome: and paints, and hides
Her decays very well.
They say, it is
Rather a visor, then a face she wears.
They wrong her verily Madame, she do's sleek
With crumbs of bread, and milk, and lies a nights
In as neat gloves. But she is fine of late
To seek, more then shoe's sought to (the same is)
And so spends that way.
Thou know all. But Galla,
What say you to Catilines Lady, Orestilla?
There is the Gallant.
She do's well. She has
Very good suits, and very rich: but, then,
She cannot put 'hem on. She knows not, how
To wear a garment. You shall have her all
Jewels, and gold sometimes, so that her self
Appears the least part of her self. No' in troth,
As I live, Madame, you put 'hem all down
With your mere strength of judgment; and doe draw, too,
The world of Rome to follow you: you attire
Your self so diversely, and with that spirit,
Still to the noblest humours. They could make
Love to your dress, although your face were away, they say.
And body too, and have the better match on it?
Say they not so too, Galla? Now! What news
Travails your countenance with?
If it please you, Mada
The Lady Sempronia is lighted at the gate;
Castor, my dream, my dream.
And comes to see yo
For Venus sake, good Madame see her.
Peac
The fool is wild, I think.
And hear her talk,
Sweet Madame, of State-matters, and the Senate.
FVluia, good wench, how dost thou?
Well, Sempronia
Whither are you thus early addressed?
To see
Aurelia Orestilla. She sent for me.
I came to call thee, with me; wilt thou go?
I cannot now, in troth, I have some letters
To write, and send away.
Alas, I pity thee.
I ha'bene writing all this night, (and am
So very weary) unto all the Tribes,
And Centuries, for their voices, to help Catiline,
In his election. We shall make him Consul
I hope, amongst vs. Crassus, I, and Caesar
Will carry it for him.
Do's he stand for it?
H'is the chief Candidate.
Who stands beside?
Give me some wine, and poulder for my teeth.
Here's a good pearl in troth.
A pretty one.
A very orient one. There are Competitors,
Caius Antonius, Publius Galbe, Lucius
Cassius Longinus, Quintus Cornificiu,
Caius Licinius, and that talker, Cicero.
But Catiline, and Antonius will be chosen.
For four of the other, Lincinius, Longinus,
Galba, and Cornificius will give way.
And Cicero they will not choose.
No? Why
It will be crossed, by the Nobility.
How she do's understand the common business!
Nor, were it fit. He is but a new fellow,
An In-mate here in Rome (as Catiline calls him)
And, the Patricians should doe very ill,
To let the Consul-ship be so defiled
Is it would be, if he obtained it? A mere vpstarr,
That has no pedigree, no house, no coat,
No ensigns of a family?
He 'has virtue.
Hang virtue, where there is no blood: it is vice
And, in him, fawcinesse. Why should he presume
To be more learned, or more eloquent,
Then the Nobility? or boast any quality
Worthy a Noble man, himself not noble?
It was virtue only, at first, made all men noble.
I yield you, it might, at first, in Romes poor age;
When both her Kings, and Consuls held the plough,
Or gardened well But, now, we have no need,
To dig, or loose our sweat for it. We have wealth,
Fortune and ease, and then their stock, to spend on,
Of Name, for Virtue, which will bear vs out
Against all new comers: and can never fail vs,
While the succession stays. And, we must glorify,
A Mushrome? one of yesterday? a fine speaker?
Because he has sucked at Athens? and advance him,
To our own loss? No Fuluia. There are they
Can speak Greek too, if need were. Caesar and I
Have sate upon him; so hath Grassus, too;
And others. We have all decreed his rest,
For rising farther.
Excellent rare Lady!
Sempronia, you are beholden to my woman, here
She do's admire you.
O good Galla, how dost thou?
The better, for your learned Ladyship.
Is this grey poulder, a good Dentifrice?
You see I use it.
I have one is whiter.
It may be so.
Yet this smells well.
And cleanses
Very well, Madam, and resists the crudities.
Fuluia, I pray thee, who comes to thee, now?
Which of our great Patricians?
Faith, I keep
No Catalogue of 'hem. Sometimes I have one,
Sometimes another, as the toy takes their bloods.
Thou hast them all. Faith, when was Quintus Curius,
Thy special servant, here?
My special servant?
Yes, thy Idolater, I call him.
He may be yours,
If you do like him.
How!
He comes, not, here,
I have forbid him, hence.
Venus forbid!
Why?
Your so constant Lover.
So much the rather.
I would have change. So would you too, I am sure.
And now, you may have him.
Hoe's fresh yet, Fuluia:
Beware, how you do tempt me.
Faith, for me,
Have is somewhat too fresh, indeed. The salt is gone,
That gave him season. His good gifts are done.
He do's not yield the crop that he was wont.
And, for the act, I can have secret fellows,
With backs worth ten of him, and shall plse me
(Now that the Land is fled) a myriad better.
And those one may command.
Tic true, These Lordings,
Your noble Fauns, they are so imperious, saucy,
Rude, and as boisterous as Centaurs; leaping
A Lady, at first sight.
And must be borne
Both with, and out, they think.
Tut, Isle obferue
None of 'hem all: nor humour 'hem a jot
Longer, then they come laden in the hand,
And say, here's tone, for th'tother.
Do's Caesar give well?
They hall all give, and pay well, that come here
If they will have it; and that jewels, pearl,
Plate, or round sums, to buy these. I'am not taken
With a Cob-Swan, or a high-mounting Bull,
As foolish Leda, and Europe were,
But the bright gold, with Dane. For such price,
I would endure, a rough, harsh Iupiter,
Or ten such thundering Gamsters, and refrain
To laugh at 'hem, till they are gone, with my much suffering.
You are a most happy wench, that thus can make
Use of they youth, and freshness, in the season:
And hast it to make use of.
(Which is the happiness.)
I am, now, fine to give to them, and keep
Musique, and a continual Table, to inuit 'hem;
Yes, and they study your kitchen, more then you:
Eat my self out with usury, and my Lord, too,
And all my officers, and friends beside,
To procure monies, for the needful charge
I must be at, to have 'hem: And, yet, scarce
Can I achieve 'hem, so.
Why, that's because
You affect young faces only, and smooth chins,
Sempronia. If youl'd love beards, and bristles,
(One with another, as others doe) or wrinkles
Who's that? Look Galla.
Tic the party, Madame.
What party? Has he no name?
Tic Quintus Curius.
Did I not bid 'hem, say, I kept may chamber?
Why, so they do.
Isle leave you, Fuluia.
Nay, good Sempronia, stay.
In faith, I will not.
By Iuno, I would not see him.
Isle not hinder you.
You know, he will not be kept out, Madam.
No,
Nor shall not, careful Galla, by my means.
As I doe live, Sempronia.
What needs this?
Go, say, I am asleep, and ill at ease.
By Castor, no; I'll tell him, you are awake;
And very well. Stay Galla. Farewell Fuluia:
I know my manners. Why doe you labour, thus,
With action, against purpose? Quintus Curius,
She is, in faith, here, and in disposition:
Spite, with your curtsy. How shall I be tortured!
WHere are you, fair one, hat conceal your self;
And keep your beauty, within lockes, and bars, here,
Like a fools treasure?
True, she was a fool,
When, first she showed it to a thief.
How pretty Solennesse!
So harsh, and short?
The fools Artillery, sir.
Then, make my gown off, for the'encounter.
Stay sir.
I am not in the mood.
Isle put you into it.
Best, put your self, i'your case again, and keep
Your furious appetite warm, against you have place for it.
What! do you coy it?
No sir. I'am not proud.
I would you were. You think, this state becomes you?
By Hercules, it do's not. Look i'your glass, now,
And see, how sciruely that countenance shows;
You would be loath to own it.
I shall not change it.
Faith, but you must; and slack this bended brow;
And shoot less scorn: There is a Fortune coming
Towards you, Dainty, that will take thee, thus,
And set thee aloft, to tread upon the head
Of her own statue here in Rome.
I wonder,
Who let this Promiser in! Did you, good Diligence?
Give him his bribe, again. Or if you had none,
Pray you demand him, why he is so venturous,
To press, thus, to my chamber, being for bidden
Both, by my self, and servants?
How! This's handsome!
And somewhat a new strain!
It is not strained, Sir.
It is very natural.
I have known it otherwise,
Between the parties, though.
For your fore-knowledge,
Thank that, which made it. It will not be so,
Hereafter, I assure you.
No, my Mistress?
No though you bring the same materials.
Hear me,
You over act when you should vnderdoe.
A little call your self again, and think.
If you doe this to practise on me' or find
At what forced distance you can hold your servant;
That' it be an artificial trick, to inflame,
And fire me more, fearing my love may need it,
As, heretofore, you have done; why, proceed.
As I have done heretofore?
Yes, when you'd fine
Your husbands jealousy, your servants watches,
Speak softly, and run often to the door,
Or to the window, form strange fears that were not;
As if the pleasure were less accountable,
That were secure.
You are an impudent fellow.
And, when you might better have done it, at the gate,
To take me in at the casement.
I take you in?
Yes, you my Lady. And, then, being abed with you,
To have your well taught waiter, here, come running,
And cry, her Lord, and hide me without cause,
Crushed in a chest, or thrust up in a chimney.
When he, tame, Crow, was winking at his Farm;
Or, had he been here, and present, would have kept
Both eyes, and beak sealed up, for six sesterces.
You have a slanderous, beastly, vnwash'd tongue,
In your rude mouth, and savouring your self,
Unmannered Lord.
How now!
It is your title, Sir.
Who (since you have lost your own good name, and know not
What to loose more) care not, whose honour you wound,
Or fame' you poison with it. You should go,
And vent your self, in the region, where you live,
Among the Suburbe-Brothels, Bawds, and Brokers,
Whither your broken fortunes have designed you.
Nay, then I must stop your fury, I see; and pluck
The tragic visor off. Come, Lady Cypress,
Know your own virtues, quickly. Isle not be
Put to the wooing of you thus, afresh,
At every turn, for all the Venus in you.
Yield, and be pliant; or by Pollux How now?
Will Lais turn a Lucrece?
No, but by Castor,
Hold off your Ravishers hands, I pierce your heart, else.
Isle not be put to kill my self, as she did
For you, sweet Tarquine. What? doe you fall off?
Nay, it becomes you graciously. Put not up.
You'll sooner draw your weapon on me, I think it,
Then on the Senate, who have cast you forth
Disgracefully, to be the common tale
Of the whole City; base, infamous Man:
For, were you other, you would there employ
Your desperate dagger.
Fuluia, you doe know
The strengths you have upon me; Doe not use
Your power too like a Tyrant: I can bear,
Almost until you break me.
I doe know, Sir,
So do's the Senate, too, know, you can bear.
By all the Gods, that Senate will smart deep
For your upbraidings. I should be right sorry
To have the means so to be veng'd on you,
(At least, the will) as I shall shortly on them.
But, go you on still: Fare you well, dear Lady;
You could not still be faire'vnlesse you were proud.
You will repent these moods, and ere't be long, too.
I shall have you come about, again.
Doe you think so?
Yes, and I know so.
By what Augury?
By the fair Entrails of the Matrons chests,
Gold, Pearl, and Jewels, here in Rome, which Fuluia,
Will then (but late) say that she might have shared.
And, grieving, miss.
Tut, all your promised Mountains,
And Seas, I am so stalely acquainted with.
But, when you see the universal flood
Run by your coffers; that my Lords, the Senators,
Are sold for slaves, their Wives for bond-women,
Their Houses, and fine Gardens given away,
And all their goods, under the Spear, at out-cry,
And you have none of this; but are still Fuluia,
Or perhaps less, while you are thinking of it:
You will advise then, Coyness, with your cushion,
And look of your fingers; say, how you were wished;
And so, he left, you.
Call him again, Galla:
This is not usual, something hangs on this
That I must win out of him.
How now, melt you?
Come, you will laugh, now, at my easiness?
But, it is no miracle; Doves, they say, will bill,
After their pecking, and their murmuring.
Yes,
And then it is kindly. I would have my Love
Angry, sometimes, to sweeten off the rest
Of her behaviour.
You doe see, I study
How I may please you, then. But you think, Curius
Tic covets hath wrought me; If you love me
Change that unkind conceit.
By my loved soul,
I love thee, like to it; and it is my study,
More then mine own revenge, to make thee happy.
And'tis that just revenge doth make me happy
To hear you prosequute: and which, indeed,
Hath won me, to you, more, then all the hope
Of what can else be promised. I love valour
Better, then any Lady loves her face,
Or dressing: then my self do's. Let me grow
Still, where I doe embrace. But what good means
Have you t'effect it? Shall I know your project?
Thou shalt, if thou'lt be gracious.
As I can be.
And wilt thou kiss me, then?
As close as shells
Of Cockles meet.
And print 'hem deep?
Quite through
Our subtle lips.
And often?
I will sow 'hem.
Faster then you can reap. What is your plot?
Why, now my Fuluia looks, like her bright name,
And is her self.
Nay, answer me, your plot:
I pray thee tell me, Quintus.
I, these sounds
Become a Mistress. Here is harmony.
When you are harsh, I see, the way to bend you
Is not with violence, but service. Cruel,
A Lady is a fire, gentle, a light.
Will you not tell me, what I ask you?
All,
That I can think, sweet Love, or my breast holds,
Isle pour into thee.
What is your design, then?
Isle tell thee; Catiline shall now be Consul:
But, you will hear more, shortly.
Nay, dear Love.
Isle speak it, in thine arms; Let vs go in.
Rome will be sacked, her wealth will be our prize;
By public ruin, private spirits must rise.
GReat Father Mars, and greater Jove,
By whose high auspice, Rome hath stood
So long; and, first, was built in blood
Of your great Nephew, that then strove
Not with his brother, but your Rites:
Be present to her now, as then,
And let not proud, and factious Men
Against your wills oppose their mights.
Our Consuls, now, are to be made;
O, put it in the public voice
To make a free, and worthy choice;
Excluding such as would invade
The Common wealth. Let whom we name
Have wisdom, foresight, fortitude,
Be more with faith, then face endued,
And study conscience, aboue am.
Such, as not seek to get the start
In State, by power, parts, or bribes,
Ambition's bawds; but move the Tribes
By Virtue, modesty, desert.
Such, as to justice will adhaere,
What ever great one it offend,
And from the embraced truth not bend
For envy, hatred, gifts, or fear.
That, by their deeds, will make it known,
Whose dignity they doe sustain;
And life, state, glory, all they gain,
Count the Republics, not their own.
Such the old Bruti, Decij were,
The Cipi, Curtij, who did give
Themselves for Rome: And would not live,
As men, good, only for a year.
Such were the great Camilli, too;
The Fabij, Seipio's; that still thought
No work, at price enough, was bought,
That for their Country they could doe.
And, to her honour, so did knit;
As all their acts were understood
The sinews of the Public good:
And they themselves, oe soul, with it.
These men were truly Magistrates;
These neither practised force, nor forms;
Nor did they leave the helm, in storms:
And such they are make happy States.
GReat Honours are great burdens: But, on whom
They'are cast with envy, he doth bear two loads.
His cares must still be double to his joys,
In any Dignity; where, if he err
He finds no pardon: and, for doing well
A most small praise, and that wrung out, by force.
I speak this, Romans, knowing what the weight
Of the high charge, you 'haue trusted to me, is.
Not, that thereby I would with art decline
The good, or greatness of your benefit;
For, I ascribe it to your singular grace
And vow, to owe it to no title else,
Except the Gods, that Cicero'is your Consul.
I have no vrnes; no dusty moniments;
No broken images of ancestors,
Wanting an ear, or nose; no forged tables
Of long descents, to boast false honours from;
Or be my undertakers to your trust.
But a new Man (as I am styled in Rome)
Whom you have dignified; and more, in whom
Yo'haue cut a way, and left it op for virtue
Hereafter, to that place, which our Great men
Held shut up, with all rampires, for themselves.
Nor have but few of them, in time been made
Your Consuls so; New men, before me, none:
At my first suite; In my just year; Preferred
To all competitors; and some the noblest.
Now the vain swells.
Up glory.
And to have
Your load consents, from your own uttered voices;
Not silent books: nor from the meaner tribes,
But first, and last, the universal concourse.
This is my joy, my gladness. But my care,
My industry, and vigilance now must work,
That still your counsel of me be approved;
Both, by your selves, and those, to whom you have,
With grudge, preferred me: Two things I must labour,
That neither they upbraid, nor you repent you.
For every lapse of mine will, now, be called
Your error; if I make such: But, my hope is,
So to bear through, and out, the Consulship,
As spite shall ne'er wound you, though it may me.
And, for my self, I have prepared this strength,
To do so well; as, if there happen ill
Unto me, it shall make the Gods to blush,
And be their crime, not mine, that I am envied;
O confidence! more new, then is the Man!
I know well, in what terms I doe receive
The Common wealth, how vexed, how perplexed:
In which, there's not that mischief, or ill fate,
That good men fear not, wicked men expect not.
I know, beside, some turbulent practises
Already on foot, and rumours of more dangers,
Or you will make them, if there be none.
Last,
I know, it was this, which made the envy, and pride
Of the Great Roman blood bate, and give way
To my election.
Marcus Tullius, true;
Our need made thee our Consul, and thy virtue.
Cato, you will undo him, with your praise.
Caesar will hurt himself, with his own envy.
The voice of Cato is the voice of Rome.
The voice of Rome is the consent of Heaven;
And that hath placed thee, Cicero, at the helm,
Where thou must render, now, thy self a Man,
And Master of thy art. Each petty hand
Can steer a ship becalmed; but he that will
Govern, and carry her to her ends, must know
His tides, his currents; how to shift his sails;
What she will be are in foul, what in fair weathers;
Where her springs are, her leaks; &amp; how to stop 'hem;
What sands, what shelves, what rocks to threate her;
The forces, and the natures of all winds,
Gusts, storms, &amp; tempests; when her keel ploughs hell
And deck knocks heaven: then, to manage her
Becomes the name, and office of a Pilot.
Which I'll perform, with all the diligence,
And fortitude I have; not for my year,
But for my life; except my life be less,
And that my year conclude it: If it must,
Your will, loved Gods. This heart shall yet employ
A day, an hour is left me, so, for Rome.
As it shall spring a life, out of my death,
To shine, for ever glorious in my facts:
 " The vicious count their years, virtuous their acts.
Most noble Consul! Let vs wait him home.
Most popular Consul he is grown, me thinks.
How the rout cling to him!
And Cato leads 'hem!
You, his colleague, Antonius, are not looked on.
Not I, nor do I care.
He enjoys rest,
And ease, the while: Let th'others spirit toil,
And wake it out, that was inspired for turmoil.
If all reports be true, yet, Caius Caesar,
The time hath need of such a watch, and spirit:
Reports? Do you believe 'hem Catulus,
Why, he do's make, and breed 'hem for the people;
To endear his service to 'hem. Do you not taste
An art, that is so common? Popular men,
They must create strange Monsters, and then quell 'hem;
To make their arts seeeme something. Would you have
Such an Herculean Actor in the Scene,
And not his Hydra? They must sweat no less
To fit their properties, then to express their parts.
" Treasons, and guilty men are made in States
" Too oft, to dignify the Magistrates.
" Those States be wretched, that are forced to buy
" Their Rulers fame, with their own infamy.
We therefore, should provide that ours do not.
That will Antonius make his care.
I shall.
And watch the watcher.
Here comes Catiline.
How do's he brooke his late repulse?
I know not.
But hardly sure.
Longinus, too, did stand?
At first: But he gave way unto his friend.
Who's that come? Lentulus?
Yes, He is again
Taken into the Senate.
And made Praetor.
I know it. He had my suffrage, next the Consuls;
True, you were there, Prince of the Senate, then.
Hail noblest Romans. The most worthy Consul,
I gratulate your Honour.
I could wish
It had been happier, by your fellowship,
Most noble Sergius, had it pleased the people.
It did not please the Gods; who'instruct the people.
And their unquestioned pleasures must be served.
They know what's fitter for vs, then our selves;
And it were impiety, to think against them.
You bear it rightly, Lucius; and, it glads, me,
To find your thoughts so even.
I shall still
Study to make them such to Rome, and Heaven.
I would withdraw with you, a little, Iulius.
Isle come home to you: Crassus would not have you
To speak to him, before Quintus Catulus.
I apprehend you. No, when they shall judge
Honours convenient for me, I shall have 'hem,
With a full hand: I know it. In mean time,
They are no less part of the Common-wealth,
That doe obey, then those, that doe command.
O, let me kiss your forehead, Lucius.
How are you wronged!
By whom?
Public report.
That gives you out, to stomach your repulse;
And brooke it deadly.
Sir: she brookes not me.
Believe me rather, and your self, now, of me;
It is a kind of slander, to trust rumour.
I know it. And I could be angry with it.
So may not I. Where it concerns himself,
Who's angry at a slander, makes it true.
Most noble Sergius! This your temper melts me.
Will you do office to the Consul, Quintus?
That Cato, and the Rout have done the other?
I waite, when he will go. Be still your self.
He wants no state, or honours, that hath virtue,
Did I appear so tame, as this man thinks me?
Looked I so poor, so dead? So like that nothing,
Which he calls virtuous? O my breast, break quickly;
And show my friends my in-parts, least they think
I have betrayed 'hem.
Whore's Gabinius?
Gone.
And Vargunteius?
Slipped away; all shrunk:
Now that he mist the Consul-ship.
I am
The scorn of bond-men; who are next to beasts.
What can I worse pronounce my self, that's fitter?
The Owl of Rome, whom Boys, and Girls will hout;
That were I set up, for that wooden God,
That keeps our gardens, could not fright the crows,
Or the least Bird from muting on my head.
Tic strange how he should miss it.
Is it not stranger,
The upstart Cicero should carry it so,
By all consents, from men so much his Masters?
Tic true.
To what a shadow, am I melted!
Antonius wan it but by some few voices.
Struck through, like ayre, and feel it not. My wounds
Close faster, then they're made.
The whole design,
And enterprise is lost by it. All hands quit it,
Upon his fail.
I grow mad at my patience.
It is a Visor that hath poisoned me.
Would it had burnt me up, and I died inward:
My heart first turned to ashes.
Here's Cethegus yet.
REpulse upon repulse? An In-mate, Consul?
That I could reach the excel, where the pins are,
Which bolt this frame; that I might pull 'hem out,
And pluck all into Chaos, with my self.
What, are we wishing now?
Yes, my Cethegus.
Who would not fall with all the world about him?
Not I, that would stand on it, when it falls;
And force new Nature out, to make another.
These wishings taste of woman, not of Roman.
Let vs seek other arms.
What should we do?
Do, &amp; not wish; something, that wishes take not:
So sudden, as the Gods should not prevent,
Nor scarce have time, to fear.
O noble Caius!
It likes me better, that you are not Consul.
I would not go through open doors, but break 'hem;
Swim to my ends, through blood; or build a bridge
Of carcasses; make on, upon the heads
Of men, struck down, like piles; to reach the lives
Of those remain, and stand: Then is it a pray,
When Danger stoppes, and Ruin makes the way.
How thou dost utter me, brave soul, that may not,
At all times, show such as I am; but bend
Unto occasion? Lentulus, this man,
If all our fire were out, would fetch down new,
Out of the hand of Jove; and riuet him
To Caucasus, should he but frown: and let
His own gaunt Eagle fly at him, to tire.
Peace, here comes Cato.
Let him come, and hear.
I will no more dissemble. Quit vs all;
I, and my loved Cethegus here, alone
Will undertake this Giants war, and cary it.
What needs this, Lucius?
Sergius be more wary.
Now, Marcus Cato, our new Consuls spy,
What is your sour austerity sent to explore.
Nothing in thee, licentious Catiline:
Halters, and racks cannot express from thee
More, then thy deeds. Tic only judgment waits thee.
Whose? Cato's? shall he judge me?
No, the Gods
" Who, ever, follow those, they go not with:
And Senate; who, with fire, must purge sick Rome
Of noisome Citizens, whereof thou art one.
Be gone, or else let me. Tic bane to draw
The same ayre with thee.
Strike him.
Hold good Caius;
Fear thou not, Cato?
Rash Cethegus, no.
It were wrong with Rome, when Catiline and thou
Do threat, if Cato feared.
The fire you speak of
If any flame of it approach my fortunes,
Isle quench it, not with water, but with ruin.
You hear this, Romans.
Bear it to the Consul.
I would have sent away his soul, before him.
You are too heavy, Lentulus, and remise;
It is for you we labour, and the Kingdom
Promised you by the Sibyl's.
Which his Praetorship,
And some small flattery of the Senate more,
Will make him to forget.
You wrong me, Lucius.
He will not need these spurs.
The action needs 'hem.
" These things, when they proceed not, they go backward.
Let vs consult then.
Let vs, first, take arms.
They that deny vs just things, now, will give
All that we ask; if once they see our swords.
Our objects must be sought with wounds, not words.
IS there a Heaven? and Gods? and can it be
They should so slowly hear, so slowly see?
Hath Jove no thunder? or is Jove become
Stupid as thou art?  neare-wretched Rome,
When both thy Senate, and thy Gods doe sleep,
And neither thine, not their own States doe keep!
What will awake thee, Heaven? what can excite
Thine anger, if this practise be too light?
His former drifts partake of former times,
But this last plot was only Catilines.
O, that it were his last. But he, before
Hath safely done so much, he will still dare more.
Ambition, like a torrent, ne'er looks back;
And is a swelling, and the last affection
A high mind can put off: being both a Rebel
Unto the soul, and reason, and enforces
All laws, all conscience, treads upon religion,
And offered violence to Natures self.
But here, is that transcends it. A black purpose
To confound Nature: and to ruin that,
Which never Age, nor Mankind can repair.
Sit down, good Lady; Cicero is lost
In this your fable: for, to think it true
Tempted my reason. It so far exceeds
All insolent fictions of the tragic Scene.
The Commonwealth, yet panting, underneath
The stripes, and wounds of a late civil war,
Gasping for life, and scarce restored to hope;
To seek t'oppresse her, with new cruelty,
And utterly extinguish her long name,
With so prodigious, and vnheard-of fierceness
What sink of Monsters, wretches of lost minds,
Mad after change, and desperate in their states,
Wearied, and galled with their necessities,
(For all this I allow them) durst have thought it?
Would not the barbarous deeds have been believed,
Of Marius, and Sylla, by our Children,
Without, this fact had rise forth greater, for them?
All, that they did, was piety, to this.
They, yet, but murdered Kinsfolk, Brothers, Parents,
Ravished the Virgins, and, perhaps, some Matrons;
They left the City standing, and the Temples:
The Gods, and Majesty of Rome were safe yet.
These purpose to fire it, to despoil them,
(Beyond the other evils,) and lay wast
The farre-triumphed world: For, unto whom
Rome is too little, what can be enough?
Tic true, my Lord, I had the same discourse.
And, then, to take a horrid Sacrament
In humane blood, for execution
Of this their dire design; which might be called
The height of wickedness: but that, that was higher,
For which they did it.
I assure your Lordship,
The extreme horror of it almost turned me
To air, when first I heard it; I was all
A vapor, when 't was told me; And I longed
To vent it any where; It was such a secret,
I thought, it would have burnt me up.
Good Fuluia,
Fear not your act; and less repent you of it.
I doe not, my good Lord. I know to whom
I have uttered it.
You have discharged it, safely.
Should Rome, for whom you have done the happy service,
Turn most ingrate; yet were your virtue paid
In conscience of the fact: so much good deeds
Reward themselves.
My Lord, I did it not
To any other aim, but for it self.
To no ambition.
You have learned the difference
Of doing office to the public weal,
And private friendship, and have shown it, Lady.
Be still your self. I have sent for Quintus Curius,
And (for your virtuous sake) i I can win him,
Yet, to the common wealth; He shall be safe too.
Isle undertake, my Lord, he will be won.
Pray you, join with me, then: And help to work him.
HOw now? Is he come?
He'is here, my Lord.
Go presently,
Pray my Colleague Antonius, I may speak with him,
About some present business of the State;
And (as you go) call on my brother Quintus,
And pray him, with the Tribunes to come to me.
Bid Curius enter. Fullin, you will aide me?
It is my duty.
O, my noble Lord!
I have to chide you, in faith. Give me your hand.
Nay, be not troubled; 't shall be gently, Curius.
You look upon this Lady? What? Doe you guess
My business, yet? Come, If you frown, I thunder:
Therefore, put on your better looks, and thoughts.
There's nought but fair, and good intended to you
And I would make those your complexion.
Would you, of whom the Senate had that hope,
As, on my knowledge, it was in their purpose,
Next sitting, to restore you: as they have done
The stupid, and ungrateful Lentulus;
(Excuse me, that I name you thus, together,
For, yet, you are not such) would you, I say,
A person both of Blood and Honour, stocked
In a long race of virtuous Ancestors,
Embark your self for such a hellish action,
With Parricides, and Traitors, men turned Furies,
Out of the wast, and ruin of their fortunes;
(For it is despair, that is the mother of madness)
Such as want (that, which all Conspirators,
But they, have first) mere colour for their mischief?
O, I must blush with you. Come, you shall not labour
To extenuate your guilt, but quit it clean;
" Bad men excuse their faults, good men will leave 'hem.
" He acts the third crime, that defends the first.
Here is a Lady, that hath got the start,
I piety, of vs all; and, for whose virtue,
I could almost turn Lover, again: but that
Terentia would be ialous. What an honour
Hath she achieved to her self! What voices,
Titles, and loud applauses will pursue her,
Through every street! What windores will be filled,
To shoot eyes at her! What envy, and grief in Matrons,
They are not she! when this her act shall seem
Worthier a Chariot, then if Pompey came,
With Asia chained! All this is while she lives.
But dead, her very name will be a Statue,
Not wrought for time, but rooted in the minds
Of all posterity; when Brass, and Marble,
I, and the Capitol it self is dust.
Your Honour thinks too highly of me.
No:
I cannot think enough. And I would have
Him emulate you. It is no shame, to follow
The better precedent. She shows you, Curius,
What claim your Country lays to you; and what duty
You owe to it: Be not afraid, to break
With Murderers, and Traitors, for the saving
A life, so near, and necessary to you,
As is your Countries. Think but on her right.
" No Child can be too natural to his Parent.
She is our common Mother, and doth challenge
The prime part of vs; Doe not stop, but give it:
" He, that is void of fear, may soon be just,
" And no Religion binds men to be Traitors.
My Lord, he understands it; and will follow
Your saving counsel. But his shame, yet, stays him.
I know, that he is coming.
Doe you know it?
Yes, let me speak with you.
O you are.
What a I?
Speak not so loud.
I am, what you should be,
Come, doe you think, I'd walk in any plot,
Where Madame Sempronia should take place of me,
And Fuluia come in the rear, or on the by?
That I would be her second, in a business,
Though it might vantage me all the Sun sees?
It was a seely phant'sie of yours. Apply
Your self to me, and the Consul, and be wife;
Follow the fortune I have put you into:
You may be some thing this way, and with safety.
Nay, I must tolerate no whisperings, Lady.
Sir, you may hear. I tell him, in the way,
Wherein he was, how hazardous his course was.
How hazardous? how certain to all ruin.
Did he, or doe, yet, any of them imagine
The Gods would sleep, to such a Stygian practise,
Against that Commonwealth, which they have founded
With so much labour, and like care have kept,
Now near seven hundred years? It is a madness,
Wherewith Heaven blinds 'hem, when it would confound 'hem,
That they should think it. Come, my Curius,
I see your nature's right; you shall no more
Be mentioned with them: I will call you mine,
And trouble this good shame, no farther. Stand
Firm for your Country; and become a man
Honoured, and loved. It were a noble life,
To be found dead, embracing her. Know you,
What thanks, what titles, what rewards the Senate
Will heap upon you, certain, for your service?
Let not a desperate action more engage you,
Then safety should; and wicked friendship force
What honesty, and virtue cannot work.
He tells you right, sweet friend: It is saving counsel.
Most noble Consul, I am yours, and ers;
I mean my Countries: you' have formed me new.
Inspiring me, wih what I should be, truly.
And I entreat, my faith may not seem cheaper
For springing out of penitence.
Good Curius,
It shall be dearer rather, and because
Il'd make it such, hear how I trust you more.
Keep still your former face; and mix again
With thse lost spirits. Run all their mazes with'hem;
For such are treasons. Find their windings out,
And subtle turnings, watch their snaky ways,
Through brakes, and hedges, into woods of darkness,
Where they are fine to creep upon their breasts
In paths ne'er trod by Men, but Wolves, and Panthers.
earn, beside Catiline, Lentulus, and those,
Whose names I have, what new ones they draw in;
Who else are likely; what those Great ones are,
They doe not name; what ways they mean to take;
And whither their hopes point; to war: or ruin,
By some surprise. Explore all their intents,
And what you find may profit the Republique,
Acquaint me with it, either, by your self,
Or this your virtuous friend, on whom I lay
The care of urging you; Isle see, that Rome
Shall prove a thankful, and a bounteous Mother:
Be secret as the night.
And constant Sir.
I doe not doubt it. Though the time cut off
All vows. " The dignity of truth is lost,
With much protesting Who is there! This way,
Least you be seen, and met. And when you come,
Be this your token; to this fellow. Light 'hem.
O Rome, in what a sickness art thou fallen!
How dangerous, and deadly! when thy head
Is drowned in sleep, and all thy body feu'ry!
No noise, n pulling, no vexation wakes thee,
Thy Lethargy is such: or if, by chance,
Thou heau'st thy eye-lids up, thou dost forget
Sooner, then thou were told, thy proper danger.
I did irreverently, to blame the Gods,
Who wake for thee, though thou snore to thy self.
Is it not strange, thou should be so diseased,
And so secure? But more, that the first symptoms
Of such a malady, should not rise out
From any worthy member, but a base
And common strumpet, worthless to be named
A hair, or part of thee? Think, think, hereafter,
What thy needs were, when thou must use such means:
And lay it to thy breast, how much the Gods
Upbraid thy foul neglect of them; by making
So vile a thing, the Author of thy safety.
They could have wrought by nobler ways: have struck
Thy foes with forked lightning; or rammed thunder;
Thrown hills upon 'hem, in the act; have sent
Death, like a damp, to all their families;
Or cause their consciences to burst 'hem. But,
When they will show thee what thou art, and make
A scornful difference twixt their power, and thee,
They help thee by such aides, as Geese, and Harlots.
How now? What answer? Is he come?
Your Brother,
Will straight be here; and your Colleague Antonius
Said, coldly, he would follow me.
I, that
Troubles me somewhat, and is worth my fear;
He is a man, against whom I must provide,
That (as he will doe no good) he doe no harm;
He, though he be not of the plot, will like it,
And wish it should proceed; for, unto men,
Pressed with their wants, all change is ever welcome.
I must with offices, and patience win him;
Make him, by art, that which he is not borne,
A friend unto the public; and bestow
The Province on him; which is by the Senate
Decreed to me: That benefit will bind him.
Tic well, if some men will doe well, for price;
" So few are virtuous, when the reward's away:
Nor must I be unmindful of my private;
For which I have called my Brother, and the Tribunes,
My Kins-folke, and my Clients to be near me;
" He that stands up against Traitors, and their ends,
" Shall need a double guard, of law, and friends:
" Especially, in such an envious State,
" That sooner will accuse the Magistrate,
" Then the Delinquent; and will rather grieve
" The Treason is not acted, then believe.
THe night grows on; and you are for your meeting:
Isle therefore end in few. Be resolute,
And put your enterprise in act: The more
" Actions of depth, and danger are considered,
" The less assuredly they are performed.
And thence it happens, that the bravest plots
(Not executed straight) have been discovered.
Say, you are constant, or another, a third,
Or more; there may be yet one wretched spirit,
With whom the fear of punishment shall work
Above all the thoughts of honour, and revenge.
You are not, now, to think what's best to doe,
As in beginnings; but, what must be done,
Being thus entered: and slip no advantage
That may secure you. Let 'hem call it mischief;
" When it is past, and prospered, 't will be virtue.
" They are petty crimes are punished, great rewarded.
Nor must you think of peril; since, " Attempts,
Begun with danger, still doe end with glory:
" And, when need spurs, despair will be called wisdom.
Less ought the care of men, or fame to fright you;
" For they, that win, do seldom receive shame
" Of victory: how ere it be achieved;
And vengeance, least. For who, besieged with wants,
Would stop at death, or any thing beyond it?
Come, there was never any great thing thing, yet,
Aspired, but by violence, or fraud:
And he that sticks (for folly of a conscience)
To reach it.
Is a good religious fool.
A superstitious slave, and will die beast.
Good night. You know what Crassus thinks, and I,
By this: Prepare you wings, as large as sails,
To cut through ayre, and leave no print behind you.
A Serpent, ere he comes to be a Dragon,
Do's eat a Bat: and so must you a Consul,
That watches. What you doe, doe quickly Sergius.
You shall not stir for me.
Excuse me, lights there.
By no means.
Stay then. All good thoughts to Caesar.
And like to Crassus.
Mind but your friends counsels.
OR, I will bear no mind. How now, Aurelia?
Are your confederates come? the Ladies?
Yes.
And is Simpronia there?
She is.
That's well.
She he's a sulphurous spirit, and will take
Light at a spark. Break with them, gentle love,
About the drawing as many of their Husbands,
Into the plot, as can: If not, to rid 'hem.
That 'll be the easier practise, unto some,
Who have been tired with 'hem long. Solicit
Their aids, for money; and their Servants help,
In firing of the City, at the time
Shall be designed. Promise 'hem States, and Empires,
And men, for Lovers, made of better clay,
Then ever the old Potter Titan knew.
Who's that? O, Porcius Less! are they met?
They are all, here.
Love, you have your instructions:
Isle trust you with the stuff you have to work on.
You'll form it? Porcius, fetch the silver Eagle
I ga' you in charge. And pray 'hem, they will enter.
O Friends, your faces glad me. This will be
Our last, I hope, of consultation.
So, it had need.
We loose occasion, daily.
I, and our means: whereof one wounds me most,
That was the fairest. Peso is dead, in Spain.
As we are, here.
And, as it is thought, by envy
Of Pompey's followers.
He too's coming back,
Now, out of Asia.
Therefore, what we 'intend
We must be swift in. Take your seats, and hear.
I have, already, sent Septimius
Into the Picene territory; and Iulius,
To raise force, for vs, in Apulia:
Manlius at Fesulae is (by this time) up,
With the old needy troops, that followed Sylla;
And all do but expect, when we will give
The blow at home. Behold this silver Eagle,
Was Marius standard, in the Cimbrian war,
Fatal to Rome; and, as our Augurs tell me,
Shall still be so: For which one ominous cause,
I have kept it safe, and done it sacred rites,
As to a Godhood; in a Chapel built
Of purpose to it. Pledge then all your hands,
To follow it, with vows of death, and ruin,
Struck silently, and home. So waters speak
When they run deepest. Now's the time, this year,
The twenti'th, from the firing of the Capitol,
As fatal too, to Rome, by all predictions;
And, in whch, honoured Lentulus must rise
A King, if he pursue it.
If he doe not,
He is not worthy the great destiny.
It is too great for me, but what the Gods,
And their great loves decree me, I must not
Seem careless of.
No nor we envious.
We have enough beside, all Galley, Belgia,
Greece Spain, and Africa.
and Asia too,
Now Pompey is returning.
Noblest Romans,
Me thinks our looks, are not so quick and high,
As they were wont.
No? whose is not?
We have
No anger in our eyes no storm, no lightning:
Our hate is spent, and fumed away in vapor,
Before our hands be'at work. I can accuse
Not any one, but all of slackness.
Yes,
And be your self such, while you do it.
Ha?
Tic sharply answered, Caius,
Truly, truly.
Come, let vs each one know his part to doe,
And then be accused. Leave these untimely quarrels.
I would there were more Romes then one, to ruin.
More Romes? More Worlds.
Nay then moe Gods, &amp; Natures
If they took part.
When shall the time be, first?
I think the Saturnals.
Twill be too long.
They are not now far off, it is not a month.
A week, a day, an hour is too far off,
Now, were the fittest time.
We have not laid
All things so safe, and ready.
While we'are laying,
We shall all lie; and grow to earth. Would I
Were nothing n it, if not now. These things
They should be done, ever thought.
Nay, now your reson
Forsakes you, Caius. Think, but what commodity
That time will minister; the Cities custom
Of being, then, i mirth, and feast.
Loosed whole
In pleasure and security.
Each house
Resolved in freedom.
Every slave a master.
And they too no mean aides.
Made from their hope
Of liberty.
Or hate unto their Lords.
Tic sure, there cannot be a time found out
More apt, and natural.
Nay, good Cethegus,
Why do your passions, now, disturb our hopes?
Why do your hopes delude your certainties?
You must lend him his way. Think, for the order,
And process of it.
Yes.
I like not fire:
Twill too much wast my City.
Were it embers
There will be wealth enough, raked out of them,
To spring a new: It must be fire, or nothing.
What else should fright, or terrify 'hem?
True.
In that confusion, must be the chief slaughter.
Then we shall kill 'hem bravest.
And in heaps.
Strew Sacrifices.
Make the Earth an Altar.
And Rome the fire.
Twill be a noble night.
And worth all Sylla's days.
When Husbands, Wives,
Grandfires, and Nephews, Servants, and their Lords,
Virgins, and Priests, the Infant, and the Nurse
Go all to hell, together, in a fleet.
I would have you, Longinus, and Statilius,
To take the charge of the firing, which must be,
At a sign given with a trumpet, done
In twelve chief places of the City, at once.
The flax, and sulphur, are already laid
In, at Cethegus house. So are the weapons.
Gabinius, you, with other force, shall stop
The pipes, and conduits: And kill those that come
For water.
What shall I do?
All will have
Employment, fear not: Ply the execution.
For that, trust me, and Cethegus.
I will be
At hand, with the army, to meet those that scope.
And Lentulus, begirt you Pompey's house,
To seize his sons alive: for they are they
Must make our peace with him. All else cut off,
As Torque did the Poppy heads; or mowers
A field of thistles; or else, up, as ploughs
Do barren lands; and strike together flints,
And clods; th'ungratefull Senate, and the People:
Till no rage, gone before, or coming after
May weigh with yours, though Horror leapt her self
Into the scale: but, in your violent acts,
The fall of torrents, and the noise of tempests,
The boiling of Charybdis, the Seas wildness
The eating force of flames, and wings of winds,
Be all outwrought, by your transcendent furies.
It had been done, ere this, had I been Consul;
We'had had no stop, n let.
How find you Antonius?
The'other he's won him lost, that Cicero
Was borne to be my opposition,
And stands in all our ways.
Remove him first.
May that, yet, be done sooner?
Would it were done.
I'll do it.
It is my province; none usurp it.
What are your means?
Enquire not. He shall die.
Shall, was too slowly said. He'is dying. That
Is, yet, too slow. He'is dead.
Brave, only Roman,
Whose soul might be the worlds soul, were that dying;
Refuse not, yet, the aids of these your friends:
Here's Vargunteius holds good quarter with him.
And under the pretext of clientele
And visitation, with the morning Hail,
Will be admitted.
What is that to me?
Yes, we may kill him in his bed, and safely.
Safe is your way, then; take it. Mine's mine own.
Follow him, Vargunteius, and persuade,
The morning is the fittest time.
The night
Will turn all into tumult.
And perhaps
Miss of him too.
Entreat, and conjure him.
In all our names.
By all our vows, and friendships.
WHat! is our Council broke up first?
You say,
Women are greatest talkers.
We have done;
And are now fit for action.
Which is passion.
There's your best activity, Lady.
How
Knowes your wise fatness that?
Your Mothers daughter
Did teach me, Madame.
Come Sempronia, leave him:
He is a Giber. And our present business
Is of more serious consequence. Aurelia
Tells me, you 'haue done most masculinely within,
And plaid the Orator.
But we must hasten
To our design as well, and execute:
Not hang still, in the fever of an accident.
You say well, Lady.
I do like our plot
Exceeding well, tic sure; and we shall leave
Little to fortune, in it.
Your banquet stays.
Aurelia take her in. VVhere's Fullin?
O the two Lovers are coupling.
In good faith,
She's very ill, with sitting up.
Youl'd have her
Laugh, and lie down.
No, faith, Sempronia,
I am not well; I'll take my leave, it draws
Toward the morning. Curius shall stay with you.
Madam, I pray you pardon me, my health
I must respect.
Farewell, good Fuluia.
Make hast, and bid him get his guards about him.
For Vargunteius, and Cornelius
Have vndertane it, should Cethegus miss:
Their reason, that they think his open rashesse
Will suffer easier discovery,
Then their attempt; so veiled under friendship.
Isle bring you to your Coach. Tell him, beside,
Of Caesars coming forth, here.
My sweet Madam,
Will you be gone?
I am, my Lord, in truth,
In some indisposition.
I do wish
You had all your health, sweet Lady. Lentulus,
You'll doe her service.
To her coach, and duty.
WHat ministers men must, for practise, use!
The rash, the ambitious, needy, desperate,
Foolish, and wretched, even the dregs of Mankind,
To whores, and women! Still, it must be so.
Each have their proper place; and, in their rooms.
They are the best. Grooms fittest kindle fires
Slaves carry burdens, Butchers are for slaughters,
Apothecaries, Butlers, Cooks for poisons;
As these for me: Dull, stupid Lentulus,
My stale, with whom I stalk; the rash Cethegus,
My executioner; and at Longinus,
Statilius, Curius, Ceparius, Cimber.
My laborers, pioners, and incendiaries;
With these domestic traitors, bosom thieves,
Whom custom hath called Wives; the readiest helps,
To strangle head-strong Husbands; rob the easy;
And lend the monies, on returns of lust.
Shall Catiline not doe, now, with these aides,
So sought, so sorted, something shall be called
Their labour, but his profit? and make Caesar
Repent his venturing counsels, to a spirit,
So much his Lord in mischief? when all these
Shall, like the Brethren sprung of Dragons teeth
Ruin each other; and he fall amongst 'hem:
With Crassus, Pompey, or who else appears,
But like, or near a great one. May my brain
Resolve to water, and my blood turn phlegm,
My hands, drop off, unworthy of my sword,
And that be inspired, of it self, to rip
My breast, for my lost entrails; when I leave
A soul, that will not serve. And who will, are
The same with slaves; such clay I dare not fear.
The cruelty, I mean to act, I wish
Should be called mine, and tarry in my name;
Whilst after Ages do toil out themselves
In thinking for the like, but do it less:
And, were the power of all the fiends let loose,
With Fate to boot, it should be, still, example.
When, what the Gaul, or Moore could not effect,
Nor emulous Carthage, with their length of spite,
Shall be the work of one, and that my night.
I Thank your vigilance. VVhere's my brother, Quintus?
Call all my servants up. Tell noble Curius,
And say it to your self, you are my Saus;
But that's too little for you, you are Rome's:
What could I then, hope less? O brother! now,
The engines I told you of, are working;
The machine 'gin's to move. Where are your weapons?
Arm all my household presently. And charge
The Porter, he let no man in, till day.
Not Clients, and your friends?
They wear those names,
That come to murder me. Yet send for Cato,
And Quintus Catulus; those I dare trust;
And Flaccus, and Pomtinius, the Praetors,
By the back way.
Take care, good brother Marcus,
Your fears be not formed greater, then they should;
And make your friends gjove, while your enemies laugh.
Tic brothers counsel, and worth thanks, But doe
As I entreat you. I provide, not fear.
Was Caesar there, say you?
Curius says, he met him,
Coming from thence.
O, so. And, had you a counsel
Of Ladies too? Who was your Speaker, Madam?
She that would be, had there been forty more;
Sempronia, who had both her Greek, and Figures;
And, ever and anon, would ask vs, if
The witty Consul could have mended that?
Or Orator Cicero could have said it better?
Shoe's my gentle enemy. Would Cethegus
Had no more danger in him. But, my guards
Are you, great powers; and the vnbated strengths
Of a firm conscience, which shall arm each step
Tan for the State; and teach me slack no pace
For fear of malice. How now, Brother?
Cato
And Qutus Catulus were coming to you,
And Crassus with 'hem. I have let 'hem in,
By the garden.
What would Crssus have?
I hear
Some whispering about the gate; and making doubt,
Whither it be not yet too early, or no?
But I doe think, they are your friends, and Clients,
Are fearful to disturb you.
You will change
To another thought, anon. Have you given the Porter
The charge, I willed you?
Yes.
Withdraw, and hearken.
THe dore's not open, yet.
You' were best to knock.
Let them stand close, then: And, when we are in,
Rush after vs.
But whore's Cethegus?
He
Has left it, since he might not do it his way.
Who's there?
A friend, or more.
I may not let
Any man in, till day.
No? why?
Thy reason?
I am commanded so.
By whom?
I hope
We are not discovered.
Yes, by revelation.
Pray thee good slave, who has commanded thee?
He that may best, the Consul.
We are his friends.
Ell's one.
Best give your name.
Dost thou hear, fellow?
I have some instant business with the Consul.
My name is Vargunteius.
True, he knows it;
And for what friendly office you are sent.
Cornelius, too, is there?
We are betrayed.
And desperate Cethegus, is he not?
Speak you, he knows my voice.
What say you to it?
You are deceived Sir.
No, it is you are so
Poor, misled men. Your states are yet worth pity,
If you would hear, and change your savage minds.
Leave to be mad; forsake your purposes
Of Treason, Rapine, Murder, Fire, and Horror:
The common wealth hath eyes, that wake as sharply
Over her life, as yours doe for her ruin.
Be not deceived, to think her lenity
Will be perpetual; or, if Men be wanting,
The Gods will be, to such a calling cause.
Consider your attempts, and while there's time,
Repent you of 'hem. It doth make me tremble
There should those spirits yet breath, that when they cannot
Live honestly, would rather perish basely.
You talk to much to 'hem, Marcus, They'are lost.
Go forth, and apprehend 'hem.
If you prove
This practise; what should let the Common-wealth
To take due vengeance?
Let vs shift, away.
The darkness hath concealed vs, yet: We'll say
Some have abused our names.
Deny it all.
Quintus, what guards have you? Call the Tribunes aide
And raise the City. Consul, you are too mild,
" The foulness of some facts takes thence all mercy:
Report it to the Senate. Hear: The Gods
Grow angry with your patience. " Tic their care,
" And must be yours, that guilty men escape not.
" As crimes doe grow, Justice should rouse it self.
WHat is it, Heavens, you prepare
With so much swiftness, and so sudden rising?
There are no Sons of earth, that dare,
Again, rebellion: or the Gods surprising?
The World doth shake, and Nature fears,
Yet is the tumult, nd the horror greater
Within our minds, then in our ears,
So much Romes faults (now grown her Fate) doe threat her.
The Priests, and People run about,
Each Order, Age, and Sex amazed at other;
And, at the ports, all thronging out,
As if their safety were to quit their Mother:
Yet find they the same dangers there,
From which they make such hast to be preserved;
For guilty States doe ever bear
The plagues about them, which they have deserved.
And, till those plagues doe get aboue
The mountain of our faults, and there doe sit;
We see 'hem not. Thus, still we love
The'euill we doe, until we suffer it.
But, most, ambition, that near vice
To virtue, hath the fate of Rome provoked;
And made, that now Rome's self no price,
To free her from the death, wherewith she's yoked.
That restless Ill, that still doth build
Upon success; and ends not in aspiring:
But there begins. And ne'er is filled,
While ought remains that seems but worth desiring.
Where in the Thought, unlike the Eye,
To which things far, seem smaller then they are,
Deems all contentment placed on high:
And thinks there's nothing great, but what is far.
O, that in time, Rome did not cast
Her errors up, this fortune to prevent;
T'haue seen her crimes'ere they were past:
And felt her faults, before her punishment.
CAn these men fear? who are not only ours,
But the worlds masters? Then I see, the Gods
Upbraid our sufferings, or would humble them;
By sending these affrights, while we are here:
That we might laugh at their ridiculous fear,
Whose names, we trembled at, beyond the Alps.
Of all that pass, I doe not see a face
Worthy a man, that dares look up, and stand
One thunder out; but downward all, like beasts,
Running away from every flash is made.
The falling world could not deserve such baseness.
Are we employed here, by our miseries,
Like superstitious fools (or rather slaves)
To plain our griefs, wrongs, and oppressions,
To a mere clothed Senate, whom our folly
Hath made, and still intends to keep our Tyrannes?
It is our base petitionary breath
That blows 'hem to this greatness; which this prick
Would soon let out, if we were bold, and wretched.
When they have taken all we have; our goods,
Crop, lands, and houses, they will leave vs this:
A weapon, and an arm will still be found,
Though naked left, and lower then the ground.
DOe; urge thine anger, still; good Heaven, and just.
Tell guilty men, what powers are aboue them.
In such a confidence of wickedness,
It was time, they should know something fit to fear.
I never saw a morn more full of horror.
To Catiline, and his: But, to just men,
Though Heaven should speak, with all his wrath at once,
That, with his breath, the hinges of the world
Did crack; we should stand upright, and vnfear'd.
Why, so we doe, good Cato. Who be these?
Ambassadors, from the Allobroges,
I take 'hem, by their habits.
I, these men
Seem of another race; Let's sue to these
There's hope of justice, with their fortitude.
Friends of the Senate, and of Rome, to day
We pray you to forbear vs: on the morrow
What suit you have, let vs, by Fabius Sanga,
(Whose Patronage your State doth use) but know it,
And, on the Consul's word, you shall receive
Dispatch, or else an answer, worth your patience.
We could not hope for more, most worthy Consul.
This Magistrate hath struck an awe into me,
And, by his sweetness, won a more reguard
Unto his place, then all the boisterous moods
That ignorant Greatness practises, to fill
The large, unfit authority it wears.
How easy is a noble spirit discerned
From harsh, and sulphurous matter, that flies out
In contumelies, makes a noise, and stinks.
May we find good, and great men, that know how
To stoup to wants, and meet necessities,
And will not turn from any equal suites.
" Such men, they doe not succour more the cause,
" They undertake, with favour, and success;
" Then, by it, their own idgments they doe raise,
" In turning just men's needs, into their praise.
Room for the Consuls. Fathers take your places.
Here, in the house of Iupiter, the STAYER,
By edict from the Consul, Marcus Tullius,
You'are met, a frequent Senate. Hear him speak.
Which may be happy, and auspicious still
To Rome, and hers. Hono'd and Conscript Fathers,
If I were silent, and that all the dangers
Threatening the State, and you, were yet so hid
In night, or darkness, thicker in their breasts,
That are the black contrivers; so, that no
Beme of the light could pierce 'hem: Yet the voice
Of Heaven, this morning, hath spoke loud enough,
T'instruct you with a feeling of the horror;
And wake you from a sleep, as dead, as death.
I have, of late, spoke often in this Senate,
Touching this argument, but still have wanted
Either your ears, or aith: so' incredible
Their plots have seemed, or I so vain, to make
These things for mine own glory, and false greatness,
As hath been given out. But be it so:
When they break forth, and shall declare themselves,
By their too foul effects, then, then, the envy
Of my just cares will find another name.
For me, I am but one: And this poor life,
So lately aimed at, not an hour yet since,
They cannot with more eagerness pursue,
Thn I with gladness would lay down, and loose,
To buy Romes peace, if that would purchase it.
But when I see, they'ld make it but the step
To more, and greater; unto yours, Romes, all:
I would with those preserve it, or then fall.
I, I, let you alone, cunning Artificer!
See, how his gorget peers aboue his gown;
To tell the people, in what danger he was.
It was absudly done of Vargunteius,
To name himself, before he was got in.
It matters not, so they deny it all:
And can but carry the lie constantly.
Will Catiline be here?
In have sent for him.
And have you bid him to be confident?
To that his own necessiy will prompt him.
Seem to believe nothing at all, that Cicero
Relates vs.
It will mad him.
O, and hpe
The other party. Who is that? His Brother?
What new intelligence he's he brought him now?
Some cautions from his Wife, how to behave him.
Place some of them without, and some bring in.
Thank their kind loves. It is a comfort yet,
That all depart not from their Countries cause.
How now, what  this Mla? Consul, Atonius?
I doe not know, ask my Colleague, he will tell you.
There is some reason in state, that I must yield to;
And I have promised him: Indeed he has bought it,
With ging me the Province.
I profess,
It grieves me Fathers, that I am compelled
To draw these arms, and aides for your defence;
And, more, against a Citizen of Rome,
Borne here amongst you, a Patrician,
A man, I must confess, of no mean house,
Nor no small virtue, if he had employed
Those excellent gifts of Fortune, and of Nature,
Unto the good, not ruin of the State.
But being bred in's fathers needy fortunes,
Bought up in's esters prostitution,
Confirmed in civil slaughter, entering first
The Common-wealth, with murder of the gentry;
Since, both by study, and custom, conversant
Wth all licetiosnesse: what could be hoped
In such a field of riot, but a course
Extreme pernicious? Though, I must protest,
I found his mischiefs, sooner, with mine eyes,
Then with my thought; and with these hands of mine
Before they touched, at my suspicion.
What are his mischiefs, Consul? you declaim
Against his manners, and corrupt your own;
" No wise man should, for hate of guilty men,
" Loose his own innocence.
The noble Caesar
Speaks Godlike truth. But, when he hears, I can
Convince him, by his manners, of his mischiefs,
He might be silent: And not cast away
His sentences in vain, where they scarce look.
Toward his subject.
Here he comes himself.
If he be wo thy any good mans voice,
That good man sit down, by him: Cato will not.
If Cato leave him. I'll not keep aside.
What face is this, the Senate here puts on,
Against me, Fathers! Give my modesty
Leave, to demand the cause of so much strangeness.
It is reported here, you are the head
To a strange faction, Lucius.
I, and will
Be proved against him.
Let it be. Why, Consul,
If in the Common-wealth, there be two bodies,
One lean, weak, rotten, and that hath a head;
The other strong, and healthful, but hath none:
If I doe give it one, doe I offend?
Restore your selves, unto your temper, Fathers;
And, without perturbation, hear me speak:
Remember who I am, and of what place,
What petty fellow this is, that opposes;
One, that hath exercised his eloquence,
Sill to the bane of the Nobility:
A boasting, insolent tongue-man.
Peace lewd Traitor,
Or wash thy mouth. He is an honest man
And loves his Country; would thou did so, too.
Cato, you are too zealous for him.
No,
Thou art too impudent.
Catiline be silent.
Nay then, I easily fear, my just defence
Will come too late, to so much prejudice.
Will he it down?
Yet, let the world forsake me,
My innocence must not.
Thou innocent?
So are the Furies.
Yes, and Ate, too.
Dost thou not blush, pernicious Catiline?
Or, hath the paleness of thy guilt drunk up
Thy blood, and drawn thy veins, as dry of that,
As is thy heart of truth, thy breast of virtue?
Whither at length wilt thou abuse our patience?
Still shall thy fury mock vs? To what licence
Dares thy unbridled boldness run it self?
Doe all the nightly guards, kept on the Palace,
The Cities watches, with the Peoples fears,
The concourse of all Good men, this so strong
And fortified seat here of the Senate,
The prsent looks upon thee, strike thee nothing?
Dost thou not feel thy Councels all laid open?
And see thy wild Conspiracy bound in
With each mans knowledge? which of all this Order
Can thou think ignorant (if they'll but utter
Their conscience to the right) of what thou did
Last night, what on the former, where thou wet,
Whom thou did call together, what your plots were?
O Age, and Manners! This the Consul fees,
The Senate understands, yet this man lives
Lives? I, and comes here into Council with vs;
Partakes the public cares: and with his eye
Marks, and points out each man of vs to slaughter.
And we, good men, doe satisfy the State,
If we can shun but this mans sword, and madness.
There was that virtue, once, in Rome, when good men
Would, with more sharpe corcion, have restrained
A wicked Citizen, then the deadliest Foe.
We have that law still, Catiline, for thee;
An at as grave, as shrpe: The State's not wanting
Nor the authority of this Senate; wee,
Wee, that are Consuls, only fail our selves.
This twenty days, the edge of that decree
We have let dll, and rust; kept it shut up,
As in a sheath, which drawn should take thy head.
Yet still thou li'st: and li'st not to lay by
Thy wicked confidence, but to confirm it.
I could desire, Fathers, to be found
Still merciful, to seem in these maine perils,
Grasping the state, a man remiss, and slack;
But then, I should condemn my self of sloth,
And treachery. Their Campe's in Italy,
Pitched in the jaws, here, of Heruria;
Their numbers daily increasing, and their General
Within our walls: nay in our Council, plotting
Hourly some fatal mischefe to the Public.
If, Catiline, I should command thee, now,
Here, to be taken, killed; I make just doubt,
Whether all good men wolt not think it done
Rather too late, then any man too cruel.
Except he were of the same meal, and batch.
But that, which ought to have been done long since
I will, and (for good reason) yet forbear.
Then will I take thee, when no man is found
So lost, so wicked, nay so like thy self,
But shall profess, it is done of need, and right.
While there is one, that dares befend thee, live;
Thou shalt have leave; but so, as now thou liu'st:
Watched at a hand, besieged, and oppressed
From working least commotion to the State.
I have those eyes, and ears, shall still keep guard,
And spall on thee, as they have ever done,
And thou not feel it. What, thn, can thou hope?
If neither Nlight can, with her darkness, hide
Thy wicked meetigs; not a private House
Can, in her walls, contain the guilty whispers
Of thy conspiracy: If all break out,
All be discovered, change thy mind at last,
And loose thy thoughts of ruin, flame, and slaughter.
Remember, how I told, here, to the Senate,
That such a day, thy Lictor, Caius Manlius,
Would be in arms. Was I deceived, Catiline,
Or in the fact, or in the time? the hour?
I told too, in this Senate, that thy purpose
Was, on the fifth, the Kalends of November,
To have slaughterd this whole Order: which my caution
Made many leave the City. Canft thou here
Deny, but this thy black design was hindered,
That very day, by me, thy self closed in
Within my strengths, so that thou coldest not move
Against a public reed? when thou were heard
To say, upon the parting of the rest,
Thou would content thee, with the murder of vs,
That did remain. Had thou not hope, beside,
By a surprise, by night, to take Praeneste?
Where when thou came, did thou not find the place
Made good against thee, with my aides, my watches?
My Garrisons fortified it. Thou dost nothing, Sergius,
Thou can endeavour nothing, nay not think,
But I both see, and hear it; and am with thee,
By, and before, about, and in thee, too.
Call but to mind thy last nights business. Come,
Isle use no circumstance: at Lecca's house,
The shop, and mint of your conspiracy,
Among your Sword-men, where so many associates
Both of thy mischief, and thy madness, met.
Dare thou deny this? wherefore art thou silent?
Speak, and this shall convince thee: Here they are,
I see 'hem, in this Senate, that were with thee.
O you immortal Gods! in what clime are wee?
What region do we live in? in what ayre?
What Common-wealth, or State is this we have?
Here, here, amongst vs, our own number, Fathers,
In this most holy Council of the world,
They are, that seek the spoil of me, of you,
Of ours, of all; what I can name's too narrow:
Follow the Sun, and find not their ambition.
These I behold, being Consul; Nay, I ask
Their counsels of the State, as from good Patriots:
Whom it were fit the axe should hew in pieces,
I not so much as wound, yet, with my voice.
Thou wast, last night, with Less, Catiline,
Your shares of Italy, you there divided;
Appointed who, and whither, each should go;
What men should stay behind, in Rome, were chosen;
Your offices set down; the parts marked out,
And places of the City, for the fire;
Thy self (though affirmd'st) wat ready to depart,
Only, a little let there was, that stayed thee,
That I yet lived: Upon the word, stepped forth
Three of thy crew, to rid thee of that care;
Two undertook this morning, before day,
To kill me in my bed. All this I knew,
Your convent scarce dismissed, armed all my servants,
Called both my brother, and friends, shut out your clients,
You sent to visit me; whose names I told
To some there, of good place, before they came.
Yes, I, and Quintus Catulus can affirm it.
Hoe's lost, and gone. His spirits have forsook him.
If this be so, why, Catiline, dost thou stay?
Go, where thou meanst: The Ports are open; forth.
The Camp abroad wants thee, their Chief, too long.
Lead with thee all thy troupes out. Purge the City.
Draw dry that noisome, and pernicious sink,
Which left, behind thee, would infect the world.
Thou wilt free me of all my fears, at once,
To see a wall between vs. Dost thou stop
To do that now, commanded; which before,
Of thine own choice, you're prone to? Go. The Consul
Bids thee, an enemy, to depart the City.
Whither, thou'lt ask? to exile? I not bid
Thee that. But ask my counsel, I persuade it.
What is there, here, in Rome, that can delight thee?
Where not a soul, without thine own foul knot,
But fears, and hates thee. What domestic note
Of private filthiness, but is burnt in
Into thy life? What close, and secret shame,
But is grown one, with thy known infamy?
What lust was ever absent from thine eyes?
What lewd fact from thy hands? what wickedness
From thy whole body? whore's that youth drawn in
Within thy nets, or caught up with thy baits,
Before whose rage, thou hast not borne a sword,
And to whose lusts thou hast not 'held a torch?
Thy latter Nuptials I let pass in silence;
Where sins incredible, on sins, were heaped:
Which I not name, lest, in a civil State,
So monstrous facts should either appear to bee,
Or not to be revenged. Thy Fortunes, too,
I glance not at, which hang but till next Ides.
I come to that, which is more known, more public;
The life, and safety of vs all, by thee
Threatened, and sought. Stood'st thou not in the field,
When Lepidus, and Tullus were our Consuls,
Upon the day of choice, armed, and with forces,
To take their lives, and our chief Citizens;
When, not thy fear, nor consciece changed thy mind,
But the mere fortune of the Common-wealth
VVithstood thy active malice? Speak but right.
How often hast thou made attempt on me?
How many of thy assaults have I declined
With shifting but my body, (as wee'ld say)
VVrested thy dagger from thy hand, how ot?
Ho often ah i fallen, or slip't by chance?
Yet can hy id not want it: which, how vowed,
Or with what rites, it is acrid of thee, I know not,
That still thou make it a necessity,
To fix it in the body of a Consul.
But let me loose this way, and speak to thee,
Not as one moved with hatred, which I ought,
But pity, of which none is owing thee.
No more then unto Tantalus, or Tityus.
Thou came, ere while, into this Senate. Who
Of such a frequency, so many friends,
And kindred thou hast here, saluted thee?
Were not the seats made bare, upon thy entrance?
Rss' not the Consular men? and left their places,
So soon as thu sat'st down? and fled thy side,
Like to a plague, or ruin; knowing, how oft
They had been, by thee, marked out or the Shambles?
How dost thou bear this? Surely, if my Slaves
At home feared me, with half the affright, and horror,
That, ere, thy fellow Citizens do thee,
I should soon quit my house, and think it need too.
Yet thou dare ary here? Go forth, at last;
Condemn thy self to flight, and solitude.
Discharge the Common-wealth, of her deep fear.
Go; into baishment, if thou wait'st the word.
Why dost thou look? They all consent unto it.
Dost thou expect the authority of their voices,
Whose silent wills condemn thee? While they sit,
They approve it; while they suffer it, they decree it;
And while they' are silent to it, they proclaim it.
Prove thou there honest, Ie endure the envy.
But there's no thought, thou should be ever hee,
Whom either shame should call from filthiness,
Terror from danger, or discourse from fury.
Go; I entreat thee: yet, why do I so?
When I already know, they'are sent before,
That tarry for thee'in arms, and do expect thee
On the Aurelian way. I know the day
Set down twixt thee, and Manlius; unto whom
The silver Eagle too is sent, before:
Which I do hope shall prove, to thee as baneful,
As thou conceiu't it to the Common-wealth.
But, may this wise, and sacred Senate say,
What mean thou Marcus Tulls? If thou know
That Catiline be looked for, to be Chief
Of an intestine war; that e'is the Author
Of such a wickedness; the Caler out
Of men of mark in mischief, to an action
Of so much horror; Prince of such a treason;
Why dost thou send him forth? why let him scope?
This is to give him liberty, and power:
Rather, thou should lay hold upon him, send him
To deserved death, and a just punishment.
To these so holy voices, thus I answer.
If I did think it timely, Conscript Fathers,
To punish him with death, I would not give
The Fencer use of one short hour, to breath;
But when there are in this grave Order, some,
Who, with soft censures, still doe nurse his hopes;
Some, that with not believing, have confirmed
His designs more, and whose authority
The weaker, as the worst men, too, have followd:
I would now send him, where they all shoud see
Clear, as the light, his heart shine; where no man
Could be so wickedly, or fondly stupid,
But should cry ot he saw, touched, felt, and grasp 't it.
Then, when he hath run out himself; led forth
His desperate party with him; blown together
Aids of all kinds, both shipwreckd minds &amp; fortunes:
Not only the grown evil, that now is sprung,
And sprouted forth, would be plucked up, &amp; weeded;
But the stock, root, and seed of all the mischiefs,
Choking the Common-wealth. Where, should we take
Of such a swarm of traitors, only him,
Our cares, and fears might seem a while relieved,
But the maine peril would bide still enclosed
Deep, in the veins, and bowels of the State.
As humane bodies, laboring with fevers,
While they are tossed with heate, if they do take
Cold water, seem for that short space much eased,
But afterword, are ten times more afflicted.
Wherefore, I say, let all this wicked crew
Depart, divide themselves from good men, gather
Their forces to one head; as I said oft,
Let 'hem be severed from vs with a wall;
Let 'hem leave off attempts, upon the Consul,
In his own house; to circle in the Praetor;
To girt the Court with weapons; to prepare
Fire, and balls, swords, torches, sulphur, brands:
In short, let it be writ in each mans forehead
What thoughts he bears the Public. I here promise,
Fathers Conscript, to you, and to my self,
That diligence in vs Consuls, for my honoured
Colleague, abroad, and for my self, at home;
So great authority in you; so much
Virtue, in these, the Gentlemen of Rome;
Whom I could scarce restrain to day, in zeal,
From seeking out the Parricide, to slaughter;
So much consent in all good men, and minds,
As, on the going out of this one Catiline
All shall be clear, made plain, oppressed, revenged.
And, with this omen, go, pernicious plague,
Out of the City, to the wished destruction
Of thee, and those, that, to the ruin of her,
Have tan that bloody, and black sacrament.
Thou Iupiter, whom we do call the STAYER
Both of this City, and this Empire, wilt
(With the same auspice thou did raise it first)
Drive from thy Altars, and all other Temples,
And Buildings of this City; from our Walls;
Lives, states, and fortunes of our Citizens;
This fiend, this fury, with his accomplices.
And all the offence of good men (these known traitors
Unto their country, thieves of Italy,
Joined in so damned a league of mischief) thou
Wilt with perpetual plagues, alive, and dead,
Punish for Rome, and save her innocent head.
If an Oration, or high language, Fathers,
Could make me guilty, here is one, hath done it:
H' has strove to aemulate this mornings thunder,
With his prodigious rhetoric. But I hope,
This Senate is more grave, then to give credit
Rashly to all he vomits, against a man
Of your own Order, a Patrician;
And one, whose ancestors have more deserved
Of Rome, then this mans eloquence could utter,
Turned the best way, as still, it is the worst.
His eloquence hath more deserved to day,
Speaking thy ill, then all thy ancestors
Did, in their good: And that the State will find,
Which he hath saved.
How he? were I that enemy,
That he would make me: Il'd not wish the State
More wretched, then to need his preservation.
What doe you make him, Cato, such a Hercules?
An Atlas? A poor petty In- mate.
Traitor.
He save the State? A Burgess son of Arpinum.
The Gods would rather twenty Romes should perish,
Then have that contumely stuck upon 'hem,
That he should share with them, in the preserving
A shed, or signpost.
Peace, thou prodigy.
They would be run themselves, again, and lost
In the first, rude, and indigested heap;
Ere such a wretched name, as Cicero,
Should sound with theirs.
Away, thou impudent head.
Doe you all back him? are you silent too?
Well, I will leave you Fathers; I will go.
Butmy fine dainty speaker.
What now Fury?
Wilt thou assault me here?
Help, aide the Consul.
See Fathers, laugh you not? who threatened him?
In vain thou dost conceive, ambitious Orator,
Hope of so brave a death, as by this hand.
Out, of the Court, with the pernicious traitor.
There is no title, that this flattering Senate,
Nor honour, the base multitude can give thee,
Shall make thee worthy Catilines anger.
Stop,
Stop that portentous mouth.
Or, when it shall,
Isle look thee dead.
Will none restrain the Monster?
Parricide.
Butcher, Traitor, leave the Senate.
In am gone, to banishment, to please you Fathers.
Thrust head-long forth?
Still, dost thou murmur, Monster?
Since, I am thus put out, and made a.
What?
Not guiltier then thou art.
I will not burn
Without my funeral pile.
What says the Fiend?
I will have matter, timber.
Sing out Scrich-owle.
It shall be in
Speak thy imperfect thoughts.
The common fire, rather then mine own.
For fall I will with all, ere fall alone.
H'is lost, there is no hope of him.
Unless
He presently take arms; and give a blow,
Before the Consuls forces can be leuie'd.
What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?
See, that the Common-wealth receive no loss.
Commit the care thereof unto the Consuls.
Tic time.
And need.
Thanks to this frequent Senate.
But what decree they, unto Curius,
And Fuluia?
What the Consul shall think meet.
Tey mst receive reward, though't be not known;
 when a State needs ministers, they have none.
Yet, Marcus Tullius, doe not I believe,
Bu Crassus, and this Caesar here ring hollow.
And would appear so, if that we durst prove 'hem.
Why dare we not? What honest act is that,
The Roman Senate should not dare, and doe?
Not an unprofitable, dangerous act,
To stir too many Serpents up at once.
Caesar, and Crassus, if they be ill men,
Are mighty ones; and, we must so provide,
That, while we take one head, from this foul Hydra,
There spring not twenty more.
In prove your Counsel.
They shall be watched, and looked too. Till they doe
Declare themselves, I will not put 'hem out
By any question. There they stand. Isle make
My self no enemies, nor the State, no traitors.
FAlse to our selves? All our designs discovered
To this State-Cat?
I, had I had my way,
Have had mewed in flames, at home, not in the Senate:
In had singed his furs, by this time.
Well, there's, now,
No time of calling back, or standing still.
Friends, be your selves; keep the same Roman hearts,
And ready minds, you' had yesternight: Prepare
To execute, what we resolved. And let not
Labour, or danger, or discovery fright you.
Isle to the army: you (the while) mature
Things, here, at home. Draw to you any aides,
That you think fit, of men of all conditions,
Or any fortunes, that may help a war.
Isle bleed a life, or win an Empire for you.
Within these few days, look to see my ensigns,
Here, at the walls: Be you but firm within.
Mean time, to draw an envy on the Consul,
And give a less suspicion of our course,
Let it be given out, here in the City,
That I am gone, an innocent man, to exile,
Into Massilia, willing to give way
To fortune, and the times; being unable
To stand so great a faction, without troubling
The Common-wealth: whose peace I rather seek,
Then all the glory of contention,
Or the support of mine own innocence.
Farewell the noble Lentulus, Longinus,
Curius, the rest; and thou, my better Genius,
The brave Cethegus: when we meet again,
We'll sacrifice to Liberty.
And Revenge.
That we may praise our hands once.
O you Fates,
Give Fortune now her eyes, to see with whom
She goes along, that she may ne'er forsake him.
He needs not her, nor them. Go but on, Sergius.
" A valiant man is his own Fate, and Fortune.
The Fate, and Fortune of vs all go with him.
And ever guard him.
I am all your Creature.
Now friends, it is left with vs. I have already
Dealt, by Vmbrenus, with the Allobroges,
Here resiant in Rome; whose State, I hear,
Is discontent with the great usuries,
They are oppressed with: and have made complaints
Divers, unto the Senate, but all vain.
These men, I'haue thought, both for their own oppressions,
As also that, by nature, they'are a people
Warlike, and fierce, still watching after change,
And now, in present hatred with our State,
The fittest, and the iciest to be drawn
To our society, and to aide the war.
The rather, for their seat: being next bordrers
On Italy: and that they' abound with horse,
Of which one want our Camp doth only labour.
And I have found 'hem coming. They will meet
Soon at Sempronia's house, where I would pray you
All to be present, to confirm 'hem more.
The sight of such spirits hurt not, nor the store.
I will not fail.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Would I
Had some what by my self, apart, to doe.
I have no genius to these many counsels.
Let me kill all the Senate, for my share,
Isle do it at next sitting.
Worthy Caius,
Your presence will add much.
I shall mar more.
THe State's beholden to you, Fabius Sanga,
For this great care: And those Allobroges
Are more then wretched, if they lend a listening
To such persuasion.
They, most worthy Consul,
As men employed here, from a grieved State,
Groaning beneath a multitude of wrongs,
And being old, there was small hope of ease
To be expected, to their evils, from hence,
Were willing, at the first to give an ear
To any thing, that sounded liberty:
But since, on better thoughts, and my urged reasons,
They' are come about, and won, to the true side.
The fortune of the Common-wealth hath conquered.
What is that same Vmbrenus, was the Agent?
One that hath had negotiation
In Galley oft, and known unto their State.
Are the Ambassadors come with you?
Yes.
Well, bring 'hem in, if they be firm, and honest,
Never had men the means so to deserve
Of Rome, as they. A happy, wished occasion,
And thrust into my hands, for the discovery,
And manifest conviction of these traitors.
Be thanked;  Iupiter. My worthy Lords,
Confederates of the Senate, you are welcome.
I understand by Quintus Fabius Sanga,
Your careful Patron here, you have been lately
Solicited against the Common-wealth,
By one Vmbrenus (take a seat, I pray you)
From Publius Lentulus, to be associates
In their intended war. I could advise,
That men, whose fortunes are yet flourishing,
And are Romes friends, would not, without a cause,
Become her enemies; and mix themselves
And their estates, ith the lost hopes of Catiline,
O Lentulus, whose mere despair doth arm 'hem:
That were to hazard certainties, for ayre,
And undergo all danger, for a voice.
Believe me, friends: "  oud tumuts are not laid
"With half the easiness that they are raised.
"All may begin a war, but few can end it.
The Senate have decreed, that my Colleague
Shall lead their army, agains Catiline,
And have declared both him, and Manlius traitors.
Metellus Celer hath already given
Part of their troops defeat. Honours are promised
To all, will quit'hem; and rewards proposed
Even to slaves, that can detect their courses.
Here, in the City, I have by the Praetors,
And Tribunes, placed my guards, and watches so,
That not a foot can tread, a breath can whisper,
But I have knowledge. And be sure, the Senate,
And People of Rome, of their accustomed greatness,
Will sharply, and severely vindicate,
Not only any fact, but any practise
Or purpose, against the State. Therefore, my Lords,
Consult of your own ways, and think which hand
Is best to take. You, now, are present utters
For some redress of wrongs; Isle undertake
Not only that shll be asur'd you, but
What grace or privilege else, Senate, or People
Can cast upon you, worthy such a service,
As you have now the way, and means, to doe 'hem;
If but your wills consent, with my designs.
We covet nothing more, most worthy Consul.
And how so ere we have been tempted lately,
To a defection, that not makes vs guilty:
We are not yet so wretched in our fortunes,
Nor in our wills so lost, as to abandon
A friendship, prodigally, of that price,
As is the Senate, and the People of Romes,
For hopes, that doe praecipitate themselves.
You then are wise, and honest. Doe but this, then:
When shall you speak with Lentulus, and the rest?
We are to meet anon, at Brutus house.
Who? Dcius Brutus? He is not in Rome.
O, but his wife Sempronia.
You instruct me,
She is a Chief. Well, fail not you to meet 'hem
And to express the best affection
You can put on, to all that they intend.
Like it, applaud it, give the Common-wealth
And Senate, lost to 'hem. Promise any aides
By arms, or counsel. What they can desire
I would have you prevent. Only, say this,
You' have had dispatch, in private, by the Consul
Of your affairs, and for the many fears
The State's now in, you are willed by him, this evening,
To depart Rome: which you, by all sought means,
Will doe, of reason to decline suspicion.
Now, for the more authority of the business
They' have trusted to you, and to give it credit
With your own State, at home, you would desire
Their letters to your Senate, and your People,
Which shown, you durst engage both life, and honour,
The rest should every way answer their hopes.
Those had, pretend sudden departure you,
And, as you give me notice, at what Port
You will go out, Isle have you intercepted,
And all the letters taken with you: So
As you shall be redeemed in all opinions,
And they convicted of their manifest treason.
" Ill deeds are well turned back, upon their Authors:
" And against an Iniurer, the revenge is just.
This must be done, now.
Cheerfully, and firmly.
We 'are they, would rather hast to undertake it,
Then stay, to say so.
With that confidence, go:
Make your selves happy, while you make Rome so.
By Sanga, let me have notice from you.
Yes.
WHen come these Creatures, the Ambassadrs?
I would fine see 'hem. Are they any Scholars?
I think not, Madame.
Have they no Greek?
No surely.
Fie, what doe I here, waiting on 'hem then?
If they be nothing but mere States-men.
Yes,
Your Ladyship shall observe their gravity,
And their reservedness, their many cautions,
Fitting their persons.
I doe wonder much,
That States, and Commonwealths employ not women,
To be Ambassadors, sometimes: we should
Doe as good public service, and could make
As honourable Spies (for so Thucidides
Calls all Ambassadors.) Are they come, Cethegus?
Doe you ask me? Am I your scout, or baud?
O Caius, it is no such business.
No?
What do's a woman at it then?
Good Sir,
There are of vs can be as exquisite Traitors,
As ere a male-Conspirator of you all.
I, at smock-treason, Matron, I believe you;
And if I were your husband; But when I
Trust to your cobweb-bosomes any other
Let me there die a Fly; and feast you, Spider.
You are too sour, and harsh Cethegus.
You
Are kind, and courtly. Il'd be torn in pieces,
With wilde Hippolytus, nay prove the death,
Every limb over, ere I'd trust a woman,
With wind, could I retain it.
Sir. They'll be trusted
With as good secrets, yet, as you have any,
And carry 'hem too, as close, and as concealed,
As you shall for your heart.
Isle not contend with you
Either in tongue, or carriage, good Calipso:
The Ambasadors are come.
Thanks to thee Mercury,
That so hast rescued me.
How now, Volturtius?
They doe desire some speech with you, in private.
O! tic about the prophecy, belike,
And promise of the Sibyls;
it may bee.
Shun they, to treat with me, too?
No, good Lady,
You may partake: I have told 'hem, who you are.
I should be loath to be left out, and here too.
Can these, or such, be any aids, to vs?
Look they, as they were built to shake the world,
Or be a moment to our enterprise?
A thousand, such as they are, could not make
One Atom of our souls. They should be men
Worth Heavens fear, that looking up, but thus,
Would make Jove stand upon his guard, and draw
Himself within his Thonder; which, amazed,
He should discharge in vain, and they unhurt.
Or, if they were, like Capaneus, at Thebes,
They should hang dead, upon the highest spires,
And ask the second charge, to be thrown down.
Why, Lentulus, talk you so long? This time
Had been enough, t'haue scattered all the Stars,
T'haue quenched the Sun, and Moon, and made the World
Despair of day, or any light, but ours.
How doe you like this spirit? In such men,
Mankind doth live. They are such souls, as these,
That move the world.
I, though he bear me hard,
I, yet, must do him right. He is a spirit.
Of the right Martian breed.
He is a Mars.
Would we had time to live here, and admire him.
Well, I doe see you would prevent the Consul.
And I commend your care: It was but reason,
To ask our Letters, and we had prepared them.
Go in, and we will take an oath, and eale 'hem.
You shall have Letters, too, to Catiline,
To visit him in the way, and to confirm
The association. This our friend, Volturtius,
Shall go along with you. Tell our great General,
That we are ready here; that Lucius Bestia
The Tribune, is provided of a speech,
To lay the envy of the war on Cicero;
That all but long for his approach, and person:
And then, you are made Freemen, as our selves.
I Cannot fear the war but to succeed well,
Both for the honour of the cause, and worth
Of him that doth command. For my Colleague,
Being so ill affected with the gout,
Will not be able to be there in person;
And then Petreius, his Lieutenant, must
Of need take charge of the army: who is much
The better soldier, having been a Tribune,
Prefect, Lieutenant, Praetor in the war,
These thirty years, so conversant in the army,
As he knows all the soldiers, by their names.
They'll fight then, bravely, with him.
I, and hee
Will lead 'hem on, as bravely.
They'haue a foe
Will ask their braueries, whose necessities
Will arm him like a fury. But, how ever,
I'll trust it to the manage, and the fortune
Of good Petreius, who's a worthy Patriot.
Metellus Celer, with three Legions, too,
Will stop their course, for Galley. How now, Fabius?
The train hath taken. You must instantly
Dispose your guards upon the Miluian bridge:
For, by that way, they mean to come.
Then, thither
Pomtinius, and Flaccus, I must pray you
To lead that force you have; and seize them all:
Let not a person scope. Th'Ambassadours
Will yield themselves. If there be any tumult
Isle send you aid. I, in mean time will call
Lentulus to me, Gabinius, and Cethegus,
Statilius, Ceparius, and all these
By several messengers: who no doubt will come,
Without sense, or suspicion. " Prodigal men
" Feel not their own stock wasting. When I have 'hem,
Isle place those guards, upon 'hem, that they start not,
But what'll you doe with Sempronia?
" A State
" Should not take knowledge either of Fools, or Women.
I do not know whether my joy or care
Ought to be greater; that I have discovered
So foul a treason: or must undergo
The envy of so many great men's fate.
But, happen what there can, I will be just,
My fortune may forsake me, not my virtue:
That shall go with me, and before me, still,
And glad me, doing well, though I hear ill.
Stand, who goes there?
We are the Allobroges,
And friends of Rome.
If you be so, then yield
Your selves unto the Praetors, who in name
Of the whole Senate, and the people of Rome,
Yet, till you clear you selves, charge you of practise
Against the State.
Die friends, and be not taken.
What voice is that? Down with 'hem all.
We yield.
VVhat's he stands out? Kill him there.
Hold, hold, hold.
I yield upon conditions.
We give none
To traitors, strike him down.
My name's Volturtius:
I know Pomtinius.
But he knows not you,
While you stand out upon these traitorous terms.
I'll yield upon the safety of my life.
If it be forfeited, we cannot save it.
Promise to doe your best. I'am not so guilty,
As many others, I can name; and will:
If you will grant me favour.
All we can
Is to deliver you to the Consul. Take him,
And thank the Gods, that thus have saved Rome.
NOw, do our ears, before our eyes,
Like men in mists,
Discover, who'ld the State surprise,
And who resists?
And, as these clouds doe yield to light,
Now, do we see,
Our thoughts of things, how they did fight,
Which seemed t'agree?
Of what strange pieces are we made,
Who nothing know;
But, as new Airs our ears invade,
Still censure so?
That now do hope, and now doe fear,
And now envy;
And then doe hate, and then love dear,
But know not, why:
Or, if we doe, it is so late,
As our best mood,
Though true, is then thought out of date,
And empty of good.
How have we changed, and come about
In every doom,
Since wicked Catiline went out,
And quited Rome?
One while, we thought him innocent;
And, then, w' accused
The Consul, for his malice spent;
And power abused.
Since, that we hear, he is in Arms,
We think not so:
Yet charge the Consul, with our harms,
That let him go.
So, in our censure of the State,
We still do wander;
And make the careful Magistrate
The mark of slander.
What age is this, where honest men
Placed at the helm,
A Sea of some foul mouth, or pen,
Shall overwhelm?
And call their diligence, deceit;
Their virtue, vice;
Their watchfulness, but lying in waite
And blood, the price.
O, let vs pluck this evil eede
Out of our spirits;
And give, to every noble deed,
The name it merits.
Least we seem fallen (if this endures)
Into those times,
To love disease: and brooke the cures
Worse, then the crimes.
IT is my fortune, and my glory, Soldiers,
This day, to lead you on; the worthy Consul
Kept from the honour of it, by disease:
And I am proud, to have so brave a cause
To exercise your arms in. We not, now,
Fight for how long, how broad, how great, and large
Th'extent, and bounds of the people of Rome shall bee;
But to retain what our great Ancestors,
With all their labours, counsels, arts, and actions,
For vs, were purchasing so many years.
The quarrel is not, now, of fame, of tribute,
Or of wrongs, done unto Confederates,
For which, the Army of the people of Rome
Was wont to move: but for your own Republique,
For the raised Temples of th'immortall Gods,
For all your Fortunes, Altars, and your Fires,
For the dear souls of your loved Wives, and Children,
Your Parents tombs, your Rites, Laws, Liberty,
And, briefly, for the safety of the World:
Against such men, as only by their crimes
Are known; thrust out by riot, want, or rashness.
One sort, Sylla's old troops, left here in Fesulae,
Who suddenly made rich, in those dire times,
Are since, by their unbounded, vast expense,
Grown needy, and poor, and have but left t'expect,
From Catiline, new Bills, and new Proscriptions.
These men (they say) are valiant; yet, I think 'hem
Not worth your pause: For either their old virtue
Is, in their sloth, and pleasures lost; or, if
It tarry with 'hem, so ill match to yours,
As they are short in number, or in cause.
The second sort are of those (Citty-beasts,
Rather then Citizens) who whilst they reach
After our fortunes, have let fly their own;
These, whelmed in wine, swelled up with meates, and weakened
With hourly whoredoms, never left the side
Of Catiline, in Rome; nor, here, are loosed
From his embraces: Such, as (trust me) never
In riding, or in using well their arms,
Watching, or other military labour,
Did exercise their youth; but learned to love,
Drink, dance, and sing, make feasts, and be fine gamsters.
And these will wish more hurt to you, then they bring you.
The rest are a mixed kind, all sorts of furies
Adulterers, Decors, Fencers, Outlaws, Thieves,
The Murderers of their Parents, all the sink,
And plague of Italy, met in one torrent,
To take, to day, from vs the punishment,
Due to their mischiefs, for so many years.
And who, in such a cause, and against such fiends,
Would not now wish himself all arm, and weapon?
To cut such poisons from the earth, and let
Their blood out, to be drawn away in clouds,
And poured, on some inhabitable place,
Where the hot Sun, and Slime breeds nought but Monsters?
Chiefly, when this sure joy shall crown our side,
That the least man, that falls upon our party
This day (as some must give their happy names
To fate, and that eternal memory
Of the best death, writ with it, for their Country)
Shall walk at pleasure, in the tents of rest;
And see far off, beneath him, all their host
Tormented after life: and Catiline, there,
Walking a wretched, and less Ghost, then he.
Isle urge no more: Move forward, with your Eagles,
And trust the Senates, and Romes cause to Heaven.
To thee, great Father Mars, and greater Jove.
I Ever looked for this of Lentulus,
When Catiline was gone.
I gave 'hem lost,
Many days since.
But, wherefore did you bear
Their letter to the Consul, that they sent you,
To warn you from the City?
Did I know
Whether he made it? It might come from him,
For ought I could assure me: if they meant,
I should be safe, among so many, they might
Have come, as well as writ.
There is no loss
In being secure. I have, of late, too, plied him,
Thick, with intelligences, but they' have been
Of things he knew before.
A little serves
To keep a man upright, on these State-bridges,
Although the passage were more dangerous.
Let vs now take the standing part.
We must,
And be as zealous or't, as Cato. Yet
I would fine help these wretched men.
You cannot
Who would save them, that have betrayed themselves?
I Will not be wrought to it, Brother Quintus.
There's no mans private enmity shall make
Me violate the dignity of another.
If there were proof against Caesar, or who ever,
To speak him guilty, I would so declare him.
But Quintus Catulus, and Peso both,
Shall know, the Consul will not, for their grudge,
Have any man accused, or named falsely.
Not falsely, but if any circumstance,
By the Allobroges, or from Volturtius,
Would carry it.
That shall not be sought by me
If it reveal it self, I would not spare
You, Brother, if it pointed at you, trust me.
Good Marcus Tullius (which is more, then great)
Thou had thy education, with the Gods.
Send Lentulus, forth, and bring away the rest.
This office, I am sorry, Sir, to doe you.
WHat may be happy still, and fortunate,
To Rome, and to this Senate: Please you, Fathers,
To break these letters, and to view them round.
If that be not found in them, which I fear,
I, yet, entreat, at such a time, as this,
My diligence be not contemned. Have you brought
The weapons hither, from Cethegus house?
They are without.
Be ready, with Volturtins
To bring him, when the Senate calls; And see
None of the rest, confer together. Fathers,
What doe you read? Is it yet worth your care,
If not your fear, what you find practised there?
It hath a face of horror.
I'am amazed.
Look there.
Gods! Can such men draw common air?
Although the greatness of the mischief, Fathers,
Hath often made my faith small, in this Senate,
Yet, since my casting Catiline out (for now
I doe not fear the envy of the word,
Unless the deed be rather to be feared,
That he went hence alive; when those I meant
Should follow him, did not) I have spent both days,
And nights, in watching, what their fury' and rage
Was bent on, that so staid, against my thought:
And that I might but take 'hem in that light,
Where, when you met their treason, with your eyes,
Your minds, at length, would think for your own safety.
And, now, it is done. There are their hands, and seals.
Their persons, too, are safe, thanks to the Gods.
Bring in Volturtius, and the Allobroges.
These be the men, were trusted with their letters.
Fathers, believe me, I knew nothing: I
Was travailing for Galley, and am sorry.
Quake not Volturtius, speak the truth, and hope
Well of this Senate, on the Consuls word.
Then, I knew all. But truely' I was drawn in
But tother day.
Say, what thou know, and fear not.
Thou hast the Senates faith, and Consuls word,
To fortify thee.
I was sent with letters
And had a message toofrom Lentulus
To Catilinethat he should use all aides
Servants, or othersand come with his army,
As soon, unto the City as he could
For they were ready, and but staid for him
To intercept those, that should flee the fire
These Men, the Allobroges, did hear it too.
Yes Fathers, and they took an oath, to vs.
Besides their letters, that we should be free;
And urged vs, for some present aide of horse.
Nay, here be other testimonies, Fathers,
Cethegus Armoury.
What, not all these?
Here's not the hundred part. Call in the Fencer,
That we may know the arms to all these weapons.
Come, my brave Sword-player, to what active use,
Was all this steel provided?
Had you asked
In Syllas days, it had been to cut throats;
But, now, it was to look on, only: I loved
To see good blades, and feel their edge, and points.
To put a helm upon a block, and cleave it,
And, now and then, to stab an armour through.
Know you that paper? That will stab you through.
Is it your hand? Hold, save the pieces. Traitor,
Hath thy guilt waked thy fury?
I did write,
I know not what; nor care not: That Fool Lentulus
Did dictate and I tother Fool, did igne it.
Bring in Statilius: Do's he know his hand too?
And Lentulus. Reach him that letter.
I
Confess it all.
Know you that seal yet, Publius?
Yes, it is mine.
Whose image is that, on it?
My Grandfathers.
What, that renowned good man,
That did so only embrace his Countrey', and loved
His fellow Citizens! Was not his picture,
Though mute, of power to call thee from a fact,
So foul.
As what, impetuous Cicero?
As thou art, for I doe not know what's fouler.
Look upon these. Doe not these faces argue
Thy guilt, and impudence?
What are these to me?
I know 'hem not.
No Publius? we were with you,
At Brutus house.
Last night.
What did you there?
Who sent for you?
Your self did. We had letters
From you, Cethegus, this Statilius here,
Gabinius Cimber, all, but from Longinus,
Who would not write, because he was to come
Shortly, in person, after vs (he said)
To take the charge of the horse, which we should levy.
And he is fled, to Catiline, I hear.
Spies? spies?
You told vs too, of the Sibyls books
And how you were to be a King, this year,
The twentieth, from the burning of the Capitol.
That three Cornelij were to reign, in Rome,
Of which you were the last: and praised Cethegus,
And the great spirits, were with you, in the action.
These are your honourable Ambassadors,
My Sovereign Lord.
Peace, that too bold Cethegus.
Besides Gabinius, your Agent, named
Autronius, Seruius Sulla, Vargunteius,
And divers others.
I had letters from you,
To Catiline, and a message, which In have told
Unto the Senate, truly, word for word:
For which, I hope, they will be gracious to me.
I was drawn in, by that same wicked Cimber,
And thought no hurt at all.
Volturtius, peace.
Where is thy visor, or thy voice, now, Lentulus?
Art thou confounded? Wherefore speak thou not?
Is all so clear, so plain, so manifest,
That both thy eloquence, and impudence,
And thy ill nature, too, have left thee, at once?
Take him aside. There's yet one more. Gabinius,
The Enginer of all. Show him that paper,
If he do know it?
I know nothing.
No?
No. Nor I will not know.
Impudent head?
Stick it into his throat; were I the Consul,
Il'd make thee eat the mischief, thou haft vented.
Is there a Law for it, Cato?
Dost thou ask
After a Law, that would have broke all laws,
Of Nature, Manhood, Conscience, and Religion.
Yes, I may ask for it.
No, pernicious Cimber,
" Th'inquiring after good, do's not belong
" Unto a wicked person.
I, but Cato
Do's nothing, but by law.
Take him aside.
There's proof enough, though he confess not.
Stay
I will confess. Ell's true, your spies have told you.
Make much of'hem.
Yes, and reward 'hem well,
For fear you get no more such, See, they do not
Die in a ditch, and stink, now you have done with 'hem;
Or beg, of the bridges, here in Rome, whose Arches
Their active industry hath saved.
Se, Fathers,
What minds, and spirits these are, that, being convicted
Of such a treason, and by such a cloud
Of witnesses, dare yet retain their boldness?
What would their rage have done, if they had conquered?
I thought, when I had thrust out Catiline,
Neither the State, nor I, should need t'haue feared
Lentulus sleep here, or Longinus fat,
Or this Cethegus rashness; It was he,
I only watched, while he was in our walls,
As one, that had the brain, the hand, the heart.
But now, we find the contrary. Where was there
A People grieved, or a State discontent,
Able to make, or help a war against Rome,
But these, the Allobroges, and those they found?
Whom had not the just Gods been pleased to make
More friends unto our safety, then their own,
As it then seemed, neglecting these men's offers,
Where had we been? or where the Common-wealth?
When their great Chief had been called home; This man,
Their absolute King, (whose noble Grandfather,
Armed in pursuit of the seditious Gracchus,
Took a brave wound, for dear defence of that,
Which he would spoil) had gathered all his aides
Of Ruffians, Slaves, and other Slaughter-men;
Given vs up for murder, to Cethegus;
The other rank of Citizens, to Gabinius;
The City, to be fird by Cassius;
And Italy, nay the world, to be laid wast
By cursed Catiline, and his accomplices.
Lay but the thought of it, before you, Fathers,
Think but with me you saw this glorious City,
The Light of all the earth, Tower of all Nations,
Suddenly falling in one flame. Imagine,
You viewed your Country buried with the heaps
Of slaughtered Citizens, that had no grave;
This Lentulus here, reigning, (as he dreamt)
And those his purple Senate; Catiline come
With his fierce army; and the cries of Matrons,
The flight of Children, and the rape of Virgins,
Shrieks of the living, with the dying groans
On every side to invade your sense; until
The blood of Rome, were mixed with her ashes.
This was the Spectacle these fiends intended
To please their malice.
I, and it would
Have been a brave one, Consul. But your part
Had not then been so long, as now it is:
I should have quite defeated your Oration;
And slit that fine rhetorical pipe of yours,
In the first Scene.
Insolent Monster!
Fathers,
Is it your pleasures, they shall be committed
Unto some safe, but a free custody,
Until the Senate can determine farther?
It pleases well.
Then, Marcus Crassus,
Take you charge of Gabinius: send him home
Unto your house. You Caesar, of Statilius.
Cethegus shall be sent to Cornificius;
And Lentulus, to Publius Lentulus Spender,
Who now is Aedile.
It were best, the Praetors
Carried 'hem to their houses, and delivered 'hem.
Let it be so. Take 'hem from hence.
But, first,
Let Lentulus put off his Praetorship.
I doe resign it here unto the Senate.
So, now, there's no offence done to legion.
Caesar, it was piously, and timely urged.
What do you decree to the Allobroges?
That were the lights to this discovery?
A free grant from the State, of all their suites.
And a reward, out of the public treasure.
I, and the title of honest men, to crown 'hem
What to Volturtius?
Life, and fauor's well.
I ask no more.
Yes, yes, some money, thou need it.
Twill keep thee honest: Want made thee a knave.
Let Flaccus, and Pomtinius, the Praetors,
Have public thanks, and Quintus Fabius Sanga,
For their good service.
They deserve it all.
But what do we decree unto the Consul,
Whose virtue, counsel, watchfulness, and wisdom,
Hath freed the Common-wealth, and without tumult,
Slaughter, or blood, or scarce raising a force,
Rescued vs all out of the jaws of Fate?
We owe our Lives unto him, and our Fortunes.
Our Wives, our Children, Parents, and our Gods.
We all are saved, by his fortitude.
The Common-wealth owes him a ciuicke gyrland.
Hee is the only Father of his Country.
Let there be public prayer, to all the Gods,
Made in that name, for him.
And in these words.
For that he hath, by his vigilance, preserved
Rome from the flame, the Senate from the sword,
And all her Citizens from massacre.
How are my labours more then paid, grave Fathers,
In these great titles, and decreed honours!
Such, as to me, first, of the civil robe,
Of any man, since Rome was Rome, have happened;
And from this frequent Senate: which more glads me,
That I now see, you' have sense of your own safety.
If those good days come no less grateful to vs,
Wherein we are preserved from some great danger,
Then those, wherein w'are borne, and brought, to light,
Because the gladness of our safety is certain,
But the condition of our birth not so;
And that we are saved with pleasure, but are borne
Without the sense of joy: why should not, then,
This day, to vs, and all posterity
Of ours, be had in equal fame, and honour,
With that, when Romulus first reared these walls,
When so much more is saved, then he built?
It ought.
Let it be added to our Fasti.
What tumult's that?
Here's one Tarquinius taken,
Going to Catiline; and says he was sent
By Marcus Crassus: whom he names, to be
Guilty of the conspiracy.
Some lying varlet.
Take him away, to prison.
Bring him in,
And let me see him.
He is not worth it, Crassus.
Keep him up close, and hungry, till he tell,
By whose pernicious counsel, he durst slander
So great, and good a Citizen.
By yours
I fear, twill prove.
Some of the Traitors, sure,
To give their action the more credit, bid him
Name you, or any man.
I know my self,
By all the tracts, and courses of this business,
Crassus is noble, just, and loves his Country.
Here is a Libel too, accuseng Caesar,
From Lucius Vectius, and confirmed by Curius.
Away with all, throw'it out of the Court.
A trick on me, too?
It is some men's malice.
I said to Curius, I did not believe him.
Was not that Curius your spy, that had
Reward decreed unto him, the last Senate,
With Fuluia, upon your private motion?
Yes.
But he has not that reward, yet?
No.
Let not this trouble you, Caesar, none believes it.
It shall not, if that he have no reward.
But if he have, sure I shall think my self
Very untimely, and vnsafely hest,
Where such, as he is, may have pay t'accuse me.
You shall have no wrong done you, noble Caesar,
But all contentment.
Consul, I am silent.
I Never yet knew, Soldiers, that, in fight,
Words added virtue unto valiant men;
Or, that a Generals oration made
An Army fall, or stand: But how much prowess
Habitual, or natural each mans breast
Was owner of, so much in act it showed.
" Whom neither glory' or danger can excite
" Tic vain t'attempt with speech: For the minds fear
" Keeps all brave sounds from entering at that ear.
I, yet, would warn you some few things, my Friends,
And give you reason of my present counsels.
You know, no less then I, what state, what point
Our affair stand in; And you all have heard,
What a calamitous misery the sloth,
And sleepiness of Lentulus, hath plucked
Both on himself, and vs: How, whilst our aides
There, in the City looked for, are defeated,
Our entrance into Galley, too, is stopped.
Two Armies waite vs: One from Rome, the other
From the Gaule-Prouinces. And, where we are,
(Although I most desire it) the great want
Of corn, and victual, forbids longer stay.
So that, of need, we must remove, but whither
The sword must both direct, and cut the passage.
I only, therefore, wish you, when you strike,
To have your valours, and your souls, about you;
And think, you carry in your laboring hands
The things, you seek, glory, and liberty,
Your Country, which you want now, with the Fates,
That are to be instructed, by our swords.
If we can give the blow, all will be safe to'vs.
We shall not want provision, nor supplies.
The Colonies, and free Towns will lie open.
Where, if we yield to fear, expect no place,
Nor friend, to shelter those, whom their own Fortune,
And ill used Arms have left without protection.
You might have lived in servitude, or exile,
Or safe at Rome, depending on the great ones;
But that you thought those things unfit for men.
And, in that thought, you then were valiant.
For no man ever yet changed peace for war,
But he, that meant to conquer. Hold that purpose.
There's more necessity, you should be such,
In fighting for your selves, then they for others.
" Hoe's base, that trusts his feet, whose hands are armed.
Me thinks, I see Death, and the Furies, waiting
What we will doe; and all the Heaven 'at leisure
For the great Spectacle. Draw, then, your swords:
And, if our destiny envy our virtue
The honour of the day, yet let vs care
To fell our selves, at such a price, as may
Undo the world to buy vs: and make Fate,
While she tempts ours, fear her own estate.
What means this hasty calling of the Senate?
We shall know straight. Waite, till the Consul speaks.
Fathers Conscript, bethink you of your safeties,
And what to doe, with these Conspirators;
Some of their Clients, their Freed men, and Slaves
Gin to make head: There is one of Lentulus Bawds
Runs up and down the shops, through every street,
With money to corrupt, the poor artificers,
And needy tradesmen, to their aide. Cethegus
Hath sent, too, to his servants; who are many,
Chosen, and exercised in bold attemptings,
That forthwith they should arm themselves, and prove
His rescue: All will be in instant uproar,
If you prevent it not, with present counsels.
We have done what we can, to meet the fury,
And will doe more. Be you good to your selves.
What is your pleasure, Fathers, shall be done?
Syllanus, you are Consul next designed.
Your sentence, of these men.
It is short, and this.
Since they have sought to blot the name of Rome,
Out of the world; and raze this glorious Empire
With her own hands, and arms, turned on her self:
I think it fit they die. And, could my breath
Now execute 'hem, they should not enjoy
An article of time, or eye of light,
Longer, to poison this our common air.
I think so too.
And I.
And I.
And I.
Your sentence, Caius Caesar.
Conscript Fathers,
In great affairs, and doubtful, it behooves
Men, that are asked their sentence, to be free
From either hate, or love, anger, or pity:
For, where the least of these doe hinder, there
The mind not easily discerns the truth.
I speak this to you, in the name of Rome,
For whom you stand; and to the present cause:
That this foul fact of Lentulus, and the rest,
Weigh not more with you, then your dignity;
And you be more indulgent to your passion,
Then to your honour. If there could be found
A pain, or punishment, equal to their crimes,
I would devise, and help: But if the greatness
Of what they have done, exceed all mans invention,
I think it fit, to stay, where our laws doe.
Poor petty States may alter, upon humour,
Where, if they' offend with anger, few doe know it,
Because they are obscure; their Fame, and Fortune
Is equal, and the same: But they, that are
Head of the world, and live in that seen height,
All Mankind knows their actions. So we see
The greater fortune hath the lesser licence.
They must nor favour, hate, and least be angry:
For what with others is called anger, there,
Is cruelty, and pride. I know Syllanus,
Who spoke before me, a just, valiant Man,
A lover of the State, and one that would not,
In such a business, use or grace, or hatred;
I know, too, well his manners, and his modesty:
Nor doe I think his sentence cruel (for
Against such delinquents, what can be too bloody?)
But that it is abhorring from our state;
Since to a Citizen of Rome, offending,
Our Laws give exile, and not death. Why then
Decrees he that? It were vain to think, for fear;
When, by the diligence of so worthy a Consul,
All is made safe, and certain. Is it for punishment?
Why Death's the end of evils, and a rest,
Rather then torment: It dissolves all griefs.
And beyond that, is neither care, nor joy.
You hear, my sentence would not have 'hem die.
How then? set free, and increase Catilines Army?
So will they, being but banished. No, grave Fathers,
I judge 'hem, first, to have their states confiscate,
Then, that their persons remain prisoners
In the free towns, far off from Rome, and seuerd':
Where they might neither have relation,
Hereafter, to the Senate, or the People.
Or, if they had, those towns, then to be mulcted.
As enemies to the State, that had their guard.
Tic good, and honourable, Caesar, hath vtterd.
Fathers, I see your faces, and your eyes
All bent on me, to note of these two censures
Which I incline to. Either of them are grave,
And answering the dignity of the speakers,
The greatness of th'affaire, and both severe.
One urges death: And he may well remember
This State hath punished wicked Citizens so.
The other bonds: and those perpetual, which
He thinks found out for the more singular plague.
Decree which you shall please. You have a Consul
Not readier to obey, then to defend
What ever you shall act, for the Republique;
And meet with willing shoulders any burden,
Or any fortune, with an even face,
Though it were death: which to a valiant man
Can never happen foul, nor to a Consul
Be immature, or to a wise man wretched.
Fathers, I spake, but as I thought: the needs
Of the Common-wealth required.
Excuse it not.
Cato, speak you your sentence.
This it is.
You here dispute, on kinds of punishment,
And stand consulting, what you should decree
Against those, of whom, you rather should beware.
This mischief is not like those common facts,
Which, when they are done, the laws may prosequute.
But this, if you provide not, ere it happen,
When it is happened, will not waite your judgment.
Good Caius Caesar, here, hath very well,
And subtly discoursed of life, and death,
As if he thought those things, a pretty fable,
That are delivered vs of Hell, and Furies,
Or of the divers way, that ill men go
From good, to filthy, dark, and ugly places.
And therefore he would have these live; and long too;
But far from Rome, and in the small free Towns,
Lest, here, they might have rescue: As if Men,
Fit for such acts, were only in the City,
And not throughout all Italy? or that boldness
Could not doe more, where it found least resistance?
Tic a vain Counsel, if he think them dangerous.
Which, if he doe not, but that he alone
In so great fear of all men, stand vnfrighted,
He gives me cause, and you, more to fear him.
I am plain, Fathers. Here you look about,
One at another, doubting what to doe:
With faces, as you trusted to the Gods,
That still have saved you; and they can do it: But
They are not wishings, or base womanish prayers
Can draw their aides: but vigilance, counsel, action:
Which they will be ashamed to forsake
Tic sloth they hate, and cowardice. Here you have
The Traitors in your houses, yet you stand
Fearing what to doe with 'hem; Let 'hem loose,
And send 'hem hence with arms too; that your Mercy
May turn your misery, as soon is it can.
O, but, they, are great men, and have offended
But through ambition. We would spare their honour:
I, if themselves had spared it, or their fame,
Or modesty, or either God, or Man:
Then I would spare 'hem. But, as things now stand,
Fathers, to spare these men, were to commit
A greater wickedness, then you would revenge.
If there had been but time, and place for you,
To have repaired this fault, you should have made it;
It should have been your punishment, to'haue felt
Your tardy error: But necessity,
Now, bids me say let 'hem not live an hour,
If you mean Rome should live a day. I have done.
Cato hath spoken like an Oracle,
Let it be so decreed.
We all were fearful.
And had been base, had not his virtue raised vs.
Go forth, most worthy Consul, we'll assist you.
I'am not yet changed in my sentence, Fathers.
No matter. What be those?
Letters, for Caesar.
From whom? let'hem be read, in open Senate;
Fathers, they come from the Conspirators.
I crave to have 'hem read, for the Republique.
Cato, read you it. Tic a Loue-letter,
From your dear sister, to me: though you hate me.
Do not discover it.
Hold thee dronkard. Consul.
Go forth, and confidently.
You'll repent
This rashness, Cicero.
Caesar shall repent it.
Hold friends.
Hoe's scarce a friend unto the Public.
No violence. Caesar be safe. Lead on:
Where are the public Executioners?
Bid 'hem waite on vs. On to Spenders house.
Bring Lentulus forth. Here, you, the sad revengers
Of capital crimes, against the Public, take
This man unto your justice: strangle him.
Thou dost well, Consul. It was a cast at dice
In Fortunes hand, not long since, that thy self
Should have heard these, or other words as fatal.
Lead on to Quintus Cornificius house;
Bring forth Cethegus. Take him to the due
Death, that he hath deserved: and let it bee
Said, He was once.
A beast, or, what is worse,
A slave, Cethegus. Let that be the name
For all that's base hereafter: That would let
This worm pronounce on him: and not have trampled
His body intoHa! Art thou not moved?
" Justice is never angry: Take him hence.
O the whore Fortune! and her bawds the Fates!
That put these tricks on men, which knew the way
To death by' a sword. Strangle me, I may sleep:
I shall grow angry with the Gods, else.
Lead
To Caius Caesars, for Statilius.
Bring him, and rude Gabinius, out. Here, take 'hem
To your cold hands, and let 'hem feel death from you:
I thank you, you do me a pleasure.
And me too.
So, Marcus Tullius, thou moist now stand up,
And call it happy Rome, thou being Consul.
Great Parent of thy Country, go, and let
The Old men of the City, ere they die,
Kiss thee; the Matrons dwell about thy neck;
The Youths, and Maids lay up, against they are old
What kind of man thou were, to tell their Nephews,
When, such a year, they read, within our Fasti,
Thy Consulship. Who's this? Petreius?
Welcome,
Welcome renowned Soldier. What's the news?
This face can bring no ill with it, unto Rome.
How do's the worthy Consul, my Colleague?
As well as victory can make him, Sir.
He greetes the Fathers, and to me hath trusted
The sad relation of the Civil strife,
For, in such war, the conquest still is black.
Shall we withdraw into the House of Concord?
No, happy Consul, here; let all ears take
The benefit of this tale. If he had voice,
To spread unto the Poles, and strike it through
The Center, to the Antipodes; It would ask it.
The straights, and needs of Catiline being such,
As he must fight, with one of the two Armies,
That then had near enclosed him; It pleased Fate,
To make vs th'object of his desperate choice,
Wherein the danger almost poised the honour:
And as he riss', the day grew black with him;
And Fate descended nearer to the earth,
As if she meant to hide the name of things
Vnde her wings, and make the world her quarry.
At this we roused, least one small minutes stay
Had left it to be' enquired, what Rome was.
And (as we ought) armed in the confidence
Of our great cause, in form of battle, stood.
Whilst Catiline came on, not with the face
Of any man, but of a public ruin:
His Countenance was a civil war it self.
And all his host had standing in their looks
The paleness of the death, that was to come.
Yet cried they out like Vultures, and urged on
As if they would praecipitate our fates.
Nor staid we longer for 'hem; But himself
Struck the first stroke: And, with it, fled a life.
Which cut, it seemed a narrow neck of land
Had broke between two mighty Seas; and either
Flowed into other; for so did the slaughter:
And whirled about, as when two violent Tides
Meet, and not yield. The Furies stood, on hills
Circling the place, and trembled to see men
Doe more, then they: whilst Piety left the field,
Grieved for that side, that, in so bad a cause,
They knew not, what a crime their valour was.
The Sun stood still, and was, behind the cloud
The battle made, seen sweating, to drive up
His frighted Horse, whom still the noise drove backward.
And now had fierce Enyo, like a flame,
Consumed all it could reach, and then it self;
Had not the Fortune of the Common-wealth
Come Pallas-like, to every Roman thought.
Which Catiline seeing, and that now his Troops.
Covered that earth, they' had fought on, with their trunks,
Ambitious of great fame, to crown his ill,
Collected all his fury, and ran in
(Armed with a glory, high as his despair)
Into our battle, like a Lybian Lion,
Upon his hunters, scornful of our weapons,
Careless of wounds, plucking down lives about him,
Till he had circled in himself with death:
Then fell he too, to embrace it where it lay.
And as, in that rebellion against the Gods,
Minerua holding forth Medusa's head,
One of the Giant Brethren felt himself
Grow marble at the killing sight, and now,
Almost made stone, began t'inquire, what flint,
What rock it was, that crept through all his limbs,
And, ere he could think more, was that he feared;
So Catiline, at the ight of Rome in vs,
Became his Tomb: yet did his look retain
Some of his fierceness, and his hands still moved,
As if he laboured, yet, to grasp the State,
With those rebellious parts.
A brave bad death.
Had this been honest now, and for his Country,
As it was against it, who had ere fallen greater?
Honoured Petreius, Rome, not I must thank you.
How modestly has he spoken of himself!
He did the more.
Thanks to the'immortall Gods,
Romans, I now am paid for all my labours,
My watchings, and my dangers. Here conclude
Your praises, triumphs, honours, and rewards
Decreed to me: only the memory
Of this glad day, if I may know it live
Within your thoughts, shall much affect my conscience,
Which I must always study before fame.
" Though both be good, the latter yet is worst,
" And ever is ill got, without the first.

A Play (expected long) makes the Audience look
For wonders:that each Scoene should be a book,
Composed to all perfection; each one comes
And brings a play in's head with him: up he sums,
What he would of a Roaring Girl have writ;
If that he finds not here, he mwas at it.
Only we entreat you think our Scoene.
Cannot speak high (the subject being but mean)
A Roaring Girl (whose notes till now never were)
Shall fill with laughter our vast Theater,
That's all which I dare promise: Tragic passion,
And such grave stuff, is this day out of fashion.
I see attention sets wide op her gates
Of hearing, and with covetous listening waits,
To know what Girl, this Roaring Girl should be.
(For of that Tribe are many.) One is she
That roars at midnight in deep Tavern bowls,
That beats the watch, and Constables controls;
Another roars in the day time, swears, stabs, gives braves,
Yet sells her soul to the lust of fools and slaves.
Both these are Suburbe-roarers. Then there's (besides)
A civil City Roaring Girl, whose pride,
Feasting, and riding, shakes her husbands state,
And leaves him Roaring through an iron grate.
None of these Roaring Girls is ours: she flies
With wings more losty. Thus her character lies,
Yet what need characters? when to give a guess,
Is better then the person to express;
But would you know who it is? would you hear her name?
She is called mad Moll; her life, our acts proclaim.
THe young gentleman (our young moister) Sir Alexanders son, is it into his ears (sweet Damsel) (emblem of fragility) you desire to have a message transported, or to be transcendent.
A private word or two Sir, nothing else.
You shall fructify in that which you come for: your pleasure shall be satisfied to your full contentation: I will (fairest tree of generation) watch when our young moister is erected, (that is to say up) and deliver him to this your most white hand.
Thanks sir.
And withal certify him, that I have culled out for him (now his belly is replenished) a daintier bit or modicome then any lay upon his trencher at dinnerhath he notion of your name, I beseech your chastity.
One Sir, of whom he be spake falling bands.
Falling bands, it shall so be given him,if you please to venture your modesty in the hall, amongst a curlpated company of rude serving-men, and take such as they can set before you, you shall be most seriously, and ingeniously welcome.
I have dyed indeed already sir.
Or will you vouchsafe to kiss the lip of a cup of rich Orleans in the buttry amongst our waiting women.
Not now in truth sir.
Our young Moister shall then have a feeling of your being here presently it shall so be given him.
I humbly thank you sir, but that my bosom
Is full of bitter sorrows, I could smile,
To see this formal Ape play Antic tricks:
But in my breast a poisoned arrow sticks,
And smiles cannot become me, Love woven slightly
(Such as thy false heart makes) wears out as lightly,
But love being truly bred ith the soul (like mine)
Bleeds even to death, at the least wound it takes,
The more we quench this, the less it slakes: Oh me!
A Sempster speak with me, say thou.
Yes sir, she's there, viva voce, to deliver her auricular confession.
With me sweet heart. What first?
I have brought home your bands sir.
Bands: Neatfoote.
Sir.
Prithee look in, for all the Gentlemen are upon rising.
Yes sir, a most methodical attendance shall be given.
And dost hear, if my father call for me, say I am busy with a Sempster.
Yes sir, hee shall know it that you are busied with a needle woman.
In's ear good Neat-foote,
It shall be so given him.
Bands, you're mistaken sweet heart, I bespoke none, when, where, I prithee, what bands, let me see them.
Yes sir, a bond fast sealed, with solemn oaths,
Subscribed unto (as I thought) with your soul:
Delivered as your deed in sight of heaven,
Is this bond concealed, have you forgot me.
Ha! life of my life: Sir Guy Fitz-Allards daughter,
What has transformed my love to this strange shape?
Stay: make all sure,so: now speak and be brief,
Because the wolfe's at door that lies in waite,
To prey upon vs both albeit mine eyes
Are blessed by thine, yet this so strange disguise
Holds me with fear and wonder.
Mines a loathed sight,
Why from it are you banished else so long.
I must cut short my speech, in broken language,
Thus much sweet Moll, I must thy company shun,
I court another Moll, my thoughts must run,
As a horse runs, thats blind, round in a Mill,
Out every step, yet keeping one path still.
Vmh: must you shun my company, in one knot
Have both our hands byt'h hands of heaven been tied,
Now to be broke, I thought me once your Bride:
Our fathers did agree on the time when,
And must another bed-fellow fill my room.
Sweet maid, lets loose no time, tic in heavens book
Set down, that I must have thee: an oath we took,
To keep our vows, but when the knight your father
Was from mine parted, storms began to sit
Upon my covetous fathers brow: which fell
From them on me, he reckond up what gold
This marriage would draw from him, at which he swore,
To loose so much blood, could not grieve him more.
He then dissuades me from thee, called thee not fair,
And asked what is she, but a beggars heir?
He scorned thy dowry of (5000) Marks.
If such a sum of money could be found,
And I would match with that, he would not undo it,
Provided his bags might add nothing to it,
But vowed, if I took thee, nay more, did swear it,
Save birth from him I nothing should inherit.
What follows then, my ship-wracke.
Dearest no:
Tho wildly in a labyrinth I go,
My end is to meet thee: with a side wind
Must I now sail, else I no haven can find
But both must sink for ever. There's a wench
Called Mole, mad Mole, or merry Moll, a creature
So strange in quality, a whole city takes
Note of her name and person, all that affection
I owe to thee, on her in counterfeit passion,
I spend to mad my father: he believes
I dote upon this Roaring Girl, and grieves
As it becomes a father for a son,
That could be so bewitched: yet isle go on
This crooked way, sigh still for her, fine dreams,
In which isle talk only of her, these streams
Shall, I hope, force my father to consent
That here I anchor rather then be rent
Upon a rock so dangerours, Art thou pleased,
Because thou see we are way-laid, that I take
A path thats safe, tho it be far about,
My prayers with heaven guide thee,
Then I will on,
My father is at hand, kiss and begone;
Hours shall be watched for meetings; I must now
As men for fear, to a strange I doll bow.
Farewell.
Isle guide thee forth, when next we meet,
A story of Moll shall make our mirth more sweet.
Thanks good Sir Alexander for our bounteous cheer:
Fie, fie, in giving thanks you pay to dear.
When bounty spreads the table, faith it were sin,
(at going of) if thanks should not step in.
No more of thanks, no more, I mary Sir,
Th'inner room was too close, how do you like
This Parlour Gentlemen?
Oh passing well.
What a sweet breath the air casts here, so cool,
I like the prospect best.
See how tic furnished.
A very fair sweet room.
Sir Day Dapper,
The furniture that doth adorn this room,
Cost many a fair gray great ere it came here,
But good things are most cheap, when they are most dear,
Nay when you look into my galleries,
How bravely they are trimmed up, you all shall swear
Yare highly pleased to see whats set down there:
Stories of men and women (mixed together
Fair ones with foul, like sun-shine in wet whether)
Within one square a thousand heads are laid
So close, that all of heads, the room seeemes made,
As many faces there (filled with blithe looks)
Show like the promising titles of new books,
(Writ merrily) the Readers being their own eyes,
Which seem to move and to give plaudities,
And here and there (whilst with obsequious ears,
Thronged heaps do listen) a cut purse thrusts and leers
With hawk eyes for his prey: I need not show him,
By a hanging villainous look, your selves may know him,
The face is drawn so rarely, Then sir below,
The very flower (as it were) waives to and fro,
And like a floating Island, seems to move,
Upon a sea bound in with shores aboue,
These sights are excellent.
I'll show you all,
Since we are met, make our parting Comical.
This gentleman (my friend) will take his leave Sir.
Ha, take his leave (Sebastian) who?
This gentleman.
Your love sir, has already given me some time,
And if you please to trust my age with more,
It shall pay double interest: Good sir stay.
I have been too bold.
Not so sir. A merry day
Amongst friends being spent, is better then gold saved.
Some wine, some wine. Where be these knaves I keep.
At your worshipful elbow, sir.
You are kissing my maids, drinking, or fast asleep.
Your worship has given it vs right.
You varlets stir,
Chairs, stools and cushions: prithee sir Day Dapper,
Make that chair thine.
Tic but an easy gift,
And yet I thank you for it sir, I'll take it.
A chair for old sir Adam Appleton.
A back friend to your worship.
Mary good Neatfoot,
I thank thee for it: back friends sometimes are good.
Pray make that stool your perch, good M. Goshawk.
I stoop to your lure sir.
Son Sebastian,
Take Moister Greenewit to you.
Sit dear friend.
Nay moister Laxtonfurnish moister Laxton
With what he wants (a stone) a stool I would say, a stool.
I had rather stand sir.
I know you had (good M. Laxton.) So, so
Now here is a mess of friends, and (gentlemen)
Because times glass shall not be running long,
I'll quicken it with a pretty tale.
Good tales do well,
In these bad days, where vice does so excel.
Begin sir Alexander.
Last day I met
An aged man upon whose head was scored,
A debt of just so many years as these,
Which I owe to my grave, the man you all know.
His name I pray you sir.
Nay you shall pardon me,
But when he saw me (with a sigh that brake,
Or seemed to break his heart-strings) thus he spake:
Oh my good knight, says he, (and then his eyes
Were richer even by that which made them poor,
They had spent so many tears they had no more.)
Oh sir (says he) you know it, for you ha seen
Blessings to rain upon mine house and me:
Fortune (who slaves men) was my slave: her wheel
Hath spun me golden threads, for I thank heaven,
I ne'er had but one cause to curse my stars,
I asked him then, what that one cause might be.
So Sir.
He paused, and as we often see,
A sea so much becalmed, there can be found
No wrinkle on his brow, his waives being drowned
In their own rage: but when th'imperious wind,
Use strange invisible tyranny to shake
Both heavens and earths foundation at their noise:
The seas swelling with wrath to part that fray
Rise up, and are more wild, more mad, then they.
Even so this good old man was by my question
Stirred up to roughness, you might see his gall
Flow even in's eyes: then grew he fantastical.
Fantastical, ha, ha.
Yes, and talk oddly.
Pray sir proceed,
How did this old man end?
Mary sir thus.
He left his wild fit to read ore his cards,
Yet then (though age cast snow on all his hairs)
He joyed because (says he) the God of gold
Has been to me no niggard: that disease
(Of which all old men sicken) Avarice
Never infected me.
He means not himself i'm sure.
For like a lamp,
Fed with continual oil, I spend and throw
My light to all that need it, yet have still
Enough to serve my self, oh but (quoth he)
Tho heauens-dew fall, thus on this aged tree,
I have a son thats like a wedge doth cleave,
My very heart root,
Had he such a son,
Now I do smell a fox strongly.
Lets see: no Moister Greene-wit is not yet
So mellow in years as he; but as like Sebastian,
Just like my son Sebastian,such another.
How finely like a fencer my father fetches hisby-blowes to hit me, but if I beat you not at your own weapon of subtilty.
This son (saith he) that should be
The column and maine arch unto my house,
The crutch unto my age, becomes a whirlwind
Shaking the firm foundation,
Tic some prodigal.
Well shot old Adam Bell.
No city monster neither, no prodigal,
But sparing, wary, civil, and (tho wiuelesse)
An excellent husband, and such a traveller,
He has more tongues in his head then some have teeth,
I have but two in mine
So sparing and so wary,
What then could vex his father so.
Oh a woman.
A flesh fly, that can vex any man.
A scurvy woman,
On whom the passionate old man swore he doted:
A creature (saith he) nature hath brought forth
To mock the sex of woman.It is a thing
One knows not how to name, her birth began
Ere she was all made. Tic woman more then man,
Man more then woman, and (which to none can hap)
The Sun gives her two shadows to one shape,
Nay more, let this strange thing, walk, stand or sit,
No blazing star draws more eyes after it.
A Monster, tic some Monster.
Shoe's a varlet.
Now is my cue to bristle.
A naughty pack.
Tic false.
Ha boy.
Tic false.
Whats false, I say shoe's nought.
I say that tongue
That dares speak so (but yours) sticks in the throat
Of a rank villain, set your self aside.
So sir what then.
Any here else had lied.
I think I shall fit you
Lye.
Yes.
Doth this concern him.
Ah sir boy.
Is your blood heated: boils it: are you stung,
Isle pierce you deeper yet: oh my dear friends,
I am that wretched father, this that son,
That sees his ruin, yet headlong on doth run.
Will you love such a poison.
Fie, fie.
You're all mad.
You are sick at heart, yet feelst it not: of all these,
What Gentleman (but thou) knowing his disease
Mortal, would shun the cure: oh Moister Greenewit,
Would you to such an Idol bow.
Not I sir.
Heir's Moister Laxton, has he mind to a woman
As thou hast.
No not I sir.
Sir I know it.
There good parts are so rare, there bad so common,
I will have nought to do with any woman.
Tic well done Moister Laxton.
Oh thou cruel boy,
Thou would with lust an old mans life destroy,
Because thou see I'm half way in my grave,
Thou shouelst dust upon me: wot thou might have
Thy wish, most wicked, most unnatural.
Why sir, tic thought, sir Guy Fitz-Allards daughter
Shall wed your son Sebastian.
Sir Day Dapper.
I have upon my knees, wood this fond boy,
To take that virtuous maiden.
Hark you a word sir.
You on your knees have cursed that virtuous maiden,
And me for loving her, yet do you now
Thus baffle me to my face: were not your knees
In such entreats, give me Fitz-Allards daughter.
Isle give thee rats-bane rather.
Well then you know
What dish I mean to feed upon.
Hark Gentlemen,
He swears to have this cut-purse drab, to spite my gall.
Moister Sebastian.
I am deaf to you all.
Ime so bewitched, so bound to my desires,
Tears, prayers, threats, nothing can quench out those fires
That burn within me.
Her blood shall quench it then,
Loose him not, oh dissuade him Gentlemen.
He shall be weand I warrant you.
Before his eyes
Lay down his shame, my grief, his miseries.
No more, no more, away.
I wash a Negro,
Loosing both pains and cost: but take thy flight,
Isle be most near thee, when I'm least in sight.
Wilde Buck isle hunt thee breathless, thou shalt run on,
But I will turn thee when I'm not thought upon.
Now sir what are you, leave your Apes tricks and speak.
A letter from my Captain to your Worship.
Oh, oh, now I remember tic to prefer thee into my service.
To be a shifter under your Worships nose of a clean trencher, when ther's a good bit upon it.
Troth honest fellowhumhhalet me see,
This knave shall be the axe to hew that down
At which I stumble, has a face that promises
Much of a villain, I will grind his wit,
And if the edge prove fine make use of it.
Come hither sir, can thou be secret, ha.
As two crafty Atturneys plotting the undoing of their clients.
Did never, as thou hast walked about this town
Hear of a wench called Moll, mad merry Moll.
Moll cutpurse sir.
The same, dost thou know her then,
As well as I know twill rain upon Simon and Iudes day next, I will sift all the taverns ith city, and drink half pots with all the Watermen ath bankside, but if you will sir Isle find her out.
That task is easy, doot then, hold thy hand up.
Whats this, first burnt?
No sir no, a little sindgd with making fire works.
Ther's money, spend it, that being spent fetch more.
Oh sir that all the poor soldiers in England had
such a leader. For fetching no water Spaniel is like me.
This wench we speak of, strays so from her kind
Nature repents she made her. Tic a Mermaid
Has told my son to shipwreck.
Isle cut her comb for you.
Isle tell out gold for thee then: hunt her forth,
Cast out a line hung full of silver hooks
To catch her to thy company: deep spendings
May draw her thats most chaste to a mans bosom.
The jingling of Golden bells, and a good fool with a hobbyhorse, will draw all the whoores ith to wneto dance in a morris,
Or rather, for thats best, (they say sometimes
She goes in breeches) follow her as her man.
And when her breeches are off, she shall follow me.
Beat all thy brains to serve her.
Zounds sir, as country wenches beat cream, till butter comes.
Play thou the subtle spider, weave fine nets
To ensnare her very life.
Her life.
Yes suck
Her heart-bloud if thou can, twist thou but cords
To catch her, Isle find law to hang her up.
Spoke like a Worshipful bencher.
Trace all her steps: at this shee-foxes den
Watch what lambs enter: let me play the shepherd
To save their throats from bleeding, and cut hers.
This is the goll shall doot.
Be firm and gain me
Ever thine own. This done I entertain thee:
How is thy name.
My name sir is Raph Trapdore, honest Raph.
Trapdore, be like thy name, a dangerous step
For her to venture on, but unto me.
As fast as your sole to your boot or shoe sir.
Hence then, be little seen here as thou can.
Isle still be at thine elbow.
The trapdores set.
Moll if you budge you're gon: this me shall crown,
A Roaring Boy, the Roaring Girl puts down,
God a mercy, loose no time.
Gentlemen what first you lack. What first you buy, see fine bands and ruffs, fine lawns, fine cambrickes, what first you lack Gentlemen, what first you buy?
Yonders the shop.
Is that she.
Peace.
She that minces Tobacco.
I: shees a Gentlewoman borne I can tell you, tho it be her hard fortune now to shred Indian pot-hearbes.
Oh sir tic many a good women's fortune, when her husband turns bankrupt, to begin with pipes and set up again.
And indeed the raising of the woman is the lifting up of the mans head at all times, if one flourish, tother will bud as fast I warrant ye.
Come you are familiarly acquainted there, I grope that.
And you grope no better ith dark you may chance lye ith ditch when you're drunk.
Go you are a mystical lecher.
I will not deny but my credit may take up an ounce of pure smoke.
May take up an ell of pure smock; away go, tic the closest striker. Life I think he comits venery 40 foot deep, no mans aware on it, I like a palpable smockster go to work so openly, with the tricks of art, that I'm as apparently seen as a naked boy in a vial, &amp; were it not for a gift of treachery that I have in me to betray my friend whe he puts most trust in me (mass yonder
hee is too) and by his injury to make good my access to her, I should appear as defective in courting, as a Farmers son the first day of his feather, that doth nothing at Court, but woe the hangings and glass windows for a month togethere, and some broken waiting woman for ever after. I find those imperfections in my venery, that were it not for flattery and falsehood, I should want discourse and impudence, and hee that wants impudence among women, is worthy to bee kicked out at beds feet.He shall not see me yet.
Troth this is finely shred.
Oh women are the bst mincers.
'Thad bin a good phrase for a Cooks wife sir.
But twill serve generally, like the front of a new Almanac; as thus: Calculated for the meridian of Cooks wives, but generally for all Englishwomen.
Nay you shall ha'te sir, I have filled it for you.
The pipe's in a good hand, and I wish mine always so.
But not to be used a that fashion.
O pardon me sir, I understand no french.
I pray be covered. Jack a pipe of rich smoke.
Rich smoke; that's 6. pence a pipe first?
To me sweet Lady.
Be not forgetful; respect my credit; seem strange;
Art and Wit makes a fool of suspicion:pray be wary.
Push, I warrant you:come, how first gallants?
Pure and excellent.
I thought it was good, you were grown so silent; you are like those that love not to talk at victuals, tho they make a worse noise in the nose then a common fiddlers prentice, and discourse a whole Supper with snuffling;I must speak a word with you anon.
Make your way wisely then. (ners,
Oh what else sir, hoe's perfection it self, full of man-
But not an acre of ground belonging to 'em.
I and full of form, he has ne'er a good stool in's chamber.
But aboue all religious: hee prays daily upon elder brothers.
And valiant aboue measure; he has run three streets from a Sergeant.
Puh, Puh.
Oh, puh, ho, ho.
So, so.
Whats the matter now sir?
I protest I'm in extreme want of money, if you can supply me now with any means, you doe me the greatest pleasure, next to the bounty of your love, as ever poor gentleman tasted.
What's the sum would pleasure ye sir?
Tho you deserve nothing less at my hands.
Why it is but for want of opportunity thou know; I put her off with opportunity still: by this light I hate her, but for means to keep me in fashion with gallants; for what I take from her, I spend upon other wenches, bear her in hand still; she has wit enough to rob her husband, and I ways enough to consume the money: why how now? what the chin-cough?
Thou hast the cowardliest trick to come before a mans face and strangle him ere hee be aware, I could find in my heart to make a quarrel in earnest.
Pox and thou dost, thou know I never use to fight with my friends, thou'l but loose thy labour in it. Jack Dapper!
Monsieur Dapper, I dive down to your anckles.
Save ye gentlemen all three in a peculiar salute.
He were ill to make a lawyer, hee dispatches three at once.
So well said: but is this of the same Tobacco mistress Gallipot?
The same you had at first sir.
I wish it no better: this will serve to drink at my chamber.
Shall we taste a pipe on it?
Not of this by my troth Gentlemen, I have sworn before you.
What not Jack dapper.
Pardon me sweet Jack, I'm sorry I made such a rash oath, but foolish oaths must stand: where art going Jack.
Faith to buy one feather.
One feather, the foole's peculiar still.
Gul.
Moister.
Heir's three halfepence for your ordinary, boy, meet me an hour hence in Powles.
How three single halfepence; life, this will scarce serve a man in sauce, a halporth of mustard, a halporth of oil, and a halporth of vinegar, whats left then for the pickle herring: this shows like final beer ith morning after a great surfeit of wine ore night, hee could spend his three pound last night in a supper amongst girls and brave baudy-house boys, I thought his pockets cackeld not for nothing, these are the eggs of three pound, Isle go sup'em up presently.
Fight, nine, ten Angles, good wench in faith, and one that loves darkness well, she puts out a candle with the best tricks of any drugsters wife in England: but that which mads her I rail upon opportunity still, and take no notice on it. The other night she would needs lead me into a room with a candl in her hand to show me a naked picture, where no sooner entered but the candle was sent of an arrant: now I not intoneding to understand her, but like a puny at the Innes of venery, called for another light innocently, thus reward I all her cunning with simple mistaking. I know she cousins her husband to keep me, and Isle keep her honest, as long as I can, to make the poor man some part of amends, an honest mind of a whooremaister, how think you amongst you, what a fresh pipe, draw in a third man.
No your a horder, you engross bith ounces.
Puh I like it not.
What feather first you'd have sir.
These are most worn and most in fashion,
Amongst the Beaver gallants the stone Riders.
The private stages audience, the twelve penny stool Gentlemen,
I can inform you tic the general feather.
And therefore I mislike it, tell me of general.
Now a continual Simon and Iudes rain
Beat all your feathers as flat down as pancakes.
Show measpangled feather,
Oh to go a feasting with,
You'd have it for a hinch boy, you shall.
Mass I had quite forgot,
His Honours footman was here last night wife,
Ha you done with my Lords shirt.
Whats that to you sir,
I was this morning at his Honours lodging,
Ere such a snake as you crept out of your shell.
Oh it was well done good wife.
I hold it better sir, then if you had don't your self.
Nay so say I: but is the Countesses smock almost donne mouse.
Here lies the cambric sir, but wants I fear me.
Isle resolve you of that presently,
Heed, oh audacious groom,
Dare you presume to noble women's linen,
Keep you your yard to measure shepherds holland,
I must confine you I see that.
What say you to this gear.
I dare the errants critic in Tobacco
To lay one fault upon it.
Life yonders Mole.
Mole which Mole.
honest Mole.
Prithee lets call herMole.
Mole, Mole, pissed Mole.
How now, whats the matter.
A pipe of good tobacco Mole.
I cannot stay.
Nay Moll puh, prithee hark, but one word in faith.
Well what first.
Prithee come hither sir.
Hart I would give but too much money to be nibbling with that wench, life, sh'as the Spirit of four great parishes, and a voice that will drown all the City, me thinks a brave Captain might get all his soldiers upon her, and ne'er bee beholding to a company of mile-end milk sops, if hee could come on, and come off quick enough: Such a Moll were a maribone before an Italian, hee would cry bone robe till his ribs were nothing but bone. Isle lay hard siege to her, money is that Aqua fortis, that eats into many a maidenhead, where the walls are flesh &amp; blood Isle ever pierce through with a golden auguer.
Now thy judgment Moll, first not good?
Yes faith tic very good tobacco, how do you sell an an ounce, farewell. God b'y you Mistress Gallipot,
Why Mole, Mole.
I cannot stay now in faith, I am going to buy a shag uffe, the shop will be shut in presently.
Tic the maddest fantasticalst girl:I never knew so much flesh and so much nimbleness put together.
She slips from one company to another, like a fat Eel between a Dutchmas fingers:Isle watch my time for her.
Some will not stick to say shees a man
And some both man and woman.
That were excellent, she might first cuckold the husband and then make him do as much for the wife.
Save you; how does Mistress Tiltyard?
Mole.
Jack Dappper.
How dost Mole.
Isle tell the by and by, I go but to the next shop.
Thou shalt find me here this hour about a feather.
Nay and a feather hold you in play a whole hour, a goose will last you all the days of your life. Let me see a good shag ruff.
Mistress Mary that shalt thou in faith, and the best in the shop.
How now, greetings, love terms with a pox between you, have I found out one of your haunts, I send you for hollands, and you're ith the low countries with a mischief, I'm served with good ware byth shift, that makes it lye dead so long upon my hands, I were as good shut up shop, for when I open it I take nothing.
Nay and you fall a ringing once the devil cannot stop you, Isle out of the Belfry as fast as I canMoll.
Get you from my shop.
I come to buy. (shop
Isle sell ye nothing, I warn ye my house and
You goody Openwork, you that prick out a poor living
And sows many a bawdy skin-coate together,
Thou private pandresse between shirt and smock,
I wish thee for a minute but a man:
Thou should never use more shapes, but as you are
I pity my revenge, now my spleens up,
I would not mock it willinglyha be thankful.
Now I forgive thee.
Mary hang thee, I never asked forgiveness in my life.
You goodman swinesface.
What will you murder me.
You remember slave, how you abused me t'other night in a Tavern.
Not I by this light.
No, but by candlelight you did, you have tricks to save your oaths, reseruations have you, and I have reserved somewhat for you,as you like that call for more, you know the sign again.
Pox ant, had I brought any company along with me to have borne witless on it, 'twold ne'er have grieved me, but to be struck and nobody by, tic my ill fortune still, why tread upon a worm they say twill turn tail, but indeed a Gentleman
should have more manners.
Gallantly performed ifath Mole, and manfully, I love thee for ever fort, base rogue, had he offered but the least counter-buffe, by this hand I was prepared for him.
You prepared for him, why should you be prepared for him, was he any more then a man.
No nor so much by a yard and a handful London measure..
Why do you speak this then, doe you think I cannot ride a stone horse, unless one lead him bith snaffle.
Yes and sit him bravely, I know thou can Mole, it was but an honest mistake through love, and Isle make amends fort any way, prithee sweet plump Mole, when shall thou and I go out a town together.
Whether to Tyburne prithee.
Mass thats out a town indeed, thou hangst so many jests upon thy friends still. I mean honestly to Brainford, Staines or Ware.
What to do there.
Nothing but bee merry and lye together, I'll hire a coach with four horses.
I thought it would bee a beastly journey, you may leave out one well, three horses will serve, if I play the jade my self.
Nay push you are such another kicking wench, prithee be kind and lets meet.
Tic hard but we shall meet sir.
Nay but appoint the place then, there's ten Angels in fair gold Mole, you see I do not trifle with you, do but say thou wilt meet me, and Isle have a coach ready for thee.
Why here's my hand Isle meet you sir.
Oh good gold,the place sweet Mole.
It shall be your appointment.
Somewhat near Holborn Mole.
In Graies-Inne fields then.
A match.
Isle meet you there.
The hour.
Three.
That will be time enough to sup at Braineford.
I am of such a nature sir, I cannot endure the house when she scolds, sh'has a tongue will be hard further in a still morning then Saint Antlings-bell, she rails upon me for forrain winching, that I being a freema must needs keep a whore ith suburbs, and seek to impoverish the liberties, when we fall out, I trouble you still to make all whole with my wife.
No trouble at all, tic a pleasure to me to join things together.
Go thy ways, I doe this but to try thy honesty Goshawk.
How lik'st thou this Mole.
Oh singularly, your fitted now for a bunch, he looks for all the world with those spangled feathers like a nobleman's bedpost: The purity of your wench would I fine try, she seems like Kent unconquered, and I believe as many wiles are in heroh the gallants of these times are shallow letchers, they put not their courtship home enough to a wench, tic impossible to know what woman is thoroughly honest, because shoe's ne'er thoroughly tried, I am of that certain belief there are more queens in this town of their own making, then of any mans provoking, where lies the slackness then? many a poor soul would down, and ther's nobody will push Women are courted but ne'er soundly tried, (em: As many walk in spurs that never ride.
Oh abominable.
Nay more I tell you in private, he keeps a whore ith suburbs.
O spittle dealing, I came to him a Gentlewoman borne. Isle show you mine arms when you please sir.
I had rather see your legs, and begin that way.
Tic well known he took me from a Ladies service, where I was well beloved of the steward, I had my Latin tongue, and a spice of the French before I came to him, and now doth he keep a subberbian whore under my nostrils.
There's ways enough to cry quite with him, hark in thine ear.
Theres a friend worth a Million.
I'll try one spear against your chastity Mist. Tiltyard
Though it prove too short by the burgh.
Mass here she is.  I'm bound already to serve her, tho it be but a sluttish trick. Bless my hopeful young Mistress with long life and great limbs, send her the upper hand of all balifes, and their hungry adherents.
How now, what art thou?
A poor ebbing Gentleman, that would gladly wait for the young flood of your service.
My service! what should move you to offer your service to me sir?
The love I bear to your heroic spirit and miscueline womanhood.
So sir, put case we should retain you to vs, what parts are there in you for a Gentlewoman's service.
Of two kinds right Worshipful: moveable, and immovable: moveable to run of errants, and immovable to stand when you have occasion to use me.
What strength have you.
Strength Mistress Mole, I have gon up into a steeple, and staid the great bell as 'thas been ringing; stopped a windmill going.
And never struck down your self.
Stood as upright as I do at this present.
Come I pardon you for this, it shall bee no disgrace to you: I have struck up the heals of the high Germans size ere now,what not stand.
I am of that nature where I love, I'll bee at my mistress foot to do her service.
Why well said, but say your Mistress should receive injury, have you the spirit of fighting in you, durst you second her.
Life I have kept a bridge my self, and drove seven
at a time before me.
I.
But they were all Lincolneshire bullocks by my troth.
Well, meet me in Graies-Inne fields, between three and four this afternoon, and upon better consideration weal retain you.
I humbly thank your good Mistreship,
Isle crack your neck for this kindness.
Remember three.
Nay if I fail you hang me.
Good wench In faith.
Whose this.
Tic I Mole.
Prithee tend thy shop and prevent bastards.
Wele have a pint of the same wine in faith Mole.
Hark the bell rings, come Gentlemen.
Jack Dapper where shells all munch.
I am for Parkers ordinary.
Hoe's a good guest to'm, hee deserves his board,
He draws all the Gentlemen in a term time thither,
Weal be your followers Jack, lead the way,
Look you by my faith the fool has fetherd his nest well.
Come shut up your shops, whore's Moister Openwork.
Nay ask not me Moister Tiltyard.
Wher's his water dog, puhpissedherhur-pist
Come wenches come, we're going all to Hogsden.
To Hogsden husband.
I to Hogsden pigs ny.
I'm not ready husband.
Faith thats wellhumpissedpissed.
Come Mistress Openwork you are so long.
I have no joy of my life Moister Gallipot.
Push, let your boy lead his water Spaniel along, and weal show you the bravest sport at parlous pond, he trug, he trug, he trug, here is the best duck in England, except my wife, he, he, he, fetch, fetch, fetch, come lets away Of all the year this is the sportfulst day.
If a man have a free will, where should the use
More perfect shine then in his will to love.
All creatures have their liberty in that,
Tho else kept under servile yoke and fear,
The very bond slave has his freedom there,
Amongst a world of creatures voiced and silent.
Must my desires wear fettersyea are you
So near, then I must break with my hearts truth;
Meet grief at a back waywell: why suppose.
The two leaud tongues of slander or of truth
Pronounce Mole loathsome: if before my love
She appear fair, what injury have I,
I have the thing I like? in all things else
Mine own eye guides me, and I find 'em prosper,
Life what should ail it now? I know that man
Ne'er truly loves, if he gainsaid he lies,
That winks and marries with his fathers eyes.
Isle keep mine own wide open.
Here's brave wilfulness,
A made match, here she comes, they met a purpose.
Must I carry this great fiddle to your chamber Mistress Mary.
Fiddle goodman hog-rubber, some of these porters bear so much for others, they have no time to carry wit for themselves.
To your own chamber Mistress Mary.
Who'le hear an Ass speak: whither else goodman
pagent-bearer: the're people of the worst memories.
Why it were too great a burden love, to have them carry things in their minds, and a'ther backs together.
Pardon me sir, I thought not you so near.
So, so, so.
I would be nearer to thee, and in that fashion,
That makes the best part of all creatures honest.
No otherwise I wish it.
Sir I am so poor to requite you, you must look for nothing but thanks of me, I have no humour to marry, I love to lye about sides ath bed my self; and again ath' other side, a wife you know ought to be obedient, but I fear me I am too headstrong to obey, therefore Isle ne'er go about it, I love you so well sir for your good will I'd be loath you should repent your bargain after, and therefore weal ne'er come together at first, I have the head now of my self, and am man enough for a woman, marriage is but a chopping and changing, where a maiden looses one head, and has a worse ith place.
The most comfortablest answer from a Roaring Girl, that ever mine ears drunk in.
This were enough now to affright a fool for ever from thee, when tic the music that I love thee for,
There's a boy spoils all again.
Believe it sir I am not of that disdainful temper, but
I could love you faithfully.
A pox on you for that word. I like you not now,
You're a cunning roarer I see that already.
But sleep upon this once more sir, you may chance shift a mind to morrow, be not too hasty to wrong your self, never while you live sir take a wife running, many have run out at heals that have don't: you see sir I speak against my self, and if every woman would deal with their suitor so honestly, poor younger brothers would not bee so often gul'd with old cosoning widows, that turn ore all their wealth in trust to some kinsman, and make the poor Gentleman work hard for a pension, fare you well sir.
Nay prithee one word more.
How do I wrong this girl, she puts him of still.
Think upon this in cold blood sir, you make as much hast as if you were a going upon a sturgeon voyage, take deliberation sir, never choose a wife as if you were going to Virginia.
And so we parted, my too cursed fate.
She is but cunning, gives him longer time in it.
Mistress Mole, Mistress Mole: so ho ho so ho.
There boy, there boy, what dost thou go a hawking after me with a red clout on thy finger.
I forgot to take measure on you for your new breeches.
Hoyda breeches, what will he marry a monster with two trinkets, what age is this? if the wife go in breeches, the man must wear long coats like a fool.
What fidlings here, would not the old pattern have served your turn.
You change the fashion, you say you'll have the great Dutch slop Mistress Mary.
Why sir I say so still.
Your breeches then will take up a yard more.
Well pray look it be put in then.
It shall stand round and full I warrant you,
Pray make em easy enough.
I know my fault now, t'other was somewhat stiff between the legs, Isle make these open enough I warrant you.
Heir's good gear towards, I have brought up my son to marry a Dutch slop,. and a French doublet, a codpice daughter.
So, I have gone as far as I can go.
Why then farewell.
If you go presently to your chamber Mistress Marye, pray send me the measure of your thigh, by some honest body.
Well sir, Isle send it by a Porter persently.
So you had need, it is a lusty one, both of them would make any porters back ache in England.
I have examined the best part of man,
Reason and judgment, and in love they tell me,
They leave me uncontrolled, he that is swayed
By an unfeeling blood, past heat of love
His spring time must needs err, his watch ne'er goes right
That sets his dial by a rusty clock,
So, and which is that rusty clock sir you.
The clock at Ludgate sir, it ne'er goes true.
But thou goosed falser: not thy fathers cares
Can keep thee right, when that insensible work,
Obeys the workman's art, lets off the hour
And stops again when time is satisfied,
But thou runst on, and judgment, thy maine wheel,
Beats by all stoppes, as if the work would break
Begun with long pains for a minutes ruin,
Much like a suffering man brought up with care.
At last bequeathed to shame and a short prayer,
I taste you bitterer then I can deserve sir.
Who has bewitch thee son, what devil or drug,
Hath wrought upon the weakness of thy blood,
And betrayed all her hopes to ruinous folly?
Oh wake from drowsy and enchanted shame,
Wherein thy soul sits with a golden dream
Flatred and poisoned, I am old my son, (mine own
Oh let me prevail quickly, for I have weightier business of
Then to chide thee: I must not to my grave,
As a drunkard to his bed, whereon he lies
Only to sleep, and never cares to rise,
Let me dispatch in time, come no more near her.
Not honestly, not in the way of marriage,
What say thou marriage, in what place, the Sessions house, and who shall give the bride, prethe, an inditemeant.
Sir now ye take part with the world to wrong her.
Why, would thou fine marry to be pointed at,
Alas the numbers great, do not o'er burden't,
Why as good marry a beacon on a hill,
Which all the country fix their eyes upon
As her thy folly dotes on. If thou longst
To have the story of thy infamous fortunes,
Serve for discourse in ordinaries and taverns
You are in the way: or to confound thy name,
Keep on, thou can not miss it: or to strike
Thy wretched father to untimely coldness,
Keep the left hand still, it will bring thee to it.
Yet if no tears wrung from thy fathers eyes,
Nor sighs that fly in sparkles, from his sorrows,
Had power to alter what is wilful in thee,
Me thinks her very name should fright thee from her,
And never trouble me.
Why is the name of Mole so fatal sir.
Many one sir, where suspect is entered,
For seek all London from one end to t'other,
More whoores of that name, then of any ten other.
Whats that to her? let those blush for themselves.
Can any guilt in others condemn her?
I'ue vowed to love her: let all storms oppose me,
That ever beat against the breast of man,
Nothing but deaths black tempest shall divide vs.
Oh folly that can dote on nought but shame.
Put case a wanton itch runs through one name
More then another, is that name the worse,
Where honesty sits possessed in it? it should rather
Appear more excellent, and deserve more praise,
When through foul mists a brightness it can raise.
Why there are of the devils, honest Gentlemen,
And well descended, keep an open house,
And some ath (good mans) that are arrant knaves.
He hates unworthily, that by rote contemns,
For the name neither saves, nor yet condemns,
And for her honesty, I have made such proof an't,
In several forms, so nearly watched her ways,
I will maintain that strict, against an army,
Excepting you my father: here's her worst,
Sh'has a bold spirit that mingles with mankind,
But nothing else comes near it: and oftentimes
Through her apparel somewhat shames her birth,
But she is loose in nothing but in mirth,
Would all Mols were no worse.
This way I toil in vain and give but aim
To infamy and ruin: he will fall,
My blessing cannot stay him: all my joys
Stand at the brink of a devouring flood
And will be wilfully swallowed: wilfully.
But why so vain, let all these tears be lost,
Isle pursue her to shame, and so al's crossed.
Hee is gon with some strange purpose, whose effect
Will hurt me little if he shoot so wide,
To think I love so blindly: I but feed
His heart to this match, to draw on the other.
Wherein my joy sits with a full wish crowned;
Only his mood excepted which must change.
By opposite policies, courses indirect,
Plain dealing in this world takes no effect.
This mad girl I'll acquaint with my intent,
Get her assistance, make my fortunes known,
Twixt lovers hearts, shoe's a fit instrument,
And has the art to help them to their own,
By her advise, for in that craft shoe's wise,
My love and I may meet, spite of all spies.
Coachman.
Here sir.
There's a tester more, prithee drive thy coach to the hither end of Marybone park, a fit place for Mole to get in.
Marybone park fir.
I, its in our way thou know.
It shall be done fir.
Coachman.
A non sir.
Are we fitted with good phrampell jade.
The best in Smithfield I warrant your sir.
May we safely take the upper hand of any coached veluet cap or tuftaffety jacket, for they keep a wild swaggering in coaches now a days, the hye ways are stopped with them.
My life for yours and baffle em to sir,why they are the same jade believe it sir, that have drawn all your famous whores to Ware.
Nay then they know their business, they need no more instructions.
The're so used to such journeys sir, I never use whip to em; for if they catch but the sent of a wench once, they run like devils.
Fine Cerberus, that rogue will have the start of a thousand ones, for whilst others trot a foot, heel ride prauncing to hell upon a coach-horse.
Stay, tic now about the hourse of her appointment, but yet I see her not, hark whats this, one, two three, three by the clock  at Sauoy, this is the hour, and Graies-Inne fields the place, she swore she'ed meet me: ha yonders two Innes a Courtmen with one wench, but thats not she, they walk toward Islington out of my way, I see none yet dressed like her, I must look for a shag ruff, a freeze jerkin, a shortsword, and a safeguard, or I get none: why Mole prithee make hast, or the Coachman will curse vs anon.
Oh hears my Gentleman: if they would keep their days as well with their Mercers as their hours with their harlots, no bankrupt would give seven score pound for a seriants place, for would you know a catchpoole rightly deririu'd,
the corruption of a Citizen, is the generation of a seriant, how his eye hawks for venery. Come are you ready sir.
Ready, for what sir.
Do you ask that now sir, why was this meeting pointed.
I thought you mistook me sir,
You seem to be some young barrister,
I have no suite in lawall my land's sold
I praise heaven for it; t'has rid me of much trouble,
Then I must wake you sir, where stands the coach,
Whose this, Mole: honest Mole.
So young, and purblind, your an old wanton in your eyes I see that.
You are admirably suited for the three pigeons at Brainford, Isle swear I knew thee not.
Isle swear you did not: but you shall know me now.
No not here, we shall be spied efaith, the coach is betla, come.
Stay.
What wilt thou untruss a point Mole.
Yes, heere's the point that I untruss, 'thas but one tag, twill serve tho to tie up a rogues tongue.
How. (here's her pace,
There's the gold with which you hired your hackney,
She rackes hard, and perhaps your bones will feel it,
Ten angels of mine own, I'ue put to thine, win em, &amp; wear em,
Hold Moll, Mistress Mary.
Draw or Isle serve an execution on thee
Shall lay thee up till dooms day.
Draw upon a woman, why what dost mean Mole?
To teach thy base thoughts manners: you are one of those
That thinks each woman thy fond flexible whore,
If she but cast a liberal eye upon thee,
Turn back her head, shees thine, or amongst company,
By chance drink first to thee: then shoe's quite gon,
There's no means to help her: nay for a need,
Wilt swear unto thy credulous fellow lechers.
That you are more in favour with a Lady at first sight
Then her monkey all her life time,
How many of our sex, by such as thou
Have their good thoughts paid with a blasted name
That never deserved loosely or did trip
In path of whoredom, beyond cup and lip.
But for the stain of conscience and of soul,
Better had women fall into the hands
Of an act silent, then a bragging nothing,
There's no mercy in itwhat durst move you sir,
To think me whorish? a name which Id tear out
From the hye Germans throat, if it lay ledger there
To dispatch privy slanders against me.
In thee I defy all men, there worst hates,
And their best flatteries, all their golden witchcrafts,
With which they entangle the poor spirits of fools,
Distressed needlewomen and trade-fallne wives.
Fish that must needs bite, or themselves be bitten,
Such hungry things as these may soon be took
With a worm fastened on a golden hook.
Those are the lechers food, his prey, he watches
For quarrelling wedlockes, and poor shifting sisters,
Tic the best fish he takes: but why good fisherman,
Am I thought meat for you, that never yet
Had angling rod cast towards me? cause youl'e say
I'm given to sport, I'm often merry, jest,
Had mirth no kindred in the world but lust?
O shame take all her friends then: but how ere
Thou and the baser world censure my life,
Isle send 'em word by thee, and write so much
Upon thy breast, cause thou shalt bear't in mind,
Tell them it were base to yield, where I have conquered.
I scorn to prostitute my self to a man,
I that can prostitue a man to me,
And so I greet thee.
Hear me.
Would the spirits of al my slanders, were clasped in thine.
That I might vex an army at one time,
I do repent me, hold,
You'll die the better Christian then.
I do confess I have wronged thee Mole.
Confession is but poor amends for wrong,
Unless a rope would follow.
I ask thee pardon.
I'm your hired whore fir.
I yield both purse and body.
Both are mine, and now at my disposing.
Spare my life.
I scorn to strike thee basely.
Spoke like a noble girl i'faith.
Heart I think I fight with a familiar, or the Ghost of a fencer, Sh'has wounded me gallantly, call you this a lecherous viage? Here's blood would have served me this seven year in broken heads and cut fingers, &amp; it now runs all out together, pox athe three pigeons, I would the coach were here now to carry me to the Surgeons.
If I could meet my enemies one by one thus,
I might make pretty shift with 'em in time,
And make 'em know, she that has wit, and spirit,
May scorn to live beholding to her body for meat,
Or for apparel like your common dame,
That makes shame get her clothes, to cover shame.
Base is that mind, that kneels unto her body,
As if a husband stood in awe on's wife,
My spirit shall be Mistress of this house,
As long as I have time in it.oh
Here comes my man that would be: it is his hour.
Faith a good well set fellow, if his spirit
Be answerable to his vmbles; he walks stiff,
But whether he will stand to it stiffly, there's the point;
Has a good calfe for it, and ye shall have many a woman
Choose him she means to meke her head, by his calfe;
I do not know their tricks in it, faith he seems
A man without; I'll try what he is within,
She told me Gries-Inne fields twixt three &amp; four,
Isle fit her Mistreship with a piece of service,
I'm hired to rid the town of one mad girl.
What a pox ails you sir?
He begins like a Gentleman,
Heart, is the field so narrow, or your eye-sight:
Life he comes back again.
Was this spoke to me sir.
I cannot tell sir.
Go you're a coxcomb.
Coxcomb.
You're a slave.
I hope there's law for you sir.
Ye, do you see sir.
Heart this is no good dealing, pray let me know what house your off.
One of the Temple sir.
Mass so me thinks.
And yet sometime I lye about chic lane.
I like you the worse because you shift your lodging
Isle not meddle with you for that trick sir. (so often
A good shift, but it shall not serve your turn.
You'll give me leave to pass about my business sir.
Your business, Isle make you waite on me before I ha done, and glad to serve me too.
How sir, serve you, not if there were no more men in England.
But if there were no more women in England
I hope you'd waite upon your Mistress then,
Mistress.
Oh your a tried spirit at a push sir,
What would your Worship have me do.
You a fighter.
No, I praise heaven, I had better grace &amp; more manners.
As how I pray sir.
Life, 'thad been a beastly part of me to have drawn my weapons upon my Mistress, all the world would a cried
shame of me for that.
Why but you knew me not.
Do not say so Mistress, I knew you by your wide straddle, as well as if I had been in your belly.
Well, we shall try you further, ith mean time wee give you entertainment.
Thank your good Mistreship.
How many suites have you.
No more suites then backs Mistress.
Well if you deserve, I cast of this, next week,
And you may creep into it.
Thank your good Worship.
Come follow me to S. Thomas Apostles,
Isle put a livery cloak upon your back, the first thing I do,
I follow my dear Mistress.
What Pru, Nay sweet Prudence.
What a pruing keep you, I think the baby would have a teat it kyes so, pray be not so fond of me, leave your City humours, I'm vexed at you to see how like a calfe you come bleating after me.
Nay honey Pru: how does your rising up before all the table show? and flinging from my friends so vnciuily, fey Pru, fie, come.
Then up and ride in faith.
Up and ride, nay my pretty Pru, thats far from my thought, duck: why mouse, thy mind is nibbling at something, whats first, what lies upon thy Stomach?
Such an ass as you: hoyda, you're best turn midwife, or Physician: you're a Apothecary already, but I'm none of your drugs.
Thou art a sweet drug, sweetest Pru, and the more thou art pounded, the more precious.
Must you be prying into a women's secrets: say ye?
Women's secrets.
What? I cannot have a qualm come upon me but your teeth waters, till your nose hang over it.
It is my love dear wife.
Your love? your love is all words; give me deeds, I cannot abide a man thats too fond ouerme, so cookish; thou dost not know how to handle a woman in her kind,
No Pru? why I hope I have handled.
Handle a fools head of your own,fihfih.
Ha, ha, tic such a wasp; it does me good now to have her sing me, little rogue.
Now fie how you vex me, I cannot abide these aperne husbands: such cotqueanes, you ouerdoe your things, they become you scurvily.
Upon my life she breeds, heaven knows how I have strained my self to please her, night and day: I wonder why wee Citizens should get children so fretful and untoward in the breeding, their fathers being for the most part as gentle as milch kine: shall I leave thee my Pru.
Fie, fie, fie.
Thou shalt not bee vexed no more, pretty kind rogue, take no cold sweet Pru.
As your wit has done: now Moister Laxton show your head, what news from you? would any husband suspect that a woman crying, Buy any scurui-grasse, should bring love letters amongst her herbs to his wife, pretty trick, fine conueyance? had jealousy a thousand eyes, a silly woman with scuruy-grasse blinds them all; Laxton with baize crown I thy wit for this, it deserves praise.
This makes me affect thee more, this proves thee wise,
Lack what poor shift is love forced to devise? (to the point)
Alas poor Gentleman, troth I pity him,
How shall I raise this money? thirty pound?
Tic thirty sure, a 3 before an 0,
I know his threes too well; my childbed linen?
Shall I pawn that for him? then if my mark
Be known I am undone; it may be thought
My husband's bankrupt: which way shall I turn?
Laxton, what with my own fears, and thy wants,
I'm  needle twixt two adamants.
Nay, nay, wife, the women are all up, ha, how, reading a letters? I smell a goose, a couple of capons, and a gammon of bacon from her mother out of the country, I hold my life,steal,steal.
O beshrow your heart.
What letter's that? I'll see it.
Oh would thou had no eyes to see the downfall of me and thy self: I'm for ever, for ever I'm undone.
What ails my Pru? what paper's that thou tear'st?
Would I could tear
My very heart in pieces: for my soul
Lies on the rack of shame, that tortures me
Beyond a women's suffering.
What means this?
Had you no other vengeance to throw down,
But even in height of all my joys?
Dear woman.
When the full sea of pleasure and content seemed to flow over me.
As thou desire to keep me out of bedlam,
tell what troubles thee, is not thy child at nurse fallen sick, or dead?
Oh no.
Heavens bless me, are my barnes and houses
Yonder at Hockly hole consumed with fire,
I can build more, sweet Pru.
Tic worse, tic worse.
My factor broke, or is the Ionise sunk.
Would all we had were swallowed in the waives,
Rather then both should be the scorn of slaves.
I'm at my wits end.
Oh my dear husband,
Where once I thought my self a fixed star,
Placed only in the heaven of thine arms,
I fear now I shall prove a wanderer,
Oh Laxton, Laxton, is it then my fate
To be by thee orethrowne?
Defend me wisdom,
From falling into frenzy, on my knees. (thy bosom.
Sweet Pru, speak, whats that Laxton who so heavy lies on
I shall sure run mad.
I shall run mad for company then: speak to me,
I'm Gallipot thy husband,Pru,why Pru.
Art sick in conscience for some villainous deed
Thou were about to act, did mean to rob me,
Tush I forgive thee, hast thou on my bed
Thrust my soft pillow under another head?
Isle wink at all faults Pru, las thats no more,
Then what some neighbours near thee, have done before,
Sweet honey Pru, whats that Laxton?
Oh.
Out with him.
Oh hoe's borne to be my undoer,
This hand which thou call thine, to him was given,
To him was I made sure ith sight of heaven.
I never heard this thunder.
Yes, yes, before
I was to thee contracted, to him I swore,
Since last I saw him twelve months three times told,
The Moon hath drawn through her light silver bow,
For ore the seas hee went, and it was said,
(But Rumour lies) that he in France was dead.
But hoe's alive, oh hoe's alive, he sent,
That letter to me, which in rage I rent,
Swearing with oaths most damnably to have me,
Or tear me from this bosom, oh heavens save me,
My heart will break,shamed and undone for ever.
So black a day (poor wretch) went ore thee never.
If thou should wrestle with him at the law,
You are sure to fall, no odd slight, no prevention.
Isle tell him you are with child.
Vmh.
Or give out one of my men was tan a bed with thee.
Vmh, vmh.
Before I loose thee my dear Pru;
Isle drive it to that push.
Worse, and worse still,
You embrace a mischief, to prevent an ill.
Isle buy thee of him, stop his mouth with Gold,
Think thou twill do.
Oh me, heavens grant it would,
Yet now my senses are set more in tune,
He writ, as I remember in his letter,
That he in riding up and down had spent,
(Ere hee could find me) thirty pounds, send that,
Stand not on thirty with him.
Forty Pru, say thou the word tic done, wee venture lives for wealth, but must do more to keep our wives, thirty or forty Pru.
Thirty good sweet
Of an ill bargain lets save what we can,
Isle pay it him with my tears, he was a man
When first I knew him of a meek spirit,
All goodness is not yet dried up I hope.
He shall have thirty pound, let that stop all:
Loves sweets taste best, when we have drunk down Gall.
Gods so, our friends; come, come, smooth your cheek;
After a storm the face of heaven looks sleek.
Did I not tell you these turtles were together?
How dost thou sir? why sister Gallipot?
Lord how shoe's changed?
Is your wife ill sir?
Yes indeed la sir, very ill, very ill, never worse,
How her head burns, feel how her pulses work.
Sister lie down a little, that always does me good.
In good sadness I find best ease in that too,
Has she laid some hot thing to her Stomach?
No, but I will lay something anon.
Come, come fools, you trouble her, shal's go Moister Goshawk?
Yes sweet Moister Tiltyard; sir Rosamond I hold my life Gallipot hath vexed his wife.
She has a horrible high colour indeed.
Wee shall have your face painted with the same red soon at night, when your husband comes from his rubbers in a false alley; thou wilt not believe me that his bowls run with a wrong bias.
It cannot sink into me, that hee feeds upon stale mutton abroad, having better and fresher at home.
What if I bring thee, where thou shalt see him stand at rack and manger?
Isle saddle him in's kind, and spur him till hee kick again.
Shall thou and I ride our journey then.
Heere's my hand.
No more; come Moister Tiltyard, shall we leap into the stirrups with our women, and amble home?
Yes, yes, come wife.
In truth sister, I hope you will do well for all this.
I hope I shall: farewell good sister: sweet Moister Goshawk.
Welcome brother, most kindly welcome sir.
Thanks sir for our good cheer.
It shall be so, because a crafty knave
Shall not out reach me, nor walk by my door
With my wife arm in arm, as it were his whore,
I'll give him a golden coxcomb, thirty pound:
Tush Pru what's thirty pound? sweet duck look cheerely.
Thou art worthy of my heart thou bui'st it dearly.
Vds light the tide's against me, a pox of your Potcarishp: oh for some glister to set him going; it is one of Hercules labours, to tread one of these City hens, because their cocks are still crowing over them; there's no turning tale here, I must on.
Oh, husband see he comes.
Let me deal with him.
Bless you sir.
Be you blessed too sir if you come in peace.
Have you any good pudding Tobacco sir?
Oh pick no quarrels gentle sir, my husband
Is not a man of weapon, as you are,
He knows all, I have opned all before him, concerning you.
Zounes has she shown my letters.
Suppose my case were yours, what would you do.
At such a pinch, such batteries, such assaults
O father, mother, kindred, to dissolve
The knot you tied, and to be bound to him?
How could you shift this storm off?
If I know hang me.
Besides a story of your death was read
Each minute to me.
What a pox means this riddling?
Be wise sir, let not you and I be tossed
On Lawyers pens; they have sharpe nibs and draw
Men's very heart blood from them; what need you sir
To beat the drum of my wives infamy,
And call your friends together sir to prove
Your precontact, when sh'has confessed it?
Vmh sir,has she confessed it?
Sh'has faith to me sir, upon your letter sending.
I have, I have.
If I let this iron cool call me slave,
Do you hear, you dame Prudence? think thou vile woman
I'll take these blows and wink?
Upon my knees.
Out impudence.
Good sir.
You goatish slaves,
No wilde foul to cut up but mine?
Alas sir,
You make her flesh to tremble, frighr her not,
She shall do reason, and what's fit.
I'll have thee, were thou more common
Then an hospital, and more diseased.
But one word good sir.
So sir.
I married her, have line with her, and goy
Two children on her body, think but on that;
Have you so beggarly an appetite
When I upon a dainty dish have fed
To dine upon my scraps, my leavings? ha sir?
Do I come near you vow sir?
Be Lady you touch me.
Would not you scorn to wear my clothes sir?
Right sir.
Then pray sir wear not her, for shoe's a garment
So fitting for my body, I'm loath
Another should put it on, you will undo both.
Your letter (as she said) complained you had spent
In quest of her, some thirty pound, I'll pay it;
Shall that sir stop this gap up twixt you two?
Well if I swallow this wrong, let her thank you:
The money being paid sir, I am gon:
Farewell, oh women hippie's hee trusts none.
Dispatch him hence sweet husband.
Yes dear wife: pray sir come in, ere Moister
Thou shalt in wine drink to him,
With all my heart;how dost thou like my wit?
Rarely, that wile
By which the Serpent did the first woman beguile,
Did ever since, all women's bosoms fill;
You're apple eaters all, deceivers still.
Out with your tale Sir Day, to Sir Adam.
A Knave is in mine eye deep in my debt.
Nay: if hee be a knave sir, hold him fast.
Speak softly, what egg is there hatching now.
A Ducks egg sir, a duck that has eaten a frog, I have cracked the shell, and some villainy or other will peep out presently; the duck that sits is the bouncing Ramp (that Roaring Girl my Mistress) the drake that must tread is your son Sebastian.
Be quick.
As the tongue of an oyster wench.
And see thy news be true.
As a barbers every saturday nightmad Mole.
Ah.
Must be let in without knocking at your back gate.
So.
Your chamber will be made bawdy.
Good.
She comes in a shirt of male.
How shirt of male?
Yes sir or a male shirt, that's to say in mans apparel.
To my son.
Close to your son: your son and her Moon will be in conjunction, if all Alminacks lie not, her black saueguard is turned into a deep slop, the holes of her upper body to button holes, her waistcoat to a doublet, her placket to the ancient seat of a codpice, and you shall take 'em both with standing collers.
Art sure of this?
As every throng is sure of a pick-pocket, as sure as a whore is of the clients all Michaelmas Term, and of the pox after the Term.
The time of their tilting?
Three.
The day?
This.
Away ply it, watch her.
As the devil doth for the death of a baud, I'll watch her, do you catch her.
Shoe's fast: here weave thou the nets; hark,
They are made. (maintain't.
I told them thou did owe me money; hold it up:
Stiffly; as a Puritan does contention,
Fox I owe thee not the value of a halfepenny halter.
Thou shalt be hanged in it ere thou scope so.
Varlet I'll make thee look through a grate.
I'll do'tpresently, through a Tavern grate, drawer: pish.
Has the knave vexed you sir?
Asked him my money,
He swears my son received it: oh that boy
Will ne'er leave heaping sorrows on my heart,
Till he has broke it quite.
Is he still wild?
As is a russian Bear.
But he has left
His old haunt with that baggage.
Worse still and worse,
He lays on me his shame, I on him my curse.
My son Jack Dapper then shall run with him,
All in one pasture.
Proves your son bad too sir?
As villainy can make him: your Sebastian
Doares but on one drab, mine on a thousand,
A noise of fiddlers, Tobacco, wine and a whore,
A Mercer that will let him take up more,
Dice, and a water spaniel with a Duck: oh,
Bring him a bed with these, when his purse gingles,
Roaring boys follow it's tale, fencers and ningles,
(Beasts Adam ne'er gave name to) these horse-leeches suck
My son, he being drawn dry, they all live on smoke.
Tobacco?
Right, but I have in my brain
A windmill going that shall grind to dust
The follies of my son, and make him wise,
Or a stark fool; pray lend me your advise.
That shall you good sir Day.
Heere's the sprindge
The set to catch this woodcock in: an action
In a false name (unknown to him) is entered.
In the Counter to arrest Jack Dapper.
Ha, ha, he.
Think you the Counter cannot break him?
Break him?
Yes and breake's heart too if he lie there long.
I'll make him sing a Counter tenor sure.
No way to tame him like it, there hee shall learn
What money is indeed, and how to spend it.
Hoe's bridled there.
I, yet knows not how to mend it,
Bedlam cures not more madmen in a year,
Then one of the Counters does, men pay more dear
There for there wit then any where; a Counter
Why it is an university, who not sees?
As scholars there, so here men take degrees,
And follow the same studies (all alike.)
Scholars learn first Logic and Rhetoric.
So does a prisoner; with fine honied speech
It's first coming in he doth persuade, beseech,
He may be lodged with one that is not itchy;
To lie in a clean chamber, in sheets not lousy,
But when he has no money, then does he try,
By subtle Logic, and quaint sophistry,
To make the keepers trust him.
Say they do.
Then hoe's a graduate.
Say they trust him not,
Then is he held a freshman and a sot,
And never shall commence, but being still bared
Be expulst from the Masters side, to the twopenny ward,
Or else in the hole, beg placed.
When then I pray proceeds a prisoner.
When money being the theme,
He can dispute with his hard creditors hearts,
And get out clear, hoe's then a Moister of Arts;
Sir Day send your son to Woodstreet College,
A Gentleman can no where get more knowledge.
There Gallants study hard.
True: to get money.
'lies bith' heals i'faith, thanks, thanks, I ha sent
For a couple of bears shall paw him.
Who comes yonder?
They look like puttocks, these should be they.
I know 'em, they are officers, sir we'll leave you.
My good knights.
Leave me, you see I'm haunted now with spirits.
Fare you well sir.
This old muzzle chops should be he
By the fellows description: Save you sir.
Come hither you mad varlets, did not my man tell you I watched here for you.
One in a blew coat sir told vs, that in this place an old Gentleman would watchforvs, a thing contrary to our oath, for we are to watch for every wicked member in a City.
You'll watch then foot ten thousand, what's thy name honesty?
Seriant Curtilax I sir.
An excellent name for a Seriant, Curtilax.
Seriants indeed are weapons of the law,
When prodigal ruffians far in debt are grown,
Should not you cut them; Citizens were orethrowne,
Thou dwel'st hereby in Holborn Curtilax.
That's my circuit sir, I conjure most in that circle.
And what young toward welp is this?
Of the same litter, his yeoman sir, my name's Hanger.
Yeoman Hanger.
One pair of shears sure cut out both your coats,
You have two names most dangerous to men's throats,
You two are villainous loads on Gentlemen's backs,
Dear ware, this Hanger and this Curtilax.
We are as other men are sir, I cannot see but hee who makes a show of honesty and religion, if his claws can fasten to his liking, he draws blood; all that live in the world, are but great fish and little fish, and feed upon one another, some eat up whole men, a Seriant cares but for the shoulder of a man, they call vs knaves and cures, but many times hee that sets vs on, worries more lambs one year, then we do in seven.
Spoke like a noble Cerberus, is the action entered?
His name is entered in the book of unbelievers.
What booke's that?
The book where all prisoners names stand, and not one amongst forty, when he comes in, believes to come out in hast.
Be as dogged to him as your office allows you to be.
Oh sir.
You know the unthrift Jack Dapper.
I, I, sir, that Gull? as well as I know my yeoman.
And you know his father too, Sir Day Dapper?
As damned a usurer as ever was among Jaws; if hee were sure his fathers skin would yield him any money, hee would when he dyes flea it off, and sell it to cover drums for children at Bartholomew fair.
What toads are these to spit poison on a man to his face? doe you see (my honest rascals?) yonder gray-hound is the dog he hunts with, out of that Tavern Jack Dapper will sally sa, sa; give the counter, on, set upon him.
We'll charge him vppo'th back sir.
Take no bail, put mace enough into his caudle, double your files, traverse your ground.
Brave sir.
Cry arm, arm, arm.
Thus sir.
There boy, there boy, away: look to your prey my true English wolves, and and so I vanish.
Some warden of the Seriants begat this old fellow upon my life, stand close.
Shall the ambuscado lie in one place?
No uooke thou yonder.
Ralph.
What says my brave Captain male and female?
This Holborn is such a wrangling street,
That s because Lawyers walks to and fro in it.
Heere's such jostling, as if every one wee met were drunk and reeled.
Stand Mistress do you not smell carrion?
Carrion? no, yet I spy ravens.
Some poor winde-shaken gallant will anon fall into sore labour, and these men-midwiues must bring him to bed in the counter, there all those that are great with child with debts, lie in.
Stand up.
Like your new maypole.
Whist, whew.
Hump, no.
Peeping? it shall go hard huntsmen, but I'll spoil your game, they look for all the world like two infected maltmen coming muffled up in their cloaks in a frosty morning to London.
A course, Captain; a bear comes to the stake.
It should bee so, for the dogs struggle to bee let loose.
Whew.
Hemp.
Hark Trapdore, follow your leader.
Gul.
Moister.
Did ever see such an ass as I am boy?
No by my troth sir, to loose all your money, yet have false dice of your own, why it is as I saw a great fellow used t'other day, he had a fair sword and buckler, and yet a butcher dry beat him with a cudgel.
Honest Sergeant fly, fly Moister Dapper you'll be arerested else.
Run Gul and draw.
Run Moister, Gull follows you.
I know you well enough, you're but a whore to hang upon any man.
Whores then are like Seriants, so now hang you, draw rogue, but strike not: for a broken pate they'll keep their bds, and recover twenty marks damages.
You shall pay for this rescue, run down shoelane and meet him.
Shu, is this a rescue Gentlemen or no?
Rescue? a pox on 'em, Trapdore let's away,
I'm glad I have done perfect one good work to day,
If any Gentleman be in Scriveners bands,
Send but for Mole, she'll bail him by these hands.
Vnahppy in the follies of a son,
Led against judgment, sense, obedience,
And all the powers of nobleness and wit;
Oh wretched father, now Trapdore will she come?
In mans apparel sir, I am in her heart now,
And share in all her secrets.
Peace, peace, peace.
Here take my Germane watch, hanged up in sight,
That I may see her hang in English for it.
I warrant you for that now, next Sessions rids her sir,
This watch will bring her in better then a hundred constables.
Good Trapdore say thou so, thou cheer my heart
After a storm of sorrow,my gold chain too,
Here take a hundred marks in yellow links.
That will do well to bring the watch to light sir.
And worth a thousand of your Headborowes lanterns.
Place that a'the Court cubbart, let it lie
Full in the view of her theefe-whoorish eye.
She cannot miss it sir, I see it so plain, that I could steal't my self.
Perhaps thou shalt too,
That or something as weighty; what she leaves,
Thou shalt come closely in, and filch away,
And all the weight upon her back I'll lay.
You cannot assure that sir.
No, what lets it?
Being a stout girl, perhaps she'll desire pressing,
Then all the weight must lie upon her belly.
Belly or back I care not so I'ue one.
You're of my mind for that sir.
Hang up my ruff band with the diamond at it,
It may be she'll like that best.
It's well for her, that she must have her choice, hee thinks nothing too good for her, if you hold on this mind a little longer, it shall bee the first work I doe to turn thief my self; would do a man good to be hanged when he is so well provided for.
So, well said; all hags well, would she hung so too,
The sight would please me more, then all their gilsterings:
Oh that my mysteries to such straights should run,
That I must rob my self to bless my son.
Thou hast done me a kind office, without touch
Either of sin or shame, our loves are honest.
I'd scorn to make such shift to bring you together else
Now have I time and opportunity
Without all fear to bid thee welcome love.
Never with more desire and harder venture.
How strange this shows one man to kiss another.
I'd kiss such men to choose Moll,
Me thinks a women's lip tastes well in a doublet:
Many an old madam has the better fortune then,
Whose breathes grew stale before the fashion came,
If that will help 'em, as you think twill do,
They'll learn in time to pluck on the hose too.
The older they wax Moll, troth I speak seriously,
As some have a conceit their drink tastes better
In an outlandish cup then in our own,
So me thinks every kiss she gives me now
In this strange form, is worth a pair of two,
Here we are safe, and furthest from the eye
Of all suspicion, this is my fathets chamber,
Upon which floor he never steps till night.
Here he mistrusts me not, nor I his coming,
At mine own chamber he still pries unto me,
My freedom is not there at mine own finding,
Still checked and curbed, here he shall miss his purpose.
And what's your business now, you have your mind sir;
At your great suite I promised you to come,
I pitied her for names sake, that a Moll
Should be so crossed in love, when there's so many,
That owes nine lays a piece, and not so little:
My taylor fitted her, how like you his work?
So well, no Art can mend it, for this purpose,
But to thy wit and help we're chief in debt,
And must live still beholding.
Any honest pity
I'm willing to bestow upon poor Ring-doues.
I'll offer no worse play.
Nay and you should sir,
I should draw first and prove the quicker man,
Hold, there shall need no weapon at this meeting,
But cause thou shalt not loose thy fury idle,
Here take this vial, run upon the guts,
And end thy quarrel singing.
Like a swan aboue bridge,
For look you heir's the bridge, and here am I.
Hold on sweet Mole.
I'ue heard her much commended sir, for one that was ne'er taught.
I'm much beholding to 'em, well since you'll needs put'vs together sir, I'll play my part as well as I can; it shall ne'er be said I came into a Gentleman's chamber, and let his instrumeant hang by the walls.
Why well said Mole i'faith, it had been a shame for that Gentleman then, that would have let it hung still, and ne'er offred thee it.
There it should have been still then for Mole, for though the world judge impudently of me, I ne'er came into that chamber yet, where I took down the instrument my self.
Pish let'em prate abroad, you are here where thou art
known and loved, there be a thousand close dames that will cal the vial an unmannerly instrument for a woman, and therefore talk broadly of thee, when you shall have them sit wider to a worse quality.
Push, I ever fall a sleep and think not of'em sir, and thus I dream.
Prithee let's hear thy dream Mole.
I dream there is a Mistress,
And she lays out the money,
She goes unto her Sisters,
She never comes at any.
That's a free Mistresse' faith.
I, I, I, like her that sings it, one of thine own choosing.
But shall I dream again?
Here comes a wench will brave ye,
Her courage was so great,
She lay with one of the Navy,
Her husband lying in the Fleet.
Yet oft with him she cauel'd,
I wonder what she ails,
Her husbands ship lay grauel'd,
When her's could hoise up sails,
Yet she began like all my foes,
To call whore first: for so do those;
A pox of all false tails.
Marry amen say I.
So say I too.
Hang up the vial now sir: all this while I was in a dream, one shall lie rudely then; but being awake, I keep my legs together; a watch, what's a clock here.
Now, now, shoe's trapt.
Between one and two; nay then I care not: a watch and a musician are cousin Germanes in one thing, they must both keep time well, or there's no goodness in 'em, the one else deserves to be dashed against a wall, and tother to have his brains knocked out with a fiddle case, what? a loose chain and a dangling Diamond.
Here were a brave booty for an euening-theefe now,
There's many a younger brother would be glad
To look twice in at a window for it,
And wriggle in and out, like an eel in a sandbag,
Oh if men's secret youthful faults should judge 'em,
'T would be the general'st execution,
That ere was seen in England; there would bee but few left to sing the ballets, there would be so much work: most of our brokers would be chosen for hangmen, a good day for them: they might renew their wardrops of free cost then.
This is the roaring wench must do vs good.
No poison sir but serves vs for some use, which is confirmed in her.
Peace, peace, foot I did here him sure, where ere he be.
Who did you hear?
My father, it was like a sight of his, I must be wary,
No wilt not be, am I alone so wretched
That nothing takes? I'll put him to his plundge for it.
Life, here he comes,sir I beseech you take it,
Your way of teaching does so much content me,
I'll make it four pound, here's forty shillings sir.
I think I name it right: help me good Mole,
Forty in hand.
Sir you shall pardon me,
I have more of the meanest scholar I can teach,
This pays me more, then you have offred yet.
At the next quarter
When I receive the means my father 'lowes me.
You shall have tother forty,
This were well now,
Were it to a man, whose sorrows had blind eyes,
But mine behold his follies and untruths,
With two clear glasseshow now?
Sir.
What's he there?
You're come in good time sir, I'ue a suite to you,
I'd crave your present kindness.
What is he there?
A Gentleman, a musician sir, one of excellent fingering
I, I think so, I wonder how they escaped her.
Has the most delicate stroke sir,
A stroke indeed, I feel it at my heart,
Puts down all your famous musicians.
I, a whore may put down a hundred of 'em.
Forty shillings is the agreement sir between vs,
Now sir, my present means, mounts but to half on it.
And he stands upon the whole.
I indeed does he sir.
And will doe still, he will ne'er be in other tail,
Therefore I'd stop his mouth sir, and I could,
Hum true, there is no other way indeed,
His folly hardens, shame must needs succeed.
Now sir I understand you profess musique.
I am a poor servant to that liberal science sir.
Where is it you teach?
Right against Cliffords Inn.
Hum that's a fit place for it: you have many scholars.
And some of worth, whom I may call my masters.
I true, a company of whooremaisters; you teach to sing too?
Marry do I sir.
I think you'll find an apt scholar of my son, especially for pricke-song.
I have much hope of him.
I am sorry for it, I have the less for that: you can play any lesson.
At first sight sir.
There's a thing called the witch, can you play that?
I would be sorry any one should mend me in it.
I, I believe thee, thou hast so bewitched my son,
No care will mend the work that thou hast done,
I have bethought my self since my art fails,
I'll make her policy the Art to trap her.
Here are four Angels marked with holes in them
Fit for his cracked companions, gold he will give her,
These will I make induction to her ruin,
And rid shame from my house, grief from my heart
Here son, in what you take content and pleasure,
Want shall not curb you, pay the Gentleman
His latter half in gold.
I thank you sir.
Oh may the operation an't, end three,
In her, life: shame, in him; and grief, in me.
Faith thou shalt haue'em it is my fathers gift,
Never was man beguiled with better shift.
Hee that can take me for a male musician,
I cannot choose but make him my instrument,
And play upon him.
Is then that bird of yours (Moister Goshawk) so wild?
A Goshawk, a Puttock; all for prey: he angles for fish, but he loves flesh better.
Is it possible his smooth face should have wrenskles in it, and we not see them?
Possible? why have not many handsome legs in silk stockings villainous splay feet for all their great roses?
Troth firra thou say true.
Did never see an archer (as tho'ast walked by Bunhill) look a squint when he drew his bow?
Yes, when his arrows have flin'e toward Islington, his eyes have shot clean contrary towards Pimlico.
For all the world so does Moister Goshawk double with me.
Oh fie upon him, if he double once he's not for me.
Because Goshawk go in a shag-ruffe band, with a face sticking up in it, which shows like an agget set in acrampe ring, he thinks I'm in love with him.
Alas I think he takes his mark amiss in thee.
He has by often beating into me made me beleeue that my husband kept a whore.
Very good.
Swore to me that my husband this very morning went in a boat with a tilt over it, to the three pigeons at Brainford, and his puncke with him under his tilt.
That were wholesome.
I believed it, fell a swearing at him, cursing of harlots, made me ready to hoise up sail, and be there as soon as hee.
So, so.
And for that voyage Goshawk comes hither incontinently, but sir this water-spaniell dives after no duck but me, his hope is having me at Braineford to make me cry quack.
Art sure of it?
Sure of it? my poor innocent Openwork came in as I was poking my ruff, presently hit I him in the teeth with the three pigeons: he forswore all, I up and opened all, and now stands he (in a shop hard by) like a musket on a rest, to hit Goshawk in the eye, when he comes to fetch me to the boat.
Such another lame Gelding offered to carry me through thick and thin, (Laxton sir) but I am rid of him now.
Happy is the woman can bee rid of 'em all; alas what are your whisking gallants to our husbands, weigh 'emrightly man for man.
Troth mere shallow things.
Idle simple things, running heads, and yet let 'emrun over vs never so fast, we shop-keepers (when ell's done) are sure to have 'em in our pursnets at length, and when they are in, Lord what simple animals they are.
Then they hang head.
Then they droop.
Then they write letters.
Then they cog.
Then they deal under hand with vs, and wee must ingle with our husbands a bed, and wee must swear they are our cousins, and able to do vs a pleasure at Court.
And yet when wee have donc our best, al's but put into a riuen dish, wee are but frumpt at and libelled upon.
Oh if it were the good Lords will, there were a law made, no Citizen should trust any of'em all.
Hush sir, Goshawk flutters.
How now, are you ready?
Nay are you ready? a little thing you see makes vs ready.
Vs? why, must she make one in the voyage?
Oh by any means, do I know how my husband will handle me?
'Foot, how shall I find water, to keep these two mils going? Well since you'll needs bee clapped under hatches, if I sail not with you both till all split, hang me up at the maine yard, &amp; duck me; it's but lickering them both soundly, &amp; then you shall see their cork heals fly up high, like two swans when their tails are aboue water, and their long necks under water, diving to catch gudgions: come, come, oars stand readie, the tyde's with vs, on with those false faces, blow winds and thou shalt take thy husband, casting out his net to catch fresh Salmon at Brainford.
I believe you'll eat of a goddess head of your own dressing, before you reach half way thither.
So, so, follow close, pin as you go.
Do you hear?
Yes, I thank my ears.
I must have a bout with your Poticariship,
At what weapon?
I must speak with you.
No.
No? you shall.
Shall? away soust Sturgeon, half fish, half flesh.
Faith gibe, are you spitting, I'll cut your tail puscat for this,
Alas poor Laxton, I think thy tayle's cut alreadie: your worst;
If I do not,
Come, ha'you done?
Sfoote Rosamond, your husband. welcome,
How now? sweet Moist. Goshawk, none more
I have wanted your embraces: when friends meet,
The musique of the spheres sounds not more sweet,
Then does their conference: who is this? Rosamond:
Wife: how now sister?
Silence if you love me.
Why maskt?
Does a mask grieve you sir?
It does.
Then you're best get you a mumming.
S'footeyou'l spoil all.
May not wee cover our bare faces with masks
As well as you cover your bald heads with hats?
No masks, why, they are thieves to beauty, that rob
Of admiration in which true love lies, (eyes
Why are masks worn? why good? or why desired?
Unless by their gay covers wits are fired
To read the vild'st looks; many bad faces,
(Because rich gems are treasured up in cases)
Pass by their privilege currant, but as caves
Dambe misers Gold, so masks are beauties graves,
Men ne'er meet women with such muffled eyes,
But they curse her, that first did masks devise,
And swear it was somebeldame. Come off with it.
I will not.
Good faces maskt are Jewels kept by spirits.
Hide none but bad ones, for they poison men's sights,
Show then as shop-keepers do their broidred stuff,
(By owl light) fine wares cannot be open enough,
Prithee (sweet Rose) come strike this sail.
Sail? (eyes:
Ha? yes wife strike sail, for storms are in thine
They are here sir in my brows if any rise.
Ha brows? (what says she friend) pray tel me
Your two flags were advanced; the Comedy, (why
Come what's the Comedy?
Westward hoe.
How?
It is Westward hoe she says.
Are you both mad?
Is it Market day at Braineford, and your ware not sent up yet?
What market day? what ware?
Apy with three pigeons in it, it is drawn and stays your cutting up.
As you regard my credit.
Art mad?
Yes lecherous goat; Baboon.
Baboon? then toss me in a blancket,
Do I it well?
Rarely.
Belike sir shoe's not well; best leave her.
No,
I'll stand the storm now how fierce so ere it blow.
Did I for this loose all my friends? refuse
Rich hopes, and golden fortunes, to be made
A stale to a common whore?
This does amaze me.
Oh God, oh God, feed at reversion now?
A Strumpets leaving?
Rosamond,
I sweat, wo'ld I lay in cold harbour.
Thou hast struck ten thousand daggers through my heart.
Not I by heaven sweet wife. (thee
Go devil go; that which thou swear by, damnes
S'heart will you undo me?
Why stay you here? the star, by which you sail, shines yonder aboue Chelsy; you loose your shore if this moon light you: seek out your light whore.
Ha?
Push; your Western png.
Zounds now hell roars.
With whom you tilted in a pair of oars, this very morning.
Oars?
At Brainford sir.
Rack not my patieuce: Moister Goshawk, some slave has buzzed this into her, has he not? I run a tilt in Brainford with a woman? it is a lie: What old baud tells thee this? S'death it is a lie.
It is one to thy face shall justify all that I speak.
Vd'soule do but name that rascal.
No sir I will not.
Keep thee there girl:then!
Sister know you this varlet?
Yes.
Swear true,
Is there a rogueso low damned? a second Iudas? a common hangman? cutting a mans throat? does it to his face? bite me behind my back? a cur dog? swear if you know this hell-hound.
In truth I do,
His name?
Not for the world;
To have you to stab him.
Oh brave girls: worth Gold.
A word honest moister Goshawk.
What do you mean sir?
Keep off, and if the devil can give a name to this new fury, holla it throngh my ear, or wrap it up in some hid character: I'll ride to Oxford, and watch out mine eyes, but I'leheare the brazen head speak: or else show me but one hair of his head or beard, that I may sample it; if the siend I mect (in mine own house) I'll kill him:the street.
Or at the Church door:there(cause he seeks to untie
The knot God fastens) he deserves most to die.
My husband titles him.
Moister Goshawk, pray sir
Swear to me, that you know him or know hiw not, (wives,
Who makes me at Brainford to take up a petticoat beside my
By heaven that man I know not.
Come, come, you lie.
Will you not have all out?
By heaven I know no man beneath the moon
Should do you wrong, but if I had his name,
I'd print it in text letters.
Print thine own then,
Did not thou swear to me he kept his whore?
And that in sinful Brainford they would commit
That which our lips did water at sir,ha?
Thou spider, that hast woven thy cunning web
In mine own house t'insnare me: hast not thou
Sucked nourishment even underneath this roof,
And turned it all to poison? spittiug it,
On thy friends face (my husband?) he as it were sleeping:
Only to leave him ugly to mine eyes,
That they might glance on thee.
Speak, are these lies?
Mine own shame me confounds:
No more, hoe's stung;
Who'd think that in one body there could dwell
Deformity and beauty, (heaven and hell)
Goodness I see is but outside, wee all set,
In rings of Gold, stones that be counterfeit:
I thought you none.
Pardon me.
Truth I doe.
This blemish grows in nature not in you,
For mans creation stick even moles in scorn
On fairest cheeks, wife nothing is perfect borne.
I thought you had been borne perfect.
What's this whole world but a gilt rotten pill?
For at the heart lies the old chore still.
I'll tell you Moister Goshawk, I in your eye
I have seen wanton fire, and then to try
The soundness of my judgment, I told you
I kept a whore, made you believe it was true,
Only to feel how your pulse beat, but find,
The world can hardly yield a perfect friend.
Come, come, a trick of youth, and it is forgiven,
This rub put by, our love shall run more even.
You'll deal upon men's wives no more?
No:you teach me a trick for that.
Troth do not, they'll o're-reach thee.
Make my house yours sir still.
No.
I say you shall:
Seeing (thus besieged) it holds out, twill never fall.
How now?
With me sir?
You sir? I have gon snaffling up and down by your door this hour to watch for you.
What's the matter husband?
I have caught a cold in my head sir, by sitting up late in the rose tavern, but I hope you understand my speech.
So sir.
I cite you by the name of Hippocrates Gallipot, and you by the name of Prudence Gallipot, to appear upon Crastino, doe you see, Crastino sancti Dunstani (this Easter Term) in Bow Church.
Where sir? what says he?
Bow: Bow Church, to answer to a libel of prisontract on the part and behalf of the said Prudence and another; you're best sir take a copy of the citation, it is but tweluepence.
A Citation?
You pocky-nosed rascal, what slave fees you to this?
Slave? I ha nothing to do with you, doe you hear sir?
Laxton first not?what fegary is this?
Trust me I thought sir this storm long ago had been full laid, when (if you be remembered) I paid you the last fifteen pound, besides the thirty you had first,for then you swore.
Tush, tush sir, oaths,
Truth yet I'm loath to vex vou,tell you what;
Make up the money I had an hundred pound,
And take your belly full of her.
An hundred pound?
What a 100 pound? he gets none: what a 100 pound?
Sweet Pru be calm, the Gentleman offers thus,
If I will make the monies that are past
A 100 pound, he will discharge all courts,
And give his bond never to vex vs more.
A 100 pound? Alas; take sir but threescore,
Do you seek my undoing?
I'll not bate one sixpence,I'll mall you pusse for spitting.
Do thy worst,
Will fourscore stop thy mouth?
No.
You're a slave,
Thou Cheat, I'll now tear money from thy throat,
Husband lay hold on yonder tauny-coate.
Nay Gentlemen, seeing your women are so hot, I must loose my hair in their company I see.
His hair sheds off, and yet he speaks not so much in the nose as he did before.
He has had the better Surgeon, Moister Greenewit, is your wit so raw as to play no better a part then a Somners?
I pray who plays a knack to know an honest man in this company?
Dear husband, pardon me, I did dissemble,
Told thee I was his precontracted wife,
When letters came from him for thirty pound,
I had no shift but that.
A very clean shift: but able to make me lousy, On.
Husband, I plucked (when he had tempted me to think well of him) Get feathers from thy wings, to make him fly more lofty.
A'the top of you wife: on.
He having wasted them, comes now for more,
Using me as a ruffian doth his whore,
Whose sin keeps him in breath: by heaven I vow,
Thy bed he never wronged, more then he does now.
My bed? ha, ha, like enough, a shop-boord will serve to have a cuckolds coat cut out upon: of that we'll talk hereafter: you're a villain
Hear me but speak sir, you shall find me none.
Pray sir, be patient and hear him.
I am muzzled for biting sir, use me how you will.
The first hour that your wife was in my eye,
My self with other Gentlemen sitting by,
(In your shop) tasting smoke, and speech beng used,
That men who have fairest wives are most abused,
And hardly escaped the horn, your wife maintained
That only such spots in City dames were stained,
Justly, but by men's slanders: for her own part,
She vowed that you had so much of her heart;
No man by all his wit, by any wile,
Never so fine spun, should your self be guile,
Of what in her was yours.
Yet Pru it is well: play out your game at Irish sir: Who wins?
The trial is when she comes to bearing:
I scorned one woman, thus, should brave all men,
And (which more vexed me) a shee-citizen.
Therefore I laid siege to her, out she held,
Gave many a brave repulse, and me compelled
With shame to sound retreat to my hot lust,
Then seeing all base desires raked up in dust,
And that to tempt her modest ears, I swore
Ne'er to prsumne again: she said, her eye
Would ever give me welcome honestly,
And (since I was a Gentleman) if it run low,
She would my state relieve, not to o'rethrow
Your own and hers: did so; then seeing I wrought
Upon her meekness, me she set at nought,
And yet to try if I could turn that tide,
You see what streme I strove with, but sir I swear
By heaven, and by those hopes men lay up there,
I neither have, nor had a base intent
To wrong your bed, what's done, is merriment:
Your Gold I pay back with this interest,
When I had most power to do it I wronged you least.
If this no gullery be sir,
No, no, on my life,
Then sir I am beholden (not to you wife)
But Moister Laxton to your want of doing ill,
Which it seems you have not Gentlemen,
Tarry and dine here all.
Brother, we have a jest,
As good as yours to furnish out a feast.
We'll crown our table with it: wife brag no more,
Of holding out: who most brags is most whore.
But prithee Moister Captain Jack be plain and perspicuous with me; was it your Megge of Westminsters courage, that rescued me from the Poultry puttockes indeed.
The valour of my wit I ensure you sir fetched you off bravely, when you werre in the forlorn hope among those desperates, Sir Beauteous Ganymed here, and sir Thomas Long heard that cuckoo (my man Trapdore) sing the note of your
ransom from captiuty.
Vds so Mole, whore's that Trapdore?
Hanged I think by this time, a Justice in this town, (that speaks nothing but make a Mittimus a way with him to Newgate) used that rogue like a fire-worke to run upon a line betwixt him and me.
how, how?
Marry to lay trains of villainy to blow up my life; I smelt the powder, spied what linstocke gave fire to shoot against the poor Captain of the Gallifoyst, &amp; away slid I my man, like a shouell-board shilling, hee stroutes up and down the suburbs I think: and eats up whores: feeds upon a bawds garbadg.
Sir Jack Dapper.
What sai'st Tom Long?
Thou had a sweet faced boy hail fellow with thee to your little Gull: how is he spent?
Troth I whistled the poor little buzzard of a my fist, because when hee waited upon me at the ordinaries, the gallants hit me in the teeth still, and said I looked like a painted Aldermans tomb, and the boy at my elbow like a deaths head. Sir Jack, Mole.
What says my little Dapper?
Come, come, walk and talk, walk and talk.
Mole and I'll be in the midst.
These Knights shall have squires places belike then: well Dapper what say y ou?
Sir Captain mad Mary, the gull my own fathere (Dapper) Sir Day) laid these London boote-halers the catch poles in ambush to set upon me.
Your father? away Jack.
By the tassels of this handkercher it is true, and what was his warlike stratagem think you? hee thought because a wicker cage tames a nightingale, a lousy prison could make an ass of me.
A nasty plot.
I; as though a Counter, which is a park, in which
all the wilde beasts of the City run head by head could tame me.
Yonder comes my Lord Noland.
Save you my Lord.
Well met Gentlemen all, good Sir Beauteous Geniemed, Sir Thomas Long?, and how does Moister Dapper?
Thanks my Lord.
No Tobacco my Lord?
No faith Jack.
My Lord Noland will you go to Pimlico with vs? wee are making a boon voyage to that appy land of spice-cakes
Hears such a merry ging, I could find in my heart to sail to the worlds end with such company, come Gentlemen let's on.
Here's most amorous weather my Lord.
Amorous weather.
Is not amorous a good word?
Shall we set upon the infantry, these troops of foot? Zounds yonder comes Mole my whorish Moister &amp; Mistress, wolt I had her kidneys between my teeth.
I had rather have a cow heel.
Zounds I am so patched up, she cannot discover me: we'll on.
Alla corago then.
Good your Honours, and Worships, enlarge the ears of commiseration, and let the sound of a hoarse military organ-pipe, penetrate your pitiful bowels to extract out of them so many small drops of silver, as may give a hard strawbed lodging to a couple of maimed soldiers.
Where are you maimed?
In both our nether limbs.
Come, come, Dapper, lets give 'em something, las poor men, what money have you? by my troth I love a soldier with my soul.
Stay, stay, where have you served?
In any part of the Low countries?
Not in the Low countries, if it please your manhood, but in Hungarie against the Turk at the siege of Belgrad.
Who served there with you sir?
Many Hungarians, Moldauians, Valachians, and Transiluanians, with some Sclauonians, and retiring home sir, the Venetian Galleys took vs prisoners, yet freed vs, and suffered vs to beg up and down the country.
You have ambled all over Italy then.
Oh sir, from Venice to Rome, Uecchio, Bononia, Romania, Bolonia, Modena, Piacenza, and Tuscana, with all her Cities, as Pistoia, Valteria, Mountepulchena, Arrezzo, with the Siennois, and diverse others.
Mere rogues, put spurs to 'em once more.
Thou look like a strange creature, a fat butterbox, yet speak English,
What art thou?
Ec mine Here. Ec bin den ruffling Teare-Cat.
Den, brave Soldade, Ec bin doric all Dutchlant.
Gueresen: Der Shellum das mere In Beasa
In woert gaeb.
Ec slaag vine strokes ou tom Cop.
Distich Den hundred touzun Devil halle,
Frolic miue Here.
Here, here, let's be rid of their iobbering,
Not a cross Sir Bewtiout, you base rogues, I have taken measure of you, better then a taylor can, and I'll fit you, as you (monster with one eye) have fitted me,
Your Worship will not abuse a soldier.
Soldier? thou deserve to bee hanged up by that tongue which dishonours so noble a profession, soldier you skeldering varlet? hold, stand, there should be a trapdore here abouts.
The balls of these glasiers of mine (mine eyes) shall be shot up and down in any hot piece of service for my invincible Mistress.
I did not think there had been such knavery in black patches as now I see.
Oh sir he hath been brought up in the Isle of dogs, and can both fawn like a Spaniel, and bite like a Mastiff, as hee finds occasion.
What are you sir? a bird of this feather too.
A man beaten from the wars sir.
I think so, for you never stood to fight.
What's thy name fellow soldier?
I am called by those that have seen my valour, Tear-Cat.
Teare-Cat?
A mere whip-Iacke, and that is in the Common-wealth of rogues, a slave, that can talk of sea-fight, name all your chief Pirats, discover more countries to you, then either the Dutch, Spanish, French, or English ever found out, yet indeed all his service is by land, and that is to rob a Fair, or some such venturous exploit; Teare-Cat, foot sir I have your name now I remember me in my book of horners, horns for the thumb, you know how.
No indeed Captain Mole (for I know you by sight) I am no such nipping Christian, but a maunderer upon the pad I confess, and meeting with honest Trapdore here, whom you had cashiered from bearing arms, out at elbows under your colours, I instructed him in the rudiments of roguery, and by my map made him sail over any Country you can name, so that now he can maunder better then my self.
So then Trapdore thou art turned soldier now.
Alas sir, now there's no wars, it is the safest course of life I could take.
I hope then you can cant, for by your cudgels, you
sir are an upright man.
As any walks the high way I assure you.
And Teare-Cat what are you? a wilde rogue, an anglare, or a ruffler?
Brother to this upright man, flesh and blood, ruffling Teare-Cat is my name, and a ruffler is my stile, my title, my profession.
Sir whore's your Doxy, halt not with me.
Doxy Mole, what's that?
His wench.
My doxy I have by the Solomon a doxy, that carries a kitchen mort in her slat at her back, besides my dell and my dainty wilde del, with all whom I'll tumble this next darkmans in the strommel, and drink ben baufe, and eat a fat gruntling cheat, a cackling cheat, and a quacking cheat.
Here's old cheating.
My doxy stays for me in a bossing ken, brave Captaine.
Hee says his wench stays for him in an alehouse: you are no pure rogues.
Pure rogues? no, wee scorn to be pure rogues, but if you come to our lib ken, or our stalling ken, you shall find neither him nor me, a quire cuffin.
So sir, no churl of you.
No, but a ben cave, a brave cave, a gentry cuffin.
Call you this canting?
Zounds, I'll give a schoolmaster half a crown a week, and teach me this peddlers French.
Do but strowle sir, half a harvest with vs sir, and you shall gabble your belly-full.
Come you rogue cant with me.
Well said Mole, cant with her sir, and you shall have money, else not a penny.
I'll have a bout if she please.
Come on sir.
Ben mort, shall you and I heave a booth, mill a ken or nip a bung, and then we'll couch a hogshead under the Ruffmans,
and there you shall wap with me, &amp; Isle niggle with you.
Out you damned impudent rascal.
Cut boner whiddes, and hold your fambles and your stamps.
Nay, nay, Mole, why art thou angry? what was his gibberish?
Marry this my Lord says hee; Ben mort (good wench) shall you and I heave a booth, mill a ken, or nip a bung? shall you and I rob a house, or cut a purse?
Very Good. (mans:
And then we'll couch a hogshead under the Ruff
And then we'll lie under a hedge.
That was my desire Captain, as it is fit a soldier should lie.
And there you shall wap with me, and I'll niggle with you, and that's all.
Nay, nay Mole what's that wap?
Nay teach me what niggling is, I'd fine bee niggling.
Wapping and niggling is all one, the rogue my man can tell you.
It is fadoodling: if it please you.
This is excellent, one fit more good Moll,
Come you rogue sing with me.
A gage of ben Rom-bouse
In a bossing ken of Rom-vile.
Is Boner then a Caster,
Peck, pennam, lay or poplar,
Which we mill in deuse a vile.
Oh I wud lib all the lightmans.
Oh I would lib all the darkemans,
By the solomon under the Ruffemans.
By the solomon in the Hartmans.
And scour the Quire cramp ring,
And couch till a pallyard docked my dell,
So my bossy nab might skew rome boss well
Auast to the pad, let vs binge,
Auast to the pad, let vs binge.
Fine knaves i'faith.
The grating of ten new cart-wheeles, and the gruntling of five hundred hogs coming from Rumford market, cannot make a worse noise then this canting language does in my ears; pray my Lord Noland, let's give these souldiers their pay.
Agreed, and let them march.
Here Mole.
Now I see that you are stal'd to the rogue, and are not ashamed of your professions, look you: my Lord Noland here and these Gentlemen, bestows upon you two, two boards and a half, that's two shillings six pence.
Thanks to your Lordship.
Thanks heroical Captain.
Away.
Wee shall cut ben whiddes of your Masters and Mistreship, wheresoever we come.
You'll maintain sir the old Justices plot to his face.
Else trine me on the cheats: hang me.
Be sure you meet me there.
Without any more maundring I'll do it, follow brave Tear-Cat.
I prae, sequor, let vs go mouse.
Mole what was in that canting song? (only milk
Troth my Lord, only a praise of good drink, the
Which these wilde beasts love to suck, and thus it was:
A rich cup of wine, oh it is juice Divine,
More wholesome for the head,: hen meat, drink, or bread,
To fill my drunken pate, with that, I'd sit up late,
By the heals would I lie, under a lousy hedge die,
Let a slave have a pull at my whore, so I be full
Of that precious liquor; And a parcel of such stuff my Lord
Not worth the opening.
What gallant comes yonder?
Mass I think I know him, it is one of Cumberland.
Shall we venture to shuffle in amongst yon heap of Gallants, and strike?
It is a question whether there bee any silver shells amongst them, for all their satin outsides.
Let's try?
Pox on him, a gallant? shadow me, I know him: it is one that cumbers the land indeed; if hee swim near to the shore of any of your pockets, look to your purses.
Is it possible?
This brave fellow is no bettet then a foist.
Foist, what's that?
A diver with two fingers, a picke-pocket; all his train study the figging law, that's to say; cutting of purses and foisting; one of them is a nip, I took him once in the twopenny gallery at the Fortune; then there's a cloyer, or snap, that dogs any new brother in that trade, and snappes will have half in any booty; Hee with the wand is both a stale, whose office is, to face a man in the streets, whilst shells are drawn by an other, and then with his black conjuring rod in his hand, he by the nimbleness of his eye and juggling stick, will in cheaping a piece of plate at a goldsmiths stall, make four or five rings mount from the top of his caduceus, and as if it were at leape-frog, they skip into his hand presently.
Zounds wee are smoked.
Ha?
Wee are boiled, pox on her; see Moll the roaring drab.
All the diseases of sixteen hospitals boyle her: away.
Bless you sir.
And you good sir.
Dost not ken me man?
No trust me sir.
Heart, there's a Knight to whom I'm bound for many favours, lost his purse at the last new play in the Swan, seven Angels in it, make it good you're best; do you see? no more.
A Synagogue shall be called Mistress Mary, disgrace me not; pacus palabros, I will conjure for you, farewell:
Did not I tell you my Lord?
I wonder how thou came to the knowledge of these nasty villains.
And why doe the foul mouths of the world call thee Mole cutpursse? a name, me thinks, damned and odious.
Dare any step forth to my face and say,
I have tan thee doing so Mole? I must confess,
In younger days, when I was apt to stray,
I have sat amongst such adders; seen their stings,
As any here might, and in full play-houses
Watched their quicke-diuing hands, to bring to shame
Such rogues, and in that stream met an ill name:
When next my Lord you spy any one of those,
So hee bee in his Art a scholar, question him,
Tempt him with gold to open the large book
Of his close villainies: and you your self shall cant
Better then poor Mole can, and know more laws
Of cheaters, lifters, nips, foists, puggards, curbers,
Withal the devils black guard, then it is fit
Should be discovered to a noble wit.
I know they have their orders, offices,
Circuits and circles, unto which they are bound,
To raise their own damnation in.
How dost thou know it?
As you do, I show it you, they to me show it.
Suppose my Lord you were in Venice.
Well.
If some Italian pander there would tell
All the close tricks of courtesans; would not you
Hearken to such a fellow?
Yes.
And here,
Being come from Uenice, to a friend most dear
That were to travel thither, you would proclaim
Your knowledge in those villainies, to save
Your friend from their quick danger: must you have
A black ill name, because ill things you know,
Good troth my Lord, I am made Mole cut purse so.
How many are whores, in small ruffs and still looks?
How many chaste, whose names fill slanders books?
Were all men cuckolds, whom gallants in their scorns
Cal so, we should not walk for goring horns,
Perhaps for my mad going some reprove me,
I please my self, and care not else who loves me.
A brave mind Mole i'faith.
Come my Lord, shal's to the Ordinary?
I, it is noon sure. (or to the world:
Good my Lord, let not my name condemn me to you
A fencer I hope may be called a coward, is he so for that?
If all that have ill names in London, were to be whipped, (there
And to pay but twelve pence a piece to the beadle, I would ra-
Have his office, then a Constables.
So would I Captain Moll: it were a sweet tickling office i'faith.
My son marry a thief, that impudent girl,
Whom all the world stick their worst eyes upon?
How will your care prevent it?
It is impossible.
They marry close, thei'r gone, but none knows whether.
Oh Gentlemen, when he's a fathers heart-strings
Held out so long from breaking: now what news sir?
They were met vppo'th water an hour since, sir,
Putting in towards the Sluice.
The Sluice? come Gentlemen,
It is Lambith works against vs.
And that Lambith, joins more mad matches, then your six wet towns, twixt that and Windsor-bridge, where fares lye soaking.
Delay no time sweet Gentlemen: to Black Friars,
We'll take a pair of Oars and make after 'em.
Your son, and that bold masculine ramp
My mistress, are landed now at Tower.
Hoyda, at Tower?
I heard it now reported.
Which way Gentlemen shall I bestow my care?
I'm drawn in pieces betwixt deceit and shame.
Sir Alexander.
You're well met, and most rightly served,
My daughter was a scorn to you.
Say not so fir.
A very abject, she poor Gentlewoman,
Your house had been dishonoured. Give you joy sir,
Of your sons Gaskoyne-Bride, you'll be a Grandfather shortly
To a fine crew of roaring sons and daughters,
Twill help to stock the suburbs passing well sir.
O play not with the miseries of my heart,
Wounds should be dressed and healed, not vexed, or left
Wide open, to the anguish of the patient,
And scornful air let in: rather let pity
And advise charitably help to refresh 'em.
Who'd place his charity so unworthily.
Like one that gives alms to a cursing beggar,
Had I but found one spark of goodness in you
Toward my deserving child, which then grew fond
Of your sons virtues, I had cased you now.
But I perceive both fire of youth and goodness,
Are raked up in the ashes of your age,
Else no such shame should have come near your house,
Nor such ignoble sorrow touch your heart,
If not for worth, for pities sake assist me.
You urge a thing past sense, how can he help you?
All his assistance is as frail as ours,
Full as uncertain, whore's the place that holds 'em?
One brings vs waer-newes; then comes an other
With a full charged mouth, like a culuerins voice,
And he reports the Tower; whose sounds are truest?
In vain you flatter him sir Alexander.
I flatter him, Gentlemen you wrong me grossly.
Hee doe's it well i'faith.
Both news are false,
Of Tower or water: they took no such way yet. (plundges?
Oh strange: hear you this Gentlemen, yet more
They are nearer then you think for yet more close, then if they were further off.
How am I lost in these distractions?
For your speeches Gentlemen,
In taxing me for rashness; fore you all,
I will engage my state to half his wealth,
Nay to his sons revenues, which are less,
And yet nothing at all, till they come from him;
That I could (if my will stuck to my power),
Prevent this marriage yet, nay banish her
For ever from his thoughts, much more his arms.
Slack not this goodness, though you heap upon me
Mountains of malice and revenge hereafter:
I'd willingly resign up half my state to him,
So he would marry the meanest drudge I hire.
Hee talks impossibilites, and you believe 'em.
I talk no more, then I know how to finish,
My fortunes else are his that dares stake with me,
The poor young Gentleman I love and pity:
And to keep shame from him, (because the spring
Of his affection was my daughters first,
Till his frown blasted all,) do but estate him
In those possessions, which your love and care
Once pointed out for him, that he may have room,
To entertain fortunes of noble birth,
Where now his desperate wants casts him upon her:
And if I do not for his own sake chiefly,
Rid him of this disease, that now grows on him,
I'll forfeit my whole state, before these Gentlemen.
Troth but you shall not undertake such matches,
We'll persuade so much with you.
Heere's my ring,
He will believe this token: fore these Gentlemen,
I will confirm it fully: all those lands,
My first love lotted him, he shall straight possess
In that refusal.
If I change it not, change me into a beggar.
Are you mad sir?
It is done.
Will you undo your self by doing,
And show a prodigal trick in your old days?
It is a match Gentlemen.
I, I, sir I.
I oks no favour; trust to you for none,
My hope rests in the goodness of your son.
Hee holds it up well yet.
Of an old knight i'faith.
Cursed be the time, I laid his first love barren,
Wilfully barren, that before this hour
Had sprung forth friutes, of comfort and of honour;
He loved a virtuous Gentlewoman.
Life, heere's Mole.
Jack.
How dost thou Jack?
How dost thou Gallant?
Impudence, whore's my son?
Weakens, go look him.
Is this your wedding gown?
The man talks monthly:
Hot broth and a dark chamber for the knight,
I see he will be stark mad at our next meeting.
Why sir, take comfort now, there's no such matter,
No Priest will marry her, sir, for a woman,
Whiles that shape's on, and it was never known,
Two men were married and conjoined in one:
Your son hath made some shift to love another.
What ere' she be, she has my blessing with her,
May they be rich, and fruitful, and receive
Like comfort to their issue, as I take in them,
He's pleased me now, marrying not this,
Through a whole world he could not choose amiss.
Glad you're so penitent, for your former sin sir.
Say he should take a wench with her smocke-dowry,
No portion with her, but her lips and arms?
Why? who thrive better sir? they have most blessing,
Though other have more wealth, and least repent,
Many that want most, know the most content.
Say he should marry a kind youthful sinner.
Age will quench that, any offence but theft and drun-
Nothing but death can wipe away. (kennesse,
There sins are greene, even when there heads are gray,
Nay I despair not now, my heart's cheered Gentlemen,
No face can come unfortunately to me,
Now sir, your news?
Your son with his fair Bride is near at hand,
Fair may their fortunes be.
Now you're resolved sir, it was never she,
I find it in the music of my heart,
See where they come.
A proper lusty presence sir.
Now has he pleased me right, I always counseld him
To choose a goodly personable creature,
Just of her pitch was my first wife his mother.
Before I dare discover my offence, I kneel for pardon.
My heart gave it thee, before thy tongue could ask it,
Rise, thou hast raised my joy to greater height.
Then to that seat where grief dejected it,
Both welcome to my love, and care for ever,
Hide not my happiness too long, al's pardoned,
Here are our friends, salute her, Gentlemen.
Heart, who this Mole?
O my reviving shame, is it I must live,
To be struck blind, be it the work of sorrow,
Before age take it in hand.
Darkness and death.
Have you deceived me thus? did I engage
My whole estate for this.
You asked no favour,
And you shall find as little, since my comforts,
Play false with me, I'll be as cruel to thee
As grief to fathers hearts.
Why what's the matter with you?
Less too much joy, should make your age forgetful,
Are you too well, too happy?
With a vengeance.
Me thinks you should be proud of such a daughter,
As good a man, as your son.
O monstrous impudence.
You had no note before, an unmarked Kinght,
Now all the town will take regard on you,
And all your enemies fear you for my sake,
You may pass where you list, through crowds most thick,
And come of bravely with your purse vnpickt,
You do not know the benefits I bring with me,
No cheat dares work upon you, with thumb or knife,
While you've a roaring girl to your sons wife.
A devil rampant.
Have you so much charity?
Yet to release me of my last rash bargain,
And I'll give in your pledge.
No sir, I stand to it, I'll work upon advantage,
As all mischiefs do upon me.
Content, bear witness all then
His are the lands, and so contention ends.
Here comes your sons Bride, twixt two noble friends.
Now are you gulled as you would be, thank me for it,
I'd a fore-singer in it.
Forgive me father,
Though there before your eyes my sorrow feigned,
This still was she, for whom true love complained.
Blessings eternal, and the joys of Angels,
Begin your peace here, to be signed in heaven,
How short my sleep of sorrow seems now to me,
To this eternity of boundless comforts,
That finds no want but utterance, and expression.
My Lord your office here appears so honourably:
So full of ancient goodness, grace, and worthiness,
I never took more joy in sight of man,
Then in your comfortable presence now.
Nor I more delight in doing grace to virtue,
Then in this worthy Gentlewoman, your sons Bride,
Noble Fitz-Alards daughter, to whose honour
And modest fame, I am a servant vowed,
So is this Knight.
Your loves make my joys proud,
Bring forth those deeds of land, my care laid ready,
And which, old knight, thy nobleness may challenge,
Joined with thy daughters virtues, whom I prise now,
As dearly as that flesh, I call mine own.
Forgive me worthy Gentlewoman, it was my blindness
When I rejected thee, I saw thee not,
Sorrow and wilful rashness grew like films
Over the eyes of judgment, now so clear
I see the brightness of thy worth appear.
Duty and love may I deserve in those,
And all my wishes have a perfect close,
That tongue can never err, the sound's so sweet,
Here honest son, receive into thy hands,
The keys of wealth, possession of those lands,
Which my first care provided, thei'r thine own,
Heaven give thee a blessing with 'em, the best joys,
That can in worldly shapes to man betide,
Are fertile lands, and a fair fruitful Bride,
Of which I hope you're sped.
I hope so too sir.
Father and son, I ha'done you simple service here,
For which thou shalt not part Moll unrequited.
Thou art a mad girl, and yet I cannot now condamn thee.
Condemn me? troth and you should sir,
I'd make you seek out one to hang in my room,
I'd give you the slip at Gallows, and cozen the people.
Heard you this jest my Lord?
What is it Jack?
He was in fear his son would marry me,
But never dreamt that I would ne'er agree.
Why? thou had a suitor once Jack, when wilt marry?
Who I my Lord, I'll tell you when in faith,
When you shall hear,
Gallants void from Sergeants fear,
Honesty and truth vnslandred,
Woman manned, but never pondered,
Cheats booted, but not coached,
Vessels older ever they are broached.
If my mind be then not varied,
Next day following, I'll be married.
This sounds like domes-day,
Then were marriage best,
For if I should repent, I were soon at rest.
In truth tho'art a good wench, I'm sorry now,
The opinion was so hard, I conceived of thee.
Some wrongs I'ue done thee.
Is the wind there now?
It is time for me to kneel and confess first,
For fear it come too late, and my brains feel it,
Upon my paws, I ask you pardon mistress.
Pardon? for what sir? what he's your rogueship done now?
I have been from time to time hired to confound you, by this old Gentleman.
How?
Pray forgive him,
But may I counsel you, you should never do it.
Many a snare to entrap your Worships life,
Have I laid privily, chains, watches, Jewels,
And when hee saw nothing could mount you up,
Four hollow-hearted Angels he then gave you,
By which he meant to trap you, I to save you.
To all which, shame and grief in me cry guilty,
Forgive me now, I cast the worlds eyes from me,
And look upon thee freely with mine own:
I see the most of many wrongs before hee,
Cast from the jaws of envy and her people,
And nothing foul but that, Il'e never more
Condemn by common voice, for that's the whore,
That deceives mans opinion; mocks his trust,
Cozens his love, and makes his heart unjust.
Here be the Angels Gentlemen, they were given me
As a Musician, I pursue no pity,
Follow the law, and you can cucke me, spare not
Hang up my vyall by me, and I care not.
So far I'm sorry, I'll thrice double 'em
To make thy wrongs amends,
Come worthy friends my honourable Lord,
Sir Bewteons Ganymed, and Noble Fitz-Allard,
And you kind Gentlewoman, whose sparkling presence,
Are glories set in marriage, beams of society,
For all your loves give luster to my joys,
The happiness of this day shall be remembered,
At the return of every smiling spring:
In my time now it is borne, and may no sadness
Sit on the brows of men upon that day,
But as I am, so all go pleased away.
A Painter having drawn with curious Art
The picture of a woman (every part,
Limbed to the life) hung out the piece to sell:
People (who passed along) viewing it well,
Gave several verdicts on it. some dispraised
The hair, some said the brows too high were raised,
Some hit her o'er the lips, mislik'd their colour,
Some wished her nose were shorter; some, the eyes fuller,
Others said roses on her cheeks should grow,
Swearing they looked too pale, others cried no,
The workman still as fault was found, did mend it,
In hope to please all; (but this work being ended)
And hung open at stall, it was so vile,
So monstrous and so ugly all men did smile
At the poor Painters folly. Such wee doubt
Is this our Comedy, Some perhaps do flout
The plot, saying; it is too thin, too weak, too mean,
Some for the person will revile the Scoene.
And wonder, that a creature of her being
Should bee the subject of a Poet, seeing
In the worlds eye, none weighs so light: others look
For all those base tricks published in a book,
(Foul as his brains they flowed from) of Cut-purse,
Of Nips and Foists, nasty, obscoene discourses,
As full of lies, as empty of worth or wit,
For any honest ear, or eye unfit. And thus,
If we to every brain (that's humorous)
Should fashion Scenes, we (with the Painter) shall
In striving to please all, please none at all.
Yet for such faults, as either the writers wit,
Or negligence of the Actors do commit,
Both crave your pardons: if what both have done,
Cannot full pay your expectation,
The Roaring Girl her self some few days hence,
Shall on this Stage, give larger recompense. (you,
Which Mirth that you may share in, her self does woe
And craves this sign, your hands to beckon her to you.

THis ayre has a sweet a breath Master Bruy
Your partner Sir.
, and in good I hope, this hal
Plays the lewd wanton with our  sails,
And makes 'm big with vaporous envy.
Tic no more yet, but then our fraught is full
When she returns laden with merchandise
And safe delivered with our customage.
Such a delivery heaven send us,
But time must ripen it? are our accounts made even?
To the quantity of a penny, if his agree with mines
What's yours Richard?
Five hundred sixty pounds;
Read the gross sum of your broad clothes.
68. pieces at B, ss, and l; 57. at l, ss, and o.
Just; lead, xix tun.
As evenly we will lay our bosoms as our bottom
With love as merchandise, and may they both increase
o Infinites.
Especially at home; that golden traffic love
Is scantier far than gold; and one mine of that
More worth than twenty Argoseyes
Of the worlds richest treasure.
Here you shall dig, and find your lading.
Heres your exchange; and as in love
So we'll participate in merchandise.
The merchants casualty:
We always venture on uncertain odds,
Although we bear hopes Emblem the anchor with us.
The wind brought it, let the wind blow't away again;
Should not the Sea sometimes be partner with us
Our wealth would swallow us.
A good resolve: but now I must be bold
To touch you with somewhat that concerns you.
I could prevent you; is it not my unthrifty brother?
Nay, leave out the adjective (unthrifty,)
 brother Sir, tic he that I would speak of.
He cannot be named without unthrifty S,
 his poper Epithet, would you conceit
ut what my love has done for him
, so chargeable, and so expensive,
 would not urge another addition.
Nay Sir, you must not stay acquantity
 the name of brother
Which is inseparable, hoe's now in Ludgate Sir,
And part of your treasure lies buried with him.
I, by vulgar blemish; but not by any good account;
There let him howl, s the best stay he hath;
For nothing but a prison can contain him
So boundless is his riot; twice have I raised
His decayed fortunes to a fair estate
But with as fruitless charity, as if I had thrown
My safe landed substance back into the Sea,
Or dress in pity some corrupted Jade,
And he should kick me for my curtsy.
I am sure you cannot but hear, what quick.
Sands he finds out, as Dice, Cards, Pigeon-holes,
And which is more, should I not restrain it,
He would make my state his prodigality.
All this may be Sir, yet examples daily show
To our eyes, that Prodigals return at last
And the loudest roarer, (as our City phrase is)
Will speak calm and smooth; you must help with hope Sir,
Had I such a brother, I should think that heaven had
Made him as an instrument for my best charity
To work upon; This is a Maxim sure, Some
Are made poor, that rich men by giving may
Increase their store. Nor think Sir, that I doe
Tax your labours and mean my self for to 
Idly by, for I have vowed if heaven bu bless
This voyage now abroad, to leave some
Memorable relic after me, that shall
Preserve my name alive till Doomsday.
I Sir, that work is good, and therein could I
Join with your good intents, but to relieve
A wast-good, a spendthrift.
O no more, no more good Sir.
Sir, when saw you my son Robert
This morning Sir, he said he would go visit his Uncle
I pay for their meetings I'm se; that boy
Makes prize of all his fingers light on
To relieve his unthrifty Uncle.
Does he rob, in truth I commend him.
Tic partly your fault, Sitra you so ever, and suffer it,
Sir, mine's a servants duty, his a sons,
Nor know I better how to express my love
Unto your self, than by loving your son.
By concealing of his pilferings.
I dare not call them so; he is my second Master,
And methink tic far above my limits
Either to check, or to complain of him.
 Du, then make a good construction,
And your son Robert a natural Nephews part.
To relieve his poor Uncle.
in neither well; Sir, for note but the
tion of my estate; I'm lately married
To a wealthy Widow from whom my substance
Chlie does arise, she has observed this in her
 often complains and grudges at it,
And what  broils such civil discords bring,
 married men are ignorant of:
Nay will you see a present proof of it.
Shall I not live to breath a quiet hour?
I would I were a beggar with content
Rather than thus be thwarted for mine own.
Why what's the matter Woman?
I'll towse 'm up, tho you regard not of my just complaints
Neither in love to me, nor preserving me from others
Injuries, both which you're tied to, by all the rightful
Laws heavenly or humane, but Isle complain
Sir, where I will be heard.
Nay, thou'It be heard too far.
Nay Sir, I will be heard; some awkeward star
Threw out his unhappy eat my conception
And twill never quench while I have heate in me:
Would I were cold, there would be bonfires made
 warm defae, my death would be a Iubilce to some.
Why Sir, how should I minister remedy and know not the .
Mother a pearl, woman, show your husband the cause,
Had he bin a husband Sir, I had had no cause to Complain, I threw down at his feet
The subjection of his whole estate:
He did not marry me for loves sake nor for pity,
But love to that I had, he now neglects the love
He had before; A prodigal is suffered to lay waste
Those worldly blessings, which I long enclosed,
Intending for good uses.
That's my son.
I, thou know it well enough, hoe's the Condu pipe that throws it forth into the common shore.
And the other's my brother.
You may well shame, as I doe grieve the kindred,
But I'd make the one a stranger, the other a servant,
No son, nor brother; For they deserve neither
Of those offices.
Why did I ever cherish him, have not I threat
Him with disinheritance for this disorder?
Why doe you not perform it?
The other's in Ludgate.
No; hoe's in my house, approving to my face
The charitable office of his kind Nephew,
Who with his pilfering purloind from me,
Has set him at liberty; if this may be suffered
Isle have no eyes to see.
Prithee content thy self; Isle see a present
Remedy; sir, go call 'm in; this worthy
Gentleman shall know the cause, and censure
For us both with equity.
Nay good Sir, let not me be so employed,
For I shall favour one for pity, the other for your loves sake,
Now Sir, are all my words with you
So light esteemed that they can
Take no hold upon your duty?
Misconstrue not, I beseech you.
Nay, heel approve his good deeds I warrant you.
And you Sir.
Well Sir.
I had thought you had bin in Ludgate Sir.
Why, you see where I am Sir.
Why, where are you Sir?
 bt Sir, in debt.
Indeed that's a place you can hardly be removed
From, but this is not a place fit for one in
Debt, how came you out of prison Sir?
As I went into prison Sir, by the keepers.
This was your work to let this bandog loose.
Sir it was my duty to let my Uncle loose.
Your duty did belong to me, and I did not command
You cannot make a separation Sir, betwixt
The duty that belongs to me, and love unto
 cle, as well you may bid me love my
Maker, and neglect the Creature, which he
Hath bid me love; if man to man join not
A love on earth, they love not heaven, nor
 that dwells above it, such is my duty
A strong Correlative unto
My Uncle why, he's half your self.
Believe me Sir, he has answered you well.
He has not worthy Sir, but to make void
That false construction; here I disclaim
The title of a brother; and by that disclaim
Hast thou lost thy childes part; be thou engaged
For any debts of his, in prison rot with him;
My goods shall not purchase such
Fruitless recompense.
Then you are a scurvy father, and a filthy brother.
I, I, Sir, your tongue cannot defame his reputation
But yours can, for all the City reports what
An abominable scold he has got to his wife.
If ere I know thou keep him company,
Isle take my blessing from thee whilst I live,
And that which after me should bless thy estate.
And Isle proclaim thy baseness to the world;
Ballads I'll make, and make 'm Tavern music
To sing thy churlish cruelty.
Tut, tut, these are bibles.
Each Festival day I'll come unto thy house,
And I will pie upon thy threshold.
You must be out of prison first Sir.
If ever I live to see thee Shreiffe of London,
I'll gild thy painted posts cum privilegio,
And kick thy Sergeants.
Nay, good Uncle.
Why, I'll beg for thee, Boy;
I'll break this leg, and bind it up again,
To pull out pity from a stony breast,
Rather than thou shalt want.
I, doe; let him fear up his arm, and scarf it up
With two yards of rope; counterfeit two villains;
Beg under a hedge and share your bounty: but come
Not near my house, not thou in's company, if thoul't obey,
There's punishment, for thee; for thee there's worse;
The loss of all that's mine, with my dear curse.
Churl, Dog, you churlish rascally miser.
Nay, good Uncle, throw not foul language;
This is but heate Sir, and I doubt not but
To cool this rage with my obedience:
But Uncle, you must not then heap on such fuel.
Cousin, I grieve for thee, that thou hast undergone
Thy fathers curse, for love unto thy Uncle.
Tut, that bond shall ne'er be canceled, Sir.
I pity that y'faith.
Let pity then from me turn to your self:
Bethink your self Sir, of some course
That might befit your estate, and let me guide it.
Ha, a course? sfoot I hate: Cousin, can lend me
40. shillings? Could I but repair this old decayed Tenement
Of mine with some new plaster; for alas, what
Can a man doe in such a case as this?
I, but your course, Uncle.
Tush, leave that to me, because thou shalt wonder
At it: If you should see me in a scarlet gown
Within the compass of a gold chain, then I
Hope you'll say, that I doe keep my self in
Good compass: then Sir, if the Cap of Maintenance
Doe march before me, and not a Cap be suffered
To be worn in my presence, pray doe not upbraid
Me with my former poverty: I cannot tell, state
And wealth may make a man forget himself;
But I beseech you doe not; there are things in my
Head that you dream not of; dare you try me, Cousin?
Why, forty shillings, Uncle, shall not keep back Your fortunes.
Why, gramerey Cousin; now if the dice doe run right,
This 40. shillings may set me up again: To lay it on my back,
And so to pawn it, there's ne'er a dimbed Broker
In the world will give me half the worth on it:
No, whilst it is in ready cash, that's the surest
Way; 7. is better than 11. a pox take the bones
And they will not favour a man sometimes.
Look you Uncle, there's 40. shillings for you.
As many good Angels guard thee, as thou hast given
Me bad ones to seduce me, for these deputy devils
Dam worse than the old ones. Now Cousin, pray listen,
Listen after my transformation; I will henceforth
Turn an Apostate to prodigality; I will eat
Cheese and Onions and buy lordships, and will
Not you think this strange?
I am glad you're merry, Uncle; but this is fixed
Betwixt an Uncle and a Nephews love,
Though my estate be poor, revenues scant,
Whilst I have any left, you shall not want.
Why gramercy, by this hand Isle make
Thee an Alderman before I dye, doe but
Follow my steps.
Sir, will the Churchman come I sent you for?
Yes, mistress, he will come: but pray resolve
Me one thing for my long service; What
Business have you with the Churchman?
Is it to make your Will, or to get you a new
Husband?
Suppose to make my Will, how then?
Then I would desire you to remember me, Mistress,
I have served you long, and that's the best
Service to a woman: make a good Will if you
Mean to dye, that it may not be said, Though
Most women be long lived, yet they all dye
With an ill-will.
So Sir, suppose it be for marriage.
Why then remember your self mistress;
Take heed how you give away the head;
It stands yet upon the shoulders of
Your widowhood; the loving embracing Ivy
Has yet the upper place in the house;
If you give it to the Holly, take heed,
There's pricks in Holly; or if you fear not
The pricks, take heed of the wands, you
Cannot have the pricks without the wands;
You give away the sword, and must defend
Your self with the scabbard; these are pretty
Instructions of a friend; I would be loath to
See you cast down, and not well taken up.
Well Sir, well, let not all this trouble you;
See, hoe's come; Will you be gone?
I will first give him a caveat, to use you
As kindly as he can. If you find my mistress
Have a mind to this coupling at barly-breake,
Let her not be the last couple to be left in hell.
I would I knew your meaning, Sir.
If she have a mind to a fresh husband, or
So, use her as well as you can; let her enter
Into as easy bands as may be.
Sir, this is none of my traffic; I sell no husbands.
Then you doe wrong, Sir, for you take money for 'm:
What woman can have a husband, but you must
Have custom for him? and often the ware proves
Nought too not worth the Imposed.
Your mans pregnant, and merry, mistress.
Hoe's saucy Sir. Sir, you'll be gone.
Nay, at the second hand you'll have a fee too;
You sell in the Church, and they bring 'm again
To your Church-yarde, you must have tollage:
Me thinks if a man dye whether you will or no,
He should be buried whether you would or no.
Nay now you wade too far, Sir.
You'll be gone, Sir.
Mistress make him your friend, for he knows what rate
Good husbands are at; if there hath bin a dearth
Of women of late, you may chance pick
Out a good prize; but take heed of a Clerk.
Will you yet Sir, after your needless trouble,
Be gone, and bid the maids dress dinner.
Mistress, it is fasting day to day, there's nothing but fish.
Let there be store of that; let bounty furnish the
Table, and charity shall be the voyder.
What fish is there, Sir?
Marry there is Sammon, Pike, and fresh Cod,
Soles, Maids, and Playce.
Bid 'm haste to dress 'm then.
Nay mistress, I'll help 'm too; the maids shall first
Dress the Pike, and the Cod, and then I'll dress
The maids in the place you wot on.
You sent for me, Gentlewoman?
Sir, I did, and to this end:
I have some scruples in my conscience;
Some doubtful problems which I cannot answer
Nor reconcile; I'd have you make them plain.
This is my duty; pray speak your mind.
And as I speak, I must remember heaven
That gave those blessings which I must relate:
Sir, you now behold a wondrous woman;
You only wonder at the Epithet;
I can approve it good; Guess at mine age.
At the half way twixt thirty and forty.
It was not much amiss; yet nearest to the last;
How think you then; Is not this a wonder,
That a woman lives full seven and thirty years,
Maid to a wife, and wife unto a widow,
Now widowed, and mine own, yet all this while
From the extremest verge of my remembrance,
Even from my weaning hour unto this minute,
Did never taste what was calamity;
I know not yet what grief is, yet have sought
A hundred ways for its acquaintance; with me
Prosperity hath kept so close a watch,
That even those things that I have meant
A cross, have that way turned a blessing;
Is it not strange?
Unparalleled; this gift is singular,
And to you alone belonging; you are the Moon,
For there's but one, all women else are stars,
For there are none of like condition:
Full oft, and many have I heard complain
Of discontents, thwarts, and adversities;
But a second to your self, I never knew
To groan under the superflux of blessings,
To have ever bin a lien unto sorrow;
No trip of fate? Sure it is wonderful.
I, Sir, tic wonderful; but is it well?
For it is now my chief affliction.
I have heard you say, that the child of heaven
Shall suffer many tribulations;
Nay, Kings and Princes share them with their subjects;
Then I that know not any chastisement
How may I know my part of childhood?
It is a good doubt; but make it not extreme,
It is some affliction, that you are afflicted
For want of affliction: Cherish that;
Yet wrest it not to misconstruction;
For all your blessings are free gifts from heaven
Health, wealth, and peace; nor can they turnto
Curses, but by abuse. Pray let me question you:
You lost a husband, was it no grief to you?
It was; but very small; no sooner I
Had given it entertainment as a sorrow,
But strait it turned unto my treble joy;
A comfortable revelation prompts me then,
That husband whom in life I held so dear,
Had changed a frailty to unchanging joys;
Me thought I saw him stellified in heaven,
And singing Hallelujahs amongst a quire
Of white Sainted souls: then again it spake,
And said; It was a sin for me to grieve
At his best good, that I esteemed best:
And thus this slender shadow of a grief
Vanished again.
All this was happy; nor can you wrest it
From a heavenly blessing. Doe not appoint
The rod: leave still the stroke unto the
Magistrate; the time is not past, but
You may feel enough.
One taste more I had, although but little,
Yet I would aggravate to make the most
On it: thus it was; The other day, it was my hap
 ssing of the Thames,
To drop that wedlock Ring from off my finger,
That once conjoined me and my dead husband;
It sunk, I prised it dear; the dearer, because it kept
Still in mine eye the memory of my loss;
Yet I grieved the loss, and did joy withal
That I had found a grief; and this is all
The sorrow I can boast of.
This is but small.
Nay sure I am of this opinion,
That had I suffered a draught to be made for it,
The bottom would have sent it up again,
I am so wondrously fortunate.
You would not suffer it?
Not for my whole estate.
O mistress, where are you? I think you are the fortunat'st Woman, that ever breathed of two shoes: the thief is Found.
The thief; what thief? I never was so happy To be robbed.
Bring him away Jug; nay, you shall see the strangest
Piece of felony discovered that ever you saw,
Or your great grandmothers Grandam before, or after,
A pirate, a water thief.
What's all this?
Bring him away Jug; yet the villain would not Confess a word till it was found about him.
I think the fellow's mad.
Did you not lose your wedding Ring the other day?
Yes Sir, but I was not robbed of it.
No; well, thank him that brings it
Home then; and will ask nothing for his pains.
You see this Sammon?
Yes, what of it?
It cost but six pence: but had the Fisher known
The worth of it, it would have cost you forty shillings.
Is not this your Ring?
The very same.
Your maid Join examining this Sammon, that she
Bought in the Market, found that he had swallowed
This Gudgeon.
How am I vexed with blessings? how think you
Sir, is not this above wonder?
I am amazed at it.
First that this fish should snatch it as a bait;
Then that my servant needs must buy that fish
Amongst such infinites of fish and buyers:
What fate is mine that runs all by it self
In unhappy happiness? My conscience dreads it:
Would thou had not swallowed it, nor thou not bought it.
Alas, blame not the poor fish, mistress, hee being a fleg, matique
Creature, took Gold for Restorative. He took it fair,
And he that gets Gold, let him eat Gold.
Nothing can hinder fate.
Seek not to cross it then.
About your business, you have not pleased me in this.
By my maid nhead if I had thought you would
Have tan it no kindlier, you should ne'er
Have bin vexed with sight on it; the garbidge should
Have bin the Cooks fees at this time.
Now doe I see the old proverb come to pass;
Give a woman luck, and cast her into th'sea:
There's many a man would wish his wife good
Luck, on that condition he might throw her
Away so. But mistress, there's one within would
Speak with you, that vexes as fast against
Crosses, as you doe against good luck.
I know her sure then, it is my gossip Foster:
Request her in; here's good company, tell her.
Isle tell her so for my own credits sake.
You shall now see an absolute contrary:
Would I had changed bosoms with her for atime,
'T would make me better relish happiness.
O friend and gossip, where are you? I am
O'er laden with my griefs, and but in your bosom
I know not where to ease me.
I had rather help you to a close, stool,
And't please you.
Ne'er had woman more sinister fate;
All ominous stars were in conjunction
Even at my birth, and doe still attend me.
This is a perfect contrary indeed.
What ails you Woman?
Unless seven witches had set spells about me,
I could not be so crossed, never at quiet
Never happy hour, not a minutes content.
You hurt your self most with impatience.
I, I Physicians minister with ease,
Although the patient do receive in pain;
Would I could think but of one joyful hour.
You have had two husbands to my knowledge;
And if you had not one joyful hour between
Both, I would you were hanged i'faith.
Full fourteen years I lived a weary maid,
Thinking no joy till I had got a husband.
That was a tedious time indeed.
I had one loved me well, and then ere long
I grew into my longing peevishness.
There was some pleasure ere you came to that.
Then all the kindness that he would apply,
Nothing could please; soon after it he died.
That could be but little grief.
Then worldly care did so o'reload my weakness,
That I must have a second stay; I chose again,
And there begins my griefs to multiply.
It cannot be, friend; your husband's kind.
A man of fair condition, well reputed.
But it may be he has not that should please her.
Peace Sir: how can your sorrows increase from him?
How can they but o'rewhelme me? he keeps a Son
That makes my state his prodigality;
To him a brother, one of the City scandals;
The tone the hand, the tother is the maw;
And between both my goods are swallowed up;
The full quantity that I brought amongst'm
Is now consumed to half.
The fire of your spleen wastes it;
Good sooth Gossip, I could laugh at thee, and only grieve
I have not some cause of sorrow with thee:
Pthee be temperate, and suffer.
Tic good counsel mistress, receive it so.
Can thou devise to lay them half on me,
And e beare'm willingly.
Would I could, that I might laugh another while:
But you are wise to heed at others harms;
You'll keep you happy in your widowhood.
Not I in good faith, were I sure marriage
Would make me unhappy.
Try, try, you shall not need to wish;
You'll sing another song, and bear a part
In my griefs descant, when you're vexed at heart:
Your second choice will differ from the first:
So oft as widows marry they are accursed.
I, cursed widows are; but if they had all stiff husbands
To tame'm, they'd be quiet enough.
You'll be gone Sir, and see dinner ready.
I care not if I doe mistress, now my stomack's ready;
Yet Isle stay a little and be but to vex you.
When go you, Sir?
I will not go yet.
Ha, ha, ha, thou make me laugh at thee; prithee stay,
Nay then Isle go to vex you.
You have a light heart Gossip.
So should you Woman, would you be ruled by me:
Come, we will dine together, after walk abroad
Unto my suburb garden, where if thou'lt hear,
He read my heart to thee, and thou from thence
Shalt learn to vex thy cares with patience.
welcome still my merchants of bone Speranza;
What's your traffic Bulleyes? What ware deal you in?
Cards, Dice, Bowls, or Pigeon-holes; sort'm
Your selves; either Passage, Novum, or Mumchance?
Say my brave Bursmen, what's your recreation?
Dice mine Host: Is there no other room empty?
Not a hole unstopped in my house, but this my Thrists.
Miscall us not for our money, good mine Host, we are
None of your thrifts; we have escaped that scandal long ago.
Yes, his thrifts we are Jack, though not our own.
Tush, you are young men, it is too soon to thrive yet:
He that gathers young, spends when hoe's old:
It is better to begin ill, and end well, than to
Begin well and end ill: Miserable fathers have
For the most part unthrifty sons; leave not
Too much for your heirs, Boys.
Hee says well i'faith; Why should a man trust
To executors.
As good trust to hangmen as to executors:
Who's in the bowling Alley mine Host?
Honest traders, thrifty lads, they are rubbing on it;
Towardly Boys, every one strives to lye nearest the Mistress.
Give's a bail of Dice.
Here my brave Wags.
We fear no Counters now mine Host, so
Long as we have your bail so ready.
Come, trip.
Up wed's heals.
Down with them.
Now the dice are mine; set me now a fair
Board; a saire passage sweet bones. Bores.
How now my fine Trundletayles;
My wooden Cosmographers:
My bowling Alley in an uproar?
Is Orlando up in arms? I must be stickler;
I am Constable, Justice, and Beadle in mine
Own house, I accuse, sentence, and punish:
Have amongst you; look to my box Boys;
He that breaks the peace, I break his pate
For recompense; look to my box, I say.
A pox o'your box, I shall ne'er be so happy to Reward it better; set me fair; aloft now.
Out.
What wast?
Two Trayes, and an Ace.
Seven still, pox on it; that number of the
Deadly sins haunts me damnably; Come Sir, throw.
Prithee invoke not so, all sinks too fast already.
It will be found again in mine hosts box.
In still, two thieves and choose thy fellow.
Take the Miller.
Have at them i'faith.
For a thief Isle warrant you, who'l you have next.
Two Quitters and a Tray.
I hope we shall have good cheer, when two
otters, and a Tray go to the market.
So ell's whist; they play upon the still pipes now,
The Bull-beggar comes when I show my head,
Silence is a virtue, and I have made'm virtuous,
Let'm play still till they be penny less; pawn
Till they be naked, so they be quiet, welcome,
And welcome.
How now, how now, my roaring Tamberlaine, take
Heed the Sultan comes; And it were not for proffit,
Who would live amongst such Bears? why Vrsa
Major I say, what in Capite Draconis? is there
No hope to reclaim you, shall I never live in quiet
For you?
Good mine Host still'm: civil Gamesters cannot play for'm.
I come amongst you, you maledictious slaves; I'll
Utter you all; some I'll take ready money for, and lay
Up the rest in the stocks: look to my box, I say.
Your box is like your belly mine Host, it
Draws all; now for a suite of apparel.
At whose suit I pray? you're out again with the threes.
Foot, I think my father threw three when I was
Begotten; pox on it, I know now why I am so
Haunted with threes.
Why, I prithee?
I met the third part of a knave as I came.
The third part of a knave, s'foote what thing's that?
Why a Serjants Yeoman, man; the supervisor himself
Is but a whole one, and he shares but a groat in the
Shilling with him.
That's but the third part indeed: but goes he no further.
No, he rests there.
Come, let's give o'er.
I thank you Sir, and so much a looser? there's but
The wast-band of my suite left: now sweet bones.
Twelve at all.
Soft, this dye is false.
False? you doe him wrong Sir, hoe's true to his Master.
Fullum:
I'll be hanged then: whore's Putney then I pray you
It is false, and I'll have my money again.
You shall have cold Iron with your silver then.
I, have at you Sir.
I think hoe's here, Sir.
I am sure hoe's now, Sir.
Hold, hold, and you be Gentlemen hold.
Get you gone Varlets, or there's hold to be taken.
Nay sweet Sir, no bloodshed in my house; I am lord Of misrule, pray you put up, Sir.
S'foote mine Host, where are our cloaks?
Why, this is quarrelling; Make after in time:
Some of your own Crew, to try the weight has
Lifted them; look out I say.
There will ever be thieves in a dicing house
Till thou be hanged I'll warrant thee.
Mine Host, my Cloak was lined through with
Orange tawny velvet.
How, your cloak? Ine'r knew thee worth one.
You're a company of Conycatching rascals;
Is this a suite to walk without a Cloak in?
Uncle, is this the reformation that you promised me?
Cousin, shall I tell thee the truth; I had diminish't
But six pence of the forty shillings by chance meeting with a
Friend, I went to a taylor, bargained for a suite, it
Came to full forty, I tendered my xxxix and a half,
And doe you think the scabby-wristed rascal would
Trust me for six pence.
Your credit is the better, Uncle.
Pox on him, if the taylor had bin a man, I had
Had a fair suite on my back, so venturing for
The tother Tester
You lost the whole Bed-stead.
But after this day, I protest Cousin, you shall never
See me handle those bones again; this day I
Break up school: if ever you call me unthrift after
This day, you doe me wrong.
I should be glad to wrong you so, Uncle.
And what says your father yet, Cousin?
I'll tell you that in your ear.
Nay, I pray you friend bear me company a little
This way, for into this dicing house I saw my good
Son in law enter, and it is odds but he meets his
Uncle here.
You cannot tire me gossip in your company, it is the best
Affliction I have to see you impatient.
I, I, you may make mirth of my sorrow.
We have hunted well, mistress; doe you not see
The hare's in sight?
Did not I tell you so; I, I, there's good counsel
Between you, the tone would go afoot to hell,
The other the horseway.
Mother, I am sorry you have trod this path.
Mother? hang thee wretch, I bore thee not, but
Many afflictions I have borne for thee; were thou
Mine own, I'd see thee stretched a handful, and
Put thee a Cossin into the Cart, ere thou should vex
Me thus.
Were I your own, you could not use me worse than you doe.
I'll make thy father turn thee out for ever, or else
I'll make him wish him in his grave; You'll witness
With me Gossip where I have found him.
Nay, I'll be sworn upon a book of Calico for that.
It shall not need, I'll not deny that I was with my Uncle.
And that shall disinherit thee, if thy father
Be an honest man; thou had bin better to have
Bin borne a viper, and eat thy way through thy
Mothers womb into the world, than to tempt my
Displeasure.
Thou lie Zantippe; it had bin better thou had
Bin pressed to death under two Irish Rugs, than to
Ride honest Socrates thy husband thus, and abuse his
Honest child.
Out Raggamustin, dost thou talk? I shall see thee
In Ludgate again shortly.
Thou lie again, it will be at More-gate, Beldam, where I shall see thee in the Ditch dancing in a Cucking-stoole.
I'll see thee hanged first.
Thou lie again.
Nay Sir, you doe wrong to give a woman so many lies,
She had rather have had twice so many standings, than
One lye.
I'll lye with him I'll warrant him.
You'll be a whore then.
Little less I promise you, if you lye with him.
If you complain upon mine honest Cousin,
And that his father be offended with him,
The next time I meet thee, though it be in the street,
 dirt upon thy velvet Cap;
Nay worse, Plestaine thy Ruff; nay worse than that,
I'll doe thus:
O my hart Gossip, do you see this? Was ever
Woman thus abused?
Me thinks it is good sport y'faith.
I, I am well recompensed to complain to you,
Had you such a kindred.
I would rejoice in it Gossip.
Do so; choose herethen; Oh my hart! But I'll doe
Your eand; Oh that my Nails were not par'd! But I'll doe
Your errand; Will you go Gossip?
No I'll stay awhile and tell 'm out with patience.
I cannot hold a joint still; Dost wisp me, thou
atterdemallion; I'll doe your errands, if I have a
Husband; Oh that I could spit Wild fire!
My heart, Oh my heart! If it does not go pantle,
Pantle, pantle in my belly, I am no honest woman:
But I'll doe your errands.
Kind Gentlewoman, you have some patience.
I have too much Sir.
You may doe a good office, and make your self a Peaceful moderator betwixt me and my angry
Father, whom his wife hath moved to spleen Against me.
Sir, I doe not disallow the kindness your
Consanguinity renders, I would not teach
You otherwise; I'd speak with your Uncle, Sir,
If you'll give me leave.
You may talk with me Sir, in the mean time.
With me would you talk, Gentlewoman?
Yes Sir, with you; you are a brave Unthrift.
Not very brave neither; yet I make a shift
When you have a clean shirt.
I'll be no Pupil to a woman; leave your discipline.
Nay, pray you hear me Sir, I cannot chide.
I'll but give you good counsel; it is not a good
Course that you n.
Yet I must run to'th' end of it.
I would teach you a better, if you'd stay where you are.
I would stay where I am, if I had any money.
In the dyeing house?
I think so too, I have played at Passage all
This while, now I'd go to Hazard.
Dost thou want Money? Thou art worthy to be tattered
Hast thou no wit now thy Money's gone?
It is all the portion I have;
I have nothing to maintain me but my it;
My Money is too little I'm sure.
I cannot believe thy wit's more than thy Money,
A fellow so well limbed, so able to doe good service,
And want.
Why Mistress, my shoulders were not made for a Froc
And a Basket, nor a Coale-sacke neither, no nor
My hands to turn a trencher at a tables side.
I like that resolution well; but how comes it
Then, that thy wit leaves thy body unfurnished?
Thou art very poor?
The fortune of the Dice you see.
They are the only wizards, I confess,
The only fortune-tellers; but he that goes to
Seek his fortune from them, must never hope
To have a good destiny allotted him: yet it is
Not the course that I dislike in thee, but that
Thou can not supply that course, and out
Cross them that cross thee; Were I as thou art
You'd be as beggarly as I am.
I'll be hanged first.
Nay, you must be well hanged ever you can be as I am.
So Sir, I conceit you; were I as well hanged then
As you could imagine, I would tell some rich widow
Such a tale in her ear.
Ha? Some rich widow? By this penniless pocket,
I think it were not the worst way.
I'd be ashamed to take such a fruitless oath:
I say, seek me out some rich widow; promise
Her fair; shoe's apt to believe a young man;
Marry her, and let her estate fly; no matter,
It is charity; Twenty to one some rich Miser raked
t together; this is none of Hercules labours.
Ha? let me recount these articles: Seek her out;
Promise her fair; Marry her; Let her estate fly:
But where should I find her?
The easiest of all: Why man, they are more common
Than Tavern Bushes; two Fairs might be
Furnished every week in London with 'm, though no
Foreigners came in, if the Charter were granted once:
Nay, it is thought, if the Horse-market be removed, that
Smithfield shall be so employed, and then I'll
Warrant you twill be as well furnished with widows as
It was with Sows, Cowes, and old trotting Jade before.
S'foote, if it were, I would be a Chapman; I'd see for
My pleasure, and buy for my love, for money I have none.
Thou shalt not stay the Market; if thoul't be ruled,
I'll find thee out a widow, and help in some of
The rest too; if thou'lt but promise me the last, but
To let her estate fly: for shoe's one I love not, and
I'd be glad to see that revenge on her.
Spend her estate, were it five Aldermens; I'll put you
In security for that, sfoote all my neighbours shall be bound
For me, nay, my kind Sister in law shall pass her word
For that.
Only this I'll enjoin you, to be matrimonially honest
To her for your own healths sake: all other injuries
Shall be blessings to her.
I'll bless her then; I ever drunk so much,
That I was never great feeder; give me drink,
And my pleasure, and a little flesh serves my turn.
I'll show thee the party; What say thou to my self?
Your self, Gentlewoman, I would it were no worse;
I have heard you reputed a rich widow.
I have a lease of thousands at least, Sir.
I'll let out your leases for you, if you'll allow me
The power I'll warrant you.
That's my hope Sir; but you must be honest withal.
I'll be honest with some; if I can he honest with all,
I will too.
Give me thy hand; go home with me, I'll give
The better clothes; and as I like thee then, we will
Go further, we may chance make a blind
Bargain of it.
I can make no blind bargain, unless I be
In your bed, Widow.
No, I bar that Sir, lets begin honestly, how
Ever we end; marry for the waste of my estate
Spare it not; doe thy worst.
I'll doe bad enough, fear it not.
Come, will you walk, Sir.
No Widow, I'll stand to no hazard of blind
Bargains; either promise me marriage, and give
Me earnest in a handfast, or I'll not budge
A foot.
No Sir, are you grown so stout already?
I'll grow stouter when I am married.
I hope thou'lt vex me.
I'll give you cause I'll warrant you.
I shall rail, and curse thee I hope; yet I'd
Not have thee give over neither; for I would
Be vexed; Here's my hand, I am thine, thou art mine,
I'll have thee withal faults.
You shall have one with some, and you have me,
Here's witness, come hither Sir.
Cozin, I must call you shortly; and you
Sitra, be witness to this match; here's Man and Wife.
I joy at mine Uncles happiness, Widow.
I doe forbid the Banes: Alas poor Shagragge,
My Mistress does but gull him; you may
Imagine it to be T welfe-day at night, and the
Bean found in the corner of your Cake, but
Tic not worth a fetch I'll assure you.
You'll let me dispose of my self, I hope.
You love to be merry Mistress; Come, come,
ve him four Farthings, and let him go.
He'll pray for his good Dame, and be drunk;
Why, if your blood does itch that way, we will
Stand together; how think you? I think here
 the sweeter bit, you see this Nap, and you
See this Louse, you may crack of your choice,
If you choose here.
You have put me to my choice then; see, here I choose?
This is my Husband: Thus I begin the Contract.
It is sealed, I am thine; now Cousin fear no black
Storms; if thy father thunder, come to me for shelter.
His word is now a deed, Sir.
I thank you both. Uncle, what my joy conceives,
I cannot utter yet.
I will make black Monday of this: ever I suffer
This disgrace, the kennel shall run with blood and rags,
Sir, I am your apposite.
I have nothing to say to you, Sir; I aim at your Uncle
He has no weapon.
That's all one, I'll take him as I find him:
I have taken him so before you, Sir; Will you be quiet.
Thou shalt take me so too Hodge, for I'll be thy fellow,
Though thy Mistresses Husband. Give me thy hand.
I'll make you seek your fingers among the Dogs,
If you come to me; my Fellow? You lousy
Companion; I scorn thee. S'foote, is it come to this?
Have I stood all this while to my Mistress, an honest,
Handsome, plaine-dealing, serving-Creature; and she to
Marry a Worson Titter Tu Tattere with never a good rag
About him? Stand thou to me, and be my friend; and since
My Mistress has forsaken me:
How now? what's the matter?
It was well you came in good time.
Why man?
I was goingthe wrong way.
But tell me one thing, I apprehend not; Why did
Lay thy Cap upon the swords point?
Dost not thou know the reason of that? why, it was
To save my belly: dost thou think I am so mad to
Cast my self away for ever a woman of'm all,
I'll see 'm hanged first.
Come Roger, will you go?
Well, since there is no remedy, Oh tears bee you my friend!
Nay, prithee Roger doe not cry.
I cannot choose; nay I will steep
Mine eyes in crying tears, and crying weep.
GEntlemen, you're welcome; that once well pronounced
Has a thousand Echoes; Let it suffice, I have spoke
It to the full: here's your affairs, here's your merchandise,
This is your prise, if you can mix your names and gentle
Bloods with the poor Daughter of a Citizen.
I make the passage free, to greet and court,
Traffic the mart of love, clap hands and strike
The bargain through, (she pleased) and I shall like.
It is good ware believe me, Sir, I know that by mine
Own experience; for I have handled the like
Many times in my first wives days, I, by Knighthood,
Sometimes before I was married too; therefore I
Know it by mine own experience.
Well Sir, I know by observation, as much as you doe
By experience; for I have known many Gentlemen
Have taken up such ware as this is, but it has lain
On their hands as long as they lived; this I
Have seen by observation.
I am like to have a couple of fair Chapman:
If they were at my own dispose, I would
Willingly rifle them both at twelve pence a share; they
Would be good food for a new plantation; the
Tone might mend his experience; and the other his
Observation very much.
Sir, let me advise you: I see you want experience,
Meddle no further in this case, it will be the
More credit for your observation; for I find by my
Experience, you are but shallow.
But shallow Sir? Your experience is a little wide;
You shall find I will be as deep in this case as
Your self; my observation has bin, where your
Experience must waite at door; yet I will
Give you the fore Horse place, and I will be in the
Fill's, because you are the elder Tree, and I the
Young Plant; put on your experience, and I will
Observe.
Sweet Virgin, to be prolix and ted ious, fits 
Experience; short words and large deeds are
Best pleasing to women.
So, Sir.
My name is Speedwell, by my fathers Copy.
Then you never served for it it seems.
Yes, sweet Feminine, I have served for it too:
For I have found my nativity suited to my name,
As my name is Speedwel, so have I sped
Well in divers actions.
It must needs be a fair and comely suit then.
You observe very well, sweet Virgin; for his
Nativity is his Doublet, which is the upper part
Of his suite; and his name is in's breeches, for
That part which is his name, he defiles many times.
Your observation is corrupt, Sir; Let me show min
Own Tale; I say, sweet Beauty, my name is
Speedwell, my God-father by his bounty being an
Old Soldier, and having served in the wars as far as
Bulloyne, therefore called my name Godfry; a
Title of large renown; my wealth and wit has
Added to those, the paraphrase of Kinghthood;
So that my name in the full longitude is called
Sir Godfry Speedwell, a name of good experience.
If every quality you have be as large in relation s
Your name Sir, I should imagine the best of them, rather
Than hear them reported.
You say well, sweet Modesty, a good imagination is good,
And shows your good experience.
Nay, if names can do any good, I beseech you observe
Mine; My name is Lambskin, a thing both hot and harmless.
On Sir, I would not interrupt you, because you Should be brief.
My Godfather seeing in my face some notes of disposition,
In my Cradle did give me the title of Innocent, which I
Have practised all my life time; and since my fathers
Decease, my wealth has purchased me in the vanguard
Of my name, the paraphrase of gentility; So that
I am called Master Innocent Lambskin.
In good time; and what Trade was your father, Sir?
My father was of an Occupation before he was a
Tradesman; for, as I have observed in my fathers
And mothers report, they set up together in
Their youth; my father was a Starch-maker, and my
Mother a Laundress; so being partners, they did
Occupy long together before they were married;
Then was I borne.
What, before your father was married?
Truly a little after, I was the first fruits, as they say;
Then did my father change his Copy, and set up
A Brewhouse.
I then came your wealth in, Sir.
Your observation's good; I have carried the Tallies
At my girdle seven years together with much
Delight and observation; for I did ever love to
Deal honestly in the Nick.
A very innocent resolution.
Your experience may see his course education; but to
The purpose, sweet Female; I doe love that
Face of yours.
Sir, if you love nothing but my face, I cannot sell it
From the rest.
You may  his slender observation; sweet Virgin,
I doe love your lower parts better than your face.
Sir you doe interrupt, and thwart my love.
I Sir, I am your Rival; and I will thwart your love
For your love licks at the face, and my love
Shall be Arsy-Versy to yours.
I would desire no better wooing of so bad suitors.
Mistake me not kind Heart.
He calls you Tooth drawer by way of experience.
In loving your face, I love all the rest of your body
As you shall find by experience.
Well Sir, you love me then?
Let your experience make a trial.
No Sir, I'll believe you rather, and I thank you for it.
I love you too, fair Maid, double and treble,
If it please you.
I thank you too Sir; I am so much beholding
To you both; I am afraid I shall never requite it.
Requite one, sweet Chastity, and let it be
Sir Godfry, with the correspondence of your
Love to him; I will maintain you like a Lady,
And it is brave, as I know by experience.
I will maintain you like a Gentlewoman: And
That may be better maintenance than a Ladies,
As I have found by observation.
How dare you maintain that, Sir?
I dare maintain it with my purse, Sir.
I dare cross it with my sword Sir.
If you dare corsse my purse with your sword Sir,
I'llay an action of suspicion of felony to you;
That's flat, Sir.
Nay, pray you Gentlemen doe not quarrel,
Till you know for what.
Oh, no quarrelling, I beseech you Gentlemen!
The reputation of my house is soiled, if any
Uncivil noise arise in it.
Let him but shake his blade at me, and I'll
Throw down my purse, and cry a rape; I
Scorn to kill him, but I'll hang his knighthood,
I warrant him, if he offer assault and battery on
My purse
Nay, good Sir, put up your sword.
You have confined him prisoner forever,
I hope your experience sees hoe's a harmless thing.
Sir, here is young Master Foster requests
To speak with you.
Does he? Prithee request him. Gentlemen,
Please you taste the sweetness of my Garden
A while, and let my daughter bear you company.
Where she is leader, there will be followers.
You send me to the Galleys, Sir; pray you redeem
Me as soon as you can; these are pretty
Things for mirth, but not for serious uses.
Prithee be merry with them then a while,
If but for courtesy; thou hast wit enough;
But take heed they quarrel not.
Nay I dare take in hand to part'm without
Any danger; but I beseech you let me not
Be too long a prisoner. Will you walk Gentlemen.
If it please you to place one of us for your conduct,
Otherwise this old Coxcomb and I shall quarrel.
Sir Godfry, you are the eldest; pray lead the way.
Withal my heart, sweet Virgin; Ah, ha; this place
Promises well in the eyes of experience; Master
Innocent, come you behind.
Right Sir; but I put the Gentlewoman before, and that
Is the thing I desire
And there your experience halts a little.
When I look back, Sir, I see your nose behind.
Then when I look back, your nose stands here.
Sweet Lady, follow experience,
And let observation follow you.
So, now request you Master Foster in, George; but hark;
Does that news hold his own still, that our ships
Are so near return, as laden on the Downs
With such a wealthy freightage.
Yes Sir, and the next Tide purpose to put into the River:
Master Foster, your partner, hath now received more
Such intelligence, with most of the particulars
Of your merchandise, your venture is returned
With treble blessing.
Let him be ever blessed that sent. George now call
In the young man; and hark ye, George, from him
Run to my Partner, and request him to me, this
News I'm sure makes him a joyful Merchant;
For my own part, I'll not forget my vow,
This free addition heaven hath lent my state,
As freely back to heaven I'll dedicate.
I marry Sir, would this were a third Suitor
To my daughter Iane, I should better
Like him than all that's come yet. Now master Foster,
Are your father annd your self yet reconciled?
Sir, it was my business in your courteous tongue
To put the arbitration, I have again
(Discovered by my mother) relieved my poor Uncle,
Whose anger now so great is multiplied,
I dare not venture in the eye of either,
Till your persuasions with fair excuse
Have made my satisfaction.
Mother a pearl, Sir, it is a shrewd task;
Yet I'll doe my best; your father hath so good news,
That I hope't will be a fair motive too't;
But women's tongues are dangerous stumbling blocks
To lye in the way of peace. Now George.
Master Foster's coming, Sir.
I beseech you Sir, let not me see him, till you
Have conferred with him.
Well, well, ever your return to Master Foster, call my
Daughter forth of the garden.
And how does your Uncle, Master Foster?
Sir, so well, 
Same that shortly will overspread  good fortunes.
Why I commend thee still,
He wants no good from thee, no not in report:
Tic well done Sir, and you show duty in it.
Now daughter, Where are your Iusty Suitors?
I was glad of my release, Sir: Suitors call you'm,
 keep dish water continually boiling, but I'd
Sees such Suitors; I have had much ado to
Keepe'm from bloodshed; I have seen for all
The world, a couple of cowardly Curs quarrel
In that fashion, as t'one turns his head, the
Other snaps behind; and as he turns, his
Mouth recoils again: but I thank my pains
For it, I have leagued with'm for a week without
Any farther intercourse.
Well daughter, well; say a third trouble come;
Say in the person of young Master Foster here
Came a third Suitor: how then?
Three's the women's total Arithmetic in
Deed, I would learn to number no farther,
If there was a good account made of that.
I can instruct you so far, sweet Beauty.
Take heed, Sir; I have had ill handfell to day;
Perhaps it is not the fortunate season, you were
Best adjourn your journey to some happier time.
There shall no Augurisme fright my plain
Dealing: Sweet, I fear no hours.
You'll not betray me with love-powder
Nor with Gun-powder neither in faith; yet I'll
Make you yield if I can.
Go, get you together; your father will be coming;
Leave me with your suite to him, ply this your self;
And Iane, use him kindly, he shall be his
Fathers heir I can tell you.
Never the more for that, Father; If I use him
Kindly, it shall be forsomething I like in him.
Self, and not for any good he borrows of his father,
But come Sir,  alke into the Garden; for
That's the field I have best fortune to overcome
My Suitors in.
I fear not that fate neither, but if I walk
Into your Garden, I shall be tasting your sweets.
Taste sweetly and welcome Sir; for there grows
Honesty, I can tell you.
I shall be plucking at your honesty.
By my honesty but you shall not Sir: I'll hold
You a hand full of Penny-royall of that y'faith,
If you touch my honesty there, I'll make you eat
Sorrel to your supper, though I eat Sullenwood my self:
No Sir, gather first Time and Sage, and such wholesome
Herbs; and Honesty and Hearts-ease will ripen
The whilst.
You have fair Roses, have you not?
Yes Sir, Roses; but no Gillyflowers.
Go, go, and rest on Uenus Violets; show he
A dozen of Bachelors Butto Boy; Here comes
His father. Now my kind Partner, have we
Good news?
Sir, in a word, take it; Your full lading and venture
Is returned at sixty fold increase.
Heaven take the glory; A wondrous blessing;
Oh keep us strong against these flowing Tides!
Man is too weak to bound himself below,
When such high waves doe mount him.
O Sir, care and ambition seldom meet,
Let us be thrifty; Titles will faster come,
Than we shall wish to have them.
Faith I desire none.
Why Sir, if so you please, I'lease your cares;
Shall I like a full adventurer now bid you
A certain ready sum for your half traffic.
I, and I'd make you gainer by it too;
For then would I lay by my trouble, and begin
A work which I have promised unto heaven,
A house, a Domus Dei shall be raised,
Which shall to Doomsday be established for succour to
The poor; for in all Ages there must be such.
Shall I bid your venture at a venture.
Pray you doe Sir.
Twenty thousand pounds.
Nay, then you under-rate your own value much;
Will you make it thirty?
Shall I meet you half way?
I meet you there Sir; for five and twenty thousand nds the full ventures yours.
If you like my payment, it is the one half in ready Cash, the other sealed for six Months.
It is Merchant like and fair; George, you
Observe this? Let the contents be drawn.
They shall Sir.
Your hazard is now all past, Sir.
I rejoice at it, Sir, and shall not grudge your gains,
Though multiplied to thousands.
Believe me Sir, I account my self a large Gainer by you.
Much good may it be to you, Sir; but one
Thing at this advantage of my love to you
Let me entreat.
What is it, Sir?
Faith my old fuite, to reconcile those breaches
Twist your kind son and you; Let not the love
He shows unto his Uncle, be any more a bar
To sunder your blessings and his duty.
I would you had enjoined me some great labour
Far your own loves sake, but to that my
 stands fixed against; I'm deaf,
 of them.
y, Sir, if you knew all, you would not waste your
Words in so vain expense: since his last
Reformation, he has flown out again,
And in my sight relieved his Uncle in the
Dicing house; for which, either he shall be no
Father to him, or no husband to me.
Well Sir, go call my Daughter forth of the
Garden, and bid her bring her Friend along
With her, troth Sir, I must not leave you thus;
I must needs make him your son again.
Sir, I have no such thing a kin to me.
Look you Sir, know you this duty?
Not I Sir: hoe's a stranger to me: Save your
Knee, I have no blessing for you.
Go, go to your Uncle Sir; you know where to
Find him, hoe's at his old haunt, he wants
More money by this time; but I think the
Conduit pipe is stopped from whence it ran.
Did he not say, he would beg for you, you'd best
Make use of's bounty.
Nay, good Sir.
Sir, if your daughter cast any eye of favour upon
This Unthrift restraint, hoe's a beggar: Mistress
Iane, take heed what you doe.
I, I, be wise Mistress Iane; doe not you trust
To spleen and time worn to pity, you'll
Not find it so; therefore good Gentlewoman
Take heed.
Nay then you are too impenetrable.
Sir, your money shall be ready, and your bills;
Other business I have none: For thee,
Beg, hang, dye like a slave;
Such blessings ever thou from me shalt have.
Well Sir, I'll follow you; and Sir, be comforted,
I will not leave till I find some remorse;
Mean time let not want trouble you;
You shall not know it.
Su, it is not want I fear, but want of blessing
My knee was bent for; for mine Uncles state,
Which now I dare say out-weighes my fathersfarre,
Confirms my hopes as rich, as with my fathers,
 love excepted only.
Thy Uncles state, how for heavens love.
By his late marriage to the wealthiest widow
That London had, who has not only made him
Lord of her self, but of her whole estate.
Mother-a-pearle, I rejoice in it: this news
Is yet but young?
Fame will soon speak it loud, Sir
This may help happily to make all peace;
But how have you parlayed with my daughter, Sir.
Very well Father: We spake something, but did
Nothing at all; I requested him to pull me
A Catherine Pear, and had not I looked to him
He would have mistook and given me a Popperrin;
And to requite his kindness, I plucked him a Rose,
And he had almost pricked my finger for my pains.
Well said Wag, are there sparks kindled, quench
'M not for me, it is not a fathers roughness,
Nor doubtful hazard of an Uncles kindness
Can me deter; I must to your father.
Where (as a chief affair) I'll once more move,
And if I can return him back to love.
Sir, you see I have made a speedy choice,
And as swift a marriage; be it as it will,
I like the man, if his qualities afflict me,
I shall be happy in it.
I must not distate, what I have helped to make;
 I that joined you.
A good bargain, I hope.
Roger, Whore's your Master?
The Good man of the house is within forsooth.
Not your Master, Sir.
It is hard of digestion: Yes, my Master is within;
Hee masters you therefore I must be
Content: You have longed for Crosses a good
While, and now you are like to be
Farther off them than ever you were; For
I'm afraid, your good husband will leave
You ne'er a cross in the house to bless you with.
Well Sir, I shall be blessed in it: But where is he?
Where he has mistaken the place a little,
Being his wedding-day; he is in nominee,
When he should be in re.
And whore's that?
In your Counting-house; If he were a kind
Husband, he would have bin in another
Counting-house by this time: hoe's tumbling
Over all his money bags yonder; you shall
Hear of him in the bowling Alley again.
Why Sir, all is his, and at his
Dispose; who shall dare to twhart him?
Look where he comes.
How now, Sweete-heart? what hast thou there?
I find much debts belonging to you, Sweet;
And my care must be now to fetch them in;
Ha, ha; prithee doe not mistake thy self,
Nor my true purpose; I did not wed to thrall,
Or bind thy large expense, but rather to add
A plenty to that liberty; I thought by this,
Thou would have stuffed thy pockets full of Gold,
And thrown it at a hazard; made Ducks and Drakes,
And baited fishes with thy silver flies;
Lost, and fetched more: why this had bin my joy;
Perhaps at length thou would have wast'd
My store; why, this had bin a blessing to
Good for me.
Content thee, Sweet, those days are gone,
I, even from my memory;
I have forgot that ever I had such follies,
And I'll not call 'm back: my ears are bent
To keep your state, and give you all content.
Roger, go, call your fellow-servants up to me,
And to my Chamber bring all books of debt;
I will o're-looke, and cast up all accounts,
That I may know the weight of all my cares,
And once a year give up my stewardship.
Now you may see what hasty matching is;
You had thought to have bin vexed, and now
You cannot: You have married a husband,
That, Sir reverence of the title, now being my Master in law,
I doe think he will prove the miserablest, covetous
Rascal, that ever beat beggar from his gate. But
It is no matter; time was when you were fairly
Offered, if you would have took it; you might have had
Other matches y'faith, if it had pleased you; and those
That would have crossed you; I would have sold away
All that ever you had had; have kept two or three
Whores at livery under your nose; have turned you out
In your smock, and have used you like a woman; where
As now, if you'd hang your self, you can have none of
These blessings: but it is well enough, now you must
Take what follows.
I'm new to seek for crosses, the hopes I meant
Turn to despair, and smoother in content.
O Nephew are you come: The welcom'st wish
That my heart has; This is my hinsman, Sweet.
Let him be largely texted in your love,
That all the City may read it fairly;
You cannot remember me, and him forget.
We were alike to you in poverty.
I should have begged that bounty of your love,
Though you had scanted me to have given't him;
For we are one, I an Uncle Nephew,
He an Nephew Uncle, but my Sweet self,
My slow request you have anticipated
With proffered kindness; and I thank you for it.
But how, kind Cozin, does your father use you?
Is your name found again within his books?
Can he read son there?
It is now blotted quite: for by the violent instigation
Of my cruel Stepmother, his Vows and Oaths
Are stamped against me, ne'er to acknowledge me,
Ne'er to call, or bless me as a child;
But in his brow, his bounty, and behaviour
I read it almost plainly.
Cozin, grieve not at it; that father lost at home,
You shall find here; and with the loss of his inheritance,
You meet another amply proffered you;
Be my adopted son, no more my kinsman;
So that this borrowed bounty doe not stray
From your consent.
Call it not borrowed, Sir, it is all your own;
Here before this reverent man I make it known,
Thou art our child as free by adoption,
As derived from us by conception, birth, and
Propinquity; Inheritor to our full substance.
You were borne to bless us both,
My knee shall practise a sons duty
Even beneath sons, giving you all
The comely dues of parents: yet not
Forgetting my duty to my father;
Where ever I meet him, he shall have my knee,
Although his blessing ne'er return to me.
Come then my dearest son, I'll now give thee
A taste of my love to thee; be thou my deputy,
The Factor and disposer of my business;
Keep my accounts, and order my affairs;
They must be all your own; for you, dear Sweet,
Be merry, take your pleasure, at home, abroad;
Visit your neighbours; ought that may seem good
To your own will, down to the Country ride;
For cares and troubles lay them all aside,
And I will take them up, it's fit that weight
Should now lye all on me: take thou the height
Of quiet and content, let nothing grieve thee;
I brought thee nothing else, and that I'll give thee.
Will the Tide never turn? Was ever woman
Thus burdened with unhappy happiness?
Did I from Riot take him, to waste my goods,
And he strives to augment it? I did mistake him.
Spoil not a good Text with a false Comment;
All these are blessings, and from heaven sent;
It is your husbands good, hoe's now transformed
To a better shade, the prodigall's returned.
Come, come, know joy, make not abundance scant;
You plain of that which thousand women want.
So, so, haste home good Lads, and return for the rest.
Would they were covered, George, it is too Public
Blazon of my estate; but it is no matter now;
I'll bring it abroad again ever it belong.
Sir, I acknowledge receipt of my still half debt,
Twelve thousand five hundred pounds; it now remains
You seal those writings, as assurance for the rest,
And I am satisfied for this time.
Pray stay Sir, I have bethought me, let me once
Throw Dice at all, and either be a complete
Merchant, or wrack my estate for ever:
Hear me Sir, I have of wares that are now vendible,
So much as will defray your utmost penny;
Will you accept of them, and save this charge
Of wax and parchment.
He they vendible Sir? I am your Chapman:
What are they, Master Foster?
Broad clothes, Karsies, Cutchineale, such
As will not stay two days upon your hands.
I find your purpose; you'd have your Ware.
Houses empty for the receipt of your full fraught;
I'll be your furtherer, make so your rates, that
I may be no looser.
I have no other end, Sir; let our
Factors peruse and deal for both.
Mine is returned; George, here's a new business,
You and Richard must deal for some commodities
Betwixt us, if you find 'm even gain or but
Little loss, take carriage presently and carry 'm home.
I shall.
Richard, have you any further news yet from our shipping?
Not yet, Sir; but by account from the last, when they
Put from Dover, this Tide should bring them into
Saint Catharins Poole; the wind has bin friendly.
Listen their arrival, and bid the Gunner speak it
In his loud thunder all the City over;
Tingle the Merchants ears at the report
Of my abundant wealth; now go with George.
I shall doe both, Sir.
I must plainly now confess, Master Alderman, I shall gain much by you. The half of your Ship defrays my full cost.
Beshrew me if I grudge it, being my self a Sufficient gainer by my venture, Sir.
Still flows the Tide of my unhappiness,
The stars shoot mischief, and every hour
Is critical to me.
How now woman? wrecked in the heaven of felicitie?
What ail thou?
I think the devil's mine enemy
I hope so too; his hate is better than his friendship.
Your brother, your goodbrother, Sir.
What of him? hoe's in Ludgate again.
No, hoe's in Hye-gate; he struts it bravely,
An Aldermans pace at least.
Why, these are Oracles, doubtful Enigmas!
Why, I'm sure you have heard the news;
Hoe's married forsooth.
How, married? no woman of repute would choose So slightly.
A woman, in whose breast, I had thought had lived
The very quintessence of discretion; and who is it,
Think you? nay you cannot guess, though I should give
You a day to riddle it; it is my Gossip, Man, the rich
Widow of Cornehill.
Fie, fie, it is fabulous.
Are you my husband? then is she his wife;
How will this upstart beggar shoulder up,
And take the wall of you? his new found pride
Will know no eldership.
But wife, my wealth will five times double his, ever
This Tide ebb again; I wonder I hear not the
Brazen Cannon proclaim the Arrival of my
Infinite substance.
But beggars will be proud of little, and shoulder at the best.
Let him first pay his old score, and then reckon;
But that she:
I, that's it mads me too.
Would any woman, less to spite her self,
So much profane the sacred name of wedlock:
A Dove to couple with a Stork, or a Lamb a Viper?
Content thee; Forgive her; she'll doe so no more;
She was a rich widow, a wife he will make her poor.
So Sir, you have closed it well; if so ill it prove,
Leave it to proof, and wish not misery
Unto your enemy look, here he comes.
You say true it is my enemy indeed.
Save you Master Alderman, I have some business with you.
With me, Sir, and most welcome, I rejoice to see you.
Doe you observe, Sir; he will not know you now?
Iockeye's a Gentleman now.
Well fare rich widows, when such beggars flourish;
But ill shall they fare, that flourish o'er such beggars.
Ha, ha, ha.
He laughs at you.
No wonder, woman, he would doe that in Ludgate;
But it was when his kind Nephew did relieve him:
I shall hear him cry there again shortly.
Oysters, new Walfleet Oysters.
The Gentleman is merry.
No, no, no; he does this to spite me; as who Should say, I had bin a fish-wife in my younger days.
Fie, fie, Gentlemen, this is not well;
My ears are guilty to hear such discords.
Look, Master Foster; turn your eye that way;
There's duty unregarded, while envy struts
In too much state: believe me, Gentlemen,
I know not which to chide first.
What Idol kneels that heretic too.
Rise Boy; thou art now my son, and owe no knee
To that unnatural; I charge you rise.
Doe Sir, or turn your adoration that way;
You were kind to him in his tarter'd state;
Let him requite it now.
Doe, doe, we have paid for it aforehand,
I would I were divided in two halfes, so that Might reconcile your harsh division
Proud Sir, this son which you have alienated
For my loves sake, shall by my loves bounty
Ride side by fide in the best Equipage
Your scorns dare pattern him.
I, I, a beggars gallop up and down.
I, it is up now, the next step down.
Ha, ha, I laugh at your envy Sir, my business s to you.
Good Sir, speak of any thing but this.
Sir, I am furnishing some shipping forth,
And want some English traffic, Broad-clothes, Karsics
Or such like, my voyage is to the Straits:
If you can supply me, Sir, I'll be your Chapman.
That I shall soon resolve you, Sir;
Come hither George.
This is the rich Merchant-man;
That's neither grave not wife;
Who will kill a man at Tiburne shortly.
By Carts that may arise; Or if the hangman dye,
He may have his office.
Then you have bargained, George.
And the Warecarryed home, Sir; you must look
To be little gainer; but lose you cannot.
It is all I desire from thence, Sir I can furnish you
With Wares I lately from your brother bought;
Please you go see them, for I would fine divide you,
Since I can win no nearer friendship.
I'll go with you, Sir.
Take your adoption with you, Sir.
I crave but your blessing with me, Sir.
It is my curse then; get thee out of mine eye.
You are a bcame in it, and I'll tear it out ever it
Offend to look on thee.
Go, go, Sir; follow your Vncle-father,
Help him to spend, what thrift has got together;
It will be charity in you to spend,
Because your charity it was to lend.
My charity; you can a virtue name.
And teach the use, yet never knew the same
See wife, here comes Richard.
Now listen, and hear me crowned
The wealthiest London Merchant.
Why dost thou look so sadly?
Why dost not speak; hast lost thy tongue?
I never could speak worse.
Why, thy voice is good enough.
But the worst accent Sir, that ever you heard,
I speak a Screechowles note. Oh you have made
The most unhappiest bargain that ever Merchant did!
Ha? what can so baleful be, as thou would 
To make by this sad prologue? I am no traitor
To consiscate my goods: speak, what ever it be.
I would you could conceit it, that I might not speak it.
Dally not with torments, sink me at once.
Now you've spoke it half; it is sinking I must treat of
Your ships are all sink.
Ho!
O thou fatal Raven; Let me pull thine eyes out for this
Sad croake.
Hold woman; hold prithee; it is none of his fake.
No, no, it is thine, thou wretch; and therefore
Let me turn my vengeance all on thee; thou
Hast made hot haste to empty all my Ware-houses,
And made room for that the sea hath drunk before
Thee.
Undone for ever! Where could this mischief fail
Were not my ships in their full pride at Dover;
And what English Carybda's has the devil dug
To swallow nearer home.
Even in the Mouth, and entrance of the Thames
They were all cast away.
Dam up thy Mouth from any farther
Mischievous relation.
Some men were saved, but not one penny-worth of goods.
Even now thy baleful utterance was choked,
And now it runs too fast; thou fatal Bird no more.
May Serpents breed, and fill this fatal Stream,
And poison her for ever.
O curse not, they come too fast!
Let me curse somewhere, Wretch, or else I'll throw
That all on thee; it is thou, ungodly Slave,
That art the mark unto the wrath of Heaven:
I thrived ever I knew thee.
I prithee split me too.
I would I could; I would I had never seen thee;
For I ne'er saw hour of comfort since I knew thee.
Undone for ever, my credit I have cracked,
To buy a Venture, which the Sea has sok'd;
What worse can woe report.
Yes worse than all,
Thy enemies will laugh, and scorn thy fall.
Be it the worst then; that place I did assign
My unthrifty brother, Ludgate, must now be mine.
Break, and take Ludgate.
Take Newgate rather.
I scorned my child, now he may scorn his father.
Scorn him still.
I will; would he my wants relieve,
 scorn to take what he would yield to give:
My heart be still my friend, although no other;
 scorn the help of either son, or brother,
My portion's begging now; seldom before.
In one sad hour, was man so rich and poor.
GEntlemen, my Father's not within; please
You to walk a turn or two in the garden,
He will not be long.
Your father, Mistress Iane, I hope you have observe in you,
And know our humours; we come not a wooing to your Father.
Experience must bear with folly; Thou art all innocent,
And thy name is Lambskin; grave Sapience guides me,
And I care not a pin for thy squibs, and thy Crackers,
My old dry wood shall make a lusty bonefire, when
Thy greene Chips shall lye hissing in the Chimney
Corner. Remember Mistress, I can make you a Lady by
Mine own experience.
Prithee doe not stand troubling the Gentlewoman
With thy musty sentences, but let her love be laid
Down betwixt us like a pair of Cudgels, and into
Whose hands she thrusts the weapons first, let him
Take up the Bucklers.
A match between us
Must I be stickler then?
We are both to run at the Ring of your setting
Up, and you must tell us who deserves most favour.
But will you stand both at my disposing?
Else let me never stand but in a Pillory.
You love me both you say?
By this hand.
Hand? Zounds by the four and twenty Elements.
Pray spare your oaths; I doe believe you doe
You would not else make all this stir to woo.
Sir Godfry, you are a knight both tough and old,
A rotten building cannot long time hold.
Speedewell, livewell, dye well, and be hanged well.
 your copy well, your experience will not carry it else.
You're rich too, at least your self so say;
What though? you're but a gilded man of clay.
A man of Ginger-bread; y'faith I could find in
My heart to eat him.
Should I wed you, the fire with frost must marry
January and May; I for a younger tarry.
That's l; in truth I'll be thy young Lambskin; thoushalt
Find me as innocent as a sucking Dove: speak, Sweet
, am I the youth in a basket?
You are the sweet youth Sir, whose pretty eyes
Would make me love; but you must first be wise.
Ah, ho, is your coxcomb cut? I see experience must
Board this fair Pinnace: a word in private,
I'll have no words in private, unless I hear too.
Come Gentlemen, we will make few
Winds about it; Merchants in
Bargaining must not, like Soldiers lying at a siege, stay
Months, weeks, days, but strike at the first parley.
Broad-clothes, and Woolls, and other rich Commodities, I
Lately from your brother bought, are all your own.
It is well.
Then be not angry gentle Sir,
If now a string be touched, which hath too long
Sounded so harshly over all the City;
I now would wind it to a musical height.
Good Master Alderman I think that string will still
Ostend mine ear; You mean the jarring
Twixt me and my brother?
In troth the same.
I hate no poison like that brothers name
O Fie, not so.
Uncivil churl, when all his sails were up.
And that his proud heart danced on golden ways:
As heaven be thanked it still does.
Yet Sir, then I being sunk, and drowned in 
Own misery, he would not cast out a poor line
Of thread to bring me to the shore; I had bin
Dead, and might have starved for him.
A better fate Sir, stood at your elbow.
True Sir; this was he that lifted me from want
And misery, whose cruel father for that
Good cast him away; scorning his name and blood;
Lopped from his side this branch that held me dear.
For which hoe's now my son, my joy, my heir,
But for his father hang him.
Fie, fie.
By heaven.
Come, come, live in more charity, he is your brother;
If that name offend, I'll sing that tune no more.
Yonder's my daughter busy with her suitors;
We'll visit them. Now Iane, bid your friends
Welcome.
They must be welcome Sir, that come with you;
To thee ten thousand welcomes still are due.
My sweet Mistress.
Lounds Sir knight, we have stood beating the Bush
And the bird's flown away; this City
Bowler has kissed the Mistress at first cast.
How fare ye Gentlemen, what cheer Sir knight?
An adventurer still Sir, to this new found land.
He sails about the point Sir, but he cannot put in yet.
The wind may turn Sir. A word Master Foster.
You see Sir Speedwell, what Card is turned
Up for trump; I hold my life this spruce
Citizen will forestall the market, Oh
These brisk factors, are notable firkers.
I doubt Sir, he will play the merchant with us.
They both are suitors Sir, yet both shoot wide;
My daughter sure must be your kinsmans bride.
I'll give her a wedding Ring on that condition
And put a Stone in it worth a thousand pound, Sir.
You have my hand and heart too't, be she pleased so.
S'foote, let's show our selves Gallants, or Gallymaw. yes:
Shall  y'd by a Cockney. A word
My ; Doe you see Sir, here be those
That have gon a fishing, and can give you a
.
You were best go fish for better manners, or I
 for les with you.
Zounds are you a striker? Draw, Sir knight.
Not in my house; I pray be quiet Gentlemen.
He dares not do it abroad believe me, Sir.
Now by my life my Boy, for this brave spirit
g thee in mine arms: lose life and limbs
 thou forsake thy love.
Hoe's no Rival here Sir; has struck me,
And we are Gentlemen.
And hear ye, Sir, let him seek out his equals;
For some of us are in danger to make her
A Lady shortly: I know what I speak; what
I speak, I'll doe; yet I'll doe nothing, but
What comes from grave experience.
Speak what you please Sir, hoe's a Gentleman as
Good at either of you both, and shall in lists of
Love for such a bed-fellow, brave him that dares,
And here lay down more gold to win her love,
Than both your states are worth.
Ha? doe you know us, Sir? You grow too bold;
My experience now hath found you;
You were once a tattered fellow, your name is
Foster; have you such gold to give?
Yes, yes, has won it betting at the bowling Alleyes,
O at the Pigeon-holes in the Garden Alleyes.
You are uddy Grooms to upbraid me with that scorn,
Which virtue now gilds over; Pray ye Gentlemen
May I request your names.
Our names are in the Heralds books I warrant you
My name is Innocent Lambskin; and this Knight,
Simply though he stands here, is known to be
Sir Godfry Speedewell.
Well may he Speed Sir; Lambskin and Speedewell,
Ha? Is it so? I think I shall give you a medicine
To purge this itch of love, Sir.
No itch neither Sir, we have no scabs here,
But your self and your Cozin.
Very good Sir, my little Lambskin. I have you
Here in Sheepeskin; look you, it is so y'faith.
See, Master Alderman, these two cracked Gallants
Are in several bonds to my Predecessor
For a debt of full two thousand apiece.
Cozin, fetch me a Sergeant strait.
Yes Sir.
O let him, I have a protection, Sir.
I'll try that, Sir.
A Sergeant? Nay, then experience must work,
Legs be strong and bold; when Sergeants waite
At feasts, the cheere's but cold.
I'll shift for one.
Knight, knight; S'foote if an errand Knight
Run away, I were an arrand Ass to tarry,
And be caught in the lime-bush: I love the
Wench well; but if they have no hole to
Place me in, but the hole in the Counter,
I'll be goue and leave'm; that's flat
You have scared the suitors from the mark, Sir.
I am glad on it Sir; they are but such as seek
To build their rotten state on you, and with your
Wealth to underprop their weakness;
Believe me, reverend Sir, I had much rather
You'd venture that my Cousin might call you father.
We will talk of that anon; See Sir,
Here comes your wife, the theme
Of all her e, with goodness mixed, the happy
Woman that was never vexed; you're welcome
Ms Foller.
I thank ye Sir.
Wife, your two debtors were here but now;
And Lambskin; A Wolf could not have torn
 Lambskin worse, than the bare name
 Sergeant: the very thought made them both
 take their heals and run away.
Alas, they are poor and lean, and being so;
 them not till they are fatter.
At thy girdle, Sweet, hangs the keys, to
 the prison doors or let them loose:
 my intent only in way of mirth to
 them from the presence of Mistress Iane,
That our adopted son might have no bar
Unto his love.
The match is fair; and were that knot once tied,
 send some Augels to attend the bride.
Sir, here's your factor.
Are the wares ready.
Yes, and delivered Sir, to Master Foster's servants,
Who conveyed them in Carts to the Custom.
House, there to be shipped; but going with them,
Sir, I met ill news.
Ill news? what first?
Old Master Foster's ships so richly laden,
By strange misfortune, Sir, are cast away.
Now heaven forbid!
Oh me!
How? cast away; where?
It is impossible; they rid at Dover safe,
When he out-bought my full share in the fraught,
And paid me down near thirty thousand pounds
In wares and money.
Which had he not done, you had lost your venture:
By Master Foster's own appointment Sir, they weighed
Their Anchors up, and so to come for London;
But by a merciless storm they all were
Swallowed, even in the Theames mouth; yet
The men were saved, but all the goods were lost.
O my poor father! This loss will break his back.
Ha? What's that to you? if in my favour you'll
Sit warm, then bury all love to him,
Nay duty, hear you Sir? What shed'st thou tears
For him, that had no care to see thy heart drop
Blood? he was unnatural, and heaven hath
Justly now rewarded him.
It is a most strange Fate; he needs would buy my
Part at any rate, he cared not what; and now ell's lost,
Greedy desire he swallowed, and now is swallowed:
It is but his hire; and I'll not pity it, no more
Than he, in his abundance, did my misery.
I grieve for my poor Gossip, his good wife,
She never met good fortune all her life,
And this will break her heart-strings:
In good sooth I'll go and comfort her.
In good sooth you shall not,
Nor him, nor her at this time, gentle wife;
He scorned me in his height, now being poor,
If that he needs my help, he knows my door.
Sir, we will for this time leave you, at fitter leisure,
We will have this marriage talked of.
At your own good pleasure.
Come wife; Go not to see your father, Sir, I charge you.
Iane, bring your friends toth'dore.
I'll help my father, though my self grow poor.
Whore's my Factor?
Here Sir.
What, are the square stones, and timber
Brought as I appointed?
Yes, Sir, and the workmen, that daily ply the
Work, are in number fourscore at least.
My vows flew up to heaven, that I would make
Some pious work in the brass book of Fame,
That might till Dooesday lengthen out my name.
Near Norton Folgae therefore have I bought
Ground to erect this house, which I will call
And dedicate, Sat Maria's Hospital;
And when it is finished, o'er the gates shall stand
In capital letters, these words fairly graven
For I have given the work and house to heaven
And called it, Domus Dei, Gods house;
For in my zealous faith I know full well,
Where good deeds are, there heaven it self doth dwell.
Good Sir, resolve not thus; return again,
Your debts are not so great, that you should yield
Your body thus to prison unconstrained.
I will not trust the iron hearts of men;
My credit's lost, my wealth the Sea has swallowed,
Wracked at my door, even in the mouth o'th'Thames.
Oh my misfortune! never man like me
Was so thrown down, and cast to misery.
Dear Sir, be patient.
I prithee get thee gone, and with thy diligence
Assist thy Mistress to keep that little left, to
Help her self, whilst here in Ludgate I secure
My body from Writs, Arrests, and Executions,
Which, well I know, my cruel Creditors will
Thunder on me. Go, get thee gone; if what
Is left they'll take, doe thou agree;
If not, I am here resolved to stay and dye.
I'll doe my best Sir, to procure your peace.
Do so, Come Sir, I yield my self your prisoner,
You are the Keeper of this Ludgate.
Yes Sir, your name is registered among the prisoners.
So, I have seen the fair outside of this tomb before;
This goodly apple has a rotten core.
As all prisons have, Sir.
I prithee bar me of no privilege due to a free
Citizen; Thou know me well?
Yes Master Foster, and I sorrow for your losses,
Yet doubt not but your son and brother.
O speak not of them! doe not kiss and kill me:
I have no son nor brother that esteems me,
And I for ever hate their memory:
Prithee no more; I am come sick into a
Bad Inn, and look for worse attendance,
I have taken a surfeit of misfortunes, and here
Must swallow pills
With poison to recur me: I am sea-sicke, Sir,
And heave my hands to heaven; ne'er to so
Low an ebb was Foster driven.
There be some Fees to pay, Sir, at your coming in.
So, so, if this old Wall-nut-tree, after all this
Cudgelling, have but one cluster left, thou shalt
Have that too; if not, take off these leaves that
Cover me; pull off these white locks; rend them from
My head, and let me in my woes be buried.
Alas, Sir, this house is poor.
I think no less;
For rich men seldom meet with such distress,
Well, well, what book must I read over now?
What servile Oar must I be tied to here,
Slave-like to tug within this christian Galley?
Sir, being the youngest prisoner in the house,
You must beg at the iron grate above,
As others doe for your relief and their's.
For a beggar to beg, Sir, is no shame;
And for the iron grate, it bears an emblem
O firon-hearted Creditors, that force men lye
In loathsome prisons thus to starve and die.
Who would you speak with, Sir?
Oh, cry you mercy; it is his son:
I'll leave them.
O torment to my soul! What make thou here?
Cannot the picture of my misery
Be drawn, and hung out to the eyes of men,
But thou must come to scorn and laugh at it?
Dear Sir, I come to thrust my back under your load,
 make the buden lighter.
Hence from my sight, dissembling villain; go,
Thine Uncle sends defiance to my woe,
And thou must bring it: Hence, thou Basilisk,
That kil'st me with mine eyes: nay, never kneel;
These scornful mocks more than my woes I feel.
Alas, I mock ye not; but come in love,
And natural duty Sir, to beg your blessing;
And for mine Uncle
Him, and thee I curse,
Pl starve, ever I eat bread from his purse,
Or from thy hand; Out villain, tell that Cur,
Thy barking Uncle, that I lye not here
Upon my bed of riot, as he did,
Coverd with all the villainies, which man
Had ever woven; tell him I lye not so,
It was the hand of heaven struck me thus low,
And I doe thank it. Get thee gone, I say,
Or I shall curse thee, strike thee; Prithee away;
Or if thou'lt laugh thy fill at my poor state,
Then stay, and listen to the prison grate,
And hear thy father, an old wretched man,
That yesterday had thousands, beg and cry,
To get a penny: Oh my misery!
Dear Sir, for pity hear me.
Upon my curse I chargeno nearer come,
I'll be no father to so wild a Son.
O my abortive fate!
Why for my good am I thus paid with hate?
From this sad place of Ludate here I freed
An Uncle, and I lost a father for it;
Now is my father here, whom if I succour,
I then must lose my Vncle's love and favour.
My Father once being rich, and Uncle poor,
I him relieving was thrust forth of doors;
Baffled, reviled, and disinherited:
Now mine own Father here must beg for bread,
Mine Uncle being rich, and yet if I
Feed him, my self must beg. Oh misery,
How bitter is thy taste! yet I will drink
Thy strongest poison; fret what mischief can,
I'll feed my Father, though, like the Pelican,
I peck mine own breast for him.
Bread, bread, one penny to buy a
Loaf of bread for the tender mercy!
O me my shame! I know that voice full well;
I'll help thy wants, although thou curse me still.
Bread, bread; some Christian man send back
Your charity to an number of poor prisoners;
One penny for the tender mercy.
The hand of heaven reward you, gentle Sir,
Never may you want, never feel misery;
Let blessings in unnumbred measure grow,
And fall upon your head where ever you go.
O happy comfort! curses to the ground
First struck me, now with blessings I am crowned.
Bread, bread, for the tender mercy; one
Penny for a loaf of bread.
Pl buy more blessings; Take thou all my store,
I'll keep no coin; and see my father poor.
Good Angels guard you, Sir, my prayers shall be
That heaven may bless you for this charity.
If he knew me, sure he would not say so;
Yet I have comfort if by any means
I get a blessing from my fathers hands:
How cheap are good prayers? A poor penny buys
That, by which man up in a minute flies,
And mounts to heaven.
Oh me, mine Uncle sees me!
Now Sir, what make you here so near the prison?
I was going, Sir, to buy meat for a poor bird I have,
That sits so sadly in the Cage of late,
I think he'll dye for sorrow.
So Sir, your pity will not quit you pains, I fear me;
I shall find that bird I think to be that churlish
Wretch, your father, that now has taken
Shelter here in Ludgate; Go too, Sir, urge me
Not, you'd best; I have given you warning:
Fawn not on him nor come not near him,
If you'll have my love.
Las Sir, that Lamb
Were most unnatural that should hate the Dam.
Lamb me no Lambs, Sir.
Good Uncle; alas you know when you lay here.
I succoured you, so let me now help him.
Yes, as he did me,
To laugh and triumph at my misery;
You freed me with his gold, but against his will:
For him I might have rotted, and lain still;
So shall he now.
Alack the day!
If him thou pity, it is thine own decay:
Bread, bread, some charitable man remember
The poor prisoners; bread for the render mercy,
One penny.
O listen Uncle; that's my poor father's voice.
There let him howl; Get you gon, and come not near him
O my soul! what tortours dost thou feel?
rth near shall find, a son so true,
 forced to be unkind.
Well, go thy ways, thou pattern of true virtue;
My  full, I could even weep, and much ado I had to forbear,
To hear a brother begging in a Jail,
That but ever while spread up a lofty sail
As proudly as the best: Oh, it were sin
Unpardonable in me, should I not succour him?
Yes, I will do it, yet closely it shall be done,
And he not know from whence his comforts come.
What ho, Keeper there, a word I pray.
What's your pleasure, Sir.
What's he that at the grate there begged even now.
One Master Foster, Sir, a decayed Citizen new
Come in. Cry you mercy Sir, you know him
Better than my self, I think.
I should doe, knew he me as I would know
Him: prithee take him from the grate,
And that no more he stand to beg,
There's ten pound to pay his score, and
Take off all his wants; if he demand
Who sends it, tell him, it is thine own free
Hand to lend him money.
Well Sir, I shall.
Spend what he will, my purse shall pay it all;
And at his parting hence, the poorest prisoner,
And all free Citizens that live in Ludgate,
Shall bless his coming in; I'll for his sake
Doe something now, that whilst this City stands,
Shall keep the Foster's name engraven so high,
As no black storm shall cloud their memory.
Heaven bless your purpose, Sir.
Sister, there's no way to make sorrow light
But in the noble bearing; be content;
Blows given from heaven are our due punishment;
All ship wrecks are no drownings, you see buildings
Made fairer from their Ruins; he that I married,
The brother to your husband, lay, you know,
On the same bed of misery, yet now
Hoe's ranked with the best Citizens.
O you were borne to wealth and
Happiness; I, to want and scorn!
Come, I will work my husband; stay this grief.
The longest sorrow finds at last relief.
Now Sir, your business.
Marry mistress here are two creatures
Se able to make one man, desires to speak
With you.
What are they, know their names.
Nay, I know that already; the one is a
Thing that was plused into the
World, by the head and shoulders to be
Wondered at, and it is called a knight; the other
Is a coach-horse of the same over-ridden race;
And that's a foolish Gentleman.
O, they are my old debtors, Speedwell and Lambskin
Go call them in, and my gentle sister
Comfort your self and my imprisoned brother,
To whom commend me give to him this gold,
What good I can, I'll doe for him be bold.
May heavenly blessings guard you from all ill:
Never was woman vexed as I am still.
Now good Sir Godfry and Master Innocent.
I put my innocent case into your hands
Mistress, as a simple country Client thrusts his money
Into a Lawyers, who stands upon no great
rmes to take it.
We come about the old business, the sickness of the purse Lady
And they'd be loath to keep their beds i'th'counter
Mistress; they are afraid of Sergeants, Master Lambskin,
Knows that Mace is a binder.
No truly it makes me loose for I never smell it, though
It be two streets off, but it gives me a stool presently,
I, you have bin a loose liver always,
It is time to look to you.
Fair Lady, we are your debtors, and owe you money.
Experience tells us that our bonds are forfeit,
For which your husband threatened to arrest us; my
Shoulders love no such clippings, I love
Tobacco, but would be loath to drink in Woodstreet.
Pipes; some money we will pay ere we go hence:
I speak you see with grave experience.
I know it well, Sir.
Had not your husband (when we went about fowling
For the Aldermans daughter) driven away the Bird
We might have bidden you to a better breakfast;
But now you must take what we can set before you.
I am content to doe so: you shall find
Nor me nor my husband carry a griping mind.
Now Cousin, whore's your Uncle.
He's hard at hand, I saw him coming
With the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.
Zounds Knight, if the Mayor come
The shoulder clappers are not far off.
O fear not, I'll be your surety Sir.
Doe you not smell Poultry ware, Sir Godfry?
Most horribly, I'll not endure the sent on it.
Upon my trust none here shall doe you wrong;
What is his business with the Alderman?
About the entertainment of the King
That means to visit London.
Saw you your sad father?
I did; would I might never see man more
Since he so hates my sight; the prison door,
Which gapes for comers in, that mouth of hell,
Shut me out with a churlish cold farewell;
After my fathers most unnatural part
Was plaid on miseries stage, mine Uncle comes
In thunder on me, threatening with black storms
To nail me to the earth, if I relieved my
Poor old father.
Here's my master now Gentlemen.
O Gentlemen, you're both welcome,
Have you paid this money on your bonds yet?
Not yet Sir, but here they come like honest Gentlemen
To take some order for it: good Sweetheart
Shall it be put to me.
Doe as you please;
In all thy deeds th'rt governed with good stars,
Therefore if thou cry'st peace, I'll not raise wars.
Even order it how thou wilt.
I thank ye Sir; then tell me Gentlemen,
What present money can you pay?
Two hundred pound we can lay down.
And take up seven times as much if we knew
Where to get it; but there's our lamentable ease:
Mistress, if you strip us any nearer, you'll strip the
Skin and all I'll assure you,
We will shear no sheep so close.
No sheep forsooth, but a poor innocent Lambskin.
You should be a Calfe by your white face.
All your two thousand pound Gentlemen we quit,
For your two hundred: go pay the money to
My Cousin, and receive your two bonds concealed:
Say Sir, are ye content.
Wife I must stand to the arbitrament.
Go Cozin, receive their
Money, and Sir make them drink.
I'll make them drink if they will; come
Gallants empty your bags, and I'll bombast
Your bellies; this lean Gentleman looks
As if he had no lining in' guts, I could
Take him by the leg and hurl him into
The dog-house.
How now sweet wife, what art thou
Musing on?
I must come a wooing to you Sir.
A wooing sweet, for what?
For your brother; Oh it is unmeet
For souls framed by one square to grow uneven,
It is like a war amongst the great lights of heaven,
One cannot lose his beauty, but the other
Suffers eclipse; so brother against brother.
Would have me kiss him that would kill me.
Would you kill a man lying at your feet:
Doe good for ill.
Thy songs are Angels tunes, and on thy wings
I'll fly with thee to heaven.
Thou speak as I would have thee;
His debts I have justly weighed, and find them light.
The easier then tan off.
Thou say most right,
But I of purpose keep aloof to try
My kinsman; whom I spied most dolefully
Hovering about the grate, where his father cried
With piteous voice, for bread; yet did I chide
And railed against the Boy; but my heart says
(How ere my tongue) it was drowned in tears,
To see such goodness in a son.
Such wheels in childrens bosom seldom run.
I'll lay a wager wife, that this two hundred pound
Paid by these foolish fellows, will by the Boy
Be given his father.
Troth would it might:
In doing me such wrong he does me right
Ludgate was once my dwelling, and to show
That I true feeling of his misery knew;
Albeit long since blown o'er; so thou'lt consent,
Within that place I'll raise some monument,
Shall keep our names alive till doomsday.
I gladly shall agree.
To any act that tends to charity.
Come, whore's Mr. Foster? Oh you lose time Sir,
Not meeting fortune that comes to kiss you.
The Lord Mayor and Aldermen stay at the Guildhall,
Expecting you, as well to set down order
Touching the entertainment of the King,
As to elect you for the following year a Sheriff of London.
Their loves out-strip my merit.
Yet since they lay that load on me, I'll bear it,
And wait in scarlet on my liege and King.
But pray resolve me, Master Alderman,
Why makes the King this visitation?
Troth Sir, to honour me, I thank his highness,
Who with my Lord the Cardinal comes along
To see the dedication of my House,
Built for the weary travellers to rest in;
Where stands three hundred beds for their relief,
With meat, drink, and some money when they part,
Which I'll give freely with a willing heart.
A pious, worthy, and religious act:
Come Sir, to the Guildhall; Wife, look to your
Kinsman, watch him near; but doe not hinder
Hi if he relieve his father: Come Master Alderman,
With such sweet incense up your offerings fly,
I'll build one Altar more to charity.
COme, come, be merry Sir; doe as mourners doe at
Funerals, wear your Hat in your eyes, and
Laugh in your heart.
I have no such fat legacy left me,
To teach me how to play the hypocrite.
No? Why look ye Sir, you shall want neither
Meat, drink, money, nor any thing that the
House affords, or if any thing abroad like ye,
Sir, here's money, send for what you will Sir:
Nay, you shall beg no more at the Grate neither.
Ha? Is not this Ludgate?
Yes Sir.
A Jail, a prison, a tomb of men locked up;
Alive and buried?
It is what you please to call it.
O, at what crevice then hath comfort
Like a Sun-beame crept? for all the doors
And windows are of Iron, and barred to keep
Her out; I had a limb cut from my body
Dear to me as life; I had a son and brother too;
Oh grief, they both would give me poison first
In gold, before their hollow palms ten
Drops should hold of natures drink, cold water,
But to save my life one minute; whence
Should pity come, when my best friends doe.
Beat it from this room.
No matter Sir, since you have good meat set
Before you, never ask who sent it; if heaven
Provide for you, and make the fowls of the
Ayre your. Cators, feed you fat, and be thankful,
And so I leave you.
The Keeper is your friend, and powers true balm
Into your smarting wounds; therefore dear
Husband endure the dressing with patience.
O wife, my losses are as numberless as the
Sea's sands that swallowed them. And shall
I in reckoning them, my sad griefs multiply?
You may Sir, but your dim eyes so thick with tears doe run.
You cannot see from whence your comforts come,
Besides your debts being truly counted cannot
Be great.
But all my wealth and state lies in the seas Bottom.
It again may rise.
Oh never.
Good Sir, so hope, for I from heaven espy
An arm to pluck you from this misery.
Sir, there's one without desires to speak with you.
Go send him in; none comes to doe me good
My wealth is lost, now let them take my blood.
Ha? what art thou? Call for the Keeper there
And thrust him out of doors, or locke me up.
O it is your son, Sir.
I know him not:
I am no King, unless of scorn and woe,
Why kneel'st thou then; why dost thou mock me so?
O my dear father, hither am I come
Not like a threatening storm to increase your wrack
For I would take all sorrows from your back
To lay them all on my own.
Rise mischief, rise, away and get thee gone.
O if I be thus hateful to your eye
I will depart, and wish I soon may dye;
Yet let your blessing, Sir, but fall on me.
My heart still hates thee.
Sweet husband.
Get you both gon;
That misery takes some rest that dwells alone;
Away thou villain.
Heaven can tell, ache but your finger, I to make it
Well, would cut my hand off.
Hang thee, hang thee.
Husband.
Destruction meet thee, turn the key there ho.
Good Sir: I'm gone, I will not stay to grieve you:
Oh knew you (for your woes) what pains I feel,
You would not scorn me so. See Sir, to cool
Your heate of burning sorrow I have got
Two hundred pounds and glad it is my lot
To lay it down, with reverence at your feet;
No comfort in the world to me is sweet,
Whilst thus you live in moan.
Stay.
Good troth Sir, I'll have none on it back,
Could but one penny of it save my life.
Yet stay and hear him; Oh unnatural strife,
In a hard fathers bosom.
I see mine error now: oh can there grow
A Rose upon a Bramble? did theree'r flow
Poison and health together in one tide?
I'm borne a man; reason may step aside.
And lead a father's love out of the way:
Forgive me, my good Boy, I went astray;
Look, on my knees I beg it; not for joy
Thou bring this golden rubbish, which I spurn
But glad in this, the heaven's mine eye balls turn,
And fix them right to look upon that face
Where love remains with pity, duty, grace.
Oh my dear wronged boy!
Gladness o'rwhelmes my heart with joy I cannot speak
Crosses of this foolish world.
Did never grieve my heart with mints more
Than it is now grown light,
With joy and comfort of this happy sight.
Yet wife, I disinherited this boy.
Your blessings all I crave.
And that enjoy for ever, evermore; my
Blessings fly, to pay thy virtues, love and charity.
Here comes your brothers wife,
Welcome dear sister.
I thank you; how fare you brother?
Better than your husband's hate could wish me,
That laughs to see my back with sorrows bow:
But I am rid of half my ague now.
Had you an ague then?
Yes, and my heart had every hour a fit.
But now 'tas left me well, and I left it.
O, it is well Cozin, what make you hear I pray?
To support a weak house falling to decay.
It is well, if you can do it, and that the timber
You under-prop it with be all your own.
Hark Cousin, whore's your Uncles money?
Faith Aunt it is gone, but not at dice,
Nor drabbing.
Sir, I believe with your Uncles gold your father
You relieve.
You are saved believing so, your beliefe's true.
You cut large thongs of that's another due
And you will answer't ill: now in good troth
I laugh at this jest, much good doe them both:
My wager I had won, had I but laid.
What has my poor boy done, that you have
Made so much blood rise in's cheeks?
Nothing dear brother, indeed ell's well:
The course that he has run I like and love,
Let him hold on the same;
A sons love to a father none can blame;
I will not leave your brother's on heart
Till I have beat it soft with my entreats.
Twill ne'er be music it is so full of frets.
Frets make best music: strings the higher
Racked sound sweetest.
And sound nothing when they are cracked,
As is his love to me, and mine to him.
I hope you both in smoother streams shall swim:
He's now the Sheriff of London, and in counsel
Set at the Guildhall, in his scarlet Gown
With Mayor and Aldermen, how to receive the King,
Who comes to see Master Bruins Hospital
To morrow consecrated by the Cardinal,
And old Saint Maria's Spittle, here by Shoreditch.
I sister, he and you may sit about what you will;
Heaven I'm sure prospers it, but I am ever crossed;
You have bin bound for thee great voyages,
Yet ne'er run a ground; maid, wife, and widow,
And wife again; have spread full and fair sails,
No wrecks you ever did dread, nor ever felt any;
But even close a shore, I'm sunk, and midst of
All my wealth made poor.
You must thank heaven.
I doe indeed, for all.
Sister, that hand can raise that gives the fall.
Master Foster, the new Sheriff your brother
Is come to Ludgate, and I am come in haste
To know your pleasure, if you would see him.
I'll see a fury first, hence, clap to the door I prithee.
Why, it is your brother Sir.
Father let's fly the thunder of his rage.
Stand valiantly, and let me bear the storm, all hurts
That are, and ruins in your bosoms I'll repair.
Whore's the Keeper, go Sir, take
My Officers, and see your prisoners
Presently conveyed from Ludgate unto
Newgate, and the Counters.
I shall Sir.
Let the Constables of the Wards assist you,
Go, dispatch and take these with you; how now,
What make thou here thou Catiffe? had come
Thou to stitch his wounds that seeks to cut
My Throat, dare thou in despite relieve this
Dotard?
Get thee from my sight, thou devil in red;
Come thou in scarlet pride to tread on thy poor
Brother in a Jail, Is there but one small conduit
pipe that runs could water to my comfort, and
Would thou cut off that thou cruel man?
Yes, I'll stop that pipe that thou moist pining sit,
When drops but fell on me, thou poysond'st it:
Thou thrus'st a sons name from thy cruel breast,
For clothing of his Uncle; now that Uncle
Shall thrust him naked forth for clothing thee,
Banished for ever from my wealth and me.
Thou can not be to nature so uneven,
To punish that which has a pay from heaven;
Pirty I mean, and duty; Would thou strike?
Wound me then, that will kill thee if I can,
That no brother, and I'll be no man.
Thou rave.
How can I choose? thou make me mad,
For shame thou should not make these white hairs sad;
Churl, beat not my poor boy, let him not lose
Thy love for my sake, I had rather bruise
My soul with torments for a thousand years, could
 live them, rather than salt tears thy
Malice draw from him; see here's thy gold,
Tell it, none's stole, my woes can ne'er be told.
O  Is nature quite forgot?
Choke with thy dung-hill muck, and vex me not.
No, keep it, he perhaps, that money stole
From me, to give it thee, for which to vex thy
Soul,  turn him forth of doors, make him
Thy he, of Iayes, miseries, curses, and despair;
For here I dherit him of all.
No matter, lands to him in heaven will fall.
 Husband.
other.
Dear Uncle.
1 line
And , the dive thumbs stop thine ears.
I'll make thee wash those curses off with tears.
Keeper, away with him out of my sight,
And doe Sir, as I charged you.
Yes Sir; I will.
Poor tyranny; when Lions weak Lambs kill.
How now wife, art vexed yet?
Never so well content, believe me Sir;
Your mildness wears this mask of cruelty well.
I'm glad they are gone, mine eyes with rain did swell,
And much ado they had from pouring down:
The Keeper knows my mind, Wife I have paid
My brothers debts; and when he's out of door:
To march to Newgate, he shall be set free.
O let me kiss thee for this charity;
But for your Cozin Sir.
He's my lives best health,
The Boy shall not miscarry for more wealth
Than London Gates look safe up every night,
My breath in black clouds flies, my thoughts
Are white.
Why from Ludgate doe you remove prisoners?
This is my meaning wife;
I'll take the prison down and build it new,
With Leads to walk on, Rooms large and fair:
For when my self lay there, the noisome ayre,
Choaktup my spirits, and none better know,
What prisoners feel, than they that taste the woe.
The workmen are appointed for the business,
I will have it dispatcht before it is thought on.
In good deeds I will walk hand in hand with you,
There is a fair tenement, adjoining close to the Gate
That was my fathers, I'll give it freely, take it down,
And add so much ground to the work.
It is fairly given.
Thy soul on prisoners prayers shall mount to heaven:
The Plummers and the Workmen have surveyed the ground
From Paddington; from whence I'll have laid pipes
Long to London to convey sweet water into Ludgate;
From fresh Springs: when charity tunes the, pipe the
Poor man sings.
How now Keeper.
The prisoners are removed Sir.
What did you with my brother?
As you commanded Sir, I have discharged him.
How did he meet that unexpected kindness?
Troth Sir, as a man or'ecome twixt grief and gladness,
But turning to his son, he fetched a sigh
So violent, as if his heart would break,
And silent, wept, having no power to speak.
Alas good old man, some sweet bird must sing,
And give his sorrows present comforting.
Not yet, I'll wrack his sorrows to the height,
And of themselves they'll then sink softly down;
Keeper, go thou again after my brother,
Charge in my name him and his son to appear
Before the King, to whom I will make known
Their wrongs against me; showing just cause
To disinherit both by course of law. Be gone.
I am gone Sir.
Come Wife.
What's your meaning Sir?
Thou shall know that anon.
The heavens oft scowl, clouds thicken, winds blow high,
Yet the brightest Sun clears all, and so will I.
O! welcome is all love, our peoples shouts
In their hearts language, make our benvenues,
Most high and sovereign; we return all thanks
Unto our loving Citizens, chiefly to you Sir,
Whose pious work invites our Majesty to royallize
This place with our best presence, accompanied with this
Reverend Cardinal; would we might, after many broils,
End our days in these religious toils;
We would work most faithfully; but bounteous Sir,
How doe you call your buildings?
Unless it please your Majesty to change it,
I call it, Domus Dei.
The house of God, it is too good to change, pray you proceed.
These are my ends to all distressed Christians,
Whose travails this way bends the hospital,
Shall free souccour be, for three days, and three nights
Sojourn, for diet, and lodging, both sweet, and
Satisfying; and if their need be such, as much in
Coin, as shall for three days more defray their
Further travail; this unto heaven, be you
Testator, good my Liege, and witness with me, noble
Gentlemen, most free and faithfully, I dedicate.
An honourable work, and deserves large memory.
It is a good example, it is pity it is no better followed.
But say Sir, now in some future age, perhaps some two or three hundred year behind us, this place
Intended for a use so charitable, should bee
Unhallowed again, by villainous inhabitants; say whores,
In the stead of christians, and your hospitable
Tenements, turned intostewes; would not this grieve
You in your grave?
If my grave were capableof grief: sure it would Sir.
Prithee be a false Prophet.
I will, if I can, my Lord.
Let now our Heralds in the streets proclaim,
The title, and office, of this hospital;
Make known to all distressed travellors, that
We will accept this charitable house, this Domus Dei:
Shall be their free fojourne, as is proposed.
What are these peticioners?
Each hath a knee for duty, the other for petition,
Rise, your dutie's done, your petitionsshall need
No knees, so your intents be honest, does
None here know them?
Yes my good Lord, there's now a wonder in your sight.
A wonder, Master Sheriff, you mean for beauty.
No my Leg, I would not so boast mine
Own wife, but it is a wonder that excels beauty.
A wonder in a woman; What is it I prithee?
Patience my Liege, this is a woman that
Was never vexed.
You may boast it largely; it is a subjects happiness
Above a Qenes; Have you suites to us?
I am the suppliant plaintiff, royal Henry
From me their griefs take their original.
What art thou?
Even what your Grace shall please to make of me;
I was the son to this distressed father, until he
Took his paity off, and threw me from his love,
Then I became son to mine Uncle by adoption,
Who likewise that hath tan away again,
And thrown me back to poverty; never was
Son so oct betwixt two fathers, yet knows
Not one, for still the richest does despise his heir,
And I am back expulst into despair.
This may your vices cause.
For that I come to your impartial censure for a doom.
We hear, speak on, we know the parties,
ach one relate his grief, and if it lye in us,
We will yield relief; it is first requisite that we
Know of you Sir, the cause of this your Sons disinheritance
Before I understood his virtuous mind,
Or weighed his disposition to be kind,
I did that froward work; This now great man,
Was an unthrifty wretch, a prodigal then.
And I disdained to know his brotherhood,
Denied relief to him; this child kind and good
Against my contradiction, did him relieve, as his
Distressed Uncle, at this I chide; for bade,
Still hee holds on his course,
He grows more kind, and he in wasting worse;
My rage continued as it had begun,
And in that rage I threw away my son.
The like plead I, my Lord: for when my state
Had raised itself by an uncertain fate,
I took this out-cast child, made him my own,
As full and free, as I my self had sown
The seed that brought him forth; for this my love,
His obliged duty presently did prove
A traitor to my trust, against my will,
Succouring that foe, which I did love so ill,
Only for hating him; my charity being thus
Abused, and quit with injury, what could I then
But as his father erst, so I again might throw
Him from my love? for worse is love abused
Then new borne hate, and should be so refused:
I did a fathers part, if it were bad,
Beam him for both, there I my pattern had.
You fall betwixt two pillars Sir, is it not so?
Unhappy fate, my Lord, yet thus I plead:
For this my fathers hate I might deserve,
I broke his precepts, and did unchildly swerve
From his commission, I to my Uncle gave
What was my fathers, striving thereby to save
His fallen repute; he raged, I did it still,
Yet must consesse as it was well, it was ill,
Well in my love, me thought, ill to my fate:
For I thereby ruined my own estate,
But that mine Uncle throws me forth of door
For the same cause he took me in before,
Beats forest, against my bosom; iftwere good
To  from a father for an Uncles food,
In laws of love and nature, how much rather
Might I abridge an Uncle for a father?
Charitie's, a virtue generally stands,
And should dispersed be through all men's hands.
Then would you keep't alone; for when your heir
I first adopted was, charity was there:
How er'rs your judgement then? seeing you see
What was good in you, makes sin in me;
You'll say my father did it, oh throw away
That soul excuse; let not discretion stray
So far a side; if custom lawful make,
Then sin were lawful for example sake;
Nor were these wasted goods only your own,
Since part was mine having adoption;
Then doe him right, my Lord, yet doe no wrong,
For where my duty fai'ld my love was strong.
With an impartial ear we have heard your
Loving story, it is both fair and honest.
O let me now anticipate your Grace,
And casting off the shadow of a face,
Show my hearts true figure, how have I strived
To make this forced counterfeit long lived,
And now it bursts; comeinto my heart,
I have two jewels here shall never part
From my loves eye watch, two worthy to be filed,
On times best record; a woman and a child,
Now Sir, to you I come, we must be friends,
Though envy wills not so, yet love contends
Against envy and her forces; my young years
Say I must offer first, a peace in tears.
O let my shame my bosoms center break!
Love is to young it coyes, but cannot speak.
You bless mine eyes with objects that become
The theater of Kings to look upon.
The keeper is discharged Sir, your debts are paid,
And from the prison yare a new free man made:
Theres not a Creditor can ask you onght,
As your son did form, so have I bought
Your liberty with mine, and to increase it more,
Because I know bare liberty is poor
Without assistance: to raise your state again,
The thirds of mine are yours, say you Amen.
No, not to that, you are kind brothers now,
Divide by halfes that love, and I'll allow.
Thou art only wise in virtue, as thou set down,
So let it be, half my estate's your own.
It whole redownes again, for I am yours;
Forget this minute my forgetful hours.
O, they are buried all Sir.
This union's good, such league should ever be in brotherhood.
Yet without boast, my Liege, let me relate
One small thing more, remorse of my own state,
And my dear brothers worse succession;
For that we both have prisoners been in one
Selfsame place of woe, and felt those throws
That Ludgate yields; my charity bestows
Some alms of comfort: Keeper you can speak it.
And many hundreds more Sir, you have reedified
And built it fair, adding more ground to it,
And by pipes of lead from Paddingtun, drawn
Water thither, free for all prisoners, lodgings
Likewise free, and a hundred pounds yearly, to make
Them fues for better comfort: all this is almost finished:
A worthy work, the better being done in the Founders ere,
Not left unto succession.
O my good Lord, I ever keep in mind an English
Sentence, which my tutor is, and teaches me to act my
Charity  mine  full is
Performance, when the Benefactor's dead.
What is it I prithee?
This my good Lord, women are forgetful.
Children unkind, Executors covetous, and take what they find,
If any man ask where the dead goods became,
The Executor swears he dyed a poor man.
You have prevented well, so has this good Alderman,
I wish you many Scholars.
You make some doubt of me in this Sir;
Did you not say that women were forgetful,
You have vexed her now Sir, how doe you answer that?
No my Lord, she's exempt from the proverb.
No my Lord, I'll help it better, I doe confess
That women are forgetful, yet ne'er the less
I am exempt, I know my fate, and find
My dear husband must not leave me behind,
But I must go before him, and it is said,
The grave's good rest when women go first to bed.
Thanks for thy excuse good wife, but not thy love
To fill my grave before me, I would not live to see that day.
Prithee no more, I had rather be angry than flattered.
You have a wonder Master Sheriff, a prizelesse jewel.
Many jewels my good Lord; a brother, wife, and child,
For this I would have strove even with a father,
 ere rough storms did in my browsappeare,
Within my bosom it was always clear.
I give him to you now Sir.
I take him, and to him back doe give,
All that my self behind in state shall leave.
And all that you gave me, I doe bestow,
So in one hour become full heir to two.
I claim a third by this bonds virtue,
See as a third father, thou art heir to those.
I will not go to him father on any of these conditions.
You shall have love to boot too, sweet Iane.
Nay, and y play booty, I dare not trust you.
What shall I say,  and ,
Tied in a True-loves Knot, ne'er to part.
I marry Sir, these are better conditions than the
Inheritance of three fathers; let me have
Love in Esse, let lands follow in Posse:
Now I'll have thee as fast as the Priest
Can dispatch us, let him read as fast as he can.
The liveliest harmony that ere I heard;
All instruments compared to these sweet tunes,
Are dull and harsh; I joy to see so good a child.
A woman wonder, brothers reconciled;
You worthy Sir, did invite us to a feast,
We'll not forget it, but will bee your guest,
Because we'll view these wonders o'er again,
Whose records doe deserve a brazen Pen,
But this above the rest, in golden text,
Shall be insculpt; A Woman never Vexed.

Boatswain.
Here Master: What cheer?
Good: Speak to the Mariners: fall too't, yearly, or we run our selves a ground, bestir, bestir.
Heigh my hearts, cheerely, cheerely my harts: yare, yare: Take in the toppe-sale: Tend to the Masters whistle: Blow till thou burst thy wind, if room enough.
Good Boatswain have care: whore's the Master? Play the men.
I pray now keep below.
Where is the Master, Boson?
Do you not hear him? you mar our labour,
Keep your Cabins: you do assist the storm.
Nay, good be patient.
When the Sea is: hence, what cares these roarears for the name of King? to Cabin; silence: trouble vs not.
Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.
None that I more love then my self. You are a Counsellor, if you can command these Elements to silence, and work the peace of the present, wee will not hand a rope more, use your authority: If you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and make your self ready in your Cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap. Cheerely good hearts: out of our way I say.
I have great comfort from this fellow: methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him, his complexion is perfect Gallows: stand fast good Fate to his hanging, make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage: If he be not borne to bee hanged, our case is miserable.
Down with the top-Mast: yare, lower, lower, bring her to Try with Maine-course. A plague 
upon this howling: they are louder then the weather, or our office: yet again? What do you here? Shall we give ore and drown, have you a mind to sink?
A pox of your throat, you bawling, blasphemous incharitable Dog.
Work you then.
Hang cur, hang, you whoreson insolent Noisemaker, we are less afraid to be drowned, then thou art.
I'll warrant him for drowning, though the Ship were no stronger then a Nutt-shell, and as leaky as an vnstanched wench.
Lay her a hold, a hold, set her two courses off to Sea again, lay her off.
All lost, to prayers, to prayers, all lost.
What must our mouths be cold?
The King, and Prince, at prayers, let's assist them, for our case is as theirs.
In am out of patience.
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards,
This wide-chopt-rascall, would thou might lye drowning the washing of ten Tides.
He will be hanged yet,
Though every drop of water swear against it.
And gape at widst to glut him.
Mercy on vs.
We split, we split, Farewell my wife, and children.
Farewell brother: we split, we split, we split.
Let's all sink with' King
Let's take leave of him.
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of Sea, for an Acre of barren ground: Long heath, Browne firs, any thing; the wills aboue be done, but I would fine dye a dry death.
If by your Art (my dearest father) you have
Put the wild waters in this Toe; allay them:
The sky it seems would power down stinking pitch,
But that the Sea, mounting to the welkins cheek,
Dashes the fire out. Oh! I have suffered
With those that I saw suffer: A brave vessel
(Who had no doubt some noble creature in her)
Dashed all to pieces: O the cry did knock
Against my very heart: poor souls, they perished.
Had I bin any God of power, I would
Have sunk the Sea within the Earth, or ere
It should the good Ship so have swallowed, and
The fraughting Souls within her.
Be collected,
No more amazement: Tell your piteous heart there's no harm done.
O woe, the day.
No harm:
I have done nothing, but in care of thee
(Of thee my dear one; thee my daughter) who
Art ignorant of what thou art nought knowing
Of whence I am: nor that I am more better
Then Prospero, Master of a full poor cell,
And thy no greater Father.
More to know
Did never meddle with my thoughts.
It is time
I should inform thee farther: Lend thy hand
And pluck my Magic garment from me: So,
Lye there my Art: wipe thou thine eyes, have comfort,
The direful spectacle of the wrack which touched
The very virtue of compassion in thee:
I have with such provision in mine Art
So safely ordered, that there is no soul
No not so much perdition as an hair
Betide to any creature in the vessel
Which thou heard cry, which thou saw sink: Sit down,
For thou must now know farther.
You have often
Begun to tell me what I am, but stopped
And left me to a bootless Inquisition,
Concluding, stay: not yet.
The hour's now come
The very minute bids thee op thine care,
Obey, and be attentive. Can thou remember
A time before we came unto this Cell?
I doe not think thou can, for then thou was it not
Out three years old.
Certainly Sir, I can.
By what? by any other house, or person?
Of any thing the Image, tell me, that
Hath kept with thy remembrance.
It is far off:
And rather like a dream, then an assurance
That my remembrance warrants: Had I not
Four, or five women once, that tended me?
Thou had; and more Miranda: But how is it
That this lives in thy mind? What see thou else
In the dark-backward and Abisme of Time?
If thou remember ought ere thou came here,
How thou came here thou moist.
But that I doe not.
Twelve year since (Miranda) twelve year since,
Thy father was the Duke of Millaine and
A Prince of power:
Sir, are not you my Father?
Thy Mother was a piece of virtue, and
She said thou wast my daughter; and thy father
Was Duke of Millaine, and his only heir,
And Princess; no worse Issued.
O the heavens,
What foul play had we, that we came from thence?
Or blessed was it we did?
Both, both my Girl.
By fowle-play (as thou say) were we heaved thence,
But blessedly help hither.
O my heart bleeds
To think of the teene that I have turned you to,
Which is from my remembrance, please you, farther;
My brother and thy uncle, called Anthonio:
I pray thee mark me, that a brother should
Be so perfidious: he, whom next thy self
Of all the world I loved, and to him put
The manage of my state, as at that time
Through all the signories it was the first,
And Prospero, the prime Duke, being so reputed
In dignity; and for the liberal Arts,
Without a parallel; those being all my study,
The Government I cast upon my brother,
And to my State grew stranger, being transported
And rapt in secret studies, thy false uncle
(Dost thou attend me?)
Sir, most heedfully.
Being once perfected how to grant suites, how to deny them: who to advance, and who
To trash for ouer-topping; new created
The creatures that were mine, I say, or changed 'em,
Or else new formed 'em; having both the key,
Of Officer, and office, set all hearts in th state
To what tune pleased his ear, that now he was
The Ivy which had hid my princely Trunk,
And sucked my verdure out on it: Thou attend not?
O good Sir, I doe.
I pray thee mark me:
I thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
To closeness, and the bettering of my mind with that, which but by being so retired
Ore-priz'd all popular rate: in my false brother
Awaked an evil nature, and my trust
Like a good parent, did beget of him
A falsehood in it's contrary, as great
As my trust was, which had indeed no limit,
A confidence sans bound. He being thus Lorded,
Not only with what my revenue yielded,
But what my power might else exact. Like one
Who having into truth, by telling of it,
Made such a sinner of his memory
To credit his own lie, he did believe
He was indeed the Duke, out of the Substitution
And executing the outward face of Royalty
With all prerogative: hence his Ambition growing:
Dost thou hear?
Your tale, Sir, would cure deafness.
To have no Schreene between this part he plaid,
And him he plaid it for, he needs will be
Absolute Millaine, Me (poor man) my Library
Was Dukedom large enough: of temporal roalties
He thinks me now incapable. Confederates
(so dry he was for Sway) with King of Naples
To give him Annual tribute, doe him homage
Subject his Coronet, to his Crown and bend
The Dukedom yet vnbow'd (alas poor Millaine)
To most ignoble stooping.
Oh the heavens:
Mark his condition, and the event, then tell me
If this might be a brother.
I should sin
To think but Nobly of my Grand-mother,
Good wombs have borne bad sons.
Now the Condition.
This King of Naples being an Enemy
To me inveterate, hearkens my Brothers suit,
Which was, That he in lieu of the premises,
Of homage, and I know not how much Tribute,
Should presently extirpate me and mine
Out of the Dukedom, and confer fair Millaine
With all the Honours, on my brother: Whereon
A treacherous Army levied, one mid-night
Fated to the purpose, did Anthonio open
The gates of Millaine, and in the dead of darkness
The ministers for the purpose hurried thence
Me, and thy crying self.
Alack, for pity:
I not remembering how I cried out then
Will cry it ore again: it is a hint
That wrings mine eyes too't.
Hear a little further,
And then I'll bring thee to the present business
Which now's vpon's: without the which, this Story
Were most impertinent.
Wherefore did they not
That hour destroy vs?
Well demanded, wench:
My Tale provokes that question: Dear, they durst not,
So dear the love my people bore me: nor set
A mark so bloody on the business; but
With colours fairer, painted their foul ends.
In few, they hurried vs aboard a Bark,
Bore vs some Leagues to Sea, where they prepared
A rotten carcass of a Butt, not rigged,
Nor tackle, sail, nor mast, the very rats
Instinctively have quit it: There they hoist vs
To cry to the Sea, that roared to vs; to sigh
To the winds, whose pity sighing back again
Did vs but loving wrong.
Alack, what trouble
Was I then to you?
O, a Cherubin
Thou was it that did preserve me; Thou did smile,
Infused with a fortitude from heaven,
When I have decked the sea with drops full salt,
Under my burden groaned, which raised in me
An vndergoing stomach, to bear up
Against what should ensue.
How came we a shore?
By providence divine,
Some food, we had, and some fresh water, that
A noble Neopolitan Gonzalo
Out of his Charity, (who being then appointed
Master of this design) did give vs, with
Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries
Which since have steeded much, so of his gentleness
Knowing I loved my books, he furnished me
From mine own Library, with volumes, that
I prize aboue my Dukedom.
Would I might
But ever see that man.
Now I arise,
Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow:
Here in this Island we arrived, and here
Have I, thy Schoolmaster, made thee more profit
Then other Princess can, that have more time
For vainer hours; and Tutors, not so careful.
Heuens thank you for it. And now I pray you Sir,
For still it is beating in my mind; your reason
For raising this Sea-storme?
Know thus far forth,
By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune
(Now my dear Lady) hath mine enemies
Brought to this shore: And by my prescience
I find my Zenith doth depend upon
A most auspicious star, whose influence
If now I court not, but omit; my fortunes
Will ever after droop: Hear cease more questions,
Thou art inclined to sleep: it is a good dullness,
And give it way: I know thou can not choose:
Come away, Servant, come; I am ready now,
Approach my Ariel. Come.
All hail, great Master, grave Sir, hail: I come
To answer thy best pleasure; be it to fly,
To swim, to dive into the fire: to-ride
On the curled clouds: to thy strong bidding, task
Ariel, and all his Quality.
Hast thou, Spirit,
Performed to point, the Tempest that I bad thee.
To every Article.
I boarded the Kings ship: now on the Beak,
Now in the Waste, the Deck, in every Cabin,
I flamed amazement, sometime I'd divide
And burn in many places; on the Top-mast,
The Yards and Bore-spritt, would I flame distinctly,
Then meet, and join. Ioues Lightning, the precursors
Of th dreadful Thunder-claps more momentary
And fight out-running were not; the fire, and cracks
Of sulphurous roaring, the most mighty Neptune
Seem to besiege, and make his bold waives tremble,
Yea, his dread Trident shake.
My brave Spirit,
Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
Would not infect his reason?
Not a soul
But felt a Fever of the mad, and plaid
Some tricks of desperation; all but Mariners
Plunged in the foaming brine, and quit the vessel;
Then all a fire with me the Kings son Ferdinand
With hair vp-staring (then like reeds, not hair)
Was the first man that leapt; cried hell is empty,
And all the Devils are here.
Why that's my spirit:
But was not this ny shore?
Close by, my Master.
But are they (Ariell) safe?
Not a hair perished:
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
But fresher then before: and as thou bad me,
In troops I have dispersed them about the Isle:
The Kings son have I landed by himself,
Whom I left cooling of the Ayre with sighs,
In an odd Angle of the Isle, and sitting
His arms in this sad knot.
Of the Kings ship,
The Mariners, say how thou hast disposed,
And all the rest of the Fleet?
Safely in harbour
Is the Kings ship, in the deep Nook, where once
Thou called me up at midnight to fetch dew
From the still-vext Bermoothes, there she's hid;
The Mariners all under hatches stowed,
Who, with a Charm joined to their suffered labour
I have left asleep: and for the rest of the Fleet
(Which I dispersed) they all have met again,
And are upon the Mediterranean Flote
Bound sadly home for Naples,
Supposing that they saw the Kings ship wrecked,
And his great person perish.
Ariel, thy charge
Exactly is performed; but there's more work:
What is the time of the day?
Past the mid season.
At least two Glasses: the time twixt six &amp; now
Must by vs both be spent most preciously.
Is there more toil? Since you dost give me pains,
Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,
Which is not yet performed me.
How now? moody?
What is it thou can demand?
My Liberty.
Before the time be out? no more:
I prithee,
Remember I have done thee worthy service,
Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, served
Without or grudge, or grumblings; thou did promise
To bate me a full year.
Dost thou forget
From what a torment I did free thee?
No.
Thou dost: &amp; think it much to tread ye Ooze
Of the salt deep;
To run upon the sharpe wind of the North,
To doe me business in the veins of the earth
When it is baked with frost.
I doe not Sir.
Thou least, malignant Thing: hast thou forgot
The foul Witch Sycorax, who with Age and Envy
Was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her?
No Sir.
Thou hast: where was she born? speak: tell me:
Sir, in Argier.
Oh, was she so: I must
Once in a month recount what thou hast bin,
Which thou forgetst. This damned Witch Sycorax
For mischiefs manifold, and forceries terrible
To enter humane hearing, from Argier
Thou know was banished: for one thing she did
They wold not take her life: Is not this true?
I, Sir.
This blew eyed hag, was hither brought with child,
And here was left by the Sailors; thou my slave,
As thou reportst thy self, was then her servant,
And for thou wast a Spirit too-delicate
To act her earthy, and abhord commands,
Refusing her grand hefts, she did confine thee
By help of her more potent Ministers,
And in her most vnmittigable rage,
Into a cloven Pine, within which rift
Imprisoned, thou did painefully remain
A dozen years: within which space she died,
And left thee there: where thou did vent thy groans
As fast as Mill-wheeles strike: Then was this Island
(Save for the Son, that he did littour here,
A frekelld whelp, hag-borne) not honoured with
A humane shape.
Yes: Caliban her son.
Dull thing, I say so: he, that Caliban
Whom now I keep in service, thou best know
What torment I did find thee in; thy groans
Did make wolves howl, and penetrate the breasts
Of euer-angry Bears; it was a torment
To lay upon the damned, which Sycorax
Could not again undo: it was mine Art,
When I arrived, and heard thee, that made gape
The Pine, and let thee out.
I thank thee Master.
If thou more murmur, I will rend an Oak
And peg-thee in his knotty entrails, till
Thou hast howled away twelve winters.
Pardon, Master,
I will be correspondent to command
And doe my spryting, gently.
Doe so: and after two days
I will discharge thee.
That's my noble Master:
What shall I doe? say what? what shall I doe?
Go make thy self like a Nymph of the Sea,
Be subject to no sight but thine, and mine: invisible
To every eye-ball else: go take this shape
And hither come in it: go: hence
With diligence.
Awake, dear hart awake, thou hast slept well,
Awake.
The strangeness of your story, put
Heaviness in me.
Shake it off: Come on,
We'll visit Caliban, my slave, who never
Yields vs kind answer.
It is a villain Sir, I doe not love to look on.
But as it is
We cannot miss him: he do's make our fire,
Fetch in our wood, and serves in Offices
That profit vs: What hoe: slave: Caliban:
Thou Earth, thou: speak.
within. There's wood enough within.
Come forth I say, there's other business for thee:
Come thou Tortoise, when?
Fine apparition: my quaint Ariel,
Hark in thine ear.
My Lord, it shall be done.
Thou poisonous slave, got by ye devil himself
Upon thy wicked Dam; come forth.
As wicked dew, as ere my mother brushed
With Ravens feather from unwholesome Fen
Drop on you both: A Southwest blow on ye,
And blister you all ore.
For this be sure, to night thou shalt have cramps,
Side-stitches, that shall pen thy breath up, Urchins
Shall for that vast of night, that they may work
All exercise on thee: thou shalt be pinched
As thick as hony-combe, each pinch more stinging
Then Bees that made 'em.
I must eat my dinner:
This Island's mine by Sycorax my mother,
Which thou take from me: when thou came first
Thou stroakst me, &amp; made much of me: would give me
Water with berries in it: and teach me how
To name the bigger Light, and how the less
That burn by day, and night: and then I loved thee
And showed thee all the qualities of the Isle,
The fresh Springs, Brine-pits; barren place and fertile,
Cursed be I that did so: All the Charms
Of Sycorax: Toads, Beetles, Bats light on you:
For I am all the Subjects that you have,
Which first was min own King: and here you sty-me
In this hard Rock, whiles you doe keep from me
The rest of the Island.
Thou most lying slave,
Whom stripes may move, not kindness: I have used thee
(Filth as thou art) with humane care, and lodged thee
In mine own Cell, till thou did seek to violate
The honour of my child.
Oh ho, oh ho, would it had been done:
Thou did prevent me, I had peopel'd else
This Isle with Calibans.
Abhorred Slave,
Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
Being capable of all ill: I pitied thee,
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
One thing or other: when thou did not (Savage)
Know thine own meaning; but would gabble, like
A thing most brutish. I endowed thy purposes
With words that made them known: But thy wild race
(Tho thou did learn) had that in it, which good natures
Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
Deservedly confined into this Rock, who had
Deserved more then a prison.
You taught me Language, and my profit on it
Is, I know how to curse: the red-plague rid you
For learning me your language.
Hag-seed, hence:
Fetch vs in Fuel, and be quick you're best
To answer other business: shrug thou (Malice)
If thou neglectst, or dost unwillingly
What I command, Isle rack thee with old Cramps,
Fill all thy bones with Aches, make thee roar,
That beasts shall tremble at thy din.
No, 'pray thee.
I must obey, his Art is of such power,
It would control my Dams god Setebos,
And make a vassal of him.
So slave, hence.
Come unto these yellow sands, and then take hands:
Curt sied when you have, and kissed the wilde waives whist:
Foot it featly here, and there, and sweet Sprights bear the burden.
Hark, hark, bough waugh: the watch-Dogges bark, bowgh-wawgh.
Hark, hark, I hear, the strain of strutting Chanticlere cry cockadidle-dowe.
Where should this Music be? In th air, or the earth?
It sounds no more: and sure it waits upon
Some God' of the Island, sitting on a bank,
Weeping again the King my Fathers wrack.
This Music crept by me upon the waters,
Allaying both their fury, and my passion
With it's sweet ayre; thence I have followed it
(Or it hath drawn me rather) but it is gone.
No, it begins again.
Full fathom five thy Father lies.
Of his bones are Corrall made:
Those are pearls that were his eyes,
Nothing of him that doth fade,
But doth suffer a Sea-change
Into something rich, &amp; strange:
Sea-Nimphs hourly ring his knell.
Hark now I hear them, ding-dong bell.
The Ditty do's remember my drowned father,
This is no mortal business, nor no found
That the earth owes: I hear it now aboue me.
The fringed Curtains of thine eye advance,
And say what thou see yond.
What is it a Spirit?
Lord, how it looks about: Believe me sir,
It carries a brave form. But it is a spirit.
No wench, it eats, and sleeps, &amp; hath such senses
As we have: such. This Gallant which thou see
Was in the wrack: and but hoe's something stained
With grief (that's beauties canker) you might call him
A goodly person: he hath lost his fellows,
And strays about to find 'em.
I might call him
A thing divine, for nothing natural
I ever saw so Noble.
It goes on I see
As my soul prompts it: Spirit, fine spirit, Isle free thee
Within two days for this.
Most sure the Goddess
On whom these airs attend: Vouchsafe my prayer
May know if you remain upon this Island,
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here: my prime request
(Which I do last pronounce) is (O you wonder)
If you be Maid, or no?
No wonder Sir,
But certainly a Maid.
My Language? Heavens:
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Were I but where it is spoken.
How? the best?
What were it thou if the King of Naples heard thee?
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples: he do's hear me,
And that he do's, I weep: my self am Naples,
Who, with mine eyes (never since at ebb) beheld
The King my Father wrack't.
Alack, for mercy.
Yes faith, &amp; all his Lords, the Duke of Millaine
And his brave son, being twain.
The Duke of Millaine
And his more braver daughter, could control thee
If now it were sit to do it: At the first sight
They have changed eyes: Delicate Ariel,
Isle set thee free for this. A word good Sir,
I fear you have done your self some wrong: A word.
Why speaks my father so ungently? This
Is the third man that ere I saw: the first
That ere I sighed for: pity move my father
To be inclined my way.
O, if a Virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, Isle make you
The Queen of Naples.
Soft sir, one word more.
They are both in eiders powers: But this swift business
I must uneasy make, least too light winning
Make the prize light. One word more: I charge thee
That thou attend me: Thou dost here usurp
The name thou ow'st not, and hast put thy self
Upon this Island, as a spy, to win it
From me, the Lord on it.
No, as I am a man.
Ther's nothing ill, can dwell in such a Temple,
If the ill-spirit have so fair a house.
Good things will strive to dwell with it.
Follow me.
Speak not you for him: hoe's a Traitor: come,
Isle manacle thy neck and feet together:
Sea water shalt thou drink: thy food shall be
The fresh-brooke Mussels, withered roots, and husks
Wherein the Acorn cradled. Follow.
No,
I will resist such entertainment, till
Mine enemy he's more power.
O dear Father,
Make not too rash a trial of him, for
Hoe's gentle, and not fearful.
What I say,
My foot my Tutor? Put thy sword up Traitor,
Who make a show, but dare not strike: thy conscience
Is so possessed with guilt: Come, from thy ward,
For I can here disarm thee with this stick,
And make thy weapon drop.
Beseech you Father.
Hence: hang not on my garments.
Sir have pity,
Isle be his surety.
Silence: One word more
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee: What,
An advocate for an Impostor? Hush:
Thou think there is no more such shapes as he,
(Having seen but him and Caliban:) Foolish wench,
To the most of men, this is a Caliban,
And they to him are Angels.
My affections
Are then most humble: I have no ambition
To see a goodlier man.
Come on, obey:
Thy Nerues are in their infancy again.
And have no vigour in them.
So they are:
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up:
My Fathers loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wrack of all my friends, nor this mans threats,
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this Maid: all corners else of the Earth
Let liberty make use of: space enough
Have I in such a prison.
It works: Come on.
Thou hast done well, fine Ariell: follow me,
Hark what thou else shalt do me.
Be of comfort,
My Fathers of a better nature (Sir)
Then he appears by speech: this is unwonted
Which now came from him.
Thou shalt be as free
As mountain winds; but then exactly do
All points of my command.
To the syllable.
Come follow: speak not for him.
Beseech you Sir, be merry; you have cause,
(So have we all) of joy; for our escape
Is much beyond our loss; our hint of woe
Is common, every day, some Sailors wife,
The Masters of some Merchant, and the Merchant
Have just our Theme of woe: But for the miracle,
(I mean our preservation) few in millions
Can speak like vs: then wisely (good Sir) weigh
Our sorrow, with our comfort.
Prithee peace.
He receives comfort like cold porridge.
The Visitor will not give him ore so.
Look, hoe's winding up the watch of his wit, By and by it will strike.
Sir.
One: Tell.
When every grief is entertained,
That's offered comes to the entertainer.
A dolor.
Dolor comes to him indeed, you have spoken truer then you purposed.
You have taken it wiselier then I meant you should.
Therefore my Lord.
Fie, what a spend-thrift is he of his tongue.
I pre-thee spare.
Well, I have done: But yet
He will be talking.
Which, of he, or Adrian, for a good wager,
First begins to crow?
The old Cock.
The Cockerel.
Done: The wager?
A Laughter.
A match.
Though this Island seem to be desert.
Ha, ha, ha.
So: you're paid.
Uninhabitable, and almost inaccessible.
Yet
Yet
He could not misse't.
It must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate temperance.
Temperance was a delicate wench.
I, and a subtle, as he most learnedly delivered.
The ayre breathes upon vs here most sweetly.
As if it had Lungs, and rotten ones.
Or, as it were perfumed by a Fen.
Here is every thing advantageous to life.
True, save means to live.
Of that there's none, or little.
How lush and lusty the grass looks?
How greene?
The ground indeed is tawny.
With an eye of greene in it.
He misses not much.
No: he doth but mistake the truth totally.
But the rarety of it is, which is indeed almost beyond credit.
As many vouched rareties are.
That our Garments being (as they were) drenched in the Sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new dyed then stained with salt water.
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not say he lies?
I, or very falsely pocket up his report.
Me thinks our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in Africa, at the marriage of the kings fair daughter Claribel to the king of Tunis.
It was a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.
Tunis was never graced before with such a Paragon to their Queen.
Not since widow Dido's time.
Widow? A pox of that: how came that Widdow in? Widow Dido!
What if he had said Widower Aeneas too?
Good Lord, how you take it?
Widow Dido said you? You make me study of that: She was of Carthage, not of Tunis.
This Tunis Sir was Carthage.
Carthage?
I assure you Carthage.
His word is more then the miraculous Harp.
He hath raised the wall, and houses too.
What impossible matter will he make easy next?
I think hee will carry this Island home in his pocket, and give it his son for an Apple.
And sowing the kernels of it in the Sea, bring forth more Islands.
I.
Why in good time.
Sir, we were talking, that our garments seem now as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now Queen.
And the rarest that ere came there.
Bate (I beseech you) widow Dido.
O Widow Dido? I, Widow Dido.
Is not Sir my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it? I mean in a sort.
That sort was well fished for.
When I wore it at your daughters marriage.
You cram these words into mine ears, against the stomach of my sense: would I had never
Married my daughter there: For coming thence
My son is lost, and (in my rate) she too,
Who is so far from Italy removed,
I ne'er again shall see her: O thou mine heir
Of Naples and of Millaine, what strange fish
Hath made his meal on thee?
Sir he may live,
I saw him beat the surges under him,
And ride upon their backs; he trod the water
Whose enmity he flung aside: and breasted
The surge most swollen that met him: his bold head
Above the contentious waives he kept and oared
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
To the shore; that ore his waue-worne basis bowed
As stooping to relieve him: I not doubt
He came alive to Land.
No, no, hoe's gone.
Sir you may thank your self for this great loss,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
But rather loose her to an African,
Where she at least, is banished from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet the grief on it.
Pre-thee peace.
You were kneeled too, &amp; importuned otherwise
By all of vs: and the fair soul her self
Weighed between loathnesse, and obedience, at
Which end of the beam should bow: we have lost your son,
I fear for ever: Millaine and Naples have
Mo widows in them of this business making,
Then we bring men to comfort them:
The faults your own.
So is the doer'st of the loss.
My Lord Sebastian,
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness,
And time to speak it in: you rub the sore,
When you should bring the plaster.
Very well.
And most Chirurgeonly.
It is foul weather in vs all, good Sir,
When you are cloudy.
Foul weather?
Very foul.
Had I plantation of this Isle my Lord.
He would sow't with Nettle-seed.
Or docks, or Mallowes.
And were the King on it, what would I do?
Scope being drunk, for want of Wine.
In the Commonwealth I would (by contraries)
Execute all things: For no kind of Traffic
Would I admit: No name of Magistrate:
Letters should not be known: Riches, poverty,
And use of service, none: Contract, Succession,
Borne, bound of Land, Tilth, Vineyard none:
No use of Mettle, Corn, or Wine, or Oil:
No occupation, all men idle, all:
And Women too, but innocent and pure:
No Sovereignty.
Yet he would be King on it.
The latter end of his Common-wealth forgets the beginning.
All things in common Nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavour: Treason, felony,
Sword, Pike, Knife, Gun, or need of any Engine
Would I not have: but Nature should bring forth
Of it own kind, all foison, all abundance
To feed my innocent people.
No marrying among his subjects?
None (man) all idle; Whores and knaves,
I would with such perfection govern Sir:
To Excel the Golden Age.
'Saue his Majesty.
Long live Gonzalo.
And do you mark me, Sir?
Pre-thee no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.
I do well believe your Highness, and did it to minister occasion to these Gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble Lungs, that they always use to laugh at nothing.
It was you we laughed at.
Who, in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you: so you may continue, and laugh at nothing still.
What a blow was there given?
And it had not fallen flat-long.
You are Gentlemen of brave metal: you would lift the Moon out of her sphere, if she would continue in it five weeks without changing.
We would so, and then go a Bat-fowling.
Nay good my Lord, be not angry.
No I warrant you, I will not adventure my discretion so weakly: Will you laugh me asleep, for I am very heavy.
Go sleep, and hear vs.
What, all so soon asleep? I wish mine eyes
Would (with themselves) shut up my thoughts,
I find they are inclined to do so.
Please you Sir,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
It seldom visits sorrow, when it doth, it is a Comforter.
We two my Lord, will guard your person,
While you take your rest, and watch your safety.
Thank you: Wondrous heavy.
What a strange drowsiness possesses them?
It is the quality of the Climate.
Why
Doth it not then our eye-lids sink? I find
Not my self disposed to sleep.
Nor I, my spirits are nimble:
They fell together all, as by consent
They dropped, as by a Thunder-stroke: what might
Worthy Sebastian? O, what might? no more:
And yet, me thinks I see it in thy face,
What thou should be: the occasion speaks thee, and
My strong imagination see's a Crown
Dropping upon thy head.
What? art thou waking?
Do you not hear me speak?
I do, and surely
It is a sleepy Language; and thou speak
Out of thy sleep: What is it thou did say?
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open: standing, speaking, moving:
And yet so fast asleep.
Noble Sebastian,
Thou let thy fortune sleep: die rather: wink'st
Whiles thou art waking.
Thou dost snore distinctly,
There's meaning in thy snores.
I am more serious then my custom: you
Must be so too, if heed me: which to do,
Trebles thee o'er.
Well: I am standing water.
Isle teach you how to flow.
Do so: to ebb
Hereditary Sloth instructs me.
O!
If you but knew how you the purpose cherish
Whiles thus you mock it: how in stripping it
You more invest it: ebbing men, indeed
(Most often) do so near the bottom run
By their own fear, or sloth.
Prithee say on,
The setting of thine eye, and cheek proclaim
A matter from thee; and a birth, indeed,
Which throws thee much to yield.
Thus Sir:
Although this Lord of weak remembrance; this
Who shall be of as little memory
When he is earthed, hath here almost persuaded
(For hoe's a Spirit of persuasion, only
Professes to persuade) the King his sonne's alive,
It is as impossible that hoe's vndrown'd,
As he that sleeps here, swims.
I have no hope
That hoe's vndrown'd.
O, out of that no hope,
What great hope have you? No hope that way, Is
Another way so high a hope, that even
Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond
But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me
That Ferdinand is drowned.
He's gone.
Then tell me, who's the next heir of Naples?
Claribell.
She that is Queen of Tunis she that dwells
Ten leagues beyond mans life: she that from Naples
Can have no note, unless the Sun were post:
The Man in th Moone's too slow, till new-borne chins
Be rough, and Razor-able: She that from whom
We all were sea-swallow'd, though some cast again,
(And by that destiny) to perform an act
Whereof, what's past is Prologue; what to come
In yours, and my discharge.
What stuff is this? How say you?
It is true my brothers daughter's Queen of Tunis,
So is she heir of Naples, twixt which Regions
There is some space.
A space, whose every cubit
Seems to cry out, how shall that Claribell
Measure vs back to Naples? keep in Tunis,
And let Sebastian wake. Say, this were death
That now hath seized them, why they were no worse
Then now they are: There be that can rule Naples
As well as he that sleeps: Lords, that can prate
As amply, and unnecessarily
As this Gonzallo: I my self could make
A Chough of as deep chat: O, that you bore
The mind that I do; what a sleep were this
For your advancement? Do you understand me?
Me thinks I do.
And how do's your content
Tender your own good fortune?
I remember
You did supplant your Brother Prospero.
True:
And look how well my Garments sit upon me,
Much fetter then before: My Brothers servants
Were then my fellows, now they are my men.
But for your conscience.
I Sir: where lies that? If it were a kybe
It would put me to my slipper: But I feel not
This Deity in my bosom: Twenty consciences
That stand twixt me, and Millaine, candied be they,
And melt ere they molest: Here lies your Brother,
No better then the earth he lies upon,
If he were that which now hoe's like (that's dead)
Whom I with this obedient steel (three inches of it)
Can lay to bed for ever: whiles you doing thus,
To the perpetual wink for aye might put
This ancient morsel: this Sir Prudence, who
Should not upbraid our course: for all the rest
They'll take suggestion, as a Cat laps milk,
They'll tell the clock, to any business that
We say befits the hour.
Thy case, dear Friend
Shall be my president: As thou got Millaine,
I'll come by Naples: Draw thy sword, one stroke
Shall free thee from the tribute which thou paiest,
And I the King shall love thee.
Draw together:
And when I rear my hand, do you the like
To fall it on Gonzalo.
O, but one word.
My Master through his Art foresees the danger
That you (his friend) are in, and sends me forth
(For else his project dies) to keep them living.
While you here do snoring lie,
Open-ey'd Conspiracy
His time doth take:
If of Life you keep a care,
Shake off slumber and beware.
Awake, awake.
Then let vs both be sudden.
Now, good Angels preserve the King.
Why how now hoe; awake? why are you drawn?
Wherefore this ghastly looking?
What's the matter?
Whiles we stood here securing your repose,
(Even now) we heard a hollow burst of bellowing
Like Bulls, or rather Lyons, did it not wake you?
It struck mine ear most terribly.
I heard nothing.
O, it was a din to fright a Monsters ear;
To make an earthquake: sure it was the roar
Of a whole heard of Lyons.
Heard you this Gonzalo?
Upon mine honour, Sir, I heard a humming,
(And that a strange one too) which did awake me:
I shook you Sir, and cried: as mine eyes opend,
I saw their weapons drawn: there was a noise,
That's verily: it is best we stand upon our guard;
Or that we quit this place: let's draw our weapons.
Lead off this ground &amp; let's make further search
For my poor son.
Heavens keep him from these Beasts:
For he is sure in th Island.
Lead away.
Prospero my Lord, shall know what I have done.
So (King) go safely on to seek thy Son.
All the infections that the Sun sucks up
From Bogs, Fens, Flats, on Prosper fall, and make him
By inchmeal a disease: his Spirits hear me,
And yet I needs must curse. But they'll nor pinch,
Fright me with Vrchyn-shewes, pitch me in th mire,
Nor lead me like a fire-brand, in the dark
Out of my way, unless he bid 'em; but
For every trifle, are they set upon me,
Sometime like Apes, that more and chatter at me,
And after bite me: then like Hedg-hogs, which
Lye tumbling in my barefoot way, and mount
Their pricks at my foot-fall: sometime am I
All wound with Adders, who with cloven tongues
Doe hiss me into madness: Lo, now Lo,
Here comes a Spirit of his, and to torment me
For bringing wood in slowly: I'll fall flat,
Perchance he will not mind me.
Here's neither bush, nor shrub to bear off any weather at all: and another Storm brewing, I hear it sing i the wind: yond same black cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul bombard that would shed his licquor: if it should thunder, as it did before, I know not where to hide my head: yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by paile-fuls. What have we here, a man, or a fish? dead or alive? a fish, hee smells like a fish: a very ancient and fish-like smell: a kind of, not of the newest poore-Iohn: a strange fish: were I in England now (as once I was) and had but this fish painted; not a holiday-foole there but would give a piece of silver: there, would this Monster, make a man: any strange beast there, makes a man: when they will not give a do it to relieve a lame Beggar, they will lay out ten to see a dead Indian: Legged like a man; and his Finns like Arms: warm of my troth: I doe now let loose my opinion; hold it no longer; this is no fish, but an Islander, that hath lately suffered by a Thunderbolt: Alas, the storm is come again: my best way is to creep under his Gabardine: there is no other shelter hereabout: Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellowes: I will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past.
I shall no more to sea, to sea, here shall I dye ashore.
This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a mans
Funeral: well, here's my comfort.
The Master, the Swabber, the Boatswain &amp; I;
The Gunner, and his Mate
Loved Mall, Meg, and Marrian, and Margerie,
But none of vs cared for Kate.
For she had a tongue with a tang,
Would cry to a Sailor go hang:
She loved not the savour of Tar nor of Pitch,
Yet a Tailor might scratch her where ere she did itch.
Then to Sea Boys, and let her go hang.
This is a scurvy tune too:
But here's my comfort.
Doe not torment me: oh.
What's the matter?
Have we devils here?
Doe you put tricks vpon's with Saluages, and Men of Inde? ha? I have not escaped drowning, to be afraid now of your four legs: for it hath bin said; as proper a man as ever went on four legs, cannot make him give ground: and it shall be said so again, while Stephano breathes it nostrils.
The Spirit torments me: oh.
This is some Monster of the Isle, with four legs; who hath got (as I take it) an Ague: where the devil should he learn our language? I will give him some relief if it be but for that: if I can recover him, and keep him tame, and get to Naples with him, he's a Present for any Emperor that ever trod on Neates-leathere.
Doe not torment me prithee: I'll bring my wood home faster.
He's in his fit now; and doe's not talk after the wisest; hee shall taste of my Bottle: if hee have never drunk wine before, it will go near to remove his Fit: if I can recover him, and keep him tame, I will not take too much for him; hee shall pay for him that hath him, and that soundly.
Thou dost me yet but little hurt; thou wilt anon, I know it by thy trembling: Now Prosper works upon thee.
Come on your ways: open your mouth: here is that which will give language to you Cat; open your mouth; this will shake your shaking, I can tell you, and that soundly: you cannot tell who's your friend; open your chaps again.
I should know that voice:
It should be,
But hee is dround; and these are devils; O defend me.
Four legs and two voices; a most delicate Monster his forward voice now is to speak well of his friend; his backward voice, is to utter soul speeches, and to detract: if all the wine in my bottle will recover him, I will help his Ague: Come: Amen, I will pour some in thy other mouth.
Stephano.
Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy: This is a devil, and no Monster: I will leave him, I have no long Spoon.
Stephano: if thou be Stephano, touch me, and speak to me: for I am Trinculo; be not afraid, thy good friend Trinculo.
If thou be Trinculo: come forth: I'll pull thee by the lesser legs: if any be Trinculo's legs, these are they: Thou art very Trinculo indeed: how came thou to be the siege of this Moone-calfe? Can he vent Trinculo's?
I took him to be killed with a thunder-strok; but art thou not dround Stephano: I hope now thou art not dround: Is the Storm ouer-blowne? I hid me under the dead Moone-Calfes Gabardine, for fear of the Storm: And art thou living Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitanes escaped?
Prithee doe not turn me about, my stomach is not constant.
These be fine things, and if they be not spright's: that's a brave God, and bears Celestial liquor: I will kneel to him.
How did thou scope?
How came thou hither?
Swear by this Bottle how thou came hither: I escaped upon a But of Sack, which the Sailors heaved of reboard, by this Bottle which I made of the bark of a Tree, with mine own hands, since I was cast a'shore.
I'll swear upon that Bottle, to be thy true subjest, for the liquor is not earthly.
Here: swear then how thou escap'dst.
Swam ashore (man) like a Duck: I can swim like a Duck i'll be sworn.
Here, kiss the Book.
Though thou can swim like a Duck, thou art made like a Goose.
O Stephano, hast any more of this?
The whole But (man) my Cellar is in a rock by the sea-side, where my Wine is hid:
How now Moone-Calfe, how do's thine Ague?
Hast thou not dropped from heaven?
Out of th Moon I doe assure thee. I was the Man in the Moon, when time was.
I have seen thee in her: and I doe adore thee:
My Mistress showed me thee, and thy Dog, and thy Bush.
Come, swear to that: kiss the Book: I will furnish it anon with new Contents: Swear.
By this good light, this is a very shallow Monster: I afraid of him? a very weak Monster:
The Man in the Moon?
A most poor credulous Monster:
Well drawn Monster, in good sooth.
Isle show thee every fertile inch 'oth Island: and I will kiss thy foot: I prithee be my god.
By this light, a most perfidious, and drunken Monster, when's god's a sleep he'll rob his Bottle.
Isle kiss thy foot. Isle swear my self thy Subject.
Come on then: down and swear.
I shall laugh my self to death at this puppi-headed Monster: a most scurvy Monster: I could find in my heart to beat him.
Come, kiss.
But that the poor Monster's in drink:
An abominable Monster.
I'll show thee the best Springs: I'll pluck thee
Berries: I'll fish for thee; and get thee wood enough.
A plague upon the Tyrant that I serve;
I'll bear him no more Sticks, but follow thee, thou wondrous man.
A most ridiculous Monster, to make a wonder of a poor drunkard.
In prithee let me bring thee where Crabs grow; and I with my long nails will dig thee pig-nuts; show thee a Joys nest, and instruct thee how to snare the nimble Marmoset: I'll bring thee to clustering Philbirts, and sometimes I'll get thee young Scamels from the Rock: Wilt thou go with me?
I prithee now lead the way without any more talking. Trinculo, the King, and all our company else being dround, wee will inherit here: Here; bear my Bottle: Fellow Trinculo; we'll fill him by and by again.
Farewell Master; farewell, farewell.
A howling Monster: a drunken Monster.
No more dams I'll make for fish,
Nor fetch in firing, at requiring,
Nor scrape trenchering, nor wash dish,
Ban' ban' Cacalyban
Has a new Master, get a new Man.
Freedom, high-day, high-day freedom, freedom high-day, freedom.
O brave Monster; lead the way.
There be some Sports are painful; &amp; their labour
Delight in them set off: Some kinds of baseness
Are nobly undergone; and most poor matters
Point to rich ends: this my mean Task
Would be as heavy to me, as odious, but
The Mistress which I serve, quickens what's dead,
And makes my labours, pleasures: O She is
Ten times more gentle, then her Father's crabbed;
And he's composed of harshness. I must remove
Some thousands of these Logs, and pile them up,
Upon a sore injunction; my sweet Mistress
Weeps when she sees me work, &amp; says, such baseness
Had never like Executor: I forget:
But these sweet thoughts, doe even refresh my labours,
Most busy lest, when I doe it.
Alas, now pray you
Work not so hard: I would the lightning had
Burnt up those Logs that you are enioynd to pile:
Pray set it down, and rest you: when this burns
Twill weep for having wearied you: my Father
Is hard at study; pray now rest your self,
Hoe's safe for these three hours.
O most dear Mistress.
The Sun will set before I shall discharge
What I must strive to do.
If you'll sit down
Isle bear your Logs the while: pray give me that,
Isle carry it to the pile.
No precious Creature,
I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
Then you should such dishonour undergo,
While I sit lazy by.
It would become me
As well as it do's you; and I should do it
With much more ease: for my good will is to it,
And yours it is against.
Poor worm thou art infected,
This visitation shows it.
You look wearily.
No, noble Mistress, it is fresh morning with me
When you are by at night: I do beseech you
Chiefly, that I might set it in my prayers,
What is your name?
Miranda, O my Father,
I have broke your hest to say so.
Admitted Miranda,
Indeed the top of Admiration, worth
What's dearest to the world: full many a Lady
I have eyed with best regard, and many a time
The harmony of their tongues, hath into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear: for several virtues
Have I liked several women, never any
With so full soul, but some defect in her
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed,
And put it to the foil. But you, O you,
So perfect, and so peetlesse, are created
Of every Creatures best.
I do not know
One of my sex; no women's face remember,
Save from my glass, mine own: Nor have I seen
More that I may call men, then you good friend,
And my dear Father: how features are abroad
I am skilless of; but by my modesty
(The jewel in my dower) I would not wish
Any Companion in the world but you:
Nor can imagination form a shape
Besides your self, to like of: but I prattle
Something too wildely, and my Fathers precepts
I therein do forget.
I am, in my condition
A Prince (Miranda) I do think a King
(I would not so) and would no more endure
This wooden slavery, then to suffer
The flesh-fly blow my mouth: hear my soul speak.
The very instant that I saw you, did
My heart fly to your service, there resides
To make me slave to it, and for your sake
Am I this patient Logge-man.
Do you love me?
O heaven; O earth, bear witness to this sound,
And crown what I profess with kind event
If I speak true: if hollowly, invert
What best is boaded me, to mischief: I,
Beyond all limit of what else in th world
Do love, prize, honour you.
I am a fool
To weep at what I am glad of.
Fair encounter
Of two most rare affections: heavens rain grace
On that which breeds between 'em.
Wherefore weep you?
At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer
What I desire to give; and much less take
What I shall die to want: But this is trifling,
And all the more it seeks to hide it self,
The bigger bulk it shows. Hence bashful cunning,
And prompt me plain and holy innocence.
I am your wife, if you will marry me;
If not, Isle die your maid: to be your fellow
You may deny me, but Isle be your servant
Whether you will or no.
My Mistress (dearest)
And I thus humble ever.
My husband then?
I, with a heart as willing
As bondage ere of freedom: heere's my hand.
And mine, with my heart in it; and now farewell
Till half an hour hence.
A thousand, thousand.
So glad of this as they I cannot be,
Who are surprised with all; but my rejoicing
At nothing can be more: Isle to my book,
For yet ere supper time, must I perform
Much business appertaining.
Tell not me, when the But is out we will drink water, not a drop before; therefore bear up, &amp; board em' Servant Monster, drink to me.
Servant Monster? the folly of this Island, they say there's but five upon this Isle; we are three of them, if the other two be brained like vs, the State totters.
Drink servant Monster when I bid thee, thy eyes are almost set in thy head.
Where should they bee set else? hee were a brave Monster indeed if they were set in his tail.
My man-Monster hath drowned his tongue in sack: for my part the Sea cannot drown me, I swam ere I could recover the shore, five and thirty Leagues off and on, by this light thou shalt bee my Lieutenant Monster, or my Standard.
Your Lieutenant if you lift, hoe's no standard.
VVeel not run Monsieur Monster.
Nor go neither: but you'll lie like dogs, and yet say nothing neither.
Moone-calfe, speak once in thy life, if thou be a good Moone-calfe.
How does thy honour? Let me like thy shoe:
Isle not serve him, he is not valiant.
Thou least most ignorant Monster, I am in case to jostle a Constable: why, thou debauched Fish thou, was there ever man a Coward, that hath drunk so much Sack as I to day? wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but half a Fish, and half a Monster?
Lo, how he mocks me, wilt thou let him my Lord?
Lord, quoth he? that a Monster should be such a Natural?
Lo, lo again: bite him to death I prithee.
Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head: If you prove a mutineer, the next Tree: the poor Monster's my subject, and he shall not suffer indignity.
I thank my noble Lord. Wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suite I made to thee?
Marry will I: kneel, and repeat it,
I will stand, and so shall Trinculo.
As I told thee before, I am subject to a Tyrant,
A Sorcerer, that by his cunning hath cheated me
Of the Island.
Thou lie.
Thou lie, thou jesting Monkey thou:
I would my valiant Master would destroy thee.
I do not lye.
Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in's tale,
By this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.
Why, I said nothing.
Mum then, and no more: proceed.
I say by Sorcery he got this Isle
From me, he got it. If thy Greatness will
Revenge it on him, (for I know thou dare)
But this Thing dare not.
That's most certain.
Thou shalt be Lord of it, and Isle serve thee.
How now shall this be compassed?
Can thou bring me to the party?
Yea, yea my Lord, Isle yield him thee asleep,
Where thou moist knock a nail into his head.
Thou least, thou can not.
What a py'de Ninnie's this? Thou scurvy patch:
I do beseech thy Greatness give him blows,
And take his bottle from him: When that's gone,
He shall drink nought but brine, for Isle not show him
Where the quick Freshes are.
Trinculo, run into no further danger:
Interrupt the Monster one word further, and by this hand, Isle turn my mercy out of doors, and make a Stockfish of thee.
Why, what did I? I did nothing:
Isle go farther off,
Did thou not say he lied?
Thou least.
Do I so? Take thou that,
As you like this, give me the lye another time.
I did not give the lie: Out of your wits, and hearing too?
A pox of your bottle, this can Sack and drinking doo:
A murren on your Monster, and the devil take your fingers.
Ha, ha, ha.
Now forward with your Tale: prithee stand further off.
Beat him enough: after a little time
Isle beat him too.
Stand farther: Come proceed.
Why, as I told thee, it is a custom with him
In th afternoon to sleep: there thou moist brain him,
Having first seized his books: Or with a log
Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
Or cut his wezand with thy knife. Remember
First to possess his Books; for without them
Hoe's but a Sot, as I am; nor hath not
One Spirit to command: they all do hate him
As rootedly as I. Burn but his Books,
He he's brave Utensils (for so he calls them)
Which when he he's a house, he will deck withal.
And that most deeply to consider, is
The beauty of his daughter: he himself
Calls her a nonpareil: I never saw a woman
But only Sycorax my Dam, and she;
But she as far surpasses Sycorax,
As greatest do's least.
Is it so brave a Lass?
I Lord, she will become thy bed, I warrant,
And bring thee forth brave brood.
Monster, I will kill this man: his daughter and I will be King and Queen, save our Graces: and Trinculo, and thy self shall be Viceroys:
Dost thou like the plot Trinculo?
Excellent.
Give me thy hand, I am sorry I beat thee:
But while thou liu'st keep a good tongue in thy hey
Within this half hour will he be asleep,
Wilt thou destroy him then?
I on mine honour.
This will I tell my Master.
Thou make me merry: I am full of pleasure,
Let vs be iocond. Will you troule the Catch
You taught me but whileare?
At thy request Monster, I will do reason,
Any reason: Come on Trinculo, let vs sing.
Flout 'em, and cout 'em: and scout 'em, and flout 'em,
Thought is free.
That's not the tune.
What is this same?
This is the tune of our Catch, plaid by the picture of No-body.
If thou be a man, show thy self in thy likeness:
If thou be a devil, take it as thou list.
O forgive me my sins.
He that dies pays all debts: I defy thee;
Mercy upon vs.
Art thou afraid?
No Monster, not I.
Be not afraid, the Isle is full of noises,
Sounds, and sweet aires, that give delight and hurt not:
Sometimes a thousand twangling Instruments
Will hum about mine ears; and sometime voices,
That if I then had waked after long sleep,
Will make me sleep again, and then in dreaming,
The clouds me thought would open, and show riches
Ready to drop upon me, that when I waked
I cried to dream again.
This will prove a brave kingdom to me,
Where I shall have my Music for nothing.
When Prospero is destroyed.
That shall be by and by:
I remember the story.
The sound is going away.
Lets follow it, and after do our work.
Lead Monster,
We'll follow: I would I could see this Taborer,
He lays it on.
Wilt come?
Isle follow Stephano.
By'r liken, I can go no further, Sir,
My old bones aches: here's a maze trod indeed
Through fourth rights, &amp; Meanders: by your patience,
I needs must rest me.
Old Lord, I cannot blame thee,
Who, am my self attached with weariness
To the dulling of my spirits: Sit down, and rest:
Even here I will put off my hope, and keep it
No longer for my Flatterer: he is droun'd
Whom thus we stray to find, and the Sea mocks
Our frustrate search on land: well, let him go.
I am right glad, that he's so out of hope:
Doe not for one repulse forgo the purpose
That you resolved to effect.
The next advantage will we take thoroughly.
Let it be to night,
For now they are oppressed with travail, they
Will not, nor cannot use such vigilance
As when they are fresh.
I say to night: no more.
What harmony is this? my good friends, hark.
Marvelous sweet Music.
Give vs kind keepers, heaues: what were these?
A living Drolerie: now I will believe
That there are Unicorns: that in Arabia
There is one Tree, the Phoenix throne, one Phoenix
At this hour reigning there.
Isle believe both:
And what do's else want credit, come to me
And Isle besworn it is true: Travellers ne'er did lye,
Though fools at home condemn 'em.
If in Naples
I should report this now, would they believe me?
If I should say I saw such Islands;
(For certes, these are people of the Island)
Who though they are of monstrous shape, yet note
Their manners are more gentle, kind, then of
Our human generation you shall find
Many, nay almost any.
Honest Lord,
Thou hast said well: for some of you there present;
Are worse then devils.
I cannot too much muse
Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound expressing
(Although they want the use of tongue) a kind
Of excellent dumb discourse.
Praise in departing.
They vanished strangely.
No matter, since
They have left their Viands behind; for wee have stomacks.
Wilt please you taste of what is here
Not I.
Faith Sir, you need not fear when wee were Boys
Who would believe that there were Mountaineers,
Dew-lapt, like Bulls whose throats had hanging at 'em
Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men
Whose heads stood in their breasts? which now we find
Each putter out of five for one, will bring vs
Good warrant of.
I will stand to, and feed,
Although my last, no matter, since I feel
The best is past: brother: my Lord, the Duke,
Stand too, and doe as we.
You are three men of sin, whom destiny
That hath to instrument this lower world,
And what is in it: the never surfeited Sea,
Hath cause to belch up you; and on this Island,
Where man doth not inhabit, you amongst men,
Being most unfit to live: I have made you mad;
And even with such like valour, men hang, and drown
Their proper selves: you fools, I and my fellows
Are ministers of Fate, the Elements
Of whom your swords are tempered, may as well
Wound the loud winds, or with bemockt-at-Stabs
Kill the still closing waters, as diminish
One dowle that's in my plumb: My fellow ministers
Are like-invulnerable: if you could hurt,
Your swords are now too massy for your strengths,
And will not be vplifted: But remember
(For that's my business to you) that you three
From Millaine did supplant good Prospero,
Exposed unto the Sea (which hath requite it)
Him, and his innocent child: for which foul deed,
The Powers, delaying (not forgetting) have
Incensed the Seas, and Shores; yea, all the Creatures
Against your peace: Thee of thy Son, Alonso
They have bereft; and doe pronounce by me
Lingering perdition (worse then any death
Can be at once) shall step, by step attend
You, and your ways, whose wraths to guard you from,
Which here, in this most desolate Isle, else false
Upon your heads, is nothing but hearts-sorrow,
And a clear life ensuing.
Bravely the figure of this Harpy, hast thou
Performed (my Ariell) a grace it had devouring:
Of my Instruction, hast thou nothing bated
In what thou had to say: so with good life,
And observation strange, my meaner ministers
Their several kinds have done: my high charms work,
And these (mine enemies) are all knit up
In their distractions: they now are in my power;
And in these fits, I leave them, while I visit
Young Ferdinand (whom they suppose is droun'd)
And his, and mine loved darling.
In th name of something holy, Sir, why stand you
In this strange stare?
O, it is monstrous: monstrous:
Me thought the billows spoke, and told me of it,
The winds did sing it to me: and the Thunder
(That deep and dreadful Organ-Pipe) pronounced
The name of Prosper: it did base my Trespass,
Therefore my Son in the Ooze is bedded; and
I'll seek him deeper then ere plummet sounded,
And with him there lye mudded.
But one feend at a time,
Isle fight their Legions ore.
Isle be thy Second.
All three of them are desperate: their great guilt
(Like poison given to work a great time after)
Now gins to bite the spirits: I doe beseech you
(That are of suppler joints) follow them swiftly,
And hinder them from what this ecstasy
May now provoke them to.
Follow, I pray you.
If I have too austerely punished you,
Your compensation makes amends, for I
Have given you here, a third of mine own life,
Or that for which I live: who, once again
I tender to thy hand: All thy vexations
Were but my trials of thy love, and thou
Hast strangely stood the test: here, before heaven
I ratify this my rich gift: O Ferdinand,
Doe not smile at me, that I boast her of,
For thou shalt find she will out-strip all praise
And make it halt, behind her.
I doe believe it
Against an Oracle.
Then, as my guest, and thine own acquisition
Worthily purchased, take my daughter: But
If thou dost break her Virgin-knot, before
All sanctimonious ceremonies may
With full and holy right, be ministered,
No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall
To make this contract grow; but barren hate,
Sower-ey'd disdain, and discord shall bestrew
The union of your bed, with weeds so loathly
That you shall hate it both: Therefore take heed,
As Hymens Lamps shall light you.
As I hope
For quiet days, fair Issue, and long life,
With such love, as it is now the murkiest den,
The most opportune place, the strongst suggestion,
Our worser Genius can, shall never melt
Mine honour into lust, to take away
The edge of that days celebration,
When I shall think, or Phoebus Steeds are founderd,
Or Night kept chained below.
Fairly spoke;
Sit then, and talk with her, she is thine own;
What Ariell; my industrious seruat Ariell.
What would my potent master? here I am.
Thou, and thy meaner fellows, your last service
Did worthily perform: and I must use you
In such another trick: go bring the rabble
(Ore whom I give thee power) here, to this place:
Incite them to quick motion, for I must
Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple
Some vanity of mine Art: it is my promise,
And they expect it from me.
Presently?
I: with a twincke.
Before you can say come, and go,
And breathe twice; and cry, so, so:
Each one tripping on his Toe,
Will be here with mop, and mow.
Doe you love me Master? no?
Dearly, my delicate Ariell: doe not approach
Till thou dost hear me call.
Well: I conceive.
Look thou be true: doe not give dalliance
Too much the reign: the strongest oaths, are straw
To the fire in the blood: be more abstenious,
Or else good night your vow.
I warrant you, Sir,
The white cold virgin Snow, upon my heart
Abates the ardour of my Liver.
Well.
Now come my Ariell, bring a Corolary,
Rather then want a Spirit; appear, &amp; pertly.
No tongue: all eyes: be silent.
Ceres, most bounteous Lady, thy rich Leas
Of Wheat, Rye, Barley, Fetches, Oats and Peas;
Thy Turphie-Mountaines, where live nibbling Sheep,
And flat Medes thatched with Stouer, them to keep:
Thy banks with pioned, and twilled brims
Which sponge April, at thy hest betrims;
To make cold Nymphs chaste crowns; &amp; thy broome-groues;
Whose shadow the dismissed Bachelor loves,
Being lasse-lorne: thy pole-clipt vineyard,
And thy Sea-marge sterile, and rockey-hard,
Where thou thy self dost ayre, the Queen of th Sky,
Whose watery Arch, and messenger, am I.
Bids thee leave these, &amp; with her sovereign grace,
Here on this grasse-plot, in this very place
To come, and sport: here Peacocks fly amain:
Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain.
Hail, many-coloured Messenger, that ne'er
Dost disobey the wife of Iupiter:
Who, with thy saffron wings, upon my flowers
Diffuse honey drops, refreshing showers,
And with each end of thy blew bow dost crown
My bosk acres, and my vnshrubd down,
Rich scarph to my proud earth: why hath thy Queen
Summoned me hither, to this short gras'd Greene?
A contract of true Love, to celebrate,
And some donation freely to estate
On the bles'd Lovers.
Tell me heavenly Bow,
If Venus or her Son, as thou dost know,
Doe now attend the Queen? since they did plot
The means, that dusky Dis, my daughter got,
Her, and her blind-Boyes scandald company,
I have forsworn.
Of her society
Be not afraid: I met her deity
Cutting the clouds towards Paphos: and her Son
Doue-drawn with her: here thought they to have done
Some wanton charm, upon this Man and Maid,
Whose vows are, that no bed-right shall be paid
Till Hymens Torch be lighted: but in vain,
Marses hot Minion is returned again,
Her waspish headed son, has broke his arrows,
Swears he will shoot no more, but play with Sparrows,
And be a Boy right out.
Highest Queen of State,
Great Iuno comes, I know her by her gate.
How do's my bounteous sister? go with me
To bless this twain, that they may prosperous be,
And honoured in their Issue.
Honour, riches, marriage, blessing,
Long continuance, and increasing,
Hourly joys, be still upon you,
Iuno sings her blessings on you.
Earths increase, foison plenty,
Barnes, and Garners, never empty.
Vines, with clustering bunches growing,
Plants, with goodly burden bowing:
Spring come to you at the farthest,
In the very end of Harvest.
Scarcity and want shall shun you,
Ceres blessing so is on you.
This is a most majestic vision, and
Harmonious charmingly: may I be bold
To think these spirits?
Spirits, which by mine Art
I have from their confines called to enact
My present fancies.
Let me live here ever,
So rare a wondered Father, and a wise
Makes this place Paradise.
Sweet now, silence:
Iuno and Ceres whisper seriously,
There's something else to doe: hush, and be mute
Or else our spell is mared.
You Nymphs called Naiads of ye windring brooks,
With your sedg'd crowns, and euer-harmelesse looks,
Leave your crisp channels, and on this greene-Land
Answer your summons Iuno do's command.
Come temperate Nymphs, and help to celebrate
A Contract of true Love: be not too late.
You Sunburned Sicklemen of August weary,
Come hither from the furrow, and be merry,
Make holly day: your Rye-straw hats put on,
And these fresh Nymphs encounter every one
In Country footing.
I had forgot that foul conspiracy
Of the beast Calliban, and his confederates
Against my life: the minute of their plot
Is almost come: Well done, avoid: no more.
This is strange: your fathers in some passion
That works him strongly.
Never till this day
Saw I him touched with anger, so distempered.
You doe look (my son) in a moved sort,
As if you were dismayed: be cheerful Sir,
Our Revels now are ended: These our actors,
(As I foretold you) were all Spirits, and
Are melted into Ayre, into thin Ayre,
And like the baseless fabric of this vision
The Clowd-capt Towers, the gorgeous Palaces,
The solemn Temples, the great Globe it self,
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
And like this insubstantial Pageant faded
Leave not a rack behind: we are such stuff
As dreams are made on; and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep: Sir, I am vexed,
Bear with my weakness, my old brain is troubled:
Be not disturbed with my infirmity,
If you be pleased, retire into my Cell,
And there repose, a turn or two, Isle walk
To still my beating mind.
We wish your peace.
Come with a thought; I thank thee Ariell: come.
Thy thoughts I cleave to, what's thy pleasure?
Spirit: We must prepare to meet with Caliban.
I my Commander, when I presented Ceres
I thought to have told thee of it, but I feared
Least I might anger thee.
Say again, where did thou leave these varlots?
I told you Sir, they were red-hot with drinking,
So full of valour, that they smote the ayre
For breathing in their faces: beat the ground
For kissing of their feet; yet always bending
Towards their project: then I beat my Tabor,
At which like vnback't colts they pricked their ears,
Advanced their eye-lids, lifted up their noses
As they smelt music, so I charmed their ears
That Calf-like, they my lowing followed, through
Toothed briers, sharpe firzes, pricking gos, &amp; thorns,
Which entered their frail shins: at last I left them
In the filthy mantled poole beyond your Cell,
There dancing up to the chins, that the foul Lake
Ore-stunck their feet.
This was well done (my bird)
Thy shape invisible retain thou still:
The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither
For stale to catch these thieves.
I go, I go.
A Devil, a borne-Deuill, on whose nature
Nurture can never stick: on whom my pains
Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost,
And, as with age, his body ouglier grows,
So his mind cankers: I will plague them all,
Even to roaring: Come, hang on them this line.
Pray you tread softly, that the blind Mole may not hear a foot fall: we now are near his Cell.
Monster, your Fairy, wc you say is a harmless Fairy,
Has done little better then plaid the lack with vs.
Monster, I do smell all horse-pisse, at which
My nose is in great indignation.
So is mine. Do you hear Monster: If I should
Take a displeasure against you: Look you.
Thou were but a lost Monster.
Good my Lord, give me thy favour still,
Be patient, for the prize Isle bring thee too
Shall hut wink this mischance: therefore speak softly,
Ell's hushed as midnight yet.
I, but to loose our bottles in the Poole.
There is not only disgrace and dishonour in that Monster, but an infinite loss.
That's more to me then my wetting:
Yet this is your harmless Fairy, Monster.
I will fetch off my bottle,
Though I be o'er ears for my labour.
Pre-thee (my King) be quiet. See thou here
This is the mouth of th Cell: no noise, and enter:
Do that good mischief, which may make this Island
Thine own for ever, and I thy Caliban
For aye thy foot-licker.
Give me thy hand,
I do begin to have bloody thoughts.
O King Stephano, O Peer: O worthy Stephano,
Look what a wardrobe here is for thee.
Let it alone thou fool, it is but trash.
Oh, ho, Monster: wee know what belongs to a frippery, O King Stephano.
Put off that gown (Trinculo) by this hand Isle have that gown.
Thy grace shall have it.
The dropsy drown this fool, what doe you mean
To dote thus on such luggage? let's alone
And doe the murder first: if he awake,
From toe to crown he will fill our skins with pinches,
Make vs strange stuff.
Be you quiet (Monster) Mistress line, is not this my Jerkin? now is the Jerkin under the line: now Ierkin you are like to lose your hair, &amp; prove a bald Jerkin.
Doe, doe; we steal by lyne and level, and't like your grace.
I thank thee for that jest; heir's a garment for it: Wit shall not go unrewarded while I am King of this Country: Steal by line and level, is an excellent pass of pate: there's another garment for it.
Monster, come put some Lime upon your fingers, and away with the rest.
I will have none on it: we shall loose our time,
And all be turned to Barnacles, or to Apes
With foreheads villainous low.
Monster, lay to your fingers: help to bear this away, where my hogshead of wine is, or Isle turn you out of my kingdom: go to, carry this.
And this.
I, and this.
Hey Mountain, hey.
Silver: there it goes, Silver.
Fury, Fury: there Tyrant, there: hark, hark.
Go, charge my Goblins that they grind their joints
With dry Convulsions, shorten up their sinews
With aged Cramps, &amp; more pinch-spotted make them,
Then Pard, or Cat of Mountain.
Hark, they roar.
Let them be hunted soundly: At this hour
Lies at my mercy all mine enemies:
Shortly shall all my labours end, and thou
Shalt have the ayre at freedom: for a little
Follow, and doe me service.
Now do's my Project gather to a head:
My charms crack not: my Spirits obey, and Time
Goes upright with his carriage: how's the day?
On the sixth hour, at which time, my Lord
You said our work should cease.
I did say so,
When first I raised the Tempest: say my Spirit,
How fares the King, and's followers?
Confined together
In the same fashion, as you gave in charge,
Just as you left them; all prisoners Sir
In the Line-groue which weather-fends your Cell,
They cannot boudge till your release: The King,
His Brother, and yours, abide all three distracted,
And the remainder mourning over them,
Brim full of sorrow, and dismay: but chiefly
Him that you termed Sir, the good old Lord Gonzallo,
His tears runs down his beard like winters drops
From eaues of reeds: your charm so strongly works 'em
That if you now beheld them, your affections
Would become tender.
Dost thou think so, Spirit?
Mine would, Sir, were I humane.
And mine shall.
Hast thou (which art but air) a touch, a feeling
Of their afflictions, and shall not my self,
One of their kind, that relish all as sharply,
Passion as they, be kindlier moved then thou art?
Though with their high wrongs I am struck to the quick,
Yet, with my nobler reason, against my fury
Doe I take part: the rarer Action is
In virtue, then in vengeance: they, being penitent,
The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
Not a frown further: Go, release them Ariell,
My Charms Isle break, their senses Isle restore,
And they shall be themselves.
Isle fetch them, Sir.
Ye Elves of hills, brooks, stading lakes &amp; groves,
And ye, that on the sands with printlesse foot
Doe chase the ebbing-Neptune, and doe fly him
When he comes back: you demy-Puppets, that
By Moone-shine doe the greene sour Ringlets make,
Whereof the Ewe not bites: and you, whose pastime
Is to make midnight-Mushrumps, that rejoice
To hear the solemn Curfew, by whose aid
(Weak Masters though ye be) I have bedymn'd
The Noone-tide Sun, called forth the mutinous winds,
And twixt the greene Sea, and the azured vault
Set roaring war: To the dread rattling Thunder
Have I given fire, and rifted Ioues stowt Ok
With his own Bolt: The strong bassed promontory
Have I made shake, and by the spurs plucked up
The Pine, and Cedar. Graves at my command
Have waked their sleepers, op'd, and let 'em forth
By my so potent Art. But this rough Magic
I here abjure: and when I have required
Some heavenly Music (which even now I do)
To work mine end upon their Senses, that
This Ayrie-charme is for, I'll break my staff,
Bury it certain fadomes in the earth,
And deeper then did ever Plummet sound
Isle drown my book.
A solemn Ayre, and the best comforter,
To an unsettled fancy, Cure thy brains
(Now useless) boil within thy skull: there stand
For you are Spell-stopt.
Holy Gonzallo, Honourable man,
Mine eyes even sociable to the show of thine
Fall fellowly drops: The charm dissolves apace,
And as the morning steals upon the night
(Melting the darkness) so their rising senses
Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle
Their clearer reason. O good Gonzallo
My true preserver, and a loyal Sir,
To him thou follow; I will pay thy graces
Home both in word, and deed: Most cruelly
Did thou Alonso, use me, and my daughter:
Thy brother was a furtherer in the Act,
Thou art pinched for it now Sebastian. Flesh, and blood,
You, brother mine, that entertain ambition,
Expelled remorse, and nature, whom, with Sebastian
(Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong)
Would here have killed your King: I do forgive thee,
Unnatural though thou art: Their understanding
Begins to swell, and the approaching tide
Will shortly fill the reasonable shore
That now lie foul, and muddy: not one of them
That yet looks on me, or would know me: Ariell,
Fetch me the Hat, and Rapier in my Cell,
I will discos me, and my self present
As I was sometime Millaine: quickly Spirit,
Thou shalt ere long be free.
Where the Bee sucks, there suck I,
In a Cowslips bell, I lie,
There I couch when Owls doe cry,
On the Bats back I doe fly after Summer merrily.
Merrily, merrily, shall I live now,
Under the blossom that hangs on the Bow.
Why that's my dainty Ariell: I shall miss
Thee, but yet thou shalt have freedom: so, so, so.
To the Kings ship, invisible as thou art,
There shalt thou find the Mariners asleep
Under the Hatches: the Master and the Boatswain
Being awake, enforce them to this place;
And presently, I prithee.
I drink the air before me, and return
Or ere your pulse twice beat.
All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement
Inhabits here: some heavenly power guide vs
Out of this fearful Country.
Behold Sir King
The wronged Duke of Millaine, Prospero:
For more assurance that a living Prince
Do's now speak to thee, I embrace thy body,
And to thee, and thy Company, I bid
A hearty welcome.
Where thou be he or no,
Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me,
(As late I have been) I not know: thy Pulse
Beats as of flesh, and blood: and since I saw thee,
The affliction of my mind amends, with which
I fear a madness held me this must crave
(And if this be at all) a most strange story.
Thy Dukedom I resign, and doe entreat
Thou pardon me my wrongs: But how should Prospero
Be living and be here?
First, noble Friend,
Let me embrace thine age, whose honour cannot
Be measured, or confined.
Whether this be,
Or be not, I'll not swear.
You doe yet taste
Some subtleties of the Isle, that will not let you
Believe things certain: Welcome, my friends all,
But you, my brace of Lords, were I so minded
I here could pluck his Highness frown upon you
And justify you Traitors: at this time
I will tell no tales.
The Devil speaks in him:
No:
For you (most wicked Sir) whom to call brother
Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive
Thy rankest fault; all of them: and require
My Dukedom of thee, which, perforce I know
Thou must restore.
If thou be Prospero
Give vs particulars of thy preferuation,
How thou hast met vs here, whom three hours since
Were wrecked upon this shore? where I have lost
(How sharp the point of this remembrance is)
My dear son Ferdinand.
I am woe for it, Sir.
Irreparable is the loss, and patience
Says, it is past her cure.
I rather think
You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace
For the like loss, I have her sovereign aid,
And rest my self content.
You the like loss?
As great to me, as late, and supportable
To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker
Then you may call to comfort you; for I
Have lost my daughter.
A daughter?
Oh heavens, that they were living both in Nalpes
The King and Queen there, that they were, I wish
My self were mudded in that oo-zie bed
Where my son lies: when did you lose your daughter?
In this last Tempest. I perceive these Lords
At this encounter doe so much admire,
That they devour their reason, and scarce think
Their eyes doe offices of Truth: Their words
Are natural breath: but howsoeu'r you have
Been iustled from your senses, know for certain
That I am Prospero, and that very Duke
Which was thrust forth of Millaine, who most strangely
Upon this shore (where you were wrecked) was landed
To be the Lord on it: No more yet of this,
For it is a Chronicle of day by day,
Not a relation for a break-fast, nor
Befitting this first meeting: Welcome, Sir;
This Cell's my Court: here have I few attendants,
And Subjects none abroad: pray you look in:
My Dukedom since you have given me again,
I will requite you with as good a thing,
At least bring forth a wonder, to content ye
As much, as me my Dukedom.
Sweet Lord, you play me false.
No my dearest love,
I would not for the world.
Yes, for a score of Kingdoms, you should wrangle,
And I would call it fair play.
If this prove
A vision of the Island, one dear Son
Shall I twice loose.
A most high miracle.
Though the Seas threaten they are merciful,
I have cursed them without cause.
Now all the blessings
Of a glad father, compass thee about:
Arise, and say how thou came here.
O wonder!
How many goodly creatures are there here?
How beauteous mankind is? O brave new world
That has such people in it.
It is new to thee.
What is this Maid, with whom thou was it at play?
Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours:
Is she the goddess that hath severed vs,
And brought vs thus together?
Sir, she is mortal;
But by immortal providence, she's mine;
I chose her when I could not ask my Father
For his advise: nor thought I had one: She
Is daughter to this famous Duke of Millaine,
Of whom, so often I have heard renown,
But never saw before: of whom I have
Received a second life; and second Father
This Lady makes him to me.
I am hers.
But O, how oddly will it sound, that I
Must ask my child forgiveness?
There Sir stop,
Let vs not burden our remembrances, with
A heaviness that's gon.
I have inly wept,
Or should have spoke ere this: look down you gods
And on this couple drop a blessed crown;
For it is you, that have chalked forth the way
Which brought vs hither.
I say Amen, Gonzallo.
Was Millaine thrust from Millaine, that his Issue
Should become Kings of Naples? O rejoice
Beyond a common joy, and set it down
With gold on lasting Pillars: In one voyage
Did Claribell her husband find at Tunis,
And Ferdinand her brother, found a wife,
Where he himself was lost: Prospero, his Dukedom
In a poor Isle: and all of vs, our selves,
When no man was his own.
Give me your hands:
Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart,
That doth not wish you joy.
Be it so, Amen.
O look Sir, look Sir, here is more of vs:
I prophesied, if a Gallows were on Land
This fellow could not drown: Now blasphemy,
That swear Grace ore-boord, not an oath on shore,
Hast thou no mouth by land?
What is the news?
The best news is, that we have safely found
Our King, and company: The next: our Ship,
Which but three glasses since, we gave out split,
Is tyte, and yare, and bravely rigged, as when
We first put out to Sea.
Sir, all this service
Have I done since I went.
My tricksey Spirit.
These are not natural evens, they strengthen
From strange, to stranger: say, how came you hither?
If I did think, Sir, I were well awake,
I'd strive to tell you: we were dead of sleep,
And (how we know not) all clapped under hatches,
Where, but even now, with strange, and several noises
Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains,
And mo diversity of sounds, all horrible.
We were awaked: straight way, at liberty;
Where we, in all our trim, freshly beheld
Our royal, good, and gallant Ship: our Master
Capering to eye her: on a trice, so please you,
Even in a dream, were we divided from them,
And were brought moaping hither.
Was it well done?
Bravely (my diligence) thou shalt be free.
This is as strange a Maze, as ere men trod,
And there is in this business, more then nature
Was ever conduct of: some Oracle
Must rectify our knowledge.
Sir, my Liege,
Doe not infest your mind, with beating on
The strangeness of this business, at picked leisure
(Which shall be shortly single) I'll resolve you,
(Which to you shall seem probable) of every
These happened accidents: till when, be cheerful
And think of each thing well: Come hither Spirit,
Set Caliban, and his companions free:
Untie the Spell: How fares my gracious Sir?
There are yet missing of your Company
Some few odd Lads, that you remember not.
Every man shift for all the rest, and let
No man take care for himself; for all is
But fortune: Coragio Bully-Monster Corasio.
If these be true spies which I wear in my head, here's a goodly sight.
O Setebos, these be brave Spirits indeed:
How fine my Master is? I am afraid
He will chastise me.
Ha, ha:
What things are these, my Lord Anthonio?
Will money buy em?
Very like: one of them
Is a plain Fish, and no doubt marketable.
Mark but the badges of these men, my Lords,
Then say if they be true: This misshapen knave;
His Mother was a Witch, and one so strong
That could control the Moon; make flows, and eb,
And deal in her command, without her power:
These three have robbed me, and this demi-devil;
(For he's a bastard one) had plotted with them
To take my life: two of these Fellows, you
Must know, and own, this Thing of darkness, I
Acknowledge mine.
I shall be pinched to death.
Is not this Stephano, my drunken Butler?
He is drunk now;
Where had he wine?
And Trinculo is reeling ripe: where should they
Find this grand Liquor that hath gilded 'em?
How came thou in this pickle?
I have bin in such a pickle since I saw you last,
That I fear me will never out of my bones:
I shall not fear fly-blowing.
Who how now Stephano?
O touch me not, I am not Stephano, but a Cramp.
You'd be King of the Isle, Sirha?
I should have bin a sore one then.
This is a strange thing as ere I looked on.
He is as disproportioned in his Manners
As in his shape: Go Sirha, to my Cell,
Take with you your Companions: as you look
To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.
I that I will: and Isle be wise hereafter,
And seek for grace: what a thrice double Ass
Was I to take this drunkard for a god?
And worship this dull fool?
Go to, away.
Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.
Or stole it rather.
Sir, I inuit your Highness, and your train
To my poor Cell: where you shall take your rest
For this one night, which part of it, Isle waste
With such discourse, as I not doubt, shall make it
Go quick away The story of my life,
And the particular accidents, gon by
Since I came to this Isle: And in the morn
I'll bring you to your ship, and so to Naples,
Where I have hope to see the nuptial
Of these our deere-belou'd, solemnised,
And thence retire me to my Millaine, where
Every third thought shall be my grave.
I long
To hear the story of your life; which must
Take the ear starngely.
I'll deliver all,
And promise you calm Seas, auspicious gales,
And sail, so expeditious, that shall catch
Your Royal fleet far off: My Ariel; chic
That is thy charge: Then to the Elements
Be free, and fare thou well: please you draw near.
NOw my Charms are all ore-throwne,
And what strength I haue's mine own.
Which is most faint: now it is true
I must be here confined by you,
Or sent to Naples, Let me not
Since I have my Dukedom got,
And pardoned the deceiver, dwell
In this bare Island, by your Spell,
But release me from my bands
With the help of your good hands:
Gentle breath of yours, my Sails
Must fill, or else my project fails,
Which was to please: Now I want
Spirits to enforce: Art to enchant,
And my ending is despair,
Unless I be relieved by prayer
Which pierces so, that it assaults
Mercy it self, and frees all faults.
As you from crimes would pardoned be,
Let your Indulgence set me free.

I Saw my Nephew Charlemont, but now
Part from his Father. Tell him I desire
To speak with him.
Borachio, thou art read
In Nature and her large Philosophy.
Obseru'st thou not the very self same course
Of revolution both in Man and Beast?
The same. For birth, growth, state, decay and death:
Only, a Man's beholding to his Nature
For th'better composition of the two.
But where that favour of his Nature, is
Not full and free; you fee a man becomes
A fool, as little-knowing as a beast.
That shows there's nothing in a Man, aboue
His nature; if there were, consid'ring it is
His beings excellence, t'would not yield
To Natures weakness.
Then if Death casts up
Our total sum of joy and happiness;
Let me have all my senses feasted in
Th'abundant fullness of delight at once,
And with a sweet insensible increase
Of pleasing surfeit melt into my dust.
That revolution is too short me thinks.
If this life comprehends our happiness,
How foolish to desire to dye so soon?
And if our time runs home unto the length
Of Nature, how improvident it were
To spend our substance on a minutes pleasure,
And after live an age in misery?
So thou conclude that pleasure only flows
Upon the stream of riches.
Wealth is Lord
Of all felicity.
It is Oracle.
For what's a man that's honest without wealth?
Both miserable and contemptible.
Hoe's worse Borachio. For if Charity
Be an essential part of Honesty,
And should be practised first upon our selves;
Which must be granted; then your honest man
That's poor, is most dishonest, for hee is
Uncharitable to the Man, whom hee
Should most respect. But what doth this touch me,
That seem to have enough? Thanks industry.
It is true. Had not my Body spread it self
Into posterity; perhaps I should
Desire no more increase of substance, then
Would hold proportion with mine own dimentions.
Yet even in that sufficiency of state,
A man has reason to provide and add.
For what is he hath such a present eye,
And so prepared a strength; that can fore-see,
And fortify his substance and himself,
Against those accidents, the least whereof
May rob him of an ages husbandry?
And for my children; they are as near to me,
As branches to the tree whereon they grow;
And may as numerously be multiplied.
As they increase, so should my providence;
For from my substance they receive the sap,
Whereby they live and flourish.
Sir enough,
I understand the mark whereat you aim.
Silence. Ware interrupted. Charlemont!
Good morrow Uncle.
Noble Charlemont;
Good morrow. Is not this the honoured day
You purposed to set forward to the war?
My inclination did intend it so.
And not your resolution?
Yes my Lord;
Had not my Father contradicted it.
O noble war! Thou first original
Of all man's honour. How deiectedly,
The baser Spirit of our present time
Hath cast it self below the ancient worth
Of our forefathers! From whose noble deeds
Ignobly we derive our pedigrees.
Sir, tax not me for his unwillingness.
By the command of his authority,
My disposition's forced against it self.
Nephew, you are the honour of our blood.
The troop of Gentry, whose inferior worth
Should second your example, are become
Your Leaders: and the scorn of their discourse,
Turns smiling back upon your backewardnesse.
You need not urge my spirit by disgrace
It is free enough. My Father hinders it.
To curb me, hee denies me maintenance
To put me in the habit of my ranque.
Unbind me from that strong necessity,
And call me Coward if I stay behind.
For want of means? Borachio! Whore's the gold?
I'd disinherit my posterity
To purchase honour. It is an interest
I prize aboue the principal of wealth.
I'm glad I had th'occasion to make known
How readily my substance shall unlock
It self to serve you. Here's a thousand Crowns.
My worthy uncle; in exchange for this,
I leave my bond. So I am doubly bound;
By that for the repayment of this gold,
And by this gold to satisfy your love.
Sir; it is a witness (only) of my love;
And love doth always satisfy it self.
Now to your Father; labour his consent.
My importunity shall second yours.
Wee will obtain it.
If entreaty fail,
The force of reputation shall prevail.
Go call my Sons, that they may take their leaves
Of noble Charlemont. Now my Borachio!
The substance of our former argument
Was wealth.
The question how to compass it.
Young Charlemont is going to the war.
O, thou begin'st to take me.
Mark me then.
Me thinks, the pregnant wit of Man, might make
The happy absence of this Charlemont,
A subject for commodious providence.
He has a wealthy Father; ready even
To drop into his grave. And no mans power
When Charlemont is gone, can interpose
Twixt you and him.
You have apprehended; both
My meaning and my love. Now let thy trust,
For undertaking and for secrecy,
Hold measure with thy amplitude of wit;
And thy reward shall parallel thy worth.
My resolution has already bound
Me to your service.
And my heart to thee.
Here are my Sons.???
There's my eternity. My life in them;
And their succession shall for ever live.
And in my reason dwells the providence,
To add to life as much of happiness.
Let all men lose, so I increase my gain,
I have no feeling of another pain.
I prithee let this current of my tears,
Divert thy inclination from the war.
For of my children thou are only left,
To promise a succession to my house.
And all the honour thou can get by arms,
Will give but vain addition to thy name;
Since from thy ancestors thou dost derive
A dignity sufficient; and as great
As thou hast substance to maintain and bear.
I prithee stay at home.
My noble Father.
The weakest sigh you breath, hath power to turn
My strongest purpose; and your softest tear
To melt my resolution to as soft
Obedience. But my affection to the war,
Is as hereditary as my blood,
To every life of all my ancestry.
Your predecessors were your presidents;
And you are my example. Shall I serve
For nothing but a vain Parenthesis,
I'th'honour'd story of your Family?
Or hang but like an empty Scutcheon,
Between the trophee's of my predecessors.
And the rich Arms of my posterity?
There's not a French-man of good blood and youth'
But either out of spirit or example,
Is turned a Soldier. Only Charlemont
Must be reputed that same heartless thing,
That Cowards will be bold to play upon.
Good morrow my Lord.
Morrow good brother.
Good morrow Uncle.
Morrow knit Nephew.
What? ha'you washed your eyes wi'teares this morning?
Come: by my soul his purpose does deserve
Your free consent. Your tenderness dissuades him.
What to the Father of a Gentleman,
Should be more tender then the maintenance
And the increase of honour to his house?
My Lord; here are my Boys. I should be proud
That either this were able, or that inclined
To be my Nephews brave competitor.
Your importunities have overcome.
Pray God my forced grant prove not ominous.
We have obtained it.???Ominous? in what?
It cannot be in anything but death.
And I am of a confident belief,
That even the time, place, manner of our deaths,
Doe follow Fate with that necessity;
That makes vs sure to dye. And in a thing
Ordained so certainly unalterable,
What can the use of providence prevail?
Morrow my Lord Montferrers, Lord D'amville.
Good morrow Gentlemen. Cousin Charlemont!
Kindly good morrow. Troth I was afraid
I should ha come too late, to tell you that
I wish your undertakings a success
That may deserve the measure of their worth.
My Lord; my duty would not let me go,
Without receiving your commandments.
Accomplements are more for ornament,
Then use. Wee should employ no time in them,
But what our serious business will admit.
Your favour had by his duty been prevented,
If we had not with-held him in the way.
Hee was o'comming to present his service.
But now no more. The Cooke invites to breakfast.
Wilt please your Lordship enter.???Noble Lady.
My noble Mistress! this accomplement
Is like an elegant and moving speech,
Composed of many sweet persuasive points,
Which second one onother, with a fluent
Increase, and confirmation of their force,
Reserving still the best until the last,
To crown the strong impulsion of the rest
With a full conquest of the hearers sense:
Because th'impression of the last we speak
Doth always longest and most constantly
Possess the entertainment of remembrance.
So all that now salute my taking leave,
Have added numerously to the love,
Wherewith I did receive their curtsy.
But you (dear Mistress) being the last and best
That speaks my farewell; like th'imperious close
Of a most sweet Oration, wholly have
Possessed my liking, and shall ever live
Within the soul of my true memory.
So (Mistress) with this kiss I take my leave.
My worthy Servant! you mistake th'intent
Of kissing. T'was not meant to separate
A pair of Lovers; but to be the seal
Of Love; importing by the joining of
Our mutual and incorporated breathes,
That we should breath but one contracted life.
Or stay at home, or let me go with you.
My Castabella! for my self to stay,
Or you to go, would either tax my youth
With a dishonourable weakness, or
Your loving purpose with immodesty.
And for the satisfaction of your love,
Here comes a man whose knowledge I have made
A witness to the contract of our vows,
Which my return by marriage shall confirm.
I salute you both with the spirit of copulation, ?????????
already informed of your matrimonial purposes, and will ?????????
testimony to the integrity.
O the sad trouble of my fearful soul!
My faithful servant! did you never hear,
That when a certain great man went to th'warre,
The lovely face of heaven was masked with sorrow,
The sighing winds did move the breast of earth,
The heavy clouds hung down their mourning heads,
And wept sad showers the day that hee went hence,
As if that day presaged some ill success,
That fatally should kill his happiness;
And so it came to pass. Me thinks my eyes
(Sweet Heaven forbid) are like those weeping clouds,
And as their showers presaged so doe my tears,
Some sad event will follow my sad fears.
Fie, superstitious? is it bad to kiss?
May all my fears hurt me no more then this.
Fie, fie, fie, these carnal kisses doe stir up the
Concupisences of the flesh.
O! heir's your daughter under her servants lips.
Madame, there is no cause you should mistrust
The kiss I gave, t'was but a parting one.
A lusty blood! Now by the lip of Love
Were I to choose, your joining one for me.
Your Father stays to bring you on the way.
Farewell. The great commander of the war
Prosper the course you undertake. Farewell.
My Lord! I humble??? take my leave???Madame!
I kiss your hand.???And your sweet lip.???Farewell.
Her power to speak is perished in her tears.
Something within me would persuade my stay,
But Reputation will not yield unto 't.
Dear Sir, you are the man whose honest trust
My confidence hath chosen for my friend.
I fear my absence will discomfort her.
You have the power and opportunity
To moderate her passion. Let her grief
Receive that friendship from you; and your Love
Shall not repent it self of curtsy.
Sir, I want words and protestation to insinuate into
your credit; but in plainness and truth, I will qualify her grief
with the spirit of consolation.
Sir, I will take your friendship up at use.
And fear not that your profit shall be small;
Your interest shall exceed your principal.
Monsieur Languebeau! Happily encountered. The
honesty of your conversation, makes me request more interest
in your familiarity.
If your Lordship will be pleased to salute me without
ceremony, I shall be willing to exchange my service for your
favour; but this worshipping kind of entertainment, is a super???stitious
vanity; in plainness and truth I love it not.
I embrace your disposition; and desire to give you
as liberal assurance of my love, as my Lord Belforest your de???served
favourer.
His Lordship is pleased with my plainness and truth
of conversation.
It cannot displease him. In the behaviour of his no???ble
daughter Castabella; a man may read her worth and your instruction.
That Gentlewoman is most sweetly modest, fair, ho???nest,
handsome, wise, well-borne, and rich.
You have given me her picture in small.
Shoe's like your Diamond; a temptation in every
mans eye, yet not yielding to any light impression her self.
The praise is hers; but the comparison your own.
You shall forgive me that, Sir.
I will not doeso much at your request as forgive you
it. I will only give you it Sir. By???You will make me
swear.
O! by no means. Prophanemot your lips with the
foulness of that sin. I will rather take it. To save your oath,
you shall lose your Ring.???Verily my Lord; my praise came
short of her worth. She exceeds a Jewel. This is but only
for ornament; She both for ornament and use.
Yet unprofitably kept without use. She deserves a
worthy Husband, Sir. I have often wished a match between
my elder Son and her. The marriage would join the houses
of Belforest and Damville into a noble alliance.
And the unity of Families is a work of love and cha???rite.
And that work an employment well becoming
the goodness of your disposition.
If your Lordship please to impose it upon me; I will
carry it without any second end, the surest way to satisfy your
wish.
Most joyfully accepted.???Rousard! Here are
Letters to my Lord Belforest touching my desire to that pur???pose.
I send you a suitor to Castabella. To this Gentleman's
discretion I commit the managing of your suite His good suc???cesse
shall be most thankful to your trust. Follow his instru???ctions,
he will be your leader.
In plainness and truth.
My leader? does your Lordship think me too weak
to give the on-set my self.
I will only assist your proceedings.
To say true, so I think you had need, for a sick
man can hardly get a women's good will without help.
Charlemont! thy gratuity and my promises were both
but words; and both like words shall vanish into ayre.???For
thy poor empty hand I must be mute:
This gives me feeling of a better suite.
Borachio! did precisely note this man?
His own profession would report him pure.
And seems to know if any benefit,
Arises of religion after death;
Yet but compare's profession with his life;
They so directly contradict themselves,
As if the end of his instructions were
But to divert the world from sin, that hee
More easily might engross it to himself.
By that I am confirmed an Atheist.
Well! Charlemont is gone. And here thou see,
His absence the foundation of my plot.
Hee is the man whom Castabella loves.
That was the reason I propounded him
Employment fixed upon a foreign place,
To draw his inclination out o'th'way.
T'has left the passage of our practise free.
This Castabella is a wealthy heir,
And by her marriage with my elder Son;
My house is honoured, and my state increased.
This work alone deserves my industry:
But if it prosper, thou shalt see my brain
Make this but an induction to a point
So full of profitable policy;
That it would make the soul of honesty
Ambitious to turn villain.
I bespeak
Employment in it. I'll be an instrument
To grace performance with dexterity.
Thou shalt. No man shall rob thee of the honour.
Go presently and buy a crimson Scarf,
Like Charlemonts. Prepare thee a disguise,
I'th'habite of a Soldier, hurt and lame;
And then be ready at the wedding feast,
Where thou shalt have employment in a work
Will please thy disposition.
As I vowed;
Your instrument shall make your project proud.
This marriage will bring wealth. If that succeed,
I will increase it though my Brother bleed.
Nay good Sir; in troth if you knew how little it plea???ses
me, you would forbear it.
I will not leave thee, till you have entertained me for thy
servant.
My servant? You are sick you say. You would tax
me of indiscretion to entertain one that is not able to doe me
service.
The service of a Gentlewoman consists most in cham???ber
work, and sick men are fittest for the chamber. I pr??????thee
give me a favour.
Me thinks you have a very sweet favour of you
own.
I lack but your black eye.
If you go to buffets among the Boys, they'll give
you one.
Nay if you grow bitter, Isle dispraise your black eye.
The gray eie'd Morning makes the fairest day.
Now that you dissemble not, I could be willing to
give you a favour. What favour would you have?
Any toy: any light thing.
Fie. Will you be so uncivil to ask a light thing at a
Gentlewoman's hand?
Wilt give me a bracelet o'thy hair then?
Doe you want hair Sir?
No faith Isle want no hair, so long as I can have it for
money.
What would you doe with my hair then?
Wear it for thy sake sweet hart.
Doe you think I love to have my hair worn off?
Come you are so witty now, and so sensible.
Tush. I would I wanted one o'my senses now.
Bitter again? What's that? Smelling?
No, no, no. Why now you're satisfied I hope. I have
given you a favour.
What favour? a kiss? I prithee give me another.
Show me that I gave you then.
How should I show it?
You are unworthy of a favour if you will not bestow
the keeping of it one minute.
Well in plain terms, doest love me? That's the
purpose of my coming.
Love you? Yes Very well.
Give me thy hand upon it.
Nay, you mistake me. If I love you very well, I
must not love you now. For now your are not very well, you're
sick.
This Equivocation is for the jest now.
I speak't as it is now in fashion, in earnest. But I
shall not be in quiet for you I perceive, till I have given you
a favour. Doe you love me?
With all my hart.
Then with all my hart, Isle give you a Jewel to hang
in your ear,???Hark ye???I can never love you.
Call you this a Jewel to hang in mine ear? It is no
light favour, for Isle be sworn it comes somewhat heavily to
me. Well. I will not leave her for all this. Me thinks it
animates a man to stand too't, when a woman desires to be rid
of him at the first sight.
I entertain the offer of this match;
With purpose to confirm it presently.
I have already moved it to my daughter;
Her soft excuses savoured at the first
(Me thought) but of a modest innocence
Of blood; whose vnmoou'd stream was never drawn
Into the current of affection. But when I
Replied with more familiar arguments,
Thinking to make her apprehension bold;
Her modest blush fell to a pale dislike,
And she refused it with such confidence,
As if she had been prompted by a love
Inclining firmly to some other man,
And in that obstinacy she remains.
Verily that disobedience doth not become a Child.
It proceeds from an vnsanctified liberty. You will be acces???sarie to your own dishonour if you suffer it.
Your honest wisdom has advised me well.
Once more Isle move her by persuasive means.
If she resist; all mildness set apart,
I will make use of my authority.
And instantly, least fearing your constraint; her con???trary
affection teach her some devise that may prevent you.
To cut off every opportunity,
Procrastination may assist her with;
This instant night she shall be married.
Best.
Please it your Lordship, my mother attends
In the Gallery, and desires your conference.
This means I used to bring me to your ear.
Time cuts off circumstance; I must be brief.
To your integrity did Charlemont
Commit the contract of his love and mine.
Which now so strong a hand seeks to divide:
That if your grave advise assist me not,
I shall be forced to violate my faith.
Since Charlemont's absence, I have weighed his love
with the spirit of consideration; and in sincerity I find it to be
frivolous and vain. With-draw your respect; his affection de???serves
it not.
Good sir; I know your heart cannot profane
The holiness you make profession of;
With such a vicious purpose, as to break
The vow, your own consent did help to make.
Can he deserve your love, who in neglect of your de???lightfull
conversation; and in obstinate contempt of all your
prayers and tears; absents himself so far from your sweet fell???lowship,
and with a purpose so contracted to that absence, that
you see hee purchases your separation with the hazard of his
blood and life; fearing to want pretence to part your comp???niece????It is rather hate that doth division move; Love still de???sires
the presence of his Love.???Verily, hee is not of the
Family of Love.
O doe not wrong him. It is a generous mind
That led his disposition to the war:
For gentle love and noble courage are
So near allied; that one begets another:
Or, Love is Sister, and Courage is the Brother.
Could I affect him better then before,
His Soldiers heart would make me love him more.
But Castabella.???
Tush, you mistake the way into a woman,
The passage lies not through her reason, but her blood.
Nay, stay! How would thou call the child,
That being raised with cost and tenderness,
To full hability of body and means;
Denies relief unto the parents, who
Bestowed that bringing up?
Unnatural.
Then Castabella is unnatural.
Nature the loving mother of vs all,
Brought forth a woman for her own relief;
By generation to revive her age.
Which now thou hast hability and means
Presented; most unkindly dost deny.
Believe me Mother; I doe love a man.
Prefer the affection of an absent Love,
Before the sweet possession of a man;
The barren mind before the fruitful body;
Where our creation has no reference
To man; but in his body: being made
Only for generation; which (unless
Our children can be gotten by conceit)
Must from the body come. If Reason were
Our counsellour, wee would neglect the work
Of generation, for the prodigal
Expense it draws vs too of that which is
The wealth of life. Wise Nature (therefore) hath
Reserved for an inducement to our sense,
Our greatest pleasure in that greatest work.
Which being offered thee; thy ignorance
Refuses, for th'imaginarie joy
Of an unsatisfied affection, to
An absent man. Whose blood once spent i'th'warre;
Then he will come home, sick, lame and impotent;
And wed thee to a torment; like the pain
Of Tantalus, continuing thy desire,
With fruitless presentation of the thing
It loves; still moved, and still unsatisfied.
Now Leuidulcia! Hast thou yet prepared
My Daughters love to entertain this Man?
Her husband here?
I'm but her mother i'law;
Yet if she were my very flesh and blood,
I could advise no better for good.
Sweet wife! Thy joyful husband thus salutes
Thy cheek.
My husband? O! I am betrayed.???
Dear friend of Charlemont! your purity
Professes a divine contempt o'th'world;
O be not bribed by that you so neglect,
In being the worlds hated instrument,
To bring a just neglect upon your self!???
Dear Father! let me but examine my
Affection.???Sir, your prudent judgment can
Persuade your son that it is improvident
To marry one whose disposition, he
Did ne'er observe.???Good sir, I may be of
A nature so unpleasing to your mind;
Perhaps you'll curse the fatal hour wherein
You rashly married me.
My Lord Belforest!
I would not have her forced against her choice.
Passion o'me thou peevish girl. I charge
Thee by my blessing, and th'authoritie
I have to claim th'obedience; marry him.
Now Charlemont! O my presaging tears!
This sad event hath followed my sad fears.
A rape, a rape, a rape!
How now?
What's that?
Why what is it but a Rape to force a wench to marry,
since it forces her to lie with him she would not?
Verily, his Tongue is an vnsanctified member.
Verily, your gravity becomes your perished soul, as
hoary moldiness does rotten fruit.
Cousin, you're both uncivil and profane.
Thou disobedient villain; get thee out of my sight.
Now by my Soul Isle plague thee for this rudeness.
Come; set forward to the Church.
And verify the Proverb. The nearer the Church;
the further from God.???Poor wench. For thy sake, may
his hability die in his appetite; that thou be not troubled
with him thou love not. May his appetite move thy desire to
another man: so hee shall help to make himself Cuckold.
And let that man be one that he pays wages too: so thou shalt
profit by him thou hottest. Let the Chambers be matted, the
hinges oiled, the curtain rings silenced, and the chamber-maid
hold her peace at his own request, that he may sleep the queen???etlier.
And in that sleep let him be soundly cuckolded. And
when hee knows it, and seeks to sue a divorce; let him have
no other satisfaction then this: Hee lay by and slept: the Law
will take no hold of her, because he winked at it.
Mistress Cataplasma! I expected you an hour since.
Certain Ladies at my house (Madame) detained
me; otherwise I had attended your Ladyship sooner.
Wee are beholding to you for you company. My
Lord; I pray you bid these Gentlewomen welcome: they are my
invited friends.
Gentlewomen, you're welcome, pray sit down.
Fresco! by my Lord D'amville's leave I prith?????? go
into the Buttry. Thou shall it find some o'my men there; if they
bid thee not welcome, they are very Loggerheads.
If your Logger heads will not, your Hoggesheads shall
Madame, if I get into the Buttry.
That fellows disposition to mirth should be our pre???sent
example. Let's be grave and meditate, when our affairs re???quire
our seriousness. It is out of season to be heavily disposed.
We should be all wound up into the key of Mirth.
The Music there.
Whore's my Lord Montferrers? Tell him here's a
room attends him.
Heaven give your marriage that I am deprived of,
joy.
My Lord Belforest! Castabella's health.
Set open the Cellar doors, and let this health go freely round
the house.???Another to your Son, my Lord; To noble
Charl. mont. Hee is a Soldier. Let the Instruments of wary
congratulate his memory.???
My Lord, here's one i'th'habite of a Soldier says hee
is newly returned from Ostend, and has some business of im???port
to speak.
Ostend! let him come in. My soul fore-tels hee
brings the news will make our Music full. My brothers joy
would do it: and here comes hee will raise it.
O my spirit, it does dissuade my tongue to question
him, as if it knew his answer would displease.
Soldier! what news? wee heard a rumour of a blow
you gave the enemy.
It is very true my Lord.
Can thou relate it.
Yes.
I Prithee doe.
The enemy, defeated of a fair
Advantage by a flattering stratagem;
Plants all the Artillery against the Town.
Whose thunder and lightning made our bulwarks shake;
And threatened in that terrible report,
The storm wherewith they meant to second it.
Th'assault was general. But for the place
That promised most advantage to beforc'd;
The pride of all their Army was drawn forth,
And equally divided into Front,
And Rear. They marched. And coming to a stand,
Ready to pass our Channel at an ebb,
W???advised it for our safest course, to draw
Our ??????uices up and maked unpassable.
Our Governor opposed; and suffered'em
To charge vs home even to the Ramp???ers foot.
But when their front was forcing up our breach,
At push o'pike, then did his policy
Let go the sluices, and tripped up the heals
Of the whole body of their troupe, that stood
Within the violent current of the stream.
Their front beleaguered twixt the water and
The Town; seeing the flood was grown too deep,
To promise them a safe retreat; exposed
The force of all their spirits, (like the last
Expiring gasp of a strong hearted man)
Upon the hazard of one charge; but were
Oppressed and fell. The rest that could not swim,
Were only drowned; but those that thought to scope
By swimming, were by murderers that flankerd,
The level of the flood both drow'nd and slain.
Now by my soul (Soldier) a brave service.
O what became of my dear Charlemont?
Walking next day upon the fatal shore,
Among the slaughtered bodies of their men,
Which the full-stomack'd Sea had cast upon
The sands, it was m'vnhappy chance to light
Upon a face, whose favour when it lived
My astonished mind informed me I had seen.
Hee lay in's Armour; as if that had been
His Coffin, and the weeping Sea (like one;
Whose milder temper doth lament the death
Of him whom in his rage he slew) runs up
The Shore; embraces him; kisses his cheek,
Goes back again and forces up the Sands
To bury him; and every time it parts,
Sheds tears upon him; till at last (as if
It could no longer endure to see the man
Whom it had slain, yet loath to leave him;) with
A kind of unresolved unwilling pace,
Winding her waives one in another, like
A man that folds his arms, or wrings his hands
For grief; ebbed from the body and descends:
As if it would sink down into the earth,
And hide it self for shame of such a deed.
And Soldier; who was this?
O Charlemont!
Your fear hath told you that whereof my grief
Was loath to be the messenger.
O God.
Charlemont drowned? Why how could that be? since
it was the adverse party that received the overthrow.
His forward spirit pressed into the front;
And being engaged within the enemy,
When they retreated through the rising stream;
In the violent confusion of the throng
Was overborne and perished in the flood.
And here's the sad remembrance of his life,???The Scarf.
Which for his sake I will for ever wear.
Torment me not with witnesses of that,
Which I desire, not to believe; yet must.
Thou art a Scrichowle; and dost come i'night
To be the cursed messenger of death.
Away. Depart my house; or (by my soul)
You'll find me a more fatal enemy,
Then ever was Ostend. Be gone. Dispatch.
Sir t'was my love.
Your love to vex my heart with that I hate?
Hark, doe you hear? you, knave????
O you are a most delicate sweet eloquent villain???
Was it not well counterfeited?
Rarely.???Be gone. I will not here reply.
Why then farewell. I will not trouble you.
So. The foundation's laid. Now by degrees,
The work will rise and soon be perfected.
O this uncertain state of mortal man!
What then? it is th'ineuitable fate
Of all things underneath the Moon.
It is true.
Brother for healths sake overcome your grief.
I cannot sir. I am incapable
Of comfort. My turn will be next. I feel
My self not well.
You yield too much to grief.
All men are mortal. The hour of death is vncer???taine.
Age makes sickness the more dangerous. And grief is
subject to distraction. You know not how soon you may be
deprived of the benefit of sense. In my understanding (there???fore)
you shall doe well if you be sick to set your state in pre???sent
order. Make your Will.
I have my wish.???Lights for my Border.
Isle withdraw a while;
And crave the honest counsel of this man.
With all my heart. I pray attend him sir.
This next room please your Lordship.
Where you will.
My Daughter's gone. Come Son. Mistress Cata???plasma,
come; we'll up into her chamber. I'd fine see how she
entertains the expectation of her husbands bedfellowship.
Faith howsoever she entertains it; I shall hardly
please her; therefore let her rest.
Nay, please her hardly and you please her best.
Boy! fill some drink Boy.
Enough good Sir; not a drop more by this light.
Not by this light? Why then put out the candles and
we'll drink in the dark and t'wut old Boy.
No??? no, no, no, no.
Why then take thy liquor. A health Fresco.
Your health will make me sick sir.
Then t'will bring you o'your knees I hope sir.
May I not stand and pledge it sir?
I hope you will doe as wee doe.
Nay then indeed I must not stand, for you cannot.
Well said old boy.
Old boy, you'll make me a young child anon: for if
I continue this, I shall scarce be able to go alone.
My body is as weak as water, Fresco.
Good reason sir, the beer has sent all the malt up into
your brain, and left nothing but the water in your body.
Borachio! see those fellows?
Yes my Lord.
Their drunkenness that seems ridiculous,
Shall be a serious instrument, to bring
Our sober purposes to their success.
I am prepared for th'execution, sir.
Cast off this habit, and about it straight.
Let them drink healths, &amp; drown their brains in the flood;
Isle promise them they shall be pledged in blood.
You ha'left a damnable snuff here.
Doe you take that in snuff Sir?
You are a damnable rogue then.???
Fortune I honour thee. My plot still rises,
According to the model of mine own desires.???
Lights for my Brother.???What ha'you drunk your selves
mad you knaves.
My Lord the Jacks abused me.
I think they are the Jacks indeed that have abused
thee, Dost hear? that fellow is a proud knave. Hee has abused
thee. As thou goosed over the fields by and by, in lighting my
brother home, Isle tell thee what'sha't doe. Knock him over
the pate with thy torch, Isle bear the out in it.
I will singe the goose by this torch.
Doest hear; fellow. See thou that proud knave, I
have given him a lesson for his sauciness. He has wronged thee.
Isle tell thee what'sha't doe: As we go over the fields by and
by, clap him suddenly o'er the coxcomb with thy torch,
Isle bear thee out in it.
I will make him understand as much.
Now Monsieur Snuff! What has my brother done?
Made his Will; and by that Will made you his heir;
with this proviso, that as occasion shall hereafter move him;
hee may revoke or alter it when he pleases.
Yes. Let him if he can.???Isle make it sure from
his revoking.
Brother now good night.
The sky is dark, we'll bring you o'er the fields.
Who can but strike, wants wisdom to maintain:
Hee that strikes safe and sure, has heart and brain.
O Love! thou chaste affection of the Soul,
Without th'adultrate mixture of the blood;
That virtue which to goodness adds good:
The min???on of heavens heart. Heaven! is it my fate
For loving that thou love to get thy hate?
Or was my Charlemont thy chosen Love?
And therefore hast received him to thy self?
Then I confess thy anger's not unjust.
I was thy rival Yet to be divorced
From love, has been a punishment enough.
(Sweet heaven) without being married unto hate,
Had thou been pleased: O double misery!
Yet since thy pleasure hath inflicted it,
I??? not my heart, my duty shall submit.
Mistress Cataplasma, good night. I pray when your
Man has brought you home, let him return and light me to
my house.
He shall instantly waite on your Ladyship.
Good Mistress Cataplasma; for my servants are all
drunk; I cannot be beholding to'em for their attendance.
O here's your Bride.
And melancholic too, me thinks.
How can she choose? your sickness will
Distaste th'expected sweetness of the night.
That makes her heavy.
That should make her light.
Look you to that.
What sweetness speak you of?
The sweetness of the night consists in rest.
With that sweetness thou shalt be surely blessed,
Unless my groaning wake thee. Doe not moan.
Sh'ad rather you would wake, and make her groan.
Nay'troth sweet heart, I will not trouble thee.
Thou shalt not lose thy maiden-head too night.
O might that weakness ever be in force;
I never would desire to sue divorce!
Wilt go to bed.
I will attend you, Sir.
Mother, good night.
Pleasure be your bed-fellow.
Why sure their Generation was asleep,
When she begot those Dormice; that she made
Them up so weakly and imperfectly.
One wants desire; the tother hability.
When my affection even with their cold bloods
(As snow rubbed through an active hand, does make
The flesh to burn) by agitation is
Inflamed. I could unbrace, and entertain
The ayre to cool it.
That but mitigates
The heate; rather embrace and entertain
A younger brother; he can quench the fire.
Can you so, sir? now I beshrew your ear.
Why bold Sebastian, how dare you approach
So near the presence of your displeased Father.
Under the protection of his present absence.
Belike you knew he was abroad then.
Yes.
Let me encounter you so; Isle persuade
Your means to reconcile me to his love.
Is that the way? I understand you not.
But for your reconcilement, meet m'at home;
Isle satisfy your suite
Within this half hour?
Or within this whole hour. When you will.???
A lusty blood! has both the presence and the spirit of a man.
I like the freedom of his behaviour.???Ho???Sebastian!
Gone????Has set my blood o'boyling i'my veins And now
(like water poured upon the ground, that mixes it self with
every moisture it meets) I could clasp with any man.
O Fresco! Art thou come? If tother fail, then thou art enter???taind.
Lust is a Spirit, which whosoever doth raise;
The next man that encounters boldly, lays.
Such stones men use to raise a house upon;
But with these stones I go to ruin one.
Passion o'me you drunken knaves: you'll put the lights out.
No my Lord; they are but in jest.
Mine's out.
Then light it at his head, that's light enough.???
Foregod, they are out. You drunken Rascals back and light'em.
It is exceeding dark.
No matter. I am acquainted with the way. Your hand.
Let's easily walk. Isle lead you till they come.
My solo's oppressed with grief??? T'lies heavy at my
heart, O my departed Son! ere long I shall be with ?????????
Marry God forbid.
O, o, o.
Now all the host of heaven forbid. Knaves, Rogues.
Pray God hee be not hurt! her's fallen into the gre???uell pit.
Brother! dear Brother! Rascals, villains, knaves.
Eternal darkness damn you; come away. Go round about
into the gravel pit, and help my Brother up. Why what a
strange unlucky night ????????? this? Is it not my Lord? I think that
Dog that ho???led the news of grief, that fatal Scrichowle
ushered on this mischiefs.
Mischief indeed my Lord. Your Brother's dead.
Hoe's dead.
Hoe's dead.
Dead be your tongues. Drop out mine eye-bals, and
let envious Fortune play at tennis with'em. Have I lived to this?
Malicious Nature! had thou borne me blind; th'adst yet been
something favourable to me. No breath? No motion? prithee
tell me heaven! hast shut thine eye to wink at murder; or hast
put this sable garment on, to morn it's death? Not one poor
spark in the whole spacious sky, of all that endless number
would vouchsafe to shine? You vize-royes to the King of na???ture!
whose constellations govern mortal births; where is
that fatal Planet ruled at his Native???tie? That might ha'pleas'd
to light him out, as well into th'world; unless it be ashamed
T???have been the instrument of such a good mans cursed de???st???no.???
Passions transports you. Recollect your self.
????????? him not. Whether our deaths be good
Or bad; it is not death but life that tries;
Hee lived well, (therefore) questionless, well dyes.
I. Tic an easy thing for him that has no pain to talk
of patience. Doe you think that Nature has no feeling?
Feeling? Yes. But has she purposed any thing for no???thing?
What good receives this body by your grief? When???there
is it more unnatural not to grieve for him you cannot
help with it; or hurt your self with grieving and yet grieve
in vain?
Indeed had hee been taken from me like a piece
o'dead flesh, I should neither have felt it, nor grieved for it. But
come hither, 'pray look here. Behold the lively tincture of
his blood! Neither the Dropsy nor the Iaundies in it. But the
true freshness of a sanguine red; for all the fog of this black
murdrous night has mixed with it. For any thing I know, hee
might have lived till doomsday, and have done more good then ei???there
you or I. O Brother ??? He was a man of such a native good???ness;
as if Regeneration had been given him in his mothers
womb. So harmless, that rather then have trod upon a worm,
hee would have shunned the way. So dearly pitiful, that ever the
poor could ask his charity with dry eyes, hee gaue' em relief
wi'teares???with tears???yes faith with tears.
Take up the Corps. For wisedom's sake let reason for???tifie
this weakness.
Why what would you have me doe? Foolish Nature
will have her course in spite o'wisedome. But I have even
done. All these words were but a great wind, and now this
shower of tears has laid it, I am calm again. You may set for???ward
when you will. Isle follow you, like one that must and
would not.
Our opposition will but trouble him.
The grief that melts to tears, by it self is spent,
Passion resisted, grows more violent.
Here's a sweet Comedy. T'begins with O dolentis,
and concludes with ha, ha, he.
Ha, ha, he.
O my echo! I could stand reuerberating this sweet
musical ayre of joy, till I had perished my sound lungs with
violent laughter. Lovely Night-Rauen! you have seized a carcass.
Put him out on's pain. I lay so fitly underneath the
bank from whence he fell; that ever his faltering tongue could
utter double Oo; I knocked out's brains with this fai???e
Ruby. And had another stone just of this form and bigness
ready: that I laid in the broken skull vpo'the ground for's pile???low;
against the which they thought he fell and perished.
Upon this ground Isle build my Manour-house;
And this shall be the chiefest corner stone.
T'has crowned the most judicious murder, that
The brain of man was ever delivered of.
I. Mark the plot. Not any circumstance
That stood within the reach of the design,
Of persons, dispositions, matter, time or place,
But by this brain of mine, was made
An Instrumental help; yet nothing from
Th'induction to th'accomplishment seemed forced,
Or done o'purpose, but by accident.
First, my report that Charlemont was dead,
Though false; yet covered with a masque of truth.
I, and delivered in as fit a time.
When all our minds so wholly were possessed
With one affair, that no man would suspect
A thought employed for any second end.
Then the Precision to be ready, when
Your brother spake of death, to move his Will.
His business called him thither; and it fell
Within his office; unrequested to it.
From him it came religiously; and saved
Our project from suspicion: which if I
Had moved had been endangered.
Then your healths.
Though seeming but the ordinary rites,
And ceremonies due to fest???uals:???
Yet used by me to make the servants drunk.
An instrument the plot could not have missed.
T'was easy to set drunkards by the ears:
Th'ad nothing but their torches to fight with;
And when those lights were out;
Then darkness did
Protect the execution of the work,
Both from prevention and discovery.
Here was a murder bravely carried, through
The eye of observation, vnobseru'd.
And those that saw the passage of it, made
The Instruments yet knew not what they did.
That power of rule Philosophers ascribe
To him they call the supreme of the Stars;
Making their influences governors
Of Sublunary Creatures; when their selves
Are senseless of their operations.
What! Doest start at thunder? Credit my belief, it is a mere
effect of nature. An exhalation hot and dry, involved within a
watery vapour in the middle religion of the ayre. Whose cold???ness
congealing that thick moisture to a cloud: the angry
exhalation shut within a prison of contrary quality, strives to
be free; and with the violent eruption through the grossenesse
of that cloud; makes this noise we hear.
It is a fearful noise.
It is a brave noise. And me thinks graces our ac???complishid
project, as a peal of Ordnance does a triumph. It
speaks encouragement. Now Nature shows thee how it sa???uour'd
our performance; to forbear this noise when wee set
forth, because it should not terrify my brothers going home;
which would have dashed our purpose: To forbear this light???ning
in our passage, least it should ha'warn'd him of the
pitfall. Then propitious Nature winck'd at our proceedings;
now it doth express, how that forbearance favoured our suc???cesse.
You have confirmed me. For it follows well;
That Nature (since her self decay doth hate)
Should favour those that strengthen their estate.
Our next endeavour is; since on the false report that
Charlemont is dead, depends the fabrique of the work; to cre???dit
that with all the countenance wee can.
Faith Sir, even let his own inheritance, whereof you've
dispossessed him, countenance the act. Spare so much out of
that, to give him a solemnity of funeral. T'will quit the cost;
and make your apprehension of his death appear more confi???dent
and true.
Isle take thy counsel. Now farewell black night;
Thou beauteous Mistress of a murderer:
To honour thee, that hast accomplished all;
Isle wear thy colours at his funeral.
You are welcome into my chamber; Fresco. Prithee
shut the door.???Nay thou mistake me. Come in and
shut it.
It is somewhat late Madame.
No matter. I have somewhat to say to thee. What? is
not thy mistress towards a husband yet?
Faith Madame, she has suitors. But they will not suite
her me thinks. They will not come off lustily it seems.
They will not come on lustily, thou would say.
I mean (Madame) they are not rich enough.
But I (Fresco) they are not bold enough. Thy Mi???stress
is of a lively attractive blood Fr??? sco. And in troth shoe's
o'my mind for that. A poor spirit is poorer then a poor
purse.
Give me a fellow that brings not only temptation with
him, but has the activity of wit, and audacity of spirit to apply
every word and gesture of a women's speech and behaviour to
his own desire; and make her believe shoe's the suitor her self.
Never give back till he has made her yield to 'it.
Indeed among our equals Madame; but otherwise we
shall be put horribly out o'countenance.
Thou art deceived, Fresco. Ladies are as cou???teous as
Yeomens wive???, and me thinks they should be more gentle.
Hot diet and soft ease makes em (like wax always kept warm)
more easy to take impression.???Prithee untie my shoe.
???What? art thou shamefaced too? Go roundly to work
man. My leg is not gouty: t'will endure the feeling I warrant
thee Come hither Fresco; thine ear.???S'daintie; I mis???took
the place. I missed thine ear and hit thy lip.
Your Lad???ship has made me blush.
That shows you are full o'lustie blood??? and thou know???est
not how to use it. Let me see thy hand. Thou should not
be shamefaced by thy hand, Fresco. Here's a brawny flesh and a
hairy skin: both signs of an able body. I doe not like these
phlegmatic, smooth-skinn'd, soft-flesh'd fellows. They are
like candied Suckets, when they begin to perish; which I would
always empty my Closet off, and giue'em my chamber-maid.
???I have some skill in Palmistry: by this line that stands di???rectly
against me; thou should be near a good fortune.
Fresco, if thou had the grace to entertain it.
O what is that Madame? I pray!
No less then the love of a fair Lady, if thou doest not
lose her with faint-heartednesse.
A Lady, Madame? alas a Lady is a great thing, I cannot
compass her.
No? Why? I am a Lady, Am I so great I cannot be com???passed? Clasp my wast and try.
I could find i'my heart Madame.
Vds body; my Husband! Faint-hearted fool! I think
thou were begotten between the North-pole, and the con???goaled
passage. Now like an ambitious Coward that betrays
himself with fearful delay: you must suffer for the treason
you never committed. Go hide thy self behind yound'arras,
instantly.
Sebastian! What doe you here so late?
Nothing yet; but I hope I shall.???
You're very bold.
And you very valiant; for you met me at full Ca???rear.
You come to ha'me move your fathers reconciliation.
Isle write a word or two i'your behalf.
A word or two, Madame? that you doe for me, will
not be contained in less then the compass of two sheets. But
in plain terms, shall wee take the opportunity of private???ness?
What to doe?
To dance the beginning of the world after the Eng???lish
manner.
Why not after the French or Italian?
Fie. They dance it preposterously; backward.
Are you so active to dance?
I can shake my heals.
You're well made for it.
Measure me from top to toe; you shall not find me
differ much from the true standard of proportion.
I think I am accursed. Sebastian! There's one at the
door has beaten opportunity away from vs. In brief, I love
thee. And it shall not be long before I give thee a testimony of
it. To save thee now from suspicion; doe no more but draw thy
Rapier; chase thy self; and when hee comes in, rush by with???out
taking notice of him. Only seem to be angry, and let me
alone for the rest.
Now by the hand of M???rcurie.
What's the matter wife?
Ooh, Ooh, Husband!
Prithee what ail'st thou woman?
O feel my pulse. It beats I warrant you. Be patient
a little sweet Husband; tarry but till my breath come to me a???gain,
and Isle satisfy you.
What a???les Sebastian, he looks so distractedly?
The poor Gentleman's almost out on's wits I think.
You remember the displeasure his Father took against him
about the liberty of speech he used even now when your daugh???la
went to be married.
Yes, what of that?
T'has crazed him sure: he met a poor man in the street
even now. Upon what quarrel I know not: but hee pursued
him so violently, that if my house had not been his rescue; he
had surely ki???d him.
What a strange desperate young man is that!
Nay husband, hee grew so in rage when hee saw the
man was conueyed from him, that he was ready even to have
drawn his naked weapon upon me. And had not your knock???ing
at the door prevented him; surely h'ad done something
to me.
Whore's the man?
Alas here. I warrant you the poor fearful soul is
scarce come to himself again yet.???If the fool have
any wit hee will apprehend me.???Doe you hear sir???
You may be bold to come forth; the Fury that haunted you
is gone.
Are you sure hee is gone?
Hoe's gone; hoe's gone, I warrant thee.
I would I were gone too. Has shook me almost into
a dead palsy.
How fell the difference between you?
I would I were out at the back door.
You are safe enough. Prithee tell's the falling out.
Yes sir, when I have recovered my spirits. My me???mori
is almost frighted from me.???Oh so, so, so.???
Why Sir, as I came along the street Sir;???this same Gentle???man
came stumbling after me, and trod o'my hecle,???
I cried O. Doe you cry sirrah? says hee. Let me see your
heel; if it be not hurt, Isle make you cry for something. So he
claps my head between his legs, and pulls off my shoe.
I having shifted no sockes in a sea' night, the Gentleman cried
foh; and said my feet were base and cowardly feet, they
stunk for fear. Then hee knocked my shoe about my pate,
and I cried O, once more. In the mean time comes a shag.
haired dog by, and rubs against his shins. The Gentle???man
took the dog in shagge-haire to be some Watch-man in
a rug gown; and swore hee would hang me up at the next
door with my lantern in my hand, th???t passengers might
see their way as they went without rubbing against Gentle???men's
shins. So, for want of a Cord. hee took his own
garters off; and as he was going to make a noose, I watched my
time and ran away. And as I ran (indeed) I bid him hang
himself in his own gatters. So hee in choler, puisued me hi???there
as you see.
Why this savours of distraction.
Of mere distraction.
How soever it savours, I am sure it smells like a lye.
Thou moist go forth at the back door (honest fell???low)
the way is private and safe.
So it had need, for your fore-doore (here) is both
common and dangerous.
Good night honest Fresco.
Good night Madame; if you get me kissing o'Ladies
again.???
This false out handsomely.
But yet the matter does not well succeed;
Till I have brought it to the very deed.
Sergeant! what hour of the night is it.
About one.
I would you would relieve me; for I am
So heavy, that I shall ha'much ado;
To stand out my perdu.
Isle even but walk
The round (sir) and then presently return.
For God's sake Sergeant relieve me, aboue five hours
together in so foul a stormy night as this?
Why t'isa musique Soldier. Heaven and earth are now
in consort, when the Thunder and the Canon play one to ano???there.
I know not why I should be thus inclined to sleep, I
feel my disposition pressed with a necessity of heaviness. Soul???dier!
if thou hast any better eyes, I prithee wake me when the Sergeant comes.
Sir, it is so dark and stormy that I shall scarce either see
or hear him ever he comes upon me.
I cannot ???orce my self to wake.???
Return to France; for thy old Father's dead;
And thou by murder, disinherited.
Attend with patience the success of things;
But leave revenge unto the King of kings.
O my affrighted soul! what fearful dream
Was this that waked me? Dreams are but the raised
Impressions of premeditated things,
By serious apprehension left upon
Our minds, or else th'imaginary shapes
Of objects proper to the complexion, or
The dispositions of our bodies. These
Can neither of them be the cause, why I
Should dream thus; for my mind has not been moved
With any one conception of a thought
To such a purpose; nor my nature wont
To trouble me with fantasies of terror.
It must be something that my Genius would
Inform me of. Now gracious heaven forbid!
O! let my Spirit be deprived of all
Fore-sight and knowledge, ere it understand
That vision acted; or divine that act
To come. Why should I think so? Left I not
My worthy Father in the kind regard
Of a most loving Uncle? Soldier! saw
No apparition of a man?
You dream Sir; I saw nothing.
Tush. These idle dreams
Are fabulous. Our boiling fantasies
Like troubled waters falsify the shapes
Of things retained in them; and make' em seem
Confounded, when they are distinguished, So
My actions daily conversant with war;
(The argument of blood and death) had left
(Perhaps) th'imaginary presence of
Some bloody accident upon my mind:
Which mixed confusedly with other thoughts,
(Whereof th'remembrance of my Father, might
Be one) presented all together, seem
Incorporate; as if his body were
The owner of that blood, the subject of
That death; when hoe's at Paris, and that blood
Shed here. It may be thus. I would not leave
The war, for reputatio'ns sake, upon
An idle apprehension; a vain dream.
Stand. Stand, I say. No? Why then have at thee. Sir,
if you will not stand, Isle make you fall? Nor stand, nor fall?
Nay then the Diuel's damme has broke her husbands head: for
sure it is a Spirit, I shot it through, and yet it will not fall.
O pardon me! my doubtful heart was slow
To credit that which I did fear to know.
SEt down the Body. Pay earth what she lent.
But she shall bear a living monument,
To let succeeding ages truly know.
That she is satisfied, what hee did owe:
Both principal and use; because his worth
Was better at his death then at his birth.
And with his Body, place that memory
Of noble Charlemont his worthy Son.
And give their Graves the rites that doe belong
To Soldiers. They were Soldiers both. The Father
Held open war with Sin; the Son with blood:
This in a war more gallant??? that more good.
There place their Arms; and here their Epitaph???.
And may these Lines survive the last of graves.
HEre lye the Ashes of that earth and fire;
whose heat and fruit, ded feed and warm the poor ???
And they (as if they would in sighs expire,
and into tears dissolve) his death deplore.
Hee did that good freel?????? for goodness sake,
fnforc'd: for gen'rousnesse he held so dear,
That hee feared none but him that did him make,
and yet he served him more for love then fear.
So's life provided, that though he did dye
Asod???un death; yet dyed not suddenly.
HIs Body lies interred within this would;
Who dyed a young man, yet departed old.
And in all strength of youth that Man can have,
Was ready still to drop into his grave.
For aged in virtue with a youthful eye,
He welcomed it being still prepared to dye;
And living so, though young deprived of breath,
He did not suffer an untimely death.
But we may say of his brave blessed decease ???
He dyed in war; and yet hee dyed in peace.
O might that fire revive the ashes of
This Phoenix! yet the wonder would not be
So great as he was good; and wondered at
For that. His lives example was so true
A practique of Religion's Theory;
That her Divinity seemed rather the
Description then th'instruction of his life.
And of his goodness, was his virtuous Son
A worthy imitator. So that on
These two Herculean pillars, where their arms
Are placed; there may be writ, Non ultra. For
Beyond their lives as well for youth as age;
Nor young nor old, in merit or in name;
Shall ever exceed their virtues or their fame.
It is done. Thus fair accomplements, make foul
Deeds gracious. Charlemont! come now when t'wut.
I'ue buried under these two marble stones.
Thy living hopes; And thy dead fathers bones.
O thou that know me justly Charl???monts.
Though in the forced possession of another;
Since from thine own free spirit wee receive it,
That our aff???ctions cannot be compelled,
Though' our actions may; be not displeased, if on
The altar of his Tomb, I sacrifice
My tears. They are the jewels of my love
Dissolved ??? to grief: and fall upon
His blasted Spring; as April dew, upon
A sweet young blossom shook before the time.
Go see my Trunks disposed of, Isle but walk
A turn or two in the Church and follow you.
O! here's the fatal monument of my
Dead Father first presented to mine eye.
What's here? in memory of Charlemont?
Some false relation has abused belief.
I am deluded. But I thank thee Heaven.
For ever let me be deluded thus.
My Castabella mourning o'er my Hearse?
Sweet Castab???lla rise, I am not dead.
O heaven defend me.
I Beshrew my rash
And inconsid'rate passion.???Castabella!
That could not think???my Castabella!???that
My sudden presence might affright her sense.???
I prithee (my affection) pardon me.
Reduce thy understanding to thine eye.
Within this habit which thy misinformed
Conceit takes only for a shape; live both
The soul and body of thy Charlemont.
I feel a substance, warm, and soft, and moist,
Subject to the capacity of sense.
Which Spirits are not; for their offence is
Aboue the nature and the order of
Those Elements whereof our senses are
Created. Touch my lip. Why turnst thou from me?
Grief aboue g???iefes. That which should woe relieve,
Wished and obtained, gives greater cause to grieve.
Can Castabella think it cause of grief
That the relation of my death proves false?
The presence of the person wee affect,
(Being hopeless to enjoy him) makes our grief
More passionate then if wee saw him not.
Why not enjoy? has absence changed thee?
Yes.
From maid to wife.
Art married?
O I am.
Married had not my mother been a woman,
I should protest against the chastity
Of all thy sex. How can the Merchant, or
The Mariner absent whole years (from wives
Expire???enc'd in the satisfaction of
Desire) promise themselves to find their sheets
Unspotted with adultery, at their
Return? when you that never had the sense
Of actual temptation; could not stay
A few short months.
O doe but hear me speak.
But thou were wise; and did consider that
A Soldier might be maimed, and so (perhaps)
Lose his hability to please thee.
No. That weakness pleases me in him I have.
What? married to a man unable too?
O strange incontinence! Why? was thy blood
Increased to such a pleurisy of lust,
That of necessity, there must a vein
Be opened; though by one that had no skill
To do it?
Sir, I beseech you hear me.
Speak.
Heaven knows I am unguilty of this act.
Why? were it thou forced to do it?
Heaven knows I was.
What villain did it?
Your Uncle 'D'amville.
And he that dispossessed my love of you;
Hath disinherited you of possession.
Disinherited? wherein have I deserved
To be deprived of my dear Fathers love?
Both of his love and him. His solo's at rest.
But here your injured patience may behold
The signs of his lamented memory.
He has found it. When I took him for a Ghost,
I could endure the torment of my fear;
More eas'ly then I can his sorrows hear.
Of all men's griefs must mine be singular?
Without example? Here I met my grave.
And all men's woes are buried in their graves
But mine. In mine my miseries are borne.
I pr'ithee sorrow leave a little room,
In my confounded and tormented mind;
For understanding to deliberate
The cause or author of this accident.???
A close advantage of my absence made,
To dispossess me both of land and wife:
And all the profit does arise to him,
By whom my absence was first moved and urged.
These circumstances (Uncle) tell me, you
Are the suspected author of those wrongs.
Whereof the lightest, is more heavy then
The strongest patience can endure to bear.
Now Sir! your business?
My Annuity.
Not a denier.
How would you ha'me live?
Why turn Crier. Cannot you turn Crier?
Yes.
Then doe so, you've a good voice for it.
You're excellent at crying of a Rape.
Sir, I confess in particular respect to your self, I
was somewhat forgetful. General honesty possessed me.
Go, you are the base corruption of my blood;
And like a Tetter growes't unto my flesh.
Inflict any punishment upon me. The severity shall
not discourage me, if it be not shameful; so you'll but put mo???ney
i'my purse. The want of money makes a free spirit more
mad then the possession does an Usurer.
Not a farthing.
Would you ha'me turn purse-taker? It is the next
way to do it. For want is like the Racque; it draws a man to
endanger himself to the gallows rather then endure it.
What art thou? Stay. Assist my troubled sense.
My apprehension will distract me. Stay.
What art thou? speak.
The spirit of Charlemont.
O stay! compose me. I dissolve.
No. It is profane. Spirits are invisible. It is the fiend
in the likeness of Charlemont. I will have no conversation with
Satan.
The Spirit of Charlemont? I'll try that.
Before God thou say true, you are all Spirit.
Go call the Officers.
You are a villain; and the Son of a villain.
You lye.
Have at thee.
Revenge to thee Isle dedicate this work.
Hold Charlemont!
Let him revenge my murder, and thy wrongs,
To whom the lustice of Revenge belongs.
You torture me between the passion of my blood,
and the religion of my soul,
A good honest fellow.
What? wounded? apprehend him. Sir; is this your
salutation for the curtsy I did you when wee parted last?
You ha'forgot I lent you a thousand Crowns. First, let him
answer for this riot. When the Law is satisfied for that; an
an action for his debt shall clap him up again. I took you
for a Spirit; and Isle conjure you before I ha'done.
No. Isle turn Conjurer. Devil! within this Circle,
in the midst of all thy force and malice I conjure thee doe thy
worst.
Away with him.
Sir, I have got a scratch or two here for your sake. I
hope you'll give me money to pay the Surgeon.
Borachio! fetch me a thousand Crowns. I am con???tent
to countenance the freedom of your spirit when it is worcester???thily
employed. A Gods name give behaviour the full scope of
generous liberty; but let it not disperse and spend it self in
courses of unbounded licence. Here, pay for your hurts.
I thank you sir.???Generous liberty.???that
is to say, freely to bestow my habilities to honest purposes. Me
thinks I should not follow that instruction now; if having the
means to doe an honest office for an honest fellow, I should
neglect it. Charlemont lies in prison for a thousand Crowns.
And here I have a thousand Crowns. Honesty tells meet'were
well done to release Charlemont. But discretion says I had
much a doe to come by this; and when this shall be gone I
know not where to singer any more: especially if I employ it
to this use, which is like to endanger me into my Fathers per???petuall
displeasure. And then I may go hang my self, or be
forced to doe that, will make another save me the labour. No
matter. Charlemont! Thou gau'st me my life and that's some???what
of a purer earth then gold as fine as it is. It is no court???sie
I doe thee but thankfulness. I owe thee it and Isle pay it.
Hee sought bravely, but the Officers dragged him villainously.
Arrant knaves! for using him so discourtcously; may the sins
of the poor people be so few, that you sha'not be able to spare
so much out o'your gettings, as will pay for the hire of a lame
starved hackney to ride to an execution. But go a foot to the
gallows, and be hanged. May elder brothers turn good hus???bands,
and younger brothers get good wives; that there be no
need of debt-bookes, nor use of Sergeants. May there be all
peace but in the war, and all charity but in the Devil; so that
prisons may be turned to Hospitals, though the Officers live
other benevolence. If this curse might come to pass, the world
would say, Blessed be he that curses.
I grant the Heaven. Thy goodness doth command
Our punishments: but yet no further then
The measure of our sins. How should they else
Be just? Or how should that good purpose of
Thy Justice take effect, by bounding men
Within the confines of humanity,
When our afflictions doe exceed our crimes?
Then they doe rather teach the barb'rous world
Examples that extend her cruelties
Beyond their own dimentions; and instruct
Our actions to be more, more barbarous.
O my afflicted soul! How torment swells
Thy apprehension with profane conceit,
Against the sacred justice of my God?
Our own constructions are the authors of
Our misery. We never measure our
Conditions but with Men aboue vs in
Estate. So while our Spirits labour to
Be higher then our fortunes they are more base.
Since all those attributes which make men seem
Superior to vs; are Man's Subjects; and
Were made to serve him. The ripening Man
Is of a servile spirit to deject
The value of himself below their estimation.
Here. Take my sword.???How now my wilde
Swag'rer? you're tame enough now; are you not? The penury
of a prison is like a soft consumption. T'will humble the pride
of your mortality; and arm your soul in complete patience
to endure the weight of affliction without feeling it. What?
Hast no music in thee? Th'hast trebles and bases enough.
Treble injury; and base usage. But trebles and bases make
poor music without means. Thou want Means; Doest?
what? Doest droop? art dejected?
No Sir. I have a heart aboue the reach
Of thy most violent maliciousnesse.
A fortitude in scorn of thy contempt;
(Since Fate is pleased to have me suffer it)
That can bear more then thou hast power t'inflict.
I was a Baron That thy Father has
Deprived me off. In stead of that, I am
Created King. I'ue lost a Signiory,
That was confined within a piece of earth;
A Wart upon the body of the world.
But now I am an Emp'rour of a world.
This little world of Man. My passions are
My Subjects; and I can command them laugh;
Whilst thou doest tickle'em to death with misery.
It is bravely spoken; and I love thee for it. Thou
least here for a thousand crowns. Here are a thousand to re???deem
thee. Not for the ransom o'my life thou gau'st me.
That I value not at one crown. It is none o'my deed. Thank
my Father for it. It is his goodness. Yet hee looks not for
thanks. For he does it under hand; out of a reserved dispo???sition
to doe thee good without ostentation.???Out
of great heart you'll refus't now; will you?
No. Since I must submit my self to Fate; I never
will neglect the offer of one benefit; but entertain them as
her favours; and th'inductions to some end of better fortune.
As whose instrument; I thank thy curtsy.
Well, come along.
Daughter you doe not well to urge me. I
Ha'done no more then Justice. Charlemont
Shall die and rot in prison; and it is just.
O Father! Mercy is an attribute
As high as Justice; an essential part
Of his unbounded goodness, whose divine
Impression, form, and image man should bear.
And (me thinks) Man should love to imitate
His Mercy; since the only countenance
Of Justice, were destruction; if the sweet
And loving favour of his mercy did
Not mediate between it and our weakness.
Forbear. You will displease me. He shall rot.
Dear Sir! Since by your greatness, you
Are nearer heaven in place; be nearer it
In goodness. Rich men should transcend the poor,
As clouds the earth; raised by the comfort of
The Sun, to water dry and barren grounds.
If neither the impression in your soul
Of goodness; nor the duty of your place,
As goodness substitute; can move you: then
Let nature, which in Savages, in beasts,
Can stir to pity, tell you that hee is
Your kinsman;???
You expose your honesty
To strange construction: Why should you so urge
Release for Charlemont? Come you profess
More nearness to him then your modesty
Can answer. You have tempted my suspicion.
I tell thee hee shall starve, and dye, and rot.
Uncle, I thank you.
Much good do it you.???Who did release him?
I.
You are a villain.
You're my Father.
I must temporise.???
Nephew??? had not his open freedom made
My disposition known; I would ha'borne
The course and inclination of my love
According to the ???otion of the Sun,
Invisibly enjoyed and understood.
That shows your good works are directed to
No other end then goodness. I was rash,
I must confess. But???
I will excuse you.
To lose a Father, and (as you may think)
Be disinherited (it must be granted)
Are motives to impatience. But for death,
Who can avoid it? And for his estate,
In the uncertainty of both your lives,
T'was done discreetly??? to conferred upon
A known Successor; being the next in blood.
And one (dear Nephew) whom in time to come,
You shall have cause to thank. I will not be
Your dispossessour, but your Guardian.
I will supply your Fathers vacant place,
To guide your greene improvidence of youth;
And make you ripe for your inheritance.
Sir, I embrance your ge???'rous promises.
Embracing? I behold the object that
Mine eye affects. Dear Cousin Charlemont.
My elder Son! He meets you happily.
For with the hand of our whole family
We interchange th'indenture of our Loves.
And I accept it. Yet not joyfully
Because you're sick.
Sir; His affection's sound,
Though hee be sick in body.
Sick indeed.
A general weakness did surprise my health
The very day I married Castabella.
As if my sickness were a punishment,
That did arrest me for some injury
I then committed. Credit me (my Love)
I pity thy ill fortune to be matched
With such a weak unpleasing bedfellow.
Believe me Sir; it never troubles me.
I am as much respectless to enjoy
Such pleasure as ignorant what it is.
Thy Sexes wonder. Unhappy Charlemont.
Come, let's to supper. There we will confirm
The eternal bond of our concluded love.
COme Soquette; your work! let's examine your work.
What's here? a Meddler with a Plum-tree growing hard by
it; The leaves of the Plum-tree falling off; the gum issuing
out of the perished joints; and the branches some of 'em dead,
and some rotten; and yet but a young Plum-tree. In good
sooth, very pretty.
The Plum-tree (forsooth) grows so near the Med???lar,
that the Meddler sucks and draws all the sap from it; and
the natural strength of the ground, so that it cannot pros???per.
How conceited you are! But here you have made a
Tree to bear no fruit. Why's that?
There grows a Sauin-tree next it forsooth.
Forsooth you are a little too witty in that.
But this Honisuckle winds about this white-thorne
very prettily and lovingly; sweet Mistress Cataplasma.
Monsieur Sebastian! in good sooth very uprightly
welcome this evening.
What? moralising upon this Gentlewoman's needle???work?
let's see.
No Sir. Only examining whether it be done to the
true nature and life of the thing?
Here you've set a Meddler with a Batchelers-button
of one side; and a Snail of th'tother. The Batchelers-button
should have held his head up more pertly towards the Med???lar;
the Snail o'th'tother side, should ha'beene wrought with
an artificial laziness, doubling his tail, and putting out his
horn but half the length. And then the Meddler falling (as
it were) from the lazy Snail, and inclining towards the pert
Batchelers-button; their branches spreading and winding one
within another as if they did embrace. But heere's a moral.
A poppring Peare-tree growing upon the bank of a River;
seeming continually to look downwards into the water, as if
it were enamoured of it; and ever as the fruit ripens, lets it fall
for love (as it were) into her lap. Which the wanton Stream,
like a Strumpet, no sooner receives, but she carries it away, and
bestows it upon some other creature she maintains: still see???ming
to play and dally under the Poppring, so long, that it
has almost washed away the earth from the root; and now the
poor Tree stands as if it were ready to fall and perish by that
whereon it spent all the substance it had.
Moral for you that love those wanton running wa???ters.
But is not my Lady Leuidulcia come yet?
Her purpose promised vs her company ere this.
Lire! your Lute and your Book.
Well said. A lesson of th'Lute to entertain the time
with till she comes.
Sol, fa, mi, la.???Mi, mi mi.???Precious!
Doest not see mi between the two Crochets? Strike me full
there.???So???forward.???This is a sweet strain,
and thou finger'st it beastly. Mi is a laerg there; and the prick
that stands before mi, a long; always half your note.???
Now???Run your division pleasingly with those qua???uers.
Observe all your graces in the touch.???Heere's a
sweet close???strike it full, it sets off your music deli???cattily.
Purity be in this House.
It is now entered; and welcome with your good La???diship.
Cease that music. Here's a sweeter instrument.
Restrain your liberty. See you not Snuff?
What does the Stinkard here? put Snuff out. He's
offensive.
No. The credit of his company defends my being
abroad from the eye of Suspicion.
Will it please your Ladyship go up into the Closet?
There are those Falls and Tyres I told you of.
Monsieur Snuff, I shall request your patience. My
stay will not be long.
My duty Madame.???Falls and Tyres? I begin
to suspect what Falls and Tyres you mean. My Lady and
Sebastian the Fall and the Tyre, and I the Shadow. I perceive
the purity of my conversation is used but for a property to co???for
the vncleanenesse of their purposes. The very contempla???tion
of the thing, makes the spirit of the flesh begin to wriggle
in my blood. And here my desire has met with an object al???ready.
This Gentlewoman (me thinks) should be swayed with
the motion; living in a house where moving example is so
common. Temptation has prevailed over me; and I will at???tempt
to make it overcome her.???Mistress Cataplasma!
My Lady (it seems) has some business that requires her stay.
The fairness of the evening invites me into the ayre; will it
please you give this Gentlewoman leave to leave her work,
and walk a turn or two with me for honest recreation?
With all my heart Sir. Go Soqu???ite; give ear to his
instructions; you may get understanding by his company I
can tell you.
In the way of holiness; Mistress Cataplasma.
Good Monsieur Snuff!???I will attend your
return.
Your hand Gentlewomen.???
The flesh is humble till the Spirit move it;
But when it is raised it will command aboue it.
Your sadness and the sickness of my Son,
Have made our company and conference
Less free and pleasing then I purposed it.
Sir; for the present I am much unfit
For conversation or society.
With pardon I will rudely take my leave.
Good night; dear Nephew.???
See thou that same man?
Your meaning Sir?
That fellows life Borachio.
Like a superfluous Letter in the Law,
Endangers our assurance.
Scrape him out.
Wut do it?
Give me your purpose I will do it.
Sad melancholy has drawn Charlemont,
With meditation on his Fathers death,
Into the solitary walk behind the Church.
The Churchyard? This the fittest place for death,
Perhaps he's praying. Then he's fit to die.
We will send him charitably to his grave.
No matter how thou take him. First take this.???
Thou know the place. Observe his passages;
And with the most advantage make a stand;
That favoured by the darkness of the night,
His breast may fall upon thee at so near
A distance, that he sha'not shun the blow.
The deed once done, thou mai'st retire with safety.
The place is unfrequented; and his death
Will be imputed to th'attempt of thieves.
Be careless. Let your mind be free and clear.
This Pistol shall discharge you of your fear.
But let me call my proiects to account,
For what effect and end I have engaged
My self in all this blood? To leave a state
To the succession of my proper blood.
But how shall that succession be continued?
Not in my elder Son??? I fear, Disease
And weakness have disabled him for issue.
For th'tother; his loose humour will endure
No bond of marriage. And I doubt his life;
His spirit is so boldly dangerous.
O pity that the profitable end,
Of such a prosperous murder should be lost!
Nature forbid. I hope I have a body,
That will not suffer me to loose my labour,
For want of issue, yet. But then't must be
A Bastard.???Tush; they only father bastards,
That father other men's begettings. Daughter!
Be it mine own; let it come whence it will.
I am resolved. Daughter!
My Lord.
I prithee call my Daughter.
Your pleasure Sir.
Is thy Husband i'bed?
Yes my Lord.
The euening's fair. I prithee walk a turn or two.
Come Jasper.
No.
Weel' walk but to the corner of the Church;
And I have something to speak privately.
No matter, Stay.
This falls out happily.
Twelve.
It is a good hour, t'will strike one anon.
How fit a place for contemplation is this dead of
night, among the dwellings of the dead.???This grave.???
Perhaps th'inhabitant was in his life time the possessor
of his own desires. Yet in the midst of all his greatness
and his wealth; he was less rich and less contented, then in
this poor piece of earth, lower and lesser then a Cottage. For
here he neither wants nor cares. Now that his body favours
of corruption; Hee enjoys a sweeter rest then ever hee did a???amongst
the sweetest pleasures of this life. For here, there's
nothing troubles him.???And there.???In that grave
lies another. He (perhaps) was in his life as full of misery as
this of happiness. And here's an end of both. Now both their
states are equal. O that Man, with so much labour should a???spire
to wordly height; when in the humble earth, the world's
condition's at the best! Or scorn inferior men; since to be
lower then a worm, is to be higher then a King!
Then fall and rise.
What villains hand was that? save thee or thou shalt
perish.
Zownes vnsau'd I think.
What? Have I killed him? whatsoever thou be I
would thy hand had prospered. For I was unfit to live, and well
prepared to die. What shall I doe? accuse my self. Submit me
to the law, and that will quickly end this violent increase of
misery. But it is a murder to be accessory to mine own death.
I will not. I will take this opportunity to scope. It may be
Heaven reserues me to some better end.
Nay good Sir; I dare not. In good sooth I come of
a generation both by Father and Mother, that were all as fruit???full
as Costard-mongers wives.
Tush then, a Timpani is the greatest danger can be
feared. Their fruitfulness turns but to a certain kind of fleg???matique
windy disease.
I must put my understanding to your trust Sir. I would be loath to be deceived.
No, conceive; thou shall it not. Yet thou shalt profit
by my instruction too. My body is not every day drawn
dry wench.
Yet me thinks Sir, your want of use should rather
make your body like a Well, the lesser it is drawn, the sooner
it grows dry.
Thou shalt try that instantly.
But we want place and opportunity.
We have both. This is the back side of the House
which the superstitious call Saint Winifrea', Church; and is ve???rely
a convenient unfrequented place.???Where under the
close Curtains of the night;
You purpose in the dark to make me light.
But what have you there?
This disguise is for security sake wench. There's a
talk thou know, that the Ghost of old Mon ferrers walks.
In this Church he was buried. Now if any stranger fall upon vs
before our business be ended; in this disguise I shall be taken
for that Ghost; and never be called to examination I warrant
thee. Thus wee shall scope both prevention and discovery.
How doe I look in this habit wench?
So like a Ghost that notwithstanding I have some fore???knowledge
of you, you make my hair stand almost an end.
I will try how I can kiss in this beard.???O fie,
fie, fie. I will put it off; and then kiss; and then put it on. I
can doe the rest without kissing.
What have wee here? a Sheet? a hair? a beard?
What end was this disguise intended for? No matter what. I'll
not expostulate the purpose of a friendly accident. Perhaps it
may accommodate my scope.???I fear I am pursued. For
more assurance, I'll hide me here in the Charnel house; this
conuccation-house of dead men's sculls.???
Death's head! deceiu'st my hold? Such is the trust to all more???talitic.???
My Lord! The night grows late. Your Lordship
spake of something you desired to move in private.
Yes. Now I'll speak it. Th'argument is love. The
smallest ornament of thy sweet form (that abstract of all plea???sure)
can command the senses into passion; and thy entire per???fection
is my object; yet I love thee with the freedom of my
reason. I can give thee reason for my love.
Love me; my Lord? I doe believe it, for I am the
wife of him you love.
It is true. By my persuasion thou were forced to
marry one, unable to perform the office of a Husband. I was
author of the wrong. My conscience suffers vnder't; and I
would disburden it by satisfaction.
How?
I will supply that pleasure to thee which he cannot.
Are y'a devil or a man?
A man; and such a man, as can return thy enter???tainment
with as prodigal a body, as the covetous desire of
woman ever was delighted with. So, that besides the full per???formance
of thy empty Husbands duty; thou shalt have the
joy of children to continue the succession of thy blood. For
the appetite that steals her pleasure; draws the forces of the
body to an united strength; and puts 'em altogether into act???on;
never fails of procreation. All the purposes of Man aim
but at one of these two ends; pleasure or profit: And in this one
sweet conjunction of our loves. they both will meet. Would
it not grieve thee, that a Stranger to thy blood, should lay the
first foundation of his house upon the ruins of thy family?
Now Heaven defend me! May my memory be vt???terly
extinguished; and the heir of him that was my Fathers
enemy, raise his eternal monument upon our ruins; ere the
greatest pleasure or the greatest profit, ever tempt me to con???tinue
it by incest.
Incest? Tush. These distances affinity observes; are
articles of bondage cast upon our freedoms by our own sub???iections.
Nature allows a general liberty of generation to all
creatures else. Shall Man to whose command and use all cry???tures
were made subject be less free then they?
O God! is thy unlimited and infinite omnipotence
less free because thou doest no ill? or if you argue merely
out of Nature; doe you not degenerate from that; and are you
not unworthy the prerogative of Natures Maister-piece, when
basely you prescribe your self authority and law from their
examples whom you should command? I could confute you;
but the horror of the argument confounds my understand???ing.
???Sir, I know, you doe but try me in your Sons be???half;
suspecting that my strength and youth of blood can???not
contain themselves with impotence.???Believe me
(Sir) I never wronged him. If it be your lust; O quench it on
their prostituted flesh, whose trade of sin can please desire
with more delight, and less offence.???The poison of your
breath; evaporated from so foul a soul; infects the ayre
more then the dampes that rise from bodies but half rotten
in their graves.
Kiss me, I warrant thee my breath is sweet. These
dead men's bones lie here of purpose to inuit vs to supply the
number of the living. Come; we will get young bones and do it.
I will enjoy thee. No? Nay then invoke your great supposed
protector; I will do it.
Supposed protector? Are y'an Atheist? Then, I
know my prayers and tears are spent in vain. O patient
Heaven! Why doest thou not express thy wrath in thunder???bolts;
to tear the frame of man in pieces? How can earth en???dure
the burden of this wickedness without an earthquake?
Or the angry face of Heaven be not inflamed with ligh???ning.
Conjure up the Devil and his Dam; Cry to the
graves; the dead can hear thee; invoke their help.
O would this grave might open, and my body were
bound to the dead carcass of a man for ever, ever it entertain
the lust of this detested villain.
Tereas-like, thus I will force my passage to???
The Devil.
Charlemont ????????? the disguise and frights D'amville away.
Now Lady! with the hand of Charlemont, I thus redeem you
from the arm of lust.???My Castabella!
My dear Charlemont!
For all my wrongs I thank thee gracious Heaven;
you have made me satisfaction; to reserve me for this blessed pur???pose.
Now sweet Death, I'll bid thee welcome. Come. I'll
guard thee home; and then I'll cast my self into the arms of
apprehension, that the law may make this worthy work, the
crown of all my actions being the best and last.
The last? The law? Now Heaven forbid! what ha'you
done?
Why, I have killed a man; not murdered him, my
Castabella; He would ha'murder'd me.
Then Charlemont; the hand of Heaven directed thy
defence.
That wicked Atheist, I suspect his plot.
My life he seeks. I would he had it since he has de???priu'd
me of those blessings that should make me love it;
Come; I'll give it him.
You sha'not. I will first expose my self to certain
danger, then for my defence destroy the man that saved me
from destruction.
Thou can not satisfy me better, then to be the
instrument of my release from misery.
Then work it by escape. Leave me to this prote???ction
that still guards the innocent; Or I will be a partner in
your destiny.
My soul is heavy. Come; lie down to rest;
These are the pillows whereon men sleep best.
Soquette! Soquette! Soquette! O art thou there????
He mistakes the body of Borachio for Soquette.
Verily thou lie in a fine premeditate readiness for the pur???pose.
Come kiss me sweet Soquette.???Now purity de???fend
me from the sin of Sodom.???This is a creature of the
ma???culine gender.???Verily the Man is blasted.???
Yea? cold and stiff????Murder, murder, murder.
Why doest thou stare upon me? Thou art not the
scull of him I murdered. What hast thou to doe to vex my
conscience? Sure thou were the head of a most dogged V???urer,
you are so uncharitable. And that Bawd the sky, there; she
could shut the windows and the doors of this great chamber
of the world; and draw the curtains of the clouds between
those lights and me about this bed of earth, when that same
Stumpet Murder &amp; my self committed sin together. Then she
could leave vs ??? the dark, till the close deed was done: But now,
that I begin to feel the loathsome horror of my sin; and
(like a Lecher emptied of his lust) desire to bury my face un???der
my eye-browes, and would steal from my shame unseen;
she meets me in the face with all her light corrupted eyes, to
challenge payment of me.???O behold. Yonder's the
Gh???ast of old Mon???ferrers in a long white sheet, climbing
yo???d lofty mountain to complain to Heaven of me.???
Montferrers! pox of fearfulness. To is nothing but a fa???re
white cloud. Why? was I borne a coward? He lies that says
so. Yet the countenance of a bloodless worm might have the
courage now to turn my blood to water. The trembling mo???tion
of an Aspen leaf, would make me like the shadow of that
leaf he shaking vnder't. I could now commit a murder', were
it but to drink the fresh warm blood of him I murdered; to
supply the want and weakness o'mine own; it is grown so
cold and f???egmaticke.
Murder, murder, murder.
Mountains overwhelm me, the Ghost of old
Montferrers haunts me.
Murder, murder, murder.
O were my body circumuolu'd within that cloud;
that when the thunder tears his passage open, it might scatter
me to nothing in the ayre!
Here you shali find the murdered body.
Black Beelzebub, and all his hell-hounds come to
apprehend me?
No my good Lord. Wee come to apprehend the
murderer. The Ghost (great Pluto) was a fool; unfit to be
employed in any serious business for the state of hell. Why?
could not he have suffered me to raise the mountain of my sins
with one as damnable as all the rest; and then have tumbled me
to ruin? But apprehend me even between the purpose and the
act? before it was committed?
Is this the murderer? He speaks suspitiously.
No verily. This is my Lord D'amville. And his di???straction
(I think) grows out of his grief for the loss of a
faithful servant. For surely I take him to be Borachio that is
slain.
Haah! Borachio slain? Thou look like Snuff,
doest not.
Yes in sincerity my Lord.
Hark thee????Saw thou not a Ghost?
A Ghost? where my Lord????I smell a Fox.
Here in the Churchyard.
Tush, tush; their walking spirits are mere imagine???rye
fables. There's no such thing in rerum nature. Here is a
man slain. And with the Spirit of confederation, I rather think
him to be the murderer got into that disguise, then any such
phantastique toy.
My brains begin to put themselves in order. I ap???prehend thee now.???It is even so.???Borachio! I will
search the Center but I'll find the murderer.
Here, here, here.???
Stay. A sleep? so soundly? and so sweetly upon
Deaths Heads? and in a place so full of fear and horror?
Sure there is some other happiness within the freedom of
the conscience, then my knowledge ever attained too.???Ho,
ho, ho!
You're welcome Uncle. Had you sooner come,
You had been sooner welcome. I'm the Man,
You seek. You sha'not need examine me.
My Nephew! and my Daughter! O my dear
Lamented blood! what Fate has cast you thus
Unhappily upon this accident?
You know Sir, she's as clear as Chastity.
As her own chastity. The time; the place;
All circumstances argue that vncleare.
Sir, I confess it; and repentantly
Will undergo the self same punishment,
That Justice shall inflict on Charlemont.
Unjustly she betrays her innocence.
But Sir, she's taken with you; and she must
To prison with you.
There's no remedy.
Yet were it not my Sons bed she abused;
My land should fly but both should be excused.
Is not my wife come in yet?
No my Lord.
Me thinks she's very affectedly inclined,
To young Sebastian's company o'late.
But jealousy is such a torment, that
I am afraid to entertain it. Yet
The more I shun by circumstance to me???e
Directly with it; the more ground I find
To circumvent my apprehension. First,
I know sh'as a perpetual appetite;
Which being so oft encountered with a man
Of such a bold luxurious freedom, as
Sebastian is; and of so promising
A body: her own blood, corrupted, will
Betray her to temptation.???
Precious! I was sent by his Lady to see if her Lord
were in bed; I should have done it silly without discovery; and now
I am blurted upon 'em before I was aware.
Know not you the Gentlewoman my wise brought
home?
By sight my Lord. Her man was here but now.
Her man? I pr'ithee run and call him quickly.???
This villain. I suspect him ever since I found him hid behind
the Tapestry.???Fresco! you are welcome Fresco.???Leave
vs. Doest hear Fresco! is not my wife at thy Mistresses?
I know not my Lord.
I prithee tell me Fresco; we are private; tell me. Is
not thy Mistress a good wench?
How means your Lordship that? A wench of the trade.
Yes faith Fresco; even a wench of the trade.
O no my Lord. Those falling diseases cause baldness;
and my Mistress recovers the loss of hair, for she is a Peri???wig-maker.
And nothing else?
Sells Falls and Tyres, and Bodies for Ladies; or so.
So Sir: and she helps my Lady to falls and bodies
now and then; doe's she not?
At her Ladyships pleasure; my Lord.
Her pleasure; you Rogue? you are the Pander to her
pleasure you Varlet, are you not? you know the conveyances
between Sebastian and my wife. Tell me the truth; or by this
hand I'll nail thy bosom to the earth. Stir not you Dog;
but quickly tell the truth.
O Yes!
Is not thy Mistress a Bawd to my wife?
O yes!
And acquainted with her tricks, and her plots, and
her devises.
O yes! If any man, 'Court, City or Country, has
found my Lady Leuidulcia in bed, but my Lord Beforest, it is
Sebastian.
What doest thou proclaim it? Doest thou cry it
thou villain?
Can you laugh it my Lord? I thought you meant to
proclaim your self Cuckold.
The Watch? Met with my wish. I must request th'as???sistance
of your offices.
S'death; stay that villain; pursue him.
Nay, if you get me any more into the Churchyard.
Why Soquette? I never got thee there yet.
Got me there? No. Not with child.
I promised thee I would not; and I was as good as my
word.
Yet your word was better then than your deed. But,
steal up into the little matted chamber of the left hand.
I prithee let it be the right hand; thou left'st me before
and I did not like that.
Precious quickly; So soon as my Mistress shall be in
bed I'll come to you.
I wonder Fresco stays so long.
Mistreffe Soquette, a word with you.???
If he brings word my Husband is i'bed; I will aduen???ture
one nights liberty to lie abroad.???My strange affe???ction
to this Man!???It is like that natural sympathy which
even among the senseless creatures of the earth, commands a
mutual inclination and consent: For though it seems to be
the free effect of mine own voluntary love; yet I can neither
restrain it, nor give reason for it. But now it is done; and in
your power it lies to save my honour; or dishonour me.
Enjoy your pleasure (Madame) without fear. I no???for
will betray the trust you have committed to me. And you
wrong your self, to let consideration of the sin; molest your
conscience. Mc thinks it is unjust, that a reproach should be
inflicted on a woman for offending but with one; when it is a
light offence in Husbands to commit with many.
So it seems to me.???Why how now Sebastian?
making love to that Gentlewoman? How many mistresses have
you ???'???aith?
In faith; none. For I think none of 'em are faithful,
but otherwise as many as clean Shirts. The love of a woman
is like a Mushrom; it grows in one night, and will serve some???what
pleasingly, next morning to breakfast: but afterwards
waxes fulsome and unwholesome.
Nay by Saint Wi??????fred; a woman's love lasts as long
as Winter fruit.
It is true. Till new come in. By my experience no
longer.
Some bodie's doing has undone vs; and we are like
pay dearly for it.
Pay deane? for what?
Will it not be a chargeable reckoning, think you;
when here are half a dozen fellows coming to callvs to
account, with every man a several bill in his hand, that wee
are not able to discharge.
Passion of me. What bouncing's that? Madame!
withdraw your self.
Sebastian if you love me, save my honour.
What violence is this? What seek you? Zownes!
you shall not pass.
Pursue the Strumpet. Villain give me way; or I
will make my passage through thy blood.
My blood will make it slippery my Lord. It were bet???la
you would take another way. You may hap??? fall else.
I have it in faith.
O God! my Husband! my Sebastian! Husband!
Neither can spake; yet both report my shame. Is this the
saving of my Honour? when their blood runs out in rivers;
and my lust the fountain whence it flows? Dear Husband ???
let not thy departed spirit be displeased; if with adult rate lips
I kiss thy cheek. Here I behold the hatefulness of lust;
which brings me kneeling to embrace him dead; whose body
living I did loathe to touch. Now I can weep. But what can
tears doe good; when I weep only water, they weep blood?
But could I make an Ocean with my tears; that on the ??????oud
this broken vessel of my body, laden heavy with light lust
might suffer shipwreck, and so drown my shame: then wee???ping
were to purpose; but alas! The Sea wants water enough
to wash away the ???oulenesse of my name. O??? in their wounds;
I feel my honour wounded to the death. Shall I out-liue my
Honour? Must my life be made the worlds example? Since it
must; then thus in detestation of my deed; to make th'eexam???ple
move more forcibly to virtue; thus, I feale it with a death
as full of horror as my life of sin.
Hold Madame! Lord what a strange night is this.
May not Snuff be suffered to go out of himself?
Nor you; nor any. All must go with vs.
O with what virtue lust should be withstood!
Since it is a fire quenched seldom without blood.
what sleep thou?
No my Lord. Nor sleep; nor wake.
But in a slumber troublesome to both.
Whence comes this gold?
It is part of the Revenue;
Due to your Lordship since your brothers death.
To bed. Leau??? me my gold.
And me my rest.
Two things wherewith one man is seldom blessed.
Cease that harsh music. W'are not pleased with it.
Here sounds a music whose melodious touch,
Like Angels voices rauishes the sense.
Behold thou ignorant Astronomer,
Whose wandering speculation seeks among
The planets for men's fortunes! with amazement,
Behold thine error and be planet struck.
These are the Stars whose operations make
The fortunes and the destinies of men.
Yond' lesser eyes of Heaven, (like Subjects ra???s'd
Into their lofty houses, when their Prince
Rides underneath th'ambition of their loves)
Are mounted only to behold the face,
Of your more rich imperious eminence,
With vnpreuented sight. Unmask fair Queen;
Vouchsafe their expectations may enjoy,
The gracious favour they admit to see,
These are the Stars the Ministers of Fate;
And Mans high wisdom the superior power,
To which their forces are subordinate.
D'am???ille! With all thy wisdom you are a ???oole.
Not like those fools that we term innocents;
But a most wretched miserable fool.
Which instantly; to the confusion of
Thy proiects with despair thou shalt behold.
What foolish dream dares interrupt my rest?
To my confusion? How can that be? Since
My purposes have hitherto been borne
With prosperous Judgment to secure success.
Which nothing ????????? to dispossess me off,
But apprehended Charlem??????t. And him,
This brain has made the happy instrument
To free Suspicion, to annihilate
All interest and title of his own;
To seal up my assurance; and confirm
My absolute possession by the law.
Thus while the simple honest worshipper
Of a phantastique providence; groans under
The burden of neglected misery;
My real wisdom has raised up a State,
That shall eternize my posterity.
What's that?
The body of your younger Son slain by the Lord
Belforest.
Slain? you lie.???Sebastian. Speak, Seba???stian!
He has lost his hearing. A Phisi???ian presently. Go call a
Surgeon.
Ooh.
What groan was that? How does my elder Son?
the sound came from his chamber.
He went sick to bed my Lord.
Ooh.
The cries of Mandrakes never touched the ear, with
more sad horror then that voice does mine.
Never you will see your Son alive.???
Nature forbid I ever should see him dead.
Withdraw the Curtains. O how does my Son?
Me thinks, he's ready to give up the ghost.
Destruction take thee and thy fatal tongue. Death,
whore's the Doctor????A?????? not thou the fact of that pro???digious
apparition s???ar'd upon me in my dream?
The Doctor's come my Lord.
Doctor! Behold two Patients, in whose ????????? thy
skill may purchase an eternal fame. If thou hast any reading
in Hipocrates, Galen, or A???ice???; if herbs, or drugs, or mi???neralles
have any power to save; Now let thy practise and their
sovereign use, raise thee to wealth and honour.
If any root of life remains within'em capable of
Physic; feare'em not, my Lord.
Ooh.
His gasping sighs are like the falling noise of some
great building when the ground-worke breaks. On these two
pillars stood the stately frame, and architecture of my lo???tie
house. An Earthquake shakes'em. The foundation shrinks.
Dear Nature! in whose honour I have raised a work of glory
to posterity; O bury not the pride of that great action, under
the fall and ruin of it self.
My Lord. These bodies are deprived of all the ra???decal
ability of Nature. The heat of life is utterly extinguished.
Nothing remains within the power of man that can restore
them.
Take this gold; extract the Spirit of it, and inspire
new life into their bodies.
Nothing can my Lord.
You haven't yet examined the true state and consti???tution
of their bodies. Sure, you haven't. I'll reserve their wa???ters
till the morning. Questionless, their urines will inform
you better.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost laugh thou villain! must my wisdom that
has been the object of men's admiration, now become the sub???jest
of thy laughter?
Ooh.
Hoe's dead.
O there expires the date of my posterity! Can Na???ture
be so simple or malicious to destroy the reputation of her
proper memory? She cannot. Sure there is some power a???above
her that con???roules her force.
A power aboue Nature? Doubt you that my Lord?
Consider but whence Man receives his body and his form.
Not from corruption like some worms and Flies; but only
from the generation of a man. For Nature never did bring
forth a man without a Man; Nor could the first Man being
but the passive Subject not the active Mover, be the maker of
himself; So of necessity there must be a Superior power to
Nature.
Now to my self I am ridiculous. Nature thou art a
Traitor to my soul. Thou hast abused my trust. I will
complain to a superior Court, toright my wrong I'll prove
thee a forger of false assurances. In yond' Star chamber thou
shalt answer it. Withdraw the bodies. O the sense of death
begins to trouble my distractedsoule.
Bring forth the malefactors to the Bar.
Are you the Gentlewoman in whose house
The murders were committed?
Yes my Lord.
That worthy attribute of Gentry, which
Your habit draws from ignorant respect;
Your name deserves not: nor your self the name
Of woman. Since you are the poison that
Infects the honour of all womanhood.
My Lord; I am a Gentlewoman: yet I must con???fesse
my poverty compels my life to a condition lower then
my birth or breeding.
Tush we know your birth.
But under colour to profess the Sale
Of Tyres and toys for Gentlewoman's pride;
You draw a frequentation of men's wives
To your licentious house; and there abuse
Their Husbands.???
Good my Lord her rent is great. The good Gen???tlewoman
has no other thing to live by but her lodgings: So,
she's forced to let her fore-roomes out to others, and her self
contented to lie backwards.
So.
Here is no evidence accuses you,
For accessories to the murder; yet
Since from the Spring of lust which you preserved;
And nourished; ran the effusion of that blood:
Your punishment shall come as near to death.
As life can bear it. Law cannot inflict
Too much severity upon the cause
Of such abhorred effects.
Receive your sentence.
Your goods (since they were gotten by that means,
Which brings diseases;) shall beturn'd to th'vse
Of Hospitals. You carted through the Streets;
According to the common shame of Strumpets,
Your bodies whipped till with the loss of blood,
You faint under the hand of punishment.
Then that the necessary force of want,
May not provoke you to your former life;
You shall be set to painful labour; whose
Penurious gains shall only give you food
To hold up Nature; mortify your flesh;
And make you fit for a repentant end.
O good my Lord!
No more; away with 'em.
Now Monsieur Snuff! A man of your profession,
found in a place of such impiety?
I grant you. The place is full of impurity. So much
the more need of instruction and reformation. The purpose
that carried me thither, was with the Spirit of conversion to pu???rife
their vncleanenesse; and I hope your Lordship will say,
the law cannot takehold of me for that.
No Sir; it cannot: but yet give me leave
To tell you, that I hold your wary answer,
Rather premeditated for excuse;
Then spoken out of a religious purpose.
Where took you your degrees of Scholarship?
I am no Scholar my Lord. To speak the sincere
truth, I am Snuff the Tallow-Chandler.
How comes your habit to be altered thus?
My Lord Belforest taking a delight in the clean???ness
of my conversation; withdrew me from that unclean
life, and put me in a garment fit for his society and my pre???sent
profession.
His Lordship did but paint a rotten post;
Or cover foulness fairly. Monsieur Snuff!
Back to your candle-making. You may give
The world more light with that, then either with
Instruction or th'example of your life.
Thus the Snuff is put out.
Judgment; Judgment.
Judgment my Lord? in what?
Your Judgements must resolve me in a case. Bring
in the bodies. Nay; I will have it tried. This is the case my Lord.
My providence, even in a moment; by the only hurt of one,
or two, or three, at most: and those put quickly out of pain
too, mark me; I had wisely raised a competent estate to my
posterity. And is there not more wisdom and more charity
in that; then for your Lordship, or your Father, or your Grand???sire,
to prolong the torment, and the rack of rent from age to
age, upon your poor penurious Tenants? yet (perhaps) with???out
a penny profit to your heir. Is it not more wise??? more cha???ritable?
Speak.
He is distracted.
How? distracted? Then you ha'no Judgment. I can
give you sense and solide reason for the very least distinguish???able
syllable I speak. Since my thrist was more judicious then
your Grandsires; why, I would fine know why your Lordship
lives to make a second generation from your Father, and the
your Father; and the whole fry of my posterity extinguished
in a moment. Not a Brat left to succeed me.???I would fine
know that.
Grief for his children's death distempers him.
My Lord; we will resolve you of your question.
In the mean time vouchsafe your place with vs.
I am contented, so you will resolve me.
Now Monsieur Charlemont. You are accused
Of having murdered one Borachio, that
Was servant to my Lord D'amville. How can
You clear your self? guilty? or not guilty?
Guilty of killing him; but not of murder.
My Lords; I have no purpose to desire
Remission for my self.???D'amville descends to Charl.
Uncivil Boy! Thou want humanity to smile at
grief. Why doest thou cast a cheerful eye upon the object
of my sorrow? my dead Sons?
O good my Lord! Let Charity forbear
To vex the spirit of a dying Man.
A cheerful eye upon the face of Death;
Is the true court'nance of a noble mind.
For honour's sake (my Lord) molest it not.
You're all uncivil. O! is it not enough that hee un???justly
hath conspired with Fate, to cut off my posterity for him
to be the heir to my possessions; but he must pursue me with
his presence; and in the ostentation of his joy, laugh in my
face, and glory in my grief?
D'amville! to show thee with what light respect,
I value Death and thy insulting pride;
Thus like a warlike Navy on the Sea,
Bound for the conquest of some wealthy land,
Passed through the storms troubles of this life,
And now arrived upon the armed coast;
In expectation of the victory,
Whose honour lies beyond this exigent;
Through mortal danger with an active spirit,
Thus I aspire to undergo my death.
And thus I second thy brave enterprise.
Be cheerful Charlemont. Our lives cut off,
In our young prime of years; are like greene herbs,
Wherewith we strew the hearses of our friends.
For as their virtue gathered when they are greene,
Before they wither or corrupt, is best;
So we in virtue are the best for Death,
While yet we have not lived to such an age,
That the increasing canker of our sins,
Hath spread too far upon vs.???
A Boon, my Lords. I beg a Boon.
What's that my Lord?
His body when it is dead for an Anatomy.
For what my Lord?
Your understanding still come short o'mine.
I would find out by his Anatomy;
What thing there is in Nature more exact,
Then in the constitution of my self.
Me thinks, my parts, and my dimentions, are
As many, as large, as well composed as his;
And yet in me the resolution wants,
To die with that assurance as he does.
The cause of that, in his Anatomy
I would find out.???
Be patient and you shall.
I have bethought me of a better way.???Nephew;
we must confer.???Sir; I am grown a wondrous Study???ent
now o'late. My wit has reached beyond the scope of Na???ture;
yet for all my learning I am still to seek, from whence
the peace of conscience should proceed.
The peace of conscience rises in it self.
Whether it be thy Art or Nature, I admire thee
Charlemont. Why; thou hast taught a woman to be valiant. I
will beg thy life.???My Lords! I beg my Nephews
life.???I'll make thee my Physician. Thou shalt read Phi???losophie
to me. I will find out th'efficient cause of a conten???ted
mind. But if I cannot profit in it; then it is no more being
my Physician, but infuse a little poison in a potion when thou
giu'st me Physic; unawares to me. So I shall steal into my
grave without the understanding or the fear of death. And
that's the end I aim at. For the thought of death is a most
fearful torment; is it not?
Your Lordship interrupts the course of law.
Prepare to die.
My resolution's made.
But ere I die; before this honoured bench;
With the free voice of a departing soul,
I here protest this Gentlewoman clear,
Of all offence the law condemns her for.
I have accused my self. The law wants power
To clear me. My dear Charlemont; with thee
I will partake of all thy punishments.
Uncle; for all the wealthy benefits;
My death aduances you, grant me but this.
Your mediation for the guiltless life
Of Castabella; whom your conscience knows
As justly clear as harmless innocence.
Freely. My Mediation for her life; and all my in???t'rest
in the world to boot, let her but in exchange possess me
of the resolution that she dies withal.???The price of things
is best known in their want. Had I her courage; So I va???lue
it, the Indies should not buy't out o'my hands.
Give me a glass of water.
Me, of wine.???
This argument of death congeals my blood.
Cold fear with apprehension of thy end,
Hath frozen up the rivers of my veins.???
I must drink wine to warm me, and dissolve the obe???struction,
or an apoplexy will possess me.???Why
thou uncharitable Knave; Dost bring me blood to drink?
The very glass looks pale and trembles at it.
It is your hand my Lord.
Can blame me to be fearful; bearing still the
presence of a murderer about me?
Is this water?
Water Sir.
Come thou clear emblem of cool temperance.
Be thou my witness, that I use no art
To force my courage; nor have need of helps,
To raise my Spirits like those weaker men;
Who mix their blood with wine, and out of that
Adulterate conjunction doe beget
A bastard valour. Native courage, thanks.
Thou lead me soberly to undertake
This great hard work of magnanimity.
Brave Charlemont! at the reflection of thy courage
my cold fearful blood takes fire, and I begin to emulate thy
death.???Is that thy executioner? My Lords; you wrong
the honour of so high a blood, to let him suffer by so base a
hand.
He suffers by the form of law my Lord.
I will reform it. Down you shagge-hair'd Cur.
The instrument that strikes my Nephew's blood, shall be as no???ble
as his blood. I'll be thy executioner my self.
Restrain his fury. Good my Lord forbear.
I'll b??????cher out the passage of his soul,
That dares attempt to inter???????????? the blow.
My Lord; the office will impress a mark
Of scandal and dishonour on your name.
The office fits him; hinder not his hand.
But let him crown my resolution, with
An vnexampled dignity of death.
Strike home. Thus I submit me.
So doe I.
In scorn of Death thus hand in hand we die.
I have the trick on it Nephew. You shall see how eas'ly
I can put you out of pain.???Ooh.
In lifting up the Axe
I think has knocked his brains out.???
What murderer was hee that lifted up my hand a???against my head?
None but your self my Lord.
I thought he was a murderer that did it.
God forbid.
Forbid? You lie Judge. He commanded it. To tell
thee that mans wisdom is a fool. I came to thee for Judge???meant;
and thou think thy self a wise man. I outreached thy
wit; and made thy Justice Murders instrument, in Castabella's
death and Charlemonts. To crown my Murder of Mon???fer???rears
with a safe possession of his wealthy state.???
I claim the just advantage of his words.
Descend the Scaffold and attend the rest.
There was the strength of natural understanding.
But Nature is a fool. There is a power aboue her that hath
overthrown the pride of all my proiects and posterity; (for
whose surviving blood, I had erected a proud monument)
and struck 'em dead before me. For whose deaths, I called to
thee for Judgment. Thou did want discretion for the sen???tence.
But yond' power that struck me, knew the Judgment
I deserved; and gave it.???O! the lust of Death commits
a Rape upon me as I would ha'done on Castabella.???
Strange is his death and judgment. With the hands
Of Joy and Justice I thus set you free.
The power of that eternal providence,
Which overthrew his proiects in their pride;
Hath made your griefs the instruments to raise
Your blessings to a greater height then ever.
Only to Heaven I attribute the work.
Whose gracious motives made me still forbear
To be mine own Revenger. Now I see,
That, Patience is the honest mans revenge.
In stead of Charlemont that but even now
Stood ready to be dispossessed of all;
I now salute you with more titles, both
Of wealth and dignity then you were borne too.
And you (swear Madame) Lady of Belforest
You have that title by your Fathers death.
With all the titles due to me; increase
The wealth and honour of my Charlemont.
Lord of Montferrers; Lord D'amuille; Belforest.
And for a close to make up all the rest;???
The Lord of Castabella. Now at last
Enjoy the full possession of my love;
As clear and pure as my first chastity.
The crown of all my blessings!???I will tempt
My Stars no longer; nor protract my time
Of marriage. When those Nuptial rites are done;
I will perform my kinsmens funerals.
The Drums and Trumpets! Interchange the sounds
Of Death and Triumph; for these honoured iiues,
Succeeding their deserved Tragedies.
Thus by the work of Heaven, the men that thought
To follow our dead bodies without tears,
Are dead themselves, and now we follow theirs.

WOuld 'were a Custom that at all New-playes
The Makers sat of the, Stage, either with Baize
To have their Works Crowned, or beate in with Hissing,
Pied and bold Ideotes, durst not then sit Kissing
A Muses cheek: Shame would base Changelings wean,
From Sucking the mellifluous Hypocrene:
Who write as blinde-men shoot, by (Hap, not Aim,)
So, Fools by lucky Throwing, oft win the Game.
Phoebus has many Bastards, True Sons ewe,
I mean of those, whose quick clear eyes can view.
Poesis pure Essence, It being so divine,
That the Suns Fires, (even when they brightest shine)
Or Lightning, when most subtly love does spend it,
May as soon be approchd, weighed, touched, or compreheded.
But tic with Poets now, as tic with Nations,
Thil-fauouredst Vices, are the bravest Fashions.
A Play whose Rudeness, Indians would abhor,
It fill a house with Fish wives, Rare, They All Roar.
It is not Praise is sought for (Now) but Pence,
Tho dropped, from Greasie-apron Audience.
Clapped may he bee with Thunder, that plucks Baize,
With such Foul Hands, &amp; with Squint-Eyes does gaze
On Pallas Shield; not caring (so hee Gains,
A Crad Third-Day, what Filth drops fro his Brains.
Let Those that lou Pans pipe, dance still to Pan,
They shall but get ong Ears by it: Give me That Man,
Who when the Plague of an Impostumd Brains
(Breaking out) inacts a Theater, and hotly reigns,
Killing the Harrears hearts, that the vast rooms
Stand empty, like so many Deadmen's oombes,
Can call the Banished Auditor home, And tie
His Ear (with golden chains) to his Melody:
Can draw with Adamantine Pen, (even creatures
Forged out of th'Hammer, on tiptoe, to Reach up,
And (from Rre silence) clap their Brawny hands,
T'Applaud, what their charmed soul scarce understands.
That Man give me; whose Breast filled by the Muses,
With Raptures, Into a second, them infuses:
Can give an Actor, Sorrow, Rage, Joy, Passion,
Whilst hee again (by selfsame Agitation)
Commands the Hearers, sometimes drawing out Tears,
Then smiles, and fills them both with Hopes &amp; Fears.
That Man give me: And to bee such-a-One,
Our Poet (is day) strives, or to bee None:
Lend not (Him) hands for Pity, but for Merit,
If he Please, hoe's Crowned, if Not, his Fate must bare it.
H!
So.
What so.
Isle be thy slave no longer.
When slave?
Hells drudge, her Gally-slaue. I ha'wore,
My flsh to the bones, bones marrowles, at the Oaer
Tugging to waft to'thy Stygian empire, Souls,
Which (but for Charon) never had come in Shoal,
Yet (swarmde they ne'er so,) them on shore I set,
Hell gets by Charon, what does Charon get?
His Fare.
Scurvy fare, isle first cry garlic.
Doe:
And make hell stink, as that does hither.
If I doe!
Some like that smell, my boat to shore isle pull;
Not work a stroke more.
How?
Not touch a Scull.
Why?
I have no doings: Graues-end-barge has more,
And cares as good as any are in hell;
I fear the infernal rivers are frozen over
So few by water come: else the whores that dwell
Next door to hell, go about: besides, tic thought,
That mn to find hell, now, new ways have sought,
s Spnirards did to the Indies. Pluto, mend
My wages, or row thy self.
Ugly, grumbling slave,
Have I not raised thy price? yet still dost crave?
Such bold brave beggars (heard off ner'e before
Are thy fares now, they teach thee to beg more.
Thy fare was (first) a halfe-peny, then the souls gave thee
A penny, then three-halfe-pence, we shall have thee
(As market-folkes on darth,) so damned-deere,
Men will not come to hell, crying out they are here
Worse rack then they are in taverns: why doest howl for money?
For money: Isle have ij. d. for each soul
I ferry over; Im'e old, crazed, Stiff, and lam'de,
That soul thats not worth ijd. wou'ld it were dimbed.
Thou shalt not.
I will have it, or lye still,
If Charon fill hell, hell shall Charon fill:
For Ghosts now come not thronging to my boat,
But drop by one and one in; none of note
Are fares now: I had wont brave fellows to ply,
Who, (hack't and mangled) did in battles dye.
But now these gallants which doe walk hells Rounds,
Are fuller of diseases, than of wounds.
If wounded any take my boat, they roar,
Being stabbed, either drunk, or slain about some whore.
Thats all the fight now.
Charon.
Get thee gon:
That called for.
Charon.
Ball not. Isle come anon.
Hags of hell gnaw thee with their foul furd-gummes.
Pluto, no wonder if so few hither comes?
Why:
Gingerly: See See,
One of thine own promooters, (with hawks eyes,
That should for prey be watching) here suoring lies.
With a mischief! cabined! a fury.
Isle Ferret out more.
Another: look: dancing abaw'de on's knee.
I doe enquire if rich bawds Carted bee
On earth as well as poor ones: I sleep not Pluto.
Twist stronger-knotted whips, Isle wake you (slaves!)
Two of thy Summers dead drunk here too.
Thou lie.
I come: If I must work, let these
Thy Prentices, ply their occupation,
T uphold hells Kingdom, more must work then one.
Ha; Are there whipping-posts for such as dwell
In Idleness on Earth, and yet shall Hell
(As if wee took bribes here too,) let such pass
Isle have you tawde: Is not the world as t'was?
Once mother of Rpes, Incests, and Sodomies,
Atheism, and Blasphemies, plump Boys indeed.
That sucked (our Dams breast) is she now barren? Ha
Is there a dearth of villains?
More now then ever?
Is there such peurie of man-kinde Hell-houndes
You can lye snoring.
Each Land is full of Rake-hells.
But shoal of Sharks eat up the Fish at Sea.
Brave pitchy villains there.
Yet you playing here.
No, No; most awful Plut.
Were you good Hell-hounds, every day should bee
A Symon-and-Iude, to crown our board with Feasts
A blacke-eyde-soules each minute: were you honest devil
Each officer in hell should have at least,
A brace of whores to his break-fast: aboue vs dwell,
Devils braver and more subtle then in Hell.
Weal fill thy palace with them.
Isle try that: go:
Rufman, take instantly a Courtiers shape
O any country: choose thine own disguise
And return swiftly.
Yes.
Shackle-soule wear thou
A Friars grave habit.
Well.
Grumshall walk thou
In trebble-ruffes like a Merchant.
So: tic don.
The bars of our litigious Courts had wont
To crack with thronging pleaders, whose load din
Shook the infernal hell, as if 't had bin
An earth-quake bursting from the deep Abisse,
Or else Ioues thunder, thrown at the head of Dis
(The God of gold,) for hiding it below,
Thereby to tempt churls hither. Nor did we know
What a Vacation meant: continual term
Fattend hells Lawyers, and shall so again.
Here.
Here.
Command vs.
Fly into the world:
As 'are in shapes transformed be so in name,
For men are our sides only: be you the same;
 thee to Npls, (Rufmn), thou shalt find
A Prince there (newly crowned,) aplie  de
To any bendin least his youthful brows
 at Stars only, way down his loftiest boughs
 lead plome poison his best thoughts with taste
O thing most sensual; if the heart once wast
The body feels consumption; good or bad kings
Breed Subjects like them: clear streams flow from clear springs.
Turn therefore Naples to a puddle: with a civil
Much promising face, and well oylde play the court devil.
Isle doo' in bravery: if as deep as hell,
Th large ears hear a Land curse me, my part's played well.
Fly Shackle-soule.
Whither?
To the Friery,
Best-samde in Naples for strict orders: throw
What nts thou see can catch them: Amongst 'em sow
Seeds of contention, or what ever sin
They most abhor, sweat thou to bring that in.
A wolf in lamb skin leaps into the rout,
Bell, book, or candle cannot curse me out:
Isle curse aster than they.
Doe:
Here.
Be thou a cittie-diuell, make thy hands
O Harpies claws, which being on courtiers lads
Oce fastend, ne'er let loose, the Merchant play,
And on the Burse, see thou thy flag display.
Of politic bnk-ruptse: train up as many
To flight under it, as th can, for now's not any
That break, (theile break their necks first) if, beside
Thou can no through the whole city meet with pride,
Riot, lechery, enu, , and such stuff,
Bing 'em all-in coached, the gores are wide enough.
The spirit of gold instruct thee: hence all.
Fly.
Sty, lest you should want helpers at your calling
Any devils shll come, (Sarch hound, Tobacco-spawling,
Vpshotten, Suckland, Glitterbacke, or any
Whom you shall need to employ, but call not many,
The'rs but ew good in hell. And stay, remember
We all meet to hear how you prosper.
Where?
The Tree
Blasted with Goblins, that bout whose root
5. Mandrakes grow, 'th Grove by Naples there,
Meet there.
Wee shall.
Our blessings with you bear.
Dread king of Ghosts, weal ply our thrift so well,
Thou shlt be forced to enlarge thy Jail of Hell.
Be quick th'at best, let sawy mortals know,
How ere they sleep, there's one wakes here below.
One of those gallant Troupes went forth to meet
Your admired Mistress (Erminhild the fair)
Hath left your Convoy with her on the way.
And brings glad news of her being here (this day)
Let Canons tell in Tunder her Arrival,
 When shoe's at hand our self ill meet her,
Pray rise; until above our brows were thrown,
These sparkling beams, suh adoration
Was not bestowed on vs: whom does the knee
Thus lovely worship? this Idol, (Gold) or me?
Indeed it is the world Saint, if that you adore,
Ge, pray to you coffers. None to vs shall bow,
Give God your knees.
Whose own voice does allow
That Subjects should to those who re Suprme,
Bend, as to God, (all King being like to h)
Thou wonder of thy time, Isle pay no more
To thee of duty than has been before
And ever shall be paid to those sit Hye.
Pray mock not me with such Idolatry,
Kings, Gods are, (I confess) but Gods of clay,
Brittle as you are, you as ood as they,
Only in weight they differ, (this poor dram)
Yet all bu flesh and blood; And such I am.
If such, pray let me eat, drink, speak, and walk,
Not looked clean through, with superstitious eyes,
(Not star'de at like a Comet.) As you go
Or speak, or feed, (un wondered at) let me so
Not Kings of Ceremony.
Uncle what then?
Still are they Kings.
But show like common men.
Good uncle know, no Sun in this our Sphere,
Shall rule but Wee, let others shine as clear,
In goodness, None in greatness shall.
Blessed reign!
The Golden world is molding new again.
All that I crave is this, and tic not new,
Pay unto Caesar only Caesars due.
We owe thee loyal hearts, and those weal pay,
Each minute (Mirror of Kings.)
Mark, the old Lords promise their hearts, but no money.
Here are the Names f bold conspirators,
(Young Catilines, and far more desperate)
Who in your Fathers days kindled the fires
Of here Rbillion.
Which are now burnt out.
Who knows that? embers in dead Ashes lye.
King, Set thy hand to this let raytors dye.
Tic fit you should doe so.
Sound ollicie.
Men many things hold fit,
That are not good,
A young Beginner and set up in blood!
(Butchers can doe no more.)
Shall Records say
Being Crowned, he played the Tyrant the first day,
How should that Chronicler be cur'd? your paper.
When such a fatal book comes in my sight,
Isle with Vespasian wish I could not write,
Their bond is concealed. I forgive the debt,
See that at liberty, they all be set.
A Princely Act.
If wisely tic well done.
That reign must bossed,
Which mercy has begun.
Bear witness all, what pace the Chariot wheels
Of our new guided Sovereignty shall run.
A mayne gallop I hope.
And here I vow to end as tic begun.
Heaven fill thee full of days,
But (being all told)
Ending no worse,
Their sum weal write in gold.
The course you'll take dear Lord.
This: pray observe it.
Call you this Coronation day? would I were ith
streets where the condutes run claret wine, there's some
good fellowship.
Peace.
Each week within the year shall be a book
Which each day ie read over: I well may do it,
The book being but six leaves (six days,) the seventh
Be his that owes it;
Sacred is that and hye;
And who profaneness one hour in that,
Shall dye.
How many will be left alive then this day fortnight?
First, beat all Taverns down then, Souls are lost
(Being drowned in Surfeits) on that seventh day most.
Stay (best of Kings) mine own hand shall set down
What laws thou made first day thou wor'st a Crown.
Begin, begin thy week.
Write Monday.
So so, Monday.
They say Monday's Shooemakers holiday, Isle fall to
that trade.
I have writ it down my liege.
Peace, harken to your lesson.
That day, from morn till night, Isle execute
The office of a Judge, and way out laws
With even scales.
Thats more than grocers doe.
The poor and rich mans cause
Isle poise alike: It shall be my chief care
That bribes and wrangling be pitched o'er the bar.
We shall have old breaking of necks then.
Down with that first.
O for a pen of gold!
You'll have no bribes.
None.
Yet terme-time all they year!
A good strong law, suite cannot now cost dear.
Have you done?
I'm at bribes, and wrangling done presently.
We must all turn pettifoggers, and in stead of got
rapiers, hang buckram bags at our girdles.
All my clients, shall be women.
Why?
Because they are easiest fetched over: there's something
to be gotten out of them.
Thy monday's task is done: whats next?
Sunday if the week goes backward.
Tuesdays weel'e sit to hear the poore-mans cries,
Orphans and widows: our own princely eyes
Shall their petitions read: our progress then
Shall be to hospitals which good minded men
Have built to pious use, for lame, sicks, and poor
Weal see whats given, what spent, and what flows over
Churls (with Gods money) shall not feast, swill wine,
And fat their rank guts whilst poor wretches pine.
This is a brave world for beggars, if it hold.
Poor wretches pine, So are they left: tot'h next.
Wednesdays weal spend.
In fish dinners.
In the affairs
Of foreign states, treat with ambassadors,
Hear them and give them answers. Thursday, for wars.
That's well: better be together byth'ares, then to go
halting to hospitals.
Our Neapolitane youths (that day) shall try
Their skill in arms, poor scorned Soldiers
Shall not be suffered beg here (as in some lands)
Nor stoop slaue-like to Captains proud commands,
Styue, and lie , when the selfsame pay,
The Soldier fights for, keeps the Leaders gay.
Nor shall he through ice and fire make gray his bread,
Wear out new Moons, only to earn his bread,
Wade up to'th beard in torrents; and be drowned
All save the head; march hard to meet a wound,
In the very face, and even his heart-strings crack,
To win a town, yet not to cloth his back:
And the black storm of troubles being gon,
Shunt like a creditor, not looked upon,
But as court-pallats (when bright day draws ny)
Told up in some dark corner is thrown by.
Uncle write that.
Fast as my pen can trot.
What a number of tottred rogues will be turned into brave
fellows a this new change of the moon
The braver they are, the sooner are mercers undone.
Soldiers are down too.
Down with Learning next.
For friday shall be spent it'h reverend Schools,
Where weal sift brnne from Hour, (hiss babbling fools,
But crown the deepe-braind disputant) none shall hold
Three or four Church-liuings (got by Symonious gold)
In them, to fat himself as in a sty,
When greater Scholars languish in beggary:
And in thin thred-bare cassocks wear out their age,
And bury their worth in some by vicorage:
This weal see mended.
Tithe pigs youl'e smoke for this.
So set it down.
Scholars languish in beggery-So:
Thy fridays law is writ; for Saturday, what?
I mary sir, All our cares now for that.
Well to begin, and not end so were base,
The winning of the gole crowns eachmans race.
Sir, theres a stranger newly arrived your court,
And much importunes to behold your Highness.
What is he?
Of goodly presence.
Let him see vs.
The powers that guide me, guard thee, I have heard thy name
In regions far hence, where it does refund
Louder than here at home; to touch this ground
The passed through countries, into which none here
Would willingly sail I think, and with me bring,
My love and service, which to your grace I tender.
What are you, and whence come you?
From Heluetia.
What hell says hee?
Peace you sall know hot hell time enough.
I am an Heluetian borne, the house from which I
am descended, ancient and well known to many princes:
Bohor is my name.
Zounds! Bohor! has struck two of my teeth out with his name,
A Shalcan Tartar being my grandfather
Men call me Shalkan Bohor. About the world
My travails make a girdle (perfect round:)
So that, what wonders Kings on earth ever found
I know, and what I know, Is yours.
Brave Heluetian,
We give you thanks and welcome: your arrival
Is fair and to our wish, of those days
Which Time sets down, to number up a week,
Every day have we tasked; save only one,
How in these courts of Kings (through which you have gon,)
Doe Princes wast their hours?
How but in that,
For which they are borne Kings? (Pleasure:) every mans aim,
Is to hi pleasure: only tic changed in name,
Thats all the difference; Are Kings Tyrants? Blood
Is then their pleasure: thirst they after wars!
Ambition tickles them; that for which man most cares,
Good or bad, tic his pleasure, and to gain it,
His soul must compass i tho hell restrain it
To this mark all men's thoughts, Creation drew,
That all might strive foe a thing, thats got by few:
Who are those few but Kings? and tic fit they
Should have it, because true pleasure does soon decay.
How like you his counsel?
Rarely.
What uffians this?
Bohor tha'st warmed our young blood; Al cares of state;
Shall that day sleep, to our self weal Saturday have,
Pleasure (the slave of Kings shall then be our slave,
Lords let there be a proclamation drawn,
What man soever (strange or native borne,)
Can feast our spleen, and heigthen our delight,
He shall have gold and be our favourite.
Tilts, turneys, masques, plays, dancing, drinking deep
Tho ere noon all Naples lye dead-drunke a sleep.
How King?
Weal have it so unle.
Down with that too.
Print Saturday in great text letters.
Well, well, it shall.
Our swan turns crow, poisond with one drop of gall.
Isle have this proclamation forthwith drawn.
And publish al the days.
And Saturday.
Especially that at large if you can in red,
like a Dominicall letter.
Go see it don.
My task.
Why sigh you? Of six days wo'd you not spare me one?
Thine own laws from thine own mouth, weal
proclaim, if thine own words thou e'ast, be it thine own
shame.
Your long expected happiness is arrived,
The princess of Calabria.
Thou crown'st me again
Dear uncle, honoured Lords, with  whole court
Honour her hither; I am rapd with Joy,
And lost till I behold her: fetch me my love.
I fear deep whirlpools tho it run smooth aboue.
To our worthy friend your welcomes.
But pray Sir tell vs, mean you that we indeed
Shall have but one playing day through the whole week?
All Iouinells, weal be Jovial all.
Till Saturday came, we lived in terrible fear.
Thank Bohor, who your dead spirits up did rear.
Had I (as first I did begin) gon on,
I like a Schoole-boy should have worn my crown,
As if I had borrowed it.
Had bin most vile.
Isle be a Sea, (boundless.)
Thou art a sun,
And let no base clouds muffle thee.
Brave Kings all!
Crown, Sceptre, Court, City, Country, are at your call
There spake young love indeed.
The tide now turns.
And now weal swim.
And laugh, tho the whole world mourns.
Omn: Tantara, hey.
Erminghild brought in.
Call up your lustiest spirits: the Lady's come.
O my earthly bliss! embraces! kisses! how sweet
Are you to parted Lovers when they meet?
That entertainment which the Duke your Father,
Lent royally (late to me,) I now can pay
At a Kings charge: to our Neapolitane Court,
None (brightest Erminhild can come longed for
More then your self.) You have stolen upon vs (Lady)
You have good Law against me, (playing the thief)
Your Grace may keep me prisoner.
In these Arms;
From whence not Jove shall ransom thee; We Twain
Will wed, and bed, and get a Prince shall reign
In Naples bravely, when wee both lye dead:
Till then, Pleasures wings, to their full breadth be spread.
A mangier, a mangier, a mangier, I must needs have
a mangy voice, whe I doe nothing but ball for a company of
hungry Scabs; a mangier.
You must be nimble Rush.
As a drawer in a new Tavern, first day the bush is ug up.
A mangier, a manger, a mangier,
So: the Lord Priors napkin here, there the Subpiors:
his knife and case of pick-toothes thus: as for the couent,
let them like their fingers in stead of wiping, and suck
their teeth in steed of picking.
What oathr duty Sir, must I call mine?
As you are novice, you are to say grace demurely,
waite on the Priors Trencher soberly, steal away a mouthfull
cunningly, and munch it up in a corner hungerly. Ply
your office, Rush.
Thanks good Friar Alphege: yes, Shackle-soule will play
The task hoe's set to: Devils never idle lye:
Friar Rush! ha, ha: you've now an excellent quire,
To sing in hell, the Devil and the Friar.
Whore's Rush, our Junior Novice?
Here Lord Prior.
Stand forth, and render thanks.
Hum, hum:
For our bread, wine, ale and beer,
For the piping hot meates here:
For broths of sundry tastes and sort,
For beef, veale, mutton, lamb, and pork.
Greene-sawce with calves head and bacon,
Pig and goose, and cramd-vp capon.
For past raised stiff with curious art,
Pie, custard, florentine and tart.
Baked rumps, fried kidneys, and lam-stones,
Fat sweete-breads, luscious maribones,
Artichoke, and oyster-pyes,
Butterd Crab, prawns, lobsters thighs,
Thanks be given for flesh and fishes,
With this choice of tempting dishes:
To which proface: with bly the looks sit ye,
Bids this Covent, much good do it ye.
How dare thou mock vs thou ill nurtured slave?
Contemn'st thou our order and religious fare?
He has spoken treason to all our stomachs.
Down with the villain.
Mischief on vs waits
If wee feed so vile a wretch.
Thrust him out at gates.
I doe conjure you by my hallowed beads
To hear me speak.
Can thou excuse thy self?
Alas (my Lord) I thought it had bin here
As in the neighbouring Churches, where the poor'st Vicar
Is filled up to the chin with choice of meates,
Yet seeks new ways to whet dull appetite,
As there with holy spells men's souls they cherish,
So with delicious fare, they themselves nourish.
Nor want they argument for sweet belly-cheere
To prove it lawful.
Most profane and fearful.
But since your order (pious and reverend)
Tied to religious fasts, spends the sad day
Wholly in meager contemplation,
I absolution beg on both my knees,
For what my tongue offended in: las! poor Rush
(See it by his cheeks) eats little: I can feed
On roots, and drink the water of the Spring
Out of mine own cup: make an Anatomy
Of my most sinful carcass: then pardon me.
Thy ignornnce is thy pardon, wee believe thee.
Gratias reuerenda domino Prior.
But do our brethren in parts more remote,
Feed so delicious say thou?
Rush cannot lye.
Thou falsely doest accuse those holy men.
How can it stand with their profession?
Thou say (vile young man) they have arguments
To prove it lawful gluttonously to feed.
Rush, answer the Sub-prior.
Auite fratres, they doe not only prove it lawful,
but make it palpable, that hee who eats not good in eat is
dambde.
Benedicite.
What shall become of all vs then?
Thou art distracted, whence can thou force arguemeant?
From silly reason, would you hear me speak?
Speak freely and be bold, listen.
Hum, hum, hum.
He that eats not good meat is damned: Sie Dispute.
If he that feeds well hath a good soul, then  Country.
No, he that feeds ill, hath a bad and a poor soul.
Thats wee.
And so cosequenly is damned, for who regards poor
souls? and if they be not regarded they are cast forth, and
if cast forth, then they are dambde.
I deny your minor, he that feeds well hath a good soul.
Sic probo: the soul follows the temperature of the
body, hee that feeds well hath a good temperature of body,
Ergo, he that feeds well hath a good soul.
A full and edifying argument.
Hum, hum, hum.
I deny that the soul follows the temperature of the body.
Enema sequitur temeratura Corporis, It is a principle,
&amp; country principia non est disputandum, All wee.
Its most apparent.
O most learned Rush!
A shallow Sophister, hear me farther.
Subprior, weal hear the rest disputed at our leisure:
you take too much upon you.
Shall I take this upon me my Lord?
Hence with this trash, we have too long forborne to
taste heavens blessings fully, which to our duty had more enabled
vs, Rush hart some Angel.
Rather some devil sent to bewitch our souls.
Sub-prior no more.
I must speak, hear me brethren,
Shall we (bound by solemn oaths) t'abuire the world,
And all her sorceries to whom night and day
Are as one hour of prayer? whose temperance makes vs
Endure what ful-fild belly Gods admire;
Shall we (by zealous patrons) tide to observe
Dirges and Requiems for their peaceful souls,
In gluttonous riot bury sacred alms!
Turn Sanctimonious zeal and Charity
To loathsome surfeit? and those well-got goods
Our benefactors saved, by their own fasts
And moderate living, shall we feed upon
Ful-gorging vs till we vomit? fore-fend it heaven!
By all the Saints, by him first taught our order
What temperance was, here shall poor Clement feed,
Till his ore-wearied life, takes her last leave
Of this all tempting world where all sins breed.
Howes this? are you become our confessor?
Best thrust vs out at gates, locke up the Cloister,
And cal in whom you like: be you the Prior.
Speak are you agreed, Rush be our maister-cooke?
You have my voice.
And mine.
Doe you all consent?
Yes, all.
First send this fiend to banishment.
We have most voices on our side.
You may;
Las! most men coet still the broadest way.
Ciue Rush his charge then, Scumb: you must resign.
With a good maw, I shall have a fatter office to be his scullion.
Worthy Lord Prior, hear me yet,
I must not my profession let,
To Scumbroath, what I know isle teach,
To make candels, Iellies, leach,
Sirrup of violets, and of roses,
Cow slip salads, and kick-choses,
Preserve the apricot, and cherry,
Damin-peare-plom, raspis berry;
Potates eke if you shall lack,
To corroborate the back:
A hundred more shall Rush device,
And yet to early matins rise,
Our ladies office, sing at prime,
At euen-song, and at compline time.
Chant Anthems, Aniuersaries, Dirges,
And the doleful de profundis.
Thou shalt not change thy order: Sir, cooke,
From Rush take lessons against night, for fare
Abndance and delicious.
I shall be greedy to learn of him sir, since your lordship
is turned, our very Jack and his spits shall turn too,
What men are these?
Welcome good holy father.
Thanks reverend moister.
Blessed sir, according to the Churches ite
We (Pilgrims, to Jerusalem bound) this night
Desire repose, and pious charity
In your most holy Covent.
You are most welcome.
Alphege, go lead'em in.
By no means.
Why?
Tic mortal sin.
O black impiety!
How? s to feed religious voaies!
Rather to nourish idle vagabod:
The Clergy of other lands, have with much pletie
And thrift destroyed those drones, that lzily
Live eating up the labours of the bee.
A churchman there cares but to feed the soul,
He makes that charge his ffice. Alsmisdeeds! alas!
They through the Lawyers hands are fitt'st to pass.
Can you hear this Devil?
Besids my reverend Lord,
These manderers here are spies, &amp; soon bear word to Princes
ears of what they hear and see.
Ha Rush! thou speak right.
Damned iniquity!
Hence with those runagates.
Come, hence.
Spurn 'em away.
Oh had mine eyes dropped out ere seen this day.
Stay comfortless poor souls, my pitying tears
Shall speak what my tongue dares not, here holy men,
You ne'er shall say when next we meet again,
Friar Clement to the hungry grutch'd his meat,
Or to the weary pilgrim lodging, this makes you eat,
And when you have relieved your faintg limbs,
Commend me in your prayers, and midst your hymmes
Thus wish, that he who did your Journey further,
May never live, to break his holy order.
Old superstitious dord; beat hence these beggars.
Many old men's curses will on his soul be pent,
Who thus defaces, Charities monument:
I told you they were curs, that ceae to bark, no
longer then you feed them.
Friar thou speak right:
Make hast with fare delicious, weal crown the night.
Ha ha, laugh Lucifer, dance grim fiends of hell,
Of souls thou judge must, ut most terrible,
I must exact a double pay from thee,
Ne'er had thou Journey man deserved such ee,
Let me cast up my reckonings, what I ha won
In this first voage: Charity! shees undone:
Fat gluttony broke her back: next her stepped in
Contention (who shakes Churches) now the sweet sin
(Sallow lechery,) should march after: Avarice,
Murder, and all sins else, hell can device,
Isle broach: the head's in, draw the body after,
Begin thy feast in full cups, end in slaughter
That damnedst fury: oh, but Friar Clement's free!
Tue: hast no snare to intrp him let me see.
Hes old, choke him with gold; hold on thy Revels,
Pluto makes Sackle-soul president of Devils.
What pictar's that (Uncle Octauio?)
The picture of thy state, (drawn by thy self,)
This is that book of statutes, were enacted
In the high Parliament of thy royal thoughts
Where wisdom was the speaker. And because
Thy subjects shall not be abused by laws
Wrapped up in racters, crabbed and unknown,
These thine own language speak.
Hang 'em up uncle.
What says the King?
You must hang up the laws.
Like cob-wbbe in owl rooms, through which great flies
Break through, the less being caught bith wing, there ies.
No no, thy laws  fix full in thy sight, Hangs a table up.
(Like sea-markes,) that if this great ship of sway
And kingly ventures, loose her constant way.
Ith bottomless gulf of state, (beaen by the storms
Of youthful folly, raging in monstrous forms)
She may be sau'de from sinking and from rack,
(Seed by this compass, for the points of it
Shall guide her so,  rock she cannot split.
You are our careful pilot in this voyage
Of Government, be you our Admiral.
Wisdom and Age being props, realms seldom fall.
Oraculous is thy voice.
How now count Brisco?
Me thinks I read a comedy in thy looks.
Has met some merry painter, hes drawn so lively.
Come count your news.
I shall bestow them freely:
The physic of your proclamation works:
Your gilded pills (rolled up in promises
Of princely favours to his wit, who highest
Can raise your pleasures) slip so smoothly down
Your Subjects throats, that all (upon a sudden)
Are loosely given.
How? loosely given? why count?
Name but what sport, your Highness would have Acted
I'm prologue too: your court must have more gates
To let in rufling Saturday: without (now) waits
Music in some ten languages: each one swears
(By Orpheus fiddle-case) they will tickle your ares
If they can do it with scraping.
Theres seven score Noise at least of english fiddlers.
7. score! they are able to eat up a city in very scraps
Very base-viall men most of 'em: besides whole
swarms of welsh harps, Irish bag-pipes, Jaws tromps,
And french kits. All these made I together play:
But their damned catter-wralling, frighted me away.
These sports to please
A Princes eyes?
How like you then of these?
The cittie-waterbearers (trimly dight)
With yellow oaker-tankerds (pind upright)
Like brooches in their hats; In their fresh loves
A may-game bring, All, wearing dog-skin gloves.
Made not to shrink it'h wetng.
Bid these poor men drink well, and so be gon.
What will you have then?
Will you see the Turners show, bravely prepared
With colours, drums, and guns (with rust half mar'de
Bearing that, of which they long have bin deprived.
What first?
Their daring Giant, (newly reui'de)
For Ioues sake lets see that.
O fie (Prince) fie!
In thy court painted monsters, they come not here,
Ride forth, thou shalt meet Giants every where.
Me thinks (young Lords) your souls being new refined
With beams of honour, should not be declined
To sports so low and vulgar: but since the King
Of birds (the Eagle) letts you spread a wing
So near his own, you should put up such game
As fits an Eagle, and pursue the same.
And not like ravens, kites, or painted Joys
So'are high, yet light on dunghills, for stinking preys.
Old Lord you rave.
What sports wood you devise?
Most fit for Kings. Were I (before his eyes)
To present objects, they should all be rare,
Of Roman triumps, laden with the spoils of war:
Or Lions, and wilde-Beares killed by active force:
Or sea-fights: or land battles on foot, or horse:
Such sights as these, kindle in Kings brave fire,
And meeting spirits that dare mount, mount'em higher,
Where pish pastimes lay our souls down flat,
Grovelling on earth, base and effemminate.
I have bowls of this bias too, for your Lordships alley.
Trundle'em out before him.
The wodden-leg Soldier,
Waits to present you with his show of war.
I mary my liege.
The Scholar has his device, the Mariner his.
These are Kings sports indeed.
Will you see these?
Faith be it so; because weal now rather please
Our uncle than our self, pray fetch in these.
The rest cashier.
Send the fiddlers merrily home.
And yet pa'em scurvily! tic impossible.
And bid the water-bearers cleanse the city
Ther's many a foul thing in it.
Marshall 'em in.
Isle fetch these worthy spirits in my self.
No, no, weal aid you sir.
March: and give vs room.
Stead! if these doting gray-beards might have their wills,
We never shall have ours: let vs cross em
As they cross vs.
How, how!
Every device
Their Ningles bring in, abuse with scurvy jest,
Beet nee're so good.
Agreed.
If Nines bring away the Nest.
Teach Jovenil and Brisco when to give fire.
Dromes and tromps sounding,
I am a Soldier.
We know that by your legs.
Does my stump grieve you?
Not if you be  our slupanimbly sir.
What hot shot's this?
A Soldier sir: thats all:
Thats more than sir I think you dare be Zounds! baffuld
For my limbs lost in service! your  father
Has clapped this buff-ierkin, when this Stump of wood
Has up to' knee stuck three hours in french blood:
When such as you, with your Spangled roses, that day
Bravely bestird their , and ran away:
Isle stand oot, I.
With one leg.
Yes: with one.
Young Lords, thus to scorn Soldiers, tic ill don.
Uncle, here is no man scornes'em; must we be braved
By a staring fellow, for a little fighting? go.
Fighting! I cannot halt I, but speak plain,
No King on earth baffalls me, id baffle again,
The whole race of great turks, had gem ith field: I ha brought
With me a hundred Soldiers, (old Servitors)
Poor as my self in clothes; pick out five hundred
Of such silke-stocken men, if they beat vs, hang vs,
S'bloud if we toss not them, hang's again: a fort
We ha built without, and mand it, this was the sport
A Soldier wood ha given thee: my no hundred
Had taught thee all the rules in the School of war.
All this isle read without may me, wound or scarre.
What say you to an Engine, that at once
Shall spoil some thirty men?
Thirty men! nothing.
If nothing! hast thou bin beat for this? farewell.
I can fetch twenty rueners have don more
With a bare goose-quill.
Moist thou but live, to need a Soldiers arm,
That laughed to see him bleed.
You have lost the day sir, for your Soldiers fly.
Fly to the devil let'em.
Your leaders before.
You fight all under one colours? doe you not?
Sir: these pleasures to the King hich I prefer,
Flow from Ioues brain.
Heyda! here is one has beaten out Ioues brains.
Wud I had thee hung up at our maine kt.
No Sir Ioues brain, (Mineua queen of wit)
If all the Muses and the Arts can fit
With their high Tunes, such choice and Princely ears,
Apollo (Father to them all)ppeares
Apollo was an Ass; he let a wench whom he loved to
be turned into a Bay-tree, and now shees glad for a penny to stick
Ale-house-windowes, and wind dead coerces.
Let Apollo go and lye with his own Daughters.
Are you a Scholar Sir?
A school-master as I take it; and comes to present a verye pretty sow of his scholars in broken La.
Can wee be dumb and see this?
O hapless Learning!
Fly and complain, to Heaven (where thou were borne)
That thou (whom Kings once nursed,) art now their
scorn.
How blows the wind Sir?
Wind! is Nore-Nore-West.
To hoise your sails up too, I think tic best.
A black Gust is coming: up a low-there hey: A
young-man up toth Top-mast-head, and looke-out: stand to
your Sails: stand to your Top-sailes: let o your Harriars,
let go, amain lover amain, quick, quick, Goofllowes.
Hes mad.
Whose at Helm? bear up hard: and hard up: and
thou be a man bear up; Star-borde, Port-agein: off with
your Drablers, and your Banners; our with you Courses:
Ho,I spy two Ships yonder, that yaw too and agen,
they have both sprung a Leake, I think the Devil is
sucking Tabaccho, hears such a Mist: out with your boat,
and you Besmen, cut-downe Maste-bith-borde; bear up,
Ime a Bunt-fell you see, All I say is this,
You that scorn , shall a Sea-man miss.
Now by my life I have patient stood too long.
To see rich merit and love, paid with base wrong:
Learning! and Arms! and Traffic! the triple wall
That fortifies a Kingdom, race em down All!
This Seaman, (hee that dearest earns his bread)
Had rigd and manned 4 Galleys bravely furnished,
With Soldiers, Rowers, and Fireworks for a Sea-fight.
You are full of Squibs too, pray go fire em all.
Must I bee then cashiered too? mary and shall.
To save thy sinking Honour, Isle send hence
These men with thanks, with praise, and recompense.
Pray doe.
Brave Shalcan-Bohor, all this while
Our eye has followed yours, and seen it smile,
(As it were in scorn) of what these men could doe,
Which made vs slight them off; to engross you
(Our best and richest prize:) ith Courts of Kings
Through which you ha passed, you ha seenewonders, show em.
I shall at opportune hours. If your Grace
Arid the toys, they bragd of (Fireworks,
And such light-stuffes) Sit fearless without danger
Of murdering shot, which villains might discharge
In (idle counterfeit Sea-fights) you shall see
At opening of this hand, a thousand Balls
Of wilde-Fire, flying round about the Airthere.
Fireworks on Lines.
Rare, Rare.
Tic excellent Seath from whence flew they?
Hell, I think.
Hell! Nay, if any that are in Hell, skip up ever so ny
Heaven, as these Devils that spit fire did, Isle drink nothing
but Gun-pouder.
Ha, ha, a trifle this. Your Scholar there,
Come with his Arts and Muses shallow, leaden brain,
Your swaggering Soldier, lead a tottered train
Of ruffianly Boore-hallers: I noted all
These feasts for Kings: ith garden of variety
The vast world! you are starved midst your satiety,
Pluck no one Apple from the golden Tree,
But shake the fruit of every pleasure down.
Thanks Bohor; why else wears a King his Crown?
Shalcan, all Naples shall not buy thee from me.
Nor you and these from me.
Ask what thou wilt have
But to stay here.
Lo, this is all I crave.
Thou hast our fast embraces.
Swift as mans thought,
Various delights shall bee each minute borne,
And dye as fast that fresh may rise; wee scorn
To serve up one dish twice; be it ne'er so rare,
Will you that against to morrow I prepare
A Feast of strange Mirth for you?
Dear Bohor doe.
I shall; Nor doe I thus your love pursue,
With servile hopes of Gold, I need it not:
If out the jaws of Hell Gold may bee got
Black Arts are mine to do it; and what delights
Those work bee yours.
Thou art gracious in our sight.
1 Come fellow Lurchall write.
Fuh, Stay not for me,
I shall out-goe you all.
2 I hold 5. Crowns,
Wee all leave you behind vs.
Don; but I
Must not leave you behind me; what pains a poor Devil
takes to get into a Merchant? hes so civil,
One of Hell must not know him, with more ease
A Devil may win ten Gallants, then one of these,
Yet a Merchants wife, before these ten is won
To entertain her Devil, if Pride be one.
But Lurchall, now thart in, and for years bound,
To play the Merchant, play him right: you have and
A Master, who more villainy has by hart,
Then thou by rote; See him but play his own part,
And thou doest Hell good service; Barteruile,
Theres in thy name a Harvest makes me smile.
Lurchall:within
My master calls.
I.
Oh, art there?
This day twixt one and two a Gallants bound
To pay 400. Crowns to free his Lands
Fast mortgaged to me, Lurchall, got thee up hye
Into my Turret, where thou may espy
All comers every way; if by thy guess,
Thou see the Gull make hither.
So Sir.
That, his Hour
Lye gasping, at the last Minutes; let him beat at door,
Within Isle beat his heart out.
Isle let him stand.
Do, take my Watch, go faster. All his Land
Is sumd with these two Figures, (2. and 1.)
At past one, (his,) strike but two, tic mine own.
Isle turn the wheels: and spin the hours up faster
The Citie-clockes then strike, and kill thy Master.
Would all the Citie-Sextons, at my cost
Were dunke this day 4. hours.
Troth so wud I,
And wee their Iackesath Clocke-house.
Wee'de strike merrily.
Fly up to'th topath house,
There sir, Isle sit,
And coak like a Ruen, to damb thee in hells pit.
How goes this month?
Much shorter than the last.
Weddings this month 12. thousand: not worth the scoring,
But think ther's little marrying, we ha so much whoring.
Grinding milles so much-vsde; about the city
Such grinding, yet no more money; suites in law,
Full brought to an end this month, no more but ten:
This law will beggar vs: had I the bags again,
I bought this combrous office with, the King
Should make his best of't: hee that did farm't before
Had it for less than I, yet received more.
Hw much remains of the salt tribute due?
7000. Crowns.
Thats well: a savoury sum:
These our Italian tributes, were well devised,
Me thinks tic fit a subject should not eat
But that his Prince from every dish of meat
Should receive nourishment: for (being the head)
Why should he pine, when all the body is fed?
Besides, it make vs more to awe a King,
When at each bit we are forced to think on him.
What payment's this?
The pension of the Stews, you need not untie it, I
brought it but now from the sealers office: ther's not a
piece there, but has a hole in it, because men may know
where it was had, and where it will be taken again: bless your
worship? Stew-mony sir, Stew-Prunc cash sir.
They are sure, tho not the soundest pay myers,
Read whats the sum.
Bu bare 20. crowns.
They are bare crowns indeed sir, and they came
from Animals and vermin that are more bare: wee that are
clarks of these flesh-markets have a great deal of rotten
mutton lying upon our hands, and find this to bee a sore
payment.
Well, well, the world will mend.
So our surgeons tell'em every day; but the pox of mendment I see.
Doe not your gallants come off roundly then?
Yes sir, their hair comes off fast enough, we turn away
cracked french crowns every day. I have suite to your
worship in behalf of all our dealers in small wares, our freewhores
sir, you know my meaning.
If your whores are known, whats thy suite?
I should have brought a petition from 'em, but that
tic put off sir, till clensing-weeke, that they may all be able to
set to their hands, or else a whores mark.
Well, well, whats their request?
Mary sir, that all the shee-tobacco-shops, that creep
up daily in every hole about the City, may bee put to scilence.
Why pray thee honest fellow?
I thank your good worshp, I had not such a sweet
bit given me this 7 years, honest fellow: marry sir Isle open
to you your suppliants cases: they that had wont to spend a
crown about a smock, have now their delight dog-cheape,
but for spending one quarter of that money in smoke: besides
sir, they are not contented to rob vs of our customs onlie,
but when their pipes are foul with spitting and drivelling
in those foresaid shops, they have no place to burn 'em in,
but our houses.
Draw their petition, and weal see all cured.
Let a frost come first sir: I thank your venerable
worshp; the pox gnaw out so many small guts as have paid
thee crowns.
The tit's against you sir, the crowns are come.
How goes my watch?
As most watches use to go sir, sleepily, heavily.
Not reached to one yet; were thou to be hanged,
The hour had galloped.
I spurt it all that I could.
S'death kook his hour, heaue help poor Citizens,
If Gentlemen grow thus wary: let him in.
Barren now, that hast in craft so fruitful bin.
Your business sir to me.
Doe you not know me sir?
No in good truth sir.
To know you I am bold sir,
You have lads of mine in mortgage, this is my day,
And here is your crowns.
Signior Innocentio;
My memory had quite lost you, pray sit both,
A bowl of wine here.
Sir it shall not need:
Please you to fetch my evidence, whilst we tell.
What needs this forward spring? faith two months hence
Had bin to me as welcome.
Sir I thank you.
Your hour draws on Signior Innocentio,
Go beat a drum ith garret, that no tongues
Of clocks be heard but mine.
Little past one.
Wind, wind.
Thus went thou to domnation.
Isle part with none sir, pardon me, till I see
Your writings: will you fetch the evidence sir.
What evidence sir, have I of yours?
My friend sir, whose money hee lends me to redeem
my mortgage.
Which you would have for your security.
Tic so sir?
No sir Innocentio,
To morrow on your bare word will I lend you 30. crowns
more: I love you sir, and wish you beware whose hands you
fall into: the worlds a serpent.
This does but spend the hour sir, will you take your money?
With all my heart.
Let him see my writings then.
Have you such covenant from me? I remember none.
Your conscience is sufficient covenant sir.
Ha! whats that conscience? I know no law-termes I,
Talk to me as to Citizen.
Weal dally no longer;
We knew what snake would sting vs, and therefore brought
Our medcine against his venom: you'll keep the writings,
And weal ith Court of conscience tender your crowns,
Whither this writ does summon you.
A fox, and ore-taken?
Serve writs upon me, yet keep my money too?
Dull slave hast thou no brain?
Brain! try this.
Peace.
Will you as fits a Christian give vs in
What is our right, and take your crowns sir yet?
Tic good to try men's patience, fetch me down
Those writing on my pillow, there they ha slept
These two hours for you: must not friends jest? ha!
Yes sir: let your men tell, just 400. crowns.
Besides the use.
The use is there too.
Hold: Isle take it without telling, put it up.
Not till we see the writings.
Dare you touch it?
Dare! ye sir, and dare stab him to the heart,
Offers to take it from vs:
Who stabs first? Flings money amongst it.
Now touch it if you dare: ther's gold of mine,
And if they lay one finger on it, cry thieves,
They come to rob me, touch it if you dare.
Dambde wretch, thou wilt go quick to hell I fear.
No sir, the devil shall fetch me when I go.
That all my errand.
We are cheated both.
Proceed, in your chancery suite, I have begun your bill.
Humbly complaining.
Of thee villain He complain
That sells thy soul for money, devils on earth dwell,
And men are no where, all this world is hell.
I kiss thy forehead, my witty Oedipus
That can unfold such riddels: one rings.
Sir, I am bound
To doe you all service, till I you all confound.
Moister Siluerpen the proctor sir, sends word, if you
come not in to morrow and personally depose your paymet
of the 200. crowns, you'll be non-suited.
That is a law-draught goes down coldly.
Why sir? Tic but your swearing the money is paid.
If oaths had back-dores to come in at, without danger
of damnation, to catch a mans soul bith back, swearing were brave.
What answer shall I give the Proctors man?
Tell him my moister shall come in and swear.
Doe, tell him: on thee Isle build: now all my fear,
Is for appearance at the Chancellors Court,
No trick to save that?
I have a brave one fort.
Bring in a pottle of wine: will Carlo here my fellow,
Depose a truth if he see it, to help his moister?
What thou not honest Carlo?
Yes sir.
Here's the wine.
Set this to your head anon sir, when tic there
Away you, and to morrow thou mai'st swear
Before the Chancellor, and swear true, if hee
Were in that case thou left him, it were in vain
To hope he could live, till thou came back again.
All Knights a'th Post learn this trick: the fits upon me now.
Take a good draught, twill help you sir: It gulps,
hes almost breathless Carolo; away.
I am gon.
Hes gon, hes gon sir.
One gulp more had choked me;
This wine had washed my fears off, tha'st given me power
To make me dote upon thee. Carolos gon.
Yes and will swear his heart out, to your good.
Swear let him; bee thy self and hee dambde too.
So I may get by it. In my bosom sleep
(My dove, my lue,) prosper but thou and I,
And let all else sink.
Let'em: so I kiss gold,
The yongmans whore, the saint of him that sold.
Whither (mad-men) run you?
To  Vines.
Your Vines?
(The tree of  and shame?) this Serpent here,
H with that lqorish poison, so set on fire
The brains of Nicodeme and Siluester,
That they in drunken rage have stabbed each other.
Stabbed!
Yes, they bleed a little, but have no harm,
Their young blood with the grapes Juice being made (warm,
They brawld and struck, but I kept off the blows,
Yet the Subprior says from me their quarrel rose.
It did.
In very deed (for I not swear)
It did no sir: to me you malice bear,
As if that all such mischief don, were mine,
But cause your self shall see how I rapine
To see vice prosper, pardon me good Lord Prior
If I a tell-tale be of what mine eyes
Beheld with water in them: sin will rise
In holy sircles I see sometimes.
What sin?
What hast tho seen?
Wud present I had not been,
But till I utter it, my clogd conscience bears
A man upon a woman.
Ha
I speak't in tears:
Scumbr our cooke, and a female I beheld
Kissing in our orchard: on her lips he dwelt
I thyke some half hour.
Shame to our reverend order!
A woman in our covent! Sin black as murder.
Our cooke shall be severely punished: a woman,
A tempter here.
Abominable!
Rush, thoul't rebuke sin.
Tho my Lord I'm bad, I'm not given that way.
Let vs some plagues invent to lay on this echerous knave
Some light punishment
(Good my Lord Prior) suppose it were your own fault,
Whip as you would be whipped, the best's nought.
He shall be punished, and then loose his place.
That sir shall be as we will: to our Vines: away.
For shame give over, dare you profane this day
That is to holy uses consecrate?
Why? what day is this?
Lambert the marter.
No matter,
To vex thee deeper, this whole day weal spend,
Only about our Vines.
You vex not me,
But heaven: what warrants you to this?
Our will.
Thou hast thy will, thy wish thou ne'er shalt have,
In ight of heaven who sees and punishes
Men's black impieties; And in sight of these
(Sharers in thy full sin:) And in his sight,
To express whose vileness, there's no epithet.
No matter what he says Rush.
I'm known what I am.
To thee I prophecy, (vicious old man to thee,
Who r'st with lift-vp-hands, and downe-bowed knee,
Seem to'haue had work in heaven: now (full of spite,
Only to eat a liquorish appetite;
Dgst our religious wales up, planting there
Luxurious fruits to pamper belly-cheere
(For all thy pains to dress it,) of this Vine
Thy lustful lips shall never taste the wine.
Distracted fool, in stead of my just anger,
Thou only hast my pity: thou prophecy?
Ha, ha.
Laugh on, but since nor prayers prevail not tears,
Isle power my grief into my Princes cares.
Heel go and complain to the King.
Let him complain,
Kings cannot Subjects of their food restrain,
Away.
Engender sin with sin; that wines rich he
May bring forth Lust, Lust murder may beget,
But here strike ail, this bark awhile hale in,
And launch into the deep, a brighter sin:
Ho, Glitterbacke, ascend, to shackle-soule,
To shackle-soule ascend, ho Glitterbacke;
Thou richest spirit, thrust up thy golden head
From hell thus hie: when? art imprisoned
In misers chests so fast thou can not come?
O fear thou thieves, or cupurses? here be some
Can save thee from their fingers: when? Arise;
And dazzle the approaching night with hy glistering eyes.
Here.
How thou sweatst with coming? Save me those drops
(Golds pure Elipar) stilling from thy lockes:
Shake from thy brows and hair that golden shower,
So: get home: quick: (to hell) least hell grow poor,
If Richmens paws once fasten thee, and beware
It'n way thou meetst no Lawyers: thele pull thee bare,
Hence: down.
I me gon.
Cool night will call Friar Clement forth anon:
Angels, be you his strong temptation:
Wines lustful fires him warm not: At this spring,
(Scorne by the rest for him,) sprd thy gilt wing,
Full in his eye; As he drinks water down
In streams of Avarice, let his weak soul drown.
I doe beseech your Highness, yet turn back
And comfort the sad Lady, whose fair eyes
Are worn away with weeping.
If her eyes be worn away, what should a man doe
With a blind wife? kill her with flies?
I cannot abide a woman thats fond of me.
Nor I.
I would love a woman but as I love a walnut, to crack
It, and peel it, eat the meat, and then throw away the
Shell.
Or as noble-men use their great horses, when they
Are past service: ell'em to brewers and make'em drey-horses:
So use a woman.
So so.
The Indians are warm without clothes, and a man
Is best at ease without a woman: or if your Highness must
 have one, have factors to buy the fairest, do ate no any,
 the turk, regard none, yet keep many.
 You hear the Juries verdict.
 hose foreman's the devil?
 counsel thee to thy destruction.
Destruction? why? the heaven can abide but one sun,
I hpe we on earth may love many men's daughters
Tl Erminhilda so: send her home to the duke her father:
And tell him too, because the disease of marriage
Brings the stone with it, I hate a woman; I love not
To be cut: enclosed grounds are too rank.
Best feeding on the Commons then.
Will you not mary this cha Lady then?
No sir, and will you now my reason have?
A women's is an insatiate grave.
Wherein hoe's damned that lies buried.
On, on, away.
Brave battles I fight you, but isle win the day
I heard the story, tell't not over again,
It were cruelty to wound men, being half slain.
Tic cruelty too much, and too much shame
That one of your high birth, youth, beauty, name,
And virtues shining bright, should hence be sent
(Like some offender into banishment)
Abused by a King, and his luxurious train,
Of parasites, knaves, &amp; fools, (a kingdoms bane,)
For them, by him not card for; you came not so,
But as his bride, his Queen, and bedfellow.
And yet am neither, fro my fathers court
Came I (being sud by Princes too) for this?
To see him, his subjects scorn, and my self his?
Once thought I that his love had bin (as fate)
Unmovable; and st now turned to hate?
Yes, yes, hes wavering as the running stream,
And far more idle than a mad-mans dream.
Sed to the duke your father, let him enforce
Your plighted marriage.
Worse than a diuore
No: to his eyes since hateful I am grown,
Isle leave his Court and him, and dye unknown.
All runs I see to ruin.
If he pursue,
These godless courses, best we leave him too,
That land to it self must a quick downefull bring,
Whose King has lost all, but the name of King.
Get thee to bed thou foolish man and sleep.
How? Sleep? no sir no, I am turned a tyrant and cannot sleep:
I stand sentinel perdu, and somebody dyes if I sleep,
I am possessed with the divell and cannot slepe.
What duell possesses thee?
The encers devil a fighting devil; Rush has commeted
a murder upon my body, and his carcass shall answer
it; the cock of my revenge is up.
Murder! what murder?
He has taken away my good name, which is flat manslughter,
and half hanged me, which is as much as murder,
he told the Lord Prior and you that I was kissing a wench: Its
a lye, I give him the lye, and he shall fight with me at single
pistall against my caliver, do I look like a whormemonger?
when have you seen a wencher thus iary as I am: Rush
thou die for this treason against my members concupiscentiallitie.
Thou wut not kill him, wut thou?
No, but Isle make him know what tic to boil a cooke
in's own grease.
I am scalding hot; I am charged with urie, I carry a heart-burning
within me. I kiss a whore? I shall have boys cry out
to me, now who kiss Mary? No Rush, Scumbroth shall give thee
sugar pellets to eat, I will not be danced upon.
Let me persuade thy peace of mind to night,
Get thee to rest, if Rush have thee belide,
Rejoice, by wrongs to have thy patience tried.
He shall forgiveness ask thee.
Let me but have one blow ats head with my cleauer
Ith kitchen, and I freely forgive him, or let me bounce at
him.
Tes bloody thoughts will dam thee into hell.
Doe you think so what becomes of our roaring
boys then that  healths one to another, doe you think
they will be damb up too?
I think so, for I know it, dear son to prayer,
Two sins beset thee, murder, and despaite,
I charge thee meet me at my cell anon,
To save thee will I spend my oson.
In name of heaven I charge thee to be gon.
Well si the cold water of your counsel has laid the
neat of my urie: he had met with his match, but I will shoot
off my anger, I will be gon, and why? Look you, because the
moon is up and makes horns at one of vs; As the noblemans
coach is drawn by four horses, the knights by two,
&amp; the cuckold by three, even so am I drawn away with none
at all. Vale, Bonos Noshes: I am possessed still: It buzzes, here.
Vale.
Blessed star of light, stuck there to illuminate
This world darkened over with sin: thou watchest late,
To guide mans coming home, showing thereby
Heavens care of vs, seeing how we tread awry
We have two great lights for midnight and for noon,
Because black deeds at no time should be don.
All hail to thee (now my best guide) be given,
What needs I earths candle, having the lamp of heaven?
Now Benedicite? where am I?
O whether am I going? which way came I?
Ah wellada, I come to fill my pot,
With water not with thee; thou art mis begot.
Else would thou not lye there; what Orphans blood
Hst thou sucked out, to make this golden flood?
None drink this well but I, how is it than
Thou thus way-lay'st me, (thief to the soul of man?
Would some poor wretch (by lsse of law undone)
Had thee: go doe him good: me can thou none.
My wholesome cup is poisoned, it flows over
With mans damnation (gold,) drink there no more
Not taste what all men thirst for? old and so brave,
When money assaults, one combat more Isle have.
So, ho, ho, father, Subprior.
Whose there? what art thou call me?
One that feeds the hungry, the cooke sir, Scumbroth.
Come hither, I have for thee a golden prize.
Ha ha: heel take it.
Villains and fools will ha gold, (tho got from hell,)
But they who doe so, (as thou shalt) pay for it well.
But stay, father Subprior, before we go one step
farther, what doe you think I have done since I went from
you?
No hurt I hope, say hast thou?
Hurt? If I did hurt in that, how much hame doe Almake
makers, who lye coldly quivering at it all the year
long? I did doe nothing but stand staring at the man in the
moon.
And what good thoughts bred that within thee?
This: I thought to my self, what a happy fellow that
man in the moon was, to see so many fools and knaves here
below, and yet never to be troubled with 'em, nor meddle
with 'em.
Hes hppy that meddles not with this world indeed.
If that man in the moon should write a prognostication,
oh he should not need to tell astronomical lies to
fill his book, nor talk in gibrish no man understands, of
Quartiles, Aspects, Stations, Retrogradations, Peragrations; Centricall,
Eccentricall, Cosmicall, Acronicall, and such Palquoicall,
Solar, Lunar, Lnaticall vaulting over the rails of heaven,
that no Christian dare look upon their tricks, for fear his
wit break his neck.
Thou putst into a Sea, thou can not sound,
Ignorance still is foe to Arts profound.
Coe hither man, come hither.
Arts profound, Arts make men as very asses as women
doe, I have no Art, and yet I know this Moon that
shines to night, sees more than you or I doe, for all your spectacles.
True, tic the eye of heaven.
Which of the eyes? tic but the left eye: and the Sun
is the right: and yet the left sometimes sees more than the
right, and the right as much as the left, there's paxonisme for
you father globicall paxonisme.
I understand thee not.
No, why here is the oyster opend, I say the Sun sees
much knavery in a year, &amp; the Moon more in a quarter the
Moon sees men carried by a quarrelling watch to prison, and
the Sun sees the constable and the booke-keepr share fees
the next morning.
Thats not well.
Yes, but they swear tic well: the Moon sees bastarts
come bwling into the world, &amp; the Sun sees'em shifted
and shuftled in dossers, away to nurse, &amp; thats the cause we
have so many dosser-heads: the Moon sees old curmudgeonce
come reeling from Taverns with spping of half pites
of Sack, and the Sun sees the same churls the next day, sobarley
cutting any mans throat for a penny.
Enough of this: come hither: look what here lies.
What here lies: mary, father Subprior, the devil and
some Vsuters money have bin here at their lechery, and see
what goodly children they have begot: if you will isle keep
the bastards at nurse.
I am content that half this gold he thine,
(If it bee asked for never, for tic not mine,)
So thou wilt promise tother half to give
To such as I appoint.
By this gold I will lay it out bravely, as you appoint me
Look not to prosper; if thou dealst amiss;
Good works are keys opening the gates of bliss,
That golden key, thou in that heap moist find;
If with it thou relieve the lame, sick, blind &amp; ugry
I will doe it I protest.
One half bestowed so, take thy self the rest.
So fare thee well.
Farewell good father,  fool: Isle give the blind a
dog to lead 'em, the lame shall to the whipping-post, the sick
shall dye in a cage, and the hungry leap at a crust: I seed
ogues, the pox shall: the world is changed: a beggar yesterday,
and full of gold to day: an ass to day, and a proved
scab to morrow.
Stay: stand.Golden head ascends.
Stand: cannot a Gentleman grow rich, but he must
keep knaves about him?
That gold is none of thine.
But all the craft in that great head of yours cannot
get it out of my angers. Zounds who the devil art thou?
A spirit sent up from hell to make thee rih.
Thank hell for it: hell makes worse fool rich in a year.
That gold I laid there for thee.
When doe you lay again, that I may have more of
these eggs?
Spnd those I charge thee first.
Yes, Head.
And bravely I charge thee.
What need you be at such charges, Isle do't: but
shall the poor be a penny the better for me, as the old felllow
charge me, yea, or no?
No.  Within?
No.
Whose that?
Tic thine own Genius cries unto thee no.
My Genius, I am a cooke, my Genius then belike is
a sullion; but when this is spent, can my Genius tell me
whither I shall have more.
More.
More.
More.
More.
Because my Genius keeps company with a great
man, Isle take all their words; and his bond.
When thou hast spent all that: I charge thee come
To the black tree, that stands in Naples grove,
Climb boldly to the top, and keep fast hold,
For there isle rain on thee a shower of gold,
If what thou see there, thou to any tell,
Devils shall tear thee.
Away.
Away.
Farewell.
Ha, ha! down down bright spirit, thou wt bee
mist anon, hell mynt stands idle.
Loose not that fool.
Be gon.
Have care to meet at next infernal court:
The day draws ny.Goes down.
I thank thee for this spirit.
You that complain against Barteruile, (receiver of all
our tribute-monies) speak your wrongs; nay you have deafl'd
our cares too much already, hee does confess your crowns
(paid and received) but to give back your writings ther's
no clause, If them you'll win, fight it out by our laws.
I humbly thank your highness. A gracious doom.
One day to try this plea, to hell thowlt come. Ex. 2.
Toth next, we ha business of our own, to the next:
O Barteruile!  for these 2o. crowns.
I payde'em to that man.
Now before the King
And his Lords here, thou least: you have paid me none.
Your chollers sir too hye.
Tho my collar stand
So hye, it scarce bears up this falling band.
Thou say thowlt swear you have paid it: vd nails swear so,
And the foul and go with it: 200. crowns?
I ha lost as much at loggets: swear but to revel,
And spend't in hell, gallop thee and that to the devil.
Man wherefore doest not swear?
Reach me a book.
Let me before I swear, on my notes look,
Isle tell you the very day; pray hold my staff,
Till I draw out my false eyes.
Draw thy heart out an't wut: thou moist well say thy false eyes.
The day: August, 14.
Thats now, be daod, and so away.
On this day (August, 14.) I swear I paid
Into these hands, 200. crowns in gold.
Zounds not in silver: by this book I had none.
One of you two is periuriously forsworn.
He, he, as I am true Curstian man.
He swears,
To your own hands he paid them.
Else let that eye,
Which sees me play false, scourge my perjury
With fearful stripes.
O intice I fallen down dead
Wud I had lost all tho I had bin cozened,
Rather than thou thy soul.
He bleeds at mouth.
See his staff (beating the earth, for heaven loves ruth
Is burst in shivers, and that gold he swore
W py'd to me, lies scattred on the ore.
He comes again, the devil will not receive him.
Take him away, weal punish him for this crime.
Beg his office: you a Courtier?
I have a suite to your highness.
What  count Spendola?
Moister, look up man,
In this black trance had thy soul flyen away,
I had wrought hard and made a holiday.
Loose not a minute (pue-fellow) leave him not yet,
I have whales here too, lye playing in the net.
Isle take this gold at venture, (sweet young King,)
For all this hel-hound owes me.
Doe, and be gon.
I am paid: the devils turned puritan I fear,
 tes (me thinks) to hear his own child swear.
The office of this periurd Barteruile,
I  give away, dividing it
To the Count Spendola, and our worthy friend
Brave  here; farm it to whom you please.
We thank your Highness.
Who bids most, he buys it.
 his life the devil gives longer lease,
To build more work for hell; go see, &amp; from him
 of what he ow vs.
That  account  take.
Show him no fauou.
If now th are a used King, keep thy word,
With thy poor subjects.
How now vcle? why
This is thy day to hear the poor mans cry:
And yonders crying eough, at thy Court gats;
Five hundred  heads, and scarce  good has,
Yet haberdashers too, of all trades some,
Crying out they are undone.
Undone, by whom?
Mary, look: by such as you are, who go gay,
Were it out, book down more, set to their hands but never pay;
Never in dear years was there such complaining
Of poor starved servants, or (when plagues are reigning)
Morn orphans so and widows, as those doe
That owe these sorrowful papers.
Pray how can I
To their complainings add a remedy?
Isle tell thee how: are any here in debt
To Merchants, Mercers, Taylors? let'em jet
In their own satins, pay for what they haan,
And these will go less brave, tother less complain.
Ha ha!
The mighty wrongs the weak, the rich the poor,
This man should have his own, could he grease more
His too-fat lawyer; that wretch for's coat does sue,
But his coat's gon, and his skin flayed off too,
First his purse bee ore-match'd: these gross impure
And rank diseases, long unto thy cure,
Thy word's in pawn fort, these are the poores cries,
How wilt thou stop their throats?
With halters.
Hang 'em.
Hang 'em! any halters here list so set down?
This law-booke speaks not so, yet tic thine own.
Still braving me with this? burn it.
Yes doe.
If you burn all the week, burn saturday too:
Doe one good dayes-deed first, read poor men's plaints.
Hells plagues confound 'em: in their heads and thine
Vex me no more.
I warrant thee isle save mine.
HolySaint pardon me, ( good father, my brain
So wilde is I forgot thee, but isle to him again,
Tic but an old mans head off. King take it, isle speak whilst
this stands on my shoulders.
But that you are.
An honest man, thou'st have this,  I beseek
thy attention to this Reverend subPrior,
Who plains against disorders of this House;
Where once Devotion dwelt and Charity,
Ther's Drunkenness now, Gluttony, and Lechery,
Tell thou the Tale.
Bad Story soon is told;
Because tic foul, that Leaf does all enfold,
Their sins grow hye, and fearful, and strike at Heaven,
Punish them THOV, whose power from thence is given.
Your Friars so lusty!
All the Barbers in Nples tell news of that Priory.
I would your Grace would let me purge this ouse of
her infection; bestow the Livings of it on me, isle seeten
it  one Month.
Heel lay it in Lavender.
The Covent, the Demesnes, Immunities,
Rents, Customs, Chartres, what to this house of Baall
soever is belongingBrisco tic thine.
Wut rob the Church too, (Now you have nothing left
scarce for thy self?)
O heaven for-fend such theft!
Bestow it at thy pleasure.
Woe to thoses days,
When to raise Upstarts, the poor CHVRCH decays.
Call back thy gift ( King) and ere these eyes
Behold unhallowed hands to Tyrannise
Where many a good man his his Osons said,
And many a Rquiem been sung out for the Dead,
(Till I am thrust ou by Death)  let ee have
My dwelling there, there let me dig my Grave,
With mine own Nails, (shut up from worldly Light,
Between two walls,) and dye an Anchorite.
I refer you to your Patron there.
Thats I:
Show me first where your Abbey-gold sleeps, then go dye.
I fear RELIGIONS Fall: Alack I see
This world's a City built by the most Hie,
But kept by man, (GODS) greatest enemy.
Let ill-Newes fly together, thou art full of tears,
But I more full of woes, of cares, of fears.
S'death shall wee have yet fair weather?
Hears one storm more.
Calbrias Dke demands of you a Daughter
Let me but lye wed's wife, Isle give him a Son.
Hee sends for Erminghlt.
Deliver her.
S s not to be found.
Ya're an old Fool,
To ask for that which is not.
Thus hee says,
Deny her and look for wars.
So go your ways.
I'm quickly gone.
With Sack isle swear you ,
This was short and sweet,Seem then we shall ha wars,
Bohor, the Drum must scold, the anon thunder:
Fighting about a wench.
Tush, thats no wonder,
Who bayld him out of 
Out of mine eye.
I neur begged before,
Pdon his  (I entreat) and back restore
Both your hye favour to him, and his place.
Let me want life, rather then want your Grace.
Doe you think Isle loose the Kings gift?
Isle send you Gold.
That stops my mouth, pray let him still Sir hold,
This Office of Receiver, I resign
That part which I have in it.
And I all mine.
Sir, thank these Lords.
I shall their loves deserve.
Barteruile, wee have wars, Isle have thee lend me
some 30000. Chicquines at least.
Take all my Gold.
We, get you home with your bags sir, weal make bold.
Your Majesty shall have what bags you will,
Bags only, but Isle keep my money still.
Now Shalcan, some new Spirit.
A thousand wenches
Stark-nak'd, to play at Leap-frog
Oh rare sight!
Your uncle.
Stead, still haunted with this gray sprite.
You need no Taylors now, but Armourers,
Theres a dear reckoning for you all to pay,
About a Lady; the Calabrian Duke
Is on a March: the Lightning flashes now,
You'll hear the crack anon. Before the star
To call whom up, the wakeful Cock doth sing
Bee twice more seen abroad; At your City gates
The Devils puseuned will beat (the Canon)
Will these brisk leaders (stuck with Estridge-feathers)
Go brave your enemy now, and beat  back?
Save thee, thy Kingdom, and themselves from wrack?
Doart, I scorn to take prescription
From any breath to which ours is supreme,
Stood Devils with fire-works on your battlements,
A thousand Armed Ioues at your proud walls
Hurling forked Thunder, and the gates rambd up
With piles of Citizens heads, our spring-tyde pleasures
No adverse winds, no Torrent shall resist
Midst flames weal dance, and dye a Nerenist.
Fight you, yare good for nothing else.
They mock vs.
All stark mad: let vs be wise,
And fly from buidldings falling to'th surer side,
If wee can his safety, if not, (our own provide.)
Thou had like t'ha sent me swearing into Hell,
Isle weave my Nets my self, how doest thou like me?
Is not this habit Turke-Merchant-like?
A mere Turk sir, none can take you for less.
King borrow 30000. Chequines of me! ha, ha!
But pray sir, what first turns you into a Turk?
That, for which many their Religion,
Most men their Faith, all change their honesty,
Profit, (that gilded god) Commodity.
Hee that would grow damnd-Rich, yet live secure,
Must keep a case of Faces, sometimes demure.
Sometimes a grum-surly sir, now play the Iewe,
Then the Precision; Not a man weal view.
But varies so. My self, (of bashful nature)
Am thus supplied by Art.
Mine own dear creature.
But sit, your Aims, and ends in this.
Mary these
A hundred thousandlorens fill my Coffers,
Some of it is mine own, and some the Kings,
Some taken up at use of sundry Merchants,
To pay at six six months, on mine own band,)
Sue that, Isle keep the monies in my hand.
You'll breke sir.
Not mine own neck, but their backs;
To get ther monies, Bartaruile must die,
Make will, name an executor, which am I.
Rre!
Given out his kinsman, lately employed
him in Turkey.
What will hence befall?
Like an executor will I cozen all.
Make creditors Orphans, and widows spend those tears
They sau'de from their late husbands burials;
They get not ij. d it'h pound.
Theile tell the King.
The King? ha ha: the King is going this way;
He means to borrow,
(If the wars holds) my gold: yes: when to morrow.
All debts of mine, on him shall be conferd,
The briefs and tickets which from time to time
Show what large sums his minions ha fetched from me,
His tribute money has paid it, that's no matter,
The world bites these dead, whom alive they flatter.
And so must I; then give it out I left
A complete state, but the Kings death bereft
Me of those sums he out.
Say the King prevails.
With that wind must I likewise shift my ail:
And where the fox gets nothing, will turn Ape,
Make legs, crouch, kiss my paw, present some stale
Device of virtues triumph to express
How much I joy him safe, with nothing less.
But how can you excuse your turning Turk?
Easiest of all: Isle swear, this saude my life,
Pursued by kennels of barking creditors:
For my much love to him, and thus being forcde
To walk obscure, my credit fell to wrack,
Want of return made all my factors break,
In parts remote; to recompense which loss,
And that with setie I may give direction
To my disturbed state, eraue I the Kings protection.
Protection! whats that?
A merchant, and yet know not
What a protection is? Isle tell thee.
Pray sir, for I never broke with any man.
It is a buckler of a large ayre compass
 within with Fox-skinnes: In the midst
A pke sticks out, (sometimes of two years long,
And sometimes longer.) And this pike keeps off
Srieants and Bailiffs, Actions, and Arrests:
Tic a strong charm against all the noisome smells
Of Counters, aylors, garnishes, and such hells;
By this, a debtor craize, so  grows,
He may walk by, and play with his creditors nose.
Under this buckler, here isle lye and fence.
You have out-reacht me.
Isle out-reache the devil:
But I tempt danger: o thou and fetch some Friar
As if (at point of death,) I did desire,
(No, Barteruile did desire (to make confession:
If any creditors beat, or rail at door,
Upstarts this Turk and answers them.
Why fetch I a Friar?
I hau a reaching plot in that (boy) hasten,
That we may smle in our securer port:
Seeing others sea tossed: why tic but a sport
For him thats safe, to see the proud waives swallow
Whole fleets of wretched souls: it needs must follow,
Nature sent man into the world, (alone,)
Without all company, but to care for one, and that isle doe.
True City doctrine sir.
Away, thy hast, our richest love shall earn,
I came to teach, but now (me thinks) must learn.
What says the prodigal child in the painted cloth?
when all his money was spent and gon, they turned him out
unnecessary; then did hee weep and wist not what to don,
for he was in's hose and doublet verily, the best is, there are
but two batches of people moulded in this world, thats to say
Gentlemen and Beggars; or Beggars and Gentlemen, or
Gentlemanlike Beggars, or Beggerlike Gentle-men; I rank
with one of these I am sure, tag and rag one with another: Am
I one of those whom Fortune favours? No no, if Fortune fauourd
me, I should be full, but Fortune favours no body but
Garlic, nor Garlic neither now, yet she has strong reason
to love it; for tho Garlic made her smell abominably in
the nostrils of the gallants, yet she had smelt and stunk
worse but for garlic: One filthy sent takes away anoher.
She once smiled upon me like a lamb, when she gave me
gold, but now she roars upon me like a Lion. Stay: what
said hey? Spend this bravely, and thou shalt have more:
can ny prodigal newcome upstart spend it more bravely?
and now to get more, I must go into the grove of Naples
thats here, and get into a black tree, hears a black tree too,
but art thou he?
He.within.
H ha, where art thou my sweet great head?
Head.
O'at the head, thats to say at the top: how shall I get
up? for tic hard when a man is down in this world to get up,
I shall never climb hie.
Hye.
I will hie me then, but I am as heavy as a sow of lead.
Lead.
Yes, I will lead (big Head) whatsoever follows,
Many a gallant for gold, has climbed higher on a gallowes'
The storm even as Head nodded) is coming: Cooke, like
thy fingers, now or never.
Now or never.
Oooh.
This is the tree.
On which would you all were hanged, so I were off it,
and safe at home.
And this (I am sure tic this) the horrid grove
Where witches broods engender, (our pace of meeting.)
Doe witches engender here: zounds I shall bee the
devils bawd whilst he goes to his techerie.
And this the hideous black infernal hour:
Hano appearance yet? if their least minute
Our vassailes break, sink shall these trees to hell.
Alas!
This grove isle turn into a brimstone lake
Which shall be euer-burning.
The best is, if I be a match in the devils tinderbox, I
can stink no worse than I doe already.
Not yet come Oooh!
Oooh, oooh.
Sure the fear no Christian
Devils, they so love one another.
Stand forth.
Friar Rush amongst 'em
And here unlade you of that precious reight
For which you went, (men's souls;) what voyage is made?
No saving voyage, but a damning.
Good.
I thought the devil was turned Merchant, theres so
many Pirates at Sea.
Ith Court of Naples have I prospred well,
And brave souls shall I shortly ship to hell
In sensual streams, Courtier and King I ha crowned,
From whence war is flowing, whose tide shall all confound.
Are there gentlemen devils too? this is one of those,
who studies the black Art, thats to say, drinks Tobacco.
Are all then good ith City?
No Lucifer.
No nor scarce ith suburbs.
Great Prince of devils,
Thy hests I have obeyed,
I am bartring for one soul, able to lade
An Argosy; if City, oaths, if perjuries,
Cheatings, or gnawing men's souls by usuries,
If all the villainies (that a City can,)
Are able to get thee a son, I ha found that man.
Serve him up,stands up.
Alas, now now.
Damnation gives his soul but one turn more,
Cause he shall be enough.
Its no marvel if markets be dear, when the 
is bnot to find the devil roast-meate.
Has Rush lain idle?
Idle? no Lucifer.
All the world is turned devil. Rush is one too,
Idle? I have your nimblest devil bin,
In twenty shapes begetting sin.
One was to get me thrust out of the priory.
I am fishing for a whole school of Friars.
Al are gluttoning or muttoning, stabbig or swelling
Ther's only one Lamb scopes my killing,
But I will have him: then theres a cooke.
Whose arse makes buttons.
Of whom I some revenge have took.
The devil choke you fort.
He mickle scath has done me,
And the knave thinks to outrun me.
Not too fast.
Kick his guily soul hither.
Isle drive him to despair,
And make him hang himself.
For hanging I stand fair.
Go, ply your works, our Sessions are at hand.
We fly to xeute thy dread command.
Would I could fly into a bench-hole!
But what have you don? nothing.
We have all like bee
Wrought in that Hye of soul (the busy world:)
Some ha lain in cheesmongers .
Wud I were there but .
For one half ounce, we had  soul
If he melted allow, hee smelt sweetly as I doe.
Walk round hells shambles, thou shalt see there sticks
Some 4. buchrs souls, puffed quaintly up with pricks.
Sweete-breads I hold my life, that devils an ass.
Taylors ore-reachers, for to this tic grown,
They scorn thy hell, having better of their own.
They fear not satin nor all his works.
I have with this fist beat upon rich-mens hearts,
To make 'em harder: and these two thumbs thrust,
(In open Churches) into brave dames ears.
Damning up attention; whilst the loose eye peers
For fashions of gowne-wings, laces, purls, ruffs,
False, calls, tires, wires, caps, hats, and mufs, and pufs.
For so the face be smug, and carcass gay,
Thats all their pride.
Twill be a festival day
When those sweet Ducks comes to vs: loose 'em not: go:
More souls you pay to hell, the less you owe.
This Ewe-tree blast with your hot-scorching breath,
 mark, (to the witch who next sits here) of death.
Ooooh.Fireworks: Scumbroath alls.
Call you this, raining down of gold? I am wet to the
skin in the shower, but tic with sweating for fear: had I
now had the conscience that some Vintners and Inholders
have? here might I have gotten the devil and all. But two
sins have undone me, prodigality, and covetousness: and
three Pees have pepperd me, the Punk, the Pot, and Pipe of
smoke, out of my pocket my gold did soak. I cannot swear
now, zounds I am gallant: but I can swear as many of the
ragged Regiment doe, zounds I have bin a gallant. But I am
now down, dejected, and debauched, and can better draw out
a thirdendale gallant, thats to say, a gallant that wants of his
true measure, than any  can draw him out of his scores:
thus he  up and  hoe's pulls down; thus is he raised
and thus declined:
Nominatiuo,  Gallantus, a Gallant.
Genetiuo, Hugious, brave.
Datiuo Huec, If he gets once a ck,
Accusatiuo Hunc, Of a affyy Punk.
Accusatiuo Hunc, 
Hunc, Hnc, &amp; Hoc, With  up her smock
 Hes gon if he cry so.
 Away with him, he has the pock
 If the pox ,
Genetiuo, Horum, Yet hes a beggar in coram.
Datiuo, His: His gilt rapier he does miss.
Acustiuo Hos, Without his cloak he goes.
Accusati Has, To the Counter he must pass.
Hos, has &amp; Have, With  Catchpols at his back.
! A hole he desired, and to t' hole he must go.
Abletiuo, ab His, Thus many a Cllant declined is.
What art thou?
Daughter to the Calabriam Duke.
The hapless trothplight wife to your sad King.
Alack! what notes are these I hear you sing?
Pardon me madam:
O Lady! want of you has bred much woe;
Calamity does every where ore-flow,
All long of your strange absence.
I confess,
Laden with your Kings contempt and loath to bear
Shame to my country who from thence came freighted
With many glorious honours, I preferred
An obscure life before a public shame;
O then (good there) be it not my blame
If my supposed death, on the King have thrown,
Dangers, which from himself are merely grown.
What (princely Maiden) would you wish me doe?
I doe conur you sir, by all the bonds
Tie you to pious Acts, you would make way
To my incensed father; give him these lines,
This Ring, pledge of that blessing he delivered me
At our last parting: add unto these, if ever
His daughters memory to him were dear,
To wound the Prince let his rash hand forbear:
Snce through each woud he gives him, I am slain,
If the sad king you meet, venture to tell him
That more for him, than he for me, I bide,
And am his subject still, tho not his bride.
This shall I doe, how shall we meet again?
Fears follow me so, I know not where nor when.
Hark how the sound of horror beats the Ayre,
Your fathers up in Arms and does prepare
Sharpe avengence, for this city, woe is me: trust yo
To me, who ne'er made much of woman yet,
Rest here sweet maid, till an old Friar beget
What joys he can to comfort thee? Is Clement grown
A women's man now? No, I am not mine own,
Where your command may sway me:
Much more in this,
Where heaven) through virtues trial) makes you his.
Thats he, &amp; theres your golden hire to charm him;
Your fees isle treble, let but lusts flame be felt;
The Alpine-snow at the un's beams does melt,
So let your beauties haw his frozen Age,
Music first act an old Lecher, then a devil on hells black Stage:
Strike, strike your silver strings: brave set of whores?
At your striking up, devil dance, and all hell roars.
What sound offends mine ear? Soul of temptation?
Enchanters I defy ye, get you gon;
Ime blind to your enticements, from this I learn,
At how dear rate the careless world does earn.
That thing called pleasure: how many souls doe fall?
(Sold for a little guilt top daube this wall?)
Hence with your witchcrafts, the sight of this drives hence,
All thoughts besieging our voluptuous sense.
Another bait, at this he will not bite.
Will you have a dainty girl? here tic:
Currall lips, teeth of pearl: here tic:
Cherry checks, softest flesh; thats she,
Breath like May, sweet and fresh; she she.
Be she white, black, or browne,
Pleasure your bed shall crown,
Chose her then, use her then,
Women are made for men.
Pretty, pretty wast:
Sweet to be embracde:
Pretty leg,  pretty foot,
To beauties tree the root
This is she shall do it,
Or she shall do it, or she shall do it, she shall do it, she shall do it
Kiss, kiss, play, play, come and dally,
Tumble, tumble, tumble, in beauties valley.
His soul is chaind in pleasures, bind it fast,
If he break your charms the strongest spell comes last.
Hence devils incarnate, tic not the orcerie
Of your deceitful tunes, shuts up mine eye,
Mine ears are likewise stopped, hence, hence I say.
Ha ha, a man of ye, a clod of clay.
Are all thy incantations spent now? art come again?
Base workmanship of heaven, what other train,
Were all hells frightful horrors stuck in thy look,
Thou can not shake me.
I can.
Thou least, thou shalt not
I bring thee tidings of thy death this nigh
How doest thou know that hour of my last fight?
False herald, Minister of despair and lies.
I know to how many minutes thy days must rise.
Who gives thee the number.
All things to vs are known,
What ever have bin, are, or shall be don.
Isle pose thee presently, whats this thou fiend
Which now I have turned too, doe but tell me that
And isle believe thee
I scorn to be thy slave
Down, down, and sink into thy damned cau:
Look here, doest fly thou hell-hound? I dare thee stand,
Over thee by these holy spells have I strong command,
Thy battries are too weak: by goodmens prayers,
The continence of saints, (by which as stayres,
They ascend to heaven) by Virgins chastity;
By Marts cround deaths, which recorded lye
In silver leaves, aboue: I charge thee down,
Howl where tha'rt bound in slavery, till the last dome,
Storms, thunder, lightning, rip up the earths womb.
Eternal power, thanks on my humbled knee,
Thou still to constant breasts giu'st victory.
No way to conquer thee? Isle give thee ore:
Ne'er fished I so, (yet lost a soul) before.
Black horrors, mischief ruin and confusion
affright vs, follow vs.
Dae them to the face,
And you fright them.
No safety but to fly.
Whither Spendola, whither? better stay, and die.
What hope? what news?
Is my uncle fled?
Hes is gon:And fights against you.
Follow him damnation,
That leaves his Prince so in distress, in misery;
O ban of Kings! (thou enchanting flattery,)
Thy venom now I feel, ating my heart,
More mortal than an Indians poisned dart.
Yar'e too dejected, gather head and fight it ou.
The head's here, where are hands to lay about?
Where is the King?
The man that title mocks
Is here, (thou sad-visage man) are any hired to kill me,
Or betray me? let 'em come:
Griefs growing extreme, death is a gentle doom.
Prepare then for the worst.
I am armed ort: show it.
Thy kingdom is a weak ship, bruised, split, sinking,
Nor hast thou any pilot to waft vs o'er
Out of this foul Sea, to some calmer shore.
Thy peoples hearts are turned to rocks of flint,
The Scholar, Soldier, and the Mariner,
Whom (as themselves say) once thou trodst upon,
Now serve as wheels of thy destruction.
Flying swiftly backward, the kingly Lions quaild,
What shall the weaker herds doe, if he fall?
Lets fly.
Zounds whither?
So we may be safe
But where?
At Barteruile: the churle's to me beholden,
His house so stands, we may enter without fear.
Beet so, to Barteruile.
What will your Highness doe?
Die Spendola, a miserable King,
None here can hinder vs of that.
How? die?ha you any stomach to death sirs?
Not I.
Not I.
Troth's, tho you grow desperate, weal grow wise.
Farewell sir, weal save one.
Oh my cruellest enemies!
Stabs Brus at me too?
Now mine own or never.
Why art not thou gon?
I, Isle stick to you ever:
I am no Courtier sir of fortunes making
Thou art no wiseman to prefer thy love.
To me, before thy life, pray thee leave me.
Not I.
I shall not hate the world so really
As else I would, O had the ancient race
Of men (who had long leases of their lives)
Bin wretched as we are, no recompense
Could the Gods have given them for their being here,
But now more pitiful wise nature grows,
Who cuts of mans years to cut off his woes.
True sir, &amp; teaches him a thousand ways
To lead him out this horrid giddy maze.
I apprehend thee, a small daggers point,
Opens the veins to cure our pleurisy.
Than to be made your foes-slaue, better dye.
A hundred thousand deaths, than like a captive
Be chaind to grace proud Caesars Chariot wheel.
Much less a petty Dukes.
Fetch me dear friend,
An armed Pistol, and mouth it at my breast:
Isle make a way my self, and all my sorrows
Are made away.
The best and nobler spirits
Have done the like.
Your bravest men at Arms
Have done the like.
Philosophers have don it.
Great peers have don it.
Kings have done the like.
And I will doe it.
Nay it shall ne'er be said,
I lived a minute after you: here, here.
I embrace thee noblest friend.
Lets sail together.
Content brave Bohor: oh! but whither? whither?
From hell, (this world,) from, fiends, (in shapes of men.)
No: into hell, fro men to be damned black with fiends.
Me thinks I see hell awne to swallow vs.
Fuh, this is but the swimming of your brain,
By looking downwards with a timorous eye.
My soul was sunk too low, to look more hye,
Forgiveness heaven.Alarms.
The whips of furies lash me: the foe comes on.
And we will meet him, dare confusion,
And the worlds mixed poisons, there is a hand
That fights for Kings, and under that weal stand.
Whither runs this rear?
To save my wretched life,
From th'insolent soldier, threatening the Cities spoil.
Of what house art thou?
Of father Clements Order,
The Capachines Subprior: a quick messenger fetched me to
be rich Bateruiles confessor, who lies a dying.
A !
He does, but I
Have come thus far, with so much jeopardy.
That could I safely get the keys shore,
Nor the priory would I see more.
For charities sake, direct me, and defend me.
To help distressed men, religion binds me,
Should thou in this hot broils, be met abroad,
It will be judged you leave your Priory,
Carrying gold and silver with you.
Las I have none.
But Friar if you be thus taken, your life is gon,
Here, here, cast off thy habit, better that lye
Ith Streets than thou poor wretch; wear mine, &amp; away
Strike down that lane.
Thanks moister, for your lives isle pray.
This Bohor shall disgise me, whither wilt thou fly
Isle shift I warrant: hast thou to the Priory
If we ne'er meet again, (best friend) farewell.
Not meet, yes, I hope, you must not thus cheae hell.
I will not trust this fellow: to the Priory, no:
Barteruiles Confessor: f to betray
Thou findst the churl apt, leave him, if not, there stay,
The downfall of that Prince, is quick and steep.
Who has no heart to leave, nor power to keep,
Make the door sure the house is round beset.
Beset!
Put up: fear nothing: Armies should they enter,
Cannot here find you.
How shall we escape?
Send or your trancks and jewels, isle ship you this
night mean time, this unknown way, leads to a celar,
where a world cannot fetch you forth: In, In, if danger pursue
you, in a dryfa isle pack you hence
Zounds into the dungeon?
So to Sardine:
Your cloaks and your gilt rapiers down, down, down.
How soon meets Babels-pride, confusion?
What nest of birds are these new-kild with fear?
Foul cannot last long sweet, therefore kept there Sergeants.
In my cold cellar; stay, house beset? what ees?
Such as strike dead the heart, yet give no blows.
Thisfoota for 'em: proclamations Lurchall,
6000. Crowns are his, can these beray,
Soon earnd, weal share fetch, the Caabriam hither,
They are here say: dam 'em.
You shall de damned together.
Wher's that devote sick man desires to take
Leave off this world? Dus ic to all now here.
Now Domino ier; what I to you confess
You are bound by oath to up.
I aer no lsse.
Keep then this close, I am no Turk, not I,
But Barteruil disguisee i policy.
Are you the Sickma
Sick of a disease,
Bad as a plague to Citizens, I must break,
Play a banckrowts part) I have money of the kings,
Of merchants, Isle keep all, these are Citie-springs;
Here lies Sergeants Leaguer: about my doors:
My house to me is an hospital, they the sores
Which run upon me vilely, (peep I but out.)
To raise this Dunkirk siege, thus cast I about.
Lets hear, pray how?
Thus, thus sweet Domino Friar,
Isle be like you, a apuchine: So, by your Prior,
Sub-prior, and covent, I may be fetched hence,
Spite of all Showlder-clappers violence.
Tho the King should lay hands on me, I wud not tarry.
You need not.
You are my guard, my Sanctuary.
But what your level in this, when this is don?
Alas what euell but pure devotion?
The Devil you have.
When I dye there, take All:
Will you go to your prior and tell this?
Yes I shall.
Isle send him an earnest penny (a 100. Crowns)
As the first stone my charity builds upon.
What drom's this? come, dispatch Friar, and be gon.
Out of this hell thou meanest: yes isle fly from thee
As from the Devils hangman: thowl't else betray me.
World to what crest of villainy art thou grown?
When (of good men) whole kingdoms scarce breed One.
Here is the Duke of Calabria sir if you have made me
tell a ye, theye se me of a voyage to the yland of Hogs and
Devils, (the Barmudas,) e Duke sir.
His grace is welcome, as! I had more need
To have Physicians and Apothecaries,
Than fighters at my gates: Lurchall why come they?
Deliver up those monsters in thy house,
That have deuourd a Kingdom and the King.
Tic death to thee, and him, if thou detainst 'em.
I detain 'em, here, here, here.
Reward if thou deliuerst them.
Ime past rewarding in this world, I look
only for good men's prayers, theres the key Lurchall.
Unbind him: stay why did thy house receive them?
Full fore against my will: the bed I rise from
Count I my death-bed; for (each minute) I look
When Angels (heavens good porters) will let me in,
Yet (like my betters) I'm heavy laden with sin.
And being thus sick, and at last gasp, I sent for my
neerst cozen, my executor,
Who seeing brave fellows beating at my gates,
Took 'em for honest men, let 'em in simply,
And undertook this night, to ha shipped 'em hence;
My faithful Servant telling me this, (In zeal,
To you and my country) I bid him, All reveal.
Thast plaid a Subjects part in it.
Heel lead you to them.
My Lord, take force and seize 'em, ne'er stand upon
More trials; give 'em speedy execution
Come fellow.
Your grace has don with me?
Go, look to thy health:
The crowns the proclamation promised,
Shall to thy man be paid.
Thanks to your Grace:
Las what I did in this, was for no hire.
Ha ha, the rent of a cellar never was so dear.
On beat the drum.
Are the rest tanc?
Yes.
The graund-Pyrat's here.
Here is the Devils bellows, kindled all those fires,
Which now are burning: This is the Snake, whose sting
(being kept warm in the bosom of a King)
Struck him to'thheart: This hee, who by the force
Of his dimbed Arguments, was the first divorce,
Of the Kings Love, this is Bohor.
This that Serpent,
You've all (like Traitors) wrought a Princes fall,
And all shall taste one death.
Sir, wheres the King?
Warrant me life, isle bring you to the place
where you shall take him.
Wult thou betray him Slave?
Yes.
Thou shalt have life.
And you the King shall have.
And the Gallows shall have thee, else hang me. Away
Alas, whereas the sub Prior?
Here, what ail thou?
Can you pick nothing out of my face?
Is there not a Deaths-head standing on my shoulders?
Why, what's the matter?
The Lord Prior is called away:
Whtiher, by whom?
By the Great-head, I think he cozened ee,
Hee is gone to the blacke-squibbe-tree, to
Iudas Ok! set by the Devil, I told you then,
I saw rear Rush spit fire amongst other Hellst,
and ye would not believe me Now I tell you,
that the Prior is choackt; will his choking
go down your throat?
How choackt?
Yes, choackt: that of which men die ore-night, and
are well the next morning, wine has kilt the Lord Prior:
he ud in a bravery taste the liquor of our Vines, because
you thratned he should never like his lips after. And the
Kernel of a grape stopped his winde-pipe, for want of a kowring-sticke.
Art thou sure hee is dead?
How dead, because I wud be sure,
I cut his throat of purpose, to take out the
Kernel.
Most fearful and prodigious, whither runst thou?
To see more throats cut, and Execution of certain
Gallants is this morning. And I came running to see them,
who like a whore spoils every good thing that comes into
his hand. The hang-man, I leave you to the Gallows.
Welcome dear brother: now your heed must be
Not to look back at this worlds vanity,
Riches and pleasures: you have laid aside
That Garment, and must now be mortifide.
I am mortifide, I warrant you.
So is the Devil.
Your Gold and silver, you must see no more.
O ye! give it every farthing to the poor,
When I have sent for it hither.
That will be never.
Your money shall be spent in pious sort.
I know that: Let my sle be the better or't,
Thats all I crave for, after I am dead.
Many a Requem for it shall be said.
What Dru is ?
ryers stand pone your Guard.
The Prioe is beset with Armed-men,
Of which some Troupes are .
I am betrayed.
Lurchall I feel my wezand pipe cut.
I warrant you.
Guard the Abbey gates, let not a Friar go forth:
You have a King amongst you, which is he?
A King!
I know of none here
Villains you lie:
This caitiff does delude you, torture him.
Hang him, and these up over the Abbey walls,
Our wrath shall smite like thunder where it falls.
I shall like a dog, die without money, Lurchall.
I warrant you.
Tyrant, that royal hart thou huntst, is here,
Stand from me all, you have betrayed me all,
And isle trust none of you, if the Lion must fall,
Fall shall he like a Lion; think thou (base Lord)
Because the glorious Sun behind black clouds
Has a while hid his beams, hes darkened for ever?
Ecclipsd never more to shined, yes, and to throw
Fires from his sparklings eyes, thee to confound,
Touch not that noble friend of mine, (It seems,
For my sake marked for danger,) let your arrows
(Dipd in rank poison) be shot all at me,
Since all is lost, die nobly, and loose life too:
O uncle! must the first dart fly from you?
Into thy bosom fly I.
To betray me?
To fight for thee till I can fight no more:
Had thou possessed this Kingly spirit before,
We ne'er had left thee: what makes Iudas here?
Here is he that to the Duke thy life betrayed.
Bohor!
I, Bohor.
I told him where you were.
I tell thee tha'rt a traitor &amp; isle have
Thy head off, or thou mine.
Head?
Thart a slave?
Thou see Duke what to trust too.
I have confessed, and shall be hanged, the King?
Our fair game come to this? our swords I see
Must from your hearts-blood let out al my wrongs?
A murdered daughter for just vengeance cries,
Whom to appease, your lives weal sacrifice:
Beat the drom.
Thunder mock thunder, beat ours.
O let these fires be quench out with my tears,
I waters cannot, (Duke) I bind thy rage
With this strong charm, nd ths read ore that spell,
And let thy hard breast grow more flexible.
Wheres Jovenelli; and that bastard cue
Of my false friends?
Beheaded.
They have their due.
The ring I gave her, and her hand: old man,
Wheres the old Friar delivered these?
Hes gon.
Make after him, tic some delusion.
Tic no delusion (father) am I the ground
Of this your quarrel, which must both confound
If you go on: your battles thus isle pt,
The first blow given, shall run clean through my heart
Oh  constant maid, forgive my wrongs,
The  of heaven to a pining spring
 such comfort give as thy glad presence
 my bosom.
Will you fight or no?
It were madness to wish storms when fair winds blow:
Will you your saith yet keep?
Inviolate.
Then here end all my wars.
And all my hate.
Ha all these Friars up to the Abbey walls,
And with shrill voices, this our peace proclaim,
Stay holy father: Bohor, See you this don.
Vengeance, I have now lost more than I have won.
I shall go scot free Lurchall.
Passing well?
They doe not smell me, yet my self I smell.
Why sends your Highness, thus these Friars to play
Your heralds parts in publishing this peace?
There's in it a riddle (uncle) which by none but by
these Friars only, can be don.Enter Friars aboue.
So: are you mounted? Sing now.
Sing.
Yes sing,
Like Swans before your deaths: there you all shall dye;
Ciue fire to this most damned priory.
Alack for pity!
Father, but for thee,
Thunder from heaven had (long ere this) to dust
Grinded these hellish buildings: that hand was used,
Which ruke your vicious Prior, so is our doom,
That Synagogue of devils, let fire consume.
But means the King that I shall burn here too?
Thou? the grand villain, give him a villains due.
I am no Friar, see I'm poor Barteruile.
How? Barteruile?
He lies the slaue's a Turk.
A Christian by this hand, Your officer.
The city canker, the courts cozener,
A devil in shape of man.
Half that I have
I freely give, so you my life will save.
Isle lend your Hyghnes 30000. chequines.
Ten Kingdoms cannot buy thee; were there  hell
Thart damned in all, S'death! fie that house of devils.
Doe: lets not want light to set forth our Reuels.
King, little doest tho know, whom (all this while)
Thy court, this Covent, and this Barteruile,
Have entertained: of hell, 3. Spirits we are.
How?
Sent to catch souls for Pluto, our Prince and myster.
Defend vs heavens.
Thy self hast burst those bands
In which I once held thee: these are in our hands.
If you be right Sergeants, for money you'll let me
go. 5000 Crowns isle give but to go home.
3. No.
Isle put in 4. brokers to be my bail: I op theile be (taken.
Yes as thou art, (to hell,) vou dog leave howling.
This pile of greene young devils, needs no fire
Of mortals kindling to consume, these frames,
You shall with vs to hell ride, all in flames.
Catch.
3. Come.
Let every spirit his own prize bear
They are so heavy with sin, theile soon be there.
Away then and be damned, wud you all were here.
OoohSink down, aboue flames.
Immortal thanks for our deliverance:
Race to the ground those walls: no stone shall stand,
To tell such place was ever in our land,
What wealth can there be found, give to the poor,
Another house weal build and thee restore,
To former virginity: weep not for these ruins,
Thou shalt from vs have honours. Here we begin
Or reign anew, which golden threads shall spin,
Justice shall henceforth sit upon our throne,
And virtue be your Kings companion.
War here resigns his black and horrid stage
To sportful Hymen, God of Marriage.
Spir. Ha, ha, ha.
Dam. Torments in-vtterable! oh! damned for nothing?
Terrors incomprehensible.
Back: you're blown up else.
Whooh: hot, hot, hot,drink,-I am heart-burnt.
One drop, a bit.
Now, now, now.
I am perbold, I am stewed, I am sod in a kettle of brimstone,
pottage.it scaldes,it scaldes,it scaldes,it scaldeswhoo
Ha ha ha:
But one half crom, a little little drop, a bit.
Towers, towers, towers, towers, pinnacles &amp; towers,
battlements and pinnacles, steeples, abbeys, churches and
old chimneys.
Zounds drink, hall I choke in mine Inn? drink.
Drink, drink, oh! one drop, one drop, to cool vs.
So many tipsters in hell, and none fill drink here:
Ball no more, you shall be liquord.
Why art thou damned to the horrors of one hell,
Yet feelst ten thousand.
Wherefore is thy soul
Made sensible of tortures which (each minute)
Kill thee ten thousand times, yet can not dye?
Some sack.
Why for a few sins that are long hence past,
Must I feel torments that shall ever last? Ever ever.
Let the sack be mulld.
Why is the devil,
(If man be bore good) suffered to make him evil?
Man is an ass, if he sit broiling thus ith glass house
Without drink: two links of my chain for a three half penny
bottle of mother consciences Ale: drink.
One drop of puddle water to cool vs.
Leave howling and be damned.
Here is drink for thee royal villain.
Oh!
First not good!
For blood you have thirsted, and thy drink is blood.
Strikes it so cold to thy heart? here is that shall warm thee (Again.
Danation, suries, fire-brandes.
Ha, ha, ha.
One drop of moisture, but one crum.
Art hungry, eat this adder: dry? Suck this Snake.
Suck and be damned thy self: Isle starve first. Away
Is not this all waters? Ruby water, some Ruby water,
Or else a bottle of postern water to save charges, or else a
Thimble-full of lemon water, to cool my stomatch the rue
By is swelled up all, here is lemon, down with it.
Foh, the great devil or else some Aquauite woman
has made water, It salds me.
Oooh.
Ha ha ha
Hell grins to hear this roaring: wheres this black
child of faddomles perdition? rarest devil
That ever hold in Barathrum? here, (dear pupil)
Of a new damnations stamp, Saucer-eyde Lucifer,
Hs drunk to thee this deep infernal boule off,
Wut pledge his ugliness?
Reach it me.
Choke with it.
Ha ha ha.
Give fire, blow all the world up.
Bounce: tic don. Ha ha ha.
I shall be grinded into dust; It falls: I am mad.
I am mad, I am mad.
4. Ha ha ha.
Ho ho ho.
Fetch whips of poisoned steel, strung with gloveing wires.
And lash these saucy hell-hounds: duck their souls,
Nine times tot'n bottom of our brimstone lakes,
From whence up pull them by their singed hair,
Then hang'em in ropes of ice nine times frozen o'er:
Are they scarce hot in hell, and must they roar?
What holiday's this? that here is such grinning, ha!
Is hell a dancing School? yare in extremes,
Snoring, or else horne-mad? who are set on shore,
On this vast land of horror, that it resounds,
With laughter stead of shrikes, who are come to our bounds? ha!
Dread Lord of this lower tortary, to thy Jail
Have we thy busy Catch-polls (prisoners) brought
Souls, for whose coming all hell long hath sought.
Their names: Is Ward and Dantziker then come?
Yes: Daziker is come.
Wheres the dutch Schellum? wheres hells factor ?
Ciron has bound him for a thousand years,
To tug ats oar: he scored the Seas so well,
Charon will make him ferriman of hell.
Whore's Ward?
The Merchants are not piled nor pulled enough,
They are yet but shaven, when they are fleade, he will come.
And bring to hell fat booties of rich thieves,
A crew of swearers and drinkers the best that lives.
Ward is not ripe for damming yet.
Who is it then?
Cutlar the Sergeant: ha! he come.
Yes Pluto:
Cutlar has bin here long, sent in by a carman,
But his sterne looks the feindes did so displease,
Bound hand and foot, he holes in little ease,
Having only mace to comfort him: he does yell,
And rave, because he cannot rest in hell.
Tic not for him, that we this holiday hold.
The bawd of Shorditch, Is that helleat come?
No: but sha's bin a long time launching forch,
In a Rosa-solis-barke.
Devils! who is it then?
Mall Cutpurse is she come?
Our cousin come? No.
Tic not yet fit Mall Cutpurse here should houle,
She has bin too late a sore-tormented soul.
Where is our daughter? ha? Is she idle?
No.
She was beating hemp in bridewell to choke thieves,
Therefore to spare this she ramp she beseeches,
Till like her self all women wear the breeches.
Mall Cutpurse plies her task and cannot come.
For whom then s this wilde Shroue-tuesday kept?
See King of gloomy shades what souls resort,
To this thy most just, and least-fying court.
Stay, since our Jail is with braue-fellowes stored,
Bid Charon that no more yet come aboard.
Seeing our Judges of hell here likewise are
Sit: call a Sessions: set the souls to a bar.
Minos (the just:) Rhadamanth (the temperate.)
And Oecus (the severe,) each take his state.
Not an officer here?
A Fury.
Make an Oyes?
Oyes! All manner of souls, if they love their own
quietness, keep out of hell, unless they have horrible business
at this infernal sessions, ypon pain of being damnably
plagued for their lustiness. Back there, let those shackeld rakehells
show their faces.
Room here, we must come into the court within.
What damned fiends are those dare make this noise?
A Jury of Brokers impanelde, and deeply sworn,
To pass on all the villains in hell.
Euill-Conscience be their keeper.
Look to the Jury: Euill-Conscience look to the Brokers.
Now proceed.
Stay, let the King of Ghosts have first a view
Of those who are doomed to pains horrid, but new.
Then produce those who came to your prison untried.
Peace there.
Here is one, hells tortures does deride.Rauillac.
Arraign me, rend me peece-meale, isle confess nothing.
Peace, thou shalt ball thy throat out.
Merciless hangmen! to tiranize over so brave a Toman spirit.
Ho, ho, what country devil is this?
Thine own.
A french.
The eagerest blood hound that ere came from thence;
Is there a King to be murdered, whilst he does stand
Colossus-like, supporting a whole land,
And when by his fall that Land most fears a wrack,
Send forth this devil; his name is Rauillac.
Ruillac: I am Rauillac, that laughs at tortures,
 at death, defies all mercy: Iybbets, racks, fires, pincers,
scalding oil, wilde-horses, I spit in the face of all.
Peace.
No: were my tongue torn out with burning fleshhooks,
Fems 100. tongues shall uder ou Reviles name,
exwhole it, eternise it,  it! Canonise it: oh!
Down with this devil to'th dung on, there let him
houle.
Worlds shall applaud my Act, and crown my soul.
Another.
Come, you lean dog.
One drop, a bit.
Whats he? what staruelings this?
One that lacks a medicine for hunger: I am fallen away.
From heaven.
To'th common Jail with him.
He must feed on beggeries basket: leave balling serra.
Shall I be undone for a little drink.
No, thart undone for drinking.
Starve him away
What was he when he lived.
A prodigal:
Who (in one year,) spent on whores, fools and slaves,
An Armies maintenance, now begs for cromes, and raves
To see his sumptuous buildings, pastures, woods,
That stood in vplands, dround in Rhenish floods.
Is here all?
All! no, the Arch-helhoud's here.
What Peter Goner's this?
Speak softly, within an inch of giving fire, within an inch.
Had all thy gray devils in their highest lust sat,
To have litterd furies, they could not have begot.
One to match this: in the dark he groapd damnation,
Now, now.
Digd cellars to find where hell stood and has found it
There was but one villainy unborn, and he crowned it.
So: all the billets lye close; glorious bonfire? pontifecal
bonfire; brave heads to contrive this, gallant souls to
conspire in it, resolute hand to seal this with my blood,
through fire, through flint; ha, ha, ha, whither fly my self to
heaven, friends to honour, none to the halter, enemies to
massacre, ha ha, dismal tragical Comedy now?
What does he?
As he thinks, giving fire to powder;
Ne'er in any land could devils have found, such walks,
As he was beating out.
His name.
Guy Eaulx.
Who calls? damnation stops throat.
Let it stop thine.
Am I betrayed? give fire, now, now, give fire.
Te burn thine own soul villain.
Pay him his hire:
He has a desperate rakehels face.
Had his plot tan fire,
One real me before any other had doomsday seen,
Kings who in tombs lay at rest had wakened been,
He was within 12. hours of he wing down
A whole land at one blow, and at once drown
In a flood of flames, an Ark-roiall with his whole fleet,
Of nobility and clergy: in a leaden sheet
Law and her children had bin hotly wrapped;
Melons ere this had in our jail bin clapped,
For damned Arts not known now, which had then
Bin rie, but now lye dead (the Acts with the men.
Make much of this our ningle: for the res
Deliuer'em to our head-hangman.
When?
When?
In a twinkling.
How applauds Pluto
Our ingenuous tortures, and most rigorous doom?
Minos, thy doom is just;But your all-fac'de
Caiffs.)
What fih in your infernal Nets, Drew you up
Ith Npls Court,  and rierie?
We chard'de you sail thither: Is mischiefs River there die?
Dry, No: Fat preys for hell we all did meet,
In Court, City, Country, Nay, in every street,
In every house, within-him, and without-him.
Hee that wore best clothes, had some Devil about him:
Courtiers from Naples hither in shoal are come,
Some for Ambition, for Flattery, and Envy some:
Some, who (each meal) eat subicts up, and wore,
Whole Families in their shoo-strings, such, and others more,
Being here, have been examining (ever since
They came) by Hells-clarke, (spotred-Conscience.)
Till the next Sessions, these wee must defer.
None come fro'th City, so many bad being there!
Yes, (King of endless horror) see who's here: Barteruile
Rich-me in hell! they are welcome, whats the gray beard
One that can buy thee and ten such as thou art out of
thy Sea-coale-pits ere. Is not this Newcastle?
No covetous wretch: tic Hell, thy blacke-soules prison.
Soul in prison! I never had any soul to speak on.
Now thou shalt find you have one.
Can Angels Bail me?
Not all the wealth which the worlds back does bear
Can Bail thy wretched soul hence, No tic here.
A thousand Pounds.
Where  fool?
Thy welds now gone,
Thy hands still catch at bags,, but they gripe none.
Whats this?
Ha, ha, ha.
Ayre, shadows, things Imaginary:
That is thy Torment now, which was thy Glory.
If you give me bags full of Saw-dust, in stead of money,
my Ghost shall walk.
To thy grim Father of Hell.
No, to my old brother, Sir Achiophell Pinch gut shall I: shall I?
Hence with him the, Churl's mad:
In Lethes-flood drowned all the wealth hee had.
My chain, Let me hang in chains, so it bee my
Gold chain; Thieves, thieves, thieves.
Throw him head-long into our boyling-Lake,
Where molten Gold unnes.
His thirst it cannot slake,
Seas could not quench his dropsy: Gold to get
Hee would hang a City, statue a Country. Even yet
Raves hee for Bonds and incombers: to save whoe soul,
(Tho hee fed none living) Saw-sages were his dole.
What coil is that?
Tic a burning zeal must consume the wicked, and
therefore I will not bee kept out, but will chastise and correct
the foul Fiend.
Whats this black Incubus?
An Arch great Puritan once.
Ha! How! a Puritan?
An Arch-great Puritan! How comes thy soul so little
I did exercise too much with a lively Spirit.
Are there any more of his Synagogue?
Yes, a whole Hoy-full are Landed.
Ha!
Are they all so black as he is?
Worse.
Syrra, why being a Puritan is your soul so black?
Wee were all smoked out of our own Country, and
sent to Rotterdam.
How came thou lame and crooked, why dost halt?
All the brethren and sisters for the better part are
crooked, and halt: for my own part, I never went upright.
And yet a puaitane? hence with him.
Alack!
How can I choose but halt, go lame, and crooked?
When I pulled a whole church down upon my back.
Hence with him, he will pull all hell down too.
Let in the brethren, to confound this wicked assembly,
Thrust him out at hell gates.
Theile confound our kingdom,
If here they get but footing: rise therefore, away;
Keep the Jury of brokers till our next court day.
Adourne this.
O yes! Sessions is deferd
Because of Puritans, Hell cannot be cleared.
Set forward to our Hall paved all with brass,
Judges we thank you: let our officers drink,
In the bottom of hells cellar, for their good service.
Since to this height our Empire up you rear,
Hell hall hold umphes, and (thats don,) prepare,
Again to walk your circuits o'er the earth,
Souls are hells Subjects, and then groan our mirth.
If it be not good, the Duell is in it, (they say,)
The Devil was in it, this then is no good play
By that conclusion, but hereby is meant,
If for so many noes, and midnights spent
To reap three hours of mirth, our haruest-seede
Lies still and rot. The Diuelt in it then indeed
Much Labour, Art, and Wit, make up a Play
As it does a Ship, yet both are cast away,
(When bravely they have past the humorous Seas)
At landing, What black fates curses both these?
Sail it, or fick it, now tic forth, and ne'er
The Haven at which it longs t'ariue: if there
It suffers wrack, the spitefuller Rocks shoot forth,
Yet non may bring it home lade with much worth.
By your wonted gentle gale, (sweet as the Balm,)
Or by extending fair liberal Palm.
To fan away all storms, if you see it lowers,
The ayre shall ring thanks, but the glory's yours.

TOrmiella Daughternor in this roomPeace: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
The dawn of Midnight, and the Drunkards noon,
No honest souls up now, but Vintners, Midwives,
The nodding Watch, and piteous Constable, Ha;
My street door open! Bilbo, Puskeena, Bilbo. 
Bawds, Panders, to a young Whore; Bilbo!
Thieves, Thieves, Thieves, where are they Master?
Where are they Bilbo? What Thief see thou?
That ilfauor'd Thief in your Candle sir, none else not I.
Why did thou cry Thieves then?
Because you cried Whores; I knew a Thief was always within a stones cast of a Whore.
What make thou up at Midnight?
I make them which are made every hour in the day (patches.)
Slave what art doing? 
That which few men can doe, mending Sir.
What art mending?
That which few men care to mend, a bad sole.
Look here, come hither, dost thou see what's this?
I see tic our Wicket master.
Stop there and tell me, is Tormiella forth?
I heard Puskeena our Kitchin-maid say, she was going about a murder:
A murder; of whom?
Of certain Skippers; she was fleeing her self.
She dwells not in her Chamber, for my Ghost
(Called from his rest) from Room to room has stalked,
Yet met no Tormelia.
Was not her sweet heart here to night, Gazetto?
Gazetto! no sir, here was no Gazetto here.
Walk round the Orchard, holla for her there.
So, ho ho, ho, ho.
She's certain with Gazetto,
Should he turn Villain, train my poor child forth
Though she's contracted to him, and rob her youth
Of that Gem none can prize (because ne'er seen)
The Virgins riches (Chastity) and then
(When he has left her ugly to all eyes)
His own should loath her, vds death I would draw
An old mans nerues all up into this arm.
And nail him to the Bed
So, ho, ho, ho, the Conies use to feed most i'th-night
Sir, yet I cannot see my young mistress in our Warren.
No!
No, nor you neither, tic so dark.
Where should this foolish girl be? tic past twelve,
Who has invited her forth to her quick ruin!
My memory jogs me by the elbow, and tells me
What Bilbo out with all.
A Barber stood with her on Saturday night very late, when he had shau'd all his Customers, and as I think, came to trim her.
A Barber! To trim her! Saw thou the Muskeod?
A chequered apron Gentleman I assure you: he smelt horrible strong of Camphor, Bay leaves and Rose water: and he stood fiddling with Tormiella.
Ha?
Fiddling at least half an hour, on a Citterne with a mans broken head at it, so that I think it was a Barber Surgeon: and there's one Cynamomo a Shopkeeper, comes hither a batfowling every Moone-shine night too.
What's he! Cynamomo!
I take him to be a Comfitmaker with rotten teeth, for he never comes till the Barber's gone.
A Comfitmaker!
Yes Sir, for he gave Tormiella a Candied root once, and she swore it was the sweetest thing
Dwells he hero in the City?
He has a house in the City, but I know not where he lives.
Sheele follow her kind; turn Monster, get a light.
My sconce is ready Sir.
Call at Gazettoes Lodging, ask how he dares
Make a Harlot of my child, slave say no more:
Begone, beat boldly.
Isle beat down the door; and put him in mind of a Shroue-tuesday, the fatal day for doors to be broken open.
For this night I'm her Porter; Oh haplesse Creatures!
There is in woman a Devil from her birth,
Of bad ones we have shoal, of good a dearth.
No more my Tormiella, night hath borne
Thy vows to heaven, where they are fyl'd by this
Either one day to crown thy constant Soul
Or (if thou spot it with foul perjury,)
For ever to condemn thee.
Come it shall not:
Here am I sphered for ever, thy fears (dear Love)
Strike coldly on thy jealous breast I know
From that my Fathers promise to Gazetto
That he should have me, contract is there none,
For my heart loathed it, is there left an oath
Fit for a Maid to swear by.
Good sweet give o'er,
What need we binding oaths being fast before?
I dare the crabbed'st Fate, she cannot spin
A thread thus fine and rotten; how now! sad!
Pray Heaven, I bee not mist at home, dear Cordolente
Thou shalt no farther, Isle venture now my self.
How sweet! venture alone!
Yes, yes, good rest.
By that are Lovers parted, seldom blessed.
Who goes there, if you be a woman stand, for all the men I met to night, lye in the Kennel.
My Fathers man! I am betrayed.
Fear nothing.
Bilbo!
Whether art thou running?
Out of my wits and yet no Churls Executor, it is no money makes me mad, but want of money.
Good tell me whether art going?
I am going to Hell (that's to say home) for my Master plays the Devil, and I come from seeking out a house of everlasting Thunder, (that's to say a Woman) I have been bouncing at Signior Gazetto's Chamber for you.
Ha!
You'll be he would when you come home.
I am undone for ever.
Thou art not, peace.
Signior Gazetto is horne-mad, and leapt out of his Bed, (as if fleas had bit him) so that I think he comes running stark naked after me.
Oh me, what help my dearest Soul?
To desperate wounds
Let's apply desperate cure, dare thou fly hence?
Dare! try me.
Then farewell Cordoua;
Horses we'll forthwith hire, and quick to Siuell
My birth-place, there thou shalt defy all storms.
Talk not, but doe.
She would have you doe much but say little.
Bilbo, thou see me not.
No, no, away, mum I.
To shut thy lips fast, here are lockes of Gold.
I'spy a light coming, trudge this way.
You dally with fire, haste, haste, Bilbo farewell.
O starre-crost Love!
To find way to whose Heaven, man wades through Hell.
Wo, ho, ho, ho,whew.
Another Fire-drake! More Salamanders! Here Sir.
Bilbo! How now! Is the Dy-dapper aboue water yet?
Signior Gazetto! Mine Eyes are no bigger then little pins heads with staring, my heals ache with trotting,
my candle is come to an untimely end through a Consumption. yet my young Mistress your sweet hart, like sweet breath amongst Tobacco-drinkers, is not to be found.
On, take my Torch, apace: the nearest way home.
Fluttering abroad by Owle-light! 
Here sir, turn down this Lane; shall I knock your Torch Signior?
Prithee doe what thou wilt, the Devil! where is she?
Had you knocked your Torch well before Tormiella (ware the post) and held it well up when it was lighted, she had nofor given you the slip, and i'faith Signior when is the day?
The wedding (meanst thou) on Saint Lukes day next,
It is mine own name thou know: but now I fear
She's lost, and the day too.
If she should drive you by foul weather into Cuckolds
Haven before Saint Lukes day comes, Signior Luco how then?
If she dares let her, I have her Fathers promise, nay oath that I shall have her.
Here is my Masters Gate.
Stay she's at home sure now: Isle slip aside,
Knock thou, and if she answers (as it is likely)
Weel try if still the old fencing be in use,
That faulty women never want excuse.
They are made for the purpose to lye and cullor,
Isle knock.
Who's there?
It is I, open the door.
What! to a Common!
What common! You doe me wrong sir, though I go in breeches, I am not the roaring girl you take me for.
Were thou with Gazetto?
Yes.
Was she with Gazetto?
No.
Was Gazetto alone?
No sir, I was with him.
Fool knew not he she was forth?
Yes when I told him.
Signior Malevento open the door pray.
Oh Luke Gazetto.
Not yet come home!
No, no.
Not yet! vds death
When I shall take the Villain does this wrong,
Had better stolen away a Star from Heaven
No Spaniard sure dares doe it.
It is some English man has stolen her, I hold my life, for most Thieves and bravest Cony-catchers are amongst them.
All Cordoua search ere morning, if not found
Isle ride to Siuill, Isle mount my Jennet Sir
And take the way to Madrill.
Ne'er speak of Madrill,
The journey is for her too dangerous,
If Cordoua hold her not, lets all to Siuill.
Haste, haste, by break of day
Signior Gazetto let vs meet again.
Agreed:
We'll hunt her out.
But you know not when, will you take your Torch.
Keep it, lustful maiden!
Hot Spanish vengeance follows thee, which flies
Like three forked Lightning, whom it smites, he dyes.
Pacheco?
My Lord.
Is it so early! What a Clock Is it?
About the hour that Soldiers go to bed, and Catchpoles rise: Will your Lordship be trussed up this morning?
How dost mean, go to hanging!
Hanging! does your Lordship take me for a crack-rope,
No, but for a notable Gallows, too many Lordships are trussed up every day (boy) some wud give a 1000. Crowns to have 'em untied, but come sir tie up my Lordship.
As ast as I can, Oh my Lord and a man could tie friends to him as fast as I doe these points, it were a brave world.
So he does, for these are fast now, and loose at night.
Then they are like the love of a woman.
Why boy! Do you know what the love of a woman is!
No faith my Lord, nor you neither, nor any man else I think.
You're a noble Villain.
Would I were, then I should be rich.
Well get you gon
Here's a brave fyle of noble Portuguese
Have sworn to help me, its hard trusting strangers,
Nay more, to give them footing in a Land
Is easy, hard to remove them; say they and I
Should send my Brother King out of this world,
And enthrone me (for that's the Star I reach at,)
I must have Spain mine, more then Portugal,
Say that the Dons and Grandies were mine own,
And that I had the Keys of the Court Gates
Hang at my Girdle; in my hand the Crown,
There's yet no lifting it up to my head
Without the people: I must ride that Beast,
And best sit fast: who walks not to his Throne
Upon their heads and hands, goes but alone;
This Dogfish must I catch then, the Queens Father!
(Pedro Valasco) what if I got him!
Its but a shallow old fellow, and to build
On the greatest, wisest Statesman, in a design
Of this high daring, is most dangerous;
We see the tops of tall trees, not their heart;
To find that sound or rotten, there's the Art.
How now Iago?
Good morrow to your Lordship,
The King looks for you,
You must come presently.
Well Sir: must come! So:
As I must come, so he ere long must go.
And broad awake!
As is that eye of Heaven.
It spake! not, did it?
No; but with broad eyes,
Glassy and fiery steered upon me thus,
As black, as is a Soul new dipped in Hell;
The t'other was all white, a beard and hair
Snowy like Portugal, and me thought his look:
But had no arms.
No arms!
No: just my height,
Now, and ever this it was shot up so high,
Me thought I heard the head knock at a Star,
Clean through the Seeling.
Fancy, Fancy.
I saw it.
A mere Deceptio visus.
A vice Ass;
You're an incredulous Coxcomb, these saw it.
Well; they did, they did.
I called for help; these entered, found me dead with fear!
It is right Sir.
Did not the Spirits glide by thee?
Your Grace must pardon me, I saw none.
'Shart doe I lye! doe you brave me! you base Peasant?
No my Lord, but I must guard my life against an Emperor.
One of my wives men, is it not! Ha!
What a Pox fawns the Cur for here! away.
Her Spy Sir! Are you!
Sooth him up, you're fools,
If the Lyon say the Asses ears are horns
The Ass if he be wise will swear it, la Sir
These tell me they all saw it.
Yes my Lord.
And yet I lye a whoreson buzzardNow sir
Prince Iohn is coming.
When sir!
Instantly.
Father Isle tell you a Tale, upon a time
The Lyon Fox and silly Ass did jar,
Grew friends and what they got, agreed to share:
A prey was tan, the bold Ass did divide it
Into three equal parts, the Lyon spied it,
And scorning two such sharers, moody grew,
And pawing the Ass, shook him as I shake you.
Not too hard good my Lord, alas I am crazed.
And in rage tore him piece meal, the Ass thus dead,
The prey was by the Fox distributed
Into three parts again; of which the Lyon
Had two for his share, and the Fox but one:
The Lyon (smiling) of the Fox would know
Where he had this wit, he the dead did show.
An excellent Tale.
Thou art that Ass.
I!
Thou: you, and the Fox my Brother cut my Kingdom,
Into what steakes you list, I share no more,
Then what you list to give.
You two broach War or Peace; you plot, contrive,
You flea off the Lyons skin, you sell him alive,
But having torn the Ass first limb from limb
His death shall tell the Fox Isle so serve him.
I doe all this! it is false in Prince Iohns face
Isle spit if he dares speak it, you might ride me
For a right Ass indeed if I should kick
At you, undermine you, or blow you up?
In whom the hope of my posterity
(By marriage of my child your wife) doth grow
None but an Ass would doe it.
If I know, your little finger was but in it, neither age;
Your place in Court, and Council, respect of honour,
Nor of my wife (your Daughter) shall keep this head
Upon these shoulders
Take it; now here's Prince Iohn.
How now Brother! Sick!
Not very well.
Our Court is some Enchanted Tower you come not near it.
Are you not troubled with some pain in the head?
Your Night-cap shows you are?
Yes wondrously,a kind of Megrim Sir.
I think to bind
Your Temples with the Crown of Spain would ease you.
The Crown of Spain! my Temples!
Nay, I but jest,
A Kingdom would make any Sick man well,
And Iohn I would thou had one.
It shall go hard else.
The King I thank him says that you and I
What?
Cut you out sir in steakes: Isle not be silent,
And that I am an Ass, and a Fox you;
Have I any dealings with you?
When I am to deal sir,
A wise man then shall hold the Cards.
Now I'm called fool too.
Sir if you remember
Before he came, you buzzed into mine ear,
Tunes that did found but scurvily.
I buzz! What buzz!
That he should sell me to the Portugal.
Were it thou as big as all the Kings in the world,
It is false and I defy thee.
Nay Sir, and more,
Out with it; no whispering,
I shall blush to speak it,
Hark you, a Pox upon it, cannot you sooth
His sullen Lordship up, you see I doe
Platter him, confess any thing.
A good Jest!
I should confess to him I know not what,
And have my throat cut, but I know not why.
W'ud your Grace
Would licence me a while to leave the Court
To attend my health.
Doe.
I take my leaveas for you Sir-
My Lord doe you see this Change in the Moon, sharpe horns
Doe threaten windy weather, shall I rule you
Send to him dead words, write to him your mind
And if your hearts be unsound purge both, all humours
That are corrupt within you.
Isle never write, but to him in person.
Pray Madam rise.
Doe you know this old fury?
No: what is she?
She's the Kings nuthooke (if report has not a blister on her tongue) that when any Filberd-tree is ripe; pulls down
the bravest bows to his hand: a Lady Pandresse, and (as this years Almanac says) has a private hot-house for his Grace only to sweat in: her name the Lady Dildoman: the poor Knight her Husband is troubled with the City Gout, lies in the Counter.
Isle hang him that stirs in it, the proudest Falcon that's perched up nearest the Eagle, if he dare, make this his prey, how many years!
Fifteen and upwards if it please your Grace.
Some two footed Devil in our Court,
Would thrust you out of all, Enclosed! or Common!
It is yet enclosed if it like your Grace.
Entailed!
Newly Entailed, as there it is to be seen in black and white.
This case my self will handle; fee no Lawyer
Isle stand for you, ha! Servants of mine turned grinders!
To oppress the weak! What slave is it! from my sight,
Least my heaved hand swerueawry, and Innocence smite.
This Bawd belike has her house pulled down.
So: come hither, nearer, where shines this star?
In the City, brightly, sprightly, bravely, oh it is a Creature
Young!
Delicate, piercing eye, enchanting voice, lip red and moist, skin soft and white; she's amorous, delicious, inciferous tender, neat.
Thou midst me, newly married!
New married, that's all the hole you can find in her conte, but so newly, the poesy of her wedding Ring is scarce warm with the heate of her finger; therefore my Lord, fasten this wagtail, as soon as you can lime your bush, for women are Venice-glasses, one knock spoils em.
Cracked things pox on 'em.
And then they'll hold no more then a Lawyers Conscience.
How shall I get a sight of this rich Diamond.
I would have you first disguised go along with me,
and buy some toy in her shop, and then if you like Dane fall into her lap like Jove, a net of Goldsmiths work will pluck up more women at one draught, then a Fisherman does Salmons at fifteen.
What's her Husband?
A flatcap, pish; if he storm, give him a Court-Loafe stop's mouth with a Monopoly.
T'hast fired me.
You know where to quench you.
Isle steal from Court in some disguise presently.
Stand on no ground good your Highness.
Away, Isle follow thee, speak not of hast,
Thou tyest but wings to a swift gray Hounds heel,
And add to a running Chariot a fifth wheel.
Thou now dost hinder me, away, away.
Lazarillo art bound yet?
No, but my Indentures are made.
Make as much haste to seal, as younger Brothers doe at taking up of Commodities: for Lazarillo, there's not any Diego that treads upon Spanish leather, goes more upright upon the soles of his Conscience, then our Master does.
Troth so I think, now I like my little smirking Mistress as well.
Like her, did not I like her simply, to run away from her father (where I had both men Servants and maid Servants under me) to wear a flat cap here and cry what doe you lack.
What is it you lack Gentlemen, rich garters, spangled
roses, silk stockings, embroidered gloves or girdles.
Don sweet Don, see here rich Tuscan hatbands, ventoyes, or Barbarian shoo-stringsno point
Their powder is dank and will not take fire.
Reach that paper of gloves what mark is it?
P. and Q.
P. and Q. chafe these, chafe, chafe, here's a world to make Shopkeepers chafe.
What is it you buy Sir, gloves, garters, girdles.
Lazarillo, Lazarillo, my old master Entered Malevento; do you hear sir, the best hangers in Spain for your worship.
Vmh! I have known that voice, what! Run away!
Why how now Bilbo! grown a Shopkeeper!
Jogging on Sir, in the old path to be called upon to bear all offices, I hope one day.
It is well: good fortunes bless you.
Turned Citizen sir, a Counter you see still before me, to put me in mind of my end, and what I must go to, if I trust too many with my ware, it's news to see your worship in Sill.
It is true: but Bilbo, no news yet of my Daughter?
None.
Not any.
What will your worship give me, if I melt away all that sow of lead that lies lieauy at your heart, by telling you where she is.
Prithee step forth, speak softly, thou warm'st my blood,
Isle give thee the best suite Prentice ever wore.
And I can tell you Prentices are as gallant now, as some that walk with my cozen Bilbo at their sides, you can scarce know'em from Prentices of Siuill.
Fly to the mark I prithee?
Now I draw home, doe you see this shop, this shop is my Masters.
So, so, what of all this?
That master lies with my young mistress, and that mistress is your Daughter.
Hal
Mum: she's gone forth, this morning to a Wedding, he's aboue, but (as great men have done) he's coming down.
Is this he?
This is he.
Look to the shop.
Pray sir a word?
You shall.
You doe not know me?
Trust me not well.
Too well, thou hast undone me,
Thou art a Civil These with looks demure
As is thy habit, but a Villains heart.
Sir
Hear me sirto rob me of that fire
That fed my life with heate (my only Child)
Turn her into
What sir! She's my wife:
Thy Strumpet, she's a disobedient Child,
To cross my purposes; I promised her
To a man whom I had chosen to be her Husband.
She loved him not; was she contracted to him?
Can he lay claim to her by Law?
Isle swear,
She told me I should rule her, that she was
Affied to no other man, and that to please me
She would only take Gazetto
I will forbear Sir
To vex you; what she spake so, was for fear,
But I have done, no Beggar has your child
I crave no Dowry with her, but your Love,
For hers I know I have it.
Must I not see her!
You shall but now she's forth sir.
She has cracked my very heart-strings quite in sunder.
Her love and duty shall I hope knit all more strongly
Sir I beseech your patience, when my bosom
Is laid all open to you, you shall find
An honest heart there, and you will be glad
You h'a met the These that robed you, and forgive him,
I am engaged to business craves some speed,
Please you be witness to it.
Well I shall,
Parents with milk feed Children, they them with gall.
As kind an old man Lazarillo, as ever drunk mulled Sack.
So it seems, for I saw him weep like a Cut Vine.
Weep; I warrant that was because hee could not find in's heart to have my Master by th'cares.
My Mistress.
Chase chase.
Whore's your master.
Newly gone forth forsooth.
Whether, with whom?
With my old Master your Father.
Ha! my Father! when came her who was with him?
What said he, how did my Husband use him?
As Officers at Court use Citizens that come without their Wives; scarce made him drink, but they are gone very lovingly together.
That's well, my heart has so  since I went forth, I am glad I was out of the peals of Thunder, asked hee not for me, was Gazetto with him, Luke was not hee with him ha!
Not only the old man.
That's well, reach my work basket, is the embroidered Muff perfumed for the Lady?
Yes forsooth, she never put her hand into a sweeter thing.
Are you sure Gazetto was not with my Father?
Unless he wore the invisible cloak.
Bless me from that disease and I care not, one fit of him would soon send me to my grave; my hart so throbs?
What is it you lack.
Fine Garters, Gloves, Glasses, Girdles what is it you buy,
I have a warrant you see from the King to search all Siuell for the woman that did this murder, the act of which has made me mad, miss no shop, let me have that, which I can buy in some Country for seven groats Justice!
Your searching house by house this is so spread abroad that it is as bad as a scarcrow to fright away the bird you seek to Catch, me thinks if you walk soberly alone, from shop to shop your bat fowling would catch more wagtailes
Well shot Sagittarius, Isle neck as thou bid me,
What think you of yonder parrot in the Cage.
A ropehapuffis the wind with me.
What stares the man at so.
His wits are reeled a little out of the road way nothing else;
Alas mistress, this world is able to make any man mad.
Ha ha ha ha.
What doe you laugh at, is this she.
No, but I saw a dove fly by that had eaten Carrion it showed like a corrupted Churchman farewell.
Doe you discharge vs then.
As hail shot at a dunghill where Crows are.
You are mine; thanks vengeance; thou at last art come,
(Tho with wolly feet) be quick now and strike home.
What is it you lack.
What is it you buy.
That's she.
Peace; Madam lets try here:
What is it you lack sir!
A glove with an excellent perfume.
For your self sir!
I would fit my self sir, but I am now for a woman: a pretty little hand, the richest you have.
About the bigness of this gentlewoman's will serve:
Yes faith Madam, at all adventures Isle make this my measure, shall I mistress!
As you please sir.
It pleases me well.
Then sir go no farther, heir's the fairest in all Spain, felllow it and take mine for a dogskin.
Pray forsooth draw it on, if it fit you it fits the party surely.
Nay Madam, the glove is most genuine for any young Ladies hand under the Coape, I assure you.
I but the Leather.
Nay, the Leather is affable and apt to bee drawn to any generous disposition.
Pray (Fair Lady) does it not come on too stiff?
No sir very gently.
Stiff; as prolixious as you please: nay sir the sent is Aromaticall and most odorous, the musk upon my word Sir is perfact Cathayne, a Tumbasine odor upon my credit, not a grain either of your Salmindy Carom or Cubit musk.
Adulterated I doubt.
No adultery in the world in it, no sophistication but pure as it comes from the cod.
Open more, you shall have what choice you please.
You shall have all the ware opened in the shop to please your worship, but you shall bee fitted!
No no, it needs not: that which is opened already shall serve my turn.
Will you go farther son and see better.
And perhaps speed worse: no: your price?
Four double Pistolets.
How!
Good ware cannot be too dear: look upon the cost,
Relish the sent, note the workmanship.
Your man is too hard, Isle rather deal with you: three Isle give you.
Come pray take it, will three fetch 'em?
Indeed we cannot, it stands my Husband in more.
Well lay these by, a Cordouant for my self.
The best in Siuell: Lack you no rich Tuskan Garters, Veteen ventoyes Madam, I have masks most methodical, and facetious: assay this glove sir?
The Leather is too rough.
You shall have a fine smooth skin please your feeling better, but all our Spanish Dons choose that which is most rough, for it holds out, sweat you never so hard.
The price?
The price!
Four Crowns, I have excellent Hungarian shag bands Madam for Ladies, cut out of the same piece that the great Turks Tolibant was made of.
The Great Turk be damned.
Doe you want any French Codpeece points Sir,
Pox on 'em, they'll not last, they are burnt in the dying.
If they be black they are rotten indeed, sir doe you want no rich spangled Morisco shoo-strings.
I like this beard-brush, but that the haire's too stiff.
Flexible as you can wish, the very bristles of the same
Swine that are fattened in Virginia.
What comes all to, before vs?
It comes to 4. 5. 6. in all, six double Pistolets, and a Spanish Ducats over.
Too dear, let's go.
Madam, worshipful Don, pray sir offer, if any shop show you the like ware.
Prithee peace fellow, how do ye like her?
Rarely. what lure can thou cast to fetch her off?
Leave that to me, give me your purse.
Doe you hear Madam!
The fatal Ball is cast, and though it fires
All Spain, burn let it, hot as my desires:
Have you dispatched?
Yes.
I assure your worship, my master will be a looser by you.
It may be so, but your Mistress will not say so.
Son I tell her of the rich embroidered stuff at home for the tops of gloves, and to make me muffs, if it please the Gentlewoman to take her man along, she shall not only see them, but certain stones, which I will have set only in one pair, I can tell you, you may so deal with me, you shall gain more then you think of.
Mistress strike in with her.
My Husband is from home, and I want skill
To trade in such Commodities, but my man
Shall wait upon your Ladyship.
Nay, nay, come you,
Your man shall go along to note my House,
To fetch your Husband, you shall dine with vs.
Faith doe forsooth, you'll not repent your match.
Come, come you shall.
Isle wait upon you Madam, Sirrah your cloak.
Make up that ware, look to th'shop.
If your Master come in, request him to stay till your fellow come for him.
Come Mistress, on Son, nay, nay indeed you shall not,
My Glove, one of my gloves lost in your shop.
Run back sirrah.
Doe we'll softly before.
Make haste.
A Glove! I saw none.
Nor I, it dropped from her somewhere else then.
I am called up to Dinner Bilbo.
Are you, then make fast the shop door, and play out your set at Maw, for the Mistress of my Masters alley is trundled before, and my bowls must rub after.
Fly then and a great one.
She's out a'th Alley, in the Crank belike, run, run, run.
Low stools, pray sit, my man shall fetch the stuffs
And after Dinner you shall have those stones:
A cup of wine; what drink you! Love you bastard!
Isle give you the best in Spain.
No wines at all.
Have you been married long?
Not long.
I think your wedding shoes have not been oft untied.
Some three times.
Pretty Soul; No more! indeed
You are the youngest Vine I ever saw planted,
So full of hope for bearing; me thinks it is pity
A Citizen should have so fair a Tree
Grow in his Garden.
I think him best worthy,
To pluck the fruit, that sets it.
Oh you'd h'a shone
At Court like a full Constellation,
Your Eyes are orbs of Stars.
Muse my man stays.
Your man is come, and sent to fetch your Husband,
Trust me you shall not hence, till you have filled
This banqueting room with some sweet thing or other:
Your Husband's wondrous kind to you.
As the Sun
To the new married Spring, the Spring to the Earth.
Some children look most sweetly at their birth,
That after prove hard fauor'd; and so doe Husbands:
Your honey Moons soonest wane and show sharpe horns.
Mine shall show none,
I doe not wish it should,
Yet be not too much kept under, for when you would
You shall not rise.
Vmh!
I was once as you are,
Young (and perhaps as fair) it was my Fate
Whilst Summer lasted and that beauty reared
Her colours in my cheeks, to serve at Court:
The King of Spain that then was, eyed me oft:
Liked me, and loved me, wooed me, at last won me.
It was well you were no City.
Why?
It seems,
You yielded ever you needed.
Nay, you must think,
He plied me with fierce batteries and assaults:
You are coy now, but (alas) how could you fight
With a Kings frowns! your womanish appetite
Were it ne'er so dead and cold would soon take fire
At honours, (all women would be lifted higher)
Would you not stoop to take it, and thrust your hand
Deep as a King's in Treasure, to have Lords
Fear you, t'haue life or death fly from your words
The first night that I lay in's Princely arms,
I seemed transformed, me thought Ioues own right hand.
Had snatched me up and in his starry sphere.
Placed me (with others of his Lemmans there)
Yet was he but the shadow I the sun.
In a proud zodiake, I my Course did run.
Mine eye beams the dials stile; and had power.
To rule his thoughts, as that Commands the hour.
Oh you shall find upon a Princes pillow.
Such golden dreams.
I find 'em.
Cry you mercy.
My husband comes not, I dare not stay.
You must.
You shall.
Before you lies your way
Beaten out by me, if you can follow doe.
What means this, are there bawds Ladies too
Why shake you, fear not, none here threats your life!
Shall not a lamb tremble at the butchers knife.
Let go your hold, keep off, what violent hands
Soever force me, ne'er shall touch woman more,
Isle kill ten Monarchs ere Isle bee ones whore.
Hear me.
Avoid thou devil.
Thou puritan fool.
Oh thou base Otter hound, help, help.
In vain.
The best in Spain shall know this.
The best now knows it.
Good pitch let me not touch thee, Spain has a King:
If from his royal throne Justice bee driven,
I shall find right, at the Kings hands of Heaven.
This is the King.
The King, alas poor slave.
A Raven stuck with Swans feathers, scarcrow dressed brave.
Doe you not know me?
Yes, for a whore-master.
No matter for her scolding, a women's tongue Is like the miraculous Bell in Are gone, which rings out without the help of man.
Hear me, thou striu'st with Thunder, yet this hand
That can shake Kingdoms down, thrusts into thine,
The Scepters, if proud fall, thou let them fall
Thou beat'st thy self in pieces on a rock
That shall for ever ruin thee and thine
Thy Husband, and all opposites that dare
With vs to cope, it shall not serve your turn
With your dim eyes to judge our beams, the light
Of Common fires, We can before thy sight
Shine in full splendour, though it suites vs now
To suffer this base cloud to mask our brow
Be wise, and when thou may (for lifting up
Thine arm) pluck Stars, refuse them not, I swear
By heaven I will not force thee against thy blood,
When I send, come: if not, withstand thy good;
Go, get you home now, this is all, farewell.
Oh me! what way to heaven can be through hell.
Why dive you so?
I hope your Majesty,
Dare swear I ha played the Pilot cunningly.
Fetching the wind about to make this Pinnace
Strike Sail as you desired.
You are a damned Bawd:
A soaking, sodden, splay-foot, ill-fac'd Bawd;
Not all the wits of Kingdoms can enact
To save what by such Gulphes as thou art wracked,
Thou whore wickedness, Devils dam, dost thou think
Thy poisons rotten breath shall blast our fame,
Or those furred gummmes of thine gnaw a Kings name!
If thou would down before thy time, to thy crew,
Prate of thisyes; doe, for gold, any slave
May gorge himself on sweets, Kings cannot have
By help of such a hag as thou, I would not
Dishonour her for an Empire, from my sight.
Well sir.
Give o'er your Trade.
Isle change my Copy.
See you doe.
I will turn over a new leaf.
We search for Serpents, but being found destroy the,
Men drink not poisons, though they oft employ them.
Give o'er! how live then! no, Isle keep that still
If Courtiers will not, I'm sure Citizens will.
Speak with you.
Ha! good fellow keep thy way.
You're a whore.
You are a base Knave, not the streets free!
Though dead, from vengeance earth thee shall not save,
Hyena like, Isle eat into thy Grave.
I dare now bestow on you a free,
And hearty welcome to my poor house:
Thanks Son:
Good Ayre, very good Ayre, and Son I think.
You stand well too for trading.
Very well sir.
I am glad on it.
Sirrah whore's your Mistress?
I, I, good youth call her,
She plays the Tortoise now, you shall twixt her and me,
See a rare Combat; tell her here's her Father,
No, an old swaggering Fencer, dares her at the weapon,
Which women put down men at, Scolding! boy
I will so chide her Son.
Pray doe Sir, go call her?
She's forth Sir with my fellow, a Lady took her along.
Taken up already, it's well, yet I commend her
She flies with birds that are of better wing
Then those she spreads her self.
Right Sir.
Nay she's wise
A subtle Ape, but loving as the Moon, is to the Sea:
I hope she'll prove more constant:
Then is the needle to the Adamant,
The God of gold power down on both your heads
His comfortable showers.
Thanks to your wishes.
May never gall be filled into your Cup,
Nor wormwood strew your Pillow; so live, so love,
That none may say, a Raven does kiss a Dove,
I am sorry that I cursed you, but the string
Sounds as it is played on, as it is set we sing.
Whore's thy Mistress?
Oh-pray Son, use Bilbo Caueare well.
Whore's thy Mistress?
She's departed Sir.
Departed! whether prithee!
It may to a Lord, for a Lady had her away, I came back to fetch a Glove which dropped from the Lady, but before I could overtake them, they were all dropped from me; my Mistress is to me Sir, the needle in the bottle you wot where.
Of hay thou mean, she'll not be lost I warrant.
Here she comes now sir,
Tormiella, call her.
What shall I call her?
Nothing by no means
No let her flutter, now she's fast in the net,
On disobedience, a graceful shame is set,
A strange dead palsy, when a women's tongue
Has not the power to stir, dumb! call her I say!
Strange news Sir!
What is it?
Yonders a Coach full of good faces.
That so strange?
Yes to alight at our Gate; They are all coming up as boldly, as if they were Landlords and came for Rent, see else.
The woman of the House sir pray?
She's in her Chamber, sirrah show the way.
Doe you know these!
Troth not I sir, I'm amazed
At this their strange arrival.
By their starcht faces,
Small shancks, and blisted shoo-knobs, they should be Courtiers.
Our Spanish Mercers say, they are the bravest fellows.
For brave men, they are no less in the Taylors books,
Courtiers in Citizens Houses, are Summer fires,
May well be spared, and being clean out are best
They doe the house no good, but help consume,
They burn the wood up, and o're-heat the room,
Sweetening only the air a little, that's all,
Play the right Citizen then, whilst you gain by them,
Hug'em, if they pluck your feathers, come not nigh them.
Isle close with them.
Doe.
Welcome Gentlemen.
Thanks.
Pray sir what Ladies may these be with my Wife?
Faith sir if they would cast themselves away upon Knights, they may be Knights Ladies, but they are only Gentlewomen of an exceeding sweet carriage and fashion, and it is so Sir, that your wives doings being bruited and spread abroad to be rare for her handling the Spanish needle, these beauties are come only to have your wife prick out a thing, which must be done out of hand, that's the whole business Sir.
In good time Sir,
Of Court I pray Sir are you?
Yes Sir, we follow the Court now and then, as others follow vs.
He means those they owe money too.
Pray Sir what news at Court?
Faith Sir the old stale news, black Jacks are filled, and standing Cups emptied.
I see then Jacks are saucy in every corner, I have gouen it him under the list of the ear.
It was soundly, you see he's struck dead.
Dancing Baboon!
Farewell.
To Coach, away.
The Welch Ambassador, has a Message to you sir.
Hee will bee with you shortly, when the Moons
Horns are in the full.
What's that they talk!
Nothing but this, they have given it me soundly, I feel it under the lists of both ears, whore's my wife!
She's fallen sick sir.
The Night-mare rides her.
Ha! sick! how sick!
Of the falling sickness; you and my Master have used her to run away, that she has showed you another light pair of heals, she's gon Sir.
Thou lie.
It may be she lies by this time, but I stand to my words, I say again She's gon sir; cast your Cap at her, but she's gon herried into a Coach drawn with four Horses.
These her oaths, vows, protestations, damnations, a Serpent kissed the first woman; and ever since the whole sex have given suck to Adders.
Run into the Street, and if thou see the privileged
Bawdy house she went into,
That runs on four wheels, the Carriage sir.
Cry to the whole City to stop her.
I will sir, it is every mans case in the City, to have his wife stopped.
Well; what wilt thou say, if this be a plot,
Of merriment betwixt thy wife and them,
For them to come thus, and disguise her thus,
Thus hoary her away to some by-Towne,
But four or five miles distance from the City,
Then must we hunt on Horseback, find our game
See and not know her in this strange disguise,
But the jest smelt out, shouts, and plandities
Must ring about the Table where she sits,
Then you kissing her, I must applaud their wits.
Well, I will once be gulled in this your Comedy,
A while Isle play the Withal, I will wink Sir,
One Bird you see is flown out of the nest,
What Bird!
A wagtail, after, fly all the rest.
Come then.
Pacheco.
My Lord.
It shall be so, to the King presently
See my Carriage be ready, furnish me
To go to Court sir.
Well Sir.
Why my Lord?
What say thou?
You will overthrow the state
Of that dear health which so much cost and time
Have been a building up, your pores lying open
Colds, Agues, and all enemies to pure bloods
Will enter and destroy life.
I will to Court.
Pray my Lord stir not forth.
Lay down, begone.
The Ayre will pierce you.
I ha took cold already.
When sir?
When you councilled me to ride my horse.
Nay that was well, how slept you the next night?
Not a wink.
All the better.
But in the next morning,
I could not in a Russian stoue sweat more
Then I did in my Bed.
Marry I'm glad on it.
And had no clothes upon me.
Still the better.
My bones Sir paid for all this, and yet you cry, still the better: when you have purged your pockets full of gold out of a Patient, and then nailed him in's Coffin, you cry then still the better too, a man were better to lye under the hands of a Hangman, than one of your rubarbatiue faces; sirrha Doctor, I doe not think but I have been well, all this time I have been Sick?
Oh my good Lord.
Oh good Master Doctor, come no more of this, I have another Diaphragma for you to tickle, you minister poison in some Medicines, doe you not?
Yes my good Lord, in Purgatiue and Expulsiue.
So, so, break not my head with your hard words, you can for a need poison a Great man?
Your Lordship's merry.
Right Sir, but I must have it done in sadness, it is your Trade Master Doctor to send men packing: hark you, it is no less Bug-beare then Don Valasco!
The Admiral of Castle!
Him you must sink.
It is my certain death to doe it.
And thy certain death to deny it, if you will not show him a cast of your Office, Isle be so bold, as bestow this upon you of mine, I am sharpe set, will you doe it?
I will by these two hands.
When?
When you please.
This day?
This hour.
And make him fast.
Fast.
For speaking.
For speaking.
Why then good Doctor rise
To honour by, it be secret and be wise.
The Admiral is come my Lord.
A way with these, show him the way in, Doctor.
Oh my Lord!
If you fail.
All health to your good Lordship, I wish that,
Which most I think you want.
Thanks my good Lord,
Doctor dispatch, take heed your Compositions,
Hit as I told you.
Oh my Lord, I am beaten to these things.
Go then, this visitation of your Lordship,
I take most kindly.
Two maine wheels my Lord,
Have hither brought me, on the Kings Command,
To'ther my love, with a desire to know
Why I mong'st all the trees that spread it'h Court
Should still be smote with lightening from your eye;
Yours only dangerous Arrows shoots at me:
You have the Courtiers dialect right, your tongue
Walks ten miles from your heart, when last you saw me,
Doe you remember how you threatened; as for you Sir
These notes are strange.
Oh my good Lord, be my good Lord, I read
Harsh Lectures in your face, but meet no Comment
That can dissolve the riddle, unless it be
Out of that noble fashion that great men
Must trip some heals up, tho they stand as low
As Vintners when they conjure, only to show
Their skill in wrestling, it is not well to strike
A man whose hands are bound, like should choose like.
I strike you not, nor strive to give you falls,
It is your own guilt afflicts you, if to the King
The song I set of you, did to your ear
Vnmusically sound, it was not in hate
To you, but in desire to give the state
True knowledge of my innocence, be sure a bird,
Chanted that tune to me, that only you
Incensed the King that I should sell him.
Vmh!
Doe you think I lye?
I doe believe your Lordship.
It was a man most near you.
A bosom villain!
For you must think that all that bow, stand bare
And give Court Cakebread to you, love you not.
True love my Lord at Court, is hardly got.
If I can friend you, use me.
Humble thanks.
Oh my good Lord, times silver foretop stands
On end before you, but you put it by.
Catch it, it is yours, escaped never yours, your shoulders
Bear the Weale-publique up, but they should bear,
Like Pillars to be strong themselves: would I
Want fish at Sea, or golden showers at Court
I'd go awry sometimes, were it but for sport.
Say you so!
Sell Justice and she'll by you Lordships, cloth her
(As Citizens doe their wives) beyond their worth
She'll make you sell your Lordships and your plate
No wise man will for nothing serve a state,
Remember this, your Daughter is the Queen
Brave phrase to say my Son in Law the King,
Whilst sweet showers fall, and Sunne-shine, make your Spring.
You look not out I see, nor hear the storms
Which late have shook the Court.
Not I! what storms!
You in your Cabin know nothing there's a Pinnace
(Was manned out first by th'City,) is come to th'Court,
New rigged, a very painted Gally foist,
And yet our Spanish Carvils, the Armada
Of our great vessels dare not stir for her.
What Pinnace mean you?
From his lawful pillow,
The King has tan a Citizens wife.
For what?
What should men doe with Citizens wives at Court?
All will be nought, poor Queen it is she smarts for it.
Now it is your time to strike.
He does her wrong,
And I shall tell him soundly.
Tell him!
Isle pay it home.
Were you some Father in Law now.
What lies here,
Lies here, and none shall know it.
How easy were it,
For you to set this warping Kingdom straight?
The peoples hearts are full,
And weed the State.
Too full of weeds already.
And to take all,
Into your own hands.
I could soon do it.
Then do it.
Doe what! misprize me not, pray good my Lord,
Nor let these foolish words we shoot in the Ayre,
Fall on our heads and wound vs: to take all
Into mine own hands, this I mean.
Come on.
Boldly and honestly to chide the King.
Vmh.
Take his minx up short.
Take her up!
Roundly, to rate, her Withal husband: to stir up
The people, since men's wives are common Cases.
You hear not me say so.
To force this Tyrant to mend or end.
Good day to your Lordship.
Shoot off the Piece you have charged.
No, it recoils.
You and I shall fall to cutting throats.
Why!
If ever you speak of this.
If we cut one another throats, I shall never
Speak of this: fare your Lordship well.
Alphonso de Gramada.
Good health to both your Lordships.
Thanks good Alphonso, nay pray stay.
Where hast thou been Alphonso!
In the Marquess of Villa Nova del Rios, Garden
Where I gathered these Grapes.
And they are the fairest Grapes I ever touched.
Troth so they are; plump Bacchus cheeks were never
So round and red, the very God of Wine.
Swells in this bunch, Lyaeus set this Vine.
I have not seen a lovelier.
It is your Lordships, if you vouchsafe to take it.
Oh I shall rob you, of too much sweetness.
No my Lord.
I thank you.
Make bold to see your honour.
Good Alphonso.
And (loath to be too troublesome) take my leave:
My duty to the King.
Farewell good Alphonso.
How doe you like your Grapes?
Most delicate, taste'em:
Is it not strange, that on a branch so fair,
Should grow so foul a fruit, as Drunkards are!
These are the bullets that make Cities reel,
More then the Cannon can.
This Juice infused
In man, makes him a beast, good things abused,
Convert to poison thus; how now!
I'm dizzy
Oh! does not all the house run round on wheels!
Doe not the Posts go round! my Lord this fellow,
Loves you I hope?
Isle pawn my life he does.
Would all we both are worth, were laid to pawn
To a Broker that's vndamn'd for half a dram
For half a scruple,oh we are poisoned.
Ha!
What doe you feel?
A giddiness too me thinks.
Without there, call the Doctor (slave)
He's here Sir.
Oh Doctor now or nevergive him his last,
We are poisoned both.
I think our banes are asked.
He will bring that shall forbid it, call him (villain)
Well Sir I will call him villain.
All thrives not well within me: On my soul
It is but Conceit, I'm hurt with fear, Don Iohn,
Is my Close mortal enemy, and perhaps
Under the Cullor I am poisoned, sends
To pay me soundly! to prevent the worst,
Preservative or poison, he drinks first.
Give it him,
No, begin,
What is it?
Cordial.
The Doctor shall begin, quickly, so here,
Half this to both our deaths if it come too late.
I pledge them both, death is a common fate.
Shift hands, is it mortal!
It strikes sure.
Let it run
It is down.
I'm glad, thy life's not a span long.
How is it!
Worse.
Better, I doe fear this physic
Like pardons for men hanged is brought too late.
Hoe's gone.
Who's without!
Some of his men attending with his Carriage
Take help; bestow the body in it, convey it,
To his own house and there sir, see you swear,
You saw him in your presence fall dead here.
This I can safely swear.
Help then, away,
Thou art next, for none must live that can betray.
So sweetness, Isle now walk no longer with you.
Are you weary of my Company!
Never shall:
Prithee keep thy Chamber a while, the Ayre bites.
It is because the Sun shines not so hot is it had wont.
There's some Cloud between then.
Yes, and a horrible foul one.
I see none but fair ones.
No! Look yonder, it comes from the City.
Let it come, by these Roses I am angry that you let me not go.
Nay look you, your Grace takes all from me too; pray
Sir give me my roses, your Highness is too covetous.
I must of necessity have one.
You shall, so you take it of my choosing.
I will, so you choose that which I like.
Which will you have, the bud, or that which is blown?
The bud sure, I love no blown ware.
Take your bud then.
Doe you hear? are you angry?
No, you are jealous, you are so loath to have me out of your sight,you need not, for I keep the fashion of the Kings of China, who never walk abroad, but besides their Attendants, have five or six as richly attired as themselves, to cut off treason.
So.
Here be others in the Troupe will bee taken for Queens sooner then I.
You are vexed, I have preferred a creature to you.
Who dares check the Sun, if he make a stinking weed grow close to a bed of Violets? vexed! not I, and yet me thinks you might give me leave to choose mine own women, as well as you doe your men, I commend no man to you, for lifting joinstools to be one of your guard.
Your Muff.
Take it good wife.
You will make me angry: good wife! so, take it.
Now I hope you'll take it, you need not scorn a Queens leavings, for a Queen has had yours.
What!
You see; does your Majesty frown because I take it from her
Come hither, put your hand here? so, well met,
All friends now, yet tho tied never so fast,
Being a bow knot, it slips it self at last.
Is it so! were it thou a Diamond worth the world,
And ne'er so hard, yet thine own Dust shall cut thee:
Go call that Lady back.
Which?
Tormiella,
No doe not! It is a Cock the Lyon can fright,
The Hen dost now, the Case is altered quite.
Your gracious pardon to call back a life
That's half lost with despair.
What hast thou done?
Poisoned a man.
Whom hast thou poisoned?
The Queens Father in law.
Would it had been the Daughter, thou shalt feel:
A double death, one here, and one in Hell.
I must have company with me then: Don Iohn
Your Highness Brother, set against my throat
Back.
His armed sword; I had died, had I not done it.
Our Guard; go fetch Don Iohn our brother to Court.
A word in your Highness ear:
Search him.
He has nothing.
I in stead of poison,
Gave him a sleepy Potion, he's preserved
Don Iohn thinks not: the noble Admiral
Fears plots against his life, forbears the Court
But sends me to your Grace, to bid you set
Your foe oting stiff and strongly, for Don Iohn
Trips at your life and Kingdom, to his throat
Valasco this will justify.
He shall
Go you and fetch him secretly to Court
Alphonso take the Doctor and return.
Death! when! Iago with your smoothest face
Go greet Don Iohn from vs,
Say we have work of State, both presently
And closely bid him come.
I shall.
How now what's he, give vs leave, come hither:
We have perused your paper Sir, and think
Your promises Spring-tides, but we fear you'll ebb
In your peformance.
My deeds and speeches Sir,
Are lines drawn from one Center, what I promise
To doe, Isle doe, or loose this.
You give me physic after I'm dead, the Portuguese and we
Have hung our drums up, and you offer here
Models of Fortification, as if a man
Should when Warre's done, set up an Armorors shop.
I bid you set up none Sir, you may choose.
This fellow Isle fitly cast in the Villains mold,
I find him crafty, envious, poor, and bold:
Into a Saw Isle turn thee, to cut down
All Trees which stand in my way; what's thy name:
You may read in my paper.
Lupo Vindicado's; Vmh! nay we shall employ you
Merit went never from vs with a forehead,
Wrinkled or sullen, what place would you serve in?
Any, but one of your turn broaches; I would not be one of your black Guard, there's too much fire in me already.
You say, you have the Languages.
Yes.
What think you of an Intelligencer, we'll send you-
To the Gallows, I love not to be hanged in State.
You having travelled as you said so far,
And knowing so much, I muse thou art so poor.
Had the confusion of all tongues began
In building me, could I sing sweet in all,
I might go beg and hang, I have seen Turks
And Jaws, and Christians, but of all, the Christians
Have driest hands, they'll see a Brother starve,
But give Ducks to a water-Spaniell.
Well observed
Come sir, faith let's crow together, in what stamp
Dost thou coin all thy Languages.
I doe speak English
When I'd move pity, when dissemble, Irish,
Dutch when I reel, and tho I feed on scalions,
If I should brag Gentility, I'd gabble Welch,
If I betray, I'm French, if full of braves,
They swell in lofty Spanish, in neat Italian
I Court my Wench, my mess is all served up.
Of what Religion art thou?
Of yours.
When you were in France?
French.
Without there.
Sir?
Give this Gentleman five hundred Pistolets
Be near vs.
In thy bosom, for thy Pistolets
Isle give thee Pistols, in a piece might ha been mine
Thou shoot'st or mean to shoot, but Isle charge thine;
Thy heart off goes it in thunder.
Through the Gallery,
Unseen convey him hither, give vs leave sir.
Leave have you
I'm glad to see your Majesty.
You have reason.
I was going to cry all hid.
Come hither
Dead man you'll justify this treason?
To his teeth,
Throat, mouth to mouth, body to body.
So.
Don Iohn of Castile's come.
A Chair, stand you
Full here and stir not, front him, bring him in
How, now, did a Hare cross your way?
The Devil
Doctor Isle give you a purge for this, Isle make
Your Highness laugh.
You must tickle me soundly then.
In this retreat of mine from Court, my body
(Which was before a clean stream) growing foul
By my minds trouble, through your high displeasure
Which went to the bottom of my heart; I called
That sound Card to me, gave him fees and bid him
(By all the fairest props that Art could rear)
To keep my health from falling, which I felt
Tottering and shaken, but my Vrinalist
(As if he sate in Barber-Surgions Hall
Reading Anatomy Lectures) left no Artery
Vnstretcht upon the Tenters.
So he vexed you to the guts.
My bowels were his conjuring rooms, to quit him
I tempted him to poison a great man,
I knowing this my honourable friend
Keep back, he will poison my glove else.
Coming to visit me,
This was the man must die.
Why did you this?
Only to hatch a jest on my piled Doddy,
I knew he durst not do it.
But say he had?
Then he had been hanged.
That had made me more glad.
I am bound to your Lordship.
Being a Doctor you may loose your self.
Men's lives then are your Balls, disarm him
How! not all thy Kingdom can.
How him in pieces,
Our Guard, s'death kill him.
Are you in earnest?
Look.
See then, I put my self into your Den:
What does the Lyon now with me?
You are a traitor.
I am none.
No!
Yes, an arrant traitor.
You sir; spit all thy poison forth.
No, I drank none sir.
Come to your proofs, and see you put 'em home.
You and I one day, being in conference,
You named this noble King (my Sovereign)
A tyrant, bid me strike, it was now my time,
Spake of a Piece charged, and of shooting off
Of stirring up the Rascals to rebel,
And to be short, to kill thee.
I speak this!
Yes Traitor, thou.
Where!
In your Chamber.
Chamber!
Was it not when you told me, that the King
Had got a strumpet.
Ha.
How!
A Citizens wife;
It was when you swore to pay him soundly.
See. see!
The peoples hearts were full.
Pox, a'my heart then.
Or was it not when you threatened to take all,
Into your own hands:
There's my glove, thou lie.
Good stuff, I shall find traitors of you both,
If you are, be so; with my finger, thus
I fan away the dust flying in mine eyes
Raised by a little wind; I laugh at these now,
It is smoke, and yet because you shall not think
We'll dance in Earth quakes, or throw squibs at Thunder,
I charge both keep your Chambers for a day
Or so.
Your will.
Chambers!
We bid it.
You may.
The Queen.
I thank your highness for the bird you gave me,
What bird?
Your Tassel gentle, shoe's lured off and gone.
How gon! what's gone!
Your woman's fled,
Whom you preferred to me, she's stolen from Court.
You jest.
bee it so.
I have hotter news for you,
Your Fathers head lies here, art thou still shooting.
Thy stings into my sides! Now doe you look
I should turn wild, and send through all the winds
Horsemen in quest of her, because you wear
A kind of yellow stocking; let her fly
If Jove for sooth would fix a star in Heaven,
Iuno runs mad, thou better might have spurned
The gates of hell op; then to look into
Our bosom.
Where your Trull lies.
You're a Toad.
Women's revenge awake thee, thou hast stirred
A blood as hot and high as is thine own
Raise no more storms; your treasure is not gon,
I feared the Sea was dangerous, and did sound it
Mischief but half up, is with ease confounded.
In thine own ruin, me can thou hit
But with one finger which can doe no harm
But when a King strikes, it is with his whole arm.
Make fast the Closetsogive me the key
I mean to kill thee.
Kill me, for what cause?
Guess.
I know none, unless the Lamb should ask
The Butcher why he comes to cut his throat.
I could through loop holes hit thee, or hire slaves
And send death to thee, twenty secret ways.
Why would you doe all this?
Or (as the Hart
Draws Serpents from their Den) with subtle breath
I could allure thee to sit down, and banquet
With me as with the King thou hast.
Oh never
Yet poison you most sweetly.
Now you doe it.
And I could make thee a Queens bedfellow
As thou hast been a Kings.
Never by
Swear,
Yet stifle you in a pillow, but I scorn
To strike thee blindfold, only thou shalt know
An Eagles nest, disdains to hatch a Crow:
Why are all mouths in Spain filled to the brim,
Flowing o'er with Court news, only of you and him
The King I mean, where lies the Court?
Sure here.
It removed last, to th'shop of a Milliner
The gests are so set down, because you ride
Like vs, and steal our fashions and our tiers,
You'll have our Courtiers to turn shopkeepers,
And fall to trading with you, ha!
Alas the Court to me is an enchanted tower
Wherein I'm locked by force, and bound by spells
To Heaven to some, to me ten thousand Hells
I drink but poison in gold, stick on the top
Of a high Pinnacle, like an idle vain
(As the wind turns) by every breath being tossed
And once blown down; not missed, but for ever lost.
Out Crocodile,
You will not murder me!
Isle cure you of the Kings evil.
To one woman
Another should be pitiful, hear me speak?
How dares so base a flower follow my Sun
It's rising to his setting.
I follow none.
How dare thou Serpent wind about a tree
That's mine.
I doe not.
Or to shake the leaves.
By Heaven, not any.
Or once to taste the fruit
Tho thrown into thy lap, if from a Harlot
Prayers ever came; pray, for thou dy'st.
Then kill me.
How did my Husband win thee?
By mere force; a Bawd betrayed me to him.
Worse and worse.
If ever I have wronged your royal bed
In act, in thought, nail me for ever fast,
To scope this Tiger of the Kings fierce lust
I will doe any thing, I will speak treason
Or Drink a Cup of poison, which may blast
My enticing face, and make it leprous foul:
Ruin you all this, so you keep up my Soul;
That's all the wealth I care for.
I have now no hart left to kill thee, rise, thou and I
Will like two quarrelling Gallants faster tie
A knot of Love, we both in the Field being wounded
Since we must needs be sharers, use me kindly
And play not the right Citizen, to undo
Your partner, who 'ith stock has more than you.
Must you be closeted?
Yes.
What are you doing?
Not getting Children.
Naked knives; for what,
Speak, s'death speak you.
They both fell from her side.
You lie, away.
Must you be closeted?
Yes.
When hart break thou, thou dost too much swell,
This Aspish biting, is incurable.
Be true to me I charge you, did the Queen
Offer no violence to you.
None at all.
Why were these drawn,
I know not.
Know not; what's here,
Why is this rose denied with a pearled tear.
When the sunneshines so warm, you know not that too,
The lamb has am'd the Lyon, the vulture tiers
Upon the Eagles hart, these subtle wires
Chanie Jove, these balls, from whose flames Cupped drew,
His wild fire burns here, this you know not too.
I love you, that you know not neither, you're coy,
And proud, and fair, you know this,
I beseech you
Let me shake off the golden fetters you tie
About my body, you enjoy a body
Without a soul, for I am now not here.
Where then.
At home in my poor husbands arms,
This is your Court, that mine.
Your husbands arms,
Thou art his whore, he played the thief and robed
Another of thee, and to spoil the spoiler,
Is Kingly justice, it is a lawful prize
That's taken from Pirates; there's are fellow wives.
Which of your subjects (which abroad adore
Your state, your greatness, presence and your throne
Of sun beams) think you now are with a wanton,
Or working a chaste wife to become one.
I work thee not to be so, for when time
Shall iog his glass and make those sands lye low
Which now are at the top, thy self shalt grow
In self same place my Queen does.
What tree ever stood
Long and deep rooted, that was set in blood;
I will not be your whore to wear your Crown.
Nor call any King my Husband, but mine own.
No!
No it were shame amongst all our City Dames
If one could not scope free, their blasted fems.
The sound of Bells and Timbrels make you mad
As it does a Tiger, the softer that I stroke you
The worse you bite, your father and your Husband
Are at my sending come to Court, Isle lay
Honours on both their backs, here they shall stay
Because Isle keep you here, if you doe frown
The engine which reares up, shall pluck all down.
Isle fetch 'em to you my self.
Oh who can stifling scope in baser throngs,
When Princes Courts threaten the selfsame wrongs!
You've the best welcome which the Court can yield,
For the King gives it you.
Your Grace is gracious.
Is this your Father?
My proper flesh and blood Sir.
And that your Husband?
Not I sir; I married an honest wench that went in a cap, no whim whams; I did but shuffle the first dealing, you cut last, and dealt last, by the same token you turned up a Court Card.
Is the man jealous!
No, but a little troubled with the yellow Iaundize, and you know if it get to the Crown of the head, a man's gon.
We send not for you hither to be braved,
Sirrah cast your darts elsew here.
Amongst the wild Irish Sir hereafter.
It is our Queens pleasure that your wife be called
Her woman, and because she will not loose her,
She hath importuned vs to raise you both;
Your name sir?
Mine, Entered Maleuento.
Entered Maleuento we make you
vice-admiral of our Navy.
Oh spiteful Comedy, he's not a Courtier of half an hours standing, and he's made a Vice already.
We make thy Husband
A Cuckold doe you not.
Son you forget your self.
Meddle with your own office; there's one will look that none meddles with mine.
Is not a change good?
Yes, of a lousy shirt.
Take hence that fellow, he's mad.
I am indeed horne-mad, oh me, in the holiest place of the Kingdom have I caught my undoing, the Church gave me my bane.
What the Church gave thee, thou hast still.
Half parts, I thought one had tan thee up.
Take me home with thee, Isle not stay here.
Ha!
Let me not come to Court.
The King is vexed, let me persuade thee Son
To wink at small faults.
What sir Pandarus!
Sends the King you to blush in's room.
You're a baggage.
Go tell the lunatic so; Entered hark,
The King sir bids me sing into your ear,
Sweet notes of place and office which shall fall
Into my mouth, I gape for 'em.
He bids me ask what will content you.
Nothing, nothing, why Sir the powers aboue cannot please vs, and can Kings think you, when we are brought forth to the world, we cry and bawl as if we were unwilling to bee borne; and when we are a dying we are mad at that.
Take hence that Wolf that barks thus.
I am muzzel'd, but one word with your Majesty, I am sober sir.
So sir.
You oft call Parliaments, and there enact
Laws good and wholesome, such as who so break
Are hung by the purse or neck, but as the weak
And smaller flies in the Spiders web are tan
When great ones tear the web, and free remain.
So may that moral tale of you be told,
Which once the Wolf related: in the Fold
The Shepherds killed a sheep and eat him there
The Wolf looked in, and seeing them at such cheer,
Alas (quoth he) should I touch the least part
Of what you tear, you would pluck our my hart,
Great men make Laws, that whosoe're draws blood
Shall dye, but if they murder flocks it is good:
Isle go eat my Lamb at home sir.
Part, and thus reckon never to see her more.
Never!
Never thus, but thus a Princes whore.
Thou dare not, if thou dost; my heart is great,
Thus wronged, thou can doe little if not threat.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
At what dost-laugh?
At a thing of nothing, at thee; why should thou be aafraid to fall into the Cuckolds disease.
Because it makes a Doctor an Ass, nothing can cure it, are you answered Sir?
Come you are a fool, to grieve that thy wife is taken away by the King to his private bed-chamber,
Now like a book called in, she'll sell better then ever she did.
Right sir, but could he choose no stock to graft upon, but that which was planted in my nursery.
Isle show thee a reason for that.
Why?
Lechers coming to women, are like Mice amongst many Cheeses, they taste every one, but feed upon the best: horns rightly weighed are nothing.
How nothing! oh sir, the smallest Letters hurt your eyes most, and the least head-ach which comes by a women's knocking hurts more then a cut to the scull by a mans knocking.
Yet I warrant thou dare swear the party's honest?
Ha; swear; not I, no man durst ever swear for his wife but Adam, nor any woman for her husband but Eve, fare you well sir.
Whether art flying?
In pieces dost not see I'm shot out of a Cannon.
Downwards Isle shoot thee, but as Devils use
Isle tickle at thy tortures, dance at thy stumbling,
Play with thee, and then paw thee, shalt make me merry
The Crown of black deeds that are hatched in Hell
Is to out-liue and laugh, and ell's played well.
I have not passed by a Don, to touch whose hand mine own was never more troubled with a more terrible itch.
I have not met a Signior, at whom mine own eyes (as if roasted enough) did ever burn more in desire to fly out: so that whether to recoil or advance on, I am between Hawk and Buzzard.
The honey of sweet Complement so turn up your Tusks or Mochatoes, that they be not too stiff, to bristle aagainst my acquaintance.
Your acquaintance is a Limbeck, out of which runs a perfumed water, bathing my nostrils in a strong scent of your embracings: are you of Court Signior?
No Signior of the City: are you a Don of the City!
No Signior of the Court City, I smile,
Why.
I assure you Signior, you are to vs of the Court but Animals You are held but as shooing horns to wait on great Lords heals.
Let em pay vs what they owe then, and pull on their shoes, and we'll wait no more.
You are our Apes.
But you are fuller of Apish-trickes.
No sooner leap our Ladies into a fashion, but your Wives are ready to creep into the same.
Why not; for tho some of your Ladies invent the fashion, some of our wives husbands are never paid for the stuff or making.
Give way with your poor scull to our oars: for I tell thee Signior you of the city, are the flatten milk of the kingdome, and wee of the Court, the Cream.
I tell thee Signior! wee of the City eat none of your Court butter, but some of your munch up our flatten milk cheese.
Be not too loud; tho you are good ringers in the City, for most of you have bells at your doors.
Be not you too loud: for you might be good singers at Court but that most of you are spoiled in learning your pricksong.
Bee temporate: I will show you your City Cinquipace, you bear, swear, tear, rear, and wear; you bear the Tanckerd, swear shop oaths, tear money out of debtors throats, rear rich estates, wear good clothes, but carry your Conscience in torn pockets.
Bee attentive, I will show you your Court Coranto pace, it consists of 5. bees and 3. cees; you borrow of any man, are brave on any terms, brag at any hand to pay, bellow at any that demands it, bite any Catchpole that fangs you, but carry neither Conscience nor coin in your whole pockets.
Tell me Signior, tell me why in the City does a
harmless sign hang at the door of a subtle Nicodemus sitting in a shop?
And tell me Signior, tell me, why when you eat our good cheer in the City, have you handsome wide chops, but meting vs at Court, none; your gumme's glued up, your lips coap'd like a Ferret, not so much as the corner of a Custard; if a cold cup, and a dry cheat loaf it is well.
Come, come, You are Acorns, and your Sons the Prodigals that eat you up.
Go, go, you are Prodigals, and glad of the yellow Acorns we leave our Sons.
I will cross my self when I owe money to a Cityzen, and pass by his door.
I will bless my self, when a Courtier owing me no money, comes near my door.
You are descend from the tanckerd generation.
You are ascended up to what you are, from the black Jack and bombard distillation.
Dear Signior.
Delicious Don.
Boy.
My Lord.
Art sure thou saw the Admiral at Court!
Am I sure I see your Lordship in your gown.
And talking with the King?
Most familiarly.
And what say the people about my committing to mine own house?
The beast grins at it, there's a Libel already of you my Lord.
A Libel, away.
Yes faith my Lord, and a Song to the tune of Lament Ladies, Lament.
I'm glad the stinkards are so merry, a halter on 'em, it's music to them to have every man thrown off, you have seen the Kings Mistress, boy have you not, what manner of peace is it?
Troth my Lord I know not, I never saw her shot off, a pretty little pocket dag.
What report gives she?
A very good report of her Husband, but he gives an ill report of her.
How does the Ladies take it; now the King keeps a
Wench under the Queens nose?
They take it passing heavily, it goes to the heart of some of them, that he keeps not them too.
I heard say they were all once leaving the Court?
True sir, but there was a devise which stopped 'em.
Who are you!
My Lord, we must speak with you.
What are you? fetch me a weapon
Your friends.
'Sdeath break it open.
The King; I did not understand your Majesty.
You shall, for Isle speak plain to you, know you these?
Not I.
You doe not, a Kings arm thou see
Has a long reach, as far as Portugal
Can We fetch treason back hatched here by you.
Me!
Thee and the traitorous Portuguese to deprive me
Of life and Crown, but I shall strike their King
And them, and thee beneath into the earth.
And lower then earth you cannot.
Half your body is in the grave, it only lacks our hand
To cast the dust upon you, yet you stand
On slippery Ice your self, and trip at vs
Whose foot is fixed on Rocks, but since you have, thrown
Thy self down never look to rise.
I care not, I will be little so in debt to you, that I will not owe you so much as God a mercy for my life.
You shall not then, stand not to aim at marks
Now rove not but make choice of one fair white
You have but one arrow to shoot, and that's thy flight
The Admiral knows our pleasure.
And Heaven knows mine
Left in mine enemies hand, are you my Jailer?
No my Lord, I think I'm rather left
To be your Confessor.
I need not any,
That you and I should both meet at one Ball,
I being the stronger, yet you give the fall.
A kind of foot-ball slight, my Lord, men use
Exceeding much at Court, your self has heard
Little shrimps have thrown men higher then the Guard;
But barring this rough play, let's now consider,
For what I stay, and what you are to doe.
Doe what?
To die.
And must you play the Hangman.
Break in fellows.
'Sdeath what are these?
Your Executioners appointed by the King.
These my Executioners,
And you my ouer-seer; wherefore kneel they?
To beg your pardon, for they fear their work
Will never please you.
What booke's that they hold
This is no time for Dedications.
That book is sent in Love to you from the King
It contains pictures of strange sundry deaths
He bids you choose the easiest.
Then I choose this.
Your choice is ill made.
I'm more sorry Sir,
I had rather have my body hacked with wounds,
Then t'haue a Hangman fillip me.
My Lord pray pardon me
I'm forced to what I doe, it is the Kings pleasure
To have you die in private.
Any where
Since I must down, the King might let me fall
From lofty Pinnacles, to make my way
Through an armed Field, yet for all that, even then
Unless I slew a kingdom full of men
I should at last be paid home: blackest fate
Thy worst, I here defy thee, what the State
Appoints it is welcome.
That's to have your head.
It is ready.
He will be quiet when you are dead.
Madam there's a fellow stays without to speak with you.
With me!
Your shoo-maker I think.
Hast brought my shoes?
Yes Madam.
You drew them not on last.
No Madam, my Master that served you last has very good custom, and deals with other Ladies as well as you, but I have fitted you before now, I should know the length of your foot.
I doe not remember thee.
I'm sorry you have forgotten me.
What shoe was the last you drew on?
A yellow.
A yellow! I never wore that cullor.
Yes Madam by that token when I fitted you first, you wore not your shoes so high in the instep, but me thinks you now go clean awry.
A fault I cannot help, many Ladies besides me go so,
I hope twill grow to a fashion..
Has not that fellow done there?
Yes sir, I have now done, I have a suit to you Madam, that none may be your shoo-marker but I.
Thy Master thou say serves me, I should wrong him then.
Yet doe you me more wrong, oh my Tormiella!
Is the leaf torn out where our Love was writ,
That I am quite forgot!
Softly good sweet.
Oh misery, I make my self a thief,
To steal mine own, another at my fire
Sits whiles I shake with cold, I fatten a stranger,
And starve my self.
Danger throws eyes upon thee,
Thus visit me, watch time for my escape
To any Country, by thy dearest side
Isle lackey all the world over, Isle not change
Thee for a thousand Kings; there's gold.
Not yet done?
Yes sir, I'm only taking instructions to make her a lower Chopeene, she finds fault that she's lifted too high.
The more fool she.
The King comes Madam, he enquires for you.
My brother Iohn is gone then?
I ha bestowed him as you commanded, in's grave.
Hoe's best there,
Except the Gods, Kings love none whom they fear.
How now!
My Shoo-maker.
Oh hast fitted her, so, hence sir.
As a worm on my belly, what should the Ant,
On his poor Mole-hill brave the Elephant,
No, Signior no,
No brains to stay, but saves a head to go.
Let me have no more of this: have not we eyes
Pointed like Sun-beames, go to, get you in.
Angel from Heaven, fallen a Kings Concubine.
May it please your Grace,
Ha!
Her Highness drowned in sorrow, that your brow
Has been so long contracted into frowns,
Wishing to die unless she see it smoothed,
Commends her best love to you in this Jewel
The Image of her heart.
My Lord Admiral, my wife's grown kind, see!
One of the happiest hours
Mine age ever numbered; would your Highness now
Would fetch up the red blood her cheeks hath lost
By sending her, some symbol of your love.
Pray step your self unto her, say I locke
My heart up in your bosom to her use, and give it her
Isle lend it in your name.
Doe.
She shall pay her heart for it in interest.
Isle see her anon
Leave vs, stay you, and set that Table here.
A chair, none trouble vs, doe you serve the Queen?
Yes sir.
We know you now, you're in our eye
Are the doors fast?
They are Sir.
Nearer yet,
Doe not you know of a conspiracy,
To take away my life upon Sainttush,
No matter for the day, you know the plot Sir?
By Heaven I know of none!
Blushing doe you stain?
It is not guilt but anger.
You've all fixed
Your hands and Seals to an Indenture drawn
By such a day to kill me.
For my part
My Loyalty like a rough Diamond shines
The more it is cut, I have no hand in that
Or any baseness else against your Life
Or Kingdom.
No!
None.
Fetch me Ink and Paper
I soon shall try that, come Sir write your name:
Stay, your own words shall choke you, it was a letter
Wrapped up in hidden Characters, and sent
Enclosed in a Pomegranate, to a great Don
And thus subscribed: At your pleasure your obsequious vassal
Write this, and then your name, here.
At your pleasure.
Thy hand shakes.
No sir, Your obsequious Vassal.
Here sir, your name now there so low it stood.
Martines Cazalla de Barameda.
There's in thy face no Traitor I cannot tell
Good mouths have given thee to me, on your life
Be not you like a Wolfes-skin Drum to fright
The whole Heard by your sound, I will compare
Your hand with this, that's all, but sir beware
You prate to none of what twixt vs is past.
Were I in the world aboue, I would desire
To come from thence, to give that man the lye,
That once should dare to blot my Loyalty.
Here take this Key, meet me some half hour hence in the privy Gallery with two naked Poniards.
Two poniards.
Yes, go send some body in, stay, Lupo
Can you write?
Yes.
Indite a Letter'sdeath sirhere begin
After my hearty Commendations, so sir.
How! writeMy most admired Mistress.
Mired Mistress,
With the fire you first kindled in me, still I am burnt.
Still I am burnt:
So that Thunder shall not hinder me from climbing the highest step of the Ladder.
Climbing the highest step of the Ladder.
Of your perfections, though I bee confounded for ever.
Be confounded for ever.
Your high pleasures are mine, mine yours.
Mine yours.
And I dye ever lastingly until I bee in your bosom.
And I dyeuntil I be in your bosom.
So.
So.
Hold.
Here sir.
Where are the Gentlemen of our Chamber?
Without Sir?
Bid them attend vs close.
I shall.
Would this days work were done, I doe not like
To see a Bull to a wild Fig-tree tied
To make him tame, beasts licking against the hair
Fore-shew some storm, and I fore-see some snare:
His sword is dipped in oil, yet does it wound
Deadly, yet stand it, innocence wronged is crowned.
Treason!
Where?
Kill the Villain.
Stay, none touch him
On your lives; on Kings shoulders stand
The heads of the Colossi of the Gods
(Aboue the reach of Traitors) were the beds
Of twenty thousand Snakes laid in this bosom,
There's thunder in our looks to break them all,
Leave vs.
You are too venturous.
Jove cannot fall,
Both person place and business were quite lost
Out of our memory, lay aside these poniards
We have altered now our business, you shall bear sir
Our salutation to the Queennot sealed!
'Sfoot, nor endorsed! some Ink, come let the forehead
Have no more wrinkles in't-but this, to the Queen,
Write it.
To the Queen, no more!
No, no, it is well,
Hast thou no Seal about thee? if my wife
Exceptions take missing our royal signet
Say that not having that, I borrowed yours.
I shall Sir.
Hide it, goe-without there.
Sir.
You met him did you not, how looked the slave?
Most strangely.
Unparalleled Villain! Devils could not set
To hatch such spiteful mischief, guard me closely,
When you see him at the stake then worry him,
Are all weapon'd?
All, all.
When Darts invisible doe fly,
A slave may kill a Lyon in the eye.
Who gave you this?
A Gentleman of your Chamber.
Call in the Villain,
Thou audatious Serpent!
How dare thou wind in knotted curls thy lust
About our honour; where had thou this Letter?
I had it from the King.
Out impudent Traitor.
How now at Barle-brake, who are in Hell?
What's that? to the Queen, what Queen!
Me, it is to me
Your mistress there the Messenger, her Secretary
Hee here.
Vds death.
Your Trull and hee have laid
Trains to blow up mine honour, I am betrayed.
Lupo, Fasten her.
Fasten me!
Iago see.
Look all, bind fast this Devil, is there no Circle
To be damned in but mine.
Slave let me go.
Oh thou lustful harlot.
Guard me Heaven.
I'm sold.
Thou Villain speak truth.
Keep her off.
Most basely.
Betrayed and baffled, is that Letter the same
I sent in to the Queen.
The very same.
Is this thy hand?
It is sir, but hear me.
And this thy name, thy hand?
My name, my hand.
Save him and let him spit
His blackest poison forth?
Spare him, vnhand her.
Let me have Justice as thou art a King!
To prison with them both.
As I am thy wife
Make not thy self a strumpet of me.
Hence, guard her.
I come Heaven, guarded with innocence.
Follow your Mistress, you.
Yes, to her grave.
Oh that I now were swallowed in some Wave.
Oh that I
Should in a women's lap my Kingdom lay,
Honour and life, and she should all betray
To a Groom, a slave.
Let not her poison run
Too near your heart.
Iago I have done,
Pray let my grief want company, this wrack
So great, shall make th'whole Kingdom mourn in black.
Lupo!
Did your Highness call!
Yes, hark thee Lupo:
It may bee you are a Serpent dull of sight,
Be quick of hearing, may be you are a Hare
And can see side-wayes, let me locke up here,
What euer's laid in there.
I am strongly charmed.
Wilt venture for me?
To the threshold of hell.
May I trust thee?
Else employ me not.
Did ever kill a Scorpion?
Never, I ha been stung by one.
Did never bait a wild Bull?
That's the pastime I most love and follow.
A strange disease
Hangs on me, and our Doctors say the blood
Only of these two beasts must doe me good,
Dare thou attempt to kill them?
Were they Devils
With heads of Iron, and Claws jointed with brass,
Encounter them I shall, in what Park run they?
The Queen that Scorpion is, Tormiellas husband
The mad Ox broken loose; in a small volume
What mischief may be writ, in a maze!
No, in a muse,
I'm plotting how to do it, and to come off.
This does it, by this key burst up all doors
That can betray thee, done be sure to rise,
Let a Kings royal breath, send the hence flying.
As Powder does the Bullet.
Heaped up honours
Are scedules to thine enterprise annexed,
Doe it and mount
To th'Gallowes.
Thy self goes next.
I scorn to be thy blood hound
Why should I vex a Soul did never grieve me?
The Queen an honest Lady: should I kill her,
It were as if I pulled a Temple down,
And from the ruins of that built up a stews,
She lives, but Butcher like the Ox Isle use.
Oh royal Sir, my Daughter Tormiella
Has lost her use of reason and run mad.
When!
Not half an hour since.
Mad now! now frantic!
When all my hopes are at their highest pitch
T'inioy her beauties! talk no more: thou lie.
May it please your Majesty
Curses consume theeon
It is dispatched, the Queen is lost, never to be found.
Wave upon Wave,
Hard hearted Furies, when will you dig my Grave:
You doe not hear him, thunder shakes Heaven first
Before dull Earth can feel it:
My dear, dearest Queen is dead.
Ha!
The Queen dead!
What said she last!
Commend me to the King
And tell him this, mine honour is not wracked,
Though his Love bee.
And so her heart-strings cracked!
Some trick upon my life, State-coniuring
To raise up Devils in Prisons, and in the dark:
If she be dead, Isle see her.
Villainous man,
Thou see what we have enjoyed, thou impudent fool
Away, Iago give this tumbling Whale
Empty barrels to play with, till this troublous Seas
(Which he more raging makes) good Heaven appease.
Well, I say nothing, Birds in Cages morn
At first, but at last sing; I will take my turn.
My Queen dead, I shall now have riming slaves
Libel upon vs, giving her innocent wings
But say we murdered her, scandal dare strike Kings:
Then here's another Moon of Spain Eclipsed,
One whom ourbest loved Queen put in her bosom,
For sweetness of pure life, integrity,
And (in Court beauties wondrous) honesty,
Shoe's mad too, Lupo, Tormiella's mad!
Mad!
As a March whore.
Mad, shall I work upon her?
Use thy skill.
I would to Heaven your highness
Ha! the Queen! was she not at my elbow?
Here was nothing.
I must not live thus, Iago if I lye
After the kingly fashion without a woman
I shall run mad at midnight; I will marry
The Lunatic Lady, she shall be my Queen,
Proclaim her so.
Your highness does but jest!
All the world's frantic, mad with mad are best.
Wretched state of Kings, that standing hye,
Their faults are marks, shot at by every eye.
Give me the key, make all fast, leave vs, Isle screw her wits to the right place.
Apollo bless thee.
Are not you a woollen-Draper?
Yes.
Whether is a women's life measured by the Ell or the Yard.
All women by the Yard sure, it's no life else.
I'm now near seventeen years old, if I should dye at these years, am I not a fool.
Yes marry are you, for the Law allows none to be of discretion, till they come to twenty one.
Out upon you, you are a Lawyer, pray get you hence, for you'll not leave me clothes to my back if I keep you company, I'm mad enough now, and you'll make me stark mad.
I am not what I seem, no Doctor I
But by your Husband sent in this disguise
To sound your bosom.
You bob for Eels, doe you not?
Here has he locked his mind up, but for me
To put a burning linstocke in a hand
That may give fire, and send my Soul in powder,
I know not, pardon me, fare you well Lady.
Hist doe you hear?
The eyes of mercy guard thee
Were it known for what I ventured thus, it were death,
Isle to your husband.
Stay, I am not mad
Yet I have cause to rave, my wits like Bells
Are backward rung, only to fright the Tyrant
That whilst his wild lust wanders, I may fly
To my sweet husbands arms, here I have hid
The trains I mean to lay for mine escape.
Excellent, he shall second you.
Should any watch vs!
Ell's fast, run mad again then, the King thinks
Me some rare fellow, you shall leave the Court
Now if you'll taste my Counsel.
Isle drink gall to cure me of this sickness.
Sit then down here
Isle bind you fast because it shall appear,
That you grow worse and worse, then will I tell
The King, the only course to leave you well,
Is to remove you home to mine own Lodging,
Isle bind you.
For ever to thee.
Once hence, you may fey
To the Straights, and then cross o'er to Barberry:
So, the art a Strumpet.
What's that you speak!
A damned one;
Dost thou not know me! I am Gazetto!
Mercy.
Who like a ball of wild-fire have been tossed
To make others sport, but here I burst and kill:
A perjured Strumpet.
I am none,
My Father swore that I should marry thee,
And then a Tiger and a Lamb had met,
I ne'er was thine, nor ever will be.
Swear thou art not mine,
That when I see thy heart drunk with hot oaths,
This Fiend may pitch thee reeling into Hell,
Swear that thou art not mine.
By heaven I am not,
To prove I swear right to thee, change that weapon,
See at my Girdle hang my wedding knives,
With those dispatch me.
To the heart?
Aim right I beseech thee.
Isle not kill thee now for spite
Because thou begst it.
Then good villain spare me!
Neither, heere's that shall sink thee; to the King
Thy juggling and these Letters shall be shown.
Upon thy head be my confusion
The King! I shall both feed his rage and lust,
First doom me to any Tortures!
Thou shalt then swear
Because I know he'll force the tie a knot,
The Church must see and figh at, if he marries thee,
Swear when he comes to touch thy naked side,
To bury him in those sheets, thou art his Bride.
By Heaven that night's his last, my just hart keeps
This vow graven there.
Till then my vengeance sleeps,
Where is the King?
I have refined
That Chaos which confounded her fair mind.
Move in thy voice the Spheres, whe next thou speak, Tormiella.
I am well my fearful dream
Is vanished, thanks to Heaven and that good man.
Thou giu'st me another Crown, oh Vindicados,
The axle-tree on which my Kingdom moves,
Leanes on thy shoulders, I am all thine; Tormiella!
Bright Cynthia look not pale, Endimions here,
Hymen shall fetch a leap from Heaven t'alight
Full in thine arms, back thou black ominous night.
Signior Lupo, why Don, not know me, I am the poor Shopkeeper, whose ware is taken up by the King.
You lye.
True, as Judges doe with their wives, very seldom, I am Cordolente a poor Gudgin diving thus under water, to see how Neptune and his Mermaids swim together, but dare not come near him, for fear he sets Dogfish to devour me.
An excellent mask against the marriage, now get a private Coat, the King means to have you stabbed.
He does that already, with the bodkin that sticks in my wives hair.
He has not the patience to stay the dressing of his meat of thy providing, he will have it taken up, and eat the flesh raw, he will be married incontinently.
Will she set her hands to my horns?
Yes, and set them to your head, she follows the steps of her old grandam, all evils take their names from her, the ills of Eve, thy wife for the hoop ring thou marriedst her withal, hath sworn to send thee a Deaths head.
Sworn!
Sworn, were thy case my case; I would set a Devil at her elbow in the very Church, I would kill her as she gave away her hand.
Wilt help me to a fit Circle to play the Devil in?
Isle place thee, Isle put thy foot into the stirrup.
And I will rid the world of one of his diseases, a loose woman.
Farewell, eat her very hart. 
As we feed one upon another, hungerly
Dost thou tell me of thy Proclamations that I am banisht from the Court, that Court where I came to thee, was none of thine, it belongs to a King that keeps open Court, one
that never wronged a poor Beggar, never took away any mans wife, unless he sent his Pursuivant death for her: oh thou daring Sacrilegious royal Thief; wilt thou rob the Church too, as thou hast me! thrust me out of that house too in the Sanctuary, turned Devil in a crowd of Angels!
Why did not kill her?
I had no power to kill her
Charms of Divinity pulled back mine Arm,
She had Armour of proof on, (reverence of the place)
She is not married, is she, shorten my pains;
Heaven came it self down, and forbade the Banes.
You must both to the King.
Must! we are for him.
Now doe I look for a fig.
Chew none, fear nothing.
Has heaven left chiding yet! there's in thy voice
A thunder that worse frights me, did thou swear
In bed to kill me, had I married thee?
It was my vow to doe so.
And did that Villain,
That Lupo Vindicado's, thrust this vengeance
Into thy desperate hand?
That Villain swore me
To speed you, I had died else; me had he murdered,
When in a Doctors shape he came to cure
The madness which in me was counterfeit,
Only to shun-your touches.
Strange preservation!
Here comes the traitor!
Devil, did thou tempt this woman against my life?
Has she betrayed me, yes, hence Antique visors
Isle now appear my self.
Gazetto!
The same.
I ha warmed a Snake in my bosom.
This is he,
To whom by promise of my mouth, (not hers)
Tormiella should have been married, but flying him
To run away with this, he in disguise
Has followed Both thus long to be revenged.
And were not my hands tied by your prevention:
It should go forward yet, my plot lay there
(King) to have her kill thee; this Cuckold her,
Then had I made him Hawkes-meat.
Bloody Varlet.
Rare Providence, I thank thee, what a heap
Of mischiefs have I brought upon my Kingdom,
By one base Act of lust, and my greatest horror
Is that for her I made away my Queen
By this destroyers hand, this crimson Hell-hound
That laughs at nothing but fresh Villainies.
The laughing days I wished for, are now come sir
I am glad that leaping into such a Gulf,
I am not drowned, your Queen lives.
Ha!
She lives; I had no reason to kill her.
A better Spirit
Stood at his elbow, then you planted there,
My poor Girl your sad Queen, breathes yet.
Long may she,
Fetch her, commend me to her, cheer her (Father.)
With the best hart I have.
Let that sly Bawd
Engine of Hell, who wrought upon thy Chastity
Be whipped through Civil, four such tempting witches
May undo a City come, you wronged pair
By a King that parted you, you new married are.
Enjoy each other and prosper.
I doe already,
Feeling more joys then on my Wedding day,
I ne'er till now was married.
Nor I ever happy until this hour.
Nor I, as I am true Lord.
No sir, you're no true Lord, you have a title,
A face of honour, as in Courts many have,
For base and servile prostitutions,
And you are such a one, your Daughters fall
Was first step to your rising, and her rising
Again to that sweet goodness she never went from,
Must be your fall, and strip you of all honours
Your Lordship is departed.
Does the Bell ring out! I care not
Your Kingdom was a departing too, I had a place in Court for nothing, and if it begone, I can loose nothing; I have been like a Lord in a play, and that done, my part ends.
Yes sir, I purge my Court of such Infection.
I shall find-company in the City I warrant; I am not the first hath given up my Cloak of honour.
Oh my abused heart, thy pardon, see
I have sent home my stolen goods:
Honestly!
As she was ever; now with full clear eyes
I see thy beauty, and strange Cheeks despise.
You call me from a grave of shame and sorrow.
In which I lay deep buried.
From a grave likewise
Your Majesty calls me, I have looked back
On all my poor Ambitions, and am sorry,
That I fell ever from so bright a Sphere,
As is the Love of such a royal brother.
Be as you speak, we are friends, it was our will
To let you know, we can, or save, on kill.
Your mercy new transforms me.
Sirrah your saving
My Queen, when I confess (lust me so blinded)
I would have gladly lost her; gives thee life.
First I thank Heaven, then him, and at last you.
I had not the heart to hurt a woman, if I had, your little face had been mall'd ere this, but my Angers out, forgive me.
With all my heart.
Pray noble brother love this man, he's honest,
I have made of him good proof, we should have had
A wedding, but Heaven frowned at it, and I
Am glad it is croft, yet we'll both Feast and dance,
Our Fame hath all this while lain in a Trance:
Come Tormiella, well were that City blessed,
That with but, Two such women should excel,
But there's so few good, you have no Parallel.

HOw is it possible to suffice
So many Ears, so many Eyes?
Some in wit, some in shows
Take delight, and some in Clothes;
Some for mirth they chiefly come,
Some for passion, for both some;
Some for lascivious meetings, that's their arrant;
Some to detract, and ignorance their warrant.
How is it possible to please
Opinion tossed in such wilde Seas!
Yet I doubt not, if Attention
Seize you above, and Apprehension
You below, to take things quickly,
We shall both make you sad, and tickle ye,
I Am at my wits ends Savor-wit.
And I am evn following after you as fast as I can Sir.
My wife will be forced from me; my pleasure!
Talk no more on it Sir; how can there be any hope in the middle, when w'are both at our wits end in the beginning? My invention was nev'r so grevel'd since I first set out upon it.
Nor does my stop stick only in this wheel
Though it be a main vexation, but I'm grated
In a dear absolute Friend, young Mr. Sandfield.
I there's another rub too.
Who supposes
That I make love to his affected Mistress,
When it is my Father works against the peace
Of both our spirits, and woes unknown to me
He strikes out sparks of undeserved anger,
'Bwixt old Steel friendship, and new Stony hate:
As much forgetful of the merry hours,
The circuits of our youth hath spent and worn,
As if they had not been, or we not born.
See where he comes.
Unmerciful in torment!
Will this disease never forsake mine eye?
It must be killed first, if it grow so painful;
Work it out strongly at one time, that th'anguish
May never more come near thy precious sight.
If my eternal sleep will give thee rest,
Close up mine eyes with opening of my Breast.
I feel thy wrongs at midnight, and the weight
Of thy close Treacheries: Thou hast a friendship
As dangerous as a Strumpets, that will kiss
Men into poverty, distress, and ruin.
And to make clear the face of thy foul deeds,
Thou work by Seconds.
Then may the sharp point of an inward horror
Strike me to earth, and save thy weapon guiltless.
Not in thy Father?
How much is truth abused, when it is kept silent!
O defend me Friendship!
True; your anger's in an error all this while, Sir;
But that a Lovers weapon now hears reason,
It is out still like a mad mans; hear but me Sir.
'Ts my young Masters injury, not yours,
That you quarrel with him for; and this shows
As if y'would challenge a lame man the field,
And cut off's head, because he has lost his Legs.
His grief makes him dead flesh, as it appeared
By offering up his Breast to you; for believe it Sir,
Had he not greater crosses of his own,
Your Hilts could not cross him
How?
Not your Hilts Sir.
Come I must have you friends, a pox of weapons
There's a Whore gapes for it; put it up in the Scabbard.
You're a made slave.
Come, give me both your hands,
You're in a Quagmire both; should I release you now,
Your wits would both come home in a stinking pickle;
Your Fathers old Nose would smell you out presentlie.
Tell him the Secret, which no mortal knows
But thou and I, and then he will confess
How much he wronged the patience of his Friend.
Then thus the Marigold opens at the splendour
Of a hot constant friendship twixt you both:
It is not unknown to your ear, some ten years since,
My Mistress his good Mother, with a Daughter
About the age of six, crossing to Jernsey,
Was taken by the Dunkirks, sold both, and separated,
As the last news brings hot, the first and last
So much discovered; for in nine years space
No certain tidings of their life or death,
Or what place held 'em, Earth, the Sea, or Heaven,
Came to the old mans ears, the Knight my Master,
Till about five months since, a Letter came,
Sent from the Mother, which related all
Their taking, selling, separation,
And never meeting; and withal required
Six hundred Crown for Ransom, which my old Master
No sooner heard the sound, but told the sum,
Gave him the Gold, and sent us both aboard;
We landing by the way, having a care
To lighten us of our carriage, because Gold
Is such a heavy metal, eased our Pockets
In Wenches Aprons; Women were made to bear,
But for us Gentlemen it is most unkindly.
Well Sir.
A pure Rogue still!
Amongst the rest Sir
It was my young Masters chance there to dote finely
Upon a sweet young Gentlewoman; but one
That would not sell her honour for the Indies,
Till a Priest struck the bargain, and then half a crown dispatcht it.
To be brief, Wedded her and bedded her,
Brought her home hither to his Fathers house;
And with a fair tale of mine own bringing up,
She passes for his sister that was sold.
Let me not lose my self in wondering at thee;
But how made you your score even for the Mother?
Pish, easily, we told him how her Fortunes
Mocked us, as they mocked her; when we were of the Sea,
She was of the Land; and as report was given,
When we were landed, she was gone to Heaven;
So he believes two lies one error bred,
The Daughter ransomed, and the Mother dead.
Let me admire thee, and withal confess
My injuries to friendship.
They're all pardoned:
These are the arms I bore against my friend
But what's all this to th'present? this discourse
Leaves you in the Bog still.
On good Savorwit.
For yet our policy has croft our selves;
For the old Knave my Master, little thinking her
Wife to his Son, but his own daughter still,
Seeks out a match for her.
Here I feel the Surgeon
At second dressing
And he has entertained
Even for pure need, for fear the Glass should crack
That is already broken, but well soader'd,
A mere Sot for her Suitor, a rank Fox;
One weatherwise, that woes by the Almanac,
Observes the Full and Change; an arrant Moon-Calf.
And yet because the Fool demands no portion
But the bare Down of her Smock, the old fellow
Worn to the bone with a dry courteous Itch,
To save his purse, and yet bestow his child,
Consents to waste lumps of Almanac stuff
Kned with May Butter.Now as I have thought on it,
I'll spoil him in the baking.
Prithee, as how Sirrah?
I'll give him such a crack in one of the sides,
He shall quite run out of my Masters favour
I should but too much love thee for that
Thus then; to help you both at once, and so good night to you.
After my wit has shipped away the fool,
As he shall part, I'll buzz into the ear
Of my old Master, that you Sir, Master Sandfield,
Dearly affect his Daughter, and will take her
With little or no portion; well stood out in it.
Methinks I see him caper at that news,
And in the full cry, Oh! This brought about
And wittily dissembled on both parts;
You to affect his love he to love yours;
I'll so beguile the Father at the marriage,
That each shall have his own, and both being wellcomed,
And chambered in one house; as it is his pride
To have his Childrens children got successively
On his Fore-fathers Feather beds, in the day time's
To please the old mans eye sight, you may dally,
And set a kiss on the wrong Lip, no sin in it.
Brothers and sisters do it, Cousins do more:
But pray take heed you be not kin to them,
So in the night time, nothing can deceive you,
Let each know his own work, and there I leave you.
Let me applaud thee.
Blessed be all thy ends,
That make armed enemies, embracing friends.
About it speedily.
I need no pricking;
I'm of that mettle, so well paced, and free,
There's no good riders that use spur to me.
Oh! are you come?
Are any comforts coming?
I never go without 'em.
Thou sport'st joys, that utterance cannot perfect.
Hark, are they risen!
Yes, long before I left 'em,
And all intend to bring the Widow homeward.
Depart then Mistress to avoid suspect,
Our good shall arrive time enough at your heart:
Poor fools that ever more take a green Surfeit
Of the first-fruits of joysLet a man but shake the Tree,
How soon they'll hold up their laps to receive comfort!
The music that I struck, made her soul dance; Peace
Here comes the Lady Widow, the late wife
To the deceased Sir Avarice Golden-fleece,
Second to none for Usury and Extortion,
As too well it appears on a poor Gentleman,
One Mr. Low-water, from whose estate
He pulled that Fleece, that makes his Widow weight;
Those are her Suitors now, Sir Gilbert Lambston, Mr. Pepperton, Mr. Overdon.
Nay good Sir Oliver Twilight, Mr. Sunset, We'll trouble you no farther.
Sir Olive. No trouble sweet Madam.
We'll see the Widow at home, it shall be our charge that.
It shall be so indeed; Thanks good Sir Wholever, and to you both,
I am indebted for those courtesies
That will ask me a long time to requite.
Ah, it is but your pleasant condition to give it out so Madam!
Mistress Grace and Mistress Jane, I wish you both
A fair contented Fortune in your choices,
And that you happen right.
Thanks to you good Madam:
There's more in that word right then you imagine.
I now repent, Girls, a rash oath I took
When you were both Infants, to conceal a Secret.
What dost concern good Madam?
No, no; since you are both so well, it is well enough;
It must not be revealed; it is now no more
Then like mistaking of one hand for t'other.
A happy time to you both.
The like to you Madam.
I shall long much to have this Riddle opened?
I would you were so kind to my poor Kinswoman,
And the distressed Gentleman her husband,
Poor Mr. Low-water, who on Ruin leans;
You keep this Secret, as you keep his means
Thanks good Sir Oliver Twilight,
Welcome sweet Mr. Pepperton,
Mr. Overdon, welcome.
And, goes the business well twixt those young lovers?
Betwixt your son and Mr. Sunset's daughla
The Line goes even Sir.
Good Lad, I like thee.
But Sir, there's no proportion, height, or evenness
Betwixt that Equinoctial and your Daughter.
It is true, and I'm right glad on it
Are you glad Sir?
There's no proportion in it.
I marry am I Sir
I can abide no word that ends in Portion;
I'll give her nothing.
Say you should not Sir,
As I'll ne'er urge your worship against your nature;
Is there no Gentleman think you, of worth and credit,
Will open's Bed to warm a naked Maid?
A hundred gallant fellows, and be glad
To be so set a work: Virginity
Is no such cheap Ware, as you make account on,
That it had need with portion be set off;
For that sets off a portion in these days.
Play on, sweet Boy; O I could hear this music all day long
When there's no money to be parted from! strike on, good Lad.
Do not wise men and great, often bestow
Ten thousand pound in Jewels that lye by 'em?
If so, what Jewel can lye by a man
More precious then a Virgin? if none more pretios,
Why should the Pillow of a fool be graced
With that brave Spirits with dearness have imb ac'd?
And then perhaps ere the third Spring come on,
Sends home your Diamond cracked, the beauty gone.
And more to know her, because you shall not doubt her,
A number of poor Sparks twinkling about her:
Now thou play Dowlands Lachrymae to thy Master.
But shall I dry your eyes with a merry Jig now,
And make you look like Sun-shine in a shower?
How, how, my honest Boy, sweet Savorwit!
Young Mr: Sandfield, gallant Mr. Sandfield,
Ha  what of him?
Affects your daughter strangely.
Brave Mr. Sandfield! let me hug thy zeal
Unto thy Masters house; Ho Mr. Sandfield!
But he'll expect a portion.
Not a whit Sir,
As you may use the matter.
Nay, and the matter fall into my using
The Devil a penny that he gets of me.
He lies at the mercy of your Lock and Key Sir; you may use him as you lit.
Say thou me so? is he so far in doing?
Quite over head and ears Sir; nay more, he means to run mad, and break his Neck off some high Steeple, if he have her not:
Now bless the young Gentleman's Grestles; I hope to be a Grand-father yet by 'em.
That may you Sir, to marry a chopping Girl with a plump Buttock,
Will hoist a Fartingal at five years old,
And call a man between eleven and twelve
To take part of a piece of Mutton with her.
Ha precious Wag! hook him in finely, do.
Make clear the way for him first, set the Gull going.
An Ass, an Ass, I'll quickly dash his wooing.
Why now the clocks go right again; it must be a strange wit
That makes the wheels of youth and age so hit;
The one are dry, worn, rusty, furred, and soiled;
Loves wheels are glib, ever kept clean, and oiled.
I cannot choose but think of this good Fortune,
That gallant Mr. Sandfield!
Stay, stay, stay!
What comfort gives my Almanac to day?
Luck I beseech thee, good days, evil days, June, July; Speak a good word for me now, and I have her; let me see, the fifth day twixt Hawk and Buzzard; the sixth day backward and forward; that was beastly to me, I remember; the seventh day on a slippery pin; the eight day fire and tow; the ninth day, the Market is mared, that's long of the Hucksters I warrant you; but now the tenth day, luck I beseech thee now, before I look into it; the eleventh day, against the hair; a Pox on it, would that hair had been left out; against the hair! that hair will go nigh to choke me; had it been against any thing but that, it would not have troubled me, because it lies cross in the way. Well, I'll try the fortune of a good face yet, though my Almanac leave me in the Sands.
Such a match too, I could not wish a better!
Mass, here he walks! Save you sweet Sir Oliver,Sir Oliver Twilight.
Oh pray come to me a quarter of a year hence; I have a little business now.
How a quarter of a year hence? what shall I come to you in September?
Nor in November neither, good my Friend.
You're not a mad Knight; you will not let your daughter hang past August, will you? she'll drop down under Tree then: She's no Winter fruit
I assure you, if you think to put her in crust after Christmas?
Sir, in a word, depart; my Girl's not for you,
I gave you a drowsy promise in a dream,
But broad awake now, I call it in again.
Have me commended to your wit, farewell Sir.
Now the Devil run away with you, and some lousy Fiddler with your daughter: May Clarkenwell have the first cut of her, and Hounds-ditch pick the Bones. I'll never leave the love of an open hearted Widow, for a narrow-ey'd Maid again; go out of the road way like an Ass, to leap over Hedge and Ditch; I'll fall into the beaten path again, and invite the Widow home to a Banquet; let who lift seek out new ways, I'll be at my journeys end before him; My Almanac told me true, how I should fare, Let no man think to speed against the hair.
Is there no Saving-means? no help Religious
For a distressed Gentlewoman to live by?
Has Virtue no Revenue? who has all then?
Is the worlds lease from Hell, the Devils Head-landlord?
Oh how was Conscience the right Heir put by?
Law would not do such an unrighteous deed,
Though with the fall of Angels it had been feed.
Where are our hopes in banks? was honesty
A younger sister, without portion left,
No dowry in the Chamber, beside wantonness?
O miserable Orphan! twixt two extremes runs there no blessed Mean,
No comfortable strain that I may kiss it?
Must I to whoredom, or to beggary lean,
My mind being sound? is there no way to miss it?
Is it not injustice, that a Widow laughs
And lays her mourning part upon a wife?
That she should have the garment, I the heart;
My wealth her Uncle left her, and me her grief.
Yet stood all miseries in their loathed'st forms
On this hand of me, thick like a fowl mist,
And here the bright enticements of the world,
In clearest colours, flattery, and advancement,
And all the bastard-glories this frame jets in
Horror, nor splendour, shadows fair nor fowl
Should force me shame my husband, wound my soul.
Cousin, y're welcome; this is kindly done of you
To visit the despised
I hope not so Couze,
The want of means cannot make you despised;
Love, not by wealth, but by desert is prized.
You're pleased to help it well Couze.
I am come to you,
Beside my visitation, to request you
To lay your wit to mine, which is but simple,
And help me to untie a few dark words
Made up in knots, they're of the Widows knitting,
That ties all sure; for my wit has not strength
Nor cunning to unloose 'em.
Good! what are they?
Though there be little comfort of my help
She wished Sir Olivers daughter and my self
Good fortune in our choices, and repented her
Of a rash oath she took when we were both Infants,
A secret to cozceal; but since ell's well,
She holds it best to keep it unrevealed.
Now what this is, Heaven knows.
Nor can I guess
The course of her whole life, and her dead husbands,
Was ever full of such dishonest riddles,
To keep right heirs from knowledge of their own:
And now I'm put in the mind on it, I believe
It was some price of Land or money given
By some departing friend upon their death-bed,
Perhaps to your self; and Sir Olivers daughter
May wrongfully enjoy it, and she hired
(For she was but an hireling in those days)
To keep the injury secret.
The most likeliest
That ever you could think on.
Is it not?
Sure Couze, I think you have untied the knot:
My thoughts lie at more ease, as in all other things,
In this I thank your help, and may you live
To conquer your own troubles, and cross ends,
As your are ready to supply your friends.
I thank you for the kind truth of your heart,
In which I flourish when all means depart:
Sure in that oath of hers there sleeps some wrong
Done to my Kinswoman.
Who'ld you speak withal?
The Gentlewoman of this house, forsooth
Whose Footman are you?
One Sir Gilbert Lambstons.
Sir Gilbert Lambstonsthere my Cousin walks.
Thank your good worship.
How now, whence are you?
This Letter will make known.
Whence comes it Sir?
From the Knight my Master, Sir Gilbert Lambston.
Return't, I'll receive none on it.
There it must lie then; I were as good run to Tyburn afoot, and hang my self at mine own charges, as carry it back again.
Life, had he not his answer? What strange impudence
Governs in man, when Lust is Lord of him?
Thinks he me mad? cause I have no monies on Earth
That I'll go forfeit my estate in Heaven,
And live eternal Beggar? he shall pardon me,
That's my souls jointure, I'll starve ere I sell that.
Oh is he gone, and left the Letter here!
Yet I will read it, more to hate the writer.
IF you desire to understand your own comfort, hear me out, ere you refuse me; I'm in the way now to d ub e the yearly means that first I offered you, and to sty you more to me, I'll empty your enemies Bags to maintain you; for the rich Widow, the Lady Golden-fleece, to whom I have been a longer Suitor, then you a longer adversary, hath given me so much encouragement lately, insomuch that I am perfectly assured, the next meeting strikes the bargain: The happiness that follows this, it were idle to inform you of, only consent to my desires, and the Widows Notch shall lie open to you. Thus much to your heart, I know y'e wise, farewell.
In this poor Brief, what Volumes has he thrust,
Of treacherons Purjury, and adulterous Lust!
So foul a Monster does this wrong appear,
That I give pity to mine enemy here
What a most fearful love reigns in some hearts,
That dare oppose all Judgment to get means,
And wed rich Widows, only to keep Queens;
What a strange path he takes to my affection,
And thinks't the nearest way; twill never be;
Goes through mine enemies ground to come to me.
This Letter is most welcome; I repent now,
That my last anger threw thee at my feet,
My bosom shall receive thee.
It is good policy too,
To keep one that so mortally hates the Widow;
She'll have more care to keep it close her self,
And look what wind her revenge goes withal,
The self-same gale whisks up the sails of love;
I shall lose much good sport by that: Now my sweet Mistress.
Sir Gilbert! you change Suitors oft,
You were here in black but lately.
My mind ne'er shifts though.
A foul mind the whilst:
But sure Sir, this is but a dissembling Glass
You sent before you; it is not possible
Your heart should follow your hand.
Then may both perish.
Do not wish that so soon Sir; Can you make
A three months love to a rich Widows Bed,
And lay her pillow under a Queens head?
I know you can't, how ere you may dissemble't;
You have a heart brought up better.
Faith you wrong me in it,
You shall not find it so; I do protest to thee,
I will be Lord of all my promises,
And er't be long, thou shalt but turn a key,
And find 'em in thy coffer; for my love
In matching with the Widow, is but policy
To strengthen my estate, and make me able
To set off all thy kisses with rewards,
That the worst weather our delights behold,
It may hail Pearl, and shower the Widows Gold.
You talk of a brave world Sir.
Twill seem better
When golden happiness breaks forth it self
Out of the vast part of the Widows Chamber.
And here it sets.
Here shall the downfall be,
Her wealth shall rise from her, and set in thee.
You men have you are to overcome poor women.
Pray give my thoughts the freedom of one day,
And all the rest take you.
I straight obey; this Bird's my own
There is no happiness but has her season,
Herein the brightness of her virtue shines,
The husk falls off in time that long shuts up
The fruit in a dark prison; so sweeps by
The cloud of miseries from wretches eyes,
That yet, though fallen, at length they see to rise,
The secret powers work wondrously, and duly.
Why how now Kate?
Oh are you come Sir? Husband,
Wake, wake, and let not patience keep thee poor,
Rouse up thy spirit from this falling slumber;
Make thy distress seem but a weeping dream,
And this the opening morning of thy comforts,
Wipe the Salt dew off from thy careful eyes,
And drink a draught of gladness next thy heart,
T'expel the infection of all poisonous sorrows.
You turn me past my senses:
Will you but second
The purpose I intend, I'll be first forward;
I crave no more of thee but a following spirit;
Will you but grant me that?
Why, what's the business
That should transport thee thu!
Hope of much good, no fear of the least ill;
Take that to comfort thee.
Yea?
Sleep not on it, this is no slumbering business,
It is like the sweating sickness; I must keep
Your eyes still wake, y're gone if once you sleep.
I will not rest then, till thou hast thy wishes.
Peruse this love paper as you go.
A Letter?
Good Mr Sandfield, for the great affection
You bear toward my Girl, I am well pleased
You should enjoy her Beauty; Heaven forbid Sir,
That I should cast away a proper Gentleman,
So far in love with a sour mood, or so.
No, no, I'll not die guilty of a Lovers Neck-cracking.
Marry, as for portion, there I leave you Sir
To the mercy of your destiny again,
I'll have no hand in that.
Faith something Sir;
Be it but t'express your love.
I have no desire Sir
To express my love that way, and so rest satisfied;
I pray take heed in urging that too much
You draw not my love from me.
Fates foresee Sir.
Faith then you may go, seek out a high Steeple,
Or a deep water, there's no saving of you.
How naturally he plays upon himself!
Marry if a wedding dinner, as I told you,
And three years board, well lodged in mine house,
And eating, drinking, and a sleeping portion
May give you satisfaction, I am your man Sir,
Seek out no other.
I am content to embrace it Sir,
Rather then hazard languishment, or ruin.
I love thee for thy wisdom; such a Son in law
Will cheer a Fathers heart. Welcome sweet Master Sandfield,
Whether away boys, Philip?
To visit my Love Sir,
Old Mr. Sunsets Daughter.
That's my Philip,
Ply't hard, my good boys both, put'em to it finely.
One day, one dinner, and one house shall join you.
That's our desire Sir.
Pish; come hither Savorwit.
Observe my son, and bring me word, sweet boy,
Whether he has a speeding wit or no in wooing.
That will I Sir;that your own eyes might tell you,
I think it speedy, your Girl has a round belly.
How soon the comfortable shine of joy
Breaks through a cloud of grief!
The tears that I let fall for my dead wife,
Are dried up with the beams of my Girls fortunes.
Her life, her death, and her ten years distress,
Are e'n forgot with me; the love and care
That I ought her, her daughter shows it all;
I'can but be bestowed, and there it is well.
How now, what news?
There's a Dutch Merchant Sir, that's now come over,
Desires some conference with you.
How, a Dutch Merchant?
Pray send him into me,what news with him trow?
Sir Oliver Twilight!
That's my name indeed Sir,
I pray be covered Sir, you're very welcome.
This is my business Sir; I took into my charge
A few words to deliver to your self
From a dear friend of yours, that wonders strangely
At your unkind neglect.
Indeed? what might he be Sir.
Nay, you're in the wrong gender now,It is that distressed Lady, your good wife Sir.
What say you Sir, my wife?
Yes Sir, your wife!
This strangeness now of yours seems more to harden
Th'uncharitable neglect she taxed you for.
Pray give me leave Sir, is my wife alive?
Came any news to you Sir, to th'contrary?
Yes by my faith did there.
Pray how long since Sir?
It is now some ten weeks.
Faith within this month Sir,
I saw her talk and eat; and those in our Calendar
Are signs of life and health.
Mass so they are in ours.
And these were the last words her paszion threw me.
No grief, quoth she, sits to my heart so close
As his unkindness, and my daughters loss.
You make me weep, and wonder, for I swear
I sent her ransom, and that daughter's here.
Here! that will come well to lighten her of one grief.
I long to see her for the piteous moan
Her Mother made for her.
That shall you Sir.Within there!
Sir.
Call down my daughter.
Yes Sir.
Here's strange budgelling; I tell you Sir,
Those that I put in trust, were near me too,
A man would think they should not juggle with me;
My own son, and my servant, no worse people Sir.
And yet oft-times Sir, what worse Knave to a man
Then he that eats his meat?
Troth you say true Sir;
I sent 'em simply, and that news they brought,
My wife had left the world, and with that Son
I sent to her, this brought his sister home:
Look you Sir, this is she.
If my eye sin not Sir,
Or misty error falsify the glass,
I saw that face at Antwerp in an Inn
When I set forth first to fetch home this boy.
How, in an Inn?
Oh I am betrayed I fear.
How do you young Mistress?
Your eyes wrong your tongue Sir,
And makes you sin in both; I am not she.
No? then I never saw face twice Si Olive Twilight
I tell you my free thoughts, I fear you're blinded;
I do not like this story; I doubt much
The sister is as false as the dead mother:
Ye! say you so Sir? I see nothing lets me, but to doubt so too then:
So, to your Chamber, we have done with you.
I would be glad you had; here's a strange storm.
Sift it out well Sir; till anon I leave you Sir.
Business commands me hence, but as a pledge
Of my return, I'll leave my little son with you,
Who yet takes little pleasure in this Country,
Cause he can speak no English, all Dutch he
A fine boy, he's welcome Sir to me.
Where', your leg, and your thanks to the Gentleman.
War es you neighgen an you thonkes you.
Ec donck you, ver ew Edermon vrendly Kite.
What says he Sir?
He thanks you for your kindness.
Pretty Knave!
Had not some business held me by the way,
This news had come to your ear ten days ago.
It comes too soon now me thinks; I'm your debtor.
But I could wish it Sir for better ware:
We must not be our own choosers in our fortunes:
Here's a cold Pie to breakfast: Wife alive,
The daughter doubtful, and the money spent!
How am I juggled withal?
It hits y'faith Sir,
The work goes even.
Oh come, come, come, are you come Sir!
Life, what's the matter now?
There's a new reckoning come in since.
Pox on it, I thought all had been paid, I can't abide these after-reckonings.
I pray come near Sir, let's be acquainted with you,
Your bold enough abroad with my purse Sir.
No more then beseems manners and good use Sir:
Did not you bring me word some ten weeks since.
My wife was dead?
Yes, true Sir, very true Sir.
Pray stay, and take my horse along with you,
And with the ransom that I sent for her
That you redeemed my daughter:
Right as can be Sir,
I never found your worship in a false tale yet:
I thank you for your good word Sir; but I'm like
To find your worship now in two at once:
I should be sorry to hear that
I believe you Sir,
Within this month my wife was sure alive.
There's six weeks bated of your ten weeks lye,
As has been credibly reported to me
By a Dutch Merchant, Father to that boy
But now come over, and the words scarce cold.
O strange!it is a most rank untruth; where is he Sir?
He will not be long absent.
Ell's confounded.
If he were here, I'll tell him to his face Sir,
He wears a double tongue; that's Dutch and English
Will the Boy say it?
'Lass he can speak no English.
All the better, I'll gabble something to him. Hoist Kaloiste, Kalooskine vou, dar sun, Alla Gaskin?
Ec wet neat watt hey zackt, Ec unverston ewe neat.
Why la, I thought as much!
What says the Boy?
He says his Father is troubled with an imperfection at one time of the Moon, and talks like a Madman.
What does the Boy say so?
I knew there was somewhat in it;
Your wife alive! Will you believe all tales Sir?
Nay more Sir, he told me, he saw this wench
Which you brought home, at Antwerp in an Inn;
Tell me, I'm plainly cozened of all hands,
It is not my daughter neither.
Ell's broke out.
How? not your daughter Sir? I must to again. Quisquinikin Salamer, alla peace kickin Sows-clows, Hoff Tofte le cumber shaw, bounce bus bexsceeno.
Ec an sawth no int been clappon de hook, I dinke ute zein zennon.
Oh zein zennon! Ah ha, I thought how it would prove in the end; the Boy says they never came near Antwerp, a quite contrary way, round about by Parma.
What's the same zein zennon?
That is, he saw no such wench in an Inn; it is well I came in such happy time to get it out of the Boy before his Father returned again; pray be wary Sir; the world's subtle, come and pretend a charitable business in policy, and work out a peace of money on you.
Mass, art advised of that?
The Age is cunning Sir, beside a Dutchman will live upon any ground, and work Butter out of a Thistle.
Troth thou say true in that, they're the best thrivers
In Turnips, Hartichalks, and Cabishes:
Our English are not like them.
O fie, no Sir!
Ask him from whence they came, when they came hither.
That I will Sir,Culluaron lagooso, lagoon, lagan, ruffed, punkatee.
Nimd aweigh de cack.
What, what, I cannot blame him then?
What says he to thee?
The poor Boy blushes for him; he tells me his Father came from making merry with certain of his Countrymen, and he's a little steeped in English Beer; there's no heed to be taken of his tongue now.
Hoyda! how come thou by all this, I heard him speak but three words to thee?
O Sir, the Dutch is a very wide Language; you shall have ten English words even for one; as for example, Gullder-goose, there's a word for you Master.
Why what's that same Gullder-goose?
How do you and all your generation
Why it is impossible? how prove you that Sir?
It is thus distinguished; Sir, Gull, how do you? Der, and; Goose, your generation.
It is a most saucy Language, how came thou by it?
I was brought up to London in an Eelship;
There was the place I caught it first by th'tale:
I shall be tripped anon; Pox, would I were gone.
I'll go seek out your son Sir, you shall hear
What thunder he'll bring with him.
Do, do Savorwit,
I'll have you all face to face.
Cuds me, what else Sir?
And you take me so near the net again,
I'll give you leave to squat me; I have escaped fairly.
We are undone in Dutch; all our three months roguery
Is now come over in a Butter Firkin.
Never was man so tossed between two tales!
I know not which to take, not which to trust;
The Boy here is the likeliest to tell truth,
Because the worlds corruption is not yet
At full years in him; sure he cannot know
What deceit means, it is English yet to him.
And when I think again, why should the Father
Dissemble for no profit? he gets none,
What ere he hopes for, and I think he hopes not.
The man's in a good case, being old and weary,
He dares not lean his arm on his sons shoulder,
For fear he lie in the dirt, but must be rather
Beholding to a stranger for his prop.
I make bold once again Sir for a Boy here.
O Sir y're welcome, pray resolve me one thing Sir:
Did you within this month, with your own eyes,
See my wife living?
I nev'r borrowed any.
Why should you move that question Sir? dissembling
Is no part of my living.
I have reason
To urge it so far Sir (pray be not angry though)
Because my man was here since your departure,
Withstands all stiffly, and to make it clearer,
Questioned your Boy in Dutch; who as he told me,
Returned this answer first to him: That you
Had imperfection at one time of the Moon,
Which made you talk so strangely.
How, how's this! Zeicke yongon, ec ben ec quilt medien dullek heght, ee untoit van the mon, an koot uram'd.
Wee ek. heigh lieght in ze Bokkas, do it site.
Why la you Sir? here's no such thing,
He says he lies in's throat that says it.
Then the Rogue lies in's throat, for he told me so,
And that the boy should answer at next question,
That you ne'er saw this wench, nor came near Antwarp.
Ten thousand Devils! Zeicke hee ewe ek kneeght, yongon, dat wee neeky by Antwarpon no don cammen no seen de daughter Dor.
Ec hub ham hean sulka dongon he zaut, hei es a skllom an rubbout?
He says he told him no such matter he's a Knave and a Rascal.
Why, how am I abused? Pray tell me one thing,
What's Gulldergoose in Dutch?
How Gulldergoose! there's no such thing in Dutch, it may be an Ass in English.
Hoyda! then am I that Ass in plain English; I am grossly cozened, most inconsiderately.
Pray let my house receive you for one night,
That I may quit these Rascals, I beseech you Sir.
If that may stead you Sir, I'll not refuse you.
A thousand thanks, and welcome:
On whom can Fortune more spit out her foam,
Worked on abroad, and played upon at home?
SO, set the Table ready, the Widow's i'd' next room, looking upon my Clock with the days and the months, and the change of the Moon: I'll fetch her in presently.
She's not so mad to be fetched in with the Moon, I warrant you: A man must go roundlier to work with a Widow, then to woo her with the Hand of a Dial, or stir up her Blood with the striking part of a clock, I should ne'er stand to show her such things in Chamber.
Welcome sweet Widow to a Bachelors house here, a single man; I, but for two or three Maids that I keep.
Why are you double with them then?
An exceeding good mourning wit; Women are wiser then ever they were, since they wore Doublets.You must think sweet Widow, if a man keep Maids, they're under his subjection.
That's most true Sir.
They have no reason to have a Lock, but the Master must have a Key to it.
To him Sir Gilbert, he fights with me at a wrong weapon now.
Nay, and Sir Gilbert strike, my weapon falls,
I fear no thrust but his; here are more shooters,
But they have shot two Arrows without heads,
They cannot stick in the Butt yet; hold out Knight,
And I'll cleave the black pin in the midst of the white.
Nay, and he led me into a Closet Sir, where he showed me diet drinks for several months, as Scurvigrass for April, Clarified Whey for June, and the like
O Madam, he is a most necessary propertyAn't be but to save our credit, ten pound in a Banquet.
Go! y're a wag Sir Gilbert.
How many there be in the world of his Fortunes, that prick their own Calves with Briars, to make an easy passage for others; or like a toiling
Usurer, sets his son a horseback in Cloth of Goldbreeches, while he himself goes 'ch' Devil a foot in a pair of old Strossers.
But shall I give a more familiar sign?
His are the Sweet-meats, but the kisses mine.
Excellent! a pox a' your Fortune.
Saucy courting has brought all modest wooing clean out of fashion: You shall have few Maids now a days got without rough handling; all the Towns so used to it, and most commonly too they're joined before they're married; because they'll be sure to be fast enough.
Sir, since he strives t'oppose himself against us,
Le's so combine our friendships in our straits,
By all means graceful to assist each other;
For I protest it shall as much glad me
To see your happiness, and his disgrace,
As if the wealth were mine, the love, the place.
And with the like faith I reward your friendship;
I'll break the bawdy ranks of his discourse,
And scatter his libidinous whispers straight, Mdam!
How cheer you Gentlemen?
Pox on 'em,
They waked me out of a fine sleep, three minutes
Had fastened all the treasure in mine arms.
You took no note of this conceit, it seems, Madam.
Twelve Trenchers, upon every one a month, January, February, March, April
I, and their Poesies under 'em.
Pray what says May? she's the Spring Lady
Now gallant May in her array
Doth make the field pleasant and gay.
This month of June use clarified Whey,
Boiled with cold herbs, and drink always.
Drink't all away, he should say?
It were match better indeed, and wholesomer for his Liver.
September's a good one here Madam
Oh have you chose your month, let's hear't Sir Gilbert!
Now may thou Physics safely take,
And bleed, and bathe for thy healths sake.
Eat Figs and Grapes, and spicery,
For to refresh thy Members dry.
Thus it is still, when a mans simple meaning lights among wantons; how many honest words have suffered corruption, since Chasers days? A Virgin would speak those words then, that a very Midwife would blush to hear now, if she have but so much blood left to make up an ounce of grace. And who is this long on, but such wags as you, that use your words like your wenches? you cannot let 'em pass honestly by you, but you must still have a flirt at 'em.
You have paid some of us home, Madam.
If conceit will strike this stroke, have at the Widows Plumb-tree; I'll put 'em down all for a Banquet. Widow and Gentlemen, my Friends and Servants, I make you wait long here for a Bachelors pittance.
O Sir, you're pleased to be modest.
No by my troth, Widow, you shall find it otherwise.
What the Twelve Signs!
These are the Signs of my love, Widow
Worse meat would have served us Sir; by my Faith
I'm sorry you should be at such charges Sir,
To feast us a whole month together here.
Widow, you're welcome a whole month, and ever.
And what be those Sir that brought in the Banquet?
Those are my Tenants, they stand for Fasting days.
Or the six weeks in Lent.
Y're in the right Sir Gilbert.
Sweet Widow take your place at Aries here,
That's the head Sign, a Widow is the head
Till she be married.
What is she then?
The middle.
It is happy she's no worse.
Taurus, Sir Gilbert Lambston that's for you;
They say you're a good TownBull.
O spare your friends Sir.
And Gemini for Master Pepperton,
He had two boys at once by his last wife.
I hear the Widow find no fault with that Sir.
Cancer the Crab for Master Overdon';
For when a thing's past fifty, it grows crooked.
Now for your self Sir.
Take no care for me Widow,
I can be any where; here's Leo, heart and hack, Firego, guts and belly; I can go lower yet, and yet fare better, sense Sagittarius fits me the thighs; I care not if I be about the thighs, I shall find meat enough
But under pardon Sir,
Though you be Lord of the Feast, and the conceit both,
Methinks it had been proper for the Banquet
To have had the Signs all filed, and no one idle.
I know it had; but whose fault's that Widow? you should have got you more Suitors to have stopped the gaps.
Nay sure, they should get us, and not we them;
There be your Tenants Sir; we are not proud,
You may bid them sit down.
By th'mass it's true too,
Then sit down Tenants once with your hats on, but spare the meat, I charge you, as you hope for new Leases: I must make my Signs draw out a month yet, with a bit every morning to break-fast, and at Full Moon with a whole one; that's restorative; sit round, sit round, and do not speak sweet Tenants, you may be bold enough, so you eat but little; how like you this now Widow?
It shows well Sir,
And like the good old Hospitable fashion.
How! like a good old Hospital; my Mistress makes an arrant gull on him.
But yet methinks there wants clothes for the feet.
That part's uncovered yet,push
no matter for the feet.
Yes, if the feet catch cold, the head will feel it.
Why then you may draw up your legs, and lie rounder together.
He has answered you well Madam.
And you draw up your legs too, Widow, my Tenant will feel you there, for he's one of the Calves.
Better and better Sir, your wit fattens as he feeds.
Sh'as took the Calf from his Tenant, and put it upon his ground now.
How now my Ladies man, what's the news Sir!
Madam, there's a young Gentleman below,
He has earnest business to your Ladyship
Another Suitor I hold my life, Widow.
What is he Sir?
He seems a Gentleman,
That's the least of him, and yet more I know not.
Under the leave of the Master of the house here,
I would he were admitted.
With all my heart, Widow, I fear him not,
Come Cut and Long tail.
I have the least fear,
And the most firmness, nothing can shake me.
If he be a Gentleman, he's welcome; there's a Sign does nothing, and that's fit for a Gentleman; the feet will be kept warm enough now 
you Widow; for if he be a right Gentleman, he has his stockings warmed, and he wears socks beside; partly for warmth, partly for cleanliness; and if he observe Fridays too, he comes excellent well. Pisces will be a fine Fish dinner for him.
Why then you mean Sir, he shall sit as he comes.
I, and he were a Lord, he shall not sit above my Tenants I'll not have two Lords to them; so I may go look my rent in another mans Breeches; I was not brought up to be so unmannerly?
I have picked out a bold time; much god do you Gentlemen.
Y're welcome as I may say Sir.
Pardon my rudeness, Madam.
No such fault Sir;
Your too severe to your self, our judgment quits you.
Please you to do as we do?
Thanks good Madam.
Make room Gentlemen.
Sit still Tenants, I'll call in all your old
Leass, and rack you else.
Oh sweet Landlord.
Take my cloak sirrah; if any be disturb'd, I'll not sit Gentlemen,
I see my place.
A proper woman turned gallant! if the Widow refuse me, I care not if I be a suitor to him: I have known those who have been as mad, and given half their living for a Male companion.
How Pisces! is that mine?
It is a conceied Banquet.
If you love any fish, pray fall to Sir; if you had come sooner, you might have happened among some of the flesh Signs, but now they are all taken up; Virgo had been a good dish for you, had not one of my Tenants been somewhat busy with her.
Pray let him keep her Sir, give me meat fresh,
I'd rather have whole fish then broken flesh.
What say you to a bit of Taurus?
No, I thank you Sir,
The Bull's too rank for me.
How Sir?
Too rank Sir.
Fie, I shall strike you dumb like all your fellows:
What with your heels, or horns?
Perhaps with both.
It must be at dead Low-water,
When I'm dead then.
It is a brave Kate, and nobly spoke of thee.
This quarrel must be drownedPickadille, my Ladies Fool!
Your, your own man Sir.
Prithee step in to one of the Maids.
That I will Sir, and thank you too.
Nay, hark you Sir, call for my Sun cup presently, I'd forgot it.
How, your Sun-cup? some cup I warrant that he stole out of the Sun-Tavern?
The more I look on him, the more I thirst for it;
Methinks his beauty does so far transcend,
Turns the Signs back, makes that the upper end;
How cheer you Widow? Gentlemen how cheer you?
Fair weather in all quarters, the Sun will peep anon, I have sent one for him;
In the mean time I'll tell you a tale of these.
This Libra here that keeps the scale so even,
Was in the old time an honest Chandlers Widow,
And had one daughter which was called Virgo,
Which now my hungry Tenant has deflowered.
This Virgo passing for a Maid, was sued to
By Sagittarius there, a gallant shooter,
And Aries his head-rival; but her old crabbed Uncle Cancer here, dwelling in Crooked lane,
Still crossed the marriage minding to bestow her
Upon one Scorpio, a rich Usurer;
The girl loathing that match, fell into folly
With one Taurus, a Gentleman in Townbul-street;
By whom she had two twins, those Gemini there.
Of which two brats, she was brought a bed in Leo,
At the Red Lion about Tower-hill.
Being in this distress, one Capricorn,
An honest Citizen pitied her case, and married her to Aquarius, an old Water bearer,
And Pisces was her living ever after,
At Standard she sold fish, where he drew water.
It shall be yours Sir
Meat and mirth too, y're lavish!
Your purse and tongue has been at cost to day Sir.
You may challenge all comers at these twelve weapons I warrant you.
Your Sun-cup call you it! it is a simple voyage that I have made here; I have left my Doublet within, for fear I should sweat through my Jerkin, and thrown a Cypress over my face for fear of Sunburning.
How now, whose this? why sirrah.
Can you endure it Mistress?
Endure, what fool!
Fill the cup Coxcomb.
Nay an't be no hotter, I'll go put on my Doublet again.
What a whoreson-sot is this! prithee fill the cup fellow, and gived the Widow.
Sirrah, how stand you? bestow your service there upon her Ladyship.
What's here a Sun?
It does betoken Madam
A cheerful day to some body?
It rises
Full in the face of you fair Sign, and yet
By course he is the last must feel the heat.
Here Gentlemen to you all, for you know the Sun must go through the twelve Signs.
Most wittily Widow; you jump with my conceit right,
There's not a hair between us.
Give it Sir Gilbert.
I am the next through whom the golden flame
Shines, when it is spent in thy Celestial Ram,
The poor Feet there must wait and cool a while
We have our Time Sir, Joy and we shall meet,
I have known the proud Neck lie between the Feet.
So round it goes.
I like this drinking world well.
So filt him again.
Fil't me! why I drunk last Sir
I know you did, but Gemini must drink twice,
Unless you mean that one of them shall be choked.
Fly from my heart all variable thoughts;
She that's enticed by every pleasing object,
Shall find small pleasure, and as little rest.
This Knave hath loved me long, he's best and worthiest,
I cannot but in honour see him requitedSir Gelbert Lambston.
How? pardon me sweet Lady,
That with a bold tongue I strike by your words,
Sir Gilbert Lambston?
Yes Sir, that's my name.
There should be a rank Villain of that name,
Came you out of that house
How, Sir Slave!
Fall to your Bull, leave roaring till anon:
Yet again! and you love me Gentlemen, let's have no roaring here.
If I had thought that, I'd have sent my Bull to the Bear garden.
Why so you should have wanted one of your Signs.
But I may chance want two now, and they fall together by the ears.
What's the strange fire that works in these two Creatures?
Cold Signs both, yet more hot then all their felllows
Ho Sol in Pisces! the Sun's in New Fishstreet; here's an end of this course.
Madam, I am bold to remember your worcestership for a years wages, and an Livery-cloak.
How, will you shame me, had you not both last week fool?
I, but there's another year past since that.
Would all your wit could make that good Sir.
I am sure the Sun has run through all the twelve Signs since, and that's a year, this Gentlemen can witness.
The fool will live Madam.
I as long as your eyes are open, I warrant him.
Sirrah!
Does your worship call?
Commend my love and service to the Widow,
Desire her Ladyship to taste that morsel.
This is the bit I watched for all this while;
But it comes duly.
And wherein has this name of mine offended,
That y're so liberal of your infamous titles?
I but a stranger to thee, it must be known Sir
Ere we two part.
Marry and reason good Sir.
O strike me coldthis should be your hand Sir Gilbert?
Why, make you question of that Madam? it is one of the Letters I sent you.
Much good do you Gentlemen.
How now? what's the matter?
Look to the Widow, she paints white, some Aqua Coolest is for my Lady, run vilain.
Aqua Solister; can no body help her case but a Lawyer? and so many Suitors here?
O treachery unma ch't, unheard of!
How do you Madam?
Oh impudence as foul! does my disease
Ask how I do? can it torment my heart,
And look with a fresh colour in my face?
What's this! what's this!
I am sorry for this qualm Widow.
He that would know a villain when he meets him,
Let him ne'er go to a Conjurer; here's a glass
Will show him without money, and far truer.
Preferver of my state, pray tell me Sir,
That I may pay you all my thanks together;
What blessed hap brought that Letter to your hand
From me, so fast locked in mine enemies power?
I will resolve you Madam: I have a Kinsman
Somewhat infected with that wanton pity
Which men bestow on the distress of women,
Especially if they be fair and poor,
With such hot Charity, which indeed is Lust;
He sought t'entice, as his repentance told me,
Her whom you call your enemy, the wife
To a poor Gentleman, one Low water.
Right, right the same.
Had it been right, 't'ad now been.
And according to the common rate of sinners,
Offered large maintenance, which with her seemed nothing;
For if she would consent, she told him roundly,
There was a Knight had bid more at one minute
Then all his wealth could compass; and withal,
Plucked out that Letter as it were in scorn;
Which by good fortune he put up in jest,
With promise that the Writ should be returnable
The next hour of his meeting. (But sweet Madam)
Out of my love and zeal, I did so practise
The part upon him of an urgent wooer,
That neither he nor that returned more to her.
Plague a that Kinsman.
Here's a gallant Rascal!
Sir you have appeared so noble in this action,
So full of worth and goodness, that my thanks
Will rather shame the Bounty of my mind,
Then do it honour: Oh thou treacherous villain!
Does thy Faith bear such fruit? are these the blocsoms of a hundred Oaths
Shot from thy bosom? was thy love so spiteful,
It could not be content to mock my heart,
Which is in love, a misery too much,
But must extend so far to the quick ruin
Of what was painfully got, carefully left me;
And amongst a world of yeilding-needy women,
Choose no one to make merry with my sorrows,
And spend my wealth on, in adulterous surfeits.
But my most mortal enemyO despiteful!
Is this thy practice? follow it, twill advance thee:
Go, beguile on; have I so happily found
What many a Widow has with sorrow tasted,
Even when my Lip touched the contracting Cup,
Even then to see the Spider; it was miraculous!
Crawl with thy poisons hence, and for thy sake
I'll never covet Titles, and more Riches,
To fall into a gulf of hate and laughter:
I'll marry Love hereafter, I've enough;
And wanting that, I have nothingThere's thy way.
Do you hear Sir? you must walk.
Hear't! thrust him down stairs.
Out of my house you treacherous, lecherous Rascal.
All curses scatter you.
Life, do you thunder here; if you had staid a little longer, I'd have rip't out some of my Bull out of your Belly again.
It was a most noble discovery; we must love you for ever for it.
Sir, for your Banquet and your mirth we thank you;
You Gentlemen, for your kind company:
But you, for all my merry days to come,
Or this had been the last else.
Love and Fortune
Had more care of your safety, peace and state Madam.
Now will I thrust in fo'rt.
I'm for my self now.
What's fifty years? it is mans best time and season;
Now the nights gone, the Widow will hear reason:
Now, now! the Suitors flatter, hold on Kate,
The Hen may pick the meat, while the Cocks prate.
If thou talk longer, I shall turn to Marble,
And death will! stop my hearing
Horrible fortune!
Nay Sir our building is so far defaced,
There is no stuff left to raise up a hope.
Oh with more patience could my flesh endure
A score of wounds, and all their several searchings,
Then this that thou hast told me.
Would that Flemmish Ram
Had ne'er come near our house; there's no going home
As long as he has a Nest there, and his young one
A little Flanders Egg, new flagged: they gape for Pork, and I shall be made meat for'em.
It is not the bare news of my Mothers life
(May she live long and happy,) that afflicts me
With half the violence that the latter draws;
Though in that news I have my share of grief,
As I had share of sin; and a foul neglect,
It is my Loves betraying; that's the sting
That strikes through flesh and spirit; and sense no wit
From thee, in whom I ne'er saw ebb till now;
Nor comforts from a faithful friend can ease me,
I'll try the goodness of a third companion,
What he'll do for me.
Hold! why friend?
Why Master? is this all your kindness Sir: offer to steal into another Country, and ne'er take your leave on's: Toath, I take it unkindly at your hands Sir; but I'll put it up for once: Faith there was no Conscience in this Sir; leave me here to endure all weathers, whilst you make your whole de like a Jugglers Egg upon the point of a Raper By my troth Sir, y're too blame in it; you might have goven us an inkling of your journey; perhaps others would as fain have gone as you.
Burns this Clay-lamp of miserable life,
When Joy, the Oil that feeds it, is dried up?
He has removed his house.
So it seems, Madam.
I'll ask that Gentleman;pray can you tell me Sir
Which is Sir Oliver Twilights?
Few can better, Gentlewoman;
It is the next fair house your eye can fix on.
I thank you Sir, go on, he had a son about some ten years since.
That son still lives.
I pray how does he Sir?
Faith much about my health, (that's never worse)
If you have any business to him, Gentlewoman,
I can cut short your journey to the house;
I'm all that ever was of the same kind.
Oh my sweet son! never fell fresher joy
Upon the heart of Mother; this is he Sir!
My seven years travel has even worm him out Of my remembrance.
Oh this gear's worse and worse!
I am so wonder-struck at your blessed presense,
That through amazed Joy, I neglect my duty!
Rise, and a thousand blessings spring up with thee.
I would we had but one in the mean time,
Let the rest grow at leisure.
But know you not this Gentleman yet son?
It take its Mr Beveril.
My name's Beveril, Sir:
Right welcome to my bosom
You'd not think son,
How much I am beholding to this Gentleman,
As far as freedom; he laid out the ransom,
Finding me so distressed.
It was worthily done Sir,
And I shall ever rest your servant for it.
You quite forget your worth: It was my good hap Sir,
To return home that way, after some travels;
Where finding your good Mother so distressed,
I could not but in pity see her released.
It was a noble Charity Sir, Heaven quit you.
It comes at last.
I left a sister here,
New married when I last took leave of England.
Oh! Mistress Low-water
Pray Sir, how does she!
So little comfort I can give you Sir,
That I would fain excuse my self, for silence.
Why what's the worst Sir.
Wrongs has made her poor.
You strike my heartAlas good Gentlewoman!
Here's a Gentleman,
You know him, Mr Sandfield.
I crave pardon Sir
He can resolve you, from her Kinswoman.
Welcome to England, Madam.
Thanks good Sir,
Now there's no way to escape, I'm compased round;
My shame is like a prisoner set with Halberds.
Pish Master, Master, it is young flood again,
And you can take your time now, away quick.
Push, thou'st a swimming head.
Will you but hear me?
When did you lose your tide, when I set forth with you?
That's true:
Regard me then, though you have no feeling;
I would not hang by th'Thumbs with a good will.
I hang by th'heart Sir, and would fain have ease.
Then this or none: Fly to your Mothers pity,
For that's the Court must help you; you're quite gone
At Common Law, no Counsellor can hear you
Confess your follies, and ask pardon for'em.
Tell her the state of all things, stand not nicely,
The meat's too hard to be minced now; she breeds young bones by this time?
Deal plainly, Heaven will bless thee; turn out all
And shake your pockets after it: Beg, weep, kneel, any thing, twill break no bones man.
Let her not rest, take breathing time, nor leave thee
Till thou hast got her help.
Lad, I conceive thee.
About it then, it requires haste, do it well;
There, but a short street between us and Hell.
Ah my poor sister!
'Lass good Gentlewoman
My heart even weeps for her:I son, we'll go now.
May I crave one word Madam?
With me son?
The more the better welcome.
Now, now, luck:
I pray not often, the last Prayer I made
Was nine year old last Bartholomew-Tide;
It would have been a jolly chopper, and ''ad lived till this time.
Why do your words start back; are they afraid
Of her that ever loved them!
I have a suit to you Madam.
You have told me that already; pray what is it?
If it be so great, my present state refuse it,
I shall be abler, then command and use it:
What er't be, let me have warning to provide for it.
Provide forgiveness then, for that's the want
My conscience feels; O my wilde youth has led me
Into unnatural wrongs against your freedom once:
I spent the ransom which my father sent,
To set my pleasures free, while you lay captive.
He does it finely faith.
And is this all now?
You use me like a stranger, pray stand up.
Rather fall flat, I shall deserve yet worse.
What ere your faults are, esteem me styl a friend,
Or else you wrong me more in asking pardon,
Then when you did the wrong, you asked it for:
And since you have prepared me to forgive you,
Pray let me know for what, the first faults nothing.
It is a sweet Lady every inch of her.
Here comes the wrong then that drives home the rest.
I saw a face at Antwerp, that quite drew me
From Conscience and Obedience; in that fray
I lost my heart, I must needs lose my way;
There went the ransom, to redeem my mind,
Sreed of the money, I brought over her;
And to cast mists before my Fathers eyes,
Told him it was my sister, lost so long,
And that your self was dead.You see the wrong.
This is but youthful still.O that word sister
Afflicts me when I think on it: I forgive thee
As freely as thou did it. For alas
This may be called good dealing to some parts,
That love and youth plays daily among sons.
She helps our Knavery well, that's one good comfort.
But such is the hard plight my state lives in,
That twixt forgiveness, I must sin again,
And seek my help where I bestowed my wrongs.
O Mother pity once, though against reason!
Cause I can merit none, though my wrongs grieve you;
Yet let it be your glory to relieve me.
Wherein have I given cause yet of mistruck,
That you should doubt my succour, and my love?
Show me but in what kind I may bestow 'em.
There came a Dutchman with report this day,
That you were living.
Came he so lately?
Yes Madam.
Which news so struck my Father on the sudden,
That he grows jealous of my faith in both.
These five hours have I kept me from his sight,
And wished my self eternally so hid:
And surely, had not your blessed presence quickened
The flame of life in me, all had gone out.
Now to confirm me to his trust again,
And settle much aright in his opinion;
Say but she is my sister, and ell's well.
You ask devotion like a bashful beggar,
That pure need urges, and not lazy impudence;
And to express how glad I am to pity you,
My bounty shall flow over your demand.
I will not only with a constant breath
Approve that, but excuse thee for my death
Why here's a woman made, as a man would wish to have her!
Oh I am placed higher in happiness,
Then whence I fell before!
We're brave fellows once again, and we can keep our own:
Now Hoffte Toftee, our Pipes play as loftily?
My sister fled!
Both fled, that's the news now; Want must obey;
Oppressions came so thick, they could not stay.
Mean are my fortunes, yet had I been nigh,
Distress nor wrong should have made Virtue fly.
Spoke like a Brother, worthy such a sister;
Grief's like a new wound, heat beguiles the sense,
For I shall feel this smart more three days hence.
Come Madam, sorrow's rude, and forgets manners.
Our knavery is for all the world like a shifting Bankrupt, it breaks in one place, and sets up in another: He tries all trades, from a Goldsmith to a Tobacco-seller; we try all shifts, from an Outlaw to a Flatterer: He cozens the Husband, and compounds with the Widow; we cousin my Master, and compound with my Mistress; only here I turn of the right hand from him, He is known to live like a Rascal, when I am thought to live like a Gentleman.
I have sent in one to th'Widow.
Well said Kate,
Thou ply'st thy business close,The coast is clear yet!
Let me but have warning,
shall make pretty shift with them.
That thou shalt wench.
My Lady Sir commends her kindly to you,
 the third part of an hour Sir,
res your patience,Two or three of her Tenants out of Kent
Will hold her so long busied.
Thank you Sir.
 it I should attend her time and leisure;
Those were my Tenants once, but what relief
Is there in what hath been, or what I was?
It is now that makes the man. A last years feast
Yields little comfort for the present humour;
He starves that feeds his hopes with what his past:
How now?
They're come, newly alighted.
Peace, peace,
I'll have a trick for 'em,Look you second me well now.
I warrant thee.
I must seem very imperious, I can tell you; therefore if I should chance to use you roughlie, pray forgive me beforehand.
With all my heart Kate.
You must look for no obedience in those clothes, that lies in the Pocket of my Gown.
Well, well, I will not then.
I hear 'em coming, step back a little Sir: Where be those fellows? who looks out there? is there ne'er a Knave in the house to take those Gentlemen's horses? where wait you to day? how stand you? like a dreaming Goose in a corner, the Gentlemens horses forsooth.
Yes an't like your worship.
What's here, a strange alteration?
A new Lord? would I were upon my Mares back again then.
Pray Gentlemen pardon the rudeness of these Grooms,
I hope they will be brought to better fashion;
In the mean time you're welcome Gentlemen.
We thank you Sir.
Life here's quick work! I'll hold my life he has struck the Widow in the right Planet, Venus in Cauda? I thought it was a lecherous Planet that goes to it with a Caudle.
How now Sir?
The Gentleman's horses are set up Sir.
No, no, no, we'll away.
We'll away.
How? by my faith, but you shall not yet, by your leave; whore's Bess? call your Mistress Sir, to welcome these kind Gentlemen my friends.
Overt. How Bess, Peg?
Plain Bess! I know how the world goes then, he has been a bed with Bess, y'faith; there's no trust to these Widows; a young horsing Gentleman carries 'em away clear.
Now whore's your Mistress Sir, how chance she comes not?
Sir, she requests you to excuse her for a while, she's busy with a Milliner about Gloves.
Gloves?
Hoyda, Gloves too!
Could she find no other time to choose
Gloves, but now when my friends are here?
No Sir, it is no matter, we thank you for your good will Sir; to say truth, We have no businos with her at all at this time, y'faith Sir.
O that's another matter; yet stay, stay Gentlemen and taste a cup of Wine ere you go.
No, thank you Sir.
Mr Pepperton, Mr Weatherwise will you Sir?
I'll see the Wine in a drunkards shoes first, and drink't after he has brewed it; but let her go, she's fitted y'faith; a proud surly Sir here, he domineers already; one that will shake her bones, and go to Dice with her money, or I have no skill in a Calendar: Life! he that can be so saucy to call her Bess already, will call her Prating-Queen a month hence.
They have given thee all the slip.
So a fair riddance!
There's three rubs gone, I've a clear way to the Mistress.
You'd need have a clear way, because you're a bad pricker.
Yet if my Bowl take bank, I shall go nigh
To make my self a saver:
Here's Alley room enough, I'll try my fortune,
I am to begin the world like a younger Brother;
I know that a bold face, and a good spirit,
Is all the Jointure he can make Widow;
And't shall go hard, but I'll be as rich as he, or at least seem so; and that's wealth enough:
For nothing kills a Widow's heart so much,
As a faint bashful wooer, though he have thousands,
And come with a poor Water-gruel spirit,
And a Fish market face, he shall ne'er speed:
I would not have himself left a poor Widower.
Faith I'm glad I'm alive; to commend thee Kate, I shall be sure now to see my commendations delivered.
I'll put her to it y'faith.
But soft ye Kate,
How and she should accept of your bold kindness?
A chief point to be thought on, by my faith;
Marry therefore Sir, be you sure to step in, for fear I should shame my self, and spoil all:
Well, I'll save your credit then for once, but look you come there no more.
Away, I hear her coming.
I am vanished.
How does my life, my soul, my dear sweet Madam?
I have wronged your patience, made you stand too long here.
There's no such thing y'faith Madam; you're pleased to say so.
Yes, I confess I was too slow Sir.
Why you shall make me amends for that then, with a quickness in your Bed.
That were a speedy mends Sir.
Why then you are out of my debt;
I'll cross the Book, and turn over a new leaf with you.
So with paying a small debt, I may chance run into a greater.
My faith your credit will be the better then: There's many a brave gallant would be glad of such fortune, and pay use for it.
Some of them have nothing else to do;
they would be idle and it were not for interest.
I promise you Widow, were I a setter up, such is my opinion of your payment, I durst trust you with all the ware in my shop.
I thank you for your good will, I can have no more.
Not of me y'faith, nor that neither; and you know allCome make but short service Widow, a kiss and to bed, I'm very hungry y'faith Wench.
What are you Sir?
Oh a younger Brother has an excellent stomach, Madam, worth a hundred of your sons and heirs, that stay their wedding stomachs with a hot bit of a Common Mistress, and then come to a Widowes bed like a flash of lightning: You're sure of the first of me, not of the five hundredth of them. I nover took Physic yet in my life; you shall have the Doctor continually with them, or some bottle for his Deputy: Out flies your moneys for restoratives and strengthnings, in me it is saved in your purse, and found in your children; they'll get peevish Apothecaries stuff, you may weigh 'em by the ounces; I boys of War, brave Commanders, that shall bear a breadth in their shoulders, and a weight in their hips, and run over a whole Country with a pound a Beef, and a Biscuit in their Belly. Ho Widow, my kisses are Firegins, my embraces perfect, my strength solid, my love constant, my heat comfortable; but to come to the point, inutterable.
But soft ye, soft ye; because you stand so stricly
Upon your purity, I'll put you to it Sir.
Will you swear here, you never yet knew woman?
Never, as man ere knew her; By this Light, Widow.
What, what Sir! shrew my heart he moves me much,
Nay, since you love to bring a man on's knees,
I take into the same oath, thus much more,
That you're the first Widow, or Maid, or Wife,
That ever I in suit of love did Court,
Or honestly did woo: How say you to that Widow?
Marry I say Sir, you had a good portion of Chastity left you, though ill fortune run away with the rest.
That I kept for thee Widow; she's of fortune, and all her strait bodied daughters; thou shalt have it Widow.
Push what do you mean.
I cannot bestow it better.
I'll call my Servants.
By my troth you shall not Madam
Does your worship call Sir?
Ha pox! are you peeping? 
He came in a good time, I thank him for it:
What do you think of me? your very forward Sir?
Extremity of love.
You say you're ignorant,
It should not seem so surely by your play;
For ought I see, you may make one your self,
You need not hold the Cards to any Gamester.
That love should teach men ways to wrong it self!
Are these the first-fruits of your boldness Sir?
If all take after these, you may boast on 'em;
There comes few such to Market among women:
Time you were taken down Sir
I've lost my way again, there's but two paths that leads to Widows beds,
That's wealth or forwardness, and I've took the wrong one.
He marry my Lady! why there's no such thought yet.
Oh here they are all again too!
Are you come Gentlemen?
I wish no better men.
Oh the Moon's changed now!
See you that Gentleman yonder!
Yes sweet Madam.
Then pray be witness all of you, with this kiss
I choose him for my husband.
A pox on it.
And with this parted Gold that two hearts join.
Never with chaster love then this of mine.
And those that have the hearts to come to th'wedding,
They shall be welcome for their former loves.
No, I thank you, you've choked me already.
I never suspected mine Almanac till now; I believe he plays cogging John with me, I bought it at his shop; it may learn the more knavery by that.
Now indeed Gentlemen I can bid you welcome,
Before it was but a flourish.
Nay so my Almanac told me There should be an Eclipse, but not visible in our Horizon, but about the Western inhabitants of Mixcana and Califormia.
Well, we have no business there Sir.
Nor we have none here Sir, and so fare you well.
You save the house a good labour Gentlemen; the fool carries them away in a Voider. Where be these fellows?
Sir.
Here Sir.
What your worship pleasure.
Oh, this is something like, take you your ease Sir,
Here are those now more fit to be commanded:
How few women are of thy mind; she thinks it too much to keep me in subjection for one day, whereas some wives would be glad to keep their husbands in awe all days of their lives, and think it the best bargain that ere they made.
I'll spare no cost for th'wedding, some device too,
To show our thankfulness to Wit and Fortune;
It shall be soRun straight for one of the wits:
How! one of the wits? I care not if I run on that account; are they in Town think you?
Whether runst thou now?
To an Ordnary for one of the wits.
Why to an Ordnary, above a Tavern.
No, I hold your best wits to be at Ordnary, nothing so good in a Tavern:
And why I pray Sir?
Because those that go to an Ordnary dine better for Twelve pence, then he that goes to a Tavern for his five shillings; and I think those have the best wits that can save four shillings, and fare better too:
So Sir, all your wit then runs upon Victuals.
It is a sign twill hold out the longer then.
What were you saying to me?
Please your worship,
I heard there came a Scholar over lately
With old Sir Oliver's Lady.
Is she come?
What is that Lady?
A good Gentlewoman,
Has been long prisoner with the enemy.
I know it too well, and joy in her release.
Go to that house then straight, and in one labour
You may bid them, and entreat home that Scholar:
It shall be done with speed Sir.
I'll along with you
And see what face that Scholar has brought over; a thin pair of Barbreaking Sea-water Greenchops, I warrant you.
Since wit has pleasured me, I'll pleasure wit,
Scholars shall fare the better.O my Blessing
I feel a hand of mercy lift me up
Out of a world of waters, and now sets me
Upon a Mountain, where the Sun plays most,
To cheer my heart even as it dries my limbs.
What deep I see beneath me? in whose falls
Many a nimble mortal toils,
And scarce can feed himself; the streams of Fortune
Against which he tugs in vain, still beat him down,
And will not suffer him (past hand to mouth)
To lift his arm to his Posterities Blessing.
I see a careful sweat run in a ring
About his Temples, but all will not do:
For till some happy means relieve his state,
There he must stick, and bide the wrath of fate
I see this wrath upon an uphil Land,
O blessed are they can see their falls, and stand!
How now?
With much entreating Sir, he's come.
Sir you'remy Brother!Joys come thick together:
Sir when I see a Scholar, pardon me,
I am so taken with affliction for him,
That I must run into his arms, and clasp him
Art stands in need Sir of such cherishers,
I meet too few; it were a brave world for Scholars
If half a Kingdom were but of your mind Sir;
Let Ignorance and Hell confound the rest.
Let it suffer sweet Sir, you cannot think
How dearly you are welcome.
May I live
To show you service for it.
Your love your love Sir,
We go no higher, nor shall you go lower.
Sir I'm bold to send for you, to request
A kindness from your wit, for some device
To grace our wedding it shall be worth your pains;
And something more express my love to art,
You shall not receive all in bare embraces.
Your love I thank, but pray Sir pardon me,
I've a heart says I must not grant you that.
No, what's your reason Sir?
I'm not at peace
With the Lady of this house; now you'll excuse me,
Sh'as wronged my sister, and I may not do it.
The Widow knows you not.
I never saw her face to my remembrance.
Oh that my heart should feel her wrongs so much,
And yet live ignorant of the injurer!
Let me persuade thee, since she knows you not,
Make clear the weather, let not griefs betray you,
I'll tell her y're a worthy friend of mine,
And so I tell her true; thou art indeed.
Sir here she comes.
What are you busy Sir?
Nothing less Lady; here's a Gentleman
Of noble parts, beside his friendship to me;
Pray give him liberal welcome.
He's most welcome.
The virtues of his mind will deserve largely.
Methinks his outward parts deserve as much then; a proper Gentleman it is.
Come worthy Sir.
I follow; check thy blood
For fear it prove too bold to wrong thy goodness
A wiseman makes affections but his slaves.
Break 'em in time, let 'em not master thee.
O it is my sisters enemy, think of that!
Some speedy grief fall down upon the fire,
Before it take my heart; let it not rise
Against brotherly Nature, Judgment, and these wrongs;make clear the weather.
Oh who could look upon her face in storms!
Yet pains may work it out, griefs do but strive
To kill this spark, I'll keep it still alive.
FAith Sir Gilbert, forget and forgive,
There's all our hands to a new bargain of friendship.
I and all our hearts to boot, Sir Gelbert.
Why la you! there's but four Suitors left on's in all th'world, and the fifth has the Widow; if we should not be kind to one another, and so few on's y'faith, I would we were all raked up in some hole or other.
Pardon me Gentlemen, I cannot but remember
Your late disgraceful words before the Widow,
In time of my oppression.
Puh, Saturn reigned then, a melancholy grumbling Planet, he was in the third house of privy enemies, and would have bewrayed all our plots; beside there was a fiery conjunction in the Dragons tails, that spoiled all that ere we went about.
Dragon or Devil, somewhat it was I am sure.
Why I tell you Sir Gilbert, we were all out of our wits in it; I was so mad at that time my self. I could have wished an hind-quarter of my Bull out of your belly again, whereas now I care not if you had eat tail and all; I am no niggard in the way of friendship, I was ever yet at Full Moon in good fellowship, and so you shall find, if you look into the Almanac of my true nature.
Well ell's forgiven for once, hands apace, Gentlemen.
Ye shall have two of mine to do you a kindness,yet when they're both abroad, who shall look to the house here?
Not only a new friendship, but a friend.
But upon this condition Gentlemen
You shall hear now a thing worth your revenge.
And you doubt that,
You shall have mine before-hand, I've one ready, I never go without a black Oath about me.
I know the least touch of a spur in this
Will now put your desires to a false gallop,
By all means slanderous in every place,
And in all companies, to disgrace the Widow,
No matter in what rank, so it be spiteful
And worthy your revenges; so now I,
It shall be all my study, care, and pains,
And we can lose no labour; all her foes
Will make such use on it, that they'll snatch it from us
Faster then we can forge it; though we keep
Four tongues at work upon it and never cease.
Then for the indifferent world, faith they're apter
To bid a slave welcome, then a truth;
We have the odds of our side: this in time
May grow so general, as disgrace will spread,
That wilde dissention may divide the bed.
Pep. Excellent!
A pure revenge, I see no dregs in it.
Let each man look to his part now, and not feed
Upon one dish all four on's, like plain Maltmen;
For at this feast we must have several kickshaws,
And delicate made dishes, that the world
May see it is a Banquet finely furnished.
Why then let me alone for one of your kickshaws.
I have thought on that already.
Prithee how Sir?
Marry Sir I'll give it out abroad, that I have lain with the Widow my self, as it is the fashion of many a gallant to disgrace his new Mistress, when he cannot have his will of her, and lie with her name in every Tavern, though he ne'er came within a yard of her person; so I being a Gentleman, may say as much in that kind as a gallant; I am as free by my Fathers copy.
This will do excellent Sir!
And moreover I'll give the world thus much to understand beside that, if I had not lain with the Widow in the wain of the Moon, at one of my Seven Stars houses, when Venus was about businos of her own, and could give no attendance, she had been brought a bed with two roaring boys by this time, and the Gemini being Infants, I'd have made away with them like a step-mother, and put mine own boys in their places.
Why this is beyond talk, you out-run your Master.
Whoop! draw home next time; here are all the old shooters, that have lost the game at pricks? what a fair mark had Sir Gilbert on it, if he had shot home before the last Arrow came in? methinks these show to me now, for all the world, like so many lousy beggars turned out of my Ladies Barn, and have ne'er a hole to put their heads in.
Mass here's her Ladyships Ass, he tells us any thing.
Ho Pickadille!
What Sir Gilbert Lambston!
Gentlemen, Out-laws all, how do you do?
How! what dost call us? how goes the world at home Lad?
What strange news?
This is the state of prodigals as right as can be, when they have spent all their means on brave feasts, their glad to scrape to a serving-man for a meals meat.
So you that meanwhile like four prodigal rivals,
Could Goose or Capon, Crane or Woodcock choose,
Now're glad to make up a poor meal with news;
A lamentable hearing!
He's in passion;up to the Eyebrows for us.
O Mr Weatherwise, I blame none but you;you are a Gentleman deeply read in Ponds Almanic;methinks you should not be such a shalllow fellow; you knew this day the twelf of June would come when the Sun enters into the Crabs room, and all your hopes would go aside, aside.
The fool says true y'faith Gentlemen, I
knew it would come all to this pass, I'll show it you presently.
If you had spared but four of your twelve Signs now,
You might have gone to a Tavern and made merry with 'em.
He has the best Moral meaning of an Ass, that ere I heard speak with tongue: Look you here Gentlemen; fifth day neither Fish nor Flesh.
No, nor good Red-herring, and you look again.
Sixth day privily prevented.
Marry faugh.
Seventh day shrunk in the wetting.
Nay, so will the best Ware bought for love or money.
The eighth day over head and ears.
By my faith he come home in a sweet pickle then!
The ninth day, scarce sound at heart.
What a pox ailed it?
The tenth day a Courtiers welcome.
That's a cup of Bear, and you can get it.
The eleventh day, stones against the wind.
Pox of an Ass, he might have thrown 'em better.
Now the twelf day Gentlemen, that was our day.Past all redemption.
Then the Devil go with it.
Now you see plainly Gentlemen how we're used,
The Calendar will not lie for no mans pleasure.
Push, you're too confident in Almanac Posies.
Faith so said we.
They're mere delusions.
How!You see how knavishly they happen Sir.
I, that's because they're foolishly belied Sir.
Well, take your courses Gentlemen without 'em, and see what will come on it you may wander like masterless-men, there's ne'er a Planet will are a half-penny for you: If they look after you I'll be hanged, when you scorn to bestow two pence to look after them.
How! a device at the wedding say thou!
Why? have none of you heard of that yet?
It is the first news y'faith Lad.
Oh there's a brave travelling Scholar entertain'd into the house a purpose; one that has been all the world over, and some part of Jerusalem; he has his Chamber, his diet, and three Candles allowed him after Supper.
By my faith he need not complain for victuals then, what ere he be.
He lies in one of the best Chambers in the house, bravely matted; and to warm his wits as much, a cup of Sack and an Aqua Vitae Bottle stands just at his elbow.
He's shroudly hurt by my faith; if he catch an Ague of that fashion, I'll be hanged.
He'll come abroad anon.
Art sure on it?
Why he ne'er stays a quarter of an hour in the house together:
No; how can he study then?
Pha best of all; he talks as he goes, and writes as he runs, besides you know it is death to a traveller to stand long in one place.
It may hit right boys!Honest Pickadille
Thou wast wont to love me.
I'd good cause Sir then.
Thou shalt have the same still, take that.
Will you believe me now; I ne'er loved you better in my life, then I do at this present.
Tell me now truly; who are the Presenters?
What Parsons are employed in the Device?
Parsons! not any Sir; my Mistress will not be at the charge; she keeps none but an old Welsh Vicar.
Prithee, I mean, who be the Speakers?
Troth I know none, but those that open their mouths: Here he comes now himself, you may ask him.
Is this he? by my faith one may pick a Gentleman out of his Calves, and a Scholar out on's Cheeks; one may see by his looks what's in him; I warrant you there has ne'er a new Almanac come out these dozen years, but he has studied it over and over.
Do not reveal us now.
Because you shall be sure on it, you have goven me a nine-pence here, and I'll give you the slip for it.
Well said; now the Fool's pleased, we may be bold.
Love is as great an enemy to Wit,
As Ignorance to Art; I find my powers
So much employed in business of my heart,
That all the time's too little to dispatch
Affairs within me.Fortune too remiss
I suffer for thy slowness, had I come
Before a Vow had chained their souls together,
There might have been some hope, though ne'er so little:
Now there's no spark at all, nor ere can be,
But dreadful ones struck from Adultery;
And if my Lust were smothered with her will,
Oh who could wrong a Gentleman so kind,
A stranger made up with a Brothers mind?
Peace, peace, enough, let me alone to manage it.
A quick invention, and a happy one
Reward your study Sir.
Gentlemen I thank you.
We understand your wits are in employment Sir,
In honour of this wedding.
Sir, the Gentleman
To whom that worthy Lady is betrothed,
Vouchsafes t'accept the power of my good will in it
I pray resolve us then Sir, for we're friends
That love and honour her.
Whether your number be yet full, or no,
Of those which you make choice of for Presenters.
First, it is so brief, because the time is so,
We shall not trouble many; and for those
We shall employ, the house will yield in servants
Nay then under your leave and favour Sir,
Since all your pains will be so weakly graced,
And wanting due performance lose their lustre;
Here are four of us Gentlemen, her friends
Both lovers of her honour, and your Art,
That would be glad so to express our selves,
And think our service well, and worthily placed.
My thanks do me no grace for this large kindness,
You make my labours proud of such Presenters.
She shall not think Sir, she's so ill beloved,
But friends can quickly make that number perfect.
She's bound t'acknowledge it.
Only thus much Sir,
Which will amaze her most; I'd hav't so carried,
As you can do it, that neither she, nor none
Should know what friends we were till all were done.
I that would make the sport.
I like it well Sir;
My hand and faith amongst you Gentlemen,
It shall be so disposed of.
We are the men then.
Then look you Gentlemen, the Device is single,
Naked, and plain, because the time's so short,
And gives no freedom to a wealthier sport;
It is only Gentlemen, the four Elements
In liveliest forms, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire.
Mass and here's four of us too.
It fits well Sir.
This the effect, That whereas all those four
Maintain a natural opposition
And untruc'd war, the one against the other,
To shame their ancient Envies they should see
How well in two breasts all these do agree:
That's in the Bride and Bridegroom; I am quick Sir.
In faith it's pretty Sir, I approve it well.
But see how soon my happiness, and your kindness
Is crossed together.
Crossed! I hope not so Sir.
I can employ but two of you.
How comes that Sir?
Air and the Fire should be by me presented,
But the two other in the forms of women.
Nay, then we're gone again: I think these women
Were made to vex and trouble us in all shapes.
Faith Sir you stand too nicely.
So think I Sir.
Yet when we tax our selves, it may the better
Set off our Errors, when the fine eyes judge 'em;
But water certainly should be a woman.
By my faith then he is gelded since I saw him last; he was thought to be a man once, when he got his wife with child before he was married.
Fie, you are fishing in an other stream Sir.
But now I come to yours, and you go to that Sir; I see no reason then but Fire and Water should change shapes and genders.
How prove you that Sir?
Why there's no reason but Water should be a man, because Fire is commonly known to be a Queen.
So Sir, you argue well.
Nay more Sir, Water will break in at a little crevice, so will a man if he be not kept out; Wala will undermine so will an Informer; Water will ebb and flow, so will a Gentleman; Water will search any place, and so will a Constable, as lately he did at my Seven Stars for a young Wench that was stole; Water will quench Fire, and so will Wat the Barber Ergo, Let Water wear a Codpeece-point.
Faith Gentlemen I like your company well.
Let's see who'll dispute with me at the Full of the Moon
No Sir; and you be vain glorious of your Talent, I'll put you to it once more.
I'm for you Sir, as long as the Moon keeps in this quarter.
Well, how answer you this then? Earth and Water are both bearers; therefore they should be women.
Why so are Porters and Peddlers, and yet they are known to be men.
I'll give you over in time Sir, I shall repent the bestowing on it else.
If I that have proceeded in five and twenty such Books of Astronomy, should not be able to put down a Scholar now in One thousand six hundred thirty and eight, the Dominical Letter being G, I stood for a Goose.
Then this will satisfy you though that be a woman;
Oceanus, the Sea, that's chief of Waters,
He wears the form of a man, and so may you.
Now I hear reason, and I may consent.
And so, though Earth challenge a Feminine face
The matter of which Earth consists, that's dust,
The general soul of Earth is of both kinds.
Fit your selves Gentlemen, I've enough for me.
Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, part 'em amongst you
Let me play fair, I was my Fathers eldest son.
I but this Air never possessed the Lands
I'm but disposed to jest with you Sir; it is the same my Almanac speaks on, is it not?
That it is Sir.
Then leave it to my discretion, to fit both the part and the person.
You shall have your desire Sir.
We'll agree
Without your trouble now Sir, we're not factious,
Or envy one another for best parts;
Like quarrelling Actors that have passionate fits,
We submit always to the Writers wits.
He that commends you, may do it liberally,
For you deserve as much as praise can show.
We'll send to you privately.
I'll dispatch you.
We'll poison your device.
She must have pleasures,
Shows and conceits, and we disgraceful doom.
We'll make your Elements come limping home.
How happy am I in this unlooked for grace,
This voluntary kindness from these Gentlemen!
Twill set off all my labours far more pleasing
Before the Widow, whom my heart calls Mistress,
But my tongue dares not second it.
How say you now Kate?
I like this Music well Sir
O unfortunate!
Yet though a Tree be guarded from my touch,
There's none can hinder me to love the fruit.
Nay, now we know your mind Brothere, we'll provide for you.
O were it but as free as late times knew it
I would deserve, it all lifes wealth could do it.
O My reviving joy! thy quickening presense
Makes the sad night of threescore and ten years
Sit like a youthful Spring upon my blood:
I cannot make thy welcome rich enough
With all the wealth of words.
It is expressed Sir
With more then can be equalled; the ill store
Lies only on my side, my thanks are poor.
Blessed be the goodness of his mind for ever,
That did redeem thy life, may it return
Upon his fortunes double! that worthy Gentleman,
Kind Mr Beveril! shower upon him, Heaven,
Some unexpected happiness to requite him!
For that my joys unlooked for;O more kind,
And juster far is a mere strangers goodness
Then the sophistick faith of natural sons.
Here's one could juggle with me, take up the ransom,
He and his loose companion.
Say you me so Sir?
I'll eat hard Eggs for that tec:
Spend the money
And bring me home false news, and empty pockets:
In that young gallants tongue there you were dead
Ten weeks before this day, had not this Merchant
Brought first the truth in words, your self in substance.
Pray let me stay you here, ere you proceed Sir;
Did he report me dead say you?
Else you live not.
See now Sir, you may lay your blame too rashly,
When no body looked after it; let me tell you Sir,
A Fathers anger should take great advice,
Ere it condemn flesh of so dear a price.
He's no way guilty yet for that report
The general tongue of all the Country spread;
For being removed 'far off, I was thought dead.
Can my faith now be taken into favour Sir?
Is it worthy to be trusted?
No by my troth is it not; it would make shift to spend another ransom yet.
Well Sir, I must confess you've here dealt well with me;
And what is good in you, I love again.
Now am I half ways in, just to the girdle,
But the worst part's behind.
Marry I fear me Sir,
This weather is too glorious to hold long.
I see no cloud to interpose it Sir,
If you place confidence in what I have told you.
Nay it is clear sky on that side, would it were so
All over his obedience; I see that,
And so does this good Gentleman.
Do you Sir?
That makes his honesty doubtful.
I pray speak Sir,
The truth of your last kindness makes me bold with you.
The Knight your husband, Madam, can best speak
He trulest can show griefs whose heart they break.
I'm sorry yet for more, pray let me know it Sir,
That I may help to chide him, though it would grieve me.
Why then prepare for it; you came over now
In the best time to do it you could pick out:
Not only spent my money, but to blind me,
He and his wicked Instrument
Now he fiddles me
Brings home a Minion here, by great chance known;
Told me she was his sister, she proyes none.
This was unkindly done Sir; now I'm sorry
My good opinion lost it self upon you;
You are not the same son I left behind me,
More grace took him.O let me end in time,
For fear I should forget my self, and chide him!
Where is he Sir? though he beguiled your eyes,
He cannot deceive mine; we're now too hard for him.
For since our first unfortunate separation.
I've often seen the Girl (would that were true)
By many a happy accident, many a one;
But never durst acknowledge her for mine own,
And therein stood my joys distressed again.
You rehearse miseries wife! call the Maid down.
She's been too often down to be now called so;
She'll lie down shortly, and call some body up.
He's now to deal with one Sir that knows truth;
He must be shamed or quit, there's no mean saves him.
I hear her come.
You see how hard it is now
To redeem good opinion being once gone;
Be careful then, and keep it when it is won.
Now see me take a poison with great joy,
Which but for thy sake, I should swoon to touch.
What new affliction? am I set to sale
For any one that bids most shame for me?
Look you? do you see what stuff they've brought me home here?
Oh bless her eternal powers! my life, my comforts,
My nine years grief, but everlasting joy now!
Thrice welcome to my heart; it is she indeed.
What is it?
I'm unfit to carry a ransom.
Down on your knees to save your Belly harmless;
Ask blessing, though you never mean to use it,
But give it away presently to a Beggar-wench:
My faith is blemished, I'm no man of trust Sir.
Rise with a Mothers blessing.
All this while sh'as rise with a sons.
But soft ye, soft ye wife!
I pray take heed you place your blessing right now.
This honest Dutchman here told me he saw her
At Antwerp in an Inn.
True, she was so Sir.
Sir, it is my quality; what I speak once,
I affirm ever; in that Inn I saw her,
That lets her not to be your daughter now?
Oh Sir, is it come to that!
Here's joys ne'er dreamt on!
O Mr Sunset, I am at the rising
Of my refulgent happiness! now son Sandfield,
Once more and ever!
I am proud on it Sir.
Pardon me boy, I have wronged thy faith too much.
Now may I leave my shell, and peep my head forth.
Where is this Savorwit, that honest whoreson?
That I may take my curse from his knaves shoulders.
O Sir, I feel you at my very blade here,
Your curse is ten stone weight, and a pound over.
Come, you're a witty Varlet, and a trusty.
You shall still find me a poor faithful felllow Sir,
If you have another ransom to send over,
Or daughter to find out.
I'll do thee right boy;
I ne'er yet knew thee but speak honest English,
Marry in Dutch I found thee a knave lately.
That was to hold you but in play a little,
Till farther truths came over, and I strong;
You shall ne'er find me a knave in mine own tongue
I have more grace in me, I go out of England
Still when I take such courses; that shows modesty Sir.
Any thing full of wit, and void of harm,
I give thee pardon for, so was that now.
Faith now I'm quit, I find my self the nimbler
To serve you so again, and my will's good
Like one that lately shook off his old Irons,
And cuts a purse at Bench, to deserve new ones.
Since it holds all the way so fortunate still,
And strikes so even with my first belief,
This is the Gentleman wife, young Mr Sandfield here,
A man of worthy parts beside his Lands,
Whom I make choice of for my daughters Bed
But he'll make choice there of another Bedfellow.
I wish 'em both the happiness of love Sir.
It was spoke like a good Lady
And your memory can reach it wife; but it is so long ago too.
Old Mr Sunset he had a young daughter
When you unluckily left England so,
And much about the age of our Girl there;
For both were nursed together.
It is so fresh
In my remembrance, now you've wakned it,
As if twelve years were but a twelve hours dream.
That Girl is now a proper Gentlewoman,
As fine a body wife, as ere was measured
With an Indenture cut in farthing steaks.
O say not so Sir Oliver, you shall pardon me Sir.
Y'faith Sir you are too blame.
Sings, dances, plays,
Touches an Instrument with a Motherly Grace.
It is your own daughter that you mean that by.
There's open Dutch indeed, and he could take it
This wench under your leave
You have my love in it.
Is my sons wife that shall be.
Thus I'd hold with it;
Is your sons wife that should be Mr Sandfields?
I come in happy time to a feast of marriages.
And now you putt's in the mind, the hour draws on
At the new married Widows there we're looked for;
There will be entertainments, sports, and banquets;
There these young lovers shall clap hands together,
The seed of one feast shall bring forth another.
Well said Sir Oliver.
You're a stranger Sir,
Your welcome will be best.
Good Sir excuse me:
You shall along y'faith, you must not refuse me.
O Mother! these new joys that sets my soul up,
Which had no means, nor any hope of any,
Has brought me now so far in debt to you,
I know not which way to begin to thank you
I am so lost in all, I cannot guess
Which of the two my service most constrains,
Your last kind goodness, or your first deer pains.
Love is a Mothers duty to a son,
As a sons duty is both love and fear.
I ow you a poor life Madam, that's all;
Pray call for it when you please, it shall be ready for you.
Make much on it Sir till then.
If Buttered Sack will
Me thinks the more I look upon her son,
The more thy sisters face runs in my mind.
Belike she's somewhat like herIt makes the better Madam.
Was Antwerp, say you, the first place you found her in?
Yes Madam: Why do you ask?
Whose daughter were you?
I know not rightly whose, to speak truth Madam.
The Mother of her was a good twigger the whilst.
No: with whom were you brought up then?
With those Madam
To whom ('ve often heard) the enemy sold me.
What's that?
Too often have I heard this piteous story
Of a distressed Mother I had once
Whose comfortable sight I lost at Sea
But then the years of childhood took from me
Both the remembrance of her, and the sorrows.
Oh I begin to feel her in my blood!
My heart leaps to be at her;What was that Mothere?
Some said an English Lady;But I know not.
What's thy name?
Grace.
May it be so in Heaven,
For thou art mine on Earth; welcome dear child
Unto thy Fathers house, thy Mothers arms,
After thy foreign sorrows.
Twill prove gallant!
What son! such earnest workI bring thee joy now
Will make the rest show nothing, it is so glorious.
Why it is not possible, Madam, that mans happiness
Should take a greater height then mine aspires.
No, now you shall confess it, this shall quit thee
From all fears present, or hereafter doubts
About this business
Give me that sweet Mother.
Here take her then, and set thine arms a work,
There needs no 'fection, it is indeed thy sister:
My sister!
Cuds me, I feel the razor!
Why, how now son? how comes a change so soon?
Oh, I beseech you Mother, wound me any where,
But where you pointed last: That's present death.
Devise some other miserable torment,
Though ne'er so pitiless, and I'll run and meet it.
Some way more merciful let your goodness think on
May steal away my joys, but save my soul;
I'll willingly restore back every one
Upon that mild condition any thing
But what you spake last, will be comfortable.
You're troubled with strange fits in England here
Your first suit to me did entreat me hardly,
To say it was she, to have old wrath appeased;
And now it is known your sister, you're not pleased
How should I show my self!
Say it is not she.
Shall I deny my daughter?
O you kill me,
Beyond all tortures!
Why do you deal thus with me!
She is my wife, I married her at Antwerp;
I have known the way unto her Bed these three months.
And that's too much by twelve weeks for a sister.
I understand you now, too soon, too plain.
O Mother if you love my peace for ever,
Examine her again, find me not guilty.
It is now too late, her words make that too true.
Her words! shall bare words overthrow a soul?
A body is not cast away so lightly.
How can you know it is she? let Sense decide it,
She then so young, and both so long divided.
She tells me the sad story.
Does that throw me?
Many a distress may have the face of yours,
Tha never was kin to you.
But however Sir,
I trust you are not married.
Here's the witness,
And all the wealth I had with her; this Ring
That joined our hearts together.
Oh too clear now!
Thou brought in evidence to o'rthrow thy self,
Had no one word been spoke only this shown
It had been enough to approved her for mine own;
See here two Letters that begun my name,
Before I knew thy Father this I gave her,
And as a Jewel fastened to her ear.
Pardon me Mother that you find it stray,
I kept it till I gave my heart away.
Oh to what Mountain shall I take my flight,
To hide the monster of my sin from sight!
I'll to Wales presently, there's the best Hills
To hide a poor knave in.
Oh heap not desperation upon guilt!
Repent yet, and ell's saved; it was but hard chance;
Amongst all sins, Heaven pities ignorance,
She's still the first that has her pardon signed,
All sins else see their faults, she's only blind.
Go to thy Chamber, pray, leave off and win,
One hours repentance cures a twelve months sin.
O my distressed husband, my dear Brother!
O Savorwit! never came sorrow yet
To mankind like it; I'm so far distressed,
I've no time left to give my heart attendance,
Too little all to wait upon my soul!
Before this empest came, how well I stood,
Full in the beams of blessedness and joy!
The memory of man, could never say
So black a storm fell in so bright a day:
I am that man that even life surfeits of;
Or if to live, unworthy to be seen
By the savage eye-sight, give's thy hand;
Commend me to thy prayers.
Next time I say 'em
Farewell my honest breast, that cravest no more
Then possible kindness, that I've found thee large in,
And I must ask no more; there Wit must stay,
It cannot pass, where Fate stops up the way.
Joy thrive with thee; I'll never see thee more.
What's that Sir! pray come back, and bring those words with you,
You shall not carry 'em so out of my company:
There's no last refuge, when your Father knows it;
There's no such need on it yet, stay but till then,
And take one with you that will imitate you
In all the desperate On-sets man dare think on.
Were it to challenge all the Wolves in France,
To meet at one set battle, I'd be your half in it.
All Beasts of Venom,what you had a mind to,
Your part should be took still: For such a day
Let's keep our selves in heart, then am I for you.
In the mean time to beat off all suspicion,
Let's to the Bridehouse toohere's my Petition.
Thou hast a learning art when all hopes fly;
Let one night waste, there's time enough left to die.
A minute's as good as a thousand year Sir,
To pnk a mans heart like a Summer suit.
Bestir your bones nimbly, you Ponderous Beef-buttock'd Knaves; what a number of lazy Hinds do I keep company withal? whore's the fleshcolour Velvet Cushion now, for my Ladies Peasporridge-tawny Sattin-bum? you attendants upon Revels!
You can prate and domineer well, because you have a privilege place; but I'd fain see you set your hand to it.
O base bone-pickers, I set my hand to it! when did you ere see a Gentleman set his hand to any thing, unless it were to a sheep-skin, and receive a hundred pound for his pains.
And afterword lie in the Counter for his pleasure.
Why true, Sir, it is for his pleasure indeed; for spite of all their teeth, he may lie in the Hole when he list.
Marry and should for me.
I, thou would make as good a Baud as the best Jailor of them all; I know that.
How? Fool!
Hark! I must call you Knave within, it is but staying somewhat the longer for it.
This fair Assembly is most freely wellcome.
Sir Whole Thanks to you good Sir.
Come my long wished for Madam,
You and this worthy stranger take best welcome,
Your freedom is a second feast to me.
How is it with my brother?
The fit holds him still;
Nay, Love's more violent.
'Lass poor Gentleman! I would he had my office without money;
If he should offer any, I'd refuse it.
I have the Letter ready:
He's worthy of a place that knows how to use it.
That's well said,Come Ladies, Gentlemen; Sir Oliver, good, seat your selves; shall we be found unreadiest?What is you Gentleman with the Funeral-face there? me thinks that look does ill become a Bride-house?
Who does your worship mean Sir? my son Philip?
I am sure he had ne'er less reason to be sad:
Why are you sad son Philip?
How Sir, sad!
You shall not find it so Sir.
Take heed he do not thenYou must beware how you carry your face in this company; as far as I can see, that young Bridegroom has Hauks-eyes, he'll go nigh to spell sister in your face, if your Nose were but crooked enough to serve for an S. he'd find an eye presently, and then he has more light for the rest.
I'll learn then to dissemble.
Nay and you be to learn that now, you'll ne'er sit in a Branched Velvet-gown as long as you live; you should have took that at Nurse, before your Mother weaned you; so do all those that prove great children, and batten well: Peace, here comes a Schoollar indeed, he has learnt it I warrant you.
Kind Sir, your welcome, you take all the pains Sir.
I wish they were but worthy of the grace Of your fair presence, and this choice Assembly. Here is an abstract, Madam, of what's shown, Which I commend to your Favour.
Thank you for it Sir.
I would I durst present my love as boldly:
My honest Brother!
Look thee here Sweet-heart.
What's there sweet Madam?
Music, and we're ready.
The Flame of Zeal
The wicked Fire of Lust
Does now spread heat through Water, Air, and Dust.
How? he's out in the beginningThe Wheel of Time.
The Devil set Fire of the Distaff.
I that was wont in elder times to pass
For a bright Angel, so they called me then,
Now so corrupted with the upstart Fires
Of Avarice, Luxury, and Inconstant heats,
Struck from the bloods of cunning Clap-aln Daughters,
Night-walking Wives, but most libidinous Widows,
That I that purify even Gold it self,
Have the contemptible Dross thrown in my face,
And my bright name walk common in disgrace.
How am I used alate, that I am so handled,
Thrust into Alleys, Hospitals, and Tubs!
I was once a name of comfort, warmed great houses
When Charity was Landlord, I have given welcome
To forty Russet Yeomen at a time,
In a fair Christmas-Hall. How am I changed!
The Chimneys are swept up, the Hearth as cold
As the Fore-fathers Charity in the Sun.
All the good hospitable heat now turns
To my young Landlords Lust, and there it burns.
Rich Widows that were wont to choose by Gravity
Their second Husbands, not by tricks of Blood,
Are now so taken with lose Aretine Flames
Of nimble wantonness, and high-fed Pride,
They marry now but the third part of Husbands,
Boys, smooth faced Katamites, to fulfil their Bed,
As if a woman should a woman wed.
These are the Fires alate, my brightness darks,
And fills the world so full of beggarly Sparks,
Heat! how am I disgraced? what rogue should this be?
By my faith Monsieur Fire, you're a hot whoreson.
I fear my Brother is beside his wits,
He would not be so senseless to rail thus else.
After this heat, you Madams, fat and fair,
Open your Casements wide, and take in Air;
But not that Air false women make up oaths with.
No, nor that Air gallants perfume their clothes with;
I am that Air that keeps about the Clouds,
None of my Kindred was smelt out in Crowds,
Not any of our house was ever tainted,
When many a thousand of our foes have fainted.
Yet some there are that be my chief poluters,
Widows that falsify their Faith to Suitors,
And will give fair words when the Signs in Cancer
But at the next remove a scurvy answer,
Come to the poor men's houses, eat their Banquet,
And at night, with a Boy tossed in a Blanquet.
Nay, shall I come more near? Perhaps at noon,
For here I find a spot full in the Moon.
I know youths trick, what's she that can withstand it,
When Mercury reigns, my Ladies Chamber Planet?
He that believes a Widows words shall fail,
When Venus Gown-skirts sweeps the Dragons tail.
Fair weather the first day she makes to any,
The second cloudy, and the third day rainy;
The fourth day a great storm, Lightning, and Thunder;
A Bolt strikes the Suitor, a Boy keeps her under.
Life! these are some counterfeit slaves crept in their rooms,
A purpose for disgrace: they shall all share with me.
Heart! who the Devil should these be?
My faith Gentlemen,
Air has perfumed the room well.
So me thinks, Madam.
A man may smell her meaning two rooms off,
Though his Nose wanted Reparations,
And the Bridge left at Shoreditch as a Pledge
For Rosa Solace, in a Bleaking-house.
Life! what should be his meaning in it?
I wonder.
Me thinks this room should yet retain such heat,
Struck out from the first Ardor, and so glow yet,
You should desire my company, wsh for Water
That offers here to serve your several Pipes,
Without constriant of Mill, or death of Waterhouse.
What if I sprinkled on the Widows Cheeks
A few cool drops to ly the guilty heat,
That flshes from her Conscience to her face;
Would it not refresh her shame? From such as she
I first took weakness and inconstancy;
I sometimes swell above my banks and spread;
They're commonly with child, before they're wed:
In me the Sirens sing before they play,
In her more witchcraft, for her smiles betray;
Where I'm lest seen, there my most danger lies,
So in those parts hid most from a mans eyes:
Her heart, her love, or what may be more close,
I know no mercy, she thinks that no loss:
In her poor gallants, Pirats thrive in me;
I help to cast away, and so does she.
Nay, and you can hold nothing sweet Sir Water,
I'll wash my hands a'you, ever hereafter.
Earth stands for a Full-point, me you should hire
To stop the gaps of Water, Air and Fire;
I love muck well, but your first husband better.
Above his soul he loved it as his end
Did fearfully witness it; at his last gasp
His spirit flmed, as it forsook his Breast,
And left the sparkles quarrelling about his Lips:
Now of such Metal the Devil makes him Whips.
He shall have Gold enough to glut his Soul;
And as for Earth, I'll stop his Cranes-throat full.
The wealth he left behind him, most men know,
He wrung inconscionably from the rights
Of poor men's livings, he drunk dry their brows.
That Liquor has a curse, yet nothing sweeter;
When your posterity drinks, then twill taste bitla.
And now to vex, against Nature, Form, Rule, Place,
See once four waiting Elements all embrace.
How? Sir Gilbert Lambston, Mr Overdon,
All our old Suitors! you have took pains my Masters.
We made a vow we'd speak our minds to you.
And I think we're as good as our words, though it cost some of our purses; I ow money for the Clouds yet, I care not who knows it; the Planets are sufficient enough to pay the Painter, and I were dead.
Who are you Sir?
Your most unworthy servant.
Pardon me, is it you Sir?
My disgrace urged my wit to take some form,
Wherein I might both best and properliest
Discover my abusers, and your own,
And show you some content, before you'd none.
Sir, I ow much both to your care and love,
And you shall find your full requital worthy.
Was this the plot now your poor envy works out?
I do revenge my self with pitying on you:
Take Fire into the Buttery, he has most need on it,
Give Water some small Beer, too good for him;
Air, you may walk abroad like a Fortune-teller,
But take down Earth, and make him drink in the Celler.
The best revenge that could be.
I commend you Madam.
I thought they were some such sneakers.
The four Suitors! and here was a mess of mad Elements.
Lights, more lights there; where be these Blew-coats?
You know your lodgings Gentlemen to night.
It is bounty makes bold guests, Madam.
Good rest Lady.
A most contentful night, begin a health Madam
To your long joys, and may the years go round with it
As many thanks as you have wished 'em hours Sir,
Take to your lodging with you.
A general rest to all.
I'm excepted.
Take in another to you then, there's room enough.
In that exception, faith to serve us both.
The Dial of my sleep goes by your eyes.
NOw like a greedy Usurer alone,
I sum up all the wealth this day has brought me;
And thus I hug it.
Prithee!
Thus I kiss it.
I can't abide these kissings.
How Sir? not?
I'll try that sure, I'll kiss you out of that humour.
Push, by my troth I cannot.
What cannot you Sir?
Not toy, nor bill and imitate House-Pigeons,
A married man must think of other matters.
How, other matters Sir! what other matters?
Why are there no other matters that belong to it?
Do you think you've married only a Cock-sparrow?
And fit but for one business, like a fool;
You shall not find it so.
You can talk strangely Sir,
Come, will you to bed?
No faith will not I.
What not to bed Sir?
And I do, hang me; not to bed with you.
How not to bed with me! Sir with whom else?
Why am not I enough to lie with my self?
Is that the end of marriage?
No by my faithit is but the beginning, yet death is the end on it,
Unless some trick come in the middle and dash all.
Were you so forward lately, and so youthfull,
That scarce my modest strength could save me from you,
And are you now so cold?
I've thought on it since,
It was but a rude part in me y'faith
To offer such bold tricks to any woman,
And by degrees I shall well break my self from it;
I feel my self well chastned since that time,
And not the third part now so loosely minded.
O when one sees their follies, it is a comfort;
My very thoughts take more staid years upon 'em.
Oh marriage is such a serious divine thing,
It makes youth grave, and sweetly nips the Spring.
If I had chose a Gentleman for care
And worldly business, I had ne'er took you;
I had the offers of enough, more fit
For such employment; I chose you for love;
Youth, and content of heart, and not for troubles:
You are not ripe for them; after you've spent
Some twenty years in dalliance, youths affairs,
Then take a Book in your hand, and sum up cares;
As for wealth now, you know that's got to your hands.
But had I known't had been so wrongfully got,
As I heard since, you should have had free leave
To have made choice of another Master for it.
Why, can that trouble you?
It may too soon; but go,
My sleeps are sound, I love not to be started
With an ill conscience at the fall of midnight,
And have mine eyes torn op with poor men's curses,
I do not like the fate on it, it is still apt
To breed unrest, dissention, wilde debate,
And I'm the worst at quarrels upon Earth,
Unless a mighty injury should provoke me.
Get you to bed, go.
Not without you in troth Sir.
If you could think how much you wrong your self
In my opinion of you, you would leave me now
With all the speed you might; I like you worse
For this fond heat, and drink in more suspicion of you.
You high-fed Widows are too cunning people
For a poor Gentleman to come simply to.
What's that Sir?
You may make a youth on him,
It is at your curtsy, and that's ill trusted:
You could not want a friend, beside a Suitor,
To sit in your husbands gown, and look over your writings.
What's this?
I say there is a time when women
Can do too much, and understand too little.
Once more to bed, I'd willingly be a Father
To no more Noses then I got my self;
And so good night to you.
Now I see the infection,
A yellow poison runs through the sweet Spring
Of his fair youth already, it is distracted;
Jealous of that which Thought yet never acted.
O dear Sir! on my knees I swear to thee.
I prithee use them in thy private Chamber,
As a good Lady should, spare 'em not there,
Twill do thee good, faith none twill do thee here
Have I yet married poverty, and must love;
What Fortune has my heart? that's all I craved,
And that lies now a dying; it has took
A speeding poison, and I'm ignorant; how!
I never knew what beggary was, till now:
My wealth yields me no comfort in this plight,
Had want but brought me love, I'd happened right.
So, this will serve now for a preparetive
To op the powers of some dislike at first;
The Physic will pay't home.How dost thou Sir?
How goes the work?
Your Brother has the Letter.
I find no stop in it then, it moves well hitherto,
Did you convey it closely.
He ne'er set eye of me.
I cannot read too often.
Peace, to your office
What blessed fate took pity of my heart,
But with her presence to relieve me thus!
All the large volumes that my time hath mastered,
Are not so precious to adorn my spirit,
As these few lines are to enrich my mind.
I thirst again to drink of the same Fountain
I found your care and love so much in the performance of a little, wherein your wit and art had late employment, that I dare now trust your bosom with business of more weight and eminence: Little thought the world, that since the Wedding dinner, all my mirth was but dissembled, and seeming joys but counterfeit. The truth to you Sir is, I find so little signs of content in the bagain I made in the morning, that I began to repent before Evening Prayer, and to show some fruits of his wilful neglect, and wilde disposition, more then the day could bring forth to me, has now forsook my Bed, I know no cause for it.
But I'll besworn I do:
Being thus distressed Sir, I desire your comfortable presence and council, whom I know to be of worth, and judgment; that a Lady may safely impart her griefs to you, and commit 'em to the Virtues of Commiseration, and Secrecy.
I have took order for your private admittance
With a trusty servant of mine own, whom I have
Placed at my Chamber-door to attend your coming,
He shall not wait too long and curse my slowness.
I would you'd come away then.
How much am I beguiled in that young Gentleman!
I would have sworn had been the perfect abstract
Of honesty and mildness: It is not so
I pardon you sweet Brother, there's no hold
Of what you speak now, you're in Cupids pound.
Blessed be the secret hand that brought thee hither;
But the dear hand that writ it, ten times blessed.
That's I still, has blessed me now ten times at twice.
Away I hear him coming.
Strike it sure now?
I warrant thee sweet Kate, choose your best
Who's there?
O Sir, is it you! you're welcome then,
My Lady still expects you Sir.
Who's with her?
Not any creature living Sir.
Drink that,
I've made thee wait too long.
It does not seem so now Sir. Sir if a man
Tread warily as any wise man will,
How often may he come to a Ladies Chamber, and be welcome to her?
Thou give me learned council for a Closet.
Make use on it Sir, and you shall find no loss in it.
So, you are surely in, and you must under.
Pardon my rude disturbance, my wrongs urge it,
I did but try the plainness of her mind,
Suspecting she dealt cunningly with my youth,
And told her the first night, I would not know her;
But minding to return, I found the door
Warded suspitiously, and I heard a noise;
Such as fear makes, and guiltiness at th'approaching
Of an unlooked for husband.
This is strange Sir.
Behold its bard, I must not be kept out.
There is no reason Sir.
I'll be resolved in it.
If you be sons of honour, follow me.
Then must I stay behind, for I think I was begot in the Woodyard, and that makes every thing go so hard with me.
That's he, be sure on him
Be not so furious Sir.
She whispered to him to slip into her Closet.
What have I taken you? is not my dream true now?
Unmerciful Adulteress, the first night!
Nay good Sir patience.
Give me the Villains heart,
That I may throw't into her bosom quick,
There let the Lecher pant.
Nay sweet Sir.
Pardon me,
His life's too little for me.
How am I wrongfully shamed? speak your intent Sir
Before this company, I pursue no pity
This is a fine thievish juggling, Gentlemen!
She asks her mate that shares in guilt with her? Too gross, too gross!
Rash mischief.
Treacherous Sir!
Did I for this cast a friends arm about thee?
Gave thee the welcome of a worthy spirit,
And lodged thee in my house, nay, entertained thee
More like a natural Brother, then a stranger;
And have I this reward? Perhaps the pride
Of thy good parts, did lift thee to this impudence?
Let her make much on 'em, she gets none of me.
Because you're deeply read in most Books else,
Thou would be so in mine; there it stands for thee,
Turn ore the leaves, and where you left, go forward.
To me it shall be like the Book of Fate,
Ever clasped up.
O dear Sir, say not so.
Nay I'll swear more; for ever I refuse her,
I'll never set a foot into her bed;
Never perform the duty of man to her,
So long as I have breath.
What an oath was there Sir? call it again.
I knew by amorous sparks struck from their eyes,
The fire would appear shortly in a blaze;
And now it flames indeed:Out of my house,
And take your Gentleman of good parts along with you;
That shall be all your substance;
He can live in any Emperors Court in Christendom
You know what you did Wench, when you chose him
To thrust out me; you have no politic love,
You are to learn to make your market; you,
You can choose wit, a burden light and free,
And leave the grosser Element with me.
Wealth, foolish trash, I thank you, out of my doors.
Nay good Sir, hear her.
Sweet Sir.
Pray to your Chambers Gentlemen, I should be here
Master of what is mine.
Hear her but speak Sir?
What can she speak but women's common language?
She's sorry and ashamed for it that helps nothing;
Sir, since it is the hard hap of my life
To receive injury where I placed my love.
Why la, I told you what escapes she'd have.
Nay pray Sir hear her forward.
Let our parting be full as charitable as our meeting was,
That the pale envious world, glad of the food
Of others miseries, civil dissentions,
And nuptial strifes, may not feed fat with ours.
But since you are resolved so wilfully
To leave my Bed, and ever to refuse me,
As by your rage I find it your desire,
(Though all my actions deserve nothing less)
Here are our friends, men both of worth and wisdoom,
Place so much power in them, to make an evenness
Between my peace and yours: All my wealth within doors
In Gold and Jewels, lie in those two Caskets
I lately led you to; the value of which
Amounts to some five thousand a piece;
Exchange a charitable hand with me,
And take one Casket freely, fare thee well Sir.
How say you to that now?
Troth I thank her Sir!
Are not both mine already?You shall wrong me,
And then make satisfaction with mine own;
I cannot blame you; a good course for you
I know it was not my luck to be so happy;
My miseries are no starters when they come,
Stick longer by me.
Nay, but give me leave Sir,
The wealth comes all by her.
So does the shame,
Yet that's most mine; why should not that be too?
Sweet Sir, let us rule so much with you,
Since you intend an obstinate separation,
Both from her Bed and board, give your consent
To some agreement reasonable and honest.
Must I deal honestly with her Lust?
Nay good Sir.
Why I tell you all the wealth her husband left her,
Is not of power to purchase the dear peace
My heart has lost in these adulterous Seas;
Yet let her works be base, mine shall be noble.
That's the best word of comfort I heard yet.
Friends may do much.Go, bring those Caskets forth,
I hate her sight, I'll leave her, though I lose by it.
Spoke like a Noble Gentleman y'faith;
I'll honour thee for this
O cursed man!
Must thy rash heat force this division?
You shall have free leave now, without all fear;
You shall not need oiled hinges, privy passages,
Watchings, and whisperings; take him boldly to you.
O that I had that freedom, since my shame
Puts by all other fortunes, and owns him.
A worthy Gentleman, if this cloud were past him,
I'd marry him, were it but to spite thee only,
So much I hate thee now.
Here come the Caskets Sir, hold your good mind now,
And we shall make a virtuous end between you.
Though nothing less she merit but a curse,
That might still hang upon her, and consume her still;
As t'has been many a better women's fortune
That has deserved less vengeance, and felt more;
Yet my mind scorns to leave her shame so poor.
Nobly spoke still.
This strikes me into Music, Ha, ha.
Parting of goods before the bodies join?
This it is to marry beardless domineering Boys: I knew it would come to this pass; well fare a just Almanac yet; for now is Mercury going into the second house near unto Ursa major, that great Huncks, the Bear at the Bridge foot in Heaven; which shows horrible Bear-baitings in wedlock; and the Sun ne'er entering into th'Dog, sets 'em all together by th'ears.
You see what's in it.
I think it is as I left it.
Then do but gage your faith to this assembly.
That you will ne'er return more to molest me,
But rest in all revenges full appeased,
And am ply satisfied with that half my wealth,
And take it as freely as life wishes health.
La you Sir; come, come, faith you shall swear that.
Nay Gentlemen for your sakes, now I'll deal fairly with her.
I would we might see that Sir.
I could set her free,
But now I think on it, she deserves it not.
Nay do not check your goodness, pray Sir, on with it.
I could release her, ere I parted with her;
But it were a courtesy ill placed, and set her
At as free liberty to marry again,
As you all know she was before I knew her.
What could thou Sir?
But it is too good a blessing for her.
Up with the Casket Sirrah.
O Sir stay!
I have nothing to say to you.
Do you hear Sir?
Pray let's have one word more with you for our money.
Since you've exposed me to all shame and sorrow,
And made me fit but for one hope and fortune,
Bearing my former comforts away with you
Show me a parting charity but in this,
For all my losses pay me with that freedom,
And I shall think this treasure as well given
As ever it was ill got
I might afford it you,
Because I never mean to be more troubled with you.
But how shall I be sure of the honest use on it,
How you'll employ that liberty? perhaps sinfully,
In wantonness unlawful, and I answer for it.
So I may live a Baud to your loose works still,
In giving 'em first vent; not I, 'shall pardon me,
I'll see you honestly joined, ere I release you;
I will not trust you for the last trick you plaid me; here's your old Suitors.
Now, we thank you Sir.
My Almanac warns me from all Cuckoldlie Conjunctions.
Be but commander of your word now Sir,
And before all these Gentlemen, our Friends,
I'll make a worthy choice.
Fly not ye back now.
I'll try thee once. I am married to another,
There's thy release.
Hoyda! there's a release with a witness?
You're free sweet wench.
Married to another!
Then in revenge to thee,
To vex thine eyes because thou hast mocked my heart,
And with such treachery repaid my love;
This is the Gentleman I embrace and choose
O torment to my blood, mine enemy!
None else to make thy choice of, but the man
From whence my shame took head!
It is done to quit thee;
Thou that wrong'st women's love, her hate can fit thee.
Brave wench y'faith! now thou hast an honest Gentleman,
Rid of a swaggering knave, and there's an end on it.
A man of good parts, this t'other had nothing!
Life, married to another?
O brave rascal with two wives!
Nay and our women be such subtle Anymals, I'll say wait at the Carriers for a Country Chamber-maid, and live still a Bachelor: When Wives are like Almanacs, we may have every year a new one, then I'll bestow my money on 'em; in the mean time I'll give 'em over, and ne'er trouble my Almanac about 'em.
I come in a good time to see you hanged Sir,
And that's my comfort.Now I'll tickle you Sir.
You make me laugh indeed.
Sir you remember
How cunningly you choked me at the Banquet
With a fine bandy Letter.
Your own fist Sir.
I'll read the Statute-Book to you now for it:
Turn to the Act in Anno Eec primo,
There lies a Halter for your Wind-pipe:
Fie no.
Faith but you'll find it so Sir, an't be foallowed.
So says my Almanac, and he's a true man.
Look you; the thirteenth day work for the Hangman.
The fourteenth day, make haste, it is time you were there then.
How? is the Book so sancy to tell me so?
Sir I must tell you now, but without Call,
The Law would hang you, if married to another:
You can but put me to my Book, sweet Brother.
And I've my Neck-verse perfect, here and here.
Heaven give thee eternal joy, my dear sweet Brother.
Who's here?
O Devil, her self? did she betray me.
A pox of shame, nine Coaches shall not stay me
I've two such deep healths in two joys to pledge,
Heaven keep me from a surfeit:
Mistress Low water!
Is she the jealous Cuckold, all this quoils about?
And my right worshipful Serving-man, is it you Sir?
A poor wronged Gentleman, glad to serve for his own Sir:
By my faith you've served the Widow a fine trick between you.
No more my enemy now, my Brothers wife,
And my kind Sister.
There's no starting now from it:
It is her own Brother, did not you know that?
It was never told me yet.
I thought you'd known't.
What matter is it, it is the same man was chose still,
No worse now then he was, I'm bound to love you,
You've examined in this a double charity,
Which to your praise, shall to all times be known,
Advanced my Brother, and restored mine own,
Nay, somewhat for my wrongs, like a good sister,
For well you know the tedious suit did cost,
Much pains and fees, I thank you, it is not lost:
You wished for love, and faith I have bestowed you
Upon a Gentleman that does dearly love you.
That recompense I've made you; and you must think Madam
I loved you well, (though I could never ease you)
When I fetched in my Brother thus to please you.
Here's unity for ever strangely wrought.
I see too late there is a heavy judgment
Keeps company with Extortion, and foul deeds;
And like a wind which Vengeance has in chase,
Drives back the wrongs into the Injurers face.
My punishment is gentle, and to show
My thankful mind for it, thus I'll revenge this,
With an embrace here, and here a kiss.
Why now the Bells they go trim, they go trim;
I wished thee Sir some unexpected blessing
For my Wives ransom, and it is fallen upon thee.
A pox of this, my Almanac ne'er gulled me till this hour, the thirteenth day work for the hangman, and there's nothing toward it; I'd been a fine ass, if I'd given twelve-pence for a horse to have rid to Tyburn to morrow.But now I see the error, it is false figured, it should be thirteen days and a half, work for the hangman; for he ne'er works under theirteen-pence half-penny:Beside, Venus being a spot in the ns garment, shows there should be a woman found in Hose and Doublet.
Nay faith sweet wife, we'll make no more hours on it now, it is as fine a contracting time, as ever came amongst Gentle-folks. Son Philip, Master Sandfield, come to the book here:
Now I'm waked
Into a thousand miseries and their torments.
And I come after you Sir, drawn with wilde horses; there will be a brave show on's anon, if this weather continue.
Come wenches; where be these young Genmen's hands now?
Poor Gentleman my son, some other time Sir.
I'll have it now y'faith wife.
What are you making here?
I have sworn, sweet Madam,
My son shall marry Mr Sunsets daughter,
And Mr Sandfield mine.
So you go well Sir,
But what make you this way then?
This! for my son.
O back Sir, back! this is no way for him.
How?
O let me break an oath, to save two souls,
Lest I should wake another judgment greater;
You come not here for him Sir.
What's the matter?
Either give me free leave to make this match,
Or I'll forbid the Banes.
Good Madam take it.
Here Mr Sandfield then.
Cuds Bodkins!
Take you this Maid.
You could not please me better, Madam.
Hoyda! is this your hot love to my daughter Sir?
Come hither Philip, here's a wife for you.
Zunes, he shall ne'er do that, marry his Sister!
Had he been ruled by you, he had married her.
But now he marries Mr Sunsets daughter,
And Mr Sandfield yours, I've saved your oath Sir.
O may this blessing hold!
Or else all the liquor runs out.
What Riddle's this Madam?
A Riddle of some fourteen years of age now.
You can remember Madam, that your daughter
Was put to nurse to Mr Sunsets wife.
True! that we talked on lately.
I grant that Madam.
Then you shall grant what follows: At that time
You likewise know old Mr Sunset here
Grew backward in the world, till his last fortunes
Raised him to this estate.
Still this we know too.
His wife then Nurse, both to her own and yours,
And both so young, of equal years, and daughters;
Fearing the extremity of her fortunes then,
Should fall upon her Infant; to prevent it,
She changed the children, kept your daughter with her,
And sent her own to you for better fortunes:
So long enjoined by solemn oath unto't,
Upon her death bed, I have concealed this,
But now so urged here's yours, and this is his.
Hoop! the joy is come of our side.
Hay. I'll cast mine Almanac to the Moon too and strike out a new one for next year.
It wants expression, this miraculous blessing.
Me thinks I could spring up, and knock my hey against yon Slver-feeling now for joy.
By my faith, but I do not mean to follow you there, so I may dash out my Brains against Charls Wain, and come down as wise as a Carman
I never wondered yet with greater pleasure.
What tears have I bestowed on a lost daughter,
And left her behind me.
This is Grace,
This Jane: Now each has her right name and place.
I never heard of this.
I'll swear you did not Sir.
How well I have kept mine oath against my will;
Clap hands, and joy go with you.Well said Boys!
How art thou blessed from shame, and I from ruin:
I, from the Bakers Ditch, if I'd seen you in.
Not possible the whole world to match again,
Such grief, such joy, in minutes lost and won.
Who ever knew more happiness in less compass?
Ne'er was poor Gentleman so bound to a Sister,
As I am, for the weakness of thy mind;
Not only that thy due, but all our wealth
Shall lie as open as the Sun to man,
For thy employments; so the charity
Of this dear Bosom bids me tell thee now.
I am her servant for it.
Ho worthy Sister!
The government of all, I bless thee with.
Come Gentlemen, on all perpetual Friendship.
Heaven still relieves, what Misery would destroy,
Never was night yet of more general Joy.
NOw let me see what weather shall we have now;
Hold fair now, and I care not.Mass Full Moon too,
Just between five and six this Afternoon:
This happens right, the sky for the best part clear,
Save here and there a Cloud or two dispersed
That's some dozen of Panders, and half a score Pick-Pockets,
You may know them by their whistle,
And they do well to use that while they may:
For Tyburn craks the Pipe, and spoils the Music.
What says the destiny of the hour this Evening,
Ho, fear no colours by my troth agreed then,
The red and white looks cheerfully: For know ye all,
The Planet's Jupiter, you should be jovial;
There's nothing lets it, but the Sun in the Dog;
Some bark in corners that will fawn and cog.
Glad of my fragments for their Ember-week,
The Signs in Gemini too, both hands should meet;
There should be noise in the Air, if all things hap,
Though I love Thunder, when you make the clap.
Some faults perhaps have slipped, I am to answer;
And if in any thing, your revenge appears,
Send me in, with all your fists about mine ears.

