WHereas you write, my fortunes and my birth
Made aboue yours, may be a real cause
That I must leave you, know thou worthiest man,
Thou hast a soul, whose plenteous wealth supplies
All the lean wants blind Chance hath dealt to thee.
Yet could I think, the Gods from all their store,
Who ne'er knew indigence unto their will,
Would (out of all their stock of Virtue left,
Or out of all new graces they can make)
Make such another piece as Scudmore is,
Then might he justly fear; but otherwise,
Sooner the Masculine Element of Fire,
Shall flame his Pyramids down to the Earth;
Sooner her Mountains shall swell up to Heaven;
Or softest April showers quench fires in Hell;
Sooner shall Stars from this Circumference,
Drop like false fiery exhalation,
Then I be false to vows made unto thee;
In whom, outh ne'er a fault: I ne'er could see,
But that you doubted once my constancy.
If (what I feel) I could express in words,
Methinkes I could speak joy enough to men,
To banish sadness from all love, forever:
Oh thou that reconcil'st the faults of all
That froathy sex, and in thy single self
Confin'st, nay hast engrossed Virtue enough
To frame a spacious world of virtuous women;
Had thou bin the Beginning of thy sex.
I think the Devil in the Serpents skin,
Had wanted Cunning to overcome thy goodness,
And all had lived and dyed in Innocence
The white Original Creation. 
Whose there? Come in.
What, up already Scudmore, near a Wench with thee? Not thy Laundress?
Good-morrow my dear Neuill.
What's this? A Letter; Sure it is not so,
A Letter written to Hieronimo!
By Heaven you must excuse me; Come, I know
You will not wrong my friendship and your manners to tempt me so.
Not for the world my friend,
Farewell, Good-morrow. 
Nay Sir, Neither must you
Depart in anger from this friendly hand:
I swear, I love you better then all men,
Equally with all Virtue in the world:
Yet this would be a Key to lead you to
A prize of that importance.
Worthy friend,
I leave you not in anger: What de'e mean?
Nor am I of that inquisitive Nature framed,
To thirst to know your private businesses:
Why, they concern not me; If they be ill
And dangerous, t'would grieve me much to know em.
If good; they be so, though I know em not:
Nor would I do your love so gross a wrong,
To Covet, to participate affairs
Of that near touch, which your assured love
Doth rhinke not fit, or dares not trust me with.
How sweetly does your friendship play with mine,
And with a simple subtlety, steals my heart
Out of my bosom. By the holiest Love
That ever made a Story, you're a man
With all good so replete, that I durst trust you
Even with this secret, were it singly mine.
I do believe you, farewell worthy friend.
Nay look you, this same fashion does not please me,
You were not wont to make your visitation.
So short and careless.
Tic your Jealousy
That makes you think it so, for by my soul
You have given me no distaste, in keeping from me
All things that might be burdenous, and oppress me.
In troth I am invited to a wedding,
And the Morn faster goes away from me,
Then I go toward it: and so Good-morrow.
God-morrow Sir, think I durst show it you.
Now by my life I not desire it Sir,
Nor ever loved these prying listening men,
That ask of other states and passages,
Not one among a hundred but proves false,
Envious and slanderous, and will cut that throat
He twines his arms about, I love that Poet
That gave vs reading, not to seek our selves
Beyond our selves, Farewell.
You shall not go,
I cannot now redeem the fault I have made
To such a friend, but in disclosing all.
Now if you love me, do not wrong me so,
I see you labour with some serious thing,
And think (like Fairies Treasure) to reveal it,
Will cause it vanish; and yet to conceal it
Will burst your breast, tic so delicious,
And so much greater then the Continent.
Oh you have pierced my entrails with your words.
And I must now explain all to your eyes,
Read, and be happy in my happiness.
Yet think on it, keep thy secret, and thy friend
Sure and entire; Oh! give not me the means
To become false hereafter; or thy self
A probable reason to distrust thy friend,
Though he be near so true, I will not see it.
I die by Heaven, if you deny again,
I starve for Counsel; take it, look upon it;
If you do not, It is an aequall plague,
As if it had been known and published:
For God-sake read, but with this Caution,
By this right hand, by this yet unstained sword,
Were you my father flowing in these waives,
Or a dear son exhausted out of them,
Should you betray this soul of all my hopes,
Like the two brethren (though love made em Stars)
We must be never more seen both again.
I read it fearless of the forfeiture,
Yet warn you, be as Cautelous, not to wound
My integrity, with doubt, on likelihoods,
From misreport, but first exquire the Truth.
Read, whilst I tell the Story of my love,
And sound the Truth of her heroic Spirit,
Whom eloquence could never flatter yet,
Nor the best tongue of praises reach unto.
The Maid there named, I met once on a Greene
Near to her Fathers house, me thought she showed,
For I did look on her, indeed no eye
That owed a sensible member, but must dwell
Awhile on such an object.
The passing Horses, and the feeding Kine
Stood still, and left their journeys and their food,
The singing Birds were in contention
Which should light nearest her; for her clear eyes
Deceived even men, they were so like bright skies.
Near in a Riuolet, swum two beauteous Swans,
Whiter then any thing, but her neck and hands,
Which they left straight to comfort her: A Bull
Being baiting on the Greene for the Swains sport,
She walking toward it, the vexed savage beast
Ceased bellowing; the snarling Dogs were mute,
And had enough to do to look on her,
Whose face brought Concord, and an end of jars,
Though Nature made em ever to have wars.
Had there bin Bears and Lyons, when she spake
They had bin charmed too: For Graecians Lute
Was rustic Music to her heavenly tongue,
Whose sweetness even cast slumbers on mine eyes,
Soft as Content, yet would not let me sleep.
Yours through the world, &amp; to the end of time. Bellafront.
Which, Bellafront Rich, Sir Iohn Wordlies Daughter?
She is the food, the sleep, the air I live by.
Oh heaven! we speak like Gods, and do like Dogs.
Where means my
This day, this Bellafront the Rich Heir,
Is married unto Count Frederick,
And that's the wedding I was going to.
I prithee do not mock me, Married?
It is no matter to be plaid withal,
But even as true as women all are false.
Oh! that this stroke were Thunder to my breast,
For Neuill thou hast spoke my heart in twain,
And with the sudden whirlwind of thy breath,
Hast ravished me out of a temperate soil,
And set me under the red burning Zone.
For shame return thy blood into thy face,
Know not how flight a thing a woman is?
Yes, and how serious too: Come Isle t'the Temple,
She shall not damn her self for want of Counsel.
Oh! prithee run not thus into the streets,
Come dress you better, so: Ah! as thy clothes
Are like thy mind, too much disordered.
How strangely is this Tide turned? For a world
I would not but have called here, as I went.
Collect thy Spirits, we will use all means
To check this black fate, flying toward thee; Come,
If thou miscarriest, tic my day of doom.
Yes, now I'm fine, Married? It may be so,
But women look too't, for if she prove untrue,
The Devil take you all, that are his due.
Is Sir Iohn Wordly up, Boy?
No my Lord.
Is my Bride up yet.
No.
No, and the Morn so fair.
Good morrow my thrice honoured &amp; heroic Lord.
Good morrow your Lord and Moister you might say, for brevity sake.
Thou'ast a good Taylor, and art very fine.
I thank your Lordship.
I you may thank his Lordship indeed.
Foregod this Doublet sits in print my Lord.
And the Hose excellent; the Pickadell rare.
Heel praise himself in trust with my Lords taylor,
For the next S. Georges suit.
Oh, Good-morrow Taylor, I abhor bills in a Morning.
Your Honour says true; their Knavery will be dis???corned by day-light,
But thou moist watch at night with bill in hand,
And no man dares find fault with it.
A good jest Efaith, Good-morrow to your Lord???ship, a very good jest. 
I wonder my invited guests are so tardy, What's a clock.
Scarce seven my Lord.
And what news Pendant?
What think thou of my present marriage?
How shows the Beauty to thee I shall wed?
Why to all women, like Diana among his Nymphs.
There's all his reading.
A beauty of that pureness and delight,
That none is worthy of her but my Lord,
My Honourable Lord.
But then her fortune
Matched with her beauty, makers her up a match.
By Heaven vnmatcheable, for none fit but Lords,
And yet for no Lord fit, but my good Lord.
And that her Sister then should love me to,
Is it not strange?
Strange: No, not strange at all,
By Cupped, there's no woman in the world
But must needs love you, dote, go mad for you;
If you vouchsafe reflection; Tic a thing
That does it home: thus much reflection
Catches em up by Dozens, like wilde foul.
Now ye shall taste the means by which he eats.
Nature her self having made you, fell sick
In love with her own work, and can no more
Make man so lovely, being diseasd with love.
You are the worlds Minion, of a little man;
Isle say no more, I would not be a woman,
For all has been got by them.
Why man, why?
Hart, I should follow you like a young rank whore,
That runs proud for her love, pluck you by 'th sleeve,
Who ere were with you, in the open street,
With the impudence of a drunken Oyster-wise,
Put on my fighting waistcoat, and the Ruff
That fears no tearing, batter down the windows
VVwhere I suspected you might lie all night,
Scratch faces, like a VVilde-Cat of Pict-hatch.
Pendant thou't make me dote upon my self,
Narcissus by this hand, had far less cause.
How know thou that?
They were all one my Lord.
How do I know, I speak my Conscience.
His beauties were but shadows to my Lord,
Why Boy his presence would enkindle sin,
And longing thoughts in a devoted Nun:
Oh foot, Oh Leg, oh Hand, oh body, face,
By Jove it is a little man of wax.
You are a rare Rascal; Tic not for nothing
That men call thee my Commendations.
For nothing, no, he would be loath it should.
Good Morrow, and good welcome Captain Pouts.
Good Morrow to your honour, and all joy
Spring from this match, and the first year a Boy,
I commend these two verses a purpose, to salute your Ho???nor.
But how haps it Captain, that your intended ma???riage with my Father in Laws third daughter, is not so???lemnized to day.
My Lord tells you true Captain, it would have saved meat.
Faith I know not, Mistress Kate likes me not, she says I speak as if I had a pudding in my mouth, and I answered her, If I had it was a white pudding, and then I was the better armed for a woman; for I had a case about me, so one laughed, and the other eried fie: the third said I was a Bawdy Captain, and there was all I could get of them.
See Boy, if they bee up yet, Maids are long liars I perceive.
How if they will not admit me my Lord:
Why should not they admit you my Lord, you cannot Commit with em my Lord.
Marry therefore my Lord. 
But what should be the reason of her sudden alto???ration, she listened to thee once: Ha,
Have you not heard my Lord, or de'e not know.
Not I, I swear.
Then you know nothing that is worth the know???ing.
That's certain, he knows you.
There's a young Merchant, a late Suitor, that deals by wholesale, and Heir to Land, well descended, of worcester???thy education, beholding to Nature.
Oh, tic young Strange.
First he that looks like an Italian Taylor? Out of the laced wheel, that wears a Bucket on's head?
That is the man, yet believe me Captive, it is a noble sprightly Citizen.
Has he money?
Infinitely wealthy.
Then Captain thou art cast, would I had gon for Cleeueland; Wordly loves money better then I love his Daughter,
Isle to some Company in Garrison, God b'wy.
Nay, ye shall dedicate this day to me,
We speak but by the way man, ne'er despair;
I can assure you, shoe's yet as free as Ayre.
And you may kill the Merchant with a look,
I'd threaten him to death: my honoured Lord
Shall be your friend, go too, I say he shall,
You shall have his good word, shall he my Lord?
Sfut, he shall have my bond to do him good.
Law, Tic the worthiest Lord in Christendom:
Oh Captain, for some fourscore brave Spirits, once
To follow such a Lord in some attempt.
A hundred Sir were better.
Heere's more Guess.
Is that Man and Wife?
It is Sir Innocent Ninne, that's his Lady,
And that M. Abraham their only son.
But did that little, old, dri'de Nets tongue, that Eele-skin get him.
So tic said Captain.
Methinkes, he in his Lady, should show like a No???dl in a Bottle of Hay.
One may see by her Nose, what Pottage she loves.
Is your name Abraham; Pray who dwells in your Mothers backside, at the sign of the Aqua-vitae bottle.
Gods precious: Save you Mistress Wagtail.
Sweet M. Pendant.
Gentlemen, I desire your better acquaintance, you must pardon my Father, hoe's somewhat rude, rude, &amp; my Mother grossly brought up, as you may perceive.
Young M. Abraham, cry ye mercy Sir.
Your Lordships poor friend, &amp; Sir Abra: Ninny
The Dubadub of Honour, piping hot,
Doth lye upon my Worships shoulder blade.
Indeed my Lord, with much cost and labour, wee have got him Knighted; and being Knighted, under favour my Lord, let me tell ye, he will prove a sore Knight as ere run at Ring. He is the one and only Ninny of our house.
He has cost ???s something ere he came to his: Hold up your head Sir Abraham.
Pish, pish, pish, pish.
De'e hear how.
Oh, my Lord.
I had well hoped she could not have spoke, she is so fat.
Long moist thou wear thy Knights-hood, &amp; thy spurs
Prick thee to Honour on, and prick off Curs.
Sir Abraham thanks your Honour; and I hope, your Lordship will consider the simplicity of Parents, a couple of old fools my Lord, and I pray so take em.
Ha, ha, ha.
I must be fine to excuse you here, you'll needs be coming abroad with me; if I had no more wit then you now we should be finely laughed at.
Byr'lady his worship says well wise, we'll troble him no longer; with your Honours leave, Isle in and see my old friend Sir Iohn, your Father that shall be.
Isle in to, and see if your Bride need no dressing.
Sfut as much as a Triple I think, hast them I pray. Captain, what think thou of such a woman in a long Sea Voyage, where there were a dearth of Victuals?
Venison my Lord, Venison.
I faith my Lord, such Venison as a Bear is.
Hart, she looks like a black Bombard, with a pint pot waiting upon it. 
What Countrymen, were your Ancestors S. Abra.
Countrymen, they were no Countrymen, I scorn it, they were Gentlemen all, My Father is a Ninny, and my Mother was a Hammer.
You should be a Knocker then by the Mothers side.
I pray my Lord, what is yon Gent. he looks so like a Saracen, that as I am a Christian I cannot endure him.
Take heed what you say Sir, hoe's a Soldier.
If you cross him, he will blow you up with Gunpowder
In good faith, he looks as if he had had a hand in the treason, Isle take my leave.
Nay good Sir Abraham, you shall not leave vs.
My Lord shall be your warrant.
My Lord shall be my warrant: Troth I doo not see that a Lords warrant is better then any other mans, un???less it bee to lay one by the heals. I shall stay here, and ha my head broke; and then I ha my mends in my own hands, and then my Lords warrant will help me to a plai???ster, that's all.
Come, come, Captain, pray shake the hand of acquaintance with this Gentleman, he is in bodily fear of you.
Sir, I use not to bite any man.
Indeed Sir, that would show you are no Gentle???man, I would you would bid me be covered: I am a knight, I was Knighted a purpose to come a wooing to Mistress Lucida, the middle Sister, Sir Iohn Worldlyes second daugh???la; and she said she would have me, if I could make her a Lady, and I can do it now; Oh here she comes.
My Bride will never be ready I think: heer are the other Sisters.
Look you my Lord; There's Lucida wears the Willow Garland, for you; and will so go to Church I hear: and look you Captain, that's the Merchant.
Now doth the pot of Love boil in my bosom; Cupped doth blow the fire; and I cannot Rime to bosom, but Isle go reason with her.
You'll make her jointure of that five hundred you say, that is your inheritance, M. Strange?
Sir I will.
Kate, you do love him?
Yes faith Father, with all my heart.
Take hands, kiss him, her portion is four thou???sand. Good-morrow my son Count, you stay long for your Bride; but this is the day that sells her, and she must come forth like my Daughter, and your Wife.
I pray salute this Gentleman as your Brother,
This morn shall make him so; and though his habit
But speak him Citizen, I know his worth
To be gentile in all parts. Captain,
Sir.
Captain, I could have been contented well You should have married Kate.
So could not Kate.
You have an honourable Title; a Soldier is a ve???rye
honourable Title: A Captain is a Commander of Sol???diers; But look you Captain, Captains have no money, therefore the Worldlies must not match with Captains.
So Sir, so.
There are brave wars.
Where?
Find them out brave Captain,
Win honour, and get money by that time;
Isle get a Daughter for my Noble Captain.
Good Sir, good.
Honour is Honour, but it is no money, 
This is the Tumbler then must catch the Coney. 
You're an old fellow: Are you a Merchant Sir?
I shame not to say yes? Are you a Soldier Sir?
A Soldier Sir; Oh God I, he is a Captain.
He may be so, and yet no Soldier Sir: For as many are Soldiers, that are no Captains; so many are Captains that are no Soldiers.
Right Sir: and as many are Citizens that are no Cuckolds.
So, many are Cuckolds, that are no Citizens.
What aisle you Sir, with your robustious looks?
I would be glad to see for my money, I have paid for my standing.
You are the Nobler Captain Sir:
For I know many that usurp that name,
Whose standings pay for them.
You are a Peddler.
You are a Pot-gun.
Merchant, I would thou had an Iron Tale Like me.
Fie Captain, you are too blame.
Nay, Gods will, you are too blame indeed, if my Lord say so.
My Lord'san Ass, and you are another.
Sweet Mistress Luce; let you and I withdraw, this is his humour.
Send for the Constable.
Sir, Isle beat you with a pudding on the change.
Thou dare as well kiss the wide mouthed Canon
At his discharging, or perform as much
As thou dare speak: For Soldier you shall know,
Some can use swords, that wear em not for show.
Why Captain, though ye be a man of war, you cannot subdue affection; you have no alacrity in your eye, and you speak as if you were in a Dream, you are of so melancholy and dull a disposition, that on my Conscience you would never get Children; Nay nor on my body nei???there: and what a sin were it in me, and a most pregnant sign of Concupiscence, to marry a man that wants the mettle of Generation; since that is the blessing ordained for Marriage, procreation the only end of it. Besides, if I could love you; I shall be heer at home, and you in Cleeue???land abroad; I among the bold Britains, and you among the hot shots.
No more puffing good Captain; leave batteries with your breath, the short is this:
This worthy Count, this Morning makes my Son;
And with that happy Marriage this proceeds:
Worldly's my Name, Wordly must be my deeds.
I will pray for Civil wars, to cut thy throat with???out danger Merchant,
I will turn Pirate, but Isle be revenged on thee.
Do Captain do, a halter will take up our quarrel then.
Zoones, I will be revenged upon ye all.
The strange adventure you are now to make
In that small Pinnace, is more perilous
Then any hazard thou coldest undergo,
Remember a scorned Soldier told thee so.
Go walk the Captain good sir Abraham.
Good faith Sir, I had rather walk your horse, I will not meddle with him, I would not keep him Com???panie
in his drink for a world.
But what good doo you Sir Abraham on my daughter,
I could be c'ne content, my Lucida
Would skip your wit, and look upon your wealth,
And this one day let Hymen Crown ye all.
Oh no, she laughs at me; and scorns my suit
For she is wilder, and more hard withal,
Then Beast, or Bird, or Tree, or stony wall.
Ha, Godamercie old Hieronimo.
Yet might she love me for my lovely eyes:
I but perhaps your nose she doth despise.
Yet might she love me for my dimpled chin:
I but she sees your Beard is very thin.
Yet might she love me for my proper body:
I, but she thinks you are an arrant Noddy.
Yet might she love me, cause I am an heir:
I, but perhaps she does not like your ware.
Yet might she love me in despite of all:
I, but indeed I cannot love at all.
Well Luce, respect Sir Abraham I charge you.
Father, my vow is past: whilst the Earl lives
I near will Marry, nor will pine for him:
It is not him I love now, but my humour.
But since my Sister he hath made his choice,
This wreath of Willow that begirts my brows,
Shall never leave to be my Ornament
Till he be dead, or I be married to him.
Life my Lord, you had best marry em all three, Theyle never be content else.
I think so to.
These are impossibilities; Come, Sit Abram. A little time will wear out this rash vow.
Shall I but hope?
Oh, by no means. I cannot endure these round Breeches, I am ready to sound at em???
The Hose are comely.
And then his left Leg: I never see it, but I think on a Plum-tree.
Indeed there's reason there should be some dif???ference in my Legs, for one cost me twenty pound more then the other.
In truth both are not worth half the money.
I hold my life one of them was broke, and cost so much the healing.
Right hath your Lordship said, it was broke indeed, At footeball in the University.
I know he is in love, by his Verse vain.
He cannot hold out on it: you shall hear.
Well since I am disdained; off Garters blew;
Which signifies Sir Abrams love was true.
Off Cypress black, for thou befits not me;
Thou art not Cypress, of the Cypress Tree,
Befitting Lovers: Out greene Shoo-strings out,
Wither in pocket, since my Luce doth pout:
Gush eyes, thumpe hand, swell heart, Buttons fly open,
Thanks gentle Doublet; else my heart had broken.
Now to thy Fathers Country house at Babram,
Ride post; There pine and die, poor, poor Sir Abram.
Oh doleful dump.
Nay you shall stay the wedding, Hark the Music, Your Btide is ready.
Put Spirit in your Fingers; Louder still,
And the vast Ayre with your enchantments fill. 
THus for my friends sake have I taken orders,
And with my reasons and some hire besides:
Won the known Priest, that was to Celebrate
This Marriage, to let me assume his place:
And heere's the Character of his face and beard.
By this means, when my friend confronts the Maid,
At the Church door (where I appointed him
To meet him, like my self: for this strange shape
He altogether is unwitting of)
If she (as one Vice in that sex alone
Were a great Virtue) to inconstancy past,
Join impudence, and slight him to his face,
Showing a resolution to this match.
By this attempt it will be frustrate;
And so we have more time though but till night,
To work to speak with her, or use violence,
(For both my blood and means are at his service.)
The reason too, I do this past his knowledge,
Is that his joy may be the more complete;
When being resolved shoe's married and gone,
I can resolve him otherwise: Thus I know,
Good deeds show double, that are timely done,
And joy that comes past expectation.
Yonder he comes, dead in his melancholy:
Isle question him, and see if I can raise
His Spirit from that, it restless rests upon:
He cannot know me. Ho, Good-morrow Sir.
Good-morrow to no living thing but one,
And that is Neuill: Oh, the Vows, the Vows,
The protestations and becoming Oaths
Which she has uttered to me, so sweet, so many,
As if she had been covetous, not to leave
One word for other Lovers, which I pitied.
She said indeed I did deserve em all;
Her lips made swearings sound of piety.
So sweet and prettily they came from her:
And yet this Morn shoe's married to a Lord.
Lord, Lord, how often has she kissed this hand,
Lost her self in my eyes, plaid with my have,
And made me (a sin I am not, subject too)
Go away proved, emproued by her favours,
And yet this Morn shoe's married to a Lord.
The Bells were ringing as I came along.
Yes Sir, tic for the great Marriage twixt
Pray hold there, I know it too well.
The Tokens and the Letters I have still:
The dangers I have past for her dear sake,
By day and night to satisfy her wishes;
That Letter I so lately did receive,
And yet this Morn shoe's married to a Lord:
Oh memory, thou blessing to all men,
Thou art my curse and cause of misery,
That tel'st me what I have bin in her eyes,
and what I am: as it is impossible
To find one good in the whole word of women:
But how I loose my self, and the remembrance
Of my dear friend, who said he would meet me here.
What is this Priest that walks before the Church?
Why walk you here so early, Sir?
I am appointed,
Here to attend the coming of the Brides,
Old Sir Iohn Worldyes Daughters.
Are there two?
Yes Sir, the eldest marries Count Erederick.
Oh.
The middlemost wears willow for his sake,
The youngest marries the rich Merchant Strange.
He is right worthy, and my well known friend.
But Parson, if you marry Bellafront,
The horror of thy Conscience shall exceed
A Murderers; Thou shalt not walk alone,
Nor eat, nor sleep, but a sad Lovers groans
and curses, shall appear and fright thy soul:
I tell thee Priest, they're sights, more terrible
Then Ghosts or Sprights, of which old wives tell Tales,
Thou shalt run mad, thou shalt be damned indeed.
Now God foresend, the reason Sir I pray?
She is contracted Sir, nay married
Unto another man, though it want form:
And such strange passages and mutual Vows,
T'would make your short hair start through your black
Cap, should you but hear it.
Sir, Isle take no notice
Of things, I do not know the injured Gentleman,
May bring em after inro the Spiritual Court,
and have a fair pull on it, a poor Gentleman,
(For so I take him by his being deceived)
Against a great Count, and an old wealthy Knight.
Thou Pancridge Parson; Oh, for my friend Nevil,
Some wile or other might remove this Priest,
and give up breathing to cross their intent.
Alas my dear friend.
Sir, do but you refuse To join em.
Upon what acquaintance Sir?
They are great persons, and I mean to rise,
I hope in time to have three livings man,
and this were not the way I take it Sir.
Why look thee, there is Gold.
Oh by no means.
I seldom know it refused, yet by thy Coat;
But where it would have bin a cause of good.
But look ye, you shall see I'm a Divine,
Of Conscience quite opposite to a Lawyer,
Isle give you Counsel Sir without a fee:
This way they are to come, if you dare do it,
Challenge her as your own, at the Church door,
I will not hinder you. 
Oh hark they come,
Neuill my friend, well I must something do:
Oh, why should Music, which joys every part,
Strike such sharpe killing discords to my hart?
THey that for Worldly wealth do wed,
That buy and sell the Marriage bed:
That come not warmed with the true fire,
Resolved to keep this Vow entire.
To soon find discontent,
To soon shall they repent.
But Hymen these are no such Lovers,
Which thy burning Torch discovers:
Though they live then many a year,
Let each day as new appear
As this first; and delights
Make of all Bridal Nights:
Io: Hymen give Consent,
Blessed are the Marriages that ne'er ripen???.
How now, who's this?
Young Scudmore.
Tic young Scudmore.
Can thou this holy Church enter a Bride,
And not a Coarse meeting these eyes of mine.
Yes, by my troth, what are your eyes to me,
But gray ones, as they are to every body,
The Gentleman I do a little know:
Hoe's frantic sure, forward a Gods name there.
Sister, this is not well, and will be worse.
Oh hold thy Thunder fast.
What is the matter?
Isle ask my Lord: What is the matter Sir.
Some idle words my Lord, t'may be have past
Twixt Scudmore, and my Daughter heretofore,
And he has dreamt em things of consequence.
Pish, nothing else; set forward.
By your leave.
Can there be such a soul in such a shape.
My Love is subject of such misery,
Such strange impossibilities and mis-fortune,
That men will laugh at me, when I relate
The Story of it, and conceive I lye.
Why Madam that shall be, Lady in Posse, do Titles,
Honours, and Fortunes, make you so forgetful?
You are insolent, nay strangely saucy Sir,
To wrong me in this public fashion.
Sirrha, go too, there's Law.
There is indeed,
And Conscience too, old Worldly thou hast one;
But for the other, wilde Virginia,
Black Africa, or the shaggy Scithia,
Must send it over as a Merchandise,
Ere thou show any here.
My honoured Lord,
Say but the word, Isle force him from the doors.
I say the word, do it.
You my Lords fine fool?
I he Sir.
No, nor you my Lord fools fool.
Ware Boy, come back.
Come back I say Sir Abraham. Intrant Templum
Tic such a forward child.
My passion and my cause of griefe's so great,
That it hath drowned all worthy parts in me:
As drink makes Virtues useless in a man,
And with too much, kills natural heat in him,
Or else I could not stand thus coldly tame,
and see them enter; but with my drawn sword
Should hail her by the hair unto the Altar,
and Sacrifice her heart to wronged love.
On my life tic so.
Worthy friend, I am exceeding sorry to see this,
But cannot help it.
Isle follow, and unfold all in the Church:
Alas, to what end, since her mind is changed,
Had she bin loyal, all the earthly Lords
Could not have borne her; so, what heinous sin
Hath she committed, God should leave her then:
I never dreamt of lying with my Mother,
Nor wished my Fathers death, nor hated Brothers;
Nor did betray Trust, nor loved money better
Then an accepted friend; No such base thought,
Nor act unnatural, possessed this breast:
Why am I thus rewarded women, women?
Hoe's mad by Heaven, that thinks you any thing
But sensual Monsters, and is never wife
Nor good, but when he hates you, as I now,
Isle not come near one, none of your base sex
Shall know me from this time, for all your Virtues
are like the Buzzes, growing in the fields,
So Weakly fastened to, by Natures hand,
That thus much wind blows all away at once,
Ye fillers of the world with Bastardy,
Worse then Diseases you are subject too,
Know I do hate you all, will write against you,
and fight against you; I will eat no meat
Dressed by a woman old or young, nor sleep
Upon a bed, made by their still given hands;
Yet once more must I see this Foeminine Devil,
When I will look her dead, speak her to hell;
Isle watch my time, this day to do it, and then
Isle be in love with death, and readier still 
His mortal stroke to take, then he to kill. 
Sweet is the love purchased with difficulty.
Then this Cross accident doth relish ours.
I rather think ours happier my fair Kate,
Where all is smooth, and no rub checks our course.
Are ye married?
Yes.
The Devil dance at your wedding: but for you I have something else to say, let me see, here are reason???ble store of people, know all my beloved Brethren, (I speak it in the face of the Congregation) this woman I have lain with oftener.
How?
Before God, you are a wicked fellow to speak on it in this manner, if you have.
Lain with her.
Yes, Good-morrow, God give ye joy. 
I am speechless with my anger, follow him,
If it be true, let her be proved a Whore;
If false, he shall abide the slander dearly.
Follow that list, I will not meddle with him.
Why speak thou not, to reconcile those looks
That fight sterne battles in thy husbands face.
Thou art not so unworthy to believe him,
If I did think thou did, I would not open
My lips, to satisfy so base a thought,
Sprung from the slander of so base a Slave.
It cannot be, Isle tell you by to morrow;
I am no Fool Kate. I will find some time
To talk with this same Captain, Pouts de'e call him,
Isle lye with to night.
Sir you shall not:
What stain my Honour hath received by this
Base Villain, all the world takes notice of,
Mark what I Vow, and if I keep it not,
May I be so given o'er, to let this Rogue
Perform his slander; Thou that were ordained,
And in thy Cradle marked to call me wife,
And in that Title made as my defence,
Yet suffered'st him to go away with life,
Wounding my Honour dead before thy face.
Redeem it on his head, and his own way,
Even by the sword his long profession,
And bring it on thy neck out of the field:
and set it clear amidst the tongues of men,
That all eyes may discern it slandered,
Or thou shalt near enjoy me as a wife:
By this bright Sun thou shalt not; Nay Isle think
As a biectly of thee, as any Mongrel
Bred in the City; Such a Citizen
as the Plays flout still, and is made the subject
Of all the stages. Be this true or no,
Tic thy best course to fight.
Why Kate I say.
Pray pardon me, none seeles the smart but I,
Tic thy best course to fight, if thou be still,
and like an honest Tradesman eat'st this wrong:
Oh, may thy Spirit and thy state so fall,
Thy first borne child may come to the Hospital.
Heaven I desire thee hear her last request,
and grant it to, if I do slack the first;
By thy assured Innocence I swear,
Thou hast lost me half the Honour I shall win,
In speaking my intent, Come lets to dinner.
I must not eat nor sleep, weep till't be done.
Sister, this resolution is not good,
Ill thrives that Marriage that begins in blood.
Sister, inform your self, I have no Ladyship
To guild my infamy, or keep tongues in awe:
If God love Innocence, I am sure he shall not
Loose in this action.
Nor first the others life,
Can give het to the world my perfect wife,
But what I do conceive. It is not blood then
Which she requires, but her good neine again,
and I will purchase it; for by heaven thou art
The excellent'st new fashioned Maid in this,
That ever ear shall hear a Tale told off.
But hear ye.
Good, save your labours, for by Heaven Isle do it
If I do it not, I shall be pointed at,
Proclaimed the Grand Rich Cuckold of the Town;
Nay Withal, even by them are known for both.
Take your revenge by Law.
It will be thought
Your greatness, and our money carries it:
Forsome say some men on the back of Law,
May ride and rule it like a patient Ass,
And with a Golden Bridle in the mouth,
Direct it unto any thing they please,
Others report, it is a Spiders web
Made to entangle the poor helpless Flies,
Whilst the great Spiders that did make it first,
and rule it, sit in the midst secure and laugh,
My Law in this shall only be my sword,
But peradventure not this month or two.
This month or two.
Isle be your second then.
You proffer too much honour, my good Lord.
And I will be your third.
Isle not be fourth, nor fifth,
For the old Prouerbe's good, which long hath bin,
Says safest tic sleeping in a whole skin.
Godamercy Nab, Isle ha thee, and bee but for thy manhood.
Wife, my Lady Ninny, do ye hear your Son, he
speaks seldom, but when he speaks.
He speaks Proverbs Efaith.
Oh, tic a pestlence Knight Mistress Lucida.
I and a pocky.
This month or two, de'e love me, not before,
It may be I will live so long Fems Whore. 
What lowering Star ruled my Nativity,
You'll come to dinner?
Yes.
Good-morrow brother,
Come, let's be merry in despite of all,
And make this day (as t'should be) festival.
This sour thwart beginning may portend
Good, and be crowned with a delicious end.
So, Isle not see you till my task be done,
So much false time I set to my intent,
Which instantly I mean to execute,
To cut off all means of prevention,
Which if they knew my day, they would assay:
Now for the Merchants honour, hit all right,
Kate, your young Strange will lie with you to night. 
What a stir is here made about lying with a Gen???tlewoman, I have been lien with, a hundred and hun???dred times, and nothing has come on it, but haulke, hum, haulke, hum, oh, oh. Thus have I done for this month or two, haulke, hum.
Ah Gods will, are you at it, you have acted your Name too much, sweet Mistress is Wagtail, this was witti???lie, though somewhat knavishly followed on me.
Vmh, a my Conscience I am peppered, well thou tumblest not for nothing, for hee Dances as well that got thee, and plays as well on the Viol, and yet hee must not Father thee, I have better men; let me remem???ber them, and here in my Melancholy. choose out one Rich enough, to reward this my stale Virginity, or fit enough, to marry my little Honesty; Haulke, hake.
She has a shroud reach, I see that, what a casting she keeps, marry my Comfort is, wee shall hear by and by, who has given her the Casting Boat???tle.
Hawk, hawk, hawk, bitter, bitter, pray God I hurt not the Babe: Well, let me see, Isle begin with Knights, Inprimis, Sir Iohn Doot-well, and Sir William Burnit.
A hot Knight by my Faith, Dootwell and Burnit too.
For old Sir Innocent Ninny, my Moister, if I speak my Conscience look ye, I cannot directly accuse him, much has hee been about, but done nothing; marry for S. Abraham, I will not altogether quit him, let me see, theres four Knights, now for Gentlemen.
And so she'll come down to the footmen.
Moister Louall, Moister Liueby't, and M. Pendant, huke, hi, up, hi, up.
By this light I have heard enough, shall I hold your belly too, fair Maid of the fashion?
What say ye Jack Sauce?
Oh fie, ill Mutton, you are too angry; why look ye, I am my Lords Page, and you are my Ladies Gentle???woman, wee should agree better, and I pray whether are you riding with this burden in your Dosser.
Why Sir, out of Town, I hope tic not the first time you have seen a child carried out of Town in a Dos???ser, for fear of the Plague.
You have answered me I promise you, but who put it in I pray.
Not you Sir, I know by your asking.
I, alas, I know that by my Talent; for I remember thus much Philosophy of my Schoole-Maisters, Ex nihilo nihil fit; but come, setting this Duello of wit aside, I have ouer-hearde your Confession, and your casting about for a Father, and in truth in mere Charity, came in to re???lieve you. In the scroll of Beasts, Horses, and Asses, that have fed upon this Common of yours, you named one Pendant, Faith Wench let him bee the Father, hee is a very handsome Gentleman I can tell you, in my Lords
favour, Isle be both secret and your friend, to my Lord, let it be him, he shall either reward thee bountifully, or marry thee.
Sir you speak like an understanding young Gen???tleman, and I acknowledge my self much bound to you for your Counsel.
Will, Will. 
My Lord has sent him to call me, now I hold a wager ont, if thou be not a Fool, as most weighting women are, thou'lt use him in his kind.
Why Will I say, go, my Lord calls extremely,
Did not I say so, Come this is but a trick to send me off Sir. 
A notable little Rascal,
Prettis Mistress Wagtail: why de'e walk so melancholy,
I sent him hence a purpose; Come shells do?
Do, what would you do, have done too much already.
What's the matter.
I am with child by you.
By me? why by me? a good jest in faith.
You'll find it Sir in earnest.
Why, do you think I am such an Ass to believe nobody has meddled with you, but I.
Do you wrong me so much to think otherwise.
This tic for a poor Damsel like my self,
To yield her Honour and her youth to any,
Who strait conceives she does so unto many,
and as I have a soul to save, tic true.
Pray do not swear, I do not urge you too't; Zoones, now I am undone; you walk somewhat round, Sweet-hart, has Nobody bin tampering with you else, think ont, for by this light, I am not worth the estate of an Ap???ple wife, I do live upon commending my Lord, the Lord of hoists knows it; and all the world besides, for me to marry thee, will undo thee more,
and that thou moist keep me, keep thee in fashion,
Sell thee to English, French, to Scot, and all,
Till I have brought thee to an Hospital:
and there I leave you, ha you not heard nor read,
Of some base slave, that wagging his fair head,
Does whistling at one end of his shop walk,
Whilst some Gay-man doth vomit bawdy talk
In his wives ears at the other; such a Rogue or worse shall I be: For look ye Mistress Wagtail, I doo live like a Chameleon upon the ayre, and not like a Moil upon the earth, Land I have none, I pray God send me a grave when I am dead.
Its all one, Isle have you for your qualities.
For my good ones, they are altogether unknown, because they have not yet bin seen, nor ever will bee, for they have no being, in plain terms, as God help me, I have none.
How, came you by your good cloths.
By undoing Taylors, and then my Lord (like a Snake) casts a suit every quarter, which I slip into; therefore, thou art worse then mad, if thou wilt cast away thy self upon me
Why, what mends will you make me, can you give me some sum of money to marry me to some Tradesman, as the play says.
No by my troth: but tell me this, has not Sir A???braham bin familiar with you.
Faith, not enough to make up a child.
Could bee content to marry him.
I by my troth, and thank ye too,
Has he but kissed thee?
Yes, and something more beside that.
Nay, and there ha been any jot of the thing, be???side that, Isle warrant thee lay the child to him, stand stiff???lie to it, leave the rest to me, By that Fool thou shalt save thy honesty. 
I Yes Captain Pouts here pray?
Sir he does.
I prithee tell him heere's a Gentleman Would speak with him.
What may I call your name Sir?
No matter for my name.
Troth Sir, the Captain is somewhat doubtful of strangers; and being as most Captains are, a little in debt, I know he will not speak with you, unless you send your Name.
Tell him my name is Strange, that I am come
About that business he spake off to day. 
To have sent a formal Challenge by a Gentleman,
He being to choose his time, might peradventure
Have made him shift himself the sooner over.
Sir, I know your business, you are come to serve a warrant, ot a Scitation, I will not speak with you: and get you gone quickly too, or I may happen send a Bullet through your Mozart. 
Strange Cross, past expectation: well Isle try,
My other course may speed more happily. 
Sir, had you borne vs company to Church,
You had been the better welcome.
Faith you had, I must needs say so to.
And I must needs say as my Lord says.
Sir Iohn I thank you, and my honoured Lord:
But I am sorry for this other News
Concerning Mistress Kate, and my good friend.
Tic certain true: He keeps his word well too,
He said he would come to dinner.
All we cannot get M. Katherine out of his chamber.
Oh good old woman, she is topshackeld.
Tic pestlence Sack, and cruel Claret. Knight, stand to me Knight I say, up, a cold stomach; give me my Aqua-vitae bottle.
Oh Guiniuer, as I am a Justice of peace and Co???ram, it were a good deed to commit thee, Fie, fie, fie.
Why alas, I cannot help this and I should bee hanged, she'll bee as drunk as a Porter: Isle tell you my Lord, I have seen her so bepiss the Rushes, as she has danced at a Wedding: Her belly, and that Aqua-vitae bottle, have almost undone my Father: Well I think in Conscience, she is not my natural begotten Mother.
Ha, ha, ha.
Well said my wise Sir Abraham.
Oh this Music and good Wine is the soul of all the world.
Come, will your Lordship make one at Primero, until your Bride come forth.
You can play well my Lord.
Whole?
Who my Lord, the only player at Primero in the Court.
I'd rather play at Bowls.
My Lords for you for that too: the only, Bowler in London, that is not a Church warden.
Can he fence well too M. Pendant?
Who my Lord? the only Fencer in Christendom, he will hit you.
He shall not hit me, I assure you now.
Is he good at the exercise of drinking Sir?
Who my Lord; the only Drunkard in the VVoild, drinker I would say.
Godamercie for that.
I would he heard him.
Oh sie no, none so good as my Lord.
Hardly, byr'lady, hardly.
How now, whose this?
What would you?
I would speak with the Lady Bellafront,
From the young Lady Lucy.
You had best send in your Letter, she is with???drawn.
My Lady gave me charge of the delivery,
And I must do it my self, or cartie it back.
A trusty servant, that way leads you to her.
This trust in Servants is a Jewel; Come,
Let vs to Bowls in the Garden. 
Blessed fate.
Oh thou, whose words and actions seemed to me,
As innocent as this smooth sleep, which hath
Locked up thy powers: would thou had slept, when first
Thou sent and proferredst me beauty and love:
I had bin ignorant then of such a loss,
Hippie's that wretch in my opinion,
That never ownd scarce Jewels, or bright Somes,
He can loose nothing but his constant wants:
But speaklesse is his plague, that once had store,
and from superfluous state false to be poor:
Such is my hell-bred hap, cou???d Nature make
So fair a superficies, to enclose
So false a heart; This is like gilded Tombs,
Compacted of Jet Pillars, Marble stones,
Which hide from his stinking Flesh, and rotten bones.
Pallas so sat (methinkes) in Hectors Tent;
But time so precious and so dangerous
Why do I loose thee? Madam, my Lady, Madam.
Believe me my dear friend, I was enforcst: Ha,
I had a Dream as strange as thou art fellow,
How came thou hither? What's thy business?
That Letter Madam tells you.
Letter: Ha?
What dost thou mock me? Here is nothing writ.
Can you read any thing then in this face?
Oh Basilisk, remove thee from my sight,
Or thy harts blood shall pay thy rash attempt.
Ho, Who attends vs there?
Stir not a foot,
And stop your clamorous acclamations,
Or by the bitterness of my fresh wrongs,
Isle send your Ladyship to the Devil quick;
I know the hazard I do undergo,
and whatsoere after becomes of me,
Isle make you sure first: I am come to speak,
and speak I will freely, and to bring back
Your Letters, and such things you sent; and then,
Isle ne'er see those deceiving eyes again.
Oh, I am sick of my corruption,
For Godsake do not speak a word more to me.
Not speak, yes woman, I will roar a loud,
Call thee the falsest fair that ever breathed,
Tell thee, that in this marriage, thou hast drowned
All virtue, left to credit thy weak sex,
which being (as it were) committed to thy trust,
Thou traitorously hast betrayed it thus.
Did I entice, or ever send thee guests
To allure thee, to reflect a beam on me?
Nay, did not thou thy self send and invent
Past human wit, our means of intercourse?
Why dost thou then prove base unto thy self,
Perjured and impious, know the good thou hast lost
In my opinion; doth outvalue far
The airy honours thou art married to.
Oh peace, for you speak sharpness to my soul
More torturous, then hells plagues to the damned,
For love sake hear me speak.
For loves sake, no:
Love is my surfeit, and is turned in me
To a disease.
Tyrant, my knees shall beg,
Till they get liberty for my tongue to speak,
Drowned almost in the Rivers of mine eyes.
What can thou say, art thou not married?
Alas I was enforced, first by the threats
Of a severe Father, that in his hand
Did gripe my fortunes; next to that, the fame
Of your neglect, and liberal tongue,
Which bred my honour an eternal wrong.
Pish, these are painted causes, till this Morn
He lived not in this land, that durst accuse
My intergritie, of such an ignorance.
But take your Letters here, your paper Vows,
Your Picture, and your Bracelets: and if ever
I build again upon a women's faith,
May sense forsake me: I will sooner trust
Dice, or a reconciled enemy: Oh God,
What an internal joy my heart has felt,
Sitting at one of these same idle plays,
When I have seen a Maids inconstancy
Presented to the life; how glad my eyes
Have stole about me, fearing least my looks
Should tell the company contented there,
I had a Mistress free of all such faults.
Oh! still retain her, dear Scudmore hear me.
Retain thee so, it is impossible,
Art thou not married? Tic impossible,
Oh no! I do despise thee, and will fly
As far on earth as to the Antipodes,
and by some learned Magician, whose deep art
Can know thy residence on this Hemisphere;
There Isle be placst, my seete just against thine,
To express the opposite Nature, which our hart???
Must henceforth hold.
Oh rather shoot me friend,
Then let me hear thee speak such bitterness.
Oh pity me, redeem from the hell
That in this Marriage I am like to feel,
Isle rather fly to barren wildernesses,
and suffer all wants with thee Scudmore, then
Live with all plenty in this husbands arms,
Thou shalt perceive I am not such a woman,
That is transported with vain dignities,
Oh thy dear words have knocked at my harts gates,
and entered: They have plucked the Devils Vizard.
(That did deform this face, and blind my soul)
Off, and thy Bellafront presents her self,
(Lau'd in a Bath of contrite Virginal tears,)
Clothed in the Original beauty that was thine:
Now for thy love to God, count this not done,
Let time go back, and be as when before it,
Or from thy memory race it for ever.
Ha, ha, ha??? was there ever such strange creatures framed,
Why dost thou speak such foolish senseless things?
Can thy forsaking him redeem thy fault?
No, I will never mend an ill with worse.
Why this example will make women false,
When they shall hear it, that before were true,
For after ill examples we do fly,
But must be vowed to deeds of piety:
Oh woman, woman, woman, woman, woman,
The cause of future and Original sin,
How happy (had you not) should we have been,
False where you kiss, but murdering in your ire,
Love all that woe, know all men you desire.
Ungrateful, yet most impudent crave,
Torturous as hell, insatiate as the grave:
Lustful as Monkeys, grinning in your ease,
Whom if we make not Idols, we near please.
More vainly proud then fools, as ignorant;
Baser then Parasites, Witches that enchant
And make vs senseless, to think death or life
Is yours to give, when only our belief
Doth make you able to deceive vs so,
Begot by Drunkards, to breed sin and wo.
As many soul diseases hide your veins,
as there are mischiefs coined in your quick brains;
Not quick in wit, fit to perform least good,
But to subvert whole States, shed Seas of blood;
Twice as deceitful as are Crocodiles,
For you betray both ways; with tears and smiles,
Yet questionless there are as good, as bad:
Hence, let me go.
Hear me, and thou shalt go:
I do confess I do deserve all this,
Have wounded all the faith my sex doth owe,
But will recover it, or pay my life:
Strive not to go, for you shall hear me first,
I charge thee Scudmore, thou hard-hearted man,
Upon my knees: thou most implacable man,
????????? since penitence
and satisfaction to, gets not thy pardon,
I charge thee use some means to set me free,
Before the Revels of this night have end,
Prevent my entering to this marriage bed;
Or by the memory of Lucretiaes knife,
Ere Morn Isle die a Virgin, though a wise. 
Pish do, the world will have one mischief less. 
Bowl they that list, for I will Bowl no more,
Cupped that lit???le Bowler in my breast
Rubs at my heart, and will not let me rest.
I, I, you may cry rub, fly to your Bowls,
For you are free, love troubles not your iowles,
But from my head to heel; from heel to hat???,
Behind, before, and round about I smart,
Then in this Arbor sitting all alone,
In doleful Ditty, let me howl my moan.
Oh Boy, leave pricking for I veil my Bonnet,
Give me but breath while I do write a Sonnet.
I have lost my money, and Sir Abraham too, yon???der he sits at his Muse by heaven, drowned in the Ocean of his love, Lord how hee labours, like a hard bound Poet, whose brains had a frost in em, now it comes.
I die, I sigh.
What after you are dead? Very good,
I die, I sigh, thou precious stony Jewel.
Good: because she is hard-hearted.
I die. 
He has died three times, and come again.
I sigh thou precious stony Jewel,
Wearing of silk, why art thou still so cruel. 
Oh Newington conceit, and quieting el???e.
Thy servant Abraham sends this foolish Ditty.
You say true intro???h Sir.
Thy Servant Abra. sends this foolish Dit 
Tie unto thee, pity both him and it. 
Tie unto thee: well, if she do not pity both, tic pity she should live.
But if thou still ????????? poor Sir Abra: ???rump 
Come grim death come, here give thy mortal thumpe.
So now Isle read it together.
I die, I sigh, thou precious stony Jewel,
Oh wherefore wear thou Sulk, yet art so cruel:
To thee thy Ninny sends this foolish Dit???
Tie, and ????????? pity both him and it,
If thou deny, and still Sir Abraham frump,
Come grim death come, here give thy mortal thumpe.
Let me see, who shall I get now, to set too a dumpish Note.
In good faith I do??? not know, but Nobody that is wise, I am sure of that. It will be an excellent matter sung to the knacking of the tongues. But to my business, God save the right Worthy and Woorshipfull Sir Abraham: what musing and writing: oh, this love will undo vs all, and that made me prevent love, and undo my self: but what news of Mistress Lucida, ha, will she not come off, not cannot you come on little Abraham.
Faith, I have courted her, and courted her: and she does as every body else does, laughs at all I can doo or say.
Laughs, why that's a sign she is pleased; doo you not know when a woman laughs, shees pleased.
I but she laughs most shamefully, &amp; most scornfully.
Scornfully, hang her, shees but a babble.
Shees the fitter for my turn Sir, for they will not stick to say, I am a fool for all I am a Knight.
Love has made you witty little Nab, but what a mad villain art thou, a striker, a fiftieth part of Hercules, to get one Wench with Child, and go a wooing to ano???there.
With child, a good jest efaith, whom have I got with child.
Why Mistress Wagtail is with child, and will bee deposd as yours, she is my Kinswoman, and I wold be loath our house should suffer any disgrace in her, if there be law in England, which there should be, if wee may judge by their Consciences, or if I have any friends, the Wench shall take no wrong, I cannot tell, I think my Lord will stick to me.
De'e hear, talk not to me of Friends, Law, or Conscience, if your Kinswoman say she is with Child by me, your Kinswoman is an arrant whore; Vds-will, have
you no body to put your Gulls upon but Knights? That Wagtail is a whore, and Isle stand to it.
Nay, you have stood to it already; but to call my Cozen whore, you have not a mind to have your throat cut: ha you?
Truth no great mind Sir.
Recant your words, or die.
Recant, oh base; out sword, my honour keep,
Love, thou hast made a Lyon of a Sheep.
But will you fight in this quarrel.
I am resolved.
Hart, I have pulled an old house over my head; hears like to bee a tall fray, I perceive a foole's more valiant then a Knave at all times, would I were well riddle of him, I had as live meet Hector God knows, if he dare fight at all: they are all one to me, or to speak more modernly, with one of the Roaring Boys.
Have you done your prayers?
Pray give me leave Sir, put up an't please you: are you sure my Cofsen Wagtail is a Whore?
With sword in hand I do it not recant.
Well, it shall never bee said Jack Peudant would venture his blood in a VVhores quarrel: but VVhore or no VVhore, she is most desperately in Love with you, praises your head, your face, your nose, your eyes, your mouth; the fire of her commendations, makes the pot of your good parts run over; and to conclude, if the whore have you not, I think the Pond at Islington, will bee her Bathing-tubbe, and give an end to mortal Misery, but if she belie you (pray put up Sir:) she is an arrant whore, and so let her go.
Does she so love me say you?
Yes, yes, out of all question the whore does love you abominable.
No more of these soul terms if she do love me,
That goes by fate, I know it by my self,
Isle not deny but I have dallied with her.
I, but hang her who ore, dallying will get no I will???drone.
Another whore, and draw; where is the Girl.
Condoling her misfortune in the Gallery,
Upon the rushes, sitting all alone,
and for Sir Abrahams love venting her moan.
I know not what to say, Fates aboue all,
Come lets go ouer-heare her, be this true,
Welcome my Wagtail, scornful Luce adieu. 
One way it takes yet, tic a Fools condition,
Whom none can love: out of his penury,
To catch most greedily at any wench
That gives way to his love, or feigns herowne,
First unto him, and so Sir Abraham now
I hope will buy the poole where I will Fish,
Thus a quick Knave makes a fat fool his dish. 
I have plaide the melancholy Ass, and partly
the Knave, in this last business, but as the Parson said that
got the wench with child, Tic done now Sir, it cannot bee
undone, and my purse or I must smart for it.
Your Trunks are shipped, and the Tide false out about twelve to night.
Isle away, this Law is like the Basilisk, to see it first, is the death ont this night: and noble London fare???well, I will never see thee more, till I be knighted for my Virtues. Let me see, when shall I return; and yet I doo not think but there are a great many dubbed for their Ver???tues; otherwise how could there be so many poor knights, what att thou? whats thy news?
Zoones, a man is fine to break open doors, ere he can get in to you.
I would speak with a General sooner.
Sir you may, hee owes less peradventure: or if more, he is more able to pay't: What ar't?
A Soldier, one that lives upon this Bus Jerkin, t'was made of Fortunatus his pouch; and these are the points I stand upon, I am a Soldier.
A counterset Rogue you are.
As true a Rogue as thy self: Thou wrong'st me, send your man away, go too, I have strange and welcome business to impart, the Merchant is dead, for shame let's walk into the fields, send away your man.
How?
Here is a Letter from the lusty Kate
That tells you all, I must not give it you
But upon some conditions. Let vs walk,
and send away your man.
Go Sirrha, and bespeak Supper at the Bear, and provide Oars, Isle see Graues-end to night. 
The Gentlewoman will run mad after you then, Isle tell you more, let's walk. 
I See greatest Spirits can serve to their own ends,
Were you the seeming Serving-man that past by?
By my sad heart I was, and not a Tittle
Of my relation to thee wrong or feigned.
In truth you were too blame to venture so,
Mischiefs find vs, we need not mischiefs seek;
I am not ti'de to that opinion,
They are like women, which do always shun
Their lovers and pursuers, and do follow
With most rank appetites them that do fly:
All mischief that I had is but one woman,
and that one woman all mischance to me,
Who speaks worst of them, then's the best of men,
They are like shadows, mischiefs are like them.
Death fears me, for in truth I seek him out;
The Sun is stale to me, to morrow Morn
as this, t'will rise, I see no difference;
The night doth visit me, but in one robe,
She brings as many thoughts as she wears Stars
When she is pleasant, but no rest at all,
For what new strange thing should I covet life then?
Is not she false, whom only I thought true?
Shall time to show his strength make Scudmore live.
Till (perish the vicious thought) I love not thee,
Or thou dear friend, remove thy heart from me.
Time is as weak for that, as he is old,
Take comfort, and attend this counsel friend,
This match is neither Sacred nor sure,
Close Fate annihilates what Opinion makes,
and since she is resolved this night to die,
If you do not redeem her, give the means,
Or her blood (credit me) will spring heavier griefs,
Sorer and stranger in thy oppressed hart
Then her false love before. Besides, tic you
My Scudmore that are false, if you will not
Consent to let her make Vows good, which were
But in a possibility to be broke,
This her Repentance casts her vice quite off:
and if you leave her now, you take it on,
Nay you incur a bloody mortal sin,
You do become an actual murderer.
If you neglect her, she will kill her self
This night, by poison, knife, or other means,
God gives you power to cross her desperate will,
and if you save not where you may, you kill.
Why can my Noble and wise friend, think still
That what a woman saics, her heart doth mean?
Can you believe that she will kill his self.
Tic a full hour since she spake the word,
and God forbid, that any women's mind
Should not be changed and changed in a long hour.
She is by this time in her Lorldly arms,
and like pleased Iuno, clasped by Iupiter,
Forgets the plaints of poor mortality,
Such state, such pride, as Poets show her in,
Incensed with Ioues loose scopes upon the earth,
She cast on me at our encountering;
As cold and heavy, as a Rock of Ice
In her love to me, which while I there staide,
My bitter and hot words resolved a little,
(Just as the Sun doth Ice) I softened her,
and made her drown her fault in her own tears,
But think you she holds this flexible vain:
No, I me removed, and shoe's congealed again.
How well does Scudmore speak, ill for himself,
Wit's a disease, that fit employment wants,
Therefore we see, those happiest in best parts,
and vnder-borne fortunes under their merits,
Grow to a sullen envy, hate, and scorn
Of their Superiors; and at last, like winds
Break forth into rebellious civil wars,
Or private Treasons; none so apt for these,
as melancholy wits fettered with need.
How free's the Rustic Swain from these assaults,
He never feels a passion all his life,
But when he cannot sleep, or hunger gripes;
And though he want Reason, Wit, Art, nay Sense,
Is not so senseless to capitulate,
and ask God why he made not him as great
As that same foolish Lord, or that rich knave:
His brains with nothing does Negotiate,
But his hard Husbandry, which makes him live.
But have we worthy gifts, as Judgment, Learning,
Ingenious sharpness, which wise God indeed,
Doth seldom give out of his equal hand,
But joined with poverty to make it even
With Riches which he clogs with ignorance,
We vent our blessing in profane conceits,
Or in strong Arguments against our selves,
Foul Bawdry, and stark blindly hold it best,
Rather to loose a soul, then loose a jest.
Ill terms my friend, this wit in any man,
(For that but seasoned with discretion)
Holds him in awe of all these blemishes,
Free's him of envy, doth Philosophise
His Spirit, that he makes no difference
Twixt man and man, twixt fortunes high and low,
But as the thicker they with virtues grow,
Freedom and bondage wit can make alone;
So t'would by being left, and being loved,
If I had any of it tempered so:
But you have spoke all this condemning me,
For having wit to speak against my self,
But Isle be ruled by you in all.
Then thus:
To night by promise, I do give a Mask,
as to congratulate the Bridal day,
In which the Count, Pendant, and the wise Knight,
Will be most worthy dancers, Sir you shall,
Learn but my part, which I will teach you to,
as nimbly as the Usher did teach me,
and follow my further directions,
Though I in the Morn were a prodigious wight,
Isle give thee Bellafr???ned in thine arms to night.
I am your property, my Enginer
Prosper your purposes, shine thou eye of heaven,
and make thie lowering Morn, a smiling Even. 
Oh, these are Lambeth fields.
Strange murdered on the wedding day by you,
At his own Brides appointment, for my sake?
As dead as Charity.
This sounds not well.
Zoones, you may say as well I am the man,
as doubt he lives, a plague of your belief,
De'e know this bloody Ruff which she has sent,
Least you should be incredulous, and this Ring
Which you have seen her wear?
I know the Ring,
and I have seen the Ruff about his neck,
This comes of enforced marriages; Where was it done?
And how escaped you?
Sir receive it briefly:
I am her Kinsman, and being newly come
Over, and not intending to stay long,
Took this day to go see my Cozen Worldly,
(For so my Name is) where I found all of them
So deeply drenched in the Bridal cup,
That sleep had tan possession of their eyes;
Bacchus had given them such an overthrow,
Their bodies lay like slaughtered carcasses;
One here, one there, making such antique faces,
as drunkenness had mocked at drunkenness,
In truth their postures and their sleep like death,
(For their's, was liker death, then sober sleep)
Remembered me of body-scattered fields,
after the bloody battles I have seen,
It was such a season. To make short my tale,
as Fate had said, Now murders may be done
and ne'er reueal'd, approaching further, I
Lighted upon a Chamber, where your Love
Sat by this Merchant cast drunk on the bed,
She weeping and lamenting her mishap,
assured both of my daring, and my trust,
Fell flat upon the ground, tehn raised her self,
Hung on my neck, then sunk down to my legs,
Told all things past to day, and never ceased
Till I had tan life from that half dead man
Before, whom straight I strangled with this Rope.
You have showed some kindness to me, I must love you Sir,
What did you with his body?
Having first
By her direction put on these his Clothes,
That like the Murdered man, the safelier
I might pass with her, being her Husbands shape,
If any of the Servants had been waked,
She showed me to a necessary vault,
Within a Closet in the Chamber too,
and there I threw the body.
Whence this blood?
That she her self first, let out of his veins,
Wherein she dipped the Ruff about his neck:
and said, Go bear this Ensign of my love,
To assure him what I dared for his dear sake.
Where is the Maid?
Captain a Maid for you,
But well you know (I hope) she is no Maid,
But Maid or no Maid, she is at my Mothers,
Whence I will bring her whether you'll appoint
To night, and let this Tide convey all hence,
For staying will be something perilous.
Sir, I will kill two men for you till then
I owe my life to you, and if ever Rackes,
Strapadoes, wheel, or any torturous Engine,
Even from the Roman Yoke, to the Scotch Boot,
Force me discover you, or her, to Law,
Pray God the Merchant may re-spire again,
But what a Villain have I been to wrong her?
Did she not tell you how I injured her?
She said you challenged her, and publicly
Told you had lain with her, but Truths no wrong.
Truth, t'was more false then Hell, &amp; you shall see me,
(As Well, as I can repent of any sin)
Ask her forgiveness for wounding of her Name,
and against the world recover her lost fame.
Kind soul, would I could weep, to make amends
Why I did slander her at the Church door.
The more base Villain thou. 
Ha, what's the news?
Thou unspeakable Rascal, thou a Soldier,
a Captain of the Suburbs, a poor forced,
That with thy Slops, and Cat a Mountains f???ce,
Thy blither chops, and thy robustious words,
Fright'st the poor whore, and terribly dost exact,
a weekly Subsidy, twelve pence a piece,
Whereon thou liu'st, and on my Conscience
Thou snapst besides, with cheats and Cut-purses.
Hart, this is some railing Poet, why you Rogue?
Thou Rogue, far worse then Rogues, thou slanderer
Thou worse then slanderous Rogues, thou murderer
Tic well remembered, I will cut thy throat,
To appease that Merchants soul, which ne'er will rest,
Till some revenge be raken on thy tongue.
Isle kill the first, and in thy vital flood, 
Wash my hands clean of that young Merchants blood.
You fight as if you had fought before,
I can still hold my sword, come on Sir.
Zoones can you ward so well, I think you are one of the Noble science of Defence.
True, a'th Science of Noble Defence I am,
That fight in safeguard of a virtuous name. 
Oh, now I understand you, and you stand over me, My hurts are not mortal, but you have the better, if your name be Wordly, be thank ???ll for your fortune.
Give me thy sword, or I will kill thee.
Some wiser then some, I love my reputation well, yet I am not so valiant an ass, but I love my life better, theirs my
Then get upon my back, come al shall be well.
Isle carry thee unto a Surgeon first, &amp; then unto thy wench, sword
Come we are friends.
Godamercy, zoones methinkes I see my self in
Moore-fields, upon a wooden leg, begging three pence.
I thank thee heaven for my success in this,
To what perfection is my business grown. 
Seldom or never is right overthrown.
They say every woman has a Sprindge to catch a Wood-cocke, remember my instructions, and let me see what a Paradise thou can bring this fool into. 15. hun???dered a year wench, will make vs all merry, but a fool to boot; why we shall throw the ???ouse out at window; Let me see, there are two things in this foolish Transitory world, which should be altogether regarded, profit and pleasure, or pleasure and profit, I know not which to place first, for indeed, they are Twins, and were borne toge???there; for Profit, this Marriage (God speed it) marries you to it, and for pleasure, if I help you not to that as cheap as any man in England, call me Cut, and so remember my instructions, for Isle go fetch Sir Abraham.
Your instructions; Nay faith, you shall see I have as fruitful a brain as a belly, you shall hear some additi???once of my own, my fantasy even kicks like my Bastard: well Boy, for I know thou art Masculine, neither thy Fa???there nor thy Mother had any foeminine quality, but one, and that was to take a good thing when it was proffered; when thou inherit'st Land, strange both to thy Father and Grandfather, and rid'st in a Caroch, it may bee thy Father an old Footman, will be running by thy side, but yonder comes the Gentle Knight, and my Squire.
Unfortunate Damsel, why dost thou love
Where thou hast sworn it never to reveal?
May be he would vouchsafe to look on thee
Because he is a Knight, is it thy terror,
Why peradventure he is Knight-hoods Mirror.
De'e hear Sir Abraham?
Yes, with standing tears.
Beef on Arundell with Morglay in hand,
Near to my Knight in prowess doth not stand;
They say Sir Beef flew both Bore and Draggon,
My Knight for that can drink up a whole Flagon,
a thing as famous now amongst our men,
as killing Monsters were accounted then,
Tic not thy leg, no, were it twice as good,
Throws me into this melancholy mood,
Yet let me say and swear, in a cross Garter,
Poles never showed to eyes a lovelier quarter.
I, but all this while she does not name me, she may mean Somebody else.
Mean Somebody else, you shall hear her name you by and by.
Courteous Sir Abraham.
Law ye there.
Oh, thy very name,
Like to a Hatchet cleaves my heart in twain,
When first I saw thee in those little Breeches,
I laughed for joy, but when I heard thy speeches
I smiled down right, for I was almost frantic,
A modern Knight should be so like an Antique,
In words and deeds, those Pinkanies of thine,
For I shall ne'er be blessed to call them mine.
Say not so, Sweet-heart.
How they did run not rheumatickly run,
But round about the room, one over one,
That wide mouth no, small, no, but Middle-size,
That Nose Dominicall, that head, like???wise.
Very good, de'e mark that head like wise?
She has an excellent wit.
Isle now into her, Sir observe what follows, Now Turtle mourning still For the party, for whom are you working that purse?
For me I warrant her.
What news good Cozen, I hope you have not reueal'd my Love.
Yes faith, I have acquainted the Knight withal, and thou moist be ashamed to abuse a Gentleman to slaun???derously, he swears he ne'er lay with you.
Lay with me, alas no, I say not so, nor no man li???uing;
but there was one night aboue the rest, that I dreamt he lay with me, and did you ne'er hear of a child begot in a Dream.
By this light, that very night I dreamt she lay with me.
I but Sir Abra: is no dreaming knight: in short, he contemns you, he scorns you at his heals.
By God so he lies, I have the most ado to for???bear, but that I would hear a little more.
And has sent this halter, you may hang your self, or you may cut your throat, heere's a knife too.
Well, I will love him in despite of all,
How ere he uses me, tic not the shame
Of being examined, or the fear of whipping.
Make as if thou would kill thy self.
Should move me, wold but he vouchsafe his love,
Bear him this purse filed with my latest breath. 
I loved thee Abraham Ninny, even in death. 
Hold, hold, thy Knight commands thee for to hold,
I sent no halter, poor soul how it pants,
Take Courage, look up.
Look, Sir Abra: in person comes to see you.
Oh, let me die then in his worships arms.
Live long and happy to produce thy Baby,
I am thy Knight, and thou shalt be my Lady:
Frown Dad, fret Mother, so my love look cheerly,
Thou hast my heart, and thou hast bought it dearly,
And for your pains, if Abraham live to inherit,
He will not be unmindful of your merit;
Wear thou this Ring, whilst I thy labours Task,
This Purse wear in my Cap, anon in the Mask.
Oh happy woman.
To Supper let's, and merry be as may be.
Now God send every wise knight such a Lady. 
Titles and State de'e call it: Oh Content!
Thou art both beauty, means, and all in marriage:
Joy dwells not in the Princes Palaces,
They that envy em do not know their cares,
Were I the Queen of Gold, it could not buy
An hours ease, for my oppressed heart.
Oh, were this Wedlock knot to tie again,
Not all the State and glory it contains,
Joined with my Fathers fury, should enforce
My rash consent; but Scudmore thou shalt see,
This false heart (in my death) most true to thee.
My Lord, my Father, all the Company
Did note my sudden sadness now at Supper,
Yet came I out, and put on feigned mirth,
And mean to sit out this nights Revels too,
To avoid all suspect may grow in em,
Least my behaviour should my intent reveal:
Our griefs (like love) we hardly can conceal,
Yon comes my Sisters: Are the Mockers ready?
They are gone to dress themselves, M. Neuil's come
I would I had not vowed to live a Maid,
I am a little taken with that Gentleman,
And yet if Marriage be so full of ill,
Let me be married to my Gyrlond still.
In truth thy State is happier much then ours,
Were never two (like vs) unfortunate.
Thy case indeed, I needs must pity much,
Because I think thy Virtue slandered,
But for my Lady Sister, if she reap
Sad discontent, tic nones but her own fault,
I knew the passages twixt her and Scudmore.
Sister, I wonder you will name a man,
I think not on, he was no match for me,
Why de'e blame me, that should rather blame
Your wandering eye, to love a man loved me,
Well tic too late now to expostulate.
But my poor little Kate, where is thy man?
Lost, lost in truth, to morrow I shall hear,
I make account hoe's gone some five years voyage,
Till this disgrace of ours be ouer-blowne,
and for my Captain Pouts, by this time hee
Is ten mile on the River toward Graves end.
Stand you two there, Sirrha go you with me.
Why how now Girls here still, what &amp; your Ladyship?
Away, away, I say, go take your places.
Some Torches for my Lady.
You Sirrha, 
Is my lady Ninny awake yet?
Yes sir, she is awake, but she is scant sober, the first thing she called for, was her Aqua vitae bottle.
Who is with her?
The good Sir Innocent, and her Gentlewoman,
Go tell em I desire their Company,
The Mask stays on em say, and de'e hear,
The sides of one a'th Chaire's must be let out,
For her great Ladyship.
Marry shall it Sir. 
Soul man, leave eating now, look, look, you have all dropped a yoursute.
Oh Sir, I was in love to day, and could not eat, but heere's one knows the case is altered, lend me but a Handkerchief to wipe my mouth, and I ha done.
Soul, how this Rascal stays with the rest of our things.
How now son Count, what ready M. Neuill.
All ready, ready, only we tarry for our Vizards &amp; our Caps, I put em to a knave to doing, because I would have em the better done.
If you put em to a knave, you are like to have em the worse done.
Your wit is most active, I called him knave in re???guard of his long stay Sir, not his work.
But de'e hear Moist. Neuill, did you bespeak a Vizard with a most terrible countenance for me.
A very Devils face, I fear nothing but that it will fright the women.
I would it would, and a huge Moustaches?
A very Turks.
Excellent.
But do you think he will come at all?
Oh, there he is. 
Nothing can be done to night, if I enter not.
Stand back there, or Isle burn you.
It were but a whorish trick Sir.
Oh Sir first you, Hart you'll be kilt.
Marry God forbid Sir.
Pray forbear, let me speak to him, Oh you use vs very well.
In good Faith, I have been so troubled about this Gentleman's scurvy face (I take it) tic wonderful.
Well, are you fitted now.
Fitted at all points.
Where are the Caps.
Here Sir.
Let me see mine.
Come help me on with mine.
This a rare face to fright the Maids in the Coun???trey, here now Isle pin my purse, come help me on.
So, so, away, mine being on Isle follow you.
Pray make hast. 
So that doors fast, and they are busied. 
About their charge: on with this Robe of mine,
This Vizard and this Cap; help me a little. 
At first Change I must tell her who I am?
Right, tic agreed, I (leading of the Mask,)
Should dance with Bellafront.
And at the second, I come away with her, &amp; leave them dancing, and shall find you at the back door.
The rest
That follows, is digested in my breast.
What would you do? Stand back,
Unless you can eat Torches.
Come, come, away for shame.
Tic such a tedious rascal. So ha with.
Thou hast well fitted em, though thou made em stay.
I forbid any man to mend em Sir, good night unto your worship.
Alas Sir, I have another to set forth
This very night: By your leave my Masters.
By your leave, by your leave, you'll let a man go out?
Now go with me, and let all in that will.
I am your Scudmore.
Ha?
By heaven I am,
Be ruled by me in all things.
Even to death.
Sfut did you not know me by my purse?
I should ne'er have known you by that, for you wear it on your head, and other folks in their pockets.
Which is my Lord I pray?
The second man
Young Neuill leads.
And whore's Sir. Abraham?
He with the terrible visage.
Now out upon him to disfigure himself so,
And it were not for my bottle, I should swooned.
Good very good.
But whore's the Bride and Neuill?
Ha.
Ware tricks.
Oh, there they come, it was their parts to do so
This Neuill, this is Scudmore.
How?
But heere's my Lady,
No my Gentlewoman.
Zoones Treason, I smell powder.
In short know, that I am married to this Gent.
To whom I was contracted long ago:
This Priest the inviolable knot hath tied,
What ease I find being vn-Ladifyed.
What Riddle's this?
Ware the last Statute of two Husbands.
Bellafront, pish.
This is the very Priest that married me,
Is it not Sister?
No.
Lord bless vs here is conjuring,
Lend me your Aqua-vitae bottle good Mother.
Hoy-day, the worlds turned up side down, I have heard and seen two or three Benefices to one Priest, or more, But two Priests to one Benefice, ne'er before.
Married not you the Earl?
Bonafide, no.
You did then?
Yes.
I have the Privilege then.
Right, you were married first.
Sir Iohn you dote,
This is a Devil in a Parsons coat.
A pretty Emblem.
Who married her, or would have cause his marry
To any man but this, no better was,
Let circumstances be examined,
Yet heere's one more, and now I hope you all,
Perceive my marrying not Cannon call.
Neuill, whoop.
Hart, what a deal a Knavery a Priests cloak can hide, if it be not one of the honestest friendliest Coozena???ges that ere I saw, I am no Lord.
Life, I am not married then in earnest.
So Mistress Kate, I kept you for my self.
It boots not to be angry.
No faith Sir Iohn.
Whether will you go with your Calfe on your back Sir.
Now more knavery yet.
Prithee forbear, or I shall do thee mischief: By your leave, heere's some sad to your merriment: know you this Captain?
Yes very well.
Oh Sister, heere's the Villain slandered me.
You see he cannot stand to it.
Is he hurt in the arm too?
Yes.
Why then by Gods-lid thou art a base Rogue, I knew I should live to tell thee so.
Sir Abraham I say.
Heaven is just.
What a Rogue are you, is this the Surgeon you would carry me to?
Confess your slander, and I will I swear.
Nay tic no matter, Isle cry quittance with you,
Forgive me Mrs. Kate, and know all people
I li'de not with her, but beli'de her once,
And to my recantation, that same Soldier
Enforced my hand. 
Yes, here tic Mistress Kate.
I see now how I am cheated, love him well,
He has redeemed your honour with his sword.
But where is Strange my Son, oh were he heer He should be married new to make all sure.
Oh my Divining Spirit, hoe's gone to Sea.
This cunning in her is exceeding good,
Your Son, your husband, Strange is murdered.
How?
Peace, peace, for Heavens sake peace,
Come Sir, Isle carr you to a Surgeon,
Heir's Gold to stop thy throat, for God-sake peace.
Sir, you have brought me to a Surgeon already, Isle be even with you.
Of all men living I could marry thee,
Were not my heart given to another man,
Sir you did speak of Strange.
These women are as crafty as the Devil,
Yes, I did speak of him, Sir Iohn, my Lord,
Know Strange is murdered by that Villains hand,
And by his wives consent.
How?
God forbid.
Search presently the Closet and the Vault,
There you shall find his body, tic too true,
The reason all may guess, her husband wanting
Spirit to do on me what he hath done,
In hope to marry her, he hath murdered him.
To marry me, no villain I do hate him
On this report, worse then I do thy self,
And may the plagues and Tortures of a Land
Ceize me, if this be not an Innocent hand.
Fore-God tic most like truth, son Scudmore pray
Look to this fellow, Gentlemen assist,
Torches, some Torches, Isle go search my self,
I will assist you.
But I pray Sir how came you unto this knowledge
From his mouth.
Isle save your labour, and discover all:
Thou perjured villain, did not swear thou would not discover me.
I but swore in jest.
Nay but remember thou did wish Strange living
If ever thou did tell, Sir all is true,
And would my punishment would ease my Conscience.
To New-gate with him hence, take her along,
Out Murderers, whore thou art no child of mine,
Fetch Constable and Officers, Away.
Sir do but hear me speak.
Fetch Officers.
Go fetch a Surgeon.
Sir, you are then too violent, I will bail her.
Oh my dear Strange.
My Son.
Brother.
Young Strange.
Hart, I was never sick before, help me now to a
Surgeon, or I shall swoon instantly. As 2 leads him he speaks
Thou were it borne a Roman-Citizen, fare thee well,
And farewell love, and women, ye diseases,
My horse and sword shall be my Mistresses,
My Horse Isle court, my sword shall lye with me. 
The way to cure lust, is to bleed I see.
Tell him al Scudmore, whilst I go a wooing again, Sir Iohn will you go along, and my two worshipful Elders, I pray be you witnesses, Priest go  not you away, Hart I have so rum???nated on a Wife, that I must have one this night, or I shall run proud. Mistress Lucida, you did once love me, if you doo still, no more words, but give me your hand, why are ye doubtful?
Ne'er look upon me M. Lucida, Time was, Time is, and Times past, Isle none of you now, I am other-wise provided.
Well spoken Brazen head, now or never Sir A???braham.
Then first as duty binds, I crave consent
Of my two parents dear: If I, say so;
If not, Isle ha her, whether you will or no.
How. how.
I hope you will not
Mam, I am resolved, you have a humour of your Aqua-vitae bottle, why should not I have a humour in a wife?
An old man were a fitter match for her,
He would make much of her.
Much on her, I know not what ye call much ma???king on her, I am su???e I have made two on her.
And that an old man cannot do I hope.
Oh thou beyond Lawrence of Lancashire.
Come, come, you shall not.
Speak not in vain, I am to sure to change,
For hand and heart are sure,
Ass signum, and this have I done, and never lay with his
Nay, then tic too late,
Tic sure, Tic vane to cross the will of Fate.
Well, well, God bless you. 
Thanks reverend couple, and God bless withal
The little Ninny that herein doth spraule,
Parson you shall dispatch vs presently:
Lord how soberly you stand.
Now truly I could ne'er stand drunk in my life.
Strange and most fortunate, wee must have a new Tucke then.
Is it a match?
Tic done.
Then Bacchus squeeze Grapes with a plenteous hand.
Parson you'll take some pains with vs to night;
Come Brothers come, fly Willow to the woods,
And like the Sea, for healths let's drink whole floods.
I consecrate my deed unto ths City,
And hope to live my self, to see the day,
It shall be shown to people in a play.
And may all true love have like happy end,
Women forgive me; Men, admire my Friend.
On Parson on, and Boy out-voice the Music,
Ne'er was so much (what cannot heavenly powers,)
Done and undone, and done in twelve short hours.

PRinces and Sons of Priam, to this end
We called you to this solemn Parlance
There's a divining spirit prompts me still
That if we new begin Hostility,
The Gracious may be forced to make repair
Of our twice rin'd walls, and of the rape
Done to our sister fair Hesioe.
Aeneas. I am my princely Sovereign of your mind,
And can by grounded arguments approve
Your power and potency: what they twice demolish',
Is ow with strength and beauty reared again.
Your Kingdom grown more populous and rich
The youth of Troy irregular and untamed,
Covetous of war and martial exercise.
From you and silver tressed Hecuba
Fifty fair sons are lineally derived,
All Asiaes Kings are in your lou and league
Their royalties as of your Empire held
Hector and Hectors brothers are of power
To fetch your sister from the heart of Greece,
Where she remains embraced by Telamon.
Aeneas, your advise assents with vs.
How stand our sons unto these wars inclined?
In mine opinion we have no just cause
To raise new tumults, that may live in peace:
War is a fury quickly conjured up,
But not so soon appeased
What juster cause
When the whole world takes note to our disgrace,
Of this our Troy, twice rac't by Hercules.
And fair Hesione rapt hence to Greece,
Where she still lives cooped up in Salamine.
Troy, was twice rac't, and Troy deserved that wrack,
The valiant (half Divine bred) Hercules,
Redeemed this Town from black mortality,
And my bright Aunt from death, when he surcharged
The vigin fed, Sea-monster with his club.
For my own Grand-fire great Lamedon,
Denied the Hero, both the mead proposed,
And most (ungrateful) shut him from the Gates:
Troy therefore drew just ruin on it self:
Tic true, our Aunt was borne away to Greece,
Who with more justice might transport her hence,
Then he whose prise she was? bold Telamon
For venturing first upon the walls of Troy,
Alcides gave her to the Salmine Duke.
Detaining her? whom keeps he but his own?
Were she my prisoner I should do the like.
By Jove she's worth the keeping.
Then of force,
She must be worth the fetching.
Fech her that list: my reverent King and father
If you pursue this expedition,
By the vntaunted honour of these arms
hat lie emblazoned on my burnh't shield
It is without good cause, and I divine
Of all your flourishing line, by which the Gods
have rectified your fame aboue all Kings,
Not one shall live to meat your Sepulchre,
Or trace your funeral Heralds to the Tombs
Of your great Aucestours: oh for your honour
Take not up unjust Arms.
Prince Hectors words
Will draw on him the imputation
Of fear and cowardesie.
Fie brother Hector,
If our Aunts rape, and Troys destruction
Bee not revenged, their several blemishes
The aged hand of Time can never wipe
From our succession.
Twill be registered
That all King Priams sons save one were willing
And forward to reuengs them on the Greeks,
Only that Hector durst not.
Ha, durst not did thou say? effeminate boy
Go get you to your Sheepe-hooke and your Scrip,
Thou look not like a Soldier, there's no fire
Within thine eyes, nor quills upon thy chin,
Tell me I dare not? go, rise, get you gone:
You are fitter for young Oenons company
Then for a bench of soldiers: here comes one,
Antenor is returned.
Welcome Antenor, what's the news from Greece?
News of dishonour to the name of Priam,
Your Highness Sister fair Hesiones
Esteemed there as a stumpet, and no Queen;
(After complaint) when I proposed your Majesty
would fetch her thence perforce, had you but seen
With what disdainful pride, and bitter taunts
They tossed my threats: it would have inflamed your splee
With more then common rage, never was Princess
So basely used: never Ambassador
With such dishonour sent f om Princes Court,
As was thenfrom that of Telamons,
Of Agamemnons and the Spartan Kings.
I shall not dye in peace, if these disgraces
Lic vrevenged.
By Jove we'll fetch her thence,
Or make all populous Greece a Wilderness,
Paris a hand, wee are friends, now Greece shall find
And thou shalt know what mighty Hector dares.
When all th'vnited Kings in Arms shall rue
This base dishonour done to Priams blood.
Hear Gracious sir, my dream in Ida Mount,
Beneath the shadow of a Cedar sleeping.
Celestial Iuno, Veus, and the Goddess
Borne from the brain of mighty Iupiter.
These three present me with a golden Ball,
On which was writ, Detur pulcherrimae,
Giue't to the fairest: Iuno proffers wealth,
Scepters and Crowns: saith, she will make me rich
Next steps forth Pallas with a golden Book,
Saith, reach it me, I'll teach the Literature,
Knowledge and Arts, make thee of all most wise.
Next smiling Venus cme, with such a look
Able to raish mankind: thus bespoke me,
Make that Ball mine? the fairest Queen that breathes,
I'll i requital, cast into thine arms.
How can I stand agist her golden smiles,
When beauty promised beauty? she prevailed:
To her I gave the prise, with which she mounted
Like to a Star from earth shot up to Heaven.
Now if in Greece (as some report) be Ladies
Peerless for beauty, wherefore might not Paris
By Venus aid sail ence to Grecia,
And quit the rape of fair Hesion,
By stealing thence the Queen most beautiful
That feeds upon the honey of that ay?
That amorous Goddess borne upon the wave
Assist thee in thy voyage, we will rigge
A royal fleee to wat thee into Greece.
Aeneas with our son Deiphobus,
And other Lords shall bear thee company.
What think our sons Hector and Troylus
Of Paris expedition?
As an attempt the Heavens have cause to prosper.
Go brother Paris, if thou bring a Queen,
Hector will be her Champion; then let's see
What Greek dare fetch her hence.
Sraight give order
To have his Fleet made ready.
Stay Priam, Paris cease, stay Trojan Peers
To pot you vniursall uertrow.
What hath poor Troy thisu'd, that you should kindle
lames to destroy it?
What intends Cassandra
To quench bright burning Troy, to seue thee,
To save old Priam and his fifty sons.
(The royal'st issue, that ever King I enjoyed)
To keep the euerent hairs of Hecuba,
From being torn off by her own sad hands
Cassandra's mad.
You are mad, all Troy is mad.
And rails before it's ruin.
What would my sister?
Stay this bold youth my brother, who by water
Would sail to bing fire which all buno all Toy.
Stay him, oh stay him ere the golden rooes
Melt o'er our heads before these gorious Turret
Bee burnt to ash. Ere cler Simois treames
Ruee with boud royal, and Scamander Plain,
In which Troy incise bee mae a Sepuchre
To bury Troy, and Troians.
Away with her, some false divining spirit
Envying the honour we shall gain from Greece,
Would trouble our designments.
Royal sir,
Cassandra is a Vestal Prophetess,
And consecrate to Pallas; oft inspired,
Then lend her gracious audience.
So let our Aunt
Bee still a slave in Greece, and wee your son
Bee held as cowards.
Let Antenors wrongs
Bee basely swallowed, and the name of Troy
Be held a word of scorn.
Then let Troy burn,
Let the Greeks clap their hands, and warm themselves
At this bright Bone-fire: dreamed not Hecuba
The night before this fatal Youth was borne,
That she brought forth a fire-brand?
It is most true.
And when King Priam to the Priest reueal'd
This ominous dream, hee with the Gods consulted,
And from the Oracle did this return,
That the Chide borne should stately Islion burn.
And well the Prophet guest, for my desire
To visi Greece, burns with a quenchless fire:
Not from this flaming brand shall I be free,
Till I have left rich Troy, and Sparta see.
Yet Hecuba, ere thou thy Priam loose,
And Priam ere thou loose thy Hecuba,
Away with her.
Why speaks not in this case Andromache?
Thou shalt loose a Hector, who's yet thine.
Why good Aeneas dost thou speech forbear?
Thou hop'st in time another Troy to rear,
When this is sacked, and therefore thou standst mute,
All struck with silence; none assist my suite.
Force her away and lay her fast in hold.
Then Troy, no Troy, but ashes; and a place
Where once a City stood: poor Priam, thou
That shalt leave fatherless fifty fair sons,
And this thy fruitful Queen, a desolate widow
And Ilium now no Palace for a King,
But a confused heap of twice burnt brick.
They that thy beauty wondered, shall admire
To see thy Towers deac'd with Greekish fire.
Thou art no Sibill, but from fury speak,
Not inspiration we rogued thee not.
Come valiant sons, we'll rst prepare our ships,
And with a royal Fleet well rigged to sea
Seek int revenge for fair Hestone.
Know you not me?
Who art thou?
View me well.
And what I am, my looks and tears will teach thee
Oenon? what brought thee hither?
To see Ida bare
Of her all Cedars, to see shipwrights square
The trunks of new field Pines: Asking the cause,
So many Hatchets, Hammers, Plowes and Saws
Were thither brought: They began me thus to greet
With these tall Cedars we must build a fleet
For Paris; who in that must sail to Greece,
To fetch a new wife thence.
And my fair Oenon,
Know that they told truth, for it is decreed
Even by the Gods behest, that I should speed
Upon this new adventure: The Gods all,
That made me judge to give the golden Ball.
Hake, hark, the Sailors cry aboard, aboard;
The Wind blows fair, fare-well.
Hear me one word.
By our first love, by all our amorous kisses
Courtings, embraces, and ten thousand blesses
I conjure thee, that thou in Troy may stay.
They cry aboard, and Paris must away.
What need thou plow the seas to seek a wife
Having one here, to hazard thy sweet life,
Seeking a Strumpet through wars feel alarms,
And have so kind a wife lodged in thine arms.
Sweet Oenon, stay me not, vnclaspe thine hold.
Not for Troys crown or all the Sun-gods Gold
Can thou? oh cast thou thy sweet life endanger,
And leave tnine own wife to seke out a stranger?
I can farewell.
Oh yet a little stay.
Let go thine hold, or I shall force my way
Oh do but look on me, yet once again.
Though now a Prince, thou wast an humble swain,
And then I was thine Oenon. (Oh sad fate)
I crave thy love, I covet not thy state;
Still  am Oenon: still thou Paris are
The selfsame man, but not the selfsame heart
Vtie, or I shall break thy charming band,
Nptune assist my course: thou Jove my hand.
Most cruel, most unkind, had thou thus said
The night before thou had my Maiden-head
I had been free to choose, and thou to wive;
Not widowed now, my husband still alive.
King Diomed, Sparta is proud to see you,
Your coming at this time's more seasonable,
In that wee have employment for your wisdom
And royal valour.
The Chritian Sceptre now in contruersi
(As this Ambassador hath late informed)
Despising that usurping hand, which long
Hath against Law and Justice swayed and borne it
Offers it self to your protection.
Is it not so my Lord?
You truly understand our Embassy.
Menelaus!
What saith Thersites?
That Heaven hath many Stars in it, but no eyes
And cannot see desert. The Goddess Fortune
Is head-winkt, why else should she proffer thee
Another Crown that hath one: (Grand Sir Jove)
What a huge heap of business shalt thou have,
Having another Kingdom? being in Create,
Sparta will go to wrack, being in Sparta,
Create will to ruin: To have more then these
Such a bright Lass as Helen: Helen? oh!
'Must have an eye to her too, fie, fie, fie,
Poor man how thou'lt bee puzzled!
Why thinks Thersites my bright Hellens beauty
Is not with her fair virtues equalised?
Yes, I think so, and Helen is a  ass,
But thou believe so too.
Thersites is a rayler.
No, I disclaim't, I am a Counsellor
I have known a fellow matched to a fair wife,
That hath had ne'er a Kingdom: thou hast two
To look to, (scarce a house) thou many Palaces,
Hee scarce a Page, and thou a thousand servants:
Yet hee having no more, yet had too much
To look to one fair wife.
Were not the King
Well grounded in the virtues of his Queen,
Thy words Thersites might set odds betwixt them.
My Helen? therein am I happiest.
Know Diomed, her beauty I prefer
Before the Crowns of Sparta, and of Create.
Music! I know my Lady then is coming
To goe kind welcome to King Diomed,
Strowe in her way sweet powders, burn Perfume,
And where my Helen treads no feet presume.
It were better strowe horne-shauings.
It is told is this Ambassador doth stay
To take my husband, my dear Lord away.
True Helen, it is a Kingdom calls me hence.
A Kingdom! hath your Helen such small grace,
That you prefer a Kingdom before her face?
You value me too cheap, and doe not know
The worth and value of the face you owe.
I had rather have a good Calves face.
Theseus, that in my non-age did assail me,
And being too young for pastime, thence did hail me:
Hee, to have had the least part of your bliss
Oft proffered me a Kingdom for a kiss.
You surfeit in your pleasures, swim in sport,
But sir, from henoeforth I shall keep you short.
Fair Queen, it is honour calls him hence away,
What's that to Helen, if she'll have him stay
Say I should weep at parting, (which I fear)
Some for ten Kingdoms would not have a tear
Fall from his Hellens eye, but hoe's unkind,
And cares not though I weep my bright eyes blind.
Great King, we have discovered from the shore
A gallant Fleet of ships, that with full sail
Make towards the Port.
What number?
Some two and twenty Sail.
Discover them more amply, and make good the Haen against them, till we know th'intent of their arrive.
My Royal Lord I shall.
Ambassador this business once blown o'er,
You shall receive your answer instantly.
You shall not go and leave your Helen here,
Can I a Kingdom govern in your absence,
And guide so rude a people as yours is?
How shall I doe my Lord, when you are gone,
So many bleak cold nights to lye alone?
You've used me so to fellowship in bed,
That should I leave it, I should soon be dead:
Troth I shall never endure it.
My sweet Helen,
Was never King blessed with so chaste a wife.
The news? whence is their Fleet?
From Troy.
The General?
Priams son.
Their expedition?
To seek adventures and strange Lands abroad
And though now weather-beat, yet braver men,
More rich in Jewels, costlier araide,
Or better featured ne'er eye beheld,
Especially the Prince their General,
Paris of Troy one of King Priams sons.
Braver then these our Lacedemons are
Madam, by much.
How is the Prince of Troy
To Menelaus mighty Spartans King?
Prince Menelaus is my Sovereign Madam,
But might I freely speak without offence,
(Excepting Menelaus) never breathed
A braver Gallant then the Trojan Prince.
What Entertainment shall wee give these strangers?
What? but the choice that Lacedemon yields,
If they come brave, our bravery let vs show,
That what our Sparta yields, their Troy may know:
Let them not say they found vs poor and bare.
Or that our Grecian Ladies are less fair
Then theirs: give them occasion to relate
At their return, how wee exceed their stare.
Helen hath well advised, and for the best
Her counsel with our honour doth agree,
All Spartaes pomp is for the Troians free.
Oh had I known their Landing one day sooner,
That Helen might have trimmed up her attire
Against this meeting then my radiant beauty
I doubt not, might in Troy be termed as fair,
As through all Greece I am reputed rare.
It is not the Spartan fashion thus to greet
Upon the lips, when royal strangers meet.
I know not what your Asian Court-ship is.
Oh Jove, how sweetly doth this Trojan kiss?
Bear with a stranger Lady though unknown;
That's practised in no fashion save his own.
Hee that his fault confesses ne'er offends
Nor can hee injure, that no wrong intends,
To kiss me! why before so many eyes
The King could do no more: would fortune bring
This stranger there where I have met the King
Patience, sweet Helen, Troians welcome all,
You shall receive the princeliest entertain
Sparta can yield you, but some late affairs
About the Cretin seepter calls vs hence,
That business once determined wee are yours,
In the mean time fair Helen be it your charge
To make their welcome in my absence large.
Oh Jove my dream! sweet Venus aid my prayer
And keep thy word: behold a face more fair
Then thou thy self can show, this is the same
Thou promised me in Ida, this I claim.
Give me this face fair enus, and that's all
I'll ask in guerdon of the golden Ball.
Of what rare mettle is this Trojan made?
That one poor kiss hath power so to persuade,
Here at my lips the sweetness did begin,
And since hath past through all my powers within:
Oh kiss me if thou love me once again,
I feel the first kiss thrill through every vein.
Queen I must speak with you,
Must?
Helen, I,
I have but two ways to take, to speak, or dye:
Grant my tongue pardon then, or turn your head
And say you will not, and so strike me dead.
Live and say on, but if your words offend,
If my tongue can destroy, you're near your end.
Oh Jove, that I had now an Angels voice
As you an Angels shape have, that my words
Might sound as spheare-like music in your ear.
That Jove himself whom I must call to witness,
Would now stand forth in person to approve
What I now speak, Helen, Helen I love.
Chide me, I care not; tell your husband, doe,
Fearless of death, behold, I boldly woe
For let me live, bright Helen to enjoy,
Or let me never back recoil to Troy:
For you I came, your fame hath hither driven me,
Whom golden Venus hath by promise given me.
I loved you ere I saw you by your fame,
Report of your rae beauty to Troy came
But more then bruit can tell, or fame emblazon
Are these divine perfections that I gaze on.
Insolent stranger, is my Name so light
Abroad in Troy, that thou at thefirst sight
Should hope to strum pet vs? thinks Priams son,
The Spartan Queen can be so easily won?
Because once Theseus ravished vs from hence,
And did to vs a kind of violence:
Follows it therefore wee are of such price,
That stolen hence once, we should be ravished twice?
That Theseus stole you hence (by Heaven) I praise him,
And for that act I to the skies will raise him.
That hee returned you back by Jove I wonder,
Had I beee Theseus, hee that should asunder
Have parted vs, and snatched you from my bed:
First from my should shoulders have tan this head.
Oh that you were the prize of some great strife,
And hee that wins might claim you as his wife,
Your self should find, and all the world should see
Helen, a prise alone ordained for me.
I am not angry; who can angry be
With him that loves her? they that Paris see,
And hears the wonders and rare deeds you boast,
And warlike spoils in which you glory most:
By which you have attained amongst soldiers grace,
None can believe you that beholds your face.
They that this lovely Trojan see, will say;
Hee was not made for war, but amorous plays
Love amorous Paris then.
My fame to endanger?
I can be secret Lady.
And a stranger?
Say I should grant thee love, as thou should clime
My long wished bed; if at th'appointed time
The Wind should alter, and blow fair for Troy,
Thou must hreake off in midst of all thy Joy.
Not for great Spartaes Crown, or Asiaes Treasure,
(That exceeds Spartaes) would I loose such pleasure.
would it were come to that.
Your Husband Menelaus hither bring,
Compare our shapes, our youth and every thing,
I make you Judges, wrong me if you can:
You needs must say I am the properer man.
I must confess that too.
Then love me Lady.
Had you then set sail,
When my virginity, and bed to enjoy
A thousand gallant princely Suitors came?
Had I beheld thee first, I here proclaim,
Your feature should have borne me from the rest.
You come too late, and covet goods possessed.
I came from Helen, Hellens love I crave,
Helen I love, and Helen I must have:
Or in this Province where I vent my mons,
I'll beg a Tomb for my exiled bones.
Now Prince of Troy, our business being o'er
This day in Lacedemon, you shall feast
Paris, wee are proud of such a Princely guest.
Thus every man is borne to his own Fate.
Now it rains Horns, let each man shield his Pate.
This royalty extended to the welcome
Of Priams son, is more then Asiaes King
Would yield unto the greatest Prince of Greece.
What is this Paris whom you honour so?
Why asks my Queen?
May not this proud this beauty venting Trojan,
In a smooth brow hide black and rugged Treason?
Hee such an one? rather a giddy brain
A formal traveller. King Dimed
Your censure of this Trojan?
A Capering, Carpet Knight, a Cushion Lord,
One that hath stald his Courtly tricks at home,
And now got leae to publish them abroad
Did to a stranger Prince, it could not though
Leaen my zeal o you: speak the fairest Queen
That ever spake, this night shall we agree
To con ecrate to pleasure and delights:
Your husband left me charge I should enjoy
All that the Court can yield: if all? then you
I would not for the world, but you should doe
All that the King your Lord commands you too:
Your King and husband, you sin doubly still
When you assent not to obey his will:
Speak beauteous Qeven. No? then it may be
She means by silence to accord with me:
Ine try that presently, lend me your hand
Tic this I want, and by the Kings command
You are to let me have it: more then this,
I want your lips to help me make a kiss.
Oh Heaven!
Oh love, a joy aboue all measure,
To touch these lips is more then heavenly pleasure.
Beshrew your amorous rhetoric that did prove
My husbands will commanded me to love,
For but for that iniuntion, Paris know
I would not yield such favours to bestow
On any stranger, but since he commands,
You may take more then either lips or hands.
Do I not blush sweet stranger? if I break
The Laws of modest, think that I speak,
But with my husbands tongue, for I ay still
I would not yield, but to obey his will.
This night then without all suspicion,
The ranishing pleasures of your royal bed
You may aoord to Paris: bitter Thersites,
King Diomed, and your servants may suppose
By my late counterfeit distemperature
I aim at no such happiness, alas
I am a puny Courtier, a weak brain,
 brainsick young man; but Divinest Helen,
When we get safe to Troy.
To Troy?
Yes Queen, by all the gods it is decred,
That I should bear you thither; Priam knows it,
And therefore purposely did rigge this Fleet,
To waft me hither; He and Hecuba,
My nine and forty brothers, Princes all
Of Ladies and bright Virgins infinite,
Will meet vs in the road of Tenedos
Then be rsolved for I will cast a plot
To bear you safe from hence!
This Trojan Prince
Will's more then any Prince of Greece dares plead,
And yet I have no power to say him nay:
Well Paris I beshrew you with my heart,
That ever you came to Sparta (by my joy
Queen Helen lies, and longs to be at Troy:)
Yet use me as you please, you know you have
My dearest love, and therefore cannot crave
What Isle deny; but if reproach and shame
Pursue vs, on you Paris light the blame:
Isle wash my hands of all, nor will I yield
But by compulsion to your least demand:
Yet if in lieu of my Kings entertain,
You bid me to a feast aboard your ship,
And when you have me there, unknown to me
Hoise sail, weigh Anchor, and bear out to Sea
I cannot help it, tic not in my power
To let fall sails, or strive with stretching oars
To row me back again: this you may do,
But sooth friend Paris He not yield thereto.
You shall be then compelled, o me let all
The danger waiting on this practise fall.
Castor and wholex your two princely brothers
Are newly Landed, and to morrow next
Purpose for Lacedemon
On their approach
He lay my plot to escape away with Paris.
I have it: you sir for some special reason
There coming keep concealed, but when to morrow
You shall perceive me near the water port,
Even when thou see me ready to take Barge.
You apprehend me.
Gracious Queen I do.
Take that farewell: now my fair princely guest
All that belongs to you's to inuit Queen Helen
Aboard your ship to morrow.
Spartaes mirror,
Will you vouchsafe to a poor wandering Prince
So much of grace, will your high majesty
Deign the acceptance of an homely banquet
Aboard his weather beaten Bark?
No Friend,
The King my husband is from Sparta gone,
And I, till his return, must needs keep home:
Urge me not I entreat, it is in vain
Get me aboard, Isle ne'er turn back again.
Nor shall you Lady, Sparta nor all Greece
Shall fetch you thence, but Troy shall stand as high
On terms with Greece, as Greece hath stood with Troy.
This is the VVater-port, the Queens royal guest, hath bound me to attendance, till the Prince and she bee ready to take Water: Methinkes in this there should bee some trick or other, she was once stolen away by Theseus, and this a gallant smooth faced Prince. The Kings from home, the Queens but a Woman, the Troins ships new trimmed, the wind stands fair, and the Sailors all ready oboerd, sweetemeates and wine, good words and opportunity, and indeed not what? If both parties bee pleased, but pleased or not the music gives warning, are they not now upon their entrance.
Health to your Mjests, your Princely brothers
Castor and Pollux, being within two Leagues
Of this great City, come to visit you.
My brothers stolen upon vs unawares.
Let me entreat thee royal Dimed,
And you Thersites, d me so much grace,
As give them friendly meeting.
Queen we shall.
Our entertainment shall be given aboard,
Where I presume, they shall be welcome guests
To princely Paris.
As to your self, fair Queen,
Set forwards then.
We will hoise up sail, near to eturne again.
Our brother Menelaus gone for Create?
Our love to see him, makes vs loose much time
Yet all our labour is not vainly spent,
Since we shall see our sister.
Princes, the Kings betrayed, all Greece dishonoured, the Queen borne hence, the Troians have weighed anchor, and with a prosperous gale they bear from hence:
Shouting and hurling up their caps for joy,
They rye farewell to Greece, amain for Troy.
Ha, ha, ha.
The Queen borne hence, with that smooth traitor Paris.
See princes with what pride they have advanced
The Arms of Tray upon their waing pendants.
Rage not, but lets resolve what's to be done.
Let some ride post to Create for menelaus.
That be my charge.
VVho'le after him to Sea?
That will my brother Castor and my self,
And perish there, or bring my sister back.
Princes be it so, and fairly may you speed:
Whilst I to Agamemnon, great Achilles,
Vlysses, Nestor, Aiax, Idomean,
And all the Kings and Dukes of populous Greece,
Relate the wrongs done by this Ravisher.
Part, and be expeditious
Ha, ha, ha,
I smelt this Sea-rat ere he came a shore, by this hoe's grawing
Menelaus Cheese, and made a huge hole in it Ship-dyet plea
seth above all his Palace banquets, much good do it them:
They are at it without grace by this both bare:
Cuckold? no subject with that name bee sorry,
Since Sovereigns may be such in all their glory.
Fair Cresida, by the honour of y birth,
As I am Hectors brother, Priams son,
And Troilus best beloved of Hecuba,
As I love Arms and soldiers, I protest,
Thy beauty lives enshrined here in my breast.
As I am Calchas daughter, Cresida,
High Priest to Pallas, she that patrons Troy:
Now sent unto the Delphian Oracle,
To know what shall betide Prince Paris voyage.
I hold the love of Troilus dearer far.
Then to be Queen of Asia.
Daughter to Calchas and the pride of Troy,
Plight me your hand and heart.
Fair Heaven I doe.
Will Troilus in exchange grant me his too?
Yes, and fast sealed, you gods, your anger wreak
On him or her, that first this union break.
So protests Cresida, wretched may they dye,
That'twixt our souls these holy bands untie.
My brother Troilus, we have news from Greece,
Prince Paris is returned.
And with a prise?
Asia affords none such.
What is she worth our Aunt Hesione?
Or what might be her name?
Helen of Sparta.
Hellens name
Hath scarce been heard in Troy.
But now her fame
Will bee eternized, for a face more fair
Sun never shone on, nor the earth e re bare.
Why stay you here? by this Faris and she
Are landed in the ort of Tenedos,
There Priam, Hecuba, Hector, all Troy
Meets the mid-way to attend the Spartan Queen.
In that fair Train, my Cresid shall be seen
Of rarer beauty then the Spartan Queen.
What Earth, what all mortality
Can in the height of our inventions find
To add to Hellens welcome, Troy shall yield her.
Should Pallas, Patronise of Troy descend,
Priam and Priams wife, and Priams son
Could not afford Her god-head more applause,
Then amply wee bestow on Helena?
We count you in the number of our daughters,
Nor can wee doe Queen Helen greater honour.
I was not forward to hane Paris sent,
But being returned you are welcome: I desired not
To have bright Helen brought, but being landed,
Hector proclaims himself her Champion
Against all the world, and he shall guard thee safe
Despite all opposition.
Hectors word
As Oracle, he will seal it with his sword.
And now my turn eomes to bid Helen welcome.
You are no stranger here, this is your Troy,
Priam your father, and this Queen your mother:
These be your valiant brothers, all your friends.
Why should a tear fall from these heavenly eyes
Being thus round ingirt with your allies.
I am I know not where, nor amongst whom,
I know no creature that I see save yon:
I have left my King, my brothers, subjects, friends
For strangers, who should they forsake me now,
I have no husband, father, brother near:
Hane you not all these, is not Paris here?
Hark how the people having Helen sen
Appland they areall of the Spartan Queen:
And millions that your coming have attended,
Amazed swear some Goddess is descended.
No way you can your eyes or body turn,
But where you walk the Priests shall Incense burn.
The sacrificed beasts the ground shall beat,
And bright religious fire the Altars heate.
Nor fear the bruit of war or threatening steel,
United Greece wee value not.
Alone, by Hector is this Town well manned,
ee like an Army against Greece shall stand.
And who would fear for such a royal wife
To set the universal World at strife:
Bright Hellens name shall live, and ne'er have end,
When all the world about you shall contend.
Be as be may, since we are gone thus far,
Proceed we will in spite of threatened war,
Hazard, and dread? both these we nothing hold,
So long as Paris we may thus enfold.
My father, mother, brothers, sisters all,
Islem and Troy in pomp majestic,
Shall solemnise our nuptials. Let that day
In which we espouse the beauteous Helena,
Be held a holy-day, a day of joy
For ever, in the Calendars of Troy.
It shall be so, we have already sent
Our high priest Calchas to the Oracle
At Delphos to return vs the success,
And a true notice of our future wars,
Whilst we expect his coming, be it our care,
The Spartans second nuptials to prepare.
Thou glory of the Greeks, the great commander
Of the stout Mirmedons: welcome from Delphos,
What speaks the Oracle? the sack of Troy?
Or the Greeks ruin? say shall wee be victors,
Or Priam triumph in our overthrow.
The god of Delphos sends you joyful news,
Troy shall be sacked, and we be Conquerors:
Upon your helmes wear triple spagled plumes:
Let all the loudest instruments of war,
With sterne alarms rouse the monster death,
And march we boldly to the walls of Troy,
Troy shall be sacked and we be conquerors.
Thanks for thy news Achilles, by that honour
My father won upon the walls of Troy.
My warlike father Aiax Telamn;
I would not for the world, Priam should send
Incestious Helen back on terms of peace.
May smooth Vlisses and bold Diomed
Whom you have sent on your late Embassy,
Be welcomed as Antenor was to Greece,
Scorned and reviled, since the Oracle hath said,
Troy shall be sacked, and we be Conquerors.
King Agamemnon heere's a Trojan priest
Was sent by Priam to the Oracle:
The reverent man I welcome, and entreat
The General with these Princes, do the like.
Welcome to Agamemnon reverent Calchas.
To Menelaus welcome.
To Aiax welcome: father can thou fight
As well as pray, if we should want for men?
By prayers I use to fight, and by my counsel
Give aid to Arms.
Such as are past arms, father Calchas still,
Say counsels good, but give me strength at will,
When you with all your Counsel, in the field
Meet Hector with his strength, tel me who'le yield?
The strong built walls of stately Tenedos
We have leuel'd with the earth. It now remains
We march along unto the walls of Troy,
And thunder vengeance in King Priams ears,
Had we once answer of our Embassy.
I ever held such Embassies as base,
The restitution of our ravished Queen
On terms of parley bars our sterne revenge,
And ends our War ere fully it begin.
King Agamemnon no, Aiax saith no,
Whose sword as thirsty as the parched earth,
Shall never ride in peace upon his thigh,
Whilst in the town of Troy there breathes a soul
That gave consent unto the Spartans rape:
March, march, and let the thunder of our drums
Strike terror to the City Pergamus.
The son of Telamon speaks honourably,
Wee have brought a thousand ship to Tenedos,
And every ship full fraught with men at Arms:
And all these armed men with fiery spirits
Sworn to revenge King Menelaus wrongs,
And burn sk kissing Islem to the ground.
Therefore strike up wars Instruments on hye,
And march unto the Town courageously.
Princes, what answer touching Helena?
What answer but d shonourable term?
Contempt and scorn perched on their leaders brows,
By Jove I thought they would have slain vs both.
If ever Helen bee redeem d from thence
But by the sack of Troy, say Diomed
Is no true soldier.
Even in the King
There did appear such high majestic scorn
Of threatened ruin, that I think himself
Will put on Arms and meet vs in the field:
Wee linger time great Agamemnon, march,
That we may buckle with the pride of Troy.
Priam so insoent, his sons so brave
To entertain so great Embassadous
With such ungentle usage.
They have a Knight called Hector, on whose valour
They build their proud defiance, if I meet him,
Now by the azured Arms of that bright goddess
From whom I am descended, with my sword
I'll lop that limb off, and enforce their pride
Fall at Achilles feet, Hector and I
Must nor both shine at once in wars bright Sky.
When they both meet, the greater dim the less,
Great General, march, Aiax endures not words
So well as blows, in a field glazd with swords.
Calchas a Traitor?
And amongst the Greeks?
Base runagate wretch, when we their Tents surprise,
As Hector lives the traitorous Prophet dies.
Let not remembrance of so base a wretch
Make vs forget our safety, the Argiue Kings
Are landed, and this day rac't Tenedos:
And bid vs battle on Scamander Plains.
Whom we will give a brave and proud affront;
Shall we not brother Hector?
Troilus yes,
And beat a fire out of their Burgonets
Shall like an earthy Commit blaze towards Heaven
There grow a fixed star in the Firmament
To emblaze our lasting glory: Hark their Drums,
Let our Drums give them parlance.
Is there amongst your troops a felon Prince
Called by the name of Paris?
Is there amongst your troops a Knight so bold
Dares meet that Paris single in the field,
And call him felon?
Or insulting Greek,
Is there one Telamon, dares set his foot
To Paris (here hee stands) and hand to hand
Maintain the wrongs done to Hesione,
As Paris shall the rape of Helena.
Know here is one called Aiax Telamon,
Behold him well, son to that Telamon:
Thou fine would see, and hee dares set his foot
To Paris or thy self.
Thou durst not.
Dare not?
Or if thou durst, by this my warlike hand
I'll make thine head fall where thy foot should stand:
And yet I love thee cousin, know thou hast parlie'd
With Trojan Hector.
Were it thou ten Hectors, yet withal thy might
Thou can not make my head fal to my feet,
By Jove thou can not cousin.
I much have heard
Of such a Knight called by the name of Hector,
If thou be hee whose sword hath conquered Kingdoms,
Pannonia, llyria, and Samothrace,
And to thy fathers Empire added them:
Achilles as a friend wills thee to sheath
Thy wareke sword, retire from Troys defenc
And spare thy precious life, I would not have
A Knight so famed meet an untimely grave.
I meet thee in that honourable love,
And for thine own sake wish thee safe aboard.
For if thou stayest thou son of Peleus,
I'd have thee know thy fame is not thine own,
But all engrossed for me; not all thy guard
Of warlike Mirmidons can wall iae
From mighty Hector.
Shame you not great Lords
To talk so long over your menacing swords?
Alarm then for Gree and Helena.
As much for vs, for Troy and Hecuba.
Oh brother Paris, thou hast this day lodged
Thy love in Hectors soul, it did me good
To see two Greekssh Knights fall in their blood
Under thy manly arm
My blows weretouches
Unto these ponderous strokes great Hector gave.
Oh that this general quarrel might be ended
In equal opposition, you and I
Against the two most valiant.
I will try
The virtue of a challenge, in the face
Of all the Greeks I will oppose my self
To single combat, hee that takes my gage
Shall feel the force of mighty Hectors rage.
Hear me you warlike Greeks, you see these fields
Are all died purple with the reeking gore
Of men on both sides slain, you see my sword
Glazed in the sanguine moisture of your friends.
I call the son of Saturn for a witness
To Hectors words I have not met one Grecian
Was able to withstand me, my strong spirit
Would fine be equalled: Is there in your Troupes
A Knight, whose breast includes so much of valour
To meet with Hector in a single war?
By Jove I think there is not: If there be?
To Him I make this proffer; if the gods
Shall grant to him the honour of the day,
And I be slain; his bee mine honoured Are mes,
To hang for an eternal Monument
Of his great valour, but my mangled body
Send back to Troy, to a red funeral pile.
But if hee fall? the armour which hee wears
I'll lodge as Trophies on Apolloes shrine,
And yield his body to have funeral rights.
And a fair Monument so noe the Sa,
That Merchants flying in their sayle-wing'd ships
Near to the shore in after times may say
There lies the man Hector of Troy did slay,
And there's my Gentler to make good my challenge.
Will none take up his gage? shall this proud challenge
Bee Entertained by none? I know you all
Shame to deny, yet fear to undertake it:
The cause is mine, and mine shall be the honour
To combat Hector.
Menelaus pause,
Is not Achilles here, sterne Aiax here,
And Kingly Diomed how will they scorn,
That stand upon the honour of their strength,
should you prevent them of this glorious combat.
By Jove I think they dare as well take up
A poisonous Serpent as great Hectors gage.
Yes Trojan, see thou not Aeacides
Dart emmulous looks on Kingly Diomed,
Least hee should stoop to take his Gantlet up.
And see how Diomed eyes warlike Aiax,
Aiax, Vlysses: every one inflamed
To answer Hector.
Is there any here
Dares stoop whilst great Achilles is in place?
I dare.
And so dare I.
You are all too weak
To encounter with the mighty Hectors arm,
This combat soly doth belong to me.
Then wherefore dost not thou take up the Gantlet?
To see if thou or any bolder Greek
Dare be so insolent to touch the same,
And bar me of the honour of the combat.
By all the gods I dare.
And all the devils
I'll lop his hands off that dares touch the gage.
Pray leave this emulous fury: Agamemnon,
To end this difference, and provide a Champion
To answers Hectors honourable challenge
Of nine the most reputed valiant:
Let several Lots be cast into an Helm,
Amongst them all one prise, he to whom Fortune
Shall give the honour: let him straight be armed
To encounter migdty Hector on this plain.
It shall be so you valiant sons of Priam:
Conduct your warlike Champion to his Tent,
To breath a while, and put his armour on:
No sooner shall the prise be drawn by any,
And our bold Champion armed, but a brave Herald
Shall give you warning by the trumpets sound,
Till when we will retire unto our Tents.
As you unto the Town.
Faint hearted Greeks,
Draw lots to answer such a noble challenge,
Had great Achilles cast his Gauntlet down
Amongst King Priams sons, the weakest of fifty
Would in the heate of flames, or mouth of Hell,
Answer the challenge of so brave a King.
Greeks to your Tents, to put armour on;
Make hast,  long to know my Champion.
Here from the walls of Troy, my reverent Queen,
And beauteous Helen, we will stay to see
The warlike combat twixt our valiant son,
And the Greeks champion. Young Astianax,
Pray that thy father may have Victory.
Why should you doubt his fortune? whose strong arm
Unhorsed a thousand Knights all in one day;
And think you any one amongst the Greeks
Is able to encounter with his strength?
But howsoever child, unto the pleasure
Of the high gods, we must refer the combat.
My royal father, Hector in his arms
Sends for your blessing, with the Queen my mother,
And craves your prayers to the all powerful gods,
To grant him victory.
Blessed may he be with honour, all my orisons
Shall invoke the gods for his success.
I almost had forgot fair Helena;
Dart me one kiss from these high battlements
To cheer him with: thanks queen these lips are charms
Which who so fights for, is secure from harms.
None pree too near the Champions.
Heralds on both sides, keep the soldiers back.
Now Greeks let me behold my Champion.
Tic I, thy cousin Aiax Telamon.
And Cousin, by Jove thou hast a brave aspect,
It cheers my blood to look on such a foe:
I would there ran none of our Trojan blood
Inall thy veins, or that it were divided
From that which thou receive from Telamon:
Were I assured our blood possessed one side,
And that the other; by Olimpicke Jove,
I'd thrill my Javelin at the Gresian moisture,
And spare the Trojan blood: Aiax I love it
Too dear to shed it, I could rather wish
Achilles the half god of your huge army,
Had been my opposite.
Hee keeps his Tent
In mournful passion that he mist the combat:
But Hector, I shall give thee cause to say,
There's in the Greekish host a Knight a Prince,
As Lyon hearted, and as Giant strong
As Thetis son: behold my warlike Target
Of ponderous brass, quilted with seven Ox hides,
Impenetrable, and so full of weight,
That scarce a Grecian (sane my self) can lift it:
Yet can I use it like a Summers fan,
Made of the stately train of Iuno's bird:
My sword will bite the hardest Adamant.
I'll with my Javelin cleave a rock of Marble:
Therefore though great Achilles be not here,
Think not brave cousin Hector but to find,
Achilles equal both in strength and mind.
Hold, you have both shed blood too dear to loose,
In single opposition.
Is your Champion,
My cousin Aiax willing to leave combat;
Will hee first give the word.
Sir Paris no,
It was Hector challenge, and it is Hectors office,
If we surcease on equal terms of valour,
To give the word.
Then here's thy cousins hand,
By Jove thou hast a lusty ponderous arm:
Thus till we meet again, lets part both friends;
For proof whereof Aiax we will interchange
Somewhat betwixt vs, for alliance sake:
Here take this sword and target, trust the blad,
It never deceived his moister.
Take of me
This purple studded belt, I won it cousin
From the most valiant prince of Samothrace:
And wear it for my sake.
Priam unto the Greekish General
This profer makes. Because these blood-stayn'd fields
Are ouer-spread with slaughter, to take truce
Till all the dead on both sides be interred:
Which if you grant, he here invites the General,
His nephew Aiax, and the great Achilles,
With twenty of your chief selected Princes,
To banquet with him in his royal Palace:
Those revels ended, then to arms again.
A truce for burying of the slaughtered bodies
We yield unto: but for our safe return
From Troy and you, what pledges have you found?
You shall not need more then the faith of Hector
For Priams pledge, King Agamemnon take
My faith and honour, which if Priam break,
Isle break the heart of Troy.
We will take your honoured word, this night we will part,
To morrow morning when sit hour shall call,
We will meet King Priam eere his Cities wall.
Brave time, rare change, from fighting now to feasting:
So many heavy blades to fly in pieces
For such a piece of light flesh? what's the reason?
A Lass of my complexion, and this feature
Might have bin rapt, and stolen again by Paris,
And none of all this stir for it: but I perceive
Now all the World's turned wenchers, and in time
All wenches will turn witches: but these Trumpets
Proclaim their enter-view.
See here's the picture of a politic state,
They all embrace and hug, yet deadly hate:
They say their are brave Lasses in this Troy.
What if Thersites sprucely smug'd himself,
And strived to hide his hutch-backe: No not I.
Tic held a rule, whom Nature marks in show
And most deforms, they are best armed below.
I'll not conceal my virtues: yet should I venture
To damme my self for painting, fan my face
With a died Ostritch plume, paster my wrinkles
With some old Ladies Trowel, I might pass
Perhaps for some maide-marrian: and some wench
Wanting good eye-sight, might perhaps mistake me
For a spruce Courtier: Courtier? tush, I from
My first discretion have abhorred that name,
Still suiting my conditions with my shape,
And doe, and will, and can, when all else aisle:
Though neither sooth nor speak well: bravely rail,
And that's Thersites humour.
After so much hostility in steel,
All welcome to this peaceful entertain.
Priam wee know thee to be honourable,
Although ou foe Treason is to be feared
In Peasants not in Princes.
Ey so, now it a Trojan and a Greek.
Cousin Aix near me, you are next in blood,
And near me you shall sit: the strain of honour
That makes you so renowned, sprung from Hein.
Tic part of Hectors blood, your grosser spirits
Less noble are your father Telamons.
Welcome to Troy, and Hector, welcome all:
In Troy thy kinsman, but in field thy foe:
Thy welcome Cousin here I pay with thanks,
The truice expired, with buffets blows and knocks.
For that wee love the Cousin.
Me thinks this Trojan Hector
Out shines Achilles and his polished honours
Eclipsed our bright glory, till he set
W ee cannot rise.
King Menelaus, we were once your guest,
You now are ours, as welcome unto Troy,
As we to Sparta.
But that these our tongues
Should be as well truce bound as our sharpe weapons,
We could be bitter Paris: but have done.
Menelaus is discreet, such heinous wrongs
Should be discoursed by Arms and not by tongues.
Why doth Achilles eye wander that way?
Is that a Trojan Lady?
She is.
From whence?
Of vs.
Her name?
Polyxena.
Polixena? she hath mlted vs within,
And hath dissolved a spirit of Adamant.
She hath done more then Hector and all Troy,
She hath subdued Achilles.
In one word this Troy shall be sacked and spo'd,
For so the gods have told me, Greece shall conquer,
And they be ruined, leave then imminent peril,
And fly to safety.
From Troilus?
From destruction, take Diomed and live,
Or Troilus and thy death.
Then Troilus and my ruin.
Is Cresid mad?
Wilt thou forsake thy father, who for thee and for thy safety hath forsook his Country?
Must then this City perish?
Troy must fall.
Alas for Troy and Troilus.
Love King Diomed
A Prince and valiant, which made Emphas
To his Imperial stile, line Diomeds Queen,
Be brief, say quickly wilt thou? is it done?
Diomed and you i'll follow, Troilus shun.
Be it Aiax, or Achilles, that Greek lies
Who speaks it, i'll maintain it on his person.
Ha Aiax!
Achilles!
We speak it, and dares Troilus fey we lie?
And wear it Diomed.
Dar'ft thou maked good?
On Diomed, or the boldest Greek
That ever menaced Troy excepting none.
None?
None.
Excepting none.
Kings of Greece.
Princes of Troy.
Achilles bafled?
And great Aiax bran'd?
If great Achilles, Aiax, or the Devil brave Troilus, hee shall brave and buffer thee.
Son.
Fellow Kings.
As wee are Priam and your father.
As wee are Agamemnon General
Turn not this banquet to a Centaus feast,
If their be strife debate it in fair terms,
Show your selnes governed Princes.
Wee are appeased.
Wee satisfied, if Hector be so.
How grew this strife?
I know not, only this I know.
Troilus will maintain nothing against his honour,
And so far, be it through the heart of Greece,
Hector will back him.
So will Paris too.
Mildly discourse your wrongs, fair Princes do.
King Diomed maintains his valour thus,
He saith it was his Lance dismounted Troilus,
And not the stumbling on the breathless course
Of one new slain that field me.
It is false.
It is true.
It was my fortune to make good that field,
And hee fell just before me, Diomed then
Was not within six spears length of the place.
How Trojan ravisher?
Call me not Cuckold maker,
I care not what you term me.
I cannot brooke this wrong.
Say thou me so mad Greek?
Paris.
Govern you Kingdoms Lords, and cannot sway
Your own affection?
Paris, forbeate.
Mildly discourse, and gently wee shall hear.
I say King Diomed unhorsed not Troilus.
How came I by his horse then?
As the vnbackt courser having lost his rider,
Galloped about the field you met with him,
And caught him by the rain.
Here was a goodly act
To boast on, and send word to Cresida.
Was no Prince near when I encountered Troilus?
I was, and saw the spear of Diomed
Tumble down Troylus but peruse his armour
The dint's still in the vainbrace.
Be it so or not so, at this time forbear
To urge extremes. Kings let this health go round,
Pledge me King Priam in a cupful crowned.
Now after banquet,  Music strike
A pirhicke strain, we are not all for war,
Soldiers their stormy spirits can appease,
And sometimes play the Courtiers when they please.
I have observed Achilles, and his eye
Dwells on the face of fair Polixena.
Why is not Helen here at this high feast?
I have sweat many a drop of blood for her,
Ye never saw her face.
I could love Hector, what's our cause of quarrel?
For Hellens rape? that rape hath cost already
Thousands of souls, why might not this contention
Twixt Paris and the Spartan King be ended,
And we leave Troy with honour.
Achilles how?
Fetch Helen hither, set her in the midst
Of this brave ring of Princes, Paris here,
And Menelaus here: she betwixt both:
They court her ore again, whom she elects
Before these Kings, let him enjoy her still,
For who would keep a woman against her will?
The names of wife and husband, th'interchange
Of our two bloods in young Hermione,
To whom we are joint parents, Hellens honour
All plead on my part, I am pleased to stand
To great Achilles motion.
So are we.
All that I have for comfort is but this,
That in the day I show the properer man,
Ith'night I please her better then hee can.
Are all the Grecian Kings agreed to this?
We are, we are.
Place the two rivals then, each bide his fate
And usher in bright Helen in all state.
Oh that I were (but Helen) any thing
Or might have any object in my eye
Save Menelaus: when on him I gaze,
My error chides me, I my shame emblaze.
Oh Helen, in thy cheek thy guilt appears,
More I would speak, but words are drowned in tears,
A gallant Queen, for such a royal friend
What mortal man would not with Jove contend?
Helen the time was I might call thee wife,
But that stile's changed; I thou thy self art changed
From what thou wast: and (most inconstant Dame)
Hast nothing left thee, sae thy face and name.
And I both these have: hast thou not confessed
Fair Helen, thy exchange was for the best.
What can our Sparta value?
Troy.
You err.
who breathes that Sparta would before Troy prefer.
Thou hast left thy father Tendarus.
To gain
King Priam, Lord of all this princely train.
Thy mother Lada thou hast left who mourns
And with her piteous tears laments thy loss:
Cannot this move thee?
Oh I have left my mother.
No Helen, but exchanged her for another:
Poor Lda, for rich Heuba, a are Queen
For the great Asian Empress.
From Castor and from Pollx thou hast ranged
Thy natural brothers.
True, true.
No, but changed,
For Hector, Troilus, and the royal store
Of eight and forty valiant brothers more.
If nothing else can move thee Helena,
Think of our daughter young Hermione.
My dear Hermione.
Can thou call her dear
And leave that issue which thy womb did bear?
Shoe's ours betwixt vs, cast thou?
Can she? knowing,
A sweeter babe within her sweet womb growing
Begot last night by Paris.
Look this way Helen, see my arms spread wide,
I am thine husband, thou my Spartan bride.
That way?
My Helen, this way turn thy sight,
These are the arms in which thou lay last night.
Oh how this Trojan tempts me!
This way wife,
Thou shalt save many a Greeks and Troians life
It is true, I know it.
This way turn thine head,
This is the path that leads unto our bed.
And it is a sweet smooth path.
Here.
Here.
Take this way Helen, this is plain &amp; eve.
That is the way to hell, but this to Heaven:
Bright Comet sin this way.
Clear star shoot this
Here honour dwells.
Here many a thousand kiss.
That way I should, because I know it is 
Welcome.
But I'll this way for Paris kisses sweeter.
And may I dye an Eunuch if ere morn
I quit thee not.
I cannot brooke this scorn,
Gracious to Arms.
Then Greece from Troy divide,
This difference arms, not language most decide.
Come to our Tents.
And wee to man the town.
These Tents shall swim in blood.
Blood Troy shall drown.
Yet shall no stroke fall from Achilles arm,
Fair Polixena, so powerful is thy charm.
King Diomed!
My rival in the love of Cresida.
False Cresida, injurious Diomed.
Now shall I prove in hostile enter-change
Of warlike blows that thou art all unworthy
The love of Cresid.
Why came thou not on Horse-backe
That Diomed once again dismounting thee
Might greet his Lady with another course
Won from the hand of Troilus.
Diomed,
By the true love I bear that trothlesse Dame
I'll win thee, and send thy Horse and Armour
Unto the Tent of Cresid guard thy head,
This day by me thou shalt be captive led.
Another Horse for Diomed to fly,
Hee had never greater need then now to run.
Though hee be fled yet Troilus this is thine.
My Steed hee got by slight, I this by force.
I'll send her this to whom hee sent my horse.
Is this the answer of the note I sent
To royal Priam and Queen Hecuba,
Touching their daughter bright Polixena?
Behold Queen Hecubaes hand, King Priams seal,
With the consent of fair Polixena,
Conditioned thus, Achilles shall forbear
To damage Troy.
Return this answer back,
Tell Priam that Achilles Arme's benumbed,
And cannot lift a weapon against Troy.
Say to Queen Hecuba wee are her son,
And not Achilles, nor one Mirmidon
Shall give her least affront, as for the Lady
Bid her presume, we henceforth are her Knight,
And but for her, Achilles scorns to fight.
Then thus saith Priam, but restrain thy powers,
And as hee is a King, his daughter's yours.
Farewell.
Achilles, whore's Achilles, what unarmed,
when all the Champaign where our battles ioyns,
s made a standing poole of Greekish blood
Where horses plunge d up to the saddle skirts
And men aboue the waste wade for their lines,
And can thou keep thy Tent?
My Lute Patroclus.
Let Greeks, kill Greeks, let's bend unnatural arms
Against our own breasts, ere the conquering Troians
Have all the honour of this glorious day.
Can our great Champion touch a womanish Lute,
And hear the groans of twenty thousand souls
Gasping their last breath?
I can.
Rescue, some rescue, the red field is strowd
With Hectors honours and young Troilus spoils.
Yet all this moves not me.
How long hath great Achilles bin surnam'd Coward in Troy, that Hector, Troilus, Paris, have all that name so currant in ther mouths?
I ever held him valiant, yet will Achilles fight?
Vlysses, no,
Beneath this globe Achilles hatho foe.
Then here unarmed be slain, think thou they'll spare
Thee more then vs?
Or if thou wilt not arm thee,
Let thy Patroclus lead thy Mirmidons,
And wear thy Armour.
Thy Armour is sufficient
Without thy presence being feared in Troy.
To save our oath and keep our Tents from sack,
Patroclus don our Arms, lead forth our guard,
And wearing them by no Prince be out-dar'd.
Achilles honours me, what heart can fear,
And great Achilles sword proof Armour wear?
Whore's this great sword and buckler man of Greece?
Wee shall have him one of sneaks noise,
And come peaking into the Tents of the Greeks,
With will you have any music Gentlemen.
Base groom, I'll tear thy flesh like falling Snow
If I had Hectors face thou durst not do it.
Durst not?
Durst not, hoe's in the field, thou in thy Tent,
Hector playing upon the Greekish burgonets,
Achilles fingering his effeminate Lute.
And now because thou durst not meet him in the field, thou hast counterfeited an humour of love. Achilles?
Thou the Champion of Greece, a mere bug-beare a scar-crow, a Hobby-horse.
Vlisses taught thee this, deformed slave.
Coward thou durst not do this to Hector.
On thee Isle practise, till I meet with him.
Aiax is valiant, and in the throng of the Troians,
Achilles is turned Fiddler in the Tents of
The Gracious.
Look here Achilles.
Patroclus?
This wound great Hector gave:
Revenge my death, before I meets my grave.
Yet will Achilles fight? see Aiax wounded,
Two hundred of thy warlike Mirmedons
Thou hast lost this day.
Let's beat him to the field.
Ha?
Had I lost a Patroclus, a dear friend
As thou hast dove, I would have doud these arms
In which he dyed, sprung through the Trojan host,
And mager opposition, let the blow
Or by the same hand died: come join with me,
And we without this picture, statue of Greece,
This shadow of Achilles, will once more
Invade the Trojan host.
Aiax?
Achilles?
Wee owe thee for this scorn.
I scorn that debt:
Thou hast not fought with Hector.
My honour and my oath both combat in me:
But lone sways most.
Our ships are fired, five hundred gallant vessels
Burnt in the Sea, half of our Fleet destroyed,
Without some present rescue.
Ha, ha, ha.
Doth no man ask where is this double fire,
That two ways flies towards heaven?
Upon the right our royal Navy burns,
Upon the left, Achilles Tents on fire.
Our Tent?
By Jove thy Tent, and all thy Mirmedons,
Have not the power to quench it: yet great Hector
Hath shed more blood this day, then would have served
To quench, both Fleet and Tent.
My sword and armour:
Polixena, thy love we will lay by,
Till by this hand, that Trojan Hector dye.
I knew he must be fired out.
Strike, stab, wound, kill, toss firebrands, and make way.
Hector of Troy, and a victorious day.
Well fought brave brothers.
What's hee?
Tic Aiax, down with him.
No man presume to dart a feather at him
Whilst we have odds: cousin if thou seek combat?
Se we stand single, not one Trojan here,
Shall lay a violent hand upon thy life,
Save wee our self.
Cousin you are honourable,
I now must both entreat and conjure thee
For my old Uncle Priams sake, his sister
Hesione my mother, and thine Aunt:
This day leave thine advantage, spare our Fleet,
And let vs quench our Tents, only this day
Stay thy Victorious hand, tic Aiax pleads
Who but of Jove hath never begged before,
And save of Jove, will not entreat again
Burn, still more fire.
Ple quench it with his blood
That adds one spark unto this kindled flame
My cousin shall not for Hesiones sake
Be ought denied of Hector, she's our Aunt:
Thou, then this day hast saved the Grecian Fleet:
Let's sound retreat, whose charge made al Greece quake,
We spare whole thousands for one Aiax sake.
Worthiest a live thou hast, Greece was this day
At her last cast, had they pursued advantage:
But I divine, hereafter from this hour,
We never more shall shrink beneath their power.
My armour, and my trusty Galatee,
The proudest steed that ever rider backed,
Or with his hooves beat thunder from the earth,
The Sun begins to mount the Eastern hill,
And wee not yet in field: Lords yesterday
Wee slipped a brave advantage, else these ships
That float now in the Samothracian road,
And with their waving pendants menace Troy,
Had with their flames reflecting from the Sea,
Gilt those high towers, which now they proudly brave.
On then; Achilles is unconquered yet,
Great Agamemnon and the Spartan King,
Aiax the bigge-bond Duke of Salamine,
With him that with his Lance made Kenus bleed,
The bold, (but ever rash) King Diome.
To lead these captive through Scamander Plains
That were a task worth Hector.
Why not vs?
Yet most becoming him, come then Aeneas,
Let each Pick one of these brave Champions out
And single him a captive.
It were an enterprise
That would deserve a lasting Chronicle:
Lead on renowned Hector.
Vnnimble slave,
Dispatch, make haft, I would be first in field,
And now I mustbe called on.
Oh stay dear Lord, my royal husband stay
Cast by thy shield, fellow uncase his arms,
Knock off the rivets, lay that baldricke by,
But this one day rest with Andromachs.
What meanest thou woman?
To save my hououred Lord
From a sad fate, for if this ominous day,
This day disastrous, thou appear'st in field
I never more shall see thee.
Fond Andromache.
Give me some reason for it.
A fearful dream,
This night me thought I saw thee amongst the Greeks
Round girt with squadrons of thine enemies
All which their Iauelis thrild against thy breast,
And stuck them in thy bosom.
So many Squadrons,
And all their darts quiuerd in Hectors breast,
Some glac' upon mine armour, did they not?
Did none of all these darts rebound from Hector
And hit thee sister, for (my Lass) I know,
Thou haft been oft hit by thiine Hector so.
Oh doe not jest my husband to his death
I waked and slept, and slept and waked again:
But both my slumbers and my sound sleeps
Met in this one maine truth, if thou this day
Affront their Army or oppose their fleet,
After this day we ne'er more shall meet.
Trust not deceptious visions, dream, are fables,
Adulterate Scenes of Antique forgeries
Played upon idle brains, come Lords to horse
To keep me from the field, dreams have no force.
Troilus, Aeneas, Paris, young Astiaax,
Hang on thy fathers armour, stay his speed.
Father, sweet father do not fight to day.
Help to take off these burrs, they trouble me.
Hold, hold thy father, if thou can not kneel,
Yet with thy tears entreat him stay at home.
I'll hang upon you, you shall beat me father
Before I let you go.
How boy? I'll whip you if you stir a foot,
Go get you to your mother.
Come to horse.
Hector, I charge thee by thye honour stay,
Go not this day to battle.
By all the gods
Andromache, thou dost abate my Ipue
To win me from my glory.
From thy death.
Troilus, persuade thy brother, daughter Helen
Speak to thy Paris to entreat him too.
Paris sweet husband.
Leave your cunning Helen.
My brother shall to the field.
But by this kiss thou shalt ot.
Now have not I the heart to say her nay:
This kiss hath overcome me.
My dearest love,
Pity your wife, your son, your father, all
These live beneath the safeguard of that arm
Pity in vs whole Troy all ready doomed
To sink beneath your ruin
If thou fall,
Who then shall stand? Troy shall consume with fire
(That yet remains in thee) wee perish all,
Or which is worse, led captain into Greece:
Therefore dear Hector, cast thy armour off.
Husband.
Son.
Brother.
By Jove I am resolved.
Oh all ye gods!
Not all the devil
Could half torment me like these women tongues!
At my entreaty, and for Hellens love,
Leave vs to bear the fortunes of this day,
Here is Troilus and my self will make them swear
Ere the fight end there are two Hectors here.
Besides Aenes, and Deiphebus
Young Margareton, and a thousand more
Sworn to set fire on all their Tents this day,
Then Hector for this once resolve to stay.
To horse then Paris, do not linger time;
To horse, come brother Troilus.
Watch Margareton, if the youthful Prince
Venture beyond his strength, let him have rescue.
Hee shall be all our charge.
Hector let's mount upon the walls of Troy,
And thence surueigh the battle.
Well be it so.
But if one Trojan shall for succour cry
I'll leave the walls and to his rescue fly
King Diomed.
Cresids first ove
Yes Diomed and her last,
Ile live to love her when thy life is past.
Hold Trojan, for no Greek must be disarmed:
Unmanly odds, King Menelaus turn
Thy face this way, it is Trojan Paris calls
Of all that breath, I love that Paris tongue
When it shall call to Arms: Now one shall down.
Thou keep thy word, for thou art down indeed.
Yet by the sword of Paris shalt not dye.
I slew thy fame when I first stole thy Queen,
And therefore Spartan will now spare thy life:
Achilles, Diomed, Aiax, one of three
Were noble prise, thou art no spoil for me.
If thou be noble by thy blood and valour,
Tell me if Hector bee in field this day.
Thy conjuration hath a double spell,
Hector is not in field, but here I stand
Thy warlike opposite.
Thou art young and weak, retire and spare thy life.
I'm Hectors brother, none of Hectors blood
Did ever yet retreat.
If Hectors friend,
Here must thy life and glory both have end.
Oh father, see where Margareton Eyes,
Your son, my brother by Achilles slain.
Thy brother Troylus will revenge his death:
But Hector shall not move.
Troylus nor all the Troians in the field
Can make their swords bite on Achilles shield:
It is none but Hector must revenge his death.
But not this day.
Before the Sun decline,
That terror of the earth I'll make divine.
Thus flies the dust before the Northern winds,
And turns to Atoms dancing in the ayre,
So from the force of our victorious arm,
Fly armed squadrons of the boldest Greeks,
And mated at the terror of our name,
So clear the field before me, no mans favoured:
The blood of three brave Princes in my rage,
I have sacrificed to Margaritons soul.
Aiax Oilaeus, Aiax Telamon,
Merionus, Menelaus, Idomea,
Arch-dukes and Kings have shrunk beneath this arm,
Besides a thousand Knights have fallen this day
Beneath the fury of my ponderous blows:
And not the least of my victorious spoils,
Quivered my Javelin through the brawny thigh
Of strong Achilles, and I seek him still,
Once more to tug with him: my sword and breath
Assist me still, till one drop down indeath.
Come cast your selves into a ring of terror,
About this warlike Prince, by whom I bleed.
What means the glory of the Grecian host,
Thus to besiege me with his Mermidons?
And keep aloof himself.
That shall my Lance
In bloody letters text upon thy breast,
For young Patrocsus death, for my dishonours,
For thousand spoils, and for that infinite wrack
Our Army hath endured only by thee
Thy life must yield me satisfaction.
My life? and welcome, by Apolloes fire
I never ventured blood with more content,
Thenagainst thee Achilles, come prepare.
For eminent death, you of my warlike guard
My Mermidons, for slaughters most renowned,
Now sworn to my designments, your seel polaxes,
Fix all at once, and girt him round with wounds.
Dishonourable Greek, Hecter ne'er deal
On base advantage, or ever life his sword
Oner a quaking foe, but as a spoil
Unworthy vs, still left him to his fear
No on the man, whom singly I struke down,
Have I redoubled blows, my valour still
Oppode against a standing enemy.
T have I twice unhorsed, and when I might
Have slano thee grovelling, left thee to the field,
Thine armour and thy shield impenetrable,
Wrought by the god of Lemnos in his forge
By aree diin, with the whole world engraven,
I have through piere't, and still it wears my skarres:
Forget not how last day, even in thy tent
I feated my good sword, and might have flung
My balls of wild-fire round about your Fleet,
To have sent up your Greekish pride in flames,
Which would have fixed a star in that high Orb,
To memorise to all succeeding times
Our glories and your shames, yet this I spared,
And shall I now be slain by treachery?
Tell him your answer on your weapons points,
Upon him my brave soldiers.
Come you aves,
Before I fall, Isle make some food forgiaues,
That gape to swallow cowards cease you dogs
Upon a Lyon with your armed fangs
And bare me bravely, where I touch I kill,
And where I fasten rear body from soul,
And soul from hope of rest: all Greece shall know,
Blood must run wast in Hectors overthrow.
Farewell the nob'est spirit that ere breathed
In any terrene mansion: Take up his body
And bear it to my Tent Isle straight to horse,
And at his fetlockes to my greater glory,
Isle drag his mangled trunk that Gracious all,
May deaf the world with shouts, at Hectors fall.
Black fate, black day, be never Kallendred
Hereafter in the number of the year,
The Planets cease to work, the Spheres to move,
The Sun in his meridian course to shine,
Perpetual darkness overwhelm the day,
In which is fallen the pride of Asia.
Rot may that hand.
And every joint drop peece-meale from his arm,
That took such base duantage on a worthy,
Who all advantage scorned.
Yet though his life they have basely tan away,
His body we have rescued maugre Greece.
And Paris, I the meanest of Priams sons,
Have made as many Mermidons weep blood,
As had least finger in the VVorthies fall.
What but his death could thus have armed y had,
Or drown decreeped Priam to the field:
That star is shot, his luster quite eclipsed:
And shall we now, surrender Helena?
Not till Achilles lye as dead as Hector
And Aiax by Achilles, no whilst Ili
Hath one stone reared upon another back
To ouer-looke these walls, or these high wall
To ouer-peere the plain.
Contrary Elements,
The warring meteors Hell and Eliziu
Are not so much opposed, as Troy and Greece,
For Hector, Hectors death.
A most sad Funeral
Will his in Troy be, where shall scarce an eye
Of twice two hundred thousand be found dry:
These obits once past o'er, which we desire,
Those eyes that now shed water, shall speak fire.
Now found retreat.
Wee back to Troy return,
Where every soul in funeral black shall morn.
Hector is dead, and yet my brother Troilus
A second terror to the Greeks still lives.
In him there's hope since all his Mermidons
Having felt his fury, fly even at his name.
But must the proud Achilles still insult
And triumph in the glory of base deeds?
No, Hector hee destroyed by treachery,
And hee must dye by craft. But Priams temper
Will ne'er bee brought to any base revenge:
A woman is most subject unto spleen,
And I will use the brain of Hecuba:
This bloody sono of Thetis doth still dote
Upon the beauty of Polexina;
And that's the base we now must build upon.
My mother hath by secret letters wrought him
Once more to abandon both the field and arms:
The plot is cast, which if it well succeed,
He that's of blood insatiate, must nextbleed.
Why will not great Achilles don his Arms,
And rouse his bleeding Mirmidons? shall Troilus
March back to Troy with armour, sword, and lance,
All died in Grecian blood? shall aged ream
Boast in fair Islium that the son of Thetis,
Whose warlike spear pierced mighty Hectors bre,
Lies like a coward slumbering in his Tent,
Because hee fears young Troilus.
Pardon me,
Vlisses, here's a Brief from Hecuba,
Wherein she vows, if I but kill one Trojan,
I never shall enjoy Polixena.
But thinks Achilles, if the Greeks be slain,
And forced perforce to march away from Troy,
That hee shall then enjoy Polixena?
No, it is King Priams subtlety, whilst thou
Sleep in thy Tent, Troilus through all our Troops
Makes Lanes of slaughtered bodies, and will toss
His Balls of wild-fire as great Hectr did
O'er all our nauall forces: But did this Prince
Lye breathless bleeding at Achilles feet,
Despairing Priam would to make his peace
Make humbly tender of Plixena,
And be much proud to call Achilles sono?
Were Troilus slain?
Who else deals wounds so thick and fast as hee,
They call him Hectors ghost, he glides so quick
Through our Battalions: If hee beat vs hence,
And wee bee then compelled to su to them?
It will be answered, that great Hectors deaths-man
Shall never wed his sister: Hectors son
Will never kneel to him, by whose strong hand
His father fell; but were young Troilus slain,
And Priams sons sent wounded from the field,
Troy then would stoop, and send Polixena
Even to Achilles Tent.
My sword and armour
Arise my bleeding ministers of death,
I'll feast you with an Ocean of blood-royall
Vlysses, ere this Sun fall from the skies,
By this right hand the warlike Troilus dyes.
Hold if thou be a man.
Stand if thou be a soldier, do not rink.
Art not thou Troilus, young and lusty Troilus.
I am, what then?
And I Thersites, lame and impotent,
What honour can thou get by killing me?
I cannot fight.
What make thou in the field then?
I came to laugh at mad-men, thou art one
The Troians are all mad, so are the Greeks
To kill so many thousands for one drab,
For Helen: a light thing, doe thou turn wise
And kill no more; I since these wars began
Shed not one drop of blood.
But proud Achilles
Slew my bold brother, and you Gracious all
Shall perish for the noble Hectors fall.
Hold, the Pox take thee hold, whilst I have breath,
I am bound to curse thy fingers.
I might have slain young Troilus when his sword
Late sparkled fire out of the Spartans helm,
But that had tild my fame, but I will trace him
Through the whole Army, when I meet the Trojan
Breathless and faint: Ile thunder on his crest
Some valour, but advantage likes me best.
Let Cowards fight with Cowards, and both fear
The base Thersites is no match for me,
Oppose me to the proudest hee in field,
Most eminent i Arms and best approved
To make the thirsty after blood to bleed.
And that's the proud Achilles.
Who names vs?
Fae, thou hast now before me set the man
Whom I most sought, to thee whom I will off
To appease Hectors ghost a sacrifice.
You widowed Matrons who now morn in tears,
And all you watery eyes surcease to weep.
Fathers that in this war have lost your sons,
And sons your fathers, by Achilles hand;
No more lament upon their funeral Arms,
But from this day rejoice: posterity
From age to age this to succession tell,
Hee falls by Troilus, by whom Hector fll.
Hectors sad fate betide him, soldiers on
Both brothers show like mercy, thy vain sound
That boasted lies now leuel'd with the ground.
Achilles!
What's hee? Thersites
Thou art a coward.
Have I not saved thy life, and slain proud Troilus
By whom the Greeks lye piled in breathless heaps?
Yes when he was out of breath so thou slowest Heto
Girt with thy Mirmidons.
Dogged Thersites,
I'll cleave thee to thy Navel if thou op'st
Thy venomous Jaw.
Doe, doe, good Dog-killer.
You slave.
I am out of breath now too, else bug-bate Greek
Thou durst not to have touched me.
To whom dost thou address thine Embassy?
To Achilles.
And not the General? It concerns our place
To hear King Priams embassy.
Let me have passage to Achilles Tent,
There Agamemnon (if you please) may hear
What Priam sends to your great Champion.
Let it bee so,
The General wrongs that honour
Wee Princes in our love confer on him.
Had I th'imperiall mandate in my mouth,
I would not loose one jot of my command
For all the proud Achilles's on earth,
Take him at best hoe's but a fellow peer,
And should lift his head aboue the Clouds
I hold my self his equal.
Vntuterd Aiax.
Who spake that word?
It was I Achilles, let the son of Priam
Bee private with vs.
It belongs to vs
To bee partakers of his Embassy.
Dismiss then our Inferiors, you lisses
Are welcome, Menelaus, Diomed.
Let Aiax stay without, and know his duty.
Duty? Oh you gods!
Ha? in what Dialect spake hee that language
Which Greece yet never knew, wee owe to him?
I'll after him and drag him from his Tent,
And teach the insolent, manners: Give me way.
lisses, thou and all the world shall know,
That save the obedience that I owe the gods,
And duty to my father Telamon,
Aiax knows none, no not to Agamemnon:
For what hee hath of mee's my curtsy,
What hee claims else, or the proud'st Greek that breaths,
I'll pay him in the poor'st and basest scorn
Contempt was ere expressed in.
Aiax you are too bold with great Achilles,
You bear your self more equal then you ought,
With one so trophied.
Bold? oh my merits,
Are you so soon forgot? why King of Ithaca,
What hath this Toy (aboue so talked of) done,
Saving slain Hector, which at best received
Was but scarce fairly, which the common tongues,
Voices, with base advantage.
Yes, Prince Troilus
Surnam'd the second Hector, lies imbak'd
In his cold blood, slain by Achilles hand:
The stream of glory now runs all towards him:
Achilles looks for it Aiax.
But when Achilles slumbered in his Tent,
Or waking with his Lute courted the ayre;
Then Aiax did not bear himself too bold
With this great Champion: when I saved our Fleet
From Hectors wild-fire, I deserved some praise,
But then your tongues were mute.
You in these times
Did not affect ostent, but still went on:
But Thetis son looks for a world of sound
To spread his attributes.
The proud Achilles
Shall no out-shine me long, in the next battle,
If to kill Troians bee to dim his praise,
I'll quench his luster by my bloody rays.
Shall I return that answer to King Priam?
Say in the morning we will visit him:
So bear our kind regreetes to Hecba.
But will Achilles trust himself with Priam,
Whose warlike sons were by his valour slain?
Priam is honourable, see here's his hand,
His Qeven religious and behold her name:
Plixena divine, read here, her vows
Honour, religions, and divinity,
All jointly promising Achilles safety:
Paris, you hear our answer, so return it.
We shall receive Achilles with al honour.
Were I Achilles and had slain great Hector
With valiant Troilus, Priams best loved sons,
I for the brightest Lady in all Asia,
Would not so trust my person with the father.
I am resolved, Vlysses you once told me
Priam would sleep if Troilus once were slain
And I dare gage my life, the reverent King
Intends no treason to Achilles person,
But merely by this honourable League,
To draw our warlike Champion from the field.
But we will deceive his hopes: fare not great Kings,
When o my Tent I bring Polixena:
The sooner Troy lies level with the ground.
You understand me Lords; shall I entreat you
Associate me unto the sacred Temple
Of Diin Phoebus?
In me these Kings shall answer, wee in peace
Will bring Achilles to Aolloes shrine,
Provided, Priam re we enter Troy,
Will give vs hostage for our safe return.
My honoured hand with his.
Oh Paris, till Achilles lye as dead,
As did thy brother Hector at his feet,
His body hacked with as many wounds,
As was thy brother Troilus when he fell.
I neur, neur shall have peace with Heaven,
Or take thee for their brother, or my son.
Mother I hate Achilles more then you;
But I have heard hee is invulnerable:
His mother Thetis from the Oracle
Receiving answer, hee should dye at Troy
(Being yet a child,) and to prevent that fate,
She dipped him in the Sea, all save the heel:
These parts she drenched, remain impentreble;
But what her dainty hand (forbore to drown)
As loath to feel the coldness of the wave,
That, and that only may bee pierced with steel.
Now since I know his fellow Kings intend,
To be his guard to Islium: what's my rage?
Or this my weapon to destroy a Prince,
Whose flh no sword can bite off.
Have I not heard thee Paris, praise thy self
For skill in Archery? have I not seen
A shaft sent level from thy constant hand,
Command the mark at pleasure? moist not thou
With such an arrow, and the selfsame bow,
Wound proud Achilles in that vndrencht part,
And by his heel draw lines blood from his heart?
Well thought on, the rare cunning of this had
None save the powers immortal can with stand:
When in the Temple hee shall think to embrace
My sister Polixena. Isle strike him there.
The Greeks are entered Troy. Let's fill the train
To avoid suspect, and now my shaft and bow,
Greece from my hand, reciue thine overthrow
Though the damage you have done to Troy,
Might cease our arms, and arm our brows with wrat,
Yet with a smooth front, and heart vnseigned,
Now bid Achilles welcome; welcome all
Before these Kings, and in the sight of Helen,
The dearest of my daughters Polixen
I tender thee: on to Apolloes shrine,
The flamen stays: these nuptial rights once past,
You of our best varieties shall taste.
My bow! now thou great god of Archery,
The Patron of our action and our vows,
Direct my shaft to wound bright Thetis son,
And let it not offend thy deity,
That in thy Temple I exhaust his blood,
Without respect of place, revenge seems good.
Tic done, Achilles bleeds, immortal powers
Clap hands, and smile to see the Greek fall dead,
By whom the valiant Hectors blood was shed.
Priam, thou hast dishonourably broke
The Laws of Arms.
By all the gods I vow,
I was a stranger to this horrid act:
It never came from Priam.
Call for your Surgeon then to stop his wound.
For if hee dye, it will be registered
For ever to thy shame.
A Surgeon there.
It is in vain for live, that god of Physice
We Gracious honour in a Serpents shape;
He could not stanch my blood: know fellow Kings
My mother Thetis by whose heavenly wisdom,
My other parts were made invulnerable.
Could not of all the gods obtain that grace,
But that my blood, vented as now it is,
The wound should be incurable: what Coward
That durst not look Achiles in the face,
Hath found my lives blood in this speeding place?
It was I, it was Paris.
It was a milke-sop then.
A Traitor to all Valour.
Did not this bleeding Greek kill valiaht Hector
Encompassed with his Guard of Mermidons?
Degenerate Paris, not old Priams son,
Thou never took thy treacherous blood from me
How cheers Achiles, though thy too much pride
Which held the heart of Aiax from thy love,
He'll be the foremost to revenge thy death.
Gramercy noble Aiax, Agamenon,
lisses, Diomed, I feel my rength
Begins to fail, let me have burial,
And then to Arms, revenge Achilles death:
Or if proud Troy remain iuincible,
To Lycomedes send to youthful Pirhus,
My son begot on bright Dedamia;
And let him force his vengeance through the hearts
Of these, by whom his father was betrayed.
I faint, may every drop of blood I shed,
Exhald by Phoebus, purife the ayre,
That every soul in Asia that draws breath,
May poisoned dye for great Achilles death.
He's dead, the pride of all our Grecian army
Will Priam let vs bear his body hence?
Yes, and not drag it about the walls of Troy.
As hee did Hectors basely.
Take it, withal truce, time to bury it.
Come Princes, on your shoulders bear him then,
Bravest of soldiers, and the best of men.
Whore's mighty Priam?
What's the news Aeneas?
Such as will make your highness doff your age
And be as youthful spirited as the Spring:
Penthisilea Queen of Amazons,
With mighty troops of Virgin warriors,
Gallant Viragoes, for the love of Hector,
And to revenge his death, are entered Troy.
May it please you, to receive the Scitbean Queen.
What Troy can yield, or Priam can express,
The Amazonian Princess shall partake:
Come Hecuba, and Ladies, let's prepare,
To bid her friendly welcome to this war.
Come, come, spread, spread, up with the pulpits straight,
Seats for the Judges, all the Kings of Greece.
Why when you lazy drudges? Is this place
For a whole Jury royal? whore's the Armour,
The prize for which the crafty Fex Vlisses,
And mad Bull Aiax, must this day contend?
What, is all ready? rare world when instead
Of smooth tong'd Lawyers, Soldiers now must plead.
This Sessions valiant Duke of Slamine,
And King of Ithaca was called for you:
Since great Achilles armour is the prise,
Due to the worthier, here before these Kings,
And in the face of all the multitude,
You are appointed for your several pleaes,
That prince who to these arms can prove most right,
Shall wear his purchase in the armies sight.
If to the worthiest they belong to me:
Could you select amongst all this throng of Princes,
None worthier then Vlisses, to contend
With Aiax? and in view of all our Navy,
Of all these tall ships, gilt with Hectors flames
Which when Vlisses fled into his tent,
I, I extiguisht, these twelve hundred ships
I saved at once, deserved Achilles arms,
Laertes son may think it grace enough,
That though hee miss his aim, hee may be said
To have strove with Aiax: Aiax who excels
As much in arms, as hee in eloquence.
My hands perform more then his tong can speak,
Act more then hee can talk: were I less valiant,
And had but half my vigour (like him) weak,
My royal birth would for this armour speak.
Duke Telamon, that in the Ergo sayl'd
To Calchos: and in Isliums second sack,
First reared Alcides colours on the VVals
My father was: His father Oecus,
On of the three that judge infernal souls;
And Oecus was son to Iupiter.
Thus am I third from Jove; besides Achilles
By marriage was my brother, and I crave,
Since hee is dead my brothers arms to have.
What hath Vlisses with our Kin to doe?
Being a stranger, not of Peleus blood:
Grave Heroes, if not honour, prize my merit,
I plead both worth and blood, these arms to inherit.
Beleue me, two sound pleas on Aiax part,
I fear the prize will bee conferred on him.
His arguments are maxims, and sound proofs
To win him way, into the soldiers hearts.
Let him proceed.
Because I hasted to the siege of Troy,
When hee feigned madness, must hee wear these arms?
When in the Phalanx, with old Nestor charging,
Thou at the name of Hector fledst the field,
And left the good old man encompassed round,
Calling aloud Vlisses, Vlisses tay,
The more hee cried the more thou made thy way
Prince Diomed you saw it, and upbraided
This Ithacans base flight, but see Heavens Justice.
Old Nestor escaped, great Hector was not there;
But meets Vlisses, as hee fled from Hector,
Hee that but late denied help, now wants help,
For at the sight of Hector down he false,
And cries aloud for aid, I came, and saw thee
Quaking with terror under Hectors arm,
The ponderous blow I took upon my Targe,
And as the least of all my noble deeds,
Saved these faint limbs from slaughter, which now sue,
To don these glorious arms, nor doe I blame thee
Forfearing Hector: what is hee of Greece
That saving Aiax, quaked not at his name?
Yet did I meet that Hector guiled in blood
Of Grecian Princes, fought with him so long,
Till all the host deft with our horrid strokes,
Begirt vs with amazement: wilt thou know
My honour in this combat? it was this,
I was not conquered: if thou still contendest?
Imagine but that field, the Time, the foes,
Hector alive, thee quaking at his feet,
And Aiax interposing his broad shield
Twixt death and thee, and thou the arms must yield.
What can the wise Vlisses, say to this?
Aiax prevails much with the multitude,
The general murmur doth accord with him.
I ever thought the son of Telamon
Did better merit the Achillean Arms
Then the Dulichian King.
Forbear to censure.
Till both be fully heard.
Me thinks grave Heroes, you should seek an Aiax
To wear these Arms, not let these Arms be sought
By Aiax: what hath sly Vlisses done
To countervail my acts? kilt unarmed Rhesus,
And set on sleepy Dolon in the night,
Stolen the Palladium from the Trojan Fane.
Oh brave exploits; nor hast thou these performed
Without the help of warlike Diomed:
So you betwixt you should divide these spoils.
Alas thou know not what thou seekst, fond man,
Thou that fightst all by craft and in the night
The radiant splendour of this burnished Helm
Shining in darkness, as the Sun by day,
Thy thievish spoils and ambush would betray.
Thy politic head's too weak to bear this cask,
This massy Helm; thou can not mount his Spear,
His warlike shield that bears the world engraven
Will tire thine arm, fool thou dost ask a Spear,
A shield a cask, thou haft not strength to wear.
Now if these Kings, or the vain peoples error
So far should err from truth to give them thee,
Twould be a mea nes to make thee sooner dye:
The weight would lag thee that art wont to fly:
Thou haft a shield vnscar'd, my seven-fold Targe
With thousand gashes peece-meald from mine arm,
And none but that would fit me: To conclude,
Go bear these Arms for which we two contend
Into the mid-ranks of our enemies,
And bid vs fetch them thence, and he to wear them
By whom this royal Armour can be won,
I had rather fight then talk, so I have done.
If with your prayers oh Grecian Kings, my vows
Might have prevailed with Heaven, there had bin then
No such contention, thou had kept thine Arms,
And wee Achilies thee: But since the Fates
Have tan him from vs, who hath now more right
To claim these Arms he dead, then hee that gave them
Unto Achilles living? nor great Princes,
Let that smooth eloquence, yon fellow scorns,
(If it bee any) be rejected now,
And hurt his moister, which so many times
Hath profited whole Greece, if we plead blood
Which is not ours, but all our Ancestors.
Laertes was my father, his Arcesius,
His Jove, from whom I am third: beside I claim
A second god-head by my mothers name.
What doe wee talk of birth? If birth should bear them,
His father being nearer Jove then hee
Should wear this honour, or if next of blood,
Ahills father Peleus should enjoy them,
Or his son Pirhus; but wee plead not kindred,
Or near propinquity: let alliance rest,
His bee the Armour that deserves it best.
Achilles mother Thetis being foretold
Her son should die at Troy, concealed him from vs
In habit of a Lady, to this siege
I brought him, therefore challenge all his deeds
As by Vlisses done: It was I sack't Thebes,
Chriss, and Scylla, with Lernessus walls,
I Troilus and renowned Hector slew:
First with this Helmet I adorned his head,
Hee gave it living, who demands it dead?
It is true, for like a Peddler being disguised,
And coming where Achilles spent his youth
In womanish habit, the young Ladies they
Look on his Glasses, Jewels and fine toys:
Hee had a Bow too much Achilles drew,
So by his strength the Ithacan him knew.
Had Aiax gone, Achilles then had stay
Hector still lived, our ransacked Tents to invade:
What can thou doe but barely fight? no more;
I can both fight and counsel, I direct
The manner of our battles, and propose
For victual and munition, to supply
The universal host, cheer up the soldiers
To endure a tedious siege, when all the Army
Cried let's away for Greece, and raised their Tents.
Aiax amongst the foremost had trust up
His bag and baggage: when I rated him,
And them, and all, and by my Oratory
Persuaded their retreat: What Greece hath won
From Troy since then, is by Vlisses done.
Behold my wounds oh Gracious, and judge you
If they be cowards marks they are in my breast:
Let boasting Aiax show such noble skarres.
These Grecian Heroes took I in your wars.
I grant hee fought with Hector, it was well done,
Where thou deserve well I will give thee due,
But what was the success of that great day?
Hector of Troy unwounded went away.
Now sure the prise will to Vlisses fall,
The murmuring soldiers mutter his deserts,
Preferring him fore Aiax: hear the rest.
But oh Achilles, when I view these Arms,
I cannot but lament thine obsequies:
Thou wall of Greece, when thou wast basely slain
I took thee on my soldiers, and from Troy
Bore thee then amed in the habiliments
I once more seek to bear, behold that shield
Tic a description Cosmographcall
Ofall the Earth, the Ayre, the Sea and Heaven
What are the Hyades? or grim Orion;
Hee peads, or what's Arcton? thy rude hand
Would lift a shield, thou can not under stand:
To omit my deeds of Arms, which all these know
Better then I can speak. When in the night
I ventured through Troys gates, and from the Temple
Raped the Palladium, then I conquered Troy,
Troy whilst that stood could never be subdued,
In that I brought away their gods, their honours,
Troys ruin and the triumphs of whole Greece.
What hath blunt Aiax done to conteruaile
This one of mine? Hee did with Hector fight,
I ten years war have ended in one night.
What Aiax did was but by my direction,
My counsel fought in him, and all his honours
(If they be any,) hee may thank me for
What hee hath done, was since his flight I stayed,
I therefore claim these Arms: so I have said.
Such is the clamour of the multitude,
Ad such lisses are your great deserts,
That those rich Arms are thine, the prize enjoy
To the defence of Greece and sack of Troy.
Come Princes, now this striffe is well determined.
To see how eloqunce the people charms,
lisses by his tongue hath gained these Arms.
Counsel prevails above strength, Heralds proclaim
Through the whole Camp Vlisses glorious name.
What dream thou Aiax?
Or is this object real that I see,
Which topsiturnes my brain, base Ithaca
To sway desert thus: Oh that such rich Troophies
Should cloth a cowards back, nor is it strange;
I'll go turn coward too, and henceforth plot,
Turn politicians all, all politicians.
A rush for valour, valour? this is the difference
Twixt the bold warrior, and the cunning statesman,
The first seeks honour, and the last his health:
The valiant hoard the knocks, the wise the wealth.
It was a gallant Armour, Aiax limbs
Would have become it bravely; the disgrace
Of loosing such an Armour by contention,
Will live to all posterity, and the shame
In Stigian Lethe drown great Aiax name.
Oh that I had here my base opposite,
In the Achilean Armour briskly clad,
Vulcan that wrought it out of gods of Steel
With his Ciclopian hammers, never made
Such noise upon his Anvil forging it,
Then these my armed fists in Vlisses wrack,
To mould it new upon the cowards back.
Why how now mad Greek?
And art thou come lisses? thus, and thus
I'll hammer on thy proof steeled Burganet.
Hold Aiax, hold, the devil take thee, hold;
I am Thersites, hell rot thy fingers off.
But art not thou lisses?
No I tell thee.
And is not thine head armed?
Hells plagues confound thee, no; thou think thou
Hast Menelaus head in hand, I am Thersites.
Thersites? Can thou rail?
Oh yes, yes; better then fight.
And curse?
Better then either: early.
And spit thy venom in the face of Greece?
Admirably.
Doe, doe, let's hear, prothee for heavens sake doe
With whom shall I begin?
Begin with the head.
Then have at thee Menelaus, thou art a king and a
No more, bu if on any, rail on me.
Desert should still be snarled at, vice psse free.
Who thou the son of Telamon, thou art a fool,
An Ass, a very block. What make thou here at
Troy to aid a Cuckold, being a Bachelor?
Paris hath stolen no wife of thine: if Aiax
Had been ought but the worst of these, he might
Have kept his Country, solaced his father, and
Comforted his mother: what thanks hast thou
For spending thy means, hazarding thy soldiers?
Wasting thy youth, loosing thy blood,
Endangering thy life? and all for a
Peace.
Yes peace for shame,
But what thanks hast thou for all thy travail?
Vlisses hath the armour, and what art thou now
Reckoned? a good moil, a horse that knows
Not his own strength, an Ass fit for service,
And good for burdens, to carry gold, and to
Feed on thistles: farewell Coxcomb. I shall be
Held to bee a Cock of the same dunghill,
For bearing thee company so long,
Isle to Vlisses.
Base slave, thou art for Cowards, not for men
Isle stown'd thee if thou come not back again:
This vantage have the valiant of the base,
Death, which they coldly fear, we boldly embrace.
Help me to rail on them too, or thou die.
Do it then, whilst tic hot.
What's Agamemnon our great General?
A blind Justice, and I would he had kissed
Fortunes blind cheeks, when hee could not see
To doe thee Justice.
Well, and what's Menelaus?
A King and a Cuckold, and a hornplague
Consume him.
Amen. What's Diomed? he sat on the bench too.
A very bench-whistler and loves Cresida.
Hell and confusion swallow him.
Amen. Amongst these what's Thsites?
A Rogue, a railing Rogue, a Cur, a barking
Dog, the Pox take me else.
Amen. But what's Vlisses my base adversary?
A damned politician, Scilla and Charibdis swallow him
And greedily devour him.
And utterly consume him
And eat up his posterity.
And rot out his memory:
In endless infamy.
And everlasting oblique.
Amen.
Enough, no more: shall he the Arms ini.
And wee the shame? away Thersites, fly,
Our prayers now said, we must prepare to dye.
Dye, and with them be damned.
Not look on Aiax? Aiax Telamon,
Hee that at once saved all your ships from fire,
Not look on me? ha? are these hands? this sword?
Which made the fame of Troy great Hector shrink
Below the ruins of an abject scorn?
Slighted? so slighted? what base thing am I,
To cup o so dull Greek, whom fame or blood
Hath rair'd one step aboue? Jove, see this;
And laugh old Grand-sir: Ha, ha, ha, by hell
I'll shake thy Kingdom for it: not look on Aiax?
The triple headed-dog, the whips of Steel,
The ravenous Vulture, and the restless stone
Are all mere fables; heir's a trusty sword,
It is mine, mine own, who claims this from me? ha?
Cowards and shallow wetted fools have slept
Amidst an armed troupe safe and secure
Under this guard: nay Agamemnon too.
But see, see from yon Sea, a shoal of sands
Come rolling on, trick't up in bristled finns
Of Purposes and Dog-fish ho my sword,
I will encounter them, they come from Greece,
And bring a poisonous breath from Ithaca
Tempered with false Vlisses gall, oh, oh;
It stinks of's wives chaste urinal, look, look
By yonder wood, how sjolly in the skirts
March policy and the devil, on, I fear you not:
Dare you not yet? not one to fight with me:
Who then? what's hee must cope with Aiax?
Echo. Aiax?
Well said old boy, wa'st Nestor my brave Lad?
I'll doot, I'll doot, come my fine cutting blade,
Make me immortal: lively fountain sprout,
Sprout out, yet with more life, brave glorious stream
Grow to a Tide, and sink the Grecian fleet
In seas of Aiax blood: so ho, so ho.
Lure back my soul again, which in amaze
Gropes for a perch to rest on: Heart, great heart
Swell bigger yet and splt, know gods, know men,
Furies, enraged Spirits, Tortures all,
Aiax by none could but by Aiax fall.
A sweet exchange of Treasure, term't I may
Even earth for ashes, and mere dust for clay:
Let Aiax kill himself, and say it was brave
Hector, a worthy Call, yet could not save
Poor fool his Coxcomb: Achilles bear him hye,
And Troilus boldly, all these brave ones dye.
Ha, ha, judge you; Is it not better far
To keep our selves in breath, and linger war:
Had all these fought as I'ue done, such my care
Hath been on both sides, that presume I dare,
These had with thousands more survived: Judge th'hoast,
I shed no blood, no blood at all have lost:
They shall not see young Pirhus, nor the Queen
Penthiselea, which had they but been
As wise as I, they might: nor Sinon, hee
Famous of all men, to be most like me.
Nor after these, Orestes, and his mother
Pillades Egistus with a many other
Our second part doth promise: These if I fail,
As I on them; you on Thersites rail.

YOu Terrors of the Asian Monarchy,
And Europes glory: Warlike Lords of Greece:
Although the great Prince of the Mirmidons,
And arme-strong Aiax, our best Champions,
Be by the gods bereft vs: yet now comes
A Phoenix out of their cold ashes rising:
Pyrhus, surnamed Neoptolemus:
On whom for his deceased fathers sake,
Wee must bestow some honours. Menelaus,
Vlisses, Diomed, give the Prince meeting,
And be his conduct to the General.
Pyrhus kneel down, we girt thee with this sword,
It was thy fathers. In his warlike hand
It hath cleft Troians to the navel down,
Par'd heads off faster then the harvest Sith
Doth the thin stalks, or bending ears of grain:
Wear it, and draw it to revenge his death.
Princes, perform your several ceremonies.
These golden spurs I fasten to thine heals,
The same thy warlike father won in field,
When Hector tide with thonges to his steeds fet-locks,
Was drag d about the high built walls of Troy.
This Armour, and this plumed Burgonet,
In which thy father, like a rampier'd wall,
Opposde the fury of his enemies,
(By general consent of all these Princes
Attributed to me) lo I surrender
To youthful Neoptolemus, wear it Prince,
Not all the world yields a more strong defence.
Achilles Tent, his Treasure, and his jewels,
We have reserved, enjoy them noble Pyrhus;
And lastly his strong guard of Mirmidons,
And with the honour hee with these have won,
His Sword, Spurs, Armour, Guard, Pavilion,
Be by his valiant son much dignified.
Before I touch the handle of his sword,
Or to my Knightly spurs direct my eyes,
Lace this rich Armour to my youthful sides,
Or roof mine head within this warlike Tent,
Make proof of this his plumed Burgonet,
Or take on me the leading of his Guard:
Witness you Grecian Princes, what I vow:
By Saturnes son, the sire of Oecus,
Begot on fair Europe; by their issue,
The second Judge, placed on the infernal bench
I will descend to Peleus, and from him,
Even to my natural father, with whose honours
I join my mother Deidamiaes
And in my avengeull oath include them all,
Till Priam be compelled to shut his Gates
For want of men: le be as mercyesse
As untamed Lyons, and the flesh-fed Bears,
Blood shall look brighter in young Pyrhus eyes
Then discoud Crystal, till od Priams hairs
Be dyed in gore: till Hecub's euerent lockes
Be go'd in slaughter; all their sones and daughters,
Subjects, and City quite confused in ruin,
Bow to our mercilesse fury: Isle not leave
This black and fatal siege; and this I wear
As I am Prince, and great Achille heir.
Even in thy looks I read the sack of Troy,
And reams Tragedy: welcome sweet Pyrhus,
And welcome you his warlike followers.
where be these Troians? I would fine behold
Their winged battalions grapple? I would see
The battered center fey about their ears
In clouds of dust: I would have horses hooves
Beat thunder out of earth: the chariot Trees
I would see drowned in blood, Scamander plains
Ore-spread with entrails baked in blood and dust:
With terror I would have this day as black,
As when Hyperion leaping from his Sphere,
Cast ugly darkness from his Chariot wheels,
And in this veiled confusion the faint Troians
Beat back into the Yowne: I'd see their Gates
Entered, and fire by their high Battlements
Climbing toward heaven: the pavement of th'streets
I'd see paved ore with faces: infants tossed
On Lances points: big-bellied Ladies flung
From out their casements: I'd have all their souls
Set upon wings, and Troy, no Troy, but fire,
As if ten thousand Comets joined in one,
To close the world in red confusion.
Well spake bold Synon; and my Lords of Greece,
This fellow boasts no more then with his sword,
Hee will adventure for, and should that aisle,
He'll set his brain to work. I tell you Princes,
My Grandsire Lycomedes hath made proof
Of Synons policies, state-quaking proiects
Are hand-maides to his brain; and he hath spirit
To drive his plots even to the door of Death,
With rare effects, and then not all the world
Affords a villain more incomparable,
Then Synon my attendant. Warlike Princes,
I speak this to his praise: and I profess
My self as sterne, bloody, and merciless.
I have not heard a braver Character
Given to a Greek: and had hee but my railing
He were a man complete.
Sure there is something
Aboue a common man in yon same fellow,
Whom nature hath so marked, and were his mind
As crooked as his body, hee were one
I could bee much in love with.
Hee hath a feature
That I could court, nay will: I would not loose
His friendship and acquaintance for the world.
Me thinks you are a comely Gentleman.
I ever held my self so: and mine eye
Gives you no less: of all the Gracious here
Thou haft a face like mine, that fears no weather
A shape that war it self cannot deform:
I best love such complexions.
By the gods
Wee have two meeting souls: be my sweet Vrchin
I will,
An thou shalt bee mine ugly Toad.
A match: be wee hence forth brothers and friends.
Embrace then friend and brother: my dear Toad
My amiable Vrchin.
I long for work, will not these Troians come,
To welcome Pyrhus, great Achilles son?
Their drums proclaim them ready for the field.
Perhaps King Priam hath not yet related
The news of Neoptolemus arrive,
That hee presumes thus, weakened as he is,
To op his Gates, and meet vs in the field.
Tic like hee hath, because for want of men
Hee brings a troop of Women to the field:
Most sure hee thinks, wee (like our warlike father)
Will be ensnared with beauty: Priam no,
We for his death, are sworn vain beauties foe.
Artthou Achilles son, beneath whose hand
Assisted by his bloody Mirmidons,
The valiant Hector fell?
Woman I am.
Thou should be then a Coward.
How?
Even so:
Thy father was a foe dishonourable
And so the world reputes him.
By all the gods
Swear not, for ere the closure of the battle,
If both the Generals please, with my good sword,
In single combat Isle make good my word.
O that thou were a man! but women's tongues
Are privileged: come Priam, all his sons,
The whole remain of fifty, Isle make good
My fathers honour against sufficient odds.
But for these scolds, we leave them to their sex
What make they amongst ouldiers.
Scorn not prou Pyrhus
Our presence in the field; I tell thee Prince,
I am a Queen, the Queen of Amazons,
A warlike Nation disciplined in Arms.
Are you those Harlots famous through the wolt,
That have usurped a Kingdom to your selaes,
And pent your sweet hearts in a barren isle,
Where your adulterate sports are exercised.
Curb thy irregular tong: we are those women
That practise arms, by which we purchase fame.
All the year long, only three months excepted,
Those wherein Phoebus drives his Chariot,
In height of splendour through the burning Cancer,
The fiery Lyon, and the Virgins sign:
Then we forsake our Sun-burnt Continent,
And in a cooler clime, sport with our men,
And then return if we have issue male,
Wee nurse them up, then send them to their Fathers.
If females, we then keep them, and with irons
Their right paps we sear off, with better ease
To couch their spears, and practise feats of arms.
We are those women, who expel'd our Land
By Aegypts Tyrant: Conquered Asia,
Egypt and Cappadocia: these two Ladies
Descend from Menlip and Hyppolita,
Who in Antiopes reign foeht hand to hand
With Hercules and Theseus; we are those
That came for love of hector to the field,
And (being murdered) to revenge his death.
Then welcome Amazonians, as I live
I love you though I hate you: but beware,
Hate will out-way my love, and isle not spare
Your usl end squadrons: for my fathers fall,
Troians, and Amazonians perish all.
Now Queen of Amazons, by the strong spirit
Achilles left his son, I let thee know
My father was an honourable Foe.
Defiance Pyrhus, isle to death proclaim,
Hector was by Achilles basely slain:
And on his sons head, with my keen edged sword,
And thdring strokes, I well make good my word.
What? wounded noble Pirhus?
Wounded? no,
I have not met one that can raze the skin
Of great Achilles son.
Yet blood drops from your arm.
Not possible!
Tic sure the blood of some slain enemy.
Come lets vs break into the battles center,
And too't pel mel.
But Neoptolemus,
Wee prise thy safety more then all advantage:
Retire thy selle to have thy wounds bound up,
Cowards fear death,
Isle avenge my blood, though with the loss of breath.
Art thou a mad-man fellow, that aduenturest
So near the blood of Neoptolemus,
Whose smallest drop must cost a Troians life.
Art thou the bleeding sue of that Greek?
I, in revenge of noble Hectors death,
Slew in Apolloes Temple.
Art thou then
That coward and effeminate Trojan boy.
Arm wounded Greek, I slew the false Achilles,
An act which I am proud of.
Fall on the murderer,
And flake him smaller then the Lybian sand.
If any but my self offer one blow,
Isle on the Troians party oppose him.
Come Paris, though against the odds of breath,
Achilles wounded son, will avenge his death.
Why sound the Troians this retreat?
Paris is own, and Penthisilea
Wounded by Pyrhus.
Come then Synon
Go with me to my Tent, this night we will revel
With beauteous Cressida.
Not I, I hate all women, painted beauty
And I am opposites: I love thee less
Because thou doat'st on Trojan Cressida.
She's worthy of our love: I tell thee Synon,
She is both constant, wise, and beautiful.
She's neither constant, wise, nor beautiful,
Isle prove it Diomed: four Elements
Meet in the structure of that Cressida,
Of which there's not one pure: she's compact
Merely of blood, of bones and rotten flesh,
Which makes her Leprous, where the Sun exhales
The moist complexion, it doth putrefy
The region of the air: there's then another,
Sometimes the Sun sits muffled in his Cave,
Whilst from the Clouds fly hideous showers of rain,
Which sweeps the earths corruption into Brookes,
Brookes into rivers, Rivers send their tribute,
As they receive it to their Sovereign
The seething Ocean: Thus Earth, Ayre, and Water,
Are all infected, she then framed of these,
Can she be beautefull? No Diomed,
If they seem fair, they have the help of Art,
By nature they are ugly.
Leave this detraction.
Now for this Cressids wisdom, is she wise,
Who would forsake her birth-right, her baue friend,
The constant Troylus, for King Diomed;
To trust the faith of Greeks, and to love thee
That art to Troy a professed enemy?
Cat thou disprove her constancy?
I can.
Never was woman constant to one man:
For proof, doe thou but put into one scale
A feather, in the other Cressids truth,
The feather shall down weigh it: Diomed
Wilt thou believe me, if I win not Crossed
To be my sweet heart: yet have no such face,
No such proportion, to bewitch a Lady
I never practised court-ship, but am blunt;
Nor can I file my tongue: yet if I win not
The most chaste woman, I will cut it out.
Shall I make proof with her?
There she comes,
Affront her Synon, Isle with-draw unseen
A gallant Lady, who but such a villain
As Synon would betray her: but my vow
Is past, for she's a Trojan. Cressida,
You are well encountered: whether away sweet Lady?
To meet with Kingly Diomed, and with kisses
Conduct him to his Tent.
Tic kindly done:
You love King Diomed then?
As mine own life.
What see thou in him that is worth thy love
He's of a fair and comely personage.
Personage? ha, ha.
I prithee look on me and view me well,
And thou wilt find some difference.
True, more odds
Twixt him and thee, then betwixt Mercury
And limping Vcan.
Yetas fair a blowse
As you, sweet Lady, wedded with that Smith
And bedded too, a black complexion
Is always precious in a women's eye:
Leave Diomed, and love me Cressida.
Thee.
Me.
Deformity forbear, I will to Diomed
Make known thine insolence.
I care not, for I, not desire to live,
If not beloved of Crossed: tell the King
If hee stood by, I would not spare a word.
For thine own part, rare goddess, I adore thee,
And owe thee divine reverence: Diomed
Indeed's Aetolians King, and hath a Queen.
A Queen?
A Queen, that shall hereafter question thee:
Or can thou think hee loves thee really
Being a Trojan, but for present use:
Can Greeks love Troians, are they not all sworn
To do them outrage?
How can thou then love me?
I am a politician, oaths with me
Are but the tools I work with, I may break
An oath by my profession. Hear me further,
Think thou King Diomed, forgets thy breach
Of love with Troylus? Ey or that he hopes
Thou can be constant to a second friend,
That wast so false unto thy first beloved.
Synn thou art deceived `thou know I never
Had left Prince Troylus, but by the command
Of my old father Calchas.
Then love Diomed;
Yes, do so still, but Crossed mark the end
If ever hee transport thee to Aeoleo,
His Queen will bid thee welcome with a vengeance:
Hast thou more eyes then these? she'll fall to work
For such an other Vixen thou ne'er knew
Come Cressida bee wise.
What shall I doe?
Love me, love Synon.
Synon loves not me
Isle swear I do.
I heard thee say, that thou would break thine oath
Then Isle not swear, because I will not break it:
But yet I love thee Cressida, love me,
Isle leave the wars unfinished, Troy vnsackt;
And to my native Country bear thee hence:
Nay wench Isle do it; come kiss me Cressida.
Well, you may use your pleasure;
But good Synon keep this from Diomed.
Oh perjured strumpet,
Is this thy faith? now Synon Isle believe
There is no truth in women.
Am  betrayed? oh thou base ugly villain,
Isle pull thine eyes out.
Ha, ha, King Diomed,
Did I not tell thee what thy sweet heart was.
Thou art a Traitor to all woman kind.
I am, and nought more grieves me then to
Think, a woman was my mother.
A villain.
Right.
A Devil.
Little better.
Go get you back to Troy, away, begone,
You shall no more be my Companion.
And now fair roian Weather-hen adieu
And when thou next love, think to be more true
Oh all you powers, aboue look down and see
How I am punished for my perjury.
Stay, what sad Lady's this? whence are you woman?
Of Troy or Greece?
I was of Troy till lone drew me from thence,
But since have sojourned in the Tents of Greece,
With Diomed King of Etolin:
Oh had I never known him.
Would you trust
You honour amongst strangers? but sweet Lady
Discourse your wrongs.
I was betrayed:
It shames me to relate the circumstance,
By a false Greek, one that doth hate our sex,
One Synon, if you meet him in the battle,
I with my tears entreat you be revenged.
How might wee know him?
His visage answered, and earthy ore his shoulder
Hangs lockes of hair, black as the Ravens phunes:
His eyes down looking, you shall hardly see
One in whose shape appears more treachery.
We loose much time: Lady haft you to Troy,
And if we meet a fellow in the battle
Of your description, by our honoured names,
We will have his blood to recompense our shames.
By her description this should be the man
Compassed with smocks and long coats:
Now you whoores.
Is thy name Synon?
No, but I know Synon.
Hee is my friend and brother.
For Synons sake, prepare thy self for aughter
He who names Synon?
Brother thou ne'er could come in better time:
See, see, how I am rounded.
Were ever such a pair of Devils feign?
They are so like, they needs must bee allied.
What can their Dams say to vs?
You betray Ladies, envy all our sex,
And that you now shall pay for girt him round.
I recan nothing,  me sweet faced brother:
And now you witches arlets, drabes, and queens,
We will cut you all to fragments.
The Troians sound retreat.
Who saw young Pyrhus?
I fear his too much rage hath spurred him on
Too far amongst the Amazonian troops.
Why stand you idle here, and let the Troians
Lead warlike Pyrhus prisoner to the Town.
How Pyrhus prisoner?
Wee saw him compassed by the Amazous:
Penthesil with her bustain troops.
Laid load upon his Helm.
Then this retreat
Upon the sudden argues that they lead him
Captive to Troy.
Courage brave Princes, I have got a prise
Worthy the purchase, on my Lances point
Sits perched the Amazonians lopped off head,
Upon my warlike sword her bleeding arm,
At sight of which the Troians sound retreat:
The honour of this day belongs to vs.
To none but Neoptolemus.
Synon you played the coward: so Thersites.
If not so.
I had not lived to see Troys overthrow
When did thou ever see a villain valiant?
What's past remember not, but what's to come:
Priam hath shut his Gates, and will no more
Meet him in arms: can you with all your valour
Glide through the walls, if not what are you nearer
For all your Ten years siege?
Tic true, some stratagem to enter Troy
Were admirable: for Princes till I see
The Temple burn wherein my father died,
And Troy no Troy but ashes; my revenge
Will have no sterne aspect, till I behold
Troys ground-sils swim in pools of crimson gore
Ramnusia's Alter filled with flowing helmes
Of blood and brains: Priam and Hecuba
Dragged by this hand to death, and this my sword
Raeach the breast of fair Polixena,
I shall not think my fathers death revenged.
To him that can contrive
A stratagem by which to enter Troy,
Isle give the whole spoil of Apolloes Temple.
I my rich Tent.
I the Palladium that I brought from Troy.
I all my birth-right in Aetoli.
Peace, tic here: I have it.
Isle hug thee Synon.
Touch me not, away:
There're more hammers beating in my brain
Then ever touched Vulcans Anvil, more Ideaes
Then Atoms, Embrions innumerable
Growing to perfect shape; and now it is good.
Call for Endimions bastard, whore's Epeus?
Isle set him straight a work.
Upon some Engine Synon.
A horse, a horse.
Ten Kingdoms for a horse to enter Troy.
Stay, let me see:
Vlisses you have the Palladium.
I have so.
Call for Epeus then, the General
Hath no command in him.
Lets know the project.
And that Palladium stood in Pall Temple,
And Consecrate to her.
It did so.
Call for Epeus then.
Lets hear what thou intend.
Isle have an Horse built with so huge a bulk,
As shall contain a thousand men in Arms.
And enter Troy with that?
Do it you, you trouble mine invention,
I am grown muddy with your interruption:
Good young man lend more patience, hear me out:
This Engine framed, and stuffed with armed Grekes.
(Will you take down your Tents, march back to Tenedos?)
What shall the Horse doe then?
Not gallop as your tongue doth: good Vlisses
Lend me your apprehension; when the Troians
Find you are gone aboard, theyle straight suppose
You'll not weigh Anchor: till the gods inform you
Of your success at Sea: if then a villain
Can drive into their ears, the goddess Pallas
Offended for her stolen Palladium:
(Will you erect this Machine to her honour?)
Withal that were it brought into her Temple,
It would retain the gilt Palladiums virtue.
Might not the forged tale move aged Priam,
To hale this Engine presently to Troy,
Pull down his walls for entrance, leave a breach
Where in the dead of night, all your whole Army
May enter, take them sleeping in their beds,
And put them all to sword.
Tic rare!
Tic admirable, I will adventure
My person in the Horse.
Do so, and get a thousand spirits more.
King Agamemnon, if you like the project,
Down with your Tent.
Synon, wee will,
Isle set a lightvpon the walls of Troy
Shall give the summous when you shall return
About it Princes: Pyrhus get you men
In readiness, I will expose my self
To bewitch Priam with a weeping tale,
I cannot to the life describe in words,
What Isle express in action.
Down with our Tents.
Isle to pick out bold Greeks to fill the horse:
Shine bright you lamps of Heaueu, for ere't be long
We will dim your radiant beams with flaming lights
And bloody meteors, from Troys burning streets.
Such sights are glorious sparks in Synons eyes,
Who longs to feast the Devil with Tragedies.
The Gracious gone?
All their tents raised, their ten years siege remoon'd
Now Troy may rest securely.
They may report at their return to Greece
The welcome they have had: what have they won?
But wounds, Times loss, shame, and confusion.
We now are Lord of our own Territories,
Ten years kept from vs by th'inuading Greeks
Now wee may freely take a full survey
Of all Scamander plain, drunk with the mixture
Of th'opposite bloods of Troians and of Greeks.
And royal Husband we have cause to joy,
That after so long siege the Greeks are fed,
And you in peace may rest your aged head.
Upon this East-side stood Vlisses Tent,
The politic Greek.
There was old Nestors quarter,
And Agamemnons that; the General.
Upon the north-side of the field, Achilles
That bloody Greek pitched, and upon this plain,
I well remember, was my Hector slain.
This empty place being South from all the rest,
The valiant Diomed hath oft made good,
And here, even here, his rich Pavilion stood.
But here, even here, near to Duke Aiax tent,
Round girt with Mirmidons, my Troilus fell.
Then was this place a standing Lake of blood,
Part of which moisture the bright Sun exhald;
And part the thirsty earth hath quaft to Mars:
But now the swords on either part are sheathed,
And after ten years tumults wars surcease,
They layding their ships home with shameful peace.
For which we will praise the gods, banquet and feast,
Since by their flight, our glorious fame's increased.
Soft, what huge Engine's that left on the strond,
That bears the shape and figure of an Horse.
What, shall we hew it peace-meale with our swords?
Oh be not rash, sure tic some mystery
That this great Architecture doth include.
But mine opinion is, this Steeds huge bulk
Is stuffed with Greekish guile.
I rather think
It is some monumental Edifice
Unto the goddess Pallas consecrate:
Then spare your fury.
Why stand you gazing at this horrid craft,
Forged by the fly Vlisses, is his brain
Unknown in Troy? or can you look for safety
From those who ten years have besieged your walls?
Either this huge swollen bulk is big with soldiers,
Longing to be delivered of armed Greeks,
Whose monstrous fatal and abhorred birth,
Will be Troys ruin: else this hill of timber
This horse-like structure stabled up in Troy,
Will spurn down these our walls, our towers demolish,
Which it shall never: come you Trojan youth
That love the public safety, no proud Greek
Upon this Steeds back, o'er Troys wall shall ride.
First with this Javelin Isle transpearce his side.
What means Laoooon?
Princes stay his fury.
Hark Troians, if a earring noise of Arms,
Sighed not throw these deep Caverns, I divine
This gluttenous womb hath swallowed a whole band
Of men in steel, then with your swords and glaues
Rip up his tough sides, and disembowel him,
That we may prove how they have lined his entrails.
Stay, and proceed, no further in your rage,
Till we have learnt some novel from this Greek,
Whom in a ditch we found fast gived and bound.
Laocoon cease thy violence till we know
From that poor Grecian, what that Machine means.
Oh me, (of all on earth most miserable,)
Whom neither Heavens will succour, earth preserve,
Nor seas keep safe, I, whom the Heavens despise,
The Earth abandnos, and the Seas disdain:
Where shall I shroud me? whom, but now the Greeks
Threatened with vengeance; and escaped from them,
Fallen now into the hands of Troians, menacing death:
The world affords no place, to wretched Synon,
Of comfort, for where ere I fix my foot,
I tread upon my grave: the four vast corners
Of this large Vniuerse, in all their rooms
And spacious emptiness, will not afford me
My bodies length of rest: where ere I fly,
Or stay, or turn, Death's th'obiect of mine eye!
What art thou? or whence come thou? briefly speak?
Thou wretched man, thou moou'st vs with thy tears:
Unbind him soldiers.
Shall I deny my self to be of Greece?
Because I am brought Captive into Troy?
No Synon cannot lye: Heaven, Earth, and Sea,
From all which I am out-cast, witness with me
That Synon cannot lye: thrice damned Vlisses,
The black-hair'd Pyrhus, and horned Menelaus
Grook-back'd Thersites, luxurious Dimed,
And all the rabble of detested Greeks,
I call to witness, Synon cannot lye.
Could I have oiled my tongue, and cringed my ham,
Supplied mine humble knee to crotch and bend,
Heaved at my bonnet, shrugged my shoulders thus,
Grinned in their faces, Synon then had stood,
Whom now this hour must stue in his own blood.
The perfect image of a wretched creature,
His speeches beg remorse.
Alas good man,
Shake off the timorous fear of servile death,
Though amongst vs Troians, and thy self a Greek,
Thou art not now amongst thine enemies,
Thy life Isle warrant, only let vs know
What this Horse means.
Greece I renounce thee, thou hast thrown me off,
Fair Troy  am thy creature. Now Isle unrip
Vlisses craft, my fatal enemy.
Who sold to death the Duke Palamides,
My Kinsman Troians (though in garments torn)
Synon stands here, yet is he nobly borne:
For that known murder did I haint his Tent
With railing menaces, horrible exclaims,
Many a blacke-saint, of wishes, oaths, and curses
Have I sung at his window, then demanding
Justice of Agamemnon, Diomed,
Duke Nestor with the other Lords of Greece,
For murder of the Prince Palamides,
And being denied it in my most vexation,
My bitter tongue spared not to bark at them:
For this I was observed, looked through and through
lisses brain had marked me, for my tongue
And fatted me for death by Calchas means,
He wrought so far that I should have bin offred
Unto the gods for sacrifice, the Priest
Lifting his hand aloft to strike me dead,
I leapt down from the Altar, and so fled,
Pursuit and search was made, but I lay safe
In a thick tuft of sedge, till I was found
By these your soldiers, who thus brought me bound.
Thou now art free secured from all their tyrannys
Now tell vs what's the meaning of this Horse?
Why have they left him here, themselves being gon?
My new released hands, thus I heave on hye,
Witness you gods, that Synon cannot lye,
But as a new adopted Trojan now
By Priams grace; I here protest by Jove,
By these eternal fires that spangle Heaven,
The Alter, and that sacrificing sword,
Beneath whose stroke I lay, since my base Country
Casts me away to death, I am now borne
A son of Troy: not Hector whilst he lived
More damaged Greece by his all wounding arm,
Then I by my discovery: Well, you know
How the Greeks honour Pallas, who inceast
Because Vlsses the Palladium stole
Out of her Temple, and her Warders slew,
In rage she threatened ruin to all Greece:
Therefore to her hath Calchas built this Horse.
(Greece pardon me, and all my Country gods
Be deaf to Synons tale, and let it bee
Henceforth forgot that I was borne in Greece,
Least times to come record what I reveal,
The black confusion of my Native weal.
And what's that Synon?
Where left I? at the Horse, built of that size,
Least you should give it entrance at your Gates:
For know should your ude hands dae to profane
This gift sacred to Pallas; Rots and diseases,
Pests and infections shall depopulate you,
And in a small short season, they returning,
Shall see thy subjects slain, fair Troy bright burning.
I'm even with thee Vlisses, and my breath
Strikes all Greece home for my intended death.
Thanks Synon, we shall bounteously reward thee,
And see my Liege, to make good his report,
Laocoon, he that with his Javelin pierced
This gift of Pallas, round embraced with Snakes,
That wind their trains about his wounded wast,
And for his late presumption sting him dead.
We have not seen so strange a prodigy,
Laocoon hath offended all the gods,
In his profane attempt.
Then lend your helping hands,
To lift up that Pallad an monument
Into Troys City: Leauers, Cables, Cords.
It cannot enter through the City Gates.
Down with the walls then.
These walls that ten years have defended Troy,
For all their service shall wee ruin them.
But this shall not defend you for ten years,
But make your Town impregnable for ever.
Down with the walls then, each man lend a hand.
I hear a noise of Armour.
Ha, what's that?
I fear some treason in that Horse enclosed:
Nor will I lend an hand to hale him in.
Down with the Walls.
And Troians now after your ten years toil,
Days battles, the fields trouble, and nights watch,
This is the first of all your rest, feast, banquet, joy and play,
Pallas is ours, the Greeks say'd hence away.
Here we release all Centuries and commit
Our broken walls to her Celestial guard:
We will fewd thee Synon, the Greeks gone,
Preen. may  est his age, in his soft throne.
S, so, so,
Snon I hope shall warm his hands anon,
A a bright goodly bone-fire: Here's the Key
Unto this Macnine by Epus built,
Which hath already with his brazen breast,
Tilt ed Trowes wall down, and anon being drunk
With the best blood of Greece, in dead of night
Having surcharged his stomach, will spew out
A thousand men in Arms: sweet mid-night come,
I long to mask me in thy sable Wings,
That I may do some mischief and black deeds:
We shall have rare sport, admirable spoil,
Cutting of throats, with stabbing, wounding, killing
Some dead a sleep, and some half sleep, half wakes
Some dancing Antiques in their bloody shirts,
To which their wives cries, &amp; their infants shrieks,
Play music, brave mirth, pleasing harmony:
Then having spit young children on our spears,
We will roast them at the scorching flames of Troy:
Fly swift you winged minutes till you catch
That long-wisht hour of stillness: in which Troy
Sleeps her last sleep, made drunk with wine and joy.
In the receiving of this fatal Steed,
Sick Troy this day hath swallowed such a pill,
Shall search her entrails, and her eves blood spill.
Soft, soft, and let your stillness suite with night,
Fair Phebe keep thy silver splendour in,
And be not seen to night.
Were Phebe in my case,
She soon would blush to show her horned face.
We would not have a star cast it's clear eye
On our dark enterprise: too fast: so, still.
Here Ambush, till you see the flaming Torch,
Synon this night upon the walls of Troy,
Will toss about his ears, as a true signal,
The great Open structure is received,
And we may find safe entrance by the breach.
A stand, the word through all the Regiment,
A stand.
Thy everlasting sleep sleep careless Troy,
This horrid night buried in Wine and mirth,
This fatal Horse spurred by the brain of Synon,
Hath leapt ore Troys high bulwarks great with Greeks,
Four times in raising up the monument,
A shaking sound of Armour harshly iar'd
In all the Princes ears, and had they not
Been drunk in Synons tears, they'd found our guile.
It is now mid-night. The black darkness fallen,
And rolled o'er all the world, as well the Poles,
As the great Ocean, and the earth: now's the time
For tragic slaughter, clad in gulls and sables,
To spring out of Hells jaws, and play strange reakes
In sleepy Troy, this bright and flaming brand
Which I so often ger about mine ears,
Is signal for the Armies quick return,
And make proud Islium like my bright torch burn,
Wink all you eyes of Heaven, or you shall be
Blood-shot to view Troys dismal Tragedy.
The signals on the wa: forward brave soldiers,
The Horse is entered, Synons Tale believed.
And wee this night shall see the sack of Troy.
March on then, the black darkness covers vs,
And we without suspicion easily may
Disperse our selves about these high built walls:
Now with a soft march enter at this breach
But give no token of a loud Alarm,
Till we have met with Pyrhus and the rest,
Whom the Steeds bulk includes.
Soft, soft, ey so, hereafter Ages tell,
How Synons key unlocked the gates of Hell.
The General?
Pyrhus?
Menelaus?
Diomed?
My Vrchin?
What my Toad?
Well met in Troy great Lords.
Where are wee now?
In the high street, ne'er to the Church of Pallas,
And this you past, the gate called Dardanus.
Then here begins Troys fatal tragedy:
Princes of Greece, at once unsheathe your swords,
And hear protest with Neoptolemus,
By our fore-father Peleus, grandam Thets,
The Imperious goddess of the Sea, that made
Achilles, save in th'heele, invulnerable,
And by my father great Aeacides,
His glorious name, his Armour which I wear,
His bloody wounds, and his black sepulchre;
I here abjure all respite, mercy, sleep,
Until this City be a place confused:
This mural girdle that begirts it round
A Cawsey for the Greeks to trample on,
The place a stone-heape swimming in an Ocean
Of Trojan blood, which shall from far appear
Like an high Rock in the red Sea.
A brave show,
To see full Boats in blood of Troians row,
And the poor labouring Snakes with arms spread swimms
In luke-warme blood of their allies and kin.
Whence must this Ocean flow?
From thousand Springs
Of gentle and ignoble, base and Kings.
Set on then, none retire;
Wave in the one hand steel, in the other fire.
Loud Drums and Trumpets ring Troys fatal peal,
That now lies drawing on, the word be vengeance,
Alarm, at that watch-word fire, and kill,
And wide-mouth'd Orchus with whole legions fill
T'was an alarm sure that frighted me
In my dead sleep, it was near the Dardan port:
Jove grant that all be well.
Oh Heaven! what tumult's this
That hurries through the fatal streets of Troy
I fear some treason.
Stay Wife, lay thine ear
Unto the ground and list, if we can gather
Of what condition this strange uproar is
That riots at this late unseasoned hour?
Sure it is the noise of war, whence should it grow?
The Greeks are sayl'd hence, Troy needs fear no foe.
The horrid stir comes on this way towards vs.
Oh whither shall we turn?
Oh save me husband.
Succour me dear wife.
Vengeance for Greece and Neoptolemus.
So fly the word along, dye old and young,
Morn Troy in ashes for Achilles loss,
Steel in one hand, in the other fire-brands toss.
This horrid clamour that hath called me up
From my deep rest, much, much amazes me;
Tic on the right hand, now upon the left,
It goes before me and it follows me:
Oh Jove expound the meaning of this horror
Which the dark mid-night makes more terrible.
this street is clear, but now I climbed a Turret,
And I might well difcernel alfe Troy in fire,
And by the flame the burnst Helmets glister
Of men in Arms, whence Jove Olympic knows.
Where shall I hide me? Treason, Troys betrayed;
The fatal horse was full of armed Greeks.
Of Greeks? damned Synon.
Prince Chorebus fly,
Fly great Aeneas.
Which way? where? or how?
Are we not rounded with a quick-set hedge
Of pointed steel? are not the gates possessed
And strongly manned with Greeks? death every where,
Then whither should we fly?
Into the throng.
Where blows are dealt, where our inflamed Turrets
Burn with most fury.
Nobly speaks Aeneas.
Then whither flames, and furies, shrieks and clamours,
Death, danger, and the devils hurry vs,
Thither will we: follow where I shall lead,
Thousands shall fall by vs ere we be dead.
Charge on these naked Troians, and cry thus,
Vengeance for Greece and Neoptolemus.
Charge on these armed Gracious, and thus cry,
We may yet live to see ten thousand dye.
They charge the Greeks and kill them, Thersites runs away.
Well fought brave spirits in our utter ruin,
We are Conquerors yet: let's don these Greekish habits,
And mix our selves amongst their Armed ranks;
So unexpected murder all we meet:
The darkness will assist our enterprise.
These Greekish Arms this night by Troians Worn
Shall to the fall of many Gracious turn.
Burn fire, and kill, as you wound cry thus,
Vengeance for Greece and Neoptolemus.
What art thou that with such a grim aspect,
In this black night so dark and turbulent,
Haunts me in every corner of my house
Which yet burns o'er mine ears?
Doest thou not know me?
Or can Aeneas so forget his friend?
This face did fright Achilles in the field,
And when I shook these lockes, now knotted all,
As baked in blood; all Greece hath quak't and trembled.
Look on mine Heals, and thou moist see those thongs
By which so often I was dragged about Troy,
My body made an universal Wound
By the vnnumbred hands of Mirmidons,
This th'hand that tossed so many wild-fire balls
Into the Ergue fleet, and this the body
That decked in Aiax and Ac ills spoils
Rid from the fields triumphant thorough Troy.
Prince Hector?
Hence Aeneas post from Troy,
Rear that abroad the gods at home destroy.
The City burns, Priam and Priams glory
Is all expired, and tumbled headlong down:
Cassandraes long neglected prophesies
This night fulfils. If either strength or might
Could have protected Troy, this hand, this arms
That saved it oft, had kept it still from harm.
But Troy is doomed, here gins the fatal Story
Of her sad sack and fall of all her glory.
Away, and bear thy Country gods along,
Thousands shall issue from thy sacred seed,
Cities more rich then this the Grecian spoil,
In after times shall thy successors build,
Where Hectors name shall live eternally.
One Romulus, another Bruit shall rear,
These shall nor Honours, nor just Rectors want,
Lumbardies room, great Britains Troy-nouant.
Heu fuge nate Dea, te{que} his pater eripe flammis;
Hostess habit muros, ruit alto a culmine Troia
Sacra, la{que} tibi commentate Troia penates
Hos cape fatorum comites, his moenia queer
Magna: pererrato statues quae denique pont.
Soft lie thy bones and sweetly may they rest
Thou wonder of all worthyes, but Troy burns:
Thousands of Trojan Corses block the streets,
Some flying fall, and some their killers kill:
Where shall I meet thee death? before I fly,
Some Conquerors yet, shall bravely conquered die.
Oh help vs father Priam, Oh the Greeks.
I have done more then age would suffer me
They have tilted masts against my Palace gates,
And burst them open.
Oh father Priam, whether shall we fly?
We are encompassed round with sword &amp; fire,
Alas Daughters, alas my young Astianax.
Oh heaven, they come, where may we hide vs safe?
Safety and help are both fled out of Troy,
And left behind nothing but massacre:
My Palace is surprised my guard all slain,
My self am wounded, but more with your shrieks,
Then by the swords of Gracious: come let's fly.
Unto the sacred Altar of the gods.
May we be safe there father?
Safe? Oh no;
Safety is fled. Death hath our lives in chase,
And since we needs must dye, let's choose this place.
Whither runs Helen?
Whither should I fly?
See, Troy is not it self, oh wretched Helen!
To shun the Greeks to run into the fire,
Or flying fire, perish by Greekish steel:
Which had thou rather choose?
Death, in what shape soever hee appears
To me is welcome, I'll no longer shun him;
But here with Cresida abide him: here,
Oh, why was Helen at the first so fair,
To be come subject to so foul an end?
Or how hath Cresids beauty sinned against Heaven,
That it is branded thus with leprosy?
I in conceit thought that I might contend
Against Heavens splendour, I did once suppose,
There was no beauty but in Cresids looks,
But in her eyes no pure divinity:
But now behold me Helen.
In her I see
All beauties frailty, and this object makes
All fairness to show ugly in it self:
But to see breathless Virgins piled on heap,
What less can Helen doe then curse these Stars
That shined so bright at her nativity,
And with her nails tear out these shining balls
That have set Troy on fire?
Pierce all the Trojan Ladies with your swords,
Least amongst them you might spare Polixena.
Stay, I should know that face, tic Helena?
My Queen?
I am not Helen, but Polixena:
Therefore revengeful Neoptolemus
Doe Justice on me for thy fathers death.
Polixena? by all Achilles honours
Isle part thee limb from limb.
Pyrhus forbear,
It's the Spartan Queen.
If Helen, the adultorous strumpet dyes,
Isle be her deaths-man.
Strike home Menelaus,
Death from thy hand is welcome.
Hold I say,
Shoe's Clitemnestras sister, for her sake
Helen shall live, and Kingly Menelaus
Receive her into favour.
Agamemnon
Is too remiss, I have sworn all blood to spill
I meet with, and this one will Pyrhus kill.
And I this other.
For our sake Menelaus let her live.
Was not our sister borne against her will
From Sparta? for that wrong done by the Troians
Doth not Troy burn? and are not all our swords
Stained in the blood of Paris slaughtered friends?
You shall be reconciled to Helend,
And bear her back to Greece.
Helen at shrift alas poor penitent Queen,
Dost hear me Menelaus? pardon her,
Take her again to Sparta, thou'lt else want
So kind a bed-fellow.
Take back my shame?
Yes for thy pleasure.
There's in the world as rich and honourable
As thou, who lend the pleasures of their bed
To others, and then take them back again
As they can get them.
My brow shall never bear
Such Characters of shame.
Thy brows bears horns already, but who sees them?
When thou return to Sparta, some will think
Thou art a Cuckold, but who is it dare say so?
Thou art a King, thy sins are clouded o'er,
Where poor men's faults by tongues are made much more.
Of all men living, Kings are last shall hear
Of their dishonours.
What inferior Beast
Dares tell the Lyon of his Tyranny,
Who is not torn asunder with his paws?
The King of Sparta therefore needs not fear
The tongues of subjects bid our sister rise
To safety in thine arms.
Doe Menelaus.
But will my Helen then by future virtue
Redeem her long lost honour?
If with tears
The Heavens may be appeased for Hellens sins,
They shall have penitent showers: If Menclans
May with the spirit of love be satisfied,
He ten times rectify my forfet honour
Before I tonch his bed.
Arise then Helen, Menclans arms
Thus welcome thee to safety.
Ha, ha, ha,
Why this is well, for he that's borne to dye
A branded Cuckhold, hugs his destiny:
Go, get you after Pyrhus to the slaughter,
Isle look to Helen.
Convey her to our guard.
Helen, hereafter see thou proou'st more wise,
If not more honest, yet be more precise,
These shapes thrive well, we have guilt our Greek arm
With blood of their own nation some we have sent
To everlasting darkness, some repulsed
Back to their ships: some we have made to fly
Into their horses bulk, whence Pyrhus first
Leapt down upon his spear.
Come soldiers, this is stately tragical,
The Greeks wade up even to the brawny thighs
In luke-warme blood of our despoiled foes.
Aboue Melpomene's huge buskind top
We plunge at every step, and bravely fought
By Troys bright burning flame: that's now our light.
More of our valiant mates, let's join with them,
This street yet's vnassaulted and vnfir'd:
Some balls of wild-fire straight, and hurl this Lady
Into the fury of the burning flame.
My wife Cassandra?
Courage, let none scope
Fire, vengeance, blood, death, murder, spoil and rape.
All these on Greece and twenty thousand more,
Till they like Troy be drowned in tears and gore.
From Greeks to Greeks, from fire kept for the sword, From one death to another.
Cassandra no.
My Lord the Prince Chorebus?
Yes the same,
Who hath preserved thee both from sword and flame.
More Greeks and see Cassandra captive made,
Assault them Troiaus, rescue the fair Princess;
This way dear father mount my back again.
Oh false Aeneas, thou hast slain thy friend:
Many a Greek (thus shaped) he sent to hell,
And being a Trojan by a Trojan fell.
He died not by my hand, but his own fate.
And I forgive thee good Aeneas, fly,
Thou shalt survive, but Troy and wee must fall:
The hope of all our future memories
Are stored in thee, take up thy sacred load
Reverent Anchises bed-rid through his age,
We are all doomed, fair Troy must perish here,
But thou art borne a greater Troy to rear.
The Heavens have hand in all things, to their pleasure
Wee must subscribe: Creusa, whore's my wife?
In loosing her I save but half my life.
Come reverent father, on my shoulders mount,
Though thousand dangers dog vs at the heals,
Yet will wee force our passage.
Still let your voices to hye Heaven aspire
For Pyrhus vengeance, murdering steel and fire.
Oh, oh.
My son Polytes? oh thou more hard hearted
Then fatal Pyrhus or his fathers guard,
That in the shadow of this sacred place
Durst sprinke the child's blood in the fathers face.
Priam? thanks sweet revenge, through swords &amp; armour,
Through mures, and Counter-mures of men and steel;
Through many a corner, and blind entries mouth
I have followed this thy bleeding son to death,
Whose swift pursuit hath trained me to this Altar
To be revenged on thee for the sad fate
Of great Achilles.
Thou art Pyrhus then?
My acts shall speak my name,
I am that Pyrhus who did mount you Horse
Hiding mine armour in his deep vast bulk,
The first that leapt out of his spacious side,
And tossed consuming fire in every street,
Which climbed, as if it meant to meet the stars,
I am that Pyrhus before whom Troy falls:
Before whom all the Vanes and Pinnacles
Bend their high tops, and from the battlements
On which they stand, break their aspiring necks.
The proudest roof and most imperious spyre
Hath veiled to vs and our all wasting fire.
Pyrhus, I know thee for my destined plague,
I know the gods have left vs to our weakness,
I see our glories ended and extinct,
And I stand ready to abide their doom;
Only for pity and for pieties sake
Be gracious to these Ladies.
Pyrhus no,
Such grace as they did to Achilles show,
Let them all taste; let grace be far exiled,
Kill from the elder to the sucking child.
Hoe's prone enough to mischief of himself,
Spur not that fury on which unnes too fast,
Nor add thou to old Priams misery
Which scarce can be augmented tic so great.
Dye in thy tortures then.
Oh spare his life.
Good man kill not my Grandsire.
Good man doe.
Kill me for him.
No, shoe's my Grandam too,
Indeed shoe's a good woman, choose some other
If you must needs kill.
This then.
Shoe's my Mother, you shall not hurt her.
This boy had a father,
Hector his name, who had hee lived to see
A sword bent against his wife, this Queen, or me,
He would have made all Greece as hot to hold him
As burning Troy is now to shelter vs.
Good Grandsire weep not, Grandam, Mother, Aunt
Alas, what mean you? If you be good men
Put up your swords and help to quench these flames,
Or if in killing you such pleasure have,
Practise on him, kill that ill favoured knave.
Me bratt?
lysses, Agancemnon. Menelaus,
Synon, Thersites, and you valiant Greeks;
Behold the vengeance wrathful Pyrhus takes
On Priams body for Achilles death:
Synon, take thou that Siren Polixene,
And hew her peece-meale on my fathers Tomb.
Thersites, make the womb of fifty Princes
A royal sheath for thy victorious blade:
Diomed, let Cassandra dye by thee,
And Agamemnon kill Andromache:
And as my sword through Priams bulk shall fly,
Let them in death consort him, and so dye.
When, when, for Ioues sake when?
Some expeditious fate this motion further,
Me thinks tic long since that I did a murder.
Oh Heaven, oh Jove, Stars, Planets, fortune, fate,
To think what I have been, and what am now;
Father of fifty brave Heroic sons,
But now no Father, for they all are slain.
Queen Hecuba the Mother of so many,
But now no Mother: for her barren womb
Hath not one child to show, these fatal wars
Have eat up all our issue.
My dear Father,
And all my pricely Uncles.
My dear Husband,
And all my royal brothers.
Worthy Hector,
And all my valiant sons.
And now that Priam that commanded Asia,
And sate enthroned aboue the Kings of Grece,
Whose dreaded Nany scowerd the Hellespont,
Sees the rich towers hee built now burnt to ashes:
The stately walls he reared, leuel'd and euen'd;
His Treasures rifled and his people spoiled:
All that he hath on earth beneath the Sun
Bereft him, saving his own life and these,
And my poor life with these, are (as you see)
Worse then the rest: they dead, we dying bee.
Strike my sterne foe, and prove in this my friend,
One blow my universal cares shall end.
And that blow Pirhus strikes, at once strike all.
Why so, so, this was stately tragical.
Where shall I hide me?
So nimble Hectors bastard?
My father slew thy father, I the son:
Thus will I toss thy carcass up on hie,
The brat aboue his fathers fame shall fly.
No, somewhat doth remain,
Alarm still, the peoples not all slain,
Let not one soul survive.
Then Trumpets sound
Till burning Troy in Trojan blood be drowned.
What more remains t'accomplish our revenge?
The proudest Nation that great Asia nursed
Is now extinct in Lethe.
All by Helen,
Oh had that tempting beauty ne'er been borne,
By whom so many worthies now lie dead.
A hot Pest take the strumpet.
And a mischief.
It was this hot whore that set all Troy a fire.
Forgive me Pyrhus for thy fathers death,
Troy for thy sack, King Priam for thy sons,
Greece for an infinite slaughter, and you Husband or all your nuptial wrongs, King Menelaus,
inust confess, my inconsiderate deed
Have made a world of valiant hearts to bleed.
What, note is that which Pyrhus eye dwells on?
The perfect number
Of Greeks and Troians slain on either part.
The siege ten years, ten months, ten days endured,
In which there perished of the Greeks before Troy
Eight hundred thousand &amp; six thousand fighting men:
Of Troians fell six hundred six and fifty thousand,
All soldiers; besides women, children, babes,
Whom this night massacred.
All these I slew.
Nay, some this hand sent packing, that's not true.
Aeneas, with twenty two ships well furnished,
(The self same ships in which young Paris sayl'd
When hee from Sparta stole fair Helena,)
Is fled to Sea.
Anthenr with five hundred Troians more Escaped through the gate called Dardan.
Let them go,
That of Troys sack the world by them may know,
Where aboue thirty brave Heroic Kings
Have breathed their last: befits inferior Princes,
Barons and Knights, eighteen imperial Monarchs
With his own hands renowned Hector slew:
My father besides Troilus and that Hector,
Eight famous Kings that came in aid of Troy.
Three Trojan Paris with his Arrows slew,
Of which one was my father: Diomed
Four Monarchs with his bright sword sent to death.
Our self the warlike Queen of Aemazons,
And aged Priam.
Bravely boast he can,
A wretched woman and a weak old man.
And now Troys wars sre ended, we in peace
With glorious conquest to sail back to Greece.
Their Nation's vanished like their Cities smoke,
Our enemies are all ashes: worlds to come
Shall Cronicle our pitiless revenge
In Books of Brass and leaves of Adamant.
Towards Greece victorious Leaders, our toyle's past;
Troy and Troys people we have burned in flames,
And of them both left nothing but their names.
With wondrous joy they say, the Greeks return
With Triumphs and ouations piercing Heaven,
Where ever they set but foot loud Paeans sung,
And Oats to spheare-like Notes tuned in their praise:
Whilst Cethus like a forlorn shadow walks
Despised, disgrac't, neglected and debauched;
Playing his melancholy, cares and sorrows
On his discordant Hart-strings. Oh my fate!
Shall I, that have this body and this brain,
A royalty stamped on me in my birth:
Whose wrongs have been of mark through all the World
Troubling each ear, and being disputable
By every tongue that hath been taught to speak,
Even in the mouths of Babes, all rating me
Of cowardesie and sloth: sleep, an occasion
Being fairly offered? No, awake revenge,
Isle bring the now to action.
Hear you the news
Orestes friend, the noble Filades?
Instruct mine ignorance, I know of none.
This day the Prince, great Agamemnonce heir
Orestes whom you truly call your friend,
Betroths the young and fair Hermione
Daugher to beauteous Helen.
Hymens joys.
Crown them with all true pleasure.
Shall we have your presence at the Contract?
Who's within?
Onlie Egistus, Clitemnestras friend,
The Qeven and fair Electra.
Witness enough,
Then spare me for this time good Pilades,
We'le owe them greater service.
But ts a duty that I owe my friend,
My absence would distaste him.
Fare you well.
Doe, doe, contract and marry, aim at Heaven,
But Hell is that they plunge in: Oh Palamedes
My basely betrayed brother, sold at Troy
As we would cheapen Horses, yet a Prince:
A Prince? nay General of the Greekish host.
Emperor and Kaiser, chose to that command
By a full Jury of Kings, and by them rated
The prime &amp; worthiest: who being far from equal
Could find in whole Greece no competitor.
Yet this peculiar man, this God of men,
By false Vlysses and Atreus sons
Agamemnon and Menelaus, basely supplanted;
Who, for they would confer amongst themselnes
The sovereignty forged letters sent from Troy,
And coin withal marked with King Priams stamp,
As if this father of his fame and Nation
Whose only ends were aymd to honour Greece
Would have betrayed his people: this suggested,
My brother was arraigned, convict, condemnd;
For which I have vowed the universal ruin
Of all the Kings of that corrupted bench.
Palamides thy blood in Asia shed
Shall make all Europe morn since thou art dead.
Meeenaes King and Sparta's would be proud
To see this happy and blessed union made
Between their royal Families.
This fair Virgin,
Second from Laeda to whom Jove vouchsa't
The strict Embrace of his immortal arm,
Unspotted with her mothers prostitution,
We'll thus receive.
May my chaste innocence
Break through the Cloud which hath eclipsed her fame
Whose luster may out-shine my mothers fraileties,
And they through m may bee forgot in Greece.
Hermione, your words taste of your breeding
Under this Queen your fair and Princely Aunt,
were young Electra but so well bestowed,
Great A gamemnon in so brave a match
Would think himself more graced, then in fruition
Of all the foreign Trophies.
May she prove?
A whore like to her Mother: Prince Orestes,
And you bright Lady Spartans second light,
May all the virtues of this potent Queen
Take life in you, to prove hereditary
That the great Arch-duke crowned with fame and honour.
In his return may add a surplusadge
To his already surfeit: find his bed
By this adulteress basely strumpeted,
And make the Down they lye on quaff their blood.
How doe you fair Electra in your judgment
Applaud your brothers choice?
As of a contract.
Made by the gods aboue, and now by Princes
Here ratified on earth.
I would my friend
Were to you sister, but as fast betrothed
As I to Hellens daughter: But dear Pilades,
Tic Time must perfect all things.
Madam you hear
This motion from your brother.
And I crave
Time to consider on it.
Tic on foot,
Pursue it then with all advantages,
Command my free assistance to begin
Had you Electra friend, as I Hermione;
We were at first as foreign as you two,
And every way as strange, but opportunity
That hath united vs, may make you one.
After some amorous parlance, let vs now
Unto the Temple and there sacrifice
Unto the gods, that Greece no more may mourn
But glory in our fathers safe return
His safety is our danger for know Madam
Our love hath bin too public.
That's the ground
On which to build my project.
Grant it hath.
Cannot a more then nine years widdow-head
Excuse me being a woman? thinks the King
Wee can forget that lesson in our age,
Which was by him first taught vs in our youth?
Or was it his aim to show vs choice delights,
Then bar vs their fruition? First to taste
Our palate, next to make vs appetite;
And when our stomachs are prepared and sharpened
For Costly vionds placed before our eyes,
Then to remove the table? hoe's unkind;
And as hee hath dealt with vs, so must find.
The Queen? to her my speed is.
Speak on soldier.
I am the herald of most happy news,
Troy with the earth is leveled, sacked, and burnt;
Priam with all his memory extinct,
Queen, daughters, sons, and subjects ruined all.
Now like the vapour of their Cities smoke,
And of them no more found: And Madam now
The King your Lord, the Elder of the Atryd's,
Duke of the puissant and all conquering Host,
His temples arched in a victorious orb,
And wreth'd in all the glories earth can yield
Is landed in Mycene a Conquer our.
How could they scope those fierce fires Naulus made
In vengeance of his son Palamides
To split their cursed Fleet upon the rocks.
Make repetition of their joys again,
Being things that I cannot ear too oft
And add to them: Is Menelaus safe
My husbands brother? Helen how fares she?
Or is she thence repurchast? fill mine ears
With such sweet Tones, it is all I can desire.
Take your full longing then, for though the Seas
With tempests, storms, rocks, shipwrecks, shelves and sands
More damaged them then all the Trojan siege.
Although the Beacons fired to draw their Fleet
Distressed and dispersed upon the rocks
Sunk many a goodly bottom: Yet the General
Escaped by the hand of Jove, with him King Diomed,
Vlysses, and great Neoptolimus,
With Spartan Menelaus late attend
With beauteous Helen cause of all these broils:
All these attend upon the General
To bring him home victorious, and this night
Will lodge in the Kings Palace,
Soldier thanks,
These twice five years I have a widow been,
Thy news have now new married me: give order
For the Kings entertainment, all the state
Mycene can yield shall freely be exposed
In honour of these Princes: your great hast
Doth ask some rest, therefore repose your self,
And for your fortunate news expect reward.
The Queen is royal.
And now to that devil
Which I must conjure up: Is the Queen mad?
Or thou Egistus sottish? see you not
The stake and scaffold, nay the Hang-man too;
And will you blind-fold run upon your deaths
When there is way to'scape them?
What horrid fright
Is this proposed by Cethus?
The King's returned,
And doth not your veins gush out of your temples
In sanguine blushes? are not your adulteries
Famous as Hellens? nay, more infamous,
There was a rape to countenance what she did,
You nought save corrupt lust and idleness:
Tic blabbed in the City, talked on in the Court,
All tongues surcharged, all eyes are fixed on you,
To see what fearful vengeance he will take
For that your prostitution.
Hoe's a King.
True Clitemnestra, so he went from hence,
But is returned a Tyrant fleshed in blood:
Think thou that he who quilt his foes abroad,
Will spare at home domestic enemies?
That was so prone to punish others wrongs,
And can forget his own?
If Menelaus
Have pardoned Helen, may not he his brother
Make Spartaes King his noble president,
To doe the like to me?
Tush shallow Queen,
How you mistake; see imminent fate affront you,
And will not shun it coming? If his brother
Be branded as a scandal to the world,
What consequence is it that he will groan
Under the self same burden? rather think
He hath proposed a vengeance dire and horrid
To terrife, not countenance such misdeeds:
And this must fall on you, lest time to come
Should Chronicle his family for a brood
Of Cuckolds and of Strumpets:
This thy language
Strikes me with horror.
And affrights me too.
Is hee not King? hath he not Lynxes eyes,
And Giants arms, the first to see far off,
The last as far to punish? was hee so poor
In friends at home, to leae no Argus here
To keep his eyes still waking? think it not
But that he knew the treason of his bed,
Hee had not fair Briscis snatched perforce
From th'armes of great Achilles.
That I heard.
Why hath he a new mistress brought from Troy,
But to state her in Clitemnestraes stead,
And make her Micenes Qucene whilst you poor wretches
Like malefactors suffer, marked for the Stag
And most ridiculous spectacles.
You show the danger,
But teach vs no prevention
See before vs
The objects of our fears and difficulties,
But not the way to avoid them.
Hear me then,
Prevent your death's by his.
How? kill the King?
So we heap sin on sin and basely add
Unto adultery murder.
Per scelus semper tutum sceleribus it er.
Boldly you have begun, and being once in,
Blood will cure lust, and mischief phisieke sin.
Perhaps our guilt lies hid.
In a Kings Palace
Can lust in such great persons be concealed?
The first offence repents me, and to that
I should but add a greater.
Perish, doe.
Or what concerns this me? I shall be safe,
I have strumpeted no Agamemnons Queen,
Nor bastarded the issue of the Atrides:
Or why should I thus labour their securities
Who study not their own?
Resolve then Queen,
The Kings austeere, and will extend his Justice
Unto some sad example.
Oh but my husband.
After ten years widowhood
Can Clitemnestra think of such a name?
You have half won me, when shall this be done?
When but this night? delays are ominous:
Ere he have time to think upon his wrongs,
Or find a tongue to whisper, ere suspicion
Can further be instructed or least censure,
To call his wrongs in question: instantly,
Even in his height of joy, fullness of complement
With the Argiue Kings: whilst cups are brimmed with healths,
Whilst jealousies are drowned in Bacchus boles.
This night before he sleep, or that his pillow
Can give him the least counsel, ere he can spare
A minute for the smallest intelligence,
Or moment to consider: I have done
If you have either grace in apprehension
Or spirit in performance.
I have both,
What answers Clitemnestra?
I am swayed,
And though I know there's difference of Justice
In Princes sitting on the skarlethench,
And husbands dallying in the private bed:
I'll hold him as one sits upon my life,
Not one that lies enclosed within mine arms;
Hoe's now my Judge, not Husband, here I vow
Assistance in his death.
And so survive
Secure and fortunate.
This night?
Tic done.
The project I have cast with all security.
And safety for your person: smooth your brows,
And let there shine a welcome in your looks
At the Kings entertainment: nay begone,
By this time you are expected; what remains
Is mine in form, but yours in action.
Now father stile me a most worthy son
Palamides, a brother, what neither fires,
Nor rocks could doe, what neither Neptunes rage,
Nor Mars his fury, what the turbulent Seas,
Nor the combustious Land that Cethus can:
Hee that succeeds my brother in his rule,
Shall first succeed in death: none that had hand
Or voice in his subversion that shall stand.
Well met on Land kind brother, wee are now
Victorious: let's be proud on it.
Thou say true,
Wee are Conquerors in our basest cowardice,
Wee had not been here else.
Valiant Hector,
Achilles, Troilus, Paris, Aiax too.
They are all fallen, we stand.
Yes, and will stiff
When all the Grecian Princes that survive
Are cramped and hamstringed.
Wast thou not sea-sicke brother?
Horribly, and feared
In the rough seas to have disgorged my heart,
And there to have fed Haddocks.
Troians were fellows
In all their fury to be parleyed with:
But with the tempests, gusts, and Furicanes,
The warring winds, the billows, rocks and fires
There was no talking: these few times we prayed,
The gods would hear no reason.
It was because
The billows with their roaring, and the winds
Did with their. whistling keep them from their ears:
But now ell's hushed, could wee find time to pray,
They might find time to hear vs.
Shall wee be
Spectators of the royal inter-view
Betwixt the King and Queen?
Ten years divorced
Should challenge a kind meeting, let's observe
The form and state of this Court-complement,
(things I did never trade with:) Hark loud music
Gives warning of their coming.
Unto our Country and our Houshold-gods
Wee are at length returned, trophied with honours,
With Troys subversion and rich Asiaes spoils,
This is a sacred day.
Such Troy had once.
Unto the gods wel'e sacrifice.
So Priam fell
Before the holy Altar.
This City is not Troy.
Where Helen treads,
I hold the place no better.
See our Queen,
Orestes and Electra, for our sake.
Princes of Greece deign them your best salutes
Dear Clitemnestra.
Royal King and Husband.
What's he that kneels so close unto our Queen
Egistus and your servant.
Hee was young
When we at first set sail from Aulis Gulf,
Now grown from my remembrance: we shall ude
Fit time to search him further,
Mark you that.
Yes, and it touched me deeply.
Our sister, and this young Hermione,
Daughter to vs and Helen.
Pretty puppy.
Ofsuch a common brach.
Young Neoptolems,
This is the Lady promised you at Troy,
For your great service done there: she's your own,
Freely embrace her then.
I see we are like
To have a jolly kindred.
Pyrhus, enjoy
Her whom I have in contract?
Beauteous Lady,
The greatest ambition Pyrhus aims at now,
Is how to know you farther.
Hath been so mighty to revenge the wrongs
Of my fair mother, can from Hermione
Challenge no less then welcome.
Oh you gods,
Pyrhus, thou were more safe inburning Troy
With horror, fury blood, fires, foes about the.
Then in my fathers court.
Another Column
On which to build my slaughters. Patience Prince,
This is no time for braves and Menaces,
I further shall instruct you.
I have done.
See now the two Queens meet, &amp; smack in public,
That oft have ki in corners
Theretes?
Thou art grown a monster, a strange thing searse knowns
Amongst soldiers, wives and daughters.
They are two sisters.
Yes, and the two King-brothers royally
Between them two cornuted
We are to loud.
Princes of Greece, fice we hae done a duty
To see our General midst his people safe,
And after many dreadful wars abroad
In peace at home. It is fit we should disperse
Unto our several Countries instantly,
I purpose for Aetolia, where my Queen
With longing waits my coming.
Not King Dimed,
Till you have seen Meana's pomp and stat
In ampliest royalty expressed at full,
Both tasted of our feasts and Princely gifts.
The fair Aegiale, who hath so long
orborne your presence, will not I presume
Deny to spare you to vs some few days,
To add to the years number, though not as General
Yet will I lay on you a friends command
Which must not be denied.
Great Agamemnon
With me was ever powerful, I am his.
And now fair sister welcome back from Troy,
Be ever henceforth Spartaes.
Your great care
In my enforced absence (gracious Queen)
Expressed unto my dear Hermione,
Hath much obliged me to you. Oh my fate,
How swift time runs: Orestes grown a man,
Whom I left in the Cradle ! Young Electra
Then (as I tak't) scarce borne, and now grown ripe,
Even ready for an husband!
In whose absence
If but one handsome sweete-heart come in place,
She'll not turn tail for it, if she do but take
After mine old Naunt Helen.
The great and solemn preparation
Of the Court, state and glory mighty Princes,
Attend for you within.
All are consecrated
Unto your royal welcomes, enter then,
We'll feast like earthy gods, or god-like men
My brain about again, for thou hast found
New project now to work on, and it is here,
Orestes hath received Hermione
From Clitemnestra's hand, her sonle is his
And hee her Genius, two combined in one:
Yet she is by the fathers Oath conferd
On Pyrhus, which shallbreede a stormy flaw
Ne'er to be peec't again, but by the deaths
Of the two hopeful youths: perhaps the hazard
Of all these Kings if my revenge strike home.
(Of that at leisure) but the bloody stage
On which to act, General this night is thine,
Thou lie down mortal, who must rise divine.
Oh Cethus what's this music unto me,
That are composed of discords? what are healths
To him that is struck heart-sicke? all those joys
Whose leaders seem to pierce against the roofs
Of these high structures, to him that is struck down
Half way below the Center?
Were you lower,
Yet here's a hand can raise you, deeper cast
Then to the lowest Abisme: It lies in me
To advance you to the height of happiness,
Where you shall live eternil'd from the reach
Of any humane malice.
Had thou seen
Her, in whose breast my heart was paradis'd,
Kissed, courted, and embraced.
By Pyrhus.
Him:
What passionate and inidiating looks
Hee cast on her, as if in scorn of me:
Shall hee enjoy my birth-right, or inheree
Where I am heir apparent? shall he usurp
Or plead my interest, where I am possessed?
Rule where I reign? where I am stated, sit?
Brave me in my peculiar Sovereignty?
Hee must not, shall not.
Show me to depose.
The proud Usurper then.
Prince, maked my charge.
In the mean time, from your distracted from
Exile all discontent, let not least rae
Reign in your eye, or harshnee in your tongue,
Smooth waters are still deep'st wate on the King,
And be no stranger to your mothers eye,
Or foreign to your Kindred: the feast spent,
And night with it: the morrow shall beget
Project of more import (scarce thought on now.)
I build upon thy Counsel.
Which hath proved,
Fixed as a rock, still constant, and vnmoou'd.
What ethus here? why no such matter now
No cause of fear, or least suspicion.
Your reason?
Tush, presume it, we are safe.
Observe it, they are still securest, whom
The Devil drives to ruin.
Hark, their healths
Carousing to the Generals Victories,
In all thy heate of joy, and fire of wine,
No spark of jealously, all the Argument
Of their discourse, what they have done at Troy.
Still health on health, and the great General
So far from seeming to have least distaste,
That in all affable terms hee courts his Queen,
Nay more, cuts off all banquet Ceremonies,
To hasten his bed-pleasures, as if times distance
Betwixt his board and pallade, seemed more tedious
Then all his Ten years siege.
Go, lost man,
Sink on firm ground, be shipwrecked in a Calm.
These healths are to your ruins, his revenge:
Hath not Egistus read of a disease
Where men dye laughing: others that have drunk
Poison in steed of Cordials, perish so?
To dye tic nothing, since tic all men due:
But wretchedly to suffer, fall unpitied,
Unpitied? nay derided, moekt, and cursed:
To dye as a base Traitor, and a Thief,
The adulterator of his Sovereigns bed,
The poison of the Atred family,
And scandal of his issue, so to dye?
Egistus will prevent, he by this hand
Must fall, before whom all Asia could not stand.
The banquet is broke up, sleep calls to rest,
And mid-nights hour for murder, still shows best
Methinkes this night, we Clitemnestra meet,
At a new bridal; all Attendants leave vs,
Wee now are only for bed-priuacies.
Great sir, I that so long have bin your widow,
Will be this night your hand-mayde.
You told me, Queen,
Orestes was a cunning horse-man grown:
It pleased me much to hear it.
Greece reports
No Centare can ride better
And young Electra,
In all the endowments that may best become
A Princess of her breeding, most complete.
It was in your long absence, all my care,
(Being my charge) that you at your return
Might find them to your wishes,
Thanks for that.
How cunningly he seems to carry it
But we must find prevention.
Who's without there?
Why started you?
Not all the Asian Legions, no not Hector
Armed with his balls of wild-fire, had the power
To shake me like this tremor: Is our Palace
Less safe in Greece, amidst our subjects here,
Then were our Tents in Asia?
Where, if not here in Clitemnestraes arms,
Can safety dwell?
And fair Queen, it should bee so.
But why sir cast you such suspicious eyes
About your Chamber? are wee not alone?
Or will you to the private sweets of night,
Call tell tale witness?
Now tic gone again. Shall we to rest?
So please you royal Sir.
How hard this Down feels, like a monument
Cut out of marble. Beds resemble Graves,
And these me-thinkes appear like winding sheets,
Prepared for corses.
Oh how ominously
Doe you presage: you much affright me sir
In this our long-wisht meeting.
Ell's shook off.
I now am armed for pleasure: you commended
Late one Egistus to me, prithee Queen
Of what condition is he?
Tyrant this.
And I am thus his second.
Treason, murder, Treason:
This shows, we Princes are no more then men.
Thanks Jove tic fit when Monarchs fall by Treason,
Thunder to al the world, would show some reason.
The deed is done, lets fly to some strong Citadel,
For our more safety.
Hee thus made divine:
Now my Egistus, I am soly thine.
What strange tumultuous noise is this so late
To rouse vs from our beds?
Prodigious sure,
Sin it is confirmed by Thunder.
In mine ears
Did never sound seem half to terrible.
Nor to your eyes, as this sad object is,
See great Atrides grovelling.
What damned Villain
Was author of this project?
Horrid sight.
Rest you amazed all, as thunder struke,
And without sense or motion Apoplext,
And only hear me speak: Orestes, he
Who as if marbled by Medusaes head,
Hath not one tear to fall, or sigh to spend,
Till I find out the murderer, and on him
Inflict remarkable vengeance: for I vow
Were it my father, brother, or his Queen,
Had thou my weeping sister hand in it.
If hee? whom equal, (if not ranked aboue)
I ever did, and shall love Pylades?
Were she whose womb did bear me, where I ly
Full nine months bedded ere I saw the Sun,
Or the most abject Traitor under Heaven,
Their dooms were all alike, and this I vow.
Now you whom this silent and speechless King
Hath oft commanded, this now senseless brain
As oft directed, this now strengthless hand
More oft protected in a war, that shall
Be to all times example: Lend your shoulders
To bear him, who hath kept you all in life,
This is a black and mourning funeral right,
Deeds of this nature must be thoroughly searched,
Nay be revenged: the gods have said tic good,
The morning Sun shall rise and blsh in blood.
Sweet Lady, can you love:
Forbear my Lord,
Can such a thing as love be once named here,
Where every Marble that supports this roof,
In emulation doth vie tears with vs?
Nay where the wounds of such a mighty King
Have yet scarce bled their last.
Tush fair Hermione,
These sights that seem to Jade terrible,
Are common to vs soldiers; when from field returning
All smeared in blood, where Dukes and Kings li slain,
Yet in our Tents at mid-night it frights not vs
From courting a sweet Mistress.
Hee saith right,
And note of this how I can poetise:
This his great father of his Love desired.
When from the slaughter of his foes retired
Hee doft his Cushes and unarmed his head,
To tumble with her on a soft day bed:
It did rejoice Brisoi to embrace
His bruised arms, and kiss his blood-stain'd face.
These hands which he so often did imbrew
In blood of warlike Troians whom hee slew,
Were then employed to tickle, touch and feel,
And shake a Lance that had no print of steel.
Continue in that vee, I'll feed thy Muse
With Crafih, Praunes and Lobsters.
You brought these of purpose to abuse me.
Peace Thersites,
And Synon you no more.
Wee see by Agamemnon all are mortal,
And I but show his niece Hermione
The way of all flesh.
Tic an easy path,
(The Mother and the Aunt have trod it both)
If she have wit to follow.
If it beso, Egistus is a traitor,
And she no more our sister.
Tic not possible
A Queen of her high birth and parentage
Should have such base hand in her husbands death,
Her husband and her sovereign.
Double treason,
Could it be proved against her.
It appears
So far against humanity and nature
We dare not once suspect it, but till proof
Explain it further, hold it in suspense.
Oh but their sudden flight and fortifying.
These are indeed presumptions, but leave that
To a most strict inquiry even for reverence
Of Majesty and Honour to all Queens,
For love of vs because she was our sister,
Both for Orestes and Electra's sake
Whose births are branded in so foul a deed
Till wee examine further circumstances
Spare your severer censures.
Tic a business
That least concerns vs, but for Honours sake
And that hee was our General.
What, prince lie Pyrhus courting our fair daughter?
Yes sir, but in a time unseasonable
Even as the suite it self is.
All delays
Shall be cut off and she be swayed by vs.
These Royal Princes ere they leave Mycone,
Shall see these uptiall rights solemnised,
Weal keep our faith with Pyrhus.
Wee our vows
As constant to the bright Hermione.
First see the royal General here interred
And buried like a soldier, it is his due:
To question of his death concerns not vs,
Wee leave it to Heavens justice and revenge.
The rights performed with fair Hermione,
Then to our several Countries each man post,
Captains disperse still when the General's lost.
Egistus? and our Mother?
Am I Cethus,
Are you Orestes, and this Pyllades,
So sure they were his murderers: this disguise
Will suite an act of death, full to the life
Hee stands upon a strict and secure guard,
I have plotted your admittance, it will take
Doubt not, it cannot fail, I have cast it so.
As sent from Menelaus?
Whose name else
Can break through such strong guards, where fear and guilt
Keep hourly watch?
It is enough, I have it,
And thou the faithful'st of all friends dear Pillades,
Doe but assist me in my vowed revenge
And enjoy fair Electra.
Next your friendship
It is the prise aim at, I am yours.
What slip you time and opportunity,
Or look you after dreams?
I am a wake.
And to send them to their eternal sleep.
In expedition there is still success,
In all delays defect: the traitor dyes
Were hee in league with all the destinies.
And tic a fruitful year for villainy,
And I a thrining Farmer. In this interim
I have more plots on foot: King Menelaus:
I have licenced against proud Diomd
Fyrhus against Orestes, hee against him,
lysses without parallel for wit
Against them all: so that the first combustion
Shall burn them up to ashes. Oh Palamides,
So dear was both thy love and memory,
Not Helen by her whoredom cause more blood
Streaming from Princes breasts, then Cethus shall
(Brother) for thine untimely funeral.
Let none presume to dare into our presence
Or pass our guard, but such well known to vs and to our Queen.
The charge hath past vs round
When sins of such hye nature against vs rise,
Tic fit wee should be kept with heedful eyes.
Presume it my Egistus, we are safe,
The Fort wherein we live impregnable:
Or say we were surprised by stratagem,
Or should expose our lives unto the censure
Of Law and Justice, even in these extremes
There were not the least fear of difficulty.
Your reason Madam.
Whom doth this concern
But our own blood? should Pyrhus grow enraged
I have at hand my niece Hermione
To calm his fury: what doth this belong to
Vlysses, or Aetolian Diomed?
Are they not strangers? If it come in question
By Menelaus, is hee not our brother
Our sister Helen in his bosom sleeps,
And can with him doe all things, fear not then,
Wee are every way secure.
Oh but Orestes
His ey's to me like lightning, and his arm
Up heaved thus, shows like Iones thunder-bolt
Aimed against lust and murder.
Hoe's our son,
The filial duty that's hereditary
Unto a mothers name prevents these fears:
Electra's young, and childish Pilades
Swayed by his friend: It rests, could we but work
Helen and Menelaus to our faction,
Egistus should be stated in Mycene,
Wee live his Queen and bride.
Feare's still suspicious.
A Letter sir.
From whence?
Tic superscribed from the great Spartae's King,
And the Queen Helen.
Who the messenger?
Two Gentlemen who much importune you
For speedy answer.
Bid them waite without,
Now fates prove but propitious, then my kingdom
I shall presume establish't.
There's no fear,
Orestes once removed, and that's my charge
Either by sword or poison.
See fair Queen,
Read what your brother writes, by this we are
Eternized in our happiness, and our lives
Rooted in sweet security.
Wee not suspect you in our brothers death,
A deed too base for any Noble breast.
Therefore in this necessity of state,
And knowing in this forced vacancy
So great a kingdom cannot want a guide:
The sovereignty we thought good to confer
On Clitemnestra, or whatsubstiture
She in her best discretion shall think fit,
The united Kings of Greece aue thus decreed.
Your brother Menelaus.
We are happied ever.
A joy ratified
And subject to no change.
Call in the messengers,
Orestes and Electra once remoon'd,
Wee have no rival, no competitor,
Therefore no jealousy at all.
None, none.
The gods have with these Kings of Greece agreed
In his supplanting and instating thee,
Thee my most dear Egistus.
You the men?
Those, whom the Spartan King made special choice of
To trust this great affair with.
And you're welcome,
But are you men of action: such I mean,
As have been Soldiers bred, whose eyes inured
To slaughter and combustions: at the like
Would not change face, or tremble?
They that to see
Legs, arms, and heads strewn on Scamander Plain,
Kings by the common soldiers stewed in gore,
And three parts hid with their imboweld Steeds,
Shadowing their mangled bodies from the Sun,
As if aboue the earth to bury them:
They that to see an Asian Potentate
Killed at the holy Altar, his own blood
Mixed with his sons and daughters, Towers demolished
Crushing whole thousands, of each sex and age
Beneath their ruins: and these horrid sights
Lighted by scathe- fires, they that have beheld
These and more dreadful objects; can their eyes
Move at a private slaughter?
You're for vs,
Will you for hire, for favour, or advancement,
(Now wars are done) to be made great in Court,
And undertake that one man easily spared
Amongst so many millions (now surviving)
That such a creature, no way necessary
But a mere burden to the world wee live in,
Hee might no longer live?
But name the man,
And as I love Egistus, honour you
And al that glory in such noble deeds.
Be what hee will; hoe's lost.
Orestes, then?
Is there none then the world so well may spare
As young Orestes? Hee to do it?
Vain world farewell,
My hopes withal, no building long hath stood
Whose slight foundation hath bin laid in blood.
I'll dye upon his bosom.
Secure the Fort my dear friend Pillades,
And to your utmost pacify the guard:
Tell them we are Orestes and their Prince,
And what wee did was to revenge the death
Of their dead Lord and Soueraige
Sir i'll do it.
Oh me, that thinking to have caught at Heaven,
Am plunged into an hell of misery.
Egistus dead? what comfort can I have,
One foot Enthroned, the tother in the grave.
Can you find tears for such an abject Groom,
That had not for an husband one to shed?
Oh monstrous, monstrous woman  is this carrion,
Is this dead Dog, (Dog said I?) nay what's worse,
Worthy the sigh or mourning of a Queen,
When a King lies unpitied?
Thou a son?
The name I am ashamed of: oh Agamemnon,
How sacred is thy name and memory!
Whose acts shall fill all foreign Chronicles
With admiration, and most happy hee
That can with greatest Art but book thy deeds:
Yet whilst this rottenness, this gangrened flesh
Whose carcass is as odious as his name
Shall stinking lie, able to breed a Pest,
Hee with a Princess tears to be embalmed,
And a King lie neglected?
Bastard.
If I be,
Damned be the whore my Mother, I, I am sure
Nor my dead father had no hand in i.
Oh that I could but lengthen out my years
Only to spend in urses.
Upon whom?
On whom but thee for my Egistus death?
And I could wish my self a Nestur age
To curse both him and thee for my dead father.
Doest thou accuse me for thy fathers death?
Indeed it would ill become me being a son,
But were I sure it were so, then I durst;
Nay, more then that, revenge it.
Upon me?
Were all the mothers of the earth in one,
All Empresses and Queens cast in one mould,
And I unto that one a only son,
My sword should ravish that incestuous breast
Of nature, and of state
I am as innocent of that black deed,
As was this guiltless Gentleman here dead.
Oh all you powers of Heaven I invoke,
And if you will not hear me, let Hell do it:
Give me some sige from either fiends or angel,
I call you both as tetates.
Godlike shape,
Have you (my father) left the Elizium fields,
Where all the ancient Heroes line in bliss,
To bring your self that sacred testimony,
To crown my approbation: Lady see.
See what? thy former murder makes thee mad,
Rest Ghost in peace, I now am satisfied,
And need no further witness: saw you nothing?
What should I see save this sad spectacle,
Which blood-shootes both mine eyes.
And nothing else?
Nothing.
Mine eyes are clearer sighted then, and see
Into thy bosom. Murdresse.
How?
Incestuous strumpet, whose adulteries,
When Treason could not hide, thou thoughts to cover,
With most inhumane murder.
Meaning vs?
Then, monster, thou did first instruct mine hand,
How to write blood, when being a Wife and Queen,
Thou kildst a King and husband, and hast taught
Me being a son, how to destroy a mother.
Oh most unnatural.
That I learnt of thee.
Unheard of cruelty, but heavens are used.
And all remarkable sins punish with mark,
One mischief still another doth beger,
Adultery murder: I am lost, undone.
Being no wife, Orestes is no son.
The guard all stand for you, acknowledging
Orestes Prince and King.
I now am neither.
What obiect's this? Queen Clitemnestra saine?
I hope no sons hand in it
Orestes did it,
The other title's lost.
All my plots take
Seyond my apprehezion.
This is an age
Of nothing but portents and prodigies.
The fathers hand as deep was in her death
As was the sons, hee pointed, and I struck:
Was hee not then as unkind to a Wife,
As I was to a Mother?
Oh my friend,
What have you done?
There is a Plasma, or deep pit
Just in the Center fixed for Parricides,
I'll keep my Court there, and Erinnis, she
In stead of Hebe, shall attend my Cup,
Charon the Ferri-man of Hell shall bee
My Ganimed.
The Prince is sure distracted.
New project still for me.
I'll have a guard of Furies which shall light me
Unto my nuptial bed with funeral Teades,
The atoll sisters shall my hand-maides be,
And waite upon the fair Hermione.
Hermione? she is betrothed to Pyrhus,
And (mourning for your absence) all the way
Unto the Temple she will strowe with tears.
Ha? Pyrhus rape my dear Hermione?
Hee that shall dare to interpose my purpose
Or cross me in mine Hymeneal rights,
I'll make him lie as flat on the cold earth
As doth this hound Egistus.
And I would so.
Would? ay I will, his father wore a smocks,
And in that shape raped Deiadamia.
Hee shall not use my Loueso, oh my Mother;
Friend take that object hence.
But you Hermione,
My hand's yet deep in blood, but to the wrist,
It shall shall be to the elbow: gods, nor men,
Angels, nor Furies shall my rage withstand,
Not the grave Honour of the assembled Kings,
Not Reverence of the Altar, nor the Priest:
No superstition shall my fury slay
Till Pyrhus from the earth be swept away,
Pillades attend your friend.
Hoe's all my charge,
My life and his are twins.
Their mines are countermined, Cethus, thy fall
Is either plotted, or to blow up all.
My head aches brother.
What a bachelor,
And troubled with the Spartan Kings disease?
No, there's a wedding breeding in my brain,
Pyrhus the Bridegroom: thou strange creature woman
To what may I compare thee?
Can thou devise ought bad enough?
Tic said they look like Angels, and of light
But for the most part, such light Angels prove,
Ten hundred thousand of their honesties
Will scarce weigh eleven Dragmaes.
Clitenestra,
And Helen for example.
Young Harmno
Hath face from both.
The sharpe shrews nose, they hate hereditary.
Thersites, I commend that fellows wit
Proffred a wife young, beautiful and rich,
Only one fault she had, she wanted brain:
Who answered in a creature of that sex,
I ne'er desire more wisdom; then to know
Her husbands bed from another.
I commend him,
But tic not in the Atrides family,
To find out such a woman.
See now the sacred nuptial rights proceed
The Priests prepare the Alter.
Hymen to whom my vows I consecrate
As all my love. To thee Hermione,
Whom in the presence of these Argiue Kings,
I hear contract, be thou auspicious to vs:
This flamming substitute to Saturnes son,
Within whose sacred Temple wee are roofed
And before all these high Celestial gods
And goddesses, in whose eyes now we kneel:
Especially you In Queen of marriage,
And fair Lucina, who have child-births charge,
Your favours I invoke: Let your chaste fires
Dry up this Virgins tears; make her so fruitful
That in her issue great Achilles name
And fame withal, may live eternally
Proceed Priest to your other Ceremonies
Priam before the holy Alter fell,
Before the Alter bid thy life farewell:
Rescue Hermione.
Achilles son
Cannot reuengelesse dye, then witness all,
Blood must flow high where such great Princes fall.
Orestes is in danger.
Save Prince Pyrhus.
This plot was laid
Both for your life and Kingdom.
Menelaus: shall never bear it so.
Fie Thersites,
Thy sword against me.
Curse upon all whoores.
What all asleep? and are these gossiping tongues,
That boasted nought faue War and Victory,
Now mute and silent? Oh thou ugly rogue,
Whore's now thy railing? and thou parricide,
Thy madness is now tamed, thou need no chains
To bring thee to thy wits, darkness hath don't.
This Diomed? who dared to encounter Mars,
And said to wound fair enus in the hand:
Whore's your valour now? Aegiale,
Unless (as some say) she be better stored,
Is like to lye without a bed-fellow:
Rise Pillades, and help to awake thy friend,
What doth your friendship sleep now? Menelaus
Hellen's with a new sweete-heart ith'next room,
Wilt thou be still a Cuckold? wink at errors
As pandors do and wittoles? Cethus now
Be crowned in History for a revenge,
Which in the former World wants president:
Methinks, as when the Giants warr'd'gainst heaven,
And dared for primacy with Jove himself
Hee darting against their mountains thunder-boles
Which shattred them to pieces: the war done,
I like the great Olimpicke Iupiter,
Walk ore my ruins, tread upon my spoils
With majesty, I pace upon this floor
Pan'd with the trunks of Kings and Potentates,
For what lesle could have sated my revenge?
This arch-rogue fallen amongst them? he whose eye
Had the preposterous virtue to fire Troy.
Now is thy black soul for thy perjuries
Swimming in red damnation.
Sir, not yet,
All policies live not in Cethus brain,
Synon hath share, and know if thou hast craft,
I have reserved some cunning: see my body
Free and untouched from wounds.
Speak, shall we then
Divide these dead betwixt vs, and both live?
If two Suns cannot shine within one sphere,
Then why should two arch-villaines? thou hast discovered
Projects almost beyond me, and for which
I have engrossed a mortal envy here,
I will be sole, or none.
Cease then to be,
That I may live without Competitor.
Cause Synons name be rayed out of the World,
And only mine remembered.
Thine's but frailty,
My am shall be immortal; made more glorious
In treading upon thee, as thou on these;
up thou my Vnderling.
I still shall stand
Rooted.
And yet cut down by Synons hand.
I now am dust like these.
One single fight
Ends him, who millions ruined in one night.
Can you behold this slaughter?
Yes, and dye
Atsight of it: for why should Helen live
Helen the cause of all these Princes deaths
Cease to lament, reach me my Glass Hermione,
Sweet Orphaned do; thy fathers dead already,
Nor will the fates lend thee a mother long.
Thanks, and so leave me. Was this wrinkled fore-head
When it was at best, worth half so many lives?
Where is that beauty? lives it in this face
Which hath set two parts of the World at war,
Been ruin of the Asian Monarchy,
And almost this of Europe? this the beauty
That launched a thousand ships from Aulis gulf?
In such a poor repurchase, now decayde?
See fair ones, what a little Time can doe;
Who that considers when a seed is sown,
How long it is ere it appear from th'earth,
Then ere it stalk, and after ere it blade,
Next ere it spread in leaves, then bud, then flower:
What care in watering, and in weeding took,
Yet crop it to our use: the beauties done,
And smell: they scarce last betwixt Sun and Sun
Then why should these my blastings still survive,
Such royal ruins: or I longer live,
Then to be termed Helen the beautiful.
I am grown old, and Death is ages due,
When Courtiers sooth, our glasses will tell true.
My beauty made me pitied, and still loved,
But that decayed, the worlds assured hate
Is all my dowre, then Helen yield to fate
Here's that, my soul and body must divide,
The guerdon of Adultery, Lust, and Pride.
In thee they are punish t: of all these Princes,
And infinite numbers that opposed Troy,
And came in Hellens quarrel (save my self).
Not one suruies, (thanks to the immortal powers)
And I am purposde now to acquire by Sea,
My Kingdom and my dear Penelope,
And since I am the man soly reserved,
Accept me for the Authors Epilogue.
If hee have been two bloody? tic the Story,
Truth claims excuse, and seeks no farther glory,
Or if you think he hath done your patience wrong
(In tedious Scenes) by keeping you so long,
Much matter in few words, hee bad me say
Are hard to express, that lengthned out his Play.

FORTUNE, that favours fools, these two short hours
We wish away; both for your sakes, and ours,
Judging Spectators: and desire in place,
To th'Author justice, to our selves but grace.
Our Scene is London, because we would make known,
No countries mirth is better then our own.
No clime breeds better matter, for your whore,
Bawd, squire, impostor, many persons more,
Whose manners, now called humours, feed the stage:
And which have still been subject, for the rage
Or spleen of comick-writers. Though this pen
Did never aim to grieve, but better men;
How ever the age, he lives in, doth endure
The vices that she breeds, aboue their cure.
But, when the wholesome remedies are sweet,
And, in their working, gain, and profit meet,
He hopes to find no spirit so much diseased,
But will, with such fair correctiues be pleased.
For here, he doth not fear, who can apply.
If there be any, that will sit so nigh
Unto the stream, to look what it doth run,
They shall find things, they'ld think, or wish, were done;
They are so natural follies, but so shown,
As even the doers may see, and yet not own.
Believe, I will.
Thy worst. I fart at thee.
Have you your wits? Why gentlemen! for love
Sirrah, I'll strip you
What to doe? lick sigs
Out at my
Rogue, rogue, out of all your sleights.
Nay, look ye! Sovereign, General, are you mad-men?
O, let the wild sheep loose. Isle gum your silks
With good strong water, an'you come.
Will you have
The neighbours hear you? Will you betray all?
Hark, I hear some body.
Sirrah
I shall mar
All that the taylor has made, if you approach.
You most notorious whelp, you insolent slave.
Dare you doe this?
Yes faith, yes faith.
Why! who
Am I, my mongrel? Who am I?
I'll tell you,
Since you know not your self
Speak lower, rogue.
Yes. You were once (time's not long past) the good,
Honest, plain, liuery-three-pound-thrum; that kept
Your masters worships house, here, in the friars,
For the vacations
Will you be so loud?
Since, by my means, translated suburb-Captayne.
By your means, Doctor dog?
Within mans memory,
All this, I speak of.
Why, I pray you, have I
Been countenanced by you? or you, by me?
Doe but collect, sir, where I met you first.
I doe not hear well.
Not of this, I think it.
But I shall put you in mind, sir, at pie-corner.
Taking your meal of steam in, from cooks stalls,
Where, like the father of hunger, you did walk
Piteously costive, with your pinch'd-horne-nose,
And your complexion, of the roman wash,
Stuck full of black, and melancholic worms,
Like poulder-cornes, shot, at th'artillerie-yard.
I wish, you could advance your voice, a little.
When you went pinned up, in the several rags,
Yo'had raked, and picked from dung-hills, before day,
Your feet in mouldy slippers, for your kibes,
A felt of rug, and a thin thredden cloak,
That scarce would cover your no-buttocks
So, sir!
When all your alchemy, and your algebra,
Your minerals, vegetalls, and animals,
Your conjuring, cosning, and your dozen of trades,
Could not relieve your corps, with so much linen
Would make you tinder, but to see a fire;
I ga'you countenance, credit for your coals,
Your stills, your glasses, your materials,
Built you a fornace, drew you customers,
Advanced all your black arts; lent you, beside,
A house to practise in
Your masters house?
Where you have studied the more thriving skill
Of bawdry, since.
Yes, in your masters house.
You, and the rats, here, kept possession.
Make it not strange. I know, yo' were one, could keep
The buttry-hatch still locked, and save the chippings,
Sell the dole-beere to aqua-vitae-men,
The which, together with your christ-masse veils,
At post and pair, your letting out of counters,
Made you a pretty stock, some twenty marks,
And gave you credit, to converse with cob-webs,
Here, since your mistress death hath broke up house.
You might talk softlier, rascal.
No, you scarab,
I'll thunder you, in pieces. I will teach you
How to beware, to tempt a fury again
That carries tempest in his hand, and voice.
The place has made you valiant.
No, your clothes.
Thou vermin, have I tan thee, out of dung,
So poor, so wretched, when no living thing
Would keep thee company, but a spider, or worse?
Raised thee from brooms, and dust, and watering pots?
Sublimed thee, and exalted thee, and fixed thee
In the third region, called our state of grace?
'Slid, prove to day, who shall shark best.
Agreed.
Yes, and work close, and friendly.
Slight, the knot
Shall grow the stronger, for this breach, with me.
Why so, my good babounes! Shall we go make
A sort of sober, sciruy, precise neighbours,
(That scarce have smiled twice, senator the king came in)
A feast of laughter, at our follies? raskalls,
Would run themselves from breath, to see me ride,
Or you t'haue but a hole, to thrust your heads in,
For which you should pay eare-rent? No, agree.
And may Don Provost ride a feasting, long,
In his old velvet jerkin, and stained scarfs,
(My noble Sovereign, and worthy General)
Ere we contribute a new cruel garter
To his most worsted worship.
Royal DOL!
Spoken like CLARIDIANA, and thy self!
For which, at supper, thou shalt sit in triumph,
And not be styled DOL Common, but DOL Proper,
DOL Singular: the longest cut, at night,
Shall draw thee for his DOL Particular.
Who's that? one rings. To the windo',
Pray heaven,
The master doe not trouble vs, this quarter.
O, fear not him. While there dyes one, a week,
Of the plague, hoe's safe, from thinking toward London.
Beside, hoe's busy at his hop-yards, now:
I had a letter from him. If he doe,
He will send such word, for airing of the house
As you shall have sufficient time, to quit it:
Though we break up a fortnight, it is no matter.
Who is it, DOL?
A fine young quodling.
O,
My Lawyers clarke, I lighted on, last night,
In Hol'bourne, at the dagger. He would have
(I told you of him) a familiar,
To rifle with, at horses, and win cups.
O, let him in.
Stay. Who shall do it?
Get you
Your robes on. I will meet him, as going out.
And what shall I doe?
Not be seen, away.
Seem you very reserved.
Enough.
God b'w'you, sir.
I pray you, let him know that I was here.
His name is DAPPER. I would gladly have staid, but
Captain, I am here.
Who's that? He's come, I think, Doctor.
Good faith, sir, I was going away.
In truth,
I'am very sorry, Captain.
But I thought
Sure, I should meet you.
I, I'am very glad.
I'had a sciruy writ, or two, to make,
And I had lent my watch last night, to one
That dines, to day, at the sheriffs: and so was robed
Of my passe-time. Is this the cunning-man?
This is his worship.
Is he a Doctor?
Yes.
And ha'you broke with him, Captain?
I.
And how?
Faith, he do's make the matter, sir, so dainty,
I know not what to say
Not so, good Captain.
Would I were fairly rid on it, believe me.
Nay, now you grieve me, sir. Why should you wish so?
I dare assure you. I'll not be ungrateful.
I cannot think you will, sir. But the law
Is such a thing And then, he says, Reade's matter
Falling so lately
Read? He was an ass,
And dealt, sir, with a fool.
It was a clarke, sir.
A clarke?
Nay, hear me, sir, you know the law
Better, I think
I should, sir, and the danger.
You know I showed the statute to you?
You did so.
And will I tell, then? By this hand, of flesh,
Would it might never wright good court-hand, more,
If I discover. What doe you think of me,
That I am a Chiause?
What's that?
The Turk was, here
As one would say, doe you think I am a Turk?
I'll tell the Doctor so.
Doe, good sweet Captain.
Come, noble Doctor, 'pray thee, let's prevail,
This is the gentleman, and he is no Chiause.
Captain, I have returned you all my answer.
I would doe much, sir, for your love But this
I neither may, nor can.
Tut, doe not say so.
You deal, now, with a noble fellow, Doctor,
One that will thank you, richly, and h'is no Chiause:
Let that, sir, move you.
Pray you, forbear
He has
Four angels, here
You doe me wrong, good sir.
Doctor, wherein? To tempt you, with these spirits?
To tempt my art, and love, sir, to my peril.
Before heaven, I scarce can think you are my friend,
Swear by your face? and in a thing so known
Unto the Doctor? How shall we, sir, trust you
In the other matter? Can we ever think,
When you have won five, or six thousand pound,
You'll send vs shares in it, by this rate?
By JOVE, sir,
I'll win ten thousand pound, and send you half.
I-fac's no oath.
No, no, he did but jest.
Go too. Go, thank the Doctor. He's your friend
To take it so.
I thank his worship.
So?
Another angel.
Must I?
Must you? Slight,
What else is thanks? will you be trivial? Doctor,
When must he come, for his familiar?
Shall I not ha'it with me?
O, good sir!
There must a world of ceremonies pass,
You must be bathed, and fumigated, first;
Besides, the Queen of Faerie do's not rise,
Till it be noon.
Not, if she danced, to night.
And she must bless it.
Did you never see
Her royal Grace, yet?
Whom?
Your aunt of Faerie?
Not, since she kissed him, in the cradle, Captain,
I can resolve you that.
Well, see her Grace,
What ere it cost you, for a thing that I know!
It will be somewhat hard to compass: but,
How ever, see her. You are made, believe it,
If you can see her. Her Grace is a lone woman,
And very rich, and if she take a phant'sye,
She will doe strange things. See her, at any hand.
'Slid, she may hap to leave you all she has!
It is the Doctors fear.
How will it be done, then?
Let me alone, take you no thought. Doe you
But say to me, Captain, I'll see her Grace.
Captain, I'll see her Grace.
Enough.
Who's there?
Anon. (Conduct him forth, by the back way)
Sir, against one a clock, prepare your self.
Till when you must be fasting; only, take
Three drops of vinegar, in, at your nose;
Two at your mouth; and one, at either ear;
Then, bath your fingers ends; and wash your eyes;
To sharpen your five senses; and, cry hum,
Thrice; and then buzz, as often; and then, come.
Can you remember this?
I warrant you.
Well, then, away. It is, but your bestowing
Some twenty nobles, among her Graces servants;
And, put on a clean shirt You doe not know
What grace her Grace may doe you in clean linen.
COme in (Good wives, I pray you forbear me, now.
Troth I can doe you no good, till afternoon)
What is your name, say you, ABEL DRVGGER?
Yes, sir.
A seller of tobacco?
Yes, sir.
'Vmh.
Free of the Grocers?
I, and't please you.
Well
Your business, ABEL?
This, and't please your worship,
I'am a young beginner, and am building
Of a new shop, and't like your worship; just,
At corner of a street: (Here's the plot on it.)
And I would know, by art, sir, of your worship,
Which way I should make my door, by necromancy.
And, where my shelves. And, which should be for boxes.
And, which for pots. I would be glad to thrive, sir.
And, I was wished to your worship, by a gentleman,
One Captain FACE, that soy's you know men's planets,
And their good angels, and their bad.
I doe,
If I doe see 'hem
What! my honest ABEL?
Thou art well met, here!
Troth, sir, I was speaking,
Just, as your worship came here, of your worship.
I pray you, speak for me to master Doctor.
He shall doe any thing. Doctor, doe you hear?
This is my friend, ABEL, an honest fellow,
He lets me have good tobacco, and he do's not
Sophisticate it, with sack-lees, or oil,
Nor washes it in muscatel, and grains,
Nor buries it, in gravel, under ground,
Wrapped up in greasy leather, or pissed clouts:
But keeps it in fine lilly-pots, that opened,
Smell like conserve of roses, or french beans.
He has his maple block, his silver tongs,
Winchester pipes, and fire of juniper.
A neat, spruce-honest-fellow, and no gold-smith.
H'is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on
Already, sir, have you found it? Lo'thee ABEL!
And, in right way to'ward riches
Sir.
This summer,
He will be of the clothing of his company:
And, next spring, called to the scarlet. Spend what he can.
What, and so little beard?
Sir, you must think,
He may have a receipt, to make hair come.
But he will be wise, preserve his youth, and fine for it:
His fortune looks for him, another way.
Me thinks, I see him, entering ordinaries,
Dispensing for the pox; and plaguy-houses,
Reaching his dose; walking more-fields for lepers;
And offering citizens-wiues pomander-bracelets,
As his preservative, made of the elixir;
Searching the spittle, to make old bawds young;
And the highways, for beggars, to make rich:
I see no end of his labours. He will make
Nature ashamed, of her long sleep: when art,
Who's but a step-dame, shall doe more, then she,
In her best love to man-kind, ever could.
If his dream last, he will turn the age, to gold.
COme on, sir. Now, you set your foot on shore
In no orb; Here's the rich Peru:
And there within, sir, are the golden mines,
Great SALOMON'S Ophir! He was sailing to it,
Three years, but we have reached it in ten months.
This is the day, wherein, to all my friends,
I will pronounce the happy word, be rich.
This day, you shall be spectatissimi.
You shall no more deal with the hollow die,
Or the frail card. No more be at charge of keeping
The liuery-punke, for the young heir, that must
Seal, at all hours, in his shirt. No more
If he deny, have him beaten to it, as he is
That brings him the commodity. No more
Shall thirst of satin, or the covetous hunger
Of velvet entrails, for a rude-spun cloak,
To be displayed at Madame AVGVSTA'S, make
The sons of sword, and hazard fall before
The golden calfe, and on their knees, whole nights,
Commit idolatry with wine, and trumpets:
Or go a feasting, after drum and ensign.
No more of this. You shall start up young Viceroys,
And have your punques, and punquettees, my SVRLY.
And unto thee, I speak it first, be rich.
Where is my SUBTLE, there? Within hough?
He will come to you, by and by.
That's his fire-drake,
His lungs, his Zephyrus, he that puffs his coals,
Till he firk nature up, in her own center.
You are not faithful, sir. This night, I'll change
All, that is mettle, in thy house, to gold.
And, early in the morning, will I send
To all the plumbers, and the pewterers,
And buy their tin, and lead up: and to Lothbury,
For all the copper.
What, and turn that too?
Yes, and I'll purchase Devonshire, and Cornwaile,
And make them perfect Indies! You admire now?
No faith.
But when you see th'effects of the great med'cine!
Of which one part proiected on a hundred
Of Mercury, or Venus, or the Moon,
Shall turn it, to as many of the Sun;
Nay, to a thousand, so ad infinitum:
You will believe me.
Yes, when I see it, I will.
But, if my eyes doe cousin me so (and I
Giving 'hem no occasion) sure, I'll have
A whore, shall peace 'hem out, next day.
Ha! Why?
Doe you think, I fable with you? I assure you,
He that has once the flower of the sun,
The perfect ruby, which we call elixir,
Not only can doe that; but by it's virtue,
Can confer honour, love, respect, long life,
Give safety, valor: yea, and victory,
To whom he will. In eight, and twenty days,
I'll make an old man, of fourscore, a child.
No doubt, hoe's that already.
Nay, I mean,
Restore his years, renew him, like an eagle,
To the fifth age; make him get sons, and daughters,
Young giants; as our Philosophers have done
(The ancient Patriarchs before the flood)
But taking, once a week, on a knives point,
The quantity of a grain of mustard, of it:
Become stout MARSES, and beget young CUPIDS.
The decayed Vestall's of Pickt-hatch would thank you,
That keep the fire a-liue, there.
It is the secret
Of nature, naturiz'd against all infections,
Cures all diseases, coming of all causes,
A month's grief, in a day; a years, in twelve:
And, of what age soever, in a month.
Past all the doses, of your drugging Doctors.
I'll undertake, withal, to fright the plague
Out of the kingdom, in three months.
And I'll
Be bound, the players shall sing your praises, then,
Without their poets.
Sir, I'll do it. Mean time,
I'll give away so much, unto my man,
Have a sublimed pure wife, unto that fellow
I'll send a thousand pound, to be my cuckold.
And I shall carry it?
No. I'll have no bawds,
But fathers, and mothers. They will doe it best.
Best of all others. And, my flatterers
Shall be the pure, and gravest of Divines,
That I can get for money. My mere fools,
Eloquent burgesses, and then my poets
The same that writ so subtly of the fart,
Whom I will entertain, still, for that subject.
The few, that would give out themselves, to be
Court, and towne-stallions, and, each where, belie
Ladies, who are known most innocent, for them;
Those will I beg, to make me eunuchs of:
And they shall fan me with ten ostrich tails
A piece, made in a plume, to gather wind.
We will be brave, Puff, now we have the med'cine.
My meat, shall all come in, in Indian shells,
Dishes of agate, set in gold, and studded,
With emeralds, sapphires, hiacynths, and rubies.
The tongues of carpes, dormice, and camels heals,
Boiled in the spirit of SOL, and dissolved pearl,
(APICIVS diet, against the epilepsy)
And I will eat these broaths, with spoons of amber,
Headed with diamant, and carbuncle.
My foot-boy shall eat pheasants, caluerd salmons,
Knots, godwits, lamprey's: I my self will have
The beards of barbels, served, in stead of salads;
Oild mushromes; and the swelling vnctuous paps
Of a fat pregnant sow, newly cut off,
Dressed with an exquisite, and poignant sauce;
For which, Isle say unto my cooke, there's gold,
Go forth, and be a knight.
Sir, I'll go look
A little, how it heightens.
Doe. My shirts
I'll have of taffata-sarsnet, soft, and light
As cob-webs; and for all my other raiment
It shall be such, as might provoke the Persian;
Were he to teach the world riot, a new.
My gloves of fishes, and birds-skins, perfumed
With gummes of paradise, and eastern air
And do'you think to have the stone, with this?
No, I doe think, t'haue all this, with the stone.
Why, I have heard, he must be homo frugi,
A pious, holy, and religious man,
One free from mortal sin, a very virgin.
That makes it, sir, he is so. But I buy it.
My venture brings it me. He, honest wretch,
A notable, superstitious, good soul,
Has worn his knees bare, and his slippers bald,
With prayer, and fasting for it: and, sir, let him
Do'it alone, for me, still. Here he comes,
Not a profane word, before him: It is poison.
GOod morrow, father.
Gentle son, good morrow,
And, to your friend, there. What is he, is with you?
An heretic, that I did bring along,
In hope, sir, to convert him.
Son, I doubt
Yo'are covetous, that thus you meet your time
In the just point: prevent your day, at morning.
This argues something, worthy of a fear
Of importune, and carnal appetite.
Take heed, you doe not cause the blessing leave you,
With your ungoverned hast. I should be sorry,
To see my labours, now, e'ene at perfection,
Got by long watching, and large patience,
Not prosper, where my love, and zeal hath placed 'hem.
Which (heaven I call to witness, with your self,
To whom, I have poured my thoughts) in all my ends,
Have looked no way, but unto public good,
To pious uses, and dear charity,
No grown a prodigy with men. Wherein
If you, my son, should now preuaricate,
And, to your own particular lusts, employ
So great, and catholic a bliss: be sure,
A curse will follow, yea, and overtake
Your subtle, and most secret ways.
I know, sir,
You shall not need to fear me. I but come,
To ha'you confute this gentleman.
Who is,
Indeed, sir, somewhat caustiue of belief
Toward your stone: would not be gulled.
Well, son,
All that I can convince him in, is this,
The work is done: Bright SOL is in his robe.
We have a med'cine of the triple Soul,
The glorified spirit. Thanks be to heaven,
And make vs worthy of it. Ulen spiegel.
Anon, sir.
Look well to the register,
But, much less charity, should I gull my self.
Why, what have you observed, sir, in our art,
Seems so impossible?
But your whole work, no more.
That you should hatch gold in a fornace, sir,
As they doe eggs, in Egypt!
Sir, doe you
Believe that eggs are hatched so?
If I should?
Why, I think that the greater miracle.
No egg, but differs from a chicken, more,
Then metals in themselves.
That cannot be.
The egg's ordained by nature, to that end:
And is a chicken in potentia.
The same we say of lead, and other metals,
Which would be gold, if they had time.
And that
Our art doth further.
I, for it were absurd
To think that nature, in the earth, bred gold
Perfect, in the instant. Something went before.
There must be remote matter.
I, what is that?
Mary, we say
I, now it heats: stand Father.
Pound him to dust
It is, of the one part,
A humid exhalation, which we call
Materia liquid, or the vnctuous water;
On the other part, a certain crasse, and viscous
Portion of earth; both which, concorporate,
Doe make the elementary matter of gold:
Which is not, yet, propria materia,
But commune to all metals, and all stones.
For, where it is forsaken of that moisture,
And hath more dryness, it becomes a stone;
Where it retains more of the humid fatness,
It turns to sulphur, or to quick-siluer:
Who are the parents of all other metals.
Nor can this remote matter, suddenly,
Progress so from extreme, unto extreme,
As to grow gold, and leap ore all the means.
Nature doth, first, beget th'imperfect; then
Proceeds she to the perfect. Of that airy,
And oily water, mercury is engendered;
Sulphur of the fat, and earthy part: the one
(Which is the last) supplying the place of male,
The other of the female, in all metals.
Some doe believe hermaphrodeitie,
That both doe act, and suffer. But, these two
Make the rest ductile, malleable, extensiue.
And, even in gold, they are; for we doe find
Seeds of them, by our fire, and gold in them:
And can produce the species of each mettle
More perfect thence, then nature doth in earth.
Beside, who doth not see, in daily practice,
Art can beget bees, hornets, beetles, wasps,
Out of the carcasses, and dung of creatures;
Yea, scorpions, of an herb, being ritely placed:
And these are living creatures, far more perfect,
And excellent, then metals.
Well said, father!
Nay, if he take you in hand, sir, with an argument,
He will bray you in a mortar.
'Pray you, sir, stay.
Rather, then I'll be brayed, sir, I'll believe,
That Alchemy is a pretty kind of game,
Somewhat like tricks of the cards, to cheat a man,
With charming.
Sir?
What else are all your terms,
Whereon no one o'your writers grees with other?
Of your elixir, your lac virgins,
Your stone, your med'cine, and your chrysosperme,
Your sal, your sulphur, and your mercury,
Your oil of height, your tree of life, your blood,
Your marchesite, your tutie, your magnesia,
Your toad, your crow, your dragon, and your panthar,
Your sun, your moon, your firmament, your adrop,
Your lato, azoch, zernich, chibrit, heautarit,
And then, your red man, and your white woman,
With all your broths, your menstrues, and materials,
Of peace, and egge-shells, women's terms, mans blood,
Hair of the head, burnt clouts, chalk, marts, and clay,
Poulder of bones, scalings of iron, glass,
And worlds of other strange ingredients,
Would burst a man to name?
And all these, named,
Intending but one thing: which art our writers
Used to obscure their art.
Sir, so I told him,
Because the simple idiot should not learn it,
And make it vulgar.
Was not all the knowledge
Of the Egyptians writ in mystic symboles?
Speak not the Scriptures, oft, in parables?
Are not the choicest fables of the Poets,
That were the fountains, and first springs of wisdom,
Wrapped in perplexed allegories?
I urged that,
And cleared to him, that SISIPHVS was damned
To roll the ceaslesse stone, only, because
He would have made ours common. Who is this?
God's preciousWhat doe you mean? Go in, good lady,
Let me entreat you. Whore's this varlet?
Sir?
You very knave! doe you use me, thus?
Wherein, sir?
He is their Visitor, and do's appoint
Who lies with whom; and at what hour; what price;
Which gown; and in what smock; what fall; what tyre.
Him, will I prove, by a third person, to find
The subtilties of this dark labyrinth:
Which, if I doe discover, dear sir MAMMON,
You'll give your poor friend leave, though no Philosopher,
To laugh: for you that are, it is thought, shall weep.
Sir. He do's pray, you'll not forget.
I will not, sir.
Sir EPICVRE, I shall leave you?
I follow you, straight.
But doe so, good sir, to avoid suspicion.
This gent'man has a par'lous head.
But wilt thou, Ulen,
Be constant to thy promise?
As my life, sir.
And wilt thou insinuate what I am? and praise me?
And say I am a noble fellow?
O, what else, sir?
And, that you'll make her royal; with the stone,
An Empress; and your self king of Bantam.
Wilt thou doe this?
Will I, sir?
Lungs, my Lungs!
I love thee.
Send your stuff, sir, that my master
May busy himself, about proiection.
Th'hast witched me, rogue: Take, go.
Your jack, &amp; all, sir.
Thou art a villainI will send my jack;
And the weights too. Slave, I could bite thine ear.
Away, thou dost not care for me.
Not I, sir?
Come, I was borne to make thee, my good weasel;
Set thee on a bench: and, have thee twirl a chain
With the best lords vermin, of'hem all.
Away, sir.
A Count, nay, a Count-palatine
Good sir, go.
Shall not advance thee, better: no, nor faster.
HAs he bit? Has he bit?
And swallowed too, my SUBTLE.
I have given him line, and now he plays, I faith.
And shall we twitch him?
Thorough both the gills.
A wench is a rare bait, with which a man
No sooner's taken, but he straight firkes mad.
DOL, my lord WHA'TS'HVMS sister, you must now
Bear your self statelich.
O, let me alone.
I'll not forget my race, I warrant you.
I'll keep my distance, laugh, and talk aloud;
Have all the tricks of a proud sciruy lady,
And be as rude'as her woman.
Well said, Sanguine.
But will he send his andirons?
His jack too;
And's iron shooing-horne: I have spoke to him. Well,
I must not loose my wary gamester, yonder.
O Monsieur Caution, that will not be gulled?
I, if I can strike a fine hook into him, now,
The Temple-church, there I have cast mine angle.
Well, pray for me. I'll about it.
What, more gudgeons!
DOL, scout, scout; stay FACE, you must go to the door:
'Pray god, it be my Anabaptist. Who is it, DOL?
I know him not. He looks like a gold-end-man.
Gods so! it is he, he said he would send. What call you him?
The sanctified Elder, that should deal
For MAMMONS jack, and andirons! Let him in.
Stay, help me of, first, with my gown. Away
Ma-dame, to your with-drawing chamber. Now,
In a new tune, new gesture, but old language.
This fellow is sent, from one negotiates with me
About the stone, too; for the holy Brethren
Of Amsterdam, the exiled Saints: that hope
To raise their discipline, by it. I must use him
In some strange fashion, now, to make him admire me.
WHere is my drudge?
Sir.
Take away the recipient,
And rectify your menstrue, from the phlegm.
Then power it, of the Sol, in the cucurbite,
And let'hem macerate, together.
Yes, sir.
And save the ground?
No. Terra damnata
Must not have entrance, in the work. Who are you?
A faithful Brother, if it please you.
What's that?
A Lullianist? a Ripley? Filius arts?
Can you sublime, and dulcefie? calcine?
Know you the sapor pontick? sapor slipstick?
Or, what is homogene, or heterogene?
I understand no heathen language, truly.
Heathen, you KNIPPER-DOLING? Is Ars sacra,
Or Chrysopoeia, or Spagirica,
Or the pamphysick, or panarchick knowledge,
A heathen language?
Heathen Greek, I take it.
How? heathen Greek?
Ell's heathen, but the Hebrew.
Sirah, my varlet, stand you forth, and speak to him
Like a Philosopher: Answer, in the language.
Formed in some mystic character; whose radij,
Striking the senses of the posers by,
Shall, by a virtual influence, breed affections,
That may result upon the party owns it:
As thus
NAB!
He first shall have a bell, that's ABEL;
And, by it, standing one, whose name is DEE,
In a rug gown; there's D. and Rug, that's DRVG:
And, right anenst him, a Dog snarling Er;
There's DRVGGER, ABEL DRVGGER. That's his sign.
And here's now mystery, and hieroglyphic!
ABEL, thou art made.
Sir, I doe thank his worship.
Six o'thy legs more, will not doe it, NAB.
He has brought you a pipe of tobacco, Doctor.
Yes, sir:
I have another thing, I would impart
Out with it, NAB.
Sir, there is lodged, hard by me,
A rich young widow
Good! a bone robe?
But nineteen, at the most.
Very good, ABEL.
Mary, sh'is not in fashion, yet; she wears
A hood: but 't stands a cop.
No matter, ABEL.
And, I doe, now and then give her a fucus
What! dost thou deal, NAB?
I did tell you, Captain.
And physic too sometime, sir: for which she trusts me
With all her mind. Shoe's come up here, of purpose
To learn the fashion.
Good (his match too!) on, NAB.
And she do's strangely long to know her fortune.
Gods lid, NAB, Send her to the Doctor, hither.
Yes, I have spoke to her of his worship, already:
But shoe's afraid, it will be blown abroad
And hurt her marriage.
Hurt it? It is the way
To heal it, if it were hurt; to make it more
Followed, and sought: NAB, thou shalt tell her this.
She'll be more known, more talked of, and your widows
Are ne'er of any price till they be famous;
Their honour is their multitude of suitors:
Send her, it may be thy good fortune. What?
Thou dost not know.
No, sir, she'll never marry
Under a knight. Her brother has made a vow.
What, and dost thou despair, my little NAB,
Knowing, what the Doctor has set down for thee,
And, seeing so many, of the city, dubbed?
One glass o'thy water, with a Madame, I know,
Will have it done,
What's her brother? a knight?
No, sir, a gentleman, newly warm in 'his land, sir,
Scarce cold in his one and twenty; that do's govern
His sister, here: and is a man himself
Of some three thousand a year, and is come up
To learn to quarrel, and to live by his wits,
And will go down again, and dye in the country.
How! to quarrel?
Yes, sir, to carry quarrels,
As gallants doe, and manage 'hem, by line.
'Slid, NAB! The Doctor is the only man
In Christendom for him. He has made a table,
With Mathematical demonstrations,
Touching the Art of quarrels. He will give him
An instrument to quarrel by. Go, bring 'hem, both:
Him, and his sister. And, for thee, with her
The Doctor happ'ly may persuade. Go to.
Shalt give his worship, a new damask suite
Upon the premises.
O, good Captain.
He shall,
He is the honestest fellow, Doctor. Stay not,
No offers, bring the damask, and the parties.
I'll try my power, sir.
And thy will too, NAB.
It is good tobacco this! What is it an ounce?
He'll send you a pound, Doctor.
O, no.
He will do it.
It is the gooddest soul. ABEL, about it.
(Thou shalt know more anon. Away, be gone.)
A miserable rogue, and lives with cheese,
And has the worms. That was the cause indeed
Why he came now. He dealt with me, in private,
To get a med'cine for'hem.
And shall, sir. This works.
A wife, a wife, for one on'vs, my dear SUBTLE:
We'll even draw lots, and he, that fails, shall have
The more in goods, the other has in tail.
Rather the less. For she may be so light
She may want grains.
I, or be such a burden,
A man would scarce endure her, for the whole.
Faith, best let's see her first, and then determine.
Content. But DOL must have no breath on it.
Mum.
Away, you to your SVRLY yonder, catch him.
'Pray god, I have not stayed too long.
I fear it.
THese chastisements are common to the Saints,
And such rebukes we of the Separation
Must bear, with willing shoulders, as the trials
Sent forth, to tempt our frailties.
In pure zeal,
I doe not like the man: He is a heathen.
And, then, the turning of this Lawyers pewter
To plate, at Christ-masse
Christ-tide, I pray you.
Yet, ANANIAS?
I have done.
Or changing
His parcel guilt, to massy gold. You cannot
But raise you friends. With all, to be of power
To pay an army, in the field, to buy
The king of France, out of his realms; or Spain;
Out of his Indies: What can you not doe,
Against lords spiritual, or temporal,
That shall oppone you?
Verily, it is true.
We may be temporal lords, our selves, I take it.
You may be any thing, and leave off to make
Long-winded exercises: or suck up,
Your ha, and hum, in a tune. I not deny,
But such as are not graced, in a state,
May, for their ends, be adverse in religion,
And get a tune, to call the flock together:
For (to say sooth) a tune do's much, with women,
And other phlegmatic people, it is your bell.
Bells are profane: a tune may be religious.
No warning with you? Then, farewell my patience.
Slight, it shall down: I will not be thus tortured.
I pray you, sir.
All shall perish. I have spoke it.
Let me find grace, sir, in your eyes; the man
He stands corrected: neither did his zeal
(But as your self) allow a tune, some-where.
Which, now, being to'ard the stone, we shall not need.
No, nor your holy vizard, to win widows
To give you legacies; or make zealous wives
To rob their husbands, for the common cause:
Nor take the start of bonds, broke but one day,
And say, they were forfeited, by providence.
Nor shall you need, ore-night to eat huge meals,
To celebrate your next days fast the better:
The whilst the Brethren, and the Sisters, humbled,
Abate the stiffenesse of the flesh. Nor cast
Before your hungry hearers, scrupulous bones,
As whether a Christian may hawk, or hunt;
Or whether, Matrons, of the holy assembly,
May lay their hair out, or wear doublets:
Or have that idol Starch, about their linen.
It is, indeed, an idol.
Mind him not, sir.
I doe command thee, spirit (of zeal, but trouble)
To peace within him. Pray you, sir, go on.
Nor shall you need to libel against the Prelates,
And shorten so your ears, against the hearing
Of the next wire-drawne grace. Nor, of necessity,
Rail against plays, to please the Alderman,
Whose daily custard you devour. Nor lie
With zealous rage, till you are hoarse. Not one
Of these so singular arts. Nor call your selves,
By names of TRIBULATION, PERSECVTION,
RESTRAINT, LONG-PATIENCE, and such like, affected
By the whole family, or wood of you,
Only for glory, and to catch the ear
Of the Disciple.
Truly, sir, they are
Ways, that the godly Brethren have invent
For propagation of the glorious cause,
As very notable means, and whereby, also,
Themselves grow soon, and profitably famous.
O, but the stone, ell's idle to'it! nothing!
The art of Angels, Natures miracle,
The divine secret, that doth fly in clouds,
From east to west: and whose tradition
Is not from men, but spirits.
I hate Traditions:
I do not trust them
Peace.
They are Popish, all.
I will not peace. I will not
ANANIAS.
Please the profane, to grieve the godly: I may not.
Well, ANANIAS, thou shalt ouer-come.
It is an ignorant zeal, that haunts him, sir.
But truly, else, a very faithful Brother,
A botcher: and a man, by revelation,
That hath a competent knowledge of the truth.
Has he a competent sum, there, in the bag,
To buy the goods, within? I am made guardian,
And must, for charity, and conscience sake,
Now, see the most be made, for my poor orphan:
Though I desire the Brethren, too, good gayners.
There, they are, within. When you have viewed, &amp; bought'hem,
And tan the inuentorie of what they are,
They are ready for proiection; there's no more
To doe: cast on the med'cine, so much silver
As there is tin there, so much gold as brass,
I'll gi'it you in, by weight.
But how long time,
Sir, must the Saints expect, yet?
Let me see,
How's the moon, now? Eight, nine, ten days hence
He will be silver potato; then, three days,
Before he citronise: some fifteen days,
The Magisterium will be perfected.
About the second day, of the third week,
In the ninth month?
Yes, my good ANANIAS.
What will the orphans goods arise to, think you?
Some hundred marks; as much as filled three cars,
Unladened now: you'll make six millions of 'hem.
But I must have more coals laid in.
How!
Another load,
And then we have finished. We must now increase
Our fire to ignis ardens, we are past
Fimus equinus, Balnei, Cineris,
And all those lenter heats. If the holy purse
Should, with this draught, fall low, and that the Saints
Doe need a present sum, I have trick
To melt the pewter, you all buy now, instantly,
And, with a tincture,  you as good Dutch dollars,
As any are in Holland.
Can you so?
I, and shall bide the third examination.
It will be joyful tidings to the Brethren.
But you must carry it, secret.
I, but stay,
This act of coining, is it lawful?
Lawful?
We know no Magistrate. Or, if we did,
This's foreign coin.
It is no coining, sir.
It is but casting.
Ha? you distinguish well.
Casting of money may be lawful.
It is, sir.
Truly, I take it so.
There is no scruple,
Sir, to be made of it; believe ANANIAS:
This case of conscience he is studied in.
I'll make a question of it, to the Brethren.
The Brethren shall approve it lawful, doubt not.
Where shall it be done?
For that we'll talk, anon.
There's some to speak with me. Go in, I pray you,
And view the parcels. That's the inuentorie.
I'll come to you straight. Who is it? FACE! Appear.
HOw now? Good prise?
Good pox! Yond' caustiue cheater
Never came on.
How then?
I have walked the round,
Till now, and no such thing.
And have you quit him?
Quit him? and hell would quit him too, he were happy.
Slight would you have me stalk like a mill-iade.
All day, for one, that will not yield vs grains?
I know him of old.
O, but to have gulled him,
Had been a maistry.
Let him go, black Boy,
And turn thee, that some fresh news may possess thee.
A noble Count, a Don of Spain (my dear
Delicious compeere, and my partie-bawd)
Who is come hither, private, for his conscience,
And brought munition with him, six great slopps,
Bigger then three Dutch hoighs, beside round trunks,
Furnished with pistolets, and pieces of eight,
Will straight be here, my rogue, to have thy bath
(That is the colour,) and to make his battery
Upon our DOL, our Castle, our cinque-Port,
Our Dover per, our what thou wilt. Where is she?
She must prepare perfumes, delicate linen,
The bath in chief, a banquet, and her wit,
For she must milk his Epididimis.
Where is the Doxy?
I'll send her to thee:
And but dispatch my brace of little IOHN LEYDENS,
And come again my self.
Are they within then?
Numbering the sum.
How much?
A hundred marks, Boy.
Why, this's a lucky day! Ten pounds of MAMMON!
Three of my clarke! A portague of my grocer!
This of the Brethren! beside reversions,
And states, to come in the widow, and my Count!
My share, to day, will not be bought for forty
What?
Pounds, dainty DOROTHEE, art thou so near?
Yes, say lord General, how fares our camp?
As, with the few, that had entrenched themselves
Safe, by their discipline, against a world, DOL:
And laughed, within those trenches, and grew fat
With thinking on the booties, DOL, brought in
Daily, by their small parties. This dear hour,
A doughty Don is taken, with my DOL;
And thou moist make his ransom, what thou wilt,
My Dousabell: He shall be brought here, fettered
With thy fair looks, before he see's thee; and thrown
In a downe-bed, as dark as any dungeon;
Where thou shalt keep him waking, with thy drum;
Thy drum, my DOL; thy drum; till he be tame
As the poor black-birds were in the great frost,
Or bees are with a basin: and so hive him
In the swan-skin coverlet, and cambric sheets,
Till he work honey, and wax, my little Gods-guift.
What is he, General?
An Adalantado,
A Grande, girl. Was not my DAPPER here, yet?
No.
Nor my DRVGGER?
Neither.
A pox on 'hem.
They are so long a furnishing! Such stinkards
Would not be seen, upon these festival days.
And gallants, yet. Here's a young gentleman,
Is borne to nothing, forty marks a year,
Which I count nothing. H'is to be initiated,
And have a fly of the Doctor. He will win you
By unresistable luck, within this fortnight,
Enough to buy a barony. They will set him
Vpmost, at the Groome-porters, all the Christmas!
And, for the whole year through, at every place,
Where there is play, present him with the chair;
The best attendance, the best drink, sometimes
Two glasses of canary, and pay nothing;
The purest linen, and the sharpest knife,
The partridge next his trencher: and, somewhere,
The dainty bed, in private, with the dainty.
You shall have your ordinaries bid for him,
As play-houses for a poet; and the master
Pray him, aloud, to name what dish he affects,
Which must be butterd shrimps: and those that drink
To no mouth else, will drink to his, as being
The goodly, president mouth of all the board.
Doe you not gull one?
'Od's my life! Do you think it?
You shall have a cast commander, (can but get
In credit with a glover, or a spurrier,
For some two pair, of eiders ware, afore-hand)
Will, by most swift posts, dealing with him,
Arrive at competent means, to keep himself,
His punk, and naked boy, in excellent fashion.
And be admired for it.
Will the Doctor teach this?
He will doe more, sir, when your land is gone,
(As men of spirit hate to keep earth long(
In a vacation, when small money is stirring,
And ordinaries suspended till the term,
He will show a perspective, where on one side
You shall behold the faces, and the persons
Of all sufficient young heirs, in town,
Whose bonds are currant for commodity;
On the other side, the merchants forms, and others,
(That, without help of any second broker,
(Who would expect a share) will trust such parcels:
In the third square, the very street, and sign
Where the commodity dwells, and do's but wait
To be delivered, be it pepper, soap,
Hops, or tobacco, oat-meale, wood, or cheeses.
All which you may so handle, to enjoy,
To your own use, and never stand obliged.
I'faith! Is he such a fellow?
Why, NAB here knows him.
And then for making matches, for rich widows,
Young gentlewomen, heirs, the fortunat'st man!
Hoe's sent too, far, and near, all over England,
To have his counsel, and to know their fortunes.
Gods will, my suster shall see him.
I'll tell you, sir,
What he did tell me of NAB. It's a strange thing!
(By the way you must eat no cheese, NAB, it breeds melancholy:
And that same melancholy breeds worms) but pass it,
He told me, honest NAB, here, was ne'er at tavern,
But once in's life!
Truth, and no more I was not.
And, then he was so sick
Could he tell you that, too?
How should I know it?
In troth we had been a shooting,
And had a piece of fat ram-mutton, to supper,
That lay so heavy of my stomach
And he has no head
To bear any wine; for, what with the noise of the fiddlers,
And care of his shop, for he dares keep no servants
My head did so ache
As he was fine to be brought home,
The Doctor told me. And then, a good old woman
(Yes faith, she dwells in Sea-coale-lane) did cure me,
With sodden ale, and pellitorie of the wall:
Cost me but two pence. I had another sickness,
Was worse then that.
I, that was with the grief
Thou took for being sassed at eighteen pence,
For the water-worke.
In truth, and it was like
T'haue cost me almost my life.
Thy hair went off?
Yes, sir, it was done for spite.
Nay, so says the Doctor.
Pray thee, tabacco-Boy, go fetch my suster,
I'll see this learned Boy, before I go:
And so shall she.
Sir, he is busy now:
But, if you have a sister to fetch hither,
Perhaps, your own pains may command her sooner;
And he, by that time, will be free.
I go.
DRVGGER, shoe's thine: the damask. (SUBTLE, and I
Must wrestle for her.) Come on, master DAPPER.
You see, how I turn clients, here, away,
To give your cause dispatch. Ha'you performed
The ceremonies were enjoined you?
Yes, of the vinegar,
And the clean shirt.
It is well: that shirt may doe you
More worship then you think. Your aunt's a fire
But that she will not show it, t'haue a sight on you.
Ha'you provided for her Graces servants?
Yes, here are sixe-score EDWARD shillings.
Good.
And an old HARRY'S sovereign.
Very good.
And three IAMES shillings, and an ELIZABETH great,

O, Sir, yo'are come in the only, finest time
Whore's master?
Now preparing for proiection, sir.
Your stuff will be all changed shortly.
Into gold?
To gold, and silver, sir.
Silver, I care not for.
Yes, sir, a little to give beggars.
Whore's the lady?
At hand, here. I have told her such brave things, of you,
Touching your bounty and your noble spirit
Hast thou?
As she is almost in her fit to see you.
But, good sir, no divinity in your conference,
For fear of putting her in rage
I warrant thee.
Six men will not hold her down. And, then
If the old man should hear, or see you
Fear not.
The very house, sir, would run mad. You know it
How scrupulous he is, and violent,
Against the least act of sin. Physic, or Mathematiques,
Poetry, State, or Bawdry (as I told you)
She will endure, and never startle: But
No word of controversy.
I am schooled, good Ule.
And you must praise her house, remember that,
And her nobility.
Let me, alone:
No Herald, no nor Antiquary, Lungs,
Shall doe it better. Go.
Why, this is yet
A kind of modern happiness, to have
DOL Common for a great lady.
Now, EPICVRE,
Heighten thy self, talk to her, all in gold;
Rain her as many showers, as JOVE did drops
Unto his DANE: Show the God a miser,
Compared with MAMMON. What? the stone will do it.
She shall feel gold, taste gold, hear gold, sleep gold:
Nay, we will concumbere gold. I will be puissant,
And mighty in my talk to her! Here she comes.
To him, DOL, suckle him. This is the noble knight,
I told your ladyship
Madame, with your pardon,
I kiss your vesture.
Sir, I were uncivil
If I would suffer that, my lip to you, sir.
I hope, my lord your brother be in health, lady?
My lord, my brother is, though I no lady, sir.
(Well said my Guiny-bird.)
Right noble madame
(O, we shall have most fierce idolatry!)
It is your prerogative.
Rather your curtsy.
Were there nought else t'inlarge your virtues, to me,
These answers speak your breeding, and your blood
Blood we boast none, sir, a poor Baron's daughter.
Poor! and gat you? Profane not. Had your father
Slept all the happy remnant of his life
After that act, lain but there still, and panted,
H' had done enough, to make himself, his issue,
And his posterity noble.
Sir, although
We may be said to want the guilt, and trappings,
The dress of honour; yet we strive to keep
The seeds, and the materials.
I doe see
The old ingredient, virtue, was not lost,
Nor the drug money, used to make your compound.
There is a strange nobility, in your eye,
This lip, that chin! Me thinks you doe resemble
One of the Austriack princes.
Very like,
Her father was an Irish costar-monger.
The house of Valois, just, had such a nose.
And such a fore-head, yet, the Medici
Of Florence boast.
Troth, and I have been lik'ned
To all these Princes.
I'll be sworn, I heard it.
I know not how! it is not any one,
But ee'n the very choice of all their features.
I'll in, and laugh.
A certain touch, or air,
That sparkles a divinity, beyond
An earthly beauty!
O, you play the courtier.
Good lady, give me leave
In faith, I may not,
To mock me, sir.
To burn in this sweet flame:
The Phoenix never knew a nobler death.
Nay, now you court the courtier: and destroy
What you would build. This art, sir, in your words,
Calls your whole faith in question.
By my soul
Nay, oaths are made of the same air, sir.
Nature
Never bestowed upon mortality,
A more vnblam'd, a more harmonious feature:
She played the step-dame in all faces, else.
Sweet madame, le' me be particular
Particular, sir? I pray you, know your distance.
In no ill sense, sweet lady, but to ask
How your fair graces pass the hours? I see
Yo'are lodged, here, in the house of a rare man,
An excellent Artist: but, what's that to you?
Yes, sir. I study here the mathematiques,
And distillation.
O, I cry your pardon.
H' is a divine instructor! can extract
DOst thou not laugh?
Yes. Are they gone?
Ell's clear.
The widow is come.
And your quarrelling disciple?
I.
I must to my Captaine-ship again, then.
Stay, bring 'hem in, first.
So I meant. What is she?
A Bony-bell?
I know not.
We'll draw lots,
You'll stand to that?
What else?
O, for a suite,
To fall now, like a cortine: flap.
To th'dore, man.
You'll have the first kiss, because I am not ready.
Yes, and perhaps hit you through both the nostrils.
Who would you speak with?
Wher's the Captain?
Gone, sir,
About some business.
Gone?
He will return straight.
But master Doctor, his Lieutenant, is here.
Come near, my worshipful Boy, my tarry Fili,
That is, my Boy of land; make thy approaches:
Welcome, I know thy lusts, and thy desires,
And I will serve, and satisfy 'hem. Begin,
Charge me from thence, or thence, or in this line;
Here is my center: Ground thy quarrel.
You lie.
How, child of wrath, and anger! the loud lie?
For what, my sudden Boy?
Nay, that look you too,
I am afore-hand.
O, this's no true Grammar,
And as ill Logic! You must render causes, child,
Your first, and second Intentions, know your canons,
And your divisions, moods, degrees, and differences,
Your praedicaments, substance, and accident,
Series extern, and intern, with their causes
Efficient, material, formal, final,
And have your elements perfect
What is this!
The angry tongue he talks in?
That false precept,
Of being afore-hand, has deceived a number;
And made 'hem enter quarrels, often-times,
Before they were aware: and, afterword,
Against their wills.
How must I doe then, sir?
I cry this lady mercy. She should, first,
Have been saluted. I doe call you lady,
Because you are to be one, ere't be long,
My soft, and buxom widow.
Is she, in faith?
Yes, or my art is an egregious liar.
How know you?
By inspection, on her fore-head,
And subtlety of her lip, which must be tasted
Often, to make a judgment. Slight, she melts
Like a Myrobalane! Here is, yet, a line
In riuo frontis, tells me, he is no knight.
What is he then, sir?
Let me see your hand.
O, your linea Fortune makes it plain;
And stella, here, in monte Veneris:
But, most of all, iunctura annularis.
He is a soldier, or a man of art, lady:
But shall have some great honour, shortly.
Brother,
Hoe's a rare man, believe me!
Hold your peace.
Here comes the tother rare man. 'Saue you Captain.
Good master KESTREL. Is this your sister?
I, sir.
Please you to kusse her, and be proud to know her?
I shall be proud to know you, lady.
Brother,
He calls me lady, too.
I, peace. I heard it.
The Count is come.
Where is he?
At the door.
Why, you must entertain him.
What'll you doe
With these the while?
Why, have 'hem up, and show 'hem
Some fustian book, or the dark glass.
Before god,
She is a delicate dab-chick! I must have her.
Must you? I, if your fortune will, you must.
Come sir, the Captain will come to vs presently.
I'll have you to my chamber of demonstrations,
Where I'll show you both the Grammar, and Logic,
And Rhetoric of quarrelling; my whole method,
Drawn out in tables: and my instrument,
That hah the several scale upon it, shall make you
Able to quarrel, at a straws breadth, by Moone-light.
And, lady, I'll have you look in a glass,
Some half an hour, but to clear your eye-sight,
Against you see your fortune: which is greater,
Then I may judge upon the sudden, trust me.
WHere are you, Doctor?
I'll come to you presently
I will have this same widow, now I have seen her,
On any composition.
What doe you say?
Have you disposed of them?
I have sent 'hem up.
SUBTLE, in troth, I needs must have this widow.
Is that the matter?
Nay, but hear me.
Go to,
If you rebel once, DOL shall know it all.
And scrub'd, and fub'd, dear Don, before you go.
You shall, in faith, my sciruie babioun Don:
Be curried, clawed, and flaw'd, and taw'd, indeed.
I will the heartilier go about it now,
And make the widow a punk, so much the sooner,
To be revenged on this impetuous FACE:
The quickly doing of it is the grace.
COme lady: I knew, the Doctor would not leave,
Till he had found the very nick of her fortune.
To be a Countess, say you? A Spanish Countess, sir.
Why? is that better then an English Countess?
Better? Slight, make you that a question, lady?
Nay, she is a fool, Captain, you must pardon her.
Ask from your courtier, to your innes of court-man,
To your mere milliner: they will tell you all,
Your Spanish jennet is the best horse. Your Spanish
Stoup is the best garb. Your Spanish beard
Is the best cut. Your Spanish ruffs are the best
Wear. Your Spanish Pain the best dance.
Your Spanish titillation in a glove
The best perfume. And, for your Spanish pike,
And Spanish blade, let your poor Captain speak.
Here comes the Doctor.
My most honoured lady,
(For so I am now to stile you, having found
By this my scheme, you are to vnder-goe
An honourable fortune, very shortly.)
What will you say now, if some
I have told her all, sir.
And her right worshipful brother, here, that she shall be
A Countess: doe not delay 'hem, sir. A Spanish Countess.
Still, my scarce worshipful Captain, you can keep
No secret. Well, since he has told you, madame,
Doe you forgive him, and I doe.
She shall doe that, sir.
I'll look to it, it is my charge.
Well then. Nought rests
But that she fit her love, now, to her fortune.
Truly, I shall never brooke a Spaniard.
No?
Never, senator eighty-eight could I abide 'hem,
And that was some three year before I was borne, in truth.
Come, you must love him, or be miserable:
Choose, which you will.
By this good rush, persuade her,
She will cry straw-berries else, within this twelue-month.
Nay, shads, and mackrel, which is worse.
Indeed, sir?
Gods lid, you shall love him, or Isle kick you.
Why?
Isle doe as you will have me, brother.
Doe,
Or by this hand, I'll maul you.
Nay, good sir,
Be not so fierce.
No, my enraged child,
She will be ruled. What, when she comes to taste
The pleasures of a Countess! to be courted
And kissed, and ruffled!
I, behind the hangings.
And then come orth in pomp!
And know her state!
Of keeping all th'idolaters of the chamber
Barer to her, then at their prayers!
Is served
Upon the knee!
And has her pages, huishers,
Foot-men, and coaches
Her six mares
Nay, eight!
To hurry her through London, to th'Exchange,
Bet'lem, the China-houses
Yes, and have
The citizens gape at her, and praise her tyres!
And my-lords goose-turd bands, that rides with her!
Most brave! By this hand, you are not my suster,
If you refuse.
I will not refuse, brother.
Que es esto, Sennores, que non se avenge?
Esta tardanza me mata!
It is the Count come!
The Doctor knew he would be here, by his art.
En gallant Madame, Don! gallantissima!
Pore tdos los diocese, la mas acabada
Hermosura, que he visto en mi vida!
Is it not a gallant language, that they speak?
An admirable language! Is it not French?
No, Spanish, sir.
It goes like law-French,
And that, they say, is the courtliest language.
List, sir.
El Sol ha perdido su lumbre, con el
Resplandor, que tre esta dama. Valga me dios!
Have admires your sister.
Must not she make curtsy?
Odds will, she must go to him, man; and kiss him!
It is the Spanish fashion, for the women
To make first court.
It is true he tells you, sir:
His art knows all.
Pore que no se acde?
He speaks to her, I think?
That he do's sir.
Pore el amor de dios, que es esto, que se trda?
Nay, see: she will not understand him! Gull.
Noddy.
What say you brother?
Ass, my suster,
Go kusse him, as the cunning man would have you,
I'll thrust a pin in your buttocks else.
O, no sir.
Sennora mia, mi persona muy indign esta
Alle gar  tnta Hermosura.
A peck of coals, or so, which is cold comfort, sir.
O my voluptuous mind! I am justly punished.
And so am I, sir.
Cast from all my hopes
Nay, certainties, sir.
By mine own base affections.
O, the cursed fruits of vice, and lust!
Good father,
It was my sin. Forgive it.
Hangs my roof
Over vs still, and will not fall,  justice,
Upon vs, for this wicked man!
Nay, look, sir,
You grieve him, now, with staying in his sight:
Good sir, the noble man will come too, and take you,
And that may breed a tragoedie.
I'll go.
I, and repent at home, sir. It may be,
For some good penance, you may ha'it, yet,
A hundred pound to the box at Bet'lem
Yes.
For the restoring such as have their wits.
I'll do it.
Isle send one to you to receive it.
Doe.
Is no proiection left?
All flown, or stinks, sir.
Will nought be saved, that's good for med'cine, think thou?
I cannot tell, sir. There will be, perhaps,
Something, about the scraping of the shards,
Will cure the itch: though not your itch of mind, sir.
It shall be saved for you, and sent home. Good sir,
This way: for fear the lord should meet you.
FACE.
I.
Is he gone?
Yes, and as heavily
As all the gold he hoped for, were in his blood.
Let vs be light, though.
I, as balls, and bound
And hit our heads against the roof for joy:
There's so much of our care now cast away.
Now to our Don.
Yes, your young widow, by this time
Is made a Countess, FACE: She has been in travail
Of a young heir for you.
Good, sir.
Off with your case,
And greet her kindly, as a bridegroom should,
After these common hazards.
Very well, sir.
Will you go fetch Don DIEGO off, the while?
And fetch him over too, if you'll be pleased, sir:
Would DOL were in her place, to pick his pockets now.
Why, you can doe it as well, if you would set to it.
I pray you prove your virtue.
For your sake, sir.
LAdy, you see into what hands, you are fallen;
Amongst what a nest of villains! and how near
Your honour was t'haue caught a certain clap
(Through your credulity) had I but been
So punctually forward, as place, time,
And other circumstance would have made a man:
For yo'are a handsome woman: would yo' were wise, too.
I am a gentleman, come here disguised,
Only to find the knaveries of this Citadel,
And where I might have wronged your honour, and have not,
I claim some interest in your love. You are,
They say, a widow, rich: and I am a bachelor,
Worth nought: Your fortunes may make me a man,
As mine have preserved you a woman. Think upon it,
And whether, I have deserved you, or no.
I will, sir.
And for these houshold-rogues, let me alone,
To treat with them.
How doth my noble DIEGO?
And my dear madame, Countess? Hath the Count
Been courteous, lady? liberal? and open?
Donzell, me thinks you look melancholic,
After your coitum, and scurvy! True-ly,
I doe not like the dullness of your eye:
It hath a heavy cast, it is vpsee Dutch,
And soy's you are a lumpish whore-master.
Be lighter, I will make your pockets so.
Will you, Don bawd, and pick-purse? How now? Reel you?
Stand up sir, you shall find since I am so heavy,
I'll give you equal weight.
Help, murder!
No, sir.
There's no such thing intended. A good cart,
And a clean whip shall ease you of that fear.
I am the Spanish Don, that should be cossened,
Doe you see? cossened? Whore's your Captain FACE?
That parcell-broker, and whole-bawd, all rascal.
How, SVRLY!
O, make your approach, good Captain.
I'haue found, from whence your copper rings, and spoons
Come, now, wherewith you cheat abroad in taverns.
It was here, you learned t'anoint your boot with brimstone,
Then rub men's gold on it, for a kind of touch,
And say it was nought, when you had changed the colour,
That you might have it for nothing? And this Doctor,
I know not, NAB: thou shalt, if I can help it.
HIERONYMO'S old cloak, ruff, and hat will serve,
Isle tell thee more, when thou bring 'hem.
Sir, I know
The Spaniard hates the Brethren, and hath spies
Upon their actions: and that this was one
I make no scruple. But the holy Synod
Have been in prayer, and meditation, for it.
And it is reueal'd no less, to them, then me,
That casting of money is most lawful.
True.
But here, I cannot doe it; if the house
Should chance to be suspected, all would out,
And we be locked up, in the tower, for ever,
To make gold there (for th'state) never come out:
And, then, are you defeated.
I will tell
This to the Elders, and the weaker Brethren,
That the whole company of the Separation
May join in humble prayer again.
And fasting.)
Yea, for some fitter place. The peace of mind
Rest with these walls.
Thanks, courteous ANANIAS.
What did he come for?
About casting dollars,
Presently, out of hand. And so, I told him,
A Spanish minister came here to spy,
Against the faithful
I conceive. Come SUBTLE,
Thou art so down upon the least disaster!
How would though have done, if I had not helped thee out?
I thank thee FACE, for the angry Boy, in faith.
Who would have looked, it should have been that rascal?
SVRLY? He had died his beard, and all. Well, sir,
Here's damask come, to make you a suit.
Whore's DRVGGER?
He is gone to borrow me a Spanish habit,
Isle be the Count, now.
But whore's the widow?
Within, with my lords sister: Madame DOL
Is entertaining her.
By your favour, FACE,
Now she is honest, I will stand again.
You will not offer it?
Why?
Stand to your word,
Orhere comes
She knows
Yo'are tyrannous still.
Strict for my right. How now, DOL? Hast'told her,
The Spanish Count will come?
Yes, but another is come,
You little looked for!
Who's that?
Your master:
The master of the house.
How, DOL!
She lies.
This is some trick. Come, leave your quiblins, DOROTHEE.
Look out, and see.
Art thou in earnest?
Slight,
Forty of the neighbours are about him, talking.
It is he, by this good day.
Twill prove ill day,
For some on vs.
We are undone, and taken.
Lost, I'am afraid.
You said he would not come,
While there dyed one a week, within the liberties.
No: it was within the walls.
Was it so? Cry' you mercy:
I thought the liberties. What shall we doe now, FACE?
Be silent: not a word, if he call, or knock.
I'll into mine old shape again, and meet him,
Of IEREMIE, the butler. In the mean time,
Doe you two pack up all the goods, and purchase,
That we can carry in the two trunks. I'll keep him
Off for to day, if I cannot longer: and then
At night, Isle ship you both away to Ratcliffe,
Where we'll meet to morrow, and there we'll share.
Let MAMMON'S brass, and pewter keep the cellar:
We'll have another time for that. But, DOL,
'Pray thee, go heate a little water, quickly,
SUBTLE must shave me. All my Captains beard
Must off, to make me appear smooth IEREMIE.
You'll do it?
Yes, Isle shave you, as well as I can.
And not cut my throat, but trim me?
You shall see, sir.
HAs there been such resort, say you?
Daily, sir.
And nightly, too.
I, some as brave as lords.
Ladies, and gentlewomen.
Citizens wives.
And knights.
In coches.
Yes, &amp; oyster-women.
Beside other gallats.
Sailors wives.
Tabacco-men.
Another Pimlico!
What should my knave advance,
To draw this company? He hung out no banners
Of a strange Calfe, with five legs, to be seen?
Or a huge Lobster, with six claws?
No, sir.
We had gone in then, sir.
He has no gift
Of teaching in the nose, that ere I knew of!
You saw no Bills set up, that promised cure
Of agues, or the tooth-ach?
No such thing, sir.
Nor heard a drum struck, for Babiouns, or Puppets?
Neither, sir.
What device should he bring forth now!
I love a teeming wit, as I love my nourishment.
'Pray god he have not kept such open house,
That he hath sold my hangings, and my bedding:
I left him nothing else. If he have eat 'hem,
A plague of the mouth, say I. Sure he has got
Some bawdy pictures, to call all this ging;
Should be to day pronounced, to all your friends.
And where be your andirons now? and your brass pots?
That should have been golden flagons, and great wedges?
Let me but breath. What! They have shut their doors,
Methinks!
I, now, it is holy-day with them.
Rogues,
Coseners, impostors, bawds.
What mean you, sir?
To enter if we can.
Another mans house?
Here is the owner, sir. Turn you to him,
And speak your business.
Are you, sir, the owner?
Yes, sir.
And are those knaves, within, your cheaters?
What knaves? what cheaters?
SUBTLE, and his Lungs.
The gentleman is distracted, sir! No lungs,
Nor lights have been seen here these three weeks, sir,
Within these doors, upon my word!
Your word,
Groom arrogant?
Yes, sir, I am the house-keeper,
And know the keys have not been out of my hands.
This's a new FACE?
You doe mistake the house, sir!
What sign was it at?
You rascal! This is one
Of the confederacy. Come, let's get officers,
And force the door.
'Pray you stay, gentlemen.
No, sir, we'll come with warrant.
I, and then,
We shall have your doors open.
What means this?
I cannot tell, sir!
These are two of the gallants,
That we doe think we saw.
Two of the fools?
You talk as idly as they. Good faith, sir,
I think the Moon has cras'd 'hem all! (O me,
The angry Boy come too? He will make a noise,
And ne'er away till he have betrayed vs all.)
What rogues, bawds, slaves, you'll open the door anon,
Punque, cocatrice, my suster. By this light
I'll fetch the marshall to you. You are a whore,
To keep your castle
Who would you speak with, sir?
The bawdy Doctor, and the cozening Captain,
And PVS my suster.
This is something, sure!
Upon my trust, the doors were never open, sir.
I have heard all their tricks, told me twice over,
By the fat knight, and the lean gentleman.
Here comes another.
ANANIAS too?
And his Pastor?
The doors are shut against vs.
Come forth, you seed of sulphur, sons of fire,
Your stench, it is broke forth: abomination
Is in the house.
I, my suster's there.
The place,
It is become a cage of unclean birds.
Yes, I will fetch the scauenger, and the constable.
You shall doe well.
We'll join, to weed them out.
You will not come then? punque, device, my suster!
Call her not sister. She is a harlot, verily.
I'll raise the street.
Good gentlemen, a word.
Satan, avoid, and hinder not our zeal.
The world's turned Bet'lem.
These are all broke loose,
Out of S. KATHER'NES, where they use to keep,
The better sort of mad-folkes.
All these persons
We saw go in, and out, here.
Yes, indeed, sir.
These were the parties.
Peace, you drunkards. Sir,
I wonder at it! Please you, to give me leave
To touch the door, I'll try, an'the lock be changed.
It mazes me!
Good faith, sir, I believe,
There's no such thing. It is all deceptio visus.
Would I could get him away.
Master Captain, master Doctor.
Who's that?
(Our clark within, that I forgot!) I know not, sir.
For gods sake, when will her Grace be at leisure?
Ha!
Illusions, some spirit of the air: (his gag is melted,
And now he sets out the throat.)
I am almost stiffled
Would you were altogether.)
It is in the house.
Ha! List.
Believe it, sir, in the air!
Peace, you
Mine aunts Grace do's not use me well.
You fool,
Peace, you'll mar all.
Or you will else, you rogue.
O, is it so? Then you converse with spirits!
Come sir. No more o'your tricks, good IEREMIE,
The truth, the shortest way.
Dismiss this rabble, sir.
What shall I doe? I am caught.
Good neighbours,
I thank you all. You may depart. Come sir,
You know that I am an indulgent master:
And therefore, conceal nothing. What's your med'cine,
To draw so many several sorts of wildfowl?
Sir, you were wont to affect mirth, and wit:
(But here's no place to talk on it in the street.)
Give me but leave, to make the best of my fortune,
And only pardon me th'abuse of your house:
It's all I beg. I'll help you to a widow,
In recompense, that you shall give me thanks for,
Will make you seven years younger, and a rich one.
It is but your putting on a Spanish cloak,
I have her within. You need not fear the house,
It was not visited.
But by me, who came
Sooner then you expected.
It is true, sir.
'Pray you forgive me.
Well: let's see your widow.
HOw! have you eaten your gag?
Yes faith, it crumbled
Away in my mouth.
You have spoiled all then.
No,
I hope my aunt of Fairy will forgive me.
Your aunt's a gracious lady: but in troth
You were to blame.
The fume did ouer-come me,
And I did do it to stay my stomach. 'Pray you
So satisfy her Grace. Here comes the Captain.
How now! Is his mouth down?
I! he has spoken!
(A pox, I heard him, and you too.) Hoe's vn-done, then.
(I have been fine to say, the house is haunted
With spirits, to keep churl back.
And hast thou done it?
Sure, for this night.
Why, then triumph, and sing
Of FACE so famous, the precious king
Of present wits.
Did you not hear the coil,
About the door?
Yes, and I dwindled with it.)
Show him his aunt, and let him be dispatched:
I'll send her to you.
Well sir, your aunt her Grace,
Will give you audience presently, on my suit,
And the Captains word, that you did not eat your gag,
In any contempt of her Highness.
Not I, in troth, sir.
Here she is come. Down o'your knees, and wriggle:
She has a stately presence. Good. Yet nearer,
And bid, God save you.
Madame.
And your aunt.
And my most gracious aunt, god save your Grace.
Nephew, we thought to have been angry with you:
But that sweet face of yours, hath turned the tide,
And made it flow with joy, that abed of love.
Arise, and touch our velvet gown.
The skirts,
And kiss 'hem. So.
Let me now stroke that head,
Much, nephew, shalt thou win; much shalt thou spend;
Much shalt thou give away: much shalt thou lend.
(I, much, indeed.) Why doe you not thank her Grace?
I cannot speak, for joy.
See, the kind wretch!
Your Graces kins-man right.
Give me the Bird.
Here is your Fly in a purse, about your neck, cousin,
Wear it, and feed it, about this day seu' night,
On your right wrist
Open a vein, with a pin,
And let it suck but once a week: till then,
You must not look on it.
No. And, kins-man,
Bear your self worthy of the blood you come on.
Her grace would ha'you eat no more Wool-sack pies,
Nor Dagger frume'ty.
Nor break his fast,
In heaven, and hell.
Shoe's with you every where!
Nor play with Costar-mongers, at mum-chance, tray-trip.
God make you rich, (when as your aunt has done it:) but keep
The gallant'st company, and the best games
Yes, sir.
Gleek and primero: and what you get, be true to vs.
By this hand, I will.
You may bring's a thousand pound,
Before to morrow night, (if but three thousand,
Be stirring) and you will.
I swear, I will then.
Your Ply will learn you all games.
Have you done there?
Your grace will command him no more duties?
No:
But come, and see me often. I may chance
To leave him three or four hundred chests of treasure,
And some twelve thousand acres of Faerie land:
If he game well, and comely, with good gamesters.
There's a kind aunt! kiss her departing part.
But you must sell you forty mark a year, now:
I, sir, I mean.
Or, gi't away: pox on it.
I'll gi't mine aunt. Isle go and fetch the writings.
It is well, away.
Whore's SUBTLE?
Here. What news?
DRVGGER is at the door, go take his suite,
And bid him fetch a Parson, presently:
Say, he shall marry the widow. Thou shalt spend
A hundred pound by the service! Now, queen DOL,
Have you packed up all?
Yes.
And how doe you like
The lady PLIANT?
A good dull innocent.
Here's your HIERONIMO'S cloak, and hat.
Give me 'hem.
And the ruff too?
Yes, I'll come to you presently.
Now, he is gone about his project, DOL,
I told you of, for the widow.
It is direct
Against our articles.
Well, we'll fit him, wench.
Hast thou gulled her of her jewels, or her bracelets?
No, but I will do it.
Soon at night, my DOLLY,
When we are shipped, and all our goods aboard,
East-ward for Ratcliffe; we will turn our course
To Brainford, westward, if thou'saist the word:
And take our leaves of this ore-weaning rascal,
This peremptory FACE.
Content, I'am weary of him.
Tho 'hast cause, when the slave will run a wiving, DOL,
Against the instrument, that was drawn between vs.
I'll pluck his bird as bare as I can.
Yes, tell her,
She must by any means, address some present
To the cunning man; make him amends, for wronging
His art with her suspicion; send a ring;
Or chain of pearl; she will be tortured else
Extremely in her sleep, say: and have strange things
Come to her. Wilt thou?
Yes.
My fine flitter-mouse,
My bird of the night; we'll tickle it at the pigeons,
When we have all, and may vn-lock the trunks,
And say, this's mine, and thine, and thine, and mine
What now, a billing?
Yes, a little exalted
In the good passage of our stock-affaires.
DRVGGER has brought his Parson, take him in, SUBTLE,
And send NAB back again, to wash his face.
I will: and shave himself?
If you can get him.
You are hot upon it, FACE, what ere it is!
A trick, that DOL shall spend ten pound a month by.
Is he gone?
The Chaplain waits you in the hall, sir.
I'll go bestow him.
He will now marry her, instantly.
He cannot, yet, he is not ready. Dear DOL,
Cousin her of all thou can. To deceive him
Is no deceit, but justice, that would break
Such an inextricable tie as ours was.
Let me alone to fit him.
Come, my venturers,
You have packed up all? Where be the trunks? Bring forth.
Here.
Let's see 'hem. Whore's the money?
Here,
In this.
MAMMONS ten pound: eight score before.
The Brethrens money, this. DRVGGERS, and DAPPERS.
What paper's that?
The jewel of the waiting maids,
That stole it from her lady, to know certain
If she should have precedence of her mistress?
Yes.
What box is that?
The fish-wiues rings, I think:
And th'ale-wiues single money. Is it not DOL?
Yes: and the whistle, that the sailors wife
Brought you, to know, and her husband were with WARD.
We'll wet it to morrow: and our siluer-beakers,
And tavern cups. Where be the French petti-coats,
And girdles, and hangers?
Here, in the trunk,
And the bolts of lawn.
Is DRVGGERS damask, there?
And the tobacco?
Yes.
Give me the keys.
Why you the keys!
No matter, DOL: because
We shall not open 'hem, before he comes.
It is true, you shall not open them, indeed:
Nor have 'hem forth. Doe you see? Not forth, DOL.
No!
No, my smock-rampant. The right is, my master
Knows all, has pardoned me, and he will keep 'hem,
Doctor, it is true (you look) for all your figures:
I sent for him, indeed. Wherefore, good partners,
Both hee, and she, be satisfied: for, here
Determines the indenture tripartite,
Twixt SUBTLE, DOL, and FACE. All I can doe
Is to help you over the wall, of the back-side;
Or lend you a sheet, to save your velvet gown, DOL.
Here will be officers, presently; bethink you,
Of some course suddenly to scope the dock:
For thither you'll come else. Hark you, thunder.
You are a precious fiend!
Open the door.
DOL, I am sorry for thee in faith. But hearst thou?
It shall go hard, but I will place thee some-where:
Thou shalt have my letter to mistress AMO.
Hang you
Or madame Caesarian.
Pox upon you, rogue,
Would I had but time to beat thee.
SUBTLE,
Let's know where you set up next; I'll send you
A customer, now and then, for old acquaintance:
What new course ha'you?
Rogue, I'll hang my self:
That I may walk a greater devil, then thou,
And haunt thee in the flock-bed, and the buttery.
WHat doe you mean, my masters?
Open your door,
Cheaters, bawds, conjurers.
Or we'll break it open.
What warrant have you?
Warrant enough, sir, doubt not:
If you'll not open it.
Is there an officer, there?
Yes, two, or three for failing.
Have but patience,
And I will open it straight.
Sir, have you done?
Is it a marriage? perfect?
Yes, my brain.
Off with your ruff, and cloak then, be your self, sir.
Down with the door.
Slight, ding it open.
Hold.
Hold gentlemen, what means this violence?
Where is this Collier?
And my Captain FACE?
These day-Owles.
That are birding in men's purses.
Madame Suppository.
Doxey, my sister.
Locusts
Of the foul pit.
Profane as BELL, and the Dragon.
Worse then the Grasse-hoppers, or the Lice of Egypt.
Good gentlemen, hear me. Are you officers,
And cannot stay this violence?
Keep the peace.
Gentlemen, what is the matter? Whom doe you seek?
Be patient ANANIAS.
I am strong,
And will stand up, well girt, against an host,
That threaten GAD in exile.
I shall send you
To Amsterdam, to your cellar.
I will pray there,
Against thy house: may dogs defile thy walls,
And wasps, and hornets breed beneath thy roof,
This seat of false-hood, and this cave of cos'nage.
Another too?
Not I sir, I am no Brother.
Away you HARRY NICHOLAS, doe you talk?
No, this was ABEL DRVGGER. Good sir, go,
And satisfy him; tell him, all is done:
He stayed too long a washing of his face.
The Doctor, he shall hear of him at Westchester;
And of the Captain, tell him at Yarmouth: or
Some good port-towne else, lying for a wind.
If you get off the angry Child, now, sir
Come on, you yew, you have matched most sweetly, have you not?
Did not I say, I would never have you tupt
But by a dubbed Boy, to make you a lady-Tom?
Slight, you are a mammet! O, I could touse you, now.
Death, mun' you marry with a pox?
You lie, Boy;
As sound as you: and I am afore-hand with you.
Anon?
Come, will you quarrel? I will fees you, sirrah.
Why doe you not buckle to your tools?
Gods light!
This is a fine old Boy, as ere I saw!
What, doe you change your copy, now? Proceed,
Here stands my dove: stoup at her, if you dare.
Slight I must love him! I cannot choose, in faith!
And I should be hanged for it. Suster, I protest,
I honour thee, for this match.
O, doe you so, sir?
Yes, and thou can take tobacco, and drink, old Boy,
I'll give her five hundred pound more, to her marriage,
Then her own state.
Fill a pipe-full, IEREMIE.
Yes, but go in, and take it, sir.
We will.
I will be ruled by thee in any thing, IEREMIE.
Slight, thou art not hide-bound! thou art a Iouy' Boy!
Come let's in, I pray thee, and take our whiffs.
Whiff in with your sister, brother Boy. That master
That had received such happiness by a servant,
In such a widow, and with so much wealth,
Were very ungrateful, if he would not be
A little indulgent to that servants wit,
And help his fortune, though with some small strain
Of his own candor. Therefore, gentlemen,
And kind Spectators, if I have out-stript
An old mans gravity, or strict canon, think
What a young wife, and a good brain may doe:
Stretch ages truth sometimes, and crack it too.
Speak for thy self, knave.
So I will, sir. Gentlemen,
My part a little fell in this last Scene,
Yet it was decorum. And though I am clean
Got off, from SUBTLE, SVRLY, MAMMON, DOL,
Hot ANANIAS, DAPPER, DRVGGER, all
With whom I traded; yet I put my self
On you, that are my country: and this pelf,
Which I have got, if you doe quit me, rests
To feast you often, and inuit new ghosts.

FOrtune, that favours Fools, these two short hours
We wish away; both for your sakes, and ours,
Judging Spectators: and desire in place,
To the Author justice, to our selves but grase.
Our Scene is LONDON, because we would make known.
No Countries mirth is better then our own.
No Clime breeds better matter, for your Whore,
Baud, Squire, Impostor, many Persons more,
Whose manners, now called Humours, feed the Stage:
And which have still been Subject, to the rage
Or spleen of Comic writers. Though this Pen
Did never aim to grieve, but better Men;
How ever the Age, he lives in, doth endure
The vices that she breeds, aboue their cure.
But, when the wholesome remedies are sweet,
And, in their working, Game, and Profit meet,
He hopes to find no spirit so much diseased,
But will, with such fair Correctiues, be pleased.
For here, he doth not fear, who can apply.
If there be any, that will sit so nigh
Unto the stream, to look what it doth run,
They shall find things, they'ld think, or wish, were done;
They are so natural follies: But so shown,
As even the Doers may see, and yet not own.
Believe I will.
Thy worst. I fart at thee.
Ha'you your wits? Why Gentlemen! for love
Sirah, I'll strip you
What to do? like figs
Out at my
Rogue, Rogue, out of all your sleights.
Nay, look ye! Sovereign, General, are you Madmen?
O, let the wild sheep loose. Isle gum your silks
With good strong water, an'you come.
Will you have
The neighbours hear you? Will you betray all?
Hark, I hear some body.
Srah.
I shall mar
All that the Taylor has made, if you approach.
You most notorious whelp, you insolent slave,
Dare you doe this?
Yes faith, yes faith.
Why! who
Am I, my Mongrel? Who am I?
I'll tell you,
Since you know not your self.
Speak lower, Rogue.
Yes. You were once (time's not long past) the good,
Honest, plain, liuerie-three-pound-Thrum; that kept
Your Masters worships house, here, in the Friars,
For the vacations.
Will you be so loud?
Since, by my means, translated Suburb-Captaine.
By your means, Doctor Dog?
Within mans memory,
All this, I speak of.
Why, I pray you, have I
Been countenanced by you? or you, by me?
Doe but collect, Sr. where I met you first.
I doe not hear well.
Not of this, I think it.
But I shall put you in mind, Sr. at Pie-Corner,
Taking your meal of steam in, from Cooks stalls
Where, like the Father of Hunger, you did walk
Pieously costive with your pinched horne-nose,
And your complexion, of the Roman wash,
Stuck full of black, and melancholic worms,
Like poulder corns, shot, at the Artillery-yard.
I wish, you could advance your voice, a little.
When you went pinned up, in the several rags,
Yo'had raked, and picked from dunghs, before day,
Your feet in mouldy sppers, for your kibes,
A felt of rug, and a thin thredden cloak,
That scarce would cover your no-buttockes.
So Sr.
When all your Alchemy, and your Algebra,
Your Minerals, Vegetalls, and Animals,
Your Conjuring, Cosning, and your dozen of Trades
Could not relieve your corps, with so much linen
Would make you tinder, but to see a fire;
I ga'you countenance, credit for your Coals,
Your Stills, your Glasses, your Materials,
Built you a Fornace, drew you Customers,
Advanced all your black Arts; lent you, beside.
A house to practise in.
Your Masters house?
Where you have studied the more thriving skill
Of Bawdry, since.
Yes, in your Masters house.
You, and the Rats, here, kept possession.
Make it not strange. I know, you were one, could keep
The Buttry-hatch still locked, and save the chippings,
Sell the dole-beere to Aqua-vtae men,
The which, together with your Christmas veils,
At Post, and Pair, your letting out of Counters,
Made you a pretty stock some twenty marks,
And gave you credit, to converse with cobwebs,
Here, since your Mistress death hath broke up house.
You might talk softlier, Rascal.
No, you Scarab,
I'll thunder you, in pieces. I will teach you
How to beware, to tempt a Fury' again
That carries tempest in his hand, and voice.
The Place has made you valiant.
No, your Clothes.
Thou Vermin have I tan thee, out of dung,
So poor, so wretched, when no living thing
Would keep thee company, but a Spider, or worse?
Raised thee from brooms, and dust, and watering pots?
Sublsm'd thee, and exaled thee, and fixed thee
In the third region, the high state of grace?
Wrought thee to spirit, to quintessence, with pains
Would twice have won me the Philosophers work?
Put thee in words, and fashion? made thee fit
For more then ordinary fellowships?
Given thee thy oaths, thy quarrelling dimensions?
Thy rules, to cheat at horse-race, cock-pit, cards,
Dice, or what ever gallant tincture, else?
Made thee a Second, in mine own great Art?
And have I this for thank? Doe'you rebel?
Doe you fly out, in the proiection?
Would you be gone now?
Gentlemen, what mean you?
Will you mar all?
Slave, thou had had no Name,
Will you undo your selves, with civil war?
Never been known, past Equi Clibanum,
The heate of horse-dung, under ground, in cellars,
Or an Ale-house, darker then deaf Iohn's: been lost
To all mankind, but Laundresses, and Tipsters,
Had not I been.
Do'you know who hears you, Somereign?
Srah
Nay General, I thought you were civil.
I shall turn desperate, if you grow thus loud.
And hang thy self, I care not.
Hang thee, Collier,
And all thy pots, and pans, in picture I will,
Since thou hast moved me.
, this'll ore-throw all.
Write thee up Baud, in Paules; have all thy tricks
Of cosning with a hollow cole, dust, scrapings,
Searching for things lost, with a sieve, and shears,
Erecting figures, in your rows of Houses,
And taking in of shadows, with a glass,
Told in red letters: And a face, cut for thee,
Worse then Gamaliel Ratsey's,
Are you sound?
Ha'you your senses, Masters?
I will have
A Book, but barely reckoning thy Impostures,
Shall prou a true Philphers stone, to Printers.
Away you Trencher-Raskall.
Out you Dog-leach,
The vomit of all prisons
Will you be
Your own destructions, Gentlemen?
Still spewed out
For lying too heavy of the basket.
Cheater.
Bawd.
Cowherd.
Conjurer.
Cutpurse.
Witch.
O me.
We are ruined lost. Ha'you no more regard
To your reputations? Whore's your judgment? Slight,
Have yet, some care of me, o'your Republique.
Away this Brach. I'll bring thee, Rogue, within
The Statute of Sorcery, tricesimo tertio
Of Harry the eight: I and (perhaps) thy neck
Within a noose, for laundring gold, and barbing.
You'll bring your head within a cocks-combe, will you?
And you Sr, with your Menstrue, gather it up.
S'death you abominable pair of Stinkards
Leave off your barking, and grow one again,
Or, by the light that shines, I'll cut your throats.
I'll not be made a prey unto the Marshall,
For ne'er a snarling Dog-bolt o'you both.
Ha'you together cossen'd all this while,
And all the world, and shall it now be said
Yo'haue made most courteous shift, to cousin your selves?
You will accuse him? You will bring him in
Within the Statute? Who shall take your word,
A whoresonne, upstart, Apocryphal Captain,
Whom not a Puritan, in Black-Friers, will trust
So much, as for a feather? And you, too,
Will give the cause, forsooth? You will insult,
And claim a primacy, in the divisions?
You must be chief? as if you, only, had
The poulder to project with? and the work
Were not begun out of aequalitie?
The venture tripartite? All things in common?
Without priority? S'death, you perpetual Cures,
Fall to your couples, again, and cousin kindly,
And heartily, and lovingly, as you should,
And loose not the beginning of a Term,
Or, by this hand, I shall grow factious too
And, take my part, and quit you.
Tic his fault,
He ever murmurs, and objects his pains,
And says, the weight of all lies upon him.
Why so it do's.
How does it? Doe not we
Sustain our parts?
Yes, but they are not aequall.
Why, if your part exceed to day, I hope
Ours may, to morrow, match it.
I, they may.
May, murmuring Mastiff, I, and do. Gods will!
Help me to thrattell him.
Dorothee, Mistress Dorothee,
O'ds precious, I'll doe any thing. What doe you mean?
Because o'your Fermentation, and Cibation?
Not I, by heaven.
Your Sol &amp; Luna: help me.
Would I were hanged then. I'll conform my self.
Will you Sr. doe so then, and quickly. Swear.
What should I swear?
To leave your faction Sr.
And labour, kindly, in the commune work.
Let me not breath, if I meant ought, beside.
I only used those speeches, as a spur
To him.
I hope we need o spurs Sr. Doewe?
Slid, prove to day, who shall shark best.
Agreed.
Yes, and work close, and friendly
Slight the knot
Shall grow the stronger, for this breach, with me.
Why so, my good Babounes! Shall we go make
A sort of sober, scruy, praecise Neighbours,
(That scarce have smiled twice, sinned King came in)
A feast of laughter, at our follies? Raskalls,
Would run themselves from breath, to see me ride,
Or you t'haue but a Hole, to thrust your heads in,
For which you should pay Eare-rent: No, Agree.
And may Don Provost ride a feasting, long,
In his old velvet jerkin, and stained scarfs,
(My noble Sovereign, and worthy General)
Ere we contribute a new cruel garter
To his most worsted worship.
Royal Dol!
Spoken like Claridiana, and thy self.
For which at supper, thou shalt sit in triumph,
And not be styled `Do common, but Do proper,
Dol singular: the longest cut, at night.
Shall draw thee for his Dol particular.
Who's that? one rings. To the windo'
Pray heaven,
The Master doe not troublevs, this quarter.
O, fear not him. While there dies one, a week,
Of the plague, hoe's safe, from thinking, toward London.
Beside, hoe's busy at his hop-yardes, now,
I had a letter from him. If he doe,
He will send such word, for airing of the house
As you shall have sufficient time, to quit it.
Though we break up a fortnight, it is no matter.
Who is it, Dol?
A fine young Quodling.
O
My Lawyers Clerk, I lighted on, last night,
In Hol'bourne, at the Dagger. He would have
(I told you of him) a Familiar,
To rifle with at horses, and win cups.
O, let him in.
Stay. Who shall do it?
Get you
Your robes on. I will meet him, as going out.
And what shall I do?
Not be seen, away.
Seem you very reserved.
Enough.
God be w'you, Sr.
I pray you, let him know that I was here.
His name is Dapper. I would gladly have stayed, But
Captain, I am here
Who's that? Hoe's come, I think, Doctor.
Good faith, Sr, I was going away.
In truth,
I am very sorry, Captain.
But I thought
Sure, I should meet you.
I am very glad.
I'had a sciruy , or two, to make,
And I had lent my watch last night, to one
That dines to day, at the Sheriffs: and so was robbed
Of my passe-time Is this the Cunning-man?
This is his worship.
Is he a Doctor?
Yes.
And ha'you broke with him, Captain?
I.
And how
Faith, he doe's make the matter, Sr. so dainty,
I know not what to say.
Not so, good Captain.
Would I were fairly rid on it, believe me.
Nay, now you grieve me Sr. Why should you wish so?
I dare assure you, I'll not be ungrateful.
I cannot think you will, Sr. But the Law
Is such a thingAnd then he says, Reade's matter
Falling so lately.
Read? He was an Ass,
And dealt Sr with a Fool.
It was a Clerk, Sr.
A Clerk?
Nay, hear me, Sr. you know the Law
Better, I think
I should Sr. and the danger.
You know I showed the Statuee to you?
You did so.
And will I tell, then? By this  of flesh,
Would it might never wright good  hand, more,
If I discover. What doe you think of me,
That I am a Chiaue?
What's that?
The Turk was, here.
As one would say, Doe you think I am a Turk?
I'll tell the Doctor so.
Doe, good sweet Captain.
Come, noble Doctor,' pray thee, let's prevail,
This is the Gentleman, and he is no Chiause.
Captain, I have returned you all my answer.
I would doe much Sr. for your loveBut this
I neither may, nor can.
Tut, doe not say so.
You deal, now, with a noble fellow, Doctor,
One that will thank you, richly, and h'is no Chiause:
Let that Sr. move you.
Pray you, forbear.
He has
Four Angels, here.
You doe me wrong good Sr.
Doctor, wherein? To tempt you with these spirits?
To tempt my art, and love, Sir, to my peril.
Fore heaven, I scarce can think you are my friend,
That so would draw me to apparent danger.
I draw you? A horse draw you, and a halter,
You, and your Flies together.
Nay, good Captain.
That know no difference of men.
Good words Sr.
Good deeds, Sr. Doctor Dogges-mouth. Slight I bring you
No cheating Clim-o'the-Cloughs, or Claribels.
That look as big as fine, and fifty, and flush,
And spit out secrets, like hot Custard
Captain.
Nor any melancholic vnder-Scribe,
Shall tell the Vicar: but, a special Gentle,
That is the Heir to forty marks, a year,
Consorts with the small Poets of the time,
Is the sole hope of his old Grand-Mother,
That knows the Law, and writes you six fair Hands,
Is a fine Clerk, and has his Ciphring perfect,
Will take his oath, of the Greek Testament,
If need be, in his pocket: and can court
His Mistress, out of Ouid.
Nay, dear Captain.
Did you not tell me, so?
Yes, but I'd ha'you
Use Mr. Doctor, with some more respect.
Hang him proud Stag, with his broad velvet head.
But, for your sake, I'd choke ere I would change
An article of breath, with such a Puck-fist.
Come let's be gone.
Pray you, le'me speak with you.
His worship calls you, Captain.
I am sorry,
I ever embarked my self, in such a business.
Nay good Sr. He did call you.
Will he take, then?
First, hear me
Not a syllable, 'lesse you take.
Pray ye' Sr.
Upon no terms, but an Assumpsit.
Your Humour must be law.
Why now Sr. talk.
Now, I dare hear you with mine honour. Speak.
So may this Gentleman too
Why Sr.
No whispring,
Before Heaven, you doe not apprehend the loss
You doe your self, in this.
Wherein? For what?
Mary, to be so'importunate for one,
That, when he has it, will undo you all:
He'll win up all the money in the Town.
How!
Yes. And blow up Gamester, after Gamester,
As they doe crackers, in a Puppit-play.
If I doe give him a Familiar,
Give you him all you play for; never set him:
For he will have it.
You're mistaken, Doctor.
Why, he do's ask one but for Cups, and Horses,
A rifling Fly: none o'your great Familiars.
Yes, Captain, I would have it, for all games.
I told you so.
Slight, that's a new business!
I understood you, a tame Bird, to fly
Twice in a Term, or so; on Friday nights,
When you had left the Office: for a Nag,
Of forty, or fifty shillings.
I it is true, Sir,
But I doe think, now, I shall leave the Law,
And therefore.
Why this changes quite the case!
Do'you think, that I dare move him?
If you please, Sir,
Ell's one to him, I see.
What? for that money?
I cannot with my Conscience. Nor should you
Make the request, me thinks.
No, Sir, I mean
To add consideration.
Why, then, Sir,
I'll try. Say, that it were for all games, Doctor?
I say, then, not a mouth shall eat for him
At any Ordinary, but of the Score,
That is a gaming mouth, conceive me.
Indeed!
He'll draw you all the treasure of the realm,
If it be set him.
Speak you this from art?
I, Sir, and reason too; the ground of art.
H'is of the only best complexion
The Queen of Fairy loves.
What! is he
Peace.
He'll ouer-heare you. Sir, should she but see him
What?
Do not you tell him.
Will he win at cards too?
The Spirits of dead Holland, living Isaac,
You'd swear, were in him: such a vigorous luck
As cannot be resisted. Slight he'll put
Six o'your Gallants, to a cloak, indeed.
A strange success, that some man shall be borne too!
Hee hears you, man.
Sir, Isle not be ungrateful.
Faith, I have a confidence in his good nature:
You hear, he says, he will not be ungrateful.
Why, as you please, my venture follows yours.
Troth, doe it Doctor. Think him trusty, and make him.
Hee may make vs both happy in an hour:
Win some five thousand pound, and send vs two on it.
Believe it, and I will, Sir.
And you shall, Sir.
You have heard all?
No, what was it? Nothing, I Sir.
Nothing?
A little, Sir.
Well, a rare Star
Reigned, at your birth.
At mine Sir? No.
The Doctor
Swears that you are
Nay Captain, Yo'll tell all, now.
Allied to the Queen of Faerie.
Who? that I am?
Believe it, no such matter.
Yes, and that
Yo'were borne with a Caul o'your head.
Who says so?
Come.
You know it well enough, though you dissemble it.
I face, I doe not. You are mistaken.
How!
Swear by your face? and in a thing, so known
Unto the Doctor? How shall we, Sir, trust you
In the other matter? Can we ever think,
When you have won five, or six thousand pound,
Yo'll send vs shares in it, by this rate?
By Gad, Sir,
I'll win ten thousand pound, and send you half.
I face is no other.
No, no, he did but jest.
Go too. Go, thank the Doctor. He is your friend.
To take it so.
I thank his Worship.
So?
Another Angel.
Must I?
Must you? Slight,
What else is Thanks? Will you be trivial? Doctor.
When must he come, for his Familiar?
Shall I not ha'it with me?
O, good Sir,
There must a world of ceremonies pass,
You must be bathed, and fumigated, first;
Besides, the Queen of Faerie do's not rise,
Till it be noon.
Not, if she danced, to night.
And she must bless it.
Did you never see
Her royal Grace, yet?
Whom?
Your Aunt of Faerie?
Not, since she kissed him, in the cradle, Captain,
I can resolve you that.
Well, see her Grace,
What ere it cost you, for a thing that I know.
It will be somewhat hard to compass: But,
How ever, see her. You are made, believe it,
If you can see her. Her Grace is a lone woman,
And very rich, and if she take a phant'sye,
She will doe strange things. See her, at any hand.
'Slid, she may hap to leave you all she has:
It is the Doctors fear.
How will it be done, then?
Let me alone take you no thought. Doe you
But say to me. Captain, I'll see her Grace.
Captain, I'll see her Grace.
Enough.
Who's there?
Anon. (Conduct him forth, by the back way)
Sir, against one a Clock, prepare your self.
Till when you must be fasting; only, take
Three drops of vinegar, in, at your nose;
Two at your mouth; and one, at either ear;
Then, bath your fingers ends; and, wash your eyes;
To sharpen your five Senses; and, cry Hum,
Thrice; and then Buzz, as often; and then, Come.
Can you remember this?
I warrant you.
Well, then, away. It is, but your bestowing
Some twenty nobles, among her Graces Servants;
And, put on a clean shirt: You doe not know
What grace her Grace may doe you in clean linen.
COme in. Good wives, I pray you forbear me, now.
Troth I can doe you no good, till afternoon.
What is your name, say you, Abel Drugger?
Yes, Sir.
A seller of Tobacco?
Yes, Sir.
'Vmh.
Free of the Grocers?
I, and't please you.
Well.
Your business, Abel?
This, and't please your worship,
I'am a young beginner, and am building
Of a new shop, and't like your worship; just,
At corner of a street: (Here's the plot on it.)
And I would know, by art, Sir, of your Worship,
Which way I should make my door, by Necromantie.
And, where my Shelves. And, which should be for Boxes,
And, which for Pots, I would be glad to thrive, Sir.
And, I was wished to your Worship, by a Gentleman,
One Captain Face, that soy's you know men's Planets,
And their good Angels, and their bad.
I doe
If I doe see'hem.
What! my honest Abel?
Thou art well met, here.
Troth, Sir, I was speaking,
Just, as your Worship came here, of your Worship.
I pray you, speak for me to Mr. Doctor.
He shall doe any thing. Doctor, doe you hear?
This is my friend, Abel, an honest fellow,
He lets me have good Tobacco, and he do's not
Sophisticate it, with Sack-lees, or Oil,
Nor washes it in Muscatel, and Grains,
Nor buries it, in gravel, under ground,
Wrapped up in greasy leather, or pissed clouts:
But keeps it in fine Lilly-pots, that opened,
Smell like conserve of Roses, or French Beans.
He has his Maple block, his silver tongs,
Winchester pipes, and fire of Juniper.
A neat, spruce-honest-fellow, and no Goldmith.
H'is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on.
Already, Sir, ha'you found it? Lo'thee Abel!
And, in right way to'ward riches.
Sir.
This Summer.
He will be of the Clothing of his company.
And, next spring, called to the Scarlet. Spend what he can.
What, and so little beard?
Sir, you must think,
He may have a receipt, to make hair come.
But he'll be wise, preserve his youth, and fine for it:
His fortune looks for him, another way.
'Slid, Doctor, how can thou know this so soon?
I'am amused, at that!
By a rule, Captain,
In Metaposcopie, which I doe work by,
A certain Star in the forehead, which you see not.
Your Chest-nut, or your Oliue-colourd face
Do's never fail: and your long Ear doth promise.
I know it, by certain spots too, in his teeth,
And on the nail of his Mercurial finger.
Which finger's that?
His little finger, Look.
Yo'were borne upon a Wensday.
Yes, indeed, Sir.
The Thumb, in Chiromantie, we give Venus;
The Fore-finger to Jove; the Midst, to Saturn;
The Ring to Sol, the Least, to Mercury:
Who was the Lord, Sir, of his Horoscope,
His House of life being Libra. Which foreshew'd,
He should be a Merchant, and should trade with Balance.
Why, this is strange! Is it not, honest Nab?
There is a Ship now, coming from Ormu's,
That shall yield him, such a Commodity
Of Drugs. This is the West, and this the South?
Yes, Sir.
And those are your two sides?
I, Sir.
Make me your Door, then, South; your broad side, West:
And, on the East-side of your shop, aloft,
Write Mathlaj, Tarmiel, and Baraborat;
Upon the North-part, Rael, Velel, Thiel,
They are the names of those Mercurian spirits,
That doe fright flies from boxes.
Yes, Sir,
And
Beneath your threshold, bury me a Loade-stone
To draw in Gallants, that wear spurs: The rest,
They'll seem to follow.
That's a secret, Nab.
And, on your stall, a Puppet, with a vice,
And a Court-fucus, to call Citie-Dames.
You shall deal much, with Minerals.
Sir, I have,
At home, already
I, I know, you'haue Arsnike,
Vitriol, Sal Tartre, Argaile, Alkali,
Cinoper. I know all. This fellow, Captain,
Will come, in time, to be a great Distiller,
And give a say (I will not say directly,
But very fair) at the Philosophers stone.
Why, how now Abel! Is this true?
Good Captain,
What must I give?
Nay, Isle not counsel thee.
Thou hearst, what wealth, he says, spend what thou can,
You are like to come too.
I would gi'him a Crown.
A Crown? And toward such a fortune? Hart,
Thou shalt rather gi'him thy shop. No Gold about thee?
Yes, I have a Portague, I ha'kept this half year.
Out on thee, Nab, Slight, there was such an offer,
Shalt keepe't no longer, I'll gi'it him for thee?
Doctor, Nab prays your Worship, to drink this, and swears
He will appear more grateful, as your skill
Do's raise him in the world.
I would entreat
Another favour of his Worship.
What is it, Nab?
But, to look over, Sir, my Almanac,
And cross out my Ill-dayes, that I may neither
Bargain, nor trust upon them.
That he shall, Nab.
Leave it, it shall be done, against afternoon.
And a direction for his shelves.
Now, Nab?
Art thou well pleased, Nab?
Thank, Sir, both your Worcesterships.
Away.
Why, now, you smoky persecutor of Nature,
Now, doe you see, that something's to be done,
Beside your Beech-coale, and your Cor'siue waters,
Your Crosse-lets, Crucibles, and Cucurbites?
You must have stuff, brought home to you, to work on?
And, yet, you think, I am at no expense.
In searching out these veins, then following 'hem,
Then trying'hem out. Before God, my intelligence
Costs me more money, then my share oft comes too,
In these rare works.
You'are pleasant, Sir. How now?
what soy's, my dainty Dolkin?
Yonder Fish-wife
Will not away. And there's your Giantess,
The Baud of Lambeth.
Hart, I cannot speak with'hem.
Not, before night, I have told'hem, in a voice,
Thorough the Trunk, like one of your Familiars.
But I have spied Sir Epicure Mammon.
Where?
Coming along, at far end of the lane,
Slow of his feet, but earnest of his tongue,
To one, that's with him.
Face, Go you, and shift,
Dol, you must presently make ready, too.
Why, what's the matter?
O, I did look for him
With the suns rising. Marvel, he could sleep.
This is the day, I am to perfect for him
The Magisterium, our great work, the Stone;
And yield it, made, into his hands: Of which,
He has, this month, talked, as he were possessed on it,
And, now, hoe's dealing pieces on it, away.
Me thinks, I see him, entering Ordinaries,
Dispensing for the pox; and Plaguy-houses,
Reaching his dose; Walking More-fields for Lepers;
And offering Citizens Wives Pomander Bracelets,
As his preservative, made of the Elixir;
Searching the Spittle, to make old Bawds young;
And the High ways, for Beggars, to make rich.
I see no end of his labours. He will make
Nature ashamed, of her long sleep, when Art,
Who's but a Step-dame, shall doe more, then she,
In her best love to Man-kinde, ever could.
If his Dream last, He will turn the Age, to Gold.
COme on, Sir. Now, you set your foot, on Shore
In No Orb; Here's the rich Porn:
And there within, Sir, are the golden Mines
Great Salomon's Op. He was sailing to it
Three years, but we have reached it in ten Months.
This is the day, wherein, to all my friends,
I will pronounce the happy word, Be rich.
This day, you shall be Spectassimi.
You shall no more deal with the hollow Die,
Or the frail Card. No more be at charge of keeping
The Liuery-punke, for my young Heir, that must
Seal, at all hours, in his shirt. No more
If he deny, ha'him beaten to it, as he is
That brings him the commodity. No more
Shall thirst of satin, or the covetous hunger
Of velvet entrails, for a rude spun cloak,
To be displayed at Madam Augusta's, make
The sons of Sword, and Hazard fall before
The golden Calfe, and on their knees, whole nights,
Commit I dolatry with Wine, and Trumpets
Or go a feasting, after Drum and Ensign.
No more of this. You shall start up young Vice-roies,
And have your Punques, and Punquettees, my Surly.
And unto thee, I speak it first, Bearish.
Where is my Subtle, there? Within Hough? Sir.
He will come to you, by and by.
That's his Fire-drake,
His Lungs, his Zephyrus, he that puffs his coals,
Till he firk Nature, up, in her own center.
You are not faithful, Sir. This night, I'll change
All, that is mettle, in my house, to gold.
And, early in the morning, will I send
To all the Plumbers, and the Peuterers,
And buy their Tin, and Lead up: and to Lothbury.
For all the copper.
What, and turn that too?
Yes, and I'll purchase Devonshire, and Cornwaile,
And make them perfect Indies. You admire now?
No faith.
But when you see th'effects of the great medicine!
Of which one part proiected on a hundred
Of Mercury, or Venus, or the Moon,
Shall turn it, to as many of the Sun;
Nay, to a thousand, so ad infinitum:
You will believe me.
Yes, when I see it, I will.
But, if my eyes doe cousin me so (and I
Giuing'hem no occasion) sure, I'll have
A Whore, shall pisse'hem out next day.
Ha! Why?
Doe you think, I fable with you? I assure you,
He that has once the Flower of the Sun,
The perfect Ruby, which we call Elixir,
Not only can doe that, but by it's virtue,
Can confer honour, love, respect, long life,
Give safety, valor: yea, and victory,
To whom he will. In eight, and twenty days,
I'll make an Old man, of fourscore, a Child.
No doubt hee'is that already.
Nay, I mean,
Restore his years, renew him, like an Eagle,
To the fifth age; make him get Sons, and Daughters,
Young Giants; as our Philosophers have done
(The ancient Patriarchs before the flood)
But taking, once a week, on a knives point,
The quantity of a grain of Mustard, of it:
Become stout Marsses, and beget young Cupids.
The decayed Vestall's of Pickt-hatch would thank you,
That keep the fire a-liue, there.
It is the secret
Of Nature, naturiz'd against all infections,
Cures all diseases, coming of all causes,
A month's grief, in a day; a years, in twelve:
And, of what age so ever, in a month.
Past all the doses, of your drugging Doctors.
I'll undertake, withal, to fright the Plague
Out of the kingdom, in three months.
And I'll
Be bound, the Players shall sing your prases, then,
Without their Poets.
Sir, I'll do it. Mean time,
I'll give away so much, unto my man,
Shall serve th'whole City, with preservative,
Weekly, each house his dose, and at the rate
As he that built the Water-worke, dos with water,
You are incredulous.
Faith, I have a humour,
I would not willingly be gulled. Your Stone
Cannot transmute me
Pertinax, Surly,
Will you believe Antiquity? Records?
I'll show you a Book, where Moses, and his Sister,
And Solomon have written, of the Art;
I, and a Treatise penned by Adam.
How!
Of the Philosophers stone, and in high Dutch.
Did Adam write, Sir, in high Dutch?
He did:
Which proves it was the Primitiue tongue.
What Paper?
On Cedar board.
O that, indeed (they say)
Will last against worms.
It is like your Irish wood
Against Cobwebs. I have a piece of Iasons fleece, too,
Which was no other, then a Book of Alchemy,
Writ in large sheepe-skin, a good fat Ram-Vellam.
Such was Pythagora's thigh, Pandora's tub;
And, all that fable of Medeas charms,
The manner of our work: The Bulls, our Fornace,
Still breathing fire; our Argent-viue, the Dragon:
The Dragons teeth, Mercury sublimate,
That keeps the whiteness, hardness and the biting;
And they are gathered, into Iason's helm,
(The Alembeke) and then sowed in Mars his field,
And, thence, sublimed so often, till they are fixed.
Both this, the Hesperian Garden, Cadmus story,
Ioue's shower, the boon of Midas, Argus eyes,
Boccace his Demogorgon, thousands more,
All abstract Riddles of our Stone. How now?
DOe we succeed? Is our day come? and hold's it?
The evening will set red upon you, Sir,
You have colour for it, crimson, the red Ferment
Has done his office. Three hours hence, prepare you
To see proiection.
Pertinax, my Surly,
Again, I say to thee, aloud: Be rich.
This day, thou shalt have Ingots: and, tomorrow,
Give Lords th'affront. Is it, my Zephyrus, right?
Blushes the Bolts-head?
Like a Wench with Child, Sir,
That were, but now, discovered to her Master.
Excellent witty Lungs. My only care is,
Where to get stuff, enough now, to project on
This town will not half serve me.
No Sir? Take
The covering of o'Churches.
That's true
Yes.
Let'hem stand bare, as doe their Auditory,
Or cap 'hem, new, with Shingles.
No, good Thatch.
Thatch will lie light, vpo'the rafters Lungs.
Lungs, I will manumit thee, from the Fornace;
I will restore thee thy complexion, Puff,
Lost in the embers; and repair this brain,
Hurt with the fume of the Metals.
I have blown, Sir,
Hard for your Worship; thrown by many a Coal,
When t'was not Beech; weighed those I put in, just,
To keep your heate, still even; These bleared eyes
Have waked, to read your several colours, Sir,
Of the pale Cron, the greene Lion, the Crow,
The Peacocks tail, the plumed Swan.
And, lastly,
Thou hast descried the Flower, the Sanguis Agni?
Yes Sir
Whore's Master?
It's prayers, Sir, hee,
Good man, he's doing his devotions,
For the success.
Lungs, I will set a period,
To all thy labours: Thou shalt be, the Master
Of my Seraglio.
Good, Sir.
But doe you hear?
I'll geld you' Lungs.
Yes, Sir.
For I doe mean
To have a list of Wives, and Concubines,
Aequall with Solomon; who had the Stone
Alike, with me: and I will make me, a back
With the Elixir, that shall be as tough
As Hercules, to encounter fifty a night.
You are sure, thou saw it blood?
Both blood, &amp; spirit, Sir.
I will have all my beds, blown up; not stuffed:
Down is too hard. And then, mine Oual Room,
Filled with such pictures, as Tiberius took
From Elephants: and dull Aretine
But coldly imitated. Then, my Glasses,
Cut in more subtle angles, to disperse,
And multiply the figures, as I walk
Naked between my Succubae. My mists
I'll have of perfume, vapor'd'bout the room,
To loose our selves in; and my bathes, like pits
To fall into: from whence, we will come forth,
And roll vs dry in Gossamour, and Roses.
Is it arrived at Ruby? Where I spy
A wealthy Citizen, or rich Lawyer,
Have a sublimed pure Wife, unto that fellow
I'll send a thousand pound, to be my Cuckold.
And I shall carry it.
No, I'll ha'no bawds,
But Fathers, and Mothers. And my flatterers,
Shall be the best, and gravest of Divines,
That I can get for money. My mere fools,
Eloquent Burgesses, and then my Poets
The same that writ so subtly of the Fart,
Whom I will entertain, still, for that Subject.
The few, that would give out themselves, to be
Court, and Towne-Stallions, and, each where, belie
Ladies, who'are known most innocent, for them;
Those will I beg, to mae me Eunuchs of
And they shall fan me, with ten Ostrich Tails
A piece, made in a plume, to gather wind.
We will be brave, Puff, now we hawed Med'cine.
My Meat, shall all come in, in Indian shells,
Dishes of Agate, set in Gold, and studded
With Emeralds, Sapphires, Hjacinths, and Rubies.
The tongues of Carpes, Dormice, and Camels heals,
Boiled in the spirit of Sol, and dissolved Pearl,
(Apicius diet, against the Epilepsy)
And I will eat these broaths, with spoons of Amber,
Headed with Diamant, and Carbuncle.
My foote-Boy shall eat Pheasants, caluerd Salmons,
Knots, Godwits, Lamprey's: I my self will have
The beards of Barbels, served, in stead of salads;
Oyld Mushromes; and the swelling vnctuous papps
Of a fat pregnant Sow, newly cut off,
Dressed with an exquisite, and poignant sauce;
For which, Isle say unto my Cooke, There's gold,
Go forth, and be a Knight.
Sir, I'll go look
A little, how it heightens.
Doe. My Shirts
I'll have of Taffata-sarsnet, soft, and light
As Cobwebs; and for all my other raiment
It shall be such, as might provoke the Persian:
Were he to teach the world riot, a new.
My Gloves of Fishes, and Birds-skinnes, perfumed
With Gummes of Paradise, and Eastern ayre
And do'you think to have the Stone, with this?
No, I doe think, t'haue all this, with the Stone.
Why, I have heard, he must be Homo frugi,
A pious, holy, and religious man,
One free from mortal sin, a very Virgin.
That makes it, Sir, he is so. But I buy it.
My venture brings it me. He, honest wretch,
A notable, superstitious, good soul,
Has worn his knees bare, and his slippers bald,
With prayer, and fasting for it: And Sir, let him
Do'it alone, for me, still. Here he comes,
Not a profane word, before him: It is poison.
GGod marrow, Father.
Gentle Son, good morrow,
And, to your friend, there. What is he, is with you?
An Heretic, that I did bring along,
In hope, Sir, to convert him.
Son, I doubt
Yo'are covetous, that thus you meet your time
In the just point: prevent your day, at morning.
This argues something, worthy of a fear
Of importune, and arnall appetite.
Take heed, you doe not cause the blessing leave you,
With your ungoverned hast. I should be sorry,
To see my labours, now, even t perfection,
Got by long watching, and large patience,
Not prosper, where my Love, and Zeal hath plac'd'hem.
Which (heaven I call to witness, with your self,
To whom, I have poured my thoughts) in all my ends,
Have looked no way, but unto public good,
To pious uses, and dear Charity
No grown a prodigy with men. Wherein
If you, my Son, should, now, praeuaricate,
And, to your own particular lusts, employ
So great, and catholic a bliss; Be sure,
A curse will follow, yea, and overtake
Your subtle, and most secret ways.
I know, Sir,
You shall not need to fear me. I but come,
To ha'you confute this Gentleman.
Who is,
Indeed, Sir, somewhat caustiue of belief
Toward your Stone. Would not be gulled.
Well, Son,
All that I can convince him in, is this,
The Work is done: Bright Sol is in his robe.
We have a med'cine of the triple Soul,
The glorified spirit. Thanks be to heaven,
And make vs worthy of it. Vlen spiegle.
Anon Sir.
Look well to the Register,
And let your heate, still, lessen by degrees
To the Aludels.
Yes Sir.
Did you look
Of the Bolts-head yet?
Which on D. Sir?
I.
What's the complexion?
Whitish.
Infuse vinegar,
To draw his volale substance, and his tincture:
And let the water in Glass E. be feltred,
And put into the Gripes egg. Lute him, well;
And leave him closed in Balneo.
I will, Sir.
What a brave language here is? next to Canting?
I'haue another work; you never saw, Son,
That, three days since, past the Philosohers wheel,
In the lent heate of Athanor; and's become
Sulphur o'nature.
But it is for me?
What need you?
You have enough, in that is, perfect.
O, but
Why this is Covets!
No, I assure you,
I shall employ it all, in pious uses,
Founding of Colleges, and Grammar Schools,
Marrying young Virgins, building Hospitals,
And now, and then a Church.
How now.
Sir please you
Shall I not change the feltre?
Mary, yes.
And bring me the complexion of Glass B.
Ha'you another?
Yes Son, were I assured
Your piety were firm, we would not want
The means to glorify it. But I hope the best:
I mean to tinct C. in sand-heate, tomorrow,
And give him imbibition.
Of white oil?
No Sir ofred. F. is come over the helm too,
I thank my Maker, in S. Maries bath,
And shows Lac Virgins. Blessed be heaven.
I sent you of his faeces there, calc'd.
Out of that calx, I'ha'wonne the salt of Mercury.
By pouring on your rectified water?
Yes, and reuerberating in Athanor.
How now? What colour says it?
The Ground black, Sir.
That's your Crows head.
Your Cockscomb's, ist not?
No, It is not perfect, would it were the Crow.
That work wants something.
O, I looked for this.
The hay is a pitching.
Are you sure, you loos'd'hem
I'their own menstrue?
Yes, Sir, and then married'hem,
And put'hem in a Bolts-head, nipped to digestion,
According as you bad me; when I set
The liquor of Mars to circulation,
In the same heate.
The process, then, was right.
Yes, by the token, Sir, the Retort brake,
And what was saved, was put into the Pelican,
And signed with Harms seal.
I thinke'twas so.
We should have a new Amalgam.
O, this Ferret
Is rank as any Pole-cat.
But I care not.
Let him e'ene die; wee have enough, beside,
In Embrion. H. he's his white shirt on?
Yes, Sir,
Hoe's ripe for inceration; He stands warm,
In his ash-fire. I would not, you should let
Any dye now, if I might council Sir,
For lucks-sake to the rest. It is not good.
He says right.
I, are you bolted?
Nay, I know it Sir,
I'haue seen the isle fortune. What is some three Ounces
Of fresh materials?
Is it no more?
No more, Sir,
Of Gold, to amalgam, with some six of Mercuri
Away, here's Money. What will serve.
Ask him, Sir.
How much?
Give him nine pound, you may gi'him ten.
Yes twenty, and be consent, Doe.
There it is.
This needs not. But that you will have it, so,
To see conclusions of all. For two
Of our inferior works, are at fixation.
A third is in Ascension. Go your ways,
Ha'you set the Oil of Luna in Kemia?
Yes, Sir.
And the Philosophers vinegar?
I.
We shall have a salad.
When do you make proiection?
Son, be not hasty, I exalt our Med'cine,
By hanging him in Balneo Vaporoso;
And giving him solution; then congeal him,
And then dissolve him; then again congeal him;
For look, how oft I iterate the work,
So many times, I add unto his virtue.
As, if at first, one Ounce convert a hundred,
After his second loose, he'll turn a thousand;
His third solution, ten: his fourth a hundred.
After his fifth, a thousand thousand Ounces
Of any imperfect mettle, into pure
Silver, or Gold, in all examinations,
As good, as any of the natural Mine.
Get you your stuff here, against afternoon,
Your Brass, your Pewter, and your Andirons.
Not those of iron?
Yes. You may bring them, too.
We'll change all metal's.
I believe you, in that.
Then I may send my Spits?
Yes, and your Racks.
And Dripping-pannes, and Pot-hangers, and Hooks?
Shall he not?
If e please.
To be an Ass.
How Sir!
This Gent'man, you must bear withal.
I told you, he had no faith.
And little hope, Sir,
But, much less charity, should I gull my self.
Why what have you observed, Sir, in our Art,
Seems so impossible?
But your whole work, no more.
That, you should hatch gold in a Fornace, Sir,
As they doe eggs in Egypt.
Sir, doe you
Believe that eggs are hatched so?
If I should?
Why, I think that the greater Miracle.
No Egg, but differs from a Chicken, more,
Then Metals in themselves.
That cannot be.
The Egg's ordained by Nature, to that end:
And is a Chicken, in Potentia.
The same we say of Lead, and other Metals,
Which would be Gold, if they had time.
And that
Our Art doth further.
I, for it were absurd
To think that Nature, in the earth, bred Gold
Perfect in the instant. Something went before.
There must be remote Matter.
I, what is that?
Mary, we say.
I, now it heats, stand Father.
Pound him to Dust.
It is, of the one part,
A humid exhalation, which we call
Materia liquid, or the Vctuous Water;
On the other part, a certain crasse, and viscous
Portion of earth; both which, concorporate,
Doe make the elementary matter of Gold:
Which is not, yet, propria materia,
But commune to all Metals, and all Stones.
For, where it is forsaken of that moisture,
And hath more dryness, it becomes a Stone;
Where it retains more of the humid fatness,
It turns to Sulphur, or to Quick-siluer:
Who are the Parents of all other Metals.
Nor can this remote Matter, suddenly,
Progress so from extreme, unto extreme,
As to grow Gold, and leap ore all the means.
Nature doth, first, beget th'imperfect; then
Proceeds she to the perfect. Of that ayrye,
And oily water, Mercury is engendered;
Sulphur of the fat, and earthy part; the one
(Which is the last) supplying the place of Male,
The other of the Female, in all Metals.
Some doe believe Hermaphrodeitie,
That both doe act, and suffer. But these two
Make the rest ductile, malleable, extensiue.
And, even in Gold, they are; for we doe find
Seeds of them, by our fire, and Gold in them:
And can produce the species of each mettle
More perfect thence, then Nature doth in earth.
Beside, who doth not see, in daily practise,
Art can beget Bees, Hornets, Beetles, Wasps,
Out of the Carcasses, and dung of Creatures;
Yea, Scorpions, of an herb, being ritely placed.
And these are living Creatures, far more perfect,
And excellent, then Mettle.
Well said, Father!
Nay, if he take you in hand, Sir, with an argument,
He will bray you in a Mortar.
Pray you, Sir, stay.
Rather, then I'll be brayed, Sir, I'll believe,
That Alchemy is a pretty kind of Game,
Somewhat like Tricks of the Cards, to cheat a man,
With charming.
Sir?
What else are all your Term,
Whereon no one o'your Writers grees with other?
Of your Elixir, your Lac virgins,
Your Stone, your Med'cine, and your Chrysosperme,
Your Sal, your Sulphur, and your Mercury,
Your Oil of height, your Tree of life, your Blood,
Your Marchesite, your Tutie, your Magnesia,
Your Toad, your Crow, your Dragon, and your Panthar,
Your Sun, your Moon, your Firmament, your Adrop,
Your Lato, Azoch, Zernich, Chibrit, Heautarit,
And then your Red man, and your white ;
With all your Broathes, your Mnstrues, and Materials,
Of Peace, and Egge-shells, Women's terms, Mans blood,
Hair of the head, burnt Clouts, Chalk, Marts, and Clay,
Poulder of bones, scalings of Iron, glass.
And worlds of other strange Ingredients,
Would burst a man to name.
And all these, named,
Intending but one thing: which art our Writers
Used to obscure their Art.
Sir, so I told him.
Because the simple I diot should not learn it,
And make it vulgar.
Was not all the knowledge
Of the Egyptians writ in mystic Symboles?
Speak not the Scriptures oft in Parables?
Are not the choicest Fables of the Poets,
That were the Fountains, and first Springs of Wisdom,
Wrapped in perplexed Allegories?
I urged that.
And cleared to him, that Sisiphus was damned
To roll the ceaslesse stone, only, because
He would have made ours common. Who is this?
God's preciousWhat doe you mean? Go in, good
Lady;
Let me entreat you. Whore's this Varlet?
Sir?
You very knave. Doe you use me, thus?
Wherein Sir?
Go in, and see, you traitor. Go.
who is it, Sir?
Nothing Sir. Nothing.
What is the matter? Good Sir!
I have not seen you thus distemp'red. Who is it?
All Arts have still had, Sir, their adversaries,
But ours the most ignorant. What now?
It was not my fault, Sir, she would speak with you.
Would she Sir? Follow me.
stay Lungs.
I dare not Sir.
Stay man, what is she?
A Lords Sister, Sir.
How! Pray thee stay?
She's mad Sir, &amp; sent hither
(He'll be mad too.
I warrant thee.) Why sent hither?
Sir, to be cured.
Why Rascal!
Lo you. Here Sir.
Fore-God, a Braante, a brave piece!
Hart, this is a baudy-House. I'll be burnt else.
O, by this light, no. Doe not wrong him. H'is
Too scrupulous, that way: It is his vice.
No, h'is a rare Physician, doe him right.
An excellent Paracelsian! and has done
Strange cures with mineral physic. He deals all
With spirits, he, He will not hear a Word
Of Galen, or his tedious Recipee's.
How now, Lungs!
Softly, Sir, speak softly. I meant
To have told your Worship all. This must not hear,
No, he will not be gulled; let him alone.
You're very right. Sir, she is a most rare scholar:
And is gone mad, with studying Broughtons works.
If you but name a word, touching the Hebrew,
She falls into her fit, and will discourse
So learnedly of Genealogies,
As you would run mad, too, to hear her, Sir,
How might one doe t'haue conference with her, Lungs?
O, divers have run mad upon the Conference.
I doe not know, Sir: I am sent in hast,
To fetch a Viale.
Be not gulled, Sir Mammon.
Wherein? 'Pray ye, be patient
Yes, as you are.
And trust confederate Knaves, and Bawds, and Whores.
You are too foul, believe it. Come here, Zephyrus.
One word.
I dare not, in good faith.
Stay, Knave.
H'is extreme angry, that you saw her, Sir.
Drink that. What is she, when she's out of her fit?
O the most affablest Creature, Sir! so merry!
So pleasant! she'll mount you up, like quick-siluer,
Over the helm; and circulate, like oil;
A very Vegetall: discourse of State,
Of Mathematiques, Badry, any thing
Is she no way accessible? no means,
No trick, to give a man a taste of her
Wt? or so?
I'll come to you again, Sir.
Srly, I did not think, one o'your breeding
Would traduce personages of worth.
Sir Epicre,
Your friend to use. Yet, still, loath to be gulled.
I doe not like your Philsophicall bawds.
Their Stone is lechery enough, to pay for,
Without this bait
'Hart you abuse your self.
I know the Lady, and her friends, and means,
The original of this disaster. Her Brother
He has told me all.
And yet, you ne'er saw her
Till now?
O yes, but I forgot. I have (believe it)
One of the treacherou'st memories, I doe think,
Of all mankind.
What call you her Brother?
My Lord
He wi'not have his name known, now I think on it.
A very treacherous memory.
O'my faith
Tut if you ha'it not about you pass it,
Till we meet next.
Nay, by this hand, it is true.
He's one I honour, and my noble friend,
And I respect his House.
Hart! Can it be,
That a grave Sir, a rich, that has no need,
A wise Sir, too, at other times should thus
With his own oaths, and arguments, make hard means
To gull himself? And, this be your Elixir,
Your Lapis Mneralis, and your Lunarie,
Give me your honest trick, yet, at Primero,
Or Gleek; and take your Lutum sapientis,
Your Menstruum simplex: I'll have Gold, before you,
And, with less danger of the Quick-siluer;
Or the hot Sulphur.
Here's one from Captain Face, Sir,
Desires you meet him in the Temple-Church,
Some half hour hence, and upon earnest business.
Sir, if you please to quit vs, now; and come,
Again, within two hours: You shall have
My Master busy examining of the works,
And I will steal you in, unto the party, 
That you may see her Converse. Sir, Shall I say,
You'll meet the Captains Worship?
Sir, I will.
But, by Attorney, and to a second purpose.
Now, I am sure, it is a Bawdy-house;
I'll swear it, were the Marshall here, to thankeme.
The naming this Commander, doth confirm it.
Don Face! Why, h'is the most autentique dealer
I'these Commodities! The Superintendent
To all the quainter Traffiquers, in town.
He is their Visitor, and do's appoint
Who lies with whom; and at what hour; what price;
Which gown; and in what smock; what fall; what tire.
Him will I prove, by a third person, to find
The subtilties of this dark Labyrinth:
Which, if I doe discover, dear, Sir Mammon,
You'll give your poor Friend leave, though no Philosopher,
To laugh: for you that are, it is thought, shall weep.
Sir. He do's pray, you'll not forget.
I will not, Sir.
Sir Epicure, I shall leave you.
I follow you, straight.
But doe so, good Sir, to avoid suspicion.
This Gent'man has a par'lous head.
But wilt thou
Be constant to thy promise?
As my life, Sir.
 And wilt thou insinuate what I am? and praise me?
And say I am a Noble fellow?
O what else, Sir?
And, that you'll make her royal, with the Stone,
An Empress; and your self King of Bantam.
Wilt thou doe this?
Will I Sir?
Lungs, my Lungs,
I love thee.
Send your stuff Sir, that my Master
May busy himself, about proiection.
Th'hast witched me, Rogue: Take, Go.
Your Jack and all Sir.
Thou art a VillainI will send my Jack;
And the weights too. Slave, I could bite thine are.
Away, thou dost not care for me.
Not I Sir?
Come, I was borne to make thee, my good Weasel;
Set thee on a bench: and, ha'thee twirl a Chain
With the best Lords Vermin, of 'hem all.
Away Sir.
A Count, nay a Count-Palatine
Good Sir, go.
Shall not advance thee, better; no, nor faster.
HAs he bit? Has he bit?
And swallowed too, my Subtle.
I have given him line, and now he plays, I faith.
And shall we twitch him?
Thorough both the gills.
A Wench is a rare bay, with which a Man
No sooner's taken, but he straight firkes mad.
Dol, my Lord Whachums Sister, you must now
Bear your self statelich.
O, let me alone.
I'll not forget my race, I warrant you.
I'll keep my distance, laugh, and talk aloud;
Have all the tricks of a proud sciruy Lady:
And be as rude 'as her woman.
Well said, sanguine.
But will he send his Androns?
His Jack too;
And's iron Shooing-horne. I ha'spoke to him. Well,
I must not loose my wary Gamester, yonder.
O Monsieur Caution, that will not be gulled?
I, if I can strike a fine hook into him, now,
The Temple-church, there I have cast mine angle.
Well, pray for me. I'll about it.
What, more Gdgeons!
Dol, scout, scout; stay Face, you must go to the door.
'Pray God, it be my Anabaptist. Who is it Dol?
I know him not. He looks like a Gold-end man.
Gods so! it is he, he said he would send. What call you him?
The sanctified Elder, that should deal
For Mammons, Jack, and Andirons! Let him in.
Stay, help me of, first, with my gown. Away
Ma-dame, to your withdrawing Chamber. Now,
In a new tune, new gesture, but old language.
This fellow is sent, from one negotiates with me
About the stone, too; for the holy Brethren
Of Amstredam; the exiled Saints: that hope
To raise their discipline, by it. I must use him
In some strange fashion, now, to make him admire me.
where is my Drudge?
Sir.
Take away the Recipient,
And rectify your Menstrue, from the Phlegm.
Then pour it, 'o the Sol, in the Cucurbite,
And let'hem macerate, together.
Yes, Sir.
And save the ground?
No. Terra damnata
Must not have entrance, in the work. Who are you?
A faithful Brother, if it please you.
What's that?
A Lullianist? a Ripley? Filius arts?
Can you sublime, and dulcefie, calcine?
Know you the sapor pontick? sapor stipstick?
Or, what is Homogene, or Heterogene?
I understand no Heathen language, truly.
Heathen, you Knipper-doling? Is Arssacra,
Or Chrysopoeia, or Spagirica,
Or the Pamphysick, or Panarchick knowledge,
A Heathen language?
Heathen Greek, I take it.
How? Heathen Greek?
Ell's Heathen, but the Hebrew.
S'rah, my Varlet, stand you forth, and speak to him
Like a Philosopher: Answer, the language.
Name the vexations, and the Martyrizations
Of Metals, in the Work.
Sir, Putrefaction,
Solution, Ablution, Sublimation,
Cohobation, Calcination, Ceration, and
Fixation.
This is Heathen Greek, to you, now?
And when comes Viuification?
After Mortification.
What's Cohobation?
It is the pouring on
Your Aqua Rgis, and then drawing him off,
To the trine circle of the seven spheres.
What's the proper passion of Metals?
Malleation.
What's your Vltimum supplicium auri?
Antimonium.
This's Heathen Greek, to you? And, what's your Mercury?
A very Fugitive, he will be gone, Sir.
How know you him?
By his viscosity,
His oleositie, and his suscitabilitie.
How do you sublime him?
With the calce of Egge-shels,
White Marble, Talc.
Your Magisterium, now?
What's that?
Shifting, Sir, your elements,
Dry into cold, cold into moist, moist in-
To hot, hot into dry.
This's Heathen Greek to you, still?
Your Lpis Philosophicus?
It is a Stone, and not
A Stone, a spirit, a soul, and a body;
Which, if you doe dissolve, it is dissolved,
If you coagulate, it is coagulated,
If you make it to fly, it flies.
Enough.
This's Heathen Greek, to you? What are you Sir.
Please you, a Servant of the exiled Brethren,
That deal with Widows, and with Orphans goods;
And make a just account, unto the Saints:
A Deacon.
O, you are sent from Mr. Wholesome,
Your Teacher?
From Tribulation Wholesome,
Our very zealous Pastor.
Good. I have
Some Orphans goods to come here.
Of what kind, Sir?
Peuter, and Brass, Andirons, and Kitchen ware,
Metals, that we must use our med'cine on:
Wherein the Brethren may have a penn'orth.
For ready money.
Were the Orphans Parents
Sincere professors?
Why doe you ask?
Because
We then are to deal justly, and give (in truth)
Their utmost value.
'Slid, you'd cousin, else,
And, if their Parents were not of the Faithful?
I will not trust you, now I think on it,
Till I have talked with your Pastor. Have you brought money
To buy more Coals?
No surely.
No? How so?
The Brethren bid me ay unto you, Sir.
Surely, they will not venture any more,
Till they may see proiection.
How!
Yo' have had,
For the Instruments, as bricks, and ome, and glasses,
Already thirty pound; and, for Materials,
They say, some ninety more: And, they have heard, since,
That one, at Hiedelberg, made it, of an Egg
And a small paper of Pinne-dust.
What's your name?
My name is Ananias.
Out, the Varlet
That consent the Apostles! Hence, away,
Flee Mischief; had your holy Consistory
No name to send me, of another sound;
Then wicked Ananias? Send your Elders,
Hither, to make atonement for you, quickly,
And give me satisfaction; or out goes
The fire: and down the Alembekes, and the Fornace.
Piger Henricus, or what not. Thou wretch,
Both Sericon, and Bufo, shall belost,
Tell 'hem. All hope of rooting out the Bishops,
Or the Antichristian Hierarchy shall perish,
If they stay threescore minutes. The Aqueitie,
Terreity, and Sulphureitie
Shall run together again, and all be annulled
Thou wicked Ananias. This willfetch 'hem,
And make'hem hast towards their gulling more.
A man must deal like a rough Nurse, and fright
Those, that are froward, to an appetite.
H'is busy with his spirits, but we'll upon him.
How now! What Mates? What Baiards have we here?
I told you he would be furious. Sir, Here's Nab,
Has brought yo' another piece of Gold, to look on:
(Wee must appease him. Give it me) and prays you
You would devise (what is it Nab?)
A sign, Sir.
I, a good lucky one, a thriving Sign, Doctor.
I was devising now.
Slight, doe not say so,
He will repent he ga' you any more.
What say you to his Constellation, Doctor?
The Balance?
No, that way is stale, and Common.
A Towns. Man, borne in Taurus, gives the Bull;
Or the Bulls-head: In Aries, the Ram.
A poor devise. No. I will have his Name
Formed in some mystic character; whose radij,
Striking the senses of the posers by,
Shall, by a virtual influence, breed affections,
That may result upon the party owns it:
As thus.
Nab.
He first shall have a Bell, That's Abel;
And, by it, standing one, whose name is Dee,
In a rug Gown; There's D. and Rg, that's Drug:
And, right anenst him, a Dog snarling Er;
There's Drugger, Abel Drugger. That's his sign.
And here's now Mystery, and Hieroglyphic.
Abel, thou art made.
Sir, I doe thank his Worship.
Six o'thy legs more, will not doe it, Nab.
He has brought you a pipe of Tobacco, Doctor.
Yes, Sir.
I have another thing, I would impart
Out with it Nab.
Sir, there is lodged hard by me
A rich young Widow.
Good! a Bone robe?
But nineteen, at the most.
Very good, Abel.
Mary sh'is not in fashion, yet; she wears
A hood: but't stands a cop.
No matter Abel.
And, I doe, now and then give her a fucus,
What dost thou deal, Nab?
I did tell you, Captain.
And physic too sometime, Sir, for which she trusts me
With all her mind. Shoe's come up here, of purpose
To learn the fashion.
Good, His match too! on Nab.
And she do's strangely long to know her fortune.
Gods lid, Nab! Send her to the Doctor, hither.
Yes, I have spoke to her of his Worship, already:
But shoe's afraid, it will be blown abroad
And hurt her Marriage.
Hurt it? It is the way
To heal it, if'twere hurt; to make it more
Followed and sought: Nab, thou shalt tell her this.
She'll be more known, more talked of, and your Widows
Are ne'er of any price till they be famous;
Their Honour is their multitude of Suitors.
Send her, it may be thy good fortune. What?
Thou dost not know.
No, Sir, she'll never mary
Under a Knight. Her brother has made a Vow.
What, and dost thou despair, my little Nab,
Knowing, what the Doctor has set down for thee,
And seeing so many, of the City, dubbed?
One Glass o'thy water, with a Madame I know
Will have it done Nab. What's her brother? a Knight?
No, Sir, A Gentleman, newly, warm in 'his land, Sir,
Scarce cold in his one and twenty; that do's govern
His Sister, here: and is a Man himself
Of some three thousand a year, and is come up
To learn to quarrel, and to live by his wits,
And will go down again, and dye in the Country.
How! to quarrel?
Yes, Sir, to carry Quarrels,
As Gallants doe, and manage 'hem, by line.
'Slid Nab. The Doctor is the only man
In Christendom for him. He has made a Table,
With Mathematical demonstrations,
Touching the Art of Quarrels. He will give him
An Instrument to quarrel by. Go, bring 'hem, both;
Him, and his Sister. And, for thee, with her
The Doctor happ'ly may persuade. Go to.
Shalt give his Worship, a new Damask suite
Upon the premises.
O good Captain.
He shall,
He is the honestest fellow, Doctor. Say not,
No offers, bring the Damask, and the Parties.
I'll try my power, Sir.
And thy will too, Nab.
It is good Tobacco this! What is it an ounce?
He will send you a pound, Doctor.
O, no:
Hee will do it.
It is the gooddest soul. Abel about it.
(Thou shalt know more anon. Away, be gone.)
A miserable Rogue, and lives with Cheese,
And has the worms. That was the cause indeed
Why he came now. He dealt with me, in private,
To get a med'cine for 'hem.
And shall, Sir. This works.
A wife, a wife, for one on'vs, my dear Subtle:
We'll even draw lots, and he, that fails, shall have
The more in goods, the other has in tail.
Rather the less. For she may be so light
She may want grains.
I, or be such a burden,
A man would scarce endure her, for the whole.
Faith, best let's see her first, and then determine.
Content. But Doll must have no breath on it.
Mum.
Away, you to your Surly yonder, Catch him.
'Pray God I haven't stayed too long.
I fear it.
THese Chastisements are common to the Saints,
And such rebukes the Elect must bear, with patience;
They are the exercises of the Spirit,
And sent to tempt our frailties.
In pure zeal,
I doe not like the man: He is a Heathen.
And speaks the language of Canaan, truly.
I think him a profane person, indeed.
He bears
The visible mark of the beast, in his forehead.
And for his Stone, it is a work of darkness,
And, with Philosophy, blinds the eyes of man.
Good Brother, we must bend unto all means,
That may give furtherance, to the holy cause.
Which his cannot: The sanctified cause
Should have a sanctified course.
Not always necessary.
The Children of perdition are, oft times,
Made instruments even of the greatest works.
Beside, we should give somewhat to mans nature,
The place he lives in, still about the Fire,
And fume of Metals, that intoxicate
The brain of Man, and make him prone to passion.
Where have you greater Atheists, then your Cooks?
Or more profane, or choleric then your Glasse-men?
More Antichristian then your Bell-founders?
What makes the Devil so devilish, I would ask you,
Satan, our common enemy, but his being
Perpetually about the fire, and boiling
Brstone, and Arsnike? We must give, I say,
Unto the motives, and the stirrers up
Of humours in the blood. It may be so.
When as the Work is done, the Stone is made,
This heate of his may turn into a zeal,
And stand up for the beauteous discipline,
Against the monstrous cloth, and rag of Rome.
We must await his calling, and the coming
Of the good Spirit. You did fault, to upbraid him
With the Brethrens blessing of Heidelberg, weighing
What need we have, to hasten on the Work,
For the restoring of the silenced Saints,
Which ne'er will be, but by the Philosophers Stone.
And, so a learned Elder, one of Scotland,
Assured me; Aurum potabile being
The only med'cine, for the civil Magistrte,
T'incline him to a feeling of the cause:
And must be daily used, in the disease.
I have not aedified more, truly, by man;
Not, since the beautiful light, first, shone on me:
And I am sad my zeal hath so offended.
Let vs call on him, then.
The motion's good.
And of the Spirit; I will knock first: Peace be within.
O Are you come? It was time. Your threescore minutes
Were at the last thread, you see, And, down had gone
Furnus acediae, Turris circulatorius,
Lembeke, Bolts-head, Retort, and Pelican
Had all been cinders. Wicked Ananias!
Art thou returned? Nay then it goes down, yet.
Sir, be appeased, Hee is come to humble
Himself in Spirit, and to ask your patience,
If too much zeal hath carried him, aside,
From the due path.
Why, this doth qualify.
The Brethren had no purpose, verily,
To give you the least grievance: but are ready
To lend their willing hands, to any project
The Spirit, and you direct.
This qualifies more.
And, for the Orphans goods, let them be valued,
Or what is needful, else, to the holy Work,
It shall be numbered: Here, by me, the Saints
Throw down their purse before you.
This qualifies, most.
Why, thus it should be, now you understand.
Have I discoursed so unto you, of our Stone?
And, of the good that it shall bring your cause?
Showed you (beside the mayne of hiring forces
Abroad, drawing the Hollanders, your friends,
From the Indies, to serve you, with all their Fleet)
That even the med'cinall use shall make you a faction,
And party in the Realm. As, put the case,
That some great Man, in stat, he have the Gout,
Why you but send three drops of your Elixir,
You help him straight: There you have made a Friend.
Another has the Palsy, or the Dropsy,
He takes of your incombustible stuff,
Hoe's young again: There you have made a Friend.
A Lady, that is past the feat of body,
Though not of mind, and hath her face decayed
Beyond all cure of painting; you restore
With the Oil of Talk: There you have made a Friend.
And all her friends. A Lord, that is a Leper,
A Knight, that has the bone-ache, or a Squire
That hath both these, you make'hem smooth, and sound,
With a bare fricassee of your med'cine: Still,
You increase your Friends.
I, it is very praegnant.
And, then, the turning of this Lawyers pewter
To plate, at Christ-masse.
Christ-tide, I pray you.
Yet, Ananias?
I have done.
Or changing
His parcel guilt, to massy Gold. You cannot
But raise you Friends. With all, to be of power
To pay an army, in the field; to buy
The King of France, out of his Realms; or Spain,
Out of his Indies: What can you not doe,
Against Lords Spiritual, or Temporal,
That shall oppone you?
Verily, it is true.
We may be temporal Lords, our selves, I take it.
You may be any thing, and leave of to make
Long-winded exercises: or suck up,
Your ha, and hum, in a tune. I not deny,
But such as are not graced, in a State,
May, for their ends, be adverse in Religion,
And get a tune, to call the flock together:
For (to say sooth) a tune do's much, with women,
And other phlegmatic people, It is your Bell.
Bells are profane, a tune may be religious.
No warning with you? Then, farewell my patience.
Slight, it shall down: I will not be thus tortured.
I pray you, Sir.
All shall perish. I have spoke it.
Let me find grace, Sir, in your eyes; The man
He stands corrected: neither did his zeal
(But as your self) allow a tune, some-where.
Which, now, being to'ard the Stone, we shall not need.
No, nor your holy vizard, to win Widows
To give you Legacies; or make zealous Wives
To rob their Husbands, for the common cause;
Nor take the start of Bands, broke but one day,
And say, they were forfeited, by providence.
Nor shall you need, ore night, to eat huge meals,
To celebrate your next days fast the better:
The whilst the Brethren, and the Sisters, humbled,
Abate the stiffenesse of the flesh; Nor cast
Before your hungry hearers, scrupulous bones,
As whether a Christian may hawk, or hunt;
Or whether, Matrons, of the holy Assembly,
May lay their hair out, or wear doublets,
Or have that Idol Starch, about their linen.
It is indeed an Idol
Mind him not, Sir.
I doe command thee, Spirit (of zeal, but trouble)
To peace within him. Pray you Sir, go on.
Nor shall you need to libel against the Prelates,
And shorten so your ears, against the hearing
Of the next wire-drawne Grace. Nor, of necessity,
Rail against plays, to please the Alderman,
Whose daily Custard you devour Nor lie
With zealous rage, till you are hoarse. Not one
Of these so singular arts. Nor call your selves,
By names of Tribulation, Persecution,
Restraint, Long-Patience, and such like, affected
By the whole Family, or Wood of you,
Only for glory, and to catch the ear
Of the Disciple.
Truly, Sir, they are
Ways, that the Godly Brethren have invented,
For propagation of the holy cause,
As very notable means; and whereby, also,
Themselves grow soon, and profitably famous.
O, but the Stone, ell's idle to'it! nothing!
The art of Angels, Natures miracle,
The divine secret, that doth fly in clouds,
From East to West: and whose Tradition
Is not from men but spirits.
I hate Traditions.
I doe not trust 'hem.
Peace.
They are Popish, all.
I will not peace. I will not
Ananias.
Please the profane, to grieve the godly. I may not.
Well, Ananias, thou shalt overcome.
It is an ignorant zeal, that haunts him, Sir.
But truly, else, a very faithful Brother;
A Botcher: and a man, by revelation,
That hath a competent knowledge of the Truth.
Has he a competent sum, there, in the bag,
To buy the goods, within? I am made Guardian,
And must, for Charity, and Conscience sake,
Now, see the most be made, for my poor Orphan.
Though I desire the Brethren, too, good Gayners.
There, they are, within. When you have viewed, &amp; bought 'hem,
And tan the Inuentory of what they are,
They'are ready for roiection; there's no more
To doe; Cast on the med'cine: So much Silver
As there is Tin there, so much Gold as Brass,
I'll give it you in, by weight.
But how long time,
Sir, must the Saints expect, yet?
Let me see,
How's the Moon, now? Eight, nine, ten days hence
He will be Silver potato; then, three days,
Before he citronise: some fifteen days,
The Magisterium will be perfected.
About the second day, of the third week,
In the ninth Month?
Yes my good Ananias.
What will the Orphans goods arise to, think you?
Some hundred Marks; as much as filled three Cars,
Unladened now: you shall make six millions of 'hem.
But I must ha'more coals laid in.
How!
Another load,
And then we have finished. We must now increase
Our fire to Ignis ardens, we are past
Fimus equinus, Blnei, Cineris,
And all those lenter heats. If the holy Purse
Should, with this draught, fall low, and that the Saint
Doe need a present sum; I have trick
To melt the Pewter, you shall buy now, instantly,
And, with a tincture, make you as good `Dutch Dollars,
As any are in Holland
Can you so?
I, and shall bide the third examination.
It will be joyful tidings to the Brethren.
But you must cary it, secret
I, but stay
This act of coining, is it lawful?
Lawful?
We know no Magistrate Or, if we did,
This's foreign coin.
It is no coining, Sir.
It is but casting,
Ha? you distinguish well.
Casting of money may be lawful.
It is, Sir.
Truly, I take it so.
There is no scruple
Sir, to be made of it; believe Ananias.
This case of conscience he is studied in.
I'll make a question of it, to the Brethren.
The Brethren shall approve it lawful, doubt not.
Where shall it be done?
For that we'll talk, anon.
There's some to speak with me. Go in, I pray you,
And view the parcels. That's the Inuentory.
I'll come to you straight. Who is it? Face? Appear.
HOw now? Good prise?
Good pox. Yon'd costive Cheater
Never came on.
How then?
Iha' walked the round,
Till now, and no such thing.
And have you quit him?
Quit him? and Hell would quit him too, he were happy.
Slight would you have me stalk like a Mill-Iade,
All day, for one, that will not yield vs Grains?
I know him of old.
O, but to have gulled him,
Had been a maystry.
Let him go, black Boy,
And turn thee, that some fresh news may possess thee.
A noble Count, a Don of Spain (my dear
Delicious compeere, and my party-baud)
Who is come hither, private, for his Conscience,
And brought munition with him, six great slopps,
Bigger then three Dutch Hoighs, beside round trunks,
Furnished with Pistolets, and Pieces of eight,
Will straight be here, my Rogue, to have thy Bath
That is the colour, and to make his battery
Upon our Dol, our Castle, our Cinque-Port,
Our Dover Per, our what thou wilt. Where is she?
She must prepare perfumes, delicate linen,
The bath in chief, a banquet, and her wit,
For she must feel his Epididimis.
Where is the Doxy?
I'll send her to thee:
And but dispatch my brace of little Iohn Leydens,
And come again my self.
Are they within then?
Numbering the sum.
How much?
A hundred marks, boy,
Why this's a lucky day. Ten pounds of Mammon?
Three of my Clerk. A Portague of my Grocer.
This of the Brethren, beside Reversions,
And States, to come in the Widow, and my Count.
My share, to day, will not be bought for forty
What?
Pounds, dainty Dorothee, art thou so near?
Yes, say Lo: General, how fares our Camp?
As, with the few, that had entrenched themselves
Safe, by their discipline, against a world, Dol:
And laughed, within those trenches, and grew fat
With thinking on the booties, Dol, brought in
Daily, by their small parties. This dear hour,
A doughty Don is taken, with my Doll;
And thou moist make his ransom, what thou wilt,
My Dousabell: He shall be brought here, fettered
With thy fair looks, before he see's thee, and thrown
In a Downe-bed, as dark as any Dungeon;
Where thou shalt keep him waking, with thy Drum;
Thy Drum, my Dol; thy Drum; till he be tame
As the poor Black-birds were in the great frost,
Or Bees are with a basin: and so hive him
In the Swan-skin Coverlet, and cambric Sheets,
Till he work Honey, and Wax, my little Gods-guift.
What is he, General.
An Adalantado,
A Grande, Girl Was not my Dapper here, yet?
No.
Nor my Drugger?
Neither.
A pox on 'hem,
They are so long a furnishing. Such Stinkards
Would not be seen, upon these festival days.
How now! ha'you done?
Done. They are gone. The sum
Is here in Banque, my Face. I would, we knew
Another chapman, now, would buy 'hem outright.
'Slid, Nab shall do it, against he have the Widow,
To furnish household.
Excellent well thought on,
Pray God, he come.
I pray, he keep away
Till our new business be o're-past.
But, Face,
How came thou, by this secret Don? A Spirit
Brought me th'intelligence, in a paper, here,
As I was conjuring, yonder, in my Circle
For Surly: I have my Flies abroad. Your Bath
Is famous Subtle, by my means. Sweet Doll,
You must go tune your Virginal, no loosing
Of the least time. And, doe you hear? good action.
Firk like a Flounder, kiss like a Scallop, close;
And tickle him with thy Mother-tongue. His great
Verdugo-ship has not a jot of language:
So much the easier to be cossin'd, my Dolly.
He will come here, in a hired Coach, obscure,
And our own Coachman, whom I have sent, as Guide,
No creature else. Who's that?
It i'not he?
O no, not yet this hour.
Who is it?
Dapper,
Your Clerk.
Gods will, then, Queen of Faerie,
On with your tire; and, Doctor, with your robes.
Let's vs dispatch him, for Gods sake.
Twill be long.
I warrant you, take but the QQs I give you,
It shall be brief enough, Slight, here are more.
Abel, and I think, the angry Boy, the Heir,
That fame would quarrel.
And the Widow?
No,
Not that I see. Away. O Sir, you are welcome.
THe Doctor is within, a moving for you;
I have had the most ado to win him to it;
He swears, you'll be the Dearling of the Dice:
He never heard her Highness dote, till now.
Your Aunt has go'n you the most gracious words,
That can be thought on.
Shall I see her Grace?
See her, and kiss her too. What? honest Nab!
Hast brought the Damask? Nab. No Sir, here's Tobacco.
It is Well done. Thou'lt bring the Damasketoo?
Yes, here's the Gentleman, Captain, Mr. Kastrill,
I have brought to see the Doctor.
Whore's the Widow?
Sir, as he likes, his Sister (he says) shall come.
O, is it so? Good time. Is your name Kastrill, Sir?
I, and the best of the Kastrills, I'd be sorry else,
By fifteen hundred, a year Where is this Doctor?
My mad Tobacco-Boy, here, tells me of one,
That can doe things. Has he any skill?
Wherein, Sir?
To cary a business, manage a Quarrel, fairly,
Upon fit terms.
It seems Sir, yo' are but young
About the town, that can make that a question.
Sir, not so young, but I have heard some speech
Of the angry Boys, and seene'hem take Tobacco;
And in his shop: and I can take it too.
And I would fine be one of'hem, and go down
And practise in the country.
Sir, for the Duello,
The Doctor, I assure you, shall inform you,
To the least shadow of a hair: and show you,
An Instrument he has, of his own making,
Wherewith, no sooner shall you make report
Of any Quarrel, but he will take the Height on it,
Most instantly; and tell in what Degree,
Of saf'ty it lies in, or mortality.
And, how it may be borne, whether in a right line,
Or a halfe-circle; or may, else, be cast
Into an angle blunt, if not acute:
All this he will demonstrate. And then, Rules,
To give, and take the Lie, by.
How? to take it?
Yes, in oblique, he will show you; or in circle:
But never in diameter. The whole Town
Study his Theorems, and dispute them, ordinarily.
At the eating Academies.
But, dos he teach
Living, by the Wits, too?
Any thing, what ever.
You cannot think that subtlety, but he reads it.
He made me a Captain; I was a stark Pimp,
Iusto'your standing, before I met with him:
It i'not two months since. I'll tell you his method.
First, Hee will enter you, at some Ordinary.
No, I'll not come there. You shall pardon me.
For why, Sir?
There's gaming there, and tricks.
Why, would you be
A Gallant, and not game?
I, twill spend a man.
Spend you? It will repair you, when you are spent.
How doe they live by their wits, there, that have vented
Six times your fortunes?
What, three thousand a year?
I, forty thousand.
Are there such?
I Sir.
And Gallants, yet. Here's a young Gentleman,
Is borne to nothing, forty marks a year,
Which I count nothing. H'is to be initiated,
And have a Fly of the Doctor. He will win you
By unresistable luck, within this fortnight,
Enough to buy a Barony. They will set him
Vpmost, at the Groome-Porters, all the Christmas.
And, for the whole year through, at every place,
Where there is play, present him with the Chair,
The best attendance, the best drink, sometimes
Two glasses of Canary, and pay nothing;
The purest linen, and the sharpest knife,
The Partridge next his trencher: and, somewhere,
The dainty bed, in private, with the Dainty.
You shall ha'your Ordinaries bid for him,
As Play-houses for a `Poet; and the Master
Pray him, aloud, to name what Dish he affects,
Which must be butterd Shrimps: and those, that drink
To no mouth else, will drink to his, as being
The goodly President-Mouth of all the board.
Doe you not gull one?
God's my life! Doe you think it?
You shall have a cast Commander, can but get
In credit with a Glover, or a Spurrier,
For some two pair, of eiders ware, afore-hand,
Will, by most swift posts, dealing with him,
Arrive at competent means, to keep himself,
His Punk, and naked Boy, in excellent fashion.
And be admired for it.
Will the Doctor teach this?
He will doe more, Sir, when your Land is gone,
(As men of Spirit hate to keep earth long)
In a Vacation, when small money is stirring,
And Ordinaries suspended till the Term,
He will show a Perspective, where on one side
You shall behold the faces, and the persons
Of all sufficient young Heirs, in town,
Whose bonds are currant for commodity;
On the other side, the Merchants forms, and others,
That, without help of any second Broker,
(Who would expect a share) will trust such parcels:
In the third square, the very street, and sign
Where the Commodity dwells, and do's but wait
To be delivered, be it Pepper, Soap,
Hopps, or Tobacco, Ote-meale, Wood, or Cheeses.
All which you may so handle, to enjoy,
To your own use, and never stand obliged.
I faith! Is he such a fellow?
Why, Nab here knows him.
And then for making matches, for rich Widows,
Young Gentlewomen, Heirs, the fortunat'st Man!
Hoe's sent too far, and near, all over England
To have his counsel, and to know their Fortunes.
Gods will, my Suster shall see him.
I'll tell you, Sir,
What he did tell me of Nab. It's a strange thing,
(By the way you must eat no Cheese, Nab, it breeds Melancholy:
And that same Melancholy breeds worms) but pass it,
He told me honest Nab, here, was ne'er at Tavern,
But once in's life.
Truth, and no more I was not.
And, then he was so sick
Could he tell you that, too?
How should I know it?
In troth wee had been a shooting,
And had a piece of fat Ram-Mutton, to supper,
That lay so heavy o'my stomach
And he has no head
To bear any Wine; for, what with the noise of the Fiddlers,
And care of his shop, for he dares keep no Servants
My head did so ache
As he was fine to be brought home,
The Doctor told me. And then a good Old Woman
(Yes faith she dwells in Seacoale-lane) did cure me,
With sodden Ale, and Pellitorie of the Wall;
Cost me but two pence. I had another sickness,
Was worse then that.
I, that was with the grief
Thou took st for bing seast at eighteen pence,
For the water-worke
In truth, and it was like
T'haue cost me almost my life.
Thy hair went off?
Yes, Sir, it was done for spite
Nay, so says the Doctor.
Pray thee Tobacco-Boy, Go fetch my Suster,
I'll see this learned Boy, before I go:
And so shall he.
Sir, he is bue now:
But, if you have a Sister to fetch ,
Perhaps, your own pains may command her sooner;
And he, by that time, will be free.
I go, Sir.
Drugger, shoe's thine; the Damase. Subtle, and I
Must wrestle for her. Come on, Mr. Dapper.
You see, how I turn Clients, here, away,
To give your cause dispatch. Ha'you performed
The ceremonies were enjoined you?
Yes, of the Vinegar,
And the clean shirt.
It is well: that shirt may doe you
More Worship then you think. Your Aunt's a fire
But that she will not show it, t'haue a sight on you.
Have you provided for her Graces Servants?
Yes here are six-score Edward shillings.
Good.
And an old Harry's Sovereign.
Very good.
And three Iames shillings, and an Elizabeth great,
Just twenty nobles.
O, you are too just.
I would you had had the other Noble in Maris.
I have some Philip and Maries.
I those same
Are best of all. Where are they? Hark, the Doctor.
IS yet her Graces Cousin come?
He is come.
And is he fasting?
Yes.
And hath cried Hum?
Thrice, you must answer.
Thrice.
And as oft Buzz?
If you have, say.
I have.
Then, to her Cousin,
Hoping, that he hath vinegard his senses,
As he was bid, the Fairy Queen dispenses,
By me, this Robe, the Petticoat of Fortune;
Which that he straight put on, she doth importune.
And though to Fortune near be her Petticoat,
Yet, nearer is her Smock, the Queen doth note:
And, therefore, even of that a piece she hath sent,
Which, being a Child, to wrap him in, was rent;
And prays him, for a scarf, he now will wear it
(With as much love, as then her Grace did tear it)
About his eyes to show, he is fortunate.
And, trusting unto her to make his State,
He will throw away all worldly pelf, about him;
Which that hee will perform, she doth not doubt him.
She need not doubt him, Sir Alas, he has nothing,
But what he will part withal, as willingly,
Upon her Graces word (Throw away your purse)
As she would ask it, (hand-kerchiefes, and all)
She cannot bid that thing, but he will obey.
If you have a Ring, about you, cast it off,
Or a silver seal, at your wrist, her Grace will send
Her Fairies here to search you, therefore deal
Directly with her Highness. If they find
That you conceal a mite, you are undone.
Truly ther's all
All what?
My money, truly.
Keep nothing, that is transitory, about you,
Bid  play musique. Look, the  are come
To pinch you, if you tell not truth. Advise you.
O, I have a paper with a Spur-riall in it.
Ti, ti,
They know it, they say.
Ti, ti, ti, ti, he has more yet.
Ti, ti ti ti. In the tother pocket?
Titi, titi, titi, titi.
They must pinch him, or he will never confess, they say.
O, o.
Nay, pray you hold. Hee is her Graces Nophew.
Ti ti ti? What care you? Good faith, you shall care.
Deal plainly, Sir, and shame the Fairies. Show
You are an Innocent.
By this good light, I ha'nothing,
Ti ti, ti ti to ta. He dos aequiuocate, she says:
Ti, ti do ti, ti ti do, ti da. And swears by the light, when he is blinded.
By this good dark, I have nothing but a halfe-Crowne
Of Gold, about my wrist, that my Love gave me;
And a leaden Heart I wore, senator she forsook me.
I thought, it was something. And, would you incur
Your Aunts displeasure for these trifles? Come
I had rather you had thrown away twenty halfe-crownes.
You may wear your leaden Heart still. How now?
What news, Dol?
Yonders your Knight, Sir Mammon.
Gods lid, We never thought of him, till now.
Where is hee?
Here, hard by. H'is at the door.
And, you are not ready, now? Dol, get his suite.
He must not be sent back.
O by no means.
What shall we doe with this same Puffin, here,
Now hoe's of the Spit?
Why lay him back a while,
With some devise, Ti, ti ti, ti ti ti. Would her Grace speak with me?
I come. Help Dol.
Who's there? Sir Epicure;
My Master's in the way. Please you to walk
Three or four turns, but till his back be turned,
And I am for you. Quickly, Dol.
Her Grace
Commends her kindly to you, Mr. Dapper.
I long to see her Grace.
She, now, is set
At Dinner, in her bed; and she has sent you,
From her own private trencher, a dead Mouse,
And a piece of Ginger-bread, to be merry withal,
And stay your stomach, least you faint with fasting.
Yet, if you could hold out, till she saw you, she says,
It would be better for you.
Sir, He shall
Hold out, and it were this two hours, for her Highness;
I can assure you that. We will not loose
All we have done.
He must nor see, nor speak
To any body, till then.
For that, we'll put Sir,
A stay in 'is mouth.
Of what?
Of Ginger-bread.
Make you it fit. He that hath pleased her Grace,
Thus far, shall not now crinckle, for a little.
Gape Sir, and let him fit you.
Where shall we now
Bestow him?
In the Privy.
Come along, Sir
I now must show you Fortunes privy lodgings.
Are they perfumed? and his bath ready?
All.
Only the Fumigation's somewhat strong.
Sir Epicure,, I am yours, Sir, by and by.
O Sir, yo'are come in the only, finest time
Whore's Master?
Now preparing for proiection, Sir.
Your stuff will be all changed shortly.
Into Gold?
To Gold, and Silver, Sir.
Silver I care not for.
Yes, Sir, a little to give Beggars.
Whore's the Lady?
At hand, here. I have told her such brave things, on you,
Touching your bounty &amp; your noble Spirit
Hast thou?
As she is almost in her fit to see you.
But, good Sir, no Divinity i'your conference
For fear of putting her in rage.
I warrant thee.
Six men will not hold her down. And, then
If the Old man should hear, or see you.
Fear not.
The very House, Sir, would run mad. You know it
How scrupulous he is, and violent,
Against the least act of sin. Physic, or Mathematiques,
Poetry, State, or Bawdry (as I told you)
She will endure and never startle; But
No word of Controuerie.
I am schooled, good Lungs.
And you must praise her House, remember that,
And her Nob
Let me, aloe:
No Helt, no nor Atiquarie, Lugs,
Shall doe it better. Go
Why this is yet
A kind of , to have
Dolommon for a great Lady.
Now, Epicure,
Heighten thy self, talk to her, all in Gold;
Rain her as many showers as Jove did drops
Unto his ,: Show the God a Misr,
Compa'rd with Mammon, What? the Stone will do it.
She shall feel Gold, taste Gold, hear Gold, sleep Gold:
Nay, we will concumbere Gold. I will be puissant,
And mighty in my talk to her. Here she comes.
To him, Dol, suckle him. This is the noble Knight,
I told your Ladyship.
Madame, with your pardon,
I kiss your vesture.
Sir, I were uncivil
If I would suffer that, my lip to you Sir.
I hope, my Lord your Brother be in health, Lady?
My Lord, my Brother is, though I no Lady, Sir.
Well said my Guiny-
Right noble Madam
O, we shall have most fierce Idolatry!
It is your Prrogatiue.
Rather your Curtsy.
Were there nought else t'inlarge your virtues, to me,
These answers speak your breeding, and your blood.
Blood wee boast none, Sir, a poor Baron's Daughter.
Poor, and gat you? Profane not, had your Father
Slept all the happy remnant of his life
After that act,  but there still, and panted,
H'had done enough to make himself, his issue,
And his posterity noble
Sir, although
We may besaid to  the guilt, and trappings,
The  of ; yet we strie to keep.
The eats, and the .
I doe see
The old , Virtue, was not lost,
Nor the Drug, Money, used to make your compound.
There is a strange Nobility, i'your eye;
This lip, that chin. Me thinks you doe resemble
One of the Austrack Princes.
Very like,
Her Father was an Irish Coster-monger.
The house of Valois, just, had such a Nose;
And such a Fore-head, yet, the Medic
Of Florin boast.
Troth, and I have been lik'ned
To all these Princes.
I'll be sworn, I heard it.
I know not, how; It is not any one,
Butee'n the very choice of all their features.
I'll in, and laugh.
A certain touch, or ayre,
That  a diveitie, beyond
An earthly beauty.
O, you play the Courtier.
Good Lady gi'me leave.
In faith, I may not,
To mock me, Sir.
To burn i'this sweet flame:
The Phoex never knew a nobler death.
Nay, now you court, the Courtier, and destroy
What you would build. This Art Sir, i'your words
Calls your whole faith in question
By my soul.
Na Oaths are made of the same ayre, Sir.
Nature
Never bestowed upon mortality,
A more vnblam'd, a more harmonious feature:
She played the Step-dame in all faces, else.
Sweet Madame, le' me be particular.
Particular, Sir? I pray you know your distance.
In no ill sense, sweet Lady, but to ask
How your fair Graces pass the hours? I see
Yo' are lodged, here, in the house of a rare man,
An excellent Artist; But, what's that to you?
Yes, Sir. I study here the Mthematiques,
And distillation.
O, I cry your pardon.
H'is a Divine Instructor, can extract
The souls of all things, by his art, call all
The virtues, and the miracles of the Sun,
Into a temperate fornace: teach dull Nature
What her own forces are. A man, the Emp'rour
Has courted, aboue Kelly: sent his medalls,
And chains, t'invite him.
I, and for his Physic, Sir.
Aboue the art of Aesculapius,
That drew the envy of the Thunderer.
I know all this, and more.
Troth, I am taken, Sir,
Whole, with these studies, that contemplate Nature:
It is a noble Humour. But, this form
Was not intended to so dark a use.
Had you been crooked, foul, of some course mould,
A Cloister, had done well: but, such a feature
That might stand up the Glory of a Kingdom
To live recluse? is a mere solecism,
Though in a Nunnery. It must not be.
I muse, my Lord your Brother will permit it:
You should spend half my Land first, were I hee.
Dos not this Diamant better, on my finger,
Then in the quarry?
Yes.
Why you are like it.
You were created, Lady, for light.
Hear, You shall wear it; take it, the first pledge
Of what I speak: to bind you, to believe me.
In chains of Adamant?
Yes, the strongest bands:
And take a secret, too. Here, by your side,
Doth stand, this hour, the happiest man, of Europe.
You are contented, Sir?
Nay, in true being:
The envy of Princes, and the fear of States.
Say you so, Sir Epicure?
Yes, and thou shalt prove it,
Daughter of Honour. I have cast mine eye
Upon thy form, and I will rear this beauty.
Aboue all Stiles.
You mean no treason, Sir?
No, I will take away that jealousy.
I am the Lord, of the Philosophers Stone,
And thou the Lady.
How Sir, have you that?
I am the Master of the Maistry.
This day, the good Old wretch, here, of the house
Has made it for vs. Now, hoe's at proiection.
Think therefore, thy first wish, now; Let me hear it:
And it shall rain into thy lap, no shower,
But floods of Gold, whole cataracts, a deluge,
To get a Nation on thee.
You are pleased, Sir,
To work on the ambition of our sex.
I'am pleased, the Glory of her sex should know,
This nook, here, of the Friars, is no climate
For her, to live obscurely in, to learn
Physic and Surgery, for the Constables wife
Of some odd Hundred in Essex; but come forth,
And taste the ayre of Palaces, eat, drink
The toils of Empricks, and their boasted practise:
Tincture of Pearl, and Coral, Gold, and Amber;
Be seen at Feasts, and Triumphs; have it asked,
What Miracle she is? set all the Eyes
Of Court a fire, like a burning Glass,
And work 'hem into cinders; when the jewels
Of twenty States adorn thee; and the light
Strikes out the Stars; that, when thy name is mentioned,
Queens may look pale: and, we, but showing our love,
Nero's Poppy may be lost in story.
Thus will we have it.
I could well consent, Sir.
But, in a Monarchy, how will this be?
The Prince will soon take notice, and both seize
You, and your Stone, it being a wealth unfit
For any private subject
If he knew it.
Your self do boast it, Sir.
To thee, my Life.
O, but beware, Sir. You may come to end
The remnant of your days, in a loathed prison,
By speaking of it.
It is no idle fear.
We'll therefore go with all, my Girl, and live
In a free State, where wee will eat our Mullets,
Soused in high-countrey Wines, sup Pheasants eggs,
And have our Cockles, boiled in Silver shells,
Our Shrimps to swim again as when they lived,
In a rare butter, made of Dolphins milk,
Whose cream do's look like Opals: And, with these
Delicate meates, set our selves high for pleasure;
And take vs down again; and then renew
Our youth, and strength, with drinking the Elixir:
And so enjoy a perpetuity
Of life, and lust. And thou shalt have thy Wardrobe,
Richer then Natures, still, to change thy self,
And vary oftner, for thy pride, then she:
Or Act, her wise, and almost-aequall servant.
Sir, you are too loud. I hear you, every word,
Into the Laboratory: some fitter place,
The Garden, or great Chamber aboue. How like you her?
Excellent, Lungs. There's for thee.
But, doe you hear?
Good Sir beware, no mention of the Rabbis.
We think not on 'hem.
O, it is well, Sir. Subtle
DOst thou not laugh?
Yes. Are they gone?
Ell's clear.
The Widow is come.
And your quarrelling Disciple?
I.
I must to my Captaine-ship again, then.
Stay, Bring 'hem in, first.
So I meant. What is she?
A Bony-Bell? ?
I know not.
We'll draw lots,
You'll stand to that?
What else?
O, for a suite,
To fall now, like a Curtine: Flap.
To th'dore, man.
You'll hawed first kiss, because I am not ready.
Yes, and perhaps hit you through both the nostrils.
Who would you speak with?
Whore's the Captain?
Gone, Sir,
About some business.
Gone?
He will return straight.
But Mr. Doctor, his Lieutenant, is here.
Come ne'er, my Worshipful Boy, my Terr Fili,
That is, my Boy of Land; Make thy approaches:
Welcome, I know thy lusts, and thy desires,
And I will serve, and satisfy 'hem. Begin.
Charge me from thence, or thence, or in this line;
Here is my Center: Ground thy Quarrel.
You lie.
How, Child of wrath, and anger! The loud lie?
For what, my so deign Boy?
Nay, that look you too;
I am afore-hand.
O, this's no true Grammar,
And as ill Logic. You must render causes, Child,
Your first, and second Intentions, know your Canons,
And your Divisions, Moods, Degrees, and Differences,
Your Praedicaments, Substance, and Accident,
Series extern, and intern, with their causes
Efficient, , formal, final,
And have your elmints perfect.
What is this
The angry tongue he talks in?
That false praecept,
Of being aforehand, has deceived a number;
And made 'hem enter Quarrels, oftentimes,
Before they were aware: and afterword.
Against their wlls.
How must I doe then, Sir?
I cry this Lady mercy. She should, first,
Have been saluted. I doe call you Lady,
Because you are to be one, ere't be long,
My soft, and buxom Widow.
Is she, in faith?
Yes, or my art is an egregio is liar.
How know you?
By inspection, on her forehead;
An subtlety of her lip, which must be tasted
Often, to make a udgement Slight, she melts
Like a Myrobalane! Here is, yet, a line
In  frontis, tells me, he is no Knight.
What is he then, Sir?
Let me see your Hand.
O, your Linea Frtunae makes it plain;
And , here, in Monte veneris:
But, most of all, Ictura annularis.
He is a Soldier, or a Man of Art, Lady:
But shall have some great honour, shortly.
Brother,
He's a rare man, believe me.
Hold your peace.
Here comes the tother rare man. 'Saue you Captain.
Good Mr. Kestrel. Is this your Sister?
I Sir.
Please you to kusse her, and be proud to know her?
I shall be proud to know you, Lady.
Brother,
He calls me Lady, too.
I, peace. I, heard it.
The Count is come.
Where is he?
At the door.
Why, you must entertain him.
Whatll you doe
With these the while?
Why haue'hem up, and shew'hem
Some Fustian Book, or the Dark Glass.
Before God,
She is a delicate Dab chick! I must have her.
Must, you? I, if your fortune will, you must.
Come Sir, the Captain will come to vs presently.
I'll ha'you to my Chamber of Demonstrations,
Where I'll show you both the Grammar, and Logic,
And  of Quarrelling, my whole method,
Drawn out in Tables, and my Instrument,
That hath the several Scae upon it, shall make you
Able to quarrel, at a straws breadth, by Moone-light.
And, Lady, I'll have you look in a Glass,
Some half an hour, but to clear your eye-sight,
Against you see your Fortune, which is greater,
Then I may judge upon the sudden, trust me.
where are you, Doctor?
I'll come to you presently.
I will have this same Widow, now I have seen her,
On any composition.
What doe you say?
Have you disposed of them?
I have sent 'hem up.
Subtle, in troth. I needs must have this Widow.
Is that the matter?
Nay, but hear me.
Go to
If you rebel once, Dol shall know it all.
Therefore, be quiet, and obey your chance.
Nay, thou at so violent now. Do but conceive,
Thou art old, and can not serve
Who, cannot I?
'Sblood, I will serve her with thee, for a
Nay,
But understand: I'll give you composition.
I will not treat with thee: what, sell my Fortune?
It is better then my Birth-right. Doe not murmur.
Win her, and carry her. If you grumble, Dol
Knows it directly.
Well Sir, I am silent.
Will you go help, to fetch in Don, in state?
I follow you Sir, we must keep Face in awe,
Or he will ouer-looke vs like a Tyranne.
Brain of a Taylor! Who comes here? Don Ion
Sennores, beso las manos,  vuestras mercedes.
Would you had stopped a little, and kissed our ans.
Peace Subtle.
Stab me; I shall never hold, man.
He looks in that deep Ruff, like a Head in a platter,
Served in by a short Cloak upon two trestles.
Or, what doe you say to a Collar of Brawn, cut down
Beneath the Souse, and wriggled with a knife?
Slut, he do's look too fat to be a Spaniard.
Perhaps some Fleming, or some Hollander got him
In D'alua's time: Count Egmonts Bastard.
Don,
Your sciruy, yellow Madril face is welcome.
Gratia.
He speaks, out of a Fortification.
'Pray God, He have no squibs in those deep sets.
Pore dios, Sennores, muy linda Case!
What says he?
Praises the house, I think,
I know no more Butt's action.
Yes, the Case,
My precious Diego, will prove fair enough,
To cousin you in. Doe you mark? you shall
Be cossened, Diego.
Cossened, doe you see?
My worthy Donzel, Cossened.
Entendo.
Do you intend it? So doe we dear Don.
Have you brought Pistolets? or Portagues?
My solemn Dn? Dost thou feel any?
Full.
You shall be emptied, Don; pumped, and drawn,
Dry, as they say.
Milked, in troth, sweet Don.
See all the Monsters; the great Lion of all, Don.
Con licencia, se puede ver  esta Sennor?
What talks he now?
Of the Sennora.
O, Don,
That is the Lioness, which you shall see
Also my Don.
'Slid, Subtle, how shall we doe?
For what?
Why, Dol's employed, you know.
That's true.
Before heaven I know not: He must stay, that's all.
Stay? That he must not, by no means.
No, Why?
Unless you'll mar all. Slight, Hee'li suspect it.
And then he will not pay, not half so well.
This is a travelled Punque-Master, and do's know
All the delays: a notable hot Rascal,
And looks, already, Rampant.
S'death, and Mammon
Must not be troubled.
Mammn, in no case!
What shall we do then?
Think: you must be sudden.
Entiendo, que la Sennora es tan her moss, q  tan
 ver la, como la bien  de mi vida,
Mi vida? 'Slid, Suble, he puts me in mind of the Widow.
What dost thou say to draw her  Ha?
And tell her, it is her Fortune. All our venture
Now lies upon it. It is but one man more.
Which on's chance to have her. And beside,
There is no Maiden head, to be feared, or lost.
What dost thou think on it, ?
Who I? Why
The Credit of our house  is engaged.
You made me an offer for my share ever while.
What wilt thou g ?
O, by that light,
Isle not buy now. You know your doom to me.
Even take your lot, obey your chance, Sir; win her,
And wear her, out for me.
Slight. I'll not work her then.
It is the common cause, therefore bethink you.
Dol else must know it, as you said.
I care not.
, pr que se trdatnta?
Faith, I am not fit, I am old.
That's now no reason, Sir.
Puede, ser, de hazr burly de miamor.
You hear the Don, too? By this ayre, I call,
And loose the hinges. whole.
A plague of Hell
Will you then doe?
Yo' are a terrible Rogue,
Isle think of this: will you, Sir, call the Widow?
Yes And le take her oo, with all her faults,
Now, I doe think on it better.
With all my heart, Sir.
Am I discharged of the lot.
As you please.
Hands.
Remember, now, that, upon any change,
You never claim her.
Much good joy, and health to'you Sir.
Marry a Whore? Fate, let me wed a Witch, first.
Pore estas  barbas.
He swears by his beard.
Dispatch, and call the Brother too.
Tiengo dd, Sennores,
Que no me hgan algunatraycion.
How, Issue on? Yes, praesto Sennor. Please you
Entered the , worthy Don;
Where if it please the Ftes, in your Bthada,
You shall be ok'd, and stroked, and tub'd, and rubbed,
And scrub'd, and fub'd, dear Don, before you go.
You shall in faith, my sciruie Babion Don;
Be curried, clawed, and flaw'd, and taw'd, indeed.
I will the heartilier go about it now,
And make the Widow a Punk, so much the sooner,
To be revenged on this impetuous Face:
The quickly doing of it is the grace.
COme Lady: I knew, the Doctor would not leave,
Till he had found the very nick of her fortune.
To be a Countess say you?
A Spanish Countess, Sir.
Why? is that better then an English Countess?
Better? Slight, make you that a question, Lady?
Nay, she is a fool, Captain, you must pardon her.
Ask from your Courtier, to your Innes of Court-man,
To your mere Milliner; They will tell you all
Your Spanish Jennet is the best Horse. Your Spanish
Stoup is the best Garb. Your Spanish Beard
Is the best Cut. Your Spanish Ruffs are the best
Wear. Your Span  the best Dance.
Your Spanish  in a Glove
The best Perfume. And, for your Spanish Pike,
And Spanish Blade, let your poor Captain speak.
Here comes the Doctor.
My most honoured Lady,
For so I am now to stile you, having found
By this my scheme, you are to undergo
An honourable fortune, very shortly.
What will you say now, if some
I ha 'told her all, Sir.
And her right worshipful Brother, here, that she shall be
A Countess: doe not delay 'hem Sir. A Spanish Countess.
Still, my scarce Worshipful Captain, you can keep
No secret. Well, since he has told you, Madam,
Doe you forgive him, and I doe
She shall doe that, Sir.
I'll look to it, it is my charge
Well then. Nought rests
But that she fit her Love, now, to her fortune.
Truly, I shall never brooke a .
No?
Never, sin eighty et could I abide'hem.
And that was some three year before I was borne in truth.
Come, you must love him, or be miserable:
Choose, which you will.
By this good rush, persuade her,
She will cry Straw-berrie else, within this twelue-month.
Nay, Shads, and Mackrll, which is worse.
Indeed, Sir?
Gods lid. you shall love him, or Isle kick you.
Why?
Isle doe as you will have me, Brother.
Doe,
Or by this hand I'll maul you.
Nay good Sir.
Be not so fierce.
No my enraged Child,
She will be ruled. What when she comes to taste
The pleasures of a Countess, to be courted
And kissed, and ruffled
I, behind the hangings.
And then come forth in pomp
And know her State
Of keeping all the Idolaters of the Chamber
Barer to her, then at their prayers
Is served
Upon the knee
And has her Pages, Huishers.
Footmen, &amp; Coaches
Her six Mares
Nay eight
To hurry her through London, to the Exchange,
Bet'lem, the China-Houses
Yes, and have
The Citizens gape at her, and praise her Tires,
And My-Lords Goose turd bands, that rides with her.
Most brave! By this hand, you are not my Suster,
If you refuse.
I will not refuse, Brother.
Que es sto Seores, que non sevega?
Esta tardanza me mata!
It is the Count come.
The Doctor knew he would be here, by his Art.
En Gallant Madame, Don! Gallantissima!
Pore todos los diocese, la mas acabada
Hermosra, que he visto en mivda!
Is it not a gallant language that they speak?
An admirable language! Is it not French?
No Spanish, Sir.
It goes like Law-French,
And that, they say, is the Courtliest language.
List Sir.
El Solha perdido su lumbre, con el
Resplandor, que tre esta dama. Valga me dio!
Have admires your Sister.
Must not she make curtsy?
Odds will, she must go to him, Man; and kiss him:
It is the Spanish fashion, for the women
To make first court.
It is true he tells you, Sir:
His Art knows all.
Pore que no se acde?
He speaks to her, I think?
That he do's Sir.
Pore el amor de dios, que es esto, que se trda?
Nay, see: she will notvnderstand him. Gull.
Noddy.
What say you Brother?
Ass, my Suster,
Go kusse him, as the Cunning man would have you.
I'll thrust a pin i'your buttocks else.
O, no Sir.
Sennora mia, mi persona muy indignaesta
Alle gar tnta Hermosura.
Dos he not use her bravely?
Bravely, in faith!
Nay he will use her better.
Doe you think so?
Sennora, si sera seruida, entremus.
Where do's he carry her?
Into the Garden, Sir,
Take you no thought, I must interpret for her.
Give Dol the word. Come my fierce Child. Advance,
We'll to our quarrelling Lesson again.
Agreed.
I love a Spanish Boy, with all my heart.
Nay, and by this means, Sir, You shall be Brother
To a great Count.
I, I knew that, at first.
This match will advance the House of the Kestrels.
'Pray God your Sister prove but pliant.
Why,
Her name is so, by her other Husband.
How!
The Widow Pliant. Knew you not that?
No faith Sir.
Yet by erection of her Figure, I gest it.
Come, let's go practise.
Yes, but doe you think, Doctor.
I ever shall quarrel well?
I warrant you.
FOr after Alexanders death
Good Lady
That Perdiccas and Antigonus were slain,
The two that stood, Seleuc', and Ptolomee
Madame.
Made up the two legs, and the fourth Beast.
That was Gog-North, and Egypt-South: which after
Was called Gog Iron-leg, and South Iron-leg
Lady
And then Gog-horned. So was Egypt, too;
Then Egypt Clay-leg, and Gog Clay-leg
Sweet Madame.
And last Gog-Dust, and Aegypt-Dust: which fall
In the last link of the fourth Chain. And these
Be Stars in Story, which none see, or look at
What shall I doe?
For, as he says, except
We call the Rabbis, and the Heathen Greeks
Dear Lady.
To come from Solemn, &amp; from Athens,
And teach the people of great Britain
What's the matter, Sir?
To speak the tongue of Eber, and Iain
O,
Sh'is in her fit.
We shall know nothing
Death, Sir,
We are undone.
Where, then, a learned Linguist
Shall see the ancient used communion
Of Vowels, and Consonants
My Master will hear!
A Wisdom, which Pythagoras held most high
Sweet honourable Lady.
To comprise
All sounds of voices, in few marks of Letters
Nay you must never hope to lay her now.
And so we may arrive by Talmud skill,
And profane Greek, to raise the building up
Of Helens house, against the Ismaelite,
King of Thogarma, and his Habergions
Brimstony, blew, and fiery; and the force
Of King Abaddon, &amp; the Beast of Cittim:
Which Rabbi Dauid Kimchi, Onkelos,
And Aben-Ezra doe interpret Rome.
How did you put her into it?
Alas
Of a fifth Monarchy I would erect,
Which the Philosophers stone (y chance) And
Falls on the other four straight.
Out of 
I told you so. 'Slid stop her mouth.
Is it
She'll never leave else. If the old man hey
We are but foeces, Ashes.
VVhat's to doe
O, we are lost. Now she hears him, she 
Where shall I hide me?
How! What sight is here?
Close deeds of Darkness, and that shun the light!
Bring him again. Who is he? What, my Son?
O, I have lived too long.
Nay good, dear Father,
There was no'vnchast purpose.
Not, and flee me,
When I come in?
That was my Error.
Error?
Guilt, guilt, my Son. Give it the right Name. No marvel,
If I found check in our great Work within,
When such affairs as these were managing.
Why, have you so?
It has gone back this half hour:
And all the rest of our less Works stand still.
Where is the Instrument of wickedness,
My lewd false Drudge?
Nay good Sir blame not him.
Believe me, it was against his Will, or Knowledge.
I saw her by chance.
Will you commit more sin,
T'excuse a Varlet?
By my hope, it is true Sir.
Nay, then I wonder less, if you, for whom
The blessing was prepared, would so tempt heaven:
And loose your fortunes.
Why Sir?
This will hinder
The Work, a Month at least.
Why, if it doe,
What remedy? but think it not, good Father:
Our purposes were honest.
As they were,
So the reward will prove. How now! Aye me.
God, and all Saints be good to vs. What's that?
O Sir, we are defeated: all the Works
Are flown in fumo. Every Glass is burst.
Fornace, and all rent down: as if a Bolt
Of thunder had been drien through the house.
Retorts, Receivers, Pelicans, Bolt-heads,
All struck in shivers. Help good Sir. Alas,
Coldness, and Death invades him. Nay, Sir Mammon,
Do the fair offices of a man. You stand,
As you were readier to depart, then he.
Who's there? My Lord her Brother is come.
Ha, Lungs?
His Coach is at the door. Avoid his sight,
For hoe's as furious, as his Sister is mad.
Alas!
My brain is quite undone with the fume, Sir,
I ne'er must hope to be mine own man again.
Is all lost, Lungs? Will nothing be preserved,
Of all our cost?
Faith, very little, Sir.
A peck of coals, or so, which is cold comfort, Sir.
O my voluptuous mind! I am justly punished.
And so am I, Sir.
Cast from all my hopes
Nay, certainties Sir.
By mine own base affections.
O the cursed fruits of vice, and lust!
Good Father,
It was my sin. Forgive it.
Hangs my roof
Over vs still, and will not fall, O Justice,
Upon vs, for this wicked man!
Nay, look, Sir,
You grieve him, now, with staying in his sight:
Good Sir, the Noble man will come too, and take you,
And that may breed a Tragedy.
I'll go.
I, and repent at home, Sir. It may be,
For some good penance, you may have it, yet
A hundred pound to the Box at Bet'lem.
Yes.
For the restoring such as have their wits.
I'll do it.
Isle send one to you to receive it.
Doe.
Is no Proiection left?
All flown, or stinks, Sir.
Will nought be saved, that's good for med'cine, think tho?
I cannot tell Sir. There will be, perhaps,
Something, about the scraping of the Shards,
Will cure the Itch, though not your itch of mind, Sir.
It shall be saved for you, and sent home. Good Sir,
This way, for fear the Lord should meet you.
Face.
I.
Is he gone?
Yes, and as heavily
As all the Gold he hoped for, were in his blood.
Let vs be light, though.
I, as Balls, and bound
And hit our heads against the roof for joy.
There's so much of our care now cast away.
Now to our Don.
Yes, your young Widow, by this time
Is made a Countess, Face: She has been in travail
Of a young Heir for you.
Good, Sir.
Off with your case,
And greet her kindly, as a Bridegroom should.
After these common hazards.
Very well, Sir.
Will you go fetch Don Diego off the while?
And fetch him over too, if you'll be pleased Sir:
Would Dol were, in her place, to pick his pockets now.
Why you can do it as well, if you would set to it.
I pray you prove your virtue.
For your sake, Sir.
LAdy, you see into what hands, you are fallen;
Amongst what a Nest of villains! and how near
Your honour was t'haue caught a certain clap
(Through your credulity) had I but been
So punctually forward, as Place. Time,
And other circumstance would have made a man.
For yo' are a handsome woman: would yo' were wise, too.
I am a Gentleman, come here disguised,
Only to find the Knaveries of this Citadel,
And where I might have wronged your honour, and have not,
I claim some interest in your love. You are,
They say, a Widow, rich: and I am a Bateheler,
Worth nought. Your fortunes may make me a man,
As mine have preserved you a woman. Think upon it,
And whether, I have deserved you, or no.
I will, Sir.
And for these Houshold-Rogues, let me alone.
To treat with them.
How doth my noble Diego?
And my dear Madame, Countess? Hath the Count
Been courteous, Lady? liberal? and open?
Donzell, me thinks you look melancholic,
After your Coitum, and scurvy! True-ly,
I doe not like the dullness of your eye:
It hath a heavy cast, it is vpsee Dutch,
And soy's you are a lumpish Whore-master.
Be lighter, I will make your pockets so.
Will you, Don Baud, and Pick-purse? How now? Reel you?
Stand up Sir, you shall find since I am so heavy,
I'll give you aequall weight.
Help, Murder.
No Sir.
There's no such thing intended. A good Cart,
And a clean Whip shall ease you of that fear.
I am the Spanish Don, that should be cossened,
Doe you see? cossened. Whore's your Captain Face?
That parcell-Broker, and whole-Baud, all Rascal.
How, Surly!
O, make your approach, good Captain.
I'haue found, from whence your Copper Rings, and Spoons
Come now, wherewith you cheat abroad in Taverns.
It was here, you learned to anoint your boot with Brimstone,
Then rub men's Gold on it, for a kind of touch,
And say it was nought, when you had changed the colour,
That you might have it for nothing. And this Doctor,
Your sooty, smoaky-bearded Compeere, He
Will close you so much Gold, in a Bolts-head,
And, on a turn, convey (in the stead) another
With sublimed Mercury, that shall burst inhe heate,
And fly out all in fumo. Then weeps Mammon.
Then swoons his Worship. Or he is the Faustus,
That casts figures, and can conjure, cures
Plague, Piles, and Pox, by the Ephemerids,
And holds intelligence, with all the Bawds,
And Midwives of three Shires. While you send in
Captain, (what is he gone?) Dam'sells with child,
Wives, that are barren, or, the waiting-Maide
With the Greene-sicknesse. Nay Sir, you must tarry
Though he be escaped; and answer, by the ears, Sir.
why, now's the time, if ever you will quarrel
Well (as they say) and be a true-borne Child.
The Doctor, and your Sister both are abused.
Where is he? Which is he? He is a Slave
What ere he is, and the Son of a Whore. Are you
The Man, Sir, I would know?
I should be loath, Sir,
To confess so much.
Then you lie, in your throat.
How?
A very errant Rogue, Sir, and a Cheater,
Employed here, by another Conjurer,
That dos not love the Doctor, and would cross him
If he knew how
Sir you are abused.
You lie,
And it is no matter.
Well said, Sir. He is
The impudent'st Rascal
You are indeed. Will you hear me, Sir?
By no means. Bid him be gone.
Be gone Sir, quickly.
This's strange! Lady, doe you inform your Brother.
There is not such a Foist, in all the town,
The Doctor had him, presently: And finds, yet,
The Spanish Count will come, here. Bear up, Subtle.
Yes Sir, he must appear, within this hour.
And yet this Rogue, would come, in a disguise,
By the temptation of another Spirit,
To trouble our Art, though he could not hurt it.
I,
I knowAway, you talk like a foolish Mauther.
Sir, all is truth, she says.
Doe not believe him, Sir:
He is the lying'st Swabber. Come your ways, Sir.
You are valiant out of Company.
Yes, how then Sir?
Nay, here's an honest fellow too, that knows him,
And all his tricks. Make good what I say, Abel,
This Cheater would have cossen'd thee of the Widow.
He owes this honest Drugger, here, seven pound,
He has had on him, in two-peny'orths of Tobacco.
Yes Sir. And he hath damned himself three terms, to pay me.
And what do's he owe for Lotium?
Thirty shillings, Sir:
And for six Syringes.
Hydra of villainy!
Nay, Sir you must quarrel him out of the house.
I will.
Sir, if you get not out of doors, you lie,
And you are a Pimp.
Why this is madness, Sir,
Not valor in you: I must laugh at this.
It is my humour: you are a Pimp, and a Trig,
And an Amadis de Gaul, or a Don Quixote.
Or a Knight of the curious coxcomb. Doe you see?
Peace to the Household.
Isle keep peace, for no man.
Casting of Dollars is concluded lawful.
Is he the Constable?
Peace Ananias.
No, Sir.
Then you are an Otter, and a Shad, a Whit,
A very Tim.
You'll hear me Sir?
I will not.
What is the Motive.
Zeal, in the young Gentleman,
Against his Spanish slops.
They are profane,
Lewd, superstitious, and idolatrous Breeches.
New Raskals!
Will you be gone, Sir?
Avoid Satan,
Thou art not of the light. That Ruff of pride,
About thy neck, betrays thee: 'and is the same
With that, which the unclean Birds, in seuenty-seuen,
Were seen to prank it with, on divers coasts.
Thou look like Antichrist, in that lewd hat.
I must give way.
Be gone Sir.
But isle take
A course with you
Depart, proud Spanish Fiend.
Captain, and Doctor.
Child of perdition.
Hence Sir.
Did I not quarrel bravely?
Yes indeed Sir.
Nay and I give my mind to it, I shall do it,
O you must follow Sir, and threaten him tame.
He will turn again else.
I'll re-turne him, then.
Drugger, this Rogue prevented vs, for thee:
With had determined, that thou should have come,
In a Spanish suit, and have carried her so; and he
A Brokerly slave, goes, puts it on himself.
Hast brought the Damask?
Yes Sir.
Thou must borrow,
A Spanish suite. Hast thou no credit with the Players?
Yes Sir, did you never see me play the Poole?
I know not Nab. Thou shalt, if I can help it.
Hieronimo's old Cloak, Ruff, and Hat will serve:
Isle tell thee more, when thou bring 'hem.
Sir, I know
The Spaniard hates the Brethren, and hath Spies
Upon their Actions: And that this was one
I make no scruple. But the holy Synod
Have been in prayer, and meditation, for it.
And it is reueald no less, to them, then me,
That casting of Money is most lawful.
True.
But here, I cannot doe it; if the House
Should chance to be suspected, all would out.
And we be locked up, in the Tower, for ever,
To make Gold there: (for the state) never come out.
And, then, are you defeated.
I will tell
This to the Elders, and the weaker Brethren,
That the whole Company of the Separation
May join in humble prayer again,
And fasting.)
Yea, for some fitter place. The Peace of mind
Rest with these walls.
Thanks, courteous Ananias.
What did he come for?
About casting Dollars,
Presently, out of hand. And so, I told him,
A Spanish Minister came here to spy
Against the Faithful
I conceive. Come Subtle,
Thou art so down upon the least disaster!
How would though have done, if I had not helped thee out?
I thank thee Face, for the Angry Boy, i.faith.
Who would ha'lookt, it should ha'beene that Rascal?
Surly? He had died his beard, and all. Well, Sir,
Here's Damask come, to make you a suite.
Whore's Drugger?
He is gone to borrow me a Spanish habit,
Isle be the Count, now.
But whore's the Widow?
Within, with my Lords Sister: Madame Dol
Is entertaining her.
By your favour, Face,
Now she is honest, I will stand again.
You will not offer it?
Why?
Stand to your word,
OrHere comes Dol. She knows
Yo' are tyrannous still.
Strict for my right. How now, Dol? Hast'told her,
The Spanish Count will come?
Yes, but another is come,
You little looked for.
Who's that?
Your Master:
The Master of the House.
How Dol?
She lies.
This is some trick. Come leave your Quiblins, Dorothee.
Look out, and see.
Art thou in earnest?
Slight
Forty of the Neighbours are about him, talking.
It is he, by this good day.
Twill proueill day,
For some on vs.
We are undone, and taken.
Lost, I am afraid.
You said he would not come,
While there dyed one a Week, within the Liberties.
No: it was within the Walls.
Was it so? Cry' you mercy:
I thought the Liberties. What shall we doe now, Face?
Be silent, not a word, if he call, or knock.
I'll into mine old shape again, and meet him,
Of Ieremie, the Butler. In the mean time,
Doe you two pack up all the goods, and purchase,
That we can carry in the two trunks. I'll keep him
Off for to day, if I cannot longer: And then
At night, Isle ship you both away to Ratcliffe,
Where we'll meet to morrow, and then we'll share.
Let Mammon's Brass, and Peuter keep the Cellar:
We'll have another time for that. But, Dol,
'Pray thee go heate a little water, quickly,
Subtle must shave me. All my Captains beard
Must off, to make me appear smooth Ieremy.
You'll do it?
Yes Isle shave you, as well as I can.
And not cut my throat, but trim me?
You shall see, Sir.
HAs there been such resort, say you?
Daily, Sir.
And nightly, too.
I, some as brave as Lords.
Ladies, &amp; Gentlewomen.
Citizens Wives.
And Knights.
In Coaches.
Yes and Oyster-women.
Beside other Gallants.
Sailors Wives.
Tabacco-men.
Another Pimlico.
What should my Knave advance,
To draw this company? He hung out no Banners
Of a strange Calfe, with five legs, to be seen?
Or a huge Lobster, with six claws?
No Sir.
We had gone in, then, Sir.
He has no gift
Of Teaching in the nose, that ere I knew of!
You saw no Bills set up, that promised cure
Of Agues, or the Tooth-ach?
No such thing, Sir.
Nor heard a Drum struck, for Babouns, or Puppets?
Neither Sir.
What devise should he bring forth now?
I love a teeming wit, as I love my nourishment.
'Pray God he have not kept such open house,
That he hath sold my hangings, and my bedding:
I left him nothing else. If he have eat 'hem,
A plague of the Mouth, say I. Sure he has got
Some bawdy Pictures, to call all this Ging;
The Friar, and the Nun; or the new Mtion
Of the Knights Courser, covering the Parsons Mare;
The Boy of six year old, with the great thing:
O't may be, he has the fleas that run at ilt,
Upon a Table, or some Dog to Dance?
When saw you him?
Who Sir, Ieremie?
Ieremie Butler?
We saw him not, this mont'h.
How!
Not these five weeks, Sir.
These six weeks, at the least.
Yo' amaze me, Neighbours.
Sure, if your Worship know not where he is,
Hoe's flipped away.
Pray God, he be not made away.
Ha? It's no time to question, then.
About
Some three weeks since, I heard a doleful cry,
As I sate up, a mending my wives stockings.
This's strange! that none will answer! Did thou hear
A cry, say thou?
Yes Sir, like unto a Man
That had been strangled an hour, and could not speak.
I heard it too, just this day three weeks, at two a clock
Next morning.
These be miracles, or you make 'hem so!
A man an hour strangled, and could not speak,
And both you heard him cry?
Yes, downward, Sir.
Thou art a wise fellow. Give me thy hand, I pray thee.
What trade art thou, on?
A Smith, and't please your Worship.
A Smith? Then, lend me thy help, to get this door open.
That I will presently, Sir, but fetch my tools
Sir. Best to knock again before you break it.
I Will.
What mean you Sir?
O, Here's 
Good Sir, Come from the door.
Why? what's the matter?
Yet farther, you are to near, yet.
In the name of wonder,
What means the fellow?
The House, Sir, has been visited.
What? with the Plague? stand thou the farther.
No, Sir.
I had it not.
Who had it then? I left
None else, but thee, in the house.
Yes, Sir. My Fellow,
The Cat, that kept the Buttry, had it on her
A week, before I spied it: But I got her
Conveyed away, in the night. And so I shut
The house up for a Month
How!
Purposing the, Sir.
To have burnt Rose-vinegar, Triackle, and Tar,
And, have made it sweet, that you should ne'er ha'knowne it:
Because I knew the News would but afflict you, Sir.
Breath less, and farther off. Why this is stranger!
The Neighbours tell me all, here, that the Doors
Have still been open.
How Sir?
Gallants, Men, and Women,
And of all sorts, tag-rag, been seen to flock here
In threaues, these ten weeks, as to a second Hogs-den,
In days of Pimlico, and Eye-bright.
Sir.
Their wisdoms will not say so.
To day, they speak
Of Coaches, and Gallants; one in a French-hood,
Went in, they tell me: and another was seen
In a Velvet Gown, at the window. Diverse more
Pass in and out.
They did pass through the doors then,
Or walls, I assure their Eyesights, and their Spectacles;
For here, Sir, are the keys; and here have been,
In this my pocket, now, above twenty days.
And for before, I kept the Fort alone, there.
But that it is yet not deep in the afternoon,
I should believe my Neighbours had seen double
Through the Black-pot, and made these apparitions:
For, on my faith to your Worship, for these three weeks
And upwards, the door has not been opened.
Strange!
Good faith, I think I saw a Coach!
And I too,
I'd have been sworn!
Doe you but think it now?
And but one Coach?
We cannot tell, Sir. leremy
Is a very honest fellow.
Did you see me at all?
No. That we are sure on.
I'll be sworn o'that.
Fine Rogues, to have your testimonies built on!
Is Ieremy come?
O yes, you may leave your tools,
We were deceived he says.
He has had the keys,
And the door has bin shut these three weeks.
Like enough.
Peace, and get hence, you Changelings.
Surly come!
And Mammon made acquainted? They'll tell all.
(How shall I beat them off? What shall I doe?)
Nothing's more wretched, then a guilty conscience.
NO Sir, He was a great Physician. This,
It was no Baudy-house: But a mere Chancel.
You knew the Lord, and his Sister.
Nay good Surly
The happy word, Be rich
Play not the Tyranne
Should be to day pronounced, to all your friends.
And where be your Andirons now? And your Brass Pots?
That should ha'beene Golden Flagons, and great Wedges?
Let me but breath. What! They ha'shut their doors,
Me thinks.
I, now, it is Holiday with them.
Rogues,
Coseners, Impostors, Bawds.
What mean you, Sir?
To enter if we can.
Another mans house?
Here is the Owner, Sir. Turn you to him,
And speak your business.
Are you, Sir, the Owner?
Yes, Sir.
And are those Knaves, within, your Cheaters?
What Knaves? What Cheaters?
Subtle, &amp; his Lungs.
The Gentleman is distracted, Sir. No Lungs
Nor Lights ha'beene seen here these three weeks, Sir,
Within these doors, upon my word.
Your word,
Groom arrogant?
Yes Sir, I am the House-keeper,
And know the keys haven't been out o'my hands.
This's a new Face!
You doe mistake the house, Sir.
What sign was it at?
You Rascal. This is one
Of the Confederacy. Come let's get Officers!
And force the door.
'Pray you stay, Gentlemen.
No, Sir, we'll come with warrant.
I, and then,
We shall ha'your doors open.
What means this?
I cannot tell Sir.
These are two of the Gallants,
That we doe think we saw.
Two of the Fools?
You talk as idly as they. Good faith, Sir,
I think the Moon has cras'd 'hem all. (O me,
The angry Boy come too? He will make a noise
And ne'er away till he have betrayed vs all.)
What Rogues, Bawds, Slaves, you'il open the door anon.
Punque, Cocatrice, my Suster. By this light
I'll fetch the Marshall to you. You are a Whore,
To keep your Castle.
Who would you speak with, Sir?
The bawdy Doctor, and the Cozening Captain,
And Pus my Suster.
This is something, sure!
Upon my trust, the doors were never open, Sir.
I have heard all their tricks, told me twice over,
By the fat Knight, and the lean Gentleman.
Here comes another.
Ananias too?
And his Pastor?
The doors are shut against vs.
Come forth, you Seed of Vipers, Sons of Belial,
Your wickedness is broke forth: Abomination
Is in the House.
My Suster's there.
The place,
It is become a Cage of unclean birds.
I, I will fetch the Scauenger, and the Cunstable.
You shall doe well.
We'll join, to weed them out.
You will not come then? Punque, Devise, my Suster?
Call her not Sister. She is a Harlot, verily.
I'll raise the street.
Good Gentlemen, a word.
Satan, avoid, and hinder not our zeal.
The world's turned Bet'lem.
These are all broke loose,
Out of S. Katherines, where they use to keep,
The better sort of Mad-folkes.
All these Persons
We saw go in, and out here.
Yes, indeed Sir.
These were the Parties.
Peace, you Drunkards. Sir,
I wonder at it! Please you, to give me leave
To touch the door, I'll try and the Lock be changed.
It mazes me!
Good faith, Sir, I believe,
There's no such thing. It is all Deceptio visus.
Would I could get him away.
Mr. Captain. Mr. Doctor.
Who's that?
(Our Clerk within, that I forgot) I know not, Sir.
For Gods sake, when will her Grace be at leisure?
Ha!
Illusions, some spirit of the ayre: (His gag is melted,
And now he sets out the throat.)
I am almost stifled
Would you were altogether.)
It is in the house.
Ha! List.
Believe it Sir, in the ayre.
Peace, you
Mine Aunts Grace dos not use me well.
You Fool,
Peace, you'll mar all.
Or you will else, you Rogue.
O, is it so? Then you converse with spirits.
Come Sir. No more o'your tricks, good leremy,
The truth, the shortest way.
Dismiss this rabble, Sir.
What shall I doe? I am caught.
Good Neighbours,
I thank you all. You may depart. Come Sir,
You know that I am an indulgent Master:
And therefore conceal nothing. What's your med'cine,
To draw so many several sorts of wild-foule?
Sir, you were wont to affect mirth, and wit.
But here's no place to talk on it in the street.
Give me but leave, to make the best of my fortune,
And only pardon me th'abuse of your House.
It's all I beg. I'll help you to a Widow,
In recompense, that you shall gi'me thanks for,
Will make you seven years younger, and a rich one.
It is but your putting on a Spanish Cloak,
I have her within. You need not fear the House,
It was not visited.
But by me, who came
Sooner then you expected.
It is true, Sir.
Pray you forgive me.
Well: Let's see your Widow.
HOw! have you eaten your gag?
Yes faith, it crumbled
Away in my mouth.
You have spoiled all then.
No,
I hope my Aunt of Fairy will forgive me.
Your Aunt's a gracious Lady, but intrude
You were to blame.
The fume did overcome me,
And I did do it to stay my stomach. 'Pray you
So satisfy her Grace. Here comes the Captain.
How now! Is his mouth down?
I, he has spoken!
(A pox, I heard him, and you too.) Hoe's undone, then.
I have been fine to say, the House is haunted
With Spirits, to keep Churl back.
And hast thou done it?
Sure, for this night.
Why then triumph, and sing
Of Face so famous, the precious King
Of present wits.
Did you not hear the coil,
About the door?
Yes, and I dwindled with it.
Show him his Aunt, and let him be dispatched:
I'll send her to you.
Well Sir, your Aunt her Grace,
Will give you audience presently, on my suit,
And the Captains word, that you did not eat your gag,
In any contempt of her Highness.
Not I, in troth, Sir.
Here she is come. Down of your knees, and wriggle:
She has a stately presence. Good. Yet nearer,
And bid God save her.
Madame.
And your Aunt.
And my most Gracious Aunt, God save your Grace.
Nephew, we thought to have been angry, with you;
But that sweet face of yours, hath turned the tide,
And made it flow with Joy, that abed of Love.
Arise, and touch our velvet Gown.
The Skirts,
And kisse'hem. So.
Let me now stroke that head.
Much, Nephew, shalt thou win; much shalt thou spend;
Much shalt thou give away, much shalt thou Lend.
I, much indeed. Why doe you not thank her Grace?
I cannot speak, for Joy.
See, the kind wretch!
Your Graces kins-man right.
Give me the Bird.
Here is your Fly in a Purse, about your neck, Cousin,
Wear it, and feed it, about this day seu' night,
On your right wrist.
Open a vein, with a Pin,
And let it suck but once a week. Till then,
You must not look on it.
No. And Kinsman,
Bear your self worthy of the blood you come on.
Her Grace would have you eat no more Wool-sack pies,
Nor Dagger Frumenty.
Nor break his fast,
In Heaven, and Hell.
Shoe's with you every where.
Nor play with Coster-mongers at Mum-chance, Tray-trip,
God make you rich (when as your Aunt has done it:) but keep
The Gallant'st company, and the best Games.
Yes, Sir.
Gleek and Primero; and what you get be true to vs.
By this hand, I will.
You may bring's a Thousand pound,
Before to morrow night, (if but three Thousand
Be stirring) if you will.
I swear, I will then.
Your Fly will learn you all Games.
Ha'you done there?
Your Grace will command him no more duties?
No:
But come, and see me often. I may chance
To leave him three or four hundred Chests of Treasure,
And some five thousand Acres of Faerie Land:
If he Game well, and comely, with good Gamsters.
There's a kind Aunt! Kiss her departing part.
But you must sell your forty mark a year, now.
I, Sir, I mean.
Or gi't away. A pox on it.
Isle gi't mine Aunt. Isle go and fetch the writings.
It is well, away.
Whore's Subtle?
Here. What news?
Drugger is at the door, go take his suite,
And bid him fetch a Parson presently.
Say he shall marry the Widow. Thou shalt spend
A hundred pound by the service. Now, Queen Dol,
Have you packed up all?
Yes.
And how doe you like
The Lady Pliant?
A good dull Innocent.
Here's your Hieronimo's cloak, and hat.
Give me 'hem.
And the Ruff too?
Yes, I'll come to you presently.
Now, he is gone about his project, Dol,
I told you of, for the Widow.
It is direct
Against our Articles.
Well, we'll fit him, Wench.
Hast thou gulled her of her Jewels, or her Bracelets?
No, but I will do it.
Soon at night, my Dlly,
When we are shipped, and all our goods aboard,
East-ward for Ratcliffe, we will turn our course
To Brainford, Westward, if thou say the word,
And take our leaves of this ore-weening Rascal,
This peremptory Face.
Content. I'am weary of him,
Thou'hast cause, when the Slave will run a wiving, Dol,
Against the instrument, that was drawn between vs.
I'll pluck his Bird as bare as I can.
Yes, tell her,
She must by any means, address some present
To th'Cunning man, make him amends for wronging
His Art with her suspicion, send a Ring,
Or chain of Pearl, she will be tortured else
Extremely in her sleep, say, and have strange things
Come to her, wilt thou?
Yes.
My fine Flitter-mouse,
My Bird of the night; we'll tickle it at the Pigeons,
When we have all, and may unlock the Trunks,
And say, this's mine, and thine, and thine, and mine
What now, a billing?
Yes, a little exalted
In the good passage of our Stock-affaires.
Drugger has brought his Parson, take him in, Subtle,
And send him back again, to wash his face.
I will: and shave himself?
If you can get him.
You are hot upon it Face, what ere it is.
A trick, that Dol shall spend ten pound a month by.
Is he gone?
The Chaplain waits you in the hall, Sir.
I'll go bestow him.
He will now marry her, instantly.
He cannot yet, he is not ready. Dear Dol,
Cousin her of all thou can. To deceive him
Is no deceit, but Justice; that would break
Such an inextricable tie as ours was.
Let me alone to fit him.
Come my Venturers.
You have packed up all? Where be the Trunks? Bring forth.
Here.
Let's see 'hem. Whore's the Money?
Here,
In this.
Mammons ten pound: Eight score before.
The Brethrens money, this. Druggers and Dappers.
What Paper's that?
The Jewel of the waiting Maids,
That stole it from her Lady, to know certain
If she should have precedence of her Mistress?
Yes.
What box is that?
The Fish-wiues rings, I think.
And th'Alewiues single money. Is it not Dol?
Yes; and the whistle, that the Sailors wife
Brought you, to know, and her Husband were with Ward.
We'll wet it to morrow: and our Siluer-beakers,
And Tavern cups. Where be the French Petticoats,
And Girdles, and Hangers?
Here, in the Trunk,
And the Bolts of Lawn.
Is Druggers Damask, there?
And the Tobacco?
Yes.
Give me the Keys.
Why you the Keys?
No matter, Dol, because
We shall not open 'hem, before he comes.
It is true, you shall not open them, indeed,
Nor have 'hem forth. Doe you see? Not forth, Dol.
No?
No my Smock-rampant. The right is, my Master
Knows all, has pardoned me, and he will keep 'hem.
Doctor it is true (you look) for all your Figures.
I sent for him, indeed. Wherefore good Partners,
Both He and She, be satisfied. For here
Determines the Indenture tripartite
Twixt Subtle, Dol, and Face. All I can doe
Is to help you over the wall, of the backside;
Or lend you a sheet, to save your Velvet Gown, Doll.
Here will be Officers presently; bethink you,
Of some course suddenly to scope the Dock,
For thither you'll come else. Hark you, Thunder.
You are a precious fiend!
Open the door.
Dol, I am sorry for thee in faith. But hearst thou?
It shall go hard, but I will place thee somewhere:
Thou shalt ha'my Letter to Mrs Amo.
Hang you
Or Madame Imperial.
Pox upon you, Rogue,
Would I had but time to beat thee.
Subtle,
Let's know where you set up next; I'll send you
A Customer, now and then, for old acquaintance:
What new course have you?
Rogue, I'll hang my self
That I may walk a greater devil, then thou,
And haunt thee in the Flock-bed, and the Buttery.
what do you mean my Masters?
Open your Door,
Cheaters, Bawds, Conjurers.
Or we'll break it open.
What warrant have you?
Warrant enough, Sir, doubt not,
If you'll not open it.
Is there an Officer, there?
Yes, two, or three for failing.
Have but patience,
And I will open it straight.
Sir, Have you done?
Is it a Marriage? perfect?
Yes, my Brain?
Off with your Ruff, and Cloak then, be your self, Sir.
Down with the door.
Slight, ding it open.
Hold.
Hold Gentlemen, what means this violence?
Where is this Collier?
And my Captain Face?
These day-Owls.
That are Birding in men's purses.
Madame Suppository.
Doxey, my Suster.
Locusts
Of the foul pit
Profane as Bell, and the Dragon.
Worsethen the Grasse-hoppers, or the Lice of Egypt.
Good Gentlemen, hear me. Are you Officers,
And cannot stay this violence?
Keep the peace.
Gentlemen, what is the matter? Whom doe you seek?
The Chemical Cousoner.
And the Captain Pander.
The Nun my Suster.
Madame Rabbi.
Scorpions,
And Caterpillars.
Fewer at once, I pray you.
One after another, Gentlemen, I charge you,
By virtue of my staff
They are the vessels
Of shame, and of dishonour.
Goodzeale, lye still,
A little while.
Peace, Deacon Ananias.
The House is mine here, and the doors are open:
If there be any such persons, as you seek for,
Use your authority, search on of Gods name.
I am but newly come to town, and finding
This tumult about my door(to tell you true)
It somewhat mazd me; till my Man, here, (fearing
My more displeasure) told me had done
Somewhat an insolent part, let out my house
(Belike, presuming on my known aversion
From any ayre of the town, while there was Sickness)
To a Doctor, and a Captain, who, what they are,
Or where they be, he knows not.
Are they gone?
You may go in, and search, Sir. Here, I find
The empty Walls, worse then I left'hem, smoked,
A few cracked pots, and Glasses, and a Fornace,
The Seeling filled with Tosies of the Candle:
And Madame, with a Dildo, writ of the walls.
Only one Gentlewoman, I met here,
That is within, that said she was a Widow
I that's my Suster. I'll go thumpe her. Where is she?
And should have married a Spanish Count, bud,
When he came to it, neglected her so grossly,
That I, a Widower, am gone through with her.
How! Have I lost her then?
Were you the Don, Sir?
Good faith, now, she do's blame yo' extremely, and says
You swore, and told her, you had tan the pains,
To dye your beard, and vmbre o'er your face,
Borrowed a Suit, and Ruff, all for her Love;
And then did nothing What an over sight,
And want of putting forward, Sir, was this!
Well fare an old Hargubuzier, yet,
Could prime his poulder, and give fire, and hit,
All in a twinkling.
The whole Nest are fled!
What sort of Birds were they?
A kind of Choughs,
Or thievish Daws, Sir, that have picked my purse
Of Eight-score, and ten Pounds, within these five weeks,
Beside my first Materials; and my Goods,
That lye in the Cellar: which I am glad, they have left,
I may have home yet.
Think you so Sir?
I.
By order of Law, Sir, but not otherwise.
Not mine own stuff?
Sir, I can take no knowledge,
That they are yours, but by public means.
If you can bring certificate, that you were gulled of 'hem,
Or any formal Writ, out of a Court,
That you did cousin your self; I will not hold them.
I'll rather loose'hem.
That you shall not, Sir,
By me, in troth. Upon these termesthey' are yours.
What should they have been, Sir, turned into Gold all?
No.
I cannot tell. It may be they should. What then?
What a great loss in hope have ou sustained?
Not I, the Common wealth has.
I, he would ha'built
The City new; and made a Ditch about it
Of Silver, should have run with Cream from Hogsden:
That, every Sunday in More-fields, the Younkers,
And Tits, and Tom-boyes should have fed on gratis.
I will go mount a Turnep-cart, and preach
The end of the world within these two months. Surly,
What! in a Dream?
Must I needs cheat my self,
With that same foolish vice of Honesty!
Come let vs go, and hearken out the Rogues.
That Face I'll mark for mine, if ere I meet him.
If I can hear of him, Sir, I'll bring you word,
Unto your lodging: for in troth, they were strangers
To me, I thought 'hem honest, as my self, Sir.
It is well, the Saints shall not loose all yet. Go,
And get some Carts
For what, my zealous Friends?
To bear away the portion of the Righteous,
Out of this den of Thieves.
What is that portion?
The goods, sometimes the Orphans, that the Brethren
Bought with their Silver pence.
What, those in the Cellar,
The Knight, Sir Mammon claims?
I doe defy
The wicked Mammon, so doe all the Brethren,
Thou profane Man. I ask thee, with what conscience
Thou can advance that Nemrod, against vs,
That have the seal? Were not the Shillings numbered,
That made the Pounds? were not the Pounds told out,
Upon the second day of the fourth week,
In the eight month, upon the table dormant,
The year, of the last patience of the Saints,
Six hundred and ten.
Mine earnest vehement Botcher,
And Deacon also, I cannot dispute with you,
But, if you get you not away the sooner,
I shall confute you, with a Cudgel.
Sir.
Be patient Ananias.
I am strong,
And will stand up, well girt, against an Host,
That threaten Gad in exile.
I shall send you
To Amstredam, to your Cellar.
I will pray there
Against thy House: May Dogs defile thy walls,
And Wasps and Hornets breed beneath thy roof,
This seat of falsehood, and this cave of cos'nage.
Another too?
Not I Sir, I am no Brother.
Away you Harry Nicholas, doe you talk?
No this was Abel Drugger. Good Sir, go.
And satisfy him; tell him, all is done:
He stayed too long a washing of his face.
The Doctor, he shall hear of him at Westchester:
And of the Captain, tell him at Yarmouth, or
Some good Port-towne else, lying for a wind.
If you can get off the Angry Child now, Sir
Come on, you Yew, you have matched most sweetly, have you not?
Did not I say, I would never have you tupt
But by a dubbed Boy, to make you a Lady-Tom?
Slight, you are a Mammet! O, I could touse you, now.
Death, mun' you marry with a pox?
You lye, Boy;
As sound as you: and I am afore-handwith you.
Anon?
Come, will you quarrel? I will fees you, sirrah.
Why doe you not buckle to your tools?
Gods light!
This is a fine Old Boy, as ere I saw!
What doe you change your copy now? Proceed,
Here stands my Dove: stoop at her, if you dare.
Slight I must love him: I cannot choose in faith,
And I should be hanged for it. Suster, I protest
I honour thee, for this match.
O doe you so, Sir.
Yes, and thou can take Tobacco, and drink, Old Boy,
I'll give her five hundred pound more, to her Marriage,
Then her own State.
Fill a pipe-full, Ieremie.
Yes, but go in, and take it, Sir.
We will.
I will be ruled by thee in any thing, Ieremy.
Slight, thou art not Hide-bound, thou art a Joy Boy!
Come let's in pray thee, and take our Wffes.
Whiff in with your Sister, brother Boy. That Master
That had received such happiness by a Servant,
In such a Widow, and with so much wealth,
Were very ungrateful, if he would not be
A little indulgent to that Servants wit,
And help his fortune, though with some small strain
Of his own candor. Therefore Gentlemen,
And kind Spectators, if I hau out stripped
An old mans gravity, or strict canon, think
What a young Wife, and a good Brain may doe:
Stretch Ages truth sometimes, and crack it too.
Speak for thy self, Knave.
So I will Sir. Gentlemen,
My Part a little fell in this last Scene,
Yet it was decorum. And though I am clean
Got off, from Subtle, Surly, Mammon, Dol,
Hot Ananias, Dapper, Drugger, all
With whom I traded; yet I put my self
On you, that are my Country: And this Pelf,
Which I have got, if you doe quit me, rests
To feast you often, and inite new ghosts.

Banished?
It grieved me much to hear the sentence.
Ha, Ha,  Democritus thy Gods
That govern the whole world! Courtly reward, and punishment. Fortun's a right whore.
If she give ought, she deals it in small parcels,
That she may take away all at one swop.
This tic to have great enemies, God quite them:
Your woolfe no longer seems to be a woolfe
Then when shees hungry.
You term those enemies
Are men of Princely rank.
Oh I pray for them.
The violent thunder is adored by those
Are poshed in pieces by it.
Come my Lord,
You are justly domed, look but a little back
Into your former life: you have in three years
Ruined the noblest Earldom
Your followers
Have swallowed you like Mummy, and being sick
With such unnatural and horrid Physic
Vomit you up ith kennel
All the damnable degrees
Of drinkings have you, you staggerd through one Citizen.
Is Lord of two fair Manors, called you master
Only for Cauiare.
Those noblemen
Which were invited to your prodigal feasts,
Wherein the Phoenix scarce could scope your throats,
Laugh at your misery, as fore-deeminge you:
An idle Meteor which drawn forth the earth
Would bee soon lost ith air.
Jest upon you,
And say you were begotten in an Earthquake,
You have ruined such fair Lordships.
Very good,
This Well goes with two buckets, I must tend
The pouring out of eather.
Worse then these,
You have acted, certain Murders here in Rome,
Bloody and full of horror.
Las they were flea-bytinges?
Why took they not my head then?
O my Lord
The law doth sometimes mediate, thinks it good
Not ever to steep violent sins in blood,
This gentle penance may both end your crimes,
And in the example better these bad times.
So, but I wonder then some great men 
This banishment, ther's Paulo Giordano Or,
The Duke of Brachiano, now lives in Rome,
And by close panderism seeks to prostitute
The honour of Uittoria Corombona,
Vittoria, she that might have got my pardon
For one kiss to the Duke.
Have a full man within you,
Wee see that Trees bear no such pleasant fruit
There where they grew first, as where the are new set.
Perfumes the more they are chafed the more they render
Their pleasing scents, and so affliction
Expresses virtue, fully, whether true,
Or ells adulterate.
Leave your painted comforts,
Isle make Italian cut-works in their guts
If ever I return.
O Sir.
I am patient,
I have seen some ready to be executed
Give pleasant looks, and money, and grown familiar
With the knave hangman, so do I, I thank them,
And would account them nobly merciful
Would they dispatch me quickly,
Fare you well,
Wee shall find time I doubt not to repeal
Your banishment.
I am ever bound to you:
This is the worlds alms; pray make use of it,
Great men sell sheep, thus to be cut in pieces,
When first they have shorn them bare and sold their sleeces.
Your best of rest.
Unto my Lord the Duke,
The best of well come, More lights, attend the Duke.
Flamineo.
My Lord.
Quite lost Flamineo.
Pursew your noble wishes, I am prompt
As lightning to your service,  my Lord!
The fair Vittoria, my happy sister
Shall give you present audience, gentlemen
Let the carriage go on, and tic his pleasure
You put out all your torches and depart.
Are wee so happy.
Can't be otherwise?
Observed you not to night my honoured Lord
Which way so ere you went she threw her eyes,
I have dealt already with her chamber-maid
Zanche the More, and she is wondrous proud
To be the agent for so high a spirit.
Wee are happy aboue thought, because above merit.
above merit! wee may now talk freely: above merit; what first you doubt, her coyness, thats but the superficies of lust most women have; yet why should Ladies blush to hear that named, which they do not fear to handle? O they are politic, They know our desire is increased by the difficulty of enjoying; where a satiety is a blunt, weary and drowsy passion, if the buttery hatch at Court stood continually open their would be nothing so passionate crowding, nor hot suit after the beverage,
O but her jealous husband.
Hang him, a guilder that hath his brains perished with
quicke-siluer is not more could in the liver. The great Barriers moulted not more feathers then he hath shed hairs, by the confession of his doctor. An Irish gamester that will play himself naked, and then wage all downward, at art, is not more ventaros. So vn-able to please a woman that like a dutch doublet all his back is shrunk into his breeches.
Shroud you within this closet, good my Lord,
Some trick now must be thought on to deuie
My brother in law from his fair bed-fellow,
O should she fail to come,
I must not have your Lordship thus unwisely amorous,
I my self have loved a lady and peursued her with a great deal of vnder-age protestation, whom some 3. or 4. gallants that have enjoyed would with all their harts have bin glad to have bin rid of Tic just like a summer bird-cage in a garden, the birds that are without, despair to get in, and the birds that are within despair and are in a consumption for fear they shall never get out: away away my Lord,
See here he comes, this fellow by his apparel
Some men would judge a politician,
But call his wit in question you shall find it
Merely an Ass in's foot cloth,
How now brother what travailing to bed to your kind wise?
I assure you brother no, My voyage lies
More northerly, in a far colder clime,
I do not well remember I protest when I last lay with her.
Strange you should loose your Count.
Wee never lay together but ear morning
Their grew a flaw between vs.
It had bin your part
To have made up that flaw.
True, but she loathes I should be seen in it.
Why Sir, what's the matter?
The Duke your moister visits me I thank him,
And I perceive how like an earnest bowler
Hee very passionately leanes that way,
He should have his boule run
I hope you do not think
That noble men boule booty, Faith his cheek
Hath a most excellent Bias, it would fine jump with my mistress.
Will you be an ass.
Despite you Aristotle or a Cocould
Contrary to your Ephemerids
Which shows you under what a smiling planet
You were first swaddled,
Pew wew, Sir tell not me
Of planets nor of Ephemerids
A man may be made Cocould in the day time
When the Stars eyes are out.
Sir God boy you,
I do commit you to your pitiful pillow
Stuffed with horne-shauings.
Brother.
God refuse me
Might I advise you now your only course
Wear to locke up your wife.
It were very good.
Bar her the sight of revels.
Excellent.
Let her not go to Church, but like a hound
In Leon atyour heals.
It were for her honour
And so you should be certain in one fortnight,
Despite her chastity or innocence
To bee Cocoulded, which yet is in suspense:
This is my counsel and I ask no see for it.
Come you know not where my-night cap wrings me.
Wear it ath' old fashion, let your large ears come through, it will be more easy, nay I will be bitter, bar your wife of her entertainment: women are more willingly &amp; more gloriouslie chaste, when they are least restrained of their liberty. It seems you would be a fine Capricious Mathematically jealous Coxcomb, take the height of your own horns with a Iacobs staff before they are up. These politic enclosures for paltry mutton, makes more rebellion in the flesh then all the prouocatiue electuaries Doctors have uttered sense last Jubilee.
This doth not physic me,
It seems you are Jealous, isle show you the error of it by a familiar example, I have seen a pair of spectacles fashiond with such perspective art, that lay down but one twelve pence ath'bord twill appear as if there were twenty, now should you
wear a pair of these spectacles, and see your wife tying her shoe, you would Imagine twenty hands were taking up of your wives clothes, and this would put you into a horrible causeless fury,
The fault there Sir is not in the eye-sight
True, but they that have the yellow Iaundeise, think all objects they look on to bee yellow. Jealousy is worser, her fit's present to a man, like so many bubles in a Basin of water, twenty several crabbed faces, many times makes his own shadow his cocould-maker. * See she comes, what reason  have you to be jealous of this creature? what an ignorant ass or flattering knave might he be counted, that should write sonnets to her eyes, or call her brow the snow of Ida, or Ivory of Corinth, or compare her hair to the black birds bill, when it is liker the black birds feather. This is all: Be wise, I will make you friends and you shall go to bed together, marry look you, it shall not be your seeking, do you stand upon that by any means, walk you a aloof, I would not have you seen in it, sister my Lord attends you in the banqueting house, your husband is wondrous discontented.
I did nothing to displease him, I carved to him at supper-time
You need not have carved him infaith, they say he is a capon already, I must now seemingly fall out with you. Shall a gentleman so well descended as Camillo.a lousy slave that within this twenty years rode with the black guard in the Dukes carriage amongst spits and dripping-pannes.
Now he begins to tickle her.
An excellent scholar, one that hath a head filled with calves brains without any sage in them,come crouching in the hams to you for a nights lodgingthat hath an itch in's hams, which like the fire at the glass house hath not gone out this seven yearsis hee not a courtly gentleman,when he wears white satin one would take him by his black mussel to be no other creature then a maggot, you are a goodly Foil, I confess, well set outbut covered with a false stone you conterfaite diamond.
He will make her know what is in me.
Come, my Lord attends you, thou shalt go to bed to my Lord.
Now he comes to it.
With a relish as curious as a vintner going to taste new wine, I am opening your case hard.
A virtuous brother a my credit.
He will give thee a ringe with a philosophers stonein it.
Indeed I am studying Alcumye.
Thou shalt lye in a bed stuffed with turtles feathers, swoon in perfumed linen like the fellow was smothered in roses, so perfect shall be thy happiness, that as men at Sea think land and trees and ships go that way they go, so both heaven and earth shall seem to go your voyage. Shall it meet him, tic fixed, with nails of diamonds to inevitable necessity.
How shells rid him hence?
I will put brees in's tail, set him gadding presently, I have almost wrought her to it, I find her coming, but might I advise you now for this night I would not lye with her, I would cross her humour to make her more humble.
Shall I, shall I?
It will show in you a supremacy of Judgment.
True, and a mind differing from the tumultuary opinion, for quae negate grant.
Right you are the Adamant shall draw her to you, though you keep distance of:
A philosophical reason.
Walk by her a'the noble mans fashion, and tell her you will lye with her at the end of the Progress
Vittoria, I cannot be induced, or as a man would say incited.
To do what Sir?
To lye with you to night; your silkeworme uses to fast every third day, and the next following spinnes the better. Tomorrow at night I am for you.
You'll spin a fair thread, trust to it.
But do you hear I shall have you steal to her chamber about midnight.
Do you think so, why look you brother, because
you shall not think isle gull you, take the key, locke me into the chamber, and say you shall be sure of me.
In truth I will, isle be your jailer once,
But have you ne'er a false door.
A pox on it, as I am a Christian tell me to morrow how scurvily she takes my unkind parting
I will.
Did thou not make the jest of the silke-worme? good night in faith I will use this trick often,
Do, do, do.
So now you are safe. Ha ha ha, thou intanglest thy self in thine own work like a silke-worme
Come sister, darkness hides your blush, women are like cursed dogs, civility keeps them tied all day time, but they are let loose at midnight, then they do most good or most mischief, my Lord, my Lord
Give credit: I could wish time would stand still
And never end this enteruew this hour,
But all delight doth it self soon'st dcuour.
Let me into your bosom happy Lady,
Power out in stead of eloquence my vows,
Loose me not Madam, for if you forcgo me I am lost eternally.
Sir in the way of pity I wish you hart-hole.
You are a sweet Physician.
Sure Sir a loathed cruelty in Ladies
Is as to Doctors many funerals: It takes away their credit.
Excellent Creature.
Wee call the cruel fair, what name for you
That are so merciful?
See now they close.
Most happy union.
My fears are fallen upon me, oh my heart!
My son the pander: now I find our house
Sinking to ruin. Earth-quakes leave behind,
Where they have tyrannised, iron, or lead, or stone,
But woe to ruin violent lust leaves none
What value is this Jewel
Tic the ornament Of a weak fortune.
In sooth isle have it; nay I will but change
My Jewel for your Jewel.
Excellent,
His Jewel for her Jewel, well put in Duke.
Nay let me see you wear it.
Hear sir.
Nay lower, you shall wear my Jewel lower.
That's better she must wear his Jewel lower.
To pass away the time I'll tell your grace,
A dream I had last night.
Most wishedly.
A foolish idle dream,
Me thought I walked about the mid of night,
Into a Church-yard, where a goodly Eu Tree
Spread her large root in ground, under that Eu,
As I sat sadly leaning on a grave,
Checkered with crosse-sticks, their came stealing in
Your Duchess and my husband, one of them
A picax bore, the other a Rusty spade,
And in rough terms they began to challenge me,
About this Eu.
That Tree.
This harmless Eu:
They told me my intent was to root up
That well-growne Eu, and plant in the steed of it
A withered blacke-thorne, and for that they vowed
To bury me alive: my husband straight
With picax began to dig, and your fell Duchess
With shovel, like a fury, voided out
The earth &amp; scattered bones, Lord how me thought
I trembled, and yet for all this terror
I could not pray.
No the devil was in your dream.
When to my rescue there arose me thought
A whirlwind, which let fall a massy arm
From that strong plant,
And both were struck dead by that sacred Eu
In that base shallow grave that was their due.
Excellent Devil.
She hath taught him in a dream
To make away his Duchess and her husband.
Sweetly shall I interpret this your dream,
You are lodged within his arms who shall protect you,
From all the fevers of a jealous husband,
From the poor envy of our phlegmatic Duchess,
I'll seat you aboue law and aboue scandal,
Give to your thoughts the invention of delight
And the fruition, nor shall government
Divide me from you longer then a care
To keep you great: you shall to me at once,
Be Dukedom, health, wife, children, friends and all.
Woe to light hearts they still forerun our fall.
What fury raised thee up? away, away
What make you hear my Lord this dead of night?
Never dropped mildew on a flower here, tell now.
I pray will you go to bed then,
Least you be blasted.
O that this fair garden,
Had all poisoned herbs of Thessaly,
At first been planted, made a nursery
For witch-craft; rather a burial plot,
For both your Honours.
Dearest mother hear me.
O thou dost make my brow bend to the earth,
Sooner then nature, see the curse of children
In life they keep vs freqeuently in tears,
And in the cold grave leaves vs in pale fears.
Come, come, I will not hear you.
Dear my Lord.
Where is thy Duchess now adulterous Duke?
Thou little dreamd'st this night she is come to Rome.
How? come to Rome,
The Duchess,
She had been better,
The lives of Princes should like dials move,
Whose regular example is so strong,
They make the times by them go right or wrong.
So, have you done?
Unfortunate Camillo.
I do protest if any chaste denial,
If any thing but blood could have allayed,
His long suite to me.
I will join with thee,
To the most woeful end ere mother kneeled,
If thou dishonour thus thy husbands bed,
Bee thy life short as are the funeral tears
In great men's.
Fie, fie, the women's mad.
Bee thy act Iudas-like betray in kissing,
Majesty thou be envied during his short breath,
And pitied like a wretch after this death.
O me accursed.
Are you out of your wits, my Lord
Isle fetch her back again?
No I'll to bed.
Send Doctor Iulio to me presently,
Uncharitable woman thy rash tongue
Hath raised a fearful and prodigious storm,
Bee thou the cause of all ensuing harm.
Now, you that stand so much upon your honour,
Is this a fitting time a night think you,
To send a Duke home without ere a man:
I would fine know where lies the mass of wealth
Which you have whoorded for my maintenance,
That I may bear my beard out of the level
Of my Lords Stirrup.
What? because we are poor,
Shall we be vicious?
Pray what means have you
To keep me from the galleys, or the gallows?
My father proved himself a Gentleman,
Sold al's land, and like a fortunate fellow,
Died ere the money was spent. You brought me up,
At Padua I confess, where I protest
For want of means, the University judge me,
I have been fine to heel my Tutors stockings
At least seven years: Conspiring with a beard
Made me a Graduate, then to this Dukes service,
I visited the Court, whence I returned:
More courteous, more lecherous by far,
But not a suite the richer, and shall I,
Having a path so open and so free
To my preferment, still retain your milk
In my pale forehead, no this face of mine
I'll arm and fortify with lusty wine,
Against shame and blushing.
O that I ne'er had borne thee,
So would I.
I would the commonest Courtesan in Rome,
Had been my mother rather then thy self.
Nature is very pittfull to whoores
To give them but few children, yet those children
Plurality of fathers, they are sure
They shall not want. Go, go,
Complain unto my great Lord Cardinal,
Yet may be he will justify the act.
Lycurgus wondered much men would provide
Good stalions for their Mares, and yet would suffer
Their fair wives to be barren,
Misery of miseries.
The Duchess come to Court, I like not that,
Wee are engaged to mischief and must on.
As Rivers to find out the Ocean
Flow with crook bindings beneath forced banks,
Or as wee see to aspire some mountains top,
The way ascends not straight, but Imitates
The subtle fouldings of a Winters snake,
So who knows policy and her true aspect,
Shall find her ways winding and indirect.
Have you not seen your husband since you arrived?
Not yet sir.
Surely he is wondrous kind,
If I had a such Doue-house as Camillo's
I would set fire on it, were it but to destroy
The Pole-cats that haunt to it,my sweet cossin.
Lord uncle you did promise me a horse
And armour.
That I did my pretty cossin,
Marcello see it fitted.
My Lord the Duke is here.
Sister away you must not yet bee seen.
I do beseech you entreat him mildly,
Let not your rough tongue
Set vs at louder variance, all my wrongs
Are freely pardoned, and I do not doubt
As men to try the precious Unicorns horn
Make of the powder a preservative Circle
And in it put a spider, so these arms
Shall charm his poison, force it to obeying
And keep him chaste from an infected straying
I wish it may. Be gone.
Void the chamber,
You are welcome, will you sit, I pray my Lord
Bee you my Orator, my hearts too full,
I'll second you anon.
Ever I begin
Let me entreat your grace forgo all passion
Which may be raised by my free discourse:
As silent as in the Church you may proceed.
It is a wonder to your noble friends,
That you have as it were entered the world,
With a free Sceptre in your able hand,
And have to th'use of nature well applied
High gifts of learning, should in your prime-age
Neglect your awful throne, for the soft down
Of an insatiate bed. oh my Lord,
The Drunkard after all his lavish cups,
Is dry, and then is sober, so at length,
When you awake from this lascivious dream,
Repentance then will follow; like the sting
Placed in the Adders tail: wretched are Princes
When fortune blasts but a petty flower
Of their unwieldy crowns; or rauesheth
But one pearl from their Sceptre: but alas!
When they to wilful shipwrake loose good Fame
All Princely titles perish with their name.
You have said my Lord,
Enough to give you taste
How far I am from flattering your greatness?
Now you that are his second, what say you?
Do not like young hawks fetch a course about
Your game flies fair and for you,
Do not fear it:
I'll answer you in your own hawking phrase,
Some Eagles that should gaze upon the Sun
Seldom soar high, but take their lustful ease,
Since they from dunghill birds their pery can cease,
You know Uittoria,
Yes.
You shift your shirt there
When you retire from Tennis.
Happily.
Her husband is Lord of a poor fortune
Yet she wears cloth of Tissue,
What of this?
Will you urge that my good Lord Cardinal
As part of her confession at next Shrift,
And know from whence it sails.
She is your Strumpet,
Uncivil sir ther's Hemlock in thy breath
And that black slander, were she a whore of mine
All thy loud Cannons, and thy borrowed Switzers
Thy Galleys, nor thy sworn confederates,
Durst not supplant her.
Let's not talk on thunder,
Thou hast a wife, our sister, would I had given
Both her whitehands to death, bound and locked fast
In her last winding sheer, when I gave thee
But one.
Thou had given a soul to God then.
True,
Thy ghostly father with al's absolution,
Shall ne'er do so by thee.
Spit thy poison,
I shall not need, lust carries her sharpe whip
At her own girdle, look to it for our anger
Is making thunder-bolts.
Thunder? in faith,
They are but crackers.
We'll end this with the Cannon.
Thou'lt get nought by it but iron in thy wounds,
And gunpowder in thy nostrils.
Better that
Then change perfumes for plasters,
Pity on thee,
It were good you'd show your slaves or men condemned
Your new ploughed fore-head defiance, and I'll meet thee,
Even in a thicket of thy ablest men.
My Lords, you shall not word it any further
Without a milder limit.
Willingly.
Have you proclaimed a Triumph that you bait a
Lyon thus.
My Lord.
I am tame, I am tame sir.
We send, unto the Duke for conference
Bout leauyes' against the Pirates, my Lord Duke
Is not at home, we come our self in person,
Still my Lord Duke is busied, but we fear
When Tyber to each proling passenger
Discovers flocks of wild-duckes, then my Lord
About moulting time, I mean wee shall be certain
To find you sure enough and speak with you.
Ha?
A mere tale of a tub, my words are idle,
But to express the Sonnet by natural reason,
When Stags grow melancholic you'll find the season
No more my Lord, hear comes a Champion,
Shall end the difference between you both,
Your son the Prince Giouanni, see my Lords
What hopes you store in him, this is a casket
For both your Crowns, &amp; should be held like dear:
Now is he apt for knowledge, therefore know
It is a more direct and even way
To train to virtue those of Princely blood,
By examples then by precepts: if by examples
Whom should he rather strive to imitate
Then his own father: be his pattern then,
Leave him a stock of virtue that may last,
Should fortune rend his sails, and split his mast.
Your hand boy growing to soldier.
Give me a pike.
What practising your pike so young, fair cous.
Suppose me one of Homers frogs, my Lord,
Tossing my bulrush thus, pray sir tell me
Might not a child of good discretion
Be leader to an army:
Yes cousin a young Prince
Of good discretion might.
Say you so,
Indeed I have heard it is fit a General
Should not endanger his own person oft,
So that he make a noise, when hoe's a horseback
Like a dank drummer,  it is excellent.
Hee need not fight, me thinks his horse as well
Might lead an army for him; if I live
I'll charge the French foe, in the very front
Of all my troupes, the foremost man.
What, what,
And will not bid my Soldiers up and follow
But bid them follow me.
Forward Lap-wing.
He flies with the shell on's head.
Pretty cousin,
The first year uncle that I go to war,
All prisoners that I take I will set free
Without their ransom.
Ha, without their ransom,
How then will you reward your soldiers
That took those prisoners for you.
Thus my Lord,
I'll marry them to all the wealthy widows
That false that year.
Why then the next year following
You'll have no men to go with you to war.
Why then I'll press the women to the war,
And then the men will follow.
Witty Prince.
See a good habit makes a child a man,
Whereas a bad one makes a man a beast:
Come you and I are friends.
Most wishedly,
Like bones which broke in sunder and well set
Knit the more strongly.
Call Camillo hither
You have received the rumour, how Count Lodowicke
Is turned a Pirate.
Yes.
We are now preparing,
Some ships to fetch him in: behold your Duchess,
Wee now will leave you and expect from you
Nothing but kind entreaty.
You have charmed me.
You are in health we see.
And aboue health
To see my Lord well,
So I wonder much,
What amorous whirlwind hurried you to Rome
Devotion my Lord.
Devotion?
Is your soul charged with any grievous sin
It is burdened with too many, and I think
The oftner that we cast our reckonings up,
Our sleeps will be the sounder.
Take your chamber?
Nay my dear Lord I will not have you angry,
Doth not my absence from you two months,
Merit one kiss?
I do not use to kiss,
If that will dispossess your jealousy,
I'll swear it to you.
O my loved Lord,
I do not come to chide; my jealousy,
I am to learn what that Italian means,
You are as welcome to these longing arms,
As I to you a Virgin.
O your breath,
Out upon sweet meates, and continued Physic.
The plague is in them.
You have oft for these two lips
Neglected Cassia or the natural sweets
Of the Spring-violet, they are not yet much whithered,
My Lord I should be merry, these your frowns
Show in a Helmet, lovely but on me,
In such a peaceful interview me thinks
They are to too roughly knit.
O dissemblance.
Do you bandy factions against me? have you learned,
The trick of impudent baseness to complain
Unto your kindred?
Never my dear Lord.
Must I be haunted out, or wast your trick
To meet some amorous gallant here in Rome
That must supply our discontinuance?
I pray sir burst my heart, and in my death
Turn to your ancient pity, though not love.
Because your brother is the corpulent Duke,
That is the great Duke, S'death I shall not shortly
Rackit away five hundredth Crowns at Tenis,
But it shall rest upon record: I scorn him
Like a shau'd Pollake, all his reverent wit
Lies in his wardrobe, hoe's a discret fellow
When hoe's made up in his robes of state,
Your brother the great Duke, because he has galleys,
And now and then ransackes a Turkish flye-boate,
(Now all the hellish furies take his soul,)
First made this match, accursed be the Priest
That sang the wedding Mass, and even my Issue.
O to too far you have cursed.
Your hand I'll kiss,
This is the latest ceremony of my love,
Hence-forth I'll never lye with thee, by this,
This wedding-ring: I'll ne'remore lye with thee.
And this divorce shall be as truly kept,
As if the Judge had doomed it: fare you well,
Our sleeps are severed.
Forbid it the sweet union
Of all things blessed; why the Saints in heaven
Will knit their brows at that.
Let not thy love,
Make thee an unbeliever, this my vow,
Shall never on my soul bee satisfied
With my repentance: let thy brother rage
Beyond a horrid tempest or sea-fight,
My vow is fixed.
O my winding sheet,
Now shall I need thee shortly, dear my Lord,
Let me hear once more, what I would not hear,
Never.
Never?
O my unkind Lord may your sins find mercy,
As I upon a woeful widowed bed,
Shall pray for you, if not to turn your eyes,
Upon your wretched wife, and hopeful son,
Yet that in time you'll fix them upon heaven.
No more, go, go, complain to the great Duke.
No my dear Lord, you shall have present witness,
How I'll work peace between you, I will make
My self the author of your cursed vow
I have some cause to do it, you have none,
Conceal it I beseech you, for the weal
Of both your Dukedoms, that you wrought the means
Of such a separation, let the fault
Remain with my supposed jealousy,
And think with what a piteous and rent hear,
I shall perform this sad ensuing part.
Well, take your course my honourable brother.
Sister, this is not well my Lord, why sister,
She merits not this welcome.
Welcome say?
She hath given a sharpe welcome.
Are you foolish?
Come dry your tears, is this a modest course.
To better what is nought, to rail and weep,
Grow to a reconcilement, or by heaven,
I'll ne'er more deal between you.
Sir you shall not,
No though Uittoria upon that condition
Would become honest.
Was your husband loud.
Since we departed.
By my life sir no,
I swear by that I do not care to loose.
Are all these ruins of my former beauty,
Laid out for a whores triumph?
Do you hear
Look upon other women, with what patience
They suffer these slight wrongs, with what justice
They study to requite them, take that course.
O that I were a man, or that I had power
To execute my apprehended wishes,
I would whip some with scorpions.
What? turned fury?
To dig the strumpets eyes out, let her lye
Some twenty months a dying, to cut off
Her nose and lips, pull out her rotten teeth,
Preserve her flesh like Mummy, for trophies
Of my just anger: Hell to my affliction
Is mere snow-water, by your favour sir,
Brother draw near, and my Lord Cardinal,
Sir let me borrow of you but one kiss,
Hence-forth I'll never lye with you, by this,
This wedding ring.
How? ne'er more lie with him,
And this divorce shall be as truly kept,
As if in thronged Court, a thousand ears
Had heard it, and a thousand Lawyers hands,
Sealed to the separation.
Ne'er lie with me?
Let not my former dotage,
Make thee an vnbeleuer, this my vow
Shall never on my soul be satisfied
With my repentance, manet alto mente repositum.
Now by my birth you are a foolish, mad,
And jealous woman.
You see it is not my seeking.
Was this your circle of pure Unicorns horn,
You said should charm your Lord; now horns upon thee,
For jealousy deserves them, keep your vow,
And take your chamber.
No sir I'll presently to Padua,
I will not stay a minute.
O good Madame.
It were best to let her have her humour.
Some half days journey will bring down her stomach,
And then she'll turn in post.
To see her come,
To my Lord Cardinal for a dispensation
Of her rash vow will beget excellent laughter.
"Unkindness do thy office, poor heart break,
"Those are the killing griefs which dare not speak.
Camel's come my Lord.
Whore's the commission?
Tic here.
Give me the Signet.
My Lord do you mark their whispering, I will compound a medicine out of their two heads, stronger then garlic, deadlier then stibium, the Cantarides which are scarce seen to stick upon the flesh when they work to the heart, shall not do it with more silence or invisible cunning.
About the murder.
They are sending him to Naples, but I'll send him to Candy, her's another property to.
O the Doctor,
A poor quackesaluing knave, my Lord, one that should have been lashed for's lechery, but that he confessed a judgment, had an execution laid upon him, and so put the whip to a non-plus.
And was consigned, my Lord, by an arranter knave then my self, and made pay all the coulourable execution.
He will shoot pills into a mans guts, shall make them have more ventages then a cornet or a lamprey, hee will poison a kiss, and was once minded, for his Master-peece, because Ireland breeds no poison, to have prepared a deadly vapour in a Spaniards fart that should have poisoned all Dublin.
O Saint Anthony fire:
Your Secretary is merry my Lord:
O thou cursed antipathy to nature, look his eyes bloud-shed like a needle a Surgeon stitcheth a wound with, let me embrace thee toad, &amp; love thee  thou abominable loathsome gargarisme, that will fetch up lungs, lights, heart, and liver
by scruples.
No more, I must employ thee honest Doctor,
You must to Padua and by the way, use some of your skill for vs.
Sir I shall.
But for Camillo?
He dies this night by such a politic strain,
Men shall suppose him by's own engine slain.
But for your Duchess death.
I'll make her sure
Small mischiefs are by greater made secure.
Remember this you slave, when knaves come to preferment they rise as gallouses are raised in the low countries, one upon another shoulders.
Here is an Emblem nephew pray peruse it.
It was thrown in at your window,
At my window,
Here is a Stag my Lord hath shed his horns,
And for the loss of them the poor beast weeps
The word Inopem me copy facet.
That is.
Plenty of horns hath made him poor of horns.
What should this mean.
Isle tell you, it is given out
You are a Cocould.
Is it given out so.
I had rather such report as that my Lord.
Should keep within doors.
Have you any children.
None my Lord.
You are the happier
Isle tell you a tale.
Pray my Lord.
An old tale.
Upon a time Phoebus the God of light
Or him wee call the Sun would need be married.
The Gods gave their consent, and Mercury
Was sent to voice it to the general world.
But what a piteous cry their straight arose
Amongst Smiths, &amp; Felt-makers, Brewers &amp; Cooks.
Reapers and Butter-women, amongst Fishmongers
And thousand other trades, which are annoyed
By his excessive heate; it was lamentable.
They came to Iupiter all in a sweat
And do forbid the banes; a great fat Cooke
Was made their Speaker, who entreats of Jove
That Phoebus might bee gilded, for if now
When there was but one, Sun so many men,
Wear like to perish by his violent heate.
What should they do if hee were married
And should be get more, and those children
Make fier-workes like their father, so say I,
Only I will apply it to your wife,
Her issue should not providence prevent it
Would make both nature, time, and man repent it.
Look you cossin.
Go change the air for shame see if your absence,
Will blast your Cornucopia, Marcello
Is chosen with you joint commissioner
For the relieving our Italian coast
From pirats.
I am much honoured int.
But sir
Ere I return the Stags horns may be sprouted,
Greater then these are shed.
Do not fear it,
I'll bee your ranger.
You must watch i'ch nights,
Then's the most danger.
Farewell good Marcello.
All the best fortunes of a Soldiers wish,
Bring you a ship-board.
Were I not best now I am turned Soldier,
Ever that I leave my wife, sell all she hath,
And then take leave of her.
I expect good from you,
Your parting is so merry.
Merry my Lord, a'th Captains humour right
I am resolved to be drunk this night.
So, it was well fitted, now shall we discern,
How his wished absence will give violent way,
To Duke Brachiano's lust,
Why that was it;
To what scorned purpose else should we make choice
Of him for a sea Captain, and besides,
Count Lodowicke which was rumor'd for a pirate.
Is now in Padua.
Is it true?
Most certain.
I have letters from him, which are suppliant
To work his quick repeal from banishment,
He means to address himself for pension,
Unto our sister Duchess.
O it was well.
We shall not want his absence past six days,
I fine would have the Duke Brachiano run
Into notorious scandal, for their's nought
In such cursed dotage, to repair his name,
Only the deep sense of some deathless shame:
It may be objected I am dishonourable,
To play thus with my kinsman, but I answer.
For my revenge I'd stake a brothers life,
That being wronged durst not avenge himself.
Come to observe this Struper.
Curse of greatness,
Sure he will not leave her.
There's small pity in it
Like mistle-tow on sear Elms spent by weather,
Let him cleave to her and both rot together.
Now sir I claim your promise, it is dead midnight,
The time prefixed to show me by your Art,
How the intended murder of Camillo,
And our loathed Duchess grow to action.
You have won me by your bounty to a deed,
I do not often practise, some there are,
Which by Sophisticke tricks, aspire that name
Which I would gladly loose, of Necromancer:
As some that use to juggle upon cards,
Seeming to conjure, when indeed they cheat.
Others that raise up their confederate spirits,
About wind-mils, and endanger their own necks,
For making of a squib, and some their are
Will keep a curtal to show juggling tricks
And give out it is a spirit: besides these
Such a whole reame of Almanacke-makers, figure-flingers.
Fellows indeed that only live by stealth,
Since they do merely lie about stolen goods,
Thei'd make men think the devil were fast and loose,
With speaking fustian Latin: pray sit down,
Put on this night-cap sir, it is charmed, and now
I'll show you by my strong-commanding Art
The circumstance that breaks your Dutchsse heart.
Excellent, then shoe's dead,
She's poisoned,
By the fumed picture, it was her custom nightly,
Before she went to bed, to go and visit
Your picture, and to feed her eyes and lips
On the dead shadow, Doctor Iulio
Observing this, infects it with an oil
And other poisoned stuff, which presently
Did suffocate her spirits.
Me thought I saw,
Count Lodowicke there.
He was, and by my art
I find hee did most passionately dote
Upon your Duchess, now turn another way,
And view Camillo's far more politic face,
Strike louder music from this charmed ground,
To yield, as fits the act, a Tragic sound.
It was quaintly done, but yet each circumstance,
I taste not fully.
O it was most apparent,
You saw them enter charged with their deep helthes
To their boon voyage, and to second that,
Flamineo calls to have a vaulting horse
Maintain their sport. The virtuous Marcello,
Is innocently plotted forth the room,
Whilst your eye saw the rest, and can inform you
The engine of all.
It seems Marcello, and Flamineo
Are both committed.
Yes, you saw them guarded,
And now they are come with purpose to apprehend
Your Mistress, fair Uittoria; wee are now
Beneath her roof: it were fit we instantly
Make out by some back postern:
Noble friend,
You bind me ever to you, this shall stand
As the firm seal annexed to my hand.
It shall enforce a payment.
Sir I thank you.
Both flowers and weeds, spring when the Sun is warm,
And great men do great good, or else great harm.
You have dealt discreetly to obtain the presence,
Of all the grave Leiger Ambassadors
To hear Vittorias trial.
It was not ill,
For sir you know we have nought but circumstances
To charge her with, about her husbands death,
Their approbation therefore to the proofs
Of her black lust, shall make her infamous
To all our neighbouring Kingdoms, I wonder (pebble
If Brachiano will be here.
O fie it were impudence too pal-
What are you in by the week, so I will try now
whether thy wit be close prisoner, me thinke's none should sit upon thy sister but old whoore-maisters,
Or cocoulds, for your cocould is your most terrible tickler of lechery: whoore-maisters would serve, for none are judges at tilting, but those that have been old Tilters.
My Lord Duke and she have been very private:
You are a dull ass, it is threatened they have been very public.
If it can be proved they have but kissed one another.
What then?
My Lord Cardinal will ferit them,
A Cardinal I hope will not catch conies.
For to sow kisses (mark what I say) to sow kisses, is to reap lechery, and I am sure a woman that will endure kissing is half won.
True, her upper part by that rule, if you will win her nether part to, you know what follows.
Hark the Ambassadors are lighted,
I do put on this feigned Garb of mirth,
To gull suspicion.
O my unfortunate sister!
I would my daggers point had cleft her heart
When she first saw Brachiano: You it is said,
Were made his engine, and his staking horse
To undo my sister.
I made a kind of path
To her &amp; mine own preferment.
Your ruin,
Hum! thou art a soldier,
Follow the great Duke, feed his victories,
As witches do their serviceable spirits,
Even with thy prodigal blood, what hast got?
But like the wealth of Captains, a poor handful,
Which in thy palm thou bear, as men hold water
Seeking to gripe it fast, the frail reward
Steals through thy fingers.
Sir,
Thou hast scarce maintenance
To keep thee in fresh shamoyes.
Brother.
Hear me,
And thus when we have even powered ourselves,
Into great fights, for their ambition
Or idle spleen, how shall we find reward,
But as we seldom find the mistle-towe
Sacred to physic: Or the builder Ok,
Without a Mandrake by it, so in our quest of gain.
Alas the poorest of their forced dislikes
At a limb proffers, but at heart it strikes:
This is lamented doctrine.
Come, come.
When age shall turn thee,
White as a blooming hauthorne.
I'll interrupt you.
For love of virtue bear an honest heart,
And stride over every politic respect,
Which where they most advance they most infect.
Were I your father, as I am your brother,
I should not be ambitious to leave you
A better patrimony.
I'll think on it, The Lord Ambassadors.
O my sprightly Frenchman, do you know him, he's an admirable Tilter.
I saw him at last Tilting, he showed like a peuter candlesticke fashioned like a man in armour, holding a Tilting staff in his hand, little bigger then a candle of twelve in the pound.
O but he's an excellent horseman.
A lame one in his lofty tricks, hee sleeps a horseback like a poulter,
Lo you my Spaniard.
He carries his face in's ruff, as I have seen a servingman carry glasses in a cypress hat-band, monstrous steady for fear of breaking, He looks like the claw of a blacke-bird, first salted and then broiled in a candle.
Forbear my Lord, here is no place assing'd you,
This business by his holiness is left
To our examination.
May it thrive with you.
A Chair there for his Lordship.
Forbear your kindness, an unbidden guest
Should travail as dutch-women go to Church:
Bear their stools with them.
At your pleasure Sir.
Stand to the table gentlewomen: now Signior
Fall to your plea.
Whats he?
A Lawyer, that pleads against you.
Pray my Lord, Let him speak his usual tongue
Isle make no answer else.
Why you understand latin.
I do Sir, but amongst this auditory
Which come to hear my cause, the half or more
May bee ignorant int'.
Go on Sir:
By your favour,
I will not have my accusation clouded,
In a strange tongue: All this assembly
Shall hear what you can charge me with.
Signior.
You need not stand on it much; pray change your language,
Oh for God sake: gentlewoman, your credit
Shall bee more famous by it.
Well then have at you.
I am at the mark Sir, Isle give aim to you,
And tell you how near you shoot.
Most literated Judges, please your Lordships,
So to connive your Judgements to the view
Of this debauched and diuersiuolent woman
Who such a black concatenation
Of mischief hath effected, that to exterpe
The memory of't, must be the consummation
Ofher and her proiections
What's all this
Hold your peace.
Exorbitant sins must have exulceration.
Surely my Lords this lawyer here hath swallowed
Some Poticaryes bills, or proclamations.
And now the hard and vndegestable words,
Come up like stones wee use give Hawk for physic.
Why this is welch to Latin.
My Lords, the woman
Know's not her tropes nor figures, nor is perfect
In the accademick derivation
Of Grammatical elocution.
Sir your pains
Shall bee well spared, and your deep eloquence
Bee worthily applauded amongst those
Which understand you.
My good Lord.
Sir,
Put up your papers in your fustian bag,
Cry mercy Sir, tic buckeram, and accept
My notion of your learned verbosity.
I most graduatically thank your Lordship.
I shall have use for them elsewhere.
I shall bee plainer with you, and paint out
Your follies in more natural red and white.
Then that upon your cheek.
O you mistake.
You raise a blood as noble in this cheek
As ever was your mothers.
I must spare you till proof cry whore to that,
Observe this creature here my honoured Lords,
A woman of a most prodigious spirit
In her effected.
Honourable my Lord,
It doth not suit a reverend Cardinal
To play the Lawyer thus
Oh your trade instructs your language!
You see my Lords what goodly fruit she seems,
Yet like those apples travellers report
To grow where Sodom and Gomora stood.
I will but touch her and you straight shall see
Sheele fall to soot and ashes.
Your inuenom'd Apothecary should do it
I am resolved.
Were there a second Paradise to loose
This Devil would betray it.
O poor charity!
Thou art seldom found in scarlet.
Who knows not how, when several night by night
Her gates were choked with coaches, and her rooms.
Out-brau'd the stars with several kind of lights,
When she did counterfeit a Princes Court.
In music banquets and most riotous surfeits
This whore, forsooth, was holy.
Ha? whore what's that?
Shall I expound whore to you? sure I shall;
Isle give their perfect character. They are first,
Sweet meates which rot the eater: In mans nostril
Poisoned perfumes. They are coosning Alcumy,
Shipwrecks in Calmest weather? What are whores?
Cold Russian winters, that appear so barren,
As if that nature had forgot the spring.
They are the true material fire of hell,
Worse then those tributes ith low countries payed,
Exactions upon meat, drink, garments sleep.
I even on mans perdition, his sin.
They are those brittle evidences of law
Which forfeit all a wretched mans estate
For leaving out one syllable. What are whores?
They are those flattering bells have all one tune:
At weddings, and at funerals, your rich whores
Are only treasuries by extortion filled,
And empted by cursed riot. They are worse,
Worse then dead bodies, which are begged at gallows
And wrought upon by surgeons, to teach man
Wherein hee is imperfect. Whats a whore?
Shees like the guilty conterfetted coin
Which who so ear first stamps it bring in trouble
All that receive it
This character scopes me.
You gentlewoman;
Take from all beasts, and from all minerals
Their deadly poison.
Well what then?
Isle tell thee
Isle find in thee a Poticaries shop
To sample them all.
She hath lived ill.
True, but the Cardinals too bitter.
You know what Whore is next the devil; Adultry.
Enters the devil, murder.
Your unhappy husband
Is dead.
O hoe's a happy husband
Now hee owes Nature nothing.
And by a vaulting engine.
An active plot
Hee jumped into his grave.
what a prodigy wast,
That from some two yards height a slender man (more,
Should break his neck?
In the rushes.
And what's.
Upon the instant loose all use of speech,
All vital motion, like a man had lain
Wound up three days. Now mark each circumstance.
And look upon this creature was his wife.
She comes not like a widow: she comes armed
With scorn and impudence: Is this a mourning habit.
Had I forknowne his death as you suggest,
I would have bespoke my mourning.
O you are conning.
You shame your wit and Judgment
To call it so; What is my just defence
By him that is my Judge called impudence?
Let me appeal then from this Christian Court
To the uncivil Tartar.
See my Lords.
She scandals our proceedings.
Humbly thus.
Thus low, to the most worthy and respected
Leigier Ambassadors, my modesty
And womanhood I tender; but withal
So entangled in a cursed accusation
That my defence of force like Perseus.
Must personate masculine virtue to the point.
Find me but guilty, sever head from body:
Weal part good friends: I scorn to hold my life.
at yours or any mans entreaty, Sir,
She hath a brave spirit
Well, well, such counterfeit Jewels
Make true on's oft suspected.
You are deceived.
For know that all your strict combined heads,
Which strike against this mine of diamonds,
Shall prove but glassen hammers, they shall break,
These are but feigned shadows of my euels.
Terrify babes, my Lord, with painted devils,
I am past such needless palsy, for your names,
Of Whore and Murdresse they proceed from you,
As if a man should spit against the wind,
The filth returne's in's face.
Pray you Mistress satisfy me one question:
Who lodged beneath your roof that fatal night
Your husband brake his neck?
That question
Enforces me break silence, I was there.
Your business?
Why I came to comfort her,
And take some course for settling her estate,
Because I heard her husband was in debt
To you my Lord.
He was.
And it was strangely feared,
That you would cousin her.
Who made you ouer-seer?
Why my charity, my charity, which should flow
From every generous and noble spirit,
To orphans and to widows.
Your lust.
Cowardly dogs bark loudest. Sirrah Priest,
Isle talk with you hereafter,Do you hear?
The sword you frame of such an excellent temper,
I'll sheath in your own bowels:
There are a number of thy coat resemble
Your common post-boyes.
Ha?
Your mercenary post-boyes,
Your letters carry truth, but it is your guise
To fill your mouth's with gross and impudent lies.
My Lord your gown.
Thou least it was my stool.
Bestow it upon thy moister that will challenge
The rest a'th household-stuff for Brachiano
Was ne'er so beggarly, to take a stool
Out of another lodging: let him make
Valence for his bed on it, or a demi foote-cloth,
For his most reverent moil, Monticelso,
Nemo me Impune lacescit.
Your Champions gon.
The wolf may prey the better.
My Lord there's great suspicion of the murder,
But no sound proof who did it: for my part
I do not think she hath a soul so black
To act a deed so bloody, if she have,
As in cold countries husband-men plant Vines,
And with warm blood manure them, even so
One summer she will bear unsavoury fruit,
And ere next spring wither both branch and root.
The act of blood let pass, only descend,
To matter of incontinence.
I decern poison,
Under your gilded pills.
Now the Duke's gone, I will produce a letter,
Wherein it was plotted, her and you should meet,
At an Appoticaries summer-house.
Down by the river Tiber: veiw't my Lords:
Where after wanton bathing and the heat
Of a lascivious banquet.I pray read it,
I shame to speak the rest.
Grant I was tempted,
Temptation to lust proves not the act,
Cast a est quam nemo rogauit,
You read his hot love to me, but you want
My frosty answer.
Frost in the dog-daies! strange!
Condemn you me for that the Duke did love me,
So may you blame so me fair and crystal river
For that some melancholic distracted man,
Hath drowned himself in it.
Truly drowned indeed.
Sum up my faults I pray, and you shall find,
That beauty and gay clothes, a merry heart,
And a good stomach to feast, are all,
All the poor crimes that you can charge me with:
Infaith my Lord you might go pistol flies,
The sport would be more noble.
Very good.
But take you your course, it seems you have beggerd me
And now would fine undo me, I have houses, (first
Jewels, and a poor remnant of Crusado's,
Would those would make you charitable.
If the devil
Did ever take good shape behold his picture.
You have one virtue left,
You will not flatter me.
Who brought this letter?
I am not compelled to tell you.
My Lord Duke sent to you a thousand ducats,
The twelfth of August.
It was to keep your cousin
From prison, I paid use for it.
I rather think
It was Interest for his lust.
Who says so but your self? if you bee my accuser
Pray cease to be my Judge, come from the Bench,
Give in your evidence against me, and let these
Be moderators: my Lord Cardinal,
Were your intelligencing ears as loving
As to my thoughts, had you an honest tongue
I would not care though you proclaimed them all.
Go to, go to.
After your goodly and vaine-glorious banquet,
I'll give you a choke pear.
A'your own grafting?
You were borne in Uenice, honourably descended,
From the Vittelli, it was my cousins fate,
Ill may I name the hour to marry you,
Hee bought you of your father.
Ha?
Hee spent there in six months
Twelve thousand Dukets, and to my acquaintance
Received in dowry with you not one Iulio:
It was a hard peny-worth, the ware being so light,
I yet but draw the curtain now to your picture,
You came from thence a most notorious strumpet,
And so you have continued.
My Lord.
Nay hear me,
You shall have time to prate my Lord Brachiano,
Alas I make but repetition,
Of what is ordinary and Ryalto talk,
And ballated, and would bee plaid a'th stage,
But that vice many times finds such loud friends.
That Preachers are charmed filent.
You Gentlemen Flamineo and Marcello,
The Court hath nothing now to charge you with,
Only you must remain upon your suerties,
For your appearance.
I stand for Marcello.
And my Lord Duke for me.
For you Vittoria, your public fault,
Joined to'th condition of the present time,
Takes from you all the fruits of noble pity.
Such a corrupted trial have you made
Both of your life and beauty, and been styled
No less in ominous fate then blazing stars
To Princes hears; your sentence, you are confined,
Unto a house of convertites and your baud.
Who I?
The Moore.
O I am a sound man again.
A house of convertites, what's that?
A house of penitent whoores.
Do the Noblemen in Rome,
Erect it for their wives, that I am sent
To lodge there?
You must have patience.
I must first have vengeance.
I fine would know if you have your salvation
By patent, that you proceed thus.
Away with her?
Take her hence.
A rape, a rape.
How?
Yes you have ravished justice,
Forced her to do your pleasure.
fie shoe's mad
Dye with these pills in your most cursed mawes,
Should bring you: health, or while you sit a'th Bench,
Let your own spittle choke you.
She's turned fury.
That the last day of judgment may so find you,
And leave you the same devil you were before,
Instruct me some good horse-lech to speak Treason,
For since you cannot take my life for deeds,
Take it for words,  women's poor revenge
Which dwells but in the tongue, I will not weep,
No I do scorn to call up one poor tear
To fawn one your injustice, bear me hence,
Unto this house of what's your mitigating Title?
Of convertites.
It shall not be a house of convertites
My mind shall make it honester to me
Then the Popes Palace, and more peaceable
Then thy soul, though thou art a Cardinal,
Know this, and let it some what raise your spite,
Through darkness Diamonds spread their ritchest light.
Now you and I are friends sir, we'll shake hands,
In a friends grave, together, a fit place,
Being the emblem of soft peace t'attone our hatred.
Sir, what's the matter?
I will not chase more blood from that loved check,
You have lost too much already, fare-you-well.
How strange these words sound? what's the interpretatio?
Good, this is a preface to the discovery of the Duchess death: Hee carries it well: because now I cannot counterfeit a whining passion for the death of my Lady, I will fine a mad humour for the disgrace of my sister, and that will keep off idle questions, Treasons tongue hath a villainous palsy in it, I will talk to any man, hear no man, and for a time appear a politic mad-man.
How now my Noble cossin, what in black?
Yes Uncle, I was taught to imitate you
In virtue, and you must imitate me
In colours for your garments, my sweet mother
Is,
How? Where?
Is there, no yonder, indeed sir I'll not tell you,
For I shall make you weep.
Is dead.
Do not blame me now,
I did not tell you so.
She's dead my Lord.
Dead?
Blessed Lady;
Thou art now aboue thy woes,
Wilt please your Lordships to with-draw a little.
What do the dead do, uncle? do they eat,
Hear music, go a hunting, and bee merry, as wee that live?
No cos; they sleep.
Lord, Lord, that I were dead,
I have not slept these six nights. When doe they wake?
When God shall please.
Good God let her sleep ever.
For I have known her wake an hundredth nights,
When all the pillow, where she laid her head,
Was brine-wet with her tears. I am to complain to you Sir.
Isle tell you how they have used her now shees dead:
They wrapped her in a cruel fouled of lead,
And would not let me kiss her.
Thou did love her.
I have often heard her say she gave me suck,
And it should seem by that she dearly loved me,
Since Princes seldom doe it.
O, all of my poor sister that remains!
Take him away for Gods sake.
How now my Lord?
Believe me I am nothing but her grave,
And I shall keep her blessed memory,
Longer then thousand Epitaphs.
Wee endure the strokes like anuiles or hard steel,
Till pain it self make vs no pain to feel.
Who shall doe me right now? Is this the end of service? Id rather go weed garlic; travail through France, and be mine own ostler; wear sheepe-skin lininges; or shoos that stink of blacking; bee entered into the list of the forty thousand peddlers in Poland.
Would I had rotted in some Surgeons house at Venice, built upon the Pox as well as on piles, ere I had served Brachiano.
You must have comfort.
Your comfortable words are like honey. They relish well in your mouth that's whole; but in mine that's wounded they go down as if the sting of the Bee were in them. Oh they have wrought their purpose cunningly, as if they would not seem to doe it of malice. In this a Politician imitates the devil, as the devil imitates a Canon. Wheresoever he comes to doe mischief, he comes with his backside towards you.
The proofs are evident.
Proof! t'was corruption. O Gold, what a God art thou! and  man, what a devil art thou to be tempted by that
cursed Mineral! You diuersiuolent Lawyer; mark him, knaves turn informers, as maggots turn to flies, you may catch goodgions with either. A Cardinal; I would hee would hear me, theres nothing so holy but money will corrupt and putrefy it, like vital under the live. You are happy in England, my Lord; here they sell justice with those weights they press men to death with. O horrible salary!
Fie, fie, Flamineo.
Bells ne'er ring well, till they are at their full pitch, And I hope yon Cardinal shall never have the grace to pray well, till he come to the scaffold.
If they were racked now to know the confederacy! But your Noblemen are privileged from the rack; and well may. For a little thing would pull some of them a pieces before they came to their arraignment. Religion; oh how it is commeddled with policy. The first bloodshed in the world happened about relegion. Would I were a Jew.
O, there are too many.
You are deceived. There are not Jaws enough;
Priests enough, nor gentlemen enough.
How?
Isle prove it. For if there were Jaws enough, so many Christians would not turn usurers; if Priests enough, one should not have six Benefices; and if gentlemen enough, so many early mushromes, whose best growth sprang from a dunghill, should not aspire to gentility. Farewell. Let others live by begging. Bee thou one of them; practise the art of Wolor in England to swallow ell's given thee; and yet let one purgation make thee as hungry again as fellows that work in saw-pit. Isle go hear the scritch-owle.
This was Brachiano's Pander, and it is strange
That in such open and apparent guilt
Of his adulterous sister, hee dare utter
So scandalous a passion. I must wind him.
How dares this banished Count return to Rome,
His pardon not yet purchased? I have heard
The deceased Duchess gave him pension,
And that he came along from Padua
In the train of the young Prince. There's somewhat in 't.
Physicians, that cure poisons, still doe work
With counterpoisons.
Mark this strange encounter.
The God of Melancholy turn thy gall to poison,
And let the stigmaticke wrinkles in thy face,
Like to the boisterous waives in a rough tide
One still overtake an other.
I doe thank thee
And I doe wish ingeniously for thy sake
The dog-daies all year long.
How crokes the raven?
Is our good Duchess dead?
Dead
O fate!
Misfortune comes like the Crowners business,
Huddle upon huddle.
Shalt thou &amp; I join housekeeping?
Yes, content.
Let's bee vnsociably sociable.
Sit some three days together, and discourse.
Only with making faces;
Lie in our clothes.
With faggots for our pillows.
And bee lousy.
In taffeta lininges; that's gentile melancholy,
Sleep all day.
Yes: and like your melancholic hare
Feed after midnight.
Wee are observed: see how yon couple grieve.
What a strange creature is a laughing fool,
As if man were created to no use
But only to show his teeth.
Isle tell thee what,
It would doe well in stead of looking glasses
To set ones face each morning by a saucer
Of a witches congealed blood.
Precious go.
Weel never part.
Never: till the beggary of Courtiers,
The discontent of church-men, want of soldiers,
And all the creatures that hang manacled,
Worse then strappado'd, on the lowest fellie
Of fortunes wheel be taught in our two lives.
To scorn that world which life of means deprives.
My Lord, I bring good news. The Pope on's death-bed,
At the earnest suit of the great Duke of Florence,
Hath signed your pardon, and restored unto you
I thank you for your news. Look up again
Flamineo, see my pardon.
Why do you laugh?
There was no such condition in our covenant.
Why?
You shall not seem a happier man then I,
You know our vow sir, if you will be merry,
Do it in the like posture, as if some great man
Sate while his enemy were executed:
Though it be very lechery unto thee,
Do it with a crabbed Politicians face.
Your sister is a damnable whore.
Ha?
Look you; I spake that laughing.
Dost ever think to speak again?
Do you hear?
Will it sell me forty ounces of her blood,
To water a mandrake?
Poor Lord; you did vow
To live a lousy creature.
Yes;
Like one
That had for ever forfeited, the day-light,
By being in debt,
Ha, ha?
I do not greatly wonder you do break:
Your Lordship learned long since. But Isle tell you,
What?
And't shall stick by you.
I long for it.
This laughter scurvily becomes your face,
If you will not be melancholy, be angry.
See now I laugh too.
You are to blame, Isle force you hence.
Vnhand me:
That ere I should be forced to right my self,
Upon a Pander.
My Lord.
H'had been as good met with his fist a thunderbolt.
How this shows!
Vds' death, how did my sword miss him?
These rogues that are most weary of their lives,
Still scope the greatest dangers,
A pox upon him: all his reputation;
Nay all the goodness of his family;
Is not worth half this earthquake.
I learnt it of no fencer to shake thus;
Come, I'll forget him, and go drink some wine.
Come, come my Lord, untie your folded thoughts,
And let them dangle loose as a brid's hair.
Your sister's poisoned.
Far bee it from my thoughts
To seek revenge.
What, are you turned all marble?
Shall I defy him, and impose a war
Most burdensome on my poor subjects necks,
Which at my will I have not power to end?
You know; for all the murders, rapes, and thefts,
Committed in the horrid lust of war,
He that unjustly cause it first proceed,
Shall find it in his grave and in his seed.
That's not the course I'd wish you: pray, observe me,
We see that undermining more prevails
Then doth the Canon, Bear your wrongs concealed,
And, patient as the Tortoise, let this Cammell
Stalk o'er your back unbruised: sleep with the Lyon,
And let this brood of secure foolish mice
Play with your nostrils, till the time bee ripe
For th'bloudy audit, and the fatal gripe:
Aim like a cunning fowler, close one eye,
That you the better may your game espy.
Free me my innocence; fro treacherous acts:
I know ther's thunder yonder: and I'll stand,
Like a safe valley, which low bends the knee
To some aspiring mountain: since I know
Treason, like spiders weaving nets for flies,
By her foul work is found, and in it dies.
To pass away these thoughts, my honoured Lord,
It is reported you possess a book
Wherein you have quoted, by intelligence,
The names of all notorious offenders
Lurking about the City,
Sir I doe
And some there are which call it my black book:
Well may the title hold: for though it teach not
The Art of conjuring, yet in it lurk,
The names of many devils.
Pray let's see it.
I'll fetch it to your Lordship.
Monticelso,
I will not trust thee, but in all my plots
I'll rest as jealous as a Town besieged.
Thou can not reach what I intend to act.
Your flax soon kindles, soon is out again,
But gold slow heat's, and long will hot remain.
It is here my Lord.
First your Intelligencers pray let's see.
Their number rises strangely,
And some of them
You'd Take for honest men.
Next are Panders.
These are your Pirats: and these following leaves,
For base rogues that undo young Gentlemen,
By taking up commodities: for politic bankroupts:
For fellows that are bawds to their own wives,
Only to put off horses and slight jewels,
Clocks, defaced plate, and such commodities,
At birth of their first children.
Are there such?
These are for Impudent bawds,
That go in men's apparel: for usurers
That share with scriveners for their good reportage:
For Lawyers that will antedate their writes:
And some Divines you might find folded there;
But that I slip them o'er for conscience sake.
Here is a general catalogue of knaves.
A man might study all the prisons o'er,
Yet never attain this knowledge.
Murderers.
Fouled down the leaf I pray,
Good my Lord let me borrow this strange doctrine.
Pray vse't my Lord.
I do assure your Lordship,
You are a worthy member of the State,
And have done infinite good in your discovery
Of these offenders.
Some-what Sir.
O God!
Better then tribute of wolves paid in England.
Twill hang their skins of the hedge.
I must make bold
To leave your Lord-ship.
Dearly sir, I thank you,
If any ask for me at Court, report
You have left me in the company of knaves.
I gather now by this, some cunning fellow
That's my Lords Officer, one that lately skipped
From a Clerks desk up to a Justice chair,
Hath made this knavish summons; and intends,
As th'Irish rebels wont were to sell heads,
So to make prize of these. And thus it happens,
Your poor rogues pay for it, which have not the means
To present bribe in fist: the rest o'th'band
Are razed out of the knaves record; or else
My Lord he winks at them with easy will,
His man grows rich, the knaves are the knaves still.
But to the use I'll make of it; it shall serve
To point me out a list of murderers,
Agents for any villainy. Did I want
Ten leash of Courtesans, it would furnish me;
Nay laundress three Armies. That so in little paper
Should lye th'vndoing of so many men!
It is not so big as twenty declarations.
See the corrupted use some make of books:
Divinity, wrested by some factious blood,
Draws swords, swelsbattels, &amp; orethrowes all good.
To fashion my revenge more seriously,
Let me remember my dead sisters face:
Call for her picture: no; I'll close mine eyes,
And in a melancholic thought I'll frame
Her figure before me. Now Iha'te how strong
Imagination works! how she can frame
Things which are not! me thinks she stands before me
And by the quick Idea of my mind,
Were my skill pregnant, I could draw her picture.
Thought, as a subtle Juggler, makes vs deem
Things, supernatural, which have cause
Common as sickness. It is my melancholy,
How came thou by thy death?how idle am I
To question mine own idleness?did ever
Man dream awake till now?remove this object
Out of my brain with it: what have I to do
With tombs, or death-beds, funerals, or tears,
That have to meditate upon revenge?
So now it is ended, like an old wives story.
States-men think often they see stranger sights
Then mad-men, Come, to this weighty business.
My Tragedy must have some idle mirth in it,
Else it will never pass. I am in love,
In love with Corombona; and my suite
Thus haltes to her in verse.
I have done it rarely:  the fate of Princes!
I am so used to frequent flattery,
That being alone I now flatter my self;
But it will serve, it is sealed; bear this
To th'house of Convertites; and watch your leisure
To give it to the hands of Corombona,
Or to the Matron, when some followers
Of Brachiano may be by. Away
He that deals all by strength, his wit is shallow:
When a mans head goes through each limb will follow.
The engine for my business, bold Count Lodowicke:
It is gold must such an instrument procure,
With empty fist no man doth falcons lure.
Brachiano, I am now fit for thy encounter.
Like the wild Irish I'll ne'er think thee dead,
Till I can play at footeball with thy head.
Flectere sinequeo Superes, Achernta mouebo.
Should it be known the Duke hath such recourse.
To your imprisoned sister, I were like
T'incur much damage by it.
Not a scruple.
The Pope lies on his death-bed, and their heads
Are troubled now with other business
Than guarding of a Lady.
Yonder's Flamineo in conference
With the Matron. Let me speak with you.
I would entreat you to deliver for me
This letter to the fair Uittoria.
I shall Sir.
With all care and secrecy,
Hereafter you shall know me, and receive
Thanks for this courtesy.
How now? what's that?
A letter.
To my sister: Isle see it delivered.
What's that you read Flamineo?
Look.
Ha? To the most unfortunate his best respected Uittoria.
Who was the messenger?
I know not.
No! Who sent it?
Vd's foot you speak, as if a man
Should know what foul is coffind in a baked meat
Before you cut it up.
Isle open it, were it her heart. What's here subscribed
This juggling is gross and palpable. (Florence?
I have found out the conveyance; read it, read, it.
Your tears Isle turn to triumphs, bee but mine.
Your propis fallen; I pity that a vine
Which Princes heretofore have longed to gather,
Wanting suppperters, now should fade and wither.
Wine in faith, my Lord, with lees would serve his turn.
Your sadimprisonement lle soon uncharm,
And with a princely uncontrolled arm
Lead you to Florence, where my love and care
Shall hang your wishes in my silver hair.
A halter on his strange aequiuocation.
Nor for y years return me the sad willow,
Who prefer blossoms before fruit that's mellow.
Rotten on my knowledge with lying too long in the bed-straw.
And all the lines of age this line convinces:
The Gods never wax old, no more doe Princes.
Apox on it tear it, let's have no more Atheists for Gods sake.
Vdsdeath, Isle cut her into Atoms
And let th'irregular North-winde sweep her up
And blow her int' his nostrils. Whore's this whore?
That? what doe you call her?
Oh, I could bee mad,
Prevent the cursed disease she'll bring me to;
And tear my hair off. Whore's this changeable stuff?
Ore head and ears in water, I assure you,
She is not for your wearing.
In you Pander?
What me, my Lord, am I your dog?
A bloud-hound: doe you brave? doe you stand me?
Stand you? let those that have diseases run;
I need no plasters.
Would you bee kicked?
Would you have your neck broke?
I tell you Duke, I am not in Russia;
My shins must be kept whole.
Do you know me?
O my Lord! methodically.
As in this world there are degrees of evils:
So in this world there are degrees of devils.
You're a great Duke; I your poor secretary.
I doe look now for a Spanish fig, or an Italian sallet daily.
Pander, ply your convoy, and leave your prating.
All your kindness to me is like that miserable curtesie of Polyphemus to Ulisses, you reserve me to be devoured last, you would dig turues out of my grave to feed your Larks: that would bee music to you. Come, Isle lead you to her.
Do you face me?
O Sir I would not go before a Politic enemy with my back towards him, though there were behind me a whirlpoole.
Can you read Mistress? look upon that letter;
There are no characters nor Hieroglyphics.
You need no comment, I am grown your receiver,
Gods precious you shall bee a brave great Lady,
A stately and advanced whore.
Say Sir.
Come, come, let's see your Cabinet, discover
Your treasury of loue-letters. Death and furies,
Isle see them all.
Sir, upon my soul,
I have not any. Whence was this directed?
Confusion on your politic ignorance.
You are reclaimed; are you? Isle give you the bells
And let you fly to the devil.
Ware hawk, my Lord.
Florence! This is some treacherous plot, my Lord,
To me, he ne'er was lovely I protest,
So much as in my sleep.
Right: they are plots.
Your beauty! , ten thousand curses on it.
How long have I beheld the devil in crystal?
Thou hast lead me, like an heathen sacrifice,
With music, and with fatal! yokes of flowers
To my eternal ruin. Woman to man
Is either a God or a wolf.
My Lord.
Away.
We'll bee as differing as two Adamants;
The one shall shun the other. What? dost weep?
Procure but ten of thy dissembling trade,
Yee'ld furnish all the Irish funerals
With howling, past wild Irish.
Fie, my Lord.
That hand, that cursed hand, which I have wearied
With doting kisses! O my sweetest Duchess
How lovely art thou now! Thy loose thoughts
Scatter like quicke-siluer, I was bewitched;
For all the world speaks ill of thee.
No matter.
Isle live so now Isle make that world recant
And change her speeches. You did name your Duchess.
Whose death God pardon.
Whose death God revenge
On thee most godless Duke.
Now for tow whirl winds.
What have I gained by thee but infamy?
Thou hast stained the spotless honour of my house,
And frighted thence noble society:
Like those, which sicke' of the Palsy, and retain
Ill-senting foxes about them, are still shunned
By those of choicer nostrils. What doe you call this house?
Is this your palace? did not the Judge stile it
A house of penitent whores? who sent me to it?
Who hath the honour to advance Uittoria
To this incontinent college? is 't not you?
Is 't not your high preferment? Go, go brag
How many Ladies you have undone, like me.
Fare you well Sir; let me hear no more ofy ou.
I had a limb corrupted to an ulcer,
But I have cut it off: and now Isle go
Weeping to heaven on crutches. For your gifts,
I will return them all; and I do wish
That I could make you full Executor
To all my sins,  that I could toss my self
Into a grave as quickly: for all thou art worth
Isle not shed one tear more;Isle burst first.
I have drunk Lethe.
Uittoria? My dearest happiness? Vittoria?
What doe you ail my Love? why doe you weep?
Yes, I now weep poniards, doe you see.
Are not those matchless eyes mine?
I had rather.
They were not matches.
Is not this lip mine?
Yes: thus to bite it off, rather than give e it thee.
Turn to my Lord, good sister.
Hence you Pander.
Pander! Am I the author of your sin?
Yes: Hoe's a base thief that a thief lets in.
Wee're blown up, my Lord,
Wilt thou hear me?
Once to bee jealous of thee is to express
That I will love thee everlastingly,
And never more bee jealous.
O thou fool,
Whose greatness hath by much oregrowne thy wit!
What dare thou doe, that I not dare to suffer,
Excepting to bee still thy whore? for that;
In the seas bottom sooner thou shalt make
A bonefire.
O, no oaths for gods sake.
Will you hear me?
Never.
What a damned impostume is a women's will?
Can nothing break it? fie, fie, my Lord.
Women are caught as you take Tortoises,
She must bee turned on her back. Sister, by this hand
I am on your side. Come, come, you have wronged her.
What a strange credulous man were you, my Lord,
To think the Duke of Florence could love her?
Will any Mercer take an others ware
When once 't is tows'd and sullied? And, yet sister,
How scurvily this frowardness becomes you?
Young Leuerets stand not long; and women's anger
Should, like their flight, procure a little sport;
A full cry for a quarter of an hour;
And then bee put to the dead quat.
Shall these eyes,
Which have so long time dwelt upon your face,
Be now put out?
No cruel Landlady in the world,
Which lend's forth grotes to broome-men, &amp; takes use for the,
Would do it.
Hand her, my Lord, and kiss her: be not like
A ferret to let go your hold with blowing.
Let vs renew right hands.
Hence.
Never shall rage, or the forgetful wine,
Make me commit like fault.
Now you are in the way out, follow third.
Bee thou at peace with me; let all the world
Threaten the Cannon.
Mark his penitence.
Best natures doe commit the grossest faults,
When they're given ore to jealousy; as best wine
Dying makes strongest vinegar. Isle tell you;
The Sea's more rough and raging than calm rivers,
But nor so sweet nor wholesome. A quiet woman
Is a still water under a great bridge.
A man may shoot her safely.
O ye dissembling men!
Wee sucked that, sister, from women's breasts, in our
first infancy.
To ad misery to misery.
Sweetest.
Am I not low enough?
I, I, your good heart gathers like a snow-ball
Now your affection's cold.
Vd'foot, it shall melt,
To a hart again, or all the wine in Rome
Shall run of the lees for it.
Your dog or hawk should be rewarded better
Then I have bin. Isle speak not one word more.
Stop her mouth,
With a sweet kiss, my Lord.
So now the tide's turne'd the vessel's come about
Hoe's a sweet armefull. O wee curl'd-haird men
Are still most kind to women. This is well.
That you should chide thus!
O, sir, your little chimneys
Doe ever cast most smoke. I sweat for you.
Couple together with as deep a silence,
As did the Gracious in their wooden horse.
My Lord supply your promises with deeds.
You know that painted meat no hunger feeds.
Stay ungrateful Rome. (usage.
Rome! it deserves to be called Barbary, for our villainous
Soft; the same project which the Duke of Florence,
(Whether in love or gullerie I know not)
Laid down for her escape, will I pursue.
And no time fitter than this night, my Lord;
The Pope being dead; and all the Cardinals entered
The Conclave for the electing a new Pope;
The City in a great confusion;
Wee may attire her in a Pages suit,
Lay her post-horse, take shipping, and amain
For Padua.
Isle instantly steal forth the Prince Giouanni,
And make for Padua. You two with your old Mother
And young Marcello that attends on Florence,
If you can work him to it, follow me.
I will advance you all: for you Vittoria,
Think of a Duchess title.
Lo you sister.
Stay, my Lord; I'll tell you a tale. The crocodile, which lives in the river Nilus, hath a worm breds in the teeth of't, which puts it to extreme anguish: a little bird, no bigger then a wren, is barbor-surgeon to this crocodile; flies into the jaws of't; pickes out the worm; and brings present remedy. The fish, glad of ease but ungrateful to her that did it, that the bird may not talk largely of her abroad for non payment, closes her chaps intoneding to swallow her, and so put her to perpetual silence. But nature loathing such in gratitude, hath armed this bird with a quill or prick on the head, top of the which wounds the crocodile in the mouth; forces her open her bloody prison; and away flies the pretty tooth-picker from her cruel patient.
Your application is, I have not rewarded
The service you have done me.
No, my Lord;
You sister are the crocodile: you are blemished in your fame, My Lord cures it. And though the comparison hold not in every particle; yet observe, remember, what good the bird with the prick in the head hath done you; and scorn ingratitude.
It may appear to some ridiculous
Thus to talk knave and madman; and sometimes
Come in with a dried sentence, stuffed with sage.
But this allows my varying of shapes,
Knaves do grow great by being great men's apes.
So, my Lord, I commend your diligence
Guard well the conclave, and, as the order is,
Let none have conference with the Cardinals.
I shall, my Lord: room for the Ambassadors,
They're wondrous brave to day: why do they wear
These several habits?
O sir, they are Knights
Of several Orders.
That Lord in the black cloak with the silver cross
Is Knight of Rhodes; the next Knight of S. Michael
That of the golden fleece; the French-man there
Knight of the Holy-Ghost; my Lord of Sauoy
Knight of th'Annuntiation; the Englishman
Is Knight of th'honoured Garter, dedicated
Unto their Saint, S. George. I could describe to you
Their several institutions, with the laws
Annexed to their Orders, but that time
Permits not such discovery.
Whore's Count Lodowicke?
Here my Lord.
It is of the point of dinnertime,
Marshall the Cardinals service,
Sir I shall.
Stand, let me search your dish, who's this for?
For my Lord Cardinal Monticelso,
Whose this?
For my Lord Cardinal of Burbon.
Why doth he search the dishes, to observe
What meat is dressed?
No Sir, but to prevent.
Least any letters should be conveyed in
To bribe or to solicit the advancement
Of any Cardinal, when first they enter
It is lawful for the Ambassadors of Princes
To enter with them, and to make their suit
For any man their Prince affects best;
But after, till a general election,
No man may speak with them.
You that attend on the Lord Cardinals
Open the window, and receive their viands.
You must return the service; the L. Cardinals
Are busied about electing of the Pope,
They have given o'er scrutiny, and are fallen
To admiration.
Away, away.
I'll lay a thousand Ducats you here news
Of a Pope presently, Hark; sure he's elected,
Behold! my Lord of Arragon appears,
On the Church battlements.
Denuntio vobis gaudium magnum. Reuerendissimus Cardinalis Lorenso de Monticelso electus est in saddam Apostoliam, &amp; elegit sibinomen Paulum quartum.
Uiuat sanctus Pater Paulus Quartus.
Vittoria my Lord.
Well: what of her?
Is fled the City,
Ha?
With Duke Brachiano.
Fled? Whore's the Prince
Gone with his father. (Giouanni
Let the Matron of the Convertites
Be apprehended: fled  damnable!
How fortunate are my wishes. Why? it was this
I only laboured. I did send the letter
T'instruct him what to doe. Thy fame, fond Duke,
I first have poisoned; directed thee the way
To marry a whore; what can be worse? This follows
The hand must act to drown the passionate tongue,
I scorn to wear a sword and prate of wrong.
My Lord reports Vittoria Corombona
Is stolen from forth the house of Convertites
By Brachiano, and they're fled the City.
Now, though this bee the first day of our state,
Wee cannot better please the divine power,
Than to sequester from the holy Church
These cursed persons. Make it therefore known,
Wee doe denounce excommunication
Against them both: all that are theirs in Rome
Wee likewise banish. Set on.
Come dear Lodouico.
You have tan the sacrament to prosecute
The intended murder.
With all constancy.
But, Sir, I wonder you'll engage your self,
In person, being a great Prince.
Divert me not.
Most of his Court are of my faction,
And some are of my council. Noble friend,
Our danger shall be 'like in this design,
Give leave, part of the glory may bee mine.
Why did the Duke of Florence with such care
Labour your pardon? say.
Italian beggars will resolve you that
Who, begging of an alms, bid those they beg of
Doe good for their own sakes; or't may bee
Hee spreads his bounty with a sowing hand,
Like Kings, who many times give out of measure;
Not for desert so much as for their pleasure.
I know you're cunning. Come, what devil was that
That you were raising?
Devil, my Lord?
I ask you.
How doth the Duke employ you, that his bonnet
Fell with such complement unto his knee,
When hee departed from you?
Why, my Lord,
Hee told me of a resty Barbary horse
Which he would fine have brought to the career,
The 'sault, and the ring galliard. Now, my Lord,
I have a rare French Rider.
Take you heed:
Least the Jade break your neck. Doe you put me off
With your wild horse-trickes? Sir you doe lie.
O, you're a foul black cloud, and thou dost threat
A violent storm.
Storms are 'ith air, my Lord;
I am too low to storm.
Wretched creature!
I know that thou art fashioned for all ill,
Like dogs, that once get blood, they'll ever kill.
About some murder? wa'st not?
Isle not tell you;
And yet I care not greatly if I doe;
Marry with this preparation. Holy father,
I come not to you as an Intelligencer,
But as a penitent sinner. What I utter
Is in confession merely; which you know
Must never bee reueal'd.
You have oretane me.
Sir I did love Brachiano's Duchess dearly;
Or rather I pursued her with hot lust,
Though she ne'er knew on it. She was poisoned;
Upon my soul she was: for which I have sworn
T'auenge her murder.
To the Duke of Florence?
To him I have.
Miserable Creature!
If thou persist in this, it is damnable.
Dost thou imagine thou can slide on blood
And not be tainted with a shameful fall?
Or like the black, and melancholic Eugh-tree,
Dost think to root thy self in dead men's graves,
And yet to prosper? Instruction to thee
Comes like sweet showers to ouer-hardned ground:
They wet, but pierce not deep. And so I leave thee
Withal the Furies hanging bout thy neck,
Till by thy penitence thou remove this evil,
In conjuring from thy breast that cruel Devil.
I'll give it o'er. He says it is damable:
Besides I did expect his suffrage,
By reason of Camillo's death.
Do you know that Count?
Yes, my Lord, &amp; Francisco,
Bear him these thousand Ducks to his lodging;
Tell him the Pope hath sent them. Happily
That will confirm more then all the rest.
Sir.
To me sir?
His holiness hath sent you a thousand Crowns,
And will you if you travail, to make him (commanded.
Your Patron for intelligence.
His creature ever to bee
Why now it is come about. He rai'ld upon me;
And yet these Crowns were told out and laid ready,
Before he knew my voyage. O the Art
The modest form of greatness! that do sit
Like Brides at wedding dinners, with their look's turned
From the least wanton jests, their puling stomach
Sick of the modesty, when their thoughts are loose.
Even acting of those hot and lustful sports
Are to ensue about midnight: such his cunning!
Hee sounds my depth thus with a golden plummet,
I am doubly armed now. Now to you have of blood,
There's but three furies found in spacious hell;
But in a great mans breast three thousand dwell.
In all the weary minutes of my life,
Day ne'er broke up till now. This marriage.
Confirms me happy.
It is a good assurance.
Saw you not yet the Moore that's come to Court?
Yes, and conferred with him in the Dukes closet,
I have not seen a goodlier personage,
Nor ever talked with man better experienc't
In State-affares or rudiments of war.
Hee hath by report, served the Venetian
In Candy these twice seven years, and been chief
In many a bold design.
What are those two,
That bear him company?
Two Noblemen of Hungary, that living in the Emperours service as commanders, eight years since, contrary to the expectation of all the Court entered into religion, into the strict order of Capuchins: but being not well settled in their vndertaking they left their Order and returned to Court: for which being after troubled in conscience, they vowed their service against the enemies of Christ; went to Malta; were there knighted; and in their return back, at this great solemnity, they are resolved for ever to forsake the world, and settle themselves here in a house of Capuchines in Padua.
It is strange.
One thing makes it so. They have vowed for ever to wear next their bare bodies those coats of maile they serued in.
Hard penance.
Is the Moore a Christian?
Hee is.
Why proffers hee his service to our Duke?
Because he understands ther's like to grow
Some wars between vs and the Duke of Florence,
In which hee hopes employment.
I never saw one in a sterne bold look
Wear more command, nor in a lofty phrase
Express more knowing, or more deep contempt
Of our slight airy Courtiers. Hee talks
As if hee had travailed all the Princes Courts
Of Christendom; in all things strives t'expresse,
That all that should dispute with him may know,
Glories, like glow-wormes, a far off shine bright
But looked to near, have neither heat norlight.
The Duke.
You'are nobly welcome. Wee have heard at full
Your honourable seruice'gainst the Turk.
To you, brave Mulinassar, wee assign
A competent pension: and are inly sorrow,
The vows of those two worthy gentlemen,
Make them incapable of our proffered bounty.
Your wish is you may leave your warlike swords
For Monuments i n our Chapel. I accept it
As a great honour done me, and must crave
Your leave to furnish out our Duchess revels.
Only one thing, as the last vanity
You ere shall view, deny me not to stay
To see a Barriers prepared to night;
You shall have private standings: It hath pleased
The great Ambassadors of several Princes
In their return from Rome to their own Countries
To grace our marriage, and to honour me
With such a kind of sport.
I shall persuade them
To stay, my Lord.
Set on there to the presence
Noble my Lord, most fortunately welcome,
You have our vows sealed with the sacrament
To second your attempts.
And all things ready.
Hee could not have invented his own ruin,
Had hee despaired with more propriety.
You would not take my way.
It is better ordered.
'T'haue poisoned his prayer book, or a pair of beads,
The pummel of his saddle, his looking-glasse,
Or th'handle of his racket,  that, that!
That while he had bin bandying at Tennis,
He might have sworn himself to hell, and struck
His soul into the hazard! O my Lord!
I would have our plot bee ingenious,
And have it hereafter recorded for example
Rather than borrow example.
There's no way
More speeding than this thought on.
On then.
And yet me thinks that this revenge is poor,
Because it steals upon him like a thief,
To have tan him by the Cask in a pitched field,
Led him to Florence!
It had bin rare.And there
Have crowned him with a wreath of stinking garlic.
T'haue shown the sharpness of his government;
And rancknesse of his lust.
Flamineo comes.
Why doth this devil haunt you? say.
I know not.
For by this light I doe not conjure for her.
Tic not so great a cunning as men think
To raise the devil: for hears one up already,
The greatest cunning were to lay him down
She is your shame.
I prithee pardon her.
In faith you see, women are like to burs;
Where their affection throws them, there they'll stick.
That is my Country-man, a goodly person;
When hoe's at leisure Isle discourse with him
In our own language.
I beseech you doe,
How is 't' brave soldier;  that I had seen
Some of your iron days! I pray relate
Some of your service to vs.
It is a ridiculous thing for a man to bee his own Chronicle, I did never wash my mouth with mine own praise for fear of getting a stinking breath.
You 're too Stoical. The Duke will expect other discourse from you
I shall never flatter him, I have studied man to much to do that: What difference is between the Duke and I? no more than between two brickes; all made of one clay. Onely't may bee one is placed on the top of a turret; the other in the bottom of a well by mere chance; if I were placed as high as the Duke, I should stick as fast; make as fair a show; and bear out
weather equally.
If this soldier had a patent to beg in Churches, then hee would tell them stories,
I have bin a soldier too.
How have you thrived?
Faith poorly.
That's the misery of peace. Only outsides are then respected: As ships seem very great upon the river, which show very little upon the Seas: So some men in the Court seem Colossusses in a chamber, who if they came into the field would appear pitiful. Pigmies.
Give me a fair room yet hung with Arras, and some great Cardinal to lug me by the ears as his endeared Minion.
And thou moist doe, the devil knows what villainy.
And safely.
Right; you shall see in the Country in harvest time, pigeons, though they destroy never so much corn, the farmer dare not present the fowling piece to them! why? because they belong to the Lord of the Manor; whilst your poor sparrowas that belong to the Lord of heaven, they go to the pot for it.
I will now give you some politic instruction. The Duke says hee will give you pension; that's but bare promise: get it under his hand. For I have known men that have come from serving against the Turk; for three or four months they have had pension to buy them new wooden legs and fresh plasters; but after it was not to bee had. And this miserable curtesie shows, as if a Tormentor should give hot cordial drinks to one three quarters dead of the rack, only to fetch the miseryble soul again to endure more dogdaies.
How now, Gallants; what are they ready for the Barriers?
Yes: the Lords are putting on their armour.
What's hee?
A new vp-start: one that swears like a Falckner, and will lye in the Dukes ear day by day like a maker of Almanacs; And yet I knew him since hee came to the Court smell worse of sweat than an vnder-tennis-court keeper.
Look you, yonder's your sweet Mistress.
Thou art my sworn brother, I'll tell thee, I doe love that Moore, that Witch very constrainedly: she knows some of my villainy; I do love her, just as a man holds a wolf by the ears. But for fear of turning upon me, and pulling out my throat, I would let her go to the Devil.
I hear she claims marriage of thee.
Faith, I made to her some such dark promise, and in seeking to fly from it I run on, like a frighted dog with a bottle it steel, that fine would bite it off and yet dares not look behind him. Now my precious Gypsy!
I your love to me rather cools then heats.
Marry, I am the sounder, lover, we have many wenches about the Town heate too fast.
What do you think of these perfumed Gallants then?
Their satin cannot save them. I am confident
They have a certain spice of the disease,
For they that sleep with dogs; shall rise with fleas.
Believe it! A little painting and gay clothes,
Make you loath me.
How? love a Lady for painting or gay apparel? I'll unkennel one example more for thee. Esop had a foolish dog that let go the flesh to catch the shadow. I would have Courtiers bee better Divers.
You remember your oaths.
Lovers oaths are like Mariners prayers, uttered in extremity; but when the tempest is o'er, and that the vessel leaves tumbling, they fall from protesting to drinking. And yet amongst Gentlemen protesting and drinking go together, and agree as well as Shooemakers and West-phalia bacon. They are both drawers on: for drink draws on protestation; and protestation draws on more drink. Is not this discourse better now then the mortality of your sun-burnt Gentleman.
Is this your perch, you haggard? fly to'th stews.
You should be clapped by th'heeles now: strike in the Court.
She's good for nothing but to make her maids,
Catch cold a nights; they dare not use a bedstaffe,
For fear of her light fingers.
Your'e a strumpet.
An impudent one.
Why do you kick her? say,
Do you think that she's like a walnut-tree?
Must she be cudgeled ere she bear good fruit?
She brags that you shall marry her.
What then?
I had rather she were pitched upon a stake
In some new-seeded garden, to affright
Her fellow crows thence.
Your a boy, a fool,
Be guardian to your hound, I am of age.
If I take her near you I'll cut her throat.
With a fan of feathers?
And for you; I'll whip
This folly from you.
Are you choleric?
I'll purg't with Rubarbe.
O your brother.
Hang him.
Hee wrongs me most that ought t'offend me least,
I do suspect my mother plaid soul play,
When she conceived thee.
Now by all my hopes.
Like the two slaughtered sons of Oedipus,
The very flames of our affection,
Shall turn 10 ways. Those words I'll make thee answer
With thy heart blood.
Doe like the geesse in the progress,
You know where you shall find me,
Very good,
And thou be a noble, friend, bear him my sword,
And bid him fit the length on it.
Sir I shall.
He comes. Hence petty thought of my disgrace,
I near loved my complexion till now,
Cause I may boldly say without a blush,
I love you.
Your love is untimely sown,
Ther's a Spring at Michaelmas, but it is but a faint one, I am sunk
In years, and I have vowed never to marry.
Alas! poor maids get more lovers then husbands,
Yet you may mistake my wealth. For, as when Ambassadors are sent to congratulate Princes, there's commonly sent along with them a rich present; so that though the Prince like not the Ambassadors person nor words, yet he likes well of the presentmeant. So I may come to you in the same manner, &amp; be better loved for my dowry then my virtue.
I'll think on the motion.
Do, Isle now detain you no longer. At your better leisure I'll tell you things shall startle your blood.
Nor blame me that this passion I reveal;
Lovers dye inward that their flames conceal.
Of all intelligence this may prove the best,
Sure I shall draw strange foul, from this foul nest.
I hear a whispering all about the Court,
Your are to fight, who is your opposite?
What is the quarrel?
It is an idle umour.
Will you dissemble? sure you do not well
To fright me thus, you never look thus pale,
But when you are most angry. I do charge you
Upon my blessing; nay I'll call the Duke,
And he shall school you.
Publish not a fear
Which would convert to laughter; it is not so,
Was not this Crucifix my fathers?
Yes.
I have heard you say, giving my brother suck,
Hee took the Crucifix between his hands,
And broke a limb off.
Yes: but it is mended.
I have brought your weapon back.
Ha, O my horror!
You have brought it home indeed.
Help, oh he's murdered.
Do you turn your gaul up? I'll to sanctuary,
And send a surgeon to you.
How? of the ground?
O mother now remember what I told,
Of breaking off the Crucifix: farewell
There are some sins which heaven doth duly punish,
In a whole family. This it is to rise
By all dishonest means. Let all men know
That tree shall long time keep a steady foot
Whose branches spread no wilder then the root.
O my perpetual sorrow!
Virtuous Marcello.
Hoe's dead: pray leave him Lady; come, you shall.
Alas he is not dead: hoe's in a trance.
Why here's no body shall get any thing by his death. Let me call him again for Gods sake.
I would you were deceived.
O you abuse me, you abuse me, you abuse me. How many have gone away thus for lack of tendance; rear vp's head,
rear vp's head; His bleeding inward will kill him.
You see hee is departed.
Let me come to him; give me him as hee is, if hee bee turned to earth; let me but give him one hearty kiss, and you shall put vs both into one coffin: fetch a looking glass, see if his breath will not stain it; or pull out some feathers from my pillow, and lay them to his lips, will you loose him for a little pains taking?
Your kindest office is to pray for him.
Alas! I would not pray for him yet. Hee may live to lay me in the ground, and pray for me, if you'll let me come to him.
Was this your handy-worke?
It was my misfortune.
Hee lies, hee lies, hee did not kill him: these have killed him, that would not let him bee better looked to.
Have comfort my grieved Mother.
O you scritch-owle.
Forbear, good Madam.
Let me go, let me go.
The God of heaven forgive thee. Dost not wonder
I pray for thee? Isle tell thee what's the reason,
I have scarce breath to number twenty minutes;
Id not spend that in cursing. Fare thee well
Half of thy self lies there: and moist thou live
To fill an howre-glasse with his mouldred ashes,
To tell how thou should spend the time to come
In blessed repentance.
Mother, pray tell me
How came hee by his death? what was the quarrel?
Indeed my younger boy presumed too much
Upon his manhood; gave him bitter words;
Drew his sword first; and so I know not how,
For I was out of my wits, hee fell wed's head
Just in my bosom.
This is not true Madam.
I pray thee peace.
One arrow's grazed already; it were vain
T'lose this: for that will ne'er bee found again.
Go, bear the body to Corneli; lodging:
And wee command that none acquaint our Duchess:
With this sad accident: for you Flamineo,
Hark you, I will not grant your pardon.
No?
Only a lease of your life. And that shall last
But for one day. Thou shalt be forced each evening to renew it, or be hanged.
At your pleasure.
Your will is law now, Isle not meddle with it.
You once did brave me in your sisters lodging;
I'll now keep you in awe for it. Whore's our beaver?
Hee calls for his destruction. Noble youth,
I pity thy sad fate. Now to the barriers.
This shall his passage to the black lake further,
The last good deed hee did, he pardoned murder.
An Armourer? vds death an Armourer?
Armourer; whore's the Armourer?
Tear off my beaver.
Are you hurt, my Lord?
O my braine's on fire,
The helmet is poisoned.
My Lord upon my soul.
Away with him to torture.
There are some great ones that have hand in this,
And near about me.
O my loved Lord, poisoned?
Remove the bar: heir's unfortunate rolls,
Call the Physicians; a plague upon you;
Wee have to much of your cunning here already.
I fear the Ambassadors are likewise poisoned.
Oh I am gone already: the infection
Flies to the brain and heart. O thou strong heart!
There's such a covenant 'tweene the world and it,
They're loath to break.
O my most loved father!
Remove the boy away,
Whore's this good woman? had I infinite worlds
They were too little for thee. Must I leave thee?
What say you scritch-owles, is the venomne mortal?
Most deadly.
Most corrupted politic hangma!
You kill without book; but your art to save
Fails you as oft, as great men's needy friends.
I that have given life to offending slaves
And wretched murderers, have I not power
To lengthen mine own a twelue-month?
Do not kiss me, for I shall poison thee.
This unction is sent from the great Duke of Florence.
Sir bee of comforts
O thou soft natural death, that art ioint-twin,
To sweetest slumber: no rough-bearded Comet,
Stares on thy mild departure: the dull Owl
Beats not against thy casement: the hoarse wolf
Scents not thy carrion. Pity winds thy coarse,
Whilst horror weights on Princes.
I am lost for ever.
How miserable a thing it is to die,
Amongst women howling! What are those.
Franciscant.
They have brought the extreme unction.
On pain of death, let no man name death to me,
It is a word infinitely terrible,
Withdraw into our Cabinet
To see what solitariness is about dying Princes. As heretofore they have unpeopled Towns; divorced friends, and made great houses vnhospitable: so now,  justice! where are their flatterers now? Flatterers are but the shadows of Princes bodies the least thick cloud makes them invisible.
There's great moan made for him.
Faith, for some few hours salt water will run most plentifully in every Office of the Court. But believe it; most of them do but weep over their step-mothers graves.
How mean you?
Why? They dissemble, as some men doe that live within compass of the verge.
Come you have thrived well under him.
Faith, like a wolf in a women's breast; I have been fed with poultry; but for money, understand me, I had as good a will to cousin him, as ever an Officer of them all. But I had not cunning enough to doe it.
What did thou think of him; faith speak freely.
Hee was a kind of States-man, that would sooner have reckond how many Cannon bullets he had discharged against a Town, to count his expense that way, than how many of his valiant and deserving subjects hee lost before it.
O, speak well of the Duke.
I have done.
Will it hear some of my Court wisdom?
To reprehend Princes is dangerous: and to ouer-commend some
of them is palpable lying.
How is it with the Duke?
Most deadly ill.
Hoe's fallen into a strange distraction.
Hee talks of Battles and Monopolies,
Levying of taxes, and from that descends
To the most brain-sicke language. His mind fastens
On twenty several objects, which confound
Deep Sense with folly. Such a fearful end
May teach some men that bear too lofty crest,
Though they live happiest, yet they dye not best.
Hee hath conferred the whole State of the Dukedom
Upon your sister, till the Prince arrive
At mature age.
There's some good luck in that yet.
See here he comes.
There's death in's face already.
O my good Lord!
Away, you have abused me.
You have conveyed coin forth our territories;
Bought and sold offices; oppressed the poor,
And I ne'er dreamt on it. Make up your accounts;
Isle now bee mine own Steward.
Sir, have patience.
Indeed I am too blame.
For did you ever hear the dusky raven
Chide blackness? or wast ever known, the devil
Raild against cloven Creatures.
O my Lord!
Let me have some quails to supper.
Sir, you shall.
No: some fried dog-fish. Your Quails feed on poison,
That old dog-fox, that Politician Florence,
Isle forswear hunting and turn dog-killer;
Rare! Isle bee friends with him. for mark you, sir, one dog
Still sets another a barking: peace, peace,
Yonder's a fine slave come in now.
Where?
Why there.
In a blew bonnet, and a pair of breeches
With a great codpeece. Ha, ha, ha,
Look you his codpeece is stuck full of pins
With pearls of the head of them. Doe not you know him?
No, my Lord.
Why it is the Devil.
I know him by a great rose he wears on's shoe
To hide his cloven foot. Isle dispute with him.
Hoe's a rare linguist.
My Lord heir's nothing.
Nothing? rare! nothing! when I want money,
Our treasury is empty; there is nothing,
Isle not bee used thus.
O! 'ly still, my Lord
See, see, Flamineo that killed his brother
Is dancing on the ropes there: and he carries
A monie-bag in each hand, to keep him even,
For fear of breaking's neck. And there's a Lawyer
In a gown whipped with velvet, stares and gapes
When the money will fall. How the rogue cuts capers!
It should have bin in a halter.
It is there; what's she?
Uittoria, my Lord.
Ha, ha, ha. Her hair is sprinkled with Arras powder, that makes her look as if she had sinned in the Pastry. What's hee?
A Divine my Lord.
Hee will bee drunk: Avoid him: the argument is fearful when Church-men stagger in it.
Look you; six gray rats that have lost their tails, crall up the pillow, send for a Rat-cather.
Isle doe a miracle: Isle free the Court
From all foul vermin. Whore's Flamineo?
I doe not like that hee names me so often,
Especially on's death-bed: it is a sign
I shall not live long: see hoe's near his end.
Pray give vs leave; Attend Domino Brachiane,
See, see, how firmly hee doth fix his eye
Upon the Crucifix.
O hold it constant.
It settles his wild spirits; and so his eyes
Melt into tears.
Domino Brachiane, solebas in bello tutus esse tuo clypeo, nnc hunc clypeum hostituo opponas infernali.
Olim hasta valuisti in bello; nnc hanc sacram hastam vibribes country hostem animarum.
Attend Domino Brachiane si nuns quque probes ea quae act sunt inter nos, flecte Caput in dexrum.
Esto securus Domino Brachiane: cogita quantum habeas meritorum denique memineris meam animam pro tua oppignoratem si quid asset periculi.
Si nnc quoque probes ea quae act sunt inter nos, flecte caput in leuum.
Hee is departing: pray stand all apart,
And let vs only whisper in his ears
Some private meditations, which our order
Permits you not to hear.
Brachiano.
Devil Brachiano.
Thou art damned.
Perpetually.
A slave condemned, and given up to the gallows
Is thy great Lord and Master.
True: for thou
Art given up to the devil.
O you slave!
You that were held the famous Politician;
Whose art was poison.
And whose conscience murder.
That would have broke your wives neck down the stairs ere she was poisoned.
That had your villainous
And fine embroidered bottles, (sallets
And perfumes
Equally mortal with a winter plague
Now there's Mercarie.
And copperesse
And quicke-siluer.
With other devilish apothecary stuff
A melting in your politic brains: dost hear.
This is Count Lodouico.
This Gasparo.
And thou shalt die like a poor rogue.
And stink
Like a dead flie-blowne dog.
And be forgotten before thy sunerall sermon.
Uittoria? Uittoria!
O the cursed devil,
Come to himself a gain. Wee are undone.
(again
Strangle him in private. What? will you call him
To live in treble torments? for charity,
For Christian charity, avoid the chamber.
You would prate, Sir. This is a true-loue knot
Sent from the Duke of Florence.
What is it done?
The snuff is out. No woman-keeper i'ch world,
Though she had practised seven year at the Pest-house,
Could have done it quaintlyer. My Lords hoe's dead.
Rest to his soul.
O me! this place is hell.
How heavily she takes it.
O yes, yes;
Had women navigable rivers in their eyes
They would despond them all; surely I wonder
Why wee should wish more rivers to the City,
When they sell water so good cheap. Isle tell thee,
These are but Moonish shades of griefs or fears,
There's nothing sooner dry than womens-teares.
Why heere's an end of all my harvest, hee has given me nothing
Court promises! Let wisemen count them cursed
For while you live hee that scores best pays worst.
Sure, this was Florence doing.
Very likely.
Those are found weighty strokes which come from th'hand,
But those are killing strokes which come from th'head.
O the rare tricks of a Machiuillian!
Hee doth not come like a gross plodding slave
And buffet you to death: No, my quaint knave,
Hee tickles you to death; makes you die laughing;
As if you had swallowed down a pound of saffron
You see the seat, it is practised in a trice
To teach Court-honestie, it iumpes on Ice.
Now have the people liberty to talk
And descant on his vices.
Misery of Princes,
That must of force bee censured by their slaves!
Not only blamed for doing things are ill,
But for not doing all that all men will.
One were better be a thresher.
Vds'death, I would fine speak with this Duke yet.
Now hoe's dead?
I cannot conjure; but if prayers or oaths
Will get to th'speech of him: though forty devils
VVaight on him in his livery of flames,
I'll speak to him, and shake him by the hand,
Though I bee blasted.
Excellent Lodouico!
What? did you terrify him at the last gasp?
Yes; and so idly, that the Duke had like
T'haue terrified vs.
How?
You shall hear that hereafter,
See! yon's the infernal, that would make up sport.
Now to the revelation of that secret,
She promi'st when she fell in love with you.
You're passionately met in this sad world.
I would have you look up, Sir; these Court tears
Claim not your tribute to them. Let those weep
That guiltily partake in the sad cause.
I knew last night by a sad dream I had
Some mischief would ensue; yet to say truth
My dream most concerned you.
Shal's fall a dreaming?
Yes, and for fashion sake Isle dream with her.
Me thought sir, you came stealing to my bed.
Wilt thou believe me sweating; by this light
I was a dreamt on thee too: for me thought
I saw thee naked
Fie sir! as I told you,
Me thought you lay down by me.
So dreamed I;
And least thou should take cold, I covered thee
With this Irish mantle.
Verily I did dream,
You were some what bold with me; but to come to it.
How? how? I hope you will not go to there.
Nay: you must hear my dream out.
Well, sir, forth.
When I threw the mantle ore thee, thou did laugh
Exceedingly me thought.
Laugh?
And cridst out,
The hair did tickle thee.
There was a dream indeed.
Mark her I prithee, she simpers like the suddes
A Collier hath been washed in.
Come, sir; good fortune tends you; I did tell you
I would reveal a secret, Isabella
The Duke of Florence sister was empoisoned,
By a fumed picture: and Camillo's neck
Was broke by damned Flamineo; the mischance
Laid on a vaulting horse.
Most strange!
Most true.
The bed of snakes is broke.
I sadly do confess I had a hand
In the black deed.
Thou kepts their counsel,
Right,
For which, urged with contrition, I intend
This night to rob Vittoria.
Excellent penitence!
Usurers dream on it while they sleep out Sermons.
To further our escape, I have entreated
Leave to retire me, till the funeral,
Unto a friend in the country. That excuse
Will further our escape, In coin and jewels
I shall, at least, make good unto your use
An hundred thousand crowns.
O noble wench!
Those crowns we will share.
It is a dowry,
Me thinks, should make that sun-burnt proverb false,
And wash the Ethiop white.
It shall, away
Be ready for our flight.
An hour before day.
O strange discovery! why till now we knew not
The circumstance of either of their deaths.
You'll weight about midnight
In the Chapel.
There.
Why now our action's justified,
Tush for justice.
What harms it Justice? we now, like the partridge
Purge the disease with laurel: for the fame
Shall crown the enterprise and quit the shame.
The young Duke: Did you ever see a sweeter Prince?
I have known a poor women's bastard better fauor'd, This is behind him: Now, to his face all coparisons were hateful: Wise was the Courtly Peacock, that being a great Minion, and being compared for beauty, by some dottrels that stood by, to the Kingly Eagle, said the Eagle was a far fairer bird then herself, not in respect of her feathers, but in respect of her long Talents. His will grow out in time,
My gracious Lord.
I pray leave me Sir.
Your Grace must be merry: it is I have cause to morn, for wot you what said the little boy that rode behind his father on horseback?
Why, what said hee?
When you are dead father (said he) I hope then I shall ride in the saddle, O it is a brave thing for a man to sit by himself: he may stretch himself in the stirrups, look about, and see the whole compass of the Hemisphere, you're now, my Lord, ith saddle.
Study your prayers, sir, and be penitent,
It were fit you'd think on what hath former bin,
I have heard grief named the eldest child of sin.
Study my prayers? he threatens me divinely,
I am falling to pieces already, I care not, though, like Anacharsis
I were pounded to death in a mortar. And yet that death were fitter for Usurers gold and themselves to be beaten together, to make a most cordial cullice for the devil.
He hath his uncles villainous look already,
In dicimo sexto. Now sir, what are you?
It is the pleasure sir, of the young Duke
That you forbear the Presence, and all room,
That owe him reverence.
So, the wolf and the raven are very pretty fools when they are young. Is it your office, sir, to keep me out?
So the Duke wills.
Verily, Moister Courtier, extremity is not to bee used
in all offices: Say that a gentlewoman were taken out of her bed about midnight, and committed to Castle Angelo, to the Tower yonder, with nothing about her, but her smock: would it not show a cruel part in the gentleman porter to lay claim to her upper garment, pull it ore her head and ears; and put her in naked?
Very good: you are merry
Doth hee make a Court eiectment of me? A flaming firebrand casts more smoke without a chimney, then withint. Isle smoore some of them.
How now? Thou hart sad.
I met even now with the most piteous sight.
Thou metst another hear a pitiful
Degraded Courtier.
Your reverend mother
Is grown a very old woman in two hours.
I found them winding of Marcello's coarse;
And there is such a solemn melody
'Tweene doleful songs, tears, and sad elegies:
Such, as old grandames, watching by the dead,
Were wont t'out-weare the nights with; that believe me
I had no eyes to guide me forth the room,
They were so ore-charg'd with water.
I will see them.
It were much vncharety in you: for your sight
Will add unto their tears.
I will see them.
They are behind the travers. Isle discover
Their superstitious howling.
This rosemary is withered, pray get fresh;
I would have these herbs grow up in his grave
When I am dead and rotten. Reach the baize,
Isle tie a garland here about his head:
Twill keep my boy from lightning. This sheet
I have kept this twenty year, and every day
Hallowed it with my prayers, I did not think
Hee should have wore it.
Look you; who are yonder.
O reach me the flowers.
Her Ladyships foolish.
Alas! her grief
Hath turned her child again.
You're very welcome.
There's Rosemary for you, and Rue for you,
Hearts-ease for you. I pray make much of it.
I have left more for my self.
Lady, who's this?
You are, I take it, the graue-maker.
So.
It is Flamineo.
Will you make me such a fool? heere's a white hand:
Can blood so soon bee washed out? Let me see,
When scritch-howles croak upon the chimney tops,
And the strange Cricketith oven singes and hoppes,
When yellow spots doe on your hands appear,
Bee certain then you of a Course shall hear.
Out upon it, how it is speckled! he has handled a toad sure.
Couslep-water is good for the memory: pray buy me 3. ounces of't.
I would I were from hence.
Do you here,
Isle give you a saying which my grandmother (sir?
Was wont, when she heard the bell toll, to sing ore unto her lute
Doe and you will, doe.
Call for the Robin-Red-brest and the wren,
Since ore shady groves they hover,
And with leaves and flowers doe cover
The friendless bodies of unburied men.
Call unto his funeral Dole
The Ante, the field-mouse, and the mole
To rear him hillocks, that shall keep him warm,
And (when gay tombs are robed) sustain no harm,
But keep the wolf far thence: that's foe to men,
For with his nails hee'ldig them up again.
They would not bury him' cause hee died in a quarrel
But I have an answer for them.
Let holy Church receive him duly
Since hee paid the Church tithes truly.
His wealth is summed, and this is all his store:
This poor men get; and great men get no more.
Now the wares are gone, wee may shut up shop.
Bless you all good people,
I have a strange thing in me, to the which
I cannot give a name, without it bee
Compassion, I pray leave me.
This night Isle know the vt most of my fate
Isle bee resolved what my rich sister means
T'assigne me for my service: I have lived
Riotously ill, like some that live in Court.
And sometimes, when my face was full of smiles
Have felt the maze of conscience in my breast.
Oft gay and honoured robes those tortures try,
"Wee think caged birds sing, when indeed they cry.
Ha! I can stand thee. Nearer, nearer yet.
What a mockery hath death made of thee? thou look sad.
In what place art thou? in you starry gallery,
Or in the cursed dungeon? No? not speak?
Pray, Sir, resolve me, what religions best
For a man to die in? or is it in your knowledge
To answer me how long I have to live?
That's the most necessary question.
Not answer? Are you still like some great men
That only walk like shadows up and down,
And to no purpose: say:
What's that? O fatal! hee throws earth upon me
A dead mans scull beneath the roots of flowers.
I pray speak Sir, our Italian Church-men
Make vs believe, dead men hold conference
With their familiars, and many times
Will come to bed to them, and eat with them.
Hoe's gone; and see, the scull and earth are vanished.
This is beyond melancholy. I doe dare my fate
To doe its worst. Now to my sisters lodging,
And sum up all these horrors; the disgrace
The Prince threw on me; next the piteous sight
Of my dead brother; and my Mothers dotage;
And last this terrible vision. All these
Shall with Vittoria's bounty turn to good,
Or I will drown this weapon in her blood.
My Lord upon my soul you shall no further:
You have most ridiculously engaged your self
Too far already. For my part, I have paid
All my debts, so if I should chance to fall
My Creditors fall not with me; and I vow
To quite all in this bold assembly
To the meanest follower. My Lord leave the City,
Or Isle forswear the murder.
Farewell Lodouico.
If thou dost perish in this glorious act,
Isle rear unto thy memory that fame
Shall in the ashes keep alive thy name.
There's some black deed on foot. Isle presently
Down to the Citadel, and raise some force.
These strong Court factions that do brooke no checks,
In the career of't break the Riders necks.
What are you at your prayers? Give e.
How Ruffin?
I come to you about worldly business:
Sit down, sit down: Nay stay blouse, you may hear it,
The doors are fast enough.
Ha, are you drunk?
Yes, yes, with wormwood water, you shall taste
Some of it presently.
What intends the fury?
You are my Lords Executrix, and I claim
Reward, for my long service.
For your service
Come therefore here is pen and Ink, set down
What you will give me.
There,
Ha! have you done already,
It is a most short conveyance.
I will read it.
I give that portion to thee, and no other
Which Caine groaned under having slain his brother.
A most courtly Patent to beg by.
You are a villain.
Is it come to this? the say affrights cure agues:
Thou hast a Devil in thee; I will try
If I can scarre him from thee: Nay sit still:
My Lord hath left me yet two case of Jewels
Shall make me scorn your bounty; you shall see the.
Sure hoe's distracted.
O he's desperate
For your own safety give him gentle language.
Look, these are better far at a dead list,
Then all your jewel house.
And yet me thinks,
These stones have no fair lustre, they are ill set.
I'll turn the right side towards you: you shall see how the will sparkle.
Turn this horror from me:
What do you want? what would you have me doe?
Is not all mine, yours? have I any children?
Pray thee good woman doe not trouble me
With this vain wordly business; say your prayers,
I made a vow to my deceased Lord,
Neither your self, nor I should out-liue him,
The numbering of four hours.
Did he enjoin it.
He did, and it was a deadly jealousy,
Least any should enjoy thee after him;
That urged him vow me to it: For my death
I did propound it voluntarily, knowing
If hee could not be safe in his own Court
Being a great Duke, what hope then for vs?
This is your melancholy and despair.
Away,
Fool, thou art to think that Politicians
Do use to kill the effects of injuries
And let the cause live: shall we groan in irons,
Or be a shameful and a weighty burden
To a public scaffold: This is my resolve
I would not live at any mans entreaty
Nor dye at any's bidding.
Will you hear me?
My life hath done service to other men,
My death shall serve mine own turn; make you ready
Do you mean to die indeed.
With as much pleasure
As ever my father gat me.
Are the doors locked?
Yes Madame.
Are you grown an Atheist? will you turn your body,
Which is the goodly palace of the soul
To the souls slaughter house?  the cursed Devil
Which doth present vs with all other sins
Thrice candied ore; Despair with gaul and stibium,
Yet we carouse it off; Cry out for help,
Makes vs forsake that which was made for Man,
The world, to sink to that was made for devils,
Eternal darkness.
Help, help.
I'll stop your
With Winter plums,
I prithee yet remember, (throat
Millions are now in graves, which at last day
Like Mandrakes shall rise shrieking.
Leave your prating,
For these are but grammatical laments,
Feminine arguments, and they move me
As some in Pulpits move their Auditory
More with their exclamation then sense
Of reason, or sound Doctrine.
Gentle Madam
Seem to consent, only persuade him teach
The way to death; let him dye first.
It is good, I apprehend it,
To kill one's self is meat that we must take
Like pills, not chew't, but quickly swallow it,
The smart a'th wound, or weakness of the hand
May else bring treble torments.
I have held it
A wretched and most miserable life,
Which is not able to dye.
O but frailty!
Yet I am now resolved, farewell affliction;
Behold Brachiano, I that while you lived
Did make a flaming Altar of my heart
To sacrifice unto you; Now am ready
To sacrifice heart and all. Fare-well Zanche.
How Madam! Do you think that I'll out-liue you?
Especially when my best self Flamineo
Goes the same voyage.
O most loved Moore!
Only by all my love let me entreat you;
Since it is most necessary none of vs
Do violence on our selves; let you or I
Be her sad taster, teach her how to dye.
Thou dost instruct me nobly, take these pistols,
Because my hand is stained with blood already:
Two of these you shall level at my breast,
The other against your own, and so we will dye,
Most equally contented: But first swear
Not to out-liue me.
Most religiously.
Then here's an end of me: fare-well day-light
And  contemtible Physique! that dost take
So long a study, only to preserve
So short a life, I take my leave of thee.
These are two cupping-glasses, that shall draw
All my infected blood out,
Are you ready?
Ready.
Whither shall I go now? O Lucian thy ridiculous Purgatory to find Alexander the great cobbling shoes, Pompey tagging points, and Iulius Caesar; making hair buttons, Haniball sellling blacking, and Augustus crying garlic, Charlemaigne selling lists by the dozen, and King Pippin crying Apples in a cart drawn with one horse.
Whether I resolve to Fire, Earth, water, Air,
Or all the Elements by scruples; I know not
Nor greatly care,Shoot, shoot,
Of all deaths the violent death is best,
For from our selves it steals our selves so fast
The pain once apprehended is quite past.
What are you dropped.
I am mixed with Earth already: As you are Noble Perform your vows, and bravely follow me.
Whither to hell,
To most assured damnation.
O thou most cursed devil.
Thou art caught
In thine own Engine, I tread the fire out
That would have been my ruin.
Will you be perjured? what a religious oath was Styx that the Gods never durst swear by and violate?  that wee had such an oath to minister, and to be so well kept in our Courts of Justice.
Think whither thou art going.
And remeber
What villainies thou hast acted.
This thy death,
Shall make me like a blazing ominous star,
Look up and tremble.
O I am caught with a spring!
You see the Fox comes many times short ho me,
It is here proved true.
Kilt with a couple of branches.
No fitter offering for the infernal furies
Then one in whom they reigned while hee was living.
O the ways dark and horrid! I cannot see,
Shall I have no company?
O yes thy sins,
Do run before thee to fetch fire from hell,
To light thee thither.
O I smell soot, most sinking soot, the chimneys a fire,
My livers purboil'd like scotch holly-bread;
There's a plumber, laying pipes in my guts, it scalds;
Wilt thou out-liue me?
Yes, and drive a stake
Through thy body; for we will give it out,
Thou did this violence upon thy self.
O cunning Devils! now I have tried your love,
And doubled all your reaches. I am not wounded:
The pistols held no bullets: it was a plot
To prove your kindness to me; and I live
To punish your ingratitude, I knew
One time or other you would find a way
To give me a strong potion,  Men
That lye upon your death-beds, and are haunted
With howling wives, near trust them, they'll re-marry
Ere the worm pierce your winding sheet: ere the Spider
Make a thin curtain for your Epitaphs.
How cunning you were to discharge? Do you practise at the Artillery yard? Trust a woman; never, never; Brachiano bee my president: we lay our souls to pawn to the Devil for a little pleasure, and a woman makes the bill of sale. That ever man should marry! For one Hypermnestra that saved her Lord and husband, forty nine of her sisters cut their husbands throats all in one night. There was a shoal of virtuous horse-leeches.
Here are two other Instruments.
Help, help.
What noise is that? ho? false keys in the Court.
We have brought you a Mask.
A matachine it
By your drawn swords. (seems,
Chuch-men turned revellers.
Isabella, Isabella,
Doe you know vs now?
Lodouico and Gasparo.
Yes and that Moore the Duke gave pension to
Was the great Duke of Florence.
O wee are lost.
You shall not take Justice from forth my hands,
O let me kill her.Isle cut my safety
Through your coats of steel: Fate's a Spaniel,
Wee cannot beat it from vs: what remains now?
Let all that doe ill, take this president:
Man may his Fate foresce, but not prevent.
And of all Axioms this shall win the prise,
It is better to be fortunate then wise.
Bind him to the pillar.
O your gentle pity:
I have seen a black-bird that would sooner fly
To a mans bosom, then to stay the gripe
Of the fierce Sparrow-hawke.
Your hope deceives you.
If Florence be ith Court, would hee would kill me.
Fool! Princes give rewards with their own hands,
But death or punishment by the hands of others.
Sirha you once did strike me, Isle strike you
Into the Center.
Thoul't doe it like a hangeman; a base hangman;
Not like a noble fellow, for thou see
I cannot strike again.
Dost laugh?
Would have me dye, as I was borne, in whining.
Recommend your self to heaven.
No I will carry mine own commendations thither.
Oh could I kill you forty times a day
And vs't four year together; it were to little:
Nought greeu's but that you are to few to feed
The famine of our vengeance. What dost think on?
Nothing; of nothing: leave thy idle questions;
I am ith way to study a long silence,
To prate were idle, I remember nothing.
Theirs nothing of so infinite vexation
As mans own thoughts.
O thou glorious strumpet,
Could I divide thy breath from this pure air
When't leaves thy body, I would suck it up
And breath't upon some dunghill.
You, my Deaths man;
Me thinks thou doest not look horrid enough,
Thou hast to good a face to be a hang-man,,
If thou be doe thy office in right form;
Fall down upon thy knees and ask forgiveness.
O thou hast bin a most prodigious comet,
But Isle cut of your train: kill the Moore first.
You shall not kill her first. behold my breast,
I will be waited on in death; my servant
Shall never go before me.
Are you so brave.
Yes I shall welcome death
As Princes doe some great Ambassadors; Isle meet thy weapon half way.
Thou dost tremble,
Me thinks fear should dissolve thee into ayre.
O thou art deceived, I am to true a woman:
Conceit can never kill me: Isle tell thee what,
I will not in my death shed one base tear,
Or if look pale, for want of blood, not fear.
Thou art my task, black fury.
I have blood
As red as either of theirs; wilt drink some?
It is good for the falling sickness: I am proud
Death cannot alter my complexion,
For I shall near look pale.
Strike, strike,
With a Joint motion.
It was a manly blow
The next thou giu'st, murder some sucking Infant,
And then thou wilt be famous.
O what blade first?
A Toledo, or an English Fox.
I ever thought a Cutler should distinguish
The cause of my death, rather then a Doctor.
Search my wound deeper: tent it with the steel that made it.
O my greatest sin lay in my blood.
Now my blood pays for it.
You are a noble sister
I love thee now; if woman doe breed man
She ought to teach him manhood: Fare thee well.
Know many glorious women that are famed
For masculine virtue, have bin vicious
Only a happier silence did betide them
She hath no faults, who hath the art to hide them.
My soul, like to a ship in a black storm,
Is driven I know not whither.
Then cast encore.
"Prosperity doth bewitch men seeming clear,
"But seas doe laugh, show white, when Rocks are near.
"Wee cease to grieve, cease to be fortunes slaves,
"Nay cease to dye by dying. Art thou gone
And thou so near the bottom: false report
Which says that women vie with the nine Muses
For nine tough durable lives: I doe not look
Who went before, nor who shall follow me;
No, at my self I will begin and end:
"While we look up to heaven wee confound
"Knowledge with knowledge.  I am in a mist.
O happy they that never saw the Court,
"Nor ever knew great Man but by report.
I recover like a spent taper, for a flash
And instantly go out.
Let all that belong to Great men remember the old wides tradition, to be like the Lyons ith Tower on Candlemas day, to morn if the Sun shine, for fear of the pitiful remainder of winter to come.
It is well yet there's some goodness in my death,
My life was a black charnel: I have caught
An everlasting could. I have lost my voice
Most irrecouerably: Farewell glorious villains,
"This busy trade of life appears most vain,
"Since rest breeds rest, where all seek pain by pain.
Let no harsh flattering Bells resound my knell,
Strike thunder, and strike load to my farewell.
This way, this way, break op the doors, this way.
Ha, are wee betrayed;
Why then lets constantly dye all together,
And having finished this most noble deed,
Defy the worst of fate; not fear to bleed.
Keep back the Prince, shoot, shoot,
O I am wounded.
I fear I shall be tan.
You bloody villains,
By what authority have you committed
This Massakre.
By thine.
Mine?
Yes, thy uncle, which is a part of thee enjoined vs to it.
Thou know me I am sure, I am Cout Lodowicke,
And thy most noble uncle in disguise
Was last night in thy Court.
Ha!
Yes, that Moore thy father chose his pentioner.
He turned murderer;
Away with them to prison, and to torture;
All that have hands in this, shall taste our justice,
As I hope heaven.
I do glory yet,
That I can call this act mine own: For my part,
The rack, the gallows, and the torturing wheel
Shall bee but sound sleeps to me, here's my rest
"I limbed this night-peece and it was my best.
Remove the bodies, see my honoured Lord,
what use you ought make of their punishment.
Let guilty men remember their black deeds,
Do lean on cruthes, made of slender reeds.
In stead of an Epilogue only this of Martial supplies me.
Haec fuerint nobis praemia si placui.

ALL fair content dwell here, &amp; may our strains
Give you that choice delight which crowns our pains.
Our subiect's low, yet to your eyes presents
Deeds high in blood, in blood of Innocents:
Transcends them low, and your invention calls
To name the sin beyond this black deed falls.
What heretofore set others pens aworke,
Was ward turned Pirate, ours is ward turned Turk.
Their trivial Scoenes might best afford to show
The baseness of his birth, how from below
Ambition oft takes root, makes men forsake
The good the'enioy, yet know not. Our Muse doth take
A higher pitch, leaving his Piracy
To reach the heart it self of villainy.
What to that period makes the nearest way,
Our Scoene pursues, you must suppose his stay
Hath lately been upon the Irish Shore,
Where wanting men he invites some strangers or
Into his Bark, in height of wine and game,
He slips his anchor, and reveals his name.
There fate succedes, and to your gentle view
We give not what we could, but what know true.
Our Ship's aflote, we fear nor rocks nor sands,
Knowing we are environed with your helping hands.
IL'e play no more.
Set but my hand out, heir's 400. Crowns
vnlost yet, Fortune may make them yours.
Fortun's a Bitch, a mere strumpet, she
hath turned up the Ace so long, I have ne'er an eye
to see with she hath sok't me.
We came aboard to venture with you,
Deal Merchant-like, put it upon one maine,
And throw at all.
One cast, and we will leave you.
Leave vs yet? we have a cast worth two of the rest.
It is set, throw at it gentle Sir.
We shall have time enough hereafter,
You are too violent.
I fear you'll not be half so forward anon when we
should use you.
A sail, a sail, a sail.
Shout.
Why stand you so amazed? conceive you not the langauge
of the Sea?
Now you may show your selves gamesters,
You shall have your bellies full of hazard.
We are betrayed.
Are you not Merchant-men?
How else? and deal by whole-sale, take up much at
a long day. Do you know this honourable shape? Heroic
Captain WARD, Lord of the Ocean, terror of Kings, Landlord
to Merchants, rewarder of Man-hood, conqueror of the
Western world, to whose followers the Lands and Seas pay
tribute, and they to none, but once in their lives to the manor
of Wpping, and then are free ever after. This is he my noble
mummers.
We are for ever lost.
I't be our monies that you covet, willingly wee
give it up, only deprive vs not of our fair home, our Country:
do but land vs.
Know we have other use for you,
Have not enticed you hither for your gold,
It is the man we want. Is it not a shame,
Men of your qualities and personage,
Should live as cankers, eating up the soil
That gave you being, like beasts that ne'er look further
Then where they first took food, that men call home,
Which gives them means equal unto their minds,
Puts them in action.
True, who is it would not smile
To hear a Soldier, that hath nothing left
But misery to speak him man, can show
More marks then pence, upon whose back contempt
Heaps on the weight of poverty. Who would not smile
To hear this piece of wretchedness boast his wounds?
How far he went to purchase them? with what honour
He put them on? and now for sustenance,
Want of a little bread, being giving up
His empty soul, should joy yet that his Country
Shall see him breath his last: when that air he terms his
Ungratefully doth stifle him.
You tell vs of a gulf, which to eschew,
You dash vs against a rock more full of fear
Of danger: for we should call that action,
Which gives unto posterity our name
Writ in the golden lines of honour, where this brands
Our fore-heads with the hateful name of thieves, of robbers,
Piracy, it's theft, most hateful, swallows up
The estates of Orphans, Widows, who borne free,
Are thus made slaves, inthral'd to misery,
By those that should defend them, at the best.
You rob the venting Merchants, whose manly breast
Scorning base gain at home, puts to the maine
With hazard of his life and state, from other lands
To enrich his own, whilst with ungrateful sands
He thus is overwhelmed.
These children have bin at S. Antlins.
They'll perswad's out of our profession.
A plague upon this Scholarship,
One man that savours of an University,
Is able to infect a whole Navy with cowardice.
Cowardice? thou lie: ther's not a man here dares
less then thy self.
Zounds Il'e try that.
Hold, or by all my hopes, who makes next proffer
Falls on my sword. If you will try your valours
The enemy is at hand. As for your virtuous lectures,
We are Mariners, and Soldiers, not tattered yet
Enough to hear them, though in time we might
Be apt for such tongue-comfort, being swayed
By your directions.
A sail, a sail, a sail.
How? more sails yet?
The first that we descried, doth bear a head,
And as it seems, pursued by a man of war,
They make with vs for succour.
Yes, we'll succour her, and suck her too, as dry as
a Usurers palm.
Nay, then we are put from shore.
Without ken boys, more sails, the least delay.
O l turn Serving-men, the trencher hold
Whilst others eat the meat.
Away, make ready for the fight.
Courage brave sparks, now to gain wealth, or graves:
To dye in peace fits beasts, and abject slaves.
Thou need not fear the curse, bloud-thirsty monster.
Oh that our better part should thus be captived
By sense and will! who like a ship unmanned,
That's borne by motion of the violent waives
And giddy winds, doth seem to make a course
Direct and punctiue, till we see it dash
Against some prouder Sylla, and display
How much she inward wanted to her sway.
You have well described him: but to our own fortunes.
We must obey necessity, since it is our fates
To be surprised thus, by this monster beast.
We must as did that Captain, so much famed,
Lik the fierce Lyons feet, till happier times
Do give vs freedom in his punish't crimes.
You have well advised. Fortune in spite of thee,
How ever my body's thrald, my mind rests free.
This stand our comfort: we may happen be
he Chorus only to their Tragedy.
Unfortunate sister, my heart dissolves to blood,
And pays ad tribute to thy sadder griefs.
Nay, make no period, our woes are not at full,
Hymen did ne'er behold so black a nuptial.
Alas! with our delay we hasten misery,
See how they bear up to vs. Dear sister hide
At least thy sex, though not thy sorrow.
Wretched Alizia, little thinks young Raymond
His Brid's so near unto captivity.
Be gentle yet you seas, and swallow me,
Since I am denied his arms, let my virginity
Be offred unto him in sacrifice.
'T will be some comfort, his love a maiden dies.
Nay then thou cleau'st my soul, do not distrust
Chaste thoughts are guided by a power, that's just.
My worthy friends, yet what persuasion needs
To stir up valour where necessity
And justice of our cause, in basest spirits
Would strike a fire to kindle cowardice?
Three days we have been pursued by a Dutch Pirate,
And now we are fallen upon no less a monster.
Me thinks I see your eyes darting forth flames
Like Lyons in their chase, the greedy hunter
Seeming to warm that blood, whose heate and rage
Proves his destruction.
Hoy,
Not ready yet? alas thou wilt betray
Thy self unto their lust.
Rather to death: Nature this comfort gave,
No place so miserable, but yields a grave
To wretchedness.
Hoy, of whence your ship, and whither are you bound?
We are of Morsels, bound for Normandy.
Of whence are you?
We are of the Sea.
The Devil land you.
Bring your moister a board or we'll give you a broad side.
As you are men I do conjure your valours.
As you are virtuous keep from slavery.
A haplesse, haplesse maid.
Misdoubt it not faire-maid,
Ther's not a man here, but well knows how much
He hath advantage of his enemy,
A race of thieves, Bankroupts, that have laien
Upon their countries stomach like a urfet,
Whence being vomited they strive with poisonous breath
To infect the general are: Creatures that stand
So far from what is man, they know no good,
But in their prey, nor for necessity
But for mere hate to virtue, pursuing vice,
And being down themselves would have none rise.
The curs are sure asleep, we'll waken 'em,
Gunner give fire.
In their own language answer them.
Zounds do they begin to prate, have with you,
lace the netting, let down the fights, make ready the sm
shot, gunner, give them a broad side, we'll prate with 'e
A star board there.
Brave countrymen,
Think through how many dangers, with what sweat, what care,
How long expense of time, we have been getting
Those goods these Robbers fight for, that should make good to vs
The sweet of just endeavours, look on this maid,
Think with what honourable welcomings,
You shall deliver her to her betrothed husband,
How much you shall engage him, lastly, think that you see,
Even all the misries despised poverty
Can throw on men, that by this one hours valour
We only can redeem our selves from death
Oh think how happy it is to innocence,
Whereunto guilty souls it looks black and fearful:
At least let this al thoughts of fear dispel,
Truth fights against theft, and heaven opposes hell.
Wee are resolved S. Dennis victory.
A constant breast may fall, but cannot dye,
Recall thy spirit brave friend, a while, yet stay,
At least bear thy revenge hence with thee.
He hath lost all motion.
Injurious heaven that with so excellent matter
As is our soul, did mingle this base mould,
So frail a substance earth, as if thou had framed man
The subject of thy laughter, gau'st him a spirit
Free, unbounded, whose fiery temper breaks
Through all the clouds of danger, dares even heaven,
Swells and bears high, when with one little prick
This bubble breaks, displays a vanity,
Ridiculous vanity, this building
That hath been twenty and odd years a rearing,
One blast thus lays it flat, I could and tremble,
To think that such a coward I bear about me,
As is this flesh, that for so small a wound
Betrays our life.
This shows sir, nature near intended man,
Other then as she sent him to the world,
All vnoffensiue, unan'd: when unto be acts,
She gave the means to hurt as to defence,
The armour she gave man was innocence.
True, there was some other end in our creation
Then to be that which men term valiant.
There was.
Courage brave sparks the slaves begin to faint,
It is his evil spirit sure that in this likeness hints him
See where he lies.
S'foot we shall share the more sir, I always thought
Fortune had marked him out to dye by the French.
He had so much of the English spirit in him.
Fortune true, the fate of man is fixed,
Unmovable as the pole: how idle then were he
Should strive to cross vnuoided destiny?
And think to stay his course, seeing we are swayed
As are the motionary engines of a clock,
By the dull weight that still doth downward tend,
Till it strike earth, and so there motion end.
Give me the hearing Sir,
Persuade no more, we have no will to act,
Or not to act more, then those orbs we see,
And planetary bodies, which in their offices
Observe the will of fate: the difference is,
They are confined, we are not they are stars fixed,
We wandering Run on thou purple line
That draw my lives fate out, thou that dost frown
Upon the births of men, now Saurn smile.
Those under milder Planets borne live, servile: good;
Mars called our Birth, my race shall be through blood
Abused knowledge that first worst given to man
A light, now helpst to dazzle him, and what ere want
Befall through our own imperfect judgment,
Unbridled will the throw on fortune, chance,
I see mans happiness, were his ignorance,
A board, a board, a board.
Dear sir withdraw, you are deprived of sight
So much the better, I see no fear in fight,
Courage brave countrymen: what's natures part
May fall; what's heavens can never, it is the odds
That just men have of bad, still to the gods
They stand or fall.
Enter, Enter Enter.
Zounds the slave winks and fights.
A Ward, A Ward, A Ward,
Down with them, down with them, away let him go overboard,
where he a second Alexand'r, ther's not a man of them
lives, but shall go ouer-board, we'll offer them to our deceased
friends in sacrifice.
My brother, my dear dear brother.
There were no conscience, no religion in it,
How? Conscience, were it but to banish those two
words they shall go ouer-board.
They shall go ouer-board: suppose I speak the contrary.
My Captain, my man of war speak the countryrye
they are as safe as the great Turk.
Now they shall ouer-board.
Out-swagered?
How many French are left?
There's only five of four and twenty living.
Never did men with equal spirit stand,
A day so black and stormy: rob not your self then,
Of so brave witnesses of this days valour.
How? dare you sir give vs directions?
How dare I sir? I am a Gentleman
Equal unto your self.
Take that now, I am before you,
You are, I'll not be long behind you.
Know, that our word shall be a law,
That may be, for he hath had conscience by
the ears already.
Hoist me a vessel up of Maligo,
We'll drink a health unto the wandering ghosts
Of our slain followers, and every draught
The Cannon makes report off, a French-man
Shall ouer-board, who to our friends may tell,
We drank a rouse to them,
As low as hell.
Francisco Captain of the man of war, pursued our
prize, hath set a Pinnace forth, who according to the custom
of the sea, demands half of the spoil, to your demand hee
threatens instant fight, force against force, or if you dare to
accept it, he makes you offer of single opposition.
Accept it? he could not name that honour
We covet more, reward the messenger,
They two shall be the hostages
For the equal trial, what's his weapon?
Where the place of fight?
His weapons are sword and dagger, the place
Here on our hatches, both our ships being grappled,
The cath on each side given, who conquers the other
Shares the whole booy.
Agreed we seal to his condition,
Francisco call you him? I emulate
His daring spirit.
Fortune shapes our reuendge you see.
What need you give your self unto this danger,
When in our general strength we have advantage?
I prithee do not move my patience, I scorn to take
From others to my rising, he's only worthy state
From fortunes wheel plucke's boldly his own fate,
And heere's an arm shall do it.
You see his insolence how he contemns vs.
No more, we are agreed.
How shall we hinder their pursuit?
When both the ships are grappled, privately
We'll cut their hausers, the wind blows fair
To give our lesser bark advantage, it is not ten league
To Tunis, where entered, we are as safe
As in a tower of brass.
How if we shoot him, as we make away?
By no means to shall be Franciscoes task
To cut his throat, this makes our revenge full,
We share the prise he fights for
Rare gull! we are all firm and secret,
All.
So that I rise, let the world sink, heaven fall.
My merit: shall I thrall them? the sway of things,
Belongs to him dares most, such should be Kings,
And such am I, what nature in my birth
Denied me, fortune supplies: this maxim I hold,
He lives a slave, that lives to be controlled,
But see the man whose ruin crowns me.
Art thou the chief and guitar of this Bark?
The same sir.
May I impute it to your ignorance
In Marines actions, or the daring spirit,
That bars my right in thy achieved prise.
This makes you answer, what do you see in me,
Doth promise I should be the sutler sir,
Feth you provision in.
A little calmer sir, you are not now in Kent,
Crying herrings seven a penny, nay we have heard of you
You can bale well, you have served a prentiship
Unto the trade, affrighting of whole streets
With your full Oyster voice.
Damnation!
Poor fishers brat, that never did aspire
Aboue a muse boat, that were not borne
Unto a fortune above two cades of sprats,
And those smoked in thy fathers bed-chamber
That by a beggar in mere charity
Being made drunk, steed of a mariner
Were stole aboard, and being awake did smell
Worse then thy shell commodity at midsummer,
That desperate through fear were made a Captain,
When to have been a shore again, thou would have turned
Swabber unto a Peter-man.
By all my hopes thou had been better dug
Thy grandsirs Urn up and have swallowed it.
Thou bark'st too much to bite.
Clear the deck there, each man bestow himself
It's done, there hauser's cut without descry,
Away, farewell brave Captain, conquest sits on thy brow.
Leave me, I say
Th'wert never gulled till now.
Give a charge there, say your prayers Knight, doom's
day is no
True it sinks thee to hell, whilst thus it bears me high.
Stand thou so long, thou hast some enchantment sure,
Or have I lost my wonted vigour?
Flatter no more thy self, wilt thou deliver
A moiety of thy prise up?
Yes, thus thou shar'st it: Damnation! his sword false.
Oh that my gall could spout out through mine eyes
A poisonous vapour to put out your lights,
And in a vale of darkness leave the world.
Wilt thou yet yield me right?
Know Francisco,
Were thou an army that imcompast me,
I would breath defiance to thee, and with this arm,
As shot from out a cannons mouth, thus would I make
A way through death and danger.
I do applaud thee, and that thou well moist know
All valor's not confined within thy breast
I thus oppose thee, fortune shall have no share
In what I conquer.
Why, now I envy thee, thy life is mine,
Take it I dare thy let.
Not for the world, thus I return thy debt:
Not only in the prise but in my self
Thou hast an equal share, henceforth I vow the brother-hood.
Your love, I ask no more.
You need not, there's one gone before
Takes order for your share.
Whether makes the slaves, whore's Gallop?
Posting as fast as his sails will bear him.
Incarnate Devil forth-with give them chase,
Why mou'st not?
They have cut our hausers we cannot budge a foot.
The death of slaves pursue him.
You are too violent.
To be baffled by a Cur, a foisting hound
My Zani: A creature without a soul
Made to mock man with.
Forbear I say, and let vs turn our anger
On the next passenger.
Might I but live to see the dog-fish once again.
Near doubt it sir, next prise we take forth-with
We'll make to Tunis, mean time let revenge sleep
Those tides most violent are, which winds back keep,
For this alone I vow, whom next I meet
Shall feel my fury, nation nor quality
Shall be their privilege, my sword now vengeance craves,
And who escape this do worse, I'll sell for slaves.
What news brave Captain?
Good. These letters from my wife bring certainty
Of our obtained pardons, on condition
We hence forth for the state of France employ
Our lives and service.
Long live King Henry of France.
My valiant friends this 4 years Dansiker
Hath led you proudly through a sea of terror,
Through deeds so full of prowess they might have graced
The brow of worthiness, had justice to our cause
Given life and action. But since the breach of laws
Of Nations, civil society, justly entitles vs
With the hateful stile of robbers, let's redeem our honour
And not return into our country, with the names
Of pardoned thieves, but by some worthy deed,
Daring attempt, make good unto the world
Want of employment, not of virtue forced
Our former act of spoil and rapine.
Set the design down may regain vs credit
Deserve this grace so freely offered vs
Weel or accomplish it, or with our lives
Seal the attempt.
Brave Captain, through death we'll follow thee,
Then thus, that with the same weapon, we may
Our country cure, with which we wounded her,
My purpose is to ruin all the Pirates
Lie in the harbour here.
Rarelit may be easy done, observe the wind
And firing but of one consume the rest.
We must not trust to such uncertainties.
Thus I have plotted it: we first will set a fire
Some house in the town, to which when each man makes,
As they will be enforced from the haven
To yield their helps, with much facility
We may perform our purpose.
How? undescried, shall we attempt the town?
That charge be mine, the Renegade Jew,
You know gives free and open entertain
To all of our profession. In some out-house of his
I will convey a pot of wild-fire to it,
I'll make a train of match, that at three hours
Shall give it fire.
Excellent! The time sir.
To morrow night: mean time make ready
For our departure, but with such secrecy
Suspicions self may not descry it: provide the balls
We must bestow upon the ships.
That care be ours.
The rest leave unto me,
We'll return nobly, or else nobly dye.
Ruben, what news?
My moister sir, desires your company,
Ther's a new Pirate landed, his name is Gallop.
More yet? do they come on so fast?
Your moister would in gross his prize.
He would: and for your courtesy herein,
He will forbear three months the crowns you owe him:
Il'e use my Art sir to his benefit,
And for the Crowns, no longer Isle delay him,
Here is my hand to morrow night Isle pay him.
Speak freely, what think you of the new-come Captaine,
Voada?
Hee looks as if his father and mother had got him in
fear: his eyes go like a City Catch-poles, several ways at
once, ther's no stuff in him. Give me the Dutch Cavalier
Dansiker.
Out upon him puffe-paste, he was spoiled in his infancy,
ill-bied.
How? spoiled with ill bread? it was ill drink spoiled
him. I am of my masters mind, the new-come Pirate is a reasonable
handsome man of a Christian.
Why? doth Religion move any thing in the shapes
of men?
Altogether. What's the reason else that the Turk &amp;
Jew is troubled (for the most part) with gouty legs, and
fiery nose, to express their heart-burning: whereas the Puritan
is a man of upright calfe, and clean nosthrill.
Setting aside your nose, you should turn Christian,
then your calfe swells upward mightily.
How? I turn Christian? they have Jew enough already
amongst'em: were it but three qualities they have, Il'e
be none of their society.
Three qualities? I prithee tell 'em vs Rabshake.
First, they suffer their wives to be their masters. Secondly,
they make men thieves for want of maintenance, and
then hang them up for stealing. Lastly, they are mad four
times a year, and those they call Tearm-times, and then they
are so purged by their Physicians, which they name Lawyers,
some of 'em are never their own men after it. I turn Christian?
they shall have more charity amongst 'em first. They
will devour one-another as familiarly as Pikes doe Gudgeonce,
and-with as much facility as Dutchman doe Flapdragons.
How? eat up one-another?
I, eat up one-another: you have an innocent Christian
called a Gallant, your City Christian will feed upon no othere
meat by his good will.
But their wives will not feed on 'em too.
The truth is, they are not altogether so great devourears;
mary they will be sucking at the bones. But see my myster,
the great thief and the little thieves, the robbers and
the receiver.
He's come. Thou powerful God of love, strike through
Those awful darts of thine, whose burning heads (mine eyes
Pierce thorough hearts of ye, melt frostiest breasts,
Make all stoop to thy Deity. Now give thy art,
No God but Cupped pities mortal's smart.
Five ducats a Tun, 'shart the Cask is worth more,
You must remember at what rate you bought 'em.
And at what price you may have more.
You speak like men that know how the market goes
Your ear Jew.
What misery remains to add to mine,
My brother lost his life in my defence;
And with his life, my sex and liberty,
I stand deprived of. Are not these wounds sufficient
To let out my weak breath? Thou flinty breast,
Art thou impenetrable? or is that thing cald death
Too great a good for such a wretch as I am? It is, it is,
And that's the cause so many miseries
Do stop the way too't.
I am your Merchant Ruben Rabshake, my wife, her sister
Fetch me three hundred Dukets for this Gentleman.
This new-come theefesit?
Gentleman, slave.
Why your thief is a Gentleman, he scorns to do any
thing, and he lives upon his comings in.
Peace dog, you see gallants, we are not Italianate to
locke our women up, wee set 'em free, give open entertainment.
It seems this Jew keeps a Bawdy-house, I like his wife
well, I could find in my heart to cast away half a Ducats
on her.
You are of a noble mind sir, courtly and high,
It's want of merit that breeds jealousy,
From which I know you clear.
As I am from covetousness: how their eyes strike
each other? Rabshake
Here sir.
Captain, your gold.
He saw our eyes meet, no matter, may I cool my heate
Let the world burn. Thy counsel Voada.
I do not like this fellows looks, Rabshake.
He hath a hanging countenance indeed sir,
Tush, my wifeman, thou hast forgot how dear
I bought my liberty, renounced my law,
The Law of Moses, turned Turk, all to keep
My bed free from these Mohammedan Dogs.
I would not be a monster Rabshake, a man-beast,
A Cuckold.
I have not fogotten sir that you damned your self because
you would not be a Cornuto: If every man should fine
so dear for his horns, we should have but a few Christians
left: but seeing you fear your vessel hath a leake, wherefore
do you put her to sea, man her thus?
For commodity: thou see rich shop-keepers set their
wives at sale to draw in custom, utter their wares, yet keep
that Gem vntouch't: all for profit man.
I am not of your mind sir, there is no profit without
some pain.
No more villain: should I suspect my self to have
that disease, I would run mad, first fury of my horns should
light on thee: look too't, thou art no longer living then my
wife is honest.
I fear my days are but short then, if my life lasts
no longer then I can keep a Woman honest against her
will.
It is a lovely boy, rare featured, would he were mine.
It is so Voada, he hath made the slave my Jailer.
I have not seen so much of beauty in a man.
You loose your self. What man? what beauty? I tell
thee I am undone, Rabshake is made my ouer-seer.
I would use him like an ouer-seer then, he should stand by
whilst the Executioner opened the bags: I must enjoy his
love, though queching of my lust did burn the world besides.
It's right Captain.
Yes, it is right.
But that's the wrong way sir, your followers expect
their equal shares.
The fellow raves: talk to a Captain of equal sharing,
I'll take order for landing the goods, &amp; bee with you presentlie.
Rabshake, thou know thy doom slave, look too't, thine
eyes, villain thine eyes.
I'll warrant you sir, I'll look toot.
Here, carry'em these two ducats to drink upon receit
of the whole, Il'e deal like a commander with 'em, as
men doe with their followers: that is, as you have followed
me to earn means, so now you shall follow me as long to
get your earnings, you shall be followers still, I will discharge
none of you.
We took him for a gull, but now I see hee hath had
command, he can cheat his Soldiers.
I hope sir you will make better respect of your credit,
you know your oaths and promise.
My promise, if a Citizen had bought a company, hee
could but keep day with 'em: you must pardon him gentlemen,
a fresh Soldier wants seasoning.
Salt vs, look too't, we shall hardly relish you sir.
How? threatens and braves?
Forbear, give the poor fellow leave to prate, he
pays for it.
Good: you are now upon your guard, we shall meet
you upon discharge of the watch, and knock you down with
a bill of accounts, we shall skeld.
Out gull, talk to a commander, a man of war of equall
sharing, we have other use for our money then to pay foallowers.
Shall we acost these Ladies, gallants?
Tic the custom of the whole world, the great thief
preys upon the less still: how's this?
The happiness of the day besall you I adyes.
The night equal the dayes-happinesse, say I.
All content both night and day stand to your 
Our desires equal your wishes sir.
Your desires are aboue my performance then.
I am drawing on, if my life lye upon her honesty, I a
upon the point of giving up already.
That Gentleman is very moving.
Could you not entreat him stay his pace.
And trot in your ring, Lady, if you please.
I purpose not to take a courser of your choosing, lest I
be iaded sir.
You presume the more of your own horsemanship.
Hoy-day, they are riding already, 'sfoot I am like to
go post to the Devil for this.
Next night, time of my project, if I prove not as
hot a shot as came in your quarters since the loss of your
virginity, let me suffer the pains of S. Anthonies purgatory.
He must necessarily be a man of deeds, he is of so few
words.
You shall do well to put him to the trial.
Without immodesty, may I question the reason you're
so heavy sir?
Nay then it rings out for me, should the Jew see this, I
were as good as speechless: there were but a little gasping
between me and the grave.
The reason of my heavinesse is, that you and I might
agree the better: for women love countryies, and you are
light I see.
How's this? you see me light, true, to be in love
With one so far disdainful.
What success woman? the Dutchman &amp; I have barterd wares
I have made exchange too, sold my liberty,
To purchase base ingratitude, I am rejected Voids.
My Mistress, Gentlemen, did you see my Mistress?
Your business irrah?
You must make provision to entertain two of the richest
Pirates ever landed here, one Captain Ward and Francisus,
they have brought a prize in worth three thousand duckits:
besides, they sell their prisoners slaves, my moister hath
engrossed them all.
Vengeance seize him and them. Back sirrah, say wee
will expect them: you sir, attend your moister his coming,
see you give vs notice on it.
Nay, I hold it the best course too, for mine own safety.
My charge is charged my watch must be now, lest my Moister
know it. If al the world were eyes, women I see would to it.
I do but dream sure, Ward and Franciscus?
What moves this passion?
Why look you pale?
Pale? I have a cause, I have less colour by 600 Duckits
then I had.
As how sir?
I'll tell you: I took an adventure to pay this Ward,
600 Ducats at our two meetings at Tunis, and see how the
Devil hath brought it about: I must leave you gallants.
By no means: we will compound the business.
I can conceal it no longer.
You will betray your self to their contempt, by your
own forwardness.
I no'r shall have so fair occasion to speak my love
again, you know my husbands watchful jealousy.
Now by my sex I am ashamed of you, were the lieu mine,
I would have no other Pander: be ruled by me
It's he shall hire the Captain to thy love,
And his own horning. What cannot we persuade?
Man was asleep when women's brain was made.
Thou giu'st me a new life, I am thy Scholar.
Il'e prick thee forth a lesson, whose choicer strain,
Shall tell men that all Art against lust &amp; women's vain.
As you are men conceal your weapons, here are women
in the room.
Sismund.
We are come to give you thanks for the 2 ducats sir.
As you are of the sword, draw.
We are fresh-men, we'll powder you.
Murder, murder, I shall be torn in pieces, by my hands.
Ward, Franciscus, we are betrayed, away.
Gallp.
My noble general alive, come to my rescue, my
ioyaltie to the brave knight did thus engage me: the slaves
could not be content to stow me vnder-boord, and force me
from thee, but would have shared the prize too: but I have
shared with 'em, see heir's three hundred ducats, thou shalt
have them all brave spark, the Devil to boot with 'em.
Then you think this gold shall purchase your pardon.
'Sfoot I am over-ioy'd with the fight of thee: see the
heroic Dansiker, his Captain Sar.
Your loves, gentlemen.
This is no slave, he pays 600. ducats at their meting,
true, we are witness on it.
I will be gul'd for once thus, I will, these ducats
shall stop my mouth.
'Sheart there are as many more in Bank, you shall have
'em all, I prize thy countenance aboue a second Indies, were
they molten in your garbage. The world runs round with
me, Sicut erat in principio, naked I came in, and penniless I shall
go out.
What stays the Jew so long,
See he is come.
You'll give my price sir.
yes, for these slaves, I will.
For ever be he servile that so makes 'em.
Hard-hearted; man, I cannot term thee, its
A name that bears too much of pity int,
Compared with so inhumane; creature were thou a father,
These tears would move thee, that bemoan a sons,
Nay all my childrens, worse then funeral,
Their ever thraldom, but nature well denied
Issue to thee, least in thy barbarous guilt
She had been a party. When thy affectioned soul
Had felt how much the name of child moves, with what care,
How many jealous fears we view there infancy,
Least having felt all this, thy accursed hand
Should yet have dared to make men childless.
Can then your marble heart endure these drops?
The soil that bred you sir doth not bring forth
Such hideous monsters, that we should imagine
You can be so far cruel to betray
So many innocent lives, for in vs bleed
An aged father, a mother, to whose grief
No other misery can be added.
My self contracted to a virtuous maid,
Who ere this hath left Marcel,
And in Normandy expects the consumation of our happiness.
You have our goods, our ship, all the substance
Should succour our old parents, you have only left
These arms to erne them bread, and can your eyes
Relentless see these chained?
Do not they move you sir?
Yes, as the Jew, art not thou moved Benwash?
As a hangman at an execution makes no other holyday
in the year.
Inhumaine dog! oh I could tear thee villainy,
I'll give thirty crowns for this old beast to bee reuenged
on him.
Be gentle, take his money, forgive me sir,
I see you are kind, would not now part vs
That twenty and odd years have grown together,
Will you not take it? give him so Jew,
I will deserve 'em, see I am not old,
No wrinkle is on my brow, these are but frowns,
Raised by his unkind refusal of my offer.
See what plump veins I have, no sinews shrunk,
These are not gray-haires, they are only white
To show the lightness of my spirit: come
Manacle these arms, you shall see vs threee
Tug the days eye out, there's not a father
And his two boys shall dare to undertake vs,
The sun outvied we'll set vs down together
And with our sadder cheer out-mourne the night,
And speak the happiness we might have lived too:
How by mine own harth in cold wintereues
I might have told my sons some ancient tales,
Which they might one day from their grandsire speak.
We'll add unto our woes thus by compare
Of what our joys might have been, then we will curse,
And when we want a plague, we'll think upon
This bloody murderer, we shall have store then:
Be eloquent in bitter execrations,
Our choler vented, then again we'll weep,
Till tears glow up our eyes to mock sad sleep.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost laugh at aged sorrow? be just ye powers,
As ye judge innocents causes, revenge ours.
My money for 'em Jew, so, away with 'em.
We will redeem them, pay their ransom,
You redeem them? your means?
All that we have a board,
Such another syllable, I'll make a sale of you to.
I am your first man, I'll give you 400 crowns for 'em
A sale of vs?
Know that if all our fortunes will set them free, it is
theres.
I'll try that, give me 400 crowns.
Hear.
They are yours, I 'le justify the sale,
Of your own fellows, countrymen do they not stand
Conditioned as your self.
Who gave you patent to examine him.
Forbear, because you're men of action Isle descend
To give you notice they are my lawful prize,
Such as denied my party, would willingly
Betray me, yea all of vs into the hands
Of our vowed enemies.
Are you not men of war then?
We are no Pirates sir, our country yields vs
More honest means of living.
Away with; 'em more honest means of uing
make 'em sure,
Give vs the hearing.
Away with 'em. Zounds I'll set them free else.
Let's take our fathers blessing with vs yet.
All curses under heaven go with you.
Is there no ear for misery to beat at?
My sons, Frederick, Albert, they are gone, sent
To perpetual vasselladge, I loved you boys
A little better then to out-liue your slaueries.
I will not curse thee monster, I know my thoughts
Cannot arrive unto so black revenge,
As shall attend thee: crack, crack, you ore-loaden strings,
And set a miserable old man free,
So, so, I will appeal for you my sons to yo high Court
Here none but beasts of prey Tigers resort.
I hate this villain, hoe's all blood.
My heart I think would break
But that in steed of words, mine eyes thus speak.
How first my noble spirits dulled with one Tragedy,
Let vs digest it with a gig, a catch.
Some wine there, shall we to hazard?
I willingly would stake my life to thine at that justgame,
there wants but an occasion.
What's your sport?
Adams game at one whole, every male to his female
How should wee be furnished?
I'll fit you with an Eve sir, a temptress,
What is she?
Your peer, a beauty that would take you
From out your self to gaze at her,
The Jaws wives sister.
First sight of her yields thee a 100 Ducats.
I'll be a conjunction copulatiue to join you together
for the money, it is a ate follow's vs soldiers when wee are
down: the reason is, wee hold it no shame to live upon spoil
of the enemy, and a greater foe to man then a whore is impossible
S'hart I am prevented, the Jew panders them himself,
that's she sir, that Turks her brother, his name is Crosman.
Is it possible?
The slave hath a goat in his looks.
That's he in the Iudas beard, use but thy art he's thine.
If I liked not his 30 thousand Ducats, better then's
person, I would never strain my complexion for him.
She equals thy commends indeed, so true a fair
I ne'er beheld till now.
Nay more to entice me, this well stuffed purse
He did enforce upon me, but it is your sin,
So you have profit, all religious laws
Must suffer violence, your wife be exposed
Unto all vndergoers.
Forgiveness honest wife, my chaste, chaste, wife.
Nay, use your pleasure, you had best keep the gold
To guild your shame with, I trow I would give it him,
Tell him he must not think I am the woman
He takes me for, if he will not believe you,
Let him make trial with the ladder of ropes
He vowed to clime my chamber with, this night,
When, as it seems, he learnt you were enforced
To be in the Synagogue.
Better and better, I cannot but admire thy chastity
A ladder of ropes, would he make that the beginning
Lechery should be the end of, I'll hamper him,
If he have any grace thy honesty overthrows him,
If he have any wit it will I hope.
My dull eyed villain Rabshake saw none of this, Hoe's
all for reminre, he would have me a cuckold by law forsooth,
by statute law, I shall put you a book case, for he shall moot I'll
prize him but to the present business. Noble Captain to express
how much you are welcome, my wife and sister, laying
all rites aside, and customary observes, come to inuit you to
a mean banquet sir.
Best thanks sir, your welcomes prodigal,
I am already feasted in this bounteous dish sir.
But you are not likely to surfeit on it, I'll have a finger
in the platter with you, were you the great Turks self.
With me, I tell thee Dansiker
Thou dost not merit with thy lips to touch
So choice a rarity, what dare thou for her?
What thou dare not.
I'll put that to the trial,
As you come of women.
By, all the rites you owe our sex, as you are men inforce
them part.
Respect the place, you are in danger of law.
You shall oresway me Lady, we shall meet again sir.
So you are men
Are they gone?
What hard fortune attends me? that none of their throats were
cut, I might have seized their goods, not so much as the flesh
biter, but is come of.
S'hart, this poverty makes a man valiant, when I had
my ducats I had no more heart then a Jew.
And that was the reason you so willingly parted with 'em sir
Old, Benwash, where hidst thou thy head in this day
of battle man?
Here under this table, did you think I am so branch
No roof would give me covering, I am but a pricket,
A mere sorrel, my head's not hardened yet
Though thanks unto your maistership your fire was not wanting
You speak in Hebrew I understand you not.
Yet you can speak the whoore-maisters language passing
well; what made you sir take my wife for a flesh-seller, a whore?
You are abused sir.
By thee lecher, you know not this purse, this gold?
You have your tricks to climb up cuckolds haven,
Your ladder of ropes, you had best keep that hour,
My wife this night expects you: my absence
Will be enforced, she bid me tell you so,
Insatiat goat thou think our wives are such,
As are your holy festers, religious Votaries,
Your spittle nuns, here take your ill got trash,
May I but know thou once more tempst my wise,
You shall not need a ladder, I'll mount you sir a Christians
I will, you oxgall, I will.
Ha, this is gold.
Do you hear sir, hereafter know a Turks wife from
You are one of those hold all women bound
Under the domination of the Moon;
All wavering, now you have seen one of the Sun sir,
Constant you slave, and as she is, with vs are millions more.
Benwash, brother, S'foote I have sought each nook
of the house for you.
It is beyond my thoughts, imaginations drowned int
Rare, doth she plead chastity?
Like a baud that would put off aviginity, the knight
is as good as ours already, besides I have procured the Gouernor
in person to regreet him
All that art can by ambition, lust, or attery do,
Assure your self this brain shall work him to.
Nay if the flesh take hold of him, hoe's past red emption
Hoe's half a Turk already, it's as good as done
Woman is hell out, in we ne'er return.
Were not I confident of my good parts, this gold
would buy me out of my five senses, a full purse, a ladder of
ropes, and his wife in the tail on it able to overcome any man
breathing, yet what should I fear that have so many good
Angels about me? sure shoe's in love with me, it is no other,
and out of her honesty it seems she hath vowed to doe nothing,
but what she dares acquaint her husband with, if she
have made him usher his own crest I'll swear she is a woman
of the Sun, she hath dazeld his eyes well, this night
makes the trial, I'll take your instructions Jew, climb the
matter of preferment.
It may be it was my destiny gave me this crown,
Women and ropes should raise me, that put others down.
I am orecharg'd sir with so high a auor
As your descending thus to visit me.
You are the man we covet, whose valour
Hath spake you, so impartial worthy,
We should do wrong to merit, not gracing you.
Believe me sir, you have injured much your self,
Vouchsafing familiarity with those
Men of so common rank as Dansiker,
Your hopes should fly a pitch aboue them,
It may be that our clime stands not to give
That full content, the air you drew at home,
And therefore purpose shortly a return.
I know no country I can call home
What by your courtesy I might, my desert stands
Not to make promise of.
Detract not from your self, call this your own
I see there speaks a fortune in your brow
Will make vs proud to have acknowledged you.
I'll gage a thousand Ducats on equal terms,
Iliue to see him the Sultans Admiral.
Why not as well as the great Customer,
My allied kinsman Governor, neither borne Turks,
I dare not look so high, yet were I employed,
What a poor Christian could, I durst make promise of.
Christian or Turk you are more wise I know
Then with religion to confine your hopes.
Hoe's too well read in Poesy to be tied
In the slaves fetters of religion.
What difference in me as I am a Turk,
And was a Christian? life, liberty,
Wealth, honour, they are common unto all?
If any odds be, it is on homets side,
His seruit ors thrive best I am sure.
Is this the ooke your golden bait doth cover?
I have oft with laughter thought how innocent
My thoughts when first I turned were, how scrupulous
I was, when with one argument I was confirmed; as thus,
If this religion were so damnable
As others make it, that God which owes the right
Profaned by this would soon destroy it quite.
That's easily answered, heaven is merciful,
By their destruction it should take all means
From giving possibility to their change,
And so unjustly damn 'em but for my part,
It is not Divinity but nature moves me,
Which doth in beasts force them to keep their kind.
But men that have two ends, safety and profit,
Where beasts no farther are transported
Then with the present object, must make their actions.
Turn to those points.
Both which are in some sort proposed to you.
As how?
As thus, for profit, you cannot with your self
Imagine, that your virtue can be smothered,
Might there but be assurance of your trust.
How should I give you that? You. As we did; turn Turk.
That were the way to more uncertainty,
Men sooner open foes then fained friends try
And where men's acts from their own ends proceed,
More look unto those ends then like the deed,
This gudgion will not bite.
But when there are examples plentiful,
To instance against your words, you need not fear,
Men what they see oppose against what they hear.
The cunning fowler to beguile the birds
Brings up some tame, and lets them fly abroad
To draw in others, that their liberty
May be the bait to others misery.
Such is state-policies, sometime to advance an ill,
When others for less crimes it oft doth kill.
But to cut off your further argument
What's mine of prowess, or art, shall rest by you
To be disposed of: but to abjure
My name, and the beliese my ancestors
Left to my being. I do not love so well
The earth that bore me, to lessen my contempt
And hatred to her, by so much advantage,
So oblique act as this should give to her.
Work in my sister presently.
You are your self free, nor will I further
Dissuade your resolution, nor less esteem
Your merit, and fair worth.
You engage me to you sir.
He enjoys too much by promise to be won,
T'must be a women's act, to whom ther's nought
That is impossible: What Devils dare not move.
Men to accomplish, women work them to.
And see, in happy time she's come, we'll single them.
Here comes an argumet that would persuade
A God turn mortal, until I saw her face,
I never knew what men term beauty was:
Besides whose fair, she hath a mind so chaste
A man may sooner melt the Alps then her.
We will along with you, when makes she hence?
The wind sits fair, the slaves are sending down
Whom the next morn bears hence.
We will aboard with you fair sir, we'll leave
Our love exchanged with you, some happier time
May perfect that good work I wish were mine.
My truest services: nay Lady stay
Though hitherto I have been a haplesse Orator,
Your milder measure, or my loue-taught tongue,
May find more fortunate hours: for by that guide,
Which rules and knows our thoughts
Reserve your oaths sir to more easy ears,
I understand my self too well to credit 'em.
Vn-gentle maid to triumph in my torment,
If ever breast did feel the power of love,
Or beauty made a conquest of poor man
I am thy captive, by heaven, by my religion.
As my beleefe's in that, my faith gives trust
To your protests.
Then by thy God, by the great Mahomet.
To weak a bond to tie a Christian in.
What shall I swear by? propose an oath to me
The breach whereof would at once sink me lower
Then hell knows being, Il'e take it willingly.
Il'e be concealed no longer, know then I love,
But not the man whose daily Orisons
Invoke confusion on me, whose religion
Speaks me an Infidel.
'Sheart I am of none, only to feed discourse,
And fill up argument.
But you must be of one if you'll enjoy me,
If then your thoughts answer to what you speak
Turn Turk I am yours.
Turn Turk?
Do you demur already? how prodigal your words
Spoke your affection, and with one simple trial
Are you struck mute.
With patience hear me Lady.
False knight, I have given too calm an ear already
To thy enchanted notes.
Should I for ever sell my liberty?
You need not, it is sufficient glory
You have betrayed a maidens liberty.
But Il'e do penance for my so black a sin,
Doting on thee, I'll henceforth hate thy whole sex;
The name of man to me, shall as the rock
From which the shipwrecked wretch hath lately escaped
Bring fear in the name of't: keep off false Siren.
Heaven well ordained man should the woman woe,
Should we their hard-hearts prove, we all ill should know.
Stay, I will enforce thee else.
Do these my tears delight thee then? cruel
Hard-hearted man, glut thy relentless sight
With full-ey'd sorrow.
She is all amorous, all fair, that she doth love,
Behold those tears whose drops would pierce the hearts
Of Tigers, make them pitiful,
They are witnesses she fains not: leave, leave to weep,
Least putting out those lights the world should morn.
Put on a veil of black, I am thine own.
If there be any Divinity, it hath
His seat in beauty: you are a God to me
My Country, friends, nay being, what would thou have.
To be no other then my self I crave.
I am no more mine own, rather then loose
So true a happiness, as thy constant love,
There is no way so black I would not prove,
That lies from heaven to hell. Crosman in vain
Thy arguments were spent would thou prevail?
Here is an Orator can turn me easily,
Where beauty pleads, there needs no sophistry.
Thou hast ore-come me Voada.
And I will raise thee but thou doest name a good,
I cannot call mine till I am possessed of 't.
Call in thy friends, make preparation,
Il'e take the orders instantly,
My speed shall give prevention to the prate
Of th'idle multitude: away, the flame doth burn
Which sets the world on fire, and makes me turn.
Thou art all harmony, best love I fly,
I have my ends,
How ever thou sink, thy wealth shall bear me high.
So, the day leaves the world, chaste Voada
Nothing can make him miserable enjoys thee:
What is 't I loose by this my change? my Country,
Already it is to me impossible,
My name is scandal'd? what is one Island
Compared to the Eastern Monarchy? this large
Unbounded station shall speak my future fame;
Besides, they are slaves stand subject unto shame.
One good I enjoy, out-weighes all else what ever
Can be objected; to sum my happiness:
That God on earth, to whom all men stand bare,
(Gold) that doth usher greatness, lackeys me,
I have more then I can spend, what wants
Is in command, and that my valour makes
Due purchase of, Il'e rather lead on laues
Then be commanded by the power of Kings.
Beauty, Command, and Riches, they are these three
The world pursues, and these do follow me.
Speak, what news Francisco?
The togues of ravens are too mild to speak it,
The very thought where of methinkes should turn
Your hair to quills of Porcupines, it's the denial
Of your Redeemer Religion, Country,
Of him that gave you being.
The slavery of man, how this religion rides vs!
Deprives vs of our freedom from our Cradles,
Ties vs in superstitious bondage.
Heaven stop mine ears from hearing thy dishonour.
Upon my knees I do conjure you sir,
Sell not your soul for such a vanity,
As that which you term Beauty, eye-pleasing Idol,
Should you with the renouncing of your God
Taking the abhorred name of Turk upon you,
Purchase a little shameful being here, your case
Might be compared to his, who adjudged to death
By his heads loss, should rave (stead of one stroke)
To dye a lingering torment on the rack.
Even such would be your life, whose guilt each hour
Would strike your conscious soul with terrors.
No more, this boys words trouble me.
If none of these move, let the example
Of that contempt is thrown on runagates
 by these Turks themselves, at least move you
To  this slavery.
Most worthy sir, now I dare call you brother,
Too fair a name to cloak so great a foe,
This instant makes a trial of your virtue,
Think on Vlysses constancy.
Why are you mute sir?
I am not well.
Alas! how can he, being so near to hell?
Are you so weak to have a boys words sway you?
You have not mine, think it is heavens hand doth stay you
Have you no other but my sister sir,
To make a stale off, did you not vow?
What ever, I do recant it, I am now
My self, her looks enchanted me.
Against a mans own soul, no oath can tie.
This thy disgrace revenged shall speak in blood.
Where is my betrothed husband? Al's ready.
To publish infamy to thee and vs?
The wether-cocke is turned, this boys breath did it
Again turned?
You cast your eyes too much upon the flame
Proves your destruction.
Vn-gentle boy, doest thou requite me thus?
How can thou blushless view me, have my tears
Procured me nought but scorn?
Forgiveness Voada: turn back thy comet-eyes,
Plagues, Devils, poverty, may all else fall
Man ever was subject to, I will enjoy thee.
Force hence, I say, this boy.
As I from hence, so thou art thrust from joy, eternal
joys.
The Muffties here: you know the custom sir,
Some trivial ceremonies, they'll be soon ore,
They once performed you're ner'e unhappy more.
Besides, the Captaine-ship of our strong Castle
Shall be my sisters portion, heir's the key.
Do not delay them then.
They are come sir.
What mean these slaves, their sights like Basilisks
Foretells my ruin: 'sh oared make this way.
Nay, do not shun our sight, hear vs but now,
We'll forgive all our wrongs, with patience row
At the unwieldy oar: we will forget
That we were sold by you, and think we set
Our bodies against your soul, the dearest purchase
Of your Redeemer, that we regained you so,
Leave but this path damnation guides you to.
Our blood, our Fathers blood, all is forgiven,
The bond of all thy sins is cancelled,
Keep but thy self from this.
Let vs redeem our countries shame by thee,
We willing will endure our slavery.
The words do rip my heart up: ha?
Why stand you in this dlemma: are you deprived
Of sense and being?
Thou telst me true: with what brain can I think
Heaven would be glad of such a friend as I am.
A Pirate, murderer? let those can hope a pardon care
To atone with heaven, I cannot, I despair.
Will you yet hear me? yet heaven hath mercy.
And hell damnation: on, zounds on I say,
The way that leads to love is no black way.
But thou wilt find it black: no hell I see's solow
Which lust and woman cannot lead vs to.
Might be compared to his, who adjudged to death
By his heads loss, should crave (stead of one stroke)
To dye a lingering torment on the rack.
Even such would be your life, whose guilt each hour
Would strike your conscious soul with terrors.
No more, this boys words trouble me.
If none of these move, let the example
Of that contempt is thrown on runagates
 by these Turks themselves, at least move you
To  this slavery.
Most worthy sir, now I dare call you brother,
Too fair a name to cloak so great a foe,
This instant makes a trial of your virtue,
Think on Vlysses constancy.
Why are you mute sir?
I am not well.
Alas! how can he, being so near to hell?
Are you so weak to have a boys words sway you?
You have not mine, think it is heavens hand doth stay you
Have you no other but my sister sir,
To make a stale off, did you not vow?
What ever, I do recant it, I am now
My self, her looks in chanted me.
Against a mans own soul, no oath can tie.
This thy disgrace revenged shall speak in blood.
Where is my betrothed husband? Al's ready.
To publish infamy to thee and vs?
The wether-cocke is turned, this boys breath did it.
Again turned?
You cast your eyes too much upon the flame
Proves your destruction.
Vn-gentle boy, doest thou requite me thus?
How can thou blushless view me, have my tears
Procured me nought but scorn?
Forgiveness Voada: turn back thy comet-eyes,
Plagues, Devils, poverty, may all else fall
Man ever was subject to, I will enjoy thee.
Force hence, I say, this boy.
As I from hence, so thou art thrust from joy, eternal
joys.
The Muffties here: you know the custom sir,
Some trivial ceremonies, they'll be soon ore,
They once performed you're ner'e unhappy more.
Besides, the Captaine-ship of our strong Castle
Shall be my sisters portion, heir's the key.
Do not delay them then.
They are come sir.
What mean these slaves, their sights like Basilisks
Foretells my ruin: 'sh oared make this way.
Nay, do not shun our sight, hear vs but now,
We'll forgive all our wrongs, with patience row
At the unwieldy oar: we will forget
That we were sold by you, and think we set
Our bodies against your soul, the dearest purchase
Of your Redeemer, that we regained you so,
Leave but this path damnation guides you to.
Our blood, our Fathers blood, all is forgiven,
The bond of all thy sins is cancelled,
Keep but thy self from this.
Let vs redeem our countries shame by thee,
We willing will endure our slavery.
The words do rip my heart up: ha?
Why stand you in this dilemma: are you deprived
Of sense and being?
Thou telst me true: with what brain can I think
Heaven would be glad of such a friend as I am.
A Pirate, murderer? let those can hope a pardon care
To atone with heaven, I cannot, I despair.
Will you yet hear me? yet heaven hath mercy.
And hell damnation: on, zounds on I say,
The way that leads to love is no black way.
But thou wilt find it black: no hell I see's solow
Which lust and woman cannot lead vs to.
Here could I wish our period, or that our Pen
Might peak the fictions, not the acts of Men.
The deeds we have presented hitherto, are white
Compared unto those black ones we must write:
For now no more at men, but Gyant-like
The face of heuen it self, he dares to strke:
And with a blushless front he dares to doe,
What we are dmbe to think, much more to show:
Yet what may fall beyond uncertain guess
Your better savours bind us to express.
The accursed Priests of Mahomet being set;
Two Knights present the wrtch, who finds no let
To his pertion: to whom nor shame, nor fear
Give any cure. Dsmounted from that steed
Did best befi the rider: they then read
The Laws of their dmed Prophet: he subscribes,
Iroles his name into their Pagan Tribes.
Now wears the habit of a free-borne Turk,
Hi suerd excepted, which least they should work
Just willny to their seducert, is denied
Unto all Runagates, unless employed
Inwarres against Christians. Last, oh be he last
For swears his name! with what, we blush to tell,
But it is no wonder, blacks the way to hell,
Who though he seem yet happy, his success
Shows he exchanged with it, and wretchednsse.
Give patience to our Scoene, which hereto tends,
To show the world, black deeds will have black ends.
Ward turned Turk? it is not possible.
I saw him Turk to the Circumcision.
Mary therein I heard he played the Jew with 'em,
Made 'em come to the cutting off an Apes tail.
I see the hand of heaven prevented mine,
Death was too fair a guerdon for him. But to the present,
Deserving sir, I now am to conjure you
By all the offices of friendship past,
By what my future love, and means may stead you,
To vow performance of one small request.
What ere it be Il'e be as just to you
As heaven to truth: by all that VVard denied,
I vow me yours.
I accept your faith: know then that I am bound
Unto a desperate attempt, how it may succeed,
Heaven and Fate only know. The circumstance
I do enjoin you further not to enquire.
What on your trust's imposed is the redeeming
Those two betrayed young men, whom Ward did sell,
When to his barbaros cruelty they opposed,
And lost themselves, &amp; state: their ransom's here,
As you prove just, from all mishaps rest clear,
And if I fail to accomplish your desires,
All my sins haunt me, when my breath expires.
I am most confident, best sir adieu,
If Dansiker do live, he lives to you.
Hast laid the train to my directions?
It is done to the undoing of 'em all,
Time calls aboard which speds not half an hour
Before our train do take it rests to be determined
What ships we fire, which bear along with vs.
Danvils makes with vs, all the rest give fire to,
Sares ship except, to him we are engaged,
Nor will we prove ungrateful, are all things ready,
To your own wishes.
Aboard then instantly, Tunis fare-well,
Dansiker bids all pirates now adieu.
He will show you, what you might do, were you true
How dull a pace keeps time to lovers eyes,
And yet to me how swift the nights black horse,
Makes way to raise the morn, whose least of light
Takes all my hopes from me and damps me quite,
Eleven and yet not come, he was not capable
Of my quaint stratagem, or being possessed
Of what he wanted, gold, contemns my love,
It is no other Agar, hee loathes thee,
Mans curse is, things forbid, still to pursue
What's freely offered not to hold worth their view,
Ha unless my credulous ears deceive me,
Theare one make towards my window,
The coast is clear, Bawd night I do salute thee
Thou that dost wink at all faults, that hugst so many sins in
thy black bosom, the Sun growe's pale to view them, to
thee damnations nurse I make my prayer, conjure thee by all
my lustful embraces thou hast been witness to, by all the cuckolds
thou hast made twixt morn and twilight to add one
to the number, but one thou black eyed negro, never did
woman make such shift to dub her husband, though many
thou dost know have made most bare ones, oh let this instrumeant
that hath so many freed from the hell of Vurers, and
from the jaws of their fear, bandogs, hath paid so manies
debts relieve my wants, I'll never blame thee, fortune henceforth
if I lack, put thy self but this once on my my back,
no false light in the window, no bawdy land-marke, no handkerchief
to waft me, I'll venture it, Agar, my lovely Agar.
It's hee who in this dead of night calls on my
name.
Thy friend, thy understanding friend, with the ladder
of ropes, here make them sure aboue, leave me to the
lower parts.
I hope you mean no wrong sir to me.
I'll do thee as much right as can be done to one of
thy sex, hast made it fast?
You may adventure sir.
He that will not adventure for such a piece of flesh,
were worthy to feed upon dumplings all days on's life, nay I
will venture, thou warden of the horned livery, omnipotent
Vnlcan, now set my shafts but right,
I'll make one freeman more ere it be light.
There's no remedy, that which makes waighting-women
puncks, and Captains panders, that causes decayed
Gentlemen become solicitors, and bankeroupt Citizens Serjoints,
that makes vs thieves, necessity, that which hath no
law on's side.
We shall have as little conscience anon in robbery.
I, should we rob hospitals, our betters have made
that a monoply, but to steal from a rich Jew it is no more sin
then to unload a weary Ass.
By hook or crook you will have it.
We were bred in a country that had the charity to
whip begging out of vs, when we were young, and for starving,
manhood denies it, you know what must necessarily follow.
Nay make your conclusion.
Press her in a dumb show, here abouts should be
the house, great windows and a little wicket, noble manlike,
what's here a ladder of ropes, S'foot we are prevented,
S. Nicolas Clerks are stepped up before vs.
Were they ten justices Clerks wee would share
with 'em.
There Masters would prevent vs for that, yet
since our case is desperate, we will put in with 'em.
Softly for waking the maids.
S'hart, thou art the son of a lapland-witch sure,
this is the maids chamber, one of them is in a dream, she fetcheth
her wind short I m sure
How long thou art poking at it, what is it man?
Some light commodity or other.
A women's lower part, it is altogether in fashion for
them to be light about the bumb indeed.
I have the male part too't, the doublet, your women
will have it ever in request to have the mans part uppermost.
S'hart, a French slop, these are none of the Jaws
trouses, and they should be no gallants, for hee hath money in
his purse.
I marry fir, this fellow had good ware about him
indeed, upon my life we are little better then bawds, get money
by others Venery, this Jew is a
Fire, fire, fire.
Water, water, water
Fire, fire, fire, the slaves lie on straw-beds, and yet this
cry will take no hold on 'em, fire, fire, fire.
Flames and brimstone, I am in hell, Zounds my breeches,
the ladder, this Jew hath found vs out and fired the house.
Dear sir contain your self.
A plague on venery, a hot end comes on it still, is the
window high enough that I may break my neck, dye any
death rather then be roasted?
Here's a vault leads to the common shower, it being
low-water the sheets shall let you down to your escape.
Those sheets have brought me low enough already.
Within Fire, fire, fire.
Flames stop thy throat.
Dear sir adieunture it and save your life.
Were it to hell I must,
A plague on whoores say, whose vast desires
Begins in watery tears and end in fires.
Fire, fire.
An Ocean overwhelm thee, where is the fire slave?
At the Jaws house, Benwash his house, your house sir:
My bags, my obligations, my wife Agar I say, I shall
run mad, I will scale the windows, burn for company, my
money and my self will go together, what's here a ladder
of ropes, Gallops breeches, burn on, burn on, findge all the
world, consume it with thy flames, thou best of elements,
burn on I say.
As you are men on this side help to save our goods.
As you are ministers of Lucifer let it burn on, it's
mine own house, come but on my ground I'll have my acton
for it.
He is distracted, help as you are men.
Dogs, villains, thieves, down with him that lays a
hand a to it, be just you powers of heaven, and throw thy wild
fire down upon the heads of these adulterers, room, room,
room, I have it, I have it, room, room, room.
The Jew is mad indeed, his loss distracts him, speak
gentle friend, doth the fire slack.
The house is saved, but all the ships in the harbour
Unquenchable do burn.
The ships in the harbour.
Yours only excepted.
My thoughts now have their ends,
Do not thou grieve boy, know I love thee
Thy maintenance shall express it, I have friends
And jewels left for thee, but I hate thee more
Then all thy wealth made me love thee before
False woman, thou shalt not shake me off thus
Were all the impudence of thy whole sex,
All there blushless impieties confined in thee
I'll move thy flinty heart to sense and shame,
I will thou sorceress: now I do see to late
There is a hand ore-rules our will and fate.
This shows the greatest plague heaven keeps in store
False, when a man is linked unto a whore.
I have it, I have it, here, heer, nay come on, you have
come off I am sure, here's evidence looks pale to think but
on it, you do not know the tenant to this cottage, hee was an
upright dealer, hee paid me to a hair, come forward and bee
hanged, I shall advance you in a ropes name, you have made
no cuckold of me. I made my self one, pondered my own
horns, now sirrah, you that go to it by art, put your cases one
in the neck of another, your rem in re what think yo of
this case.
I think the serpent crept into a narrow hole, and let
his case behind him.
Then I am a Cornuto.
This mike's the naked truth appear so.
The best is, the crest is mine own, I paid well for it.
Dear husband pardon me, I will confess,
What wilt thou confess? that thou hast made a mere
Ass of me, to pay thy iourney-man wages before hand.
It should seem he laboured hard to earn it, he could
keep no clothes about him.
This slave doth not think I'll cut his throat for this,
you have watched nearly sirrah, you have.
Unless I should have been their baud, I could watch
no nearer, me thinks she hath done you a great pleasure, rid
you of your disease, jealousy, now you need sear no more,
you are in possession on it, your doubts are at an end.
Good, very good, my doubts are at end, but I shall
hang you in suspense for this: you Manticora that plump
upon raw flesh, here set your hand to this letter, that I may
draw your Captain on again upon the breach, I'll blow you
up else, why move you not, I am sure you laid your hand to
the business when time was.
Pardon me sir, I know my life is forfeit
To your just anger, nor will I be the means
To shed more blood, mine shall suffice alone,
Since only one is wronged punish but one.
She loves him still, I am a cuckold
He has out-gon me, do you hear; subscribe
Move me no further.
The worst can be but death, I will not.
I tel thee I'll for give thee, give my reuendge
Scope but at him, thou art free.
Swear it by Abrahams dust, the ashes of our fore-fatheirs.
Dust and ashes it's but a frail oath.
By that, and all that ties a virtuous mind,
I vow and swear by written writ.
You'll swear as much to forgive me I hope to sir.
Why, thou shalt be the messenger, nay the actor
In my just vengeance.
The hang-man you mean sir, I am expert at it.
Francisco, what news man?
The worst your ears can hear, our ships
They are untouched, of all they are only safe.
You dazzle your own eyes, that villain Dansiker
Hath grappled them and fled.
Whirle-winds pursue him, heaven, seas, earth, all at once
Join to his confusion, now I do see too late
There is a hand ore-rules our will and fate.
I shall then take your promise, your brother being
redeemed, this night I shall enjoy thee.
This Diamond binds me to it, by this I swear.
It is thine I will bestow it on thee, to tie thy faith
Thou hast his ransom.
It is here.
About it then, now fortune equal prove
I am happy, yet her lust redeems my love.
Yet see, midst all my miseries I have a friend,
My constant loyal Voada, could what we enjoy
Make a man happy, I am not miserable.
Thou come to comfott me, I know thou doest.
This fellow raves sure: do you know to who you speak?
Put not a further trial on me, thou best of women:
Know if this arm were bared all other means
From hearts of Christians, it should dig thee food.
We know you are a bloody murderer, and are repaid
By our just Prophet, that hates false Runagates.
How could thou malice man so much, heaven,
As to create a woman?
Thou hast forgot me sure: oh look on him
That hath denied his faith, sold all his hopes
To purchase thee his bride.
To match with beggary: know I contemn thee
As a most abject slave, and hate thee more
Then all thy wealth could make me love before.
What mean you sir? could you expect a good,
A happiness from hell? she is a whore.
Thou least: this arm shall make it good,
My soul for her I lost, and now my blood.
Your passio doth transport you, here comes her pander,
One that knows all her secrets: examine him,
If she stand clear, let my life answer it.
Il'e put you to the Test.
I have had a hot night of this, nothing but fire in my
mouth two hours together: mary the old Jew my moister I
hear hath stumbled on a cooler. I thought this Captain
would bee coming so long on upon the breach hee would
break his neck at the last. This venery is a tempting dish,
some ner'e lin licking at it till they burn their lips. Well, I
must go comfort up old Benwash, hoe's heavy upon his wives
lightness.
You Jew, a word with you?
You Turk, I have nothing to say to you: Ha, ha, ha,
poor fellow, how hee looks since Mahomet had the handling
of him? hee hath had a sore night at Whose that knocks at
the backe-doore? Cry you mercy, I thought you were an Italian
Captain.
Zounds, leave your circumlocutions, Il'e send your
head to your heals else.
You parcel haud, all usher, answer directly who it is
bears a way the prize in your Mistresses race, or Il'e spoil
your footing, cut you off by the hams.
Alas sir!
Speak, who are her utters?
Voadi's utters? oh sir, a Barber sir.
Il'e make you have need of a Surgeon ever I have done
with you. How do you know hee is a Barber?
He smells strong of Rose-water, and he hath never mony
in his purse but on Saturday-nights.
What other suitor, slave?
An other sweet youth too, I take it a Comfet-maker;
and it seems hath rotten teeth, for he dares not come in sight
so long as the Barber's in the way.
This dog deludes vs, Il'e tear thy throat out vilelain,
unlesse thou instantly name him she loves.
Her Page sir, the little Christian, the good faced Captaine
gave her, Fidelio.
My slave, the French Ship-boy?
I saw him leave her now. How dost thou kow she loves him?
She makes him sing bawdy songs to her, looks fortunes
in his fist, &amp; babies in his eyes, makes dialogues betwixt
him, her little dog, &amp; her self: lies upon her back, puts his
hand in her hand, &amp; wrings it till the tears come again.
Insatiate monster, could her swollen blood
Reach such a height none but my Page must suit her.
Contain your self a while, this slave can speak
One of her dialogues.
It is my practise sir: you shall stand for the Lady, you
for her dog, and I the Page: you and that dog looking
one upon another, the Page presents himself.
Good.
The best is behind sir.
Jew, slave, dog.
The horned Devil follow him. A Skippers boy?
The shame of woman? rather then be baffeld thus
I will betray this town, blow up the Castle:
Francisco, do but second me.
First repossess your self of your strong hold,
I fear some treachery: the Governor
With all the Janissaries of the town
I met in their way thither.
Blast them ye powers first. The Governor
Make towards the Castle? I am betrayed, away,
I see that heaven forgets not though I delay.
Thrust out by Janissaries?
Pack hence false Runagate,
Slave, Beggar.
Disgratious vassals, what mountain covers me?
Wink, wink, thou Day-star, hide my guilty shame,
Make me as if I ner'e had been, whose name
Succeeding times will curse: should I confess my sin,
Ther's not an ear that can with pity hear
A man so wicked miserable: should I bear up,
Out-looke my crimes, I want means to support me.
To dye I dare not, the jaws of hell do yawn
To swallow me: live I cannot Famine threats,
And that the worst of poverty, contempt and scorn.
Never on man Fate cast so black a frown,
Up I am denied to fly, unpitied down.
Rest restless soul on this accursed soil,
And teach the world into how sad a toil
Ambition and swift riot run, when mean content
Sits low, yet happy: and when their day is spent
All that they get is labour and unrest,
A hateful grave, and worst, a troubled breast.
Where shall I find this most unfortunate wretch?
There is a part in him called man, which we should pity
How ever his merit stands, nor will I leave him,
Though he hath left himself. See where he lies
Best suiting with his fortunes, could we our fate forknow
Men were as Gods, nor need we have lain so low.
How fare you brother? why with so sad an eye
Do you behold me, that in your miseries
Bear equal part?
Can there remain a soul that will vouchsafe
Compassion on me? thou doest but flatter,
Or hast forgot, I have lost all, and poverty
When no ill else will do it, makes all friends fly.
Were you entitled to no other guilt,
How willing for you should my blood be spilt?
Here sir, accept this poor relief
Bootless alas distress recounts those errors
To think what might have been cures, not the terror
Of present suffering.
True, true, Francisco, could I redeem the time,
The world should speak my penitence.
Could I call back but one seven years,
Though all my life were servile after,
Were my soul but free
From innocent blood, and fearful blasphemy,
On the condition I might live an age
Tortured upon a wheel.
I tell thee friend,
Were I this Cities Vice-roy, I would give
My crown, despoil my self of all, only to live
One month with that content this soul did know
When a poor Fisherman possessed it.
You are too low dejected.
Men that with sufferance their wrongs do bear
Are held but weak, and States more oft for fear
Then love unto the right, redress men's else.
Who stoutly down his enemies, malice kills,
Who basely wounds himself.
No less then truth, I have been too low indeed
Each one the yielding grass doth dare to tread
That flies resisting thorns, self Voada,
Thy Lamb is turned a Lyon, I feel reuendge
Give a new life to me, I'll only stay
Till I have spoke thy brother, I think he'll blush
To hear thy shame, tell thee thou hast not plaid
A women's part with me, suppose the worse
That he turn villainy to, he had better curse
His grand sirs ashes, if once more I fall in
I'll be unparalleled at least for sin.
Stay see the strumpets love, Fidelio,
Captain, you are the man I seek, I have a suit to you,
Concerning Voada, is it not?
Concerning her that hates you for my sake
Neglects your merit, this night gives full reuendge
To all her injuries.
Repeat that happy word again, I am wholly thine.
Know her vassaliat lust hath long pursued,
And with such violence attempted me,
That with my oaths this night to sate her heate
I hardly have delayed her.
What's this to my reuendge?
It follow's, give me but way
Through your Castle there's a Hollander
This evening makes from hence
That gives them passage.
I have tied him to it
Thou art for ever free, the hour name,
I'll speak your worth yet, in spite of fame
About three, watch the word Fidelo.
Avoid suspicion and till then be gone.
Nay then my joys do flow,
Whether tends this? what passage, come you for him?
To heaven I once more must exact
Thy trust and diligence.
Speak it.
Make instantly to Voada, tell her
This night a skipper doth attend to steal aboard
Her love Fidelio, give her the hour and place
Wish her to pistol him.
Would have her kill her to.
I, and run made for it, mean while I'll walk the
streets I shall meet some will know me to whom I will relate
my wrongs, wilt do it Francisco?
My soul to gage.
This comfort then in spite of hell I'll have,
went not vnreuendg'd unto his grave.
How black a path unbounded riot treads,
Your gentler eyes have viewed. Our Scoene now leads
To give him rest, that from his ills had learned
To know his misery, and at least had earned
This lesson from the extremes, that others past
No course that violent is, secure can last.
This clue doth wind him back, and Dansiker,
The wealth of Tunis, now is become there fear,
Strives to redeem his infamy and with success,
Makes through their bowels to his happiness.
No sooner hee arrives in France, but his sad ears
Instead of welcomes entertain new fears,
The aged Ok that Atlas-like sustained,
The weight of France, that with his bloudregain'd
Her wasted body, like the Pelican
By one that from his life took breath is slain,
This fatal blow, astonisheth the hopes
Of Dansiker, and his, to make return,
Impossible those fires yet fresh doe burn,
Would threaten them with utmost tortures here
To make abode, they find themselves beset
With many they by their spoil made foes, yet
Twixt two extremes they chose the better part
Take land and to the Governor present
Themselves and fortunes, show their act, intent
And poenitence, their promised prdon, what befell
This show presents, which words deny to tell.
Twixt hope and dread, as suited former merit,
The Governor receives them gives new spirit
Unto their drooping hopes, when with the name
Of Dansikers arrival, swift winged fame
Brings in the opressed Merchants, whose spoil
Had fd his hungry sword, and with their toil
Made rich his ripens, these crave law, his life
The opposing Yournour almost ends the strife,
With his own blood, informs them, the Kings death
Stoo only bar to his safety, that his breath
Would recompnce all former inuries,
To approve it gives them notice of the prise
Brought from Tunis, and more to assawadge their ire
Dansiker dare, what act they can desre
Man to accomplish, to redeem his peace
And their great losses, all their furies cease.
And with one voice demand Benwash the Jew
As his just ranome, they need no more renew,
This their request, by oath themselves they tie.
To bring him prisoner, or in the action dye.
No motives from his wife or child dissuade,
This his resolve, suppose h now hath made
His back return and in some apt disguise
Attends success unto his enterprise
His end and strange prevention, briefly show
Designs are men's, their sway the gods do owe.
This is the place a cold blood thwarts my heart,
My fleeting soul in her disturbed passion
Proclaims some ill near, let me suppose the worst
Aliziaes dead, false tongue how durst thou name
So great a mischief? alas this bracelet speaks it,
This which I tied unto her ivory wrist
The witness of those vows confirmed vs one,
The news of my captivity took all her hopes
And life away, and dying she bequeathed
This loyal gift again, with my sad ransom.
'T may be this youth may be Alizia
Her self a prisoner, yet shoe's to virtuous
To out-liue her honour and her chastity,
Which her captivity must needs endanger:
I hear his footsteps.
We are not far off from the place, softly, softly.
The night is dark and friendly to mine ends.
Fidelio, Fidelio,
It is he would rob me of Fidelio,
Fidelio I say young Raymond here
Shoot.
So I am slain.
Thus dost thou bear Fidelio back again,
Ha, ha, ha.
Oh false, false Alizia thy watch-words as thy self
Deceiving, did think my slavery
Was not an ill sufficient, but my blood
Must pay thy falsehood tribute, or could not wish
So great a plague to me, that I should hear
Thou were turned prostitute, ungentle cruel woman,
It is not the boy sure, his voice, his passion
Speaks him another, more proiects yet, I hear some foot stir.
How fearful is the night, heauen's angry sure,
And having drawn the day up, chid her thus
For giving light to men's impieties.
It is much about the hour of my appoint,
Wht sad groan wounds my ears, Fidlo,
Raymond, friend Fdleo.
Or rather Infidleo, what ere thou art
Thou need not doubt thy task, thou hast made me sure,
Or if thou doubts it, here dischardge one bullet more.
It is not his voice, thou least self thoughts, Raymonte,
Fidelio.
My name is Raymond, that Fidleo unjustly murdered.
No marvel though thou thundrest heaven;
And darts thy flashes down, oh! why is not
This world a vniuerall fire? what one good
Keeps back thy lames?
Oh speak! what art thou? whose sad speech
Makes death stay yet to hear thee.
My friend, my Raymond by my means murdered
I have lived too long, too long.
Oh speak! what art thou whose sad accents force
Pale death to stay and hear thee.
Alas I am nothing, nothing.
As thou hast hope in heaven tell me thy name,
I will, my name's Alizia, thy constant loyal, loyal
friend, that in her passage unto thee will not be long
Oh save thy life.
Wish me not so much ill, I love thee better.
Miracle of thy sex, oh let me embrace thee yet.
Here, here, fly hence vain breath,
No other good is known to me but death, moritur
Franceco you're a villain, forgiveness Voada,
The words of these two innocents with purple eyes
Dart terror through me, Fidelio turned a woman.
Within Follow, follow, follow.
I will rather give an ear to the black shrikes
Of mandrakes, thou knew I loved him
And that hath force his wond, at sight whereof
Methinkes reflecting heyen should spread it self
In a deep crimson veil, blush to ha created
A wretch so monstrous, but my reuendge sleeps, know boy
I will repay thy death, slave I will famish thee,
And when thy fainting eye-lids gin to crack,
My satisfied lust, by him most hates thee,
Shall be thy object.
You wrong me to suppose I should be guilty
Of such an impious deed.
Doth not thy blood stained poniard speak it
With which thy accursed arm did force his breast
His too too gentle breast.
Thy self be witness.
That I am reuendge on thee, murder, murder, the slave
will murder me.
What mean you wife?
As you are men make rescue of me.
I am betrayed, out-gon by a she devil.
He hath not only slain his innocent page,
But thus assailed my life, lay hands on him
Dear countrymen revenge my wrongs, my blood
On this false runagate, I faint, I faint.
Convey me to a Surgeon, make him safe.
In the Governors name I do command you give
your weapons up.
S'hart Gentlemen, you know Francisco killed him,
I'll make it good.
Wee have nothing to charge you with about your page
It is the wounding your wife with an unlawful weapon.
You have most unmanly thrust in a woman.
Honest friends, Turks, and Officers, if ever I laid
hands on her, may I never see light more.
We will take a reasonable order for that, you ne'er laid
hands on her, out impudence away to the dungeon with him.
S'hart carry me to the Governor that I may have
justice first.
The fellow raves, he thinks men in office have nothing
to doe but to give him justice, you must first be punished
and then talk of justice when you have cause.
Away with him, he shall know what it is to marry
into a great Tribe, an honourable Tribe: you use a great woman
as if she were your wife, ye'ar a base fellow indeed. You
a Courtier?
Nay, then I see my end draws, I shall rave,
Run mad: have you er'a Bedlam, that I may not famish
But show tricks to get meat with, or rail against the State:
And when I have eased my gall a month or two
Come out again. Zounds let me beat hemp,
Doe any thing rather then famish: That death
She hath vowed me, and Il'e prevent it: allow me
But every week a Christian, I am content
To feed upon raw flesh, if it be but once a month
A Britain, Il'e be content with him.
Nay then you are mad indeed, away with him.
As you are true Turks, I will put you in sureties,
I know the Devil will provide me bale,
Rather then loose my employment: as you are pitiful Turks.
Nay then we shall be troubled with you.
Plagues, pestilences, all fall upon my head
Rather then by a whore be famished.
I do conjure you.
Rabshake?
Here sir.
Is this child of Adam coming yet? hee that will
eat of the forbidden fruit though he loose Paradise fort, is
he coming.
As fast as his legs will bear him, considering the
use he means to put them to. I have provided a Cadl to
comfort him with.
That's my dear precious villain, how sweet art thou
Revenge? the thought of thee turns all my blood to air.
And your horns too sir?
All light Rabshake.
They were begotlight, but methinkes they should
be heavy in the wearing.
I will make them abortiues man, smother them in the
womb.
Though you lop the branches, you will preserve the
tree to bear more fruit, I hope, your wife sir.
She shall down too, I will let her blood in a new vein
she shall turn up the white of the eye, and dye the death of a
sinner.
How will you dispense with your oaths sir?
Tush, by equivocation man, I will not hurt her, but
thou shalt by equivocation, behind the Arras, my dear
Rabshake.
That word (by equivocation) lies on my stomach,
I would be loath it should make me cast up my gall, I would
not have my throat cut by equivocation.
The game is roused, take thy stand and strike Rabshake.
Strike you sir? you are the keeper, and have the fees in
possession, I have no money upon this equivocation.
So the hour of my redemption is at hand, for mans
worst hell, a whore.
You put me to a sweet purgation the other night, it was
well fear took away some of my senses, I had smelt for it
else.
You saw the necessity of it sir.
You may call it necessity. I thought of the day of
Judgment, and that was more then ever I did in my life before:
what with the fire aboue, and the Ram-headed Devil
your husband below, I imagined damnation could not bee
far off.
Good, excellent good.
And whither is that golden calfe of Horeb, that
Jew of the the Tribe of Israel gone, that it is Jubilee with you
1 page duplicate
1 page duplicate
now, all open?
Hee is rid to the Goletto about taking in a commonditty.
And in the mean time thou wilt utter one at home, I
am thy Merchant Wench, and will deal with the by wholesale.
Rather by retail sir, retail.
Where is your Pim Rabshake, taking a nap at the stair
foot, committing sin in conceit, whilst we are at it in action?
hath he the two qualities of an Usher, a good ear, and to indure
cold of his feet? have you given him instructions?
I see how it did work, I feel it.
He will make the old Jew believe I was his wives
bawd.
The slave was borne Pander, his mother was a Midwife,
and then he must needs be bawd to set his mothers trade
aworke.
You will groan for this anon sir.
I pray you sir sit down, a small banquet sir.
Provocatiues and whetters on? one licorice thing
draws out another. Who will not swear Venery is a sweet
sin now? Bacchus and Venus, two Gods, the Devil is far enough
off then.
You are deceived sir, he is at your elbow.
Is Dunne in the mire? for old acquaintance sake we'll
drag you out sir: you are in travel, I am the son of a Midwife,
Il'e help to deliver you.
It cannot be, I am in a dream.
A good belief doth well; were I in your case, I
should be past dreaming: but Il'e cast you in a slumber sir.
You must bee at your sweet meates: cannot Mutton
serve your turn, but you must have sauce to it?
This Whore hath betrayed me: now she hath wrung
what she can out of me, she hanges me up for a dried Neats-tongue.
She is an insatiate Whore sir, hath enticed me by the
Pander your man: I was chaste before I knew her sir.
Believe him not sir, he is a mere Goat, look on
his beard else.
You may see by his hair hee is a man of hot Liver;
he came over me with such violence I had not the heart
to resist him.
I believe you wife, I believe you, and thou shalt instiff
it to his teeth before the greatest Devil in hell. Rabshake
give her a Mittimus, strangle her.
Have you forgot your oaths sir?
I swear as I was a Turk, and I will cut your throat as
I am a Jew.
Villain, keep off, I say.
You should have said so when time was Mistress.
Thou betraiest thy self slave, make way to thine
own destruction.
Stop her throat, I say, give no ear to her.
I do confess my sin, I have wrongfully betrayed thee.
I find my self in bonds for it Lady, it is some comfort
yet, that I dye not unrevenged.
Thou speak charitably. Is she gone? is her lust satisfied
now?
Do a woman to death, and she will bee satisfied, nothing
else will.
Now for you M. Gallop: you gave it me with tilting,
and I will return your courtesy.
Save my life sir, and I will be your slave, sell my self in
open market, brand me.
That were Lex talion indeed, one mark for another:
but it will not serve the turn. Have at you.
Ha, ha, ha, how the Ox goares him.
'Sdeath villains, treacherous villains, the plague, pox.
He died a true lecher, with the pox in his mouth. Why
this was valiantly done sir, in single opposition.
why now my brow begins to smooth. How lik'st this
Tragedy, Rabshake?
Rarely, if it do not prove a Tragedy to vs sir, i'ts but a
Comedy hitherto: the setting off is all.
Tush, the best is behind man: dost think I doe not
bear a brain about me? Beware a politician, man: here,
bind me, bind me, hard, hard.
I mary sir, I like this well, a man may trust you when
your hands are tied behind you.
I cannot choose but laugh to think how happy I am
in my project: it will amaze thee when thou hear it Rabshake,
wee shall so gull the innocent world, laugh at the silly
world.
If you gull me now, Il'e give you leave to make mummy
of me: what's next sir?
Here, take this dagger, stab me an inch into the
breast and arm.
Do you call this gulling of the world?
I cannot but laugh at the gentleman's lecherous voyage
to Lucifer: there, there. Now Rabshake let me bind thee.
How? bind me?
Thou art not capable of the mystery, thou art shallow
Rabshake.
I doe not desire to wade deeper in I thank you sir, I am
no politician, bear no brain about me sir; yet I can dive into
a knaves pockets as well as any man, your worship knows.
What doest thou mean by this?
To rob you as I am a Turk, &amp; cut your throat as I am
a Jew, you have forgot your equivocation; Il'e chop logic
with you. Come, your rings, your chain: do you not laugh?
have you not gul'd the world fairly?
Thou hast mistaken me: know thou art all my care.
And you would be rid of me, I conceive you sir, though
I am no politician: I have seen the play of Pedringano sir, of
Pedringno sir.
Dear Rabshake, vpo my knees I do entreat thee hear me.
For whom have I tan thought, out-watcht the night
Out-toyl'd the day, but for my Rabshake? what friend,
What kinsman, what heir had I but Rabshake?
Yes, you meant I should have been your heir.
Nay, thou should have had all in possession, my purpose
was to have lived a private life, done penance for my sins,
and given thee all.
You would have parted with this chain, these rings
and gold.
They are thine own, on whom should I bestow the else?
And you have a trick to come off clear with this business.
In spite of jealousy, without suspicion man: you being
bound, your head thrust in this circle, as if tied up for starting,
I had cried out thieves, murder, raised the street, transferd
the act upon some stranger.
And I should have been your heir.
Thou wrongst me to make question of't.
If I should try him, it is beyond my compass if hee
out-saile me: this chain and gold is mine.
'Sfoot my self too.
For once Ile try you: here bind me, if you do outreach
me, Il'e ner'e trust Jew more.
Here, here: Is thy head in?
It is sir.
Have I caught you? are you in the noose? you have
seen the play of Pedringano sir, Il'e play with you.
'Sheart I am your slave sir, I did it to make your worcestership
merry.
Tush, you are my heir, Il'e hang you up a airing.
As you are a man hear me sir.
You must have your chains, you shall be chained, I
could even crack my sides with laughter. This will afford
me mirth unto my dying day. The play of Pedingano? how
the weeell hangs! Ha, ha, ha. Thieves, thieves: Murder, murder.
I shall betray my self with laughter. Were you caught
Rynard? are you in the noose? Murder, murder, thieves murder.
Break op the doors, the voice speaks from this
room.
Murder, murder, murder.
Inhumane deed! what hand could b so bloody?
Speak, who was the murderer?
Help me to a Surgeon.
Run for a Surgeon. Tell by what monster was this
act (so full of horror) done?
Three strangers rushed in suddenly, wee being at supper,
all my servants forth, save honest Rabshake: and having rifled
vs, did act this horrid murder.
Here is a Surgeon.
The Prophet Mahomet reveal the homicides.
What moves these out-cryes?
Behold a bloody murder, Benwash, his wife,
This Captain, and his servant.
My honest servant, honest Rabshake.
Benwash murdered? he hath saved me a labour.
Is there any hope of life in him?
His wounds are slight, sir, only his faint-heart makes
them dangerous.
Take courage man. Speak, hast thou any knowledge
of the Murderers?
Only he says they are strangers, men of the sea.
Can thou remember in what habit, what men of person
and complexion they were?
What means the slave to eye me so?
That fellow in the stammel hose is one of them.
Lay hands on him.
On me? Villain, thou buy'st my blood
At a dear rate. O thou immortal God
Who know my innocence! that for his former sins
Hast guiven up, Dansiker into the hands
Of these damned miscreants.
Dansiker?
I Dansiker, that would with all your deaths
Have cancelled his former infamy,
Left to the world a president of valour,
Writ in your sad confusions: but heaven is just,
Christians did fall by me, by slaves I must.
Call forth the common Hangman, by this time he hath
done his office on Fracic. Dansiker? unlooked for?
Hear me before I dye, I do confess
Mine own hand did these murders. Dansiker
Hath justly done me vengeance.
How's this? thou done these murders thy self, being
bound and hurt? Thou rau'st sure.
I did them sir: the cause my wife proved false, untrue,
Bear witness, though I lived a Turk, I dye a Jew.
Out Dog, Devil.
Unheard of Monster! Cast his loathed carcass
Unto the common air. Never did day discover
Two such inhumane Caitiffs, stretch out his arms,
You have your trains and fireworks, apply your Torches
Unto his breast. We'll know what project now
Lead you unto this second venture.
I will confess it willingly: It was to have conveyed
This Jew from hence, have made a massacre
Of the whole Town, dashed out the miscreant brains
Of your young Infidels.
And art not sorry, Dog?
Yes Dog, I am sorry, and confess my crimes
Prevented such a merit: I was not worthy
To do heaven so good a service.
Pull off his hateful flesh, dig out his heart
By peece-meal.
Wilt thou turn Turk, and save thy soul yet?
Yes Pagan, villain, I will. Forgiveness heaven,
Let my example move all Pirates, Robbers
To think how heavy thy revenging hand
Will sit upon them. I feel thy justice now,
Receive my soul, accept my intended vow.
So, convey his hateful body to the same place,
The Jew doth lye unburied.
Justice, let me have Justice, worthy Governor.
Give her no ear, she is all woman dissimulation.
I am a Turk, and I do crave the law.
He hath wounded here a Turk, a Lady, and
We crave sentence acording to his merit.
He may receive the Bastinado, pay a fine.
Pay a fine, what fine, from one that's famished,
For want of a poor aspire, set me to sea again,
The tenth of what I'll bring you in, shall connteruaile
The revenue of the Indies.
The slave is mad, we will send you far enough,
Lady depose the for it, you shall have justice.
By our great Prophet Mahomet.
You do me wrong, let me in private speak to her
Ere she betray my life, it is no less
Then your own law affords me.
The weakness of her body brookes it not.
How say you Voada, can you afford him speech?
I'll give his vain words hearing, though to much pain
Oh my deep wound let all remove from hence.
Had she a heart of brass In de pierce it, leave vs all.
Now sir your motion,
Wherein hath my desert stro'd so much ill
To strain thy hate, to this a high beyond,
What we seem malice, I loved that face so well
To purchase it I exchanged my heaven with hell.
And to be bared what I so dearly paid for,
I'st not a plague sufficient? but thy faith
Must now be sold, to be a vengeance greater,
To pay me ungrateful hire, can thou behold
These eyes stroke inward, as ashamed to view
The fires which first betrayed them, this mind, body,
That doth contain a soul more black and dismal
Then is the raven night, these arms, that have so oft
Made to thee rules of love, now famished
For want of what thou surfeits on, can without tears
Behold my miseries?
Ha, ha, ha.
Prodigy of woman, dost laugh?
This is true music, could I enjoy these tunes
My self would be thy Jailer.
Why then thy wound is not dangerous?
A mere scratch, know that I am revenged
Of my Fidelios death, and as thy tortures
Each hour increase, so shall my harmony
Till vengeance period give unto thy destiny.
I will discover thy hypocrisy.
You are prevented, help, I sound, I fall.
As low as hell there keep thy festival.
Hold murderous villain, all tortures man ere knew,
Shall be inflicted on thee.
Inhumane dog.
Ha, ha, ha, I laugh at you.
Here's a preservative, against all your poisons
True Balsamum for villainy,, who will soar high
First lesson that he learn's, must be to dye.
Here is precedent for him, you're slaus of Mahomet
Ungrateful curs, that have repaid me thus
For all the service that I have done for you,
He that hath brought more treasure to yuor shore
Then all Arabia yields, he that hath shown you
The way to conquer Europe, did first impart,
What your forefathers knew not, the seamans art;
Which had they attained, this vuiuerse had been
One Monarchy: may all your seed be damned
The name of Ottoman be the only scorn
And by-word to all Nations; may his own slaves
Tear out the bowels of the last remains
Unto his bloud-propt throne, may ye cut each others throat
Or may, oh may the force of Christendom
Be reunited, and all at once require
The lives of all that you have murdered,
Beating a path out to Jerusalem,
Over the bleeding breasts of you and yours.
Unheard of monster.
Lastly, oh may I be the last of all my country
That trust unto your tret cherries, seducing tretchries
All you that live by theft and Piracies,
That sell your lives and oules to purchase graves,
That dye to hell, and live far worse then slaves,
Let dying Ward tell you that heaven is just,
And that despair attends on blood and lust:
Down with the villain.
Tear the wretch peece-meale, throw his accursed limb
Into the raging bowels of the sea.
His monument in brass we'll thus engrave,
VVard sold his country, turned Turk, and died a slave.
who writes and thinks to please the general taste
Where eyes and ears are fed, shall find he hath ply
His work with the fond Painter, who did mend
So long, that striving to please others, gave no end
To his own labours; for vs, and if not all
We know we have pleased some, whose judgements fall
Beyond the common rank, to whom we humbly yield
Our selves and labours, they best deserve to shield
The worthy works of Time, and with their view
To grace choice Pens, and such we hope are you,
To whom we owe our toil, and willing give
All right in this, your favour makes it live.
Stand fair unto our ends then still, and crown
With gentle hand this work which now's your own.

