NEw Plays, and Maidenheads, are near a kin,
Much followed both, for both much money g'yn,
If they stand sound, and well; And a good Play
(Whose modest Scenes blush on his marriage•… day,
And shake to loose his honour) is like his
That after holy Tie, and first nights stir
Yet still is Modesty, and still retains
More of the maid to sight, than Husbands pains;
We pray our Play may be so; For I am sure
It has a noble Breeder, and a pure,
A learned, and a Poet never went
More famous yet twixt Po and silver Trent.
Chaser (of all admired) the Story gives,
There constant to Eternity it lives;
If we let fall the Nobleness of this,
And the first sound this child bear, be a hiss,
How will it shake the bones of that good man,
And make him cry from under ground, O fa•…
From me the witless chafe of such a wrighter
That blasts my Baize, and my famed works makes lighter
Then Robin Hood? This is the fear we bring;
For to say Trut•…, it wa•…e an endless thing,
And too ambitious to 〈◊〉 to him;
Weak as we are, and almost breathless swim
In this deep water. 〈◊〉 you hold out
Your helping hands, and we shall take about,
And something do•… 〈◊◊〉: You shall hear
Scenes though 〈◊◊〉 Art, may yet appear
Worth two hours travel. To his •…nes sweet sleep:
Content to you. If this play doe not keep,
A little dull time from us, we perceive
Our losses fall so thick, we must needs leave.
ROses their sharpe spines being gon,
Not royal in their smells alone,
But in their hew.
Maiden Pinckes, ofodour faint,
Daisies smel-lesse, yet most quaint
And sweet Time true.
Prim-rose first borne, child of Ver,
Merry Spring times Harbinger,
With her bells dim.
Oxlips, in their Cradles growing,
Mary-golds, on death beds blowing,
Larkes-heeles trim.
All dear natures children: sweete-
Lie fore Bride and Bridegrooms feet•… 
Blessing their sense.
Not an angle of the air,
Bird mclodious, or bird fair,
Is absent hence.
The Crow, the •…ndrous Cuckoo, nor
The boding Raven, nor Clough hee
Nor •…hattring Pie,
May on our Bridehouse perch or sing,
Or with them any discord bring
But from it fly.
For pities sake and true gentilities,
Hear, and respect me.
For your Mothers sake.
And as you wish your womb may thrive with fair ones,
Hear and respect me,
Now for the love of him whom love hath marked
The honour of your Bed, and for the sake
Of clear virginity, be Advocate
For us, and our distresses: This good deed
Shall raze you out of the Book of Trespasses
All you are set down there.
Sad Lady •…ise.
Stand up.
No knees to me.
What woman I may steed that is distressed,
Does bind me to her.
What's your request? Deliver you for all.
We are 3. Queens, whose Sovereigns fell before
The wrath of cruel Croon; who endured
The Beaks of Ravens, Talents of the Knights,
And pecks of Crows, in the foul fields of The•…
He will not suffer us to burn their bones,
To urn their ashes, nor to take the off•…nce
Of mortal loathsomeness from the blessed eye
Of holy Ph•…bus, but infects the winds
With stench of our slain Lords. O pity Duke,
Thou purger of the earth, draw thy feared Sword
That does good turns to'th world; give us the Bones
Of our dead Kings, that we may Chapel them;
And of thy boundless goodness take some note
That for our crowned heads we have no roof,
Save this which is the Lyons, and the Bears,
And vault to every thing.
Pray you kneel not,
I was transported with your Speech, and suffered
Your knees to wrong themselves; I have heard the fortunes
Of your dead Lords, which gives me such lamenting
As wakes my vengeance, and revenge for'em
King Capaneus, was your Lord the day
That he should marry you, at such a season,
As now it is with me. I met your Groom,
By Marsis Altar, you were that time fair;
Not Iunos Mantle fairer then your Tresses,
Nor in more bounty spread her. Your wheaten wreathe
Was then nor threashd, nor blasted; Fortune at you
Dimpled her Cheek with smiles: Hercules our kinesman
(Then weaker than your eyes) laid by his Club,
He tumbled down upon his Nenuan hide
And swore his •…ws thawd: O grief, and time,
Fearful consumers, you will all devour.
O I hope some God,
Some God hath put his mercy in your manhood
Whereto heel infuse power, and press you forth
Our undertaker.
O no knees, none Widow,
Unto the Helmeted-Belona use them,
And pray for me your Soldier.
Troubled I am.
Honoured Hypolita
Most dreaded Amazonian, that hast slain
The Sith-tuskd-Bore; that with thy Arm as strong
As it is white, wast near to make the male
To thy Sex captive; but that this thy Lord
Borne to uphold Creation, in that honour
First nature stilt it in, shrunk thee into
The bound thou wast ore-flowing; at once subduing
Thy force, and thy affection: Soldiresse
That equally can poise sternenes with pity,
Whom now I know hast much more power on him
Then ever he had on thee, who ow'st his strength
And his, Love too: who is a Servant for
The Tenor of the Speech. Dear Glass of Ladies
Bid him that we whom flaming war doth scorch,
Under the shadow of his Sword, may cool us:
Require him he advance it ore our heads;
Speak't in a women's key: like such a woman
As any of us three; weep ere you fail; lend us a knee;
But touch the ground for us no longer time
Then a Doves motion, when the head's plucked off:
Tell him if he in the blood cizd field, lay swollen
Showing the Sun his Teeth; g•…inning at the Moon
What you would doe.
Poor Lady, say no more:
I had as leife trace this good action with you
As that whereto I am going, and never yet
Went I so willing, way. My Lord is taken
Hart deep with your distress: Let him consider:
Isle speak anon.
O my petition was 
Set down in ice, which by hot grief uncandied
Melts into drops, so sorrow wanting form
Is pressed with deeper matter.
Pray stand up,
Your grief is written in your check.
O woe,
You cannot read it there; there through my tears,
Like wrinkled peobles in a glass stream
You may behold 'em (Lady, Lady, alack)
He that will all the Treasure know of the earth
Must know the Center too; he that will fish
For my least min•…ow, let him lead his line
To catch one at my heart. O pardon me
Extremity that sharpens sundry wits
Makes me a Fool.
Pray you say nothing, pray you,
Who cannot feel, nor see the rain being in it,
Knows neither wet, nor dry, if that you were
Tho ground-peece of some Painter, I would buy you
T'instruct me against a Capital grief indeed
Such heart pierced demonstration; but alas
Being a natural Si•…la of our Sex
Your sorrow beats so ardently upon me,
That it shall make a counter reflect against
My Brothers heart, and warm it to some pity
Though it were made of stone: pray have good comfort.
Forward to'th Temple, leave not out a Jot
Of the sacred Ceremony.
O This Celebration
Will long last, and be more costly then,
Your Suppliants war: Remember that your Fame
Knowles in the ear, of the world: what you doe quickly,
Is not done rashly; your first thought is more.
Then others laboured meditance: your premeditating
More then their actions: But oh love, your actions
Soon as they moves as Asprayes doe the fish,
Subdue before they touch, think, dear Duke think
What beds our slain Kings have.
What griefs our beds
That our dear Lords have none.
None fit for'th dead:
Those that with Cords, Knives, drams precipitance,
Weary of this worlds light, have to themselves
Been deaths most horrid Agents, human grace
Affords them dust and shadow.
But our Lords
Lie b•…string fore the visitating Sun,
And were good Kings, when living.
It is true. and I will give you comfort,
To give your dead Lords graves:
The which to doe, must make some work with Creou;
And that work presents it self to'th doing:
Now twill take form, the heats are gone to morrow.
Then, bootless toil must recompense it self,
With it's own sweat; Now he's secure,
Not dreams, we stand before your puislance
Wrenching our holy begging in our eyes
To make petition clear.
Now you may take him,
Drunk with his victory.
And his Army full
Of Bread, and sloth.
Artesuis that best know
How to draw out fit to this enterprise,
The prim'st for this proceeding, and the number
To carry such a business, forth and levy
Our worthiest Instruments, whilst we despatch
This grand act of our life, this daring deed
OfFate in wedlock.
Dowagers, take hands
Let us be Widows to our wo•…s, delay
Commends us to a famishing hope.
Farewell.
We come unseasonably: But when could grief
Cull forth as unpanged judgement can, fit'st time
For best solicitation.
Why good Ladies,
This is a service, whereto I am going,
Greater then any was; it more imports me
Then all the actions that I have foregone,
Or futurely can cope.
The more proclaiming
Our suit shall be neglected, when her Arms
Able to locke Jove from a Synod, shall
By warranting Moone-light corslet thee, oh when•…
Her twining Cherries shall their sweetness fall
Upon thy tasteful lips, what wilt thou think
Of rotten Kings or blubbered Queens, what care
For what thou feelst not? what thou feelst being able
To make Mars spurn his Drom. O if thou couc•…
But one night with her, every hour in it will
Take 〈◊〉 of thee for a hundred, and
Thou shalt remember nothing more, then what
That Banquet bids thee too.
Though much unlike
You should be so transported, as much sorry
I should be such a Suitor; yet I think
Did I not by th'abstayning of my joy
Which breeds a deeper longing, cure their surfeit
That craves a present medcine, I should pluck
All Ladies scandal on me. Therefore Sir
As I shall here make trial of my prayers,
Either presuming them to have some force,
Or sentencing for ay their vigour dombe,
Prorogue this business, we are going about, and hang
Your Shield before your Heart, about that neck
Which is my 〈◊〉, and which I freely lend
To doe these poor Queens service.
Oh help now
Our Cause cries for your knee.
If you grant not
My Sister her petition in that force,
With that Celerity, and nature which
She makes it in: from henceforth isle not dare
To ask you any thing, nor be so hardy
Ever to take a Husband.
Pray stand up.
I am entreating of my self to doe
That which you kneel to have me; •…yrithous
Lead on the Bride; g•…t you and pray the Gods
For success, and return; omit not any thing
In the pretended Celebration: Queens
Follow your Soldier (as before) hence you
And at the banckos of Anly meet us with
The forces you can raise, where we shall find
The moiety of a number, for a business,
More bigger looked; since that our Theme is haste
I stamp this kiss upon thy currant lip,
Sweet keep it as my Token; Set you forward
For I will see you gone. 
Farewell my beauteous Sister: Pyrithous
Keep the feast full, bate not an hour on it.
Sir
Isle follow you at •…eels; The Feasts solemnity
Shall want till your return.
Co•…en I charge you
Boudge not from Athens; We shall be returning
Ere you can end this Feast; of which I pray you
Make no abatement; once more farewell all.
Thus dost thou still make good the tongue of the world.
And ernst a Deity equal with Mars,
If not above him, for
Thou being but mortal make•… affections bend
To Godlike honours; they themselves some say
Groan under such a Mastry.
As we are men
Thus should we doe, being sensually subdued
We loose our humane title; good cheer Ladies. 
Now turn we towards your Comforts. 
Dear Palamon, 〈◊〉 in love then Blood
And our prime Cousin, yet unhardned in
The Crimes of nature; Let us leave the City
Thebs, and the temptings in it, before we further
Sully our gloss of youth,
And here to keep in abstinence we shame
As in Incontinence; for not to swim
In the aide of the Current, were almost to sink,
At least to frustrate striving, and to follow
The common Stream, twold bring us to an Edy
Where we should turn or drown; if labour through,
Our gain but life, and weakness.
Your advice
Is cried up with example: what strange ruins
Since first we went to School, may we perceive
Walking in Thebs? Scarce, and bar•… weeds
The gain of the Martialist, who did propound
To his bold ends, honour, and golden Ingots,
Which though he won, he had not, and now flurted
By peace for whom he fought, who then shall offer
To Marsis so scorned Altar? I doe bleed
When such I meet, and wish great 〈◊〉 would
Resume her ancient fit of Jealousy
To get the Soldier work, that peace might purge
For her repletion, and retain anew
Her cha•…itable heart now hard, and harsh•…
Then strife, or war could be.
Are you not out?
Meet you no ruin, but the Soldierin
The Cranks, and turns of Thebs' you did begin
As if you met decays of many kinds:
Perceive you none, that doe arouse your pity
But th'un considerd Soldier?
Yes, I pity
Decays where ere I find them, but such most
That sweating in an honourable Toil
Are paid with ice to coole'em.
Tic not this
I did begin to speak of: This is virtue
Of no respect in Thebs I spake of Thebs'
How dangerous if we will keep our Honours,
It is for our r•…syding, where ev•…rye evil
Hath a good cullor; where eve'ry seeming good's
A certain evil, where not to be ev•… Jump
As they are, here were to be strangers, and
Such things to be meet Monsters.
Tic in our power,
(Unless we fear that Apes can Tutor's) to
Be Masters of our manners: what need I
Affect another gate, which is not catching
Where there is faith, or to be fond upon
Another way of speech, when by mine own
I may be reasonably conceived; saved too,
Speaking it truly; why am I bound
By any generous bond to follow him
Follows his Taylor, happily so long until
The followed, make pursuit? or let me know,
Why mine own Barb•… is unblessed, with him
My poor Chin too, for tic not Cizard just
To such a Favourites glass: What Cannon is there
That does command my Rapier from my hip
To dangle it in my hand, or to go tip toe
Before the street be foul? Either I am
The fore-horse in the Team, or I am none
That draw in the sequent trace: these poor fleight sores,
Need not a plantin; That which tips my bosom
Almost to'th heart's,
Our Uncle Croon.
He,
A most unbounded Tyrant, whose successes
Makes heaven unfeard, and villainy assured
Beyond its power: there's nothing, almost puts
Faith in a fever, and deifies alone
Voluble chance, who only attributes
The faculties of other Instruments
To his own No•…ves and act; Commands men service,
And what they win in it, boot and glory on;
That fears not to do harm; good, dares not; Let
The blood of mine that's sibbe to him, be sucked
From me with Leeches, Let them break and fall
Off me with that corruption.
Clear spirited Cozen
Lets leave his Court, that we may nothing share,
Of his loud infamy: for our milk,
Will relish of the pasture, and we must
Be vile, or disobedient, not his kinesmen
In blood, unless in quality.
Nothing truer:
I think the Echoes of his shames have dea'ft
The ears of heavenly Justice: widows cries
Descend again into their throats; and have not: Enter Va∣leri•…s.
Due audio•…nce of the Gods: •…alerius
The King calls for you; yet be leaden footed
Till his great rage be off him. Phebus when
He broke his whipflocke and exclaim dagainst
The Horses of the Sun, but whispered too
The low denes•…e of his Fury.
Small winds shake him,
But whats t•…e matter?
Val. Theseus (who where he threats appals,) hath sent
Deadly defiance to him, and pronounces
Ruin to Thebs, who is at hand to seal
The promise of his wrath.
Let him approach;
But that we fear the Gods in him, he brings not
A jot of terror to us; Yet what man
Thirds his own worth (the case is each of ours)
When that his actions dregd, with mind assured
Tic ba•… he goes about.
Leave that unreasond.
Our ser•…ices stand now for Thebs, not Croon,
Yet to be neutral to him, were dishonour;
Rebellious to oppose: therefore we must
With him stand to the mercy of our Fate,
Who hath bounded our last minute.
So we must;
First sed this wars afoot? or it shall be
On fail of some condition.
Tic in motion
The intelligence of state came in the instant
With the defier.
Lets to the king, who, were he
A quarter carrier of that honour, which
His Enemy come in, the blood we venture
Should be as for our health, which were not spent,
Rather laid out for purchase: but alas
Our hands advanced before our hearts, what will
The fall of the stroke doe damage?
Let th'event,
That never erring Arbitrator, tell us
When we know all our selves, and let us follow
The becking of our chance.
No further.
Sir farewell; repeat my wishes
To our great Lord, of whose success I dare not
Make any timorous question, yet I wish him
Exces, and overflow of power, and't might be
To dure ill-dealing fortune; speed to him,
Store never hurts good Governors.
Though I know
His Ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they
Must yield their tribute there: My precious Maid,
Those best affections, that the heavens infuse
In their best tempered pieces, keep enthroand
In your dear heart.
Thanks Sir; Remember me
To our all royal Brother, for whose speed
The great 〈◊〉 isle so•…licit; and
Since in our terrene State petitions are not
Without gifts understood: Isle offer to her
What I shall be advised she likes; our hey•…ts
Are in his Army in his Tent.
In's bosom:
We have bin Soldiers, and wee cannot weep
When our Friends don their helmes, or put to sea,
Or tell of Babe, broached on the Lance, or women•…n
That have sod their Infants in (and after eat them)
Tho brine, they wept at killing 'em; Then if
You stay to see of us such Spinesters, we
Should hold you here for e ver.
Peace be to you
As I pursue this war, which shall be then
Beyond further requiring.
How his longing
Follows his Friend; since his depart, his sports
Though craving seriousness, and skill, past slightly
His careless execution, where nor gain
Made him regard, or loss consider, but
Playing ore business in his hand, another
Directing in his head, his mind, nurse equal
To these so differing Twins; have you observed him,
Since our great Lord departed?
With much labour:
And I did love him fort, they two have Cabined
In many as dangerous, as poo•…e a Corner,
Peril and want contending, they have skift
Torrents whose roaring tyranny and power
In the least of these was dreadful, and they have
Fought out together, where Deaths-selfe was lodged,
Yet fate hath brought them off: Their knot of love
Tide, weaved, entangled, with so true, so long,
And with a finger of so deep a cunning
May be out worn, never undone, I think
Theseus cannot be umpire to himself
Cleaving his conscience into twain, and doing
Each side like Justice, which he loves best.
Doubtless
There is a best, and reason has no manners
To say it is not you: I was acquainted
Once with a time, when I enjoyd a Play-fellow;
You were at wars, when she the grave enriched,
Who made too proud the Bed, took leave of the Moon
(which then looked pale at parting) when our count
Was each a eleven.
It was Flauia.
Yes
You talk of Pirithous and Theseus love;
Theirs has more ground, is more maturely seasons,
More buckled with strong Judgment. and their needs
The one of the other may be said to water
Their intertangled roots of love, but I
And she (I sigh and spoke of) were things innocent,
Loved for we did, and like the Elements
That know not what, nor why, yet doe effect
Rare issues by their operance; our souls
Did so to one another; what she liked,
Was then of me approved, what not condemned
No more arraignment, the flower that I would pl•…cke
And put between my breasts, oh (then but beginning
To swell about the blossom) she would long
Till she had such another, and commit it
To the like innocent Cradle, where Phoenix like
They did in perfume: on my head no toy
But was her pattern, her affections (pretty
Though happily, her careless, were, I followed
For my most serious decking, had mine care
Stolen some new air, or at adventure humd on
From misicall Coinage, why it was a note
Whereon her spirits would sojourn (rather dwell on)
And sing it in her slumbers; This reh•…tsall
(Which fury-innocent wots well) comes in
Like old importments baftard, h•…s this end,
That the true love tweene Maid, and maid, may be
More then in sex individual.
You're ont of breath
And this high speeded-pace, is but to say
That you shall never (like the Maid Flavina)
Love any that's called Man.
I am sure I shall not.
Now alack weak Sister,
I must no more believe thee in this point
(Though, in it I know thou dost believe thy self,)
Then I will trust a sickly appetite,
That loathés even as it longs, but sure my Sister
If I were ripe for your persuasion, you
Have said enough to shake me from the Arm
Of the all noble Theseus, for whose fortunes,
I will now in, and kneel with great assurance,
That we, more then his Pirotho•…, possess
The high throne in his heart.
I am not against your faith,
Yet I continue mine.
To thee no star be dark.
Both heaven and earth
Friend thee for ever.
All the good that may
Be wished upon thy head, I cry Amen too't.
Th'imparciall Gods, who from the mounted hey∣vans
View us their mortal Heard, behold who err,
And in their time chastise: go and find out
The bones of your dead Lords, and honour them
With treble Ceremony, rather then a gap
Should be in their dear rights, we would suppl'it.
But those we will depute, which shall invest
You in your dignities, and even each thing
Our hast does leave imperfect; So adieu
And heavens good eyes look on you. what are those?
Men of great quality, as may be judgd
By their appointment; Some of Thebs have told's
They are Sisters children, Nephews to the King.
By the Helm of Mars, I saw them in the war,
Like to a pair of Lions, smeard with prey,
Make lanes in troops aghast. I fixed my note
Constantly on them; for they were a mark
Worth a god's view: what prisoner was it that told me
When I enquired their names?
We leave, they are called
Arcite and Palamon,
Tic •…ight, those, those
They are not dead?
Nor in a state of life, had they bin taken
When their last hurts were given, it was possible
They might have bin r•…covered; Yet they breathe
And have the name of men.
Then like men use 'em
The very lees of such (millions of rates)
Exceed the wine of others. all our Surgeons
Convent in their behoof, our richest balms
Rather then niggard wast, their lives concern us,
Much more then Thebs is worth, rather then have 'em
Fre•…d of this plight, and in their morning state
(Sound and at libcrty) I would 'em dead,
But forty thousand fold, we had rather have 'em
Prisoners to us, then death; Bear 'em speedily
From ou•… kind air, to them unkind, and minister
What man •…o man may doe for our sake more,
Since I have known frights, fury, friends, behests,
Loves, provocations, zeal, a mistress Task,
Desire of liberty, a fever, madues,
Hath set a mark which nature could not reach too
Without some imposition, sickness in will
Or wrestling strength in reason, for our Love
And great Appollos mercy, all our best,
Their best skill tender. Lead into the City,
Where having bound things scattered, we will post Flourish.
To Athens for our Army.
Vrnes, and odours, bring away,
Vapours, sighs, darken the day;
Our dole more deadly looks than dying
Balms, and G•…mes, and heavy cheers,
〈◊〉 vials filled with tears,
And clamours through the wild ayre flying.
Come all sad, and solemn Shows,
That are queen•…-eyd pleasures foes;
We convent nought else but woes.
This funeral path, brings to your households grave:
Joy cease on you again: peace sleep with him.
And this to yours.
Yours this way: Heavenslend
A thousand differing ways, to one sure end.
This world's a City full of straying Streets,
And Death's the market place, where each one meets.
I may depart with little, while I live, some thing I
May cast to you, not much: Alas the Prison I
Keep, though it be for great ones, yet they seldom
Come; Before one Salmon, you shall take a number
Of Minnows: I am given out to be better lined
Then it can appear, to me report is a true
Speaker: I would I were really, that I am
Delivered •…o be: Marry, what I have (be it what
it will) I will aflure upon my daughter at
The day of my death.
Sir I demand no more then your own offer,
And I will estate your Daughter in what I
Have promised,
Well, we will talk more of this, when the solemnity
Is past; But have you a full promise of her?
When that shall be seen, I tender my consent.
I have Sir; here she comes.
Your Friend and I have ch•…nced to name
You here, upon the old business: But no more of that.
Now, so soon as the Court hurry is over, we will
Have an end of it: In•…h mean time look tenderly
To the two Prisoners. I can tell you they are princes.
These strewings are for their Chamber; tic pity they
Are in prison, and it were pity they should be out: I
Doe think they have patience to make any adversity
Ashamed; the prison it self is proud of 'em; and
They have all the world in their Chamber.
They are fa•…'d to be a pair of absolute men.
By my troth, I think Fame but stammers 'em, they doers.
Stand a greece above the reach of report.
I heard them reported in the Battle, to be the only
Nay most likely, for they are noble suffrers; I
Marvel how they would have looked had they been
Victors, that with such a constant Nobility, enforce
A freedom out of Bondage, making misery their
Mirth, and affliction, a toy to jest at.
Doe they so?
It seems to me they have no more sense of their
Captivity, then I of ruling Athens: they eat
Well, look merrily, discourse of many things,
But nothing of their own restraint, and disasters:
Yet sometime a divided sigh, martyrd as it were
In the deliverance, will break from one of them.
When the other presently gives it so sweet a rebuke,
That I could wish my self a Sigh to be so chid,
Or at least a Sigher to be comforted.
I never saw'em.
The Duke himself came privately in the night, 
And so did they, what the reason of it is, I
Know not: Look yonder they are; that's
Arcite looks out.
No Sir, no, that's Palamon; Arcite is the
Lower of the twain; you may perceive a part
Of him.
Go too, leave your pointing; they would not
Make us their object; out of their sight.
It is a holiday to look on them: Lord, the
Difference of men. 
How doe you Noble Cousin?
How doe you Sir?
Why strong enough to laugh at misery,
And bear the chance of war yet, we are prisoners
I fear for ever Cousin.
I believe it,
And to that destiny have patiently
Laid up my hour to come.
Oh Cousin Arcite,
Where is Thebs now? where is our noble Country?
Where are our friend•…, and kindreds? never more
Must we behold those comforts, never see
The hardy youths strive for the Games of honour
(Hung with the painted favours of their Ladies)
Like tall Ships under sail: then start amongst 'em
And as an Eastwind leave 'em all behind us,
Like lazy Clouds, whilst Palamon and Arcite,
Even in the wagging of a wanton leg
Out-stript the peoples praises, won the Garlands,
Ere they have time to wish 'em ours. O never
Shall we two exercise, like Twins of honour,
Our Arms again, and feel our fyry horses
Like proud Seas under us, our good Swords, now
(Better the red-eyd god of war nev'r were)
Bravishd our sides, like age must run to rust,
And deck the Temples of those gods that hate us,
These hands shall never draw'em out like lightning
To blast whole Armies more.
No Palamon,
Those hopes are Prisoners with us, here we are
And here the graces of our youths must wither
Like a too-timely Spring; here age must find us,
And which is heaviest (Palamon) unmarried,
The sweet embraces of a loving wife
Laden with kisses, armed with thousand Cupids
Shall never clasp our necks, no issue know us,
No figures of our selves shall we ev'r see,
To glad our age, and like young Eagles teach'em
Boldly to gaze against bright arms, and say
Remember what your fathers were, and conquer.
The faire-eyd Maids, shall weep our Bauishments,
And in their Songs, curse ever-blinded fortune
Till she for shame see what a wrong she has done
To youth and nature; This is all our world;
We shall know nothing here but one another,
Hear nothing but the Clock that tells our woes.
The Vine shall grow, but we shall never see it:
Summer shall come, and with her all delights;
But dead-cold winter must inhabit here still.
Tic too true Arcite. To out Theban hounds,
That shook the aged Foe: rest with their echoes,
No more now must we hello, no more shake
Our pointed Javelins, whilst the angry Swine
Flies like a parthian quiver from our rages,
Struck with our well-steeld Darts: All valiant uses,
(The soot, and nourishment of noble minds,)
In us two here shall perish; we shall die
(which is the curse of honour) lastly,
Children of grief, and Ignorance.
Yet Cousin,
Even from the bottom of these miseries
From all that fortune can inflict upon us,
I see two comforts rising, two mere blessings,
If the gods please, to hold here abrave patience,
And the enjoying of our griefs together.
Whilst Palamon is with me, let me perish
If I think this our prison.
Certainly,
Tic a maine goodness Cousin, that our fortunes
Were twined together; tic most true, two sou•…es
Put in two noble Bodies, let'em suffer
The gaul of hazard, so they grow together,
Will never sink, they must not, say they could,
A willing man dies sleeping, and ell's done.
Shall we make worthy uses of this place
That all men hate so much?
How gentle Cousin?
Let's think this prison, holy sanctuary,
To keep us from corruption of worse•… men,
We are young and yet desire the ways of honour,
That liberty and common Conversation
The poison of pure spirits; might like women
Woo us to wander from. What worthy blessing
Can be but our Imaginations
May make it ours? And here being thus together,
We are an endless mine to one another;
We are one another wife, ever begotting
New births of love; we are father, f•…ends, acquaintance,
We are in one another, Families,
I am your heir, and you are mine: This place
Is our Inheritance: no hard Oppressor
Dare take this from us; here with a little patience
We shall live long, and loving: No surfeits seek us:
The hand of war •…urts none here, nor the Seas
Swallow their youth: we•…e we at liberty,
A wife might part us lawfully, or business,
Quarrels consume us, Envy of 〈◊〉 men
Crave our acquaintance, I might s•…ken Cousin,
Where you should never know it, and so perish
Without your noble hand to close mine eyes,
Or pra•…rs to the gods; a thousand chances
Were we from hence, would seaver 〈◊〉.
You have made me
(I thank you Cousin Arcit•…) almost wanton
With my Captivity: what a misery
It is to live abroad? and every where:
Tic like a Beast me thinks: I find the Court here,
I am sure a more content, and all those pleasures
That woo the wills of men to vanity,
I see through now, and am sufficient
To tell the world, tic but a gaudy shadow,
That old Time, as he passes by takes with him,
What had we bin old in the Court of Croon,
Where sin is Justice, lust, and ignorance,
The virtues of the great ones: Cousin Arcite,
Had not the loving gods found this place for us
We had died as they doe, ill old men, unwept,
And had their Epitaphs, the peoples Curses,
Shall I say more?
I would hear you still.
Ye shall.
Is there record of any two that loved
Better then we doe Arcite?
Sure there cannot.
I doe not think it possible our friendship
Should ever leave us.
Till our deaths it cannot 
And after death our spirits shall be led
To those that love eternally. Speak on Sir.
This garden has a world of pleasures in it.
What Flower is this?
Tic called Narcissus Madam.
That was a fair Boy certain, but a fool,
To love himself, were there not maids enough?
Pray forward.
Yes.
Or were they all hard hearted?
They could not be to one so fair.
Thou would not.
I think I should not, Madam.
That's a good wench:
But take heed to your kindness though.
Why Madam?
Men are mad things.
Will ye go forward Cousin?
Can not thou work: such flowers in silk wench?
Yes.
•…e have a gown full of 'em and of these,
This is a pretty colour, wilt not doe
Rarely upon a Skirt wench?
Dainty Madam.
Gosen, Cousin, how doe you Sir? Why Palamon?
Never till now I was in prison Arcite.
Why whats the matter Man?
Behold, and wonder.
By heaven she is a Goddess.
Ha.
Doe reverence.
She is a Goddess Arcite.
Of all Flowers.
Me thinks a Rose is best.
Why gentle Madam?
It is the very Emblem of a Maid.
For when the west wind courts her gently
How modestly she blows, and paints the Sun,
With her chaste blushes? When the North comes near her,
Rude and impatient, then, like Chastity
She lockes her beauties in her bud again,
And leaves him to base briers.
Yet good Madam,
Sometimes her modesty will blow so far
She false for it: a Maid
If she have any honour, would be loath
To take example by her.
Thou art wanton.
She is wondrous fair.
She is all the beauty extant.
The Sun grows high, lets walk in, keep these flowers,
Weal see how near Art can come near their colours;
I am wondrous merry hearted, I could laugh now.
I could lie down I am sure.
And take one with you?
That's as we bargain Madam,
Well, agree then.
What think you of this beauty?
Tic a rare one.
Is it but a rare one?
Yes a matchless beauty.
Might not a man well lose himself and love her?
I cannot tell what you have done, I have,
Beshrew mine eyes for it, now I feel my Shackles.
You love her then?
Who would not?
And desire her?
Be fore my liberty.
I saw her first.
That's nothing
But it shall be.
I saw her too.
Yes, but you must not love her.
I will not as you doe; to worship her;
As she is heavenly, and a blessed Gods;
(I love her as a woman, to enjoy her)
So both may love.
You shall not love at all.
Not love at all.
Who shall deny me?
I that first saw her; I that took possession
First with mine eye of all those beauties
In her reveled to mankind: if thou love her.
Or entertain a hope to blast my wishes,
Thou art a Traitor Arcite and a fellow
False as thy Title to her: friendship, blood
And all the ties between us I disclaim
If thou once think upon her.
Yes I love her,
And if the lives of all my name lay on it,
I must doe so, I love her with my soul,
If that will lose ye, faŕewell Palamon,
I say again, I love, and in loving her maintain
I am as worthy, and as free a lover
And have as just a title to her beauty
As any Palamon or any living
That is a mans Son.
Have I called thee friend?
Yes, and have found me so; why are you moved thus?
Let me deal coldly with you, am not I
Part of you blood, part of your soul? you have told me
That I was Palamon, and you were Arcite.
Yes.
Am not I liable to those affections,
Those joys, griefs, angers, fears, my friend shall suffer?
Ye may be.
Why then would you deal so cunningly,
So strangely, so unlike a noble kinesman
To love alone? speak truly, doe you think me
Unworthy of her sight?
No, but unjust,
If thou pursue that sight.
Because an other
First sees the Enemy, shall I stand still
And let mine honour down, and never charge?
Yes, if he be but one.
But say that one
Had rather combat me?
Let that one say so,
And use thy freedom: else if thou pursue her,
Be as that cursed man that hates his Country,
A branded villain.
You are mad.
I must be.
Till thou art worthy, Arcite, it concerns me,
And in this madness, if I hazard thee
And take thy life, I dcale but truly.
Fie Sir.
You play the Child extremely: I will love her,
I must, I ought to doe so, and I dare,
And al, this justly.
O that now, that now
Thy false-sel•…e and thy friend, had but this fortune
To be one hour at liberty, and grasp
Our good Swords in our hands, I would quickly teach thee
What tw'er to filch affection from another:
Thou a•… baser in it then a Cutpurse;
Put but thy hey•… out of this window more,
And as I have a soul, Isle nail thy life too't.
I thou dare not fool, thou can not, thou art feeble.
Pu•… my head out? Isle throw my Body out,
And leap the garden, when I see her next 
And pitch between her arms to anger thee.
No more; the keeper's coming; I shall live
To k•…cke thy brains out with my Shackles.
Doe.
By your leave Gentlemen:
Now honest keeper?
Lord Arcite, you must presently to'th Duke;
The cause•… I know not yet.
I am ready keeper.
Prince Palamon, I must awhile bereave you
Of your fair Cousins Company.
And me too,
Even when you please of life; why is he sent for?
It may be he shall marry her, he's goodly.
And like enough the Duke hath taken notice
Both of his blood and body: But his falsehood,
Why should a friend be treacherous? If that
Get him a wife so noble, and so fair;
Let honest men ne'er love again. Once more
I would but see this fair One: Blessed Garden,
And fruit, and flowers more blessed that still blossom
As her brigh•… eyes shine on ye. would I were
For all the fortune of my life hereafter
Yon little Tree, yon blooming Apricot;
How I would spread, and fling my wanton arms
In at her window; I would bring her fruit
Fit for the Gods to feed on: youth and pleasure
Still as she tasted should be do•…bled on her,
And if she be not heavenly I would make her
So near the Gods in nature, they should fear her. 
And then I am sure she would love me: how now keeper
Wher's Arcite,
Banished: Prince Piritbous
Obtained his liberty; but never more
Upon his oath and life must he set foot
Upon this Kingdom.
Hes a blessed man,
He shall see Thebs again, and call to Arms
The bold young men, that when he bids 'em charge,
Fall on like fire: Arcit•… shall have a Fortune,
If he dare make himself a worthy Lover,
Yet in the Field to strike a bat•…le for her;
And if he lose her then, he's a cold Coward;
How brave•…lie may he bear himself to win her
If he be noble Arcite; thousand ways.
Were I at liberty, I would doe things
Of such a virtuous greatness, that this Lady,
This blushing virgin should take manhood to her
And seek to ravish me.
My Lord for you
I have this charge too.
To discharge my life.
No, but from this place to remo•…ve your Lordship,
The window•… are too open.
Devils take 'em
That are so envious to me; prithee kill me.
And hang for it afterword.
By this good light
Had I a sword I would kill thee.
Why my Lord?
Thou bring such pelting scurvy news continually
Thou art not worthy life•…; I will not go.
Indeed yon must my Lord.
May I see the garden?
No.
Then I am resolved, I will not go.
I must constrain you then; and for you are dange∣rous
Isle clap more irons on you.
Doe good keeper.
Isle shake'em so, ye shall not sl•…epe,
Isle make ye a new Morri•…e, must I go?
There is no remedy.
Fare well kind window.
May rude wind never hurt thee. O my Lady
If ever thou hast felt what sorrow was,
Dream how I suffer. Come; now bury me.
Banished the kingdom? tic a benefit,
A mercy I must thank 'em for, but banished
The free enjoying of that face I die for,
Oh twasa stud died punishment, a death
Beyond Imagination: Such a vengeance
That were I old and wicked, all my sins
Could never pluck•… upon me. Palamon;
Thou hast the Start now, thou shalt stay and see
Her bright eyes break each morning against thy window,
And let in life into thee; thou shalt feed
Upon the sweetness of a noble beauty,
That nature nev'r exceeded, nor nev'r shall:
Good gods? what happiness has Palamon?
Twenty to one, he will come to speak to her,
And if she be as gentle, as she's fair,
I know she's his, he has a Tongue will tame
Tempe sts, and make the wild Rocks wanton. Come what can come'
The worst is death; I will not leave the Kingdom,
I know mine own, is but a heap of ruins,
And no redress there, if I go, he has her.
I am resolved an other shape shall make me,
Or end my fortunes. Either way, I am happy:
Isle see her, and be near her, or no more.
My Masters, isle be there that's certain.
And Isle be there.
And 〈◊〉.
Why then have with ye Boys; Tic but a chi•…ing,
Let the plough play to day, isle tick'lt out
Of the lades tails to morrow.
I am sure
To have my wife as jealous as a Turkey:
But that's all one, isle go through, let her mumble.
Clap her aboard to morrow night, and stoa her,
And ell's made up again.
I, doe but put a feskue in her fist, and you shall see her
Take a new lesson out, and be a good wench.
Doe we all hold, against the Maying?
Hold? what should ail us?
Arses will be there.
And Sennois.
And Rices, and 3. better lads nev'r danced under green Tree,
And yet know what wenches: ha?
But will the dainty Domino, the Schoolmaster keep touch
Doe you think: for he do's all ye know.
He will eat a hornebooke ere he fail: go too, the mat∣ter's too far driven between him, and the Tanners daugh∣la, to let slip now, and she must see the Duke, and she must da•…nce too.
Shall we be lusty.
All the Boys in Athens blow wind in the b•…ch on's,
and here isle be and there isle be, for our Town, and here again, and there again: ha, Boys, heigh for the wea∣verse.
This must be done in the woods.
O pardon me.
By any means our thing of learning sees so: where he himself will 〈◊〉 the Duke most pa•…ously in our behalfes: hes excellent in the woods, bring him to'th plains, his lear∣ning makes no cry:
Weal see the sports, then every man to's Tackle: and Sweet Companions lets rehearse by any means before The Ladies s•…e us, and doe sweetly, and God knows what May come on it.
Content; the sports once ended, we'll perform. Away Boys and hold.
By your leaves honest friends: pray you whither go•… you.
Whither? why, what a question's that?
Yes, tic a question, to me that know not.
To the Games my Friend.
Where were you bred you know it not?
Not farie Sir,
Are there such Gam•…s to day?
Yes marry are there:
And s•…ch as you never saw; The Duke himself
Will be in person there.
What pastimes are they?
Wrestling, and Running; Tic a pretty Fellow.
Thou wilt not go along.
Not yet Sir.
Well Sir
Take your own time, come Boys
My 〈◊〉 misgives me
This fellow has a veng'ance trick of the hip,
Mark how his Bodi's n•…de for it
Isle be hanged though
If he dare venture, hang him plumb porridge,
He wrestle? he roast eggs. Co•… lets be gon Lads.
This is an offered opportunity
I durst not wish for. Well, I could have wrestled,
The best men called it excellent, and run
Swifter, then wind upon a field of Corn
(Curling the wealthy ears) never flew: Il•… venture,
And in some poor disgu•…ze be there, who knows
Whether my brows may not be girt with garlands?
And happiness prefer me to a place,
Where I may ever dwell in sight of her.
Why should I love this Gentleman? Tic odds
He never will aff•…ct me; I am base,
My Father the mean Keeper of his Prison,
And he a prince; To marry him is hopeless;
To be his whore, is witless; Out upon it;
What pushes are we wenches driven to
When fifteen once has found us? First I saw him,
I (seeing) thought he was a goodly man;
He has as much to please a woman in him,
(If he please to bestow it so) as ever
These eyes yet looked on; Next, I pittled him,
And so would any young wench 〈◊◊〉
That ever dreamed, or vowed her Maidenhead
To a young hansom Man; Then I loved him,
(Extreme•…y loved him) infinitely loved him;
And yet he had a Cousin, fair as he too.
But in my heart was Palamon, and there
Lord, what a coil he keeps? To hear him
Sing in an evening, what a heaven it is?
And yet his Songs are sad-ones; Fairer spoken,
Was never Gentleman. When I come in
To bring him water in a morning, first
He bows his noble body, then salutes me, thus:
Fair, gentle May de, good morrow, may thy goodness,
Get thee a happy husband; Once he kissed me,
I loved my lips the better ten days after,
Would he would doe so every day; He grieves much,
And me as much to see his misery.
What should I doe, to make him know I love him,
For I would fine enjoy him? Say I ventured
To set him free? what says the law then? Thus much
For Law, or kindred: I will doe it,
And this night, or to morrow he shall love me.
You have done worthily: I have not seen
Since Hercules, a man of tougher sinews;
What ere you are, you run the best, and wrestle,
That these times can allow.
I am proud to please you.
What Country bred you?
This; but far off, Prince.
Are you a Gentleman?
My father said so;
And to those gentle uses gave me life.
Are you his heir?
His youngest Sir.
Your Father
Sure is a happy Sire then: what proves you?
A little of all noble Qualities:
I could have kept a Hawk, and well have holloa'd
To a deep cry of Dogs; I dare not praise
My feat in horsemanship: yet they that knew me
Would say it was my best piece: last, and greatest,
I would be thought a Soldier.
You are perfect.
Upon my soul, a proper man.
He is so.
How doe you like him Lady?
I admire him,
I have not seen so young a man, so noble
(If he say true,) of his sort.
Believe,
His mother was a wondrous handsome woman,
His face me thinks, goes that way.
But his Body
And fiery mind, illustrate a brave Father.
Mark how his virtue, like a hidden Sun
Breaks through his baser garments.
Hoe's well got sure.
What made you seek this place Sir?
Noble Theseus.
To purchase name, and doe my ablest service
To such a well-found wonder, as thy worth,
Foe only in thy Court, of all the world
dwells faire-eyd honour.
All his words are worthy.
Sir, we are much indebted to your travel,
Nor shall you loose your wish: Perithous
Dispose of this fair Gentleman.
Thanks Theseus.
What ere you are you're mine, and I shall give you
To a most noble service, to this Lady,
This bright young Virgin; pray observe her goodness;
You have honoured his fair birth-day, with your virtues,
And as your due you're hers: kiss her fair hand Sir.
Sir, you're a noble Giver: dearest Beauty,
Thus let me seal my vowed faith: when your Servant
(Your most unworthy Creature) but offends you,
Command him die, he shall.
That were too cruel.
If you deserve well Sir; I shall soon see it:
You're mine, and somewhat better than your rank Isle use you.
Isle see you furnished, and because you say
You are a horseman, I must needs entreat you
This after noon to ride, but tic a rough one.
I like him better (Prince) I shall not then
Freeze in my Saddle.
Sweet, you must be ready,
And you Emilia, and you (Friend) and all
To morrow by the Sun, to doe observance
To flowery May, in Deans wood: waite well Sir
Upon your Mistress: Emily, I hope
He shall not go a foot.
That were a shame Sir,
While I have horses: take your choice, and what
You want at any time, let me but know it;
If you serve faithfully, I dare assure you
You'll find a loving Mi•…ris.
If I doe not,
Let me find that my Father ever hated,
〈◊〉, and blows.
Go lead the way; you have won it:
It shall be so; you shall receive all dues
Fit for the honour you have won; It were wrong else,
Sister, beshrew my heart, you have a Servant,
That if I were a woman, would be Master,
But you are wise.
I hope too wise for that Sir.
Let all the Dukes, and all the devils roar,
He is at liberty: I have ventured for him,
And out I have brought him to a little wood
A mile hence, I have sent him, where a Cedar
Higher than all the rest, spreads like a plane
Fast by a Brooke, and there he shall keep close,
Till I provide him Files, and food, for yet
His iron bracel•…ts are not off. O Love
What a stout hearted child thou art! My Father
Durst better have endured cold iron, than done it:
I love him, beyond love, and beyond reason,
Or wit, or safety: I have made him know it
I care not, I am desperate, If the law
Find me, and then condemn me for it; some wenches,
Some honest hearted Maids, will sing my Dirge.
And tell to memory, my death was noble,
Dying almost a Martyr: That way he takes,
I purpose is my way too: Sure he cannot
Be so unmanly, as to leave me here,
If he doe, Maids will not so easily
Trust men again: And yet he has not thanked m•…
For what I have done: no not so much as kissed me,
And that (me thinks) is not so well; not scarcely
Could I persuade him to become a Freeman,
He made such scruples of the wrong he did
To me, and to my Father. Yet I hope
When he considers more, this love of mine
Will take more root within him: Let him doe
What he will with me, so he use me kindly,
For use me so he shall, or isle proclaim him
And to his face, no-man: Isle presently
Provide him necessaries, and pack my clothes up,
And where there is a path of ground Isle venture
So h•… be with me; By him, like a shadow
Isle ever dwell; 〈◊〉 bin thy•… hour the whoobub
Will be all ore the prison: I am then
Kissing the man they look for: farewell Father;
Get many more such prisoners, and such daughters,
And shortly you may keep your self. No•… to him:
The Duke has lost Hypolita; each took
A several land. This is a solemn Right
They owe bloomed May, and the Athenians pay it
To'th heart of Ceremony: O Queen Emilia
Fresher then May, sweeter
Then his gold Buttons on the bows, or all
Th'en amelld knackes of the Mead, or garden, yea
(We challenge too) the bank of any Nymph
That makes the stream seem flowers; thou o Jewel
Of the wood, of the world, hast likewise blessed a pace
With thy sole presence, in thy rumination
That I poor man might eftsoones come between
And chop on some cold thought, thrice blessed chance
To drop on such a Mistress, expectation
most guiltless on it: tell 〈◊〉 O Lady Fortune
(Next after Emily •…y Sove•…gne) how far
I may be proud. She takes strong note of me,
Hath made me near her; and this benteous Morn
(The prim'st of all the year) presents me with
A brace of horses, two such Steeds might well
Be by a pair of Kings backed, in a Field
That their crowns titles tried: Alas, alas
Poor Cousin Palamon, poor prisoner, thou
So lit•…le dream upon my fortune, that
Thou think thy self, the happier thing, to be
So near Emilia, me thou deem at Thebs,
And therein wretched, although free; But if
Thou knew my Mistress breathed on me, and that
I eared her language, lived in her eye; O Cos
What passion would enclose thee.
Traitor kinseman,
Thou should perceive my passion, if these signal
Of prisonment were off me, and this hand
But owner of a Sword: By all oaths in one
I, and the justice of my love would make thee
A conf•… Traitor, o thou most persidious
That ever gently looked the voids of honour.
That eu'r bore gentle Token; falsest Cousin
That ever blood made kin, call thou his thine?
Isle prove it in my Shackles, with these hands,
Void of appointment, that thouly'st, and art
A very thief in love, a Ch•…y Lord
Nor worth the name of villain: had I a Sword
And these house clogs away.
Dear Cousin Palamon,
Cosoner Arcite, give me language, such
As thou hast showed me feat.
Not •…ding in
The circuit of my breast, any gross stuff
To form me like your blazon, holds me to
This gentleness of answer; tic your passion
That thus mistakes, the which to you being enemy,
Cannot to me be kind: honour, and honesty
I cherish, and depend on, how so ev'r
You skip them in me, and with them fair Cos
Isle maintain my proceedings; pray be pleased
To show in generous terms, your griefs, since that
Your question's with your equal, who professes
To clear his own way, with the mind and Sword
Of a true Gentleman.
That thou durst Arcite.
My Cos, my Cos, you have been well advertised
How much I dare, you've seen me use my Sword
Against th'advice of fear: sure of another
You would not hear me doubted, but your silence
Should break out, though in the Sanctuary.
Sir,
I have seen you move in such a place, which well
Might justify your manhood, you were called
A good knight and a bold; But the whole weeke's not fair
If any day it rain: Their valiant temper
Men loose when they incline to treachery,
And then they fight like compelled Bears, would fly
Were they not tide.
Kinsman, you might as well
Speak this, and act it in your Glass, as to
His care, which now disdains you.
Come up to me,
Q•…it me of these cold Gives, give me a Sword
Though it be rusty, and the charity
Of one meal lend me; Come before me then
A good Sword in thy hand, and doe but say
That Emily is thine, I will forgive
The trespass thou hast done me, yea my life
If then thou carry•…, and brave souls in shades
That have died manly, which will seek of me
Some news from earth, they shall get none but this
That thou art brave, and noble.
Be content,
Again betake you to your hawthorn house,
With counsel of the night, I will be here
With wholesome viands; these impediments
Will I file off, you shall have gannents, and
Perfumes to kill the •…nil of the prison, after
When you shall stretch your self, and say but Arcite
I am in plight, there shall be at your choice
Both Sword, and Armour.
Oh you heavens, dares any
So noble bear a guilty business! none
But only Arcite, therefore none but Arcite
In this kind is so bold.
Sweet Palamon.
I doe embràce you, and your offer, for
Your offer do it I only, Sir your person
Without hypocrisy I may not wish 
More then my Swords edge ont.
You hear the Horns;
Enter your Music least this match between's
Be crossed, er met, give me your hand, farewell.
Isle bring you every needful thing: I pray you
Take comfort and be strong.
Pray hole•… your promise;
And doe the deed with a bent brow, most creaine
You love me not, be rough with me, and power
This oil out of your language; by this ayre
I could for each word, give a Cuff: my stomach
not reconcild by reason,
Plainly spoken,
Yet pardon me hard language, when I spur 
My horse, I chide him nor; content, and anger
In me have but one face. Hark Sir, they call
The scattered to the Banquet; you must guess
I have an office there.
Sir your attendance
Cannot please heaven, and I know your office
Unjustly is achieved.
If a good title,
I am persuaded this question sick between's,
By bleeding must be cured. I am a Suitor,
That to your Sword you will be queath this plea,
And talk of it no more.
But this one word:
You are going now to gaze upon my Mistress,
For note you, mine she is.
Nay then.
Nay pray you,
You talk of feeding me to breed me strength
You are going now to look upon a Sun
That strengthens what it looks on, there
You have a vantage ore me, but enjoy't till
I may enforce my remedy. Farewell.
He h•…s mistook; the Beak I meant, is gone
After his fancy, Tic now well-nigh morning,
No matter, would it were perpetual night,
And darkness Lord of the world, Hark tic a woolfe:
In me hath grief slain fear, and but for one thing
I care for nothing, and that's Palamon.
I wreak not if the wolves would jaw me, so
He had this File; what if I hallowd for him?
I cannot hallow: ifI whooped; what then?
If he not answered, I should call a wolf,
And doe him but that service. I have heard
Strange howls this live-long night, why may it not be
They have made prey of him? he has no weapons,
He cannot run, the Jangling of his Gives
Might call fell things to listen, who have in them
A sense to know a man unarmed, and can
Smell where resistance is. Isle set it down
He's torn to pieces, they howl many together
And then they feed on him: So much for that,
Be bold to ring the Bell; how stand I then?
Ell's char'd when he is gone, No, no Ely,
My Father's to be hanged for his escape,
My self to beg, if I prized life so much
As to deny my act, but that I would not,
Should I try death by dussons: I am mop't,
Food took I none these two days.
Sipped some water. I have not closed mine eyes
Save when my lids scowrd off their bine; alas
Dissolve my life, Let not my sense unsettle
Least I should drown, or stab, or hang my self,
O state of Nature, fail together in me,
Since thy best props are warped: So which way now?
The best way is, the next way to a grave:
Each errant step beside is torment. Lo
The Moon is down, the Crickets chirp, the Schreichowl
Calls in the dawn; all offices are done
Save what I fail in: But the point is this
An end, and that is all.
I should be near the place, hoe. Cousin Palamon.
Arcite.
The same: I have brought you food and files,
Come forth and fear not, her'e sno Theseus.
Nor none so honest Arcite.
That's no matter,
We'll argue that hereafter: Come take courage,
You shall not dye thus beastly, here Sir drink
I know you are faint, then isle talk further with you.
Arcite, thou might now poison me.
I might.
But I must fear you first: Sit down, and good now
No more of these vain parleys; let us not
Having our ancient reputation with us
Make talk for Fools, and Cowards, To your health, &amp;c.
Doe.
Pray sit down then, and let me entreat you
By all the honesty and honour in you,
No mention of this woman, t'will di•…urbe us,
We shall have time enough.
Well Sir, Isle pledge you.
Drink a good hearty draught, it breeds good blood man.
Doe not you feel it thaw you?
Stay, 〈◊〉 t•…ll you after a draught or two more.
Spare it not, the Duke has more Cousin: Eat now.
Yes.
I am glad you have so good a stomach.
I am gladder I have so good meat too't.
Is it not mad lodging here in the wild woods Cousin
Yes, for then that have wilde Consciences.
How tastes your vittails? your hunger needs no sauce I see,
Not much.
But if it did, yours is too 〈◊〉: sweet Cousin: what is this?
Venison.
Tic a lusty meat:
Give me more wine; here Arcite to the wenches
We have known in our days. The Lord Stewards daughter.
Doe you remember her?
After you Cousin.
She loved a black-haired man.
She did so; well Sir.
And I have heard some call him Arcite. and
Out with it faith.
She met him in an Arbour:
What did she there Cousin? play of the virginals?
Something she did Sir.
Made her groan a month for it; or 2. or 3. or 10.
The Marshals Sister,
Had her share too, as I remember Coffin,
Else there be tales abroad, you'll pledge her?
Yes.
A pre•…tie brown wench t'is-There was a time
When young men went a hunting, and a wood,
And a broad Beech: and thereby hangs a tale: heigh ho.
For Emily, upon my life; Fool
Away with this strained mirth; I say again
That sigh was breathed for Emily; base Cousin,
Dare thou break first?
you are wide.
By heaven and earth, ther's nothing in thee honest.
Then Isle leave you: you are a Beast now:
As thou makst me, Traitor.
Ther's all things needful, files and shirts, and, per∣fumes:
Isle come again some two hours hence, and bring
That that shall quiet all,
A Sword and Armour.
Fear me not; you are now too foul; fare well.
Cet off your Trinkets, you shall want nought;
Sir ha:
Isle hear no more.
If he keep touch, he dies for it.
I am very cold, and all the Stars are out too,
The little Stars, and all, that look like aglets:
The Sun has seen my Folly: Palam•…n;
Alas no; hes i•… heaven; where am I now?
Yonder's the sea, and ther's a Ship; how't tumbles
And ther's a Rock lies watching under water;
Now, now, it beats upon it; now, now, now,
Ther's a leak sprung, a sound one, how they cry?
Upon her before the wind, you'll loose all else:
Up with a course or two, and take about Boys.
Good night, good night, you're gon•…; I am very hungry,
Would I could find a fine 〈◊〉 would tell me
〈◊〉 from all parts of the world, then would I make
A Carrack of a Cockle shell, and sail
By east and North East to the King of Pigmes,
For he tells fortunes rarely. Now my Father
Twenty to one is trust up in a trice
To morrow morning, Isle say never a word.
For isle cut my 〈◊〉 coat, 〈◊〉 above my knee,
And isle clip my yellow lockes; an inch below mine eye. hey, nonny, nonny, nonny,
He's buy me a white Cut, forth for to ride
And isle go seek him, throw the world that is so wide hey nonny, nonny, nonny.
O for a prick now like a Nightingale, to put my breast
Against. I shall sleep like a Top else.
Fie, fie, what tediosity, &amp; disensanity is here among ye? have my Rudiments bin bi•…abourd so long with ye? milkd unto ye, and by a figure even the very plumbroth &amp; marrow of my understanding laid upon ye? and do you still cry where, and how, &amp; wherefore? you most course freeze capacities, ye jave Judgements, have I said thus let be, and there let be, and then let be, and no man understand me, proh 〈◊〉, medius 〈◊〉, ye are all dunces: For why here stand I. Here the Duke comes, there are you close in the Thicket; the Duke appears, I meet him and unto him I utter learned things, and many figures, he hears, and nods, and hums, and then cries rare, and I go forward, at length I fling my Cap up; mark there; then do you as once did M•…ager, and the Bore break comely out before him: like true lovers, cast your selves in a Body decently, and sweetly, by a figure trace, and turn Boys.
And sweetly we will doe it Master Gerrold.
Draw up the Company, Whore's the Taborour.
Why Timothy.
Here my mad boys, have at ye.
But I say whore's their women?
Here's Frizz and Maudlin.
And little Luce with the white legs, and bouncing 〈◊〉.
And freekeled Nel; that never failed her Master.
Where be your Ribands maid•…? swim with your Bodies
And carry it sweetly, and deliverly
And now and then a favour, and a frisko.
Let us alone Sir.
Wher's the rest of the Music.
Dispersed as you commanded.
Couple then
And see what's wanting; wher's the Bavian?
My friend, carry your tail without offence
•…r scandal to the Ladies; and be sure
〈◊〉 tumble with audacity, and manhood,
And when you bark doe it with judgement.
Yes Sir.
Quo usque tandem. Here is a woman wanting
We may go whistle: all the fat's in the fi•…e.
We have,
As learned Authors utter, washd a Tile,
We have been fatu•…, and laboured vainly.
This is that scornful piece, that 〈◊〉 vi hilding
That gave her promise faithfully, she would be here,
Cice y the Sempsters daughter:
The next gloves that I give her shall be dog skin;
Nay and she fail me once, you can tell Arses
She swore by wine, and bread, she would not break.
An Eel and woman,
A learned Poet says: unless by the tail
And with thy teeth thou hold, will either fail,
In manners this was false position
A fire ill take her; do's she flinch now?
What
Shall we determine Sir?
Nothing,
Our business is become a nullity
Yea, and a woeful, and a piteous nullity.
Now when the credit of our Town lay on it,
Now to be frampall, now to peace of the nettle,
Go thy ways, isle remember thee, isle fit thee,
The George allow, came from the South, from
The coast of Barberry a.
And there he met with brave gallants of war By one, by two, by three, a
Well held well held, you jolly gallants,
And whither now are you bound a
O let me have your company till come to the sound a
There was three fools, fell out about an howls
The one sed it was an owl
The other he sed nay,
The third he sedit was a hawk, and her bells were cut away.
Ther's a dainty mad woman Mr. comes in the Nick as mad as a march hare: if wee can get her dance, wee are made again: I warrant her, she'll doe the rarest gambols.
A mad woman? we are made Boys.
And are you mad good woman?
I would be sorry else,
Give me your hand.
Why?
I can tell your fortune.
You are a fool: rell ten, I have post him: Buzz
Friend you must eat no white bread, if you doe
Your teeth will bleed extremely, shall we dance ho?
I know you, y'a•… a Tinker: Sirha Tinker
Stop no more holes, but what you should.
Dij bone. A Tinker Damsel?
Or a Conjurer: raise me a devil now, and let him play
of the bells and bones.
Go take her, and fluently persuade her to a peace:
Et opus exegi, quote nec 〈◊〉 ira, 〈◊〉 ignis.
Strike up, and lead her in.
Come Lasle, lets trip it.
Isle lead:
Doe, doe.
Persuasively, and cunningly: away boys, 
I hear the horns: give me some
Meditation, and mark your Cuo:
Pallas inspire me.
This way the Stag took.
Stay, and edisie.
What have we here?
Some Country sport, upon my life Sir.
Well Sir, go forward, we will 〈◊〉.
Ladies sit down, we'll 〈◊◊〉.
Thou doughty Duke all hail: •…ll hail sweet Ladies.
This is a cold beginning.
If you but favour; our Country pastime made is,
We are a few of those collected here
That ruder Tongues distinguish villager,
And to say verity, and not to fable;
We are a merry rout, or else a rabble
Or company, or by a figure, Choris
That fore thy dignity will dance a Morris.
And I that am the rectifier of all
By title Pedagogus, that let fall
The Birch upon the breeches of the small ones,
And humble with a 〈◊〉 the tall ones,
Doe here present this Machine, or this fra•…e,
And dainty Duke, whose doughty dis•…all fame
From Dis to Dedal•…, from post to pillar
Is blown abroad; help me thy poor well willer,
And with thy twins•…ing eyes, look right and straight
Upon this mighty 〈◊〉 — of mickle weight
Is — now comes in, which being glewd together
Makes Morris, and the cause that we came •…ether.
The body of our sport of no small study
I first appear, though rude, and raw, and muddy,
To speak before thy noble grace, this te•…er:
At whose great feet I offer up •…y penner.
The next the Lord of May, and Lady bright,
The Chambermaid, and Serving-man by night
That seek out sell•…t •…ging: Then mine Host
And his fat Spouse, that welcomes to their cost
The gauled Traveller, and with a beckoning
Informs the Tipster to inflame the reckoning:
Then the beast eating Clown, and next the fool,
The Bavian with long tail, and eke long 〈◊〉,
Cummultis aliijs that make a dance,
Say I, and all shall presently advance.
I, I by any mea•…s, dear Domino.
Produce. 
〈◊◊〉, Come forth, and foot it,
Ladies, if we have been •…erry
And have pleased thee with a derry,
And a 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 a 〈◊〉
Say the Schoolemaster's no Clown:
Duke, if we have pleased three 〈◊〉
And have done as good Boys should doe,
Give us but a tree or twain
For a Maypole, and again
Ere another year run out,
We'll make thee laugh and all this 〈◊〉.
Take 20. D•…mine; how does my sweet heart.
Never so pleased Sir.
It was an excellent dance, and for a preface
I never heard a better.
Schoolmaster, I thank yo•…, One see'•… all re∣warded.
And heir's something to paint your Pole withal.
Now to our sports again.
May the Stag thou 〈◊〉 stand long,
And thy dogs be swift and strong:
May they kill him withoutlets,
And the Ladies •…ate his dows•…ts: Come we are all •…de. 
Dij Dea{que} omnes, ye have danced rarely wenches. 
About this hour my Cousin gave his faith
To visit me again, and with him bring
Two Swords, and two good Armours; if he fail
He's neither man, nor Soldier; when he left 〈◊〉
I did not think a week could have restored
My lost strength to me, I was grown so low,
And Crestfallen with my wants: I thank thee Arcite,
Thou art yet a fair Foe; and I feel my self
With this refreshing, able once again
To out dure danger: To delay it longer
Would make the world think when it comes to hearing,
That I lay fatting like a Swine, to fight
And not a Soldier: Therefore this blessed morning
Shall be the last; and that Sword he refuses,
If it but hold, I kill him with; tic Justice:
So love, and Fortune for me: O good morrow. 
Good morrow noble kinesman,
I have put you
To too much pains Sir.
That too much fair Cousin.
Is but a debt to honour, and my duty.
Would you were so in all Sir; I could wish ye
As kind a kinsman, as you force me find
A beneficial foe, that my embraces
Might thank ye, not my blows.
I shall think either
Well done, a noble recompense.
Then I shall quit you.
Defy me in these fair terms, and you show
More then a Mistress to me, no more anger
As you love any thing that's honourable;
We were not bred to talk man, when we are armed
And both upon our guards, then let our fury
Like meeting of two tides, fly strongly from us,
And then to whom the birthright of this Beauty
Truly pertains (without obbraidings, scorns,
Dispisings of our persons, and such pouting•…
Fitter for Girls and Schooleboyes) will be seen
And quickly, you•…s, or mine: wilt please you arm Sir,
Or if you feel your self not sitting yet
And furnished with your old strength, isle stay Cousin
And every day discourse you into health,
As I am spared, your person I am friends with,
And I could wish I had not said I loved her
Though I had did; But loving such a Lady
And justifying my Love, I must not fly from it.
Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy
That no man but thy Cosen's fit to kill thee,
I am well, and lusty, choose your Arms.
Choose you Sir:
Wilt thou exceed in all, or dost thou doe it
To make me •…pare thee?
If you think so Cousin,
You are deceived, for as I am a Soldier.
I will not spare you.
That's well said.
You'll find it
Then as I am an honest man and love,
With all the justice of affection
Isle pay thee soundly: This isle take.
That's mine then,
Isle are•…e you first.
Do: pray thee tell me Cousin,
Where gotst thou this good Armour.
Tic the Dukes,
And to say true, I stole it; doe I pinch you.
No.
Is it not too heavy?
I have worn a lighter,
But I shall make it serve.
Isle buckle it close.
By any means.
You care not for a Grand guard?
No, no, we'll use no horses, I perceive
You would fine be at that Fight.
I am indifferent.
Faith so am I: good Cousin, thrust the buckle
Through far enough.
I warrant you.
My Cask now.
Will you fight bare-armed?
We shall be the no•…bler.
But use your Gauntlets though; those are of the least,
Prithee take mine good Cousin.
Thank you Arcite.
How doe I look, am I fallen much away?
Faith very little; love has used you kindly.
Isle warrant thee, Isle strike home.
Doe, and spare not;
Isle give you cause sweet •…ocean.
Now to you Sir,
Me thinks this Armours very like that, 〈◊〉,
Thou wor'st that day the 3. Kings fell, but lighter.
That was a very good one, and that day
I well remember, you out did me Cousin,
I never saw such valour: when you charged
Upon the left wing of the Enemy,
I spurt hard to come up, and under me
I had a right good horse.
You had indeed
A bright Bay I remember.
Yes but all
Was vainly laboured in me, you outwent me,
Nor could my wishes reach you; yet a little
I did by imitation.
More by virtue,
You are modest Cousin.
When I saw you charge first,
Me thought I heard a dreadful clap of Thunder
Break from the Troop.
But still before that flew
The lightning of your valour: Stay a little,
Is not this piece too 〈◊〉?
No, no, tic well.
I would have nothing hurt thee but my Sword,
A bruise would be dishonour.
Now I am perfect.
Stand off then.
Take my Sword, I hold it better.
I thank ye: No, keep it, your life lies on it,
Here's one, if it but hold, I ask no more,
For all my hopes: My Cause and honour guard me.
And me my love: * Is there ought else to say?
This only, and no more: Thou art mine Aunts Son.
And that blood we desire to shed is mutual,
In me, thine, and in thee, mine: My Sword
Is in my hand, and if thou killst me
The gods, and I forgive thee; If there be
A place prepared for those that sleep in honour,
I wish his weary soul, that falls may win it:
Fight bravely Cos•…, give me thy noble hand.
Here Palamon: This hand shall never more
Come near thee with such friendship.
I commend thee.
If I fall, curse me, and say I was a coward,
For none but such, dare die in these just Trials.
Once more farewell my Cousin,
Farewell Arcite.
Lo Cousin, lo, our Folly has undone us.
Why?
This is the Duke, a hunting as I told you,
If we be found, we are wretched, O retire
For honours sake, and safely presently
Into your Bush again; Sir we shall find
Too many hours to dye in, gentle Cousin:
If you be seen you perish instantly
For breaking prison, and I, if you reveal me,
For my contempt; Then all the world will scorn us,
And say we had a noble difference,
But base disposers of it.
No, no, Cousin
I will no more be hidden, nor put off
This great adventure to a second Trial
I know your cunning, and I know your cause,
He that faints now, shame take him, put thy self
Upon thy present guard.
You are not mad?
Or I will make th'advantage of this hour
Mine own, and what to come shall threaten me,
I fear less then my fortune: know weak Cousin
I love Emilia, and in that isle bury
Thee, and all crosses else.
Then come, what can come
Thou shalt know Palamon, I dare as well
Die, as discourse, or sleep: Only this fears me,
The law will have the honour of our ends.
Have at thy •…ife.
Look to thine own well Arcite.
What ignorant and mad malicious Traitors,
Are you? That against the tenor of my Laws
Are making Battle, thus like Knights appointed,
Without my leave, and Officers of Arms?
By Castor both shall dye.
Hold thy word Theseus,
We are certainly both Traitors, both despisers
Of thee, and of thy goodness: I am Palamon
That cannot love thee, he that broke thy Prison,
Think well, what that deserves; and this is Arcite
A bolder Traitor never trod thy ground
A Falser neu'r seemed friend: This is the man
Was begged and banished, this is he contemns thee
And what thou dare doe; and in this disguise
Against this own Edict follows thy Sister,
That fortunate bright Star, the fair Emilia
Whose servant, (if there be a right in seeing,
And first bequeathing of the soul to) justly
I am, and which is more, dares think her his.
This treachery like a most trusty Lover,
I called him now to answer; if thou be
As thou art spoken, great and virtuous,
The true descider of all injuries,
Say, Fight again, and thou shalt see me Theseus
Doe such a Justice, thou thy self wilt envy,
Then take my life, Isle woo thee too't.
O heaven,
What more then man is this!
I have sworn.
We seek not
Thy breath of mercy Theseus, Tic to me
A thing as soon to dye, as thee to say it,
And no more moved: where this man calls me Traitor,
Let me say thus much; if in love be Treason,
In service of so excellent a Beauty,
As I love most, and in that faith will perish,
As I have brought my life here to confirm it,
As I have served her truest, worthiest,
As I dare kill this Cos•…, that denies it,
So let me be most Traitor, and ye please me:
For scorning thy Edict Duke, ask that Lady
Why she is fair, and why her eyes command me
Stay here to love her; and if she say Traitor,
I am a villain fit to lye unburied.
Thou shalt have pity of us both, o Theseus,
If unto neither thou show mercy, stop,
(As thou art just) thy noble ear against us,
As thou art valiant; for thy Cousins soul
Whose 12. strong labours crown his memory,
Lets die together, at one instant Duke,
Only a little let him fall before me,
That I may tell my Soul he shall not have her.
I grant your wish, for to say true, your Cousin
Has ten times more offended, for I gave him
More mercy then you found, Sir, your offences
Being no more then his: None here speak for'em
For ere the Sun set, both shall sleep for ever.
Asas the pity, now or never Sister
Speak not to be denied; That face of yours
Will bear the curses else of after ages
For these lost Cousins.
In my face dear Sister
I find no anger to 'em; nor no ruin,
The missed venture of their own eyes kill'em;
Yet that I will be woman, and have pity,
My knees shall grow to'th ground but Isle get mercy.
Help me dear Sister, in a deed so virtuous,
The powers of all women will be with us,
Most royal Brother.
Sir by our tie of Marriage.
By your own spotless honour.
By that faith,
That fair hand, and that honest heart you gave me.
By that you would have pity in another,
By your own virtues infi•…ite.
By valour,
By all the chaste nights I have ever pleased you.
These are strange Conjurings.
Nay then I•…o in too: By all our friendship Sir, by all our dangers,
By all you love most, wars; and this sweet Lady.
By that you would have trembled to deny
A blushing Maid.
By your own eyes: By strength
In which you swore I went beyond all women,
Almost all men, and yet I yielded Theseus.
To crown all this; By your most noble soul
Which cannot want due mercy, I beg first.
Next hear my prayers.
Last let me entreat Sir.
For mercy.
Mercy.
Mercy on these Princes.
Ye make my faith reels: Say I felt
Comp•…ssion to'em both, how would you place it?
Upon their lives: But with their banishments.
You are a right woman Sister; you have pity,
B•…t want the understanding where to use it.
If you desire their lives, invent a way
Safer then banishment: Can these two live
And have•… the agony of love about 'em,
And not kill one another? Every day
The'yld fight about you; hourly bring your honour
In public question with their Swords; Be wise then
And here forget 'em; it concerns your credit,
And my oath equally: I have said they die,
Better they fall by the law, then one another.
Bow not my honour.
O my noble Brother,
That oath was rashly made, and in your anger,
Your reason will not hold it, if such vows
Stand for express will, all the world must perish.
Beside, I have another oath, against yours
Of more authority, I am sure more love,
Not made in passion neither, but good heed.
What is it Sister?
Urge it home brave Lady.
That you would nev'r deny me any thing
Fit for my modest suit, and your free granting:
I tie you to your word now, if ye fall in it,
Think how you maim your honour;
(For now I am set a begging Sir, I am deaf
To all but your compassion) how their lives
Might breed the ruin of my name; Opinion,
Shall any thing that loves me perish for me?
That were a cruel wisdom, doe men proyne
The straight young Bows that blush with thousand Blossom•…
Because they may be rotten? O Duke Theseus
The goodly Mothers that have groaned for these,
And all the longing Maids that ever loved,
If your vow stand, shall curse me and my Beauty,
And in their funeral songs, for these two Cousins
Despise my cruelty, and cry woe worth me,
Till I am nothing but the scorn of women;
For heavens sake save their lives, and banish 'em.
On what conditions?
Sweare'em never more
To make me their Contention, or to know me,
To tread upon thy Duke dome, and to be
Where ever they shall travel, ever strangers to one another.
Isle be cut a pieces
Before I take this oath, forget I love her?
O all ye gods despise me then: Thy Banishment
I not mislike, so we may fairly carry
Our Swords, and cause along: else never trifle,
But take our lives Duke, I must love and will,
And for that love, must and dare kill this Cousin
On any piece the earth has.
Will you Arcite
Take these conditions?
H'es a villain then.
These are men.
No, never Duke: Tic worse to me than begging
To take my life so basely, though I think
I never shall enjoy her, yet isle preserve
The honour of affection, and dye for her,
Make death a Devil.
What may be done? for now I feel compassion.
Let it not fall again Sir.
Say Emilia
If one of them were dead, as one mu•…, are you
Content to take the other to your husband?
They cannot both enjoy you; They are Princes
As goodly as your own eyes, and as noble
As ever fame yet spoke of; look upon'em,
And if you can love, end this difference,
I give consent, are you content too Princes?
With all our souls.
He that she refuses
Must dye then.
Any death thou can invent Duke.
If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favour,
And Lovers yet unborn shall bless my ashes.
If she refuse me, yet my grave will wed me,
And Soldiers sing my Epitaph.
Make choice then.
I cannot Sir, they are both too excellent
For me, a hair shall never fall of these men.
What will become of 'em?
Thus I ordain it,
And by mine honour, once again it stands,
Or both shall dye. You shall both to your Country,
And each within this mo•…eth accompanied
With three fair Knights, appear again in this place,
In which Isle plant a Pyramid; and whether
Before us that are here, can force his Cousin
By fair and knightly strength to touch the Pillar,
He shall enjoy her: the other loose his head,
And all his friends; Nor shall he grudge to fall,
Nor think he dies with interest in this Lady:
Will this content ye?
Yes: here Cousin Arcite
I am friends again, till that hour.
I embrace ye.
Are you content Sister?
Yes, I must Sir,
Else both miscarry.
Come shake hands again then,
And take •…eede, as you are Gentlemen, this Quarrel
Sleep till the hour prefixed, and hold your course,
We dare not fail thee Theseus.
Come, Isle give ye
Now usage like to Princes, and to Friends:
When ye return, who wins, Isle settle here,
Who looses, yet Isle weep upon his Beer. 
Hear you no more, was nothing said of me
Concerning the escape of Palamon?
Good Sir remember.
Nothing that I heard,
For I came home before the business
Was fully ended: Yet I might perceive
Ere I departed, a great likelihood
Of both their p•…rdons: For Hipolita,
And faire-eyd Emily, upon their knees
Begged with such hansom pity, that the Duke
Me thought stood staggering, whether •…e should follow
His ra•…h of the, or the sweet compassion
Of those two 〈◊〉; and to second them,
That truly noble Prince P•…rithous
Half his own heart, set in too, that I hope
All shall be well: Neither heard I one question
Of your name, or his scope.
Pray heaven it hold so.
Be of good comfort man; I bring you news,
Good news.
They are welcome,
Palamon has cleared you,
And got your pardon, and discovered
How, and by whose means he escaped, which was your Daughters,
Whose pardon is procured too, and the Prisoner
Not to be held ungrateful to her goodness,
Has given a sum of money to her Marriage.
A large one isle assure you.
Ye are a good man
And ever bring good news.
How was it ended?
Why, as it should be; they that nev'r begged
But they prevailed, had their suites fairly granted,
The prisoners have their lives.
I knew t'would be so.
But there be new conditions, which you'll hear of
At better time.
I hope they are good.
They are honourable,
How good they'll prove, I know not.
T'will be known.
Alas Sir, wher's your Daughter?
Why doe you ask?
O Sir when did you see her?
How he looks?
This morning.
Was she well? was she in health? Sir, when did she sleep?
These are strange Questions.
I doe not think she was very well, for now
You make me mind her, but this very day
I asked her questions, and she answered me
So far from what she was, so childishly.
So sillily, as if she were a fool,
An Inocent, and I was very angry.
But what of her Sir?
Nothing but my pity; but you must know it, and as good by me
As by an other that less loves her:
Well Sir.
Not right?
Not well? — Wooer, No Sir not well.
Tic too true, she is mad.
It cannot be.
Believe you'll find it so.
I half suspected
What you told me: the gods comfort her:
Either this was her love to Palamon,
Or fear of my miscarrying on his scope,
Or both.
Tic likely.
But why all this haste Sir?
Isle tell you quickly. As I late was angling
In the great Lake that lies behind the Palace,
From the far shore, thick set with reeds, and Sedges,
As patiently I was attending sport,
I heard a voice, a shrill one, and attentive
I gave my ear, when I might well perceive
T'was one that sung, and by the smallness of it
A boy or woman. I then left my angle
To his own skill, came near, but yet perceivd not
Who made the sound; the rushes, and the Reeds
Had so encompassed it: I laid me down
And listened to the words she song, for then
Through a small glade cut by the Fi•…her men,
I saw it was your Daughter.
Pray go on Sir?
She sung much, but no sense; on•…lie I heard her
Repeat this often. Palamon is gone,
Is gone to'th wood to gather Mulberries,
Isle find him out to morrow.
Pretty soul.
His shackles will betray him, he will be taken,
And what shall I doe then? Isle bring a •…eavy,
A hundred black eyd Maids, that love as I doe
With Chaplets on their heads of Daffodils,
With cherry-lips, and cheeks of Damask Rofes,
And all we'll dance an Antique fore the Duke,
And beg his pardon; Then she talked of you Sir;
That you must loose your head to morrow morning,
And she must gather flowers to bury you,
And see the house made handsome, then she sung
Nothing but Willow, willow, willow, and between
Ever was, Palamon, fair Palamon,
And Palamon, was a tall young man. The 〈◊〉
Was knee deep where she sat; her careless Tresses,
A wreak of bull-rush rounded; about her stuck
Thousand fresh water flowers of several colours.
That me thought she appeared like the fair Nymph
That feeds the lake with waters, or as Iris
Newly dropped down from heaven; Rings she made
Of rushes that grew by, and to 'em spoke
The prettiest posies: Thus our truelove's tide,
This you may loose, not me, and many a one:
And then she wept, and s•…ng again, and sighed,
And with the same breath smiled, and ki•… her hand.
Alas what pity it is?
I made in to her.
She saw me, and s•…raight sought the stood, I saved her,
And set her safe to land: when presently
She slipped away, and to the Go•…tie made,
With such a •…rye, and 〈◊〉, that 〈◊〉 me
She left me far behind her; 〈◊〉, 〈◊◊〉,
I saw from far off cross her 〈◊◊〉
I knew to be your brother, where 〈◊〉 staid,
And fell, scarce to be got away: I left them with her. 
And hither came to tell you: Here they are.
May you never more 〈◊〉 the light, &amp;c.
Is not this a fine Song?
O a very fine one.
I can •…ing twenty more.
I think you can,
Yes truly can I, I c•…n sing the Broom,
And Bony Robin. Are not you a tailor?
Yes,
Wher's my wedding Gown?
Isle bring it to morrow.
Doe, very rarely, I must be abroad else
To call the Maids, and pay the Minstrels
For I must loose my Maidenhead by cocklight
Twill never th•…iv else.
You must even take it patiently.
Tic true,
Good'ev'n, good men, pray did you ever hear
Of one young Palamon?
Yes wench we know him.
Is it not a fine young Gentleman?
Tic, Love.
By no mean cross her, she is then distempered
For worse then now she shows.
Yes, he's a fine man.
O, is he so? you have a Sister.
Yes.
But she shall never have him, tell her so,
For a trick that I know, you'd best look to her,
For if she see him once, she's gone, she's done,
And undone in an hour. All the young Maids
Of our Town are in love with him, but I laugh at'em
And let 'em all alone, Is it not a wise course?
Yes.
There is at least two hundred now with child by him,
There must befowre; ye•… I keep close for all this,
Close as a Cockle; and all these must be Boys,
He has the trick on it, and at ten years old
They must be all 〈◊〉 for 〈◊〉,
And sing the wars of Thesem.
This is strange.
As ever you heard, but say nothing.
No.
They come from all parts of the Dukedom to him,
Isle warrant ye, he had not so few last night
As twenty to dispatch, he will tickl't up
In two hours, if his hand be in.
She's lost
Past all cure.
Heaven forbid man.
Come hither, you are a wise man.
Do's she know him?
No, would she did.
You are master of a Ship?
Yes.
Wher's your Cömpasse?
Here.
Set it too'th North.
And now direct your conrse to'th wood, where Palamon
Lies longing for me; For the Tackling
Let me alone; Come weigh my hearts, cheerely.
Owgh, owgh, owgh, tic up, the wind's fair, top the
Bowling, out with the maine sail, wher's your
Whistle Master?
Lets get her in.
Up to the top Boy.
Wher's the Pilot?
Here,
What ken'st thou?
A fair wood.
Bear for it master: take about:
Yet I may bind those wounds up, that must open
And bleed to death for my sake else; Isle choose,
And end their strife: Two such young hansom men
Shall never fall for me, their weeping Mothers,
Following the dead cold ashes of their Sons
Shall never curse my cruelty: Good heaven,
What a sweet face has Arcite? if wise nature
With all her best endowments, all those beauties
She sows into the births of noble bodies,
Were here a mortal woman, and had in her
The coy denials of young Maids, yet doubtless,
She would run mad for this man: what an eye?
Of what a fyry sparkle, and quick sweetness,
Has this young Prince? Here Love himself sits smiling,
Just such another wanton Ganimead,
Set Love a fire with, and enforcd the god
Snatch up the goodly Boy, and set him by him
A shining constellation: What a brow,
Of what a spacious Majesty he carries?
Arched like the great eyd Iuno's, but far sweeter,
Smoother then Pelops Shoulder? Fame and honour
Mc thinks from hence, as from a Promontory
Pointed in heaven, should clap their wings, and sing
To all the under world, the Loves, and Fights
Of gods, and sueh men neere'em. Palamon,
Is but his foil, to him, a mere dull shadow,
Hoe's swarth, and meagre, of an eye as heavy
As if he had lost his mother; a still temper,
No stirring in him, no alacrity,
Of all this sprightly sharpness, not a smile;
Yet these that we count errors may become him:
Narcissu•… was a sad Boy, but a heavenly:
Oh who can find the bent of women's fancy?
I am a Fool, my reason is lost in me,
I have no choice, and I have lied so lewdly
That women ought to beat me. On my knees
I ask thy pardon: Palamon, thou art alone,
And only beautiful, and these the eyes,
These the bright lamps of beauty, that command
And threaten Love, and what young Maid dare cross 'em
What a bold gravity, and yet inviting
Has this browne manly face? O Love, this only
From this hour is Complexion: Lye there Arcite,
Thou art a changeling to him, a mere Gypsy.
And this the noble Body: I am sotted,
Utterly lost: My Virgins faith has fled me.
For if my brother but even now had asked me
Whether I loved, I had run mad for Arcite,
Now if my Sister; More for Palamon,
Stand both together: Now, come ask me Brother,
Alas, I know not: ask me now sweet Sister,
I may go look; What a mere child is Pansy,
That having two fair gauds of equal sweetness,
Cannot distinguish, but must cry for both.
How now Sir?
From the Noble Duke your Brother
Madam, I bring you news: The Knights are come.
To end the quarrel?
Yes.
Would I might end first:
What sins have I committed, chaste Diana,
That my unspotted youth must now be soiled
With blood of Princes? and my Chastity
Be made the Altar, where the lives of Lovers,
Two greater, and two better never yet
Made mothers joy, must be the sacrifice
To my unhappy Beauty?
Bring 'em in quickly,
By any means, I long to see'em.
Your two contending Lovers are returned,
And with them their fair Knights: Now my fair Sister,
You must love one of them.
I had rather both,
So neither for my sake should fall untimely
Who saw'em?
I a while.
And I.
From whence come you Sir?
From the Knights.
Pray speak
You that have seen them, what they are.
I will Sir,
And truly what I think: Six braver spirits
Then these they have brought, (if we judge by the outside)
I never saw, nor read of: He that stands
In the first place with Arcite, by his seeming
Should be a stout man, by his face a Prince,
(His very looks so say him) his complexion,
Nearer a browne, than black; sterne, and yet noble,
Which shows him hardy, fearless, proud of dangers:
The circles of his eyes show fair within him,
And as a heated Lyon, so he looks;
His hair hangs long behind him, black and shining
Like Ravens wings: his shoulders broad, and ftrong,
Armed long and round, and on his Thigh a Sword
Hung by a curious Baldrick; when he frowns
To seal his will with, better o'my conscience
Was never Soldiers friend.
Thou hast well described him.
Yet a great deal short
Me thinks, of him that's first with Palamon.
Pray speak him friend.
I guess he is a Prince too,
And if it may be, greater; for his show
Has all the ornament of honour in it:
Hoe's somewhat bigger, then the Knight he spoke of,
But of a face far sweeter; His complexion
Is (as a ripe grape) ruddy: he has felt
Without doubt what he fights for, and so apter
To make this cause his own: In's face appears
All the fai•…e hopes of what he undertakes,
And when he's angry, then a settled valour
(Not tainted with extremes) runs through his body,
And guides his arm to brave things: Fear he cannot,
He shewesno such soft temper, his head's yellow,
Hard haired, and curled, thick twinned like Ivy tops,
Not to undo with thunder: In his face
The livery of the warlike Maid appears,
Pure red, and white, for yet no beard has bleft him.
And in his rolling eyes, 〈◊〉 victory.
As if she ever meant to correct his valour:
His Nose stands high, a Character of honour.
His red lips, after fights, are fit for Ladies.
Must these men die too?
When he speaks, his tongue
Sounds like a Trumpet; All his lineaments
Are as a man would wish 'em, strong, and clean,
He wears a well-steeld Axe, the staff of gold,
His age some five and twenty.
Ther's another,
A little man, but of a tough soul, seeming
As great as any: fairer promises
In such a Body, yet I never looked on.
O, he that's freckle faced?
The same my Lord,
Are they not sweet ones?
Yes they are well.
Me thinks,
Being so few, and well disposed, they show
Great, and fine art in nature, he's white haired,
Not wanton white, but such a manly colour
Next to an aborne, tough, and nimble set,
Which shows an active soul; his arms are brawny
Lined with strong sine was: To the shoulder piece,
Gently they swell, like women new conceived,
Which speaks him prone to labour, never fainting
Under the weight of Arms; stout hearted, still,
But when he stirs, a Tiger; he's gray eyd,
Which yields compassion where he conquers: sharpe
To spy advantages, and where he finds 'em,
He's swift to make 'em his: He do's no wrongs,
Nor takes none; he's round faced, and when he smiles
He shows a Lover, when he frowns, a Soldier:
About his head he wears the winners ok,
And in it stuck the favour of his Lady:
His age, some six and thirty. In his hand
He bears a charging Staff, embossed with silver.
Are they all thus?
They are all the sons of honour.
Now as I have a soul I long to see'em,
Lady you shall see men fight now.
I wish it,
But not the cause my Lord; They would show
Bravely about the Titles of two Kingdoms;
Tic pity Love should be so tyrannous:
O my soft hearted Sister, what think you?
Weep not, till they weep blood; Wench it must be.
You have steel'd'em with your Beauty: honoured Friend,
To you I give the Field; pray order it,
Fitting the persons that must use it.
Yes Sir.
Come, 〈◊〉 go visit'em: I cannot stay.
Their fame has fired me so; Till they appear,
Good Friend be royal.
There shall want no bravery.
Poor wench go weep, for whosoever wins,
Looses a noble Cousin, for thy sins.
Her distraction is more at some time of the Moon,
〈◊〉 at other some, is it not?
She is continually in a harmless distemper, sleeps
Little, altogether without appetite, save often drinking,
Dreaming of another world, and a better; and what
Broken piece of matter so'ere she's about, the name
Palamon lardes it, that she 〈◊〉 every business 
Withal, fits it to every question; Look where
〈◊〉 comes, you shall perceive her behaviour.
I have forgot it quite; The burden o'nt, was down
A down a, and pend by no worse man, then
Gerald, Emilias Schoolmaster; he's as
Fantastical too, as ever he may go upon's legs,
For in the next world will Dido see Palamon, and
Then will she be out of love with 〈◊〉.
What stuff's here? pore soul.
Even thus all day long.
Now for this Charm, that I told you of, you must
Bring a piece of silver on the tip of your tongue,
Or no feiry: then if it be your chance to come where
The blessed spirits, as the'rs a sight now; we maids
That have our Livers, perished, cracked to pieces with
Love, we shall come there, and doe nothing all day long
But pick flowers with Proserpine, then will I make
Palamon a Nosegay, then let him mark me, — then.
How prettily she's amiss? note her a little further.
Faith isle tell you, sometime we go to Barley break,
We of the blessed; alas, tic a sore life they have in the
Tother place, such burning, frying, boiling, hissing,
Howling, chattering, cursing, oh they have shroud
Measure, take heed; if one be mad, or hang or
Drown themselves, thither they go, Iupiter bless
Vs, and there shall we be put in a Cauldron of
Lead, and Usurers grease, amongst a whole million of
Cutpurses, and there boyle like a Gamon of Bacon
That will never be enough.
How her brain coins?
Lords and Courtiers, that have got maids with
Child, they are in this place, they shall stand in fire up to the
Nav'le, and in ice up to'th hart, and there th'offending part burns, and the deceiving part freezes; in troth a very gre∣vous punishment, as one would think, for such a Trifle, be∣leve me one would marry a leprous witch, to be rid on it Isle assure you.
How she continues this fancy? Tic not an engraffed
Madness, but a most thick, and profound melancholy.
To hear there a proud Lady, and a proud City
wife, howl together: I were a beast and il'd call it good
sport: one cries, o this smoke, another this fire; One cries, o,
that ever I did it behind the arras, and then howls; the other
curses a suing fellow and her garden house.
〈◊〉. I will be true, my stars, my fate, &amp;c.
What think you of her Sir?
I think she has a perturbed mind, which I cannot minister to.
Alas, what then?
Understand you, she ever affected any man, ere
She beheld Palamon?
I was once Sir, in great hope, she had fixed her
Liking on this gentleman my friend.
I did think so too, and would account I had a great
Pen-worth on it, to give half my slate, that both
She and I at this present stood unfeignedly on the
Same terms.
That intemprat surfeit of her eye, hath distempered the
Other senses, they may return and settle again to
Execute their preordaind faculties, but they are
Now in a most extravagant vagary. This you
Must doe, Confine her to a place, where the light
May rather seem to steal in, then be permitted; take
Upon you (young Sir her friend) the name of
Palamon, say you come to eat with her, and to
Commune of Love; this will catch her attention, for
This her mind beats upon; other objects that are
Inserted tweene her mind and eye, become the pranks
And friskins of her madness; Sing to her, such greene
Songs of Love, as she says Palamon hath sung in
Prison; Come to her, stuck in as sweet flowers, as the
Season is mistress of, and thereto make an addition of
Some other compounded odours, which are grateful to the
Sense: all this shall become Palamon, for Palamon can
Sing, and Palamon is sweet, and every good thing, desire
To eat with her, crave her, drink to her, and still
Among, intermingle your petition of grace and acceptance
Into her favour: Learn what Maids have been her
Companions, and play-pheeres, and let them repair to
Her with Palamon in their mouths, and appear with
Tokens, as if they suggested for him, It is a falsehoód
She is in, which is with fasehoods to be combated.
This may bring her to eat, to sleep, and reduce what's
Now out of square in her, into their former law, and
Regiment; I have seen it approved, how many ti•…s
I know n•…t, but to make the number more, I have
Great hope in this. I will between the passages of
This project, come in with my appliance: Let us
Put it in execution; and hasten the success, which doubt not
Will bring forth comfort.
Now let'em enter, and before the gods
Tender their holy prayers: Let the Temples
Burn bright with sacred fires, and the Altars
In hallowed clouds commend their swelling Incense
To those above us: Let no due be wanting, 
They have a noble work in hand, will honour
The very powers that love 'em.
Sir they enter.
You valiant and strong hearted Enemies
You royal German foes, that this day come
To blow that nearness out that flames between ye;
Lay by your anger for an hour, and dove-like
Before the holy Altars of your helpers
(The all feared gods) bow down your stubborn bodies,
Your ire is more than mortal; So your help be,
And as the gods regard ye, fight with Justice,
I le leave you to your prayers, and betwixt ye
I part my wishes.
Honour crown the worthiest.
The glasso is running now that cannot finish
Till one of us expire: Think you but thus,
That were there ought in me which strove to show
Mine enemy in this business, were it one eye
Against another: Arm oppressed by Arm:
I would destroy th'offender, Cos, I would
Though parcel of my self: Then from this gather
How I should tender you.
I am in labour
To push your name, your ancient love, our kindred
Out of my memory; and in the self same place
To seat something I would confound: So hoist we
The sails, that must these vessels port even where
The heavenly Lymiter pleases.
You speak well;
Before I turn, Let me embrace thee Cousin
This I shall never doe again.
One farewell.
Why let it be so: Farewell Cos.
Farewell Sir;
Knights, Kinsemen, Lovers, ye•… my Sacrifices
True worshippers of Mars, whose spirit in you
Expels the seeds of fear, and th'apprehension
Which still is farther off it, Go with me
Before the god of our profession: There
Require of him the heart•… of Lyons, and
The breath of Tigers, yea the fierceness too,
Yea the speed also, to go on, I mean:
Else wish we to be Snails; you know my prize
Must be dragged out of 〈◊〉, force and great feat
Must put my Garland on, where she sticks
The Queen of Flowers: our intercession then
Must be to him that makes the Camp, a Cestron
Brymd with the blood of men: give me your aide
And bend your spirits towards him. 
Thou mighty one, that with thy power hast turned
Greene Nepture into purple.
Comets prewarne, whose havoc in vast Field
Vnearthed skulls proclaim, whose breath blows down,
The teeming Ceres foison, who dost pluck
With hand armenypotent from forth blew clouds,
The •…asond Turrets, that both make, and break
The stony girths of Cities: me thy puple,
Youngest follower of thy Dro•…, 〈◊〉 this day
With military skill, that to thy lawed
I may advance my Streamer, and by thee,
Be styled the Lord of the day, give me great Mars
Some token of thy pleasure. 
O Great Corrector of enormous times;
Shaker of ore-rank States, thou grand decider
Of dusty, and old tytles, that healst with blood
The earth when it is sick, and cursed the world
Of the pleurisy of people; I doe take
Thy signs auspiciously, and in thy name
To my design; march boldly, let us go•….
Our stars must glister with new fire, or be
To day extinct; our argument is love,
Which if the goddess of it grant, she gives
Victory too, then blend your spirits with mine,
You, whose free nobleness doe make my cause
Your personal hazard; to the goddess Uenus
Commend we our proceeding, and implore
Her power unto our party. 
Hail Sovereign Queen 〈◊〉, who hast power
To call the fiercest Tyrant from his rage;
And weep unto a Girl; that hast the might
Even with an ey-glance, to choke Marsis Drom
And turn th'allarme to whispers, that can make
A Cripple flourish with his Cr•…ch, and cure him
Before Apollo; that may force the King
To be his subjects vassal, and induce
Stale gravity to dance, the bold Bachelor
Whose youth like wanton Boys through Bonfires
Have skipped thy flame, at seventy, thou can catch
And make him to the scorn of his hoarse throat
Abuse young lays of love; what godlike power
Hast thou not power upon? To 〈◊〉 thou
Add flames, hotter then his the heavenly fires
Did scorch his mortal Son, thine him; the huntress
All moist and cold, some say began to throw
Her Bow away, and sigh: take to thy grace
Me thy vowed Soldier, who doe bear thy yoke
As it were a wreath of Roses, yet is heavier
Then Lead it self, stings more than Nettles;
I have never been foul mouthed against thy law,
Nev'r reveled secret, for I knew none; would not
Had I kend all that were; I never practised
Upon mans wife, nor would the Libels read
Ofliberall wits: I never at great feasts
Sought to betray a Beauty, but have blushed
At simpering Sirs that did: I have been harsh
To large •…onfessors, and have hotly asked them
If they had Mothers, I had one, a woman,
And women it were they wronged. I knew a man
Of eighty winters, this I told them, who
A Lass of fourteen breded, it was thy power
To put life into dust, the aged Cramp
Had screwed his square foot round,
The Gout had knit his fingers into knots,
Torturing Convulsions from his globe eyes,
Had almost drawn their spheres, that what was life
In him seemed torture: this Anatomy
Had by his young fair fear a Boy, and I
Believed it was his, for she swore it was,
And who would not believe her? brief I am
To those that prate and have done; no Companion
To those that boast and have not; a defyer
To those that would and cannot; a Rejoycer,
Yea him I doe not love, that tells close offices
The foulest way, nor names concealments in
The boldest language, such a one I am,
And vow that lover never yet made sigh
Truer then I. O then most soft sweet goddess
Give me 〈◊〉 victory of this question, which
Is true loves merit, and bless me with a sign
Of thy great pleasure.
O thou that from eleven, to ninety raign'st
In mortal bosoms, whose chase is this world
And we in herds thy game; I give thee thanks
For this fair Token, which being laid unto
Mine innocent true heart, arms in assurance 
My body to this business. Let us rise
And bow b•…ore the goddess: Time comes on.
O sacred, sh•…dow, cold and constant Queen,
Abandoner of Revels, mute contemplative,
Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure
As windefand Snow, who to thy female knights
Allow no more blood than will make a blush,
Which is their orders robe. I here thy Priest
Am humbled fore thine Altar, O vouchsafe
With that thy rare greene eye, which never yet
Bah•…d thing maculate, look on thy virgin,
And sacred silver Mistress, lend hen ear
(Which 〈◊〉 heard scurrill term, into whose port
Ne'er entered wanton sound,) to my petition
Second wi•…h ho•…y fear; This is my last
Of vestal office, I am 〈◊〉 habitat,
But maid•…n hearted, a husband I have poin•…ed,
But doe not know him out of two, I should
Choose one, and pray for his success, but I
Am guiltless of election of mine eyes,
Were I to loose one, they are equal precious,
I could doombe neither, that which perished should
Go too't unsentenc'd: Therefore most modest Queen,
He of the two Pretenders, that best loves me
And has the truest ti•… in it, Let him
Take off my wheaten Garland, or else grant
The fyle and qualitiel hold, I may
Continue in thy Band. 
See what our General of Ebbs and Flows
Out from the bowels of her holy Altar
With sacred act advances: But one Rose,
If well inspird, this Battle shall confound
Both these brave Knights, and I a virgin flower
Must grow alone unpl•…ck'd. 
The flower is fallen, the Tree descends: O Mistress
Thou here dischargest me, I shall be gathered,
I think so, but I know not thine own will;
Vnclaspe thy Mystery: I hope she's pleased,
Her Signs were gracious.
Has this advice I told you, done any good upon her?
O very much; The maids that hept her company
Have half persuaded her that I am Palamon; within this
Half hour she came smiling to me, and asked me what I
Would cate, and when I would kiss her: I told her
Presently, and kissed her twice.
T was well done; twenty times had bin far better,
For there the cure lies •…inely.
Then she told me
She would watch with me to night, for well she knew
What hour my fit would take me.
Let her do•… so,
And when your fit comes, fit her home,
And presently.
She would have me sing.
You did so?
No.
It was very i•…l done then,
You should observe her every way.
Alas
I have no voice Sir, to confirm her that way.
That's all one, if ye make a noise,
If she entreat again, doe any thing,
Lye with her if she ask you.
Hoe there Doctor.
Yes in the way of cure.
But first by your leave
In the way of honesty.
That's but a niceness,
Nev'r cast your child away for honesty;
Cure her first this way, then if shoe will be honest,
She has the path before her.
Thank ye Doctor.
Pray bring her in
And let's see how she is.
I will, and tell her
Her Falam•…n stays for her: But Doctor,
Me thinks you are in the wrong still.
•…o, go: you Fathers are fine Fools: her honesty?
And we should give her physic till we find that:
Why, doe you think she is not honest Sir?
How old is she?
She's eighteen.
She may be,
But that's all one, tic nothing to our purpose,
What ere her Father says, if you perceive
Her mood inclining that way that I spoke of
Videlicet, the way of flesh, you have me.
Yet very well Sir.
Please her appetite
And doe it home, it cures her ips•… facto,
The melancholy humour that infects her.
I am of your mind Doctor.
You'll find it so; she comes, pray honour her.
Come, your Love Palamon stays for you child,
And has done this long hour, to visit you.
I thank him for his gen•…le patience,
He's a kind Gentleman, and I am much bound to him,
Did you nev'r see the horse he gave me?
Yes.
How doe you like him?
He's a very fair one.
You never saw him dance?
No.
I have often.
He dances very finely, very comely,
And for a Jig, come cut and long tail to him,
He turns ye like a Top.
That's fine indeed.
He will dance the Morris twenty mile an hour,
And that will founder the best hobby-horse
(If I have any skill) in all the parish,
And gallops to the turn of Light a'love,
What think you of this horse?
Having these virtues
I think he might be brought to play at Tennis.
Alas that's nothing.
Can he write and read too.
A very fair hand, and casts himself th'accounts
Of all his hay and provender: That Hostler
Must rise betime that cozens him; you know
The Chestnut Mare the Duke has?
Very well.
She is horribly in love with him, poor beast,
But he is like his master coy and scornful.
What dowry has she?
Some two hundred Bottles,
And twenty strike of O•…s; but he will ne'er have h•…
He lisps in's neighing able to entice
A Millars Mare,
H•…l be the death of her.
What stuff she utters?
Make curtsy, here your love comes.
Pretty soul
How doe ye? that's a fine maid, ther's a curtsy.
Yours to command ith way of honesty;
How far is it now to'th end of the world my Masters?
Why a days Journey wench.
Will you go with m•…?
What shall we doe there wench?
Why play at stool ball.
What is there else to doe?
I am content
If we shall keep our wedding there.
Tic true
For there I will assure you, we shall find
Some blind Priest for the purpose, that will venture
To marry us, for here they are nice, and foolish;
Besides my father must be hanged to morrow
And that would be a blot in the 〈◊〉
Are not you Palamon?
Doe not you know me?
Yes, but you care not for me; I have nothing
But this pore petticoat, and too corse Smocks.
That's all one, I will have you.
Will you surely?
Yes by this fair hand will I.
We'll to bed then.
Even when you will.
O Sir, you would fine be nibbling.
Why doe you rub my kiss off?
Tic a sweet one,
And will perfume me finely against the wedding.
Is not this your Cousin Arcite?
Yes sweetheart,
And I am glad my Cousin Palamon
Has made so fair a choice.
Doe you think he will have me?
Yes without doubt.
Doe you think so too?
Yes.
We shall have many children: Lord, how you're grown,
My Palamon I hope will grow too finely
Now he's at liberty: Alas poor Chicken
He was kept down with hard meat, and ill lodging
But isle kiss him up again.
What doe you here, you'll loose the noblest sight
That ev'r was seen.
Are they in the Field?
They are
You bear a charge there too.
Isle away straight
I must even leave you here.
Nay we'll go with you,
I will not loose the Fight.
How did you like her?
Isle warrant you within these 3. or 4 days
Isle make her right again. You must not from her
But still preserve her in this way.
I will,
Lets get her in.
Come sweet we'll go to dinner
And then weal play at Cards.
And shall we kiss too?
A hundréd times
And twenty.
I and twenty.
And then we'll sleep together.
Take her offer.
Yes marry will we.
But you shall not hurt me.
I will not sweet.
If you doe (Love) isle cry.
Isle no step further.
Will you loose this sight?
I had rather see a wren hawk at a fly
Then this decision every; blow that falls
Threats a brave life, each str•…ache laments
The place whereon it false, and sounds more like
A Bell, then blade: I will stay here,
It is enough my hearing shall be punished,
With what shall happen, against the which there is
No deafening, but to hear; not taint mine eye
With dread sights, it may shun.
Sir, my good Lord
Your Sister will no further.
Oh she must.
She shall see deeds of honour in their kind,
Which sometime show well pencild. Nature now
Shall make, and act the Story, the belief
Both sealed with eye, and ear; you must be present,
You are the victors mead, the price, and garlond
To crown the Questions title.
Pardon me,
If I were there, I'd wink
You must be there;
This Trial is as it were in the night, and you
The only star to shine.
I am extinct,
There is but envy in that light, which shows
The one the other: darkness which ever was
The dam of horror, who do's stand accursed
Of many mortal Millions, may even now
By casting her black mantle over both
That neither could find other, get her self
Some part of a good name, and many a murder
Set off where she's guilty.
You must go.
In faith I will not.
Why the knights must kindle
Their valour at your eye: know of this war
You are the Treasure, and must needs be by
To give the Service pay.
Sir pardon me,
The title of a kingdom may be tried
Out of it self.
Well, well then, at your pleasure,
Those that remain with you, could wish their office
To any of their Enemies.
Farewell Sister,
I am like to know your husband fore your self
By some small start of time, he whom the gods
Doe of the two know best, I pray them he
Be made your Lot.
Arcite is gently visagd; yet his eye
Is like an Engine bent, or a sharpe weapon
In a sustained sheath; mercy, and manly courage
Are bedfellows in his visage: Palamon
Has a most menacing aspect, his brow
Is graved, and seems to bury what it frowns on,
Yet sometime tic not so, but alters to
The quality of his thoughts; long time his eye
Will dwell upon his object. Melancholy
Becomes him nobly; So do's Arcites mirth,
But Palamons sadness is a kind of mirth,
So mingled, as if mirth did make him sad,
And sadness, merry; those darker humours that
Stick misbecomingly on others, on them
Live in fair dwelling. 
Hark how you spurs to spirit doe incite
The Princes to their proof, Arcite may win me,
And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to
The spoiling of his figure. O what pity
Enough for such a chance; if I were by
I might doe hurt, for they would glance their eyes
Toward my Seat, and in that motion might
Omit a ward, or forfeit an offence
Which craved that very time: it is much better
(Cornets. a great cry and noise within crying a Palamon.)
I am not there, oh better never born•…
Then minister to such harm, what is the chance?
The Crie's a Palamon.
Then he has won: It was ever likely,
He looked all grace and success, and he is
Doubtless the prim'st of men: I prithee run
And tell me how it goes.
Still Palamon.
Run and enquire, poor Servant thou hast lost,
Upon my right side still I wore thy picture,
Palamons on the le•…, why so, I know not,
I had no end in it; else chance would have it so. 
On the sinister side, the heart lies; Palamon
Had the best boding chance: This burst of clamour
Is sure th'end of the Combat.
They said that Palamon had Arcites body
Within an inch of the Pyramid, that the cry
Was general a Palamon: But anon,
The Assistants made a brave redemption, and
The two bold Tytlers, at this instant are
Hand to hand at it.
Were they metamorphisd
Both into one; oh why? there were no woman
Worth so composed a Man: their single share,
Their nobleness peculiar to the•…, gives
The prejudice of disparity values shortness 
To any Lady breathing — More exulting?
Palamon still?
Nay, now the sound is Arcite.
I prithee lay attention to the Cry.
 Set both thine •…ares to'th business.
The cry is
Arcite, and victory, hark Arcite, victory,
The Combats consummation is proclaimed
By the wind Instruments.
Half sights saw
That Arcite was no babe: god's lyd, his richness
And costliness of spirit looked through him, it could
No more be hid in him, then fire in flax,
Then humble banks can go to law with waters,
That drift winds, force to raging: I did think
Good Palamon would miscarry, yet I knew not
Why I did think so; Our reasons are not prophets
When oft our fancies are: They are coming off:
Alas poor Palamon.
Lo, where our Sister is in expectation,
Yet quaking, and unsettled: Fairest Emily.
The gods by their divine arbitrament
Have given you this Knight, he is a good one
As ever struck at head: Give me your hands;
Receive you her, you him, be plighted with
A love that grows, as you decay;
Emily,
To buy you, I have lost what's dearest to me,
Save what is bought, and yet I purchase cheaply,
As I doe rate your value.
O loved Sister,
He speaks now of as brave a Knight as ere
Did spur a noble Steed: Surely the gods
Would have him die a Bachelor, least his race
Should show in the world too godlike: His behaviour
So char•…d me, that me thought Alcides was
To him a sow of lead: if I could praise
Each part of him to'th all; I have spoke, your Arcut•…
Did not loose by it; For he that was thus good
Encountered yet his Better, I have heard
Two emulous Philomels, beat the care of the night
With their contentious throats, now one the higher,
Anon the other, then again the first,
And by and by out breasted, that the sense
Could not be judge between 'em: So it fared
Good space between these kinesmen; till heavens did
Make hardly one the winner: wear the Girlond
With joy that you have won: For the subdued,
Give them our present Justice, since I know
Their lives but pinch'em; Let it here be done:
The Scene's not for our seeing, go we hence,
Right joyful, with some sorrow. Arm your prize,
I know you will not loose her: Hipolita
I see one eye of yours conceives a tear
The which it will deliver.
Is this winning?
Oh all you heavenly powers where is you mercy?
But that your wills have said it must be so,
And charge me live to comfort this unfriended,
This miserable Prince, that cuts away
A life more worthy from him, then all women;
I should, and would die too.
Infinite pity
That four such eyes should be so fixed on one
That two must needs be blind fort.
So it is.
Ther's many a man alive, that hath out lived
The love of the people, yea in the selfsame state
Stands many a Father with his child; some comfort
We have by so considering: we expire
And not without men's pity. To live still,
Have their good wishes, we prevent
The loathsome misery of age, beguile
The Gout and Rheum, that in lag hours attend
For grey approachers; we come towards the gods
Young, and unwapper'd not, halting under Cry•…es
Many and stale: that sure shall please the gods
Sooner than such, to give us Nectar with 'em,
For we are more clear Spirits. My dear kinsemen.
Whose lives (for this poor comfort) are laid down,
You have sold 'em too too cheap.
What ending could be
Of more content? ore us the victors have
Fortune, whose title is as momentary,
As to us death is certain: A grain of honour
They not ore'-weigh us.
Let us bid farewell;
And with our patience, anger tottring Fortune,
Who at her certain'st reels.
Come? who begins?
Even he that led you to this Banquet, shall
Taste to you all: ah ha my Friend, my Friend,
Your gentle daughter gave me freedom once;
You'll see it done now for ever: pray how does she?
I heard she was not well; her kind of ill
gave me some sorrow.
Sir she's well restored,
And to be married shortly.
By my short life
I am most glad on it; Tic the latest thing
I shall be glad of, prithee tell her so:
Commend me to her, and to piece her portion
Tender her this.
Nay lets be offerers all.
Is it a maid?
Verily I think so,
A right good creature, more to me deserving
Then I can quite or speak of.
Commend us to her.
The gods requight you all,
And make her thankful.
Adieu; and let my life be now as short,
As my leave taking.
Lead couragiour Cousin.
Wec'l follow cheerfully.
Hold, hold, O hold, hold, hold.
Hold hoe: It is a cursed hast you 〈◊〉
If you have done so quickly: noble Palamon,
The gods will show their glory in a life.
That thou art yet to lead.
Can that be,
When Venus I have said is false? How doe things fare?
Arise great Sir, and give the tidings 〈◊〉
That are most early sweet, and bitter.
What
Hath waked us from our dream?
List then: your Cousin
Mounted upon a Steed that Emily
Did first bestow on him, a black one, owing
Not a hair 〈◊〉 of white, which some will say
Weakens his 〈◊〉, and many will not buy
His goodness with this note: Which superstition
〈◊〉 finds allowance: On this horse is Arcite
Trotting the stones of Athens, which the Calkins
Did rather tell, then trample; for the horse
Would make his length a mile, if it pleased his Rider
To put pride in him: as he thus went counting
The flinty pavement, dancing as it were to'th Music
His own 〈◊〉 made; (for as they say 〈◊〉 iron
Came Musickes origin) what 〈◊〉 Flint,
Cold as old Saturn, and like him possessed
With fire male volent, darted a Spark
Or what fierce sulphur else, to this end 〈◊〉,
I comment 〈◊〉; the hot horse, hot as fire
Took Toy at this, and fell to what disorder
His power could give his will, bounds, comes on end,
Forgets school doing, being therein trained,
And of kind mannadge, pig-like he whines
At the sharpe Rowel, which he frets at rather
Then any jot obeys; seeks all foul means
Of boisterous and rough Iadrie, to dis-seate
His Lord, that kept it bravely: when nought served,
When neither Curb would crack, girth break nor differing plunges
Dis-roote his Rider whence he grew, but that
He kept him tweene his legs, on his hind hooves on end he stands
That Arcites legs being higher then his head
Seemed with strange art to hang: His victoros wreath
Even then fell off his head: and presently
Backward the lade comes ore, and his full poyze
Becomes the Riders load: yet is he living.
But such a vessel 〈◊〉, that floats but for
The surge that next approaches: he much desires
To have some speech with you: Lo he appears. 
O miserable end of our alliance
The gods are 〈◊〉 Arcite, if thy heart,
Thy worthy, manly heart be yet unbroken;
Give me thy last words, I am Palamon,
One that yet loves thee dying.
Take Emilia
And with her, all the worlds joy: Reach thy hand,
Farewell: I have told my last hour; I was false,
Yet never treacherous: Forgive me Cousin:
One 〈◊〉 from fair Emilia: Tic done:
Take her: I die.
Thy brave soul 〈◊〉 Elikium.
Isle close thine eyes Prince; blessed souls be with thee,
Thou art a right good man, and while I live,
This day I give to tears.
And I to honour.
In this place first you fought: even very here
I sundried you, acknowledge to the gods
Our thanks that you are living:
His part is played, and though it were too short
He did it well: your day is lengthned, and,
The blissful dew of heaven do's arouse you.
The powerful 〈◊〉, well hath graced her Altar,
And given you your love: Our Master Mars
Hast vouched his Oracle, and to Arcite gave
The grace of the Contention: So the Deities
Have showed due justice: Bear this hence.
O Cousin,
That we should things desire, which doe cost us
The loss of our desire; That nought could buy
Dear love, but loss of dear love.
Never 〈◊〉
Did play a subtler 〈◊〉: The conquered triumphs,
The victor has the Loss: yet in the passage,
The gods have been most equal: Palamon,
Your kinseman hath confessed the right of the Lady
Did lye in you, for you first saw her, and
Even then proclaimed your fancy: He restored her
As your stolen Jewel, and desired your spirit
To send him hence forgiven; The gods my justice
Take from my hand, and they themselves become
The Executioners: Lead your Lady off;
And call your Lovers from the stage of death,
Whom I adopt my Friends. A day or two
Let us look sadly, and give grace unto
The Funeral of Arcite, in whose end
The visages of 〈◊〉 weal put on
And smile with Palamon; for whom an hour,
But one hour since, I was as dearly sorry,
As glad of Arcite: and am now as glad,
As for him sorry. O you heavenly Charmers,
What things you make of us? For what we lack
We laugh, for what we have, are sorry still,
Are children in some kind. Let us be thankful
For that which is, and with you leave dispute
That are above our question: Let's go off,
And bear us like the time:
I Would now ask ye how ye like the Play,
But as it is with School Boys, cannot say,
I am cruel fearful: pray yet stay a while,
And let me look upon ye: No man smile?
Then it goes hard I see; He that has
Loved a young handsome wench then, show his face:
Tic strange if none be here, and if he will
Against his Conscience let him hiss, and kill
Our Market: Tic in vain, I see to stay ye,
Have at the worst can come, then; Now what say ye?
And yet mistake me not: I am not bold
We have no such cause. If the tale we have told
(For tic no other) any way content ye)
(For to that honest purpose it was meant ye)
We have our end; and ye shall have ere long
I dare say many a better, to prolong
Your old loves to us: we, and all our might,
Rest at your service, Gentlemen, good night.

IVpiter and Iuno willing to doe
honour to the Marriage of the
two famous Rivers Thamesis
and Rhone, employ their Mes∣sengers
severally, Mercury and
Iris for that purpose. They meet and con∣tend:
then Mercury for his part brings forth
an Anti-masque all of Spirits or divine Na∣tures;
but yet not of one kind or livery (be∣cause
that had been so much in use hereto∣fore)
but as it were in consort like to broken
Music: And preserving the propriety of
the devise; for that Rivers in nature are
maintained either by Springs from beneath,
or Showers from aboue: He raises four of
the Naiads out of the Fountains, and brine∣geth
down five of the Hyades out of the
Clouds to dance• hereupon Iris scoffs at
Mercury for that hee had devised a dance
but of one Sex, which could have no life: but
Mercury who was provided for that excep∣tion,
and in token that the Match should be
blessed both with Love and Riches calls
forth out of the Groves four Cupids, and
brings down from Iupiters Altar four
Statues of gold and silver to dance with the
Nymphs and Stars: in which dance the
Cupids being blind, and the Statues having
but half life put into them, and retaining still
somewhat of their old nature, gives fit oc∣cession
to new and strange varieties both in
the Music and paces. This was the first An∣ti-masque.
Then Iris for her part in scorn of this
high-flying devise, and in token that the
Match shall likewise be blessed with the love
of the Common People, calls to Flora her
confederate (for that the Months of flowers
are likewise the Months of sweet showers,
and Rain bows) to bring in a May dance
or Rural dance, consisting likewise not of
any suited persons, but of a confusion or com∣mixture
of all such persons as are natural
and proper for Country sports. This is the
second Anti-masque.
Then Mercury and Iris after this vying
one upon the other, seem to leave their con∣tention;
and Mercury by the consent of Iris
brings down the Olympian Knights, intimation∣ting
that Iupiter having after a long discon∣tinuance
revived the Olympian games, and
summoned thereunto from all parts the live∣least
&amp; actiuest persons that were had enjoy∣ned
them before they fell to their games to
doe honour to these Nuptials. The Olympian
games portend to the Match, Celebrity,
Victory, and Felicity. This was the maine
Masque.
The Fabric was a Mountain with two
descents, and severed with two Trauesses.
THe first Travers was drawn, and the
lower descent of the Mountain disco∣uered,
which was the Pendant of a hill to
life, with divers boscages and Grouets upon
the steep or hanging grounds thereof; and
at the foot of the Hill, four delicate Foun∣taines
running with water and bordered with
sedges and water flowers.
Iris first appeared; and presently after
Mercury striving to overtake her.
Iris apparelled in a robe of discoulored
Taffeta figured in variable colours, like the
Rainbow, a cloudy wreath on her head,
and Tresses.
Mercury in doublet and hose of white
Taffeta, a white hat, wings on his shoulders
and feet, his Caduceus in his hand, speaking
to Iris as follows:
STay, Stay.
Stay light foot Iris, for thou strive in vain,
My wings are nimbler then thy feet.
Away,
Dissembling Mercury; my messages
Ask honest haste, not like those wanton ones
Your thundering father sends.
Stay foolish Maid,
Or I will take my rise upon a hill,
When I perceive thee seated in a cloud,
In all the painted glory that thou hast,
And never cease to clap my willing wings,
Till I catch hold of thy discoloured Bow,
And shiver it beyond the angry power
Of your cursed Mistress, to make up again.
Harms forbear, Iuno will chide and strike;
Is great Jove jealous that I am employed
On her love errands? she did never yet
Clasp weak mortality in her white arms,
As he hath often done: I only come
To celebrate the long wished Nuptials,
Here in Olympia, which are now performed
Betwixt two goodly Rivers, which have mixed
Their gentle rising waives, and are to grow
Into a thousand streams, great as themselves;
I need not name them, for the sound is load
In heaven and earth, and I am sent from her
The Queen of Marriage, that was present here,
And smiled to see them join, and hath not chid
Since it was done: good Harms let me go.
Nay you must stay, Ioues message is the same,
Whose eyes are lightning, and whose voice is thunder,
Whose breath is any wind, he will, who knows
How to be first on earth as well as heaven.
But what hath he to doe with Nuptial rights?
Let him keep state upon his starry throne,
And fright poor mortals with his thunderbolts,
Leaving to vs the mutual darts of eyes.
Alas, when ever offered he t'abridge
Your Ladies power, but only now in these,
Whose match concerns his general government?
Hath not each god a part in these high joys?
And shall not he the King of gods presume
Without proud Iunoes licence? let her know
That when enamoured Jove first gave her power
To link soft hearts in Undissolved bonds,
He then foresaw, and to himself reserved
The honour of this Marriage: thou shalt stand
Still as a Rock, while I to bless this feast
Will summon up with my all charming rod,
The Nymphs of fountains, from whose watery locks
Hung with the dew of blessing and increase,
The greedy Rivers take their nourishment.
You Nymphs, who bathing in your loved springs,
Beheld these Rivers in their infancy,
And joyed to see them, when their circled heads
Refresht' the air, and spread the ground with flowers:
Rise from your Wells, and with your nimble feet
Perform that office to this happy pair;
Which in these plains, you to Alpheus did;
When passing hence through many seas vnmixt,
He gained the favour of his Arethuse.
Immediately upon which speech, four
Naiads arise gently out of their se∣uerall
Fountains, and present them∣selves
upon the Stage, attired in long
habits of sea-greene Taffeta, with bub∣bless
of Crystal intermixed with pow∣dering
of silver resembling drops of
water• bluish Tresses on their heads,
garlands of Water-Lillies. They fall
into a Measure, dance a little, then
make a stand.
IS Harms grown a lover, by what power
Unknown to vs, calls he the Naiads?
Presumptuous Iris, I could make thee dance
Till thou forgott'st thy Ladies messages,
And ran back crying to her, thou shalt know
My power is more, only my breath, and this
Shall move fixed stars, and force the firmament
To yield the Hyades, who govern showers,
And dewic clouds, in whose dispersed drops
Thou form'st the shape of thy deceitful Bow.
You maids, who yearly at appointed times,
Advance with kindly tears, the gentle floods,
Descend, and power your blessing on these streams,
Which rolling down from heaven aspiring hills,
And now united in the fruitful vales;
Bear all before them ravished with their joy,
And swell in glory till they know no bounds.
Five Hyades descend softly in a cloud from
the firmament, to the middle part of
the hill, apparelled in skie-coloured
Taffeta robes, spangled like the Hey∣uens,
golden Tresses, and each a fair
Star on their head; from thence de∣scend
to the Stage, at whose sight the
Naiads seeming to rejoice, meet
and join in a dance.
GReat wit and power hath Harms to contrive
A lifeless dance, which of one sex consists.
Alas poor Iris, Venus hath in store
A secret Ambush of her winged boys,
Who lurking long within these pleasant groves;
First struck these Lovers with their equal darts,
Those Cupids shall come forth, and join with these,
To honour that which they themselves begun.
Enter four Cupids from each side of the
Boscage, attired in flame coloured Taf∣fita
close to their body, like naked
Boys, with Bows, Arrows, and wings
of gold; Chaplets of flowers on their
heads, hoodwinckt with Tiffiny scarfs,
who join with the Nymphs and the
Hyades in another dance. That ended,
Iris speaks.
BEhold the Statues which wise Vulcan placed
Under the Altar of Olympian Jove,
Shall dance for joy of these great Nuptials:
And gave to them an Artificial life,
See how they move, drawn by this heavenly joy,
Like the wilde trees, which followed Orpheus Harp.
The Statues enter, supposed to be before
descended from Ioues Altar, and to
have been prepared in the covert with
the Cupids, attending their call.
These Statues were attired in cases of
gold and silver close to their body, faces,
hands and feet, nothing seen but gold and
silver, as if they had been solid Images of
mettle, Tresses of hair as they had been of
mettle embossed, girdles and small aprons
of oaken leaves, as if they likewise had been
carved or molded out of the mettle: at their
coming, the Music changed from Vio∣lens
to Hoboyes, Cornets, &amp;c. And the ayre
of the Music was utterly turned into a soft
time, with drawing notes, excellently express∣sing
their natures, and the Measure likewise
was fitted unto the same, and the Statues ply∣ced
in such several postures, sometimes all
together in the Center of the dance, and
sometimes in the four utmost Angles, as was
very graceful, besides the novelty and so
concluded the first Anti-masque.
ANd what will Iunoes Iris do for her?
Just match this show; or my Invention fails,
Had it been worthier, I would have invoked
The blazing Comets, Clouds and falling Stars,
And all my kindred Meteors of the Ayre
To have excelled it, but I now must strive
To imitate Confusion, therefore thou
Delightful Flora, if thou ever felt
Increase of sweetness in those blooming plants,
On which the horns of my fair bow decline;
Send hither all the Rural company,
Which deck the May-games with their Country sports;
Iuno will have it so.
The second Anti-masque rush in, dance
their Measure, and as rudely depart;
consisting of a Pedant May Lord, May Lady, Serving-man, Chambermaid, A Country Clown, or Shepherd, Country Wench, An Host, Hostess, A Hee Baboon, She Baboon, A Hee Fool, She Fool vshe∣ring
them in.
All these persons apparelled to the life, the
Men issuing out of one side of the Boss∣cage,
and the Women from the other:
the Music was extremely well fitted,
having such a spirit of Country ioli∣tie•
as can hardly be imagined; but the
perpetual laughter and applause was
aboue the Music.
The dance likewise was of the same strain;
and the Dancers, or rather Actors expressed
every one their part so naturally and aptly, as
when a Mans eye was caught with the one,
and then past on to the other, hee could not
satisfy himself which did best. It pleased his
Majesty to call for it again at the end, as he
did likewise for the first Anti-masque; but
one of the Statues by that time was undressed.
IRis we strive,
Like winds at liberty, who should do worst
Ere we return. If Iuno be the Queen
Of Marriage, let her give happy way
To what is done, in honour of the State
She governs.
Harms, so it may be done
Merely in honour of the State, and these
That now have proved it, not to satisfy
The lust of Iupiter, in having thanks
More then his Iuno, if thy snaky rod
Have power to search the heavens, or found the sea,
Or call together all the ends of earth,
To bring in any thing that may do grace
To vs, and these; do it, we shall be pleased.
Then know that from the mouth of Jove himself,
Whose words have wings, and need not to be borne;
I took a message, and I bare it through
A thousand yielding clouds, and never stayed
Till his high will was done: the Olympian games
Which long have slept, at these wished Nuptials,
He pleased to have renewed and all his Knights
Are gathered hither, who within their tents
Rest on this hill, upon whose rising head.
Behold Ioues Altar, and his blessed Priests
Moving about it: come you holy men,
And with your voices draw these youths along,
That till Ioues music call them to their games,
Their active sports may give a blessed content
To those, for whom they are again begun.
THe second Travers is drawn, and the
higher ascent of the Mountain is dis∣covered;
wherein upon a level after a great
rise of the Hill, were placed two Pavilions:
open in the front of them, the Pavilions were
to sight as of cloth of gold, and they were
trimmed on the inside with rich Armour and
Military furniture hanged up as upon the
walls; and behind the Tents there were re∣presented
in prospective, the tops of divers
other Tents, as if it had been a Camp. In
these Pavilions were placed fifteen Olympian
Knights, upon seats a little imbowed near
the form of a Croissant, and the Knights ap∣peared
first, as consecrated persons all in
veils, like to Coapes, of silver Tiffinie, ga∣thered,
and falling a large compass about
them, and over their heads high Meters with
long pendants behind falling from them; the
Meters were so high, that they received their
hats and feathers, that nothing was seen but
veil: in the midst between both the Tents
upon the very top of the hill, being a higher
level then that of the Tents, was placed In∣piters
Altar gilt, with three great Tapers upon
golden Candlesticks burning upon it: and
the four Statues, two of gold, and two of
silver, as supporters, and Iupiters Priests in
white robes about it.
Upon the sight of the King, the veils of
the Knights did fall easily from them, and
they appeared in their own habit.
ARming doublets of Carnation satin
embroidered with Blazing Stars of sell∣for
plate, with powderings of smaller Stars
betwixt; gorgets of silver maile; long hose of
the same, with the doublets laid with silver
lace spangled, and enriched with embroidery
between the lace; Carnation like stockings
embroidered all over; garters and roses su∣table;
Pumps of Carnation satin imbro∣dered
as the doublets; hats of the same stuff
and embroidery cut like a helmet before, the
hinder part cut into Scallops, answering the
skirts of their doublets; the bands of the hats
were wreathes of silver in form of garlands
of wilde Olives, white feathers with one fall
of Carnation; Belts of the same stuff and em∣brodered
with the doublet; Silver swords;
little Italian bands and cuffs embroidered
with silver fair long Tresses of hair.
LOng robes of white Taffeta; long white
heads of hair: The high-Priest a cap of
white silk shag close to his head, with two
labels at the ears, the midst rising in form
of a Pyramid, in the top thereof a branch of
silver, every Priest playing upon a Lute:
twelve in number.
The Priests descend and sing this song
following; after whom the Knights like∣wise
descend• first laying aside their
veils• belts, and swords.
SHake off your heavy trance,
And leap into a dance,
Such as no mortals use to tread,
Fit only for Apollo
To play to, for the Moon to lead,
And all the Stars to follow.
The Knighs by this time are all descended
and fallen into their place, and then
dance their first Measure.
ON blessed youths, for love doth pause
Laying aside his graver laws
For this device,
And at the wedding such a pair,
Each dance is taken for a prayer,
Each song a sacrifice.
The Knights dance their second Mea∣sure.
MOre pleasing were these sweet delights,
If Ladies moved as well as Knights;
Run every one of you and catch
A Nymph in honour of this match;
And whisper boldly in her ear,
Jove will but laugh, if you forswear.
And this daye's sins he doth resolve
That we his Priests should all absolve.
The Knights take their Ladies to dance
with them Galliards, Durets, Coran∣toes,
&amp;c. and lead them to their ply∣ces.
Then loud Music sound's, sup∣posed
to call them to their Olympian
games.
YE should stay longer if we durst,
Away, alas that he that first
Gave Time wilde wings to fly away,
Hath now no power to make him stay.
But though these games must needs be plaid,
I would this Pair, when they are laid,
And not a creature no them,
Could catch his scythe, as he doth pass,
And cut his wings, and break his glass,
And keep him ever by them.
The Knights dance their parting Measure
and ascend, put on their Swords and
Belts; during which time, the Priests
sing the fifth and last Song.
PEace and silence be the guide
To the Man, and to the Bride,
If there be a joy yet new
In marriage, let it fall on you,
That all the world may wonder.
If we should stay, we should doe worse,
And turn our blessing to a curse,
By keeping you asunder.

BRother, is your last hope past to mollify Moore∣crafts heart about your Mortgage?
Hopelessly past: I have presented the Usurer with a richer draught, then ever Cleopa∣tra swallowed; he hath sucked in ten thousand pounds worth of my Land, more then hee paid for at a gulp, without Trumpets.
I have as hard a task to perform in this house.
Faith mine was to make a Usurer honest, or to loose my land.
And mine is to persuade a passionate woman, or to leave the Land.
Sauill make the boat stay, I fear I shall begin my vnfor∣tunate journey this night, though the darkness of the night and the roughness of the waters might easily dissuade an unwilling man.
Sir, your fathers old friends hold it the sounder course for your body and estate, to stay at home, and marry, and propagate, and govern in your Country, then to tra∣uell for diseases, and return following the Court in a nightcap, and die without issue.
Sauill, you shall gain the opinion of a better
servant, in seeking to execute, not alter my will, how so∣for my intents succeed.
Yonders Mistress Yongloue brother, the grave rubber of your mistress toes.
Mistress Yongloue.
Mr. Loveless, truly wee thought your sails had been hoist: my Mistress is persuaded you are Se•…sick ere this.
Loves she her ill taken up resolution so dearly? Did thou move her for me?
By this l•…light that shines, theirs no removing her, if she get a •…if opinion by the end. I attempted her to day when they say a woman can deny nothing.
What critical minute was that?
When her smock was over her ears: but she was no more pliant then if it hung about her heals.
I prithee doliuer my service, and say I desire to see the dear cause of my banishment; and then for France.
Isle do it: hark hither, is that your Brother?
Yes, have you lost your memory?
As I live hoe's a pretty fellow.
O this is a sweet Brache.
Why she knows not you.
No, but she offered me once to know her: to this day she loves youth of eighteen; she heard a tale how Cu∣bid ftrooke her in love with a great Lord in the Tilt-yard, but he never saw her; yet she in kindness would needs wear a willow garland at his wedding. She loved all the Players in the last Queens time once over: She was struck when they acted lovers, and forsook some when they plaid murderers. She has nine Spurroyals, and the servants say she hoards old gold; and she herself pronounces angrily, that the Farmers eldest son, or her Mistress husbands Clark that shall be, that marries her, shall make her a jointure of fourscore pounds a year; she tells tales of the s•…ruing-men.
Enough, I know her brother. I shall en•…reate you only to salute my Mistress, and take leave, we'll part at the staiers.
Now Sir, this first part of your will is performed: whats the rest?
First let me beg your notice for this Gentleman my Brother.
I shall take it as a favour done to me, though the gentleman hath received but an v•…timely grace from you, yet my charitable disposition would have been ready to have done him freer courtesies as a stranger, then upon those cold commendations.
Lady, my salutations crave acquaintance and leave at on•…e.
Sir I hope you are the n•…aster of your own occa∣sions.
Would I were so. Mistress, for me to praise over again that worth, which all the world, and you your self can see.
Its a cold Rome this; Servant.
Mistress.
What think you if I have a chimney fort out heer?
Mistress another in my place, that were not tied to believe all your actions just, would app•…ehend himself wronged: But I, whose virtues are constancy &amp; obedience.
Yongloue, make a good fire aboue to warm me after my servants Exordiums.
I have heard and seen your affability to bee such, that the servants you give wages to may speak.
Tic true, tic true; but they speak to the purpose.
Mistress your will leads my speeches from the purpose. But as a man — 
A Simile servant? This room was built for honest meaners, that deliver themselves hastily and plainly, and are gone. Is this a time or place for Exordiums, and Similes, and metaphors? If you have ought to say, break intoo't; my answers shall very reasonably meet you.
Mistress I came to see you.
Thats happily dispacht, the next.
To take leave of you.
To be gon?
Yes.
•…ou •…eede not have despaired of that, nor have used so many circumstances to win me to give you leave to per∣form my com•…nd: Is there a third.
Yes, I had a third, had you been apt to hear it.
I never apter. Fast (good servant) fast.
It was to entreat you to hear reason.
Most willingly, have you brought one can speak it?
Lastly, it is to kindle in that barren heart love and forgiveness.
You would stay at home?
Yes Lady.
Why you may, and doubtlessly will, when you have debated that your commander is but your M•…stress, a wo∣man, a weak one, wildly overborne with p•…scions: but the thing by her commanded, is to see Douers dreadful cliff, p•…ssing in a pore waterhouse; the dangers of the merciless merc•…less twixt that and Callis, five long hours sail, with three pore weeks victuals.
You wrong me.
Then to land dumb, unable to enquire for an Eng∣glish host, to remove from City to City, by most charge∣able post-horse, like one that rod in quest of his mother tongue.
You wrong me much.
And all these (almost invincible labours) perfor∣med for your mistress to be in danger to for sake her, and to put on new alleagance to some French Lady, who is con∣tent to change language with you for laughter, and after your whole year spent in tennis and broken speech, to stand to the hazard of being laughed at at your return, and have tales made on you by the chamber-maids.
You wrong me much.
Louder yet.
You know your least word is offorce to make me seek out dangers, move me not with toys: but in this banishment, I must take leave to say, you are unjust: was one kiss forced from you in public by me so vnpardo∣noble? why all the hours of day and night have seen vs kiss.
Tic true, and so you satisfied the company that heard me chide.
Your own eyes were not dearer to you then I?
And so you told um.
I did, yet no singne of disgrace need to have stained your cheek: you your self knew your pure and simple heart to be most unspotted, and free from the least baseness.
I did: But if a Maids heart doth but once think that she is suspected, her own face will write he•… guilty.
But where lay this disgrace? The world that knew vs, knew our resolutions well: And could it bee hoped that I should give away my freedom, and ven∣ture a perpetual bondage with one I never kissed? or could I in 〈◊〉 wisdom take •…oo much lou•… upon me, from he•… that chose me for her husband?
Believe me; if my w•…dding smock were on,
Were the gloves bought and given, the Licence com•…,
Were the Rosemary branches dipped, and all
The Hipochrists and cakes 〈◊〉 and drunk off,
Were these two arms inc•…mpast with the hands
Of Bachelors, to l•…ade me to the Church;
Were my feet in the door, were I Iohn, said,
If Io•…n should boast a favour done by me,
I would not wed that year: And you I hope,
When you have spent his year commodiously,
In achieving Languages, will at your return
Acknowledge me more coy of parting with mine eyes,
Then such a friend. More talk I hold not now,
If you dare go!
I dare you know; First let me kiss.
Farewell sweet servant, your ta•…ke performed,
On a new ground as a beginning suitor,
I shall be apt to hear you.
Farewell cruel Mistress.
Brother you'll hazard the loosing your tide to Grauesend: you have a long half mile by land to Greene∣which.
I go: but brother, what yet unheard of course to live, doth your imagination flatter you with? your ordi∣nary means are deuourd.
Course? why horse-coursing I think. Con∣sum no time in this: I have no es•…te to bee mended by meditation: hee that busies himself about my fortunes, may properly be said to busy himself about no•…hinge.
Yet some course you must take, which for my sa∣tisfaction resolve and open: If you will shape none, I must inform you, that that man bu•… persuades himself hee means to live, that imagines not the means.
Why live upon others, as others have lived v∣pone me.
I apprehend not that: you have fed others, and consequently disposed of um: and the same measure must you expect from your maintainers, which will be too hey∣uy an alteration for you to bear.
Why isle purse; if that raise me not, Isle bet at bowling-alleys, or man whores; I would fain live by others: but Isle live whilst I am vnhangd, and after the thoughts taken.
I see you are tide to no particular employment then.
Faith I may choose my course: they say nature brings forth none but she provides for em: Isle try her liberality.
Well, to keep your feet out of base and dange∣rous paths, I have resolved you shall live as Master of my house. It shall bee your care Sauill to see him fed and clo∣thed, not according to his present estate, but to his birth and former fortunes.
If it be referd to him, if I be not found in Carna∣tion Iearsie stockings, blew devils breeches, with three guards down, and my pocket ith sleeves, isle ne'er look you in the face again.
A comlier wear I wuss it is then those dangling slops.
To keep you ready to doe him all service peacea∣bly, and him to command you reasonably, I leave these further direcitons in writing, which at your best leisure together open and read.
S•…r my Mrs. commends her love to you in this to∣ken, and these words; It is a Jewel (she says) which as a favour from her she would request you to wear till your years t•…auell be performed: which once expired, she will has•…lie expect your happy return.
Return my service with such thanks, as she may imagine the heart of a suddenly overjoyed man would will∣lingly utter: and you (I hope) I shall with slender argue∣mints persuade to wear this Diamond, that when my Mistress shall through my long absence, and the approach of new suitors, offer to forget me; you may call your eye down to your finger, and remember and speak of me: She will hear thee better then those allied by birth to her; as we see many men much swayed by the grooms of their chambers, not that they have a greater part of their love or opinion on them, as on others, but for they know their secrets.
A my credit I swear, I think it was made for me: Fear no other suitors.
I shall not need to teach you how to discredit their beginnings, you know how to take exception at their shirts at washing, or to make the maids swear they found plasters in their beds.
I know, I know, and doe not you fear the suitors.
Farewell, be mindful and be happy: the night calls me.
The Gods of the winds befriend you Sir: a con∣stant and a liberal lover thou art; more such God send vs.
Let um not stand still, we have rid hard.
A suitor I know by his riding hard, Isle not be seen.
A pretty Hall this, No servant in it? I would look freshly.
You have delivered your arrand to me then: ther's no danger in a handsome young fellow: Isle show my self.
Lady may it please you to bestow upon a stran∣ger the ordinary grace of salutation: Are you the La∣die of this house?
Sir, I am worthily proud to be a servant of hers.
Lady I should be as proud to be a sernant of yours, did not my so late acquaintance make me despair.
Sir, it is not so hard to achieve, but nature may bring it about.
For these comfortable words I remain your glad debtor. Is your Lady at home?
She is no stragl•…r Sir.
May her occasions admit me to speak with her?
If you come in the way of a Suitor, No.
I know your a•…ble virtue will be moved to per∣swade her, that a Gentleman benighted and strayed offers to be bound to her for a n•…ghts lodging.
I will commend this message to her: but if you aim at her body, you will be de•…uded: oath•…r women the households of good carriage and government; upon any of which if you can cast your affection, they will perhaps bee found as faithful, and not so coy.
What a skin full of lust is this? I thought I had come awoeing, and I am the courted party. This is right Court fashion: Men, women, and all woe; catch that catch may. If this soft hearted woman have infused any of her tenderness into her Lady, there is hope she will be ply∣ant. But who's here?
God save you Sir, My Lady lets you know she de∣sires to be acquainted with your name before she confer with you.
Sir my name calls me Welford.
Sir, you are a gentleman of a good name. I'll try his wit.
I will uphold it as good as any of my Ancestors had this two hundred years Sir.
I knew a worshipful and a religious gentleman of your name in the Bishopric of Durham. Call you him Cousin?
I am only allied to his virtues Sir.
It is modestly said: I should carry the badge of your Christianity with me to.
VVhats that, a Cross? there's a tester.
I mean the name which your Godfathers &amp; God∣mothers gave you at the Font.
Tic Harry: but you cannot proceed orderly now in your Catechism: foe•… you have told me who gave me that name. Shall beg your names.
Roger.
What room fill you in this house?
More rooms then one.
The more the merrier. But may my boldness know, why your Lady hath sent you to decipher my name?
Her own words were these; To know whether you were a formerly denied suitor, disguised in this mes∣sage: For I can assure you she delights not in Tha∣lame: Himen and sh•… are at variance, I shall return with much hast.
And much speed Sir I hope: certainly I am ari∣ued amongst a Nation of new found fools: on a Land where no Na•…igator has yet planted wit, If I had fore∣seen it, I would have laded my breeches with bells, knives, copper a•…d glasses to trade with the women for their virginities: yet I fear I should have betrayed my self to an 〈◊〉 charge then: here is the walking night-cap again.
Sir, my Ladies pleasure is to see you: who hath commanded me to acknowledge her sorrow. that you must take the pains to come up for so bad enter∣tainement.
I shall obey your Lady that sent it, and acknow∣ledge you that brought it to be your Arts Master.
Jam but a Bachelor of Art Sir; and I have the men∣ding of all under this roof, from my Lady on her down bed, to the maid in the peas straw.
A Cobbler Sir?
No Sir. I inculcate Divine service within these walls,
But the inhabitants of this house doe often im∣ploy you on errands, without any scruple of conscience.
Yes, I doe take the air many mornings on foot, three or four miles for eggs: but why move you that?
To know whether it might become your functi∣on to bid my man to neglect his horse a little, to attend on me.
Most properly Sir.
I pray ye doe so then: and whilst I will attend your Lady. You direct all this house in the true way?
I doe Sir.
And this door (I hope) conducts to your Lady?
Your understanding is engine•…os.
By your favour Sir you shall pardon me.
I shall beat your favour Sir, cross me no more; I say they shall come in.
Sir you forget one, who I am.
Sir I doe not; thou art my brothers Steward, his cast off mill-money, his Kitchen Arithmetic.
Sir I hope you will not make so little of me.
I make thee not so little as thou art: for indeed there goes no more to the making of a Steward, but a fair Imprimis, and then a reasonable Item infused into him, and the thing is done.
Nay then you stir my duty, and I must tell you.
What would thou tell me, how Hoppes go, or hold some rotten discourse of sheep, or when our Lady day false? Prithee farewell, and entertain my friends, bee drunk, and burn thy Table-bookes: and my dear spark of velvet thou and I
Good Sir remember.
I doe remember thee a foolish fellow, one that did put his trust in Almanacs, and horse-faiers, and rose by honey and pot-butter. Shall they come in yet?
Nay then I must unfold your Brothers pleasure, these be the lessons Sir, he left behind him.
Prithee expound the first.
I leave to keep my house 300 pounds a year; and my Brother to dispose of it.
Mark that my wicked Steward, and I dispose of it.
Whilst hee bears himself like a Gentleman, and my credit false not in him. Mark that my good young Sir, mark that.
Nay if it be no more I shall fulfil it: whilst my legs will carry me isle bear my self gentleman-like, but when I am drunk, let them bear me that can. Forward dear steward.
Next it is my will, that hee bee furnished (as my bro∣there) with attendance, apparel, and the obedience of my people.
Steward this is as plain as your old minikin breeches. Your wisdom will relent now, will it not? Be mollified or — you understand me Sir, proceed.
Next, that my Steward keep his place, and power, and bound my brothers wildness with his care.
Isle hear no more this Apocripha, bind it by it self steward.
This is your Brothers will, and as I take it, he makes no mention of such company as you would draw un to you. Captains of Gallifoists, such as in a clear day have seen Callis, fellows that have no more of God, then their oaths comes to: they wear swords to reach fire at a Play, and get there the oyld end of a pipe for their guerdon: then the remnant of your regiment are wealthy Tobacco merchants, that set up with one ownce, and break for three; together with a forlorn hope of Poets, and all these look like Car∣thusians, things without linen: Are these fit company for my Mafters Brother?
I will either convert thee (O thou Pagan stew∣art)
or presently confound thee and thy reckonings, who's there? call in the Gent.
Good Sir.
Nay you shall know both who I am, and where I am.
Are you my masters Brother?
Are you the sage Master Steward, with a face like an old Ephemerids?
Then God help all, I say.
I, and tic well said my old peer of France: welcome gentlemen, welcome gentlemen; mine own dear lads, you're richly welcome. Know this old Harry∣groat.
Sir I will take your love.
Sir you will take my purse.
And study to continue it.
I doe believe you.
Your honourable friend and masters brother, hath given you to vs for a worthy fellow, and so wee hug you Sir.
Has given himself into the hands of varlets, not to be carved out. Sir are these the pieces?
They are the Morals of the age, the virtues. Men made of Gold.
Of your gold you mean Sir.
This is a man of war, that cries go on; and wears his Colours.
In's nose.
In the fragrant field. This is a Traveller Sir, knows men and manners, and has plowd up the Sea so far, till both the poles have knocked, has seen the Sun take Coach, and can distinguish the colour of his horses, and their kinds, and had a Flanders Mare leapt there.
Tic much.
I have seen more Sir.
Tic even enough a conscience; sit down, and rest you, you are at the end of the world already. Would you had as good a living Sir as this Fellow could
lie you out of has a notable gift in it.
This ministers the Smoke, and this the Muses.
And you the clothes, and meat, and money, you have a goodly generation of um, pray let um multiply, your Brothers house is big enough, and to say truth, he's too much Land, hang it dirt.
Why now thou art a loving stinkeard. Fire off thy annotations and thy rent books; thou hast a weak brain Sauill, and with the next long Bill thou wilt run mad. Gentlemen you are once more welcome to three hundred pounds a year; wee will bee freely merry, shall we not?
Merry as mirth, and wine my lovely Love∣less.
A serious look shall be a Jury to excommunicate any man from our company.
We will have nobody talk wisely neither.
What think you gentlemen by all this Reave∣new in drink?
I am all for drink.
I am dry till it be so.
He that will not cry Amen to this, let him live so∣ber, seem wise, and die ath Corum.
It shall bee so, we'll have it all in drink, let meat and lodging go, they are transitory, and show men merely mortal: then we'll have wenches, every one his wench, and every week a fresh one: weal keep no powderd flesh: all these wee have by war∣rant under the Title of things necessary. Here upon this place I ground it: the obedience of my people, and all necessaries: Your opinions Gentle∣men?
Tic plain and evident that he meant wenches.
Good Sir let me expound it.
Here be as sound men as your self Sir.
This doe I hold to bee the interpretation of it; In this word Necessary, is concluded all that bee helps to man: woman was made the first, and therefore here the chiefest.
Believe me tic a learned one, and by these words; The obedience of my people, (you steward being one) are bound to fetch vs wenches.
He is, he is.
Steward attend vs for instructions.
But will you keep no house Sir?
Nothing but drink, three hundred pounds in drink.
O miserable house, and miserable I that live to see it. Good Sir keep some meat.
Get vs good whoores, and for your part, Isle board you in an Alehouse, you shall have cheese and onions.
What shall become of me, no chimney smoking? Well prodigal, your brother will come home.
Come lads Isle warrant you for wenches, three hundred pounds in drink.
Sir now you see your bad lodging, I must bid you goodnight.
Lady if there be any want, tic in want of you.
A little sleep will ease that complement. Once more good night.
Once more dear Lady, and then all sweet nights.
Dear Sir be short and sweet then.
Shall the morrow prove better to me, shall I hope my suit happier by this nights rest.
Is your suit so sickly that rest will help it? Pray ye let it rest then till I call for it. Sir as a stranger you have had all my welcome: but had I known your errand ere you came, your passage had been straighter: Sir, good night.
So fair, and cruel, dear unkind good∣night.
Nay Sir you shall stay with me, Isle press your zeal so far.
O Lord Sir,
Doe you love Tobacco?
Surely I love it, but it loves not me; yet with your reverence isle be bold.
Pray light it Sir. How doe you like it.
I promise you it is notable stinging gear indeed. It is wet Sir, Lord how it brings down Room?
Handle it again Sir; you have a warm text of it.
Thanks ever premised for it. I promise you it is very powerful, and by a Trope, spiritual: for certainly it moves in sundry places.
I, it does so Sir, and me especially to ask Sir, why you wear a night cap.
Assuredly I will speak the truth unto you; you shall understand Sir, that my head is broken, and by whom; e∣uen by that visible beast the Butler.
The Butler? certainly hee had all his drink a∣bout him when he did it. Strike one of your grave Cassock? The offence Sir?
Reproving him at Tra-trip Sir, for swearing: you have the total surely.
You told him when his rage was set atilt, and so hee cract your Cannons. I hope hee has not hurt your gentle reading: But shall wee see these Gentleweomen to night?
Have patience Sir, until our fellow Nicholas bee deceased, that is, a sleep: for so the word is taken; to sleep to die, to die to sleep: a very Figure Sir.
Cannot you cast another for the Gentleweomen?
Not till the man bee in his bed, his grave; his grave, his bed; the very same again Sir. Our Comic Poet gives the reason sweetly; Plenus rimarum est, he is full of loop∣holes, and will discover to our Patronise.
Your comment Sir has made me understand you.
Sir be addressed, the graces doe salute you with the full bowl of plenty. Is our old enemy entombed?
He's fast?
And does he snore out supinely with the Poet?
No, he out-snores the Poet.
Gentlewoman, this courtesy shall bind a stranger to you, ever your servant.
Sir, my S•…sters strictness makes not vs forget you are a stranger and a Gentleman.
In sooth Sir were I changed into into my Lady, a Gentleman so well endued with parts, should not be lost.
I thank you Gentlewoman, and rest bound to you. S•…e how this foul familiar ch•…was the Cud: From thee and three and fifty, good l•…ue deliver me.
Will you sit down Sir, and take a spoon?
I take it kindly Lady.
It is our best banquet Sir.
Shall we give thank,?
I have to the Gentlewoman already Sir.
Good Sir Roger keep that breath to cool your part of the posit, you may chance have a scalding zeal else: and you will needs bee doing, pray tell your twenty to your self. Would you could like this Sir?
I would your Sister would like me as well Lady.
Sure Sir she would not eat you: but banish that imagination; she's only wedded to herself, lies with her∣self, and lou•…s herself; and for an other husband then her∣self, he may knock at the gate, but ne'er come in: bee wise Sir, she's a woman, and a trouble, and has her many faults, the least of which is, she cannot love you.
God pardon her, she'll doe worse, would I were worthy his least grief Mistress Martha.
Now I must ouer-heare her.
Faith would thou had them all withal my heart: I do•… not think they would make thee a day older.
Sir will you put in deeper, tic the sweeter.
Well said old sayings.
She looks like one indeed. Gentlewoman you keep your word, your sweet self has made the bottom sweeter.
Sir I begin a frolic, dare you change Sir?
My self for you, so please you. That smile has turned my stomach. This is right the old Emblem of the
Moil cropping off thistles: Lord what a hunting head she carries, sure she has been ridden with a Martingale. Now love deliver me.
Doe I dream, or doe I wake? surely I know not: am I rubbed off? is this the way of all my mornings prayers? Oh •…ger, thou art but grass, and woman as a flower. Did I for this consume my quarters in meditation, vows, and wooed her in Heroical Epistles? Did I expound the Owl, and un∣dertooke, with labour and expense the recollection of those thousand Pieces, consumed in Colours and Tobacco shops of that our honoured Englishman No. Br.? Have I done this, and am I done thus too? I will end with the Wise-man, and say, He that holds a woman, has an Eel by the tail.
Sir, it is so late, and our entertainment (meaning our posit) by this is grown so cold, that it were an unmannerly part longer to hold you from your rest: let what the house has be at your command Sir.
Sweet rest be with you Lady; and to you what you desire too.
It should be some such good thing like your self then.
Heaven keep me from that curse, and all my Issue. Good night Antiquity.
Solomon Miseris socios habuisse doloris: but I alone.
Learned Sir, will you bid my man come to me? and requesting a greater measure of your learning, good night, good Mr Roger.
Good Sir, peace be with you.
Adieu dear Domino. Half a dozen such in a King∣dome would make a man forswear concession: for who that had but half his wits about him would commit the counsel of a serious sin to such a cruel nightcap?
Why how now, shall we have an Antique?
Whose head do you carry upon your shoulders, that you jowl it so against the post? Is it for your ease? or have you seen the S•…llor? Where are my slippers sir?
Here Sir.
Where Sir? have you got the pot verdugo? have you seen the horses Sir?
Yes Sir.
Have they any meat?
Faith Sir they have a kind of wholesome rushes, hay I cannot cal it.
And no provender?
Sir so I take it.
You are merry Sir, and why so?
Faith Sir, here are no oats to be got, unless you'll have um in porridge: the people are so mainly given to spoonemeate: yonders a cast of Coach-mares of the gentle∣women's, the strangest Cattle.
Why?
Why they are transpārant sir, you may see through them: and such a house?
Come Sir, the truth of your discovery.
Sir they are in tribes like Jaws: the Kitchen and the Dairy make one tribe, and have their faction and their forni∣cation within themselves; the Buttry and the Laundry are an other, and ther's no love lost; the chambers are entire, and what's done there, is somewhat higher then my knowledge; but this I am sure, between these •…opulations, a stranger is kept virtuous, that is, fasting. But of all this the drink Sir.
What of that Sir?
Faith Sir I will handle it as the time and your patience will give me leave. This drink, or this cooling Iulip, of which three spoonefuls kills the Calenture, a pint breeds the cold Palsy.
Si•… you belly the house.
I would I did Sir. But as I am a true man, if it were but one degree colder, nothing but an asses hoof would hold it.
I am glad on it Sir: for if it had proved stronger, you had been tongue-tide of these commendations. Light me the candle Sir, Isle hear no more.
Come my brave man of war, trace out thy darling,
And you my learned Council, set and turn boys
Kiss till the Cow come home, kiss close, kiss close knave s.
My modern Poet, thou shalt kiss in couplets. 
Strike up you merry varlets, and leave your peeping,
This is no pay for Fiddlers.
O my dear boy, thy Hercules, thy Captain
Makes thee his Hilas, his delight, his solace.
Love thy brave man of war, and let thy bounty
Clap him in Shamois: Let there be deductedd out of our maine potation
Five Marks in hatchments to adorn this thigh,
Cramped with this rest of peace, and I will fight
Thy battles.
Thou shalt have it boy, and sly in Feather, Lead on a march you Michers.
O my head, O my heart, what a noise and change is here; would I had been cold ith mouth before this day, and ne'er have liud to see this dissolution. Hee that lives within a mile of this place, had as good sleep in the perpetual noise of an iron mill. Ther's a dead Sea of drink ith Sellor, in which goodly vessels lie wract, and in the middle of this deluge ap∣pears the tops of •…lagons and black jacks, like Churches drown ith marshes.
What art thou come? My sweet Sir Amias welcome to Troy. Come thou shalt kiss my Helen, and court her in a dance.
Good Sir consider.
Shall we consider gentlemen. How say you?
Consider? that were a simple toy in faith, Consider? whose morals that? The man that cries Consider, is our foe: let my steel know him.
Stay thy dead doing hand, he must not die yet: prithee be calm my Hector.
Peasant, slave, thou groom, composde of grudge∣ings, live and thank this Gentleman, thou had seen Pluto else. The next consider kill•… thee.
Let him drink down his word again in a gallon of Sack.
Tic but a snuff, make it two gallons, and let him doe it kneeling in repentance.
Nay rather kill me, theres but a lay-man lost. Good Captain doe your office.
Thou shalt drink Steward, drink and dance my Steward. Strike him a horne-pipe 〈◊〉, take thy striuer,
and pace her till she stew.
Sure Sir I cannot dance with your Gentlewoman, they are too light for me, pray break my head, and let me go.
He shall dance, he shall dance.
Hee shall dance, and drink, and bee drunk and dance, and bee drunk again, and shall see no meat in a year.
And three quarters.
And three quarters be it.
Who knocks there? let him in.
Some to deliver me I hope.
Gentlemen, God save you all, my business is to one Mr Loveless.
This is the Gentleman you mean; view him, and take his Inuentory, hoe's a right one.
He promises no less Sir.
Sir your business?
Sir, I should let you know, yet I am loath, yet I am sworn too't, would some other tongue would speak it for me.
Out with it a Gods name.
All I desire Sir is, the patience and sufferance of a man, and good Sir be not moved more,
Then a pottle of Sack will doe, heere's my hand, prithee thy business?
Good Sir excuse me, and whatsoever you hear, think, must have been known unto you, and bee your self discreet; and bear it nobly.
Prithee dispatch me.
Your brothers dead Sir.
Thou dost not mean dead drunk?
No, no, dead and drowned at sea Sir.
Art sure hoe's dead?
Too sure Sir.
I, but art thou very certainly sure of it?
As sure Sir as I tell it.
But art thou sure he came not up again?
He may come up, but ne'er to call you brother.
But art sure he had water enough to drown him?
Sure Sir he wanted none.
I would not have him want, I loved him bet∣la; here I forgive thee: and •…aith bec plain, how doe I bear it?
Very wisely Sir.
Fill him some wine. Thou dost not see me moved, these transitory toys ne'er trouble me, hoe's in a better place my friend, I know it. Some fellows would have cried now, and have cursed thee, and fallen out with their meat, and kept a putter; but all this helps not, he was too good for vs, and let God keep him: there's the right use on it friend. Off with thy drink, thou hast a spice of sorrow makes thee dry: fill him a∣another, Sauill, your Masters dead, and who am I now Sauill? Nay, let's all bear it well, wipe, Sauill, wipe, tears are but thrown away: we shall have wenches now, shall we not Sa∣will? Drink to my friend Captain.
Yes Sir.
And drink innumerable.
Yes forsooth Sir.
And you'll strain curse and be drunk a little.
I would be glad, Sir, to doe my weak endeavour.
You may be brought in time to love a wench too.
In time the sturdy Oak Sir.
Some more wine for my friend there.
I shall be drunk anon for my good news: but I have a loving brother, that's my comfort.
Heere's to you sir, this is the worst I wish you for your news: and if I had another elder brother, and say it were his chance to feed more fishes, I should bee still the same you see me now, a poor contented Gentleman. More wine for my friend there, hoe's dry again.
I shall be if I follow this beginning. Well, my dear brother, if I scope this drowning, it is your turn next to sink, you shall duck twice before I help you. Sir I cannot drink more, 'pray let me have your pardon.
O Lord sir, it is your modesty: more wine, give him a bigger glass; hug him my Captain, thou shalt
bee my chief mourner.
And this my pennon. Sir a full rouse to you, and to my Lo. of Land here.
I fecle a buzzing in my brains, pray God they bear this out, and Isle ne'er trouble them so far again. Heers to you Sir.
To my dear Steward, down a your knees you in∣•…del, you Pagan; be drunk and penitent.
Forgive me Sir and isle be any thing.
Then be a Bawd: Isle have thee a brave Baud.
Sir I must take my leave of you, my business is so ur∣gent.
Lets have a bridling cast before you go. Fills a new stoup.
I dare not Sir by no means.
Have you any mind to a wench? I would fine gratify you for the pains you took Sir.
As little as to the tother.
If you find any stirring, doe but say so.
Sir you are too bounteous, when I find that itch∣ing, you shall assuage it Sir before another: this only, and farewell Sir. Your brother when the storm was most extreme, told all about him, he left a will, which lies close behind a chimney in the matted chamber: and so as well Sir, as you have made me able, I take my leave.
Let vs embrace him all: if you grow dry before you •…d your business, pray take a bait here, I have a fresh hogshead for you.
You shall neither will nor choose sir. My Master is a wonderful fine Gentleman has a fine state, a very sine state Sir, I am his steward Sir, and his man.
Would you were your own Sir, as I left you. Well I must cast about, or all sinks.
Farewell Gentleman, Gentleman. Gentleman.
What would you with me Sir?
Farewell Gentleman.
O sleep Sir, sleep.
Well boys, you see whats fallen, lets in and drink, and give thanks for it.
Let's give thanks for it.
Drunk as I live.
Drunk as I live boys.
Why now thou art able to discharge thine office, and cast up a reckoning of some weight; I will bee knighted, for my state will bear it, it is sixteen hundred boys: off with your husks, Isle skin you all in satin.
O sweet Loveless!
All in satin? O sweet Loveless.
March in my Noble Compeers: and this my Countess shall be led by two: and so proceed we to the will.
And Widow, as I say be your own friend: your husband left you wealthy, I and wise, continue so sweet duck, continue so. Take heed of young smooth varlets, younger brothers, they are worms that will eat through your bags: they are very lightning, that with a slash or two will melt your money, and never singe your purse strings: they are colts, wench, colts, heady and dangerous, till we take um up, and make um fit for bonds; look upon me, I have had, and have yet matter of moment girl, matter of moment; you may meet with a worse back, Isle not commend it.
Nor I neither Sir.
Yet thus far by your favour vviddow, it is tuffe.
And therefore not for my diet, for I love a tender one.
Sweet widow leave your frumps, and bee edified: you know my state, I sell no Perspectives, Scarses, Gloves, nor Hangers, nor put my trust in Shoo-ties: and where your hus∣band in an age was rising by burnt figs, dragged with meal and powdered sugar, saunders and grains, wormeseed and rotten reasons, and such vile tobacco, that made the foot-men man∣gie; I in a year have put up hundreds incios'd, my widow, those pleasant meadows, by a forfeit mortgage: for which the poor Knight takes a lone chamber, owes for his Ale, and dare nor beat his Hostess: nay more — 
Good Sir no more, what ere my husband was, I know what I am, and if you marry me, you must bear i•… bravely off Sir.
Not with the head, sweet widow.
No, sweet sir, but with your shoulders: I must have you dubbed, for under that I will stoop a feather. My husband was a fellow loved to toil, feed ill, made gain his exercise, and so grew costive, which for I was his wife, and gave way to, and spun mine own smocks course, and sir, so little; but let that pass. Time, that vveares all things out, vvore out this hue•…band, who in penitence of such fruitless five years mar∣riage, left me great with his wealth, which if you'll bee á worthy gossip to, be knighted Sir.
Now sir, from whom come you? whose man are you Sir?
Sir, I come from young Mr Loveless.
Be silent sir, I have no money, not a penny for you, hoe's sunk, your Master's sunk, a perished man sir.
Indeed his brother's sunk Sir, God be with him, a pe∣risht man indeed, and drowned at Sea.
How said thou, good my friend, his brother drowned?
Untimely, Sir, at sea.
And thy young Master left sole heir?
Yes, Sir.
And he wants money?
Yes, and sent me to you; for he is now to be knighted.
Widow, be wise, there's more land coming, wid∣dow be very wise, and give thanks for me vviddow.
B•… you very wise, and bee knighted, and then give thanks for me Sir.
What says your Worship to this money?
I say, he may have money if he please.
A thousand Sir?
A thousand Sir, provided any wise Sir, his land lye for the payment, otherwise — 
Hoe's here himself Sir, and can better tell you.
My notable dear friend, and worthy Mr Loveless, and now right worshipful, all joy and welcome.
Thanks to my dear incloser, Mr Moorecraft; pre∣thee old Angel gold, salute my family, Isle doe as much for yours; this, and your own desires, fair Gentlewoman.
And yours Sir, if you mean well; it is a handsome Gen∣tleman.
Sirrha, my brothers dead.
Dead?
Dead, and by this time souc't for Ember week.
Dead?
Drowned, drowned at sea: Man, by the no•…t fresh Conger that comes we shall hear more.
Now by the faith of my body it moos me much.
What, will it thou be an Ass, and weep for the dead? why I thought nothing but a general inundation would have moved thee: prithee be quiet, he hath left his land behind him.
O, he's he so?
Yes faith, I thank him for it, I have all boy, hast a∣ny ready money?
Will you sell Sir?
No not outright good Gripe; marry, a mortgage, or such a slight security.
I have no money Sir for mortgage; If you will sell, and all or none, I•…e work a new Mine for you.
Good Sir look before you, he will work you out of all else: if you sell all your Land, you have sold your Country, and then you must to sea to seek your brother, and there lye pickled in a poudering tub, and break your teeth with bis∣kits and hard beef that must have watering Sir: and whore's your 300. pounds a year in drink then? I•… you'•…e tun up the straights you may, for you have no calling for drink there, but with a Cannon, nor no scoring but on your ships sides, and then if you scope with life, and take a faggot boat, and a bottle of Vsq•…bough, come home poo•…e men, like a type o•… Theames Str•…t stinking of pitch and poor Iohn. I cannot tell Sir, I woul•… be •…th to s•… 〈◊◊〉.
Steweard, you are an Ass, a measel'd mongrel, and were it not again the peace of my sovereign f•…iend here, I would break your forecasting coxcomb, dog I would, even with thy s•…affe of •…ffice there, thy pen and Inkhorn. No∣ble boy, the god of gold here has sed thee well, take money for thy 〈◊〉: 〈◊〉 &amp; believe, thou art cold of cons•…tion, thy seat vnhealthful, sell &amp; be wise; we are three that will adorn thee,
and live according to thine own heart child: mirth shall be only ou•…s, and only ours shall be the black eyed beauties of the time. Money makes men eternal.
Doe what you will, it is the noblest course, then you may live without the charge of people, only wee four will make a family, I and a•… age that shall beget new Annals, in wh•…ch Isle write thy life my son of pleasure, equal with Nor•… or Cali•…ula.
What mean they Captain?
Two roaring boys of Rome that made all split.
Come Sir, what dare you give?
You will not sell Sir?
Who told you so Sir?
Good Sir have a care.
Peace, or Isle tack your tongue up to your roof. What money? speak.
Six thousand pound Sir.
Take it, he has ouerbidden by the Sun: bind him to his bargain quickly.
Come, strike me luck with earnest, and draw the writings.
There's a Gods penny for thee.
Sir, for my old Masters sake let my Farm be excepted, if I become his tenant I am undone, my children beggars, and my wife God knows what: consider me dear Sir.
Isle have all in or none.
All in, all in: dispatch the writings.
Go, thou art a pretty forehanded fellow, would thou were wiser.
Now doe I sensibly begin to feel my self a rascal: would I could teach a School, or beg, or lye well, I am utterly undone; now he that taught thee to deceive and cou∣sen, take thee to his mercy: so be it.
Come widow, come, never stand upon a knighthood, it is a mere paper honour, and not proof enough for a Ser∣geant. Come, come, Isle make thee — 
To answer in short, it is this Sir, No knight, no widow: if you make me any thing, it must be a Lady; and so I take my leave.
Farewell sweet widow, and think of it.
Sir I do more then think of it, it makes me dream sir.
Shoe's rich and sober, if this itch were from her: and say I bee at charge to pay the Footmen, and the True•…pett, I and the Horsemen too, and be a Knight, and she refuse me then: then am I hoist into the Subsidy, and so by consequence should prove a Coxcomb: Isle have a care of that. Six thou∣sand pound, and then the Land is mine, there's some refresh∣ing yet.
IF he but follow me, as all my hopes tells me hoe's man enough, up go•…s my rest, and I know I shall draw him.
This is the strangest pamperd piece of flesh towards fifty, that ever frailty cop't withal, what a trim Lenuoy here she has put upon me: these women are a proud kind of cat∣tell, and love this whoreson doing so directly, that they will not stick to make their very skins Bawds to their flesh. Here's dogskin and storax sufficient to kill a H•…ke: what to do with it, beside nailing it up amongst Irish heads of Teere, to show the mightiness of her palm, I know not: there she is, I must enter into Dialogue. Lady you have lost your glove.
Not Sir if you have found it.
It was my meaning Lady to restore it.
Twill be uncivil in me to take back a favour, For∣tune hath so well bestowed Sir, 'pray wear it for me.
I had rather wear a Bell. But hark you Mistress, What hidden virtue is there in this glove, that you would have me wear it? Is it good against sore eyes, or will it charm the toothache? Or these red tops, being steeped in white wine soluble, will it kill the itch? or he has it so concealed a providence to keep my hand from by•…ds? If it have none of these, and prove no more but a bare glove of half a crown a pair, twill bee but half a curtsy, I wear two always: faith let's draw cuts, one will doe me no pleasure.
The tenderness of his years keeps him as yet in eg∣norance:
hoe's a well moulded fellow, and I wonder his blood should stir no higher; but 〈◊〉 his want of company: I must grow nearer to him.
God save you both.
And pardon you Sir: this is somewhat rude, how came you hither?
Why through the doors, they are open.
What are you? and what business have you here?
More I believe then you have.
Who would this fellow speak with? Art th•…u sober?
Y•…s, I come not here to sleep.
Prithee what a•…t thou?
As much (gay man) as thou art, I am a Gentleman.
Art thou no more?
Yes, more then thou dare be, a So•…ldier.
Thou dost not come to quarrel?
No, not with women; I come to speak here with a Gentlewoman.
Why I am one.
But no•… with one so gentle.
This is a fine fellow.
Sir I am not fine yet, I am but new come over, di∣rect me with your ticket to your Taylor, and then I shall bee fine Sir. Lady, if there be a better of your sex within this house, say I would see her.
Why am not I good enough for you Sir?
Your way you'll be too good, 'pray •…nd my business. This is another Su•…er: O srayle woman.
This fellow with his bluntness hopes to doe more then the long suites of a thousand could: though he be sour hoe's quick I must not trust him. Sir, this Lady is not to speak with you, she is more serious: you smell as if you were new ralkt; go and be handsome, and then you may sit with her Serving∣men.
What are you Sir?
Guess by my outside.
Then I take you Sir for some new silken thing weaned from the country, that shall (when you come to keep good company) be beaten into better manners. 'Pray good proud Gentlewoman help me to your Mistress.
How many lives hast thou, that thou talk thus rud•…lie?
But one, I am neither cat nor woman.
And will that one life Sir maintain you ever in such bold sauciness?
Yes amongst a nation of such men as you are, and be no worse for wearing Shall I speak with this Lady?
No by my troth shall not you.
I must stay here then.
That you shall not neither.
Good fine thing tell me why.
Good angry thing Isle tell you:
This is no place for such companions,
Such lousy Gentlemen shall find their business
Better in the the Suburbs; there your strong pitch persume,
Mingled with lees of Ale, shall re•…ke in fashion:
This is no Thames street Sir.
This Gentleman informs you truly:
Prithee be satisfied, and seek the Suburbs,
Good Captain, or whatever title else,
The warlike Eelcboats have bestowed upon thee,
Go and resorme thy s•…lfe: prithee be sweeter,
And know my Lady speaks with no such swabbers.
You ca•…not talk me out with your tradition
Of wit you pick from plays, go too, I have found ye:
And for you, tender Sir, whose gentle blood
Runs in your nose, and makes you snuff at all
But three piled people, I doe let you know,
He that be got your worships satin suit,
Can make no men Sir: I will see this Lady,
And with the reverence of your silkenship,
In these old Ornaments.
You will not sure.
Sure Sir I shall.
You would be beaten out.
Indeed I would not, or if I would beaten,
Pray who shall beat me? this good Gentleman
Looks as he were of the peace.
Sir you shall see that: will you get you out?
Yes, that, that shall correct your boys tongue,
Dare you fight? I will stay here st•…ll.
O their things are out, help, help for Gods sake,
Madam; Iesus they foin at one another,
Madam, why who is within there? 
Who breeds this rudeness?
This uncivil sellow:
He says he comes from sea, where I believe
He has purged away his manners.
What of him?
Why he will rudely, without once God bless you,
Press to your privacies, and no de•…all
Must stand betwixt your person and his business;
I let go his ill language.
Sir, have you •…usinesse with me?
Madam some I have,
But not so serious to 〈◊〉 my life for it:
If you keep this qua•…la, and maintain about you
Such Knights of the Sun 〈◊〉 this is, to defy
Men of 〈◊◊〉 ye, you may live,
But in what some?
Pray stay Sir, who he has wronged you?
Wrong me he cannot, though uncivilly
He 〈◊〉 his wilde words at me: But to you
I think he did no honour, to deny
The haste I come withal, a passage to you,
Though I seem course.
Excuse me, gentle 〈◊〉, it was from my knowledge,
And shall have no protection. And to you Sir,
You have showed more heat then wit, and from your self
Have borrowed power, I never gave you here,
To doe these wilde unmanly things: my house
Is no blind street to swagger in: and my favours
Not doting yet on your unknown deserts
So far, that I should make you Master of my business:
My credit yet, stands fairer with the people
Then to be tried with swords: And they that come
To doe meseruice, must not think to win me
With hazard of a murder: If your love
Consist in fury, carry it to the Camp,
And there in honour of some common mistress,
Shorten your youth. I pray be better tempered,
And give me leave a while Sir.
You must have it.
Now Sir, your business?
First I thank you for schooling this young fellow,
Whom his own follies, which is prone enough
Daily to fall into, if you but frown,
Shall level him away to his repentance:
Next I should rail at you, but you are a woman,
And anger lost upon you.
Why at me Sir?
I never did you wrong, for to my knowledge
This is the first sight of you.
You have done that,
I must confess I have the least curse in,
Because the least acquaintance: But there be
(If there be honour in the minds of men)
Thousands, when they shall know what I deliver,
(As all good men must share 〈◊〉) will to sham•…
Blast your black memory.
How is this good Sir?
Tic that, that if you have a soul will choke it:
You've kilt a Gentleman:
I kilt a Gentleman?
You and your cruelty have kilt 〈◊〉 woman;
And such a man (let me be angry in it)
Whose least worth vvaighed aboue all vveomens virtues
That are, I spare you all to come too: guess him now.
I am so innocent I cannot Sir.
Ripen•… you mean: you are a perfect woman,
And as the first was, made for mans undoing.
Sir you have mist your way, I am not she.
Would he had mist his way too, though hee had
Wondered farther 〈◊〉 women are ill spoken of,
So he had 〈◊〉 this misery, you Lady.
How doe you doe Sir?
〈◊◊〉 I hope,
While I can keep my self from such temptations.
Pray leap into this matter, whither would ye?
You had a Servant that your peenishnes
Enjoined to travel.
Such a one I have
〈◊〉, and should be grieved it were otherwise.
Then have your asking, and be grieved, hoe's dead;
How you will answer for his worth I know not,
But this I am sure, either he, or you, or both
Were stark mad, else he might have lived
To have given a stronger testimony to the world
Of what he might have been. He was a man
I knew but in his evening: ten Suns after,
〈◊〉 by a tyrant storm our beaten bark
Bulged under vs; in which sad parting blow,
He called upon his Saint, but not for life,
On you unhappy woman; and whilst all
Sought to preserve their souls, he desperately
Embraced a wave, crying to all that see it,
If any live, go to my Fate, that forced me
To this untimely end, and make her happy:
His name was Loveless: And I escaped the storm.
And now you have my business.
Tic too much.
Would I had been that storm, he had not perished.
If you'll rail now I will forgive•… you Sir,
Or if you'll call in more, if any more
Come from this ruin, I shall justly suffer
What they can say: I doe confess my self
A guilty cause in this. I would say more,
But grief is grown to great to be delivered.
I like this well: these women are strange things.
Tic somewhat of the latest now to weep,
You should have wept when he was going from you,
And chained him with those tears at home.
Would you had told me then so, these two arms had been his Sea.
Trust me you move me much: but say he lived, these were forgotten things again.
I, say you so? Sure I should know that voice: this is kna∣•…very. Isle fit you for it: Were h•… living sir, I would persuade you to be charitable, I, and confess we are not all so ill as your opine∣on holds vs. O my friend, what penance shall I pull upon my fault, upon my most unworthy self for this?
Leave to love others, it was some jealousy
That turned him desperate.
Isle be with you straight: are you wrung there?
This works amain upon her.
I doc confess there is a Gentleman
He has borne me long good will.
I doe not like that.
And vowed a thousand services to me; to me, regardless of him: But since Fate, that no power can withstand, he has taken from me my first and best Love, and to weep away my youth is a mere folly: I will show you what I determine sir: you shall know all: Call Mr. Welford there: That Gentleman I mean to make the model of my Fortunes, and in his chaste embraces keep alive the memory of my lost lovely Loveless: hee is somewhat like him too.
Then you can Love?
Yes certain sir.
Though it please you to think me hard and cruel,
I hope I shall persuade you otherwise.
I have made my self 〈◊〉 fool.
Would you have spoke with me Madam?
Yes Mr. Welford, and I ask your pardon before this gentle∣man, for being froward: This kiss, and henceforth more affection.
So, it is better I were drowned indeed.
This is a sudden passion, God hold it.
This fellow out of his fear sure he's
Persuaded her, Isle give him a new suit on it.
A parting kiss: and good Sir let me pray you
To waite me in the Gallery.
I am in another world. Madam where you please.
I will to Sea, an't shall go hard but Isle be drowned indeed.
Now Sir you see I am no such hard creature,
But time may win me.
You have forgot your lost Love,
Alas Sir, what would you have me doe? I cannot call him back again with sorrow; Isle love this man as dearly, a•…d be∣shrove
me, Isle keep him far enough from sea: and it was told me, now I remember me, by an old wise woman, that my first Love should be drowned: and see Tic come about.
I would she had told you your second should be hanged to, and let that Come about: but this is very strange.
Faith Sir, consider all, and then I know you'll bee of my mind: if 〈◊〉 would redeem him, I would weep still.
But say that I we•…e Loveless,
And escaped the storm, how would you answer this?
Why for that Gentleman I would leave all the world.
This young thing too?
That young thing too,
Or any young thing else: why I would lose my stare.
Why then he lives still, I am he, your Loveless.
A as I knew it S•…r, and for that purpose prepared this Pa∣geant: get you to your task. And leave these Players tricks, or I shall leave you, indeed I shall. Travel, or know me not.
Will you then marry?
I will not promise, take your choice. Farewell.
There is no •…er Purgatory but a woman.
I must doe something.
Mistress I am 〈◊〉
You are indeed.
You have so overjoyed me Lady.
Take heed you surfeit not, pray fast and welcome.
By this light you love me extremely.
By this, and tomorrows light, I care not for you.
Come, come, you cannot hide it.
Indeed I c•…n, •…here you shall never find it.
I like this mirth well Lady
•…ou shall have more on it.
I must kiss you.
No fir.
Indeed I must.
What must be, must be; Isle take my leave, you have your parting blow: I pray commend me to those few friends you have, that sent you hi•…er, and tell them, when you 〈◊〉 next, it were fit you brought less bravery with you, and more wit, you'll no∣for get a wise else.
Are you in earnest?
Yes sai•…h. Will you eat sir? your horses will be ready straight, you shall have a •…apkin laid in the buttery for ye.
Do not you love me then?
Yes, for tha•… face.
It is a good one Lady.
Yes, if it were not warped, the fire in time may mend it.
Me thinks yours is none of the best Lady.
No by my troth Sir: yet o'my conscience,
You could make shift with it.
Come, 'pray no more of this.
I will not: Fare you well. Ho, who's within there? bring out the Gentleman's whore•…es, hoe's in haste; and set some cold meat on the table.
I have too much of that, I thank you Lady: take your Chamber when you please, there goes a black one with you Lady.
Farewell young man.
You have made me one. Farewell: and may the curse of a great house fall upon thee, I mean the Butler. The D•…uell and all h•…s works are in these women: would all of my sex were of my mind, I would make um a new Lent, and a long one, that flesh might be in more reverence with them.
I am sorry Mr. Welford.
So am I, that you are here.
How do's my Lady use you?
As I would use you, scurvily.
I sh•…uld have been more kind Sir.
I should have been undone then. 'Pray leave me, and look to your sweet meats: hark, your Lady calls.
Sir I shall borrow so much time without offending.
You're nothing but offence: for Gods love leave me.
Tic strange •…y Lady should be such a tyrant.
To send you to me. 'Pray go stitch, good doe, you're more trouble to me then a Term.
I doe not know how my good will, if I said love I lied not, should any way deserve this.
A thousand ways, a thousand ways: sweet creature let me depart in peace.
What creature Sir? I hope I am a woman.
A hundred I think by your noise.
Since you are angry sir, I am bold to tell you, that I am a woman, and a rib.
Of a roasted horse.
Construe me that.
A Dog can doe it better. Farewell Countess, and commend me to your Lady: tell her shoe's proud, and scurvy; and
so I commit you both to your tempter.
Sweet Mr. Welford.
Avoid old Satanus: Go daube your ruins, your face looks fowler then a storm: the footcman stays you in the Lob∣by Lady.
If you were a Gentleman I should know it by your gen∣tle conditions? are these fit words to give a gentlewoman?
As fit as they were made for ye: Sirrah, my horses. Fare∣well old Adage, keep your nose warm, the Room will make it horn else.
The blessings of a prodigal young heir be thy company∣once Welforde, Marry come up my gentleman, are your gummes grown so tender they cannot bite? A skittish Filly will be your fortune Welford, and fair enough for such a packsaddle. And I doubt not, (if my aim hold) to see her made to amable to your hand.
Save thy brave shoulder, my young puissant Knight, and may thy back-sword bite them to the bone, that love thee not: thou art an errant man, go on. The circumcisde shall fall by thee∣Let land and labour fill the man that tils, thy sword must bee thy plough, and Jove it speed. Mecha shall sweat, and Mahomet shall fall, and thy dear name fill up his monument.
It shall Captain, I mean to be a worthy.
One worthy is too little, thou shalt be all.
Captain I shall deserve some of your love too.
Thou shalt have heart and hand to noble Mooreraft, if thou wilt lend me money. I am a man of Garrison, be ruled, and open to me those infernal gates, whence none of thy evil angels pass again, and I will stile thee Noble; nay Don Diego, Isle woe thy Infant for thee, and my Knight shall feast her with high meats, and make her apt.
Pardon me Captain, you're beside my meaning.
No Mr. Moorecraft, it is the Captains meaning
I should prepare her for ye.
Or provoke her. Speak my modern man, I say pro∣•…ok her.
Captain I say so too, or stir her to it. So says the Critics.
But howsoever you expound it Sir, she's very welcome,
and this shall serve for witness. And widow, since you're come so happily, you shall deliver up the keys, and free possession of this house; whilst I stand by to ratify.
I had rather give it back again believe me,
It is a misery to say you had it. Take heed.
It is past that widow, come, sit down; some wine there: there is a scur•…y banquet if we had it. All this fair house is yours Sir. Sauill.
Yes Sir.
Are your keys ready, I must ease your burden.
I am ready Sir to be undone, when you shall call me to it.
Come come, thou shalt live better.
I shall have less to doe, thats all, ther's half a dozen of my friends ith fields, sunning against a bank, with half a breech among um, I shall bee with um shortly. The care and continual vexation of being rich eat up this rascal. What shall become of my poor family? they are no sheep, and they must keep them∣selves.
Drink Mr. Moorecraft, pray be merry all:
Nay and you willl not drink ther's no society.
Captain speak loud, and drink: widow a word.
Expound her thoroughly Knight. Here God a gold, here's to thy fair possessions: Bee a Baron, and a bold one: leave off your tickling of young heirs like trouts, and, let thy chimneys smoke. Feed men of war, live and bee honest, and be saved yet.
I thank you worthy Captain for your counsel. You keep your chimneys smoking there, your nostrils, and when you can, you feed a man of war: this makes not you a Baron, but a bare∣one: and how or when you shall be saved, let the clarke of the com∣pany (you have commanded) have a just care of.
The man is much is much moved. Be not angry Sir, but as the Poet sings; Let your displeasure be a short fury, and go out. You have spoke home, and bitterly, to me Sir? Captain take truce the Miser is a tart and a witty whoreson.
Poet you fine party, the wit-of this man lies in his fin∣gers ends, he must tell al: his tongue fills but his mouth like a nears∣tongue, and only serves to lick his hungry chaps after a purchase: his brains and brimstone are the Devils diet to a fat usurers head. To her Knight, to her: clap her abourd and stow her. Wheres the brave Steward?
Here is your poor friend, and Sauil Sir.
A way, you are rich in ornaments of nature. First in thy face, thou hast a serious face, a betting, bargaining, and saving face, 〈◊〉 face, pawn it to the Usurer; a face to kindle the compassion of the most ignorant and frozen Justice.
It is such, I dare not show it shortly sir.
By blithe and bonny Steward: Master Moorecraft, Drink to this man of reckoning.
Heere's even to him.
The Devil guide it downward: would there were in it an acre of the great broom field he bought, to sweep your dirty conscience, or to choke ye, it is all one to me Usurer.
Consider what I told you, you are young, unapt for worldly business: Is it fit one of such tenderness, so delicate, so con∣trary to things of care, should stir and break her better m•… dita∣tions, in the bare brokage of a brace of Angels? or a new kirtell, though it be of satin? Eat by the hope of surfeits, and lie down only in expectation of a morrow that may undo some easy har- ted fool, or reach a widows curses? Let out money, whose use returns the principal? and get out of these troubles, a consuming heir: For such a one must follow necessary, you shall die hated, if not old and miserable; and that possessed wealth that you got with pining, live to see tumbled to another hands, that is no more a∣kin to you, then you to his cosenage.
Sir you speak well, would God that charity had first be∣gun here.
Tic yet time. Be merry, me thinks you want wine there, ther's more in the house: Captain, where rests the health?
It shall go round boy?
Say you can suffer this, because the end points at much profit, can you so far bow below your blood, below your too much beauty, to be a partner of this fellows bed, and lie with his diseases? If you can, I will not press you further: yet look upon him: ther's nothing in that hide-bound Usurer; that man of mat, that all d•…eyed, but aches: for you to love, unless his peris•…t lungs his dry cough, or his scurvy. This is truth, and so far I dare speak yet: he has yet past cure of Physic, spew, or any diet, a primatiue pox in his bones; and a' my knowledge hee has been ten times rowelled: ye may love him; he had a basta•…d, his own toward issue,
whipped, and then cropped for washing out the roses, in three farthings to make um pence.
I doe not like these Morals.
You must not like him then.
B•… your leave Gentlemen.
By my troth Sir you are welcome, welcome fai•…h: Lord what a stranger you are grown; pray know this Gentlewoman, and •…f you please these friends here: We are merry, you see the worst on's: your house has been kept warm Sir:
I am glad to hear it brother, pray God you are wise too.
Pray Mr. Moorecraft know my elder brother, and Cap∣•…in doe your complement. Sauil, I dare svvere is glad at heart 〈◊〉 you: Lord, we heard Sir you were droun'd at Sea, and see how luckily things come about?
This money must be paid again Sir?
No Sir, pray keep the sale, t'wil make good Tailors measures? I am well I thank you.
By my troth the Gentleman has stewed him in his own sauce, I shall love •…im fort.
I know not where I am, I am so glad: your worship is the welcom'st man alive; upon my knees I bid you welcome home: here ha•… been such a hue•…y, such a din, such dismal d•…king, sue∣ring, and whoring, 'thas almost made me mad: We hauc al hued in a continual Turneball street; Sir blessed be Heaven, that sent you safe again. Now shall I eat and go to bed again.
Brother dismiss these people.
Captain be gone a while, meet me at my whole•… Rande∣uouse in the evening, take your small Poet with you Mr. Moore∣craft, you we•…e •…st go prattle with your learned Counsel, I shall preser•… your mon•…y. I was cozened when time was, we are quit Sir.
B tter and better still:
What is this fellow brother?
The thirsty Usurer that supped my Land off:
What does he 〈◊〉 for?
Sir to b Land-lord of your house and state: I was hold to make a little sale Sir.
A•… Iouer-reacht? if there be law, Isle hamper ye.
Pre•…hee bee gone, and ra•…e at home, thou art so base 〈◊〉 fool I cannot laugh at thee 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 c•…mes of c•…usening, home and spare, cate 〈◊〉 till you raise your sums again. I•… you stir
far in this, Isle have you whipped, your ears nailed for intelligen∣cing, of the pillory, and your goods forfeit: you are a stale Couse∣ner, leave my house: no more.
A pox upon your house. Come VViddow, I shall yet hamper this young gamester.
Good twelve 〈◊〉 hundred keep your way, I am not for your diet: marry in your own Tribe Jove, and get a Brokes.
Tic well said widow: will you jog on Sir?
Yes, I will go, but it is no matter whither:
But when I trust a wilde fool, and a woman,
May I lend gratis, and build Hospitals.
Nay good sir make all even, here's a vviddow wants your good word for me: shoe's rich, and may renew me &amp; my Fortunes.
I am glad you look before you. Gentlewoman, here is a poor distressed younger brother.
You doe him wrong Sir, hoe's a Knight.
I ask your mercy: yet it is no matter, his Knighthood is no inheritance I take it: whatsoever he is, hoe's your servant, or would bee Lady. Faith bee not merciless, but make a man; hes young and handsome, though he be my brother, and his obseruan∣ces may deserve your love: hee shall not fall for means.
Sir, you speak like a worthy brother: and so much I doe cordite your fair language, that I shall love your brother: and so love him, but I shall blush to say more.
Stop her mouth. I hope you shall not live to know that hour when this shall be repented. Now brother I should chide, but Isle give no distaste to your fair Mistress, I will instruct her in it, and she shall do it: you hau•… bin wild, and ignorant, 'pray mend it.
Sir every day now sp•…ng comes on.
To you, good Mr. Sauill, and your Office, thus much I have to say: You're from my Steward become, first your own Drunkard, then his Bawd: they say you're excellent grown in both, and perfect: give me your keys Sir Sauill.
Good Sir consider who you left me too.
I left you as a curb for, not to provoke my brothers foal∣lies: Whore's the best drink now? come, tell me Sauill: whore's the soundest whores? Ye old he Goat, ye dried Ape, ye lamestal∣lion, must you be leading in my house your whores, like Fairies dance their night rounds, without fear either of King or Con∣stable,
within my walls? Are all my Hangings safe? my sheep vnsold yet? I hope my Plate is currant, I have too much on it. What say you to 300. ponds in drink now?
Good Sir forgive me, and but hear me speak.
Me thinks thou should be drunk still, and not speak, it is the more par•…onable.
I will sir, if you will have it so.
I thank ye; yes even pursue it Sir: doe you hear? get a whore soon for your recreation: go loo•…e out Captain Bro∣kenbreech your fellow, and quarrel, if you date: I shall deliver these k•…yes to one shall have more honesty, though not so much fine wit Sir. Ye may walk and gather Crosses sir to cool your liver; there's something for you to begin a diet, you•… have the pox else. Speed you well, Sir Sauill: you may •…ate at my house to prescrue life; but keep no fornications in the stables.
Now must I hang my self, my friends will look for it. Eating and sleeping, I doe despise you b•…th now: I will run mad first, and if that get not pity, Isle drown my self, to a most dismal ditty. 
A Lass poor Gentlewoman, to what a misery hath age brought thee to? to what scurvy Fortune? thou that hast been a companion for Noble men, &amp; at the worst of those times for Gentlemen: now like a broken Serving-man, must beg for favour to those that would have crawled like Pilgrims to my chamber, hut for an apparition of me: you that bee coming on, make much of fifteen, and so till five and twenty: use y•…ur time with reverence, that your profit may arise: it will not tarry with you Ec•…e si•…number: here was a face, but time that like a su•…set eats our youth, plague of his Iron teeth, and draw um for it, he has been a little bolder here then welcome: and now to say the truth I am fit for no man. Old men in〈◊〉 house, of fifty, call me Granam; and when they are drunk, e'ene then, when Ione and my Lady are all one, not one will doe me reason. My little L•…uite hath forsaken
me, his silver sound of Cytterne quite abolish't, his doleful hymmes under my chamber window, digested into tedious learning: well fool, you leaped a Haddock when you left him: hoe's a clean man, &amp; a good Ed•…fire, &amp; twēty nobles is his state de Claro, besides his pigs in posse. To this good Homilist I have been ever stub∣borne, which God forgive me for, and mend my manners: and Love, if ever thou had care of forty, of such a piece of lap ground, hear my prayer, and fire his zeal so far forth that my faults, in this renewed impressi•… of my love, may show corrected to our gentle Reader. 
See how neglectingly he passes by me: with what an Equipage Canonical, as though he had broke the heart of Bellarmine, or ad∣ded some thing to the singing Brethren. Tic scorn, I know it, and this•…ue it. Mr. Rogor.
Fair Gentlewoman, my name is Roger.
Then gentle Roger.
Ungentle Abigall.
Why Mr. Roger will you set your wit to a weak women's.
You are weak indeed: for so the Poet sings.
I doe confess my weakness sweet Sir Roger.
Good my Ladies Gentlewoman, or my •…ood Ladies Gen∣tlewoman (this trope is lost to you now) leave your prating, you have a season of your first Mother in ye: and surely had the devil been in love, he had been abused too, go Doled•…; you make men fools, and wear fig breeches.
Well, well, hard hearted man; dilate upon the weak infirmities of w•…men: these are fit texts: but •…ce there was a time, would I had never seen those eyes, those eyes, those orient eyes.
I they were pearls once with you.
Saving your reverence Sir, so they are still.
Nay, nay, I doe beseech you leave your cogging, what they ate, they are, they serve me without Spectacles I thank um,
O will you kill me?
I doe not think I can,
You're like a Coppy-hold with nine lives in it.
You were wont to bear a Christian fear about you:
For your own VVorships sake.
I was a Christian fool then: Doe you remember what a dance you led me? how I grew quaum'd in love, and was a dunce?
could expound but once a quarter, &amp; then was out too: and then at prayers once (out of the stinking stir you put me in) I pried for mine own royal issue. You doe remember all this?
O be as then you were.
I thank you for it; surely I will be wiser Abigall: and as the Ethnic Poet sings, I will not loose my oil and labour too. You're for the worshipful I take it Abigall.
O take it so, and then I am for thee.
I like these tears well, and this humbling also, they are Symptoms of contrition, as a Father saith. If I should fall into my fit again, would you not shake me into a quotidian Coxcomb? Would you not use me scurvily again, and give me posits with purging comsets in it? I tel thee Gentlewoman, thou hast been har∣der to me then a long chapter with a pedigree.
O Curate cure me: I will love thee better, dearer, lone∣ger, I will doe anything, betray the secrets of the maine house∣hold to thy reformation. My Lady shall look lovely on thy learning; and when true time shall point thee for a Parson, I will invert thy eggs to penny custards, and thy tithe goose shall grase and multiply.
I am mollified: as well shall testify this faithful kiss: and have a great care Mistress, Abigall, how you depress the spirit any more with your rebukes and mo•…kes: for certainly the edge of such a folly cuts it self.
O sir you have pierced me thorough. Here I vow a recan∣tation to those malicious faults I ever did against you. Never more will I despise your learning never more pin cards and cunny tails upon your Cassock, never again reproach your reverend night∣cap, and cal it by the mangy name of murrin, never your reverend person more, and say, you look like one of Bails Priests a han∣ging; never again, when you say grace, laugh at you, no•… put you out at prayers: never cramp you more with the great Book of Martyrs; nor when you ride, get soap and thistles for you. No my Roger, these faults shall be corrected and amended, as by the tenor of my tears appears.
Now cannot I hold if I should bee hanged, I must cry to. Come to thine own beloved, &amp; doe even what thou wilt withme, sweet, sweet, Abi. I am thine own for •…for: heers my hand, whē To. proves a recreant, hang him in the Bel-ropes. 
Why how now Mr. Roger, no prayers down with you to night? did you hear the bell ring? You are courting, your slock shall fat well for it.
I humbly ask your pardon: Isle clap up Prayers (but stoic a little) and be with you again.
How dare you being so unworthy a Fellow,
Presume to come to move me any more?
Ha, ha, ha.
What ails the fellow.
The fellow comes to laugh at you. I tell you Lady, I would not for your Land, be such a Coxecome, such a whining Ass, as you decreed me for when I was last here.
I joy to hear you are wise Sir, tic a rare Jewel
In an elder Brother: pray be wiser yet.
Me thinks I am very wise: I doe not come a wooing;
Indeed Isle move no more love to your Ladyship.
What make you here then?
Only to see you, and be merry Lady: thats all my bu∣sinesse. Faith lets be very merry. Wher's little Roger? he's a good fellow: an hour or two well spent in wholesome mirth is worth a thousand of these puling passions. Tic an ill world for Lovers.
They were never fewer.
I thank God ther's one less for me Lady.
You were never any Sir.
Till now; and now, I am the prettiest fellow.
You talk like a Taylor Sir.
Me thinks your faces are no such fine things now.
Why did you tell me you were wise. Lord what a lying age is this, where will you mend these faces?
A hogs face soust is worth a hundred of um.
Sure you had some Sow to your Mother.
She brought such fine white pigs as you: fit for none but Parsons Lady.
Tic well you will allow vs our Clergy yet.
That shall not save you. O that I were in love again with a wish.
By this light you are a scurvy fellow, pray be gone.
You know I am a clean skinned man.
Do I know it?
Come, come, you would know it; thats as good: but
not a snap, never long for it, not a snap dea•…e Lady.
Hark ye Sir, ha•…ke ve, get ye to the Suburbs, there's horse∣flesh for such hounds: will you go Sir?
Lord, how I l•…u'd this woman, how I worshipped this pret∣tie calfe with the white face here: as I live, you were the prettiest fool to play withal, the wittiest little varlet, it would talk: Lord how it talk•…; and when I angered it, it woul•… cry out, and scratch, and eat no meat, and yet would say, Go hang.
It will say so still, if you anger it.
And when I asked it, if it would be married, it sent me of an errant into France: and would abuse me, and be gladi•… it did so.
Sir, this is most unmanly, 'pray begone.
And tu•…e (even when it twitterd to be a•… me) I was vnha•…some.
Have you no manners in you?
And say my back was melted, when the gods knows 〈◊〉 kept it at a cha•…ge: Four Flaunders Mares would have been easier to me, and a Fencer.
You think all this is true now.
Faith whether it be or no, it is too good for you.
But so much for our mirth: Now have at you in earnest.
There is enough Sir, I desire no 〈◊〉.
Yes faith, weal have a cast at your best parts now,
And •…en the devil take the worst.
Pray Sir •…o more, I am not much affected with your com∣•…dations: tic almost dinner, I know they stay you at the Ordinary.
E'•…no a short Grace, and then I am gone: You are a wo∣man, and the prou•…st that ever loved a C•…ach: the scornful•…st, scuru•…t, and most 〈◊〉 woman; the greediest to be praised, and never moved, though it be gro•…e and open; the most envious, that at the poor f•…me of another face, would eat your own, •…nd more then is your own, the p•…int b•…nging to it: of such a self opinion, that you thy•…ke none can this•…ue your glove: and for your mali•…e, you are so exce•…ent, you might have been your Tempters tutor: Nay, 〈◊〉 c•…y.
Your own hey•…t knows you wrong me: I cry for ye?
You shall before I leave you
Is all this spoke in ca•…st?
Yes, and more as so•… as I can get it out.
Well, out with it.
You are, let me see.
One that has used you with too much respect.
One that hath used me (since you will have it so) the ba∣sest, the most Foot-boy like, without respect of what I was, or what you might be by me: you have used me, as I would use a jade, ride him off's legs, then turn him into the Commons: you have used me with discretion, and I thank ye. If you have many more such pretty Servants, pray build an Hospital, and when they are old, keep um for shame.
I cannot think yet this is serious,
Will you have more on it?
No faith, there's enough if it be true:
Too much by all my part: you are no Lou•…r then?
No, I had rather be a Carrier.
W•…y the gods amend all.
Neither doe I think there can bee such a fellow found in the world, to be in love with such a froward woman: if there bee such, they are mad, Jove comfort um. Now you l aue all, and I as new a man, as light, &amp; spirited, that I feel my self clean through another creature. O'tis brave to be ones own man. I can see you now as I would see a Picture, sit all day by you and never kiss your hand: hear you sing, and never fall backward; but with as set a temper, as I would hear a Fiddler, rise and thank you. I can now keep my money in my purse, that still was gadding out for Scarfs and Waistcoats: and keep my hand from Mercers sheep∣skins finely. I can eat Mutton now, and feast my self with my two shillings, and can see a Play for eighteen pence again: I can my Lady.
The carriage of this fellow vexes me. Sir, pray let me speak a little private •…ith you, I must not suffer this.
Ha, ha, ha, what would you with me?
You will not ravish me? Now, your set speech.
Thou perjurd man.
Ha, ha, ha, this is a fine Exordium:
And why I pray you p•…jurd?
Did you not swear a thousand thousand times you loved me best of all things?
I doe confess it: make your best of that.
Why doe you say, you doe not then?
Nay 〈◊〉 swear it,
And give sufficient reason, your own usage.
Doe you not love me now then?
No faith.
Did you ever think I loved you dearly?
Yes, but I see but rotten fruits on it.
Doe not deny your hand, for I must kiss it, and take my last farewell: now let me die so you be happy.
I am too foolish: Lady, speak dear Lady.
No let me die.
O my sister.
O my Lady, help, help.
Run for some Rosasolis.
I have plaid the fi•…e ass: bend her body, Lady, best, dearest, worthiest Lady, hear your servant: I am not as I showed: O wretched fool to fling away the Jewel of thy life thus. Give her more air, see she begins to 〈◊〉, sweet Mistress hear me.
Is my servant well.
In being yours I am so.
Then I care not.
How doe ye, reach a chair there: I confess my fault not pardonable, in pursuing thus upon such tenderness my wilful er∣roar: but had I known it would have roughed thus with ye, thus strangely; not the world had won me to it, and let not (my best Lady) any word spoke to my end disturb your quiet peace: for sooner shall you know a general ruin, then my faith broken. Doe not doubt this Mistress: for by my life I cannot live without you. Come come, you shall not grieve, rather be angry, and heap i•…∣fliction on me: I will suffer. O I could curse my self, pray smile upon me. Upon •…y faith it was but a trick to try you, knowing you loved me dea•…lie, and yet strangely that you would never show it, though my means was all humility.
Ha, ha.
How now?
I thank you fine fool for your most fine plot: this was a sub•…isle one, a 〈◊〉 device to have caught Do•…ls with. Good senseless Sir, could you imagine I should swoon for you, and know your self to be an a•…t ass? I, a discovered one. Tic quit I Thank•… you Sir. Ha, ha, ha.
Take heed sir, she may chance to swoon again?
Ha, ha, ha.
Step to her sir, see how she changes colour.
Isle go to h•… •…erst, and bebetter welcome.
I am fooled, I doe confess it, •…y •…o'd,
Lady fooled Madam, and I thank you for it.
Faith '〈◊〉 not so much worth Sir:
But if I know when you come n•…xt a burding.
Isle have a stronger noose to hold the woodcock.
Ha, ha, ha.
I am glad to see you merry, pray laugh on.
Had a hard heart that could not laugh at you Sir. ha, ha.
Pray Sister doe not laugh, you'll anger him,
And then he will 〈◊〉 like a rude 〈◊〉,
That Schooleboies had cozned of his apples,
As loud and senseless.
I will not rai•….
Faith then lets hear him sister.
Yes you shall hear me.
Shall we 〈◊〉 the better for it then?
No. He that makes a woman better by his words,
Isle have him Sainted: blows will not doe it.
By this light h•…'l beat vs.
Yo•… doe deserve it richly,
And may live to have a Beadle doe it.
Now he rai•….
Come 〈◊〉 full Folly,
If this be railing, you shall hear me rail.
•…ay put it in good words then.
The worst are good enough for such a trisle,
Such a proud 〈◊〉 of Cobw•…b lawnë.
You 〈◊〉 Sir.
I would till the bones cracked, and I had my will.
We had best mussel him, he grows 〈◊〉.
I would it were 〈◊〉 in the next great sickness to have the dogs spared; those harmless creatures, and knock i•… head these hot continual plagues, women, that are more 〈◊〉. I hope the stat•… will think on it.
Are you w•…l sir?
He looks as though he had a grecuous fit ath Colic.
〈◊〉 will you cure me?
He heate a trencher for him.
Dirty December doe. Thou with a face as old as Erra Pater, such a prog•…osticating nose: thou thing that ten years
since has left to be a woman, outworn the expectation of a Bawd; and thy dry bones can reach at nothing now, but gords or ninepins; pray go fetch a trencher, go:
Let him alone, 'is cracked:
Isle see him hanged first, 'is a beastly fellow, to loose a woman of my breeding thus; I marry is a: would I were a man, Id make him eat his knaves words.
Tie your she Otter up, good Lady Folly, she stinks worse then a bear-baiting.
Why will you be angry now?
Go paint and purge, call in your kennel with you: you a Lady?
Sir, look too't against the quarter Sessions, if there be good behaviour in the world, Isle have thee bound to it.
L. You must not seek it in your Ladies house then: pray send this Ferret home, and spin good Abigall. And Madam, that your Ladyship may know, in what base man∣ner you have used my service, I doe from this hour hate thee heartily: and though your folly should whip you to repentance. and waken you at length to see my wrongs, tic not the indea∣uour of your life shall win me: not all the friends you have in intercession, nor your submissive letters, though they spoke as many tears as words; not your knees grown to the ground in penitence, not all your state, to kiss you: nor my pardon nor will to give you Christian burial, if you dye thus: so farewell. When I am married and made sure, Isle come and visit you a∣gain, and vex you Lady. By all my hopes Isle be a torment to you, worse then a tedious winter. I know you will recant and sue to me, but save that labour: Isle rather love a Fever and con∣tinuall thirst, rather contract my youth to drink, and safer dote upon quarrels, or take a drawn whore from an Hospital, that time, diseases, and Mercury had eaten, then to be drawn to love you.
Ha, ha, ha, pray doe, but take heed though.
From thee, false dice, lades. Cowards, and plaguy Sum∣mers, good Lord deliver me.
But hark you servant, hark ye: is he gone? call him aine:
Hang him Paddock.
Art thou here still? fly, fly, and call my servant, fly or ne'er see me more.
I had rather knit again then see that rascal, but I must doe it.
I would be loath to anger him too much: what fine foolery 〈◊〉 this in a woman, to use those men most frowardly they love most? If I should loose him thus, I were rightly served. I hope is not so much himself to take it •…h heart: how now? will he come back?
Never he swears whilst he can hear men say ther's any woman living: he swore hee wood ha me first.
Did thou entreat him wench?
As well as I could Madam. But this is still your way, to love being absent, and when hoe's with you, laugh at him and abuse him. There is another way if you could hit on it.
Thou say true, get me paper, pen, and ink, Isle write to him, Id be loath he should sleep in's anger.
Women are most fools, when they think they are wise•….
Pray Sir cast off these fellows, as unfitting for your bare knowledge, and far more your company: first fit such Rag∣amuffins as these are should bear the name of friends? and fur∣nish out a civil house? you're to be married now, and men that love you must expect a course far from your old carer: If you will keep um, turn um to the stable, &amp; there make um grooms: and yet now I consider it, such beggars once set a horse back, you have heard will ride, how far you had best to look to.
Hear you, you that must be Lady, pray content your self and 〈◊〉 upon your carriage soon at night, what dress∣ing will best take your knight, what wastcote, what cor∣dial will doe well in the morning for him, what triers have you?
What doe you mean Sir?
Those that must switch him up: if he start well, fear not but cry S. George, and bear him hard: when you perceive his wind grows ho•…, and wanting, let him a little down, `is •…eet ne'er doubt him, and stands sound.
Sir, you hear these fellows?
Merry companions, wench, merry companions:
To one another let um be companions, but good Sir not to you: you shall be civil and slip off these base trappings.
He shall not need, my most sweet Lady grocer, if hee be civil, not your powdered Sugar, nor your Reasens shall persuade the Captain to live a Coxcome with him: Let him be civil and eat in the Arches, and see what will come ont.
I et him bee civil, doe: undo him: I, thats the next way. I will not take (if hee be civil once) two hundred pounds a year to live with him: bee civil? theres a trim pe•…swasion.
If thou be civil Knight, as Jove defend it, get thee a∣another nose, that will be pulled off by the angry boys, for thy con∣uersion: •…he Children thou shalt get on this Civilian cannot in∣herit by the law, they are Ethnickes, and all thy sport mere More∣rall lechery: when they are grown having but little in um, they may p•…ooue Haberdashers, or gross Grocers, like their dear damme there: prethe be civil Knight, in time thou moist read to thy household and be drunk once a year: this would show finely.
I wonder sweet heart you will offer this, you doe not understand these Gentlemen: I will be short and pithy: I had ra∣there cast you off by the way of charge: these are Creatures, that nothing goes to the maintenance of but Corn and Water. I will keep these fellows just in the Competency of two Hens:
If you can cast it so Sir, you have my liking; if the•… eat less, I should not be offended: But how these, Sir, can live upon so little as Co•…no and Wa•…er. I am vnbeleeuing.
Why prithee sweet heart what's your Ale? is not that Corn and Water my sweet Widow?
I but my sweet Knight, wheres the meat to this, and clothes that they must look for?
In th•… short sentence Ale, is all included: Meat, Drink, and Cloth: these are no ravening foot-men, no fellows tha•… at Ordinaries dare 〈◊〉 their eighteen pence thrice out before they rise, and yet go hungry to play, and crack more nuts then would suffice a dozen Squirrels; besides the din,
which is damnable: I had rather rail, and be confined to a Boat maker, then hue among such rascals; these are people of such a clean discretion in their diet, of such a moderate suste∣nonce, that they sweat if they but smell hot meat. Porridge is poison, they hate a kitchen as they hate a counter, and show em but a Featherbed they swooned. Ale is their 〈◊〉, and their drinking surely, which keeps their bodies clear, &amp; soluble. Bread is a binder, and for that abolished even in their ale, whose lost room fills an apple, which is mo•… ayre, a•…d of 〈◊〉 Nature. The rest they take, is little, and that little, as little easy: For like strict men of order, they doe correct their bodies with a bench, or a poor stubborn table; if a chimney 〈◊〉 it 〈◊〉 with some few broken rushes, they are in down: when they are sick, that's drunk, they may have fresh shaw, else they doe despise these worldly pamperings. For their poor apparel, tic worn out to the diet; new they seek none, and if a man should offer, they are angry: scarce to be reconciled again with him: you shall not hear em ask one a cast doublet, once in a year, which is a modesty besetting my poor friends: you see their 〈◊〉 pe, though slender, competent: For shirts I take it, they are things worn out of their remembrance. Lousy they will be, when they list, and M•…ngie, which shows a fin̄e variety: and then to cure em, a Tanners lymepit, which is little charge, two dogs, and these; these two may be cured for three pence.
You have half persuaded me, pray use your pleasure: and my good f•…iends since I doe know your diet, Isle take an or∣der, meat shall not offend you, you shall have ale.
Wee ask no more, let it be mighty, Lady: and if wee perish, then our own sins on vs.
Come forward gentlemen, to Church my boys, when we have done, Isle give you cheer in boules.
This senseless woman vexes me to the heart, she will not from my memory: would she were a m•…n for one two hours, that I might beat her. If I had bin 〈◊〉, old, or •…∣it had
bin an even lay she might have scorned me: but to be young, and by this light I think as proper as the proudest; made as clean, as straight, and strong backed; means and manners e∣quall with the best cloth of silver Sir in the kingdom: But these are things at some time of the Moon, below the cut of Canvas: Sure she has some Mecching rascal in her house, some hind, that she hath seen bear (like another Milo) quarters of Malt upon his back, and sing with it, thrash all day, and ith evening in his stockings, strike up a hornepipe, and there stink two hours, and ne'er a whit the worse man; these are they, these 〈◊〉 •…hind rascals that undo vs all. Would I had bin a carter, or a Coach∣man, I had done the deed ere this time:
Sir ther's a Gentleman without would speak with you:
Bid him come in:
By your leave Sir.
You are welcome, whats your will Sir?
Have you forgotten me?
I doe not much remember you.
You must Sir. I am that gentleman you plea•…d to wrong, in your disgu•…se I have inquired you out.
I was disguised indeed Sir if I wronged you. Pray where and when?
In such a Ladies house Sir: I need not name her.
I doe remember you: you s•…'d to be a suitor to that Lady:
If you remember this, doe not forget how scurvily you used me: that was no place to quarrel in, pray you think of it: If you be honest you dare fight with me, without more viging, else I must provoke ye:
Sir I dare fight, but never for a woman, I will not have her in my cause, she's Mort•…ll and so is not my anger: If you have brought a Nobler subject for our swords, I am for you: in this I would be loath to 〈◊〉 my finger. And where you say I wronged you, 〈◊〉 so •…are from my profession, that 〈◊〉 •…y fears, to do•… wrong is the greatest: credit me we hau•… bin both abused. (not by our selves, for that I ho•…d a spleen no 〈◊〉 of Malice, and may with man enough be lest forgotten,) but by that wilful, 〈◊〉 piece of hatred, that much 〈◊〉 Lady: For whose
sake, if we should leave our reason, and run on upon our sense, like Rams: the little world of good men would laugh at vs, and despise vs, fixing upon our desperate memories the neuer-worne ou•… names of Fools, and 〈◊〉. Sir tic not fear, but reason makes me tell you: in this I had rather help you Sir, then hurt you, and you shall find it, though you throw your self into as many dangers as she offers, though you redeem her lost name every day, and find her out new honours with your sword, you shall but be h•…r mitth, as I have bin.
I ask you mercy Sir, you have tan my edge off: yet I wou•…d fine be even with this Lady.
In which isle be your helper: we are two, and they are two: two sisters, rich alike, only the elder has the prouder dow∣rye: In troth I pity this disgrace in you, yet of mine own I am 〈◊〉: doe but follow my counsel, and isle pawn my spirit, we will ou•…ach em yet; the means is this.
Sir theres a Gentlewoman will needs speak with you: I cannot keep her out, she's entered Sir:
It is the waiting woman, pray be not seen: sir hold her in discourse awhile: hark in your ear, go, and dispatch it quickly, when I come in Isle tell you all the project.
I care not which I have.
Away, tic done, she must not see you: now Lady Gwi∣never, what news with you?
Pray leave these frumps Sir, and receive this letter.
From whom good vanity?
It is from my Lady Sir: alas good soul, she cri•…s and takes on:
Do's she so good soul? wot she not have a Caudle? do's she send you with your fine Oratory goody Tully to tie me to belief again? Bring out the Cat hounds, isle make you 〈◊〉 a tree whore, then with my tyller bring down your Gibship, and then have you cast, and hung up ith warren.
I am no beast Sir: would you knew it:
Wot I did, for I am yet very doubtful: what will you say now?
Nothing not I:
Art thou a woman, and say nothing?
Unless you'll hear me with more moderation; I c•… speak wise enough:
And loud enough: will your Lady love me?
It seems so by her letter, and her lamentations: but you are such another man:
Not such another as I was, Mumps; nor will not be: isle read her fine Epistle: ha, ha, ha: is not thy Mistress mad?
For you she will be, it is a shame you should use a poor gentlewoman so untowardly: she loves the ground you tread on: and you (hard hart) because she jested with you, mean to kill her: it is a fine conquest as they say:
Hast thou so much moisture in thy whitleather hyde yet, that thou can cry? I wot have sworn thou had been•… touchwood five year since: Nay let it rain, thy Face chops for a shower like a dry dunghill.
Isle not endure this Ribaldry: Farewell in the Devils name: if my Lady die, isle be sworn before a Jury, thou art the cause•… o•…'t:
Doe Maukin doe: deliver to your Lady from me this: I mean to see her, if I have no other business; which before isle want to come to her, I mean to go se•…ke birds nests: yet I may come too: but if I come, from this door till I see her, will I think how to rail wildly at her; how to v•… her, and make her cry so much, that the Physician if she fall sick upon it shall want v•…in to find the cause by: and she remodel•…sse die in her heresy: Farewell old Adage, I hope to see the boys make Potguns on thee.
You are a vile man; God bless my issue from thee.
Thou hast but one, and thats in thy left c•…upper, that makes thee hobble so; you must be ground ith breech like a top, you'll ne'er spin well else: Farewell Fytchocke.
Is it not strange that every women's will should track out new ways to disturb her self? if I should call my reason to account, it cannot answer why I stop my self from mine •…own wish; and stop the man I love from his; and e∣very hour repent again, yet still go on: I know it is like a man, that wants his natural sleep, and growing dull, would glad∣lie give the remnant of his life for two hours rest: yet through his frowardness, will rather choose to watch another man.
Drowsy as he, then take his own repose. All this I know: yet a strange peevish•…s and anger, not to have the power to doe things unexpected, carries me away to mine own rue•… had rather dye sometimes then not disgrace in public him whom people think I love, and do it with oaths, and am in earnest then: O what are wee! Men, you must answer this, that d•… obey such things as wee command. How now? what news?
Faith Madam none worth hearing.
Is he not come?
No truly.
Nor has he writ?
Neither. I pray God you have not undone your self:
Why, but what says hee?
Faith he talks strangely:
How strangely?
First at your Letter he laughed extremely:
What in contempt?
He laughed monstrous loud, as he would dye, and when you wrote it, I think you were in no such merry mood, to pro∣uoke him that way: and having done he cried ala•… for her, and violently laughed again.
Did he?
yes till I was angry:
Angry, why? why were thou angry? he did doe but well, I did deserve it, hee had been a fool, an unfit man for any one to love, had he not laughed thus at me: you were angry, that showed your folly; I shall love him more for that, then all that 〈◊〉 he did before: but said he nothing else?
Many uncertain things: he •…aid though you had mock't him, because you were a woman, he could wish to doe you so much sauout as to see you: yet he said, he knew you rash, and was loath to offend you with the sight of one, whom now he was bound not to leave.
What one was that?
I know not, but truly I doe fear there is a making up there: for I heard the servants, as I past by some, whisper such a thing: and as I came back through the hall, there were two or three Clarks writing great conveyances in hast, which they said were for their Mistress jointure.
〈◊〉 very like and fit it should be so, for he does think, and reasonably think, that I should keep him with my idle tricks for ever 〈◊〉 he married.
At last he said, it should go hard but he would see you for your satisfaction.
All we that are called Women, know as well as men, it were a far more Noble thing to grace where wee are graced, and give respect there where wee are respected: yet we practise a wilder co•…rs, and never bend our eyes on men with pleasure, till they find the way to give vs a neglect: then we, too late, 〈◊〉 the loss of what we might have had, and dote to death.
Sister yonders your Servant, with a gentlewoman with him.
Where?
Close at the door.
Alas I am undone, I fear he is betrothed.
What kind of woman is she?
A most ill favoured one, with her Masque on:
And how her face should mend the rest I know not.
But yet her mind is of a milder stuff then mine was.
Now I see him, if my heart swell not again (away thou women's pride) so that I cannot speak a gentle word to him, let me not live.
By your leave here.
How now, what new trick invites you hither?
Have you a fine device again?
Faith this is the finest device I have now:
How dost thou sweet heart?
Why very well, so long as I may please
You my dear Lover: I nor can, nor will
Be ill when you are well, well when you are ill.
O thy sweet temper: what would I have given, that lady had been like thee: see thou her? that face (my love) joined with thy humble mind, had made a wench indeed.
Alas my love, when•… God hath done, I dare not think to mend: I use no paint, nor any drugs of Art, my hands and face will show it.
Why what thing have you brought to show vs there? doe you take money for it?
A Godlike thing, not to be bought for money: tic my Mistress: in •…home there is no passions, nor no scorn: what I will is for law; pray you salute her.
Salute her? by this good light I would not kiss her for half my wealth.
Why, why pray you?
You shall see me do it before you: look you.
Now fie upon thee, a beast would not have don•… I would not kiss thee of a month to gain a Kingdom.
Marry you shall not be troubled.
Why was there ever such a Meg as this?
Sure thou art mad•….
I was mad once, when I loved pictures: for what 〈◊〉 shape and colours else, but pictures? in that tawny hide there lies an endless mass of virtues; when all your red &amp; white ones want it.
And this is she you are to marry, is it not?
Yes indeed is•….
God give you joy.
Amen.
I thank you, as unknown, for your good wish.
The like to you, when ever you shall wed.
O gentle spirit.
You thank me? I pray
Keep your breath nearer you, I doe not like it.
I would not willingly offend at all:
Much less a lady of your worthy parts.
Sweet, Sweet.
I doe not think this woman can by nature be thus,
Thus ugly: sure shoe's some common Strumpet,
Deformed with exercise of sin.
O Sir believe not this: for heaven so comfort me as I am free from foul pollution with any man: my honour tan away, I am no woman.
Arise my dearest soul: I doe not credit it. Alas, I fear her tender heart will break with this reproach: fie that you know no more civility to a weak virgin. Tic no matter Sweet, let her say what she will, thou art not worse to me, and therefore not at all: be careless.
For all things else I would, but for mine honour: Me thinks.
Alas, thine honour is not stained.
Is this the business that you sent for me about?
Faith Sister you are much to balm, to use a woman, what∣so ever she be, thus: •…e salute her: You are welcome hither.
I humbly thank you.
Mild still as the Dove, for all these injuries. Come, shall
we go, I love thee not so ill to keep thee h•…re a jesting stock. Adieu to the vvorlds end.
Why whither now?
Nay you shall never know, because you shall not find me.
I pray let me speak with you.
Tic very well: come.
I pray you let me speak with you.
Yes for another mock.
By heaven I have no mocks: good Sir a word.
Though you deserve not so much at my hands, yet if you be in such earnest, I will speak a word with you: but I be∣seech you bee brief; for in good faith there's a Parson, and a li∣cence stay for vs in the Church all this while: &amp; you know tic night.
Sir, give me hearing patiently, and whatsoever I have heretofore spoke jestingly, forget: for as I hope for mercy any where, what I shall utter now is from my heart, and as I mean.
Well, well, what doe you mean?
Was not I once your Mistress, and you my Servant?
O it is about the old matter.
Nay good Sir stay me out: I would but hear you excuse your self, why you should take this woman, and leave me.
Prithee why not, deserves she not as much as you?
I think not, if you will look
With an indifference up on vs both.
Upon your faces, tic true: but if judicially we shall cast our eyes upon your minds, you are a thousand women of her in worth: She cannot sound in jest, nor set her lover tasks, to show her pe•…uishnes, and his affection: nor cross what he says, though it bee Canonicoll. Shoe's a good plain wench, that will doe as I will have her, and bring me lusty boys to throw the Sledge, and lift at Pigs of lead: and for a wife, shoe's far beyond you: what can you doe in a household, to provide for your issue, but lye a bed and get um? your business is to dress you, and at idle hours to eat; when she can doe a thousand profitable things: She can doe pre•…tie well in the Pastry, and knows how pullen should be crammed: she cuts Comb•…icke at a third: weaues bone-lace, and quilts balls: And what are you good for?
Admit it true, that she were far beyond me in all respects, does that give you a licence to forswear your self?
Forswear my self, how?
Perhaps you have forgot the innumerable oaths you have uttered in disclaiming all for wives but m•…: Isle not remember you: God give you joy.
Nay but conceive me, the intent of oaths is ever under∣stood. Admit I should protest to such a friend, to see him at his lodging to morrow: Divines would never hold me perjured, if I were struck blind, or he hid him where my diligent search could not find him: so there were no cross act of mine own in it. Can it bee imagined I meant to force you to marriage, and to have you whether you will or no?
Alas you need not. I make already tender of my self, and then you are forsworn.
Some sin I see indeed must necessarily fall upon me, as whosoever deals with women shall never v•…terly avoid it: yet I would choose the least ill; which is to forsake you, that have done me all the abuses of a malignant woman, contemned my service, and would have held me prating about marriage, till I had be•…no past getting of children: then her that hath forsook her family, and put her tender body in my hand, upon my word.
Which of vs swore you first to?
Why to you.
Which oath is to be kept then.
I prithee doe not urge my sins unto me,
Without I could amend um.
Why you may by wedding me.
How will that satisfy my word to her?
Tic not to be kept, and needs no satisfaction,
Tic an error fit for repentance only.
Shall I live to wrong that tender hearted virgin so? It may not be.
Why may it not be?
I swear I had rather marry thee then her: but yet mine honesty.
What honesty? Tic more preserved this way:
Come, by this light servant thou shalt, Isle kiss thee on it.
This kiss indeed is sweet, pray God no sin lie under it.
There is no sin at all, tri•… but another.
O my heart.
Help sister, this lady swoons.
How doe you?
Why very well, if you be so.
Suce a puiet mind lives not in any woman: I shall doe 〈◊〉 most ungodly thing. Hear me one word more, which by all my hopes I will not alter. I did make an oath when you delayed me so; that this very night I would be marted. Now if you will go without delay, suddenly, as late as it is, with your own Mini∣ster to your own Chapel, Isle wed you, and to bed.
A match dear servant.
For if you should forsake me now, I care not, she would not though for all her iniu•…ies, such is her spirit, If I bee not asha∣med to kiss her now I part, may I not live.
I see you go, as sliely as you think to steal away: yet I will pray for you; All blessings of the world light on you two, that you may live to be an aged pair. Al curses on me if I doe not speak what I doe wish indeed.
If I can speak to purpose to her, I am a will•…in.
Servant away.
Sister, will you marry that inconstant man? think you he will not cast you off to morrow, to wrong a lady thus, looked she like dirt, it was basely done. May you ne'er prosper with him.
Now God forbid, Alas I was unworthy, so I told him.
That was your modesty, too good for him.
I would not see your vvedding for a world.
Choose, choose, come Yo•…glove.
Dri•… up your 〈◊〉 forsooth, you shall not think we are all uncivil, all such beasts as these. Would I knew how to give you a revenge.
So would not I: No let me suffer truly, that I desire.
Pray vvalke in with me, tic very late, and you shall stay all night: your bed shall be no vvorse then mine; I wish I could but doe you right.
My humble thanks:
God grant I may but live to quit your love.
Did your Master send for me Sauil?
Yes he did send for your worship sir.
Doe you know the business?
Alas Sir I know nothing, nor am employed beyond my
hovvers of eating. My dancing days are done sir.
What art thou now then.
If you consider me in little, I am with your vvorships reave∣rinse sir, a rascal: one that upon the next anger of your brother, must raise a sconce by the high way, and sell svvitches. My wife is learning new sir to vveaue inckle.
What dost thou mean to doe with thy children Sauill?
My eldest boy is half a rouge already, he was borne bur∣sten, and your worship knows, that is a pretty steppe to men's capassions. My youngest boy I purpose sir to bind for ten years to a Ioaler, to draw under him, that he may show vs mercy in his function.
Your family is quartered with discretion: you are recall∣ued to cant then: where Sauil shall your scene lie.
Beggars must be no choosers:
In every place (I take it) but the stocks.
This is your drinking, and your who•…ing Sauil,
I told you of it, but your heart was hardened.
Tic true, you were the first that told me of it, I doe re∣member yet in tears, you told me you would have whores, and in that passion sir, you broke our thus; Thou miserable man, re∣pent, and brew three strikes more in a hogshead. Tic noon ere we be drunk now, and the time can tarry for no man.
You're grown a bitter Gentlememan. I see misery can can clear your head better then mustard. Isle be a suitor for your keys again sir.
Will you but be so gracious to me sir? I shall be bound.
You shall sir,
To your bunch again, or I'll miss foully.
Save you gent. save you.
Now Pole-cat, what young Rabets nest have you to draw?
Come, pre thee bee familiar Knight.
Away Fox, Isle send for Terriers for you.
Thou art wide yet: Isle keep thee company.
I am about some business; Indentures,
If ye follow me Isle beat you: take heed,
As I live Isle cancel your 〈◊〉.
Thou art cozened now, I am no usurer:
What poor fellow's this?
I am poor indeed sir.
Give him money Knight.
Doe you begin the offering.
There pore fellow, heir's an angel for thee.
Art thou in earnest Moorcraft?
Yes faith K•…ight. Isle follow thy example: thou had land and thousands, thou spendst, and flungst away, and yet it flows in double: I purchased, wrung, and wierdraw'd for my wealth, lost, and was consent: for which I make a vow, to try all the ways aboue ground. but Isle find a constant mean•… to riches without curses.
I am glad of your conversion Mr. Moorcraft:
you're in a fair course, pray pursue it still.
Come, we are all gallants now, Isle keep thee company; Here honest fellow, for this gentleman's sake, theres two angels more for thee.
God quit you sir, and keep you lunge in this mind.
Wilt thou persevere?
Till I have a penny. I have brave clothes a making, and two horses; can thou not h•…lp me to a Match Knight, Isle lay a a thousand pound upon my crop-eare.
Foot thit is stranger then an Africa monster,
There will be no more talk of the Cleave wars
Whilst this lasts, come, Isle put thee into blood.
Would all his dimbed tribe were as tender hearted. I be∣seech you let this gent. join with you in the recovery of my Keys; I like his good beginning sir, the whilst Isle pray for both your worships.
He shall sir.
Shall we go noble Knight? I would fine be acquainted.
Isle be your servant sir.
Faith my sweet Lady, I have caught you now, maugre your s•…btilties, and fine devises, be coy again now.
〈◊〉 sweeteheart tell true.
By this light, by all the pleasures I have had this night, by your lost maidenhead, you are consent merely. I have cast beyond your wit. That gent. is your retainer Welford.
It cannot be so.
Your sister has found it so, or I mistake: mark how she
blushes when you see her next. Ha, ha, ha, I shall not travel now, ha, ha, ha.
Prithee sweet heart be quiet, thou hast angerd me at heart.
Isle please you soon again.
Welford.
I Welford, hoe's a young handsome fellow, well bred and landed: your sister can instr•…ct you in his good parts better then I by this time.
Vdsfoote, am I fetched over thus?
Yes in faith.
And over shall be fetched again, never fear it.
I must be patieut, though it torture me:
You have got the Sun Sir.
And the Moon too, in which I•… be the man.
But had I known this, had I but surmised it, you should have hunted three trains more, before you had come to'th course, you should have hanckt of the bridle, Sir, in faith.
I knew it, and mined with you, and so blew you up.
Now you may see the Gentlewoman: stand close.
For Gods sake Sir be private in this business,
You have undone me else. O God, what have I done?
No harm I warrant thee.
How shall I look upon my friends again?
With what face?
Why even with that: tic a good one, thou can not find a better: look upon all the faces thou shalt see there, and you shall find um smooth still, fair still, sweet still, and to your thin∣king honest: those have done as much as you have yet, or dare doe Mistress, and yet they keep no stir.
Good Sir go in, and put your women's clothes on.
If you be seen thus, I am lost for ever.
Isle watch you for that Mistress: I am no fool, here will I •…arry till the house be up and witness with me.
Good dear friend go in.
To bed again if you please, else I am fixed here, till there be notice taken what I am, and what I have done: If you could juggle me into my woman-hood again, &amp; so cog me out of your company, all this would be forsworn, and I again an asinego, as your Sister left me. No, Isle have it known and public•…t; then if
you'll be a whore, forsake me, &amp; be shamed: &amp; when you can hold out no longer, ma•…rye some cast Cleue Captain, and sell Bottle-ale.
I dare not stay sir, use me modestly, I am your wife.
Go in, Isle make up all.
Isle be a witness to your naked truth Sir: this is the gen∣tlewoman, prithee look upon him, this is he that made me break my faith Sweet: but thank your sister, she hath soderd it.
What a dull ass was I, I could not see this wencher from a wench: twenty to one, if I had been but tender like my sister, he had served me such a slippery trick too.
Twenty to one I had.
I would have watched you Sir, by your good patience, for ferreting in my ground.
You have been with my Sister.
Yes, to bring.
An heir into the world he means.
There is no chafing now.
I have had my part on it: I have been chaft this three hours, thats the least, I am reasonable cool now.
Cannot you fare well, but you must cry rost-meat?
He that fares well, and will not bless the founders, is ei∣there surfeited, or ill taught, Lady: for mine own part, I have found so sweet a diet, I can commend it, though I cannot spare it.
How like you this dish, Welford, I made a supper on it, and fed so heartily, I could not sleep.
By this light, had I but scented out your train, ye had slept with a bare pillow in your arms, &amp; kissed that, or else the bed-post, for any wife ye had got this twelue-month yet: I would have vexed you more then a •…yr'd post-horse: &amp; bin longer bearing, then ever after-game at Irish was. Lord, that I were unmarried again.
Lady, I would not undertake ye, were you again a Haggard, for the best cast of sore Ladies in the Kingdom: you were ever tickle footed, and would not truss round?
Is she fast?
She was all night locked here boy.
Then you may lure her without fear of loosing: take off her Cranes. You have a delicate Gentlewoman to your sister: Lord what a pretty fury she was in, when she perceived I was a man: but I thank God I satisfied her scruple, without the Par∣son of the town.
What did ye?
Madam, can you tell what we did?
She has a shrewd guess at it I see by her.
Well you may mock vs: but my large Gentlewoman, my Mary Ambree, had I but seen into you, you should have had another bedfellow, fitter a great deal for your itch.
I thank you Lady, me thought it was well,
You are so curious.
Get on your doublet, here comes my brother.
Good morrow brother, and all good to your Lady.
God save you, and good morrow to you all.
Good morrow. Here's a poor brother of yours.
Fie how this shames me.
Prithee good fellow help me to a cup of Beer.
I will Sir,
Brother what make you here? will this Lady doe?
Will she? is she not nettel'd still?
No, I have cured her.
Mr. Welford, pray know this Gentleman, is my brother.
Sir, I shall long to love him.
I shall not be your debtor Sir. But how is it with you?
As well as may bee man'; I am married: your new ac∣quaintance hath her Sister: and ell's well.
I am glad on it. Now my pretty Lady Sister,
How doe you find my brother?
Almost as wilde as you are.
A will make the better husband: you have tried him?
Against my will Sir.
He will make your will amends soon, doe not doubt it. But Sir, I must entreat you to be better known To this converted Jew here.
Here's Beer for you Sir.
And here's for you an angel:
Pray buy no Land, twill never prosper Sir.
How's this?
Bless you, and then Isle tell: He's turned Gallant.
Gallant?
I Gallant, and is now called, Cutting Moorecraft:
The reason Isle inform you, at more leisure,
O good Sir let me know him presently.
You shall hug one an other.
Sir I must keep you company.
And reason.
Cutting Moorcraft faees about. I must present another.
As many as you will Sir, I am for um.
Sir I shall doe you service.
I shall look for it in good faith sir.
Prithee good sweet-heart kiss him.
Who, that fellow?
Sir will it please you to remember me: my keys good sir.
I'll doe it presently.
Come thou shalt kiss him for our sport sake.
Let him come on then, and doe you hear, doe not instruct me in these tricks, for you may repent it.
That at my peril. Lusty Mr. Moorecraft,
Here is a Lady would salute you.
She shall not loose her longing Sir: what is she?
My wife Sir.
She must be then my Mistress.
Must I Sir:
O yes, you must.
And you must take this ring, a poor pawn,
Of some fifty pound.
Take it by any means, tic lawful prise.
Sir I shall call you servant.
I shall be proud on it: what fellow's that:
My Ladies Coach-man.
Ther's something. (my friend) for you to buy whips,
And for you sir, and you sir.
Under a miracle this is the strangest,
I ever heard of.
What shall we play, or drink? what shall we doe?
Who will hunt with me for a hundred pound?
Stranger and Stranger!
Sir you shall find sport after a day or two.
Sir I have a suit unto you,
Concerning your old servant Sauill.
O, for his keys, I know it,
Now sir, strike in.
Sir I must have you grant me.
Tic done Sir, take your keys again:
But hark you Sauill, leave of the motions
Of the flesh, and be honest, or else you shall graze again.
Isle try you once more.
If cuer I be taken drunk, or whoring,
Take off the biggest key in the bunch, and open
My head with it Sir: I humbly thank your worships.
Nay then I see we must keep holiday 
Heers the last couple in hell.
Joy be amongst you all.
Why how now sir, what is the meaning of this Emblem?
Marriage an't like your worship.
Are you married?
As well as the next priest could doe it, Madam.
I think the signs in Gemini heir's such coupling.
Sir Roger, what will you take to lie from your sweet∣heart to night?
Not the best benefice in your worships gift Sir.
A whoreson, how he swells.
How many times to night Sir Roger?
Sir you grow scurrilous:
What I shall doe, I shall doe: I shall not need your help.
For horse flesh Roger.
Come prithee be not angry, tic a day
Given wholly to our mirth.
It shall be so sir: Sir Roger and his Bride,
We shall entreat to be at our charge.
Welford get you to Church: by this light,
You shall not lie with her again, till you're married.
I am gone.
To every Bride I dedicate this day:
Six healths a piece, and it shall go hard,
But every one a Jewel: Come be mad Boys.
You are in a good beginning: come who leads?
Sir Roger, you shall have the Van: lead the way:
Would every dogged wench had such a day. 

Have you played over all your old Lessons of the Virginals?
Yes.
Yes, you are a dull Maid alate, me thinks you had need have somewhat to quicken your Greene Sickness, doe you weep? A Hus∣band. Had not such a piece of Flesh been ordained, what had vs Wives been good for? To make Sallets, or else cried up and down for Sampier. To see the difference of these Seasons, when I was of your youth, I was lightsome, and quick, two years before I was married. You fit for a Knights bed, drowsy browd, dull eyed, drossy sprited, I hold my life you have forgot your Dancing: When was the Dancer with you?
The last week.
Last week, when I was of your board, he mist me not a night, I was kept at it, I took delight to learn, and he to teach me, pretty browne Gentleman, he took pleasure in my company, but you are dull, nothing comes nimbly from you, you dance like a Plummers Daughter, and deserve two thousand pound in Lead to your marriage, and not in Gold-Smithes Ware.
Now what's the din betwixt Mother and Daugh∣la, ha?
Faith small, telling your Daughter Mary of her Errors.
Errors, nay the City cannot hold you Wife, but you must needs fetch words from Westminster, I ha done I faith, has no Atturneys Clarke been here a late, and changed his Halfe-Crowne-peece his Mother sent him, or rather consent you with a gilded Two-pence, to bring the word in fashion, for her faults or cracks, in duty and obedience, term em eeue so sweet Wife. As there is no Woman made without a Flaw, your purest Lawns have Frays, and Cambrickes Brackes.
But it is a Husband sowders up all Cracks.
What is he come Sir?
Sr Walters come.
He was met at Holborn Bridge, and in his company, a proper fair young Gentlewoman, which I guess by her red Hair, and other rank descriptions, to be his landed Niece, brought out of Wales, which Tim our Son (the Cambridge Boy) must marry.
It is a match of Sr Walters own making to bind vs to him, and our Heirs for ever.
We are honoured then, if this Baggage would be humble, and kiss him with devotion when he enters.
I cannot get her for my life
to instruct her Hand thus, before and after, which a Knight will look for, before and after.
I have told her still, it is the waving of a Woman dose often move a Man, and prevails strongly.
But sweet, ha you sent to Cambridge, (has Tim word an't?)
Had word just the day after when you sent him the Silver Spoon to eat his Broth in the Hall, amongst the Gentlemen Commoners.
O it was timely.
How now?
A Letter from a Gentleman in Cambridge.
O one of Hobsons Porters, thou art well-come.
I told thee Maud we should hear from Tim. Amantissi∣mis charissimis{que} ambobus parentibus patri &amp; matri.
What's the matter?
Nay by my troth, I know not, ask not me, he's grown too verbal, this Learning is a great Witch.
Pray let me see it, I was wont to understand him.
Amantissimus charissimus, he has sent the Carriers Man he says: ambobus parentibus, for a pair of Boots: patri &amp; matri, pay the Porter, or it makes no matter.
Yes by my faith Mistress, there's no true construe∣ction in that, I have took a great deal of pains, and come from the Bell sweating. Let me come to it, for I was a Scholar forty years ago, it is thus I warrant you: Matri, it makes no matter: ambobus parentibus, for a pair of Boots: patri, pay the Porter: amantissimis charissimis, he's the Car∣ryers Man, and his name is Sims, and there he says true, forsooth my name is Sims indeed, I have not forgot all my learning. A Money matter, I thought I should hit on it.
Go thou art an old Fox, ther's a Tester for thee.
If I see your Worship at Goose Fair, I have a Dish of Birds for you.
Why dost dwell at Bow?
All my life time Sir I could ever say By, to a Goose. Farewell to your Worship.
A merry Porter.
How can he choose but be so, coming with Cambridge Letters from our Son Tim?
What's here, maximus diligo, Faith I must to my learned Counsel with this gear, twill ne'er be discerned else.
Go to my Cousin then, at Innes of Court.
Fie they are all for French, they speak no Latin.
The Parson then will doe it.
Nay he disclaims it, calls Latin Papistry, he will not deal with it. What first you lack Gentleman?
Pray weigh this Chain.
Now Wench thou art well-come to the Heart of the City of London.
Dugat a whee.
You can thank me in English if you list.
I can Sir simply.
Twill serve to pass Wench, it was strange that I should lye with thee so often, to leave thee without En∣glish, that were unnatural, I bring thee up to turn thee into Gold Wench, and make thy fortune shine like your bright Trade, a Gold-Smithes Shop sets out a City Maid. Day Dahanna, not a word.
Mum, mum Sir.
Here you must pass for a pure Virgin.
Pure Welch Virgin, she lost her Maidenhead in Brekenocke-Shire.
I hear you mumble Day.
I have Teeth Sir, I need not mumble yet this forty years.
The Knave bites plaguely.
What's your price Sir?
A hundred pound Sir.
A hundred marks the utmost, it is not for me else.
What Sr Walter Whorehound?
O Death.
Why Daughter.
Faith the Baggage a bashful Girl Sir, these young things are shamefaced, besides you have a presence sweet Sr Walter, able to daunt a Maid brought up in the City,
A brave Court Spirit makes our Virgins quiver, and kiss with trembling Thighs. Yet see she comes Sir.
Why how now pretty Mistress, now I have caught you. What can you injure so your time to strey thus from your faithful Servant.
Pish, stop your words good Knight, twill make her blush else, which wound to high for the Daughters of the Freedom, honour, and faithful Servant, they are com∣plements for the Worthy's of Whitehall, or Greenwitch, even plain, sufficient, subsidy words serves vs Sir. And is this Gentlewoman your worthy Niece?
You may be bold with her on these terms, it is she Sir, Heir to some nineteen Mountains.
Bless vs all, you overwhelm me Sir with love and riches.
And all as high as Pals.
Here's work I faith.
How say thou Day?
Higher Sir by far, you cannot see the top of 'em.
What Man? Maudlin salute this Gentlewoman, our Daughter if things hit right.
My Knight with a brace of Footmen, is come and brought up his Ewe Mutton, to find a Ram at London, I must hasten it, or else pick a Famine, her Bloods mine, and that's the surest. Well Knight, that choice spoil is only kept for me.
Sir?
Turn not to me till thou may lawfully, it but whets my stomach, which is too sharpe set already. Read that note carefully, keep me from suspicion still, nor know my zeal but in thy Heart: read and send but thy liking in three words, I'll be at hand to take it.
O turn Sir, turn.
A poor plain Boy, an University Man, proceeds next Lent to a Bachelor of Art, he will be called Sr Yellowhammer then over all Cambridge, and that's half a Knight.
Please you draw near, and taste the well-come of the City Sir?
Come good Sr Walter, and your virtuous Niece here.
It is manners to take kindness.
Lead 'em in Wife.
Your company Sir.
I'll giue't you instantly.
How strangely busy is the Devil and riches,
Poor Soul kept in too hard, her Mothers Eye, is cruel toward her, being to him, it were a good mirth now to set him a work to make her wedding Ring. I must about it.
Rather then the gain should fall to a Stranger, it was honesty in me to enrich my Father.
The Girl is wondrous peevish, I fear nothing, but that she's taken with some other love,
then ell's quite dashed, that must be narrowly looked to, we cannot be too wary in our Children. What first you lack?
O nothing now, all that I wish is present.
I would have a wedding Ring made for a Gentlewoman, with all speed that may be.
Of what weight Sir?
Of some half ounce, stand fair and comely, with the Spark of a Diamond.
Sir it were pity to lose the least grace.
Pray let's see it, indeed Sir it is a pure one.
So is the Mistress.
Have you the wideness of her Finger Sir?
Yes sure I think I have her measure about me, good faith it is down, I cannot show it you,
I must pull too many things out to be certain.
Let me see, long, and slender, and neatly jointed,
Just such another Gentlewoman that's your Daughter Sir.
And therefore Sir no Gentlewoman.
I protest I never saw two Maids handed more alike
I'll ne'er seek farther, if you'll give me leave Sir.
If you dare venture by her Finger Sir.
I, and I'll bide all loss Sir.
Say you so Sir, let's see hither Girl.
Shall I make bold with your finger Gentlewoman?
Your pleasure Sir.
That fits her to a hair Sir.
What's your Posy now Sir?
Mass that's true, Posy I faith even thus Sir.
Love that's wise, blinds Parents Eyes.
How, how, If I may speak without offence Sir,
I hold my life
What Sir?
Go too, you'll pardon me?
Pardon you? I Sir.
Will you I faith?
Yes faith I will.
You'll steal away some Mans Daughter, am I ne'er you?
Doe you turn aside? You Gentlemen are mad Wage, I
wonder things can be so warily carried, and Parents blinded so, but the're served right that have two Eyes, and were so dull a fight.
Thy doom take hold of thee.
To morrow noon shall show your Ring well done.
Being so it is soon, thanks, and your leave sweet Gentlewoman
Sir you are well-come.
O were I made of wishes, I went with thee.
Come now we will see how the rules go within.
That robs my Joy, there I loose all I win.
Honesty wash my Eyes, I have spied a Withal.
What Day Dahanna, well-come from North Wales
I faith, and is Sr Walter come?
Now come to Town Sir.
Into the Maids sweet Day, and give order his Chamber be made ready instantly, my Wife's as great as she can wallow Day, and longs for nothing but pickled Coucombers, and his coming, and now she shall ha'te Boy.
She's sure of them Sir.
Thy very sight will hold my Wife in pleasure, till the Knight come himself. Goin, in, in Day.
The Founders come to Town, I am like a Man finding a Table furnished to his hand, as mine is still to me, prays for the Founder, bless the right Worshipful, the good Founders life.
I thank him, he has maintained my House this ten years, not only keeps my Wife, but a keeps me, and all my Family, I am at his Table, he gets me all my Children, and pays the Nurse, monthly, or weekly, puts me to nothing, rent, nor Church duties, not so much as the Scauenger, the happiest state that ever Man was borne to.
I walk out in a morning, come to breake-fast,
Find excellent Cheer, a good Fire in Winter,
Look in my Coale-house about Midsommer-eeue,
That's full, five or six Chaldorne, new laid up,
Look in my back yard, I shall find a steeple
Made up with Kentish Fagot's, which o're-lookes
The Water-House and the Wind-milles, I say nothing
But smile, and pin the door, when she lies in,
As now she's even upon the point of grunting,
A Lady lies not in like her, there's her imbossings,
Embrodring, spanglings, and I know not what,
As if she lay withal the gaudy Shops
In Gressams Burs about her, then her restoratives,
Able to set up a young Apothecary,
And richly stock, the Foreman of a Drug-shop.
Her Sugar by whole Loaves, her Wines by Rundlets.
I see these things, but like a happy Man,
I pay for none at all, yet Fools think's mine,
I have the name, and in his Gold I shine.
And where some Merchants would in Soul kiss Hell,
To buy a Paradise for their Wines, and dye
Their Conscience in the Bloods of prodigal Heirs,
To deck their Night-peece, yet all this being done,
Eaten with jealousy to the inmost Bone,
As what affliction Nature more constrains,
Then feed the Wife plump, for another veins.
These torments stand I freed of, I am as clear
From jealousy of a Wife, as from the charge.
O two miraculous blessings, it is the Knight
Hath took that labour, all out of my hands,
I may sit still and play, he's jealous for me,
Watches her steps, sets spies, I live at ease,
He has both the cost and torment, when the strings
Of his Heart frets, I feed, laugh, or sing,
La dildo, dildo la dildo, la dildo dildo de dildo.
What has he got a singing in his Head now?
Now's out of work he falls to making Dildo's.
Now Sirs, Sr Walters come.
Is our Master come?
Your Master, what am I?
Doe not you know Sir?
Pray am not I your Master?
O you are but our Mistresses Husband.
Ergo Knave, your Master.
Negatur argumentum. Here comes Sr Walter, now a stands bare as well as we, make the most of him he's but one peep aboue a Serving-man, and so much his Horns make him.
How dost Jack?
Proud of your Worships health Sir.
How does your Wife?
Even after your own making Sir,
She's a tumbler a faith, the Nose and Belly meets.
The 'ile part in time again.
At the good hour, they will and please your worcester∣ship.
Here Sir, pull off my Boots. Put on, but on Jack.
I thank your kind worship Sir.
Slippers, Heart you are sleepy.
The game begins already.
Pish, put on Jack.
Now I must doe it, or he'll be as angry now, as if I had put it on at first bidding, it is but observing, it is but observing a Mans humour once, and he may have him by the Nose all his life.
What entertainment has lain open here,
No strangers in my absence?
Sure Sir not any.
His jealousy begins, am not I happy now
That can laugh inward whilst his Marrow melts?
How doe you satisfy me?
Good Sir be patient.
For two months absence I'll be satisfied.
No living Creature entered.
Entered, come swear.
You will not hear me out Sir.
Yes I'll heare't out Sir.
Sir he can tell himself.
Heart he can tell,
Doe you think I'll trust him? As a Usurer
With forfeited Lordships. Him, ô monstrous injury!
Believe him, can the Devil speak ill of Darkness?
What can you say Sir?
Of my soul and conscience Sir, she's a Wife as honest of her Body to me, as any Lords proud Lady can be.
Yet by your leave, I heard you were once offering to go to bed to her.
No I protest Sir.
Heart if you doe, you shall take all, I'll marry.
O I beseech you Sir,
That wakes the Slave, and keeps his Flesh in awe.
I'll stop that gap
Where ever I find it open, I have poisoned
His hopes in marriage already,
Some old rich Widows, and some landed Virgins,
And I'll fall to work still before I'll lose him,
He's yet too sweet to part from.
God-den Father.
Ha Villain, peace.
God-den Father.
Peace Bastard, should he hear em. 〈◊〉 are two foolish Children, they doe not know the Gentleman that sits there.
Oh Wat, how dost Nick•? Go to School,
Ply your Books Boys, ha?
Whore's your Legs Whore sons? They should kneel indeed if they could say their Prayers.
Let me see, stay,
How shall I dispose of these two Brats now
When I am married, for they must not mingle
Amongst my Children that I get in Wedlock,
Twill make foul work that, and raise many storms.
I'll bind Wat Prentice to a Goldsmith, my Father Yellowh.
As fit as can be. Nick with some Vintner, good, Goldsmith
And Vintner, there will be Wine in Boles I faith.
Sweet Knight
Welcome, I have all my longings now in Town,
Now well-come the good hour.
How cheers my Mistress?
Made lightsome, even by him that made me heavy.
Me thinks she shows gallantly, like a Moon at full Sir.
True, and if she bear a Male child, there's the Man in the Moon Sir.
It is but the Boy in the Moon yet Goodman Calfe.
There was a Man, the Boy had never been there else.
It shall be yours Sir.
No by my troth, I'll swear it's none of mine, let him that got it keep it, thus doe I rid my self of fear, Lye soft, sleep hard, drink Wine, and eat good cheer.
Twill be so tedious Sir to live from you,
But that necessity must be obeyed.
I would it might not Wife, the tediousness
Will be the most part mine, that understand
The blessings I have in thee, so to part
That drives the torment to a knowing Heart,
But as thou say, we must give way to need
All live awhile asunder, our desires
Are both too fruitful for our barren fortunes.
How adverse runs the destiny of some Creatures,
Some only can get riches and no Children,
We only can get Children and no riches,
Then it is the prudents part to check our wills,
And till our state rise, make our Bloods lye still.
Life every year a Child, and some years two,
Besides, drinkings abroad, that's never reckoned,
This gear will not hold out.
Sir for a time, I'll take the courtesy of my Uncles House
If you be pleased to like on it, till prosperity
Look with a friendly Eye upon our states.
Honest Wife I thank thee, I ne'er knew
The perfect treasure thou brought'st with thee more
Then at this instant minute. A Man's happy
When he's at poorest that has matched his Soul
As rightly as his Body. Had I married
A sensual Fool now, as it is hard to scope it
Amongst Gentlewomen of our time, she would have hanged
About my Neck, and never left her hold
Till she had kissed me into wanton businesses,
Which at the waking of my better Judgment
I should have cursed most bitterly,
And laid a thicker vengeance on my act
Then misery of the Birth, which were enough
If it were borne to greatness, whereas mine
Is sure of beggary, though it were got in Wine.
Fullness of Joy shows the goodness in thee,
Thou art a matchless Wife, Farewell my Joy.
I shall not want your sight?
I'll see thee often,
Talk in mirth, and play at kisses with thee,
Any thing Wench but what may beget Beggars,
There I give o'er the Set, throw down the Cards,
And dare not take them up.
Your will be mine Sir.
This does not only make her honesty perfect,
But her discretion, and approves her Judgment.
Had her desire been wanton, they'd been blameless
In being lawful ever, but of all Creatures
I hold that Wife a most unmatched treasure,
That can unto her fortunes fix her pleasure,
And not unto her Blood, this is like wedlock,
The feast of marriage is not Lust but Love,
And care of the estate, when I please Blood,
Merely I sing, and suck out others, then
It is many a wisemans fault, but of all Men
I am the most unfortunate in that game
That ever pleased both Genders, I ne'er played yet
Under a Bastard, the poor Wenches curse me
To the Pit where ever I come, they were ne'er served so,
But used to have more words then one to a bargain,
I have such a fatal Finger in such business
I must forth with it, chiefly for Country Wenches,
For every Harvest I shall hinder Hay-making,
I had no less then seven lay in last Progress,
Within three weeks of one another time.
O Snaphance, have I found you.
How Snaphance?
Doe you see your workmanship,
Nay turn not from it, nor offer to escape, for if you doe,
I'll cry it through the Streets, and follow you.
Your name may well be called Tuchwood, a Pox on you,
You doe but touch and take, thou hast undone me,
I was a Maid before, I can bring a Certificate for it,
From both the Church-Wardens.
I'll have the Parsons Hand too, or I'll not yield to it.
Thou shalt have more thou Villain, nothing grieves me, but Ellen my poor cousin in Darbishiere, thou hast cracked her marriage quite, she'll have a bout with thee.
Faith when she will I'll have a bout with her.
A Law bout Sir I mean.
True, Lawyers use such bouts as other Men doe,
And if that be all thy grief, I'll tender her a Husband,
I keep of purpose two or three Gulls in pickle
To eat such Mutton with, and she shall choose one.
Doe but in curtsy faith Wench excuse me,
Of this half yard of Flesh, in which I think it wants
A Nail or two.
No, thou shalt find Villain
It hath right shape, and all the Nails it should have.
Faith I am poor, doe a charitable deed Wench,
I am a younger Brother, and have nothing.
Nothing, thou hast too much thou lying villain
Unless thou were more thankful.
I have no dwelling,
I brake up House but this morning, Pray thee pity me,
I am a good Fellow, faith have been too kind
To people of your Gender, if I ha'te
Without my Belly, none of your Sex shall want it,
That word has been of force to move a Woman.
There's tricks enough to rid thy Hand on it Wench,
Some rich-mans Porch, to morrow before day,
Or else anon in the evening, twenty devises,
Here's all I have, I faith, take purse and all,
And would I were rid of all the Ware in the Shop so.
Where I find manly dealings I am pitiful,
This shall not trouble you.
And I protest Wench, the next I'll keep my self.
Soft, let it be got first.
This is the fifth, if ever I venture more
Where I now go for a Maid, may I ride for a Whore.
what shift shele make now with this piece of flesh
In this strict time of Lent, I cannot imagine,
Flesh dare not peep abroad now, I have known
This City now aboue this seven years,
But I protest in better state of government,
I never knew it yet, nor ever heard of,
There has been more religious wholesome Laws
In the half cirkle of a year erected
For common good, then memory ever knew of,
Setting apart corruption of Promoters,
And other poisonous Officers that infect
And with a venomous breath taint every goodness.
O that ever I was begot, or bred, or borne.
Be content sweet Wife.
What's here to doe now?
I hold my life she's in deep passion
For the imprisonment of Veale and Mutton
Now kept in Garrets, weeps for some Calves Head now,
Me thinks her Husbands Head might serve with Bacon.
Hist.
Patience sweet Wife.
Brother I have sought you strangely.
Why what's the business?
With all speed thou can procure a Licence for me.
How, a Licence?
Cuds-foot she's lost else, I shall miss her ever.
Nay sure thou shalt not miss so fair a mark▪
For thirteen shillings four pence.
Thanks by hundreds.
Nay pray thee cease, I'll be at more cost yet,
Thou know we are rich enough.
All but in blessings,
And there the Beggar goes beyond vs. O, ô, ô,
To be seven years a Wife and not a Child, ô not a Child.
Sweet Wife have patience.
Can any Woman have a greater cut?
I know it is great, but what of that Wife?
I cannot doe with all, there's things making
By thine own Doctors advice at Poticaries,
I spare for nothing Wife, no if the price
Were forty marks a spoonful,
I'd give a thousand pound to purchase fruitfulness,
It is but bating so many good works
In the erecting of Bridewels and Spittle-houses,
And so fetch it up again, for having none
I mean to make good deeds my Children.
Give me but those good deeds, and I'll find Children.
Hang thee, thou hast had too many.
Thouly'st brevity.
O horrible, dare thou call me brevity?
Dare thou be so short with me?
Thou deserve worse.
Think but upon the goodly Lands and Livings
That's kept back through want on it.
Talk not on it pray thee,
Thou'lt make me play the Woman, and weep too.
It is our dry barrenness puffs up Sr Walter,
None gets by your not-getting, but that Knight,
He's made by the means, and fats his fortunes, shortly
In a great Dowry with a Gold-Smiths Daughter.
They may be all deceived,
Be but you patient Wife.
I have suffered a long time.
Suffer thy Heart out, a Pox suffer thee.
Nay thee, thou desertlesse Slave.
Come, come, I have done,
You'll to the Gossiping of Mr Allwits Child?
Yes, to my much joy,
Every one gets before me, there's my Sister
Was married but at Bartholmew-eeue last,
And she can have two Children at a birth,
O one of them, one of them would have served my turn.
Sorrow consume thee, thou art still crossing me,
And know my nature.
O Mistress, weeping or railing,
That's our House harmony.
What say Jug?
The sweetest news.
What first Wench?
Throw down your Doctors Drugs,
They're all but Heretikes, I bring certain remedy
That has been taught, and proved, and never failed.
O that, that, that or nothing.
There's a Gentleman,
I happily have his Name too, that has got
Nine Children by one Water that he uses,
It never mis〈◊〉es, they come so fast upon him,
He was fine to give it over.
His name sweet Jug?
One Mr Tuchwood, a fine Gentleman,
But run behind-hand much with getting Children.
First possible?
Why Sir, he'll undertake,
Using that Water, within fifteen year,
For all your wealth, to make you a poor Man,
You shall so swarm with Children.
I'll venture that I faith.
That shall you Husband.
But I must tell you first, he's very dear.
No matter, what serves wealth for?
True sweet Husband,
There's Land to come, Put case his Water stands me
In some five hundred pound a pint,
Twill fetch a thousand, and a Kersten Soul.
I'll about it.
And that's worth all sweet Husband.
I'll go bid Gossips presently my self,
That's all the work I'll doe, nor need I stir,
But that it is my pleasure to walk forth
And ayre my self a little, I am tied to nothing
In this business, what I doe is merely recreation,
Not constraint.
Here's running to and fro, Nurse upon Nurse,
Three Chare women, besides maids &amp; neighbours children.
Fie, what a trouble have I rid my Hands on,
It makes me sweat to think on it.
How now Jack?
I am going to bid Gossips for your Wps child Sir,
A goodly Girl I faith, give you joy on her,
She looks as if she had two thousand pound to her portion
And run away with a Taylor, A fine plump black eyed slut,
Under correction Sir,
I take delight to see her: Nurse.
Doe you call Sir?
I call not you, I call the Wet Nurse hither,
Give me the wet Nurse, I it is thou,
Come hither, come hither,
Lets see her once again; I cannot choose
But bus her thrice an hour.
You may be proud on it Sir,
It is the best piece of work that ever you did.
Think thou so Nurse, What say to Wat and Nick?
They're pretty children both, but here's a wench
Will be a knocker.
Pup say thou me so, pup little Countess,
Faith Sir I thank your Worship for this Girl,
Ten thousand times, and upward.
I am glad I have her for you Sir.
Here take her in Nurse, wipe her, and give her Spoone-meat.
Wipe your Mouth Sir.
And now about these Gossips.
Get but two, I'll stand for one my self.
To your own Child Sir?
The better policy, it prevents suspicion,
It is good to play with rumour at all weapons.
Troth I commend your care Sir, it is a thing
That I should ne'er have thought on.
The more Slave,
When Man turns base, out goes his Souls pure flame,
The fat of ease o're-throwes the eyes of shame.
I am studying who to get for Godmother
Suitable to your Worship, Now I have thought on it.
I'll ease you of that care, and please my self in it
My Love the Goldsmiths Daughter, if I send,
Her Father will command her, Day Dahumma.
I'll fit your Worship then with a Male Partner.
What is he?
A kind proper Gentleman, Brother to Mr Tush∣wood.
I know Tuchwood, has he a Brother living?
A neat Bachelor.
Now we know him, we will make shift with him
Dispatch the time draws near, Come hither Day.
In troth I pity him, he ne'er stands still,
Poor Knight what pains he takes, sends this way one,
That way another, has not an hours leisure,
I would not have thy toil, for all thy pleasure,
Ha, how now, what are these that stand so close
At the Street-corner, pricking up their Ears,
And snuffing up their Noses, like rich-mens Dogs
When the first Course goes in? By the mass Promoters,
It is so I hold my life, and planted there
To arrest the dead Corps of poor Calves and Sheep,
Like ravenous Creditors, that will not suffer
The Bodies of their poor departed Debtors
To go to the grave, but even in Death to vex
And stay the Corps, with Bills of Middlesex,
This Lent will fat the whoresons up with Sweetbreads,
And lard their whores with Lambe-stones, what their gols
Can clutch, goes presently to their Mols and Dols,
The Bawds will be so fat with what they earn,
Their Chins will hang like Vdders, by Easter-eeue,
And being stroak't, will give the Milk of Witches,
How did the Mungrels hear my wife lies in?
Well, I may baffle 'em gallantly, By your favour Gentlemen
I am a stranger both unto the City,
And to her carnal stricktnesse.
Good, Your will Sir?
Pray tell me where one dwells that kills this Lent.
How kills? Come hither Dicke,
A Bird, a Bird.
What first that you would have?
Faith any Flesh,
But I long especially for Veale and Greene-sauce.
Greene-Goose, you shall be sau'st.
I have half a scornful stomach, no Fish will be admitted.
Not this Lent Sir?
Lent, what cares Colon here for Lent?
You say well Sir,
Good reason that the Colon of a Gentleman
As you were lately pleased to term your worship Sir,
Should be fulfilled with answerable food,
To sharpen Blood, delight Health, and tickle Nature,
Were you directed hither to this Street Sir?
That I was, I marry.
And the Butcher belike
Should kill, and sell close in some upper Room?
Some Apple-loft as I take it, or a Cole-house,
I know not which I faith.
Either will serve,
This Butcher shall kifse Newgate, less he turn up the
Bottom of the Pocket of his Apron,
You go to seek him?
Where you shall not find him,
I'll buy, walk by your Noses with my Flesh,
Sheepe-biting Mungrels, Hand-basket Freebooters,
My Wife lies in, a footra for Promoters.
That shall not serve your turn, what a Rogue's this, how cunningly he came over vs?
Hushed, stand close.
I have escaped well thus far, they say the Knaves are wondrous hot and busy.
By your leave Sir,
We must see what you have under your Cloak there.
Have? I have nothing.
No, doe you tell vs that, what makes this lump stick out then, we must see Sir.
What will you see Sir, a pair of Sheets, and two of my Wives foul Smocks, going to the Washers?
O we love that sight well, you cannot please vs better: What doe you gull vs, call you these Shirts and Smocks?
Now a Pox choke you,
You have consent me and five of my Wives kindred
Of a good Dinner, we must make it up now
With Herrings and Milke-potage.
It is all Veale.
All Veale, Pox the worse luck, I promised faithfully to send this morning a fat quarter of Lamb, to a kind Gentlewoman in Turnebull street that longs, and how I'm crossed.
Let's share this, and see what hap comes next then.
Agreed, stand close again, another booty,
What's he?
Sir, by your favour.
Meaning me Sir?
Good Mr Oliuer, cry thee mercy, I faith.
What hast thou there?
A Rack of Mutton Sir, and half a Lamb,
You know my Mistresses diet.
Go, go, we see thee not, away, keep close,
Heart let him pass, thou'lt never have the wit
To know our benefactors.
I have forgot him.
It is M. Beggerlands man the wealthy Merchant
That is in fee with vs.
Now I have a feeling of him.
You know he purchased the whole Lent together
Gave vs ten groats a piece on Ash wednesday.
True, true.
A Wench.
Why then stand close indeed.
Women had need of wit, if they'll shift here,
And she that hath wit, may shift any-where.
Look, look, poor Fool,
She has left the Rump uncovered too,
More to betray her, this is like a Murdrer,
That will out-face the deed with a bloody Band.
What time of the year first Sister?
O sweet Gentlemen, I am a poor Servant,
Let me go.
You shall Wench, but this must stay with vs.
O you undo me Sir,
It is for a wealthy Gentlewoman that takes Physic Sir,
The Doctor do's allow my Mistress Mutton,
O as you tender the dear life of a Gentlewoman,
I'll bring my Master to you, he shall show you
A true authority from the higher powers,
And I'll run every foot.
Well, leave your Basket then,
And run and spare not.
Will you swear then to me,
To keep it till I come.
Now by this light I will.
What say you Gentleman?
What a strange Wench it is?
Would we might perish else.
Nay then I run Sir.
And ne'er return I hope.
A politic Baggage,
She makes vs swear to keep it,
I prethe look what market she hath made.
Imprimis Sir, a good fat Loin of Mutton,
What comes next under this Cloth?
Now for a quarter of Lamb.
Not for a Shoulder of Mutton.
Done.
Why done Sir.
By the mass I feel I have lost,
It is of more weight I faith.
Some Loin of Veale?
No faith, here's a Lambs Head,
I feel that plainly, why yet win my wager.
Ha?
Swounds what's here?
A Child.
A Pox of all dissembling cunning Whores.
Here's an unlucky Breakfast.
What shal's doe?
The Queen made vs swear to keep it too.
We might leave it else.
Villainous strange,
Life had she none to gull, but poor Promoters,
That watch hard for a living.
Half our gettings must run in Suger-sope,
And Nurses wages now, besides many a pound of Soap,
And Tallow, we have need to get Loins of Mutton still,
To save Suet to change for Candles.
Nothing mads me, but this was a Lamb• head with you, you felt it, she has made Calves heads of vs.
Prethe no more on it,
There's time to get it up, it is not come
To Mid-Lent Sunday yet.
I am so angry, I'll watch no more to day.
Faith nor I neither.
Why then I'll make a motion.
Well, what first?
Let's even go to the Checker at Queene-hiue and roast the Loin of Mutton, till young Flood, then send the Child to Branford.
It is a busy day at our House Day.
Always the Kursning day Sir.
Truss, truss me Day.
No matter and you were hanged Sir.
How do's this Suit fit me Day?
Excellent neatly, my Masters things were ever fit for you Sir, even to a Hair you know.
Thou hast hit it right Day,
We ever jumped in one, this ten years Day,
So well said, what art thou?
Your Comfit-makers Man Sir.
O sweet youth, into the Nurse quick,
Quick, it is time I faith,
Your Mistress will be here?
She was setting forth Sir.
Here comes our Gossips now, O I shall have such kissing work to day, Sweet Mistress Ʋnderman welcome I faith.
Give you joy of your fine Girl Sir,
Grant that her education may be pure,
And become one of the faithful.
Thanks to your Sisterly wishes Mr Ʋnderman.
Are any of the Brethrens Wives yet come?
There are some Wives within, and some at home.
Verily thanks Sir.
Verily you are an Ass forsooth,
I must sit all these times, or there's no Music,
Here comes a friendly and familiar payer,
Now I like these Wenches well.
How dost sir?
Faith well I thank you Neighbor, and how dost thou?
Want nothing, but such getting Sir as thine.
My gettings wench, they are poor.
Fie that thou'lt say so,
You have as fine Children as a Man can get.
I as a Man can get,
And that's my Master.
They are pretty foolish things,
Put to making in minutes,
I ne'er stand long about 'em,
Will you walk in Wenches?
The hapiest meeting that our souls could wish for
Here's the Ring ready, I am beholding unto your Fathers hast, he has kept his hour.
He never kept it better.
Back, be silent.
Mistress and Partner, I will put you both into one Cup.
Into one Cup, most proper,
A fitting complement for a Gold-smiths Daughter.
Yes Sir, that's he must be your Worships Partner
In this days business, Mr Tuchwoods Brother.
I embrace your acquaintance Sir.
It vows your service Sir.
It's near high time, come Mr All-wit.
Ready Sir.
Will it please you walk?
Sir I obey your time.
Good Mris Yellowhammer.
In faith I will not.
Indeed it shall be yours
I have sworn I saith.
I'll stand still then.
So will you let the Child go without company
And make me forsworn.
You are such another Creature.
Before me, I pray come down a little.
Not a whit, I hope I know my place.
Your place, great wonder sure, are you any better then a Comfit-makers wife.
And that's as good at all times as a Apothecaries.
Ye lye, yet I forbear you too.
Come sweet Sister, we go in unity, and show the fruits of peace like Children of the Spirit.
I love lowliness.
True, so say I, though they strive more,
There comes as proud behind, as goes before.
Every inch I faith.
O Sir, if ever you felt the force of love, pity it in me.
Yes, though I ne'er was married Sir,
I have felt the force of love from good men's daughters,
And some that will be Maids yet three years hence.
Have you got a Licence?
Here it is ready Sir.
That's well.
The Ring and all things perfect, she'll steal hither.
She shall be welcome Sir, I'll not be long
A clapping you together.
O here she's come Sir.
What's he?
My honest Brother.
Quick, make hast Sirs.
You must dispatch with all the speed you can,
For I shall be mist straight, I made hard shift
For this small time I have.
Then I'll not linger,
Place that Ring upon her Finger,
This the Finger plays the part,
Whose master Vein shoots from the Heart,
Now join Hands.
Which I will sever,
And so ne'er again meet never.
O we are betrayed.
Hard fate.
I am struck with wonder.
Was this the politic fetch, thou mystical baggage
Thou disobedient strumpet,
And were so wise to send for her to such an end,
Now I disclaim the end, you'll make me mad.
And what are you Sir?
And you cannot see with those two Glasses, put on a pair more.
I dreamt of anger still, here take your Ring Sir,
Ha this, life it is the same, abominable,
Did not I sell this Ring?
I think you did, you received money for it.
Heart, hark you Knight,
Here's no inconscionable villainy,
Set me a work to make the Wedding Ring,
And come with an intent to steal my Daughter,
Did ever run-a-way match it?
'This your Brother Sir?
He can tell that as well as I.
The very Poesy mocks me to my face,
Love that's wise, blinds Parents eyes,
I thank your wisdom Sir for blinding of vs,
We have good hope to recover our sight shortly,
In the mean time I will locke up this baggage,
As carefully as my Gold, she shall see as little Sun
If a close Room or so can keep her from the light on it.
O sweet Father, for Loves sake pity me.
Away.
Farewell Sir, all content bless thee,
And take this for comfort,
Though violence keep me, thou can loose me never,
I am ever thine although we part for ever.
I we shall part you Minkes.
Your acquaintance Sir, came very lately,
Yet it came too soon,
I must here-after know you for no friend,
But one that I must shun like Pestilence,
Or the Disease of Lust.
Like enough Sir, you have tan me at the worst time for words that ever ye picked out, faith doe not wrong me Sir.
Look after him and spare not, there he walks
That never yet received baffling, you're blessed
More then ever I knew, go take your rest.
I pardon you, you are both losers.
How first Woman, we have brought you home
A Kursen Soul.
I, I thank your pains.
And verily well kursend, in the right way,
Without Idolatry or Superstition,
After the pure manner of Amsterdam.
Sit down good Neighbours, Nurse.
At hand forsooth.
Look they have all low stools
They have forsooth.
Bring the Child hither Nurse, how say you now
Gossip, first not a chopping Girl, so like the Father?
As if it had been spit out of his Mouth,
By it, nosed, and browed as like a Girl can be,
Only indeed it has the Mothers Mouth.
The Mothers Mouth up and down, up and down.
It is a large Child, she's but a little Woman.
No believe me, a very spiny Creature, but all hart,
Well metteld, like the faithful to endure
Her tribulation here, and raise up seed.
She had a sore labour on it I warrant you, you can tell Neighbour.
O she had great speed,
We were afraid once,
But she made vs all have joyful hearts again,
It is a good Soul I faith,
The Midwife found her a most cheerful Daughter.
It is the spirit, the Sisters are all like her,
O here comes the chief Gossip Neighbours.
The fatness of your wishes to you all Ladies.
O deer sweet gentleman, what fine words he has
The fatness of our wishes.
Calls vs all Ladies.
I promise you a fine Gentleman, and a courteous.
Me thinks her Husband shows like a Clown to him.
I would not care what Clown my Husband were too, so I had such fine Children.
She's all fine Children Gossip.
I, and see how fast they come.
Children are blessings, if they be got with zeal,
By the Brethren, as I have five at home.
The worst is past, I hope now Gossip.
So I hope to good Sir.
Why then so hope I too for company,
I have nothing to doe else.
A poor remembrance Lady,
To the love of the Babe, I pray accept of it.
O you are at too much charge Sir.
Look, look, what has he given her, what First Gossip?
Now by my faith a fair high standing Cup, and two great Postle Spoons, one of them gilt.
Sure that was Iudas then with the red Beard.
I would not feed my daughter with that spoon for all the World, for fear of colouring her Heir, Red Hair the Brethren like not, it consumes them much, it is not the Sisters colour.
Well said Nurse,
About, about with them amongst the Gossips,
Now out comes all the tasseled Handkerchers,
They are spread abroad between their Knees already,
Now in goes the long Fingers that are washed
Some thrice a day in Urine, my Wife uses it,
Now we shall have such pocketing,
See how they lurch at the lower end.
Come hither Nurse.
Again, she has taken twice already.
I had forgot a Sisters Child that's sick.
A Pox it seems your purity loves sweet things well that puts in thrice together, had this been all my cost now I had been beggerd, these Women have no consciences at sweet meats, where ever they come, see and they have not could out all the long Plumbs too, they have left nothing here but short riggle-tayle-Comfits, not worth mouthing, no mar'le I heard a Citizen complain once, that his Wives Belly only broke his Back: Mine had been all in fitters seven years since, but for this worthy Knight, that with a
prop upholds my Wife and me, and all my estate buried in Bucklers-berrie.
Here Mris Yellowhammer, and Neighbours,
To you all that have taken pains with me,
All the good Wives at once.
I'll answer for them,
They wish all health and strength,
And that you may courageously go forward,
To perform the like and many such,
Like a true Sister with Motherly bearing.
Now the cups trole about to wet the gossips whistles
It pores down I faith, they never think of payment.
Fill again Nurse.
Now bless thee, two at once, I'll stay no longer,
It would kill me and if I paid for it,
Will it please you to walk down and leave the women.
With all my Heart Jack.
Troth I cannot blame you.
Sit you all merry Ladies.
Thank your Worship Sir.
Thank your Worship Sir.
A Pox twice tipple ye, you are last &amp; lowest.
Bring hither that same Cup-Nurse, I would fine drive away this hup Antichristian grief.
See Gossip and she lies not in like a Countess,
Would I had such a Husband for my Daughter.
Is not she toward marriage?
O no sweet Gossip.
Why she's nineteen?
I that she was last Lemmas,
But she has a fault Gossip, a secret fault.
A fault, what first?
I'll tell you when I have drunk.
Wine can doe that I see, that friendship cannot.
And now I'll tell you Gossip, she's too free.
To free?
O I, she cannot lye dry in her Bed.
What, and nineteen?
It is as I tell you Gossip.
Speak with me Nurse, who first?
A Gentleman from Cambridge,
I think it be your Soon forsooth.
It is my Soon Tim I faith,
Prethe call him up among the Women,
Twill embolden him well,
For he wants nothing but audacity,
'Would the Welch gentlewoman at home were here now.
Is your Son come forsooth?
Yes from the University forsooth.
It is great joy on ye.
There's a great marriage towards for him.
A marriage?
Yes sure, a hugh Heir in Wales,
At least to nineteen Mountains,
Besides her Goods and Cattle.
O, I'm betrayed.
What gone again, run after him good Nurse,
He's so bashful, that's the spoil of youth,
In the University they're kept still to Men,
And ne'er trained up to Women's company.
It is a great spoil of youth indeed.
Your Mother will have it so.
Why Son, why Tim,
What must I rise and fetch you? For shame Son.
Mother you doe entreat like a fresh Woman,
It is against the Laws of the University,
For any that has answered under Bachelor
To thrust amongst married Wives.
Come we will excuse you here.
Call up my Tutor Mother, and I care not.
What is your Tutor come, have you brought him up?
I have not brought him up, he stands at door,
Negatur, there's Logic to begin with you Mother.
Run call the gentleman nurse, he's my sons tutor
Here eat some Plumbs.
Come I from Cambridge, and offer me six plumbs?
Why how now Tim,
Will not your old tricks yet be left?
Served like a Child,
When I have answered under Bachelor?
You'll never lin till I make your Tutor whip you, you know how I served you once at the Free School in Pals Churchyard?
O monstrous absurdity,
Ne'er was the like in Cambridge since my time,
Life whip a Bachelor, you'd be laughed at soundly,
Let not my Tutor hear you,
It would be a Jest through the whole University,
No more words Mother.
Is this your Tutor Tim?
Yes surely Lady, I am the man that brought him in League with Logic, and red the Dunces to him.
That did he Mother, but now I have 'em all in my own Pate, and can as well read 'em to others.
That can he Mistress, for they flow naturally from him.
I'm the more beholding to your pains Sir.
No• ideo sa••.
True, he was an Idiot indeed,
When he went out of London, but now he's well mended▪
Did you receive the two Goose-pies I sent you?
And eat them heartily, thanks to your Worship.
It is my Son Tim, I pray bid him welcome Gentlewomen.
Tim, hark you Timothius Mother, Timothius.
How, shall I deny your Name? Timothius quoth he? Faith there's a name, it is my Son Tim for∣sooth.
You're welcome Mr Tim.
O this is horrible, she wets as she kisses,
Your Handkercher sweet Tutor, to wipe them off, as fast as they come on.
Welcome from Cambridge.
This is intolerable, This woman has a villainous sweet breath, did she not stink of Comfits, Help me sweet Tutor, or I shall rub my Lips off.
I'll go kiss the lower end the whilst.
Perhaps that's the sweeter, and we shall dispatch the sooner.
Let me come next, Welcome from the Welspring of discipline, that waters all the Brethren.
Hoist I beseech thee.
O bless the Woman, Mr Undermine.
It is but the common affliction of the faithful,
We must embrace our falls.
I'm glad I escaped it, it was some rotten kiss sure,
It dropped down before it came at me.
Here's a noise, not parted yet?
Hyda, a Looking-glasse, they have drunk so hard in Plate,
That some of them had need of other Vessels,
Yonder's the bravest Show.
Where? Where Sir?
Come along presently by the Pissing-conduit,
With two brave Drums and a Standert-bearer.
O Brave.
Come Tutor.
Farewell sweet Gossip.
I thank you all for your pains.
Feed and grow strong.
You had more need to sleep then eat,
Go take a nap with some of the Brethren, go,
And rise up a well edified, boldified Sister,
O here's a day of toil well past o'er,
Able to make a Citizen Hare mad,
How hot they have made the Room with their thick Bums,
Dost not feel it Day?
Monstrous strong Sir.
What's here under the Stools?
Nothing but wet Sir, some Wine spilt here be∣like.
First no worse think thou?
Fair Needle work Stools, cost nothing with them Day
Nor you neither I faith.
Look how they have laid them,
Ee'ne as they lye themselves, with their Heals up,
How they have shuffled up the Rushes too Day
With their short figging little shittle-corke-heels,
These Women can let nothing stand as they find it,
But what's the secret thou'st about to tell me
My honest Day?
If you should disclose it Sir.
Life rip my Belly up to the Throat then Day.
My Master's upon Marriage.
Marriage Day, send me to hanging rather.
I have story him.
When, where, what is she Day?
Even the same was Gossip, and gave the Spoon.
I have no time to stay, nor scarce can speak,
I'll stop those wheels, or all the work will break.
I knew 'twold prick, Thus doe I fashion still
All mine own ends by him and his rank toil,
It is my desire to keep him still from marriage,
Being his poor nearest Kinsman, I may fare
The better at his death, there my hopes build
Since my Lady Kixe is dry, and hath no Child.
You're in the happiest way to enrich your self,
And pleasure me Brother, as Mans feet can tread in,
For though she be locked up, her vow is fixed only to me;
Then time shall never grieve me, for by that vow,
Even absent enjoy her, assuredly confirmed that none
Else shall, which will make tedious years seem gamefull
To me, In the mean space lose you no time sweet brother,
You have the means to strike at this Knights fortunes,
And lay him level with his bankrupt merit,
Get but his Wife with Child, perch at tree top,
And shake the golden fruit into her Lap,
About it before she weep her self to a dry ground,
And whine out all her goodness.
Prethe cease, I find a too much aptness in my blood
For such a business without provocation,
You might 'well spared this banquet of Oringoes,
Hartechokes, Potatoes, and your buttered Crab,
They were fitter kept for your own wedding dinner.
Nay and you'll follow my suit, &amp; save my purse too
Fortune dotes on me, he's in happy case
Finds such an honest friend in the Common place.
Life what makes thee so merry? thou hast no cause
That I could hear of lately since thy crosses,
Unless there be news come, with new additions.
Why there thou hast it right,
I look for her this Evening Brother.
How's that, look for her?
I will deliver you of the wonder straight Brother,
By the firm secrecy, and kind assistance
Of a good Wench in the House, who made of pity,
Weighing the case her own, she's lead through Gutters,
Strange hidden ways, which none but Love could find,
Or have the Heart to venture, I expect her
Where you would little think.
I care not where, so she be safe, and yours.
Hope tells me so,
But from your love and time my peace must grow.
You know the worst then brother, now to my Kix
The barren he and she, they're in the next Room,
But to say which of their two humours hold them
Now at this instant, I cannot say truly.
Thou lie Barrenness.
O first that time of day, give you joy of your tongue
There's nothing else good in you, this their life
The whole day from eyes open to eyes shut,
Kissing or scolding, and then must be made friends,
Then rail the second part of the first fit out,
And then be pleased again, no Man knows which way,
Fall out like Giants, and fall in like Children,
Their Fruit can witness as much.
It is thy fault.
Mine, Drouth and coldness?
Thine, it is thou art barren.
I barren, ó life that I durst but speak now,
In mine own Justice, in mine own Right, I barren,
It was otherwise with me when I was at Court,
I was ne'er called so till I was married.
I'll be deuorc't.
Be hanged, I need not wish it,
That will come too soon to thee:
I may say, Marriage and hanging goes by destiny,
For all the goodness I can find in it yet.
I'll give up House, &amp; keep some fruitful whore,
Like an old Bachelor in a Tradsmans Chamber,
She and her Children shall have all.
Where be they?
Pray cease,
When there are friendlier courses took for you,
To get and multiply within your House,
At your own proper costs in spite of censure,
Me thinks an honest peace might be establish't.
What with her? Never.
Sweet Sir.
You work all in vain.
Then he doth all like thee.
Let me entreat Sir.
Singleness confound her,
I took her with one Smock.
But indeed you came not so single,
When you came from Shipboard.
Heart she bit sore there,
Prethe mike's friends.
First come to that, the peal begins to cease.
I'll sell all at an Out-cry.
Doe thy worst Slave,
Good sweet Sir bring vs into love again.
Some would think this impossible to compass,
Pray let this storm fly over.
Good Sir pardon me, I'm Master of this House,
Which I'll sell presently, I'll clap up Bills this Evening.
Lady friends come?
If ever ye loved Woman, talk not on it Sir, what friends with him? good faith do you think I'm mad with one that's scarce the hinder quarter of a Man?
Thou art nothing of a Woman.
Would I were less then nothing.
Nay prethe what dost mean?
I cannot please you.
I faith thou art a good Soul, he lies that says it,
Bus, bus, pretty Rogue.
You care not for me.
Can any man tell now which way they came in?
By this light I'll be hanged then.
Is the Drink come?
Here's a little Vial of Almond-milke
That stood me in some three pence.
I hope to see thee wench within these few years,
Cirkled with Children, pranking up a Girl,
And putting Jewels in their little Ears,
Fine sport I saith.
I had you been ought Husband,
It had been done ere this time.
Had I bin ought, hang thee, had thou bin ought,
But a cross thing I ever found thee.
Thou art a Grub to say so.
A Pox on thee.
By this light they are out again at the same door,
And no Man can tell which way,
Come here's your Drink Sir.
I will not take it now Sir,
And I were sure to get three Boys ere Midnight.
Why there thou show now of what breed thou come
To hinder generation, O thou Villain,
That knows how crookedly the World goes with vs,
For want of Heirs, yet put by all good fortune.
Hang strumpet, I will take it now in spite.
Then you must ride upon it five hours.
I mean so, Within there?
Sir?
Saddle the white Mare,
I'll take a Whore along, and ride to Ware.
Ride to the Devil.
I'll plague you every way,
Look ye, doe you see, it is gone.
A Pox go with it.
I curse and spare not now.
Stir up and down sir, you must not stand.
Nay I'm not given to standing.
So much the better sir for the —
I never could stand long in one place yet,
I learnt it of my Father, ever figient,
How if I crossed this Sir?
O passing good Sir, and would show well a Horse∣back: When you come to your Inn, If you leapt over a ioynt-stoole or two, it were not amiss although you brake your neck Sir.
What say you to a Table thus high Sir?
Nothing better Sir, if it be furnished with good Victuals. You remember how the bargain runs about this business?
Or else I had a bad Head: you must receive Sir four hundred pounds of me at four several payments:
One hundred pound now in hand.
Right, that I have Sir.
Another hundred when my Wives is quick: the third when she's brought a bed: and the last hundred when the Child cries, For if it should be still borne, it doth no good Sir.
All this is even still, a little faster Sir.
Not a whit Sir,
I'm in an excellent pace for any Physic,
Your white Mares ready.
I shall up presently: One kiss, and farewell.
Thou shalt have two Love.
Expect me about three.
With all my Heart Sweet.
By this light they have forgot their anger since,
And are as far in again as ever they were,
Which way the Devil came they, Haart I saw 'em not,
Their ways are beyond finding out. Come sweet Lady.
How must I take mine Sir?
Clean contrary, yours must be taken lying.
A Bed Sir?
A Bed, or where you will for your own ease,
Your Coach will serve.
The Physic must needs please.
Negatur argumentum Tutor.
Probo tibi Pupil, stultus non est animal rationale.
Faller is sane.
Quaso v• taceas, probo tibi.
Quomodo probe• domino.
Stultus non habit rationem, ergo non est animal rati∣onale.
Sic argumentaris domino, stultus non habit rationem, ergo non est animal rationale, negatur argumentum again Tutor.
Argumentum itterum probo tibi domino, queen non par∣ticipat de ration nullo modo potest la rationalibus, but stultus non participate de ration, ergo stultus nullo modo potest decor rationalis.
Participate.
Sic disputus, queen participate quomodo participate.
Ʋt homo, probabo tibi in silagismo.
Hunc probe.
Sic probo domino, stultus est homo sicut tu &amp; ego sum, homo est animal rationele, sicut stultus est animal rationale.
Here's nothing but disputing all the day long with 'em.
Sic disputus, stultus est homo sicut tu &amp; ego sum homo est animal rationale, sicut stultus est animal rationale.
Your reasons are both good what ever they be
Pray give them over, faith you'll tire your selves,
What's the matter between you?
Nothing but reasoning about a Fool Mother.
About a Fool Son, alas what need you trouble your heads about that, none of vs all but knows what a Fool is.
Why what's a Fool Mother?
I come to you now.
Why one that's married before he has wit.
It is pretty I faith, and well guest of a Woman never brought up at the University: but bring forth what Fool you will Mother, I'll prove him to be as reasonable a Creature, as my self or my Tutor here.
Fie it is impossible.
Nay he shall do it forsooth.
It is the easiest thing to prove a Fool by Logic,
By Logic I'll prove any thing.
What thou wilt not?
I'll prove a Whore to be an honest Woman.
Nay by my faith, she must prove that her self, or Logic will never do it.
Twill do it I tell you.
Some in this Street would give a thousand pounds that you could prove their Wives so.
Faith I can, and all their Daughters too, though they had three Bastards. When comes your Taylor hither?
Why what of him?
By Logic I'll prove him to be a Man,
Let him come when he will.
How hard at first was Learning to him? Truly
Sir I thought he would never a took the Latin Tongue.
How many Accidences doe you think he wore out ever he came to his Grammar?
Some three or four.
Believe me Sir some four and thirty.
Pish I made haberdins of 'em in Church porches
He was eight years in his Grammar, and stuck horribly at a foolish place there called Ass in pre∣senti.
Pox I have it here now.
He so shamed me once before an honest Gentle∣man that knew me when I was a Maid
These women must have all out.
Quidest Gramatica? Says the Gentleman to him (I shall remember by a sweet sweet token) but nothing could he answer.
How now Pupil, ha, Quid est Gramatica?
Grammatica? Ha, ha, ha.
Nay doe not laugh Son, but let me hear you say it now: There was one word went so prettily off the Gentleman's tongue, I shall remember it the longest day of my life.
Come, Quid est Gramatica?
Are you not ashamed Tutor, Gramatica? Why Recte scribendi at{que} loquendi ars, ser-reuerence of my Mo∣there.
That was it I faith: Why now Son I see you are a deep Scholar: And Mr Tutor a word I pray, let vs with-draw a little into my Husbands Chamber, I'll send in the North-Wales Gentlewoman to him, she looks for wooing: I'll put together both, and locke the Door.
I give great approbation to your conclusion.
I mar'le what this Gentlewoman should be,
That I should have in marriage, she's a stranger to me:
I wonder what my Parents mean I faith,
To match me with a stranger so:
A Maid that's neither kiss nor kin to me:
Life doe they think I have no more care of my Body,
Then to lye with one that I ne'er knew,
A mere stranger,
One that ne'er went to School with me neither,
Nor ever play-fellowes together,
They are mightily o're-seene in it me thinks,
They say she has Mountains to her marriage,
She's full of Cattle, some two thousand Runts,
Now what the meaning of these Runts should be,
My Tutor cannot tell me,
I have looked in Riders Dixcionarie for the Letter R,
And there I can hear no tidings of these Runts neither,
Unless they should be Rumford Hogs,
I know them not,
And here she comes,
If I know what to say to her now
In the way of marriage, I'm no Graduate,
Me thinks I faith it is boldly done of her
To come into my Chamber being but a stranger,
She shall not say I'm so proud yet, but I'll speak to her,
Marry as I will order it,
She shall take no hold of my words I'll warrant her,
She looks and makes a coursey,
Salve tu quo{que} puella puleherima,
Quid vis nescio nec sane curo,
Tully's own phrase to a Hart.
I know not what he means,
A Suitor quoth a?
I hold my life he understands no English.
Ferter me hercule tu virgo,
Wallia vt opibus abundis maximis.
What's this fertur and abundundis?
He mocks me sure, and calls me a bundle of Farts.
I have no Latin word now for their Runts, I'll make some shift or other: Itterum dico opibus abundat maximis montibus &amp; fontibus &amp; vt ita december Rontibus, atta∣men vero homauculus ego sum nature simule art bachalarius lecto profecto non parity.
This is most strange, may be he can speak Welch,
Auedera whee comrage, der due cog foginis.
Cog foggin, I scorn to cog with her, I'll tell her so too in a word near her own Language: Ego non cogo.
Rhegosin a whiggin harle ron corid ambre.
By my faith she's a good scholar, I see that already
She has the Tongues plain, I hold my life she has travelled,
What will folks say? There goes the learned couple,
Faith if the truth were known, she hath proceeded.
How now, how speeds your business?
I'm glad my Mothers come to part vs.
How doe you agree forsooth?
As well as ever we did before we met.
How's that?
You put me to a Man I understand not,
Your Sonne's no English Man me thinks.
No English Man, bless my Boy,
And borne in the Heart of London?
I have been long enough in the chamber with him,
And I find neither Welch nor English in him.
Why Tim, how have you used the Gentle∣woman?
As well as a Man might doe Mother, in modest Latin.
Latin Fool?
And she recoiled in Hebrew.
In Hebrew Fool? It is Welch.
All comes to one Mother.
She can speak English too.
Who told me so much?
Heart and she can speak English, I'll clap to her,
I thought you'd marry me to a stranger.
You must forgive him, he's so inured to Latin,
He and his Tutor, that he hath quite forgot
To use the Protestant tongue.
It is quickly pardoned forsooth.
Tim make amends and kiss her,
He makes towards you forsooth.
O delicious, one may discover her Country by her kissing, It is a true saying, there's nothing tastes so sweet as your Welch Mutton: It was reported you could sing.
O rarely Tim, the sweetest British Songs.
And it is my mind I swear before I marry,
I would see all my Wives good parts at once,
To view how rich I were.
Thou shalt here sweet Music Tim.
Pray forsooth.
CUPID is VENVS only Joy,
But he is a wanton Boy,
A very very wanton Boy,
He shoots at Ladies naked Breasts,
He is the cause of most Men's Crests,
I mean upon the Forehead,
Invisible but horrid,
It was he first taught upon the way,
To keep a Ladies Lips in play.
Why should not VENVS chide her Son,
For the pranks that he hath done,
The wanton pranks that he hath done?
He shoots his Fiery Darts so thick,
They hurt poor Ladies to the quick,
Ah me, with cruel wounding,
His Darts are so confounding,
That life and sense would soon decay,
But that he keeps their Lips in play.
Can there be any part of bliss,
In a quickly fleeting kiss,
A quickly fleeting kiss,
To ones pleasure, leasures are but wast,
The slowest kiss makes too much hast,
And loose it ere we find it,
The pleasing sport they only know,
That close aboue and close below.
I would not change my wife for a Kingdom,
I can doe somewhat too in my own Lodging.
Why well said Tim, the Bells go merrily,
I love such peals alife, wife lead them in a while,
Here's a strange Gentleman desires private conference.
You're welcome Sir, the more for your names sake.
Good Mr Yellowhammer, I love my name well,
And which a'the Yellowhammers take you descent from,
If I may be so bold with you, which I pray?
The Yellowhammers in Oxfordshiere,
Near Abbington.
And those are the best Yellowhammers, and truest bred: I came from thence my self, though now a Citizen: I'll be bold with you, You are most welcome.
I hope the zeal I bring with me shall deserve it.
I hope no less, what is your will Sir?
I understand by rumours, you have a Daughter,
Which my bold love shall hence-forth title cousin.
I thank you for her Sir.
I heard of her virtues, and other confirmed graces.
A plaguy Girl Sir.
Fame sets her out with richer ornaments,
Then you are pleased to boast of, It is done modestly,
I hear she's towards marriage.
You hear truth Sir.
And with a Knight in Town, Sr Walter Whore∣hound.
The very same Sir.
I am the sorrier for it.
The sorrier, Why cousin?
It is not too far past first? It may be yet recal'd?
Recal'd, why good Sir?
Resolve me in that point ye shall hear from me.
There's no Contract past.
I am very joyful Sir.
But he's the Man must bed her.
By no means cus, she's quite undone then,
And you'll curse the time that ever you made the match,
He's an arrant whoremaster, consumes his time and state, —whom in my knowledge he hath kept this 7 years,
Nay cus, an other Mans Wife too.
O ahbominable!
Maintains the whole house, apparels the husband,
Pays servants wedges, not so much, but —
Worse and worse, &amp; doth the husband know this?
Knows? I and glad he may too, it is his living,
As other Trades thrive, Butchers by selling Flesh,
Poulters by venting Connies, or the like cous.
What an incomparable Witall's this?
Tush, what cares he for that?
Believe me cous, no more then I doe.
What a base Slave is that?
Ell's one to him, he feeds and takes his ease,
Was ne'er the Man that ever broke his sleep,
To get a Child yet by his own confession,
And yet his Wife has seven.
What, by Sr Walter?
Sr Walter's like to keep 'em, and maintain 'em,
In excellent fashion, he dares doe no less Sir.
Life has he Children too?
Children? Boys thus high,
In their Cato and Cordelius.
What you jest Sir?
Why, one can make a Verse,
And is now at Eaton College.
O this news has cut into my Heart cous.
It had eaten nearer if it had not been prevented.
One Allwit's Wife.
Allwit? 'Foot I have heard of him,
He had a Girl Kursned lately?
I that work did cost the Knight aboue a hundred mark.
I'll mark him for a Knave and Villain for it,
A thousand thanks and blessings, I have done with him.
Ha, ha, ha, this Knight will stick by my ribs still,
I shall not loose him yet, no Wife will come,
Where ever he woos, I find him still at home, Ha, ha,
Well grant all this, say now his deeds are black,
Pray what serves marriage, but to call him back,
I have kept a Whore my self, and had a Bastard,
By Mris Anne, in Anno
I care not who knows it, he's now a jolly fellow,
He has been twice Warden, so may his fruit be,
They were but base begot, and so was he,
The Knight is rich, he shall be my son-in-law,
No matter so the Whore he keeps be wholesome,
My Daughter takes no hurt then, so let them wed,
I'll have him sweat well ever they go to Bed.
O Husband, Husband.
How now Maudlin?
We are all undone, she's gone, she's gone.
Again, Death which way?
Over the Houses:
Lay the Water-side, she's gone for ever else.
O venturous Baggage!
Thieves, Thieves, my Sister's stolen,
Some Thief hath got her:
O how miraculously did my Fathers Plate scope,
It was all left out Tutor.
First possible?
Besides three chains of Pearl &amp; a Box of Curral.
My Sister's gone, let's look at Trig-staires for her,
My Mother's gone to lay the Common-staires,
At Puddle-wharfe, and at the Dock below,
Stands my poor silly Father, Run sweet Tutor, run.
I had been taken Brother by eight Sergeants,
But for the honest Watermen, I am bound to them,
They are the most requiteful'st people living,
For as they get their means by Gentlemen,
They are still the forwardest to help Gentlemen,
You heard how one escaped out of the Blacke-Fryers,
But a while since from two or three Varlets
Came into the House with all their Rapiers drawn,
As if they'd dance the Sword-dance on the Stage,
With Candles in their Hands like Chandlers Ghosts,
Whilst the poor Gentleman so pursued and banded,
Was by an honest pair of Oars safely landed.
I love them with my Heart for it.
Your first Man Sir.
Shall I carry you Gentlemen with a pair of Oars?
These be the honest Fellows,
Take one pair, and leave the rest for her.
Barne-Elmes.
No more Brother.
Your first man.
Shall I carry your Worship?
Go, and you honest watermen that stay,
Here's a French-crowne for you,
There comes a Maid with all speed to take water,
Row her lustily to Barne-Elmes after me.
To Barne-Elmes, good Sir: make ready the boat Sam,
We will wait below.
What made you stay so long?
I found the way more dangerous then I looked for.
Away quick, there's a Boat waits for you,
And I'll take water at Pauls-wharfe, and ouer-take you.
Good Sir doe, we cannot be too safe.
Life, call you this close keeping?
She was kept under a double locke.
A double Devil.
That's a buff Sergeant Tutor, he'll ne'er were out.
How would you have Women locked?
With Padlockes Father, the Venetian uses it,
My Tutor reads it.
Heart, if she were so locked up, how got she out?
There was a little hole looked into the gutter,
But who would have dreamed of that?
A wiser Man would.
He says true Father, a wise man for love will seek every hole: my Tutor knows it.
Verum poet dicit.
Dicit Virgillius Father.
Prithee talk of thy Gills some-where else, she's played the Gill with me: whore's your wise Mother now?
Run mad I think, I thought she would have drowned her self, she would not stay for Oars, but took a Smelt-boat: sure I think she be gone a fishing for her.
She'll catch a goodly dish of Gudgeons now,
Will serve vs all to Supper.
I'll tug thee home by the Hair.
Good Mistress spare her.
Tend your own business.
You are a cruel Mother.
O my Heart dyes!
I'll make thee an example for all the Neighbours Daughters.
Farewell life.
You that have tricks can counterfeit.
Hold, hold Maudlin.
I have brought your Jewel by the Hair.
She's here Knight.
Forbear or I'll grow worse.
Look on her Tutor, she hath brought her from the Water like a Mermaid, she's but half my Sister now, as far as the Flesh goes, the rest may be sold to Fish∣wives.
Dissembling cunning baggage.
Impudent Strumpet.
Either give over both, or I'll give over:
Why have you used me thus unkind Mistress?
Wherein have I deserved?
You talk too fondly Sir, we will take another course and prevent all, we might have don't long since, we will loose no time now, nor trust to it any longer, to morrow morn as early as Sun rise we will have you joined.
O bring me Death to night, Love pitying Fates,
Let me not see to morrow up upon the World.
Are you content Sir, till then she shall be watched?
Baggage you shall.
Why Father, my Tutor and I will both watch in Armour.
How shall we doe for Weapons?
Take you no care for that, if need be I can send for conquering mettle Tutor, ne'er lost day yet, it is but at Westminster, I am acquainted with him that keeps the Monuments, I can borrow Harry the Fifth's Sword, twill serve vs both to watch with.
I never was so near my wish, as this chance
Makes me, ere to morrow noon,
I shall receive two thousand pound in Gold,
And a sweet Mayden-head
Worth forty.
O thy news splits me.
Half drowned, she cruelly tugged her by the Hair,
Forced her disgracefully, not like a Mother.
Enough, leave me like my Joys,
Sir saw you not a wretched Maid pass this way?
Heart Villain, is it thou?
Yes Slave, it is I.
I must break through thee then, there is no stop
That checks my Tongue, and all my hopeful fortunes,
That Breast excepted, and I must have way.
Sir I believe twill hold your life in play.
Sir you'll gain the Heart in my Breast at first?
There is no dealing then, think on the Dowry for two thousand pounds.
O now it is quit Sir.
And being of even hand, I'll play no longer.
No longer Slave?
I have certain things to think on,
Before I dare go further.
But one bout?
I'll follow thee to death, but have it out.
A misery of a House.
What shall become of vs?
I think his wound be mortal.
Think thou so Day?
Then am I mortal too, but a dead Man Day,
This is no world for me, when ever he goes,
I must even truss up all, and after him Day,
A Sheet with two knots, and away.
O see Sir,
How faint he goes, two of my Fellows lead him.
O me!
Hyday, my wife's laid down too, here's like to be
A good House kept, when we are altogether down,
Take pains with her good Day, cheer her up there,
Let me come to his Worship, let me come.
Touch me not Villain, my wound aches at thee,
Thou poison to my Heart.
He raves already,
His senses are quite gone, he knows me not,
Look up an't like your Worship, heave those Eyes,
Call me to mind, is your remembrance lost?
Look in my face, who am I an't like your Worship?
If any thing be worse then Slave or Villain,
Thou art the Man.
Alas his poor Worships weakness,
He will begin to know me by little and little.
No Devil can be like thee.
Ah poor Gentleman,
Me thinks the pain that thou endure.
Thou know me to be wicked for thy baseness
Kept the Eyes open still on all my sins,
None knew the dear account my soul stood charged with
So well as thou, yet like Hells flattering Angel,
Would never tell me an't, let me go on,
And join with Death in sleep, that if I had not waked
Now by chance, even by a strangers pity,
I had everlastingly slept out all hope
Of grace and mercy.
Now he is worse and worse,
Wife, to him wife, thou wast wont to doe good on him.
How first with you Sir?
Not as with you,
Thou loathsome strumpet: some good pitying Man
Remove my sins out of my sight a little,
I tremble to behold her, she keeps back
All comfort while she stays, is this a time,
Unconscionable Woman, to see thee,
Art thou so cruel to the peace of Man,
Not to give liberty now, the Devil himself
Shows a far fairer reverence and respect
To goodness then thy self, he dares not doe this,
But part in time of penitence, hides his Face,
When Man withdraws from him, he leaves the place,
Hast thou less manners, and more impudence,
Then thy instructor, prithee show thy modesty,
If the least grain be left, and get thee from me,
Thou should be rather locked many Rooms hence,
From the poor miserable sight of me▪
If either love or grace had part in thee.
He is lost for ever.
Run sweet Day quickly,
And fetch the Children hither, sight of them,
Will make him cheerful straight.
O Death! Is this
A place for you to weep? What tears are those?
Get you away with them, I shall fare the worse,
As long as they are a weeping, they work against me,
There's nothing but thy appetite in that sorrow,
Thou weep for Lust, I feel it in the slackness
Of comforts coming towards me,
I was well till thou began to undo me,
This shows like the fruitless sorrow of a careless mother
That brings her Son with dalliance to the Gallows,
And then stands by, and weeps to see him suffer.
There are the children Sir, an't like your worship,
Your last fine Girl, in troth she smiles,
Look, look, in faith Sir.
O my vengeance, let me for ever hide my cursed Face
From sight of those that darkens all my hopes,
And stands between me and the sight of Heaven,
Who sees me now, ho to and those so near me,
May rightly say, I am o're-growne with sin,
O how my offences wrestle with my repentance,
It hath scarce breath,
Still my adulterous guilt hovers aloft,
And with her black Wings beats down all my prayers.
Ere they be half way up, what's he knows now,
How long I have to live? ô what comes then,
My taste grows bitter, the round World, all Gall now,
Her pleasing pleasures now hath poisoned me,
Which I exchanged my Soul for,
Make way a hundred sighs at once for me.
Speak to him Nick.
I dare not, I am afraid.
Tell him he hurts his wounds Wat, with making moan.
Wretched, death of seven.
Come let's be talking somewhat to keep him alive
Ah sira Wat, and did my Lord bestow that Jewel on thee,
For an Epistle thou made in Latin,
Thou art a good forward Boy, there's great joy on thee.
O sorrow!
Heart will nothing comfort him?
If he be so far gone, it is time to moan,
Here's Pen, and Ink, and Paper, and all things ready,
Will it please your Worship for to make your Will?
My Will? Yes, yes, what else? Who writes apace now?
That can your man Day an't like your Worship,
A fair, fast, legible Hand.
Set it down then:
Inprimis, I bequeath to yonder Withal,
Three times his weight in Curses,
How?
All Plagues of Body and of Mind,
Write them not down Day.
It is his Will, I must.
Together also,
With such a Sickness, ten days ere his Death.
There's a sweet Legacy,
I am almost choak't with it.
Next I bequeath to that foul whore his Wife,
All barrenness of Joy, a drouth of Virtue,
And dearth of all repentance: For her end,
The common misery of an English Strumpet,
In French and Duch, beholding ere she dyes
Confusion of her Brats before her Eyes,
And never shed a tear for it.
Whore's the Knight?
O Sir, the Gentleman you wounded, is newly departed.
Dead? Lift, lift, Who helps me?
Let the Law lift you now, that must have all,
I have done lifting on you, and my Wife too.
You were best locke your self close.
Not in my House Sir,
I'll harbour no such persons as Men-slayers,
Locke your self where you will.
What's this?
Why Husband.
I know what I doe Wife.
You cannot tell yet,
For having kilt the Man in his defence,
Neither his Life, nor estate will be touched Husband.
Away Wife, hear a Fool, his Lands will hang him.
Am I denied a Chamber?
What say you forsooth?
Alas Sir, I am one that would have all well,
But must obey my Husband. Prithee Love
Let the poor Gentleman stay, being so sore wounded,
There's a close Chamber at one end of the Garret
We never use, let him have that I prithee.
We never use, you forget sickness then,
And Physic times: First not a place for easement?
O Death! doe I hear this with part
Of former life in me? What's the news now?
Troth worse &amp; worse, you're like to lose your land
If the Law save your life Sir, or the Surgeon.
Hark you there Wife.
Why how Sir?
Sr Oliuer Kixes Wife is new quickened,
That Child undoes you Sir.
All ill at once.
I wonder what he makes here with his consorts?
Cannot our House be private to our selves,
But we must have such Guests? I pray depart Sirs,
And take your Murderer along with you,
Good he were apprehended ere he go,
He has kilt some honest Gentleman, send for Officers.
I'll soon save you that labour.
I must tell you Sir,
You have been some-what boulder in my House,
Then I could well like of, I suffered you
Till it stuck here at my Heart, I tell you truly
I thought you had been familiar with my Wife once.
With me? I'll see him hanged first, I defy him,
And all such Gentlemen in the like extremity.
If ever Eyes were open, these are they,
Gamsters farewell, I have nothing left to play.
And therefore get you gone Sir.
Of all Wittalles,
Be thou the Head. Thou the grand whore of Spittles.
So, since he's like now to be rid of all,
I am right glad, I am so well rid of him.
I knew he durst not stay, when you named Officers
That stopped his Spirits straight,
What shall we doe now Wife?
As we were wont to doe.
We are richly furnished wife, with Household-stuff
Let's let out Lodgings then,
And take a House in the Strand.
In troth a match Wench:
We are simply stocked, with Cloth of Tissue Cussions,
To furnish out bay-windows: Push, what not that's quaint
And costly, from the top to the bottom:
Life, for Furniture, we may lodge a Countess:
There's a Cloase-stoole of tawny Velvet too,
Now I think on it Wife.
There's that should be Sir,
Your Nose must be in every thing.
I have done Wench,
And let this stand in every Gallants Chamber,
There's no Gamester like a politic sinner,
For who ever games, the Box is sure a winner.
O Husband, husband, she will dye, she will dye
There is no sign but death.
Twill be our shame then.
O how she's changed in compass of an hour:
Ah my poor girl! good faith thou were too cruel
To drag her by the Hair.
You would have done as much Sir,
To curb her of her humour.
It is curbed sweetly, she catched her bane of the water.
How now Tim.
Faith busy Mother about an Epitaph,
Upon my Sisters death.
Death! She is not dead I hope?
No: but she means to be, and that's as good,
And when a thing's done, it is done,
You taught me that Mother.
What is your Tutor doing?
Making one too, in principal pure Latin,
Cul'd out of Ouid de Tristibus.
How does your Sister look, is she not changed?
Changed? Gold into white Money was never so changed,
As is my Sisters colour into paleness.
O here she's brought, see how she looks like death
Looks she like Death, and ne'er a word made yet,
I must go beat my Brains against a Bed-post,
And get before my Tutor.
Speak, how dost thou?
I hope I shall be well, for I am as sick at Heart,
As I can be.
Alas my poor Girl,
The Doctor's making a most sovereign drink for thee,
The worst Ingredience, dissolved Pearl and Amber,
We spare no cost Girl.
Your love comes to late,
Yet timely thanks reward it: What is comfort,
When the poor Patients Heart is past relief?
It is no Doctors Art can cure my grief.
All is cast away then,
Prithee look upon me cheerfully.
Sing but a strain or two, thou wilt not think
How twill revive thy Spirits: strive with thy fit,
Prithee sweet Moll.
You shall have my good will Mother.
Why well said Wench.
Weep Eyes, break Heart,
My Love and I must part,
Cruel Fates, trew-loue doe soonest sever,
O, I shall see thee, never, never, never.
O happy is the Maid, whose life takes end,
Ere it knows Parents frown, or loss of friend.
Weep Eyes, break Heart,
My Love and I must part.
O, I could die with Music: well sung Girl.
If you call it so, It was.
She plays the Swan, and sings her self to death.
By your leave Sir.
What are you Sir? Or what's your business pray?
I may be now admitted, tho the Brother
Of him your hate pursued, it spreads no further,
Your malice sets in death, does it not Sir?
In Death?
He's dead: it was a dear Love to him,
It cost him but his life, that was all Sir:
He paid enough, poor Gentleman, for his Love.
There's all our ill removed, if she were well now:
Impute not Sir, his end to any hate
That sprung from vs, he had a fair wound brought that.
That helped him forward, I must needs confess:
But the restraint of Love, and your unkindness,
Those were the wounds, that from his Heart drew Blood,
But being past help, let words forget it too:
Scarcely three Minutes, ere his Eye-lids closed,
And took eternal leave of this Worlds light,
He wrote this Letter, which by Oath he bound me,
To give to her own Hands, that's all my business.
You may perform it then, there she sits.
O with a following look.
I trust me Sir, I think she'll follow him quickly.
Here's some Gold,
He wild me to distribute faithfully amongst your Servants.
Alas what doth he mean Sir?
How cheer you Mistress?
I must learn of you Sir.
Here's a Letter from a Friend of yours,
And where that fails, in satisfaction
I have a sad Tongue ready to supply.
How does he, ere I look on it?
Seldom better, he has a contented health now.
I am most glad on it.
Dead Sir?
He is: Now Wife let's but get the Girl
Upon her Legs again, and to Church roundly with her.
O sick to Death he tells me:
How does he after this?
Faith feels no pain at all, he's dead sweet Mistress.
Peace close mine Eyes.
The Girl, look to the Girl Wife.
Moll, Daughter, sweet Girl speak,
Look but once up, thou shalt have all the wishes of thy hart
That wealth can purchase.
O she's gone for ever, that Letter broke her hart.
As good now then, as let here lye in torment,
And then break it.
O Susan, she thou loved so dear, is gone.
O sweet Maid!
This is she that helped her still,
I'ue a reward here for thee
Take her in,
Remove her from our sight, our shame, and sorrow.
Stay, let me help thee, it is the last cold kindness
I can perform for my sweet Brothers sake.
All the whole Street will hate vs, and the World
Point me out cruel: It is our best course Wife,
After we have given order for the Funeral,
To absent our selves, till she be laid in ground.
Where shall we spend that time?
I'll tell thee where Wench, go to some private Church,
And marry Tim to the rich Brecknocke Gentlewoman.
Mass a match,
We will not loose all at once, some-what we will catch.
Ho my Wives quickened, I am a Man for ever,
I think I have bestur'd my stumps I faith:
Run, get your Fellows altogether instantly,
Then to the Parish-Church, and ring the Belles.
It shall be done Sir.
Upon my love I charge you Villain, that you make a Bon-fier before the Door at night.
A Bon-fier Sir?
A thwacking one I charge you.
This is monstrous.
Run, tell a hundred pound out for the Gentleman
That gave my Wife the Drink, the first thing you doe.
A hundred pounds Sir?
A bargain, as our joys grows,
We must remember still from whence it flows,
Or else we prove ungrateful multipliers:
The Child is coming, and the Land comes after,
The news of this will make a poor Sr Walter.
I have struck it home I faith.
That you have marry Sir.
But will not your Worship go to the Funeral
Of both these Lovers?
Both, go both together?
I Sir, the Gentleman's Brother will have it so,
Twill be the pitifullest sight, there's such running,
Such rumours, and such throngs, a pair of Lovers
Had never more spectators, more Men's pities,
Or Women's wet Eyes.
My Wife helps the number then?
There's such drawing out of Handkerchers,
And those that have no Handkerchers, lift up Aprons.
Her Parents may have joyful Hearts at this,
I would not have my cruelty so talked on,
To any Child of mine, for a Monopoly.
I believe you Sir.
It is cast so too, that both their Coffins meet,
Which will be lamentable.
Come, we will see it.
Never could Death boast of a richer prize
From the first Parent, let the World bring forth
A pair of truer Hearts, to speak but truth
Of this departed Gentleman, in a Brother,
Might by hard censure, be called flattery,
Which makes me rather, silent in his right,
Then so to be delivered to the thoughts,
Of any envious hearer, starved in virtue,
And therefore pining to hear others thrive.
But for this Maid, whom Envy cannot hurt
With all her Poisons, having left to Ages,
The true, chaste Monument of her living name,
Which no time can deface, I say of her
The full truth freely, without fear of censure
What Nature could there shine, that might redeem
Perfection home to Woman, but in her
Was fully glorious, beauty set in goodness
Speaks what she was, that Jewel so infixt,
There was no want of any thing of life,
To make these virtuous presidents, Man and Wife.
Great pity of their deaths.
Ne'er more pity.
It makes a hundred weeping Eyes, sweet Gossip.
I cannot think, there's any one amongst you,
In this full fair assembly, Maid, Man, or Wife,
Whose Heart would not have sprung with joy &amp; gladness
To have seen their marriage day?
It would have made a thousand joyful Hearts.
Up then a pace, and take your fortunes,
Make these joyful Hearts, here's none but Friends.
Alive Sir? ô sweet dear Couple.
Nay, do not hinder 'em now, stand from about 'em,
If she be caught again, and have this time,
I'll ne'er plot further for 'em, nor this honest chambermaid
That helped all at a push.
Good Sir a pace.
Hands join now, but Hearts for ever,
Which no Parents mood shall sever.
You shall forsake all Widows, Wives, and Maids:
You, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Men of Trades:
And if in hast, any Article misses,
Go inter-line it with a brace of kisses.
Here's a thing trould nimbly. Give you joy brother
Were it not better thou should have her,
Then the Maid should dye?
To you sweet Mistress Bride.
Joy, joy to you both.
Here be your Wedding Sheets you brought along with you, you may both go to Bed when you please too.
My joy wants utterance.
Utter all at night then Brother.
I am silent with delight.
Sister, delight will silence any Woman,
But you'll find your Tongue again, among Maid Servants,
Now you keep House, Sister.
Never was hour, so filled with joy and wonder.
To tell you the full story of this Chamber-Mayd,
And of her kindness in this business to vs,
It would ask an hours discourse: In brief it was she,
That wrought it to this purpose cunningly.
We shall all love her for it.
See who comes here now.
A storm, a storm, but we are sheltered for it.
I will prevent you all, and mock you thus,
You, and your expectations, I stand happy,
Both in your lives, and your Hearts combination.
Here's a strange day again.
The Knights proved Villain,
Al's come out now, his Niece an arrant Baggage,
My poor Boy Tim, is cast away this morning,
Even before Breakfast: Married a Whore
Next to his Heart.
A Whore?
His Niece forsooth.
I think we rid our Hands in good time of him.
I knew he was past the best, when I gave him over.
What is become of him pray Sir?
Who the Knight? he lies in the Knights ward now.
Your Belly Lady begins to blossom, ther's no peace for him
His Creditors are so greedy.
Mr Tuchwood, hear thou this news?
I am so endeared to thee for my Wives fruitfulness,
That I charge you both, your Wife and thee,
To live no more asunder for the Worlds frowns,
I have Purse, and Bed, and Board for you:
Be not afraid to go to your business roundly,
Get Children, and I'll keep them.
Say you so Sir?
Prove me, with three at a birth, &amp; thou dare now.
Take heed how you dare a Man, while you live Sir
That has good skill at his Weapon.
'Foot, I dare you Sir.
Look Gentlemen, if ever you say the picture
Of the unfortunate Marriage, yonder it is.
Nay good sweet Tim.
Come from the University,
To marry a Whore in London, with my Tutor too?
O Tempora! O Morse!
Prithee Tim be patient.
I bought a Jade at Cambridge,
In let her out to execution Tutor,
For eighteen pence a day, or Brainford Horse-races,
She'll serve to carry seven Miles out of Town well.
Where be these Mountains? I was promised Mountains,
But there's such a Mist, I can see none of 'em.
What are become of those two thousand Runts?
Let's have about with them in the mean time.
A Vengeance Runt thee.
Good sweet Tim have patience.
Flectere si neguro Superos Acherouta mourbo, mother
I think you have married her in Logic Tim.
You told me once, by Logic you would prove
A Whore, an honest Woman, prove her so Tim
And take her for thy labour.
Troth I thank you.
I grant you I may prove another Mans Wife so,
But not mine own.
There's no remedy now Tim,
You must prove her so as well as you may.
Why then my Tutor and I will about her,
As well as we can.
Ʋxor non est Meritrix, ergo falacis.
Sir if your Logic cannot prove me honest,
There's a thing called Marriage, and that makes me honest.
O there's a trick beyond your Logic Tim.
I perceive then a Woman may be honest according to the English Print, when she is a Whore in the Latin.
So much for Marriage and Logic. I'll love her for her Wit, I'll pick out my Runts there: And for my Moun∣taines, I'll mount upon —
So Fortune seldom deals two Marriages
With one Hand, and both lucky: The best is,
One Feast will serve them both: Marry for room,
I'll have the Dinner kept in Gold-Smithes-Hall,
To which kind Gallants, I inuit you all.

SEarch all Chronicles, Histories,
Records, in what language or let∣la
soever; let the inquisitive man
waste the dear Treasures of his
Time and Eye-sight, he shall con∣clude
his life only in this certain∣tie,
that there is no subject upon
earth received into the place of
his government with the like State &amp; Magnificence
as is the Lord Mayor of the City of London. This be∣ing
then infallible (like the Mistress of our Triumphs)
and not to be denied of any, how careful ought those
Gentlemen to be, to whose discretion and Judgment
the weight and charge of such a business is entirely
referred and committed by the whole Society, to have
all things correspondent to that Generous and Noble
freeness of cost and liberality, the streams of Art, to
aequall those of Bounty; a Knowledge that may take
the true height of such an Honourable Solemnity; the
miserable want of both which in the impudent com∣mon
Writer, hath often forced from me much pity and
sorrow; and it would heartily grieve any vnderstan∣ding
spirit to behold many times so glorious a fire in
bounty and goodness offering to match in self with
freezing Art, sitting in darkness, with the candle out,
looking like the picture of Black Monday.
But to speak truth, which many beside my self can
affirm upon knowledge, a care that hath been sell∣dome
equalled, and not easily imitated, hath been faith∣fully
shown in the whole course of this business,
both by the Wardens and Committees, men of much
understanding, industry, and carefulness, little weigh∣ing
the greatness of expense, so the cost might pur∣chase
perfection, so fervent hath been their desire to
excel in that (which is a learned and virtuous Am∣bition)
and so unfeignedly pure the loves and affecti∣once
of the whole Company to his Lordship; If any
shall imagine that I set fairer colours upon their De∣serts,
then they upon themselves, let them but read
and conceive, and their own understandings will
light them to the acknowledgement of their errors.
First, they may here behold love and bounty opening
with the morning, earlier then some of former years,
ready at the first appearing of his Lordship, to give
his ear a taste of the days succeeding glory, and thus
the form of it presents it self.
At Soper-lane end a Senate-house erected, upon which
Musicians sit playing; and more a quicken time, a
sweet voice married to these words:
Mother of many honourable Sounes,
Think not the Glass too slowly runs
That in Times hand is set,
Because thy worthy Son appears not yet:
Lady be pleased, the hour grows on,
Thy joy will be complete anon;
Thou shalt behold
The man enroled
In Honours books, whom Virtue raises,
Loue-circled round,
His triumphs crowned
With all good wishes, prayers, and praises.
After this sweet air hath liberally spent it self, at
the first appearing of the Lord Mayor from Guild-hall
in the morning, a Trumpet placed upon that Scaffold,
sounds forth his welcome; then after a strain or two
of Music, a Grave Foeminine Shape presents it self,
from behind a silk curtain, representing London, at∣tired
like a reverend Mother, a long white hair na∣turally
flowing on either side of her: on her head a
model of Steeples and Turrets, her habit Crimson
silk, near to the Honourable garment of the City:
her left hand holding a Key of gold, who after a come∣lie
grace, equally mixed with Comfort and Reverence,
sends from her lips this Motherly salutation.
Honour and Joy salute thee, I am raised
In comfort and in love to see thee, glad
And happy in thy blessings, nor esteem
My words the less, cause I a woman speak,
A women's counsel is not always weak.
I am thy Mother, at that name I know
Thy heart do's reverence to me, as becomes
A Son of Honour, in whose soul burns clear
The sacred lights of divine fear and knowledge,
I know, that at this instant, all the works
Of Motherly love in me, shown to thy Youth
When it was soft and helpless, are summed up
In thy most grateful mind, thou well remember
All my dear pains and care, with what affection
I cherish thee in my bosom, watchful still
Over thy ways,
Set wholesome and Religious Laws before
The foot-steps of thy youth, showed Thee the way
That lead thee to the Glory of this Day.
To which (with tears of the most fruitful joy
that cuer Mother shed) I welcome Thee.
Oh I could be content to take my part
Out of Felicity only in weeping,
Thy Presence and this Day is so dear to me.
Look on my age (my Honourable Son)
And then begin to think upon thy Office:
See how on each side of me hang the cares
Which I bestowed on Thee, in silver hairs.
And now the Faith, the Love, the zealous Fires
With which I cheered thy Youth, my Age requires,
The duty of a Mother I have shown,
Through all the Rites of pure affection,
In Care, in Government, in Wealth, in Honour,
Brought Thee to what thou art, thow'st all from me,
Then what thou should be I expect from Thee.
Now to Thy Charge, Thy Government, Thy Cares,
Thy Mother in her age submits her years.
And though (to my abundant grief I speak it,
Which now ore-flowes my joy) some Sons I have
Thankless, unkind, and disobedient,
Rewarding all my Bounties with Neglect,
And will of purpose wilfully retire
Themselves, from doing grace and service to me,
When they have got all they can, or hope for, from me,
The thankfulness in which Thy Life doth move,
Did ever promise fairer fruits of Love,
And now they show themselves, yet they have all
My blessing with them, so the world shall see
It is their unkindness, no defect in me;
But go Thou forward (my thrice Honoured Son)
In ways of goodness, Glory is best won
When Merit brings it home, disdain all Titles
Purchased with Coin, of Honour take Thou hold,
By thy Desert let others buy't with Gold;
Fix thy most serious Thought upon the Weight
Thou goosed to undergo, it is the just Government
Of this Famed City, (Me) whom Nations call
Their brightest Eye, then with great care &amp; fear
Ought I to be ore-seene to be kept clear.
Spots in deformed Faces are scarce Noted,
Fair cheeks are stained if ner'e so little blotted.
See thou this Key of Gold? it shows thy charge,
This place is the Kings Chamber, all pollution,
Sin and Uncleanness must be locked out here,
And be kept sweet, with Sanctity, Faith &amp; Fear,
I see Grace take effect, Heavens Joy upon her,
It is rare, when Virtue ops the Gate to Honour,
My blessing be upon thee, Son, and Lord,
And on my Sons all, that obey my word.
Then making her Honour, as before, the Waits of
the City there in service, his Lordship and the Worcester∣thy
Company, are lead forward toward the water side,
where you shall find the River decked in the richest
glory to receive him; upon whose Crystal Bosom
stands five Islands art-fully garnished with all manner
of Indian Fruite-Trees, Drugs, Spiceries; and the
like, the middle Island with a fair Castle especially
beautified.
But making haste to return to the City again,
where Triumph waits in more Splendour and Magni∣ficence,
the first then that attends to receive his Lord∣ship
off the water at Bainards Castle, is Truths Angel
on Horse-backe, his Raiment of white Silk powdered
with Stars of Gold: on his head a Crown of Gold,
a Trumpeter before him on Horse-backe, and Zeal
the Champion of Truth, in a Garment of Flame∣coloured
Silk, with a bright hair on his head, from
which shoot Fire-beames, following close after him,
mounted alike, his Right hand holding a flaming
Scourge, intimating thereby that as hee is the mani∣fester
of Truth, he is likewise the chastizer of Ignorance
and Error.
I have within mine Eye my blessed Charge,
Hail Friend of Truth, Safety and Iay attnds thee;
I am Truths Angel, by my Mistress sent
To guard and guide thee, when thou took thy Oath
I stood on thy Right hand, though to thy eye
In visible form I did not then appear,
Ask but thy Soul t'will tell thee I stood near;
And it was a Time to take care of Thee then
At such a Marriage before Heaven and Men,
(Thy Faith being wed to Honour) close behind thee
Stood Errors Minister, that still sought to blind thee,
And wrap his subtle mists about thy Oath,
To hide it from the nakedness of Troth,
Which is Truths purest glory, but my light
Still as it shone, Expelled her blackest spite;
His Mists fled by, yet all I could devise,
Could hardly keep them from some Peoples eyes,
But thine they flew from, thy Care's but begun
Wake on, the Victory is not half yet wun,
Thou wilt be still assaulted, thou shalt meet
With many dangers, that in voice seem sweet,
And ways most pleasant to a worldlings eye,
My Mistress he's but One, but that leads hye
To yo'n triumphant City follow me,
Keep thou to Truth, Eternity keeps to thee.
On boldly Man of Honour, thou shalt win,
I am Truths Champion, Zeal, the Scourge of Sin.
The Trumpet then sounding, the Angel and Zeal
rank themselves just before his Lordship, &amp; conduct
him to Pauls-chaine, where in the South-yard Error
in a Chariot with his infernal Ministers attends to as∣salt
him, his Garment of Ash-colour Silk, his head
rolled in a cloud, over which stands, an Owl, a Moil
on one shoulder, a Bat on the other, all Symboles of
blind Ignorance and Darkness, Mists hanging at his
Eyes: close before him rides Envy his Champion, ea∣ting
of a humane heart, mounted on a Rhinoceros, at∣tired
in Red Silk, suitable to the bloudinesse of her
manners her left Pap bare, where a Snake fastens, her
Arms half Naked, holding in her right hand a Dart
tincted in blood.
Art come? O Welcome my triumphant Lord,
My Glories Sweet-heart! how many millions
Of happy wishes hath my love told out
For this desired minute, I was dead
Till I enjoyed the Presence, I saw nothing,
A Blindness thicker then Idolatry,
Clove to my Eye-bals, now I am all of Light,
Of Fire, of Joy, Pleasure runs nimbly through me,
Lets join together both in State and Triumph,
And down with beggarly and friendless Virtue,
That hath so long impouerish't this fair City,
My Beasts shall trample on her naked breast,
Under my Chariot-wheeles her Bones lye pressed,
She ner'e shall rise again, great Power this day,
Is given into thy hand, make use on it Lord,
And let thy Will and Appetite sway the Sword,
Down with them all now, whom thy heart envies,
Let not thy Conscience come into thine Eyes
This twelue-month, if thou love revenge or gain,
Isle teach thee to cast mists, to blind the plain
And simple eye of Man, he shall not know it,
Nor see thy Wrath when it is upon his throat,
All shall be carried with such Art and Wit,
That what thy Lust Acts, shall bee counted fit,
Then for Attendants that may best observe thee,
Il'e pick out Seriants of my band to serve thee,
Here is Gluttony and Sloth, two precious Slaves,
Will tell thee more then a whole heard of Knaves,
The worth of every Office to a Hair,
And who bids most, and bow the Markets are,
Let them alone to smell, and for a need,
They'll bring thee in Bribes for Measure and light Bread,
Keep thy eye winking, and thy hand wide op,
Then thou shalt know what Wealth is, and the scope
Of rich Authority, Ho tic sweet and dear,
Make use of Time then, thou'st but one poor Year,
And that will quickly slide, then be not nice,
Both Power and Profit cleaves to my Advice,
And what's he lockes his Ear from those sweet Charms,
Or runs not to meet Gain with wide-stretch't Arms,
There is a poor thin thred-bare thing, called Truth,
I give thee warning of her, if she speak
Stop both thine ears close, most Professions break
That ever dealt with her, an Unlucky thing,
Shoe's almost sworn to nothing, I can bring
A thousand of our Parish, besides Queens,
That ne'er knew what Truth meant, nor ever means.
Some I could cull out here, even in this Throng,
If I would show my Children, and how strong
I were in faction; 'ldsse poor simple Stray,
Shoe's all her life time finding out one way:
Shee' as but one foolish way, straight on, right forward,
And yet she makes a toil on it, and goes on
With Care and Fear forsooth, when I can run
Over a hundred with delight and pleasure,
Backe-waies, and by-waies, and fetch in my Treasure
After the wishes of my heart, by shifts,
Deceits, and slights, and Isle give thee those gifts;
Isle show thee all my corners yet untold,
The very nookes where Beldams hide their gold,
In hollow walls and chimneys, where the Sun
Never yet shone, nor Truth came ever near,
This of thy Life Isle make the golden year: Follow me then.
Envy. Learn now to scorn thy Inferiors, those must love thee,
And wish to eat their Hearts, that sit aboue thee.
Zeal stirred up with Divine Indignation, at the Im∣pudence
of these Hel-hounds, both forces their retire∣meant,
and makes way for the Chariot wherein Truth
his Mistress sits, in a close garment of white Satin,
which makes her appear thin and naked, figuring
thereby her simplicity and nearness of heart to
those that embrace her; a robe of white silk cast
over it, filed with the eyes of Eagles, showing her deep
insight, and height of wisdom, over her thrice san∣ctified
head a milke-white Dove, and on each should∣der
one, the sacred Emblems of Purity, Meekness,
and Innocence, under her Feet, Serpents, in that she
treads down all Subtlety and Fraud, her Fore-head
impaled with a Diadem of Stars, the Witness of her
Eternal descent; on her Breast a pure round Crystal,
showing the brightness of her thoughts and actions;
a Sun in her Right-hand, then which, nothing is truer,
a fan filled all with Stars in her left, with which she
parts Darkness, and strikes away the vapours of Eg∣norance;
if you hearken to Zeal her Champion after
his holy anger is past against Error, and his crew, hee
will give it you in better terms, or at least more
smoothly and pleasingly.
Bold Furies, back, or with this scourge of Fire
Whence sparkles out Religious chast-desire
Isle whip you down to darkness; this a place
Worthy my Mistress, her Aeternall Grace
Be the full object to feast all these eyes
But Thine the first, hee that feeds here is wise;
Nor by the naked plainness of her weeds
Judge thou her worth, no burnished gloss Truth needs;
That Crown of Stars shows her descent from heaven;
That Robe of white filled all with Eagles eyes,
Her piercing sight through hidden mysteries;
Those milke-white Doves her spotless Innocence;
Those Serpents at her feet her victory shows
Over deceit and guile, her rankest foes,
And by that Crystal Mirror at her Breast,
The clearness of her Conscience is expressed;
And showing that her deeds all darkness shun,
Her Right-hand holds Truths Symbol, the bright Sun;
A Fan of Stars she in the other twists,
With which she chaceth away Errors mists:
And now she makes to thee, her so even Grace,
For to her Rich and Poor look with one Face.
Man raised by Faith and Love, upon whose Head
Honour sits fresh, let not thy Heart be led
In ignorant ways of insolence and pride
From Her, that to this day hath been thy guide;
I never showed thee yet more Paths then one,
And thou hast found sufficient That alone
To bring Thee hither, then go forward still,
And having most power, first subject thy Will,
Give the first Fruits of Justice to thy Self,
Then dost thou wisely Govern, though that Elf
Of Sin and Darkness still opposing me,
Counsels thy Appetite to Master Thee.
But call to mind what brought thee to this Day,
Was Falsehood, Cruelty, or Revenge the way?
Thy lust or pleasures? peoples curse or hate?
These were no ways could raise Thee to this State
The ignorant must acknowledge, if then from Me,
Which no Ill dare deny, or Sin control,
Forsake me not, that can advance thy soul:
I see a blessed yielding in thy Eye,
You're mine, lead on, thy Name shall never dye.
These words ended, they all set forward, this Chariot
of Truth and her celestial hand-maids the Graces &amp;
Virtues, taking place next before his Lord ship, Zeal
and the Angel before that, the Chariot of Error foal∣lowing
as near as it can get, all passing on, till they
come into Pals Church-yard, where stand ready the
five Lands, those dumb Glories that I spake of be∣fore
upon the water, upon the height of these five
Lands sit five persons representing the five Senses,
Visus, Auditus, Tactus, Gustus, Olfactus, (or) Seeing,
Hearing, Touching, Tasting, Smelling; at their feet
their proper Emblems, Aquila, Ceruus, Araneus,
Simia, Canis, an Eagle, a Hart, a Spider, an Ape, a
Dog.
No sooner can your eyes take leave of these, but
they may suddenly espy a strange Ship making to∣ward,
and that which may raise greater astonishment,
it having neither Sailor nor Pilot, only upon a
white silk streamer these two words set in letters of
Gold, Veritate Gubernor, I am Steered by Truth; the
Persons that are contained within this little Vessel
are only four; a King of the Moors, his Queen,
and two Attendants of their own colour, the rest of
their followers, people the Castle that stands in the
middle Island, of which company two or three on the
top appears to sight, this King seeming much asto∣need
at the many eyes of such a multitude, utters his
thoughts in these words.
I see amazement set upon the faces
Of these white people, wondrings, and strange gazes,
Is it at me? do's my Complexion draw
So many Christian Eyes, that never saw
A King so black before? no, now I see
Their entire object, the're all meant to thee
(Grave City Governor) my Queen and I
Well honoured with the Glanees that by,
I must confess many wilde thoughts may rise,
Opinions, Common murmurs, and fixed Eyes
At my so strange arrival, in a Land
Where true Religion and her Temple stand:
I being a Moor, eden in Opinions lightness
As far from Sanctity as my Face from whiteness;
But I forgive the Iudgings of th'Vnwise,
Whose Censures ever quicken in their Eyes,
Only begot of outward form and show,
And I think meet to let such Censurers Know,
How ever Darkness dwells upon my Face,
Truth in my soul sets up the Light of Grace;
And though in days of Error I did run
To give all Adoration to the Sun,
The Moon &amp; Stars; nay Creatures base and poor,
Now only their Creator I adore:
My Queen and People all, at one time wun,
By the Religious Conversation
Of English Merchants, Factors, Travellers,
Whose Truth did with our Spirits hold Commerce
As their affairs with vs, following their path
Wee all were brought to the true Christian Faith:
Such benefit in good Example dwells,
It oft hath power to convert Infidels;
Nor could our Desires rest, till wee were led
Unto this place, where those good Spirits were bred;
And see how we arrived, in Blessed Time,
To do that Mihresse Service, in the Prime
Of these her Spotless Triumphs, and t'attend
That Honourable Man, her Late sworn Friend.
If any wonder at the safe Arrive
Of this small Vessel, which all Wethers drive
According to their Rages, where appears
Nor Mariner nor Pilot (arm'd' against fears)
Know this came hither from mans guidance free,
Only by Truth Steered; as our Souls must bee;
And see where one of her fair Temples stands,
Do Reverence, Moors, bow low, and Kiss your hands,
Behold our Queen.
Her Goodnesses are such
Wee cannot Honour Her, and Her House too much.
All in the Ship and those in the Castle bowing
their bodies to the Temple of Saint Paul, but Error
smiling betwixt Scorn and Anger to see such a de∣vote
humility take hold of that complexion, breaks
into these,
What, have my Sweete-fac'st Devils forsook me too,
Nay, then my charms will have enough to doo?
But Time, sitting by the Frame of Truth his
Daughters Chariot, attired agree-able to his Conditi∣on,
with his Hower-glasse, Wings, and Sith, Know∣ing
best himself when it is fittest to speak, goes for∣ward
in this manner:
This Time hath brought t'effect, for on thy Day
Nothing but Truth and Virtue shall display:
Their Virgin Ensigns, Infidelity,
Barbarism and Guile shall in deep Darkness lye.
O I could ever stand still thus, and gaze,
Never turn Glass again; wish no more days
So this might ever last, pity the Light
Of this rich Glory must be casde in Night;
But Time must on, I go, it is so decreed,
To bless my Daughter Truth, and all her seed
With Joys Immortal, Triumphs never ending:
And as her Hand lifts me, to thy Ascending
May it be always ready (worthy Son)
To hasten which, my Hours shall quickly run,
See thou you place, thither Isle weekly bring thee,
Where Truths celestial Harmony Thou shalt hear,
To which I charge Thee bend a serious Ear:
Lead on, Times swift Attendants.
Then the five Lands pass along into Cheapside,
the Ship next after them; the Chariot of Truth still
before his Lord-ship, and that of Prror still chac'st be∣fore
it, where their Eyes meet with another more sub∣tile
Object, planting it self close by the little Con∣duet,
which may bear this Character, the True
Form and Fashion of a Mount Triumphant, but the
Beauty and Glory thereof ouer-spred with a thick
Sulphurous Darkness, it being a Fog or Mist raised
from Error, enviously to blemish that Place which
bears the Title of Londons Triumphant Mount (the
chief Grace and Luster of the whole Triumph) at
the four corners sit four Monsters Errors Disciples,
on whom hangs part of the Mist for their clothing,
holding in their hands little thick Clubs, colou∣red
like their Garments; the Names of these four
Monsters, Barbarism, Ignorance, Impudence, Falsehood,
who at the near approaching of Truths Chariot, are
seen a little to tremble, whilst her Deity gives life to
these words.
VVhat's here? the Mist of Error? dare his Spite
Stain this Triumphant Mount? where our delight
Hath been Divinely fixed so many Ages,
Dare darkness now breathe forth her Insolent Rages,
And hang in poysnous Vapours o'er the Place
From whence wee received Love and returned Grace?
I see if Truth a while but turn her Eyes,
Thick are the Mists that o'er fair Cities rise:
Wee did expect to receive welcome here,
From no deformed Shapes but Divine and Clear,
In steed of Monsters that this place attends;
To meet with Goodness and her Glorious Friends,
Nor can they so forget me to bee far,
I Know there stands no other envious Bar:
But that foul Cloud to Darken this Bright Day,
Which with this Fan of Stars Isle Chase away.
Vanish Infectious Fog that I may see
This Cities Grace, that takes her Light from Me.
At this her powerful command, the Vanish, give
Way, Cloud suddenly rises, and changes into a
bright spredding Canopy, stuck thick with Stars,
and beams of Gold, shooting forth round about it,
the Mount appearing then most rich in Beauty and
Glory, the four Monsters falling flat at the Foot of
the Hill; that grave Foeminine Shape, figuring London,
sitting in greatest Honour; next aboue her in the most
eminent place, sits Religion, the Model of a fair Tem∣ple
on her Head, and a burning Lamp in her Hand,
the proper Emblems of her Sanctity, Watchfulness,
and Zeal; on her right Hand sits Liberality, her head
circled with a Wreath of Gold, in her hand a Cornu∣copy,
or Horn of Abundance, out of which rushes a
seeming Flood of Gold, but no way flowing to Prodi∣gality;
for as the Sea is governed by the Moon, so is
that wealthy River by her Eye, (for Bounty must bee
led by Judgment) and hence is Art-fully derived
the only difference between Prodigality and Boun∣tie,
the one deals her Gifts with open eyes, the
other blind-fold; on her left side sits Perfect Love,
his proper Seat being nearest the Heart, wearing up∣on
his Head a wreath of white and red Roses mingled
together, the Ancient Witness of Peace, Love and V∣neon,
wherein consists the Happiness of this Land, his
Right hand holding a Sphere, where in a Circle of
Gold, is contained all the 12 Companies Arms; and
therefore called the Spear of true Brother-hood, or An∣nulus
Amoris, the Ring of Love: upon his left hand
stand two Billing Turtles, expressing thereby the hap∣pie
Condition of mutual Love and Society: on either
side of this Mount are displayed the Charitable and Re∣ligious
works of London (especially the worthy Com∣pany
of Grocers) in giving maintenance to Scholars,
Soldiers, Widows, Orphans, and the like, where
are placed one of each number: &amp; on the two Heights
sit Knowledge &amp; Modesty; Knowledge wearing a Crown
of Stars, in her Hand a Perspective Glass, betoke∣ning
both her High Judgment, and Deep In-sight,
the Brow of Modesty circled with a Wreath all of red
Roses, expressing her Bashfulness and Blushings, in
her hand a Crimson Boner, filled with Silver Stars, figu∣ring
the white Purity of her Shamfastnesse, her cheeks
not red with Shame or Guilt, but with Virgin-Feare,
and Honour. At the Back of this Triumphant Mount,
Chastity, Fame, Simplicity, Meekness, have their Seats,
Chastity wearing on her Head a Garland of white To∣ses,
in her Hand a white Silk Banner, filled with Stars
of Gold, expressing the aeternity of her vn-spotted
Pureness: Fame next under her, on her a Head a
Crown of Silver, and a Silver Trumpet in her hand,
showing both her Brightness and Shrillness: Simpli∣city
with a Milke-white Dove upon her Head, and
Meekness with a Garland of mingled Flowers, in her
hand a white Silk Banner with a red Cross, a Lamb
at her Feet, by which both their Conditions are suffi∣ciently
expressed; The Mount thus made glorious by
the Power of Truth, and the Mist expelled, London thus
speaks.
Thick Scales of Darkness in a Moments space
Are fell from both mine Eyes, I see the Face
Of all my Friends about me (now) most clearly,
Religions Sisters, whom I Honour dearly;
Oh I behold the work, it comes from Thee
Illustrious Patronise, thou that made me see
In Days of blindest Ignorance, when this Light
Was ee'n extinguished, Thou Redeem my sight;
Then to Thy Charge (with Reverence) I commend
That worthy Son of mine, thy virtuous Friend,
Whom on my Love and Blessing I require,
To observe Thee Faithfully, and his Desire
To imitate Thy will, and there lye bounded,
For Power's a Dangerous Sea, which must be sounded
With Truth and Justice, or Man soon runs on
Against Rocks and Shelves to Dissolution;
Then that thou moist the Difference ever know,
Twixt Truth and Error, a few words shall show;
The many Ways that to blind Error slide
Are in the entrance broad, Hell-mouth is wide,
But when Man enters far, he finds it then
Close, Dark and Straight, for Hell returns no Men;
But the One sacred Way which Truth directs,
Only at Entrance Mans Affection Checks,
And is there strict alone, to which place throngs
All Worlds Afflictions, Calumnies and wrongs.
But having past those, then thou find a way
In breadth, whole Heaven, in length, aeternall Day,
Then following Truth, she brings Thee to that way;
But first observe what works she here requires,
Religion, Knowledge, Sanctity, Chaste Desires,
Then Charity, which Bounty must express,
To Scholars, Soldiers, Widows, Fatherless;
These have been still my Works, they must be thine,
Honour and Action must together shine,
Or the best part's Eclipsed, behold but this,
Thy very Crest shows Bounty, here it is put,
Thou giu'st the open Hand, keep it not shut;
But to the Needy, or Deserving Spirit,
Let it spread wide, and Heaven enrowles that Merit;
Do these, and prove my Hopeful Worthy Son,
Yet nothing's spoke, but needfully must bee done.
And so lead forward.
At which Words the whole Triumph moves in his
richest glory toward the Cross in Cheap, at which
place Error full of Wrath and Malice to see his Mist
so chased away, falls into this Fury.
Heart of all the Fiends in Hell!
Could her Beggarly Power expel
Such a Thick and Poisonous Mist
Which• set Envies Snakes to twist;
Up Monsters, was her Feeble Frown
Of Force to strike my Officers down?
Barbarism, Impudence, Lies, Ignorance,
All your Hell-bred Heads advance,
And once again with Rotten Darkness shroud
This Mount Triumphant, drop down sulphurous Cloud.
At which the Mist falls again, and hangs over all
the Beauty of the Mount, not a Person of Glory seen,
only the four Monsters gather courage again, and
take their Seats, advancing their Clubs aboue their
Heads, which no sooner perceived, but Truth in her
Chariot making near to the place, willing still to res∣cue
her Friends and Servants, from the Powers of Eg∣norance
and Darkness, makes use of these Words,
Dare yet the works of Ugliness appear
Against this Days Brightness, and see Vs so near?
How bold is Sin and Hell, that yet it dare
Rise against Vs? but know (Partitions Heir)
It is Idle to contend against our Power,
Vanish again Foul Mist from Honours Bower.
Then the Cloud dispersing it self again, and all the
Mount appearing Glorious, it passes so on to the
Standard, about which place, by Elaborate action from
Error it falls again, and goes so darkened, till it comes
to S. Laurence lane end, where by the former words by
Truth uttered, being again chased away, London thus
gratefully requites her Goodness.
Aeternities bright Sister, by whose Light,
Errors infectious Works still fly my Sight.
Receive thy Servants Thanks; Now perfect Love
Whose Right hand holds a Sphere, wherein doe move
Twelve blessed Societies, whose beloved increase,
Stiles it the Ring of Brother-hood, Faith and Peace,
From thy Harmonious Lips let them all taste,
The Golden Counsel that makes Health long last.
Perfect Love then standing up, holding in his right
hand a Sphere, on the other, two Billing Turtles,
gives these words.
First then I banish from this Feast of Joy,
All Excess, Epicurisme, both which destroy
The Healths of Soul and Body, no such Guest
Ought to be welcome to this Reverend Feast
Where Truth is Mistress, who's admitted here,
Must come for Virtues love more then for Cheer,
These two white Turtles may example give
How Perfect Joy and Brother-hood should live,
And they from whom Grave Order is expected,
Of rude Excess must never bee detected;
This is the Council which that Lady calls
Golden Advice, for by it no man falls
Hee that desires Days healthful, sound and blessed,
Let moderate Judgment serve him at his Feast,
And so lead on, may Perfect Brother-hood shine,
Still in Sphere, and Honour still in thine.
This Speech so ended, his Lordship and the Com∣panies
pass on to Guild-hall; and at their Returning
back, these Triumphs attend to bring his Lordship
toward Saint Pals Church, there to perform those
yearly Ceremonial Rites, which Ancient and Grave
Order hath determined, Error by the way still busy
and in Action to draw Darkness often upon that
Mount of Triumph, which by Truth is as often dis∣perst:
then all returning homewards full of Beauty and
Brightness, this Mount and the Chariot of Truth,
both placed near to the Entrance of his Lordships
Gate, near Leaden-hall; London, the Lady of that
Mount; first gives utterance to these words,
Before the Day sprang from the Mornings Womb
I rose, my Care was earlier then the Light,
Nor would it rest till I now brought Thee Home,
Marrying to one Joy both thy Day and Night;
Nor can we call this Night, if our Eyes count
The Glorious beams that dance about this Mount,
Sure did not Custom guide'em, Men would say
Two Noons were seen together in one day,
The Splendour is so piercing, Triumph seems
As if it sparkled, and to Men's esteems
Threw forth his Thanks, wrapped up in Golden Flames,
As if hee would give Light to read their Names
That were at Cost this Day to make him shine,
And be as free in Thanks, as they in Coin,
But see Time checks me, and his Sith stands ready
To cut all off, no State on Earth is steady,
Therefore Grave Son the Time that is to come,
Bestow on Truth, and so Thour't welcome Home.
Time standing up in Truths Chariot, seeming to
make an offer with his Sith to cut off the Glories of
the Day, growing near now to the Season of Rest
and Sleep, his Daughter Truth thus meekly stays
his Hand.
Father desist a while till I send forth
A few Words to our Friend, that Man of Worth:
The Power that Heaven, Love, and the Cities choice,
Have all conferred on Thee with Mutual voice,
As it is Great, Reverend, and Honourable,
Meet it with equal Goodness, strive t'excell
Thy former Self, as thy Command exceeds
Thy last-yeares State, so let new Acts, old Deeds;
And as great men in Riches and in Birth
(Heightening their Bloods, and joining Earth to Earth,)
Bestow their best hours and most serious cares
In choosing out fit Matches for their Heirs:
So never give Thou over day or hour
Till with a Virtue thou hast matched this Power:
For what is Greatness if not joined with Grace?
Like one of High-bloud that hath married Base.
Who seeks Authority with an Ignorant Eye,
Is like a man seeks out his Enemy:
For where before his Follies were not spread
Or his corruptions, then their clearly read
Ee'n by the eyes of all men; it is so pure
A Crystal of it self, it will endure
No poison of Oppression, Bribes, Hired Law,
But twill appear soon in some crack or flaw,
How ever men sooth their hopes with Popular breath,
If not in Life, she'ile find that crack in Death:
I was not made to fawn or stroke fin smooth
Bee wise and hear me then that cannot sooth:
I have set Thee High now, bee so in Example,
Made thee a Pinnacle in Honours Temple,
Fixing ten thousand Eyes upon thy Brow
There is no hiding of thy Actions now,
They must abide the Light, and imitate Me,
Or bee thrown down to Fire where Errors bee.
Nor only with these words thy ear I feed,
But give those part that shall in Time succeed,
To thee in present, and to them to come
That Truth may bring you all with Honour home
To these your Gates, and to those, after these
Of which your own good Actions Keep the Keys;
Then as the Loves of thy Society
Hath flowde in Bounties on this Day and Thee,
Counting all Cost too little for true Art,
Doubling rewards there where they found Desert,
In Thankfulness, Justice, and Virtuous care
Perfect their hopes, those thy Requitals are;
With Fatherly Respect embrace'em all,
Faith in thy Heart, and Plenty in thy Hall,
Love in thy VValkes, but Justice in thy State,
Zeal in thy Chamber, Bounty at thy Gate:
And so to Thee and these a Blessed Night,
To thee Fair City, Peace, my Grace and Light.
Zeal, the Champion of Truth on Horse-backe, his
head circled with strange Fires, appears to his Mi∣stress,
and thus speaks:
See yonder, Lady, Errors Chariot stands,
Braving the Power of your incensed commands,
Emboldened by the privilege of Night
And her black Faction, yet to crown his Spite
Which Isle confound, I burn in Divine wrath.
Strike then, I give thee leave to shoot it forth.
Then here's to the destruction of that Seat,
There's nothing seen of Thee but Fire shall eat.
At which, a Flame shoots from the Head of Zeal,
which fastening upon that Cariot of Error sets it on
Fire, and all the Beasts that are ioynde to it.
The Fire-worke being made by Moister Hum∣phrey
Nichols, a Man excellent in his Art: and the
whole Work and Body of the Triumph, with all the
proper Beauties of the Workmanship most Artfully
and Faithfully performed by Iohn Grinkin: and those
furnished with Apparel and Porters by Anthony
Monday, Gentleman.
This proud Seat of Error lying now only glowing
in Embers, (being a Figure or Type of his Lord-ships
Justice on all wicked offenders in the Time of his
Government,) I now conclude, holding it a
more learned Discretion to cease of my
self, then to have Time cut me off
rudely, and now let him strike
at his pleasure.

BEfore the starry threshold of Ioves Court
My mansion is, where those immortal shapes
Of bright aëreall Spirits live insphear'd
In Regions mild of calm and serene air,
Above the smoke and stir of this dim spot
Which men call Earth, and with low-thoughted care
Confined, and pestered in this pin-fold here,
Strive to keep up a frail, and feverish being
Unmindful of the crown that Virtue gives
After this mortal change to her true Servants
Amongst the enthroned gods on Sainted seats.
Yet some there be that by due steps aspire
To lay their just hands on that golden key
That ope's the palace of Aeternity:
To such my errand is, and but for such
I would not soil these pure ambrosial weeds
With the rank vapours of this Sin-worne mould.
•ut to my task. Neptune besides the sway
Of every salt Flood, and each ebbing Stream
Took in •y lot twixt high, and nether love
Imperial rule of all the S•a-girt Isles
That like to rich, and various gems inlay
The unadorned bosom of the Deep,
Which he to grace his tributary gods
By course commits to several government
And gives them leave to wear their Sapphire crowns,
And wield their little tridents, but this Isle
The greatest, and the best of all the maine
He quarters to his blu-hair'd deities,
And all this tract that fronts the falling Sun
A noble Peer of mickle trust, and power
Has in his charge, with tempered awe to guide
An old, and haughty Nation proud in Arms:
Where his fair off-spring nurs't in Princely lore
Are coming to attend their Fathers state,
And new-entrusted Seepter, but their way
Lies through the perplexed paths of this dreary wood,
The nodding horror of whose shady brows
Threats the forlor•e and wandering Passenger.
And here their tender age might suffer peril
But that by qu•ck command from Sovereign Jove
I was disp•cht for their defence and guard,
And listen why, for I will tell ye now
What never yet was heard in Tale or Song
From old, or modern Bard in hall, or bower.
Bacchus that first from out the purple Grape
Crush't the sweet poison of mis-used Wine
After the Tuscan Mariners transformed
Coasting the Tyrrhenc shore, as the winds listed,
On Circes Island fell (who knows not Circa
The daughter of the Sun? whose charmed Cup
Whoever tasted lost his upright shape
And downward fell into a grovling Swine)
This Nymph that gazed upon his clustering locks
With Ivy berries wreathed, and his blithe youth
Had by him, ere he parted thence, a Son
Much like his Father, but his Mother more,
Whom therefore she brought up and Comu• named,
Who ripe, and frolic of his full grown age
Roving the Celtic, and Iberian fields
At last betakes him to this ominous wood,
And in thick shelter of black shades imbowr'd
Excels his Mother at her mighty Art
Offering to every weary Travailer
His orient liquor in a Crystal glass
To quench the drouth of Phoebus, which as they taste
(For most doe taste through fond intemperate thirst)
Soon as the Potion works, their humane count'hance
Th'expresse resemblance of the gods is changed
Into some brutish form of Wolf, or Bear
Or Ounce, or Tiger, Hog, or bearded Goat,
All other parts remaining as they were,
And they, so perfect in their misery,
Not once perceive their foul disfigurement,
But boast themselves more comely then before
And all their friends; and native home forget
To roll with pleasure in a sensual sty.
Therefore when any favoured of high Jove
Chances to pass through this adventurous glade,
Swift as the Sparkle of a glancing Star
I •oote from heaven to give him safe convoy,
As now I doe: but first I must put off
These my sky robes spun out os Iris wooffe,
And take the weeds and likeness of a Swain,
That to the service of this house belongs,
Who with his soft Pipe, and smooth-dittied Song,
Well knows to still the wild winds when they roar,
And hush the waving woods, nor of less faith,
And in this office of his Mountain watch,
Likeliest, and nearest to the present aide
Of this occasion. But I hear the tread
Of hateful steps, I must be viewlesse now.
The star that bids the Shepherd fold,
Now the top of heaven doth hold,
And the gilded Carre of Day
His glowing Axle doth allay,
In the steep Atlantic stream,
And the slope Sun his upward beam
Shoots against the dusky Pole,
Pacing toward the other gole
Of his Chamber in the East.
Mean while welcome Joy, and Feast,
Midnight shout, and revelry,
Tipsy dan•e, and Jollity.
Braid your Locks with rosie Twine,
D•opping odours, dropping Wine.
Rigour now is gone to bed,
And A•vice with scrupulous head,
Strict Age, and sour Severe•ie
With their grave Saws in slumber lie.
We that are of pu•er fire,
Imitate the starry quire,
Who in their nightly watchful Spheres,
Lead in swift round the Months and Years.
The Sounds, and Seas with all their finny drove,
Now to the Moon in wavering Morris move,
And on the tawny sands and shelves,
Trip the pert Fairies and the dapper Elves;
By dimpled Brooke, and Fountain brim.
The Wood-nymphs decked with daisiestrim,
Their merry wakes, and pastimes keep,
What hath night to doe with sleep?
Night hath better sweets to prove,
Venus now wakes, and wakens Love.
Come let us our rights begin
It is only day-light that makes Sin
Which these dun shades will ne'er report.
Hail Goddess of Nocturnal sport
Dark-vaild cotytto, t'whom the secret flame
Of mid-night To•ches burns; mysterious Dame
That ne'er at called, but when the Dragon woome
Of Stygian darkness spets her thickest gloom
And makes one blot of all the air,
Stay thy cloudy Ebon chair,
Wherein thou rid'st with Hecat', and befriend
Vs thy vowed Priests, till utmost end
Of all thy dues be done, and none left out
E•e the blabbing Eastern scout
The nice Morn on the Indian steep
From her cabined loop hole peep,
And to the tel-tale Sun descry
Our concealed Solemnity.
Come, knit hands, and heate the ground
In a light fantastic round.
Break off, break off, I feel the different pace
Of some chaste footing near about this ground,
Run to your shrouds, within these Brakes, and Trees
Our number may affright: Some Virgin sure
(For so I can distinguish by mine Art)
Benighted in these woods. Now to my charms
And to my wily trains, I shall ever long
Be well stocked with as fair a Heard as grazed
About my Mother Circa. Thus I hurl
My d•zling Spells into the sponge air
Of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion,
And give it false presentiments, lest the place
And my quaint habits breed astonishment,
And put the Damsel to suspicious flight,
Which must not be, for that's against my course;
I •nder fair praetents of friendly ends,
And well placed words of glossing curtsy
Bait•d with reasons not unplausible
Wind me into the easy hearted man,
And hug him into snares; when once her eye
Hath met the virtue of this Magic dust,
I shall appear some harmless Villager
Whom thrift keeps up about his Country gea•
But here she comes, I fairly step afide
And hearken, if I may, her buifnesse here.
This way the noise was, if mine ear be true
My best guide now, me thought it was the sound
Of Riot, and ill managed Merriment,
Such as the jocund Flute, or gamesome Pipe
Stirs up among the loose unlettered Hinds
When for their teeming Flocks, and granges full
In wanton dance they praise the bounteous Pan,
And thank the gods amiss. I should be loath
To meet the rudeness, and swilled infolence
Of such late Wassailers; yet 〈◊〉 where else
Shall I in•e my unacquainted feet
In the 〈◊〉 of this tangled wood?
My Brot• when they saw me wearied out
With th•ng way, resolving here to lodge.
Under the spreading favour of these Pines
Stepped as they se'd to the next Thicket side
To bring me Berries, or such cooling fruit
As the kind hospitable woods provide.
They left me then, when the gray-hooded Even
Like a sad Vote•st in Palmers weeds
Rose from the hindmost wheels of Phoebus wane.
But where they are, and why they came not back
Is now the labour of my thoughts, it is likeliest
They had engaged their wandering steps too far,
And envious darkness, ever they could return,
Had stolen them from me, else ô thievish Night
Why should thou, but for some felonious end
In thy dark lantern thus close up the Stars,
That nature hung in Heaven, and filled their lamps
With everlasting oil to give due light
To the misled, and lonely Travailer.
This is the place, as well as I may guess
Whence even now the tumult of loud Mirth
Was rife, and perfect in my listening ear,
Yet nought but single darkness doe I find,
What might this be? a thousand fantasies
Begin to throng into my memory
Of calling shapes, and beckoning shadows dire,
And airy tongues, that syllable men's names
On Sands, and Shores, and desert Wildernesses.
These thoughts may startle well, but not astound
The virtuous mind, that ever walks attended
By a strong siding champion Conscience.—
O welcome pure-ey'd Faith, white-handed Hope
Thou flittering Angel girt with golden wing•;
And thou unblemish't form of Chastity
I see ye visibly, and now believe
That he, the Supreme good, t'whom all things ill
Are but as slavish officers of vengeance
Would send a glistering Guardian if need were
To keep my life, and honour unassail'd.
Was I deceived, or did a sable cloud
Turn forth her silver lining on the night?
I did not err, there does a sables cloud
Turn forth her silver lining on the night
And casts a gleam over this tufted Grove.
I cannot hallow to my Brothers, but
Such noise as I can make to be heard fardest
Isle venture, for my new enliv'nd spirits
Prompt me; and they perhaps are not far off.
Sweet echo, sweetest Nymph that liv'st unseen•
Within thy airy shell
By slow Mender's margent greene,
And in the violet-imbroider'd vale
Where the love〈◊〉 Nightingale
Nightly to thee her sad Song mourns well.
Can thou not tell me of a gentle Pair
That likest thy Narcissus are?
O if thou have
Hid them in some flowery Cave,
Tell me but where
Sweet Queen of Parley, Daughter of the Sphere,
So moist thou be translated to the skies,
And give resounding grace to all Heavens Harmonies.
Can any mortal mixture of Earths mould
Breath such Divine enchanting ravishment?
Sure something holy lodges in that breast,
And with these raptures moves the vocal air
To testify his hidden residence;
How sweetly did they float upon the wings
Of Silence, through the emptie-vaulted night
At every fall smoothing the Raven down
Of darkness till she smiled: I have oft heard
My mother Circa with the Sirens three
Amidst the slowrie-kirtl'd Naiads
Culling their Potent herbs, and baleful drugs
Who as they sung, would take the prisoned soul
And lap it in Elysinm, Scylla wept,
And chid her barking waves into attention,
And fell Charybdis murmured soft applause:
Yet they in plea•ing slumber lulled the sense
And in sweet madness robed it of it self,
But such a sacred, and home-felt delight,
Such sober certainty of waking bliss
I never heard till now. Isle speak to her
And she shall be my Queen. Hail foreign wonder
Whom certain these rough shades did never breed
Unless the Goddess that in rural shrine
Dwell'st here with Pan, or Sylvan, by blessed Song
Forbidding every bleak unkindly Fog
To touch the prosperous growth of this tall wood.
Nay gentle Shepherd ill is lost that praise
That is addressed to unattending Ears,
Not any boast of skill, but extreme shift
How to regain my severed company
Compelled me to awake the courteous Echo
To give me answer from her mossy Couch.
What chance good Lady hath bereft you thus?
Dim darkness, and this levy Labyrinth.
Could that divide you from neere-ushering guides?
They left me weary on a grassy terfe.
By falsehood, or discourtesy, or why?
To seek in the val'y some cool friendly Spring.
And left your fair side all unguarded Lady?
They were but twain, &amp; purposed quick return.
Perhaps fore-stalling night praevented them.
How easy my misfortune is to hit!
Impor•s their loss, beside the present need?
No less then if I should my brothers lose.
Were they of manly prime, or youthful bloom?
As smooth as Hobo's their unrazord lips.
Two such I saw, what time the laboured Ox
In his loose traces from the furrow came,
And the swink't headgear at his Supper sate;
I saw them under a greene mantling vine
That crawls along the side of yon small hill,
Plucking ripe clusters from the tender shoots,
Their port was more then human; as they stood,
I took it for a faërie vision
Of some gay creatures of the element
That in the colours of the Rainbow live
And play in the plighted clouds, I was aw-strooke,
And as I past, I worshipped; if those you seek
It were a journey like the path to heaven
To help you find them.
Gentle villager
What readiest way would bring me to that place?
Due west it rises from this shrubby point.
To find out that good shepherd I suppose
In such a scant allowance of star light
Would overtask the best land-pilots art
Without the sure guess of well-practiz'd feet.
I know each lane, and every alley greene
Dingle, or bushy dell of this wild wood,
And every bosk bourne from side to side
My day lie walks and ancient neighbourhood,
And if your stray attendance be yet lodged
Or shroud within these limits, I shall know
Ere morrow wake, or the low-roosted lark
From her thach't palate rouse, if otherwise
I can conduct you Lady to a low
But loyal cottage, where you may be safe
Till further quest.
Shepherd I take thy word,
And trust thy honest offered curtsy,
Which oft is sooner found in lowly sheds
With smokey rafters, then in tapstrie halls,
And courts of Princes, where it first was named,
And yet is most p•ae•ended: in a place
Less warranted then this, or less secure
I cannot be, that I should fear to change it,
Eye me blessed Providence, and square my trial
To my proportioned strength. Shepherd lead on.—
Vnmuffle ye faint stars, and thou fair moon
That wontst to love the travellers benizon
Stoop thy pale visage through an amber cloud
And disinherit Chaos, that reigns here
In double night of darkness, and of shades;
Or if your influence be quite d•mm'd up
With black usurping mists, some gentle taper
Though a •ush candle from the wicker hole
Of some clay habitation visit us
With thy long levelled rule of streaming light
And thou shalt be our star of Arcade
Or Tyrian Cynosure.
Or if our eyes:
Be barr d that happiness, might we but hear
The folded flocks penned in their wattled cotes,
Or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops,
Or whistle from the Lodge, or village cock
Count the night watches to his feathery Dames,
T'would be some solace yet, some little cheering
In this close dungeon of innumerous bows.
But ô that haplesse virgin our lost sister
Where may she wander now, whether betake her
From the chill dew, amongst rude burs and thistles?
Perhaps some cold bank is her bolster now
Or against the rugged bark of some broad Elm
Leans her unpillow'd head fraught with sad fears.
What if in wild amazement, and affright
Or while we speak within he direful grasp
Of Savage hunger, or of Savage heat?
Peace brother, be not over exquisite
To cast the fashion of uncertain evils,
For grant they be so, while they rest unknown
What need a man forestall his date of grief
And run to meet what he would most avoid?
Or if they be but false alarms of Fear
How bitter is such selfe-delusion?
I doe not think my sister so to seek
Or so unprincipled in virtues book
And the sweet peace that goodness bosoms ever
As that the single want of light, and noise
(Not being in danger, as I trust she is •ot)
Could stir the constant mood of her calm thoughts
And p•t them into mis• becoming plight.
Virtue could see to doe what virtue would
By her owne'radiant light, though Sun and Moon
Were in the slat Sea sunk, and Wifdoms self
Oft seeks to sweet retired Solitude
Where with her best nurse Contemplation
She plumes her feathers, and lets grow her wings
That in the various bustle of resort
Were all to ruffled, and sometimes impaired.
He that has light within his own clear breast
May sit in the center, and enjoy bright day,
But he that hides a dark soul, and foul thoughts
Benighted walks under the mid-day Sun,
Himself is his own dungeon.
It is most true
That musing meditation most affects
The Pensive secrecy of desert cell
Far from the cheer•full haunt of men, and herds,
And sits as safe as in a Senate house
For who would rob an Hermit of his weeds
His few books, or his beads, or maple dish,
Or doe his gray hairs any violence?
But beauty like the fair Hesperian tree
Laden with blooming gold, had need the guard
Of dragon watch with uninchanted eye
To save her blossoms, and defend her fruit
From the rash hand of bold Incontinence.
You may as well spread out the unsun'd heaps
Of misers treasure by an outlaws den
And tell me it is safe, as bid me hope
Danger will wink on opportunity
And let a single helpless maiden pass
Vninjur'd in this wild surrounding wast.
Of night, or loneliness it recks me not
I fear the dred events that dog them both,
I est some ill greeting touch attempt the person
Of our unowned sister.
I doe not brother
Infer, as if I thought my sisters state
Secure without all doubt, or controversy:
Yet where an equal poise of hope, and fear
Does arbitrate th'event, my nature is
That I incline to hope, rather then fear
And gladly banish squint suspicion.
My sister is not so defenceless left
As you imagine, she has a hidden strength
Which you remember not.
What hidden strength
Unless the strength of heaven, if mean that?
I mean that too, but yet a hidden strength
Which if heaven gave it, may be termed her own:
It is chastity, my brother, chastity:
She that has that, is clad in complete steel,
And like a quivered nymph with arrows keen
May trace huge forests, and unharbour'd heaths
Infamous hills, and sandy perilous wilds
Where through the sacred rays of chastity
No savage fierce, bandit, or mountaneet•
Will dare to soil her virgin purity
Yea there, where very desolation dwells
By grots, and caverns shag'd with horrid shades
She may pass on with unblench't majesty
Be it not done in pride, or in presumption.
Some say no evil thing that walks by night
In fog, or fire, by lake, or moorish fen
Blew meager hag, or stubborn unlayd ghost
That breaks his magic chains at curfeu time
No goblin, or answered Faërie of the mine
•as hurtful power ore true virginity.
Doe ye believe me yet, or shall I call
Antiquity from the old schools of Greece
To testify the arms of Chastity?
Hence had the huntress Dian her dred bow
Fair silver-shaf•ed Queen for ever chaste
Wherewith we tamed the brinded lioness
And spotted mountain pard, but set at nought
The frivolous bolt of Cupped, gods and men
Feared her sterne frown, &amp; sh• was queen of the woods.
What was •hat snaky headed Gorgon shield
That wise Minerva wore, unconquered virgin
Wherewith she friezed her foes to congealed stone?
But rigid looks of Chaste austerity
And noble grace that dished brute violence
With sudden adoration, and blank awe.
So dear to heaven is saintly chastity
That when a soul is found sincerely so,
A thousand liveried angels lackey her
Driving sarre off each thing of sin, and guilt,
And in clear dream, and solemn vision
Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear,
Till oft converse with heavenly habitants
Begin to cast a beam on the outward shape
The unpolluted temple of the mind
And turns it by degrees to the souls essence
Till all bee made immortal; but when lust
By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk
But most by lewd, and lavish act of sin
Lets in defilement to the inward parts,
The soul grows clotted by contagion,
Embody•, and imbrutes, till she quite loose
The divine property of her first being.
Such are those thick, and gloomy shadows damp
Oft seen in Charnel vaults, and Sepulchers
Hovering, and sitting by a new made grave
As loath to leave the body that it loved,
And linked it self by carnal sensuality
To a degenerate and degraded state.
How charming is divine Philosophy!
Not harsh, and crabbed as dull fools suppose,
But musical as is Apollo's lute,
And a perpetual feast of nectar'd sweets
Where no crude surfeit reigns.
List, list I hear
Some far off hallow break the silent air.
Me thought so too, what should it be?
For certain
Either some one like us night foundered here,
Or else some neighbour wood man, or at worst
Some roving robber calling to his fellows.
Heaven keep my sister, again again and near,
Best draw, and stand upon our guard.
Isle hallow,
If he be friendly he comes well, if not
Defence is a good cause, and Heaven be for us.
That hallow I should know, what are you, speak,
Come not too near, you fall on iron stakes else.
What voice is that, my young Lord? speak again.
O brother it is my father Shepherd sure.
Thyrsis whose artful strains have oft de∣laid
The huddling brook to hear his madrigal,
And sweetened every muskrose of the dale,
How came thou he• good Swain, hath any ram
Slip't from the fold, or young kid lost his dam,
Or straggling weather the pen't flock sorsook,
How could thou find this dark sequestered nook?
O my loved masters heir, and his next joy
I came not h•re on such a trivial toy
As a strayd Ewe, or to pursue the stealth
Of pilfering wolf, not all the fleccie wealth
That doth enrich these downs is worth a thought
To this my errand, and the care it brought.
But 〈◊〉 my virgin Lady where is she,
How chance she is not in your company?
To tell thee sadly shepherd, without blame
Or our neglect, wee lost her as wee came.
Aye me unhappy then my fears are true.
What fears good Thyrsis? prithee briefly show.
Isle tell you, it is not vain, or fabulous
(Though so esteemed by shallow ignorance)
What the sage Po•s taught by th'heav'nly Muse
S•oried of old in high immortal verfe
Of dire Chimera's and enchanted Isles
And rifted rocks whose entrance leads to hell,
〈◊〉 such there be, but unbelief is blind.
Within the navill of this hideous wood
Immured in cypress shades a Sorcerer dwells
Of •acchus, and of Ciree borne, great Comus,
Deep skilled in all his mothers witcheries,
And here to every thirsty wanderer
By sly enticement gives his baneful cup
With many murmurs mixed, whose pleasing poison
The visage quite transforms of him that drinks,
And the inglorious likeness of a beast
Fixes in•ead, unmoulding reasons mintage
Character'd in the face; this have I learned
Tending my flock• h•rd by in the hilly crofts
That brow this bottom glade, whence night by night
He and his monstrous rout are heard to howl
Like stabled wolves, or tigers at their prey
Doing abhorred rites to Hecate
In their obscured haunts of inmost bowers.
Yet have they many baits, and guileful spells
T'inveigle, and invite th'unwarie sense
Of them that pass unwitting by the way.
This evening late by then the chewing flocks
Had taken their supper on the savoury herb
Of Knot-grass dew-besprent, and were in fold
I sate me down to watch upon a bank
With ivy canopied, and interwove
With flaunting hony-suckle, and began
Wrapped in a pleasing fit of melancholy
To meditate my rural minstrelsy
Till fancy had her fill, but ere a close
The wonted roar was up amidst the woods,
And filled the air with barbarous dissonance
At which I ceased, and listened them a while
Till an unusual stop of sudden silence
Gave respit to the drowsy frighted steeds
That draw the litter of close-curtain'd sleep.
At last a soft, and solemn breathing sound
Rose like a steam of rich distilled Perfumes
And stole upon the air, that even Silence
Was took ever she was ware, and wished she might
Deny her nature, and be never more
Still to be so displaced. I was all ear,
And took in strains that might create a soul
Under the ribs of Death, but ô ere long
Too well I did perceive it was the voice
Of my most honoured Lady your dear sister.
Amazed I stood, harrowed with grief and fear,
And ô poor haplesse nightingale thought I
How sweet thou sing, how near the deadly snare!
Then down the lawns I ran with headlong hast
Through paths, and turnings often trod by day
Till guided by mine ear I found the place
Where that damned wizard hid in slie-disguise
(For so by certain signs I knew) had met
Already, ere my best speed could p•aevent
The aidlesse innocent Lady his wished prey,
W•o gently asked if he had s•en such two
Supposing him some neighbour villager;
Longer I durst not stay, but soon I guess't
Ye were the two she meaned, with that I sprung
Into 〈◊〉 flight till I had found you here,
But farther know I not.
O night and shades
How are ye joined with hell in triple knot
Ag•inst th'unarmed weakness of one virgin
Alone, and helpless! is this the confidence
You gave me brother?
Yes, and keep it still,
Lear on it safely, not a period
Shall be unsaid for me; against the threats
Of malice or of 〈◊〉, or that power
Which erring men call Chance, this I hold firm,
Virtue may be assailed, but never hurt,
Surprised by unjust force, but not enthralled,
Yea even that which mischief meantmost harm,
Shall in the happy trial prove most glory.
But 〈◊〉 on it self shall back recoil
An 〈◊〉 no more with goodness, when at last
Gathered like se•m, and settled to it self
It shall bee in eternal restless changē
Self fed, and self consumed, if this fail
The pillar'd firmament is rottenness•,
And earths base built on stubble. But come let's on•
Against the opposing will and arm of heaven
May never this just sword be lifted up,
But for that damned magician, let him be girt
With all the grisly legions that troop
Under the sooty flag of Acheron,
Harpies and Hydra's, or all the monstrous bugs
Twixt Africa, and Inde, Isle find him out
And force him to restore his purchase back
Or drag him by the curls, and cleave his scalp
Down to the hipps.
Alas good venturous youth,
I love thy courage yet, and bold Empress,
But here thy sword can doe thee little stead,
Far other arms, and other weapons must
Be those that quell the might of hellish charms,
He with his bare wand ca• u•thread thy joints
And crumble all thy sinews.
Why prithee shepherd
How durst thouthen thy self approach so near
As to make this relation•?
Care and utmost shifts
How to s•cure the Lady from surprise
Brought to my mind a certain shepherd lad
Of small regard to see to, yet well skilled
In every •tuous plant, and healing herb
That spreds her verdant lease t•th morning ray,
He loved me well, and oft would beg me sing,
Which when I did, he on the tender grass
Would sit, and hearken even to ecstasy,
And in requital op his leather'n scrip,
And show me simples of a thousand names
Telling their strange, and vigorous faculties,
Amongst the rest a small unsightly 〈◊〉,
But of divine effect, he 〈◊〉 me out;
The leaf was darkish, and had prickles on it,
But in another Coun•, as be said,
Bore a bright golden flow•e, but not in this soil:
Unknown, and like esteemed, and the dull swain
Treads on it daily with his cloured s•oone,
And yet more med' cinall is it then that Moby
That Harms once to wise Vl•sses gave,
He called it Haemony, and gave it me
And bad me keep it as of sovereign use
Against all enchantments, mildew blast, or damp
Or ghastly furies apparition;
I purs't it up, but little reck'ning made
Till now that this extremity compelled,
But now I find it true, for by this means
I knew the foul enchanter though disguised,
Entered the very limetwigs of his spells,
And yet came off, if you have this about you
(As I will give you when wee go) you may
Boldly assault the necromancers hall,
Where if he be, with da•tlesse hardihood
And brandish't blade rush on him, break his glass,
And shed the lushious liquor on the ground
But seas his wa•d, though he and his cursed crew
Fierce sign of b•ail make, and m•ace high,
Or like the sons of V•lcan vomit smoke,
Yet will they soon retire, if he but shrink
Thyrsis lead on apace Isle •ollow thee,
And some good angel bear a shield before us.
Nay Lady sit; if I but wave this wand,
Your nervs are all chained up in alabaster,
And you a statre; or as Dap• was
Root bound that fl• Apoll•.
Foo'e doe not boast,
Thou 〈◊〉 not touch the freedom of my mind
Withal thy charms, although this corporal rind
Thou hast 〈◊〉, while •even sees good.
Why are you ve•t Lady, why doe you frow•
Here dwell no frowns, nor anger, from these gates
Sorrow •ies far: see here be all the pleasurs
That fancy can beget on youthful thoughts
When the fresh blood grows lively, and returns
Brisk as the April buds in primrose season.
And first behold thy• cordial •ulep here
That flames, and dances in his crystal bounds
With spirits of bal•e, and fragrant syrops mixed.
Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Tho•
In Egypt gave to love borne He•
Is of such power to 〈◊〉 up joy as this,
To li•e so friendly, or so cool to thirst.
Why should you be so cruel to your self,
And to those dain• li•ms which nature lent
For gentle usage, and soft delicacy?
But you invert the cov'nants of her trust,
And har•hly deal like an ill borrower
With that which you received on other terms,
Scorning the u•exempt condition,
By which all mortal frailty must subsist,
Refreshment after toil, ease after pain,
That have been tired all day without repast,
And timely rest have wanted, but fair virgin
This will restore all soon.
T'will not false traitor,
T'will not restore the truth and honesty
That thou hast banished from thy tongue with lies,
Was this the cottage, and the safe abode
Thou told me of? what grim aspects are these,
These ougly-headed monsters? Mercy guard me!
Hence with thy brewd enchantments foul deceiver,
Hast thou betrayed my credulous innocence
With visor'd falsehood, and base forgery,
And would thou seek again to trap me here
With lickerish baits fit to ensnare a brute?
Were it a draft for Iuno when she banquets
I would not taste thy treasonous offer; none
But such as are good men can give good things,
And that which is not good, is nor delicious
To a wel-govern'd and wise appetite.
O foolishness of men! that lend their ears
To those budge doctors of the Stoic fur,
And fetch their praecepts from the Cynic tub,
Praising the lean, and sallow Abstinence.
Wherefore did Nature power her bounties forth
With such a full and unwithdrawing hand,
Covering the earth with odours, fruits, and flocks
Thronging the seas with spawn innumerable
But all to please, and sate the curious taste?
And set to work millions of spinning worms,
That in their green shops weave the smooth-hair'd silk
To deck her Sons, and that no corner might
Be vacant of her plenty, in her own loins
She hutch't th'all worshipped ore, and precious gems
To store her children with; if all the world
Should in a pet of temperance feed on Pulse,
Drink the clear stream, and nothing wear but Freize,
Th'all-giver would be unthank't, would be unprais'd,
Not half his riches known, and yet despised,
And we should serve him as a grudging master,
As a penurious niggard of his wealth,
And live like Natures bastards, not her sons,
Who would be quite surcharged with her own weight, plumes,
And strangled with her wast fertility;
Th'earth encumbered, and the winged air dark't with
The herds would over-inultitude their Lords,
The sea ore-fraught would swell, and th'unsought dia∣monds
Would so emblaze he forehead of the Deep,
And so bestudde with stars that they below
Would grow inured to light, and come at last
To gaze upon the Sun with shameless brows.
List Lady be not coy, and be not cozened
With that same vaunted name Virginity,
Beauty is natures coin, must not be hoarded,
But must be currant, and the good thereof
Consists in mutual and partaken bliss,
Unsavoury in th'injoyment of it self
If you let slip time, like a neglected rose
It withers on the stalk with languish't head.
Beauty is natures brag, and must be shown
In courts, at feasts, and high solemnities
Where most may wonder at the workmanship;
It is for homely features to keep home,
They had their name thence; course complexions
And cheeks of sorry grain will serve to ply
The sampler, and to tease the huswifes wool.
What need a vermeil-tinctur'd lip for that
Love-darting eyes, or tresses like the Morn
There was another meaning in these gifts?
Think what, and be advised, you are but young yet.
I had not thought to have unlocked my lips
In this unhallowed air, but that this Juggler
Would think to charm my judgement, as mine eyes
Obtruding false rules pranckt in reasons garb.
I hate when vice can bolt her arguments
And virtue has no tongue to check her pride:
Impostor doe not charge most innocent nature
As if she would her children should be riotous
With her abundance, she good cateresse
Means her provision only to the good
That live according to her sober laws
And holy dictate of spare Temperance,
If every just man that now pines with want
Had but a moderate, and beseeming share
Of that which lewdy-pamper'd Luxury
Now heaps upon some few with vast excess,
Natures full blessings would be well dispensed
In unsuperfluous even proportion,
An•she no whit encomber'd with her store,
And then the giver would be better thanked,'
His pr•se due paid, for swinish gluttony
Ne'er looks to heaven amidst his gorgeous feast,
But with besorted base ingratitude
Cramms, and blasphemes his feeder. Shall I go on?
Or have I said enough? to him that dares
Arm his profane tongue with re• words
Against the Sun-clad power of Chastity
Fine would I something say, yet to what end?
Thou hast nor Ear, nor Skull to apprehend
The sublime notion, and high mystery
That must be uttered to unfold the sage
And serious doctrine of Virginity,
And thou art worthy that thou should not know
More happiness then this thy present lot.
Enjoy your dear Wit, and gay Rhetoric
That hath so well been taught her dazzling fence,
Thou art not fit to hear thy self convinced;
Yet should I try, the uncontrolled worth
Of this pure cause would kindle my raped spirits
To such a flame of sacred vehemence,
That dumb things would be moved to sympathize,
And the brute Earth would lend her nerves, and shake,
Till all thy magic structures reared so high
Were shattered into heaps ore thy false head.
She fables not, I feel that I doe fear
Her words set off by some superior power;
And t•ough not mortal, yet a cold shuddering dew
Dips me aloe•e, as when the wrath of Jove
Speaks thunder, and the chains of Erebus
To some of Scturns crew. I must dissemble,
And try her yet more strongly. Come; no more,
This is mere moral babble, and direct
Against the canon laws of our foundation,
I must not suffer this, yet it is but the lees
And setlings of a melancholy blood;
But this will cure all straight, one sip of this
Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight
Beyond the bliss of dreams. Be wise, and taste.—
What, have you let the false enchanter scope?
O ye mistook, ye should have snatched his wand
And bound him fast; without his rod revers't,
And backward mutters of discovering power
Wee cannot free the Lady that sits here
In stony fetters fixed, and motionless;
Yet stay, be not disturbed, now I bethink me,
Some other means I have which may be used,
Which once of Melibaeus old I learnt
The soothest shepherd that ere pipe't on plains.
There is a gentle nymph not far from hence
That with moist curb sways the smooth Severn stream,
Sabrina is her name, a virgin pure,
Meanwhile she was the daughter of Locrine,
That had the sceptre from his father Brute.
She guiltless damsel flying the mad pursuit
Of her enraged stepdam Guendolen
Commended her fair innocence to the flood
That stayed her flight with his crosse-flowing course,
The water Nymphs that in the bottom played
Held up their pearled wrists and took her in,
Bearing her strait to aged Nereus hall
Who piteous of her woes reatd her lank head,
And gave her to his daughters to imbathe
In nectar'd lavers strewd with asphodil,
And through the porch, and inlet of each sense
Dropped in ambrosial oils till she revived,
And underwent a quick, immortal change
Made goddess of the river; still she retains
Her maiden gentleness, and oft at eve
Visits the herds along the twilight meadows,
Helping all urchin blasts, and ill luck signs
That the shrewd meddling elf delights 〈◊〉 make,
Which she with precious viold liquors heales.
For which the shepherds at their festivals
Carroll her goodness loud in rustic lays,
And throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream
Of pansies, pinks, and gaudie daffodils.
And, as the old Swain said, she can unlock
The clasping charm, and thaw the numming spell,
If she be right invoked in warbled Song,
For maidenhood she loves, and will be swift
To aid a virgin such as was her self
In hard besetting need, this will I try
And add the power of some adjuring verse.
Sabrina fair
Listen where thou art sitting
Under the glassy, cool, translucent wave,
In twisted braids of lilies knitting
The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair,
Listen for dear honours sake
Goddess of the silver lake
Listen and save.
Listen and appear to us
In name of great One•us,
By th earth sha•ng Neptun's mace
And Tethys grave majestic pace,
By hoary N•reus wrinkled look,
And the Carpath• wizards hook,
By 〈◊〉 win•ing shell.
And old sooth saying Clau• spell,
By Leucothea's lovely hands,
And her son that rules the strands,
By Thetis •nsel-slipper feet;
And the songs of Sirens sweet,
By dead Parthenope's dear tomb,
And fair Ligea's golden comb,
Wherewith she sits on diamond rocks
Sleeking her soft alluring locks,
By all the Nymphs that nightly dance
Upon thy streams with w•lie glance,
Rise, rise and heave thy rosie head
From thy coral-paven bed,
And bridle in thy headlong wave
Till thou our summons answered have.
Listen and save.
Sabrina rises attended by water Nymphs and sings.
By the rushy fringed bank,
Where grows the willow and the osier dank
My sliding chariot stays,
Thick set with agate, and the azurne sheen•
Of turkkis blew, and •rolled greene
That in the channel strays,
Whilst from off the waters fleet
Thus I set my printlesse feet
Ore the cowslips velvet head,
That bends not as I tread,
Gentle swain at thy request
I am here.
Goddess dear
Wee implore thy powerful hand
To undo the charm•d band
Of true virgin here distressed,
Through the force, and through the wile
Of unblessed enchanter vile.
Shepherd tic my office best
To help ensnared chastity;
Brightest Lady look on me,
Thus I sprinckle on thy breast
Drops that from my fountain pure
I have kept of precious cure,
Thrice upon thy fingers tip,
Thrice upon thy rubied lip,
Next this marble venomed seat
Smeared with gummes of glutenous heate
I touch with chaste palms moist and cold,
Now the spell hath lost his hold.
And I must hast ere morning hour
To waite in Amphitrite's bower.
Virgin, daughter of Locrine
Sprung of old Anchises line
May thy brimmed waves for this
Their full tribute never miss
From a thousand petty rills,
That tumble down the snowy hills:
Summer drouth, or singed air
Never scorch thy tresses fair,
Nor wet Octobers torrent flood
Thy molten crystal fill with mud,
May thy billows roll a shore
The beryl, and the golden ore,
May thy lofty head be crowned
With many a tower, and terrace round,
And here and there thy banks upon
With groves of myrrh, and cinnamon.
Come Lady while heaven lends us grace,
Let us fly this cursed place,
Lest the sorcerer us entice
With some other new device.
Not a wast, or needless sound
Till we come to holier ground,
I shall be your faithful guide
Through this gloomy covert wide,
And not many furlongs thence
Is your Fathers residence,
Where this night are met in state
Many a friend to gratulate
His wished presence, and beside
All the Swains that there abide,
With Iiggs, and rural dance resort,
Wee shall catch them at their sport,
And our sudden coming there
Will double all their mirth, and chere,
Come let us hast the stars are high
But night sits monarch yet in the mid sky.
Back shepherds, back enough your play,
Till next Sun-shine holiday,
Here be without duck or nod,
Other trippings to be trod
Of lighter toes, and such Court guise
As Mercury did first devise
With the mineing Dryads
On the lawns, and on the leas.
Noble Lord, and Lady bright,
I have brought ye new delight,
Here behold so goodly grown.
Three fair branches of your own,
Heaven hath timely tried their youth,
Their faith, their patience, and their truth,
And sent th•m here through hard assays
With a crown of deathless Praise,
To •riumph in victorious dance
Ore sensual Folly, and Intemperance.
To the Ocean now I fly,
And those happy climes that lie
Where day never shuts his eye,
Up in the broad fields of the sky:
There I suck the liquid ayre
All amidst the gardens fair
Of Hesperus, and his daughters three
That sing about the golden tree,
Along the crisped shades, and bowers
Revels the spruce and jocund Spring,
The Graces, and the rosie-bosom'd Hours
Thither all their bounties bring,
That there aeternall Summer dwells
And west winds, with muskie wing
About the cedar'n alleys fling
Nerd, and Cassia's balmy smells.
Iris there with humid bow
Waters the odorous banks that blow
Flowers of more mingled hew
Then her purfl'd scarf can show,
And drenches with Elysinn dew
(List mortals, if your ears be true)
Beds of Hyacinth, and roses)
Where young Atones oft reposes,
Waxing well of his deep wound
In slumber soft, and on the ground
Sadly sits th• Assyrian Queen;
But far above in spangled sheen
Celestial Cupped her famed Son advanced,
Holds his dear Psyche sweet entranced
After her wandering labours long,
Till free consent the gods among
Make her his aeternal• Bride,
And from her fair unspotted side
Two blissful twins are to be borne,
Youth, and Joy; so Jove hath sworn.
But now my task is smoothly done,
I can fly, or I can run
Quickly to the greene earths end,
Where the bowed welkin slow doth bend,
And from thence can soar as soon
To the corners of the Moon.
Mortals that would follow me,
Love virtue, she alone is free,
She can teach ye how to clime
Higher then the Sphaerie chime;
Or if virtue feeble were
Heaven it self would stoop to her.

COme Masters, I think it be past five a clock,
Is it not time we were at work?
My old Moister heel be stirring anon.
I cannot tell whether my old master will be
stirring or no: but I am sure I can hardly take my
afternoons nap, for my young moister Thomas,
He keeps such a quile in his study,
With the Sun, and the Moon, and the seven stars,
That I doe verily think heel read out his wits.
He skill of the stars? theres good-man Car of Fulhum,
He that carried vs to the strong Ale, where goody Trundell
Had her maid got with child: O he knows the Stars,
Heel tickle you Charles Wane in nine degrees,
That same man will tell goody Trundell
When her Ale shall miscarry, only by the stars.
I that's a great virtue indeed, I think Thomas
Be no body in comparison to him.
Well Masters come, shall we to our hammers?
I content, first lets take our mornings draught,
And then to work roundly.
I agreed, go in Hodge.
Good morrow morn, I doe salute thy brightness,
The night seems tedious to my troubled soul:
Whose black obscurity binds in my mind
A thousand sundry cogitations▪
And now Aurora with a lively dye,
Adds comfort to my spirit that mounts on high.
Too high indeed, my state being so mean▪
My study like a mineral of gold,
Makes my hart proud wherein my hope's inrowld,
My books is all the wealth I doe possess,
And unto them I have engaged my hart,
O learning how divine thou seems to me:
Within whose arms is all felicity?
Peace with your hammers, leave your knocking there,
You doe disturb my study and my rest,
Leave off I say, you mad me with the noise.
Why how now Moister Thomas how now,
Will you not let vs work for you?
You fret my hart, with making of this noise.
How fret your hart? I but Thomas, you'll
Fret your fathers purse if you let vs from working.
I this tic for him to make him a gentleman.
Shall we leave work for your musing, thats well I faith?
But here comes my old Moister now.
You idle knaves, what are you loitering now,
No hammers walking and my work to doe?
What not a heate among your work to day?
Marry sir your son Thomas will not let vs work at all,
Why knave I say, have I thus carkde and cared
And all to keep thee like a gentleman,
And dost thou let my servants at their work:
That sweat for thee knave? labour thus for thee?
Father their hammers doe offend my study.
Out of my doors knave if thou likest it not,
I cry you mercy is your cares so fine?
I tell thee knave these get when I doe sleep,
I will not have my Anvil stand for thee.
There's money father, I will pay your men.
Have I thus brought thee up unto my cost,
In hope that one day thou would relieve my age,
And art thee now so lavish of thy coin,
To scatter it among these idle knaves?
Father be patient, and content your self,
The time will come I shall hold gold as trash:
And here I speak with a presaging soul,
To build a palace where now this cottage stands,
As fine as is King Henries, house at Sheen.
You build a house? you knave, you'll be a beggar,
Now before God all is but cast away
That is bestowed upon this thriftless lad;
Well, had I bound him to some honest trade:
This had not been, but it was his mothers doing,
To send him to the University:
How build a house where now this cottage stands,
As fair as that at Sheen? he shall not here me,
A good boy Tom, I con thee thank Tom,
Well said Tom, gramarcies Tom,
Into your work knaves hence you saucy boy.
Why should my birth keep down my mounting spirit?
Are not all creatures subject unto time?
To time, who doth abuse the world,
And filles it full of hodgepodge bastardy,
There's legions now of beggars on the earth,
That their original did spring from Kings:
And many Monarchs now whose fathers were,
The riffe-raffe of their age: for time and Fortune
Wears out a noble train to beggary,
And from the dunghill minions doe advance
To state: and mark in this admiring world,
This is but course, which in the name of Fate
Is seen as often as it whirls about:
The River Thames that by our door doth pass,
His first beginning is but small and shallow?
Yet keeping on his course, groves to a sea.
And likewise W•lsay, the wonder of our age,
His birth as mean as mine, a Butchers son
Now who within this land a greaterman?
Then Cromwell cheer thee up, and tell thy soul,
That thou moist live to flourish and control.
Tom Cromwell, what Tom I say.
Doe you call sir?
Here is Moister Bowser come to know, if you have
dispatched his petition, for the Lords of the counsel or no.
Father I have, please you to call him in.
That's well said Tom, a good lad Tom.
Now Moister Cromwell, have you dispatched this petition?
I have sir, here it is, please you peruse it.
It shall not need, weal read it as we go by water:
And Moister Cromwell, I have made a motion
May doe you good, and of you like of it.
Our Secretary at Antwarpe, sir is dead,
And the Merchants there hath sent to me,
For to provide a man fit for the place:
Now I doe know none fitter then your self,
If with your liking it stand Moister Cromwell.
With all my hart sir, and I much am bound,
In love and duty for your kindness shown.
Body of me Tom make hast, least some body
Get between thee and home Tom.
I thank you good Moister Bowser, I thank you for my boy,
I thank you always, I thank you most heartily sir:
Hoe a cup of Beer there for Moister Bowser.
It shall not need sir, Moister Cromwell will you go?
I will attend you sir.
Farewell Tom, God bless thee Tom,
God speed thee good Tom.
I hope this day is fatal unto some,
And by their loss must Bagot seek to gain.
This is the lodging of Moister Friskiball,
a liberal Merchant, and a Florentine,
To whom Banister owes a thousand pound,
A Merchant Banckrout, whose Father was my Moister,
What doe I care, for pity or regard?
He once was wealthy, but he now is fallen,
And this morning have I got him arrested,
At the suit of Moister Friskiball,
And by this means shall I be sure of coin,
For doing this same good to him unknown:
And in good time, see where the Merchant comes.
Good morrow to kind Moister Friskiball.
God morrow to your self good moister Bagot,
And whats the news you are so early stirring?
It is for gain, I make no doubt of that.
It is for the love sir that I bear to you,
When did you see your debtor Banister?
I promise you, I have not seen the man
This two months day, his poverty is such,
As I doe think he shames to see his friends.
Why then assure your self to see him straight,
For at your suit I have arrested him,
And here they will be with him presently.
Arrest him at my suit? you were to blame,
I know the mans misfortunes to be such,
As hoe's not able for to pay the debt,
And were it known to some he were undone.
This is your pitiful hart to think it so,
But you are much deceived in Banister,
Why such as he will break for fashion sake,
And unto those they owe a thousand pound,
Pay scarce a hundred: O sir beware of him,
The man is lewdly given, to Dice and Drabs,
Spends all he hath in harlots companies,
It is no mercy for to pity him.
I speak the truth of him, for nothing else,
But for the kindness that I bear to you,
If it be so, he hath deceived me much,
And to deal strictly with such a one as he.
Better severe then too much lenity,
But here is Moister Banister himself,
And with him as I take the officers.
O Moister Friskiball you have undone me,
My state was well nigh overthrown before,
Now altogether downe-cast by your means.
O master Friskiball, pity my husbands case
Hee is a man hath lived as well as any,
Till envious fortune and the ravenous Sea
Did rob, disrobe, and spoil vs of our own.
Mistress Banister, I envy not your husband,
Nor willingly would I have used him thus:
But that I hear hee is so lewdely given,
Haunts wicked company, and hath enough
To pay his debts, yet will not be known thereof.
This is that damned Broker, that same Bagot,
Whom I have often from my Trencherfed,
Ungrateful villain for to use me thus.
What I have said to him is nought but truth.
What thou hast said springs from an envious hart.
A Cannibal that doth eat men alive,
But here upon my knee believe me sir,
And what I speak, so help me God is true▪
We scarce have meat to feed our little Babes,
Most of our Plate is in that Broken hand.
Which had we money to defray our debts
O think wee would not bide that penury:
Be merciful, kind moister Friskiball,
My husband, children, and my self will eat
But one meal a day, the other will we keep and sell,
As part to pay the debt we owe to you:
If ever tears did pierce a tender mind,
Be pitiful, let me some favour find.
Be not you so mad sir, to believe his tears.
Go to, I see thou art an envious man,
Good mistress Banister kneel not to me,
I pray rise up, you shall have your desire.
Hold officers; be gone, ther's for your pains,
You know you owe to me a thousand pound,
Here take my hand, if ear God make you able;
And place you in your former state again,
Pay me: but if still your fortune frown,
Upon my faith Isle never ask you crown:
I never yet did wrong to men in thrall.
For God doth know what to my self may fall.
This unexpected favour undeserved,
Doth make my hart bleed inwardly with joy,
Ne'er may ought prosper with me is my own,
If I forget this kindness you have shown.
My children in their prayers both night and day,
For your good fortune and success shall pray.
I thank you both, I pray go dine with me,
Within these three days, if God give me leave,
I will to Florence to my native home,
Bagot hold, theres a Portague to drink,
Although you ill deserved it by your merit,
Give not such cruel scope unto your hart,
Be sure the ill you doe will be requited,
Remember what I say, Bagot farewell.
Come Moister Banister, you shall with me,
My fare's but simple, but welcome heartily.
A plague go with you, would you had eat your last,
Is this the thanks I have for all my pains:
Confusion light upon you all for me,
Where he had wont to give a score of crown••
Doth he now foist me with a Portague:
Well, I will be revenged upon this Banister.
Isle to his Creditors, buy all the debts he owes,
As seeming that I doe it for good-will,
I am sure to have them at an easy rate;
And when tic done, in Christendom he stays not,
But isle make his hate t'ake with sorrow,
And if that Banister become my debtor
By heaven and earth isle make his plague the greater.
Now gentlemen imagine, that young Cromwell is
In Antwarpe, Ledger for the English Merchants:
And Banister to shun this Bigots hate,
Hearing that he hath got some of his debts,
Is fled to Antwarpe, with his wife and children,
Which Bagot hearing is gone after them:
And thither sends his bills of debt before,
To be revenged on wretched Banister,
What doth fall out, with patience sit and see,
A just requital of false treachery.
Thus far my reckoning doth go straight and even:
But Cromwell this same plodding fits not thee:
Thy mind is altogether set on travel,
And not to live thus cloistered like a Nun,
It is not this same trash that I regard,
Experience is the jewel of my hart.
I pray sir, are you ready to dispatch me?
Yes here is those sums of money you must cary.
You go so far as Frankford, doe you not?
I doe sir.
Well prithee make all the hast thou can,
For there be certain English gentlemen
Are bound for Venice, and may happily want
And if that you should linger by the way:
But in hope that you will make good speed,
There's two Angels to buy you spurs and wands.
I thank you sir, this will add wings indeed.
Gold is of power to make an Eagles speed.
What gentlewoman is this that grieves so much?
It seems she doth address her self to me.
God save you sir, pray is your name Moister Cromwell.
My name is Thomas Cromwell, gentlewoman.
Know you not one Bagot sir, that's come to Antwarpe?
No trust me, I never saw the man,
But here are bills of debt I have received
Against one Banister a Merchant fallen into decay.
Into decay indeed, long of that wretch,
I am the wife to woeful Banister,
And by that bloody villain am pursued,
From London here to Antwarpe,
My husband he is in the governors hands:
And God of heaven knows how he'ill deal with him,
Now sir your hart is framed of milder temper,
Be merciful to a distressed soul,
And God no doubt will treble bless your gain.
Good Mistress Banister, what I can, I will,
In any thing that lies within my power.
O speak to Bagot, that same wicked wretch,
An Angels voice may move a damned devil.
Why is he come to Antwarpe as you here?
I hard he landed some two hours since.
Well Mistress Banister assure your self,
Isle speak to Bagot in your own behalf:
And win him t'all the pity that I can,
Mean time, to comfort you in your distress,
Receive these Angels to relieve your need,
And be assured that what I can effect:
To doe you good, no way I will neglect.
That mighty God that knows each mortals hart,
Keep you from trouble, sorrow, grief and smart.
Thanks courteous woman,
For thy hearty prayer:
It grieves my soul to see her misery,
But we that live under the work of fate,
May hope the best, yet knows not to what state
Our stars and destinies hath vs assigned,
Fickle is Fortune, and her face is blind.
So all goes well, it is as I would have it,
Banister he is with the Governor:
And shortly shall have guiues upon his heals,
It glads my hart to think upon the slave,
I hope to have his body rot in prison:
And after here, his wife to hang her self,
And all his children die for want of food,
The Jewels I have brought to Antwarpe,
Are reasoned to be worth five thousand pound,
Which scarcely stood me in three hundredth pound,
I bought them at an easy kind of rate,
I care not which way they came by them
That sold them me, it comes not near my hart.
And least they should be stolen as sure they are,
I thought it meet to sell them here in Antwarpe,
And so have left them in the Governors hand,
Who offers me within two hundredth pound
Of all my price: but now no more of that,
I must go see and if my bills be safe,
The which I sent to Moister Cromwell,
That if the wind should keep me on the sea,
He might arest him here before I came:
And in good time, see where he is: God save you sir.
And you, pray pardon me, I know you not.
It may be so sir, but my name is Bagot,
The man that sent to you the bills of debt.
O the man that pursues Banister,
Here are the bills of debt you sent to me:
As for the man you know best where he is,
It is reported yu'aue a flinty hart,
A mind that will not stoop to any pity;
An eye that knows not how to shed a tear,
A hand thats always open for re••rd,
But Moister Bagot would you be ruled by me:
You should turn all these to the contrary,
Your hart should still have feeling of remorse,
Your mind, according to your state, be liberal
To those that stand in need and in distress;
Your hand to help them that doe stand in want,
Rather then with your poise to hold them down,
For every ill turn show your self more kind,
Thus should I doe, pardon, I speak my mind.
I sir, you speak to here what I would say,
But you must live I know, as well as I:
I know this place to be extortion,
And tic not for a man to keep safe here,
But he must lye, cog, with his dearest friend;
And as for pity, scorn it, hate all conscience,
But yet I doe commend your wit in this,
To make a show, of what I hope you are not,
But I commend you and tic well done,
This is the only way to bring your gain.
My gain: I had rather chain me to an ore,
And like a slave there toil out all my life,
Before id live so base a slave as thou:
I like an hipocrite to make a show,
Of seeming virtue and a devil within?
No Bagot, if thy conscience were as clear,
Poor Banister, ne'er had been troubled here.
Nay good Moister Cromwell be not angry sir,
I know full well that you are no such man,
But if your conscience were as white as Snow,
It will be thought that you are otherwise,
Will it be thought that I am other wise?
Let them that think so know they are deceived;
Shall Cromwell live to have his faith misconsterd,
Antwarpe for all the wealth within thy Town
I will not stay here full two hours longer:
As good luck serves, my accounts are all made even,
Therefore isle straight unto 〈◊〉 treasurer,
Bagot, I know you'll to the gournour,
Commend me to him, say I am bound to travail,
To see the fruitful parts of Italy,
And as you ever bore a Christian mind,
Let Banister some favour of you find.
For your sake sir isle help him all I can,
To starve his hart out ear he gets a groat,
So Moister Cromwell doe I take my leave,
For I must straight unto the governor.
Farewell sir, pray you remember what I said:
No Cromwell, no, thy hart was ne'er so base
To live by falsehood or by brokery,
But 't falls out well, I little it repent,
Hereafter, time in travel shall be spent.
Your son Thomas, quoth you, I have been Thomast,
I had thought it had been no such matter to a gone by water: for
at Putnay isle go you to Parish-garden for two pence, sit as still as
may be, without any wagging or ioulting in my guts, in a little
boat too: here we were scarce four mile in the great greene
water, but I thinking to go to my afternoons vnchines, as it was
my manner at home, but I felt a kind of rising in my guts: at
last one a the Sailors spying of me, be a good cheer says hee, set
down thy victuals, and up with it, thou hast nothing but an
Ecle in thy belly▪ Well, too't went I, to my victuals went the
Sailors, &amp; thinking me to be a man of better experience then any
in the ship, asked me what Wood the ship was made of:
they all swore I could them as right as if I had been acquainted
with the Carpenter that made it, at last wee grew near land,
and I grew villainous hungry, went to my bag, the devil a
bit there was, the Sailors had tickled me▪ yet I cannot blame
them, it was a part of kindness, for I in kindness told them
what Wood the ship was made of, and they in kindness eat
up my victuals, as indeed one good turn asks another: well
would I, could I, find my Moister Thomas in this Dutch Town,
he might put some English Bear into my belly.
What Hodge my fathers man, by my hand welcome,
How doth my father? whats the news at home?
Moister Thomas, O God Moister Thomas, your hand.
glove and all, this is to give you to understanding that your fa∣there
is in health, and Alice Downing here hath sent you a Nut∣meg,
and Bess Make water a race of Ginger, my fellow Will and
Tom hath between them sent you a dozen of points, and good∣man
Toll, of the Goat, a pair of mittons, my self came in per∣son,
and this is all the news.
Gramercy good Hodge, and thou art welcome to me,
But in as ill a time thou comes as may be:
For I am travelling into Italy,
What say thou Hodge, wilt thou bear me company?
Will I bear thee company Tom, what tell me of
Italy, were it to the furthest part of Flanders, I would go with
thee Tom, I am thine in all weal and woe, thy own to com∣maund.
what Tom, I have passed the rigorous waives of Nep∣tunes
blasts, I tell you Thomas I have been in the danger of the
floods, and when I have seen Bores begin to play the Ruffin
with vs, then would I down a my knees and call upon Vulcan.
And why upon him?
Because as this same fellow Neptune is God of the Seas,
so Vulcan is LORD over the Smiths, and therefore I being a
Smith, thought his Godhood would have some care yet of me.
A good conceit, but tell me hast thou dined yet?
Thomas to speak the truth, not a bit yet I.
Come go with me, thou shalt have cheer good store.
And farewell Antwarpe if I come no more.
I follow thee sweet Tom, I follow thee
Is Cromwell gone then, say you Moister Bagot,
What dislike, I pray, what was the cause?
To tell you true, a wilde brain of his own,
Such youth as they, cannot see when they are well:
He is all bent to travail, thats his reason,
And doth not love to eat his bread at home.
Well, good fortune with him, if the man be gone.
We hardly shall find such a one as he,
To fit our turns, his dealings were so honest:
But now sir, for your Jewels that I have,
What doe you say? what, will you take my prise?
O sir, you offer too much vnderfoote.
Tic but two hundred pound between vs man,
Whats that in payment of five thousand pound.
Two hundred pound byr'lady sir tic great,
Before I got so much, it made me sweat.
Well Moister Bagot Isle proffer you fairly,
You see this Merchant Moister Banister,
Is going now to prison at your suit.
His substance all is gone, what would you have?
Yet in regard I knew the man of wealth.
Never dishonest dealing, but such mishaps
Hath fallen on him, may light on me, or you,
There is two hundred pound between vs,
We will divide the same, Isle give you one,
On that condition you will set him free:
His state is nothing, that you see your self,
And where nought is the King must lose his right.
Sir▪ sir, you speak out of your love,
Tic foolish love sir sure to pity him:
Therefore content your self, this is my mind,
To doe him good I will not bate a penny.
This is my comfort though thou dost no good,
A mighty ebb follows a mighty flood.
O thou base wretch, whom we have fostered.
Even as a Serpent for to poison vs,
If God did ever right a women's wrong:
To that same God I bend and bow my heart,
To let his heany wrath fall on thy head,
By whom my hopes and joys are butchered.
Alas fond woman, I prithee pray thy worst,
The Fox fares better still when he is cursed.
Moister Bowser! your welcome sir from England,
Whats the best news? How doth all our friends?
They are all well and doe commend them to you,
There's letters from your brother and your son:
So fair you well sir, I must take my leave.
My hast and business doth require so.
Before you dine sir? what go you out of town?
I faith unless I here some news in town,
I must away, there is no remedy.
Moister Bowser what is your business, may I know it?
You may sir, and so shall all the City.
The King of late hath had his treasury robed,
And of the choicest jewels that he had:
The value of them was seven thousand pounds,
The fellow that did steal these jewels is hanged,
And did confess that for three hundred pound,
He sold them to one Bagor dwelling in London:
Now Bigot's fled, and as we here to Antwarpe,
And hither am I come to seek him out,
And they that first can tell me of his news,
Shall have a hundred pound for their reward.
How just is God to right the innocent?
Moister Bowser you come in happy time,
Here is the villain Bagot that you seek.
And all those jewels have I in my hands,
Officers look to him, hold him fast.
The devil ought me a shame, and now hath paid it.
Is this that Bagot? fellows bear him hence,
We will not now stand for his reply;
Lade him with Irons, wee will have him tried
In England where his villainies are known.
Mischief, confusion, light upon you all,
O hang me, drown me, let me kill my self,
Let go my arms let me run quick to hell.
Away, bear him away, stop the slaves mouth.
Thy works are infinite, great God of heaven.
I hard this Bagot was a wealthy fellow.
He was indeed, for when his goods were zeased,
Of Jewels, coin, and Plate within his house,
Was found the value of five thousand pound,
His furniture fully worth half so much,
Which being all strained for the King,
He frankly gave it to the Antwarpe Merchants,
And they again, out of their bounteous mind,
Hath to a brother of their company,
A man deceit by fortune of the Seas,
Given Bigots wealth, to set him up again:
And keep it for him, his name is Banister.
Moister Bowser, with this happy news,
You have revived two from the gates of death,
This is that Banister, and this his wife.
Sir I am glad my fortune is so good,
To bring such tidings as may comfort you,
You have given life unto a man deemed dead,
For by these news, my life is newly bred.
Thanks to my God, next to my Sovereign King.
And last to you that these good news doe bring.
The hundred pound I must receive as due
For finding Bagot, I freely give to you.
And Moister Banister, if so you please,
Isle bear you company, when you cross the Seas.
If it please you sir, my company is but mean,
Stands with your liking, Isle waite on you.
I am glad that all things doe accord so well:
Come Moister Bowser, let vs in to dinner:
And Mistress Banister, be merry woman,
Come after sorrow now, lets cheer your spirit,
Knaves have their due, and you but what you merit.
Call ye this seeing of fashions?
Marry would I had staide at Putney still,
O Moister Thomas, we are spoiled, we are gone.
Content thee man, this is but fortune.
Fortune, a plague of this Fortune makes me go wet∣shod,
the rogues would not leave me a shoe to my feet, for my
hoase they scorned them with their heals, but for my Doublet
and Hat, O Lord they embraced me, and unlaced me, and
took away my clothes, and so disgraced me.
Well Hodge, what remedy?
What shift shall we make now?
Nay I know not, for begging I am nought, for stealing
worse: by my troth I must even fall to my old trade, to the
Hammer and the Horse heals again: but now the worst is, I
am not acquainted with the humour of the horses in this country,
whether they are not coltish, given much to kicking, or no, for
when I have one leg in my hand, if he should up and lay
tother on my chops, I were gone, there lay I, there lay Hodge.
Hodge I believe thou must work for vs both.
O Moister Thomas, have not I told you of this, have
not I many a time and often, said Tom, or Moister Thomas, learn
to make a Horse-shooe, it will be your own another day: this
was not regarded. Hark you Thomas, what doe you call the
fellows that robbed vs?
The Bandetto.
The Bandetto doe you call them, I know not what
they are called here, but I am sure we call them plain thieves in
England, O Th•mas that we were now at Putney, at the ale there▪
Content thee man, here set up these two bills,
And let vs keep our standing on the bridge:
The fashion of this country is such,
If any stranger be oppressed with want,
To write the manner of his misery,
And such as are disposed to succour him,
Will doe it, what hast thou set them up?
I they're up, God send some to read them,
And not only to read them, but also to look on vs:
And not altogether to look on vs,
But to relieve vs, O cold, cold, cold.
Whats here? two Englishmen robed by the Bandetto,
One of them seems to be a gentleman:
Tic pity that his fortune was so hard,
To fall into the desperate hands of thieves,
Isle question him of what estate he is,
God save you sir, are you an Englishman?
I am sir a distressed Englishman.
And what are you my friend.
Who I sir, by my troth I doe not know my self what I
am now, but sir, I was a Smith sir, a poor Farrier of Putney,
thats my Moister sir yonder, I was robbed for his sake sir.
I see you have been met by the Bandetto,
And therefore need not ask how you came thus:
But Friskiball, why dost thou question them
Of their estate and not relieve their need?
Sir, the coin I have about me is not much:
There's sixteen Ducats for to cloth your selves,
There's sixteen more to buy your diet with,
And there's sixteen to pay for your horse hier:
Tic all the wealth you see my purse possesses,
But if you please for to enquire me out,
You shall not want for ought that I can doe,
My name is Friskiball, a Florence Merchant,
A man that always loved your nation.
This unexpected favour at your hands,
Which God doth know, if ever I shall requi•e it,
Necessity makes me to take your bounty,
And for your gold can yield you nought but thanks,
Your charity hath helped me from despair.
Your name shall still be in my hearty prayer.
It is not worth such thanks come to my house,
Your want shall better be relieved then thus.
I pray excuse me, this shall well suffice,
To bear my charges to Bononia,
Whereas a noble Earl is much distressed:
An Englishman, Russel• the Earl of Bedford
Is by the French King sold unto his death,
It may fall out, that I may doe him good:
To save his life, Isle hazard my hart blood:
Therefore kind sir, thanks for your liberal gift,
I must be gone to aide him there's no shift.
Isle be no hinderer to so good an act,
Heaven prosper you, in that you go about:
If Fortune bring you this way back again,
Pray let me see you: so I take my leave▪
All good a man can wish, I doe bequeath.
All good that God doth send, light on your head,
There's few such men within our climate bred.
How say you now Hodge, is not this good fortune?
How say you, Isle tell you what moister Thomas▪
If all men be of this Gentleman's mind,
Lets keep our standings upon this Bridge,
We shall get more here with begging in one day,
Then I shall with making Horshoes in a whole year.
No Hodge, we must begone unto Bononia,
There to relieve the noble Earl of Bedford:
Where if I fail not in my policy,
I shall deceive their subtle treachery.
Nay Isle follow you, God bless vs from the theeuing
Bandettoes again.
Am I betrayed, was Bedford borne to die,
By such base slaves in such a place as this?
Have I escaped so many times in France,
So many battles have I over passed,
And made the French stir when they hard my name;
And am I now betrayed unto my death?
Some of their harts blood first shall pay for it.
They doe desire my Lord to speak with you.
The traitors doe desire to have my blood,
But by my birth, my honour, and my name,
By all my hopes, my life shall cost them dear.
Open the door, isle venture out upon them,
And if I must die, then isle die with honour.
Alas my Lord that is a desperate course,
They have begirt you round about the house:
Their meaning is to take you prisoner,
And so to send your body unto France.
First shall the Ocean beas dry as sand,
Before alive they send me unto France:
Isle have my body first bored like a Sieve,
And die as Hector, against the Mermidons,
Ear France shall boast Bedfordes their prisoner,
Treacherous France that against the law of arms:
Hath here betrayed thy enemy to death,
But be assured my blood shall be revenged,
Upon the best lives that remains in France:
Stand back, or else thy run'st upon thy death.
Pardon my Lord, I come to tell your honour
That they have hired a Neopolitan,
Who by his Oratory hath promised them
Without the shedding of one drop of blood,
Into their hands safe to deliver you,
And therefore craves none but himself may enter,
And a poor swain that attends on him.
A Neapolitan, bid him come in,
Were he as cunning in his eloquence
As Cicero the famous man of Rome,
His words would be as chafe against the wind,
Sweet tong'd Vlesses that made Aiaxe mad;
Were he and his tongue in this speakers head,
Alive he wins me not, then tic no conquest dead.
Sir, are you the moister of the house?
I am sir.
By this same token you must leave this place,
And leave none but the Earl and I together,
And this my Peasant here to tend on vs.
With all my hart, God grant, you doe some good.
Now sir whats your will with me?
Intends your honour, not to yield your self:
No good-man goose, not while my sword doth last,
Is this your eloquence for to persuade me.
My Lord my eloquence is for to save you,
I am not as you judge a Neopolitan:
But Cromwell your servant, and an Englishman.
How Cromwell, not my Farriers son?
The same sir, and am come to succour you.
Yes faith sir, and I am Hodge your poor Smith,
Many a time and oft have I shooed your Dapper Gray.
And what avails it me that thou art here?
It may avail if you'll be ruled by me,
My Lord you know the men of Mantua;
And these Bononians are at deadly strife,
And they my Lord, both love and honour you▪
Could you but get out of the Mantua port,
Then were you safe despite of all their force.
The man thou talk of things impossible,
Dost thou not see that we are round beset:
How then is it possible, we should escape?
By force we cannot, but by policy,
Put on the apparel here that Hodge doth wear,
And give him yours: the States they know you not,
For as I think they never saw your face,
And at a watch-word must I call them in,
And will desire, that we two safe may pass
To Mantua, where Isle say my business lies,
How doth your Honour like of this devise?
O wondrous good: But wilt thou venture Hodge?
Will I O noble Lord, I doe accord? in any thing I can,
And doe agree, to set thee free, doe fortune what she can.
Come then lets change our apparel straight.
God Hodge make hast least they chance to call.
I warrant you isle 〈◊〉 with a 〈◊〉.
Heavens grant this policy doth take success,
And that the Earl may safely scope •eay.
And yet it grieves me for this simple wretch,
For fear they should offer him violence.
But of two evils tic best to shun the greatest,
And better is it that he live in thrall,
Then such a Noble Earl as he should fall.
Their stubborn harts, it may be will relent:
Since he is gone, to whom their hate is bent,
My Lord have you dispatched?
How dost thou like vs Cromwell, is it well?
O my Lord excellent: Hodge how dost feel thy self?
How do I feel my self? why as a Noble man should do,
O how I feel honour come creeping on,
My Nobility is wonderful melancholy:
Is it not most Gentleman like to be melancholy?
Yes Hodge, now go sit down in the study.
And take state upon thee.
I warrant you my Lord, let me alone to take state upon
me: but hark my Lord, doe you feel nothing bite about you?
No trust me Hodge.
I, they know they want their old pasture, tic a strange
thing of this vermin, they dare not meddle with Nobility.
Go take thy place Hodge, I will call them in,
All is done, enter
and if you please.
What have you won him? will he yield himself?
I have an't please you, and the quiet Earl,
Doth yield himself to be disposed by you.
Give him the money that we promised him:
So let him go, whether it please himself.
My business sir lies unto Mantua,
Please you to give me safe conduct thither.
Go and conduct him to the Mantua port,
And see him safe delivered presently.
Go draw the curtains, let vs see the Earl.
O he is writing, stand apart a while.
Fellow William, I am not as I have been, I went from
you a Smith, I write to you as a Lord: I am at this present writing, a∣mong
the Polonyan Casiges. I do commend my Lordship to Raphe
&amp; to Roger, to Bridget &amp; to Doritie, &amp; so to al the youth of Putu•y.
Sure these are the names of English Noblemen.
Some of his special friends, to whom he writes:
But stay he doth address himself to sing.
My Lord I am glad you are so frolic and so blithe,
Believe me noble Lord if you knew all,
Your change your merry vain to sudden sorrow.
I change my merry vain, no thou Bononian, no,
I am a Lord and therefore let me go,
And doe defy thee and thy Sasigis,
Therefore stand off, and come not near my honour.
My Lord this jesting cannot serve your turn.
Dost think thou black Bononian beast,
That I doe flower, doe gibe, or jest,
No, no, thou Beare-pot, know that I, a noble Earl, a Lord party.
What means this Trumpets sound?
One come from the States of Mantua.
What, would you with vs speak, thou man of Mantua?
Men of Bononia: this my message is,
To let you know the Noble Earl of Bedford:
Is safe within the town of Mantua,
And wills you send the peasant that you have,
Who hath deceived your expectation,
Or else the States of Mantua have vowed:
They will recall the truce that they have made,
And not a man shall stir from forth your town,
That shall return unless you send him back.
O this misfortune how it mads my hart?
The Neopolitan hath beguiled vs all;
Hence with this fool: what shall we doe with him,
The Earl being gone? a plague upon it all.
No Isle assure you I am no Earl, but a smith Sir,
One Hodge, a smith at Putney sir:
One that hath gulled you, that hath bored you sir.
Away with him, take hence the fool you came for.
I sir: and isle leave the greater fool with you.
Farewell Bononians, come friend a long with me.
My friend before, my Lordship will follow thee.
Well Mantua, since by thee the Earl is lost,
Within few days I hope to see thee crossed.
Thus far you see how Cromwells fortune passed.
The Earl of Bedford being safe in Mantua:
Desires Cromwells company into France,
To make requital for his curtsy:
But Cromwell doth deny the Earl his suit,
And tells him that those parts he meant to see,
He had not yet set footing on the land,
And so directly takes his way to Spain:
The Earl to France, and so they both doe part,
Now let your thoughts as swift as is the wind,
Skip some few years, that Cromwell spent in travel,
And now imagine him to be in England:
Servant unto the Moister of the Roules,
Where in short time he there began to flourish,
An hour shall show you what few years did cherish.
Come sirs, be careful of your Masters credit,
And as our bounty now exceeds the figure
Of common entertainment: so doe you
With looks as free as is your Masters soul,
Give formal welcome to the thronged tables,
That shall receive the Cardinals followers,
And the attendants of the great Lord Chancellor.
But all my care Cromwell depends on thee,
Thou art a man, differing from vulgar form,
And by how much thy spirit is ranked above these,
In rules of Art, by so much it shines brighter by travel,
Whose observance pleads his merit
In a most learned, yet vnaffecting spirit,
Good Cromwell cast an eye of fair regard,
Bout all my house, and what this ruder flesh,
Through ignorance, or wine, doe miscreate,
Salve thou with courtesy: if welcome want,
Full bowls, and ample banquets will seem scant.
Sir, whatsoever lies in me,
Assure you I will show my utmost duty.
About it then, the Lords will straight be here:
Cromwell, thou hast those parts would rather suit,
The service of the state, then of my house,
I look upon thee with a loving eye,
That one day will prefer thy destiny.
Sir the Lords be at hand,
They are welcome, bid Cromwell straight attendys,
And look you all things be in perfect readiness.
O sir Christopher you are too liberal, what a banquet to?
My Lords if words could show the ample welcome,
That my free hart affords you, I could then become a praetor:
But I now must deal like a feast Politician,
With your Lordships, defer your welcome till the banquet end,
That it may then salve our defect of fair:
Yet Welcome now and all that tend on you,
Thanks to the kind Moister of the Roules,
Come and sit down, sit down sir Thomas Moore:
Tic strange, how that we and the Spaniard differ,
Their dinner, is our banquet after dinner,
And they are men of active disposition,
This I gather, that by their sparing meat:
Their body more fitter for the wars,
And if that famine chance to pinch their mawes,
Being used to fast it breeds less pain.
Fill me some Wine: Isle answer Cardinal Wolsay:
My Lord we Englishmen are of more heer souls,
Then hunger starved, and ill complexioned spaniards,
They that are rich in Spain, spare belly food,
To deck their backs with an Italian hood,
And Silks of Civil: And the poorest Snake,
That feeds on Lemmons, Pilchers, and near heated
His pallet with sweet flesh, will bear a case,
More fat and gallant then his starved face,
Pride, the Inquisition, and this belly-euill,
Are in my judgment Spaines three headed devil.
Indeed it is a plague unto their nation.
Who stager after in blind imitation.
My Lords with welcome, I present your Lordships
A solemn health.
I love health well, but when as health• doe bring
Pain to the head, and bodies surfeiting:
Then cease I health•: nay spill not friend,
For though the drops be small,
Yet have they force, to force men to the wall.
Sir Christopher, is that your man?
And like your grace he is a Scholar, and a Li•guest,
One that hath travelled many parts of Christendom my Lord.
My friend come nearer, have you been a traveller?
My Lord I have added to my knowledge, the low countries,
France, Spain, Germanie, and Italy:
And though small gain of profit I did find,
Yet did it please my eye, content my mind.
What doe you think of the several states.
And Princes Courts as you have travelled?
My Lord no Court with England may compare,
Neither for state nor civil government:
Lust dwells in France, in Italy, and Spain,
From the poor peasant to the Princes train,
In Germanie, and Holland riot serves,
And he that most can drink, most he deserves:
England I praise not: for I here was borne,
But that she laughs the others unto scorn.
My Lord there dwells within that spirit.
More then can be discerned by outward eye,
Sir Christopher will you part with your man?
I have sought to proffer him to your Lordship,
And now I see he hath preferred himself.
What is thy name?
Cromwell my Lord.
Then Cromwell here we make thee solicitor of our causes,
And nearest next our self:
Gardiner give you kind welcome to the man.
My Lord you are a royal Winer.
Hath got a man besides your bounteous dinner,
Well Knight, pray we come no more:
If we come often, thou moist shut thy door.
Sir Christopher had thou given me.
Half thy lands, thou coldest not have pleased me
So much as with this man of thine,
My infant thoughts doe spell:
Shortly his fortune shall be lifted higher,
True industry doth kindle honours fire,
And so kind Moister of the Roules farewell.
Cromwell farewell.
Cromwell takes his leave of you
That near will leave to love and honour you.
Now Cromwells highest fortunes doth begin.
Wolsay that loved him as he did his life:
Committed all his treasure to his hands,
Wolsay is dead, and Gardiner his man,
Is now created Bishop of Winchester:
Pardon if we omit all Wolsayes life,
Because our play depends on Cromwells death,
Now sit and see his highest state of all;
His height of rising: and his sudden fall,
Pardon the errors is all ready past,
And live in hope the best doth come at last:
My hope upon your favour doth depend▪
And look to have your liking ere the end.
Moister Cromwell, since Cardinal Wolsayes death,
His Majesty is given to understand,
There's certain bills and writings in your hand,
That much concerns the state of England:
My Lord of Winchester is it not so?
My Lord of Norfolk, we two were meanwhile fellows,
And Moister Cromwell, though our Masters love:
Did bind vs, while his love was to the King,
It is no boot now to deny those things
Which may be prejudicial to the state:
And though that God hath raised my fortune hyer,
Then any way I looked for, or deserved.
Yet my life no longer with me dwell,
Then I prove true unto my Sovereign:
What say you moister Cromwell have you those writings, I, or no?
Here are the writings, and upon my knees,
I give them up, unto the worthy Dukes,
Of Suffolk, and of Norfolk: he was my Moister,
And each virtuous part
That lived in him, I tendered with my hart,
But what his head complotted against the state.
My countries love commands me that to hate:
His sudden death I grieve for, not his fall,
Because he sought to work my countries thrall.
Cromwell, the King shall here of this thy duty,
Whom I assure my self will well reward thee:
My Lord, lets go unto his Majesty,
And show these writings which he longs to see.
How now, whose this Cromwell?
By my soul, welcome to England:
Thou once did save my life, did not Cromwell?
If I did so, it is greater glory for me that you remember it,
Then for my self vainly to report it.
Well Cromwell, now is the time,
I shall commend thee to my Sovereign:
Cheer up thy self, for I will raise thy state,
A Russel yet was never found ingrate.
O how uncertain is the wheel of state,
Who lately greater then the Cardinal,
For fear, and love: and now who lower lies?
Gay honours are but Fortunes flatteries▪
And whom this day, pride and promotion swell•,
To morrow, envy and ambition quills.
Who sees the Cob-web entangle the poor Fly,
May boldly say the wretches death is nigh.
I know his state and proud ambition,
Was too too violent to last ouer-long.
Who soars too near the sun with golden wings,
Melts them, to ruin his own fortune brings.
Cromwell kneel down in king Henries name,
Arise sir Thomas Cromwell, thus begins thy fame.
Cromwell the Majesty of England,
For the good liking he conceives of thee:
Makes thee Moister of the jewel house,
Chief Secretary to himself, and with all,
Creates thee one of his highness privy Counsel.
Where is sir Thoma, Cromwell is he knighted,
He is my Lord.
Then to add honour to his name,
The King creates him Lord keeper of his privy S•ale:
And Moister of the Roules,
Which you sir Christopher doe now enjoy;
The King determines higher place for you.
My Lords these honours are too high for my desert,
O content thee man, who would not choose it?
Yet thou art wise in seeming to refuse it.
Here's honours, titles and promotions,
I fear this climbing, will have a sudden fall.
Then come my Lords, lets altogether bring,
This new made Counsellor to Englands King.
But Gardiner means is glory shall be dim'd:
Shall Cromwell live a greater men then I?
My envy with his honour now is bred,
I hope to shorten Cromwell by the head.
O Friskiball, what shall become so thee?
Where shalt thou go, or which way shalt thou turn?
Fortune that turns her too inconstant wheel,
Hath turned thy wealth and riches in the Sea,
All parts abroad where ever I have been,
Grows weary of me, and denies me succour,
My debtors they, that should reserve my want,
Forswears my money, says they owe me none:
They know my state too mean, to bear out law,
And here in London where I 〈…〉 been,
And have done good to many a w••ched man,
Am now most wretched here, despised my self,
In vain it is, more of their hearts to try,
Be patient therefore, lay thee down and die.
Come Join, come lets see what heel doe for vs now?
I wis wee have done for him, when many a time and often hee
might have gone a hungry to bed.
Alas man, now he is made a Lord, heel never look up∣on
vs, heel fulfil the old Proverb: set Beggars a horse-backe, &amp;
theile ride: a wells day for my cow, such as he hath made vs come
behind hand, we had never pound our Cow else to pay our rent.
Well Join, heel come this way: and by Gods dickers
isle tell him roundly of it, and if hee were ten LORDS: a
shall know that I had not my Chief and my Bacon for no∣thing.
Doe you remember husband how hee would much
up my Cheese cakes, hee hath forgot this now, but now weal
remember him.
I we shall have now three flappes with a Fox tail:
but I faith isle gibber a joint, but isle tell him his own: stay
who comes here? O stand up here he comes, stand up.
Come, away with these beggars here, rise up sir,
Come out good people: run before there no.
I vvee are kicked away now, vvee come for our
own, the time hath been hee would a looked more friend∣lie
upon vs: And you Hodge, we know you well enough though
you are so fine.
Come hither sirrah: stay, what men are these?
My honest Host of Hounslow, and his wife:
I owe thee money father, doe I not?
I by the body of me do thou, would thou
would pay me, good four pound it is, I have a the post at
home.
I know tic true, sirrah give him ten Angels,
And look your wife, and you doe stay to dinner:
And while you live I freely give to you,
Four pound a year, for the sour pound I ought you.
Art not changed, art old Tom still?
Now God bless the good Lord Tom:
Home Join, home, isle dine with my Lord Tom to day,
And thou shalt come next week,
Fetch my Cow, home Join, home.
Now God bless thee, my good Lord Tom,
Isle fetch my Cow presently.
Sir, go to yon stranger, tell him I desire him
Stay to dinner: I must speak with him;
My Lord of Norfolk see you this same bubble?
That same puff, but mark the end, my Lord, mark the end.
I promise you, I like not something he hath done,
But let that pass, the King doth love him well.
Good morrow to my Lord of Winchester.
I know you bear me hard, about the Abbey lands.
Have I not reason, when religion is wronged?
You had no colour for what you have done.
Yes the abolishing of Antichrist,
And of his Popish order from our Realm:
I am no enemy to religion,
But what is done, it is for Englands good,
What did they serve for but to feed a sort:
Of lazy Abbots, and of full fed Fryers,
They neither plow, nor sow, and yet they reap
The fat of all the Land, and suck the poor:
Look what was theirs, is in King Henries hands,
His wealth before lay in the Abbey lands.
Indeed these things you have aledg'd my Lord,
When God doth know the infant yet unborn,
Will curse the time, the Abbeys were pulled down,
I pray now where is hospitality?
Where now may poor distressed people go
For to relieve their need, or rest their bones,
When weary travel doth oppress their limbs?
And where religious men should take them in.
Shall now be kept back with a Mastiff dog,
And thousand thousand.
O my Lord no more▪ things past redress
Tic bootless to complain.
What shall we to the Convocation house.
Weal follow you my Lord pray lead the way.
How, one Cromwell made Lord keeper since I left Putney
And dwelt in Yorkshire? I never hard better news:
Isle see that Cromwell, or it shall go hard.
My aged father: state set aside.
Father on my knee I crave your blessing:
One of my servants go and have him in,
At better leisure will we talk with him.
Now if I die, how happy were the day,
To see this comfort rains forth showers of joy.
This duty in him shows a kind of grace.
Go on before for time draws on apace.
I wonder what this Lord would have with me,
His man so strictly gave me charge to stay:
I never did offend him to my knowledge,
Well, good or bad, I mean to bide it all,
Worse then I am, now never can befall.
Come wi•e I take it be almost dinner time,
For Moister Newton, and Moister Crosbie sent to me:
Last might, they would come dine with me,
And take their bond in: I pray thee hie thee home,
And see that all things be in readiness.
They shall be welcome, husband Isle go before,
But is not that man Moister Friskiball?
O heavens it is kind Moister Friskiball:
Say sir, what hap hath brought you to this pass?
The same that brought you to your misery.
Why would you not acquaint me with your state?
Is Banister your poor friend forgot?
Whose goods, whose love, whose life and all is yours.
I thought your usage would be as the rest,
That had more kindness at my hands then you,
Yet looked askance, when as they saw me poor▪
If Banister should bear so base a hart,
I never would look my husband in the face,
But hath him as I would a Cockatrise.
And well thou might, should Banister deal so,
Since that I saw you sir, my state is mended:
And for the thousand pound I owe to you,
I have it ready for you sir at home,
And though I grieve your fortune is so bad:
Yet that my hap's to help you, makes me glad,
And now sir will it please you walk with me.
Not yet I cannot, for the Lord Chancellor,
Hath here commanded me to weight on him,
For what I know not▪ pray God it be for good.
Never make doubt of that, isle warrant you,
He is as kind a noble gentleman;
As ever did possess the place he hath.
Sir my brother is his steward, if you please,
Weal go along and bear you company:
I know we shall not want for welcome there?
Withal my hart: but whats become of Bagot.
He is hanged, for buying jewels of the Kings.
A just reward for one so impious,
The time draws on, sir will you go along.
Isle follow you kind Moister Friskiball.
Now Moister Crosbie, I see you have a care
To keep your word, in payment of your money.
By my faith I have reason upon a bond,
Three thousand pound is too much to forfet,
Yet I doubt not Moister Banister.
By my faith your sum is more then mine,
And yet I am not much behind you too,
Considering that to day I paid at Court.
Mass and well remembered:
Whats the reason the Lord Cromwels men,
Wear such long skirts upon their coats?
They reach down to their very ham.
I will resolve you sir, and thus it is;
The Bishop of Winchester, that loves not Cromwell,
As great men are envied, as well as less.
A while ago there was a jar between them,
And it was brought to my Lord Cromwels ear,
That Bishop Gardiner would sit on his skirts,
Upon which word, he made his men long Blew coats,
And in the Court wore one of them himself:
And meeting with the Bishop, quoth he, my Lord
Here's skirt enough now for your Grace to sit on.
Which vexed the Bishop to the very hart,
This is the reason why they wear long coats.
Tic always seen, and mark it for a rule,
That one great man will envy still another:
But tic a thing that nothing concerns me:
What, shall we now to Moister Banisters?
I come, weal pay him royally for our dinner.
Uncover there Gentlemen.
My noble Lords of Suffolk and of Bedford,
Your honours welcome to poor Cromwels house:
Where is my father? nay be covered Father,
Although that duty to these noble men doth challenge it
Yet Isle make bold with them.
Your head doth bear the calender of care:
What Cromwell covered, and his Father bare?
It must not be. Now sit to you,
Is not your name Friskiball, and a Florentine.
My name was Friskiball, till cruel fate?
Did rob me of my name and of state.
What fortune brought you to this country now?
All other parts hath left me succourless,
Save only this, because of debts I have
I hope to gain for to relieve my want.
Did you not once upon your Florence bridge,
Help a distressed men, robbed by the Bandetto,
His name was Cromwell?
I never made my brain a calender of any good I did,
I always loved this nation with my heart.
I am that Cromwell that you there relieved,
Sixteen Ducats you gave me for to cloth me,
Sixteen to bear my charges by the way,
And sixteen more I had for my horse hier,
There be those several sums justly returned,
Yet it injustice were that serving at thy need,
For to repay them without interest,
Therefore receive of me these four several bag•▪
In each of them there is four hundred mark,
And bring to me the names of all your debtors,
And if they will not see you paid, I will:
O God forbid, that I should see him fall,
That help• me in my greatest need of all▪
Here stands my Father that first gave me life,
Alas what duty is too much for him?
This man in time of need did save my life,
And therefore cannot doe too much for him.
By this old man I often times was sed,
Else might I have gone supperless to bed.
Such kindness have I had of these three men,
That Cromwell no way can repay again:
Now in to dinner, for we stay too long,
And to good stomachs is no greater wrong
Sir, where be those men I cause to stay?
They doe attend your pleasure Sir within,
Bid them come hither, and stay you without,
For by those men the Fox of this same land,
That makes a Goose of better then himself,
Must worried be unto his latest home,
or Gardiner will fail in his intent.
As for the Dukes of Suffolk and of Norfolk,
Whom I have sent for to come speak with me,
Howsoever outwardly they shadow it,
Yet in their harts I know they love him not;
As for the Earl of Bedford hee is but one,
And dares not gain•ay what we doe set down.
Now my friends, you know I saved you lives,
When by the law you had deserved death,
And then you promised me upon your oaths,
To venture both your lives to doe me good.
We swore no more then that we will perform.
I take your words, and that which you must doe,
Is service for your God, and for your King,
To root a rebel from this flourishing land,
One thats an enemy unto the Church:
And therefore must you take your solemn oaths,
That you heard Cromwell, the Lord Chancellor,
Did wish a dagger at King Henries hart:
Fear not to swear it, for I hard him speak it,
Therefore weal shield you from ensuing harms,
If you will warrant vs the deed is good,
Weal undertake it.
Kneel down, and I will here absolve you both,
This Crucifix I lay upon you heads,
And sprinckle holy-water on your brows,
The deed is meritorious that you doe,
And by it shall you purchase grace from heaven.
Now Sir weal undertake it by our souls.
For Cromwell never loved none of our sort.
I know he doth not, and for both of you,
I will prefer you to some place of worth;
Now get you in, until I call for you,
For presently the Dukes means to be here.
Cromwell sit fast, thy time's not long to reign,
The Abbeys that were pulled down by thy means,
Is now a mean for me to pull thee down:
Thy pride also thy own head lights upon,
For thou art he hath changed religion:
But now no more, for here the Dukes are come.
Good even to my Lord Bishop.
How fares my Lord? what are you all alone?
No not alone my Lords, my mind is troubled:
I know your honours muse wherefore I sent
And in such hast: What came you from the King?
We did, and left none but Lord Cromwell with him.
O what a dangerous time is this we live in?
There's Thomas Wolsay, hoe's already gone,
And Thomas Moore, he followed after him:
Another Thomas yet there doth remain,
That is far worse then either of those twain,
And if with speed my Lords we not pursue it,
I fear the King and all the land will rue it.
Another Thomas? pray God it be not Cromwell.
My Lord Bedford, it is that traitor Cromwell.
Is Cromwell false? my hart will never think it.
My Lord of Winchester, what likelihood,
Or proof have you of this his treachery.
My Lord too much, call in the men within,
These men my Lord upon their oaths affirm,
That they did here Lord Cromwell in his garden,
Wished a dagger sticking at the hart,
Of our King Henrie, what is this but treason?
If it be so, my hart doth bleed with sorrow.
How say you friends, what, did you here these words?
We did and't like your grace.
In what place was Lord Cromwell when he spake them?
In his Garden, where we did attend a suit,
Which we had waited for two year and more.
How long first since you heard him speak these words?
Some half year since.
How chance that you concealed it all this time?
His greatness made vs fear, that was the cause,
I, I, his greatness thats the cause indeed,
And to make his treason here more mainfest,
He calls his servants to him round about,
Tells them of W•lsayes life, and of his fall,
Says that himself hath many enemies,
And gives to some of them a Park or Manor,
To others Leases, Lands to other some:
What need he doe thus in his prime of life,
And if he were not fearful of his death?
My Lord these likelihoods are very great.
Pardon me Lords, for I must needs depart,
Their proofs are great, but greater is my heart.
My friends take heed of that which you have said,
Your souls must answer what your tongues reports:
Therefore take heed, be wary what you doe.
My Lord we speak no more but truth.
Let them depart my Lord of Winchester,
Let these men be close kept
Until the day of trial.
They shall my Lord: hoe take in these two men.
My Lords, if Cromwell have a public trial,
That which we doe, is void, by his denial:
You know the King will credit none but him.
Tic true, he rules the King even as he pleases.
How shall we doe for to attach him then?
Mary my Lords thus, by an Act he made himself,
With an intent to entrap some of our lives,
And this it is: If any Councellor
Be convicted of high treason,
He shall be excecuted without a public trial.
This Act my Lords he caused the King to make.
A did indeed, and I remember it,
And now it is like to fall upon himself.
Let vs not slake it, tic for Englands good,
We must be warry, else heel go beyond vs.
Well hath your Grace said my Lord of Norfolk
Therefore let vs presently to Lambeth,
Thither comes Cromwell from the Court to night,
Let vs arest him, send him to the Tower.
And in the morning, cut off the traitors head.
Come then about it, let vs guard the town,
This is the day that Cromwell must go down.
Along my Lords, well Cromwell is half dead,
He shook my har•• but I will shave his head,
My soul is like a water troubled,
And Gardiner is the man that makes it so,
O Cromwell, I doe fear thy end is near▪
Yet Isle prevent their malice if I can,
And in good time, see where the man doth come,
Who little knows how nears his day of dome.
Your well encountered my good Lord of Bedford,
I see your honour is addressed to talk,
Pray pardon me, I am sent for to the King,
And doe not know the business yet me self,
So fare you well, for I must needs be gone.
You must, well, what remedy?
I fear too soon you must be gone indeed,
The King hath business, but little doest thou know,
Whose busy for thy life: thou think not so.
The second time well met my Lord of Bedford,
I am very sorry that my hast is such,
Lord Marks Dorset being sick to death,
I must receive of him the privy seal
At Lambeth, soon my Lord weal talk our fill,
How smooth and easy is the way to death
My Lord, the Dukes of Norfolks and of Suffo•ke,
Accompany•d Bishop of Winchest•• 〈…〉
Entreats you to come presently to Lambeth,
On earnest matters that concerns the state▪
To Lambeth, so: go fetch me pen and ink
I and Lord Cromwell there shall talk enough,
I and our last, I fear, and if he come,
Here take this letter, and hear it to Lord Cromwell,
Bid him read it, say it concerns him no••,
Away be gone make all the hast you can,
To Lambeth doe I go a woeful man.
Is the Barge ready? I will straight to Lambeth,
And if this one days business once were past,
I'd take me ease to morrow after trouble,
How now my friend would thou speak with me?
Sir here is a letter from my Lord of Bedford.
O good my friend commend me to thy Lord,
Hold take those Angels, drink them for thy pains.
He doth desire your grace to read i•▪
Because he says it doth concern you near.
Bid him assure himself of that fare•ell▪
To morrow tell him shall he hear from me,
Set on before there, and away to Lambeth▪
Halberta stand close unto the waterside▪
Sergeant at arms be bold in your office,
Herald deliver your proclamation.
This is to glue notice to all the Kings subjects.
The late Lord Cromwell Lord Chancellor of England,
Vicar general over the realm,
Him to hold and esteem as a traitor,
Against the Crown and dignity of England▪
So God save the King.
Amen.
Amen, and root thee from the land,
For whilst thou lives truth cannot stand.
Make a lane there, the traitor is at hand,
Keep back Cromwells men:
Drown them if they come on, Sergeant your office.
What means my Lord of Norfolk by these words?
Sirs come along.
Kill them if they come on.
Lord Cromwell, in King Henries name,
I doe arrest your honour of high treason.
Sergeant, me of treason?
Kill them if they draw a sword.
Hold, I charge you, at you love me draw not a sword,
Who dares accuse Cromwell of treason now?
This is no place to reckon up your crime,
Your Doue-like looks were viewed with serpents eyes.
With serpents eyes indeed, by thine they were,
But Gardiner doe thy worst, I fear thee not,
My faith compared with thine as much shall pass,
As doth the Diamond excel the glass:
Attached of treason, no accusers by,
Indeed what tongue dares speak so foul a lie?
My Lord, my Lord, matters are too well known,
And it is time the King had note thereof.
The King, let me go to him face to face,
No better trial I desire then that,
Let him but say that Cromwells faith was •ained,
Then let my honour, and my name be stained:
If ever my hart against my King was set,
O let my soul in Judgment answer it,
Then if my faith's confirmed with his reason,
Against whom hath Cromwell then committed treason?
My Lord your matter shall be tried,
Mean time, with patience content your self.
Perforce I must with patience be content:
O dear friend Bedford doest thou stand so neat?
Cromwell rejoices one friend sheds a tear,
And whether first? which way must Cromwell now?
My Lord you must unto the tower,
Lieutenant, take him to your charge
Well where you please, yet before I part,
Let me confer a little with my men.
As you go by water so you shall.
I have some business present to impart.
You may not stay, Lieutenant, take your charge.
Well, well my Lord, you second Gardeners text.
Norfolk farewell, thy turn will be the next.
His guilty conscience makes him rave my Lord.
I let him talk his time is short enough.
My Lord of Bedford, come you weep for him,
That would not shed half a tear for you.
It grieves me for to see his sudden fall.
Such success wish I unto traitors all.
Why? can this news be true? first possible?
The great Lord Cromwell arrested upon treason▪
I hardly will believe it can be so,
It is too true sir, would it were otherwise.
Condition I spent half the wealth I have,
I was at Lambeth? s•w him there arrested,
And afterword committed to the Tower.
What wast for treason that he was commit••d?
Kind noble Gentlemen•n 〈…〉 time,
All that I have, I did in•oy by him,
And if he 〈◊〉, then all my state is gone.
It may be hoped that he shall not die,
Because the King did favour him so much.
O sir, you are deceived in thinking so,
The grace and favour he had with the King,
Hath caused him have so many enemies:
He that in court secure ill keep himself,
Must not be great, for then he is envied at.
The Shrub is safe, when as the Cedar shakes,
For where the King doth love aboue compare,
Of others they as much more entiled are.
Tic pity that this noble man should fall,
He did so many charitable deeds.
Tic true, and yet you see in each estate,
There•• none so good, but some one doth him hate,
And they before would smile him in the face,
will be the foremost to doe him disgrace:
What will you go along unto the Court?
I care not if I do, and hear the newer,
How men will judge what shall become of him▪
Some will speak hardly some will speak in pity▪
Go you to the Court, Isle go into the City,
There I am sure to here more news then you.
Why then soon will we meet again.
Now Cromwell hast thou time to meditate,
And think upon thy state, and of the time:
Thy honours came unsought, I, and unlooked for,
Thy fall as sudden, and unlooked for to,
What glory was in England that I had not?
Who in this land commanded more then Cromwell?
Except the King who greater then my self?
But now I see what after ages shall,
The greater man, more sudden is their fall.
And now I doe remember the Earl of Bedford
Was very desirous for to speak to me:
And afterword sent unto me a letter,
The which I think I have still in my pocket,
Now may I read it, for I now have leisure,
And this I take it is.
My Lord come not this night to Lambeth,
For if you doe, your state is overthrown.
And much I doubt your life, and if you come:
Then if you love your self, stay where you are.
O God had I but read this letter,
Then had I been free from the Lions paw,
Deferring this, to read until to morrow,
I spurnd at joy, and did embrace my sorrow,
Now Moister Lieutenant, when's this day of death?
Alas my Lord would I might never see it,
Here are the Dukes of Suffolk and of Norfolk,
Winchester, Bedford, and sir Richard Ratcliffe,
With others, but why they come I know not.
No matter wherefore, Cromwell is prepared,
For Gardiner has my state and life insnard,
Bid them come in, or you shall doe them wrong,
For here stands he, whom some thinks lives too long,
Learning kills learning, and instead of Inck
To dip his Pen, Cromwels heart blood doth drink.
Good morrow Cromwell, what alone so sad?
One good among you, none of you are bad,
For my part, it best fits me be alone,
Sadness with me, not I with any one.
What, is the King acquainted with my cause?
We have, and he hath answered vs my Lord.
How, shall I come to speak with him my self?
The King is so advertised of your guilt,
He will by no means admit you to his presence.
No way admit me, am I so soon forgot?
Did he but yesterday embrace my neck,
And said that Cromwell was even half himself,
And is his Princely ears so much bewitched
With scandolous ignomy, and slanderous speeches,
That now he doth deny to look on me,
Well, my Lord of Winchester, no doubt but you,
Are much in favour with his Majesty,
Will you bear a letter from me to his grace?
Pardon me, isle bear no traitors letters,
Ha, will you doe this kindness then?
Tell him by word of mouth, what I shall say to you.
That will I.
But on your honour will you?
I on my honour.
Bear witness Lords,
Tell him when he hath known you,
And tried your faith but half so much as mine.
Heel find you to be the falsest hearted man
In England: Pray tell him this.
Be patient good my Lord in these extremes.
My kind and honourable Lord of Bedford,
I know your honour always loved me well,
But pardon me, this still shall be my theme,
Gardiner is the cause makes Cromwell so extreme,
Sir Ralph Sadler, pray a word with you,
You were my man, and all that you possess
Came by my means, to requite all this,
Will you take this letter here of me,
And give it with your own hands to the King.
I kiss your hand, and never will I rest,
Ear to the King this be delivered.
Why yet Cromwell hath one friend in store.
But all the •ast he makes shall be but vain;
Here is a discharge for your prisoner,
To see him executed presently:
My Lord, you here the tenor of your life.
I doe embrace it, welcome my last date,
And of this glistening world I take last leave,
And noble Lords, I take my leave of you,
As willingly I go to meet with death,
As Gardiner did pronounce in with his breath,
From treason is my hart as white as Snow,
My death only procured by my foe:
I pray commend me to my Sovereign King,
And tell him in what sort his Cromwell died,
To loose his head before his cause were tried:
But let his Grace, when he shall here my name,
Say only this, Gardiner procured the same.
Here is your son come to take his leave.
To take his leave,
Come hither Harry Cromwell,
Mark boy the last words that I speak to thee,
Flatter not Fortune, neither fawn upon her,
Gape not for state, yet loose no spark of honour,
Ambition, like the plague see thou eschew it,
I die for treason boy, and never knew it,
Yet let thy faith as spotless be as mine,
And Cromwels virtues in thy face shall shine,
Come go along and see me leave my breath,
And Isle leave thee upon the flower of death.
O father I shall die to see this wound,
Your blood being spilt will make my hart to sound.
How boy, not look upon the Axe▪
How shall I doe then to have my head stroke off▪
Come on my child and see the end of all,
And after say that Gardiner was my fall.
My Lord you speak it of an envious hart,
I have done no more then law and equity.
O good my Lord of Winchester for bear,
It would better seemed you to been absent,
Then with your words disturb a dying man.
Who me my Lord? no: he disturbs not me,
My mind he stirs not, though his mighty shock
Hath brought mo peers heads down to the block▪
Farewell my boy, all Cromwell can bequeath,
My hearty blessing, so I take my leave.
I am your death• man, pray my Lord forgive me.
Even with my soul, why man thou art my Doctor,
And brings me Precious physic for my soul,
My Lord of Bedford I desire of you,
Before my death a corporal embrace.
Farewell great Lord, my love I doe commend.
My hart to you, my soul to lieauen I send,
This is my joy that ere my body fleet,
Your honoured arms is my true winding sheet,
Farewell dear Bedford, my p••ce is made in heaven,
Thus falls great Cromwell a poor ell in length,
To rise to unmeasured height 〈◊〉 with new strength.
The land of Worm, which dying men discover.
My soul is shrinde with heavens 〈◊〉 cover.
Well, farewell Cromwe•• the 〈◊〉 friend,
That ever Bedford shall possess again,
Well Lords I fear when this man is dead,
You'll wish in vain that Cromwell had a head.
Here is the head of the deceased Cromwell.
Pray thee go hence, and bear his head away,
Unto his body, inter them both in clay.
Ho now my Lords, what is Lord Cromwell dead?
Lord Cromwels body now doth want a head,
O God a little speed had saved his life,
Here is a kind reprive come from the King,
To bring him straight unto his Majesty.
I, I sir Ralph, reprieves comes now too late.
My conscience now tells me this deed was ill,
Would Christ that Cromwell were alive again.
Come let vs to the King whom well I know,
Will grieve for Cromwell, that his death was so.

SO shaken as we are, so wan with care,
Find we a time for frighted Peace to pant,
And breath shortwinded accents of new broils
To be commenced in Stronds afar remote:
No more the thirsty entrance of this Soil,
Shall daube her lips with her own childrens blood:
No more shall trenching War channel her fields,
Nor bruise her Flowrets with the Armed hooves
Of hostile paces. Those opposed eyes,
Which like the Meteors of a troubled Heaven,
All of one Nature, of one Substance bred,
Did lately meet in the intestine shock,
And furious close of civil Butchery,
Shall now in mutual well-beseeming ranks
March all one way, and be no more opposed
Against Acquaintance, Kindred, and Allies.
The edge of War, like an ill-sheathed knife,
No more shall cut his Master. Therefore Friends,
As far as to the Sepulchre of Christ,
Whose Soldier now under whose blessed Cross
We are impressed and engaged to fight,
Forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
Whose arms were moulded in their Mothers womb,
To chase these Pagans in those holy Fields,
Over whose Acres walked those blessed feet
Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed
For our advantage on the bitter Cross.
But this our purpose is a twelve month old,
And bootless it is to tell you we will go:
Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
Of you my gentle Cousin Westmerland,
What vesternight our Council did decree,
In forwarding this dear expedience.
My Liege: This haste was hot in question,
And many limits of the Charge set down
But yesternight: when all athwart there came
A Post from Wales, laden with heavy News;
Whose worst was, That the Noble Mortimer,
Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wilde Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
And a thousand of his people butchered:
Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
Such beastly, shameless transformation,
By those Welsh women done, as may not be
(Without much shame) re-told or spoken of.
It seems then, that the tidings of this broil,
Brake off our business for the Holy land.
This matched with other like, my gracious Lord,
Far more uneven and unwelcome News
Came from the North, and thus it did report:
On Holy-roode day, the gallant Hotspurre there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald,
That euer-valiant and approved Scot,
At Holmeden met, where they did spend
A fad and bloody hour:
As by discharge of their Artillery,
And shape of likely-hood the news was told:
For he that brought them, in the very heate
And pride of their contention, did take horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.
Here is a dear and true industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his Horse,
Strained with the variation of each soil,
Betwixt that Holmedon, and this Seat of ours:
And he hath brought vs smooth and welcomes news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited,
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty Knights
Balked in their own blood did Sir Walter see
On Holmedons Plains. Of Prisoners, Hotspurre took
Mordake Earl of Fife, and eldest son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Idol,
Of Murry, Angus, and Mentioned.
And is not this an honourable spoil?
A gallant prize? Ha Cousin, is it not? Infaith it is.
A Conquest for a Prince to boast of.
Yea, there thou make me sad, &amp; make me sin,
In envy, that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the Father of so blessed a Son:
A Son, who is the Theme of Honours tongue;
Amongst a Grove, the very straightest Plant,
Who is sweet Fortunes Minion, and her Pride:
Whilst I by looking on the praise of him,
See Riot and Dishonour stain the brow
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved,
That some Night-tripping-Faiery, had exchanged
In Cradle-clothes, our Children where they lay,
And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet:
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine:
But let him from my thoughts. What think you Cos
Of this young Percies pride? The Prisoners
Which he in this adventure hath surprised,
To his own use he keeps, and sends me word
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.
This is his Uncles teaching. This is Worcester
Malevolent to you in all Aspects:
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of Youth against your Dignity.
But I have sent for him to answer this:
And for this cause awhile we must neglect
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next, our Council we will hold
At Windsor, and so inform the Lords:
But come your self with speed to vs again,
For more is to be said, and to be done,
Then out of anger can be uttered.
I will my Liege.
Now Hal, what time of day is it Lad?
Thou art so fat-witted with drinking of old Sack, and unbuttoning thee after Supper, and sleeping upon Benches in the afternoon, that thou hast forgotten to demand that truly, which thou would truly know. What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the day? unless hours were cups of Sack, and minutes Capons, and clocks the tongues of Bawds, and dialls the signs of Leaping-houses, and the blessed Sun himself a fair hot Wench in Flame-coloured Taffeta; I see no reason, why thou shouldest bee so superfluous, to demand the time of the day.
Indeed you come near me now Hal, for we that take Purses, go by the Moon and seven Stars, and not by Phoebus hee, that wandering Knight so fair. And I prithee sweet Wag, when thou art King, as God save thy Grace, Majesty I should say, for Grace thou wilt have none.
What, none?
No, not so much as will serve to be Prologue to an Egg and Butter.
Well, how then? Come roundly, roundly.
Marry then, sweet Wag, when thou art King, let not vs that are Squires of the Nights body, bee called Thieves of the Days beauty. Let vs be Dianaes For???sters, Gentlemen of the Shade, Minions of the Moon; and let men say, we be men of good Government, being governed as the Sea is, by our noble and chaste mistress the Moon, under whose countenance we steal.
Thou say well, and it holds well too: for the fortune of vs that are the Moons men, doth ebb and flow like the Sea, being governed as the Sea is, by the Moon: as for proof. Now a Purse of Gold most reason???lutely snatched on Monday night, and most dissolutely spent on Tuesday Morning; got with swearing, Lay by: and spent with crying, Bring in: now, in as low an ebb as the foot of the Ladder, and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the Gallows.
Thou say true Lad: and is not my Hostess of the Tavern a most sweet Wench?
As is the honey, my old Lad of the Castle: and is not a Buff Jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?
How now? how now mad Wag? What in thy quips and thy quiddities? What a plague have I to doe with a Buffe-Ierkin?
Why, what a pox have I to doe with my Ho???stesse of the Tavern?
Well, thou hast called her to a reck'ning many a time and oft.
Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?
No, Isle give thee thy due, thou hast paid al there.
Yea and elsewhere, so far as my Coin would stretch, and where it would not, I have used my credit.
Yea, and so used it, that were it here apparent, that thou art Heir apparent. But I prithee sweet Wag, shall there be Gallows standing in England when thou art King? and resolution thus fobbed as it is, with the rue???sty curb of old Father Antique the Law? Doe not thou when thou art a King, hang a Thief.
No, thou shalt.
Shall I? O rare! Isle be a brave Judge.
Thou judge false already. I mean, thou shalt have the hanging of the Thieves, and so become a rare Hangman.
Well Hal, well: and in some sort it iumpes with my humour, as well as waiting in the Court, I can tell you.
For obtaining of suites?
Yea, for obtaining of suites, whereof the Hang???man hath no lean Wardrobe. I am as Melancholy as a Gyb-Cat, or a lugged Beat.
Or an old Lyon, or a Lovers Lute.
Yea, or the Drone of a Lincolnshire Bagpipe.
What say thou to a Hare, or the Melancholy of Moore Ditch?
Thou hast the most unsavoury smiles, and art in???deed the most comparative rascallest sweet young Prince. But Hal, I prithee trouble me no more with vanity, I wold thou and I knew, where a Commodity of good names were to be bought: an old Lord of the Council rated me the other day in the street about you sir; but I marked him not, and yet hee talked very wisely, but I regarded him not, and yet he talked wisely, and in the street too.
Thou did well: for no man regards it.
O, thou hast damnable iteration, and art indeed able to corrupt a Saint. Thou hast done much harm un???to me Hall, God forgive thee for it. Before I knew thee Hal, I knew nothing: and now I am (if a man should speak truly) little better then one of the wicked. I must give o???for this life, and I will give it over: and I do not, I am a Villain. Isle be damned for never a Kings son in Chri???stendome.
Where shall we take a purse to morrow, Jack?
Where thou wilt Lad, Isle make one: and I doe not, call me Villain, and baffle me.
I see a good amendment of life in thee: From Praying, to Purse-taking.
Why, Hal, it is my Vocation Hal: It is no sin for a man to labour in his Vocation.
Now shall wee know if Gads hill have set a Watch. O, if men were to be saved by merit, what hole in Hell were hot enough for him? This is the most omni???potent Villain, that ever cried, Stand, to a true man.
Good morrow Ned.
Good morrow sweet Hal. What says Mon???sieur Remorse? What says Sir Iohn Sack and Sugar: Jack? How agrees the Devil and thee about thy Soul, that thou soldest him on Good-Friday last, for a Cup of Madera, and a cold Capons leg?
Sir Iohn stands to his word, the devil shall have his bargain, for he was never yet a Breaker of Proverbs: He will give the devil his due.
Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.
Else he had damned for cozening the devil.
But my Lads, my Lads, to morrow morning, by four a clock early at Gads hill, there are Pilgrims go???ing to Canterbury with rich Offerings, and Traders ri???ding to London with fat Purses. I have vizards for you all; you have horses for your selves: Gads-hill lies to night in Rochester, I have bespoke Supper to morrow in Eastcheape; we may doe it as secure as sleep: if you will go, I will stuff your Purses full of Crowns: if you will not, tarry at home and be hanged.
Hear ye Yed ward, if I tarry at home and go not, Isle hang you for going.
You will chops.
Hal, wilt thou make one?
Who, I rob? I a Thief? Not I.
There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good fell???lowship in thee, nor thou came not of the blood-royall, if thou dare not stand for ten shillings.
Well then, once in my days Isle be a mad-cap.
Why, that's well said.
Well, come what will, Isle tarry at home.
Isle be a Traitor then, when thou art King.
I care not.
Sir Iohn, I prithee leave the Prince &amp; me alone, I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure, that he shall go.
Well, moist thou have the Spirit of persuasion; and he the ears of profiting, that what thou speak, may move; and what he hears may be believed, that the true Prince, may (for recreation sake) prove a false thief; for the poor abuses of the time, want countenance. Far???well, you shall find me in Eastcheape.
Farewell the latter Spring. Farewell Alhollown Summer.
Now, my good sweet Honey Lord, ride with vs to morrow. I have a jest to execute, that I cannot man???nag alone. Falstaff, Haruey, Rossill, and Gads-hill, shall rob those men that wee have already way-layde, your self and I, will not be there: and when they have the boo???tie, if you and I do not rob them, cut this head from my shoulders.
But how shall we part with them in setting forth?
Why we will set forth before or after them, and appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at our plea???sure to fail; and then will they adventure upon the ex???ploit themselves, which they shall have no sooner itchy???ued, but we'll set upon them.
I, but tic like that they will know vs by our horses, by our habits, and by every other appointment to be our selves.
Tut our horses they shall not see, Isle tie them in the wood, our vizards wee will change after wee leave them: and sirrah, I have Cases of Buckram for the nonce, to immaske our noted outward garments.
But I doubt they will be too hard for vs.
Well, for two of them, I know them to bee as true bred Cowards as ever turned back: and for the third if he fight longer then he sees reason, Isle forswear Arms. The virtue of this Jest will be, the incomprehensible lies that this fat Rogue will tell vs, when we meet at Supper: how thirty at least he fought with, what Wards, what blows, what extremities he endured; and in the reproof of this, lies the jest.
Well, Isle go with thee, provide vs all things necessary, and meet me to morrow night in Eastcheape, there Isle sup. Farewell.
Farewell, my Lord.
I know you all, and will awhile uphold
The vnyoak'd humour of your idleness:
Yet herein will I imitate the Sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his Beauty from the world,
That when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wondered at,
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapours, that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To sport, would be as tedious as to work;
But when they seldom come, they wisht-for come,
And nothing pleases but rare accidents.
So when this loose behaviour I throw off,
And pay the debt I never promised;
By how much better then my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men's hopes,
And like bright Mettle on a sullen ground:
My reformation glittering o'er my fault,
Shall show more goodly, and attract more eyes,
Then that which hath no soil to set it off.
Isle so offend, to make offence a skill,
Redeeming time, when men think least I will.
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these indignities,
And you have found me; for accordingly,
You tread upon my patience: But be sure,
I will from henceforth rather be my Self,
Mighty, and to be feared, then my condition
Which hath been smooth as Oil, soft as young Down,
And therefore lost that Title of respect,
Which the proud soul ne'er pays, but to the proud.
Our house (my Sovereign Liege) little deserves
The scourge of greatness to be used on it,
And that same greatness too, which our own hands
Have help to make so portly.
My Lord.
Worcester get thee gone: for I do see
Danger and disobedience in thine eye.
O sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
And Majesty might never yet endure
The moody Frontier of a servant brow,
You have good leave to leave vs. When we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
You were about to speak.
Yea, my good Lord.
Those Prisoners in your Highness demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were (as he says) not with such strength denied
As was delivered to your Majesty:
Who either through envy, or misprision,
Was guilty of this fault; and not my Son.
My Liege, I did deny no Prisoners.
But, I remember when the fight was done,
When I was dry with Rage, and extreme Toil,
Breathless, and Faint, leaning upon my Sword,
Came there a certain Lord, neat and trimly dressed;
Fresh as a Bridegroom, and his Chin new reaped,
Showed like a stubble Land at Harvest home.
He was perfumed like a Milliner,
And twixt his Finger and his Thumb, he held
A Pouncet-box: which ever and anon
He gave his Nose, and took't away again:
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in Snuff: And still he smiled and talked:
And as the Soldiers bare dead bodies by,
He called them untaught Knaves, Unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome Coarse
Betwixt the Wind, and his Nobility.
With many Holiday and Lady term
He questioned me: Among the rest, demanded
My Prisoners, in your Majesties behalf.
I then, all-smarting, with my wounds being cold,
(To be so pestered with a Popingay)
Out of my Grief, and my Impatience,
Answered (neglectingly) I know not what,
He should, or should not: For he made me mad,
To see him shine so brisk, and smell so sweet;
And talk so like a Waiting-Gentlewoman,
Of Guns, &amp; Drums, and Wounds: God save the mark;
And telling me, the Soueraign'st thing on earth
Was Parmacity, for an inward bruise:
And that it was great pity, so it was,
That villainous Salt-peter should be dug
Out of the Bowels of the harmless Earth,
Which many a good Tall Fellow had destroyed
So Cowardly. And but for these vile Guns???
He would himself have been a Soldier.
This bald, anointed Chat of his (my Lord)
Made me to answer indirectly (as I said.)
And I beseech you, let not this report
Come currant for an Accusation,
Betwixt my Love, and your high Majesty???
The circumstance considered, good my Lord,
What ever Harry Percie then had said,
To such a person, and in such a place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably dye, and never rise
To do him wrong or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.
Why yet doth deny his Prisoners,
But with Proviso and Exception,
That we at our own charge, shall ransom straight
His Brother-in-Law, the foolish Mortimer,
Who (in my soul) hath wilfully betrayed
The lives of those, that he did lead to Fight,
Against the great Magician, damned Glendower:
Whose daughter (as we hear) the Earl of March
Hath lately married. Shall our Coffers then,
Be emptied, to redeem a Traitor home?
Shall we buy Treason? and indent with Fears,
When they have lost and forfeited themselves.
No: on the barren Mountain let him starve:
For I shall never hold that man my Friend,
Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.
Revolted Mortimer?
He never did fall off, my Sovereign Liege,
But by the chance of War: to prove that true,
Needs no more but one tongue. For all those Wounds,
Those mouthed Wounds, which valiantly he took,
When on the gentle Seuernes siege bank,
In single Opposition hand to hand,
He did confound the best part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower:
Three times they breathed, and three times did they drink
Upon agreement, of swift Seuernes flood;
Who then affrighted with their bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling Reeds,
And hid his crispe-head in the hollow bank,
Blood-stained with these Valiant Combatants.
Never did base and rotten Policy
Colour her working with such deadly wounds;
Nor never could the Noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly:
Then let him not be sland'red with Revolt.
Thou dost belly him Percy, thou dost belly him;
He never did encounter with Glendower:
I tell thee, he durst as well have met the devil alone,
As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? But Sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.
Send me your Prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease ye. My Lord Northumberland,
We License your departure with your son,
Send vs your Prisoners, or you'll hear of it.
And if the devil come and roar for them
I will not send them. I will after straight
And tell him so: for I will ease my heart,
Although it be with hazard of my head.
What? drunk with choler? stay &amp; pause awhile.
Here comes your Uncle.
Speak of Mortimer?
Yes, I will speak of him, and let my soul
Want mercy, if I do not join with him.
In his behalf, Isle empty all these Veins,
And shed my dear blood drop by drop in th dust,
But I will lift the downfall Mortimer
As high in th Ayre, as this Unthankful King,
As this Ingrate and Cankered Bullingbrooke.
Brother, the King hath made your Nephew mad
Who struck this heate up after I was gone?
He will (forsooth) have all my Prisoners:
And when I urged the ransom once again
Of my Wives Brother, then his cheek looked pale,
And on my face he turned an eye of death,
Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
I cannot blame him: was he not proclaimed
By Richard that dead is, the next of blood?
He was: I heard the Proclamation,
And then it was, when the unhappy King
(Whose wrongs in vs God pardon) did set forth
Upon his Irish Expedition:
From whence he intercepted, did return
To be deposed, and shortly murdered.
And for whose death, we in the worlds wide mouth
Live scandalised, and foully spoken of.
But soft I pray you; did King Richard then
Proclaim my brother Mortimer,
Heir to the Crown?
He did, my self did hear it.
Nay then I cannot blame his Cousin King,
That wished him on the barren Mountains starved.
But shall it be, that you that set the Crown
Upon the head of this forgetful man,
And for his sake, wore the detested blot
Of murderous subornation? Shall it be,
That you a world of curses undergo,
Being the Agents, or base second means,
The Cords, the Ladder, or the Hangman rather?
O pardon, if that I descend so low,
To show the Line, and the Predicament
Wherein you range under this subtle King.
Shall it for shame, be spoken in these days,
Or fill up Chronicles in time to come,
That men of your Nobility and Power,
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
(As Both of you, God pardon it, have done)
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely Rose,
And plant this Thorne, this Canker Bullingbrooke?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are fooled, discarded, and shook off
By him, for whom these shames ye vnderwent?
No: yet time serves, wherein you may redeem
Your banished Honours, and restore your selves
Into the good Thoughts of the world again.
Revenge the gearing and disdained contempt
Of this proud King, who studies day and night
To answer all the Debt he owes unto you,
Even with the bloody Payment of your deaths:
Therefore I say???
Peace Cousin, say no more.
And now I will vnclaspe a Secret book,
And to your quick conceiving Discontents,
Isle read you Matter, deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and adventurous Spirit,
As to o're-walke a Current, roaring loud
On the vnstedfast footing of a Spear.
If he fall in, good night, or sink or swim:
Send danger from the East unto the West,
So Honour cross it from the North to South,
And let them grapple: The blood more stirs
To rowze a Lyon, then to start a Hare.
Imagination of some great exploit,
Drives him beyond the bounds of Patience.
By heaven, me thinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright Honour from the pale-fac'd Moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where Fadome-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned Honour by the Lockes:
So he that doth redeem her thence, might wear
Without Co-riuall, all her Dignities:
But out upon this halfe-fac'd Fellowship.
He apprehends a World of Figures here,
But not the form of what he should attend:
Good Cousin give me audience for awhile,
And list to me.
I cry you mercy.
Those same Noble Scots
That are your Prisoners.
Isle keep them all.
By heaven, he shall not have a Scot of them:
No, if a Scot would save his Soul, he shall not.
Isle keep them, by this Hand.
You start away,
And lend no ear unto my purposes.
Those Prisoners you shall keep.
Nay, I will; that's flat:
He said, he would not ransom Mortimer:
Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer.
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
And in his ear, Isle holla Mortimer.
Nay, Isle have a Starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but Mortimer, and give it him,
To keep his anger still in motion.
Hear you Cousin: a word.
All studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bullingbrooke,
And that same Sword and Buckler Prince of Wales.
But that I think his Father loves him not,
And would be glad he met with some mischance,
I would have poisoned him with a pot of Ale.
Farewell Kinsman: Isle talk to you
When you are better tempered to attend.
Why what a Waspe-tongu'd &amp; impatient fool
Art thou, to break into this Women's mood,
Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own?
Why look you, I am whipped &amp; scourged with rods,
Nettled, and stung with Pismires, when I hear
Of this vile Politician Bullingbrooke.
In Richards time: What de'ye call the place?
A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire:
It was, where the madcap Duke his Uncle kept,
His Uncle York, where I first bowed my knee
Unto this King of Smiles, this Bullingbrooke:
When you and he came back from Rauenspurgh.
At Barkley Castle.
You say true:
Why what a caudie deal of courtesy,
This fawning Grey-hound then did proffer me.
Look when his infant Fortune came to age,
And gentle Harry Percy, and kind Cousin:
O, the Devil take such Couzeners, God forgive me,
Good Uncle tell your tale, for I have done.
Nay, if you have not, too't again,
We'll stay your leisure.
I have done insooth.
Then once more to your Scottish Prisoners.
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
And make the Douglas son your only mean
For powers in Scotland: which for divers reasons
Which I shall send you written, be assured
Will easily be granted you, my Lord.
Your Son in Scotland being thus implied,
Shall secretly into the bosom creep
Of that same noble Prelate, well beloved,
The Archbishop.
Of York, is it not?
True, who bears hard
His Brothers death at Bristow, the Lord Scroope.
I speak not this in estimation,
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.
I smell it:
Upon my life, it will do wondrous well.
Before the game's afoot, thou still let slip.
Why, it cannot choose but be a Noble plot,
And then the power of Scotland, and of York
To join with Mortimer, Ha.
And so they shall.
Infaith it is exceedingly well aimed.
And it is no little reason bids vs speed,
To save our heads, by raising of a Head:
For, bear our selves as even as we can,
The King will always think him in our debt,
And think, we think our selves unsatisfied,
Till he hath found a time to pay vs home.
And see already, how he doth begin
To make vs strangers to his looks of love.
He does, he does; we'll be revenged on him.
Cousin, farewell. No further go in this,
Then I by Letters shall direct your course
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly:
Isle steal to Glendower, and lo, Mortimer,
Where you, and Douglas, and our powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,
To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Farewell good Brother, we shall thrive, I trust.
Uncle, adieu: O let the hours be short,
Till fields, and blows, and groans, applaud our sport.
Heigh-ho, an't be not four by the day, Isle be hanged. Charles wane is over the new Chimney, and yet our horse not packed. What Ostler?
Anon, anon.
I prithee Tom, beat Cuts Saddle, put a few Flocks in the point: the poor Jade is wrung in the wi???theirs, out of all cesse.
Peas and Beans are as dank here as a Dog, and this is the next way to give poor Jade the Bottes: This house is turned upside down since Robin the Ostler dyed.
Poor fellow never joyed since the price of oats rose, it was the death of him.
I think this is the most villainous house in al London rode for Fleas: I am stung like a Tench.
Like a Tench? There is ne'er a King in Chri???stendome, could be better bit, then I have been since the first Cock.
Why, you will allow vs ne'er a Iourden, and then we leake in your Chimney: and your Chamber-lye breeds Fleas like a Loach.
What Ostler, come away, and be hanged: come away.
I have a Gammon of Bacon, and two razes of Ginger, to be delivered as far as Charing-crosse.
The Turkeys in my Pannier are quite starved. What Ostler? A plague on thee, hast thou never an eye in thy head? Can not hear? And it were not as good a deed as drink, to break the pate of thee, I am a very Vile???lain. Come and be hanged, hast no faith in thee?
Good-morrow Carriers. What's a clock?
I think it be two a clock.
I prithee lend me thy Lantern to see my Gel???ding in the stable.
Nay soft I pray ye, I know a trick worth two of that.
I prithee lend me thine.
I, when, can tell? Lend me thy Lantern (quoth-a) marry Isle see thee hanged first.
Sir Carrier: What time do you mean to come to London?
Time enough to go to bed with a Candle, I warrant thee. Come neighbour Mugges, we'll call up the Gentlemen, they will along with company, for they have great charge.
What ho, Chamberlain?
At hand quoth Pick-purse.
That's even as fair, as at hand quoth the Cham???berlaine: For thou veriest no more from picking of Pur???ses, then giving direction, doth from labouring. Thou lay the plot, how.
Good morrow Master Gads-Hill, it holds cur???rant that I told you yesternight. There's a Franklin in the wilde of Kent, hath brought three hundred Marks with him in Gold: I heard him tell it to one of his company last night at Supper; a kind of Auditor, one that hath abun???dance of charge too (God knows what) they are up al???ready, and call for Eggs and Butter. They will away presently.
Sir, if they meet not with S. Nicholas Clerks,
Isle give thee this neck.
No, Isle none of it: I prithee keep that for the Hangman, for I know thou worshipst S. Nicholas as true???lie as a man of falsehood may.
What talk thou to me of the Hangman? If I hang, Isle make a fat pair of Gallows. For, if I hang, old Sir Iohn hangs with me, and thou know hoe's no Starveling. Tut, there are other Troians that you dream not of, the which (for sport sake) are content to doe the Profession some grace; that would (if matters should bee looked into) for their own Credit sake, make all Whole. I am joined with no Foot-land-Rakers, no Long-staffe six-penny strikers, none of these mad Mustachio-purple???hu'd-Maltwormes, but with Nobility and Tranquillity; Bourgomasters, and great Oneyers, such as can hold in, such as will strike sooner then speak; and speak sooner then drink, and drink sooner then pray: and yet I lye, for they pray continually unto their Saint the Common???wealth; or rather, not to pray to her, but prey on her: for they tide up &amp; down on her, and make his their Boots.
What, the Commonwealth their Boots? Will she hold out water in foul way?
She will, she will; Justice hath liquored her. We steal as in a Castle, cocksure: we have the receipt of Fern???seed, we walk invisible.
Nay, I think rather, you are more beholding to the Night, then to the Fernseed, for your walking in???uisible.
Give me thy hand.
Thou shalt have a share in our purpose,
As I am a true man.
Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false Thief.
Go too: Homo is a common name to all men. Bid the Ostler bring the Gelding out of the stable. Fare???well ye muddy Knave.
Come shelter, shelter, I have removed Falstafs Horse, and he frets like a gummed Velvet.
Stand close.
Poines, Poines, and be hanged Poines.
Peace ye fat-kidney'd Rascal, what a brawling dost thou keep.
What Poines. Hal?
He is walked up to the top of the hill, Isle go seek him.
I am accursed to rob in that Thief company: that Rascal hath removed my Horse, and tied him I know not where. If I travel but four foot by the squire further a foot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt not but to dye a fair death for all this, if I scope hanging for kill???ling that Rogue, I have forsworn his company hourly any time this two and twenty year, &amp; yet I am bewitched with the Rogues company. If the Rascal have not given me medicines to make me love him, Isle behanged; it could not be else: I have drunk Medicines. Poines, Hal, a Plague upon you both. Bardolph, Peto: Isle starve ere I rob a foot further. And it were not as good a deed as to drink, to turn True-man, and to leave these Rogues, I am the veriest Varlet that ever chewed with a Tooth. Eight yards of uneven ground, is threescore &amp; ten miles afoot with me: and the stony-hearted Villains know it well enough. A plague upon it, when Thieves cannot be true one to another.
a plague light upon you all. Give my Horse you
give me my Horse, and be hanged.
Peace ye fat guts, lye down, lay thine ear close to the ground, and list if thou can hear the tread of Travellers.
Have you any Leauers to lift me up again being down? Isle not bear mine own flesh so far afoot again, for all the coin in thy Fathers Exchequer. What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?
Thou lie, thou art not colted, thou art vncolted.
I prithee good Prince Hal, help me to my horse, good Kings son.
Out you Rogue, shall I be your Ostler?
Go hang thy self in thine own heire-apparant-Garters: If I be tan, Isle peach for this: and I have not Ballads made on all, and sung to filthy tunes, let a Cup of Sack be my poison: when a jest is so forward, &amp; a foot too, I hate it.
Stand.
So I do against my will.
O it is our Setter, I know his voice:
Bardolf, what news?
Case ye, case ye; on with your Vizards, there's money of the Kings coming down the hill, it is going to the Kings Exchequer.
You lie you rogue, it is going to the Kings Tavern.
There's enough to make vs all.
To he hanged.
You four shall front them in the narrow Lane: Ned and I, will walk lower; if they scope from your en???counter, then they light on vs.
But how many be of them?
Some eight or ten.
Will they not rob vs?
What, a Coward Sir Iohn Paunch?
Indeed I am not Iohn of Gaunt your Grandfather; but yet no Coward, Hal.
We'll leave that to the proof.
Sir Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge, when thou need him, there thou shalt find him. Fare???well, and stand fast.
Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.
Ned, where are our disguises?
Here hard by: Stand close.
Now my Masters, happy man be his dole, say I: every man to his business.
Come Neighbor: the boy shall lead our Horses down the hill: We'll walk afoot a while, and ease our Legs.
Stay.
Iesu bless vs.
Strike??? down with them, cut the villains throats; a whoreson Caterpillars: Bacon-fed Knaves, they hate vs youth; down with them, fleece them.
O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever.
Hang ye gorbellied knaves, are you undone? No ye Fat Chuffs, I would your store were here. On Ba???cons on??? what ye knaves? Young men must live, you are Grand Jurors, are ye? We'll jure ye in faith.
The Thieves have bound the True-men: Now could thou and I rob the Thieves, and go merrily to Lone???don, it would be argument for a Week, Laughter for a Month, and a good jest for ever.
Stand close, I hear them coming.
Come my Masters, let vs share, and then to horse before day: and the Prince and Poynes bee not two are???rand Cowards, there's no equity stirring. There's no more valour in that Poynes, than in a wilde Duck.
Your money.
Villains.
Got with much ease. Now merrily to Horse: The Thieves are scattred, and possessed with fear so strong???lie, that they dare not meet each other: each takes his fell???low for an Officer. Away good Ned, Falstaff sweates to death, and Lards the lean earth as he walks along were it not for laughing, I should pity him.
How the Rogue roared.
But for mine own part, my Lord, I could bee well contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear your house.
He could be contented: Why is he not then? in respect of the love he bears our house. He shows in this, he loves his own Barn better then he loves our house. Let me see some more. The purpose you undertake is dangerous. Why that's certain: It is dangerous to take a Cold, to sleep, to drink: but I tell you (my Lord fool) out of this Nettle, Danger; we pluck this Flower, Safety. The purpose you undertake is dangerous, the Friends you have na???med uncertain, the Time it self vnsorted, and your whole Plot too light, for the counterpoise of so great an Opposition. Say you so, say you so: I say unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly Hind, and you Lye. What a lacke-braine is this? I protest, our plot is as good a plot as ever was laid; our Friend true and constant: A good Plot, good Friends, and full of expectation: An excellent plot, very good Friends. What a Frosty-spirited rogue is this? Why, my Lord of York commends the plot, and the general course of the action. By this hand, if I were now by this Rascal, I could brain him with his Ladies Fan. Is there not my Father, my Uncle, and my Self, Lord Edmund Mortimer, my Lord of York, and Owen Glendour? Is there not besides, the Douglas? Have I not all their let???ters, to meet me in Arms by the ninth of the next Mo???neth? and are they not some of them set forward already? What a Pagan Rascal is this? An Infidel. Ha, you shall see now in very sincerity of Fear and Cold heart, will he to the King, and lay open all our proceedings. O, I could divide my self, and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of skimmed Milk with so honourable an Action. Hang him, let him tell the King we are prepared. I will set forwards to night.
How now Kate, I must leave you within these two hours.
O my good Lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offence have I this fortnight bin
A banished woman from my Harries bed?
Tell me (sweet Lord) what is it that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth?
And start so often when thou sitt'st alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks?
And given my Treasures and my rights of thee,
To thicke-ey'd musing, and cursed melancholy?
In my faint-slumbers, I by thee have watched,
And heard thee murmore tales of Iron Wars:
Speak terms of manage to thy bounding Steed,
Cry courage to the field. And thou hast talked
Of Sallies, and Retires; Trenches, Tents,
Of Palizadoes, Frontiers, Parapets,
Of Basilisks, of Canon, Culuerin,
Of Prisoners ransom, and of Soldiers slain,
And all the current of a heady fight.
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at War,
And thus hath so bestirred thee in thy sleep,
That beds of sweat hath stood upon thy Brow,
Like bubbles in a late-disturbed Stream;
And in thy face strange motions have appeared,
Such as we see when men restrain their breath
On some great sudden hast. O what portents are these?
Some heavy business hath my Lord in hand,
And I must know it: else he loves me not.
What ho; Is Gilliams with the Packet gone?
He is my Lord, an hour agony.
Hath Butler brought those horses fro?? the Sheriff?
One horse, my Lord, he brought even now.
What Horse? A Roan, a crop ear, is it not.
It is my Lord.
That Roan shall be my Throne. Well, I will back him straight. Esperance, bid Butler lead him forth into the Park.
But hear you, my Lord.
What say thou my Lady?
What is it carries you away?
Why, my horse (my Love) my horse.
Out you mad-headed Ape, a Weasel hath not such a deal of Spleen, as you are tossed with. In sooth Isle know your business Harry, that I will. I fear my Bro???there Mortimer doth stir about his Title, and hath sent for you to line his enterprise. But if you go???
So far a foot, I shall be weary, Love.
Come, come, you Paraquito, answer me directly unto this question, that I shall ask. Indeed Isle break thy little finger Harry, if thou wilt not tel me true.
Away, away you trifler: Love, I love thee not,
I care not for thee Kate: this is no world
To play with Mammets, and to tilt with lips.
We must have bloody Noses, and cracked Crowns,
And pass them currant too. Gods me, my horse.
What say thou Kate? what wold'st thou have with me?
Do ye not love me? Do ye not indeed?
Well, do not then. For since you love me not,
I will not love my self. Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if thou speak in jest, or no.
Come, wilt thou see me ride?
And when I am a horseback, I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you Kate,
I must not have you henceforth, question me,
Whether I go: nor reason whereabout.
Whether I must, I must: and to conclude,
This Evening must I leave thee, gentle Kate.
I know you wise, but yet no further wise
Then Harry Percies wife. Constant you are,
But yet a woman: and for secrecy,
No Lady closer. For I will believe
Thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,
And so far wilt I trust thee, gentle Kate.
How so far?
Not an inch further. But hark you Kate,
Whither I go, thither shall you go too:
To day will I set forth, to morrow you.
Will this content you Kate?
It must of force.
Ned, prithee come out of that fat room, &amp; lend me thy hand to laugh a little.
Where hast been Hall?
With three or four Logger-heads, amongst 3. or fourscore Hogsheads. I have sounded the very base string of humility. Sir, I am sworn brother to a leash of Drawers, and can call them by their names, as Tom, Dicke, and Francis. They take it already upon their confidence, that though I be but Prince of Wales, yet I am the King of Courtesy: telling me flatly I am no proud lack like Fall???staff, but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a good boy, and when I am King of England, I shall command al the good Lads in East-cheape. They call drinking deep, die???ing Scarlet; and when you breath in your watering, then
they try hem, and bid you play it off. To conclude, I am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour, that I can drink with any Tinker in his own Language during my life. I tell thee Ned, thou hast lost much honour, that thou were it not with me in this action: but sweet Ned, to sue???ten which name of Ned, I give thee this peniworth of Su???gar, clapped even now into my hand by an under Skinker, one that never spake other English in his life, then Eight shillings and six pence, and, You are welcome: with this shrill addition, Anon, Anon sir, Score a Pint of Bastard in the Half Moon, or so. But Ned, to drive away time till Fall???staff come, I prithee doe thou stand in some by-roome, while I question my puny Drawer, to what end hee gave me the Sugar, and do never leave calling Francis, that his Tale to me may be nothing but, Anon: step aside, and Isle show thee a President.
Francis.
Thou art perfect.
Francis.
Anon, anon sir; look down into the Pomgar???net, Ralfe.
Come hither Francis.
My Lord.
How long hast thou to serve, Francis?
Forsooth five years, and as much as to???
Francis.
Anon, anon sir.
Five years: Betlady a long Lease for the clean???king of Pewter. But Francis, dare thou be so valiant, as to play the coward with thy Indenture, &amp; show it a fair pair of heals, and run from it?
O Lord sir, Isle be sworn upon all the Books in England, I could find in my heart.
Francis.
Anon, anon sir.
How old art thou, Francis?
Let me see, about Michaelmas next I shall be???
Francis.
Anon sir, pray you stay a little, my Lord.
Nay but hark you Francis, for the Sugar thou gave me, it was a pennyworth, was it not?
O Lord sir, I would it had been two.
I will give thee for it a thousand pound: Ask me when thou wilt, and thou shalt have it.
Francis.
Anon, anon.
Anon Francis? No Francis, but to morrow Fran???cis: or Francis, on thursday: or indeed Francis when thou wilt. But Francis.
My Lord.
Wilt thou rob this Leathern Jerkin, Crystal button, Not-pated, Agate ring, Puke stocking, Caddice garter, Smooth tongue, Spanish pouch.
O Lord sir, who do you mean?
Why then your browne Bastard is your only drink: for look you Francis, your white Canvas doub???let will sully. In Barberry sir, it cannot come to so much.
What sir?
Francis.
Away you Rogue, dost thou hear them call?
Here they both call him, the Drawer stands amazed, not knowing which way to go.
What, stand thou still, and hear such a cal???ling? Look to the Guests within. My Lord, old Sir Iohn with half a dozen more, are at the door: shall I let them in?
Let them alone awhile, and then open the door. Poines.
Anon, anon sir.
Sir, Falstaff and the rest of the Thieves, are at the door, shall we be merry?
As merry as Crickets my Lad. But hark ye, What cunning match have you made with this jest of the Drawer? Come, what's the issue?
I am now of all humours, that have showed them???selves humours, since the old days of goodman Adam, to the pupil age of this present twelve a clock at midnight. What's a clock Francis?
Anon, anon sir.
That ever this Fellow should have fewer words then a Parrot, and yet the son of a Woman. His endue???stry is vp-staires and down-staires, his eloquence the par???cell of a reckoning. I am not yet of Percies mind, the Hot???spur of the North, he that kills me some six or seven dozen of Scots at a Breakfast, washes his hands, and says to his wife; Fie upon this quiet life, I want work. O my sweet Harry says she, how many hast thou killed to day? Give my Roan horse a drench (says hee) and answers, some fourteen, an hour after: a trifle, a trifle. I prithee call in Falstaff, Isle play Percy, and that damned Brawn shall play Dame Mortimer his wife. Rino, says the drun???kard. Call in Ribs, call in Tallow.
Welcome Jack, where hast thou been?
A plague of all Cowards I say, and a Vengeance too, marry and Amen. Give me a cup of Sack Boy. Ere I lead this life long, Isle sow nether stocks, and mend them too. A plague of all cowards. Give me a Cup of Sack, Rogue. Is there no Virtue extant?
Did thou never see Titan kiss a dish of Butter, pitiful hearted Titan that melted at the sweet Tale of the Sun? If thou did, then behold that compound.
You Rogue, heere's Lime in this Sack too: there is nothing but Roguery to be found in Villainous man; yet a Coward is worse then a Cup of Sack with lime. A vile???lanous Coward, go thy ways old Jack, die when thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood be not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a shotten Herring: there lines not three good men vnhang'd in England, &amp; one of them is fat, and grows old, God help the while, a bad world I say. I would I were a Weaver, I could sing all manner of songs. A plague of all Cowards, I say still.
How now Woolsacke, what mutter you?
A Kings Son? If I do not beat thee out of thy Kingdom with a dagger of Lath, and drive all thy Sub???jests before thee like a flock of Wilde-geese, Isle never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales?
Why you whoreson round man? what's the matter?
Are you not a Coward? Answer me to that, and Poines there?
Ye fetch paunch, and ye call me Coward, Isle stab thee.
I call thee Coward? Isle see thee damned ere I call the Coward: but I would give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou can. You are straight enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back: Call you
that backing of your friends? a plague upon such bac???king: give me them that will face me. Give me a Cup of Sack, I am a Rogue if I drunk to day.
O Villain, thy Lips are scarce wiped, since thou drunk'st last.
Ell's one for that.
A plague of all Cowards still, say I.
What's the matter?
What's the matter? here be four of vs, have taken a thousand pound this Morning.
Where is it, Jack? where is it?
Where is it? taken from vs, it is: a hundred upon poor four of vs.
What, a hundred, man?
I am a Rogue, if I were not at half Sword with a dozen of them two hours together. I have scoped by miracle. I am eight times thrust through the Doublet, four through the Hose, my Buckler cut through and through, my Sword hacked like a Hand-saw, ass signum. I never dealt better since I was a man: all would not doe. A plague of all Cowards: let them speak; if they speak more or less then truth, they are villains, and the sons of darkness.
Speak sirs, how was it?
We four set upon some dozen.
Sixteen, at least, my Lord.
And bound them.
No, no, they were not bound.
You Rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or I am a Jew else, an Hebrew Jew.
As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon vs.
And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
What, fought ye with them all?
All? I know not what ye call all: but if I fought not with fifty of them, I am a bunch of Radish: if there were not two or three and fifty upon poor old Jack, then am I no two-legged Creature.
Pray Heaven, you have not murdered some of them.
Nay, that's past praying for, I have peppered two of them: Two I am sure I have payed, two Rogues in Buckrom Suits. I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell thee a Lye, spit in my face, call me Horse: thou know my old word: here I lay, and thus I bore my point; four Rogues in Buckrom let drive at me.
What, four? thou said but two, even now.
Four Hal, I told thee four.
I, I, he said four.
These four came all a-front, and mainly thrust at me; I made no more ado, but took all their seven points in my Targuet, thus.
Seven? why there were but four, even now.
In Buckrom.
I, four, in Buckrom Suits.
Seven, by these Hilts, or I am a Villain else.
Prithee let him alone, we shall have more anon.
Doest thou hear me, Hal?
I, and mark thee too, Jack.
Doe so, for it is worth the listening too: these nine in Buckrom, that I told thee of.
So, two more already.
Their Points being broken.
Down fell his Hose.
Began to give me ground: but I followed me close, came in foot and hand; and with a thought, seven of the eleven I paid.
O monstrous! eleven Buckrom men grown out of two?
But as the Devil would have it, three mis-be???gotten Knaves, in Kendall Greene, came at my Back, and let drive at me; for it was so dark, Hal, that thou coldest not see thy Hand.
These Lies are like the Father that begets them, gross as a Mountain, open, palpable. Why thou Clay-brayn'd Guts, thou Knotty-pated Fool, thou Whoreson obe???scene greasy Tallow Catch.
What, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth, the truth?
Why, how coldest thou know these men in Kendall Greene, when it was so dark, thou coldest not see thy Hand? Come, tell vs your reason: what say thou to this?
Come, your reason Jack, your reason.
What, upon compulsion? No: were I at the Strappado, or all the Racks in the World, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on compulsi???on? If Reasons were as plenty as Black-berries, I would give no man a Reason upon compulsion, I.
Isle be no longer guilty of this sin. This san???guinea Coward, this Bed-presser, this Hors-back-breaker, this huge Hill of Flesh.
Away you Starveling, you Elfe-skin, you dried Nets tongue, Bulles-pissell, you stocke-fish: O for breath to utter. What is like thee? You Tailors yard, you sheath you Bow-case, you vile standing tucke.
Well, breath awhile, and then to it again: and when thou hast tired thy self in base comparisons, hear me speak but thus.
Mark Jack.
We two, saw you four set on four and bound them, and were Masters of their Wealth: mark now how a plain Tale shall put you down. Then did we two, set on you four, and with a word, outfac'd you from your prize, and have it: yea, and can show it you in the House. And Falstaff, you carried your Guts away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared for mercy, and still ran and roared, as ever I heard bull calf. What a Slave art thou, to hack thy sword as thou hast done, and then say it was in fight. What trick? what devices? what starting hole can thou now find out, to hide thee from this open and apparent shame?
Come, let's hear Jack: What trick hast thou now?
I knew ye as well as he that made ye. Why hear ye my Masters, was it for me to kill the Heir apparent? Should I turn upon the true Prince? Why, thou know I am as valiant as Hercules: but beware Instinct, the Lion will not touch the true Prince: Instinct is a great matter. I was a Coward on Instinct: I shall think the better of my self, and thee, during my life: I, for a valiant Lion, and thou for a true Prince. But Lads, I am glad you have the Money. Hostess, clap to the doors: watch to night, pray to morrow. Gallants, Lads, Boys, Harts of Gold, all the good Titles of Fellowship come to you. What, shall we be merry? shall we have a Play extempory.
Content, and the argument shall be, thy running away.
A, no more of that Hall, and thou love me.
My Lord, the Prince?
How now my Lady the Hostess, what say thou to me?
Marry, my Lord, there is a Noble man of the Court at door would speak with you: hee says, hee comes from your Father.
Give him as much as will make him a Royal man??? and send him back again to my Mother.
What manner of man is hee?
An old man.
What doth Gravity out of his Bed at Midnight?
Shall I give him his answer?
Prithee doe Jack.
Faith, and Isle send him packing.
Now Sirs: you fought fair; so did you Peto, so did you Bardol: you are Lyons too, you ran away upon instinct: you will not touch the true Prince; no, fie.
Faith, I ran when I saw others run.
Tell me now in earnest, how came Falstaffes Sword so hacked?
Why, he hacked it with his Dagger, and said, hee would swear truth out of England, but hee would make you believe it was done in fight, and persuaded vs to doe the like.
Yea, and to tickle our Noses with Spear-grasse, to make them bleed, and then to beslubber our garments with it, and swear it was the blood of true men. I did that I did not this seven years before, I blushed to hear his monstrous devices.
O Villain, thou stole a Cup of Sack eigh???teene years ago, and were taken with the manner, and ever since thou hast blushed extempore: thou had fire and sword on thy side, and yet thou rinsed away; what instinct had thou for it?
My Lord, doe you see these Meteors? doe you behold these Exhalations?
I doe.
What think you they portend?
Hot Livers, and cold Purses.
Choler, my Lord, if rightly taken.
No, if rightly taken, Halter.
Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone. How now my sweet Creature of Bombast, how long is it ago, Jack, since thou saw thine own Knee?
My own Knee? When I was about thy years (Hal) I was not an Eagles Talent in the Waste, I could have crept into any Aldermans Thumbe-Ring: a plague of sighing and grief, it blows a man up like a Bladder. There's villainous News abroad: here was Sir Iohn Braby from your Father; you must go to the Court in the Morning. The same mad fellow of the North, Percy; and hee of Wales, that gave Amamon the Bastinado, and made Lucifer Cuckold, and swore the Devil his true Liege-man upon the Cross of a Welch-hooke; what a plague call you him?
O, Glendower.
Owen, Owen; the same, and his Son in Law Mortimer, and old Northumberland, and the sprightly Scot of Scots, Douglas, that runs a Horse-backe up a Hill perpendicular.
Hee that rides at high speed, and with a Pistol kills a Sparrow flying.
You have hit it.
So did he never the Sparrow.
Well, that Rascal hath good mettle in him, hee will not run.
Why, what a Rascal art thou then, to praise him so for running?
A Horse-backe (ye Cuckoo) but a foot hee will not budge a foot.
Yes Jack, upon instinct.
I grant ye, upon instinct: Well, hee is there too, and one Mordake, and a thousand blew-Cappes more. Worcester is stolen away by Night: thy Fathers Beard is turned white with the News; you may buy Land now as cheap as stinking Mackrel.
Then it is like, if there come a hot Sun, and this civil buffeting hold, wee shall buy Maiden-heads as they buy Hob-nayles, by the Hundreds.
By the Mass Lad, thou say true, it is like wee shall have good trading that way. But tell me Hal, art not thou horrible afeared? thou being Heir apparent, could the World pick thee out three such Enemies a???gain, as that Fiend Douglas, that Spirit Percy, and that Devil Glendower? Art not thou horrible afraid? Doth not thy blood thrill at it?
Not a whit: I lack some of thy instinct.
Well, thou wilt be horrible chidde to morrow, when thou comes to thy Father: if thou doe love me, practise an answer.
Doe thou stand for my Father, and examine me upon the particulars of my Life.
Shall I? content: This Chair shall bee my State, this Dagger my Sceptre, and this Cushion my Crown.
Thy State is taken for a Ioyn'd-Stoole, thy Gol???den Sceptre for a Leaden Dagger, and thy precious rich Crown, for a pitiful bald Crown.
Well, and the fire of Grace be not quite out of thee now shalt thou be moved. Give me a Cup of Sack to make mine eyes look red, that it may be thought I have wept, for I must speak in passion, and I will doe it in King Cambyses vain.
Well, here is my Leg.
And here is my speech: stand aside Nobility.
This is excellent sport, in faith.
Weep not, sweet Queen, for trickling tears are vain.
O the Father, how hee holds his count???nonce?
For Gods sake Lords, convey my trustful Queen,
For tears doe stop the floud-gates of her eyes.
O rare, he doth it as like one of these harlotry Players, as ever I see.
Peace good Pint-pot, peace good Tickle-braine. Harry, I doe not only marvel where thou spend thy time; but also, how thou art accompanied: For though the Camomile, the more it is trodden, the faster it grows; yet Youth, the more it is wasted, the sooner it wears. Thou art my Son: I have partly thy Mothers Word, partly my Opinion; but chiefly, a villainous trick of thine Eye, and a foolish hanging of thy nether Lip, that doth warrant me. If then thou be Son to me, here lies the point: why, being Son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shall the blessed Son of Heaven prove a Micher, and eat Black-berryes? a question not to bee asked. Shall the Son of England prove a Thief, and take Purses? a question to be asked. There is a thing, Harry, which thou hast often heard of, and it is known to
many in our Land, by the Name of Pitch: this Pitch (as ancient Writers doe report) doth defile; so doth the com???panie thou keep: for Harry, now I doe not speak to thee in Drink, but in Tears; not in Pleasure, but in Pas???zion; not in Words only, but in Woes also: and yet there is a virtuous man, whom I have often noted in thy company, but I know not his Name.
What manner of man, and it like your Ma???jest?
A goodly portly man in faith, and a corpulent, of a cheerful Look, a pleasing Eye, and a most noble Carriage, and as I think, his age some fifty, or (by our lady) inclining to threescore; and now I remember me, his Name is Falstaff: if that man should be lewdly given, hee deceives me; for Harry, I see Virtue in his Looks. If then the Tree may be known by the Fruit, as the Fruit by the Tree, then peremptorily I speak it, there is Virtue in that Falstaff: him keep with, the rest banish. And tell me now, thou naughty Varlet, tell me, where hast thou been this month?
Dost thou speak like a King? doe thou stand for me, and Isle play my Father.
Depose me: if thou dost it half so gravely, so majestically, both in word and matter, hang me up by the heals for a Rabbet-sucker, or a Poulters Hare.
Well, here I am set.
And here I stand: judge my Masters.
Now Harry, whence come you?
My Noble Lord, from East-cheape.
The complaints I hear of thee, are grievous.
In faith, my Lord, they are false: Nay, Isle tickle ye for a young Prince.
Swearest thou, ungracious Boy? henceforth ne'er look on me: thou art violently carried away from Grace: there is a Devil haunts thee, in the likeness of a fat old Man; a Tun of Man is thy Companion: Why dost thou converse with that Trunk of Humours, that Boulting-Hutch of Beastliness, that swollen Parcel of Dropsies, that huge Bombard of Sack, that stuffed Cloak-bag of Guts, that roasted Manning Tree Ox with the Pudding in his Belly, that reverend Vice, that grey Ini???quite, that Father Ruffian, that Vanity in years? where???in is he good, but to taste Sack, and drink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a Capon, and eat it? where???in Cunning, but in Craft? wherein Crafty, but in Villa???no? wherein Villainous, but in all things? wherein worcester???thy, but in nothing?
I would your Grace would take me with you: whom means your Grace?
That villainous abominable mis-leader of Youth, Falstaff, that old white-bearded Satan.
My Lord, the man I know.
I know thou dost.
But to say, I know more harm in him then in my self, were to say more then I know. That hee is old (the more the pity) his white hairs doe witness it: but that hee is (saving your reverence) a Whore-ma???ster, that I utterly deny. If Sack and Sugar bee a fault, Heaven help the Wicked: if to be old and merry, be a sin, then many an old Host that I know, is damned: if to be fat, be to be hated, then Pharaohs lean Kine are to be loved. No, my good Lord, banish Peto, banish Bardolph, banish Poines: but for sweet Jack Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff, valiant Jack Fall???staff, and therefore more valiant, being as hee is old Jack Falstaff, banish not him thy Harryes company, banish not him thy Harryes company; banish plump Jack, and banish all the World.
I doe, I will.
O, my Lord, my Lord, the Sheriff, with a most most monstrous Watch, is at the door.
Out you Rogue, play out the Play: I have much to say in the behalf of that Falstaff.
O, my Lord, my Lord.
Heigh, heigh, the Devil rides upon a Fiddle-sticke: what's the matter?
The Sheriff and all the Watch are at the door: they are come to search the House, shall I let them in?
Dost thou hear Hal, never call a true piece of Gold a Counterfeit: thou art essentially made, without seeming so.
And thou a natural Coward, without in???stinct.
I deny your Mayor: if you will deny the Sheriff, so: if not, let him enter. If I become not a Cart as well as another man, a plague on my bringing up: I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a Halter, as ano???there.
Go hide thee behind the Arras, the rest walk up aboue. Now my Masters, for a true Face and good Conscience.
Both which I have had: but their date is out, and therefore Isle hide me.
Call in the Sheriff.
Now Master Sheriff, what is your will with me?
First pardon me, my Lord. A Hue and Cry hath followed certain men unto this house.
What men?
One of them is well known, my gracious Lord, a gross fat man.
As fat as Butter.
The man, I doe assure you, is not here,
For I my self at this time have employed him:
And Sheriff, I will engage my word to thee,
That I will by to morrow Dinner time,
Send him to answer thee, or any man,
For any thing he shall be charged withal:
And so let me entreat you, leave the house.
I will, my Lord: there are two Gentlemen
Have in this Robbery lost three hundred Marks.
It may be so: if he have robbed these men,
He shall be answerable: and so farewell.
Good Night, my Noble Lord.
I think it is good Morrow, is it not?
Indeed, my Lord, I think it be two a Clock.
This oily Rascal is known as well as Poules: go call him forth.
Falstaff? fast asleep behind the Arras, and snorting like a Horse.
Hark, how hard he fetches breath: search his Pockets.
What hast thou found?
Nothing but Papers, my Lord.
Let's see, what be they? read them.
Item, a Capon. ii.s.ii.d.
Item, Sauce. iiii.d.
Item, Sack, two Gallons. v.s.viii.d.
Item, Anchoues and Sack after Supper. ii.s.vi.d.
Item, Bread. obe.
O monstrous, but one half penny-worth of Bread to this intolerable deal of Sack? What there is else, keep close, we'll read it at more advantage: there let him sleep till day. Isle to the Court in the Morning: Wee must all to the Wars, and thy place shall be hono???rabble. Isle procure this fat Rogue a Charge of Foot, and I know his death will be a Match of Twelue-score. The Money shall be paid back again with advantage. Be with me betimes in the Morning: and so good more???row Peto.
Good morrow, good my Lord.
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
And our induction full of prosperous hope.
Lord Mortimer, and Cousin Glendower,
Will you sit down?
And Uncle Worcester; a plague upon it,
I have forgot the Map.
No, here it is:
Sit Cousin Percy, sit good Cousin Hotspurre:
For by that Name, as oft as Lancaster doth speak of you,
His Cheeks look pale, and with a rising sigh,
He wishes you in Heaven.
And you in Hell, as oft as he hears Owen Glen???dower spoke of.
I cannot blame him: At my Nativity,
The front of Heaven was full of fiery shapes,
Of burning Cressets: and at my Birth,
The frame and foundation of the Earth
Shook like a Coward.
Why so it would have done at the same season, if your Mothers Cat had but kitten'd, though your self had never been borne.
I say the Earth did shake when I was borne.
And I say the Earth was not of my mind,
If you suppose, as fearing you, it shook.
The Heavens were all on fire, the Earth did tremble.
Oh, then the Earth shook
To see the Heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your Nativity.
Diseased Nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions; and the teeming Earth
Is with a kind of Colic pinched and vexed,
By the imprisoning of unruly Wind
Within her Womb: which for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old Beldam Earth, and tombles down
Steeples, and mosse-growne Towers. At your Birth,
Our Grandam Earth, having this distemperature,
In passion shook.
Cousin: of many men
I doe not bear these Crossings: Give me leave
To tell you once again, that at my Birth
The front of Heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The Goats ran from the Mountains, and the Herds
Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields:
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my Life doe show,
I am not in the Roll of common men.
Where is the Living, clipped in with the Sea,
That chides the Banks of England, Scotland, and Wales,
Which calls me Pupil, or hath read to me?
And bring him out, that is but Women's Son,
Can trace me in the tedious ways of Art,
And hold me pace in deep experiments.
I think there's no man speaks better Welsh:
Isle to Dinner.
Peace Cousin Percy, you will make him mad.
I can call Spirits from the vast Deep.
Why so can I, or so can any man:
But will they come, when you doe call for them?
Why, I can teach thee, Cousin, to command the Devil.
And I can teach thee, Cousin, to shame the Devil,
By telling truth. Tell truth, and shame the Devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And Isle be sworn, I have power to shame him hence.
Oh, while you live, tell truth, and shame the Devil.
Come, come, no more of this unprofitable Chat.
Three times hath Henry Bullingbrooke made head
Against my Power: thrice from the Banks of Wye,
And sandy-bottom'd Seuerne, have I hent him
Bootless home, and Weather-beaten back.
Home without Boots,
And in foul Weather too,
How scopes he Agues in the Devils name?
Come, heere's the Map:
Shall wee divide our Right,
According to our three-fold order-ta'ne?
The Arch-Deacon hath divided it
Into three Limits, very equally:
England, from Trent, and Seuerne hitherto,
By South and East, is to my part assigned:
All Westward, Wales, beyond the Seuerne shore,
And all the fertile Land within that bound,
To Owen Glendower: And dear Couze, to you
The remnant Northward, lying off from Trent.
And our Indentures Tripartite are drawn:
Which being sealed interchangeably,
(A Business that this Night may execute)
To morrow, Cousin Percy, you and I,
And my good Lord of Worcester, will set forth,
To meet your Father, and the Scottish Power,
As is appointed vs at Shrewsbury.
My Father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall wee need his help these fourteen days:
Within that space, you may have drawn together
Your Tenants, Friends, and neighbouring Gentlemen.
A shorter time shall send me to you, Lords:
And in my Conduct shall your Ladies come,
From whom you now must steal, and take no leave,
For there will be a World of Water shed,
Upon the parting of your Wives and you.
Me thinks my Moity, North from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours:
See, how this River comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my Land,
A huge half Moon, a monstrous Cantle out.
Isle have the Currant in this place damned up,
And here the smug and Silver Trent shall run,
In a new Channel, fair and evenly:
It shall not wind with such a deep indent,
To rob me of so rich a Bottom here.
Not wind? it shall, it must, you see it doth.
Yea, but mark how he bears his course,
And runs me up, with like advantage on the other side,
Gelding the opposed Continent as much,
As on the other side it takes from you.
Yea, but a little Charge will trench him here,
And on this North side win this Cape of Land,
And then he runs straight and even.
Isle have it so, a little Charge will doe it.
Isle not have it altered.
Will not you?
No, nor you shall not.
Who shall say me nay?
Why, that will I.
Let me not understand you then, speak it in Welsh.
I can speak English, Lord, as well as you:
For I was trained up in the English Court;
Where, being but young, I framed to the Harp
Many an English Ditty, lovely well,
And gave the Tongue a helpefull Ornament;
A Virtue that was never seen in you.
Marry, and I am glad of it with all my heart,
I had rather be a Kitten, and cry mew,
Then one of these same Meeter Ballad-mongers:
I had rather hear a Brazen Candlestick turned,
Or a dry Wheel grate on the Axle-tree,
And that would set my teeth nothing an edge,
Nothing so much, as mincing Poetry;
It is like the forced gate of a shuffling Nag.
Come, you shall have Trent turned.
I doe not care: Isle give thrice so much Land
To any well-deseruing friend;
But in the way of Bargain, mark ye me,
Isle cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Are the Indentures drawn? shall we be gone?
The Moon shines fair,
You may away by Night:
Isle haste the Writer; and withal,
Break with your Wives, of your departure hence:
I am afraid my Daughter will run mad,
So much she dotes on her Mortimer.
Fie, Cousin Percy, how you cross my Fa???there.
I cannot choose: sometime he angers me,
With telling me of the Moldwarpe and the Ant,
Of the Dreamer Marlin, and his Prophecies;
And of a Dragon, and a finne-lesse Fish,
A clip-wing'd Griffin, and a molten Raven,
A couching Lyon, and a romping Cat,
And such a deal of skimble-skamble Stuff,
As puts me from my Faith. I tell you what,
He held me last Night, at least, nine hours,
In reckoning up the several Devils Names,
That were his Lackeys:
I cried hum, and well, go too,
But marked him not a word. O, he is as tedious
As a tyred Horse, a railing Wife,
Worse then a smokey House. I had rather live
With Cheese and Garlic in a Windmill far,
Then feed on Cates, and have him talk to me,
In any Summer-House in Christendom.
In faith he was a worthy Gentleman,
Exceeding well read, and profited,
In strange Concealments:
Valiant as a Lyon, and wondrous affable,
And as bountiful, as Mines of India.
Shall I tell you, Cousin,
He holds your temper in a high respect,
And curbs himself, even of his natural scope,
When you doe cross his humour: faith he does.
I warrant you, that man is not alive,
Might so have tempted him, as you have done,
Without the taste of danger, and reproof:
But doe not use it oft, let me entreat you.
In faith, my Lord, you are too wilful blame,
And since your coming hither, have done enough,
To put him quite besides his patience.
You must needs learn, Lord, to amend this fault:
Though sometimes it show Greatness, Courage, Blood,
And that's the dearest grace it renders you;
Yet oftentimes it doth present harsh Rage,
Defect of Manners, want of Government,
Pride, Haughtiness, Opinion, and Disdain:
The least of which, haunting a Nobleman,
Loses men's hearts, and leaves behind a stain
Upon the beauty of all parts besides,
Beguiling them of commendation.
Well, I am schooled:
Good-manners be your speed;
Here come your Wives, and let vs take our leave.
This is the deadly spite, that angers me,
My Wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
My Daughter weeps, she'll not part with you,
She'll be a Soldier too, she'll to the Wars.
Good Father tell her, that she and my Aunt Percy
Shall follow in your Conduct speedily.
She is desperate here:
A peevish selfe-will'd Harlotry,
One that no persuasion can doe good upon.
I understand thy Looks: that pretty Welsh
Which thou pour down from these swelling Heavens,
I am too perfect in: and but for shame,
In such a parley should I answer thee.
I understand thy Kisses, and thou mine,
And that's a feeling disputation:
But I will never be a Truant, Love,
Till I have learned thy Language: for thy tongue
Makes Welsh as sweet as Ditties highly penned,
Sung by a fair Queen in a Summers Bower,
With ravishing Division to her Lute.
Nay, if thou melt, then will she run mad.
O, I am Ignorance it self in this.
She bids you,
On the wanton Rushes lay you down,
And rest your gentle Head upon her Lap,
And she will sing the Song that pleases you,
And on your Eye-lids Crown the God of Sleep,
Charming your blood with pleasing heaviness;
Making such difference betwixt Wake and Sleep,
As is the difference betwixt Day and Night,
The hour before the Heavenly Harneis'd Teem
Begins his Golden Progress in the East.
With all my heart Isle sit, and hear her sing:
By that time will our Book, I think, be drawn.
Doe so:
And those Musicians that shall play to you,
Hang in the Ayre a thousand Leagues from thence;
And straight they shall be here: sit, and attend.
Come Kate, thou art perfect in lying down:
Come, quick, quick, that I may lay my Head in thy Lap.
Go, ye giddy-Goose.
Now I perceive the Devil understands Welsh,
And it is no marvel he is so humorous:
By our lady hoe's a good Musician.
Then would you be nothing but Musical,
For you are altogether governed by humours:
Lye still ye Thief, and hear the Lady sing in Welsh.
I had rather hear (Lady) my Brach howl in Irish.
Would have thy Head broken?
No.
Then be still.
Neither, it is a Women's fault.
Now God help thee.
To the Welsh Ladies Bed.
What's that?
Peace, she sings.
Come, Isle have your Song too.
Not mine, in good sooth.
Not yours, in good sooth?
You swear like a Comfit-makers Wife:
Not you, in good sooth; and, as true as I live;
And, as God shall mend me; and, as sure as day:
And gives such Sarcenet surety for thy Oaths,
As if thou never walk further then Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a Lady, as thou art,
A good mouth-filling Oath: and leave in sooth,
And such protest of Pepper Ginger-bread,
To Veluet-Guards, and Sunday-Citizens.
Come, sing.
I will not sing.
It is the next way to turn Taylor, or be Red???breast teacher: and the Indentures be drawn, Isle away within these two hours: and so come in, when ye will.
Come, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow,
As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our Book is drawn: we'll but seal,
And then to Horse immediately.
With all my heart.
Lords, give vs leave:
The Prince of Wales, and I,
Must have some private conference:
But be near at hand,
For wee shall presently have need of you.
I know not whether Heaven will have it so,
For some displeasing service I have done;
That in his secret Doom, out of my Blood,
He will breed Revengement, and a Scourge for me:
But thou dost in thy passages of Life,
Make me believe, that thou art only marked
For the hot vengeance, and the Rod of heaven
To punish my Mistreadings. Tell me else.
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
Such barren pleasures, rude society,
As thou art matched withal, and grafted too,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their level with thy Princely heart?
So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all offences with as clear excuse,
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
My self of many I am charged withal:
Yet such extenuation let me beg,
As in reproof of many Tales deuis'd,
Which oft the Ear of Greatness needs must hear,
By smiling Pick-thankes, and base Newes-mongers;
I may for some things true, wherein my youth
Hath faulty wandered, and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.
Heaven pardon thee:
Yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy affections, which doe hold a Wing
Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.
Thy place in Council thou hast rudely lost,
Which by thy younger Brother is supplied;
And art almost an alien to the hearts
Of all the Court and Princes of my blood.
The hope and expectation of thy time
Is ruined, and the Soul of every man
Prophetically doe fore-thinke thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common hackneyed in the eyes of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar Company;
Opinion, that did help me to the Crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession,
And left me in reputelesse banishment,
A fellow of no mark, nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir,
But like a Comet, I was wondered at,
That men would tell their Children, This is hee:
Others would say; Where, Which is Bullingbrooke.
And then I stole all Curtsy from Heaven,
And dressed my self in such Humility,
That I did pluck Allegiance from men's hearts,
Loud Shouts and Salutations from their mouths,
Even in the presence of the Crowned King.
Thus I did keep my Person fresh and new,
My Presence like a Robe Pontifical,
Ne'er seen, but wondered at: and so my State,
Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a Feast,
And won by rareness such Solemnity.
The skipping King hee ambled up and down,
With shallow Easters, and rash Bavin Wits,
Soon kindled, and soon burnt, carded his State,
Mingled his Royalty with Carping Fools,
Had his great Name profaned with their Scorns,
And gave his Countenance, against his Name,
To laugh at gybing Boys, and stand the push
Of every Beardless vain Comparative;
Grew a Companion to the common Streets,
Enfeoff'd himself to Popularity:
That being daily swallowed by men's Eyes,
They surfeited with Honey, and began to loathe
The taste of Sweetness, whereof a little
More then a little, is by much too much.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
He was but as the Cuckoo is in June,
Heard, not regarded: seen but with such Eyes,
As sick and blunted with Community,
Afford no extraordinary Gaze,
Such as is bent on Sunne-like Majesty,
When it shines seldom in admiring Eyes:
But rather drowsed, and hung their eye-lids down,
Slept in his Face, and rendered such aspect
As Cloudy men use to doe to their adversaries,
Being with his presence glutted, gorged, and full.
And in that very Line, Harry, stand thou:
For thou hast lost thy Princely Privilege,
With vile participation. Not an Eye
But is a weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which hath desired to see thee more:
Which now doth that I would not have it doe,
Make blind it self with foolish tenderness.
I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious Lord,
Be more my self.
For all the World,
As thou art to this hour, was Richard then,
When I from France set foot at Rauenspurgh;
And even as I was then, is Percy now:
Now by my Sceptre, and my Soul to boot,
He hath more worthy interest to the State
Then thou, the shadow of Succession;
For of no Right, nor colour like to Right.
He doth fill fields with Harness in the Realm,
Turns head against the Lyons armed Jaws;
And being no more in debt to years, then thou,
Leads ancient Lords, and reverent Bishops on
To bloody Battles, and to bruising Arms.
What neuer-dying Honour hath he got,
Against renowned Douglas? whose high Deeds,
Whose hot Incursions, and great Name in Arms,
Holds from all Soldiers chief Maioritie,
And Military Title Capital.
Through all the Kingdoms that acknowledge Christ,
Thrice hath the Hotspur Mars, in swathing Clothes,
This Infant Warrior, in his Enterprises,
Discomfited great Douglas, taken him once,
Enlarged him, and made a friend of him,
To fill the mouth of deep Defiance up,
And shake the peace and safety of our Throne.
And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,
The Arch-bishops Grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,
Capitulate against vs, and are up.
But wherefore doe I tell these News to thee?
Why, Harry, doe I tell thee of my Foes,
Which art my nearest and dearest Enemy?
Thou, that art like enough, through vassal Fear,
Base Inclination, and the start of Spleen,
To fight against me under Percies pay,
To dog his heals, and curtsy at his frowns,
To show how much thou art degenerate.
Doe not think so, you shall not find it so:
And Heaven forgive them, that so much have swayed
Your Majesties good thoughts away from me:
I will redeem all this on Percies head,
And in the closing of some glorious day,
Be bold to tell you???that I am your Son,
When I will wear a Garment all of Blood,
And stain my favours in a bloody Mask:
Which washed away, shall scour my shame with it.
And that shall be the day, when ere it lights,
That this same Child of Honour and Renown.
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praysed Knight,
And your vnthought-of Harry chance to meet:
For every Honour fitting on his Helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my head
My shames redoubled. For the time will come,
That I shall make this Northern Youth exchange
His glorious Deeds for my Indignities:
Percy is but my Factor, good my Lord,
To engross up glorious Deeds on my behalf:
And I will call him to so strict account,
That he shall render every Glory up,
Yea, even the sleights worship of his time,
Or I will tear the Reckoning from his Heart.
This, in the Name of Heaven, I promise here:
The which, if I perform, and doe survive,
I doe beseech your Majesty, may salve
The long-growne Wounds of my intemperature:
If not, the end of Life cancels all Bands,
And I will dye a hundred thousand Deaths,
Ere break the smallest parcel of this Vow.
A hundred thousand Rebels dye in this:
Thou shalt have Charge, and sovereign trust herein.
How now good Blunt? thy Looks are full of speed.
So hath the Business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland hath sent word,
That Douglas and the English Rebels met
The eleventh of this month, at Shrewsbury:
A mighty and a fearful Head they are,
(If Promises be kept on every hand)
As ever offered foul play in a State.
The Earl of Westmerland set forth to day:
With him my son, Lord Iohn of Lancaster,
For this advertisement is five days old.
On Wednesday next, Harry thou shalt set forward:
On Thursday, wee our selves will march.
Our meeting is Bridgenorth: and Harry, you shall march
Through Glocestershire: by which account,
Our Business valued some twelve days hence,
Our general Forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our Hands are full of Business: let's away,
Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay.
Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely, since this last action? doe I not bate? doe I not dwindle? Why my skin hangs about me like an old Ladies loose Gown: I am withered like an old Apple Iohn. Well, Isle repent, and that suddenly, while I am in some li???ing: I shall be out of heart shortly, and then I shall have no strength to repent. And I have not forgotten what the in-side of a Church is made of I am a Pepper Corn, a Brewers Horse, the in-side of a Church. Company, villa???nous Company hath been the spoil of me.
Sir Iohn, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.
Why there is it: Come, sing me a bawdy Song, make me merry: I was as virtuously given, as a Gentle???man need to be; virtuous enough, swore little, diced not aboue seven times a week, went to a Bawdy-house not aboue once in a quarter of an hour, paid Money that I borrowed, three or four times; lived well, and in good compass: and now I live out of all order, out of com???pass.
Why, you are so fat, Sir Iohn, that you must ???edes bee out of all compass; out of all reasonable compass Sir Iohn.
Doe thou amend thy Face, and Isle amend thy Life: Thou art our Admiral, thou bear the Lantern in the Poop, but it is in the Nose of thee; thou art the Knight of the burning Lamp.
Why, Sir Iohn, my Face does you no harm.
No, Isle be sworn: I make as good use of it, as many a man doth of a Deaths-Head, or a Memento More. I never see thy Face, but I think upon Hell fire, and Dives that lived in Purple; for there he is in his Robes burning, burning. If thou were any way given to virtue, I would swear by thy Face; my Oath should bee, By this Fire: But thou art altogether given over; and were indeed, but for the Light in thy Face, the Sun of utter Dark???ness. When thou ra???'st up Gads-Hill in the Night, to catch my Horse??? if I did not think that thou had been an Ignis fatnus, or a Ball of Wild-fire, there's no Purchase in Money. O, thou art a perpetual Triumph, an ever???lasting Bone-fire-Light: thou hast saved me a thousand Marks in Links and Torches??? walking with thee in the Night betwixt Tavern and Tavern: But the Sack that thou hast drunk me, would have bought me Lights as good cheap, as the dearest Chandlers in Europe. I have maintained that Salamander of yours with fire, any time this two and thirty years, Heaven reward me for it.
I would my Face were in your Belly.
So should I be sure to be heart-burn'd.
How now, Dame Partlet the Hen, have you enquired yet who picked my Pocket?
Why Sir Iohn, what doe you think, Sir Iohn? doe you think I keep Thieves in my House? I have searched, I have enquired, so haz my Husband, Man by Man, Boy by Boy, Servant by Servant: the tight of a hair was never lost in my house before.
Ye lye Hostess: Bardolph was shau'd, and lost many a hair; and Isle be sworn my Pocket was picked: go to, you are a Woman, go.
Who I? I defy thee: I was never called so in mine own house before.
Go to, I know you well enough.
No, Sir Iohn, you doe not know me, Sir Iohn: I know you, Sir Iohn: you owe me Money, Sir Iohn, and now you pick a quarrel, to beguile me of it: I bought you a dozen of Shirts to your Back.
Doles??? filthy Doles: I have given them away to Bakers Wives, and they have made Boulters of them.
Now as I am a true Woman, Holland of eight shillings an Ell: You owe Money here besides, Sir Iohn, for your Diet, and by-Drinkings, and Money lent you, four and twenty pounds.
Hee had his part of it, let him pay.
Hee? alas hee is poor, hee hath no???thing.
How? Poor? Look upon his Face: What call you Rich? Let them coin his Nose, let them coin his Cheeks, Isle not pay a Denier. What, will you make a Yo???kerr of me? Shall I not take mine ease in mine Inn, but I shall have my Pocket picked? I have lost a Seale-Ring of my Grand-fathers, worth forty Mark.
I have heard the Prince tell him, I know not how oft that that Ring was Copper.
How? the Prince is a Jack, a Sneake-Cuppe: and if hee were here, I would cudgel him like a Dog, if hee would say so.
How now Lad? is the Wind in that Door?
Must we all march?
Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.
My Lord, I pray you hear me.
What say thou, Mistress Quickly? How does thy Husband? I love him well, hee is an honest man.
Good, my Lord, hear me.
Prithee let her alone, and lift to me.
What say thou, Jack?
The other Night I fell asleep here behind the Arras, and had my Pocket picked: this House is turned Bawdy-house, they pick Pockets.
What did thou lose, Jack?
Wilt thou believe me, Hal? Three or four Bonds of forty pound apiece, and a Seale-Ring of my Grand???fathers.
A Trifle, some eight-penny matter.
So I told him, my Lord; and I said, I heard your Grace say so: and (my Lord) hee speaks most vilely of you, like a foule-mouth'd man as hee is, and said, hee would cudgel you.
What hee did not?
There's neither Faith, Truth, nor Woman-hood in me else.
There's no more faith in thee then a stu'de Prune; nor no more truth in thee, then in a drawn Fox: and for Wooman-hood, Maid-marian may be the Deputies wife of the Ward to thee. Go you nothing: go.
Say, what thing? what thing?
What thing? why a thing to thank heaven on.
I am no thing to thank heaven on, I wold thou should know it: I am an honest mans wife: and setting thy Knighthood aside, thou art a knave to call me so.
Setting thy woman-hood aside, thou art a beast to say otherwise.
Say, what beast, thou knave thou?
What beast? Why an Otter.
An Otter, sir Iohn? Why an Otter?
Why? She's neither fish nor flesh; a man knows not where to have her.
Thou art unjust man in saying so; thou, or any man knows where to have me, thou knave thou.
Thou say true Hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.
So he doth you, my Lord, and said this other day, You ought him a thousand pound.
Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?
A thousand pound Hal? A Million. Thy love is worth a Million: thou ow'st me thy love.
Nay my Lord, he called you Jack, and said hee would cudgel you.
Did I, Bardolph?
Indeed Sir Iohn, you said so.
Yea, if he said my Ring was Copper.
I say it is Copper. Dare thou bee as good as thy word now?
Why Hal? thou know, as thou art but a man, I dare: but, as thou art a Prince, I fear thee, as I fear the roaring of the Lyons Whelp.
And why not as the Lyon?
The King himself is to bee feared as the Lyon: Dost thou think Isle fear thee, as I fear thy Father? nay if I do, let my Girdle break.
O, if it should??? how would thy guts fall about thy knees. But sir: There's no room for Faith, Truth, nor Honesty, in this bosom of thine: it is all filled up with Guts and Midriff. Charge an honest Woman with picking thy pocket? Why thou whoreson impudent embossed Rascal, if there were any thing in thy Pocket but Tavern Recknings, Memorandums of Bawdie-houses, and one poor peny-worth of Sugar-candie to make thee long-winded: if thy pocket were enriched with any o???there injuries but these, I am a Villain: And yet you will stand to it, you will not Pocket up wrong. Art thou not ashamed?
Dost thou hear Hal? Thou know in the state of Innocence, Adam fell: and what should poor Jack Falstaff do, in the days of Villainy? Thou see, I have more flesh then another man, and therefore more frailty. You confess then you picked my Pocket?
It appears so by the Story.
Hostess, I forgive thee:
Go make ready Breakfast, love thy Husband,
Look to thy Servants, and cherish thy Guests:
Thou shalt find me tractable to any honest reason:
Thou see, I am pacified still.
Nay, I prithee be gone.
Now Hal, to the news at Court for the Robbery, Lad?
How is that answered?
O my sweet Beef:
I must still be good Angel to thee.
The Money is paid back again.
O, I do not like that paying back, it is a double Labour.
I am good Friends with my Father, and may do anything.
Rob me the Exchequer the first thing thou dost, and do it with vnwash'd hands too.
Do my Lord.
I have procured thee Jack, a Charge of Foot.
I would it had been of Horse. Where shall I find one that can steal well? O, for a fine thief of two and twenty, or thereabout: I am heinously unprovided. Well God be thanked for these Rebels, they offend none but the Virtuous. I laud them, I praise them.
Bardolph.
My Lord.
Go bear this Letter to Lord Iohn of Lancaster
To my Brother Iohn. This to my Lord of Westmerland,
Go Peto, to horse: for thou, and I,
Have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.
Jack, meet me to morrow in the Temple Hall
At two a clock in the afternoon,
There shalt thou know thy Charge, and there receive
Money and Order for their Furniture.
The Land is burning, Percie stands on hye,
And either they, or we must lower lye.
Rare words! brave world.
Hostess, my breakfast, come:
Oh, I could wish this Tavern were my drum.
Well said, my Noble Scot, if speaking truth
In this fine Age, were not thought flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have,
As not a Soldier of this seasons stamp,
Should go so general currant through the world.
By heaven I cannot flatter: I defy
The Tongues of Soothers. But a Braver place
In my hearts love, hath no man then your Self.
Nay, task me to my word: approve me Lord.
Thou art the King of Honour:
No man so potent breathes upon the ground,
But I will Beard him.
Do so, and it is well. What Letters hast there?
I can but thank you.
These Letters come from your Father.
Letters from him?
Why comes he not himself?
He cannot come, my Lord,
He is grievous sick.
How? haz he the leisure to be sick now,
In such a jostling time? Who leads his power?
Under whose Government come they along?
His Letters bears his mind, not I his mind.
I prithee tell me, doth he keep his Bed?
He did, my Lord, four days ere I set forth:
And at the time of my departure thence,
He was much feared by his Physician.
I would the state of time had first been whole,
Ere he by sickness had been visited:
His health was never better worth then now.
Sick now? droop now? this sickness doth infect
The very Life-blood of our Enterprise,
It is catching hither, even to our Camp.
He writes me here, that inward sickness,
And that his friends by deputation
Could not so soon be drawn: nor did he think it meet,
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On any Soul removed, but on his own.
Yet doth he give vs bold advertisement,
That with our small conjunction we should on,
To see how Fortune is disposed to vs:
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now,
Because the King is certainly possessed
Of all our purposes. What say you to it?
Your Fathers sickness is a maim to vs.
A perilous Gash, a very Limb lopped off:
And yet, in faith, it is not his present want
Seems more then we shall find it.
Were it good??? to set the exact wealth of all our states
All at one Cast? To set so rich a mayne
On the nice hazard of one doubtful hour,
It were not good: for therein should we read
The very Bottom, and the Soul of Hope,
The very List, the very utmost Bound
Of all our fortunes.
Faith, and so wee should,
Where now remains a sweet reversion.
We may boldly spend, upon the hope
Of what is to come in:
A comfort of retirement lives in this.
A Rendezvous, a Home to fly unto,
If that the Devil and Mischance look big???
Upon the Maidenhead of our Affairs.
But yet I would your Father had been here:
The Quality and Heir of our Attempt
Brookes no division: It will be thought
By some, that know not why he is away,
That wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike
Of our proceedings, kept the Earl from hence.
And think, how such an apprehension
May turn the tide of fearful Faction,
And breed a kind of question in our cause:
For well you know, wee of the offering side,
Must keep aloof from strict arbitrament,
And stop all sight-holes, every loop, from whence
The eye of reason may pry in upon vs:
This absence of your Father draws a Curtain,
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear,
Before not dreamt of.
You strain too far.
I rather of his absence make this use:
It lends a Lustre, and more great Opinion,
A larger Dare to your great Enterprise,
Then if the Earl were here: for men must think,
If we without his help, can make a Head
To push against the Kingdom; with his help,
We shall o're-turne it topsie-turuy down:
Yet all goes well, yet all out joints are whole.
As heart can think:
There is not such a word spoke of in Scotland,
At this Dream of Fear.
My Cousin Vernon, welcome by my Soul.
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, Lord.
The Earl of Westmerland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hither-wards, with Prince Iohn.
No harm: what more?
And further, I have learned,
The King himself in person hath set forth,
Or hither-wards intended speedily,
With strong and mighty preparation.
He shall be welcome too.
Where is his Son,
The nimble-footed Mad-Cap, Prince of Wales,
And his Cumrades, that daft the World aside,
And bid it pass?
All furnished, all in Arms,
All plumed like Ostriches, that with the Wind
Baited like Eagles, having lately bathed,
Glittering in Golden Coats, like Images,
As full of spirit as the Month of May,
And gorgeous as the Sun at Mid-summer,
Wanton as youthful Goats, wilde as young Bulls.
I saw young Harry with his Beaver on,
His Cushes on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury.
And vaulted with such ease into his Seat,
As if an Angel dropped down from the Clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the World with Noble Horsemanship.
No more, no more,
Worse men the Sun in March:
This praise doth nourish Agues: let them come.
They come like Sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-ey'd Maid of smokey War,
All hot, and bleeding, will wee offer them:
The mayled Mars shall on his Altar sit
Up to the ears i??? blood. I am on fire,
To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh,
And yet not ours. Come, let me take my Horse,
Who is to bear me like a Thunder-bolt,
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
Harry to Harry, shall not Horse to Horse
Meet, and ne'er part, till one drop down a Coarse?
Oh, that Glendower were come.
There is more news:
I learned in Worcester, as I rode along,
He cannot draw his Power this fourteen days.
That's the worst Tidings that I hear of yet.
I by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
What may the Kings whole Battle reach unto?
To thirty thousand.
Forty let it be,
My Father and Glendower being both away,
The powers of vs, may serve so great a day.
Come, let vs take a muster speedily:
Doomsday is near; dye all, dye merrily.
Talk not of dying. I am out of fear
Of death, or deaths hand, for this one half year.
Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry, fill me a Bottle of Sack, our Soldiers shall march through: we'll to Sutton-cop-hill to Night.
Will you give me Money, Captain?
Lay out, lay out.
This Bottle makes an Angel.
And if it doe, take it for thy labour: and if it make twenty, take them all, He answer the Coinage. Bid my Lieutenant Peto meet me at the Towns end.
I will Captain: farewell.
If I be not ashamed of my Soldiers, I am a sowc't-Gurnet: I have misused the Kings Press dam???nobly. I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty Soldiers, three hundred and odd Pounds. I press me none but good House-holders, Yeomens Sons: enquire me out contracted Bachelors, such as had been asked twice on the Banes: such a Commodity of warm slaves, as had as lieve hear the Devil, as a Drum; such as fear the report of a Caliver, worse then a struck-Foole, or a hurt wilde-Ducke, I pressed me none but such Tostes and Butter, with Hearts in their Bellies no bigger then Pins heads, and they have bought out their services: And now, my whole Charge consists of Ancients, Cor???porals, Lieutenants, Gentlemen of Companies, Slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the painted Cloth, where the Glut???tons Dogs licked his Sores; and such, as indeed were never Soldiers, but dis-carded unjust Serving-men, youn???ger Sons to younger Brothers, revolted Tipsters and Ostlers, Trade-falne, the Cankers of a calm World, and long Peace, ten times more dishonourable ragged, then an old-fac'd Ancient; and such have I to fill up the rooms of them that have bought out their services: that you would think, that I had a hundred and fifty tottered Prodigals, lately come from Swine-keeping, from eating Draff and Husks. A mad fellow met me on the way, and told me, I had unloaded all the Gibbets, and pressed the dead bodies. No eye hath seen such skar-Crowes: Isle not march through Coventry with them, that's flat. Nay, and the Villains march wide betwixt the Legs, as if they had Gyves on; for indeed, I had the most of them out of Prison. There's not a Shirt and a half in all my Company: and the half Shirt is two Napkins tacked to???gether, and thrown over the shoulders like a Heralds Coat, without sleeves: and the Shirt, to say the truth, stolen from my Host of S. Albones, or the Red-Nose Innkeeper of Dauintry. But that's all one, they'll find Linen enough on every Hedge.
How now blown Jack? how now Quilt?
What Hal? How now mad Wag, what a Devil dost thou in Warwickshire? My good Lord of West???merland, I cry you mercy, I thought your Honour had al???ready been at Shrewsbury.
Faith, Sir Iohn, it is more then time that I were there, and you too: but my Powers are there already. The King, I can tell you, looks for vs all: we must away all to Night.
Tut, never fear me, I am as vigilant as a Cat, to steal Cream.
I think to steal Cream indeed, for thy theft hath already made thee Butter: but tell me, Jack, whose fellows are these that come after?
Mine, Hal, mine.
I did never see such pitiful Rascals.
Tut, tut, good enough to toss: food for Pow???der, food for Powder: they'll fill a Pit, as well as better: tush man, mortal men, mortal men.
I, but Sir Iohn, me thinks they are exceeding poor and bare, too beggarly.
Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had that; and for their bareness, I am sure they never learned that of me.
No, Isle be sworn, unless you call three fingers on the Ribs bare. But sir, make haste, Percy is already in the field.
What, is the King encamped?
Hee is, Sir Iohn, I fear wee shall stay too long.
Well, to the latter end of a Fray, and the begin???ning of a Feast, fits a dull fighter, and a keen Guest.
We'll fight with him to Night.
It may not be.
You give him then advantage.
Not a whit.
Why say you so? looks he not for supply?
So doe wee.
His is certain, ours is doubtful.
Good Cousin be advised, stir not to night.
Doe not, my Lord.
You doe not counsel well:
You speak it out of fear, and cold heart.
Doe me no slander, Douglas: by my Life,
And I dare well maintain it with my Life,
If well-respected Honour bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear,
As you, my Lord, or any Scot that this day lives.
Let it be seen to morrow in the Battle,
Which of vs fears.
Yea, or to night.
Content.
To night, say I.
Come, come, it may not be.
I wonder much, being me?? of such great leading as you are
That you fore-see not what impediments
Drag back our expedition: certain Horse
Of my Cousin Vernons are not yet come up,
Your Uncle Worcesters Horse came but to day,
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
Their courage with hard labour tame and dull,
That not a Horse is half the half of himself.
So are the Horses of the Enemy
In general journey bated, and brought low:
The better part of ours are full of rest.
The number of the King exceeds ours:
For Gods sake, Cousin, stay till all come in.
I come with gracious offers from the King,
If you vouchsafe me hearing, and respect.
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt:
And would to God you were of our determination.
Some of vs love you well: and even those some
Envy your great deservings, and good name,
Because you are not of our quality,
But stand against vs like an Enemy.
And Heaven defend, but still I should stand so,
So long as out of Limit, and true Rule,
You stand against anointed Majesty.
But to my Charge.
The King hath sent to know
The nature of your Griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the Breast of Civil Peace,
Such bold Hostility, teaching his duteous Land
Audacious Cruelty. If that the King
Have any way your good Deserts forgot,
Which he confesses to be manifold,
He bids you name your Griefs, and with all speed
You shall have your desires, with interest;
And Pardon absolute for your self, and these,
Herein mis-led, by your suggestion.
The King is kind:
And well wee know, the King
Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.
My Father, my Uncle, and my self,
Did give him that same Royalty he wears:
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
Sick in the Worlds regard, wretched, and low,
A poor vnminded Out-law, sneaking home,
My Father gave him welcome to the shore:
And when he heard him swear, and vow to God,
He came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
To sue his Livery, and beg his Peace,
With tears of Innocence, and terms of Zeal;
My Father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance, and performed it too.
Now, when the Lords and Barons of the Realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
The more and less came in with Cap and Knee,
Met him in Boroughs, Cities, Villages,
Attended him on Bridges, stood in Lanes,
Laid Gifts before him, proffered him their Oaths,
Gave him their Heirs, as Pages followed him,
Even at the heals, in golden multitudes,
He presently, as Greatness knows it self,
Steps me a little higher then his Vow
Made to my Father, while his blood was poor,
Upon the naked shore at Rauenspurgh:
And now (forsooth) takes on him to reform
Some certain Edicts, and some strait Decrees,
That lay too heavy on the Common-wealth;
Cries out upon abuses, seems to weep
Over his Countries Wrongs: and by this Face,
This seeming Brow of Justice, did he win
The hearts of all that hee did angle for.
Proceeded further, cut me off the Heads
Of all the Favourites, that the absent King
In deputation left behind him here,
When hee was personal in the Irish War.
Tut, I came not to hear this.
Then to the point.
In short time after, hee deposed the King.
Soon after that, deprived him of his Life:
And in the neck of that, task't the whole State.
To make that worse, suffered his Kinsman March,
Who is, if every Owner were placed,
Indeed his King, to be engaged in Wales,
There, without Ransom, to lye forfeited:
Disgraced me in my happy Victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated my Uncle from the Councell-Boord,
In rage dismissed my Father from the Court,
Broke Oath on Oath, committed Wrong on Wrong,
And in conclusion, drove vs to seek out
This Head of safety; and withal, to pry
Into his Title: the which wee find
Too indirect, for long continuance.
Shall I return this answer to the King?
Not so, Sir Walter.
We'll with-draw a while:
Go to the King, and let there be impawn'd
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the Morning early shall my Uncle
Bring him our purpose: and so farewell.
I would you would accept of Grace and Love.
And't may be, so wee shall.
Pray Heaven you doe.
Hie, good Sir Michell, bear this sealed Brief
With winged haste to the Lord Marshall,
This to my Cousin Scroope, and all the rest
To whom they are directed.
If you knew how much they doe Import.
You would make haste.
My good Lord, I guess their tenor.
Like enough you doe.
To morrow, good Sir Michell, is a day,
Wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
Must bide the touch. For Sir, at Shrewsbury,
As I am truly given to understand,
The King, with mighty and quick-raysed Power,
Meets with Lord Harry: and I fear, Sir Michell,
What with the sickness of Northumberland,
Whose Power was in the first proportion;
And what with Owen Glendowers absence thence,
Who with them was rated firmly too,
And comes not in, ouer-rul'd by Prophecies,
I fear the Power of Percy is too weak,
To wage an instant trial with the King.
Why, my good Lord, you need not fear,
There is Douglas, and Lord Mortimer.
No, Mortimer is not there.
But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy,
And there is my Lord of Worcester,
And a Head of gallant Warriors,
Noble Gentlemen.
And so there is, but yet the King hath drawn
The special head of all the Land together:
The Prince of Wales, Lord Iohn of Lancaster,
The Noble Westmerland, and warlike Blunt;
And many more Corrivals, and dear men
Of estimation, and command in Arms.
Doubt not my Lord, he shall be well opposed
I hope no less? Yet needful it is to fear,
And to prevent the worst, Sir Michell speed;
For if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the King
Dismiss his power, he means to visit vs:
For he hath heard of our Confederacy,
And, it is but Wisdom to make strong against him:
Therefore make hast, I must go write again
To other Friends: and so farewell, Sir Michell.
How bloodily the Sun begins to peer
Aboue you busky hill: the day looks pale
At his distemperature.
The Southern wind
Doth play the Trumpet to his purposes,
And by his hollow whistling in the Leaves,
Fortels a Tempest, and a blust'ring day.
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
For nothing can seem foul to those that win.
How now my Lord of Worster? It is not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms,
As now we meet. You have deceived our trust,
And made vs doffe our easy Robes of Peace,
To crush our old limbs in ungentle Steel:
This is not well, my Lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? Will you again vnknit
This churlish knot of all-abhorred War?
And move in that obedient Orb again,
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhaled Meteor,
A prodigy of Fear, and a Portent
Of broached Mischief, to the unborn Times?
Hear me, my Liege:
For mine own part, I could be well content
To entertain the Lagge-end of my life
With quiet hours: For I do protest,
I have not sought the day of this dislike.
You have not sought it: how comes it then?
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
Peace, Chewet, peace.
It pleased your Majesty, to turn your looks
Of Favour, from my Self, and all our House;
And yet I must remember you my Lord,
We were the first, and dearest of your Friends:
For you, my staff of Office did I break
In Richards time, and posted day and night
To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
When yet you were in place, and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate, as I;
It was my Self, my Brother, and his Son,
That brought you home, and boldly did out-dare
The danger of the time. You swore to vs,
And you did swear that Oath at Doncaster,
That you did nothing of purpose against the State,
Nor claim no further, then your new-falne right,
The seat of Gaunt, Dukedom of Lancaster,
To this, we swear our aide: But in short space,
It rained down Fortune showering on your head,
And such a flood of Greatness fell on you,
What with our help, what with the absent King,
What with the injuries of wanton time,
The seeming sufferances that you had borne,
And the contrary Winds that held the King
So long in the unlucky Irish Wars,
That all in England did repute him dead:
And from this swarm of fair advantages,
You took occasion to be quickly wooed,
To gripe the general sway into your hand,
Forgot your Oath to vs at Doncaster,
And being fed by vs, you used vs so,
As that ungentle gull the Cuckowes Bird,
Uses the Sparrow, did oppress our Nest,
Grew by our Feeding, to so great a bulk,
That even our Love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing: But with nimble wing
We were enforced for safety sake, to fly
Out of your sight, and raise this present Head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you your self, have forged against your self,
By unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
And violation of all faith and troth
Sworn to vs in younger enterprise.
These things indeed you have articulated,
Proclaimed at Market Crosses, read in Churches,
To face the Garment of Rebellion
With some fine colour, that may please the eye
Of fickle Changelings, and poor Discontents,
Which gape, and rub the Elbow at the news
Of hurly burly Innovation:
And never yet did Insurrection want
Such water-colours, to impaint his cause:
Nor moody Beggars, starving for a time
Of pell-mell havoc, and confusion.
In both our Armies, there is many a soul
Shall pay full dearly for this encounter,
If once they join in trial. Tell your Nephew,
The Prince of Wales doth join with all the world
In praise of Henry Percie: By my Hopes,
This present enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a braver Gentleman,
More active, valiant, or more valiant young,
More daring, or more bold, is now alive,
To grace this latter Age with Noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame,
I have a Truant been to Chivalry,
And so I hear, he doth account me too:
Yet this before my Fathers Majesty,
I am content that he shall take the odds
Of his great name and estimation,
And will, to save the blood on either side,
Try fortune with him, in a Single Fight.
And Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit, considerations infinite
Do make against it: No good Worster, no,
We love our people well; even those we love
That are ???sled upon your Cousins part:
And will they take the offer of our Grace:
Both he, and they, and you; yea, every man
Shall be my Friend again, and Isle be his.
So tell your Cousin, and bring me word,
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread correction waite on vs,
And they shall do their Office. So bee gone,
We will not now be troubled with reply,
We offer fair, take it advisedly.
It will not be accepted, on my life,
The Douglas and the Hotspurre both together,
Are confident against the world in Arms.
Hence therefore, every Leader to his charge,
For on their answer will we set on them;
And God befriend vs, as our cause is just.
Hal, if thou see me down in the battle,
And bestride me, so; it is a point of friendship.
Nothing but a Colossus can do thee that friendship
Say thy prayers, and farewell.
I would it were bed time Hal, and all well.
Why, thou ow'st heaven a death.
It is not due yet: I would bee loath to pay him before his day. What need I bee so forward with him, that call's not on me? Well, it is no matter, Honour pricks me on. But how if Honour prick me off when I come on? How then? Can Honour set too a leg? No: or an arm? No: Or take away the grief of a wound? No. Honour hath no skill in Surgery, then? No. What is Ho???nor? A word. What is that word Honour? Ayre: A trim reckoning. Who hath it? He that dyed a Wednes???day. Doth he feel it? No. Doth hee hear it? No. Is it insensible then? yea, to the dead. But will it not live with the living? No. Why? Detraction will not suffer it, there???fore Isle none of it. Honour is a mere Scutcheon, and so ends my Catechism.
O no, my Nephew must not know, Sir Richard,
The liberal kind offer of the King.
It were best he did.
Then we are all undone.
It is not possible, it cannot be,
The King would keep his word in loving vs,
He will suspect vs still, and find a time
To punish this offence in others faults:
Supposition, all our lives, shall be stuck full of eyes;
For Treason is but trusted like the Fox,
Who ne'er so tame, so cherished, and locked up,
Will have a wilde trick of his Ancestors:
Look how he can, or sad or merrily,
Interpretation will misquote our looks,
And we shall feed like Oxen at a stall,
The better cherished, still the nearer death.
My Nephews trespass may be well forgot,
It hath the excuse of youth, and heate of blood,
And an adopted name of Privilege,
A haire-brain'd Hotspurre, governed by a Spleen:
All his offences live upon my head,
And on his Fathers. We did train him on,
And his corruption being tan from vs,
We as the Spring of all, shall pay for all:
Therefore good Cousin, let not Harry know
In any case, the offer of the King.
Deliver what you will, Isle say it is so.
Here comes your Cousin.
My Uncle is returned,
Deliver up my Lord of Westmerland.
Uncle, what newe-?
The King will bid you battle presently.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmerland.
Lord Douglas: Go you and tell him so.
Marry and shall, and very willingly.
There is no seeming mercy in the King.
Did you beg any? God forbid.
I told him gently of our grievances,
Of his Oath-breaking: which he mended thus,
By now forswearing that he is forsworn,
He calls vs Rebels, Traitors, and will scourge
With haughty arms, this hateful name in vs.
Arm Gentlemen, to Arms, for I have thrown
A brave defiance in King Henries teeth:
And Westmerland that was engaged did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the king,
And Nephew, challenged you to single fight.
O, would the quarrel lay upon our heads,
And that no man might draw short breath to day,
But I and Harry Monmouth. Tell me, tell me,
How showed his Talking? Seemed it in contempt?
No, by my Soul: I never in my life
Did hear a Challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a Brother should a Brother dare
To gentle exercise, and proof of Arms.
He gave you all the Duties of a Man,
Trimmed up your praises with a Princely tongue,
Spoke your deservings like a Chronicle,
Making you ever better then his praise,
By still dispraising praise, valued with you:
And which became him like a Prince indeed,
He made a blushing citall of himself,
And chid his Truant youth with such a Grace,
As if he mastered there a double spirit
Of teaching, and of learning instantly:
There did he pause. But let me tell the World,
If he out-liue the envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope,
So much misconstrued in his Wantonness.
Cousin, I think thou art enamoured
On his Follies: never did I hear
Of any Prince so wilde at Liberty.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night,
I will embrace him with a Soldiers arm,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Arm, arm with speed. And Fellow's, Soldiers, Friends,
Better consider what you have to do,
That I that have not well the gift of Tongue,
Can lift your blood up with persuasion.
My Lord, here are Letters for you.
I cannot read them now.
O Gentlemen, the time of life is short;
To spend that shortness basely, were too long.
If life did ride upon a Dials point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour,
And if we live, we live to tread on Kings:
If dye; brave death, when Princes dye with vs.
Now for our Consciences, the Arms is fair,
When the intent for bearing them is just.
My Lord prepare, the King comes on apace.
I thank him, that he cuts me from my tale:
For I profess not talking: Only this,
Let each man do his best. And here I draw a Sword,
Whose worthy temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal,
In the adventure of this perilous day.
Now Esperance Percy, and set on:
Sound all the lofty Instruments of War,
And by that Music, let vs all embrace:
For heaven to earth, some of vs never shall,
A second time do such a courtesy.
What is thy name, that in battle thus you crossest me?
What honour dost thou seek upon my head?
Know then my name is Douglas,
And I do haunt thee in the battle thus,
Because some tell me, that thou art a King.
They tell thee true.
The Lord of Stafford dear to day hath bought
Thy likeness: for insted of thee King Harry,
This Sword hath ended him, so shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as a Prisoner.
I was not borne to yield, thou haughty Scot,
And thou shalt find a King that will revenge
Lords Staffords death.
O Douglas, had thou fought at Holmedon thus I never had triumphed o'er a Scot.
Ell's done, ell's won, here breathless lies the king
Where?
Here.
This Douglas? No, I know this face full well:
A gallant Knight he was, his name was Blunt,
Semblably furnished like the King himself.
Ah fool: go with thy soul whether it goes,
A borrowed Title hast thou bought too dear.
Why did thou tell me, that thou were it a King?
The King hath many marching in his Coats.
Now by my Sword, I will kill all his Coats,
Isle murder all his Wardrobe piece by piece,
Until I meet the King.
Up, and away,
Our Soldiers stand full fairly for the day.
Though I could scope shot-free at London, I fear the shot here: here's no scoring, but upon the pate. Soft who are you? Sir Walter Blunt, there's Honour for you: here's no vanity, I am as hot as molten Lead, and as hey???uy too; heaven keep Lead out of me, I need no more weight then mine own Bowels. I have led my rag of Muffins where they are peppered: there's not three of my 150. left alive, and they for the Towns end, to beg du???ring life. But who comes here?
What, stand thou idle here? Lend me thy sword,
Many a Nobleman likes stark and stiff
Under the hooves of vaunting enemies,
Whose deaths are vnreueng???d. Prethy lend me thy sword
O Hal, I prithee give me leave to breath awhile: Turk Gregory never did such deeds in Arms, as I have done this day. I have paid Percy, I have made him sure.
He is indeed, and living to kill thee:
I prithee lend me thy sword.
Nay Hal, if Percy bee alive, thou get not my Sword; but take my Pistol if thou wilt.
Give it me: What, is it in the Case?
I Hal, it is hot: There's that will Sack a City.
What, is it a time to jest and dally now.
If Percy be alive, Isle pierce him: if he do come in my way, so: if he do not, if I come in his (willingly) let him make a Carbonado of me: I like not such grinning honour as Sir Walter hath: Give me life, which if I can save, so: if not, honour comes unlooked for, and ther's an end.
I prithee Harry withdraw thy self, thou blue???dest too much: Lord Iohn of Lancaster, go you with him.
Not I, my Lord, unless I did bleed too.
I beseech your Majesty make up,
Least you retirement do amaze your friends.
I will do so:
My Lord of Westmerland lead him to his Tent.
Come my Lord, Isle lead you to your Tent.
Lead me my Lord? I do not need your help;
And heaven forbid a shallow scratch should drive
The Prince of Wales from such a field as this,
Where stained Nobility lies trodden on,
And Rebels Arms triumph in massacres.
We breath too long: Come cousin Westmerland,
Our duty this way lies, for heavens sake come.
By heaven thou hast deceived me Lancaster,
I did not think thee Lord of such a spirit:
Before, I loved thee as a Brother, Iohn;
But now, I do respect thee as my Soul.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point,
With lustier maintenance then I did look for
Of such an vngrowne Warrior.
O this Boy lends mettle to vs all.
Another King? They grow like Hydra's heads:
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
That wear those colours on them. What art thou
That counterfeit the person of a King?
The King himself: who Douglas grieves at hart
So many of his shadows thou hast met,
And not the very King. I have two Boys
Seek Percy and thy self about the Field:
But seeing thou fall on me so luckily,
I will assay thee: so defend thy self.
I fear thou art another counterfeit:
And yet infaith thou bear thee like a King:
But mine I am sure thou art, whore thou be,
And thus I win thee.
Hold up they head vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again: the Spirits
Of valiant Sherly, Stafford, Blunt, are in my Arms;
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
Who never promises, but he means to pay.
Cheerely My Lord: how fare's your Grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succour sent,
And so hath Clifton: Isle to Clifton straight.
Stay, and breath awhile.
Thou hast redeemed thy lost opinion,
And showed thou make some tender of my life
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
O heaven, they did me too much injury,
That ever said I hearkened to your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end,
As all the poisonous Potions in the world,
And saved the Treacherous labour of your Son.
Make up to Clifton, Isle to Sir Nicholas Gauzy.
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Thou speak as if I would deny my name.
My name is Harry Percie.
Why then I see a very valiant rebel of that name.
I am the Prince of Wales, and think not Percy,
To share with me in glory any more:
Two Stars keep not their motion in one Sphere,
Nor can one England brooke a double reign,
Of Harry Percy, and the Prince of Wales.
Nor shall it Harry, for the hour is come
To end the one of vs; and would to heaven,
Thy name in Arms, were now as great as mine.
Isle make it greater, ere I part from thee,
And all the budding Honours on thy Crest,
Isle crop, to make a Garland for my head.
I can no longer brooke thy Vanities.
Well said Hal, to it Hal. Nay you shall find no Boys play here, I can tell you.
Oh Harry, thou hast robed me of my youth:
I better brooke the loss of brittle life,
Then those proud Titles thou hast won of me,
They wound my thoughts worse, then the sword my flesh:
But thought's the slave of Life, and Life, Times fool;
And Time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could Prophecy,
But that the Earth, and the cold hand of death,
Lies on my Tongue: No Percy, thou art dust
And food for ???
For Worm???, brave Percy. Farewell great heart:
Ill-weau'd Ambition, how much art thou shrunk?
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A Kingdom for it was too small a bound:
But now two paces of the vilest Earth
Is room enough. This Earth that bears the dead,
Bears not alive so stout a Gentleman.
If thou were it sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so great a show of Zeal.
But let my favours hide thy mangled face,
And even in thy behalf, Isle thank my self
For doing these fair Rites of Tenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven,
Thy ignomy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not remembered in thy Epitaph.
What? Old Acquaintance? Could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell:
I could have better spared a better man.
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,
If I were much in love with Vanity.
Death hath not struck so fat a Dear to day,
Though many dearer in this bloody Fray:
Disembowelled will I see thee by and by,
Till then, in blood, by Noble Percie lye.
Disembowelled? If thou disembowel me to day, Isle give you leave to powder me, and eat me too to morrow. It was time to counterfeit, or that hot Termagant Scot, had paid the scot and lot too, Counterfeit? I am no coun???terfeit; to dye, is to be a counterfeit, for hee is but the counterfeit of a man, who hath not the life of a man: But to counterfeit dying, when a man thereby lives, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life in???deed. The better part of Valour, is Discretion; in the which better part, I have saved my life. I am afraid of this Gun-powder Percy though he be dead. How if hee should counterfeit too, and rise? I am afraid hee would prove the better counterfeit: therefore Isle make him sure: yea, and Isle swear I killed him. Why may not hee rise as well as I: Nothing confutes me but eyes, and no-bodie sees me. Therefore sir, with a new wound in your thigh come you along me.
Come Brother Iohn, full bravely hast thou fleshed thy Maiden sword.
But soft, who have we here?
Did you not tell me this Fat man was dead?
I did, I saw him dead,
Breathless, and bleeding on the ground: Art thou alive?
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eye-sight?
I prithee speak, we will not trust our eyes
Without our ears. Thou art not what thou seem.
No, that's certain: I am not a double man: but if I be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack: There is Per???cy, if your Father will do me any Honour, so: if not, let him kill the next Percie himself. I look to be either Earl or Duke, I can assure you.
Why, Percy I killed my self, and saw thee dead.
Did thou? Lord, Lord, how the world is given to Lying? I grant you I was down, and out of Breath, and so was he, but we rose both at an instant, and fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may bee belee???ued, so: if not, let them that should reward Valour, bear the sin upon their own heads. Isle take it on my death I gave him this wound in the Thigh: if the man were a???live, and would deny it, I would make him eat a piece of my sword.
This is the strangest Tale that ever I heard.
This is the strangest Fellow, Brother Iohn.
Come bring your luggage Nobly on your back:
For my part, if a lye may do thee grace,
Isle gil'd it with the happiest terms I have.
The Trumpets sound Retreat, the day is ours:
Come Brother, let's to the highest of the field,
To see what Friends are living, who are dead.
Isle follow as they say, for Reward. Hee that re???wards me, heaven reward him. If I do grow great again, Isle grow less? For Isle purge, and leave Sack, and live cleanly, as a Nobleman should do.
Thus ever did Rebellion find Rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester, did we not send Grace,
Pardon, and terms of Love to all of you?
And would thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenor of thy Kinsmans trust?
Three Knights upon our party slain to day,
A Noble Earl, and many a creature else,
Had been alive this hour,
If like a Christian thou had truly borne
Betwixt out Armies, true Intelligence.
What I have done, my safety urged me to,
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided, it false on me.
Bear Worcester to death, and ??ernon too:
Other Offenders we will pause upon.
How goes the Field?
The Noble Scot Lord Douglas, when hee saw
The fortune of the day quite turned from him,
The Noble Percy slain, and all his men,
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest;
And falling from a hill, he was so bruised
That the pursuers took him. At my Tent
The Douglas is, and I beseech your Grace.
I may dispose of him.
With all my heart.
Then Brother Iohn of Lancaster,
To you this honourable bounty shall belong:
Go to the Douglas, and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free:
His Valour shown upon our Crests to day,
Hath taught vs how to cherish such high deeds,
Even in the bosom of our Adversaries.
Then this remains: that we divide our Power.
You Son Iohn, and my Cousin Westmerland
Towards York shall bend you, with your dearest speed
To meet Northumberland, and the Prelate Scroope,
Who (as we hear) are busily in Arms.
My Self, and you Son Harry will towards Wales,
To fight with Glendower, and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this Land shall lose his way,
Meeting the Check of such another day:
And since this Business so fair is done,
Let vs not leave till all our own be won.

THe chiefest point of Kings felicity,
Some subjects do esteem Authority.
Wee are aboue, the Potentates of earth
Be unacquainted with high blood and birth.
We do transcend supremacy of Kings,
Account them (as they are) most mortal things.
Subject to putrefaction, to disease,
To folly; which no physic may appease.
Yet they do magnify themselves alone,
Their haughty stomachs doe acknowledge none
Aboue; who may such dignity surmount:
Of power supreme as fables they account.
My God-head may with privilege complaint
Of Sparta; whose proud factious Kings refrain
By wicked council, from due sacrifice
•At my religious Altar: they suffice
To render duty in Olimpickes once,
And rob me of an—tique oblations:
Which wee ascribe unto the base repute
They do conceive of our Divinity,
My Temples honour and supremacy.
To Matrons (Bawds and Widows) they translate
To service of weak women dedicate
My whole praedominance; they do exempt
Mans homage, and believe my power of change
Extends no further then the female sex.
This new-conceited error Il'e refute,
Il'e manifest how far compulsive change
Doth oversway proud man; Il'e execute
The rigour of my vengeance: dreadful awe
Gods do obtain by a correctiue law.
And thus will I restore that holiness,
Which they extinguish through bold sauciness:
Mortals contemn the Makers Deity,
Until his wrath scourge their impiety.
Nature acquainted well with indigence,
Defining (in it self) our impotence,
Liable to corruption general,
Shows, nothing doth endure that's natural:
Sterne death no pity takes on hallowed age,
Upon the sucking babe, whose harmless twine,
Tenderly hangs about the nurses neck,
Never did old men's holy tears obtain,
Never did death from Innocents refrain.
The slave who smothers in obscurity
His hated life; who never did account
Of rising Sun, eclipse, and prodigies,
More then of customs and impertinence;
Never accounted seasons, months, and years,
Autumnal harvest, Spring-tide happiness,
Further then means to nourish misery,
Who never lent the busy world a smile,
But breathes out melancholy air, and groans.
This man (alike with Epicures and Kings,
Who often strive with a departing soul)
Expects upon the leisure of his fate,
So Kings and Cripples be incorporate;
Their ashes often mixed, when they repose
Two petty vrnes, their bodies oft enclose.
Death, how impartial be thy wounds? how free
From all exceptions? My beloved fire,
Lusty and full of Spirit five days since,
Here humbled lies, once royal prop of Greece.
Laments are idle, neither can recall
Your fathers soul back from Elizium.
But grief informs the world hee once did live
Worthy, and well respected, like a Prince,
W•om people pray for, and whose happy reign
True subjects crave to be perpetual.
But sorrow in excess (dread some••igne)
Begets a weak distraction of the brain.
Breeds a contempt of mundane diligence,
Neglects profession, violates the law
Of solace, and abhors congruity,
Gives careless reigns to sick security,
Turns nature to a living lethargy.
True Hypponax, and therefore temperance
Limits with reason our compulsive woe:
For men of pure discretion (you may find)
Bear all extremes with a most aequall mind.
Repeat Perillus (the last sign of love)
A poem to express the Obsequy,
With tears concluding his Catastrophe.
Fear to offend his far divulged name,
Which (who may mention without righteous fame)
Being ever busied in effecting laws,
Commended still with popular applause,
Retaining orders of Antiquity,
Forbids me to repeat his Elegy:
Each clamorous echo and all forrest-noise
Engendered by the Sylvan Dryads,
Be henceforth silent; never may such tunes
Afford free mirth to Poets fantasy;
Who, may surcease to sing their sacred lays,
Viewing the unaccustomed change of time:
Till future ages do revive the loss
Of our dejected worthy in his son,
Whose true external image doth retain,
The living lustre of our wonted king,
May whose dear genius dwell thy gifts among,
And vs provoke to leave his funeral song.
Enough; and in that final word, Enough,
Our lamentations fail: remove the hearse,
His body sleeps: who may the soul reverse?
(My Council) stay, assist me; and because
From the succession of new Kings, new laws
Take their original, I do intend
Enormities of custom to amend,
Matters (though in themselves erroneous)
Amended, may prove meritorious,
Had but impartial Fate five longer weeks,
Allotted to my••fe progenitor.
He, by advise of your sage gravity,
Had finished (ere this) what you begun,
Which (through default) I must remember done.
The people of our continent, each sex
Both masculine and female, do adore
A Goddess, whose essential part is change,
(Proper to widows, virgins wilde, and wives)
Antiquity doth call her CYNTHIA;
The honour, sacrifice and Hecatombes,
Spent in the solemn, superficial awe
Of her accounted-sanctimonious law,
Are (without aequall number) infinite.
We, knowing her supremacy extends
No further then weak women, will abridge
That annual expense, and will confine
Such customare devotion to the sect
Of Priest-hoods foeminine; their simple sex
Shall by injunction worship CYNTHIA,
To whom indeed they be subordinate.
So, this decree of privilege exempts
Men from oblations: Let an Officer
Inform the people thus.
We all subscribe.
Your dutiful acceptance (noble friends)
Of this propounded policy, doth urge
My secret nature to disclose the love
Which was inflamed when iuniority
Of years and judgment (my associates)
Gave me advice, which a more grounded age
Doth entertain, with equal permanence:
With selfsame fervor and integrity
Of true entire affection, as before.
What Spartan Lady will oppose the King?
What Spartan Lady doth Maenander love?
Nay friends allow the marriage of your King,
A matter lawful first in general
And thence refute the scruple so precise,
Which bolsters up a life Monastical.
That scruple wee as error do account.
Then Il'e advertise in especial,
You sapient hearers of that beauteous dame,
Who, vnredeem'd Maenander, captivate
Doth hold in fetters, though a free-borne King,
The daughter of Hyarchus doe I love.
My daughter? unexpected happiness!
Give me then leave, sweet ravishment, to see
Her glad espousal celebrated once,
By which, but some conjecture may arise,
To see the royal issue of her womb;
And Il'e go lodge in my forefathers tomb.
Do all agree with this old or'e-ioyd man?
True subjects will commend Maenanders choice.
Nothing doth more prevent a Princes fate,
Then wise directing Councellors of State.
Gross indignation! manifest repulse!
Am I neglected? O disdainful Prince!
May wee observe thy peevish altitude,
Like a contemptiue groom or Sycophant,
Without your glance and poor espial? Judge,
O judge my quarrel some ingenious man,
Witness my righteous challenge of his pride;
Resolve me some indifferent arbiter,
How to digest this ignomious pill.
My love and duty both rejected thus?
My dignity esteemed so little worth?
My salutations frustrate? Some poor doult,
Who pays a courtesy and supple cringe
For every dram of air hee sucks in,
Cannot be used with less humanity.
Wee, bending, stooped before his Majesty,
Hee, with a crabbed countenance, clean auers'd,
Goes on like some dull statue; never stoops,
Nor smiles, but with a frowning arrogance,
Just like a moulded picture, like the frame
Of a supported Image, doth move on,
As by some artificial new device,
Puppets are seen to make a solemn dance.
He now attended with a barbell size
Of sober Statesmen, doth reject my love,
As if I were not in full aequipage
Of his own years: nay almost of degree,
Excepting his high place of Sovereign.
O pride of Princes! ô how forcibly
Be scornful frowns from an offended King?
This argues guilt, and makes me culpable,
Without a conscious crime; without pretence
Of any thing committed: In defence
I therefore well may plead pure ignorance.
What new suggestion should exasperate
The Kings displeasure? doubtless, he of late,
And his big title, was more affable,
More gent and courteous: but the crown perhap
Is heavy, and requires the cunning help
Of those gray dotards (who indeed possess
Our most deluded Monarch) to support
A thing so massy, and immense; proceed,
Soon may my wrathful curses overtake
The proudest vein of their advanced souls:
May the vast concave of Olympus crack
And give a signal to our Gods decree
Of dissolution ready to approach,
Of earth and heaven their latest period,
When I repent my curse, or do abstain
From an effectual means, which may procure
Destruction, though delayed; yet deadly sure.
Am I not noble? bred of aequall stem
With Sparta's chief and best Magnificoes?
My Ancestors (removed but nine degrees)
Knew never man below the blood of Kings
Worth aemulation, as a rival fit
For them, admitting mighty Emperors,
None as aboue, but as competitors:
From those heroic monuments of Greece,
From those Hyrudo you can testify,
Our self derives a lineal descent:
And by the law of Heralds dignity,
A supported by antiquity)
I am 〈◊〉 amid the chiefest rank
Of Duke•s, which govern this Peninsula:
Yet shall I •rauerse so obsequiously,
Within the glance of his huge altitude,
Like some dejected melancholy Ass,
Which feeds on thistles.
Death! you are abused,
Were I the man appointed to sustain,
So undeserved a signal of disgrace,
The proudest King in Europe should perceive,
I'd not digest an injury so base.
You being the subject of such high abuse,
You should with faction terrify the King,
Amaze the Court, and make your opposites
Tremble again like babes, who shaking stand,
Doubtful of mercy from the Tutors hand.
Were I the man whom dignity of place
Entitled to such vast prerogative
As you enjoy, no scandal, no disgrace,
Should touch my honour without full revenge:
The King himself should not escape my spleen,
(Upon so just a quarrel) I'd affront
His ample greatness: nay expostulate
On equal terms, why without open cause
He should reject my service with a frown,
I'd tax him of ungoverned appetite,
Selfe-humour, peevish ignorance of state,
And charge him to amend infirmities:
If like a tyrant hee but durst reply,
Rating the licence of audacity,
Then would I menace torture; I would tear,
The big voluminous Title he doth wear
Pined on his back by parasites and knaves,
Who though they want, yet can bestow much grace,
Kings when they leave to be upright, are base.
Make me acknowledge this thy love sincere,
Bring thy magnanimous courage into act;
O be my agent, reconcile the doubts
Which do possess my intellectual sense.
The Statesmen are my sole Antigonists,
They do seduce and steal away the King.
Keep his heroic bounty for themselves;
They doe detain his nature punctually,
Make him (deluded) parsimonious,
Erect who pleases their magnificence,
Who them displease, the king must frown upon:
They do entomb the silly wretch alive,
Make him as dead, to eminent designs,
Which they approve not; then revive his will,
To adventure such, as none approve but they▪
In brief, they lead him like a Lyons whelp,
Tame, and yet fierce; if so the keeper please,
To wurry with advantage: then beware,
Those who offended have the keepers will;
By which, the tame-taught Lion's governed still.
Believe my Lord, a home-bred naturalist,
Whose resolution never was confirmed
By art, example, or experience;
Who never knew a faith historical,
(That low step to a warrant rational)
His anger would be ready for attempt;
Nay finish all with very good success,
Whilst you revolue a tedious advice,
Of which, too long delay doth spoil the prize.
But sir, the high opponents, who traduce
My honour, and good name, be numerous,
Men of no dung-hill breeding (not advanced
By some especial Madame of the Court,
For a concealment of her secrecy,
In case, where witness, bawdy hand, or seal,
To broken Titles be restorative)
But matchless in their eminence of birth,
Not sprung from petty page, or foot-boyes race,
(Only removed, to fill up vacant place,
And rob judicial statesmen of deserts,
To whom by Nations law, all same reverts)
No, my assailants be both rich and wise,
(Two qualities scarce analogicall,
Yet my oppugnant enemies have both)
Rich, wise, and nobly borne; nay favourites,
Men of an aequall judgment with my self,
Ingenious they be (though Flatterers)
Who with calumnious faction doe deprave
My potent fortunes, making birth a slave.
My foes be great, therefore I am dismayed,
And to encounter great ones am afraid.
What huge Antaus may of conquest brag,
Who euercomes a Pigmy? or insults
Over a simple wrecth condemned to chains?
May loves own Eagle stoop at stinking flies?
And suffer Owls to penetrate the skies?
Well did that mighty Indian dog deserve,
Whom neither Buck, mad Bull, nor threatening Boar,
Could from the kennel make to rise, before
A stout courageous Lyon, king of strength,
Ireful enough, with vengeance in his jaws,
Prepared for single combat; boldly then
Like a resolved Champion forth he flew,
And the Majestic Lyon fiercely slew.
Give me a man, whom neither multitude,
Nor means to work revenge, can terrify;
Who, though encompassed with corival foes,
Immured with adverse competitors,
Left even amidst the circumuenting Jaws,
Of greedy hounds, and hunters policy;
Can, like a whirlwind, in despite of those,
Who with vnaequall faction dare oppose,
Fly through the thickest, make their big-swolne mawes,
Level with stinking lakes, and ditches deep,
Like a Colossus though they stood before.
Who may esteem it an inglorious act,
Rather who thinks the valour not divine,
Which through a banded troop of enemies,
Doth, like some bolt of thunder fly apace,
And force withstanding objects to give place?
Men of your size being urged with insolence.
Of peevish statists aemulating pride,
(A humour most unnecessary ill)
Should, like the murdering Chain-shot, drive downe-hill
Castles and rocks, although impregnable,
Make mountains stoop before you, rend up Oaks,
Buffet large Atlas with incessant strokes,
(Though the supporter of Olympus frame)
Till heaven and earth beg rescue for the same.
Yet shallow great-men, they must wise-men seem,
For noble births doe live by peoples breath;
Nor may the privilege of birth redeem
Our aestimation, subject still to death;
Bee theerfore wise (wisdom who dares condeme?)
If not by nature, then by stratagem.
Thou'art young (Hirudo) resolute and wise,
A pliant apprehension soon will rise;
Remember now thy natural good parts,
Think if they serve to reconcile the doubt
Of my ensuing mischief; prithee think,
If thou dar'ft venture boldly to remove
My foes from bounty of Maenanders love:
Which, till the blinded King doe abrogate,
Each fool may from my fortunes derogate.
Combine thy powers, and ingenious parts
To salve the wound of my disgrace, which smarts.
And be my creature; meditate withal
Our now-declining joys to re-install:
And be my creature; satisfy the King
By some corrupted means, or anything:
And bee my creature; may some new devise,
Purchased by Magic Art, and hellish prise,
Wholly avert the puny Kings belief
From our opponents tales, which doe in chief
Poison my merits; ô abolish those,
And bee my creature, or indeed dear slave
I will bee thine; doe but employ some care
To best advantage of thy agent-skill;
Remember then, thou art my creature still.
Know then I love thee Duke, and must prefer
Thy fortunes, though I doe confiscate all,
Whom Gods will not relieve, invention shall.
The King my brother? No, my brother clown,
Malicious coxcomb, peevish Spartan-foole;
Death breded? ô my torments!
Madam know,
He is contract already.
To a whore?
The strumpet Fa••rina?
Hark just heaven!
She rails upon a virgin, whose pure soul
Might give example of true chastity
To her own spotted, leprous infamy.
Now old Hyarchus laughs.
Her father: yes:
A rotten Magistrate, who may thank warm clothes,
Caudels and physic for each rising Sun,
Which he poor man is made partaker of,
His daughter must be married to the King:
So, I, degraded must acknowledge one
Aboue vs in our female properties,
Be boundless my exclaims, and terrible;
(Curses) assemble your offensive rage,
And help a women's fury to disgorge
The poison of her stomach, in the face
Of a most spiteful brother, whose design
Is unto me a purge so laxative,
As my unable body will be spent
With bitter execrations; ô I feel
The storm of vengeance wrestle in my blood,
Tempting my soul to bee more great then good.
O may the horror of some fatal knife,
Finish the blessings of my brothers wife.
May she live loathed, or never may she live,
Till heavens unto my happiness shall give
A freedom, to insult and tyrannise,
Upon that impious whore, that Cockatrize.
O may new mischief tread upon the heals
Of terror, to affront the joy she feels.
Let some infernal Negromanticke charm,
Change their expected happiness to harm.
Let many clouds salute their nuptial morn,
With omenons affrights in way of scorn.
The height of mischief makes my sorrow sound,
As Op•-balsum doth a bleeding wound.
O the rude licence of a women's rage,
Who her malignant disco•ds can presage?
So, let her vanish, and her gall unmask,
Till wee accomplish our appointed task.
My sorry conscience doth recoil (old men)
Worthy Mali•d• did enforce my vow
To prove delinquent, rather then oppose
My dreaded sovereigns life (an impious act,
Urged by the cunning of more impious age.)
O then submit, with poenitentiall tears
Confess, your age offends the King through fears,
Our age offend the King? we urge this act?
Of murder: yes, you love 〈◊〉.
Subtle distraction!.
Silence.
Hippo•ax.
Hyarchus we disclaim your subtilties.
My father so rejected?
Queen forbear,
Malindo is our faithful favourite.
In thy protection let our kingdom live.
Welcome brave Duke; be ever mine, beloved;
Accounted in the chiefest scarlet rank
Of understanding Iudices; we thank
Your noble and magnaminous resolve,
Your charitable undertaking; be advanced
And ever in my bosom: you are loyal.
Deign mighty Monarch but experience,
Your love already hath in ample sort,
Given testimonial enough: be graced
And ever happy in our high account:
Another subject Officer I have,
Phe•dip called; on whom the graces smile:
A man so absolute in my approof,
That Nature hath reserved small dignity
Which he enjoys not. Welcome friend approach,
Forsake the City, ever dwell in Court;
Nay nearer, in my bosom: we observe
Your manifest endeavour, diligence,
And all industrious faculties that lodge
Themselves in thee with a true correspondence,
Wee note your proiects, and esteem them highly.
I servile groom put forth small industry,
Excepting what I owe in subjects duty.
My father, in the latest fillable
Of his weak vt'trance, did inculcate often,
Thy unrewarded loyalty: be big
In honour, and out-shine the radiant gloss
Of bearded politicians: kneel before vs.
And in uprising swell with a new name:
No more Phe•dip, but all-potent Duke
Of wide illiri••; (noble friend) arise,
We dive into the bottom of thy soul,
Which doth engender a sweet sympathy.
Live long and happy in a Monarchs love:
Malind•, you provide some Theater,
Some regal show, wherewith we mutually
May solace and disport our heaviness.
Hyrud• live: May treason ever find
The biting tortures of a troubled mind.
You magistrates imagine it a curse,
And punishment beyond all punishment.
(If you attainted are with any guilt
Of so enorme designs) think it a curse
To suck up the salubrious air, and live,
Fame will infect you, though I pardon give:
So prosper we as we are innocent.
Good slave I thank thee, thou hast reconciled
The Kings distasteful and ambiguous frown,
I must enrol thee in the Catalogue
Of my professed favourites: contemn
The servile clog of stooping courtesy:
Enjoy what ever in the bounds of freedom.
Be idle, and securely frivolous,
Wanton or any thing that appertains
Unto a noble personage of worth.
Or if thou wish a contented life,
Free from the cavils incident to worth,
Bee only idle, ever gazing ou•
Of public windows, and observe the pride
Of such a man, fair mounted on his cloth
And gelding dapple gray, accounting all
His footmen, till the coltish bayard stumble.
Bee whom thou please, whom thou dost suppose
A blessed man is, absolutely rich.
All this demands a furtherance, my Lord.
Yes, and that furtherance will I bestow:
But the most noble have their enemies,
Their opposites, antigonists; nay some
Of ragged base repute do still survive,
Who (notwithstanding) dare malign the state
Of vs, though splendour to the Commonwealth.
These vomit forth each scandal, each contempt,
Malice and gall together: poison choke them;
I feel their aspic venom here involved,
They wound worse then a raging Basilisk.
How bitter is the taste of contumely!
Some patience I entreat thee (heaven) bestow
Upon our scandalised name: Reproach,
That common adversary of vs all,
Who are in a good way to purchase fame,
Doth dog vs to our latest winding-sheet,
Even to the womb of our great grand-mother,
That never satisfied womb of earth.
Blame not my zealous anger, I am hot,
And carried with true valour, to the pitch
Of an exclaim so requisite: ô slaves,
And prodigies of nature, that will taint
Pure sanctity; nay, even the Gods aboue,
And their incomprehended holiness;
Their sacred essence, with like blasphemy;
If but enraged awhile, as they do mine.
Who? or what man is he that dares do thus?
S'death I will not endure the sight of him.
How? speak that again, doe you remember well?
S'death I will not endure the sight of him.
No? why thou ungrateful man; must I advance,
Must I search out a lodging for thy soul,
And make room for thy friendship in our bosom?
Can ever hope to bee incorporate
With my own essence? the same man almost,
And not endure the presence, nay the sight
Of our malicious foe? recall your thought:
Each timorous fellow, that abhors the name
Of absolute revenge, could say no more:
What? run away from our contemned foe?
Il'e not endure the presence; nay the sight
Of such a slave, yet never turn my •eels:
No, I'd disembowel the base rogue at first,
Contrive a quick dispatch: the villains heart
Would I expose upon a mountains top,
Or offer it upon my faulchions point,
Fresh bleeding to some wrath•ull Deity,
Of vnappeas'd revenge, in sacrifice:
I'd mix my urine with his reeking blood,
And peace upon the carcass in despite,
Dissever joints and flesh, till all were done,
Then toast his marrow in the melting Sun:
I'd not endure the sight of him alive.
Courageous resolution! I commend
Such vehemence in valour: this doth urge
And animate my purpose to be quick,
Royal, and open-breasted to a man
Of such full undertaking every way.
Let vs employ this youthful vehemence
Betimes: a quick blood calls for action.
Imagine this the pavement where my foe
Hath fixed (upon the quarrel) his firm foot;
For know that such a villain doth survive,
Whom I will scourge in thee my favourite,
Briefly you must disgrace and murder him
Whose name is hitherto concealed; but you
(After instruction for the stratagem)
Shall know the varlet, whom you must imagine
(Merely for apprehension) is your self.
I like a ruffaine (which remember well,
You must hereafter practise) though for instance
I will now undertake it, unawares
I fetch away your not misdoubting heals
From of the trampled earth, even thus: then swear
Some oath of high importance, that the air
Shall never be infected with a slave,
Who breathes out poisoned blasphemy on earth.
Swear then that neither shining light of day
No interchanged seasons shall afford
One minute more of blessing, that himself
Shall not enjoy one article of breath
Beside, to ask forgiveness of the world:
Swear that no planet, no supernal star,
No Hercules, no Gigant•a• arm
Shall rescue villains from appointed harm:
Then spit him through the center of his heart,
Even thus, His•ds.
But you jest Im'e sure.
S'death I am slain; forbear, ingratitude!
I perish without expectation: O.
May my suspected agents perish ever.
There sleep (unthought of) in a vaulted tomb:
Thus great men must be jealous of their fame,
Prevent all blemish in a noble name.
Now King and kingdom both are almost mine,
Lights be obscured when the greater shine.
The King reputes me loyal and submiss,
(Transparent colour to deceive a Prince)
(But hell bear record) I am bent to ruin,
To purchase kingdoms, or impeach my state,
Who never ventured, never knew his fate.
In Epires rule now lives my noble friend,
Thither will we address our false complaint,
Pretending I am hated here at Court,
Threatened to death, not likely to escape,
Withal insinuate our appointed joy,
Which five days hence the King doth celebrate▪
Inform I may, that then both Prince and Peers,
Will bee assembled in the Theater:
And being so, how safely hee may send
A manadg'd Army to destroy them all.
(Dissembling still the means to rescue me
When I am safe aduaunc'd) but meaning most
To further my advancement: for which cause
I framed this little motive: Hoe within,
Fly to the confines of Epir•ts rule,
Deliver unto Cassius my friend,
The Governor, this caution here enclosed,
Urge him upon allegiance ever due,
From one friend to another, to make haste.
Speak this, and speak no more, neither to any
Open the passage doors of utterance,
But to my friend, my dear, my best beloved,
Imagine me a block, a Niobe,
Conceive my mouth to be devoid of tongue,
Till with content I do accomplish all.
Bee secret as calm silence, or the night.
My care must follow to frame Theaters,
Warning the Megalenses, our Comaedians
To act some pithy and applauded Scoene,
Wherewith to shadow my pretensiue zeal.
But well-incountred (Poet) •pray approach.
And let vs parley of an Interlude.
Patron of Poets, much esteemed Duke,
Leaving the Muses, and my pleasant cares
Regarding yours more then my own affairs,
Poor Poet Il'e attend your conference,
Command me ever, most ingenious Lord.
Command Per•llus? no, entreat thee rather,
Each high-borne Title must advance the worth
Of holy rapture: pray inform the Actors
Of some true Moral, of some Tragedy
Or else some subject more ridiculous,
Which may with new deuis'd conceits stir up
The dull and solemn audience.
Believe
Il'e stretch the scant•esse of my Mother-wit,
Rather then fail for to accomplish it.
The God of Kings protect thee: so adieu.
Attempts of great men speak in silver tones,
Thus gilded tombs ore-shadow dead men's bones.
A speedy foot-poast here attends your honour.
His message?
Out of Greece, and more precisely
From Sparta.
Then admit the messenger.
Now friend, your business?
Open sir the Casket.
Somewhat's within contained, that will instruct you.
Arm if thou love me noble CASSIVS,
And help thy brother with a royal rescue,
I am in prison, prithee make great haste,
Or I am dead: against Ianus-festiuall,
Address thy courage to assault our King,
Both King and Statesmen kill, for fit occasion
Will bee afforded, while they sleep: secure
Busied with joy, and jesting Cordials.
Arm if thou love me noble Cassius?
Yes, arm I will, and in despite of spite
Rescue thy valour from the blackest night,
Which envy, or malignant wrath can yield,
To darken thy resplendent fortitude.
Carry the letter (friend) from whence you brought it,
Let nothing hinder quick delivery:
Nothing excels a wise dexterity.
You (Titio) shall act Mandragona,
But you (Eulal•o) stout Bellephoron,
Each hath his part appointed, as in plays,
And this our active Scoene, so in the world
All have their parts allotted to begin
At seasons known after nativity,
But our evasion out of misery,
What cunning Sophist may denominate?
As for the Prologue in my sportive Scoene,
There needs no Actor it to amplify;
The festival approaches, let vs give
Direction to your fellows:
Look Eulalio,
Unloose that Paper, or peruse the Title:
No superscription? rend the seal, and read.
Arm if thou love me noble Cassius,
And help Malindo with a royal rescue,
I am in prison, prithee make great haste,
Or I am dead: at I•nus Festival. &amp;c.
Words of amazement, and exceeding strange.
I smell a treason hypocritical.
A just construction; correspondent sure,
To this intent.
And therefore Titio,
You (much disguised) may safe anihilate
Both his, and our proceedings: Let's be wise,
Il'e pen a part shall dash the enterprise.
Jove, or what-else supernal Deity,
The Gods and Goddesses who govern Kings,
Who arbitrate the schism of month and years,
Whose sacred essence heaven and earth adore,
To whom the greatest potentates below,
Do sacrifice their Greekish Hecatombes,
These are accustomed to dispense with joy,
And in remembrance of their holy acts,
(As now) we often solemnise the day,
Recorded long from all antiquity,
And civil joy perhibite without fear;
Mirth may refresh not difanull my care.
Pheudippe (friend) sit here; all do agree,
That each mans place should answer dignity.
So, call for this appointed melody.
A quiet calm foretells tempestuous wind,
And faire-plum'd swans sing sweetest when they dye.
Gesture doth oft conceal a traitors mind,
And many golden dreams do prove a lye,
Sent and inspired by heavens high thundering Jove,
I bid you arm, desist from jollity,
Those who pretend, show colourable, love,
What ere avoids the test, is flattery
Gliding a far from out the Thracian soil,
I could espy Malindo's friend in arms,
Swiftly addressing his battalions,
Here to entrap and fully ruinate
You ancient Magistrates, thee matchless King.
Sovereign the •allow is lunatic,
Remove the mad man sirs; away with him.
Not mad Malindo, thou a traitor art,
Take witness from that paper, his own part,
L•leo, Lord General, give speedy battle.
Arm soldiers, arm, cry conquest and approach.
Make ready forces to repell the foe.
Arise from foggy Ler•a some foul smoke.
Each living creature without mercy choke.
Be ever clouded Phoebus, may thy light,
Turn in a moment to aeternall night:
Return oblivion, or the antique age;
Forgotten Chaos, and the pilgrimage
Of undefiled mans first innocence,
That I all torment may escape on earth,
And be accounted guiltless (as at birth)
O for enchantments, for a potent charm,
A magic spell that may con-iure the clouds,
To cover me with darkness at noone-day!
For such a charm would I expose the wealth
Of Tagus, or the Ocean (were it mine)
Help, ô assist me some infernal aid,
Now be propitious (Hell) I am betrayed.
Fortune, ô strumpet! Il'e advance the dark
And fearful habitation of the dead,
Il'e worship witches, and extol the praise
Of Pluto, Il'e prefer impiety,
Canonise all before thy Deity.
The blood of Nessus never did enforce
A Hercules to half such vehemence.
Was it you Malind•, that through mischiefs bait
Composed this ensign of a hollow heart?
Alas I loved thee well, why did devise
Such fatal Scoenes, fashioned of blood and death?
The paper mourned when thou thy mind had writ,
Yes, mourned in black merely to think on it:
But you persist in deep obduracy.
I morn my self, yet am devoid of pity,
Because thy error is ambitious pride.
The man whom fate hath from aeternity,
From since the words beginning, hath enrol'd
Amidst mis-fortunes mournful Catalogue,
Whose downfall frowning planets have conspired,
Who never was the bounded favourite
Of way-ward rumour; whom adversity
Hoth wholly seized, whom heavens appointed awe
Prepares as fatal object of disdain
To level her inuenom'd aim against.
O let him ever dwell in mothers womb,
Or let that Infants cradle be his tomb.
Conduct him Soldiers to the car•ifex,
E•phorbus, you attend the final gasp,
Then give to Cassius the decouped scull.
Ambition leads vs to the fountains brink,
But then affoord's destruction 'stead of drink.
We read large conquest in our Captains face,
Stand forth some sober nuntius, relate
The manner of this notable de-signe,
Brontes, nor did Pyragmon ever shake
The Anvil of that Iron-munger God
V•lcan, with blows so unsupportable,
In hammering the thunderbolts of Jove,
As did the courage of our General
(By animating soldiers to attempt)
Shatter the weak array of Cassius.
He faint (for faintness ever doth attend
On such designs) being faint before the time
Of on-set, he withdrew so speedily,
As, that retinue of his rebell-slaues,
Begged noble mercy of the Conqueror.
But wee, like some fierce Giant given to spoil,
Enraged with a remembrance of their act,
Their too contemptuous uproar; did reply,
With anger vnappeas'd in bloody phrase,
That no compassion should redeem their lives
From famine of our faulchions: for indeed,
Rebellion must be scourged until it bleed.
Then flew the common Soldier with such speed,
To enterprise in rigour the new spoil,
As never did a hungry Woolfe insult▪
With more unsatisfied revenge, then they.
Grim Slaughter in a Chariot of dead skulls,
Rode up and down triumphing, till dark night
Shook off the fetlock from her sleepy i•des,
And gave way for retreat; each man before
Trod in contempt upon the scattred foe,
Until my fortune, rather then exploit,
Slue the once owner of this▪ vn-ioyn'd scull,
Then every man gave back, with blood being full.
Magnanimous Amilcar, I account
Thy courage beyond apprehension; swell,
Swell my Phendippe with abundant joy,
Rejoice in thy coragious son, like me,
Who vaunt the rather, even because thy son
Doth so be have himself, thou being my friend,
Whom I esteem aboue all earthly good.
Stand forth Phe•dip, honour doth attend
To cast a gracious smile upon thee, friend;
And thee Amilcar, let vs magnify.
Malindo sleeps (A•ilcar) I advance
Thee through the ruin of his dignity,
Possess both place and goods.
Without desert
As hitherto; but I will endeavour.
We have a sister, where is she? L••isle?
Let some attendant urge her company:
Bring hither likewise an appointed Priest,
(Be not amazed my sober Magistrates)
Pheudippe, you shall be espoused to her:
Her Il'e bestow, and without prejudice
On thee alone, my noble Bed-fellow.
Pardon (dear Liege) least worthy I of all
To be a Monarchs kinsman, less, to be called
The brother of a Greekish King, your sell•e.
Do not refuse, for (noble friend) my love
Only admits thee as a friend and brother,
And for a witness that I make this league
Of love and friendship; let's embrace each other.
Ever obeisance to your Majesty.
My sister doth approach, let grooms make way
For beauty able to obscure the day.
Sister, behold thy husband; friend, thy wife,
Marriage doth breed, but sooner banish strife.
You (Priest) the Hy••••all rites may offer:
Acceptance is experienced by proffer.
Let Hymen triumph, and unite your souls.
Now live in peace, and brother ask a boon:
Ask what you list, for grant I will what-euer,
Which henceforth may commemorate the time
Of an espousal so remarkable.
Your divine Majesty accumulates
Honour, aboue the trite capacity
Of all contemptuous age; that ancestors
(Before thy hallowed birth-day) did approve:
(Great King) I have a kinsman, though obscure,
Yet wealthy, whom (because obscure) I beg
A small part of your high magnificence,
But to enrol amid the Catalogue
Of those you least remember: Kings be wise,
Their bounty will provoke a slave to rise.
To deific the worth of whom wee love,
Advancement Il'e impoverish, compel
Honour to hug thy kinsman, till a warmth
Quicken his humble blood without control.
Envy, (the scourge of Kings) be henceforth dumb,
Thus will I treason evermore entomb.
And thus exalt our love beyond all merit,
Birth may do much, love makes the low inherit.
A Midst my slumber, circumvolu'd with doubt,
In this thick midnight darkness, now all sense
Securely lies enchained; now potent dreams,
With unresisted awe, rule the dead lump
Of mans poor fabric; now all humane flesh,
Kings, and the sterne-brow'd Tyrants doe submit
Their majesty to Sleeps Imperial feet.
Now, not long since I dreamed, and could with ease,
Utter the subject, how a misshapen hag,
His hair full horrid black, huge were his eyes,
Big, like a bowl encompassed with bone,
Thrice did the Imp appear, did vanish thrice,
Three massy Crowns, of worth inaestimate,
(Had they enjoyed a worth substantial:)
Thrice did hee show, and thrice again withdraw
The hallowed objects, then a pace proclaim
Quote libet, li•et, and away departs.
I then awaked, struck with extreme amazem•ned,
And nimbly leaping from a secûre couch,
Came to expel this ominous affright.
Reading, or whatsoever can avail
The vigour of temptation, to withstand,
Wee should perhibite (though against our will.)
Heir's an aspiring Poet, whose proud touch,
May elevate some brain aboue the flight
Of nimble apprehension; Il'e vnclaspe
Thy sacred volume, Lucan: Il'e content
My roving fancy with full argument.
He writes of witherd skulls, of mutiny,
Ominous apparitions of the dead,
Of Caesar, Pompei, and Imperial state,
Of combats foreign, of domestic broils,
Of dire invasion, of ambitious war,
(What-euer makes vs noble) fortitude,
Of expert undertaking, of event:
O hoe's a fellow able to inflame
The frosty stomach of a staru'ling youth,
Who wholly feeds on rheumish winter-plums.
An Author of commanding Altitude,
And such a man give me; a man of worth,
Who makes the reader rub his paled brow,
Makes idle nature melt away in fume,
Gives breath and courage to out-puffe the Cannon:
Such Authors you may feel at fingers end,
They gallop in your blood, provoke each vein,
To give them passage without violence,
Bellaper aemathios plusquam civil• compose
Ins{que} datum scelert canimus populum{que} potent•m:
N•e quenquamnu•c far potest, Caesar-ve priorem
Pompei•s-ve parem: quis i•stùs intuit arma
Scire nefas: magno se i•dice quisque tu•tur.
Ah Pomp•, Pompei, if thy hallowed acts,
Once more might flourish, I would aemulate
Those bold encounters; ô most happy men,
Whom Fate enrols to bee victorious:
They conquer, spoil, subvert, and aedifie
Turn Dukes, nay Kings to common Parafites,
And make the proudest flatter to win life:
Yet Kings are mighty: yes and aequall too;
(Though weak, although base cowards by the law
Of natural endowment) yet the name
Doth yield them aequall; nay aboue the fame
Which often doth enrich a conqueror.
What may we hence collect? a principle,
A maxim of no vulgar consequence:
Subjects are base, and to acknowledge one
Superior, doth note servility:
O what a most perpetual slave is man,
If not the chiefest in praedominance?
Let obscûre politicians be content
As chief in Parish; or some petty Town,
I'd make Dominions tremble with a frown:
Make every subject, high and low observe
The heavy danger of our discontent,
Or make a precious forfeit of each life.
Woe to that King where subjects be inflamed
With greater zeal of eminence then hee:
There must invasion triumph, timeless death,
Rapes, murder, all iniquity of age:
By gulfs; by rocks, even by the laws of hell.
Wee swim who would obtain the gates of heaven.
O what a large deuinity's involved
About the awful phrase of Emperor.
The name, the name of King, how it awakes
Our caitiff blood, quickens our faculty!
Ambition be my judge, if I were sick,
Wounded with pistols, out of hope to live,
Forsaken by all Art and physic law,
Lay speechless in my chamber, lost my sense
Of man or voice making no difference
Yet through the magic of this powerful sound,
You are a King, (if hallowed in my ear)
I should again recover, should recoil
Skip forty fathom from the couch, and sing,
Dance without shame, though naked, without noise
Trample amid the pavement, touch my roof,
Run giddy with glad passion, rub my veins,
Like one revived anew, esteem all base
Under bloud-royall, be a rank mad man,
Till joy and rapture both were clean digested.
How readily mans temper is traduced?
How forcibly temptation doth oppose
The supernatural act of doing well?
Wee are like windemils on ambitious mounts,
Open to every tempest, which will turn
Our sails without resistance: like the waives
Wurried from shores to rocks; from rocks to shelf;
Man is not man till he deny himself.
Yet on our state's imposed a slavish curse,
To see things good, though we connive at worse.
Ah husband, husband, what excessive care
Invaded me with violence? shot far
Into my shaking bosom, when I saw
Your sudden absence? heavy sleep alas
No sooner left mine eye-lids, gave me leave
To ask, how does the comfort of my soul?
How does my silent love? my dear Phe•dip?
But with familiar lip, and flexile arm,
I seized upon the pillow 'stead of thee.
Think how intruding jealously began
To blur whatever I could wisdom call,
Within me, or without me; which alas,
All know's extremely dwa•ffish in out sex.
Jealous the first night wife?
O-then or never
An honest, loving wife is jealous ever.
Jealous at home, least husbands ouer-vex
A painful heart with meditation,
Of matters which concern his family.
Jealous when husbands bee enforced to travel;
Danger exceeds the objects they do me•,
Whether by sea, or in the public street.
I (peevish fool) perceiving you were gone,
Thus in my choler did expostulate▪
Doth hee for some dislike abhor my sheets?
Neglect what others love? the maiden sweets
Of mutual embrace? may men's taste
Loose their accustomed relish▪ and refuse
The mellow joys of ripe virginity?
Will hee contemn the sportive dally•ce
That married couples may engross with leave?
Will he this mid-night show himself no man?
The first night of our meeting bee disgraced?
Or will hee by disaster end all strife?
Perish? and so prevent a formal tax
That may impeach his manhood? Thus, even thus
Poor foolish I did thus praevaricate;
Thus (for indeed wee women struggle much
Until delivered of opinion) thus
Did loving zeal praeiudicate amiss.
You are offended (love) I doe suspect
See how his colour's changed, astonishment!
Prithee what pensive thoughts oppress thy soul?
I read the humour of a malecontent
Written between your eye-browes; recollect
The common sparks of scattered Majesty.
Speak gentle sir.
Women, women, women.
What of women?
Most women love to talk,
To scatter tales, and yet swear silence too,
To breed sedition, to deceive all those
Who in simplicity are confident,
Of honest meaning: ô they do• insult
With a tyrannic boldness over one
Who through bewithch'd opinion, doth impart
The substance of included secrecy.
O they will dare the soul of such a man,
Make him so subject to their base command,
As if they had his heart-strings in their hand.
Rail at our sex? why husband, though perhap
Such women do survive, what will you hence
Conclude within their guilt, my innocence?
Cry mercy wise, good faith I did imagine
Their wicked conversation, general,
(All in good time be otherwise:) But wise,
The painters of our age be culpable
Of high abuse committed; they portraict.
Each mental vice in habit of a whore,
A Hag, a Witch, or Woman, at the least.
Virtue (although the others opposite)
Is painted with the like habiliment,
Therefore conclude, if tender woman-hood
Take any full impression of deceit,
Virtue, or vice, of either strong belief.
Or colourable incredulity;
To change her mind will ask another age.
You may convert belief, you may revoke
Errors of wise-men, by a deep dispute,
But women settled, nothing will confute.
For painters do imply this consequent
By emblem; that our sex is permanent.
Are you so philosophical I'faith?
Well dost thou argue, for they sex and self.
She hath a ripe conceit, and I approve
Her subtle apprehension, out of love.
I relish her deep judgment; for indeed,
My railing laboured only to obtain
Of wits reply the due experience,
That in our wisdom of credulity.
We may impart a proud conspiracy.
women shoot fair sometimes, though seldom true
Like whetstones they give edge to tricks a new.
Brave Catiline for this cause did account
Young Orestilla worthy to partake
Of his attempt (though far aboue the brain
Of woman to accomplish) hee approved
The talkative Sempronia: Thus will I
Induce my wife through cunning circumstance,
To give directions for a raw conceit:
Though man is rather blessed, who may with-hold
His closet counsel from a women's ear;
Yet am I of such spungy clay compact,
As till I am dis-burthen'd of my care,
Nothing yields comfort: ô I must vnclaspe
A volume, which may prejudice my life;
Hippie's the man who dares believe his wife.
What magic may this motion ocular
Of lips, without all utterance portend?
For men to pause at a poor stile of Dukes,
Most frequent Lords, and yet more common knights
Proclaims them base and trivial; if means
Of more advantage may be thought upon:
Thy father was a King L•cello.
Just.
And shall the Chronicles of age report
Lucilla was no Queen? Were I a woman—
The Madam Fauorina doth usurp
My due respect.
Shall 〈◊〉 live?
Shall she out-shine the beauty whom I love?
Nature, nay Gods deny a double Moon,
They both are ominous; they do import
A prodigy of vprores and of death.
O man assist our weakness, we'll enforce
The potent succour of religious fate;
Con-iure by solemn other, deep secrecy
So crown the vigour of conspiracy.
Now spoke dame resolution: I adore
Such credible engagement; and embrace
Faction aboue all true faelicity.
I can discover yet a childish vice
Within my nature, named cowardice:
I feel a fearful and familiar stamp
That shows I am a coward: I recoil
In thought of high achievements; I dissolve
With repetition of a sound so brave
As conquest, and impartial victory;
Yet would subdue Dominions; would enthral
The vast Horizon of our vniuerse:
But I abhor the sound of enemies;
Of proud resistance: Ambiguities
(With cowards) are begotten of each tale
Of each fantastic rumour; idle care:
A new suggestion will beget new fear.
If notwithstanding women will bee stout
Women (the badge of damorous affrights)
This would encourage slaves to victory,
And shall encourage me; my wife is valiant,
No creature living must (Lucilla) dare
When twice two Moons have made a change in Greece;
Dare to accost thy super-eminence
Nor with like privilege (as now) affront
My then sublimed authority: be judge
Thou happy time, when that more haughty phrase
Long live, shall be pronounced, with 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 twice
We'll then disclaim acquaintance; live recluse;
Then if wee are disposed to imitate
Some lively gesture of disdainful grace,
And peep into the public air awhile,
The thronging City will be crowded up
In a poor handful, to expatiate
With rolling eyes our unaccustomed face.
I am inflamed already: O ambition
Be but auspicious; mount my nimble breath
And win the Gods good liking to command
Of earth and heaven a hopeful furtherance:
Swell heart, and with it swell my bravest blood,
Suggest new motives dear necessity,
Resolve now for a lucky plot betimes.
Nay first resolve of some associates:
Three to a banquet, four beget a brawl
Says our instructive adage; but i'faith
Five to a bloody banquet makes all square:
A banquet (wise) a banquet, shall enthrone
Our happy wishes and our hopeful joy:
The King shall dye.
Yes, and the new Queen perish.
The Captain of his Guard will I corrupt
With forcibly engagement, and fair shows:
(Chief architects in a design so rare,
Sole agents for the great men of our age)
Him if I do seduce; the Soldiers apt
For innovation will obey betimes:
My son A•il•are (by injunction bound)
Must then remove thy opposite, the Queen:
My faithful steward, sage M••easy
Hee (by commandment) shall engross the corn
Which harvest hath afforded; and procure
The famishment of those who may resist
By insurrection our new seated bliss.
New barnes Isle build, erect new granaries,
Which (open to their wants,) may well remove
Crippled allegiance, and procure much love.
The banquet shall obey my providence.
Wee who work jointly, may ingeminate
An others loss makes many fortunate.
Pheudippe false? and shall the king exclaim?
VVrest vengeance from the rage of Cynthia?
Distraction talked of in the lower Dis?
O I am ravished with extremity
Of hellish laughter, of loud harmony:
Balm to my torture, music to my soul!
How sweet this clamorous echo: all revenge;
Cracks in the jaws of repercussiue air:
Awake thou damned troupe of high-borne youth
Angels of darkness my dear friends awake,
Howl forth some ditty, that vast hell may ring
With charms all potent; earth asleep to bring.
VVee who be barred from happiness by fate;
Who be confined within the fiery gulf,
The kingdom of perdition; who exempt
From full enjoying of supernal good,
VVee do but laugh when our colleagues are damned.
VVee triumph in their multitude, we dance
Our dismal rounds; our changes double over
Whilst pur-blind owls with night-rauens do consort,
And still together sing though Caesars dance:
I a mere caltife in the prime of youth.
Nourished an itching appetite to rule
The sudden rigour of which new disease
Crept in my dearest blood; until at length
As maggots doe engender by the warmth
Of violent reflection; so attempt
Was all encouraged by desire, both which
Creating base ambition; bred my fall:
Thus do praedominant affects consume
All hope; and turn the substance into sum:
Yet seeing our fate is vn-auoide-able
What may we answer saving welcome fate?
For, happiness wee exiles never knew,
Nor any joy doth holiness afford
To vs the out-casts of Eliz••m,
But only this: to yawn aloud below
With lofty shouts; when foes may ranged be
Amongst our hellish troupes for company:
Thus though my obscure shadow much compelled
Pays due allegiance to King Pl•to's Court
Yet by the fatal wisdom being informed
Of dire events, of Cinthia's revenge,
Revenge though future; yet in equity
Hereafter to be cast upon the Prince
Manander (he my downfall did approve
Doomed execution, him do I abhor)
Will triumph in his mad Catastrophe:
And do awake to haunt his company:
My shadowed spirit walks invisible
Can work it self into a Tennis-ball,
Shoot through the Center, search into the Sea;
Slide through the Caverns, penetrate stone-wals:
Watch by the pillow of a sleeping man
Without all notice taken, without noise;
Hath liberty to play the Incubus;
Haunt whom I please with apparitions,
By privilege assumed from Pluto's fordge:
Thus do I haunt Phe•dip; I suggest
Visions of air, of nocturnal sum,
Forcibly to buzxe falshoood in his brain:
Falsehood in whom the King so dear accounts
Will breed a rigour in the Kings exclaims;
Till hee impeach adored divinity,
His anger will expostulate the cause
Of change so sudden, of a breach, in love
So manifest; improper, then Distrust
Will answer chang's derived from Cynthia
His passion will approve the pedigree
And after ful-stuff'd oaths crown blasphemy:
Then bloody •awed revenge will trot apace
Upon his winged curtal; to attach
Maenander of high-treason: O my Ghost
Shall quaff down, Lethe; tumble in the Wash
The rainbow coloured waives of A•heron:
I, like some Sea-fish, frolic with fair shine,
Will toffe about the billows of our flood;
Then through the flames (in leiu of triumph) scudd;
Till then, implore some wrinkled witch, some hag,
Which may provoke Maenanders patience:
To torment brave companions yield much ease
In sickness our associates help disease.
What shadow void of substance hither comes?
What incorporeal essence doth approach?
What vapors painted like my self with fume?
(Who steal existence from united fog)
What substance insubstantial? what Ghost
Walks in the clouded element of air?
Ired thou dumb associate of dark
And thievish midnights; now ired thy name.
Recital serves to tortuose, yet know
I am the ghost of slaughterd Cassio,
Slain for the zeal I nourished to a friend;
Unfaithful usage wrought my timeless end.
My true borne Cassius? well encountered; see
The soul and image of thy zealous friend.
What echo bred of impudence, what air,
Eiaculates the name without a blush?
Avaunt, ô vanish (thou wild caitise) run,
Least with a repetition of old tort,
I make thee vanish by the full report.
Stay thou abortive image, who assum'st
The title of a traitor, whom I loved,
Stay thou ignoble wretch, I will inform
How falsehood hath deluded innocence.
Tremble, ô tremble (earth) when I repeat
The black disaster of my fatal end.
Tremble; for know, this ignominious man,
Whose wicked mischief did enthral my days,
Hee was produced from out the loins of earth;
Yes (damned politician) thy proud aim
Thought by invasion to surprise thy prince,
Under praetext of high abuses done,
Of wrongful censure, of imprisonment.
Thus did your oiled speech infinuate,
Thus move a simple meaning friend, my self
To train forth Soldiers; ô impiety!
Pretending rescue still to undertake
Rescue of thee, whose finger did not ache.
Seated in triumph, sole competitor,
With Princes of high courage, thou did rule:
Envy, the common traitor to estate
Stood far enough from thee: imprisonment,
No way impeached thy lustre: yet as winds
Crowded within the recluse caverns, swell,
That dreadful earth-quake is engendered thence,
So did thy turbulent faction ouer-boyle
The brim of due obedience; poor I
(Incited to rebellion by fair gloss,
Which colourable smoothness had put on)
Perished in battle, through thy peevish train,
Imprisonment proved false, and rescue vain.
I vanish where thy Ghost shall never see
My shadowed substance of impiety.
Run thou remorseless Image to the womb
Of hell, thy heavy mansion: let all sex
Believe that man to lethargy condemned,
Who takes a politician for his friend.
Gape greedy Lerna, thou most impious gulf,
Stretch thy unhallowed gums, belch poison forth;
Send some infectious plague into my blood,
Into my blood and bosom, send a curse
More biting then the breath of Scorpions:
Be boundless my swollen ou•rage; ô blaspheme
That irreligious deity of chance;
My good estate's consumed with idle game:
What-euer this inconstant age terms Wealth,
What-euer I did call Peculiar,
My own poor substance, styled with proper name:
What with much travail, and extorting means,
I scraped (laborious to enrich my 'state)
All, in five hours, hath foolish game destroyed:
Large expectation doth impoverish
The wisest politician: wee are cozened
With our opinionate luck; delusiue hope:
Amongst all creatures (upon aequall terms)
Man is most foolish, most improvident;
Confirmed in a belief, that happiness
Will make an everlasting harmony
When mischief lurks within our elbow-roome.
I feel the sharpe disease of beggary
Begin eeu'n with a thred-bare impudence,
To seize upon our nothing-valued life.
All that is Courtier in me, who contemned
To'acknowledge one aboue me (but my maker)
To sue for friendship; cog for patronage,
Who was enfranchised by the Kings dcreee,
Had no revenues but a morning bribe,
(Which now of late are precious things, all men
Have so inclined themselves to subtlety,
As they conceive a Courtiers gullery)
But I was well provided for, before
A foul disaster of such consequence,
As peevish gamesters luck oppressed my soul.
All that is Courtier in me, now compelled
Must vanish into smooth-tongu'd flattery.
With oiled gums, and with a supple arm,
I must salute my patron (though a fool)
Insinuate how many blessed years
Hee will enjoy, to bless my indigence:
Tell him how plump, how lusty, latter time
And my young mistress make him, though his face
More full of wrinkles then a practised witch
With pitiful hoofe-shoulders do consort:
So, like a fawning Spaniel must I wag
At every costive wind-fall of a crumb;
Bid fare-well to my Courtiership, and live,
Like an arch-foole, a Sycophant: fly hence
These childish terrors to my pained soul,
The chiefest Courtiers will my kinsmen bee,
My fellows in profession, my colleagues,
Nay aemulate my worth, if I excel,
In the most ample trade of glossing well.
O Gracchus! Gracchus! but a free-borne-life
Rather alludes unto foelicity,
If our estate hath no dependant cause,
If wee possess without another claim,
Revenues (clear from tenancy at will)
Regardless of observance; doe despise
Payment of homage to a foot-cloth-sir,
And may revile the best of Tradesmen's coat,
If he insult (sans praeiudiciall fear
Of a compulsive debt, or Officers,
Who follow satisfaction:) for indeed
Revenues I account, although possessed,
Yet if infected with a name of Debt,
Nothing as mine which answers to the name;
Possessions be what others cannot claim.
If without scruple therefore we can boast,
In so complete a fashion as before
I did inculcate; then Rusticity,
To Gods and Monarchs may well answer free▪
Thus doth improvidence of hare-braine mates,
Buy little wisdom at excessive rates:
It is indeed better to bee wise at last,
Then gallop head-long till our hopes bee past.
Though latter wisdom doe import withal
An insufficiency in points natural.
What melancholic caitiff yonder walks?
Gracchus (my Lord) the gallant Eunuch.
So,
What malcontented humour doth oppress
The image of unspotted honesty,
With him so frequenr? I adore and love
The civil carriage that I do observe
In his Employment: if a Courtier hath
(Courtiers of common out-side-silkes) if they
Have dear acquaintance with dame Honesty
(Famished in exile to the frozen pole)
Gracchus I dare avow may parallel
The best of their acquaintance: (Gracchus) hoe?
My gracious Lord?
What peril imminent,
Doth so oppose thy noble splendour? which
(without mere base descention to col-logue)
I must inform thee is re•ulgent.
ô,
My good and gracious Lord; but poverty,
Is able to oppress maturity
Of diligence, of judgment, of designs,
Each liberal Art and Science doth submit
Their ends and occupations to obtain
The true terrestrial Saint, the sacred gloss,
Of all-effecting riches; every man
Will hazard his damnation to adore
A thing so blessed, so licentious:
The weake-brain'd gallant in extremity,
Will change Religion, will aequivocate
With mental reservation, rack the joints
Of his benumbed conscience, will provoke
A lethargy of sharpe distinction: will out-puffe
The Cardinal four winds, when they oppose
Each other all at once (and procrea•e
A whirlwind) these will hee out-puffe alone,
With some insuffe'rable oath, which far exceeds
The three dimensions, dares ploclaime himself
A perjured villain, to appropriate
Six-pence, upon trivial mistake.
Arts-maisters will transgress the rule of Art;
Nay our precisest schoolmen will forsake
The principles which they have authoris'd,
In cases that concern selfe-avarice,
And greedy lucre: knowledge is enforced
To follow by constraint, abuse of time,
Wit misemployed gapes at improper ends:
Strong men are impotent without rich friends.
What cloudy passion, wrapped in ample phrase
May such a railing vehemence portend?
What means thy sharpe invecti•e? what's involved?
Hee doth (my Lord) inveigh at poverty,
And shows how force-able a Saint Wealth is,
How potent the command of money is,
The dreadful awe of dame 〈◊〉.
And whilst I do re-volue the misery
Which happens by constraint of beggary,
Then I remember what my plague must bee.
Vn-shell thy riddle: most miraculous!
Your gaming fool is most ridiculous:
O Fortune, Fortune hath infringed the web
Which I with painful diligence did weave,
Whereto the pillar of my state was pinned:
Some little store I had (not looking higher)
A household smoke our-warmes my neighbours fire.
Have you lost all?
Some fifty hundred crowns.
O the uncertain lot of idle game!
I long have known thee.
And have known me honest.
Honest is now a metamorphis'd name:
He that can swear, blaspheme, be riotous,
Roar till the mid-night echo, or beginne'
Some vn-appeased fray, who dares commence
A drunken skirmish in a bawdy-house,
Fight for his hackney whore, and hazard all,
In honour of his damned associates:
Dares combat with a public officer,
Be (out of gun-shot) most irregular,
Drunk in good earnest, be•te five Constables,
Cousin a flock of geese compendiously:
Yet after all put a smooth visage on,
Seem sober, be indulgent of his same,
Though a most practised knave, remembering still,
To make the mid-nights all participate
Of such enormous acts: ô •ees the man
Reputed sociable in our age: ò hee
Is reckoned for the honest gentleman:
Who plays the spend-thrift, the voluptuous fool,
Exceeds the Turk in sensualty,
Is a true mid-night Epic••e, can hide
His lewd impostures from discovery,
Hee shall be most vn-touch'd with 〈◊〉;
Hee (amongst youthful bloods) shall win 〈◊〉 wreath
Purchase the name of Loyal honest friend;
But (as our adage says) observe his end.
But (Gracchus) I am rather confident
Then scrupulous of thy square honesty,
Gracchus, I love thee, therefore will bestow
An annual pension of fix hundred pounds,
And must withal employ thee.
In a task
That may require my soul then I beseech thee;
May stretch sincerity with tenters: ô
Impose an ample burden; ô some task
That will survey the depth of love indeed:
Favour beyond mans merit, doth exact
A most vn-quenched seruor; not his vow,
But sinews active, and a sweating brow.
My life lies prostrate to praedominance,
Of your commanding voice: I will bestow
My reeking blood in recompense of love
Ready, without all first or second cause:
I wish some Doctor in extremity
Of vn-knowne sickness, which may seize upon
Your most respective honour; would prescribe
The marrow of a man, medicinal;
You should not be indebted to the bones
Of a forsaken caitiff, new condemned,
Whose pocky pith might be infectiue: No,
My supple fingers should unloose a joint
From off this flexile carcass. I would bruise
A luculent and lushious mari-bone,
(The best I can stile proper) to appease
The sharpe divulsions of such new disease.
Gracchus, who gives not credence to a zeal
Of thy profession, wee account him base:
Be chief among my chiefest followers,
They shall receive directions from thy self.
Withdraw, and punish th•s• 〈◊〉
Which my famêlie 〈…〉 with;
And which abusiue ages do afford•
A zeal sincere the Gods cannot reprove
And we ere-long will manifest out loves
Let vs inculcate now my fathers charge,
Remember what with vehemence was-vrgd,
Nay was enjoined you 〈◊〉
By our most watchful father.
I expect
Upon deliue•• of his closet keys.
Take them, and prosper; pray be vigilant;
Revolve I pray on how large consequence,
The bare event and ••quell of our hopes
Jointly consist; who jointly have embarked
The doubtful hazard of our dearest lives
Upon a small miscarriage: only five
Participate of our designs; my self,
But first my father, then my step-d•me next
You (Steward) and the Captain of the Guard
Whose happy full consent is scarce obtained:
Wee severally have instructions learned
Of each particular function; have agreed
How each conspirator shall be employed.
Time calls for speedy action; the square plot
Doth now transcend a shapeless Embryo
And will expect upon delivery:
You have engaged a wise dexterity,
And travail; to procure the famishment,
To purvey, to collect aestiuall corn,
Which Harvest will enrich the Rustics with:
My task intends surprise of the Queen:
Be careful, take the keys, expend the weal••
Which long hath been vp-hoorded: traitors all
Like cunning Statuaries, must avoid
Blemish and eye-sores; you conceive me sir:
Successive business needs no roweld spur:
Treason like some insculpture spacious
On a smooth touch-stone will demand men wise
A diligent perusal, most precise;
With an elaborate artificer
Who may direct; for it is infallible
That errors in a beauteous frame (though small
And at another time though venial)
Yet if committed in a curious piece
Where blemish might (by sufferance) ensue
The total is condemned and carved a new:
Be white, or black; not (party-coulour'd) gray;
So follow your commission, post away.
Now my contentious brain re-uolue the tax
Imposed (upon thy blessing) to surprise,
And spoil the ruddy blossom of our age;
Fair Fauourina that Angel-like dame
A Equal for beauty, for unmatched fame;
With Saint-like Venus (by Appeals drawn)
This Queens espousals have I undertook
To dis-vniite, by a most impious act
Of murder; but alas I am enthral'd
With true libidinous fervor; am enforced
By lustful hot invasions to decline;
Which punctually tempt me to avoid
The colourable death of whom I love,
Our sweet Cycnaean Goddess; the fair Queen;
Whose body I'll enjoy with privilege,
(I will enjoy with hazard of my death)
Whilst every man imagine she is dead.
Gracchus the Eunuch did I entertain
Commodiously fore-casting an exploit
Where-with to muffle up the serpent-eyes
Of probable suspicion: Like the Fuller
Who cannot live by cloth must live by colour.
But see, observe the beautiful approach
Of my commanding object: bless me fate.
What makes Amilcar so obesequiou•?
Damsels depart.
Yes, rather, so, then maids.
Amilcar.
Madam.
Thy grave countenance
Trussed up in such a formal cognisance,
With front composed; so perpendicular
Directing steady aim at open gaze,
Your longing silence doth detect; as if
The business should concer•e my audience:
In-faith, in-faith, you are disconsolate.
Yes, but my meaning is emaculate
Like the forgotten primitiue attempts,
When all things were accounted innocence.
O might the wrath-full arrogance of some
(Who by a peeuish-tutor'd vehemence,
Conspire in habit of corriuallship
Against one pious beauty) be so far
From prejudicial meaning as my self
The age and Kingdom both might live secure:
Madam, I can discos a prodigy
That appertains to you.
Delluer it.
Have you then female fortitude enough,
A most resolved courage, to conceive,
To apprehend a passion that will wound
Nay penetrate, the fabric of the soul?
Shoot through the center of thy trembling blood?
Infuse five shaking palfies mutual
Before I finish the first period?
Give then a quick release; I am resolved:
Tormênt me not with idle circumstance,
Begin this tale of prodigy.
Hark hea'un;
How careless she accounts of accident,
Grief, and this woman be familiar
I think, and well acquainted.
When begins
The prodigy you spake of?
Twill amaze
The organs of attention Madam: yet
Seeing you enforce and covet misery,
You shall no longer be with-held: then thus:
But I beseech thee Queen remember well
These admonitions that exemplify
The horror of my following discourse.
Imagine whilst you doe ingurgitate
My poisoned soppes the beauty of your sense
Of your ingenious parts (all donatiues
Of Natures bounty, and the Gods aboue)
Imagine they'll be changed with violence
With unresisted lunacy; so long,
Until each spirit leave her function:
Till with a surfeit you sur-sease to live
Neglecting mundane solace; be transformed
Into a lifeless image, all thy veins
And vital arteries being stopped with fear:
Thus much remember Queen I do prae-mise.
Amplifications yet? begin, begin:
With all remember, you (right noble Queen)
Who may attend my tale, are but a woman.
And whether will your prolixê Lord-ship amble?
To the worlds end I think in preamble:
That (after all) you may anew begin.
No (my compendious Lady) heere's an end:
Obstinate silence is the safest whip
To punish a perverse disciple with.
Are you enraged jolly sir in faith?
O be appeasd, leave ambiguities;
Finish thy tale (man.)
Worthy Madam no,
Your supple phrase shall not again recover
One vowel of narration.
O abrupt!
Yes (my blunt youth) if torment may unbind
Your costive silence, know, I will recover
The whole narration; if deuulsiue rackes
Have not forsook the Kingdom; if the King
Will hearken to my spacious complaint;
Or yield with exoration of his Queen.
Your spacious? ô then Arithmetic
Hath taught you to augment and multiply:
(Dear Madam) speak within the bounds of truth.
(Cheap Lord) thy impudence shall smart for this.
O bitter!
Thy dumb silence be enforced
To witness, nay reiterate the depth
Of your concealment.
O pernicious.
You shall rehearse, nay shall expound, this tale
Of prodigies.
Without your wide complaint
Without all torment to enforce the same
I will expound them straight; and therefore thus:
Ladies by birth of late are satisfied
With natures gifts, nor seek they to resist
Impediments of age, or stinking breaths,
But well are guided by the heavens decree
Respecting beauty less then the command,
Of Gods aboue; be not these prodigies?
They honour husbands, hallow chastity
Reject all midnight offers, live within:
Abhor the name of lustful visitants,
Take little relish in a home-bred fool;
And less delight in Physic, or the knaves
Who practise that purloining office well.
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak;
When Ladies do bestow their idle time
In scrutination of divinity
Not seeking to beguile the abused Art
Of painting; or to wish five Iubiles
Might be allotted to their tumbling tricks
And coltish untamed pleasure; which they use
To practise without intermission: speak:
Be not these prodigies dee•e Madame? speak
When Ladies, and light-women be estranged
From Para-kitos, Munkies, island-curres
Coaches, and Coach-mares, masking novelties;
From waspish aemulation, to exceed
Some elevated Madame in her gown;
Some luy-bush attire; to engross
The knowledge of a fucus, deutifrice,
Vnguentum, plaster (for in-faith sometimes
Diverse scabbed sheep do perish for defect
Of these restoratives) ô then resolve
When Madams do estrange their faculty
From inquisition, from delight in these;
Will not the mouldred ashes that have slept
So many thousand years, again revive?
Will not the crazy joints of earth dissolve?
And rotten fathers be resuscitate?
The final extirpation of each dame
Both light and sober may this tale portend
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak.
Wisdom doth urge me to entreat him fair
Least hee indeed dissemble, or conceal
Business of high importance, that may touch
My most particular advantage: (sir
So-well-accomplish'd, meritorious count.)
I must importune your dexterity,
To re-collect the now-forgotten tale
Of prodigies indeed; withal confess
My peevish error.
This doth mollify,
Nor may redemption of abuse, though late;
Although abruptly offered, derogate
From the large sequel; either thy belief
Or my unfeigned meaning (noble Queen)
But Madam you shall seriously admit
A most impugned caution, ere I speak;
And shall observe the same inviolate,
Without base mental reservation.
Wee will engage our female Majesty
Thy strictest of injunctions to prefer
Aboue all temporary baits, which may
Allure smooth falsehood to infringe the same:
Swear by this image of Paladium,
(Reckoned amongst our Sacramental oaths)
Neither by subtle tokens nor by voice
By second causes, by secure complaint,
Upon malicious, or well meaning terms,
To manifest, divulge, communicate,
Nor any way disclose the future plot
Whereof you shall anon participate
By process of relation.
I do swear
And will submit my life to thy advise.
With privilege, then Madam, Isle express
The wicked meaning of your enemies:
Lucilla my proud step-dame, doth abhor,
Sole repetition of thy harmless name:
She doth repose her chiefest confidence
In my audacious act, who am obliged
Upon surprise to kill thee.
Subtle whore?
So young, and yet so full of impudence?
So full of indignation, causeless wrath?
Envy how feeble are thy foaming jaws?
With vndefined rancor they attempt,
But seldom are obnoxious to any,
Who have acquaintance with integrity;
For envy (upon spite) assails the hinge
Of our success: but wrong inflames revenge:
And therefore did high Ioues omnipotence,
Envy; unto the female sex impart:
Woman's a witch by Malice, man by Art.
How, how (Amilcar) may wee recompense
The new disease of her indignity
Which would entice, and so corrupt thy youth
By fraudulent commotions.
Isle instruct
How opportunely, Madam, you may meet
With her abusiue malice; and exempt
Your self from the suspicion of revenge.
And yet revenge will be conspicuous:
I think, and well acquainted.
When begins
The prodigy you spake of?
Twill amaze
The organs of attention Madam: yet
Seeing you enforce and cover misery,
You shall no longer be with-held• then thus:
But I beseech thee Queen remember well
These admonitions that exemplify
The horror of my following discourse.
Imagine whilst you doe ingurgitate
My poisoned soppes the beauty of your sense
Of your ingenious parts (all donatiues
Of Natures bounty, and the Gods aboue)
Imagine they'll be changed with violence
With unresisted lunacy; so long,
Until each spirit leave her function:
Till with a surfeit you sur-sease to live
Neglecting mu•dan: solace; be transformed
Into a lifeless image, all thy veins
And vital arteries being stopped with fear:
Thus much remember Queen I do prae-mise.
Amplifications yet? begin, begin:
With all remember, you (right noble Queen)
Who may attend my tale, are but a woman.
And whether will your prolix• Lord-ship amble?
To the worlds end I think in preamble:
That (after all) you may anew begin.
No (my compendious Lady) heere's an end:
Obstinate silence is the safest whip
To punish a perverse disciple with.
Are you enraged jolly sir i'saith?
O be appeasd, leave ambiguities;
Finish thy tale (man.)
Worthy Madam no,
Your s•pple phrase shall not again recover
One vo•ell of narration.
O abrupt!
Yes (my blunt youth) if torment may unbind
Your 〈◊〉 silence, know, I will recover
The whole narration; if d•uulsiue rackes
Have not forsook the Kingdom; if the King
Will hearken to my spacious complaint;
Or yield with exoration of his Queen.
Your spacious? ô then Arithmetic
Hath taught you to augment and multiply:
(Dear Madam) speak within the bounds of truth.
(Cheap Lord) thy impudence shall smart for this.
Obitter!
Thy dumb silence be enforced
To witness, nay reiterate the depth
Of your concealment.
O pernicious.
You shall rehearse, nay shall expound, this tale
Of prodigies.
Without your wide complaint
Without all torment to enforce the same
I will expound them straight; and therefore thus:
Ladies by birth of late are satisfied
With natures gifts, nor seek they to resist
Impediments of age, or stinking breaths,
But well are guided by the heavens decree
Respecting beauty less then the command,
Of Gods aboue; be not these prodigies?
They honour husbands, hallow chastity
Reject all midnight offers, live within:
Abhor the name of lustful visitants,
Take little relish in a home-bred fool;
And less delight in Physic, or the knaves
Who practise that purloining office well.
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak▪
When Ladies do bestow their idle time
In scrutination of divinity
Not seeking to beguile the abused Art
Of painting; or to wish five Iubiles
Might be allotted to their tumbling tricks
And coltish untamed pleasure; which they use
To practise without intermission; speak:
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak
When Ladies, and light-women be estranged
From Para-kitos, Munkies, island-curres
Coaches, and Coach-mares, masking novelties;
From waspish aemulation, to exceed
Some elevated Madame in her gown;
Some luy-bush attire; to engross
The knowledge of a f•cus, dentifrice,
Vnguentum, plaster (for in-faith sometimes
Diverse scabbed sheep do perish for defect
Of these restoratives) ô then resolve
When Madams do estrange their faculty
From inquisition, from delight in these;
Will not the mouldred ashes that have slept
So many thousand years, again revive?
Will not the crazy joints of earth dissolve?
And rotten fathers be resuscitate?
The final extirpation of each dame
Both light and sober may this tale portend
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak.
Wisdom doth urge me to entreat him fair
Least hee indeed dissemble, or conceal
Business of high importance, that may touch
My most particular advantage: (sir
So-well-accomplish'd, meritorious Count)
I must importune your dexterity,
To re-collect the now-forgotten tale
Of prodigies indeed; withal confess
My peevish error.
This doth mollify,
Nor may redemption of abuse, though late;
Although abruptly offered, derogate
From the large sequel; either thy belief
Or my unfeigned meaning (noble Queen)
But Madam you shall seriously admit
A most impugned caution, ere I speak;
And shall observe the same inviolate,
Without base mental reservation.
Wee will engage our female Majesty
Thy strictest of injunctions to prefer
Aboue all temporary baits, which may
Allure smooth falsehood to infringe the same:
Swear by this image of Paladium,
(Reckoned amongst our Sacramental oaths)
Neither by subtle tokens nor by voice
By second causes, by secure complaint,
Upon malicious, or well meaning terms,
To manifest, divulge, communicate,
Nor any way disclose the future plot
Whereof you shall anon participate
By process of relation.
I do swear
And will submit my life to thy advise.
With privilege, then Madam, Isle express
The wicked meaning of your enemies:
Lucilla my proud step-dame, doth abhor,
Sole repetition of thy harmless name:
She doth repose her chiefest confidence
In my audacious act, who am obliged
Upon surprise to kill thee.
Subtle whore•
So young, and yet so full of impudence?
So full of indignation, causeless wrath?
Envy how feeble are thy foaming jaws?
With vndefined rancor they attempt,
But seldom are obnoxious to any,
Who have acquaintance with integrity;
For envy (upon spite) assails the hinge
Of our success: but wrong inflames revenge:
And therefore did high Io•es omnipotence,
En•y; unto the female sex impart:
Woman's a witch by Malice, man by Art.
How, how (A•ilcar) may wee recompense
The new disease of her indignity
Which would entice, and so corrupt thy youth
By fraudulent commotions.
Isle instruct
How opportunely, Madam, you may meet
With her abusiue malice; and exempt
Your self from the suspicion of revenge.
And yet revenge will be conspicuous:
For all complaints and public remedy
The primitiue in•unction doth deny;
You therefore shall admit my new devise,
When Summer makes each field, each meadow fair;
When pleasant spring-tide music is in tune,
You may retire into this thicker-groue
Loosely attended, with one maid, no more:
Whilst, like a common soldier in disguise
I suddenly rush forth, and do surprise
You not misdoubting, whom I will convey
Into my lodging near the City walls
After all inquisition cease: till then,
Wee may re-past in some poor Country Town.
The manner I allow; speak for event.
(All men amazed with such a sudden chance)
I will suborn a simple idiot
(Being first obliged by bounty) to confess
That hee through wicked instigation
Of my most infamous step-dame, did attempt,
Nay finish the supposed murder; then
That mere compunction did enforce the tale;
To mitigate, his wound of conscience.
So hee may hazard life being innocent.
No, hee may craftily insert a boon
Which will avoid the danger of his life.
Hee shall beseech his death may be deferred
Till my unlawful mother by the Law
Taste execution, or hee will profess
Obstinate silence; so conceal the place
Of your pretended burial; the King
Nor any man alive may this deny;
But I'll instruct him when hee doth espy
Occasion; this to manifest aloud
The Queen doth live, though I were tempted oft
By that malicious woman, now deprived
Of natural bad parts, by righteous death,
(Meaning my mother who shall then be dead)
To slay whom I preserved, this hopeful Queens.
The plot provokes me to esteem revenge
Aboue all earthly blessing; and embrace
The subtle virtue of a painted face.
Subtle indeed, for my pretence implies
Nothing but foggy mift to blind her eyes;
When fair temptaion's weak; surprise must
Give satisfaction to my flaming lust.
Most opportunely did you prae-acquaint
My place with a design so requisite.
Captain, you have well easd my anxious fear
But bounty shall remunerate thy care:
The title Vize-roy (Captain) doth attend
To countervail thy meritorious act:
The famine doth already tyrannize.
What policy procures the famishment?
All insurrection do I disappoint,
Subdue resistance, mollify the fierce
And peevish ouer-looking multitude
By a substraction of their usual food
Which will discourage appetite to war:
But unexpected liberality,
And satis-faction of their empty mawes
With rich abundance after penury,
It will enchain the base to loyalty.
A project most ir-reprehensible.
The chiefest on-set doth belong to you:
Doe you conceive a full advertisement
For each proceeding? punctually relate
How your conceit doth apprehend me sir.
To supper you'll inuit the honest King—
Honest?
I; simple, indiscreet, bloud-raw,
Of small experience to beguile, suspect,
Frown, laugh, kill, flatter with a tyrant's face;
A King too-open-breasted for this age;
And so the world doth honest men accou•t
By way of high reproach.
Smooth Orator,
Ingeniously well worded is thy speech:
May not the sequel perish, now proceed.
To supper you'll inuit this honest King;
Hee (not mis-doubting home-bred violence)
With a select strong military troupe
I, and the Guard together, will invade
Murder (amidst the cups and Magistrates)
Him; who shall surfeit of each fatal wound;
Shall rather dye then see Pheudippe crowned.
Captain, thy apprehension is acute
Thus bounty will oblige men resolute:
With-draw, your several reward is future;
A pregnant Pupil thrives without his Tutor.
The popular invective doth exclaim
Upon Pheudippe; swear with open voice
Hee bred this famine.
Am I then betrayed?
Will my sage Steward turn delinquent? ha?
Can my Pheudippe prove disloyal? no,
Doth hee intend subversion of my state?
Wee may consult of war-like discipline
Amidst our height of solace; (though secure)
Although at league with every Potentate
Who sits enthroned upon the spacious Orb.
So may wee well advise your Majesty
To have a watchful ouer-looking spy
Upon your haughty Duke; (though innocent;
Though in himsefe obsequiously bent)
Learning advanced may prove judicious;
But (if misled) extremely vicious.
Tell me my proper Genius may prove false,
My blood become a traitor to my life;
The issue of my loins degenerate;
Say; this right hand conspires against my head;
Tell me; the Gods whom I adore, neglect
Religion, doe forbid all sacrifice;
And I believe you: but the villains lye,
Who dare imagine my Pheudippe false.
In-faith I am afraid you do abuse
My honest friends integrity, too much;
Pheudippe false? my bosome-counsellour?
The earth will shake at such a prodigy:
Some Phaeton shall mount the Chariot
Of our vp-rising Phoebus, and inflame
The world again; each widow shall conceive
Without mans aide five dragons at a birth,
All threatening this impossible event,
Ere I do entertain a syllable
Of your suggestion: though the Gods descend
Though they admonish my credulity
(In special) to beware of whom wee speak
And call him traitor; ô I should reply
Within the bounds (I fear) of blasphemy.
See how hee walks perplexed with agony;
My anger shall im-proue his patience.
Pheudippe.
Doth my dread Sovereign call?
What doth my demi-selfe Pheudippe doe?
Beshrew my melancholic dumps I doe;
Which preter-mit Menanders Majesty
Without obeisance; whilst I walk secure
In a blind corner thus extravagant.
His aromatic breath perfumes the air:
The spicy fields where gossa-moure doth grow
Have not one vapour half so redolent:
I must for fashion chide him fatherly.
Friend, friend, you are ambitous of rule,
Report exclaims upon your dignity;
All attribute the times calamity
Of dearth, to you the Author; who engross
Heaps of provision without real cause;
I must not wink at fraudulent abuse
Done to my Subjects; rather abuse me:
Thou might enjoy full many blessed years,
Live in an aeqnall happiness with me,
Rather then thus neglect my sincere love,
And loose the hope of our munificence▪
Do not (I pray) deserve that infamy
With which our scandalising age condemns
Thy whole endeavours; ô redeem the loss
Of Loyalty; a thing so precious.
Reject those machinations infinite
With which the people charge thee; I conceal
The horror of a rage so violent
As some censorious Critics have adiug'd
To dwell within thy bosom: prithee think
Whether I do deserve thy impious hand
To thrust me from a lineal descent
Or (being down) deserve thy helping hand,
To rescue and uphold my primacy.
Some better Angel be auspicious
Unto my naked answer; (mighty King)
Your deep discretion may with ease collect;
(Though I were dumb and did through silence purge
This weighty accusation) that per-force
To public censure all authority
Is often subject: so ir-regular
Be sudden apprehensions; as upright
And politic proceedings are condemned;
The Prudent •am'd for ignominious
M•d Authors, of sick innovation;
(Though not resolved how this language means:)
I do in ample, and with open terms
Confess the crime supposed, not culpable,
Though burdened with ambition) I confess
A duteous love unto the Commonwealth,
Hath bred my damage; O•er-diligence
May summon active zeal to a defence,
Which doth appear in my ill-tun'd event,
As you perceive, or call me insolent.
The famous Art of Mathe-maticke Rules,
(Wherein my ignorance will never boast
A singularity of knowledge, or conceit)
Did by infallible demonstrations
Fore-signifie this famine: ô resolve
When•her then by the law of Nations
I be accomp•able unto the Gods
For this pretended accusation;
Seeing to the safety of our Commonwealth,
A providence conjectural hath urged,
My whole endeavour? If unto the Gods
I am excused; what impudence will dare
With false-hood to accuse my innocence?
For those designs which Gods allow, ne'er can
Be in themselves offensive unto man.
Know therefore (upon hopeful prae-science)
I did engage a new dexterity▪
To countervail the famishment fore-knowne,
I did engross provision, did expend
Twelue-months revenue to accomplish corn:
Ill be my pains acquitted, worse my love;
Which, labours in the common cause may prove.
Thus imputations are too usual,
And bad constructions are authentical.
Some Kings, (to manifest praedominance)
Accumulate on subjects, heavy wealth,
Honour aboue de-merit, offices,
Popular Cities, and in-franchif'd Towns;
Nay whole dominions, Dukedoms they'll bestow,
And raise a simple Mushrom to the height
Of any monarch's due magnificence;
Till by excess of labour, sweat of brains,
Hee hath enriched his beggarly estate;
Then (like a full-ripe Orange; or indeed,
Like a deceitful sponge, whose empty pores
The owner doth replenish) hee must look
To •eel a sudden crush, a nip will squeeze
Him; who pretends hee may be rich and please:
If then my Title (ô iuditious King)
My now desertlesse wealth, or eminence,
Which (by especial favour I enjoy,
Which freely were bestowed long since), if these
Shall be accounted error and offence,
Or be imputed to my sauciness,
I doe submit, and will my crime con•esse;
If your vn-reprehended sapience
Think it a policy expedient,
Il'e run to exile, dye in banishment,
Live like a scritch-owle in some secret cave,
Turn errant caitiff, and so dye a slave:
If you suppose it bee available
Or to diminish, or annihilate
To dis-anull, or to abbreviate
My large allowance; if you doe account
The base degrading of a loyal peer
Will give advantage and security
To your successive regiment; (may which
Continue to the worlds aeternity:)
If thus you doe imagine (dreaded Liege)
Lo, I will prostrate fall, and ask a boon,
Beg that the heads-mans Axe may ouer-take,
May with a bloody sentence, me salute,
With willing voice, and a more willing arm,
Would I the messenger of death re-greet;
Till then, most lowly kiss your graces feet:
Arise my faithful honourer, arise:
Good honest soul, thy language would enforce
The Cannibals to turn compassionate:
I will transmit thee into Scythia,
To Pontus, to the fierce vn-tamed Getes,
Till with a fluent phrase, thou doe compel
Their savage superstition to submit,
And me acknowledge, as their lawful King:
Thus thou like Orpheus could (I'm sure) enthral
The rude Arabian, or the rugged Ga•le,
And captivate their longing audience
With an aeternity of eloquence.
Thus could thou re-inlarge my sovereign awe,
Thus multiply each province, thus augment
The bounds of our dominion, or de-duce
Appointed troops of Colony; with voice:
But (my alone beloved) never think
I will exchange thy noble company
For temporal possession: though the Gods
Would all resign Olympus, and elect
Me as co-heire in-dub•ta•e to Jove,
Upon Proviso to forsake this friend,
I rather would refuse divinity,
Live like a drudge in dark obscurity,
Then leave so loyal, so complete a friend:
And yet this man deserves a watchful eye;
Speak you censorious rank of Magistrates,
Doth hee deserve suspicion? who replies?
Reports and rumour did deserve advise.
Who guided by report so far doth blame
Another, as to argue his ill-name,
Insisting much on some particular,
Detects himself, an Ass auricular.
This vn-expected fume to pacify
Let your good grace vouchsa•e to dignify
A Summer banquet, and I shall entreat
You the Patricians to accept my love.
R•her then bounty; whom I will invite
And •east with my beloved Liege to night.
With temptiue cups we'll was• away conceit,
And so •enew each health in sober height.
May then my cauterised soul forsake
The rules of nature? sanctimonious law?
Religion' or distinct humanity?
The common spark of times morality?
M•st lethargy now seize upon my soul?
Shall my infectious humour so control
Judgment? so much prefer fantastic joy?
Give licence to dis-loyall treachery?
Atheisme' Rebellion? black deformity?
O most ungoverned appetite of man!
Wee may fore see what few escape, ever can.
Resolve me, Sophist, or Philosopher,
Some cunning moral disputant resolve,
I• •is the people do maintain) Gods live,
Gods, who revenge our close iniquity▪
A•d search the recluse corners of each soul;
Why doe the Gods forbear to punish me?
Who am as •icked as a man may be:
Why doth Olympus, or the Gods who dwell
Within that fabric suffer smo•ky hell,
Horror, 〈◊〉 prodigies, and death,
Ve••ea•ce, delay; to stop a villains breath?
Can such 〈…〉 slave as I
〈…〉 minutes longer? 〈◊〉 protract
A peace-able success, without heavens crack?
Can ominous 〈◊〉 be now asleep,
Whilst I am waking? do the Angels keep
No watch for Kings? then Iupiter awake,
And give the world some notice that you take
Especial care o• P•incise: ô me thinks
Morphe• the God of sleep, who daily winks,
Should leave his drunken catalogue of dreams,
And start with repetition of extremes,
Wherewith I am infected; seas should burn,
Bears, wolves, and Lyons peace-able should turn
Into their antique affability,
And argue men of much impiety.
Now should thy thunder (Jove•) ass•isle the the fort
Of my ambitious hope, by way of sport,
Blast me with lightning▪ brand me full of spots;
Who have entrenched a garrison of plots
Against my second maker, against my King.
So credulous, so element, so sincere,
So flexible, and gracious to me,
As I without him never had my name;
Hee hath endeared my dangerous attempt,
Is both indulgent of each true surmise,
And zealous of each tale that may arise,
Or to detect, •r to oppugn my pride,
My most perfidious dealing; doth deride
All true suggestion of his Councellors,
Who would exasperate his amity,
Whilst I••chant his ears with flattery,
With mere dissimulation (Physic Art)
My gilded dagger stabs him to the heart.
Can my obstreperous passion echo forth
A sound so dismal ir-religious,
Without some sudden earth-quake ominous?
Without a clap of thunder to be-numme
M• trembling •oynts, a•d make my language dumb?
Then Il'e infer the mas•y frame of earth,
Man universal; peasant, patriarch,
Grocers and great men, Kings and Copper-smiths,
Be governed by the Gods, no more then sheep,
Or Il'e depose, the Gods be all asleep:
Scruple in actions doth augment the vice,
Which courage hath surnamed Cowardice.
Soon may a states-man savour of the Fool,
Who leaves his torrent for a standing-poole;
Who doth neglect his high prae-eminence
For safety of a quiet conscience.
All senior Sophists, and each puisne elf
Account him wise, who's wisest for himself.
Yet for conceited disputation sake,
A long discourse of Honesty Il'e make,
Of times corruption will I satirise,
And with each cunning nature temporise.
Thus doth a serpent, which will satisfy
His common thirst, and Summer heat allay,
After hee is approached unto the bank
Of pleasant Nilus, without much delay,
Instinct doth teach him to dis-gorge the bag
Of poison, kept in his pernicious iaw,
Till hee hath tasted the resulting wave;
Then readily lickes up the viscous gall
Which hee by nature did evacuate,
And so remains his body temperate,
His poison (though suspended) virulent.
So when wee crafty •allows (for attempt)
By sudden motives do remember ways
Which men more honest, name Legitimate,
Or by converse, if wee shall tempted be,
To show the be•t of our affections, wee
Doe like the thirsty snake, renounce our Saint,
(Accounted sin) which re-assume wee will;
So re-assumption makes the Serpent still;
If my designs incur discovery,
I then adm••, the King is merciful,
And hee a milk••pis, (wee may resolve)
Can fear, if Kings bee ready to absolve:
Noble attempts beget experience,
Republics purchase mundane policy
Through observation; my success will bring
Plenty of knowledge: errors difficult
Daily in-gender rational discuss,
Which by events doe sweep away the sink
Or muddy oppilation of our sense,
Original of knowledge is offence:
I therefore thus embarked for enterprise,
May win a double stake, learn wit, and rise.
This frolic evening, full of silent air,
Speaks a success to thy achievements, fair:
Both time an opportunity's, benign;
The Sun at his departure, seems to smile,
My banquet is prepared, which must beguile:
No apparitions, no refulgent star,
No threatening Comet can our act oppose,
No new transfigured met•or disclose
Our most herôicke humour, and annoy
The glad conception of all future joy.
Nay, if a plot so well-contriu'd, so square,
So formal, so judicious, should prove
Ill-•eatur'd, and abortive, I'd forswear
All crafty dealing; never would I move,
Compassion with repentance; to obtain
Most absolute forgiveness, though the King
Do then release my criminal attempt,
I'd not en-deere his donatiue, except
With resolution to escape the law,
And wreak more ample vengeance on my self,
With my own proper hands, through violence.
If a design so mature, so concealed,
So rich in expectation, so obliged,
May now mis-carry, and repugnant prove;
Il'e sure prevent the heads-man, hang my self
With expedition, hire a mounte-banke,
Some noted empr'icke, to anatomize
My politician corpse, dissect my scull,
Boyle tongue and heart together in my blood,
Effuse them into broth made of my brains,
In which, my vnctuous kidney-lease dissolved
With my more lushious marrow, may compose
A poultice, which will speedily contrive
The downfall of erected favourites,
Inflame desire-then disanull the ends
Which that affection gapes for: I resolve
Thus to be queath my members, to the sect
Of those, who narrow inquisition make
After each mystic virtue, physical;
If our attempts prove •ot effectual.
Then prae-suppose your project well do thrive,
What recompense may 〈◊〉 expect,
Chie•e captain of the guard; whose instant blow
Gives an advantage so peculiar?
That my officious Captain of his guard
The cunning woolfe hath taught me to reward
Resolve the manner, be emphaticall.
The famished woolfe (whom hunger oft endues
With belly courage to be valiant)
If by adventure his extremity
Meets with a beast of more validity.
Though less •yrannicke rapi•e then himself,
Hee (practis•d in such skill perniti•us)
〈…〉 make his body ponderous;
〈◊〉 by a•t to aequall natures strength,
Till hee de•••sse, and over-come at length.
By which 〈◊〉▪ his boo•y once obtained,
An easy 〈◊〉 natural doth purge
His lumpish maw of that despised earth;
Which (after conquest) hee thinks little worth:
Eeu'n thus the Captain Il'e remunerate,
And with contempt, Il'e re-capitulate
His humble service; so cashier the hope
Of due requital, with a good excuse,
We entertain those agents but forvse.
Here comes my faithful steward; speak what news?
The Captain with his military troop,
I have appointed to their ambush; they
Expect upon my signal (gracious Duke)
The Kings vaunt-curriers doe each testify
His glad approach; give •are to Majesty.
The most of subjects welcome, to my Liege,
Accept our weak endeavour, I beseech;
Si• (gracious King) the Cates contain our love.
Wee doe accept, and will de•erue (my decree)
This thy extended free munificence:
This plentiful provision I may call,
(With licence of our Ethics) Liberal.
No (my most mindful &amp; more sapient Prince)
I am your vassal, drudge, obsequious,
Not bountiful; for it is impossible
That a dependant caiti•e who doth owe
His whole endeavour, and essential part,
His poor existence, spirits animal,
His function, his each power vegetall,
To a supreme efficient, should obtain
(After a free expense, to gratulate
His all-respectiue patron, God, or Saint)
One shred or title of Munificent,
Of Bountiful, or Liberal, because
Duty and love exact such obsequies
For lawful Kings, in stead of sacrifice.
What means thy mad irruption L•leo?
The ambush, the ambush; strike fellow, strike.
Strike this ignoble traitor, Cockatrice,
The subtle vermin base Pheudippe, strike,
Strike fellows, strike, as doth your General,
Who hath withstood temptation actual.
If dear temptation, if enticement smile,
Happy is hee who can himself beguile.
Amazement be my death; dear captain hold:
Hold from the rescue of my royal King?
Wee were tempted to thy causeless death.
Permit the the traitor to enjoy some breath.
My wounds are many, I degenerate,
Lived villain-like, and dye a reprobate.
My husband, my dear husband is betrayed,
Another death makes guilty men afraid.
Infamous change of dignity! dear friend,
Loyal repentance might again restore,
(Could thou revive) thy simple innocence.
Captain, you have abused our Majesty,
And thy audacious act will wee revenge.
Revenge a traitors ignominious death?
Traitor? thou lie, admit his active blood,
His nimble brain, acute sincerity,
Conceived some sober means to ratify,
Or to confirm opinionate belief,
With trial of our unattempted love;
May this deserve a stab? what insolence
May term this loyal project an offence?
Il'e over-vexe with artificial fire,
Thee (slave) who did Pheudippe's death conspire.
May treachery be then accounted zeal?
To his persuasive lines I do appeal.
Read them, they doe contain Apostasy,
Foul matter of sedition: I avouch
The guard to witness, I implore the Gods
In their omnipotence, to testify
The zeal of my affection; to resolve
Whether this kingdom had not suffered woe,
Thy Majesty been trampled under foot,
Thy sinews cracked, thy bones vn-buried,
Sparta been battered with intestine war,
If through dis-loyall humour, through neglect
Of homage, we had hearkened to the false,
But honey-mouth of this rebellious man.
Insolent sit, suppose my friend were false,
(Which I can scarce imagine) or suppose
Confident faith made him erroneous:
Will you abridge the trial of our law?
Prevent my absolution? I appeal
Unto the blessed Theater of Saints,
Let holiness, or let humanity,
Your zeal, how much defective, testify:
For though the three dimensions did concur
In his offence, yet I had mercy left.
Pheudippe, simple man, thy false designs
Ne'er knew a height in mischief so extreme,
A breadth, or depth in solly so profound,
So villainous, but our compassion knew
A means to mitigate thy error; See
My Concubine comes fraught with sober news;
Begin, resolve, and so exaggerate
Our heavy loss, wee will intoxicate
Our soul with im-bibition of more change:
Begin, depose an accident so strange,
As repetition of two syllables
May strike vs with a sudden lethargy,
And so conclude a Kings Catastr•phe.
The queen•
There make thy period; wee know
Mischief (like mighty waives) ne'er comes alone.
The Queene's delivered of a hideous son
Some winged Dragon; is she so? or dead?
Privately walking in the forrest-groue
A ruffaine seized her, slue thy hopeful Queen,
Trussed up the carcass on a speedy nag,
Which by instruction (as my judgment gives)
Flew fast away, like Pegasus: poor I
(Never-enough contented with a chance
Of so secure amazement) stupid wretch,
I looking stood immovable with fear,
Whilst hee upon his pelf•ey cut the air;
Whilst every mountain echoed with laments,
The hollow rocks, and every bush repents
Their weak vn-able powers to resist
And stop the caitiffs passage▪ ô desist
From a pursuit of such high consequence
Not a small minute longer; captain fly,
A bold career may st•p loves desti••.
We'll fly with expedition; follow friends.
Discharge a bullet in my naked breast;
Be charitable some auspicious arm.
My daughter, ô my daughter, she is dead.
Fair Favoured•a's dead, thy love, my Queen,
My dear Pheudippe's dead our joys bee go•e
Mirror of change• the plagues of Cynthia
Are manifest, revenge is palpable,
O tha• assembly (sir) who by command
Of your injunction did restrain the vow
Which masculines a• like with females owe
To Cynthia, great Goddess of the air,
Was without qu•stion all-erronious,
Your edict which pronounced her deity,
Sole-potent over foeminine degrees,
Which did confine her awe celestial:
To that unable sex, seems trivial:
These accidents do cancel your design,
They dis-allow your obstinate decree,
They doe advance forgotten Majesty:
O now reform delusion: terror speaks,
Cynthia is Goddess over humane sex.
Cinthia's a female wether-cocke, a whore,
Doth she afflict our happiness? resolve
Speak (friends) deliver what you think.
Abstain
(Distressed King) from blasphemy; beware
Judgements more strict may follow; these but scare.
O could I compass with a sudden leap,
The verge of big Olympus, or assault
With Swallowes-wings, the orb of Cynthia!
O my revenge, my sweet revenge, more bold
Then bloody-iaw'd Bucyris, then the Boar
Which slue dame Venus-ioy, should wrathful vex
Her opposite exce•se divinity.
With rage would I blaspheme, though angry Jove
Makes ready thunder to praecipitate
My daring voice: I will ingeminate
With deep derision, her distasteful name,
Enforcing others to abuse the same.
Dost thou not hear me Cynthia? dissolve
The melancholy clouds which mask thy brow,
And let compunction mollify thee (witch)
Forth from thy cloudy palace (Luna) peep
And with incessant soft contrition, weep:
Reduce the antique deluge with thy tears,
Turn thy rejoicing into pale-fac'd fears.
Cynthia, remember my abuse, and blush,
Blush thou immodest harlot, be ashamed
To look upon the shadowed universe.
Catch me some whirlwind with a sweeping blast,
And carry me aloft, Il'e vex the Moon
For she (ungracious Goddess) doth afflict
Vs, and our dignity: she did suggest
Rebell-temptations to my beauteous friend,
Whose innocence I ever shall commend.
Manifest proof (Menander) doth detect
His viperous-reproachfull perfidy,
Composed of pregnant infidelity:
To mischief his endeauour's daily bent,
I ever thought hee was malevolent:
Of crimes detected (blame vs if thou wilt)
Despairing apprehensions, argue guilt:
Hee did alike despair: which proceeds
From the confusion of abortive deeds:
I do enforce, that Cynthia hath done well,
She gives good warning to prevent a hell:
These weaker med'cines do but search the wound,
Least rotten members perish; to confound
An ulcerous limb, is worse then scarify;
But rather then loose all: what remedy?
To Cinthia's, revenge ó this apply:
Touching her name Il'e prove a renegate,
My sudden scourge what soul can tolerate?
Error of man which over-tops the sky,
And with quick wastage doth for vengeance fly;
Cal's down Gods judgment (mischief to amend)
Nay, often doth enforce the Gods descend:
Horror, more ugly then the jaws of hell,
Horror, that apprehension doth excel,
Startles my God-head to imagine how
I further may avenge the Spartans vow:
Shall wee (great empress of Imperious night,
Heavens wonder, and wide Corinths blessed Saint)
Thus be, • thus compelled, presumptuous King,
To spit our vn-appeas'd flames in thy face?
O the sharpe edge of bitter blasphemy!
How deep incision doth attend on it?
Flesh cannot brooke one trivial abuse•,
And shall the Gods (being injured) take truce?
No; Il'e inflict a terror to offence,
And will (without compassion) scourge thy sense:
For like some snow-ball tossed upon hot coals,
Thy wit shall vanish, and thy se•ce consume:
A madness must ensue, but mad alike,
Never was any; those that see shall shake
And tremble at our vengeance; but because
Thy vn-aduised rashness rails upon
Our monthly change, vp-braiding holiness,
With a false friends mis-carriage, Il'e impose
A change vn-parralel'd, which ner'e shall cease,
Till thy distracted body sleep in peace:
The most magnificent may learn of thee,
Kings from a dreadful vengeance are not free:
Kings may like petty-gods, insult below,
But of a deere-deepe reckoning they must know:
Fame, freedom, fates, and all that may conspire
To make man happy, shall not make thee man:
For Fates doe rescue neither life nor fame,
If Gods high justice do enthral the same:
Nor may the strict evasion of mis-hap,
Hurt who secured lye in Virtues lap.
But if destruction be aboue decreed,
Means stop in justice, sew by means are freed.
Fall then the horror of blaspheming fears,
Not wiped away with poenitentiall tears;
Till by his death my vengeance be appeased,
And wrathful famine absolutely pleased.
What you already with good cause condemn,
I must (though need not) urge thee to contemn
With all extremity of noble hate,
Vice which emboldens man to be ingrate.
To prove unthankful if occasion speaks,
The joyful head of free-borne bounty breaks:
Do but employ your bond-slaue (mighty Lord)
If Kings command not, how can slaves accord?
The blessings of my body, breath and soul,
Be so engaged, as their existence knows
No• one redeemer amongst all the Gods,
(Fabulous things to me) except your self:
You have replenished my poor empty veins,
Have lent new spirits to despairing hope
Nay have bestowed a whole creations work
Upon mê off all-caitife, who adore
Impression of your foot-steps; that is all:
Expecting hourly on the happy time
When you shall dare command what I dare do:
When with advantage you will but pronounce
O Gracchus, give me of thy blood an ounce:
An ounce? take fifty pottles It reply,
Open your self a passage to my soul,
To take a lawful debt who dares control?
Nor do impute this love to lack of wit,
Or some dis-ioynted weakness of the brain;
For if I argue as the thing demands,
Unless my life, what with your honour stands?
Let me profess, unto the Saints and you
I do desire employment, will bee proud
Of death or life, being by your self allowed.
Life wee allow, but never wish thy death,
For wee expect upon true diligence,
And must improve the nature of thy zeal;
Eunuchs, forbidden actions do conceal;
Thou art an Eunuch, listen to my shame,
Then give advise, and secrefie, though blame:
I love; no, rather lust and love the Queen,
Whom (all-supposing dead) by stratagem
And strong delusion of her silly sense,
I did surprise, being blinded with pretence;
Nor did she seem repugnant to such ruth
My Rhetoric was clad in robes of truth:
Affirming she might thus revenge the spleen,
Of proud Lucilla (who malign's her state)
Giving no colour of revengeful hate;
As to suborn a subtle wretch I vowed
Who with abundant knowledge being endowed
Most caitife-like should counterfeit, no less,
(For paenitent compunction) heaviness;
And so divulge hee slew the Noble Queen,
There-to induced by poor Lucilla's spleen:
Then should Lucilla live no longer day
But loose each vital benefit for aye:
Thus did the hope of vain revenge entice
Woman to prove more valiant then wise:
Whom I (as captive) do retain, till she
Shall manu-mit my self, (her bond-slaue) free▪
Here in the Village doth your Goddess live?
Here; and thy self though sprung of humane •eed
As Jailer to my Goddess I areed.
Faithfully wise wee doe account thy love;
And managing of this design will prove
Thy elegant enforcements, touching me,
Which (happily per-chaunce) may set both free.
O now my blood and reason be at war
With apparition of this fatal star:
Fatal to me, because enchanted beams
Shoot from her eye-lids into loue-sicke streams:
See where she comes with excellence enough
For fifty thousand of the female sex,
Beauties which bless the owner, neighbours vex.
Are you my Lords attendant?
(Madam) no,
But a poor bond-slaue, who can easily owe
The hazard of a soul in sacrifice
To his good Honours health, and pay the debt
Without compulsion, or a double threat.
Madame hee is the blessing of my fate
Borne to my fortunes, and my whole estate.
So• then resolve what news.
All fear is fled:
The worst of women's fear, Lucilla's dead:
Most welcome tidings speak, I pray, and stuff
Your happy speech with circumstance enough.
Titan roused up from darkness by the day
Shrunk with amazement of the fatal morn,
(Remembering what a mischief should befall)
For cloudy night-caps hee again did call,
When my suborned vassal gave consent
To swim (for satisfaction of our sake)
Through deep damnations gulf, so, through the lake
Of vn-digested horror, to accuse
My step-dame, young Lucilla, of your death:
Hee, a dissembling caitiff, deeply read
In ir-religious acts; with doubtful face
More doubted voice, and miserable groan
Salutes the foote-step of Maenanders throne;
Then weeping▪ said, the Worm of Conscience
〈◊〉 in my blood; tortures my broken soul;
Haunted I am with terror whilst • live
Who to my life a period will give?
A final period: for I live too long
Let vila••• fortune be my fatal song,
With which the so••y King was some-what moved,
And (after silence) did exact his name
Proceeding to the circumstantial cause;
My rude impostor did prevent the clause,
And seeming to afflict his pensive heart,
Back from the royal footsteps doth hee start:
Help, ô defend me from her hateful frowns,
See where Medusa-like she comes, (hee cried)
Clad all in torch-light like the Queen of hell
Her sealpe's en-circled with a Crown of flames:
Much leane-iaw'd horror hangs about her eyes;
The gaping wound for greedy vengeance cries.
What madness now affrights thee, quoth our king?
Fair Fauourina's shadow hee replies,
For throvgh enticements of Lucilla's spleen
I slew the gallant Bride, and Sparta's Queen:
Lucilla, by consent, was doomed to death
And my Impostor also, whom I taught
For lifes own safe-guard to beseech the King,
That his vprighteous judgment of grim death
Might fail of execution, just so long
As the condemned Lucilla did survive
Thinking by this, then to discover all
And say hee did preserve whom she conspired to kill.
The King, enraged with sorrow, did re-pell
This poor petition of my totur'd slave:
Who then despairing to escape from death
Drew forth a dagger, gave one fatal stab
Into the Kings own bosom, with which wound
Hee like a lofty Turret, nodding low,
Clape his victorious palms aboue his head,
And swo•e a mighty oath, MENANDER'S DEAD.
〈…〉 dead? My King and Husband dead?
My slave torn peece-meale did enjoy his fate,
Lucilla bur•t a before the Palace gate.
Menander dead?
Yes, but Pheudippe's King.
Pheudippe King?
Yes; but MENANDER'S DEAD.
Oppressed with sorrow, I lament his death:
But am appeased by proud Lucilla's breath.
What is a women's love? when to revenge
And empty out the poison of her gall
Against some Lady her malignant foe
She doth forget compassion, doth refuse
Friendship to neighbours, duty to her Spouse,
Respect of parents, piety to blood:
Nay, aboue these; abhor celestial good.
Now quickly (Madam) to disclose you live
Were dangerous, and prejudicial I doubt:
Therefore expect on opportunity,
Least you infringe the league of unity;
Till I advise, live (as you doe) sec•re:
Safety's no less accepted of obscure
And Country Peasants, then of Courted Kings:
Place cannot change the nature of good things.
THe Mountain echoes they shall catch his name
And every nook re-•terate the same;
For I will teach the night-rauen to repeat
His pe•sieve sound, the sleepy owl shall sing
And happy news of lost Pheudippe bring:
Awake dumb Ghost, Pheudippe, friend awake
And now repair thy old mansion-place;
Return Pheudippe but a while return
And truly answer to my just demand
I will resign a Kingdom to thy hand.
Hey•ke you mad furies of eternal night:
Boats-man of Styx, by burning Phlegeton
Secluded Angels, and superior aide
I doe con-iure you to direct his soul
Back to the bosom of that slaughtered Hearse
Ah Charon, Charon, prithee Boats-man bring
His errant shadow to the pl•ce of rest,
And Charon I will Canonise thy name
Give thee a Queen to sleep in thy cold arms,
To kindle moisture in thy rugged limbs
And make thy wastage easy with her hymns:
Bring but the soul of that ignoble man
To ask forgiuensse, and I will forgive.
A foolish hope! (heaven knows) for hee indeed
Hee hath a haughty stomach full of rage
Swolne-big with pride, begot of too much love,
And my familiar usage makes him think
(The more fault's mine) hee should not now submit.
O sir the final stab of mischiefs end
Hath struck him dead; hee cannot now amend.
No! it is a language difficult to learn
Though rules be frequent in our mother-tongue.
O that a lesson of one word; not two,
Should ask a life to learn, an age to do?
Yes; though Pheudippes age had been deferred
Till a consumption of the Vniuerse
In hope of his amendment, I believe
Hee would have purchased immortality
Through vice and vicious acts.
Damnation claps,
Gaping for custom at mans new relapse.
Right: Can the earth yield such a faithless man
As false Pheudidippe?
O damnation laughs
And winged mischief claps her dusky plumes,
If proud ambition great men's hope consumes.
What a continual clapping is there then?
For daily hope consumes the greatest men:
I doe appeal to dead Pheudippes shame
Thou terror to my sense, a prodigy
Of all remembrance never to be matched
With any Ghost or man except thy self:
Who through abortive hope did match thy self:
A man most worthy of all impious fame,
Who D•n Pheudippe cleaped was by name.
Know (gallant sir) I did repose my life
Upon the friend-ship of that foolish man;
Hee kept my soul between his Tyrant's arms
Nay (let me add) the value of my Crown,
(For which some Kings would even exchange their soul)
Hee kept both Soul and Crown betwixt his arms,
Ye• both lay open to excessive harms:
O if I had election to despond
My favour upon such a Rogue as hee
But once, once more; I'd locke my counsel up
And keep my bosom secrets to my self.
Kings may indeed deprive their Senate-house
Of some pretence, and may (let others prate)
Conceal affairs belonging to the State.
If hell afforded such a monstrous rag
I'd re-conclile the error of my sense;
But, now may reckon up some woe-full verse
For solid passion Poets best rehearse.
A Poets rapture Kings have wished to feel
Which some despise because incapable.
The Muses make my brain their banquet-house,
And thus with Lucan will wee frame our song
Of dreaded horror, whose in-human rage
Blew dire-full tempest through the Tharsall plain
Of laws neglected, and a stubborn age
Whose blood &amp; black-deeds did their country stain
Of civil discord, and a haplesse breach
In Kingdoms covenant, which did sore impeach
The worlds whole Confines, and their Publicke-weale
Wee sing, and sternely treat how every deal
Standards met Standards, Ensigns were alike,
Bows threatened Bows, and nimble spears the Pike.
(Romans) what madness may wee term this strife?
Be your own blades let loose, against your life?
That Nations far remote should see and smile
At your wide gaping wounds, and 〈◊〉 revile?
And must your hot encounters carlesse boyle,
When Babylon should perish in the spoil
Of her victorious Trophies? when the Ghost
Of unrevenged Crassius here stood tossed
Aboue ground? then must war-like humours breath
Which wanting triumph, want a worthy wreath.
O and alas! what Kingdoms, what renown
This blood might have obtained? some temptiue Crown,
Where beauteous Titan sleeps, and heavy night
Exempts the joyful harbingers of light:
Else where the sweltring noone-day scalds with heate,
Else where continual Winter takes her seat:
Where Scythicke Po•tus pierced with c••zy cold
Lies bed-red on a cripple corner-moul'd,
Ceres might conquered been, Araxes yoked
Had not domestic war such broils provoked.
If (Rome) thy battles thou esteem such bliss
Subdue all Kings, then were it not amiss
To combat with thy self; mean while break of,
For multitude of foes may freely scoff.
Our King hath tasted juice of Helicon.
Tasted? no fool, the Muses do entrance
My dear imagination, I will swim
Through each sweet stream of ravished eloquence
Of Passion, Satire, Aeglogue, Epigram
Of Sonnets, Imprecations, Epitaphs,
And by them all admonish Mighty Kings
To keep their bosom locked; for friendship stings.
Go fetch a Garland from the 〈◊〉grove
For I will sit amongst the Sheep-heard Swains
Upon some pretty tust or pleasant hill
Hung (in my honour) with fresh hallowed bays,
And echo forth an Alphabet of lays:
My Queen, poor Queen, berest of beauties pride
Shall in our fancy sit and touch our side,
Grieve not, she was my daughter (gracious King)
Gracious, and King, be words not known to me;
I am no King, nor will be gracious
But an impartial Poet of this age
Who must inveigh at Kings and Kingly grace:
I must a multitude of woes rehearse
And stab my audience with I-ambicke verse:
Rail at the peevish humour of a slave
Whose rude examples be notorious.
Attend my whole narration (royal Dukes)
Remember how I did the Forest rule,
How I amongst the troupe of Elephants,
Foxes, and Tigers, Apes, and Leopards,
Was, by appointment of my fathers will
Left as an heir legitimate, to live
And re-establish my true parents blood:
Remember and imagine I did rule
Like an audacious Lyon of the lawns,
Who by mis-fortune have caught a prick
Which doth distemper his presuming paw
M•etes with a heart-lesse Pilgrim, doth salute
His coward fancy with a peal of fears
Then doth submit (some ceremonies done)
His royal stoutness to the trembling man
Puts forth his pained member, shows the wound
Till the distracted traveller conceives
A remedy to succour that which grieves:
The Lie•a thus allured with seeming love
Protect• the Pilgrim by his noble force
Doth not for-sake him, fawns upon the wretch
Whose poor compulsive cowardice did urge
That tribute at allegiance (not his love)
Least life should answer what his will denied:
Thus did they live till the most faithless man
Grew so familiar hee was not afeared
To shake the sleeping Lyon by the beard:
Thus hee pretended still to be aboue
So slew the Lyon for his Kingly love.
And thus, ô thus! did my Pheudippe deal:
For from the dust and dunghill did I raise
The needy fortunes of that naked man
Without all merit, save hypocrisy
Which was my thank for all his dignity:
The Gods and you bear witness (noble friends)
I took that fellow for the truest man
That woman ever was blessed with; did believe
His birth and education both Divine,
Who was indeed a devil; for whose death
My brainelesse fury did blaspheme the Gods:
O if I had election to for-sake
The substance of my souls eternity,
If soul and body did together die
If deaths corruption could corrupt the soul,
(So make it vanish, and avoid control,)
No speedy torment should escape, no death
Be unattempted, till my life and breath
Were as my soul is now, invisible:
O I would climb Acro-serannian rocks,
Run to the top of Aet•a, or the Alps
And rush down head-long like a desperate slave;
Or like an Aiax, greedy of revenge,
I would in-counter Woules, and Unicorns,
Tempting the savage worthies to assail
My careless life, and so in-counter me.
But sir, the soul of man is precious,
Made of immortal essence, cannot die.
So, I'm oppressed with immortality,
And though my rotten Carcass soon decay
Yet must my soul account for blasphemy:
For Blasphemy, which I in zealous love
To a false lewd impostor did augment
With sharpe invectiues eeu'n to vex the Gods.
Your love to that dissembler was extreme
And all extremes beget extremities.
To that dissembler, to that devil, say;
To that Magician, true-borne Imp of hell,
Speak thus; and let me thank your eloquence;
For had hee been produced of earthly race
His charms and witch-craft could not so deceive
My narrow apprehension, ô a•tend!
And I will make you weep before I end.
Pheud pp like a frozen viper was
Whom, I (delighted with a formal show)
By chance took up, and warmth and life bestowed
Upon this piteous creature; till at length
Hee crept and crawled into my bosom; I
Did suffer still, through plain simplicity,
The se•pent to become familar;
My table and my Trencher gave him food,
Still did I suffer, still hee slept and fed
Upon my trembling bosom; hee did kiss
And like my tenderveines, as I did his:
Still did I suffer, though my soundest friends
Bad me beware of such a subtle Guest,
Giving fair cautions to embrace the best;
Still did I suffer, and did scourge advice,
With sharpe rebukes, not valuing the price.
So long I suffered, hee so long did sleep,
So long hee licked me, and so long time crept,
So long I loved him, hee so long time wept
With false affection, as hee did confirm
My not mis-doubting friend-ship, which was firm,
But after all my love, and all his tears,
After my patience, and his creeping smiles,
My long, long sufferance, and his thankful vows;
After all these ô God, my bosom groans
To think, that after all such boundless good
Hee wished to suck upon my royal blood.
The subtle wretch, in mischief, did rejoice,
And was corrupted by the peoples voice.
True, they corrupt, whom they still hope to please
The peoples physic, doth inflame disease.
Foul vengeance choke the people, and their love,
They doe deject whom they advance aboue:
The peoples suffrage, to a rising youth
Is like their folly at a public Stage,
Striving to purchase a dumb audience
By multitude of clamour; they suppose
Peace is engendered by still crying peace,
As if confusion did by murmur cease:
So they imagine, by their open mouth,
To make a Giant, though but scarce a man:
They speak him virtuous, bountiful, and wise
Hoping polluted breath, might Canonise
Whom they (with dirty palms) do seem to raise,
And bind his Temples with their stinking bays:
No, they but make him dizzy, deaf, and mad,
Whom they desire to make a demi-god;
Their multitudes of clamour doe beget
A most vn-cured swimming of the head;
For so the rules of ringing do agree,
Confusion ever spoils a harmony.
What Cox-combe now dares call Menander mad•
Doe not (I pray) abuse me (noble boys)
Although I be a Poet; all men know
I never writ of Cupids whirligig,
Of amorous conceits, nor dalliance,
And just so long as Poets will abstain
From foolish love and Cupids Deity.
The Poets Art is counted Piety.
But if the tenor of a loue-sicke Theme
Stuff rotten Volumes then the Author's mad,
Or Moone-sicke, some judicious bookmen, say,
Though others, amid' earnest, allow play.
(Alas good King) what sudden ouer-throw
Distracts poor weakness by a little woe?
Who talks of woe' did you sweet passenger?
Open thy case if it bee parallel,
Let's live co-partners in some ugly shade
Where none but melancholy night-rauens keep
There let's complain, but (breath being silent) weep.
Not far from hence, low in a humble Cave,
My little cottage stands devoid of care
Finely en-compass'd with a pleasant wave
Dressed up with D•isies, Cow-slips, Hyacinths
And many thousand pretty, pretty things
Which Nature lends me while the black-bird sings:
Four Goats I have which browze upon the twigs,
Two did relinquish mê, for I had six,
One seemed a Lamb which was indeed a Wolf,
Him did my dog discover, kill, and eat—
Wee doe discover all thy weakness King
To help is hard, to weep an easy thing.
Dares then thy blistredtongue (audacious fool)
Forget all duty and disturb a Duke?
(Impudent Ass) I do degrade thy ears
And thee, from all employment; be an Ass
At large, and carry loaves, like Lucius
Deserve a Cudgel and a biting spur,
Be dull and sluggish in extremities
Till I bestow a Rose or any thing
To make thy sudden metamorphosis.
It's made already (King) and I will kiss
Your dainty plame, then laugh, and Poetize
Cast of my robe and act old Lucius,
Or Messala Coruino; dance I will,
And after sixty Summers will I dote
So, change my garment for a mimickes coat:
Captives rapine at their compulsive thrall
Who then (sweet Mistress) may me Captive call?
Though conquered I confess
Yet void of heaviness:
Forbearance makes my freedom•
At length to bee more welcome.
When with compassion thou shalt pity
Me; or approve my harmless Ditty:
If ransom you require
Tell me thy chief desire;
What is it I would not give thee?
Make trial and believe• me.
Ransom though you refuse
Or at the least excuse
Yet to the latest of a thousand lives
I will rejoice in love, triumph in gives.
Age is become a young inamorata.
Laugh, laugh, infernal furies leap for joy;
Make me a flaming Chariot, I will ride
Upon the wings of potent Lucifer,
And stile, like lightning, through the amazed Orb.
Thunder shall be my Page, and Aeolus
Lead up my Coach-horse to big Titans Hall,
Where in that fair Assembly of the Gods,
Glistening with golden robes Pontifical:
I must a volume of large thanks recite,
And a petition to dame Luna write:
All, for thy sweet acquaintance Messala
Whom I adore, and much will dignify
Those who partake in ravished lunacy.
So, then wee are companions (lusty lad.)
Till daring Jove dissolve the Vniuerse,
Till the last revolution of this Orb.
Till Citizens accounted civil knaves,
To chea•ing custom be no longer slaves.
Till sige authentickes of vn-spotted lives
Leave bawdy Panderism to their willing wives.
Then, faith till Courtiers too, with satin sleeves
Renownce all begging and be arrant thieves.
Till Taylors like-wise made of shreds and shelves
Enrich the debtor to vn-doe themselves.
Till the most gallant Ladies of the Court
Esteem devotion there abused sport.
Then faith till Players, Poets, (Ape and Ass)
Spend all they get from June to Michaelmas.
So then for ever shall wee live like friends,
Thou must forgive though Messala offends.
What can exceed these miracles of age,
Whose actions might again revive the stage?
A Common council must protect the State,
Till mad Menander have atoned his fate:
Till Cynthia her punishment release
And give Manander leave to rule in peace.
Whither, ô whither, and to what extremes
Doe the most waking Gods drive guilty men?
Who lives to know, obtains a blessed age,
But hee a curse, who knowledge doth abuse;
Subtle temptation must not make men err
With judgment, though approval may confer
Kingdoms of wealth, which is impossible
(So gotten) to continue, if well paid.
O since I knew the folly to advise
And nourish up the rude infirmities
Of each voluptuous Epicure in state
Striving to take dependence from the smile
Of an imperious favourite, weak shame
Never 〈◊〉 now oppressed me; and I swear
Did not 〈◊〉 sword of justice now strike home
I wou•d •••counter sh•me with fortitude,
But a discarded woe (the common plague
Of servile age eeu'n dead with misery)
Hath after long forbearance seized on me:
Pheudippes death was fatal to my life
Because neglected by his living wife.
Have I then caught thy vn-appeased soul?
Tell me, come tell me, wicked wretch declare,
Why hast thou broken holy friend-ships vow?
Speak (damned vermin) each true accent tell
For we'll vn-rip thy bosom spite of hell;
Speak thou contemptuous varlet, doe not strive
And shake thy limbs with vn-expressed fear,
For (trembling slave) my hand shall catch thy hair,
Hold thee perforce, with chains of adamant,
Till thy audacious shadow quaking sees,
If hands be weary I can hold by teeth.
But ô Judicious—
Villain I abhor
The hateful sound of thy be-witching voice,
Keep in thy clamorous echo (conjurer)
And cease with Magic to enchant our sense
Or I will si•dge thy beard off with my breath:
O you damned fawning Rascal, can thou shake
And tremble after all thy infamy?
Thou thankless, rotten-hearted-slaue, thou snake
Did I deserve suppression? tell me (Fox)
You temporising Courtier, that's enough,
Hee needs not call thee knave, nor Sycophant,
And it-religious Jew, that calls thee so,
For thou did study these; thinking to prove
A learned Politician, that's a devil,
A most abortive monster, strangely made
With long huge horns a crafty Foxes head
A Lyons posture and extended ears
With eighty souls and hearts, like little eggs;
But with a Camels back, and Tigers legs;
Wanting a breast-bone, like the savage Bear,
So climb hee doth and curry up the rocks,
Mounting the tops of straight Pyramids
But when hee tumbles, like a smitten Tower,
Declining softly to an ominous dearth,
First will his head salute the shaking earth.
The black remembrance of thy fatal end
Makes my assertion true, thee a false-friend:
O pacify great King.—
—Your yawning voice
With a full concord of my furious palm
If you produce another syllable
You most notorious caitiff, you mad cur,
Thou Politicians d•g, did I advance
Thy ragged fortunes to degrade my self,
Make thee a partner of my Kingdoms joy
Give thee my Kingdoms pleasure, wealth, and wives,
When I (made foolish) to make thee as King
Took the bare title and a glorious heap
Of golden sorrow requisite for Kings,
Keeping the best (by privilege) for thee
Without a second rival? thus I did,
Nay, did I thus and yet thou prove unkind?
I call my faith in question to demand
Such need-lesse truth, for thou did prove unkind,
Contriving the subucision of my rule
Which gave a perfect essence to thy soul,
Submit, submit for shame, and say forgive:
Say but forgive and I am gracious.
I am not (sacred King) as you suppuse
The tortured Ghost of that in-glorious man
Pheudippe, sunk below the verge of hell.
But old Mantesio is my servile name,
Once did I serve whom you so much did love,
The murdered honour of that haughty Duke.
Thou Spirit of delusion, 〈◊〉 affirm
This doubtful figment; once again deny
A soul of reason to thy Sovereign.
My flesh doth witness for me I doe live.
Am I then mad Mantesio? agree
Your are no Ghost and make the consequence.
But brother, who's mad now? not Messala.
Deride vs then, and be ridiculous.
Tell me Mantesio, why did talk of curse,
Discarded woe, and vexing misery?
Of all I tasted in extremity.
Lives there that soul upon the spacious globe,
Which doth uprightly think it can deserve
Extremity of sorrow, heaps of woe
As did Pheudippe? it's impossible:
No (good old man) though thy large multitude
Of capital offences do exceed,
The wandering stars, I may account thee clean,
Like a religious innocent, or babe,
As a bright Angel, to Pheudippe's shame.
Yet am I poor, and will partake in woe:
Can be distracted? melancholic? mad?
Swear by the beauty of the burning Zone?
Look like a dead-mans scull, most scirvily?
Laugh, weep, rail, swear, and hang thy self at once?
Rend off thy pleated hair, be lunatic?
Live naked in a tempting wilderness?
Call me Don. Aiax? live by roots and herbs?
Be a true male-content? be ever sad?
Cloudy, like Christmas? be disconsolate?
And (aboue all) renounce society?
If thus thou can observe a dogged change,
If gloomy sorrow (made excessive strange)
Stab thy distracted senses to the life,
Wee may dispatch all sense without a knife.
But who comes here?
A Poet (precious sir)
Thy name?
Perillus.
O advance thy tune,
Provoke thy sharpe Melpomene to sing
The story of a beggar and the King.
Can command Poems vn-praemedite?
I have a little smack of poesy,
Can smell the amber-breath that rapture brings,
Upon receipt of which my consort sings.
But I have bedded the fair Muses nine,
Slept in the bosom of Melpomene,
Have rid upon the wings of Pegasus,
Drunk down a flood of sparkling Hyppocren,
Keep a perpetual moisture in my head,
Hating such dilatory sloth of men,
From whose weak brains the rotten papers shed,
Like leaves in autumn; I account him quick
Who is by nature so; with small intent
Such (as my self) may be proficient:
I could now turn conceited stagerite,
And represent I will, with feeling strains,
The Ghost of Crassus, or crack all my veins:
Suppose me then the Ghost of that old man,
That sorry man, my ribs transfixed with steel,
Or with a tempest of the Scythian darts,
My wounded carcass black with bloody gore,
Long slept in frosty stupor, to arise,
With squalid raiment from the waives of bell,
And unto Pompei apparitions tell:
Will you great Pompei, patron of my cause,
Who did by solemn oath, vowfull revenge?
Will you, the comfort of my funerals,
Tomb to my ashes, and my naked bones?
Will you, will Pompei prove delinquent? hee,
Who hath in love to Crassus, threatened stabs,
Death and destruction till deep wounds increase,
Can hee love Crassus foe, and seek for peace?
Bleed then my gaping and forgotten wounds
Bleed even afresh, or let my frozen blood,
Like a congealed syrup, now dissolve,
After such cloudy seasons of the year,
Such heavy sorrow, and such doubtful fear:
After so many dismal nights and days,
So many tempests of the Stygian Bark,
And prophecy, things fatal, true, but dark:
Calamity made famous by extremes
Erected in a marble monument,
Shall by her often meeting vex thy mind,
Else by opposed number make thee blind:
Horror and ruin (Pompei) shall affront
Thy shameless fortunes, thy foul negligence,
Cities at thy sub-uersion shall rejoice
The skulls and trophies of thy captains loss
The victor shall upon his •ailing toss;
Where swift Euphrates, sent such worthy names
To black oblivion, and the tumbling waives
Of big-swolne Tygris, cast my carcass dead
Upon the margent of that muddy shore,
And gave to earth what Neptune could not keep,
Having once cast my wounded limbs asleep:
There shall thy woe approach, and Pompei know
If quick avoidance bee not difficult,
Thou then more easily might atone the strife
Which thy proud factious Nephew hath begun,
Raging amid the heart of Thessaly.
Think but a while upon the Roman orb,
Think of thy friends at home, think who they are,
And those few friends with watchful foes compare:
Think yet of Egypt, her seuen-headed gulf,
Join with Egyptian Ptolomei, and thrive,
His high tuition appertains to thee,
Tender his nonage, aim at Aegypts throne,
Whose King hath but the shadow of a name,
Because a childish infant, lacking fame,
And fear, (the substance of a Diadem)
Nor think the old allegiance to their kings,
Can so estrange the peoples love to thee,
But know the state of kingdoms be most mild,
If, or, the King is new, or is a child:
Both do concur to crown thy happiness,
Set sail for Egypt, make thy covenant there,
Oppose the Parthi, and depopulate
The fields, where Crassus did enjoy his fate:
Say, from the cinders of a slaughered man,
You took advice to turn Egyptian.
Most lively acted, and like Roseius,
Hee doth pronounce with volubility.
For a pure copious linguist hee doth well,
But for ingenious action doth excel.
The King for a Comaedian I'faith;
But I will strive to act aboue thee (King)
And out of brim-stone rocks may virtue split,
I am a cold, and must go dig for wit.
Go dig for wit whilst I am Ioviall,
And laugh and leap among my flatterers,
Come dance Lavolioes my familiar knaves,
Do you commend this mirth?
Most happily.
Mirth may expel distraction, if secûre.
But ô my friend, I am not as I seem,
Merry indeed, but only seeming so;
Vn-rip my bosom, and with lines of blood
Deeply engraved upon my trembling heart,
You may discern attractive Epitaphs,
The shameful curse of a contemptuous King,
A loue-knot double broken; and by whom
Friendship rewarded with extreme abuse;
False-hood, without a colour, and excuse.
What flinty flesh could now abstain from tears?
Do then thy stranger thoughts compassionate,
And weep at our in-humane destiny.
If thy relenting heart true passion feel,
Then let thy moist'ned love some drops distill;
Weep on (my friend) I cannot I control
The copious fountain; for a silent tear
Doth apprehend the quick; but never howl:
Forsake me now, and leave me desolate,
I would revolue the lessons of my state.
Up from earths lodging, and those rotten skulls,
Buried in embers till the earth awake,
Wrapped in my funerall-ashes, safe reserved,
I doe arise from rude antiquity,
To beg but pardon as a mid-nights alms,
Feeling the horror of my fault immense,
Which doth exceed in nature all offence.
I come (Maenander.)
Who Menander cal's?
What hidden Devil dares molest my muse?
Denounce thy judgment with a milder tune,
I come (Maenander.)
Death to my soul! what comes?
Who comes? or how dost come? invisible?
I come with meekness.
Why, or whence dost come?
Damnation overtake thee, what's thy name?
Shadow of Stygian horror! what's thy name?
(Intruder) know thy distance, keep aloof,
Come not within six yards, upon the price
And peril of an vn-avoided charm:
By which, and thousand other potent spells,
The magic Herbal, ointments, numbers odd,
By transmutations, mid-nights, Iucubus,
Squint-ey'd Ericthon, soul of Hecate,
I doe con-iure thee, tell, and not mistake,
How fares Pheudippe of the Stygian lake?
O I am hee, a spirit of despair,
Compact (by loves decree) of cloudy air.
I am the wretch, who was in life, a span;
But in excess of crime, a crooked man.
Bless the good stars aboue, thou guilty thief
Which doe in-close thee with a robe of clouds,
Spite of protection else, and coats of steel,
The tempest of my passion thou should feel;
Thunder and lightning should not dare with-stand
To take due vengeance from my fatal hand.
My tortures be aboue thy humane guess,
The torment of my soul who may express?
My comforts now be multitudes of pain,
Viewing a number infinite of souls,
Which stuste the dampish pit with piercing howls,
Restless they tumble, hoping to get ease,
And, more they move, out-rage doth more increase,
Wee rail at our conception, curse the sky,
And in the face of heaven spit blasphemy.
Wee all enjoy a most impatient curse,
Yet all suppose our own pain shall the worse;
Motion doth vex vs, sitting still doth vex,
Torment, no age escapes, no sumptuous sex:
Did thy ambitious height incur all this?
My falsehood, slattery, and a Courtiers life,
(The fountai•es to all sorrow) did infect
My •ou•e with a disease vn-curable.
I doe indeed forgive thee, therefore tell
Compassion to the Pursuivant of •ell;
Say I forgive thee, and on that dis-charge,
Command the crabbed Jailer to in-large
Thy long and low•ie thraldom; often say
I doe forgive thee (false ungracious man)
O often-times repeat, the Kingforgiues,
Often repeat, as an exemplar thing,
Thou hast obtained forgiveness of a King,
For a tall grant-error, an offence
Made monstrous big by circumstance; contempt
In a degree aboue comparison;
Yet I forgive those capital crimes done:
If thou attainted be with some offence,
Equal in nature to this high contempt,
Go then ••cursed, till I redeem thee, go
Accounted worthy of damnations woe:
But, because officers do sting like bees,
Say I forgive thee, and will pay thy fees.
Few plaintifes, or appellants doe the like,
Though I without a judgment will release
Errors escaped from youth, soliue in peace.
But I am past repentance (royal sir)
And so thy pardon is like bounty given
To beggars dead, or med'cines ill-bestow'd
On separated members, like vain life
Purchased by seals and writings after death,
And execution of a guilty thief;
There's no capacity for dead relief.
Kings, clad with numerous titles, cannot give
Promethean fire, to make a dead man live:
Pardon of Kings no benefit may deal,
Except it pass by a superior seal:
Surfeits and rupture, to be dumb, and blind,
Acknowledge Art; but surfeits of the mind
And rupture in affections forcing ill,
Know none aboue, but a free governed will:
Which if it prove re-misse, mans powerful fate
Carries him head-long to my damned estate;
The ship-wrack'd Pilot may discern a shelf,
But every fool vn-cheated, cheats himself:
Advance thy pale desires, look fresh and big,
Think on revenge, clear thy contracted brow,
Be sensible of wrong, and (worthy) know
My false co-partners live, who did conspire,
And frame the bellows of ambitious fire:
Amilcar lives (my some) Lucilla lives
(Thy subtle sister) old Mantesio lives:
All my adhaerents, all competitors
In mischief, most well-known conspirators;
Yet all survive in safety, traitors live:
Think on revenge, I doe advise thee well;
Sleep not upon thy proiects, if thou want
Opinion of a friend, hear me a supplicant:
Level invention with a speedy aim,
Till thou the cunning of such knaves reclaim.
My sister false? Amilcar such a knave?
Who indeed is, but is affections slave?
A•d none but him, judgements encounter can,
Although aspersions touch the honest man.
Remember these my motives, morning peepes,
The day no dilatory time doth give,
To echo forth at large, thy Queen doth live.
Doth Fauorina live? dear shadow stay,
My absence is enforced through rising day.
Split then in pieces thou pernicious toad,
My plagues diminish to augment thy load.
My Queen survive! ioynt-cause of all my woe!
Of all my anger, blasphemy and rage!
Is she reserved? doth Fauorina live?
Whose absence made me rail at Cynthia?
O I have swallowed poison▪ which tor•ênts
All my distracted veins with agony,
A grief continuing without all re-lease,
Consumption of my pain breeds pains increase.
Now for obnoxious compounds to possess
The soul with everlasting lethargy,
Ransom of thousand Kings would I exchange,
Or like a beast, humanity estrange.
O for enchanted Poppy, or the juice
Of drunken Hemlock, to lay souls asleep,
I'd like a Serpent on our belly creep,
Licking each humble shrub, and careless feed
Upon the stubble of each stinking weed.
Shriek ô the mid-night-mandrakes voice aloud,
So may the horror of that piercing sound,
Turn soul and body both alike to ground:
Pel-mel together my affections fight,
Each conquer each, some scudd away by flight.
Coin•s and Lust, arch-enemies to love,
Combat apace within my youthful blood;
Fear to attempt my vn-experienc'd wish,
Tells me with what a coy and constant face
The Queen will start in motives of my lust;
(For I no better Title can bestow
On our audacious meaning) lust abounds,
Free from all apprehension of that love
Which simple-meaning youths do still protest
And vow to virgin-chastity; but I,
Who am inflamed with ambiguity
Will not embark a faithless vow so far
As evaporate promise, which infects
Beyond fierce natures lust, and stabs my fame:
Because rich Nature, although covetous,
Loath to confer a full satiety
Of goodness, upon me her suppliant,
Hath yet imposed one virtue aboue all,
In promise ever to disdain the breach,
Though strict observance do my weal impeach:
Yes, I prefer the violent attach
Of maiden-head, before false promises;
For (all can witness) rape's a thing in act,
So there's an end; We never doe dissemble,
Nor do extinguish sparks of sanctity
With fraud, with vn-supported perjury,
(Joining rank false-hood to concupiscence)
Protesting marriage to enjoy a smack,
And so deceive the long desirous womb
Of hoped fruition: A hot ravisher
Gives what the womb would otherwise demand:
Yet will I not enrage my lust so far,
As violence to wrong the beauteous Queen,
If she (as women will) prove pliable,
Nor will engage on oath to assevêtre
What I disdain, yoak'd-marriage; for indeed,
Women be clogs which hang about the neck
Of man, so heavy till it sometimes break:
A well-couch'd theme of love shall therefore try
If without promise I may mount on high:
The bonds of marriage I abhor to choose,
And rather would upon such points refuse
The noble Queen (if to accomplish it
Were possible) then happily enjoy:
Seeing nature doth demand variety,
Admitting which, with full society,
Health is impeached, and many men made poor,
Who having honest wives will hug a whore.
Speak, is she made of wax (solicitor?)
Of mil-stones (my good Lord) for lime &amp; chalk
Cannot express the full comparison:
Cold Images of Ice, and frozen snow,
Had been dissolved with my summer speech
Piercing unto the quick, but constant she,
Like to some Eagle on a Cedars top,
Disdaining idle nets, will perch aboue,
In spite of Cupped, and his potent love.
I burn the rather, and by rape will quench
My lastfull famine, were she loves own wench,
O doe not offer head-strong violence;
Delay makes modest women more propense.
Death &amp; damnations plague to boot! how long
Must I abstain (you smooth-tongu'd flatterer)
Till doomsday? doe not urge my flaming wrath,
Least you provoke a Lyon to the spoil.
By Cupids Sacraments of lust and love,
I will no more delay (thou lazy dog)
Dost trifle? speak forbearance, and delay?
I doe begin to be suspicious
Of thy proceedings: tell vs of delay?
No, as the Falcon doth a Pheasant seize,
I will both seize upon her (prating daw)
And truss her up in my Imperious claw.
(Sirrah) rememer, I did give you meat,
Clothes, coin, and such good poor commodities,
When you were quite blown up with gamesters luck,
Rags and foul linen, scabs and sciruy lice,
The quick associates of all cheating dice,
Did honestly begin to set up house
In your old single suit, pray do not make
Me a disseisor of francke-tenements,
By tortious dealing with your free-holders,
Who had a better Title then my self
If you do prove vn-thankfull; so consider.
Am I vp-braided? noble sir I thank
The bounteous alms you lent my bare estate,
And I as freely doe disclaim desert,
As you did freely give them; yet in-faith
I was not lousy (Lord) consider well,
Though Lords be lousy too sometimes; if hell
Heaven, earth, and men, be not so gracious,
As to conceal infirmities of state.
Say I am lousy sir.
Can pox forbid?
But I must give him better language now:
No (my respected sir) I dare not tax
Especial favourites, of lice or pox,
Amongst whom you are the chief, but milky skin
That hath fair out-sides, may be foul within.
And I again do in despite aver,
'Voidance of lice from our nativity.
Reclaim then that aspersion (Lord) and know
I was not lousy, but like mid-night snow,
Pure, when thy self (now seeking to supplant)
Took me to rescue from the jaws of want:
I was not lousy (Lord) look big and burst,
I will maintain my credit, though accursed.
You were not lousy (knave) not ragged, no
Nor sick, I condescend; yet sirrah know
The plagues of Egypt all began to march
Full-mouth upon thee (like devou•ing dogs
Ready enough to rend a breathless Fox)
When I with noble pity being oppressed,
Flew forth like lightning to thy rescued life,
Which is indeed my proper donatiue.
Do not reply thou true insulting toad,
Squint-ey'd caitiff, you pernicious rat,
You gelded rascal, you most lousy rogue:
Do not reply, mad masti•e, do not swell,
And think (because you can discover well
My tricks of youth) to stop the fervent rage
Of our vn-tam'd affections; future age
Must, and shall, witness my fierce violence,
If thou discover but one syllable;
Nay, if thou entertain a piece of thought,
Which by vn-masking me doth hope revenge:
Swear, swear (you thick-lip'd rascal) kindly swear
Without compulsion, or base-minded fear,
To be like mid-night, as a sepulchre,
Dumb as a Turkish executioner,
Nay, as a marble statue, void of signs
Touching the substance of my secrecy.
Swear (slave) and think my soul a fury mad,
Able to force wide rupture through the face
Of threatening Horror to damage thee;
As to demand account of perjury.
Do not seem loath, expecting new delay;
For I can stab you (capon) to the quick,
Cut off your Eunuch-nose, then laugh and kick
Your lousy stinking neats-iowle to the dogs.
Without collusion I do strictly swear.
And think withal, I who have coin bestowed,
Clothes, and fair countenance, with store of meat,
Can also give sharpe sauce, which will procure
Digestion to the stomach, else (proud sir)
You will dis-gorge the vomit in my face;
If kindness do recoil, let fear take place:
I am your footstool, tread upon my teeth,
And so charm silence if you do mis-doubt.
No, but remember if you shall bewray
My dark designments, or use cheating play
In prosecution of my private cause,
(Hoping for payment from the Spartan laws)
Remember that thy life, and interest
Of being rich, both owe a special rent
With homage, and knight-seruice unto me,
Remember you do hold in Capite.
Cut then my servile tongue out of my head,
Slit my suspected organs, make me dumb,
Handles and sighlesse if you think me false,
For I must otherwise be false indeed:
Men that admonish to avoid some vice,
Must not inculcate motives more then thrice;
Pupils much tutored with Identity
Of reprehension, prove but spur-gall Jade;
Because they think the vicious estate
Of things habitual, doe argue fate,
Which to resist, they think impiety,
Exclude me therefore from society
Of human habitants, or leave to vex,
Which is a torment to all human sex.
I leave addition, but consider well,
You are as deep engaged almost as I;
Which depth, of both engagements, reach to hell,
If any (but our selves) the depth espy.
Sir, I have broke the Ice to Appetite,
And with a studied phrase did I begin,
Hoping to thaw the coldest frosty North
By representing multitude of fears.
And did she melt?
Yes melted into tears,
But was a stranger to my wanton tales:
She comes whom your hot love so close impales.
Wonder of women, pomp and pride of earth,
Whose woeful absence might make beauties dearth,
Goddess of loue-sick souls, thou glorious Nymph
Who might attract the Angels eyes to sin:
O thou beyond Amilcars county love,
(Because indeed a concubine for Jove),
Rob not the treasure of my souls delight,
Which lies imprisoned in aeternall night.
Did you for this (most lying impious man)
Pull me from refuge and protection safe?
Give me advice, in hope of due revenge,
To follow thee, forsake the Title Queen
Of Spirea, to become a Queen of Lust?
For this did you solicit (beastly Lord?)
And labour by this talking Eunuch-bawd,
To conquer chastity through faithless fraud?
For this did you obtest high oaths aboue
My poor conceit, to show dissembling love?
Let me again obtest the waking Gods,
Or (beyond them) your beauteous deity,
(Which to abuse, were wild impiety)
Thy glad fr••ition were a ransomed soul,
Or kingdoms conquest in my rich account
Of gloriou• beauty; giving more content
Then soul imagine, or great kingdoms may.
Wee call to •••ness thy imperious hate,
And do appeal to virtue of thy love,
(If hate and love may both together lodge)
Thy love surmounts my value, doth infuse
A sudden rapture to my longing soul,
Doth change dull nature, quicken up my brain,
Put a persume into my sordid breath,
And is indeed restorative to death.
If you intend a true religious love,
Profess it sir, without offence to Jove,
And so remember blessed nuptials;
For hee enjoys his fate and funerals,
Who sometime was Maenander, and my spouse;
Your self did seal his death by constant vows.
Speak then, and let thy answer be direct,
Or I shall think, religion you neglect.
O she hath given his fury a full stab,
My sweet-mouth'd Courtier swallows down a crab.
The Eel is in a sand-bagge, some good man
See how the mimic scrues an Alphabet
Of hungry faces, how the maggot crawls
To feed upon the kernel.
Who replies?
Again, again (for loves sake) spur the Jade:
Give him another pill, provoke the slave,
And make him spue his heart with madness; melt
His larded veins with striving to extend
A lousy answer; but the Idol speaks.
What makes Amilcar dumb with my request?
What makes thy trembling blood so pale and wanne,
Most like the colour of a dying man?
The sad remembrance of my foolish vow,
Vexes meek apprehension; yielding forth
In stead of answer, ambiguities.
Look for a subtle rare-compacted lye.
Madam, the vow mays me monastical,
I have protested a true single life,
Which did engender a Dilemma, long,
But religious indeed.
Ridiculous,
Indeed you are a Goat libidinous.
I never will be yoked, by consequence
No drawing beast, no big laborious ox,
I must not marry madame.
Must you then
(Because not marry, to avoid the ox)
Live like a noted and eggregious Ass?
Or like a Cammell, fierce with flaming lust?
Would you seduce my weaker innocence?
Seek to entrap my credulous conceit?
You must not marry; would you then defile
The modest thoughts of virgin-chastity?
Would you take licence from a single life,
To make each maid a whore, not being a wife?
I blush to view such wild affinity,
Betwixt a Goatish beard, and bearded men.
But be familiar (Madam) and re-call
I was a target once to thee condemned,
Both by Lucilla, and Pheudippe's doom;
Remember Madam, I did turn the edge
Of quick Lucilla's wrath upon her self,
Took thy confiscate beauty from the snare
Of imminent sub-version, drew thee out
As from a gulf which gaping, ready stood
To swallow down thy honour, sing thy hurt,
So change thy golden dignity to dirt.
I did (remember Madam) banish hate,
For I did wrestle with vp-rising fate.
You did enfranchise my condemned life,
You did return Lucilla's point of spleen
Upon her wicked bosom; whence it came;
You (sir) did manage my neglected cause,
Took my confiscate beauty from the snare
Of imminent sub-version; you did this;
You, you have been my target, you alone
D•ew my forgotten safety from the teeth
Of tugging•singers; you alone did this;
And did you this to amplify abuse?
Did you reserve my innocence for this?
For this did you protect my ignorance?
You kept my carcass from a rampant Woolfe,
To feed your tame, but hungry, Lyons whelp:
You did prevent a near captivity,
To make my thraldom be notorious;
You, from a guiltless danger, did redeem
My maiden thoughts, to make the danger, guilt;
Thou gau'st new being (about too fail before)
After which being, must I be thy whore?
Faith you have done a deed of charity,
Toke me by rescue, from death past the chin,
To rip my pregnant womb, and flea my skin.
But know (Amilcar) I am so resolved
Upon the spot-lesse love of chastity,
As I with proper violence will rend
My womb in pieces, tear my tempting face
And go beyond a women's forritude,
Rather then (like a Strumpet) prostitute.
(Queen) I contemn your points of chastity,
Laugh at such idle tricks to colour sin:
You are a captive in my custody,
Consider well the law of time and place
Be at my proper nod; if naked lust
Bribe me to some injustice, doe not blame
A smooth acceptance; for the frugal age
Wherein I live, doth bark aloud for fees
Which in themselves be bribes; if to the knees,
Or neck, some rascal knave be drenched in blood,
The scarlet can absolve a scarlet sin
And call deep slaughter a correctiue deed.
Then blame the bribes which did injustice feed,
Blame not the man (I pray;) so blame our lust
Not met Amilcar, if enjoy wee must.
Have you decreed some rauisher's attempt?
Will you determine to be violent?
A dead pale horror doth possess thy cheek
With repetition of the simple sound;
Thou violate a virgins chastity?
Can thou commit an odious rape, a sin
Of such high out-rage; yet look pale and de•d
Upon recital of the sin it self?
N•p me (good Gracchus) how? look pale and dead?
Fetch Aqua-fortis (Gracchus) stab my arm,
A shaking palsy doth oppress my heart;
How? pale, and dead?
(Wise woman) I adore
The quick invention, and if Gods agree
Will in despite of false-hood set her free.
O what damned terror to a wicked ma•
Be guilty thoughts, considering offence
(Fitly compared to prodigal expense:)
Nor may the valiant'st sinful youth alive
With resolution so in-wal'd appear
But his high heart will be below his fear.
Can you commit lewd rape (Amilcar?) no:
Ma••s, and chaste women need no more defence
For hot invasion except innocence,
Earnest resistance, by but one true maid,
Will make the fear ravisher afraid:
For if a virgin violate you see
She did in part deny, in part agree:
〈◊〉 resolution of a maidens hand,
Tall Gyant-letchers, cannot half with-stand.
Take her (good Gracchus) to your custody
Be thou my bawd, and purge Phlebotomy.
Our 〈…〉; the most valiant skull
〈…〉 Champion, truly doth possess
My 〈◊〉 square limbs; then (subjects) call,
〈◊〉 brave Aiax that renowned Peer
Aequall to Agamemnon, •ee presume
By our Tragoedians Art to Deify:
Lalio must Act Vlysses.
I agree.
Mantesio and Lucilla must like mutes
Expect upon my rage all counterfeit,
As did the savage throng that Aiax slew;
Robes shall not make a metamorphosis;
Wee may suppose you whom the Scoene requires
Some savage couple fit for Aiax wrath.
You may command vs.
but brave Messala
Acts Agamemnon.
Brother I am glad
To thank your aestimation of my parts
And I will strive to please you sir, though mad.
Bufo, Perillus, both be Chiefe-taines too,
Attentive to decide the argument
Of our contention, striving to deserve
The honour of Achilles after death.
Wee both be vassailes to your celsitude.
Each take his part and study to rehearse
〈…〉 may stumble at an easy verse.
Manander is a Delphic Oracle.
Be silent, leave this big Hyperbole,
And show thy breeding modest.
Sir I am
A Gallant, thanks to Tailors, and good clothes,
Yet keep no crafty Page to pick a purse:
Nor doe I often play the Sodomite,
Will, with a lively posture personate
The Scoene of Aiax, and enjoy our fate,
Enough, the solemn festival of joy
Which doth ensue, exacts your diligence,
To give some testimonial indeed
Of 〈◊〉 deservings: think me bountiful
If any Action in my troupe excel.
Fortune. I doe contemn thee; sirs advance
And in despite of death, use vigilance.
MAdam, all chaste desires be laudable,
But if you tempt a mischief merciless,
Such certain truths be doubtful to avoid;
And I prefer the public safety still
(Which wants you as a chief and moving wheel)
Before my simple damage, though the curse,
Railings, and wrath of my contemptuous Lord
Fall last upon me, like so many shaftes
Shot from heavens fabric by offended Jove:
Come therefore death, destruction, stabs or steel,
Come out-rage, madness, fierce amazing oaths,
Terror, and tortures come, what can betide,
You shall, unknown, by our advice escape
Least long exspectance doe incur the rape.
I much commend your zealous charity,
Yet I believe Amilcar cannot wrong
The harmel•sse meaning of our innocence:
Suppose I doe expect upon the rage
And lustful fury of that impious man,
Yet I presume the Gods will govern lust
And give such valour to a virtuous maid
As she may well in-counter Cannibals.
Why should Amilcar seem to conquer me?
Or why assault my noble chastity?
Secured hope, and heaven can witness too
I have no biting bosome-snake which gnaws
With greedy vulture-teeth and stinging jaws
Upon the precious comfort of my soul;
No second In-mate ready to control
Our quiet actions; no loud fearful sin
To stab me in the midst of honest mirth
And ouer-looke the music of my mind,
To make me start and rob me of content
No, no (good Gracchus) I am innocent,
And therefore not excluded from the help
Of heavens tuition; know I dare affront
Amilcar in the fury of his flames,
Rail at the stubborn youth, and make him melt
Eeu'n like a leaden statue, or indeed
Like some obdurate image carved of Ice,
Which through one blast of lightning doe despair
And from tall statues vanish into air:
I feel within me such true noble signs
Of earnest courage, as no female thought
Can (except pure and pious) well compare:
I am not valiant, like a drunken whore,
Romping by virtue of abused wine;
Not is my resolution desperate,
I am not fearless, to see fear abound
But innocence is resolutions ground.
Will you neglect my counsel to escape?
Will your deluded love to innocence
Not reckon means ordained for innocence?
Protection doth imply our vigilance,
Else virtue is reputed arrogance;
Honest and simple hearts alone deserve
That in extremity pure holiness
Should make means thrive, not without good means, bless.
(Madam) I swear they lack humanity
Who will teach men to tempt their destiny;
Believe it (Fauorina) I should fear
The doubtful mercy of a hungry Bear:
They who desire to feel the Lyons paw
May live in compass of the Lyons Cave;
I know good means, neglected, make a slave.
(Gracchus) I once again commend your zeal
Thank, and admit your love, which labours well
To win the height of our capacity:
But (Gracchus) tell me now, suppose I stay,
Suppose Amilcar doe continue still,
Like a wilde Satire, most libidinous;
Admit hee shall extend so far as rape
And by the ruin of our modest grace
Erect a shameful Priapus in place?
Tell me (good Gracchus) what rich victory
Can the fool boast of? what egregious act
Can hee ascribe to conquest of our sex?
Wee are alas like walls vn-fortified,
Or like a Castle made of March-pane walls
Easily subdued, without fierce ravishment.
Women were made to make rash men repent.
Shame to my fortunes, I did seek revenge
And sure the Gods will turn revenge on me;
Lucilla's death, the Kings Catastrophe
Might have been both avoided, if revenge
And malice had not been so force-able
To banish pity from our spiteful breast,
The want of which procured a funeral chest
To keep the cinders of a sleeping pair;
Which loss, no time can prove, no age repair:
Lucilla's death had my malicious doom
As Epitaph to dead Mananders Tomb;
The plaintiffs lye which proved Lucilla's death
Did like-wise rob Manander of his breath.
(Madam) you are deluded; I can give
A testimonial that both doe live.
Maenander live? and doth Lucilla live?
Speak it again, proclaim the news aloud
Let heaven and earth be witness to thy tale:
Speak it again (good Gracchus) give the Gods
Notice again of my certificate
Which makes me in a glorious estate:
Dance my dejected soul, sing merrily
Leap all my organs, I am innocent,
Gracchus will witness, I am innocent,
I did not kill Maenander, not accuse
My rival young Lucilla, no (good heaven)
Gracchus will witness I am innocent:
Lucilla lives, my best MENANDER lives,
Speak it again (good Gracchus.)
both do live.
Bear witness now; hark heaven, he said they live
Take special notice of his name and words
For hee is prompt enough to justify
Our depositions, neither will hee lye:
No, hoe's an honest, very honest man
Is called Gracchus so inscribe his name;
And set his certain testimonial
Upon record: Lucilla doth survive
And my Maenander hee is yet alive:
So saith good Gracchus, so inscribe the same.
Joy hath no passage through my ravished soul:
I did before put on a painted face
Forging false colour to my innocence
But now indeed am truly innocent:
Thou Gracchus be my judge, and heaven be judge
I am not now defiled with bloody thoughts
And fearful agues; thou be like-wise judge
That false Amilcar is a monstrous rag,
A youth ranke-rotten, before mellow-ripe:
Flye-blowne already as a carcass hot
Which hath no shelter from the dog-day Sun:
Beyond all virtues cunning to reclaim:
Goodness and reformation bee to him
Monsters in nature; and detested more,
Then of a Hermit is the common-whore.
Vices, like Maggots, creep on him so thick,
As who destroys the one, hee must not stick
To follow the sub-version of them both:
Of lewd Am••are and his lustful growth.
Who can escape the lime-twigs which are set
By loose affections to ensnare himself?
Man doth about him carry watchful foes
And must be careful to in-counter those;
For all without him, though by troops they come
Cannot offend, who is in peace at home:
Amilcar (Madam) is now riding post
Upon exact employments; his return
Is doubtful, therefore to avoid delay,
The love and duty of my zeal obey.
A friend in whom I claim full interest
Doth give attendance to accompany
Your Grace, till I can truss a farthel up
And follow.
What's thy friend'
A Fencer.
I am engaged upon fidelity
And must preserve you from hostility,
Eeu'n to the latest of a mortal life,
I will defend thee widow, maid, or wife.
My new redemption is a doubtful task,
You both doe promise more then I will ask:
And though my squint-ei'd fortune look askance
Yet heaven will succour my deliverance:
Which being once purchased, proud Amilcars lust
Shall vanish into Salamanders dust.
Put on the wings of speed; fly fast away
I follow (Madam) before peeping day.
Success attend her, till I soon dispatch
And speedily escape Amilcars rage:
Saddle my horse, and fetch my Caskets, hoe,
Servants make ready I must ride to Athens.
All men desirous to prevent quick fate
Scorn (aboue all things) to procrastinate:
Watch there without, like busy sentinels
And 〈◊〉 Lords return, see some fore-tels.—
Hee is returned already; doth approach,
Saith you may travail in his new Caroch.
Yes, to the devil; death! is hee returned?
I am undone, I am undone; (good genius)
Help me; (good Angels) be auspicious,
Or I shall perish past recovery:
Senge me some lightning, though in-visible;
O burn my bleeding heart; consume, consume!
Fly from my nostrils an infectious fume!
Stop all my organs, ô commiserate
The bad mis-fortune of a poor estate:
Hee comes, hee comes—
(Gracchus my dear) how dost?
What answer makes my Goddess? doth she melt?
Doth she recant and ask my pardon? speak.
No: I am troubled with a falling rheum.
Fetch forth Pigmalious Image, I will dote,
And so become Cupids Idolater:
Stay Gracchus, wee will both accompany
Her sacred passage to the public air:
What shaking palsy doth detain thy steps?
Where is the Queen? speak (trembling coward) speak.
She ouer-came me with incessant tears;
To those I yielded, ô forgive my fears.
Yielded? (base caitiff) be our hopes all dead?
My labour, lies, delusion, studied care,
All turned to smoke through yielding of a drudge?
All our engagements, my benevolence,
My proiects, aims, and large gratuities,
All come to this? the center of my thoughts,
My double tricks, and cunny-catching-slights,
All come to this? the rich faelicity
Whereon my faith was grounded, come to this?
Come ghastly horror to consummate all,
Add ruin like-wise to my wit-lesse fall.
O my loud curse! delusion was my bait
And I am now deluded; learning fails;
No new invented stratagem avails;
And virtue I am not acquainted with.
O you damned rogue, it is holiday at home,
You hope the Queen (sir) will advance you high,
And hope so still, but (very, very knave)
I will dis-ioint your elevated hopes;
And make you (sir) an Alcibiades:
The Queen departed?
Pity did prevail,
For she did weep, nor did of passion fail:
Her eyes (good Lady!) did with weeping smart,
Which made me give her licence to depart.
I am undone (you fragment) I'm undone,
I am detected, whither shall I run?
The harvest of my long laborious toil,
Now I have swam through death and swallowed fire.
Given doubtful fury a most brave repulse
Put back suspense, and all approaching fears
Almost concluded things impossible;
Made smooth my way, and tilted in the face
Of frowning mischief ready to take place;
Now, now is all subverted; I am lost
In a large Wood, a winding labyrinth:
I am excluded from all native power,
Am like the rubbish of a ruined Tower;
I am abused, I am to death betrayed,
By thee a doctor villain; not afraid
To swear me homage, and vn-lace my heart:
The blessings of your body, breath, and soul
Be so engaged, as their existence knows
Not one redeemer among all the Gods,
(Fabulous things to you) except my self;
Thus did you swear, and swore I gave thee life,
Nay did bestow a whole creations work
Upon thee offal-caitiffe, who adored
Impression of my footsteps that was all
Expecting hourly on the happy time
When I should dare command what you durst doe,
When with advantage, I would but pronounce
O Gracchus give me of thy blood an ounce:
Thus did you swear, you dog-day-villaine, thus;
And yet your actions bee malicious:
Teach me, some devil, to torment the rogue,
Else take the righteous rigour of his fault
In•• the depth of hells extremity;
Rescue, ô rescue this offending wretch
(Some powers aboue) from my most fatall-wrath,
For to afflict thee as the crime deserves
Would loose a double part in Paradise:
Yet must I punish thee (thou Spiders-gall)—
The to ade and spider cannot choose but brawl.
—I must (you creeping cur) and would refuse
Rather to be a God, then to forgive
A thing so capital; and thou escape;
But an arch-diuell would I ever bee
A fiend of horror beneath all degree,
Eat flames and brimstone to beget me fierce
That with astonished fury I might pierce
And split each sinew; fear thy plumpest vain,
So rack thy feeling with perpetual pain.
O feel compassion, for I do repent.
Repent? compassion? I would rather whip
My weakened carcass with a Scorpions tail;
Dwell in a nest of Adders, make them sting
Till patience could endure; then wash my wounds
With burning pitch and lamp-oile, bath in lead,
Or make a poultice of some swelling toad,
Rather then take one cruel thought from load.
Your menace and commotion do torment
Aboue all suffering; ô I will repent
Six thousand times a day; devour my flesh,
Feed upon frogs, or quaff down aconite,
Kiss and embrace, a fearful Succubus,
If you but leave to terrify me thus.
No (thievish tumbler) leave thy cheating tricks
And swear allegiance to some puny Lord,
Make those believe that lack intelligence,
For I am lashed with true experience:
Though on thy bosom thou would therefore crawl,
And, like a Serpent, live upon the dust:
Though by continual creeping thou did wear
Thy breast and belly, (so become submiss
In a most new degree) did like paths clean
Where I should walk, and scrape away the filth:
Employ each servile sinew to my ends,
Yet you and I must never more be friends.
Fill flat upon thy face (thou parricide)
Fall down as ready (captive) to abide
Our indignation, which in child-birth lies,
Big with a thousand swelling lunacies:
Expecting all to be delivered out,
And by vexation of thy falling strength,
To be an orb in breadth, an age in length:
Fall (thou condemned Shismaticke) and charm
The killing rage of my advanced arm;
For I shall prove so desperately mad
And full of rigour, in my sharpe revenge;
As to reuoule the terror of my doom
Phanfy doth tremble, but my rage makes room:
(Falie wretch) I must forget humanity,
And fall acquainted with some forest Woolfe;
Hee, and such bloody Tutors shall instruct
The shameless Art of savage cruelty,
To kill thee, and become exorbitant;
I will a•otto •ife thy limbs alive;
Will 〈◊〉 small gobbets of thy quaking flesh
And •eed my Hawk, while life continues fresh
Within the bloody morsel; make the sluice
To qu•for when they swallow down the juice:
The Turk shall teach me to extend some plague
Of most vn-suffering nature: till the day,
And thy blaspheming breath doe both decay.
But 〈…〉 •orrow seize me) what avails
This villains torture to my living woe?
For I (except I quickly be transformed
Into a Rat, a Hedge-hog, Lowfe, or To•de,
Some base and obscure animal) must feel
Torments more tedious then tongues may express,
A Equal to which is doubtful heaviness:
Nay. our attempts and high abuses done
Be of such horrid shape, such ample strain;
As to absolve them would require a Saint
With special pardon from almighty Jove:
Yes, though I should obtain that idle wish
Of transmigration; yet the shameful troupe
Of sins which we are my scarlet livery
Would follow fast, and (as Actions dogs)
Tear me to pieces, not remembering, once,
That I was moister of the family:
If, to become a new conformitant,
Implied a venial act; each virtuous thought
Should be my fellow: it is the fault of all,
Wee doe despair to stand, because we fall.
One maxim I retain by privilege;
Such secrets, they doe seldom thrive, nor can,
Where we depend upon the breath of man:
O had my drudge, my Vassal been but true,
And faithful to the fore-cast of my hopes,
I had been brave confederate of Kings,
Nay, might have called some Kings my feodars.
(O devil) had thou been to my desires
A sudden knave and dutiful enough:
But for a time had thou continued so
Until some limitation did expire
With such observance as rank devils use
Upon the precious mortgage of a soul
I had been ready to depart with all;
With pleasures, titles, all things, to enrich
Thy budding fortunes; all did I reserve
Till death determined my approaching fate,
Only to thee, then all, was consecrate,
By due surrender; but (young prodigal)
Your hopes and life (poor slave) be pawned to me
Whom no sworne-diuels Broker shall exceed
In scurvy usage, though my heart-strings bleed.
If no true mercy then may mitigate
Thy dull and stupid deafness. I do dare
The utmost of your frantic violence,
Cast all thy Adder-stings upon my heart;
Be thy conceited cramps more exquisite
Then is a terrible tormenting Bull;
Break forth (Hyena) get some peevish dwarf
To hack me down at leisure; till I stand
Like a Colossus, like a Cedar tall
And yet immovable with smarting wounds:
Stab me now (tyrant) or inflict full pain
Upon each noble joint and glorious vein,
Virtue shall keep me with a sacred charm
Against the strength of a stipendious arm:
The challenge of my cause being heard at large
All (to thy damage) would my griefs discharge:
Mock babes and children (sir) with rods in peace,
I did approve no true defence like this,
That I have done uprightly; knit your brow,
Swell with a crabbed face conformable,
Let your offended garbidge fry in steakes,
Truth will aver, and honest dealing speaks
That I have done uprightly; be ashamed
Of thy unjust revenge, and murder named.
Dare you then buzz (you beetle) and advance
Your voice to contradict superiors?
Proud slave come nearer; hee may live among rats,
Who will be daunted with a swarm of gnats,
Much less with one poor mushrump; petty sir
Pray leave to grumble, (you mad factious cur)
Torments shall mitigate and make you tame
Pains wo•s• then death, shall make thee deadly lame.
Do I deserve such pains? no fiery youth
I have done most uprightly, will discharge
A good officious part, if you proceed,
I will vn-maske your shameful tricks indeed.
A squib, a squib, crack, flash, and spit apace,
Break (my oxe-bladder) vanish into breath,
A scritch-owle bids thee sing before thy death,
Squeak our rare bag-pipe; flesh-flye buzz again,
Seem to insult with voice, (thou very sound)
Take thy last leave, bequeath short life to ground.
Hark how the monstrous whale doth roar aloud.
Presaging tempests (Pilot) in the straights.
No huge sea-wonder) I a sword-fish am,
Who will by virtue most upright and plain,
Sting thee, and thresh thee, till thou roar with pain:
Proud man, remember what thou well deserve,
Think who hath tempted royal chastity;
Who like a cheating thief did steal the Queen,
With lying vows, and studied shameless oaths,
Did play the Juggler; left the Kings high-way,
And went about to break enclosures: think
Who did excel in mischief, who did strive
To worship Devils, who did seek by Just,
And means new moulded, most inordinate,
To make a Heavenly Saint a Sodomite,
Compel pure thoughts to worship Priapus.
Think who protended to defile the Queen,
And did (aboue pretence) affirm the death
Of mad Maenander, the deluded King,
And vow Lucilla's death: observe young sir
The suitable description to the end;
And tell vs if it bee significant:
Or if the language be too blunt; observe;
Tell your opinion of the congruence,
And spew a whetstone up ever I proceed:
Think if I use (sir) an affected stile,
Think also of the strange absurdities,
Think who's the subject of my railing theme,
And when thou dost consider heavily
It is thy wicked self whereof I speak
And all uprightly spoken; you'll perceive
You want much leisure (friend) to punish me
For mischiefs nearer hand-doe threaten thee:
Except thou dost despair and hang thy self.
Impudent devil, did not hear the voice
Of threatening tortures; like so many toads,
Night-rauens, or scritch owls which together sing
Thy deaths decree, as a 〈◊〉 funeral dirge?
Repent, repent (slave) and consider well,
Who is now sailing to the gates of hell.
(Servants) come apprehend this Eunuch; hoe,
Reserve him till the rigour of my doom
Demands sharpe execution; tie the wretch
With loading manacles, and crucify
This false condemned railer fifty times,
Till with excess of pain the Traitor dies.
I cannot now with-stand hostility,
But follow death with such alacrity
As one resolved upon religious war,
Such deaths doe purchase a triumphal carre.
Unfold your Ensigns, beat your silent Drums,
Exchange (I say) their sable cognisance,
Adding a limitation to the fears
Of this great Captains death: exhausted tears
May m•ttigate compunction, not despair
A loss unmatched well worthy of repair.
Weeping should show our zeal, not once rapine
At Providence aboue, which is Divine.
But (Agamemnon) now the funeral rites
Be finished; new horror, new despights
Speak with a bloody accent: Aiax roars,
And like a tempest, or the Giants race,
Which lay encamped against the God-like face
Of great Olimpus, doth hee bellow forth
Bombast exclaims, and eals upon desert;
Give me (saith hee) that armour which is due,
And (as a trophy of eternal fame)
May stout Achilles, that most valiant man,
Survive in me: O thou vn-thankfull Greece,
(Helmets and lances bee my Orators)
Thou art indebted to my brave designs
Past restitution; let some Soldier speak,
And call thee Bankrupt; for I am abused:
Will you admit a rival then saith hee
In my magnanimous aims to conquer me?
Will you admit Vlysses?
They approach.
Shall every coward be competitor
With Princes of such potent fortitude,
Such high descent, such saintish pedigree
As Greece can tell I Aiax doe enjoy?
For Jove and all the Gods acknowledge me,
My arm hath whole share in the dust of Troy.
True (Aiax) true, take double share in dust,
But for Achilles now contend we must.
Contend with me? (thou creeping snail) with me?
Whom wrathful Hector on his Elephant,
Mounted like Neptune on the cursed waives,
Loath to encounter, did forsake the field;
Through his fair absence did the Troians yield.
But (Aiax) wise men know selfe-arrogance
Is still instructed sir to amplify.
Fie (prating coxcomb) what a senseless fool
A stupid wretch, and suffering Ass am I
To enter-change the air, and empty voice
With such a sheeps-head, a poor Ithacan?
(Aiax) Your Giant brags lack policy,
Strength wanting wisdom, argues ecstasy.
Give vs our lance and he•met, I consume
Till I have turned this coward into fume:
Fetch some offensive swords, and scimitars,
Iauelings and Curtaxe, I will crush this Ape,
And as a trophy wear his captive skin;
(The doubtful terror of my certain spoil
Which may affright, and make our foes recoil.)
What high renown or fame is to be had
By fighting with a Soldier who is mad?
O my forgotten fury swell apace,
And spit forth lightning in the cowards face,
Who hath no title to his bold pretence,
But a most a poor vn-tutor'd eloquence.
Aiax—
Be silent, Agamemnon speaks,
Hang taming fetters on your lofty frowns,
Compel thy wrath which is praedominant,
Force wilde affections (Aiax:) I profess.
Arax 〈◊〉 are too violent; leave rage,
And by appointment of my poor advice,
You (in this great assembly) shall recount
Your noble acts; which if they do amount
Beyond Vlysses memorable deeds,
The armour of Achilles then succeeds
To thee alone, made happy through desert,
Else to Vlysses shall the arms revert.
Then let me challenge some prerogative
From this forgotten place: laugh Iupiter,
And blame the stupid brains of this rude throng,
Which with unthankful eyes can here behold
The ships, the sands, the tattred sails and shore,
(All rescued vassailes of my venturous arm)
Yet make vs dead, and vain Vlysses warm;
Warm with the bounty which the frozen snake
Will but abuse (my Lords) and you mistake.
What man was hee took danger by the jaws?
Gave an assault of battery to the ribs
Of rampant Horror? hewed a passage out
From spoil and ruin, to reap victory?
Wrestled, and rescued Navies from the fire?
And did (for safety) senge his beard with flames?
Gave to triumphant Hector the repulse?
Quenched a combustion aequall in extremes
To burning Phaëton, and the torrid Zone?
What man was hee? No talking verbalised;
But I, eeu'n Aiax, with but half a fist:
Where was my smooth-tongu'd adversary then?
What hope had weak Vlysses to supply
A Captains part with schoole-boyes eloquence?
No (poor Vlysses) if thou apprehend
My vn-resisted victories aright;
If you conceive your disabilities,
Your inclinations natural, and raw,
Your lame, and halting courage in exploit;
Remembering sir with whom you do contend,
With me, with Aiax, whom no fears offend,
Then magnify your self, and think it praise,
Aboue thy merits, to confess, by drum,
By harp and sacke-but, that (though ouer-come)
Thou did yet strive with Aiax, and renounce
Each other title, which may well denounce
Thee indiscreet, and thy assumption proud;
Help me (dear Wisdom) to refrain, for I
Shall be transported into agony
By virtue of a sight so ominous,
So full of brazen impudence and fear,
As that proud linguist, my competitor.
Advance, advance, your melancholy brow,
Bend your attentive politicians ear
To that which heaven and I will asseucre,
You have been taught to dance, and turn the heel,
To run away betimes, and to forsake
Thy friend, nay soul, upon extremity.
Nestor, Tydides, both can well aver,
You lack the rules of doctrine militant;
All rescue is accounted heresy:
Which rule (if pity and compassion both
Were not my maxims friend) had cost your life.
I saw death's Sergeant ready to arrest
Thy pensive soul, when tumbling down to earth,
I threw my target on thy pallid hearse,
Drove back thy foes, and did thy soul reverse.
Will you (sir) walk unto the place again?
Go feign some foes approach, put fear enough,
And wounds on, for a shift, shrink up again,
And like the Tortorse vnder-creepe your shell;
So sir contend I pray, and stammer well:
Be wise (you mighty Captains) and collect
How Hector did the Trojan troops renew,
Amazing vaunt-guards with-a multitude
Of heathen Gods giving a bloody cause
Of quick despair to my Antagonist;
Nay to the valiant and provincial Dukes:
This dreadful man, this Hector (tossing souls
Like Gnats and Ants-egges down to Erebus)
I beat him grovelling, laid his limbs asleep;
And like a mountain from the firmament,
Down fell great Hector from his Elephant:
Let then a wreath of Ok impale my head,
And let Vlysses share with Diomed.
Mars be my aequall judge! what simple man
(Except in league with sottish ignorance)
Would (upon forfeit of his patrimony,
And stock of wisdom to debility)
Admit Vlysses my competitor
To strive in jest with Aiax? if desert
Shall in the vp-shot be praedominant,
Look on our out-sides, on our helmets look;
View each mans Beaver, Breast-plate, Sword and Lance,
Look on our out-sides hoe! consider well
And pause upon each target; give me leave,
To show the tokens of a Soldiers claim,
And to uncase a cowards infamy.
Mark but the difference betwixt our shields:
Mine (a true target) hath sustained whole groves
Of artificial timber, topped with steel,
I stood like Mars among my Trojan foes,
When all forsook me but my faithful targe,
It still continued, and did nobly keep,
My limbs exposed to danger of the field;
A Crocodile I think may covert sleep
Within the large wounds of my open shield:
Cast (I beseech) now half a pur-blinde look
Upon that thievish varlet; and his shield,
Observe how smooth and fair his night-caps be,
His helmets (Lords) I mean, observe his shield,
His Beaver trimmed twice twenty times a day;
His gauntlets, gorgets, and his gilded Arms,
All of a sweet complexion, sanguine sap,
As to encounter some fine Ladies lap:
Meaning to be a Champion of the smocks,
A gallant spruce young warrior indeed,
War shall press wives; for Soldiers do not bleed.
Account my phrase no ambiguity,
Vlysses sloth my words will verify:
I laugh most freely to imagine how
Effoeminate Vlysses will support
The massy fabric of Achiles arms,
If my deservings shall be robed and loose
That which I honour, and affection woos.
(Aiax) enough; Vlysses now begin:
Desire (alas) being not effectual
To raise from Cinders dead mortality,
And make a living heir indubitate,
Heaven saith, hee shall remain ambiguous,
Till you (great Judges) doe decide the strife,
And so restore Achilles unto life:
Which, because doubtful, I doe challenge grace
Of you my patrons, and this public place.
The bragging fellow Aiax doth derive
A long forgotten age from Telamon,
Striving to fetch a foolish argument
Of his renowned acts, from high descent,
If which dead picture of Kings pedigree,
Could but infuse a fortune competent,
And make that piercing wisdom of the soul
A thing entitled to inheritance,
I could produce a genealogy,
From sacred Jove, and subtle Mercury;
But, may the best of all my stratagems,
Which to thy sole advantage (happy Greece)
I have invented; may they perish all
When I assume the virtue of my sire,
As agent for my hope, and chief desire.
〈…〉 brave Achilles to the siege
When hee (••tain'd with fear of destiny)
Was eeu'n excluded in a female robe?
When hee forgot to be pontifical,
And was a true virago? did refuse
Both weapons, and each little sound of war?
I had a feeling of my countries cause,
And drew Achilles to the Trojan wars;
That mighty Captain of the Mermedons
I drew to battle, made him disobey
His mother-goddesse, to advance the state
Of weary toil, and trouble Pergamus:
I put his armour on; gave weapons too;
For what I gave (great Lords) I humbly woo.
Speak, did not I encounter Telephone?
Turn Thebes to ashes? conquer Tenedos?
Chryses, and Cello, Syron, Hector, Troy,
All do acknowledge me; my valiant arm,
My notable advice; all attribute
The shameless ruin of subverted Troy
To me, as author sole, and absolute
Of such a safety to the commonwealth;
Which, notwithstanding (fathers) I renounce,
And must acknowledge you the principals
Of an achievement so perspicuous:
And whatsoever the vain peoples voice,
Captains report, and painful Soldiers love,
Doth by mis-guided error give to me,
I render back with all humility.
To urge my own directions, and advice
In Architecture of that happy horse,
That fatal fabric (being so fresh in thought)
Were to condemn you (mindful country-men)
Of that which wisdom loathes, Ingratitude.
To reckon up Minerua's image, bought
With hazard of my breath, and precious limbs,
Wh•n wedging bars flew from the Iron gates,
And gave access unto that sacred spell,
Might argue a most false oblivion
In your quick wisdoms with strange impudence
In my most bold surmise. But (Mighties all)
May stupid Aiax his reproachful terms,
(Without each scruple to your judging ears)
Be twice retorted in his rotten teeth;
So hee may swallow down such base Rebukes,
And make amends to me: for let him know,
My suffering shoulders could sustain the load
Not of Achilles armour, but his lump
Of solid, brawny flesh, both legs and arms,
Nay the whole massy trunk trussed up in steel:
I (Aiax) I, that carcass once be-stridde,
Upon my shoulders took his heavy trunk
When death stood there, and in the midst of all
Carried Achilles to his funeral.
When after thousand sharpe calamities
Of war, of winter, famine, pestilence,
Of parching dog-daies, long and tedious,
Of tempest, thunder, much mortality,
After all these, and ten years doubtful siege,
When you forsook the Camp, did so recoil,
As almost scorning a recovery;
• charmed the top-mast, hauled you back to shore,
Converted all to conquest, which before
Did seem aboue my dull inventive brain,
Give me a •eed for ten years toil and pain.
Succ••d Vlysses, take thy rich desire.
Depth to my fortunes! shall Vlysses rob
My long d•s•ruings of so rich a claim?
I will increase the bargain, stay a while
Take my memento.
Sir, avoid his rage.
Dost fly from vengeance? whither can you fly?
Whither (thou shifting coward) to escape
The indignation of my doubtless wrath?
See how the lurking caitiff there doth hide
His Cuckow-bill; what fury could abstain?
Angels protect vs; help, we both are slain?
Defend it (fiction.)
Help it forward (faith)
And give some fee to Justice: (gallants) know,
Mischief to high extremes this pair did woo,
With false Pheudippe did conspire wee two.
Hark they confess what wonder did reveal,
Give your applause, and make a merry peal:
Call me not Aiax now, but Mercury,
Who could vn-tye a Tragic riddle thus;
Worthy to be esteemed miraculous.
Cannot you (sir) espy the honest man
(That noble Eunuch, my deliverer)
Good Gracchus coming yet?
(Dear Madame) no.
Indeed my fancy doth suggest new fear,
Seeming to tell me Gracchus is detained
By his Lords rage, who did (I doubt) return
Sooner then hee exspected; which despite
If I could well conjecture to bee true,
With wings of lightning I'd again go back
And bring my Eunuch from captivity.
Take then some officers to apprehend
The lustful traitor.
Such delay is long,
And my dear Eunuch may be dead alas
With tortures and extremity of pain,
Ever such late rescue doth advantage give,
To qualify his torment; hee, good man,
(Little affected with ensuing harm)
Bestowed upon me a deliverance,
Which is repaid (I fear), with bloody stripes:
Stay not my purpose; but give charity
A gentle freedom to deliver one
Who is my comfort; (friend) I will return:
And (let no living soul participate
Of what I say, except my self and air)
I will, through colour of a pious end,
Enjoy Amilcar, whom I did refuse:
For, to set free my Eunuch, will afford
A fine praetext, though I do prostitute;
Which I did eeu'n defer, expecting still
Upon each little sign of violence,
(The modest shadow of a secret whore)
So will I win what was half lost before.
Madam, you do protract the precious time,
Leave me, I will return.
The way's not far;
Walk on whilst I assemble Officers.
A needless caution, be content I pray
To take no care, save what I shall command;
Be not so dutiful aboue thy hire,
Bring me no water when I call for fire.
A riddle: so in safeties name walk on:
Yet seeing the woman will be obstinate,
I (to avoid suspicion) will go home,
Fetch neighbours, and encompass round the walls,
If Lords like out-lawes live, the kingdom falls.
When, when (ô Goddess) will thy anger leave
To punish nature, and afflict poor man,
Who was created to offensive sin?
The Soldiers awe, and common peoples rage,
Make civil customs be licentious;
Rapine, rude contracts, discord, enmity,
All take their essence from one ecstasy:
Maenander lives, the luckless cause of all;
His life alone procures the kingdoms fall:
The longer life, the loss more eminent:
Know (Lords) I am a witness ocular,
And may with privilege inform you both
Of a most new and fatal accident:
The King, Maenander, did produce a Scoene,
A Scoene of Ai•x, that unhappy play
(Pretending sport) became a Tragedy
For blood, and breath's efluxion: five deep wounds
(wearing Maenanders badge) at once deprived
The sister Royal, next allied, by law
Of birth, and native consanguinity,
From hope of all succession to the chair.
Lucilla dead?
With her Mantesio sleeps:
Each life was tributary to the rage
Of our mad King; but each accused it self
As privy, to that arch-conspiracy
So long forgotten; to Pheudippe's crime.
Concealed so long?
Who did discover it?
A question doubtful; but Maenander saith
An apparition did reveal the truth.
Shadows may walk indeed.
Impossible!
I am resolved against all argument;
I am incredulous; dead never walk.
Never the same, yet the similitude,
Who says again so, weel'e aver the lye;
What be no things of nature, I account
Fables.
You are not Metaphysical.
No sir: I think the age is giddy; death!
Can wee from ashes raise a second life?
The age is drunken sure.
A doting age.
The times are dizzy.
No man doth deny
A theme so irrepugnable and true:
Reasons own self will be our advocate
In proving what you speak; for punies know
The world's lame reuoluti'on hath been long,
And all partake of mundane giddiness:
The turning round of earth hath touched our brain;
The longer age, the more absurd and vain.
Age must decline, life's comfort will decay.
Though all things perish; let religion stay.
I have a thousand plagues in readiness,
Strappadoes, and empalements, pitch, and oise,
A Rack of Bow-strings, a tormenting Bull.
Hogs-heads with nails inuerted; furies whips,
And artificial pricks of Adders bone,
Which to behold, in practise on my slave,
Your Lady-ship is welcome; and approach
Most opportunely (Madam:) after all
When grief hath feared your eye-sight up; you shall
Then be dis-burthn'd of that chastity
Which is a trouble to your conscience:
I (Madam) will remove the dear suspense
Of question; whither you may prostitute,
And so resolve you a whore absolute:
(Se•uants) come cast my drudge upon the wheel;
Stand vp-right (rascal) stand sir, do not reel,
Take your last •eaue of standings say adieu
To ease; and as you leave pain, look for new.
O save my Eunuch, and I will submit
My whole revenue, life, and chastity
To your disposal.
President of shame!
Shoot (hell) a bon-fire of unbounded flame,
And may each heavenly star augment his light
To make this woman famous; may each night
Change foggy darkness to prodigious day,
And (by some sign) a subtle whore display
To be the miracle of monstrous age
Worthy of judgements quill, and natures stage.
Are you the vestal? that religious Nun,
Who speak no syllable but Innocence,
Sacred devotion, Virgin chastity?
Rail at our fleshly sins, concupisence,
Temptations actual, and yet embrace,
Nay, hug hells bosom? creep into the vice
(Which you would seem so lively to abhor)
Gaping at small occasion? (Madam) know
Affection is my servant, Will my slave,
Passion my drudge, Temptation is my page
And I more easily can command them all,
Then may a Turk his tugging Gally-slaue:
Know, I contemn that courteous venery
Which is afforded scot-free; such nice dames
Would seem to cover when they covet flames.
Of puddle-water no sick patient drinks;
A precious odour, cheaply valued, stinks.
And, that you may conceive how I esteem
Your beauty; thus will I deform—
O help.
Hark (neighbours) follow, force down locks &amp; bars,
Attach the Traitor,
Am I then betrayed?
Take up the Queen.
My wound's not mortal; stay
Release that Eunuch.
Keep the Traitor safe.
Con-vey him as an Idiot, or Drudge;
My Wrong may be accuser, Clerk, and Judge.
Tilt in my face (Euphorbus) and reclaim
The slight opinion of our Deity.
Tilt in our face (I say) and thence collect
If I be Harms; make some steady thrust,
And call me Sacred, Matchblesse, Mercury:
Believe it (youth) I will dis-ioine thy neck
And shoulders, if thou dost again deny
That I am Harms, Ioues Ambassador,
A winged, and im-penetrable God:
Tilt therefore in my face, tilt speedily;
Be thou conjured by laws of sanctity.
The fiend (sir) doth oppress my feeble arm.
(Caitiff) provoke not my offensive rage
Least I deprive thee of all future age.
Then I must kill thee (King.)
I am a God;
Translated by the voice of Parliament
Which sits aboue this cloudy firmament:
I am a God Euphorbus; am no King;
The Tawny-more, and Ethiop shall bring
Unto my Altars pleasant sacrifice,
Fresh Op•-balsum; Fawns of paradise;
Roe-buckes and balm to please our Deity.
Stab vs (thou Atheist) stab vs, and believe
That I am perfect shadow, am a God;
Thrust thy vn-willing Poniard through my ribs;
And thence perceive our full Divinity;
Avoid my wrath (I say) it is dangerous,
If you refuse, I am unmerciful.
Stand to thy fortune (God) my dagger comes:
Deep enough dig then: ô my small wound smarts
My breath is stopped, my God-like soul departs.
So: I now assume the intellectual robe
Of Reason; and relinquish Lunacy
Which idle scare brought me acquainted with:
And (as I hope) the understanding heads,
Which rule this Commonwealths society;
Will construe this an act of Piety.
Where is the King? I carry news of joy—
Where is the King? dead Fauorina lives.
Here lies the King who did enforce a death
Upon the peril of his Authors life,
If hee refused to execute his will.
Euphorbus then recovered?
Yes; for I
Did counterfeit a couz'ning lunacy.
Sparta behooves to'acknowledge thee her friend.
The sentence of Amilcar let's attend.
Long live the Queen.
Draw the damned villain forth,
And let him swallow sulphur; flaming pitch,
Or else be roasted pitiless alive.
O give me oil of Mandrakes, Poppy juice
Or poison of infected Hellebore.
Flea him, and make a trophy of his skin.
Cut off his members; bind and broil the slave.
Let him be quarterd.
To deceive all these
Were policy aboue the rules of Art:
I have concluded to prevent the shapes
Of torture; death by death alone escapes.
Save, save the Traitor, save him.
Hee is dead.
May then the Traitor sleep in tortures bed.
But may Maenanders dying soul ascend;
Whom for the safety of this Common-wealth,
I did restore to happiness and health.
Amazement of our age! wonder of time!
Touched with a feeling of my Countries good
I dipped my dagger in his royal blood,
By his own chief desire; so leave mad care,
Which my suspicion did assume through fear.
The Queen shall Crown thee.
So I leave the school
Of madness, to become mad fortunes fool.
Remove the Carcass of that slaughtered King.
Wee once obeyed him: after ecstasy
Let's therefore follow his dead obsequy.
(Nature) stand speech-lesse, for aboue thy part
With man prevails both Lunacy and Art.
Horror, affrightments, death, and anger fly,
Fly to the bottom of hells dark Abyss,
That heaven may smile upon the clouded earth
And all take notice wee are pacified:
Grim death triumphant, whose impaled brow
Can terrify the factious Kings below,
(Who when wee were incensed through blasphemy
Sent forth revenge to please our Deity)
Shall now enchain that mischief merciless,
And qualify revengeful greediness:
Discloud thy lustre (my new borrowed shine)
Scatter thy foggy damps which doe debar
My bounteous lamp of universal light:
Let exhalations give my honour place,
All stars attendant look earth in the face.
Gods cannot dwell in rage; though slimy man
If but ennobled by permissiue law,
Dares prosecute his vengeance to the death
Till hee extirpe a whole posterity:
Wee though immortal, though aboue best brains
To comprehend; though sole efficients,
Though every thing in essence, though divine,
Though Gods; (in which one syllable, the sum
Of every thing's involved) though Gods wee are,
Yet in compassion wee doe still accept
Those that profane our sacred holiness.
For; should the anger of Omnipotence
Punish man-kind so often, or so long
As their insatiate folly doth deserve,
Jove would be weary and the Gods aboue
Turn boiling wrath into abundant love.

AT the house of the most worcester∣thely
honoured preferrer and
grocer of all honourable Act∣once,
and virtues, (Sir Edward
Philips Knight, Master of the
Rolls) al the Performers and their Assistants
made their Rends vous, prepared to their
performance, and thus set forth.
Fifty Gentlemen, richly attired, and as gal∣lantly
mounted, with Foot-men particularly
attending, made the noble vant-guarde of
these Nuptial forces. Next (a fit distance
observed between them) marched a mock-Maske
of Baboons, attired like fantastical
Travellers, in Neapolitane suits, and great
ruffs, all horsed with Asses; and dwarf Pal∣fries,
with yellow foot-cloathes, and casting
Cockle-demois about, in curtsy, by way
of lardges; Torches boarn on either hand of
them; lighting their state as ridiculously,
as the rest Nobly. After them were sorted
two Cars Triumphal, adorned with great
Mask heads, Festones, scrolls, and an∣tick
leaves, every part enriched with silver and
gold. These were through-varied with dif∣ferent
invention, and in them advanced, the choice
Musicians of our Kingdom, six in
each; attired like Virginean Priests, by whom
the Sun is there adored; and therefore called
the Phoebades. Their Robes were tuckt up
before; strange Hoods of feathers, and scale∣lops
about their necks, and on their heads
turbans, stuck with several coloured fea∣theirs,
spotted with wings of Flies, of extraor∣denariate
bigness; like those of their country:
And about them marched two ranks of Tor∣ches.
Then rode the chief Mockers, in In∣dian
habits, all of a resemblance: the ground
cloth of silver, richly embroidered, with
golden Suns, and about every Sun, ran a
trail of gold, imitating Indian work,: their
bases of the same stuff and work, but betwixt
every pane of embroidery, went a row of
white Ostrich feathers, mingled with sprigs
of gold plate; under their breasts, they
wore bawdricks of gold, embroidered
high with purl, and about their necks,
Ruffs of feathers, spangled with pearl and
silver. On their heads high sprig'd-fea∣theirs,
compassed in Coronets, like the Verge∣neon
Princes they presented. Betwixt every
set of feathers, and about their brows, in
the vnder-part of their Coronets, shined
Suns of gold plate, sprinkled with pearl;
from whence sprung rays of the like plate,
that mixing with the motion of the fea∣theirs,
showed exceedingly delightful, and
gracious. Their legs were adorned, with
close long white silke-stockings: curious∣lie
embroidered with gold to the Mid∣leg.
And over these (being on horse back) they
drew grieves or buskins embroidered with
gould, &amp; interlaced with rewes of feathers; Al∣together
estrangfull, and Indian like.
In their Hands (set in several postures as they
rode) they brandished cane darts of the finest
gould. Their vizerds of olive colour; but
pleasingly visaged: their hair, black and
lardge, waving down to their shoulders.
Their Horse, for rich show, equalled the
Mockers them-selues; all their caparisons be∣ing
enchac't with suns of Gould and Or∣namentall
Jewels. To every one of which,
was tacked a Scarffing of Silver; that ran sin∣nuousely
in works over the whole compare∣son,
even to the dazzling of the admiring
spectators.
Their heads, no less gracefully and pro∣perly
decked with the like light skarffing that
hung about their ears wantonly dangling.
Every one of these horse, had two Moors,
attired like Indian slaves, that for state sided them;
with swelling wreaths of gould, and
watshed on their heads, which arose in all to
the number of a hundred.
The Torch-bearers habits were likewise of
the Indian garb, but more strauagant then
those of the Mockers; all showfully garnished
with seueral-hewd feathers. The humble va∣riety
whereof, stuck off the more amply, the
Mockers high beauties, shining in the habits
of themselves; and reflected in their kind,
a new and delightfully-varied radiance on
the beholders.
All these sustained torches of Virgin wax,
whose staves were great canes al over gilded;
And these (as the rest) had every Man his
Moore, attending his horse.
The Mockers, riding single; had every
Mocker, his Torch-bearer mounted before
him.
The last Chariot, which was most of all
adorned; had his whole frame filled with mole∣ded
work; mixed all with paintings, and
glittering scarffings of silver; over which was
cast a Canopy of gold, boarne up with an∣tick
figures, and all composed a la Grotesea.
Before this in the seat of it, as the Chario∣tere;
was advanced a strange person, and as
strangely habitat, half French, half Swiss;
his name Capriccio; wearing on his head a
pair of golden Bellows, a guilt spur in
one hand, and with the other managing
the reigns of the four Horses that drew
it:
On a seat of the same Chariot, a little
more elevate, sate Eunomia, the Virgin
Priest of the Goddess Honour, together with
Phemis, her Herald: The habit of her Priest,
was a Robe of white silk, gathered about the
neck; a pentacle of silvered stuff about her
shoulders, hanging foldedly down, both
before and behind.
A vestal veil on her head of Tiffany,
strip'twith silver, hanging with a train, to
the earth.
The Herald was attired in an Antique
Curace of silver stuff, with labells at the
wings and basses; a short gown of gould
stuff; with wide sleeves, cut in panes: A
wreath of gould on his head, and a Rod of
gould in his hand.
Highest of all in the most eminent seat
of the Triumphal sat, side to side, the coo∣lestiall
Goddess, Honour; and the earthy
Deity, Plutus; or Riches. His attire; a short
robe of gould, frindg'd; his wide sleeuesturn'd
up, and out-showd his naked arms: his
Head and Beard sprinkled with showrs of
gould: his Buskins, clinckant, as his other attire.
The Ornaments of Honour were these:
a rich full robe of blew silk girt about her,
a mantle of silver worn ouer-thwart, full ga∣thered,
and descending in folds behind: a
veil of netlawne, enbrodered with Ooze and
Spangled; her tresses in tucks, braided with
silver: The hinder part shadowing in waives
her shoulders.
These, thus particularly, and with pro∣pretty
adorned, were strongly attended
with a full Guard of two hundred Halbar∣diers:
two Marshals (being choice Gentle∣men,
of either house) Commaunder-like attired,
to and fro coursing, to keep all in
their orders.
A show at all parts so novel, conceitfull
and glorious, as hath not in this land, (to the
proper use and object it had porpos'd) been
ever before beheld. Nor did those honora∣ble
Inns of Court, at any time in that kind,
such acceptable service to the sacred Majesty
of this kingdom, nor were returned by ma∣ny
degrees, with so thrice gracious, and roy∣all
entertainment and honour. But, (as aboue
said) all these so marching to the Court at
White Hall, the King, Bride, &amp; Bridegroom,
with all the Lords of the most honoured privy
Council, and our chief Nobility, stood in the
Gallery before the Tilt-yeard, to behold their
arrival; who, for the more full satisfaction of
his Majesties view, made one turn about the
yard, and dismounted: being then honora∣bly
attended through the Gallery to a Cham∣ber
appointed, where they were to make rea∣die
for their performance in the Hall, &amp;c.
The King being come forth, the Ma∣skers
ascended unseen to their scoene. Then
for the works.
First there appeared at the lower end of the
Hall, an Artificial Rock, whose top was near
as high as the hall it self. This Rock, was in
the undermost part craggy, and full of hollow
places, in whose concaues were contrived, two
winding pair of stairs, by whose greases
the Persons aboue might make their descents,
and all the way be seen: all this Rock grew
by degrees up into a gold-colour; and was run
quite through, with veins of gold: On the
one side whereof, eminently raised on a fair
hill, was erected a silver Temple of an octane∣glee
figure, whose Pillars were of a composed
order, and bore up an Architraue, Freeze, and
Cornish: Over which stood a continued
Plinth; whereon were advanced Statues of
silver: Aboue this, was placed a bastard
Order of Architecture, wherein were keru'd
Compartements: In one of which was written
in great gold Capitalls, HONORIS FA∣NVM:
Aboue all, was a Coupolo, or Type,
which seemed to be scaled with silver Plates.
For finishing, of all, upon a Pedestal, was
fixed a round stone of silver, from which grew
a pair of golden wings, both feigned to bee
Fortunes: the round stone (when her feet trod
it) ever affirmed to be rolling; figuring her in∣constancy:
the golden wings, denoting those
nimble Powers, that pompously bear her a∣bout
the world; On that Temple (erected to
her daughter, Honour; and figuring this king∣dome)
put off by her, and fixed, for assured sign
she would never forsake it.
About this Temple, hung Festones wreathed
with silver from one Pillars head to another.
Besides, the Freeze was enriched with keruings,
all showing Greatness and Magnificence.
On the other side of the Rock,
grew a Grove, in whose utmost part appeared a vast,
withered, and hollow Tree, being the bare re∣ceptacle
of the Baboonerie.
These following should in duty have had
their proper places, after every fitted speech of
the Actors; but being prevented by the vnex∣pected
haste of the Printer, which he never let
me know, and never sending me a proof, till
he had past those speeches; I had no reason to
imagine hee could have been so forward. His
fault is therefore to be supplied by the observe∣tion,
and reference of the Reader, who will
easily perceive, where they were to bee inser∣ted.
After the speech of Plutus (who as you may
see after, first entered) the middle part of the
Rock began to move, and being come some
five paces up towards the King, it split in pee∣ces
with a great crack; and our brake Capriccio,
as before described. The pieces of the Rock
vanished and he spake as in his place.
At the singing of the first Song, full, which
was sung by the Virginian Priests; called the
Phoebades, to six Lutes (being used as an Or∣phean
virtue, for the state of the Mines op∣ning):
the upper part of the Rock was sudden∣lie
turned to a Cloud, discovering a rich and
refulgent Mine of gold; in which the twelve
Mockers were triumphantly seated: their
Torch-bearers attending before them. All
the lights being so ordered, that though none
were seen, yet had their lustre such virtue, that
by it, the least spangle or spark of the Mockers
rich habits, might with ease and clearness
be discerned as far off as the seat.
Over this golden Mine, in an Evening sky,
the ruddy Sun was seen ready to be set; and
behind the tops of certain white Cliffs, by
degrees descended, casting up a bank of
Clouds; in which, a while hee was hidden:
but then gloriously shining, gave that vsually-obseru'd
good Omen, of succeeding fair wea∣there.
Before he was fully set, the Phoebades (show∣ing
the custom of the Indians to adore the
Sun setting) began their observance with
the Song, to whose place, wee must refer
you for the manner and words; All the time
they were singing; the Torch-bearers hole∣ding
up their Torches to the Sun; to whom
the Priests themselves, and the rest, did as they
sung obeisance: Which was answred by other
Musique and voices, at the commandment
of Honour, with al'obseruances used to the King
&amp;c. As in the following places.
TO answer certain insolent objections made against
the length of my speeches, and narrations; being (for the
probability of all accidents, rising from the invention
of this Mask; and their application, to the persons, and ply∣ces:
for whom, and by whom it was presented) not conue∣nient,
but necessary; I am enforced to affirm this; That: as
there is no Poem nor Oration so general; but hath his one
particular proposition; Nor no river so extrauagantly am∣ple,
but hath his neuer-so-narrow fountain, worthy to be named;
so all these courtly, and honouring inventions (having
Poesy, and Oration in them, and a fountain, to be expressed,
from whence their Rivers flow) should expressiuely-arise;
out of the places, and persons for; and by whom they are
presented; without which limits, they are luxurious, and pain.
But what rules soever are set down, to any Art, or
Act (though, without their observation; No Art, nor Act, is true,
and worthy) yet are they nothing the more followed;
or those few that follow them credited. Every vulgarly-esteemd
upstart; dares break the dreadful dignity of an∣tient
and autenticall Poesy: and presume Luciforously, to
proclaim in place thereof, repugnant precepts of their own
span. Truth, and Worth, have no faces, to enamour the
Licentious, but vaine-glory, and humour. The same body:
the same beauty, a thousand men seeing: Only the man
whose blood is fitted, hath that which hee calls his soul,
enamourd. And this, out of infallible cause; for, men un∣derstand
not these of Maenander—est more∣bus
oportunitas
But the cause of all Men's being enamourd with Truth.
And of her slight respect, in others; is the divine Freedom;
one touching with his apprehensive finger, the other, passing.
The Hill of the Muses (which all men must clime in the
regular way, to Truth) is said of old, to be forcked. And the two points
of it, parting at the Top; are Insania, and, di∣uinus
furor. Insania, is that which every Ranck-brainde writer;
and judge of Poetical writing, is rapt withal;
when hee presumes either to write or censure the height
of Poesy; and that transports him with humour, vaine-glo∣rye
and pride, most profane and sacrilegious: when dive∣nus
furor; makes gentle, and noble, the never so truly in∣spired
writer—
And the mild beams of the most holy inflamer; easily,
and sweetly enter, with all understanding sharpness, the
soft, and sincerely humane; but with no Time; No Study;
No means under heaven: any arrogant, all-occupation
devourer (that will Chandler-like set up with all wares;
selling, Poesies Nectar and Ambrosia; as well as mustard, and
vinegar.) The chaste and restraind beams of humble truth
will ever enter; but only grase, and glance at them: and
the further fly them.
Rocks? Nothing but Rocks in
these masking deu•ces? Is Inuen∣tion
so poor she must needs e∣for
dwell amongst Rocks? But
it may worthily have chaunc'd (being so of∣ten
presented) that their vain Custom is
now become the necessary hand of heaven,
transforming into Rocks, some stony hear∣ted
Ladies, courted in former masks; for
whose loves, some of their repulsed servants
have perished: or perhaps some of my flin∣tie-hearted
Usurers have been here meta∣morphosed;
betwixt whom and Ladies,
there is resemblance enough: Ladies using
to take interest, besides their principal, as
much as Usurers. See, it is so; and now is the
time of restoring them to their natural
shapes: It moves, opens, excellent! This
metamorphosis I intend to ouek-heare.
HOw hard this world is to a man of wit?
hee must eat through many Rocks
for his food, or fast; a restless and tor∣menting
stone, his wit is to him: the very
stone of Sisyphus in hell; nay, the Philoso∣phers
stone, makes not a man more wret∣ched:
A man must be a second Proteus, and
turn himself into all shapes (like Vlisses) to
wind through the straits of this pinching
vale of misery; I have turned my self into
a Tailor, a Man, a Gentleman, a Noble∣man, a Worthy
man; but had never the
wit to turn my self into an Alder-man.
There are many shapes to perish in, but
one to live in, and tha's an Aldermans:
Tic not for a man of wit to take any rich Fi∣gure
upon him: your bold, proud, igno∣rant,
that's brave and clinkant, that finds
crowns put into his shoes every morning
by the Fairies and will never tell; whose
Wit is humour, whose Judgment is fashion,
whose Pride is emptiness, Birth his full
man, that is in all things something, in Sum total,
nothing. He shall live in the land of
Spruce, milk and honey flowing into his
mouth sleeping.
This is no transformation, but an intrusi∣on
into my golden mines: I will hear him-further.
This breach of Rocks I have made, in
needy pursuit of the blind Deity, Riches:
who is miraculously arrived here. For (ac∣cording
to our rare men of wit) heaven stan∣ding,
and earth moving, her motion (being
circular) hath brought one of the most re∣mote
parts of the world, to touch at this all-exceeding
Island: which a man of wit would
imagine must needs move circularly with
the rest of the world, and so ever maintain
an equal distance. But, Poets (our chief men
of wit) answer that point directly; most in∣geniously
affirming: That this Isle is (for the
excellence of it) divided from the world (di∣uisus
ab orb Britannus) and that though the
whole World besides moves; yet this Isle
stands fixed on her own feet, and defies the
Worlds mutability, which this rare accident
of the arrival of Riches, in one of his fur∣thest-off-scituate
dominions, most demon∣stratiuely
proves.
This is a man of wit indeed, and knows
of all our arrivals.
With this dull Deity Riches, a rich Island
lying in the South-sea, called Poeana, (of the
Poeans (or songs) sung to the Sun, whom they
there adore (being for strength and riches,
called the Nauill of that South-sea) is by
earths round motion moved near this Brit∣tan
Shore. In which Island (being yet in
command of the Virginian continent.) A
troupe of the noblest Virginians inhabiting;
attended hither the God of Riches, all tri∣umphantly
shining in a Mine of gould. For
hearing of the most royal solemnity, of these
sacred Nuptials; they crossed the Ocean in
their honour, and are here arrived. A poor
snatch at some of the golden Ore, that the
feet of riches have turned up as he trod here,
my poor hand hath purchased; and hope the
Remainder of a greater work, will be short∣lie
extant.
You Sir, that are meshing about my goul∣den
Mines here.
What, can you see Sir? you have hereto∣fore
been presented blind: like your Mo∣there
Fortune; and your Brother Love.
But now Sir, you see I see.
By what good means, I beseech you Sir.
That means, I may vouchsafe you here∣after;
mean space, what are you?
I am Sir a kind of Man; A Man of wit:
with whom your worship has nothing to do
I think.
No Sir, nor will have any thing to doe
with him: A Man of wit? whats that? A
Beggar.
And yet no Devil Sir.
As I am, you mean.
Indeed sir your Kingdom is under the
Earth.
That's true; for Riches is the Atlas that
holds it up, it would sink else.
Tic rather a wonder, it sinks not with you
Sir, you're so sinfully, and damnably heavy.
Sinful? and damnable? what a Puritan?
These Bellows you wear on your head,
show with what matter your brain is puffed
up Sir: A Religion-forger I see you are, and
presume of inspiration from these Bellows;
with which ye study to blow up the settled
governments of kingdoms.
Your worship knocks at a wrong door
Sir, I dwell far from the person you speak
of.
What may you be then, being a man of
wit? a Buffon, a Easter. Before I would take
upon me the title of a man of wit, and bee
baffled by every man of wisdom for a Buf∣fon;
I would turn Banckrout, or let up
a Tobacco shop, change cloaks with an Al∣chemist,
or serve an Usurer, bee a watering
pot for every Groom; stand the push of
e∣very rascal wit; enter lifts of jests with tren∣cher-fooles,
and bee foold down by them, or (which is worse) put them down in foo∣ling:
are these the qualities a man of wit
should run proud of?
Your worship I see has obtained wit, with
sight, which I hope yet my poor wit will well
be able to answer; for touching my jesting, I
have heard of some Courtiers, that have run
themselves out of their states with Iusting;
and why may not I then raise my self in the
State with jesting? An honest Shoemaker,
(in in a liberal Kings time) was knighted for
making a clean boot, and is it impossible,
that I for breaking a clean Jest, should bee
advanced in Court, or Counsel? or at least,
served out for an Ambassador to a dull Cli∣mate?
Jests, and Merriments are but wild
weeds in a rank soil, which being well ma∣nured,
yield the wholesome crop of wisdom
and discretion at time ath'yeare.
Nay, nay, I commend thy judgment for
cutting thy cote so just to the breadth of thy
shoulders; he that cannot be a courser in the
field, let him learn to play the Iack-an-Apes
in the Chamber, hee that cannot personate
the wise-man well amongst wizards, let him
learn to play the fool well amongst diz∣zards.
Tic passing miraculous, that your dull and
blind worship should so suddenly turn both
sightfull, and witfull.
The Riddle of that miracle, I may chance
dissolve to you in sequel; mean time, what
name sustain'st thou? and what toys are these
thou bear so phantastically about thee?
These, toys Sir, are the Ensigns that dis∣cover
my name and quality: my name be∣ing
Capriccio, and I wear these Bellows on
my head, to show I can pusse up with glory
all those that affect me: and besides, bear
this spur, to show I can spur gall, even the best
that contemn me.
A dangerous fellow, But what make
thou (poor man of wit) at these pompous
Nuptials;
Sir, I come hither with a charge; To doe
these Nuptials, I hope, very acceptable ser∣vice;
And my charge is; A company of ac∣complisht
Travellers; that are excellent at
Antemaskes; and will tender a taste of their
quality, if your worship please.
Excellent well pleased; of what virtue are
they besides.
Passing grave Sir, yet exceeding acute:
witty, yet not ridiculous; never laugh at their
own jests: laborious yet not base, having cut
out the skirts of the whole world, in amorous
quest of your gould and silver.
They shall have enough; cal them: I beseech
thee call them: how far hence abide they?
Sir (being by another eminent quality the
admired soldiers of the world) in contempt
of softness, and delicacy, they lie on the na∣turally
hard boards of that naked tree; and
will your worship assure them rewards fit for
persons of their freight.
Dost thou doubt my reward being plea∣sed?
I know Sir, a man may sooner win your
reward, for pleasing you, thē deserving you.
But you great wise persons, have a fetch of
State; to employ with countenance, and en∣couragement,
but reward with answer and disgrace, save your purposes, and lose your
honours.
To assure thee of reward, I will now sa∣tisfie
thee touching the miraculous cause,
both of my sight and wit, and which
consequently moves me to humanity, and
bounty; And all is, only this; my late be∣ing
in love, with the lovely Goddess
Honour.
If your Worship love Honour, indeed, Sir
you must needs be bountiful. But where is
the rare Goddess you speak of to be seen?
In that Rich Temple, where Fortune fixed
those her golden wings, thou see; And
that rolling stone she used to tread upon, for
sign she would never for-sake this King∣dome;
There is adored, the worthy Goddess
Honour. The sweetness of whose voice, when
I first heard her persuasions, both to my self,
and the Virginian Princes arrived here, to doe
honour and homage, to these heavenly Nup∣teals,
so most powerfully enamoured me,
that the fire of my love flew up to the sight
of mine eyes: that have lighted within me
a whole firmament of Bounty, which may
semingly assure the, thy reward is certain: &amp;
therefore call thy accomplished company to
their Antemaske.
See Sir, The time, set for their appearance,
being expired; they appear to their service
of them-selues.
Gramercy now Capriccio, take thy men of
complement, and travail with them to o∣there
marriages. My Riches to thy Wit; they
will get something some-where.
Whats this?
A strain of Wit beyond a Man of Wit.
I have employed you, and the grace of that,
is reward enough; hence; pack, with your
complemental Farthel: The sight of an atten∣dant
for reward, is abominable in the eyes of
a turne-seru'd Politician, and I fear, will
strike me blind again. I can not abide these
bellows of thy head, they and thy men of
wit have melted my Mines with them, and
consumed me, yet take thy life and be gone.
Neptune let thy predecessor, Vlysses, live after
all his slain companions, but to make him
die more miserably living; gave him up to
ship wrecks, enchantments; men of wit are
but enchanted, there is no such thing as wit
in this world. So, take a tree, inure thy soul∣diers
to hardness, tic honourable, though not
clinkant.
Can this be possible?
Alas! poor man of wit, how want of re∣ward
daunts thy virtue? But because I must
send none away discontented, from these all-pleasing
Nuptials; take this wedge of gold,
and wedge thy self into the world with it, re∣nouncing
that loose wit of thine, t'will spoil
thy complexion.
Honour, and all Argus eyes, to Earths all-commaunding
Riches. Pluto etiam cadet
Iupiter
These humble objects can no high eyes draw,
Eunomia? (or the sacred power of Law)
Daughter of Jove, and Goddess Honours Priest;
Appear to Plutus, and his love assist.
What would the god of Riches?
Join with Honour:
In purposed grace of these great Nuptials;
And since to Honour none should dare access,
But helped by virtues hand (thy self, chaste Love
Being Virtues Rule, and her directfull light)
Help me to th'honor of her speech and sight.
Thy will shall straight be honoured; all that seek
Access to Honour, by clear virtues beam,
Her grace prevents their pains, and comes to them.
Crown of all merit, Goddess, and my Love;
Tic now high time, that th'end for which we come
Should be endeavoured in our utmost right,
Done to the sweetness of this Nuptial night.
Plutus? The Princes of the Virgin land,
Whom I made cross the Briton Ocean
To this most famed Isle, of all the world,
To do due homage to the sacred Nuptials
Of Law, and Virtue, celebrated here,
By this Hour of the holy Even I know,
Are ready to perform the rites they owe
To setting Phoebus; which (for greater State
To their appearance) their first act aduances.
And with songs Ushers their succeeding dances,
Herald! give summons to the Virgin Knights,
No longer to delay their purposed Rites.
Knights of the Virgin Land, whom beauties lights
Would glorify with their inflaming sights;
Keep now obscured no more your fair intent,
To add your Beams to this nights ornament,
The golden-winged Hour strikes now a Plain,
And calls out all the pomp ye entertain;
The Princely Bridegroom, and the Brides bright eyes,
Sparkle with grace to your discoveries.
Op Earth thy womb of gold,
Show Heaven thy cope of stars.
All glad Aspects unfold,
Shine out, and clear our Cares:
Kiss Heaven and Earth, and so combine
In all mixed joy our Nuptial Twine.
Se now the setting Sun, casts up his bank,
And shows his bright head at his Seas repair,
For sign that all days future shall be fair.
May he that rules the nights &amp; days confirm it.
Behold the Suns fair Priests the Phaebades,
Their evening service in an Hymn address
To Phoebus setting; which we now shall hear,
And see the forms of their devotions there.
Descend (fair Sun) and sweetly rest,
In Tithes Crystal arms, thy toil,
Fall burning on her Marble breast,
And make with Love her billows boyle.
Blow blow, sweet winds, O blow away,
Al vapours from the fined ayre:
That to this golden head no Ray,
May languish with the least impair.
Dance Tithes, and thy loves red beams,
Embrace with Joy he now discends:
Burns burns with love to drink thy streams,
and on him endless youth attends.
This superstitious Hymn, sung to the Sun,
Let vs encounter with fit duties done
To our clear Phoebus; whose true piety,
Enjoys from heaven an earthly deity.
Rise, rise O Phoebus, ever rise,
descend not to th'inconstant stream,
But grace with endless light, our skies,
to thee that Sun is but a beam.
Dance Ladies in our Suns bright rays,
in which the Bride and Bridegroom shine:
Clear sable night with your eyes days,
and set firm lights on Hymens shrine.
O may our Sun not set before,
he sees his endless seed arise:
And deck his triple crowned shore,
with springs of humane Deities.
1. Set Set (great Sun) our rising love
shall ever celebrate thy grace:
Whom entering the high court of Jove,
each God greetes rising from his place.
2. When thow thy silver bow dost bend,
all start aside and dread thy draughts:
How can we thee enough commend,
commanding all worlds with the shafts?
Blessed was thy mother bearing thee,
and Phoebe that delights in darts:
Thou artful Songs dost set; and she
winds horns, loves hounds, &amp; high pallmd harts
Again our Musique and conclude this Song,
To him, to whom all Phoebus beams belong:
1 Rise still (clear Sun) and never set,
but be to Earth her only light:
All other Kings in thy beams met,
are clouds and dark effects of night.
As when the Rosie Morn doth rise,
Like Mists, all give thy wisdom way;
A learned King, is, as in skies,
To poor dim stars, the flaming day▪
Blessed was thy Mother, bearing Thee,
Thee only Relic of her Race,
Made by thy virtues beams a Tree,
Whose arms shall all the Earth embrace.
Virginian Princes, ye must now renounce
Your superstitious worship of these Suns,
Subject to cloudy darknings and descents,
And of your sweet devotions, turn the events
To this our Briton Phoebus, whose bright sky
(Enlightened with a Christian Piety)
Is never subject to black Errors night,
And hath already offered heavens true light,
To your dark Region, which acknowledge now;
Descend, and to him all your homage vow.
Musiquely our voices, now tune sweet and hie,
And singe the Nuptial Hymn of Love, and Beauty.
Twins, as of one age, so to one desire
May both their bloods give, an vnparted fire.
And as those twins that Fame gives all her prise,
Combined their lifes power in such Symphathies;
That one being merry; mirth the other graced:
If one felt sorrow, the other grief embraced.
If one were healthful; Health the other pleased:
If one were sick: the other was diseasd;
And all ways joined in such a constant troth
That one like cause had like effect in both,
So may these Nuptial Twynnes, their whole lives store,
Spend in such even parts, never grieving more,
Then may the more set off their joys divine;
As after clouds, the Sun, doth clearest shine.
Bright Panthaea borne to Pan,
Of the Noblest Race of Man,
Her white hand to Eros giving,
With a kiss, joined Heaven to Earth
And begot so fair a birth,
As yet never graced the living.
ATwinne that all worlds did adorn,
For so were Love and Beauty borne.
Both so loved, they did contend
Which the other should transcend,
Doing either, grace, and kindness;
Love from Beauty did remove,
Lightness called her stain in love,
Beauty took from Love his blindness.
Love sparks made flames in Beauties sky,
And Beauty blew up Love as hie.
Virtue then comixed her fire;
To which Bounty did aspire,
Innocence a Crown conferring;
Mine, and Thine, were then vnusde,
All things common: Nought abused,
Freely earth her frutage bearing.
Nought then was cared for, that could fade,
And thus the golden world was made.
Now may the blessings of the golden age,
Swim in these Nuptials, even to holy rage,
A Hymn to Sleep prefer, and all the joys
That in his Empire are of dearest choice,
Betwixt his golden slumbers ever flow,
In these; And Theirs, in Springs as endless grow.
Now sleep, bind fast, the flood of Ayre,
strike all things dumb and deaf,
And, to disturb our Nuptial pair,
Let stir no Aspen leaf.
Send flocks of golden Dreams
That all true joys presage,
Bring, in thy oily streams,
The milk and honey Age.
Now close the world-round sphere of bliss,
And fill it with a heavenly kiss.
Come Virgin Knights, the homage ye have done,
To Love and Beauty, and our Briton Sun,
Kind Honour, will requite with holy feasts
In her fair Temple; and her loved Guests,
Gives me the grace t•inuit, when she and I
(Honour and Riches) will eternally
A league in favour of this night combine,
In which Loves second hallowed Tapers shine;
Whose Joys, may Heaven &amp; Earth as highly please
As those two nights that got great Hercules.

SIr i'm no Boy, i'm deep in one and twenty,
The second yeare's approaching.
A fine time
For a youth to live by his wits then I should think,
If ever he mean to make account of any.
Wits Sir?
I wits Sir, if it be so strange to thee,
I'm sorry I spent that time to get a Fool,
I might have employed my pains a great deal better;
Thou know all that I have I ha got by my wits,
And yet to see how urgent thou art too;
It grieves me thou art so degenerate
To trouble me for means, I never offered it:
My Parents from a Schoole-boy, past nineteen once,
See what these times are grown too, before twenty
I rushed into the world, which is indeed
Much like the Art of Swimming, he that will attain to it
Must fall plump, and duck himself at first,
And that will make him hardy and adventurous,
And not stand putting in one foot and shiver,
And then draw tother after, like a quake-buttock;
Well he may make a peddler in the world,
From hand to mouth, but never a brave swimmer,
Borne up by the chin as I bore up my self▪
With my strong industry that never failed me;
For he that lies borne up with Patrimonies,
Looks like a long great Ass that swims with bladders,
Come but one prick of adverse fortune to him
He sinks, because he never tried to swim
When wit plays with the billows that choackt him.
Why is it not a fashion for a Father Sir,
Out of his yearly thousands, to allow
His only son a competent brace of hundreds,
Or such a toy?
Yes, if he mean to spoil him,
Or mar his wits he may, but never I
This is my humour Sir, which you'll find constant;
I love wit so well because I lived by it,
That isle give no man power out of my means to hurt it,
And that's a kind of gratitude to my rayser,
Which great ones oft forget; I admire much
This Ages dullness, when I scarce writ man,
The first degree that ever I took in thriving,
I lay intelligencer close for winching,
Could give this Lord or Knight a true Certificate
Of all the Maiden-heads extant, how many lay
Amongst Chamber-maids, how many amongst Exchange Wenches,
Though never many there I must confess,
They have a trick to utter ware so fast;
I knew which Lady had a mind to fall,
Which Gentlewoman new divorc'st, which Trades-man breaking,
The price of every sinner to a hair,
And where to raise each price; which were the Tearmers
That would give Velvet Petty-coates, Tissue Gowns,
Which Pieces, Angels, Suppers, and Half crowns;
I knew how to match and make my market,
Could give intelligence where the Pox lay ledger,
And then to see the Lechers shift a point,
It was sport and profit too; how they would shun
Their adored Mistress chambers, and run fearfully,
Like Rats from burning houses, so brought I
My Clients a the game still safe together,
And noble Gamesters loved me, and I felt it:
Give me a man that lives by his wits say I,
And never left a Great, there's the true Gallant.
When I grew somewhat purse, I grew then
In men's opinions too, and confidences,
They put things called Executorships upon me,
The charge of Orphans, little senseless creatures,
Whom in their Childe-hoods I bound forth to Felt-makers,
To make 'em lose and work away their Gentry,
Disguise their tender natures with hard custom,
So wrought 'em out in time, there I rise ungently,
Nor do I fear to discourse this unto thee,
I'm armed at all points against treachery,
I hold my humour firm, if I can see thee thrive by
Thy wits while I live, I shall have the more courage
To trust thee with my Lands when I dye; if not,
The next best wit I can hear of carries 'em:
For since in my time and knowledge so many rich I will∣drone
Of the City conclude in beggary, i'd rather
Make a wise stranger my Executor, then a foolish
Son my Heir, and to have my Lands called after my
Wit, thou after my name; and that's my nature.
It is a strange harsh one, must I still shift then?
I come brave cheats, once to my trade again,
And i'll ply't harder now then ever I did for it,
You'll part with nothing then, Sir?
Not a jot Sir.
If I should ask you blessing ever I go Sir,
I think you would not give it me.
Let me but hear thou liv'st by thy wits once
Thou shalt have any thing, you're none of mine else,
Then why should I take care for thee?
'Thanke your bounty. 
So wealth love me, and long life, I beseech it,
As I do love the man that lives by his wits,
He comes so near my nature; i'm grown old now,
And even arrived at my last cheat I fear me,
But twill make shift to bury me, by day-light too,
And discharge all my Legacies, it is so wealthy,
And never trouble any Interest money:
Iv'e yet a Niece to wed, over whose steps
I have plac'st a trusty watchful Gardinesse,
For fear some poor Earl steal her, 't has bin threatened
To redeem mortgaged Land, but he shall miss on it;
To prevent which, I have sought out a match for her,
Fop of Fop-hall, he writes himself, I take it,
The ancient, st Fop in England, with whom i'm privately
Compounded for the third part of her Portion,
And she seems pleased, so two parts rest with me,
Hoe's come; Sir Gregory, welcome, what's he Sir?
Young Cunningham, a Norfolk Gentleman,
One that has lived upon the Fops, my kindred,
Ever since my remembrance; hoe's a wit indeed,
And we all strive to have him, nay, it is certain
Some of our name has gone to Law for him;
Now it is my turn to keep him, and indeed
Hoe's plaguy chargeable as all your wit, are,
But I will give him over when I list,
I ha used wits so before.
Hope when you're married Sir you'll shake him off.
Why what do you take me to be, old Father i'Law that shall be, do you think isle have any of the Wits hang upon no after I am married once? none of my kindred ever had before me; but whore's this Niece? first a fashion in London to marry a woman and never see her?
Excuse the niceness Sir, that care's your friend,
Perhaps had she Been seen, you had never seen her;
There's many a spent-thing called an't like your honour,
That lies in wait for her at first snap, she's a Countess,
Drawn with six Mares through Fleet-streete, and a Coach-man,
Sitting Bare-headed to their Flaunders buttocks,
This whets him on.
Pray let's clap up the business Sir,
I long to see her, are you sure you have her,
Is she not there already? Hark, O hark.
How now, what's that Sir?
Every Carriage goes by,
Goes even to the heart of me.
Isle have that doubt eased Sir,
Instantly cased, Sir Gregory, and now I think on it
A toy comes in my mind, seeing your friend there,
We'll have a little sport, give you but way to it,
And put a trick upon her, I love wit pretiously,
You shall not be seen yet, we'll stale your friend first,
If it please but him to stand for the Anti-maske.
Puh, he shall stand for any thing, why his supper
Lies in my breeches here, isle make him fast else.
Then come you forth more unexpectedly
The Mask it self, a thousand a year jointure,
The cloud your friend will be then drawn away,
And only you the beauty of the Play.
For Red and Black Isle put down all your Fuller
Let but your Niece bring White, and we have three Colours. 
I'm given to understand you are a Wit Sir.
I'm one that Fortune shows small favour to Sir.
Why there you conclude it, whether you will or no Sir;
To tell you truth, i'm taken with a wit.
Fowlers catch Woodcocks so, let not them know so much,
A Pestilence mozart, a Duke Humphrey spark
Had rather lose his Dinner then his Jest,
I say, I love a wit the best of all things.
always except your self.
Has gin't me twice now,
All with a breath, I thank him; but that I love a wit
I should be heartily angry; cuds, my Niece,
You know the business with her,
With a woman?
It is even the very same it was i'm sure
Five thousand years a go, no fool can miss it.
This is the Gentleman I promised Niece,
To present to your affection.
'Ware that Arrow.
Deliver me the truth now of your liking.
I'm spoiled already, that such poor lean Game
Should be found out as I am.
Go set too her Sir—ha, ha, ha.
How noble is this virtue in you Lady,
Your eye may seem to commit thousand slaughters
On your dull servants, which truly tasted
Conclude all in comforts.
Puh.
It rather shows what a truth worth can make,
Such as yours is.
And that's not worth a great,
How like you him Niece?
It shall appear how well Sir,
I humbly thank you for him.
Ho? ha, good gullory, he does it well in faith,
Light, as if he meant to purchase lip-land there:
Hold, hold, bear off I say, slid your part hangs too long.
My joys are mockcries.
You've ••th expressed a worthy care and love Sir,
Had mine own eye been set at liberty,
To make a public choice (believe my truth Sir)
It could not ha done better for my heart
Then your good providence has.
You will say so then,
Alas sweet Niece, all this is but the scahbard,
Now I draw forth the weapon.
How?
Sir Gregory,
Approach thou Lad of thousands.
Who calls me?
What motion's this? the Model of Ninivie?
Accost her daintily now, let me advise thee.
I was advised to bestow dainty cost on you.
You were ill advised, back, and take better counsel;
You may have good for an Angel, the least cost
You can bestow upon a woman Sir
Trebles ten Counsellors Fees, in Lady-ware,
You're over head and ears ere you be aware,
Faith keep a Bachelor still, and go to bowls Sir,
Follow your Mistress there, and prick and save Sir,
For other Mistresses will make you a slave Sir.
So, so, I have ray lerrepoop already.
Why how now Niece, this is the man I tell you.
He, hang him Sir, I know you do but mock,
This is the man you would say.
The Devil rides I think.
I must use cunning here.
Make me not mad, use him with all respect,
This is the man I swear.
Would you could persuade me to that;
Alas, you cannot go beyond me Uncle.
You carry a lest well I must confess,
For a man of your years, but—
I'm wrought beside my self.
I never beheld comeliness till this minute.
O good sweet Sir, pray offer not these wards
To an old Gentlewoman.
Sir.
Away fifteen,
Here's fifty one exceeds thee.
What's the business?
Give me these motherly creatures, come, ne'er smother it,
I know you are a teeming woman yet.
Troth a young Gent. might do much I think Sir
Go too then.
And I should play my part, or I were ungrateful.
Can you so soon neglect me?
Hence, i'm busy.
This cross point came in luckily, impudent Baggage.
Hang from the Gentleman, art thou not ashamed
To be a Widows hinderance?
Are you angry Sir?
You're welcome, pray court on, I shall desire
Your honest wise acquaintance; vex me not
After my care and pains to find a match for thee,
Lest I confine thy life to some out chamber,
Where thou shalt waste the sweetness of thy youth,
Like a consuming light in her own socket,
And not allowed a male creature about thee;
A very Munckey thy necessity
Shall prize at a thousand pound a Chimney-sweeper
At fifteen hundred.
But are you serious Uncle?
Serious.
Pray let me look upon the gentleman
With more heed, then I did but hum him over
In haste, good faith, as Lawyers Chancery sheets;
Beshrew my blood a tolerable man,
Now I distinctly read him.
Hum, hum, hum.
Say he be black, hoe's of a very good pitch,
Well anckled, two good confident calves, they look
As if they would not shrink at the ninth child;
The redness in the face, why that's in fashion,
Most of your high bloods have it, sign of greatness marry;
It is to be taken down too with May butter,
Isle send to my Lady Spend-tayle for her Medicine.
Him te dum, dum, dum, de dum.
Hoe's qualified too, believe me.
Him to dum, de dum, de dum.
Where was my judgement?
Him te dum, dum, dum, te dum, te dum.
Perfections covered mess.
Him te dum, te dum, te dum.
It smokes apparently, pardon sweet Sir
The error of my Sex.
Why well said Niece,
Upon submission you must pardon her now Sir.
Isle do it by course, do you think i'm an ass Knight?
Here's first my hand, now't goes to the Seal Office.
Formally finished, how goes this Suit forward?
I'm taking measure of the widows mind Sir,
I hope to fit her heart.
Who would have dreamt
Of a young morsel now? things come in minutes.
Trust him not widow, hoe's a younger Brother,
He will swear and lye; believe mo hoe's worth nothing.
He brings more content to a woman with that nothing,
Then he that brings his thousands without any thing,
We have presidents for that amongst great Ladies.
Come, come, no Language now shall be in fashion,
But your Love-phrase the bell to procreation. 
Pox, there's nothing puts me besides my wits, but this fourth,
This lay illiterate share, there's no conscience in 't.
Sir, it has ever been so where I have practised, and must be
Sill where I am, nor has it been undeserved at the years
End, and shuffle the Almanac together, vacations and
Terme-times one with another, though I say it, my wife is a
Woman of a good spirit, then it is no lay-share.
Faith for this five year, Ego possum probare, I have had
A hungry penurious share with em, and she has had as much
As I always.
Present or not present?
Residence aut non residence, perfidem.
And what president's this for me? because your Hic &amp; hac, Turpis and Queen mihi discipulus brains (that never got any thing but by accidence and uncertainty) did allow it, therefore I must, that have grounded con∣clusions of wit, hereditary rules for my Father to get by.
Sir be compendious, either take or refuse, I will bate no token of my wives share, make even the last recko∣nings, and either so unite or here divide company.
A good resolution, profecto, let every man beg his own way, and happy man be his dole.
Well, here's your double share, and single brains Pol, edipo, here's toward, a Caster ecastor for you, I will endure it a forthnight longer, but by these just five ends—
Take heed, five's odd, put both hands together or severally they are all odd unjust ends.
Medeius sidius, hold your tongue, I depose you from half a share presently else, I will make you a parti∣ciple and decline you, now you understand me, be you a quiet conjunction amongst the undeclined; you and your Latin ends shall go shift, Solves cum solo together else, and then if ever they got ends of gold and silver enough to
serve that Gerundine maw of yours, that without Do will end in Di &amp; Dum instantly.
Enough, enough, here comes company, we lose five shares in wrangling about one.
My Father, put on Priscian, he has Latin frog∣mints too, but I fear him not, isle case my face with a lit∣tle more hair and relieve.
Tush Nephew (isle call you so) for if there be
No other obstacles then those you speak of
They are but powder charges without pellets,
You may safely front 'em; and warrant your own danger.
No other that I can perceive ifailh Sir, for I put her to it, and felt her as far as I could, and the stron∣gest repulse was, she said, she would have a little Soldier in me, that (if need were) I should defend her repu∣tation.
And surely Sir, that is a principle
Amongst your principal Ladies, they require
Valour either in a friend or a husband.
And I allow their requests in faith, as well as a∣ny women's heart can desire, if I knew where to get va∣lore, I would as willingly entertain it as any man that blows.
Breathes, breathes Sir, that's the sweeter phrase.
Blows for a Soldier, in faith Sir, and i'm in
Practise that way.
For a Soldier, I grant it.
Slid isle swallow some bullets, and good round ones too, but isle have a little Soldier in me.
Will you on and beg, or steal and be hanged.
And some Scholar she would have me besides,
Tush, that shall be no bar, it is a quality in a
Gentleman, but of the least question.
Salvete Domini benignissimi, munificentissimi.
Salvete dices ad nos? fubeo te salvere,
Nay Sir, we have Latin and other mettle in us too,
Sir, you shall se talk with this fellow now.
I could find in my heart to talk with him too,
If I could understand him.
Charissimi, Doctissimiq. Domini, ex abundantia,
Charitatis vestrae estote poopitii in me junenem,
Miserum, pauperem, &amp; omni consolation exulem.
A pretty Scholar by my faith Sir, but isle to him again.
Does he beg or steal in this Language can you tell Sir?
He may take away my good name from me, and I ne'er
The wiser.
He begs, he begs Sir.
Ass, ass, in oculis lacrymarum flumen, in ore
Fems, sitisq. ignis in vultu, pudor &amp; impudentia,
In omni part necessitas &amp; indigentia.
Aunt tu bonus socius, tu es Scolasticus, sic intelligo,
Ego faciam argumentum, mark now Sir, now I fetch
Him up.
I have been fetched up a hundred times for this,
Yet I could never learn half so much.
Aunt, &amp; respond, hoc est Argumentum, nomen est
Nomen, ergo, quote est tibi nomen, Respond nuns,
Respond argumentum meum. Have I not put him to it Sir?
Yes Sir, I think so.
Step in, the rascal is put out of his penned speech,
And he can go no farther.
Cur non responds?
Oh Domino, tanta mea est misery.
So he's almost in again.
Ʋt nocte mecum pernoctat egestas, luce quotidie
Paupertat habitat.
Sed quid est tibi nomen, &amp; quis dedit? Respond
Argumentum.
Hem, hem.
He's dry, he hems, on quickly.
Courteous Gentlemen, if the brow of a Military face may not be offensive to your generous eye-balls, let his wounds speak better then his words, for some branch or small sprig of charity to be planted upon this poor barren soil of a Soldier.
How now, what Arms and Arts both go a beg∣ing?
Such is the poast-progresse of cold charity now a days, who (for heat to her frigid limbs) passes in so swift a motion, that two at the least had need be to stay her.
Sir, let's reward um I pray you and be gone, if any quarrel should arise amongst us, I am able to an∣swer neither of them, his Iron and Steel tongue is as hard as the tothers Latin one.
Stay, stay Sir, I will talk a little with him first,
Let me alone with both, I will try whether they
Live by their wits or no; for such a man I love,
And what? you both beg together then?
Conjunctis minibus, profecto, Domino.
With equal fortunes equal distribution, there's not the breadth of a swords point uneven in our dive∣zion.
What two qualities are here cast away upon two poor fellows, if a man had um that could maintain um, what a double man were that, if these two Fellows might be bought and sodden, and boiled to a jelly, and eaten fasting every morning, I do not think but a man should find strange things in his stomach.
Come Sir, join your charity with mine, and we will make up a couple of pence betwixt us.
If a man could have a penny-worth for his pen∣ny, I would bestow more money with 'em.
Save you Gentlemen, how now? what are you en∣countred here? what fellows are these?
Faith Sir, here's Mars and Mercury, a pair of poor Planets it seems, that Jupiter has turned out to live by their wits, and we are even about a little spark of charity to kindle um a new fire.
Stay, pray you stay Sir, you may abuse your cha∣rity, nay make that goodness in you no better then a vice, so many deceivers walk in these shadows now a days, that certainly your bounties were better spilt then reserved to so lewd and vicious uses; which is he that pro∣fesses the Soldier?
He that professes his own profession Sir, and the dangerous life he hath led in it this pair of half score years.
In what services have you been Sir?
The first that fleshed me a soldier Sir, was that great battle at Aleazar in Barbary, where the noble Eng∣lish Stukely fell, and where that royal Portugal Sebastian ended his untimely days.
Are you sure Sebastian dyed there?
Faith Sir, there was some other rumour hoped a-amongst us, that he wounded escaped, and touched on his Native shore again, where finding his Country at home more distressed by the invasion of the Spaniard then his loss abroad, forsook it, still supporting a miserable and un∣fortunate life, which (where he ended) is yet uncer∣taine.
By my faith Sir, he speaks the nearest same of truth in this.
Since Sir, I served in France, the Low Countries, lastly, at that memorable Skirmish at Newport, where the forward and bold Scot there spent his life so freely, that from every single heart that there fell, came home from his resolution a double honour to his country.
This should be no counterfeit, Sir.
I do not think he is, Sir.
But Sir, me thinks you do not show the marks of a Soldier, could you so freely scope, that you brought home no scars to be your chronicle?
Sir, I have wounds and many, but in those parts where nature and humanity bids me shame to publish.
A good Soldier cannot want those badges.
Now am not I of your mind in that, for I hold him the best soldier that scopes best, always at a Cocke-fencing I give him the best that has the fewest knocks.
Nay isle have a bout with your Scholar too,
To ask you why you should be poor (yet richly learned)
Were no question, at least you can easily
Answer it; but whether you have learning enough,
To deserve to be poor or no (since poverty is
Commonly the meed of Learning) is yet to be trye'd;
You have the Languages, I mean the chief,
As the Hebrew, SyriacK, Greek, Latin, &amp;c.
Aliquantulum, non totaliter, Domino.
The Latin I have sufficiently tried him in,
And I promise you Sir he is very well grounded.
I will prove him in some of the rest.
Toes miois fatherois iste Cock-scomboy?
Kay yonkeron niggitton oy fouleroi Asinisoy.
Cheateron ton biton?
Tous pollous strikerous, Angelo to peeso.
Certainly Sir, a very excellent Scholar in the Greek.
I do note a wondrous readiness in him.
I do wonder how the Trojans could hold out ten years Siege (as it is reported) against the Greeks, if Achilles spoke but this Tongue? I do not think but he might have shaken down the walls in a seventh-night, and ne'er troubled the wooden horse.
I will try him so far as I can in the Syriack.
Kircom bragmen, shag a dou ma dell mathou.
Hashagath rabgabash shobos onoriadka.
Colpack Rubasca, gnawerthem shigshag.
Napshamothem Ribsbe bongomosh lashemech nagothi.
Gentlemen I have done, any man that can, go further,
I confess my self at a Nonplus.
Faith not I Sir, I was at my farthest in my natural Language, I was never double-tongu'd I thank my hard fortune.
Well Gentlemen, it is pity (walk further off a little my friends) I say, it is pity such fellows so endowed, so qualified with the gifts of Nature and Arts, yet should have such a scarcity of fortunes benefits, we must blame our Iron-hearted age for it.
It is pity indeed, and our pity shall speak a little for 'em;
Come Sir, here's my Great.
A Great Sir? oh fie, give nothing rather, it were better you railed on um for begging and so quit your self, I am a popre Gentleman, that have little but my wits to live on.
Troth and I love you the better, Sir.
Yet isle begin a better example then so, here fellows, there's between you, take Purse and all, and I would it were heavier for your sakes, there's a pair of Angels to guide you to your lodgings, a poor Gentle∣mans good will.
Gratias, maximas gratias, benignissime Domino.
This is an ill example for us, Sir, I would this bountiful Gentleman had not come this way to day.
Pox, we must not shame our selves now, Sir, isle give as much as that Gentleman, though I never be Soldier or Scholar while I live; here friends, there's a piece, that if he were divided would make a pair of Angels for me too, in the love I bear to the Sword and the Tongues.
My largess shall be equal too, and much good doe you, this bounty is a little abatement of my wit though, I feel that.
May soldiers ever defend such charities.
And Scholars pray for their increase.
Fare you well Sir, these fellows may pray for you, you have made the Scholars commons exceed to day, and a word with you, Sir, you said you lived by your wits, if you use this bounty you'll beggar your wits be∣leeve it.
Oh Sir, I hope to increase 'em by it, this seed never wants his harvest, fare you well, Sir. 
I think a man were as good mere with a reasonable Thief, as an unreasonable Beggar sometimes, I could find in my heart to beg half mine back again, can you change my piece my friends?
Tempora mutantur, &amp; nos mutamur in illis.
My Gold is turned into Latin,
Look you good fellows, here's one round
Shilling more that lay concealed.
Sir, away, we shall be drawn farther into dam∣mage else.
A pox of the Fool, he live by his wits? if his wits leave him any money but what he begs or steals ve∣rye shortly, isle be hanged for him.
This breakfast parcel was well fetched of in faith.
Tush, a by-blow for mirth, we must have better purchase, we want a fourth for another project that I have ripened.
My wife, she shares, and can deserve it.
She can change her shape, and be masculine.
It is one of the free'st conditions, she fears not the crack of a Pistol, she dares say stand to a Grazier.
Probatum fuit, profecto, Domino.
Good, then you Sir Bacchus, Appollo shall be dispatcht with her share, and some contents to meet us to morrow (at a certain place and time appointed) in the masculine Gender, my Father has a Nephew, and I an own Cousin coming up from the University, whom he loves most indulgently, easy Master Credulous Oldcraft, (for you know what your mere Academique is) your Carrier never misses his hour, he must not be robed (be∣cause he has but little to lose) but he must join with us in a devise that I have, that shall rob my Father of a hundred pieces, and thank me to be rid on it, for there's the ambition of my wit to live upon his professed wit, that has turned me out to live by my wits.
Cum hirundinis alias tibi regratulor.
A male habit, a bag of a hundred weight, though it be counters (for my Alchemy shall turn 'em into Gold of my Fathers) the hour, the place, the action shall be at large set down, and Father, you shall know, that I put my portion to use, that have given me to live by;
And to confirm your self in me renate,
I hope you'll find my wits legitimate. 
NAy Lady.
Put me not in mind on it prithee,
You cannot do a greater wrong to women,
For in our wants, it is the most chief affliction
To have that name remembered; it is a title
That misery works us by, and the worlds malice,
Scorn and contempt has not where with to work
On humble Callings; they are safe, and lye
Level with pity still, and pale distress
Is no great stranger to 'em; but when fortune
Looks with a stormy face on our conditions,
We find affliction work, and envy pastime,
And our worst enemy then that most abuses us,
Is that we are called by, Lady, O my spirit,
Will nothing make thee humble? I am well methinkes,
And can live quiet with my fate sometimes,
Until I look into the world again,
Then I begin to rave at my stars bitterness,
To see how many muck hills placed above me;
Peasants and Droyles, Caroches full of Dunghills,
Whose very birth stinks in a geenerous nostril,
Glistering by night like Glow-wormes through the High-streets,
Hurried by Torch-light in the Foot-mans hands
That show like running Fire-drakes through the City,
And I put to my shifts and wits to live,
Nay sometimes danger too; on Foot, on Horse-back,
And earn my supper manfully ere I get it,
Many a meal I have purchased at that rate,
Fed with a wound upon me, stamped at midnight.
Ho, what are you?
Now you rnay tell your self Lady. 
Oh Mr. Priscian, what's the project,
For you ne'er come without one.
First, your Husband,
Sir Ruinous Gentry greetes you with best wishes,
And here has sent you your full share by me
In five Cheats, and two Robberies.
And what comes it too?
Near upon thirteen pound.
A goodly share.
Twill put a, Lady scarce in Philip and Cheyney,
With three small Bugle Laces, like a Chamber-maid,
Here's precious lifing.
'Lasse you must consider, Lady,
It is but young Term, Attorneys ha small doings yet,
Then High-way Lawyers, they must needs ha little,
Wee'ne had ho great good luck to speak troth Beauty,
Since your stout Lady-ship parted from 's at Hye-gate,
But there's a fair hope now for a present hundred,
Here's mans Apparel, your Horse stands at door.
And what's the virtuous plot now?
Marry Lady,
You like a bvave young Gallant must be robed.
I robed?
Nay then—
Well, well, go on, let's hear Sir.
Here's a sealed bag of a Hundred, which indeed
Are Counters all, only some sixteen Groats
Of white money in the mouth on it.
So, what Saddle have I?
Monsieur Laroon's the French-mans.
That again,
You know so well itis not for my stride,
How oft have I complained on it?
You nay have Jockey's then, the little Scotch one,
You must dispatch. 
Isle soon by ready Sir,
Before you ha shifted Saddles, many women
Have their wealth flow to 'em, I was made I see
To help my fortune, not my fortune me. 
My ways are Goblin-led, and the night Else
Still drawee me from my home, yet I follow,
Sure it is not altogether fabulous,
Such Hags do get dominion of our tongues
So soon as we speak, the Enchantment binds;
I have dissembled such a trouble on me,
As my best wits can hardly clear again;
Piping through this old Reed, the Gardianesse,
With purpose that my harmony shall reach
And please the Ladies ear, she stops below,
And echoes back my love unto my lips,
Persuaded by most violent arguments
Of selfe-love in her self; I am so selfe-foole,
To do at upon her hunder'd-wrinckl'd face;
I could beggar her to accept the gifts
She would throw upon me; it were charity,
But for pities sake I will be a niggard
And undo, her, refusing to take from her;
I'm haunted again, if it take not now
I'll break the Spell.
Sweet Cuningame, welcome;
What? a whole day absent? Birds that build Nests
Have care to keep 'em.
That's granted,
But not continually to sit upon 'em;
Less in the youngling season, else they desire
To fly abroad, and recreate their labours,
Then they return with fresher appetite
To work again.
Well, well, you have built a nest
That will stand all storms, you need not mistrust
A weather-wrack, and one day it may be
The youngling season too, then I hope
You'll ne'er fly out of sight.
There will be pains,
I see to shake this Bur off, and sweetest,
Prithee how fares thy charge? has my good friend
Sir Gregory the countenance of a Lover?
No by my troth, not in my mind, me thinks
(Setting his Worship aside) he looks like a fool.
Nay in faith, ne'er divide his Worship from him for that
Small matter; Fool and Worship are no such
Strangers now adays, but my meaning is,
Has he thy Ladies countenance of love?
Looks she like a welconie on him? plainly,
Have they as good hope of one another,
As Cupped bless us, we have ?
Troth I know not,
I can perceive no forwardness in my charge,
But I protest I wish the Knight better
For your sake, Bird.
Why thanks sweet Bird, and with my heart I wish,
That he had as strong and likely hope of her
As thou haste of me.
Well, he's like to speed
Ne'er the worse for that good wish, and isle tell you
Bird (for secrets are not to be kept betwixt us two)
My charge thinks well of you.
Of me? for what?
For my sake, I mean so, I have heard her
A hundred times since her. Uncle gave her
The first bob about you, that she'de do somewhat
For my sake if things went well together,
We have spoke of doors and bolts, and things and things,
Go too, Isle tell you all, but you'll find
Some advancement for my sake I do believe.
Faith be not sparing, tell me.
By my Lady
You shall pardon me for that, it were a shame
If men should hear all that women speaks behind
Their backs sometimes.
You must give me leave yet,
At least to give her thanks.
Not that neither,
She must not take a notice of my blabbing,
It is sufficient you shall give me thanks,
For it is for my sake if she be bountiful,
She loves me, and loves you too for my sake.
How shall I knowing this but be ingrate,
Not to reapy her with my dearest duty.
I, but you must not know it, if you tell
All that I open to you, you'll shame us both;
A far off you may kiss your hand, blush, or so,
But I'll allow no nearer conference.
Whoop! you'll be jealous I perceive now.
Jealous? why there'e no true love without it, Bird,
I must be jealous of thee, but for her,
(Were it within my duty to my Master)
I durst trust h er with the strongest tempter,
And I dare swear her now as pure a Virgin
As ever was welcomed to a marriage bed,
If thoughts may be untainted, hers are so.
And whore's the cause of your fear then?
Well, well;
When things are past, and the wedding Torches
Lighted at matches, to kindle better fire,
Then Isle tell you more.
Come, come, I see further,
That if we were married you'd be jealous.
I protest I should a little, but not of her,
It is the married woman (if you mark it)
And not the maid that longs, the appetite
Follows the first taste, when we have relished
We wish cloying, the taste once pleased before,
Then our desire is whetted on to more,
But I reveal too much to you, in faith Bird.
Not a whit faith, Bird, betwixt you and I,
I am beholding for bettering of my knowledge.
Nay you shall know more of me if you'll be ruled,
But make not things common.
Vd' so, your Lady?
I, it is no matter, she'll like well of this,
Our familiarity is her content.
This present from Sir Gregory?
From my Master, the Worshipful right Sir Gre∣gory Fop
A Ruff? and what might be his high conceit
In sending of a Ruff?
I think he had two conceits in it forsooth, too high too
Low, Ruff high, because as the Ruff does embrace your
neck all day, so does he desire to throw his Knightly arms.
But then I leave him off a nights.
Why then he is ruff low, a ruffian, a bold adven∣taros errant to do any rough service for his Lady.
A witty and unhappy conceit, do's he mean
As he seems to say unto that reverence? 
He does woo her sure. 
To tell you truth Lady, his conceit was far better then I have blazed it yet.
Do you think so, Sir?
Nay I know it forsooth, for it was two days ere he compassed it, to find a fitting present for your Lady∣ship, was sending once a very fine Puppy to you.
And that he would have brought himself.
So he would indeed, but then he altered his de∣vise, and sent this Ruff, requesting withal, that whenso∣ever it is foul, you (with your own hands) would be∣stow the starching of it.
Else she woos him, now his eyes shoots this way; And what was the reason for that Sir?
There lies his maine conceit, Lady, for says he, In so doing she cannot choose but in the starching to clap it often between her hands, and so she gives a great liking and applause to my present, whereas if I should send a Puppy; she ever calls it to her with Irist, hiss, hiss, which js a fearful disgrace, he drew the devil from a Play, at the Bull tother day.
I marry Sir, this was a rich conceit indeed.
And far fetched, therefore good for you Lady
How now? which way look you, Bird?
At the Fdole Bird shall I hot look at the Fool?
At the Fool and I here? what need that? pray look this way.
Isle fit him aptly, either isle awake
His wits (if he have any) or force him
To app•are (as yet I cannot think him)
Without any, Sirrah, tell me one thing true
That I sahall ask you now, Was this devise
Your Masters own? I doubt his wit in it;
He's not so ingenious.
His own I assure you, Madam.
Nay, you must not lye.
Not with a Lady, i'd rather lye with you then lye with my Master, by your leave in such a case as this.
Yet again your eye?
The Fool makes mirth in faith,
I would hear some.
Come, you shall hear none but me.
Come hither friend, nay come near me; did
Thy Master send thee to me? he may be wise,
But did not she it much in that; men sometimes
May wrong themselves unawares, when they least think on 't;
Was Ʋulcan ever so unwise, to send Mars
To be his spokesman when he went a wooing ?
Send thee? heigh-ho, a pretty rolling eye.
I can turn up the white and the black too, and need be, forsooth.
Why, here's an amorous nose.
You see the worst of my nose, forsooth.
A cheek, how I could put it now in dalliance,
A pair of lips, oh that we were uney'd,
I could suck Sugar from 'em, what a beard's here?
When will the Knight thy Master have such a
Stamp of man-hood on his face? nay, do not blush.
It is nothing but my flesh and blood that rises so.
Death, she courts the Fool.
Away, away, it is sport, do not mind it.
Give me thy hand, come be familiar;
I, here's a promising palm; what a soft
Handful of pleasure's here, here's Down compared
With Flocks and quilted Straw, thy Knights fingers
Are lean mattrice rubbers to these Feathers,
I prithee let me lean my cheek upon it,
What a soft pillow's here?
Hum, umh, hue, hum.
Why there's a courage in that lively passion,
Measure thee all o'er, there's not a limb
But has his full proportion; it is my voice,
There's no compare betwixt the Knight and thee,
The goodlier man by half, at once now
I see thee all over.
If you had seen me swim tother day on my back, you would have sed you had seen, there was two Cham∣barmaids that saw me, and my legs by chance were tang∣led in the flags, and when they saw how I was hanged, they cried out, O help the man for fear he be drowned.
They could do no less in pity, come, thine arm, we'll walk together.
Blindness of Love and Women, why she dotes upon the Fool.
What's that to you, mind her not.
Away you Bur.
How's that?
Hang of Fleshook, fasten thine itchy clasp
On some dry Toadstool that will kindle with thee,
And burn together.
Oh abominable,
Why do you not love me?
No, never did?
I took thee down a little way to
Enforce a Vomit from my offended stomach,
Now you're up again I loath thee filthy.
Oh Villain.
Why dost thou not see a sight
Would make a man abjure the sight of women.
Ha, ha, ha, he's vexed; ha, ha, ha,
Ha, ha, ha.
Why dost thou laugh?
Because thou laugh, nothing else in faith.
She has but mocked my folly, else she finds not
The bosom of my purpose, some other way
Must make me know; isle try her, and may chance quit
The fine dexterity of her Lady-wit. 
Yes in truth, I laughed to think of thy Master,
Now, what he would think if he knew this?
By my troth I laugh at him too, faith Sirrah, hoe's but a fool to say the truth, though I say it that should not say it.
Yes, thou should say truth, and I believe thee;
Well, for this time we'll part, you perceive something,
Our tongues betray our hearts, there's our weakness,
But pray be silent.
As Mouse in Cheese, or Goose in Hay in faith.
Look, we are cut off, there's my hand where my lips would be.
Isle wink and think 'em thy lips, farewell. 
Now Gardionesse, I need not ask where you have been.
O Lady, never was woman so abused
Dost thou hear Lady sweet-heart, I had forgot to tell thee, if you will I will come back in the Evening?
By no means, come not till I send for you.
If there be any need, you may think of things when I am gone, I may be conveyed into your chamber, isle lye un∣der the bed while midnight, or so, or you shall put me up in one of your little boxes, I can creep in at a small hole.
These are things I dare not venture, I charge you on my love never come till I send for you.
Verbum insapienti, it is enough to the wise, nor I think it is not fit the Knight should know any thing yet.
By no means, pray you go now, we are suspected.
For the things that are past, let us use our secrets.
Now isle make a firm trial of your love,
As you love me, not a word more at this time,
Not a syllable, it is the seal of love, take heed.
Hum, hum, hum, hum —
Hum's loath to depart. 
So, this pleasant trouble's gone, now Gardianesse,
What? your eyes easing your heart, the cause woman?
The cause is false man, Madam, oh Lady,
I have been gub'd in a shining Carbuncle,
A very Glo-worme, that I thought had sire in it,
And it is as cold as Ice.
And justly served,
Would thou once think that such an erring Spring
Would dote upon thine Autumn?
Oh, had you heard him
But protest.
I would not have believed him,
Thou might have perceived how I mocked thy folly,
In wanton imitation with the Fool,
Go weep the sin of thy credulity,
Not of thy loss, for it was never thine,
And it is gain to miss it; were thou so dull?
Nay yet you're stupid and incapable,
Why thou were but the bait to fish with, not
The prey, the stale to catch another Bird with.
Indeed he called me Bird.
Yet thou perceiv'st not,
It is your Niece he loves, would thou be made
A stakling Jade? it is she, examine it,
Isle hurry all awry, and tread my path
Over unbeaten grounds, go level to the mark,
Not by circular bouts, rare things are pleasing,
And rare's but seldom in the simple sense,
But has her Emphasis with eminence 
My Niece? she the rival of my abuse?
My flesh and blood wrong me? isle Aunt her for it;
Oh opportunity, thou blessest me
Now Gentlewoman, are you parted so soon?
Whore's your friend I pray? your Cuningame?
What say you Aunt?
Come, come, your Cuningame?
I am not blind with age yet, nor deaf.
Dumb I am sure you are not, what ailed you Ant?
Are you not well?
No, nor sick, nor mad, nor in my wits, nor slay∣ping, nor walking, nor nothing, nor any thing; I know not what I am, nor what I am not.
Mercy cover us, what do you mean Aunt?
I mean to be revenged.
On whom?
On thee, Baggage.
Revenge should follow injury,
Which never reached so far as thought in me
Towards you Aunt.
Your cunning, minion,
Nor your Cuningame can either blind me,
The gentle Beggar loves you.
Beseech you,
Let me stay your error, I begin to hear,
And shake off my amazement; if you think
That ever any passage treating love
Hath been betwixt us yet commenced, any
Silent eye-glance that might but sparkle fire,
So much as brother and sister might meet with,
The lip-salute, so much as strangers might
Take a farewell with, the commixed hands,
Nay, but the least thought of the least of these;
In troth you wrong your bosom, by that truth
(Which I think yet you durst be bail for in me,
If it were offered ye) I am as free
As all this protestation.
May I believe this?
If ever you'll believe truth: why, I thought he had spake love to you, and if his heart prompted his tongue, sure I did hear so much.
Oh falsest man, Ixions plague fell on me,
Never by woman (such a masculine cloud)
So airy and so subtle was embraced.
By no cause in me, by my life dear Aunt.
I believe you, then help in my revenge,
And you shall do it, or loose my love for ever,
Isle have him quited at his equal weapon,
Thou art young, follow him, bait his desires
With all the Engines of a women's wit,
Stretch modesty even to the highest pitch;
He cannot freeze at such a flaming beauty;
And when thou hast him by the amorous gills,
Think on my vengeance, choke up his desires,
Then let his banquettings be Tantalisme,
Let thy disdain spurn the dissembler out;
Oh I should clime my stars, and sit above,
To see him burn to ashes in his love.
This will be a strange taste, Aunt, and an
Unwilling labour, yet in your injunction
I am a servant to it.
Thou'lt undertak't?
Yes, let the success commend it self hereafter.
Effect it Girl, my substance is thy store,
Nothing but want of will makes woman poor. 
Why Pompey, thou art not stark mad, art thou?
Wilt thou not tell me how my Lady doe's?
Your Lady?
Did she receive the thing that I sent her kind∣lie, or no?
The thing that you sent her, Knight, by the thing that you sent, was for the things sake that was sent to carry the thing that you sent, very kindly received, first, there is your Indenture, now go seek you a servant: se∣condly, you are a Knight: thirdly and lastly, I am mine own man: and fourthly, fare you well.
Why Pompey? prithee let me speak with thee,
Isle lay my life some Hair has crossed him.
Knight, if you be a Knight, so keep you; as for the Lady, who shall say that she is not a fair Lady, a sweet Lady, an honest and a virtuous Lady, I will say he is a base fellow, a blab of his tongue, and I will make him eat these fingers ends.
Why here's no body says so Pompey.
Whatsoever things have past between the Lady and the other party, whom I will not name at this time, I say she is virtuous, and honest, and I will maintain it, as long as I can maintain my self with bread and water.
Why I know no body thinks otherwise.
Any man that doe's but think it in my hearing, I will make him think on it while he has a thought in his Bosom; shall we say that kindnesses from Ladies are common? or that favours and protestations are things of no moment betwixt parties and parties? I say still, what∣soever has been betwixt the Lady and the party which I will not name, that she is honest, and shall be honest, what∣soever she doe's by day or by night, by light or by dark∣ness, with cut and long tale.
Why I say she is honest.
Is she honest? in what sense do you say she is ho∣nest, Knight?
If I could not find in my heart to throw my Dagger at thy head, hilts and all, I'm an ass, and no Gentleman.
Throw your Dagger at me! do not Knight, I give you fair warning, it is but cast away if you do, for you shall have no other words of me, the Lady is an ho∣nest Lady, whatsoever reports may go of sports and toys, and thoughts, and words, and deeds, betwixt her and the party which I will not name; this I give you to under∣stand, That another man may have as good an eye, as amorous a nose, as fair a stamped beard, and be as proper a man as a Knight, (I name no parties) a Serving-man may be as good as a Sir, a Pompey as a Gregory, a Doodle as a Fop; so Serving-man Pompey Doodle may be respected as well with Ladies (though I name no parties) as Sir Gregory Fop; so farewell. 
If the fellow be not out of his wits, then will I never have any more wit while I live; either the sight of the Lady has gaster'd him, or else he's drunk, or else he walks in his sleep, or else he's a fool, or a knave, or both, one of the three I'm sure it is; yet now I think on it, she has not used me so kindly as her Uncle promised me she should, but that's all one, he says I shall have her, and I dare take his word for the best Horse I have, and that's a weightier thing then a Lady, I'm sure on it. 
Nay, I am your own, it is in your pleasure
How you'll deal with me; yet I would entreat,
You will not make that which is bad enough,
Worse then it need be, by a second ill,
When it can render you no second profit;
If it be coin you seek, you have your prey,
All my store, I vow, (and it weighs a hundred)
My life, or any hurt you give my body,
Can enrich you no more.
You may pursue.
As I am a Gentlewoman, I never will,
Only we'll bind you to quiet behaviour
Till you call out for Bail, and on the other
Side of the hedge leave you; but keep the peace
Till we be out of hearing, for by that
We shall be out of danger, if we come back,
We come with a mischief.
You need not fear me.
Come, we'll bestow you then. 
Why law you Sir, is not this a swifter Revenue then Sic probes ergo's &amp; igitur's can bring in? why is not this one of your Syllogisms in Barbara? Omne utile est ho∣nestum.
Well Sir, a little more of this acquaintance,
Will make me know you fully I protest.
You have (at first sight) made me conscious
Of such a deed my dreams ne'er prompted, yet
I could almost have wished rather ye'ad robed me
Of my Cloak, (for my Purse it is a Scholars)
Then to have made me a robber.
I had rather have answered three difficult quest∣once,
Then this one, as easy as yet it seems.
Tush, you shall never come to further answer for it;
•an you confess your penurious Uncle,
〈◊〉 his full face of love, to be so strict
〈◊〉 Niggard to your Commons, that you are fine
To size your belly out with shoulder fees?
With Rumps and Kidneys, and cues of single Beer,
And yet make Deign•y to feed more daintily,
A• this easier rate? fie Master Credulous,
I blush for you.
This is a truth undeniable.
Why go to then, I hope I know your Uncle,
How doe's he use his Son, nearer then you?
Faith like his Jade, upon the bare Commons,
Turned out to pick his living as he can get it;
He would have been glad to have shared in such
A purchase, and thanked his good fortune too;
But mum no more — is all safe, Bullies?
Secure? the Gentleman thinks him most happy in his loss,
With his safe life and limbs▪ and redoubles
〈◊〉 first vow, as he is a Gentleman,
Never to pursue us.
Well away then,
Disperse you with Master Credulous, who still
Shall bear the purchase, Priscian and I
Will take some other course: You know our meeting
At the Three Cups in Saint Giles, with this proviso,
(For it is a Law with us) that nothing be opened
Till all be present, the looser says a hundred,
And it can weigh no less.
Come, Sir, we'll be your guide.
My honesty, which till now was never forfeited,
All shall be close till our meeting. 
Tush, I believ't,
And then all shall out; whore's the thief that's robed?
Here Master Old•raft, all follows now.
It was neatly done, wench, now to turn that bag 〈◊〉 counterfeits to current pieces, &amp; actum est.
You are the Chemist, we'll blow the fire still,
If you can mingle the ingredients.
I will not miss a cause, a quantity, a dram,
You know the place.
I have told her that, Sir.
Good, turn Ruinous to be a Constable, I'm sure
〈…〉 not beards of all sorts, from the
Worshipful Magistrate to the under Watchman;
•ecause we must have no danger of life,
〈◊〉 cleanly cheat, attach Credulous,
〈◊〉 cause is plain, the theft found about him;
••en fall I in his own Cozens shape
〈◊〉 •eere accident, where finding him distressed,
• w••h some difficulty must fetch him off,
With promise that his Uncle shall shut up all
With double restitution: Master Constable, Ruinous
His mouth shall be stopped; you, Mistress rob thief•,
Shall have your share of what we can pull my father of;
Is it plain enough?
As plain a cozenage as can be, saith.
Father, I come again, and again when this is
Past too, Father, one will beget another;
I'd be loath to leave your posterity barren,
You were best to come to composition Father,
Two hundred pieces yearly allow me yet,
It will be cheaper (Father) then my wit,
For I will cheat none but you, dear Father.
WHy now you take the course Sir Gregory Fop:
I could enforce her and I list, but love
That's gently won, is a mans own for ever,
Have you prepared good music?
As fine a noise, Uncle, as heart can wish▪
Why that's done like a Suitor,
They must be wooed a hundred several ways,
Before you obtain the right way in a woman,
It is an odd creature, full of creeks and windings.
The Serpent has not mo•e; for sh'as all his,
And then her own beside came in by her mother.
A fearful portion for a man to venture on.
But the way found once by the wits of men,
There is no creature lies so tame again.
I promise you, not a house-Rabbit, Sir.
No sucker on 'em all.
What a thing's that?
They're pretty Fools I warrant, when they're tame
As a man can lay his lips to.
How were you bred, Sir?
Did you never make a fool of a Tenants daughter?
Never i'faith, they have made some fools for me,
And brought 'em many a time under their aprons.
They could not show you the way plainlier, I think,
To make a fool again.
There's fools enough, Sir,
Less they were wiser.
This is wondrous rare,
Come you to London with a Maiden-head, Knight?
A Gentleman of your rank ride with a Cloak-bag?
Never an Hostess by the way to leave it with?
Nor Tipsters sister? nor head Ostlers wife?
What no body?
Well mocked old Wit Monger,
I keep it for your Niece.
Do not say so for shame, she'll laugh at thee,
A wife ne'er looks for it, it is a Bachelors penny,
He may gived to a beggar-wench, in the progress time,
And never called to account for it. 
Would I'd known so much,
I could have stopped a beggars mouth by the way,
That railed upon me because I'd give her nothing—
What, are they come?
And placed directly, Sir,
Under her window.
What may I call you Gentleman?
A poor servant to the Viol, I'm the Voice, Sir.
In good time Master Voice.
Indeed good time doe's get the mastery.
What Countryman Master Voice?
Sir, borne at Ely, we all set up in Ely,
But our house commonly breaks in Rutland Shire.
A shrewd place by my faith, it may well break your voice,
It breaks many a mans back; come, set to your business.
Fine would I wake you, Sweet, but fear
I should invite you to worse cheer;
In your dreams you cannot fare
Meaner then Music; no compare;
None of your slumbers are compil'de
Ʋnder the pleasure makes a child;
Your day-delights, so well compact,
That what you think, turns all to act:
I'd wish my life no better play,
Your dream by night, your thought by day.
Wake gently, wake,
Part softly from your dreams;
The morning flies
To your fair eyes,
To take her special beams.
I hear her up, here Master Voice,
Pay you the Instruments, save what you can,
To keep you when you're cracked. 
Who should this be?
That I'm so much beholding to, for sweetness?
Pray Heaven it happens right.
Good morrow Mistress.
An ill day and a thousand come upon thee.
'Light that's six hundred more then any Al∣manic has.
Comes it from thee? it is the mangiest Music
That ever woman heard.
Nay say not so Lady,
There's not an itch about 'em.
I could curse
My attentive powers, for giving entrance to it;
There is no boldness like the impudence
That's locked in a fools blood, how durst you do this?
In conscience I abused you as sufficiently
As woman could a man; insatiate Coxcomb,
The mocks, and spiteful language I have given thee,
Would a' my life have served ten reasonable men,
And rise contented too, and left enough for their friends.
You glutten at abuses, never satisfied?
I am persuaded thou devour'st more flouts
Then all thy body's worth, and still a hungered!
A mischief of that maw; prithee seek elsewhere,
In truth I am weary of abusing thee;
Get thee a fresh Mistress, though• make work enough;
I do not think there's scorn enough in Town
To serve thy turn, take the Court Ladies in,
And all their women to 'em, that exceed 'em.
Is this in earnest, Lady?
Oh unsatiable!
Dost thou count all this but an earnest yet?
I'd thought I'd paid thee all the whole sum, trust me;
Thou't beggar my derision utterly
If thou stai'st longer, I shall want a laugh:
If I knew where to borrow a contempt
Would hold thee tack, stay and be hanged thou should then,
But thou'st no conscience now to extort hate from me,
When one has spent all she can make upon thee;
Must I begin to pay thee hire again?
After I have rid thee twice? faith it is unreasonable.
Say you so? I'll know that presently.
Now he runs
To fetch my Uncle to this musty bargain,
But I have better ware always at hand.
And lay by this still when he comes to cheapen.
I met the Music now, yet cannot learn
What entertainment he received from her.
There's some body set already, I must to it, I see,
Well, well, Sir Gregory.
Ho, Sir Gregory?
Where ever you come you may well boast your conquest.
She's lost y'faith, enough, has fortune then
Remembered her great boy? she seldom fails 'em.
He was the unlikeliest man at first, me thought,
To have my love, we never met but wrangled,
A pox upon that wrangling, say I still,
I never knew it fail yet, where er't came;
It never comes but like a storm of hail,
It is sure to bring fine weather at the tail on it,
There's not one match amongst twenty made without it,
It fights in the tongue, but sure to agree in the haunches.
That man that should have told me, when time was,
I should have had him, had been laughed at piteously,
But see how things will change?
Here's a heart feels it — O the deceitful promises of love!
What trust should a man put in the lip of woman?
She kissed me with that strength, as if sh'ad meant
To have set the fair print of her soul upon me.
I would have sworn it would ne'er have been a match once.
Isle hear no more, I'm mad to hear so much,
Why should I aim my thoughts at better fortunes
Then younger brothers have? that's a Maid with nothing,
Or some old Soap-boylers Widow, without teeth,
There waits my fortune for me, seek no farther.
You tell me things, Sir Gregory, that cannot be,
She will not, nor she dares not.
Would I were whipped then.
Isle make as little show of love, Sir Gregory,
As ever woman did, you shall not know
You have my heart a good while.
Heard you that?
Man will insult so soon, it is his condition,
It is good to keep him off as long as we can,
I've much a do, I swear; and love in the end
Will have his course, let Maids do what they can,
They are but frail things, till they end in man.
What say you to this, Sir?
This is somewhat handsome.
And by that little wrangling that I feigned,
Now I shall try how constant his love is,
Although't went sore against my heart to chide him.
Alas poor Gentlewoman.
Now you're sure of truth,
You hear her own thoughts speak.
They speak indeed.
Go, you're a brainelesse Cox, a Toy, a Fop,
Isle go no farther then your name, Sir Gregory,
Isle right my self there; were you from this place,
You should perceive I'm heartily angry with you,
Offer to sow strife twixt my Niece and I?
Good morrow Niece, good morrow.
Many fair ones to you, Sir.
Go, your'e a Coxcomb. How dost Niece this morning?
An Idle shallow fool: Slep'st thou well, Girl?
Fortune may very well provide thee Lordships,
For honesty has left thee little manners.
How am I banged a' both sides?
Abuse kindness? Will it take the ayre to day Niece?
When you please, Sir,
There stands the Heir behind you I must take,
(Which I'd as live take, as take him I swear.)
La' you; do you hear't continued to your teeth now?
A pox of all such Gregories; what a hand 
Have I with you?
No more y'feck, I have done, Sir:
Lady, your Scarfe's fallen down.
It is but your luck, Sir,
And doe's presage the Mistress must fall shortly,
You may wear it, and you please.
There's a trick for you,
You're parlously beloved, you should complain.
Yes, when I complain, Sir,
Then do your worst, there Isle deceive you Sir.
You are a Dolt, and so I leave you, Sir. 
Ah sir, Mistress, were you caught y'faith?
We overheard you all; I must not know
I have your heart, take heed a that, I pray,
I knew some Scarf would come.
He's quite gone, sure:
Ah you base Coxcomb, could thou come again?
And so abused as thou wast?
How?
It would have killed
A sensible man, he would have gone to his Chamber,
And broke his heart by this time.
Thank you heartily.
Or fixed a naked rapier in a wall,
Like him that earned his Knighthood ever he had it,
And then refused upon it, ran up to'th hilts.
Yes, let him run for me, I was never brought up to it,
I never professed running in my life.
What art thou made on? thou tough villainous vermin,
Will nothing destroy thee?
Yes, yes, assure your self
Unkind words may do much.
Why, dost thou want 'em?
I've even consumed my spleen to help thee to 'em,
Tell me what sort of words they be would speed thee?
Isle see what I can do yet.
I'm much beholding to you,
Your'e willing to bestow huge pains upon me.
I should account nothing too much to rid thee.
I wonder you'd not offer to destroy me,
All the while your Uncle was here?
Why there thou betray'st thy house, we of the Old-Crafts
Were borne to more wit then so.
I wear your favour here.
Would it might rot thy arm off: if thou knew
With what contempt thou hast it, what hearts bitterness,
How many cunning curses came along with it,
Thoud'st quake to handle it.
A pox, tak't again then;
Who'd be thus plagued of all hands?
No, were it still,
But long I hope thou shalt not, it is but cast
Upon thee, purposely to serve another
That has more right to it, as in some Countries they convey
Their treasure upon Asses to their friends,
If mine be but so wise and apprehensive
As my opinion gives him to my heart,
It stays not long on thy desertlesse arm;
Isle make theee're I have done not dare to wear
Any thing of mine, although I give it thee freely;
Kiss it you may, and make what show you can,
But sure you carryit to a worthier man,
And so good morrow to you.
Hue hum, ha hum;
I have not the spirit now to dash my brains out,
Nor the audacity to kill my self,
But I could cry my heart out, that's as good,
For so't be out no matter which way it comes,
If I can dye with a fillip, or depart
At hot cockles, what's that to any man?
If there be so much death that serves my turn there.
Every one knows the state of his own body,
No Carrion kills a Kite, but then again
There's Cheese will choke a Daw; time I were'dead in faith,
If I knew which way without hurt or danger.
I am a Maiden-Knight, and cannot look
Upon a naked weapon with any modesty,
Else it would go hard with me, and to complain
To Sir Perfidious the old Knight again,
Were to be more abused; perhaps he would beat me well,
But ne'er believe me;
And few men dye a beating, that were lost too:
Oh, here's my friend, isle make my moan to him.
I cannot tear her memory from my heart,
That treads mine down, was ever man so fooled
That professed wit?
O Cuningame?
Sir Gregory?
The choice, the Victor, the Towns happy man?
Sniggs, what dost mean? come I to thee for comfort, and dost abuse me too?
Abuse you? how Sir?
With justifying your fortune, and your joys?
Pray hold your hand, Sir i've bin bold enough,
You come with a new way now; strike me merrily,
But when a man's sore beaten a both sides already,
Then the least tap in jest goes to the guts on him;
Wilt ha the truth? i'm made the ranckest ass
That ever was borne to Lordships.
What? no Sir;
I had not thought my body could a yielded
All those foul scurvy names that she has called me,
I wonder whence she fished 'em?
Is this credible?
She pined this scarf upon me before her Uncle,
But his back turned, she cursed me so for wearing on it,
The very brawn of mine arm has ached ever since,
Yet in a manner forced me to were it still,
But hoped I should not long; if good luck serve
I should meet one that has more wit and worth
Should take it from me, it was but lent to me,
And sent to him for a token.
I conceit it, I know the man
That lies in wait for it, part with it by all means,
In any case, you are way-laid about it.
How Sir? way-laid?
Pox of a Scarf say I,
I prize my friends life 'bove a million on 'em,
You shall be ruled, Sir, I know more then you.
If you know more then I, let me be rid on it,
Lass it is not for my wearing, so she told me.
No, no, give me't, the knave shall miss his purpose,
And you shall live.
I would, as long as I could, Sir.
No more replies, you shall, Isle prevent this,
Pompey shall march without it.
What, is it he?
My man that was?
Call him your deadly Enemy;
You give him too fair a name, you deal too nobly,
He bears a bloody mind, a cruel foe, Sir,
I care not if he heard me.
But do you hear, Sir?
Can't sound with reason she should affect him?
Do you talk of reason? I never thought to have heard
Such a word come from you; reason in love?
Would you give that, no Doctor could ever give?
Has not a Deputy married his Cooke-maid?
An Aldermans Widow one that was her turn broach?
Nay, has not a great Lady brought her Stable
Into her Chamber: lay with her Horse-keeper?
Did ever love play such Jades tricks, Sir?
Oh thousands, thousands: Beware a sturdy Clown ere while you live, Sir;
It is like a housewifery in most Shires about us;
You shall have Farmers widows wed thin Gentlemen,
Much like your self, but put'em to no stress;
What work can they do, with small trap-stick legs?
They keep Clowns to stop gaps, and drive in pigs,
A drudgery fit for Hinds, even back again, Sir,
You're safest at returning.
Think you so, Sir?
But how came this Clown to be called Pompey first?
Push, one good man Caesar, a Pump-maker kersen'd him;
Pompey he writes himself, but his right name's Pumpey,
And stunk too when I had him, now he's crank.
I'm glad I know so much to quell his pride, Sir,
Walk you still that way, Isle make use of this,
To resolve all my doubts, and place this favour
On some new Mistress, only for a try,
And if it meet my thoughts, Isle swear it is I. 
Is Pompey grown so malapert? so frampell?
The only cutter about Ladies honours?
And his blade soonest out?
Now, what's the news, Sir?
I dare not say but good; oh excellent good, Sir.
I hope now you're resolved she loves you, Knight?
Cuds me, what else Sir? that's not to do now.
You would not think how desperately you angered me,
When you belied her goodness; oh you vexed me,
Even to a Palsy.
What a thing was that, Sir?
It is, that it is; as I have hope of sweetness, the Scarfe's gone;
Worthy wise friend, I dote upon thy cunning,
We two shall be well matched, our Issue male, sure
Will be borne Counsellors; is it possible?
Thou shalt have another token out of hand for it;
Nay since the way's found, pity thou should want, y'faith,
O my best joy, and dearest.
Well said, Niece,
So violent fore your Uncle? what will you do
In secret then?
Marry call me slave, and rascal.
Your Scarf — the Scarf I gave you—
Mass that's true Niece,
I ne'er thought upon that; the Scarf she gave you- Sir?
What dumb? no answer from you? the Scarf?
I was way-laid about it, my life threatened;
Life's life, Scarfe's but a Scarf, and so I parted from it.
Unfortunate woman! my first favour too?
Will you be still an ass? no reconcilement
Twixt you and wit? are you so far fallen out,
You'll never come together? I tell you true,
I'm very lowsily ashamed on you,
That's the worst shame that can be;
Thus baiting on him: now his heart's hook't in,
Isle make him, ever I have done, take her with nothing,
I love a man that lives by his wits a life;
Nay leave, sweet Niece, it is but a Scarf, let it go.
The going of it never grieves me, Sir.
It is the manner, the manner—
O dissembling Marmoset! if I durst speak,
Or could be believed when I speak,
What a tale could I tell, to make hair stand upright now?
Nay, Sir, at your request you shall perceive, Uncle,
With what renewing love I forgive this?
Here's a fair Diamond, Sir, Isle try how long
You can keep that?
Not very long, you know it too,
Like a cunning witch as you are.
You're best let him have that too.
So I were, I think, there were no living else,
I thank you, as you have handled the matter.
Why this is musical now, and Tuesday next
Shall tune your Instruments, that's the day set.
A match, good Uncle.
Sir, you hear me too?
Oh very well, I'm for you.
What ever you hear, you know my mind.
I a — on it, too well, if I do not wonder how we two shall come together, I'm a bear whelp? he talks of Tuesday next, as familiarly as if we loved one another, but it is as unlikely to me, as it was seven year before I saw her; I shall try his cunning, it may be he has a way was never yet thought on, and it had need to be such a one, for all that I can think on will never do it; I look to have this Diamond taken from me very speedily, there∣fore Isle take it off a my finger, for if it be seen, I shall be way-laid for that too.
OH torture! torture! thou carry a sting i'thy tail,
Thou never brought'st good news i'thy life yet,
And that's an ill quality, leave it when thou wilt.
Why you receive a blessing the wrong way, Sir,
Call you not this good news? to save at once Sir
Your credit and your kinsmans life together;
Would it not vex your peace, and gaul your worth?
To have one of your name hanged?
Peace, no such words, boy.
Be thankful for the blessing of prevention then.
Le' me see, there was none hanged out of our house since Brute,
I have searched both Stowe, and Hollinshead.
O Sir.
Isle see what Polychronicon says anon too.
It was a miraculous fortune that I heard on it.
I would you would never heard on it,
That's true too,
So it had ne'er been done; to see the luck on it,
He was even brought to Justice Aurums threshold,
There had flown sorth a Mittimus straight for Newgate;
And note the fortune too, Sessions a Thursday,
Jury cul'd out a Friday, Judgement a Saturday,
Dungeon a Sunday, Tyburne a Monday,
Miseries quotidian ague, when't begins once,
Every day pulls him, till he pull his last.
No more, I say, it is an ill theme: where left you him?
He's in the Constables hands below in the Hall, Sir,
Poor Gentleman, and his accuser with him.
What's he?
A Judges Son, it is thought so much the worse too,
He'll hang his enemy, an't shall cost him nothing,
That's a great privilege.
Within there?
Sir?
Call up the folks in the Hall. I had such hope on him,
For a Scholar too, a thing thou ne'er wast fit for,
Therefore erected all my joys in him;
Got a Welch Benefice in reversion for him,
Deane of Cardigan, has his grace already,
He can marry and bury, yet ne'er a hair on's face;
Like a French Vicar, and doe's he bring such fruits to Town with him?
A thief at his first lighting? Oh good den to you.
Nay, sweet Sir, you're so vexed now, you'll grieve him,
And hurt your self.
Away, Isle hear no counsel;
Come you but once in seven year to your Uncle,
And at that time must you be brought home too?
And by a Constable?
Oh speak low, Sir,
Remember your own credit, you profess
You love a man a' wit, begin at home, Sir,
Express it in your self.
Nay, Master Constable,
Show your self a wise man, against your nature too.
Sir, no Dish-porridgement, we have brought home
As good men as ye.
Out, a North-Brittaine Constable, that tongue
Will publish all, it speaks so broad already;
Are you the Gentlewoman?
The unfortunate one, Sir,
That fell into the power of merciless thieves,
Whereof this fellow, whom I'd call your kinsman,
As little as I could, (for the fair reverence
I owe to fame and years) was the prime villain.
A wicked prime.
Nay, not so loud, sweet father.
The rest are fled, but I shall meet with 'em,
Hang one of 'em I will certain, I have swore it,
And it was my luck to light upon this first.
A Cambridge man for this? these your degrees, Sir?
Nine years at University for this fellowship?
Take your voice lower, dear Sir.
What's your loss, Sir?
That which offends me to repeat, the Money's whole, Sir,
It is in the Constables hands there, a sealed hundred,
But I will not receive it.
No? not the money, Sir,
Having confessed it is all?
It is all the Money, Sir,
But it is not all I lost, for when they bound me,
They took a Diamond hung at my shirt string,
Which fear of life made me forget to hide;
It being the sparkling witness of a Contract
Twixt a great Lawyers daughter and my self.
I told you what he was; what does the Diamond
Concern my Cozen, Sir?
No more did the Money,
But he shall answer all now.
There's your conscience,
It shows from whence you sprung.
Sprung? I had leapt a thief,
Had I leapt some of your alliance.
Slave!
You prevent me still.
'Slid, son are you mad?
Come, come, Isle take a legal course.
Will you undo us all? what's your demand, Sir?
Now we're in's danger too.
A hundred Mark, Sir,
I will not bate a do it.
A hundred rascals.
Sir, find 'em out in your own blood, and take 'em.
Go take your course, follow the Law, and spare not.
Does fury make you drunk? know you what you say?
A hundred dogs dungs, do your worst.
You do I'm sure; whose loud now?
What his own asking?
Not in such a case?
You shall have but three score pound; spite a your teeth,
Isle see you hanged first.
And whats seven pound more man?
That all this coyle's about? stay, I say, he shall have it.
It is your own, you may do what you please with it;
Pardon my zeal, I would ha saved you money;
Give him all his own asking?
What's that to you, Sir?
Be sparing of your own, teach me to pinch
In such a case as this? go, go, live by your wits, go.
I practise all I can.
Follow you me, Sir,
And Master Constable come from the knave,
And be a witness of a full recompense.
Pray stop the Constables mouth, what ere you do. Sir
Yet again? as if I meant not to do that my self,
Without your counsel? As for you, precious kinsman,
Your first years fruits in Wales shall go to rack for this,
You lye not in my house, Isle pack you out,
And pay for your lodging rather. 
Oh fie Cozen,
These are ill courses, you a Scholar too,
I was drawn into it most unfortunately,
By filthy deboyst company.
I, I, I,
It is even the spoil of all our youth in England;
What were they Gentlemen?
Faith so like, some on 'em,
They were even the worse again.
Hum.
Great Tobacco swivers,
They would go near to rob with a pipe in their mouths.
What, no?
Faith leave it Cozen, because my rascals use it,
So they do meat and drink, must worthy Gentlemen
Refrain their food for that? an honest man
May eat of the same pig some Parson dines with,
A Lawyer and a fool feed of one Woodcock,
Yet one ne'er the simpler, t'other ne'er the wiser;
It is not meat, drink, or smoke, dish, cup, or pipe,
Co-operates to the making of a knave,
It is the condition makes a slave, a slave,
There's London Philosophy for you; I tell you cozen,
You cannot be too cautelous, nice, or dainty,
In your society here, especially
When you come raw from the University,
Before the world has hardened you a little,
For as a buttered loaf is a Scholars breakfast there,
So a poacht Scholar is a cheaters dinner here,
I have known seven of 'em supped up at a Meal.
Why a poacht Scholar?
Cause he powers himself forth,
And all his secrets, at the first acquaintance,
Never so crafty to be eaten in the shell,
But is outstripped of all he has at first,
And goes down glib, he's swallowed with sharp wit,
Stead of Wine Vinegar.
I shall think, Cozen,
A' your poch't Scholar, while I live.
Master Credulous,
Your Uncle wills you to forbear the House,
You must with me, I'm charged to see you placed
In some new lodging about Thieving Lane,
What the conceit's, I know not, but commands you
To be seen here no more, till you hear further.
Here's a strange welcome, Sir.
This is the World, Cozen;
When a mans fame's once poisoned, fare thee well Lad.
This is the happiest cheat I ever claimed share in,
It has a two fold fortune, gets me coin,
And puts him out of grace, that stood between me,
My fathers Cambridge Jewel, much suspected
To be his Heir, now there's a bar in's hopes.
It chinks, make haste.
The Goat at Smithfield Pens.
So, so, zufficient. Master Cunningame?
I never have ill luck when I meet a wit.
A wit's better to meet, then to follow then,
For I have none so good I can commend yet,
But commonly men unfortunate to themselves,
Are luckiest to their friends, and so may I be.
I run o'er so much worth, going but in haste from you,
All my deliberate friendship cannot equal.
It is but to show that you can place sometimes,
Your modesty a top of all your virtues. 
This Gentleman may pleasure me yet again;
I am so haunted with this broad brimmed hat,
Of the last progress block, with the young hat-band,
Made for a sucking Devil of two year old,
I know not where to turn my self.
Sir?
More torture?
It is rumor'd that you love me.
A my troth Gentlewoman,
Rumour's as false a knave as ever pissed then,
Pray tell him so from me; I cannot fine
With a sweet Gentlewoman, I must deal down right.
I heard, though you dissembled with my Aunt, Sir,
And that makes me more confident.
There's no falsehood,
But pays us our own some way, I confess
I feigned with her, it was for a weightier purpose,
But not with thee, I swear.
Nor I with you then,
Although my Aunt enjoined me to dissemble,
To right her spline, I love you faithfully.
Light, this is worse then it was.
I find such worth in you,
I cannot, nay I dare not dally with you,
For fear the flame consume me.
Here's fresh trouble,
This drives me to my conscience, for it is foul
To injure one that deals directly with me.
I crave but such a truth from your love, Sir,
As mine brings you, and that's proportionable.
A good Geometrician, shrew my heart;
Why are you out a' your wits, pretty plump Gentlewoman,
You talk so desperately? it is a great happiness,
Love has made one on's wiser then another,
We should be both cast away else;
Yet I love gratitude, I must requite you,
I shall be sick else, but to give you me,
A thing you must not take, if you mean to live,
For a' my troth I hardly can my self;
No wise Physician will prescribe me for you.
Alas your state is weak, you had need of Cordials
Some rich Electuary, made of a Son an Heir,
An elder brother in a Cullisse, whole,
'T must be some wealthy Gregory, boiled to a Jelly,
That must restore you to the state of new Gowns,
French Ruffs, and mutable head tires,
But where is he, Sir?
One that's so rich will ne'er wed me with nothing.
Then see thy conscience and thy wit together,
Would thou have me then, that has nothing neither?
What say you to Fop Gregory the first yonder?
Will you acknowledge your time amply recompensed?
Full satisfaction upon loves record?
Without any more suit, if I combine you?
Yes, by this honest kiss.
You're a wise Client,
To pay your fee before hand, but all do so,
You know the worst already, that's thee best too.
I know he's a fool,
You're shrewdly hurt then;
This is your comfort, your great wisest women
Pick their first husband still out of that house,
And some will have 'em to choose, if they bury 20.
I'm of their minds, that like him for a first husband,
To run youths race with him, it is very pleasant,
But when I'm old, I'd always wish a wiser.
You may have me by that time; for this first business,
Rest upon my performance.
With all thankfulness.
I have a project you must aid me in too.
You bind me to all lawful action, Sir,
Pray wear this scarf about you;
I conjecture now—
There's a Court principle for it, one office must help another;
As for example, for your cast a Manchits out a'th Pantry,
Isle allow you a Goose out a'th Kitchen.
It is very sociably done, Sir, farewell performance,
I shall be bold to call you so.
Do, sweet confidence,
If I can match my two broad brimmed hats;
It is he, I know the Maggot by his head;
Now shall I learn news of him, my precious chief.
I have been seeking for you in the bowling Greene,
Enquired at Nettletons, and Anthonies Ordinary,
T'ha's vexed me to the heart, look, I've a Diamond here,
And it cannot find a Master.
No? That's hard y'faith.
It does belong to some body, a — on him,
I would he had it, do's but trouble me,
And she that sent it, is so waspish too,
There's no returning to her till't be gone.
Oh, ho, ah sirrah, are you come?
What's that friend?
Do you note that corner sparkle?
Which? which? which Sir?
At the West end a'the Collar.
Oh I see it now.
It is an apparent mark; this is the stone, Sir,
That so much blood is threatened to be shed for.
I pray?
A tun at least.
They must not find't I'm then, they must
Go where it is to be had.
It is well it came to my hands first, Sir Gregory,
I know where this must go.
Am I discharged on it?
My life for yours now. 
What now?
It is discretion, Sir,
Isle stand upon my Guard all the while I have it.
Troth thou take too much danger on thee still,
To preserve me alive.
It is a friends duty, Sir,
Nay, by a toy that I have late thought upon,
Isle undertake to get your Mistress for you.
Thou wilt not? wilt?
Contract her by a trick, Sir,
When she least thinks on it.
There's the right way to it,
For if she think on it once, she'll never do it.
She doe's abuse you still then?
A —damnably,
Every time worse then other; yet her Uncle
Thinks the day holds a tuesday; say it did, Sir,
She's so familiarly used to call me rascal,
She'll quite forget to wed me by my own name,
And then that marriage cannot hold in Law, you know.
Will you leave all to me?
Who should I leave it to?
It is our luck to love Nieces; I love a Niece too.
I would you did y'faith.
But mine's a kind wretch.
I marry Sir, I would mine were so too.
No rascal comes in her mouth.
Troth, and mine has little else in hers.
Mine sends me tokens,
All the world knows not on.
Mine gives me tokens too, very fine tokens,
But I dare not wear 'em.
Mine's kind in secret.
And there mine's a hell-cat.
We have a day set too.
'Slid, so have we man,
But there's no sign of ever coming together.
Tell thee who it is, the old women's Niece.
Is it she?
I would your luck had been no worse for mildness;
But mum, no more words on it to your Lady.
Foh!
No blabbing as you love me.
None of our blood
Were ever bablers.
Prithee convey this Letter to her,
But at any hand let not your Mistress see it.
Yet again Sir?
There's a Jewel in it,
The very art would make her dote upon it.
Say you so?
And she shall see it for that trick only.
Remember but your Mistress, and ell's well.
Nay if I do not hang me. 
I believe you;
This is the only way to return a token,
I know he will do it now, cause he's charged to'th contrary.
He's the nearest kin to a woman, of a thing
Made without substance, that a man can find again,
Some petticoat begot him, Isle be whipped else,
Engendering with an old pair of pound hose,
Lying in some hot chamber o'er the Kitchen,
Very steam bred him,
He never came where Rem in Re ever grew;
The generation of a hundred such
Cannot make a man stand in a white sheet,
For it is no act in Law, nor can a Constable
Pick out a bawdy business for Bridewell in it;
A lamentable case, he's got with a mans Urine, like a Mandrake.
How now? ho? what prodigious bravery's this?
A most preposterous Gallant, the Doublet sits
As if it mocked the breeches.
Save you, Sir,
Has put his tongue in the fine suit of words too.
How doe's the party?
Takes me for a Scrivener. Which of the parties?
Hum, simplicity betide thee—
I would fine hear of the party; I would be loath to go
Further with her; honour is not a thing to be dallied withal,
No more is reputation, no nor fame, I take it, I must not
Have her wronged when I'm abroad, my party is not
To be compelled with any party in an oblique way;
It is very dangerous to deal with women;
May prove a Lady too, but shall be nameless,
Isle bite my tongue out, ever it prove a Traitor.
Upon my life I know her.
Not by me,
Know what you can, talk a whole day with me,
You're ne'er the wiser, she comes not from these lips.
The old Knights Niece.
'Slid he has got her, pox of his heart that told him,
Can nothing be kept secret? let me entreat you
To use her name as little as you can, though.
Twill be small pleasure, Sir, to use her name.
I had intelligence in my solemn walks,
Twixt Paddington and Pancridge, of a Scarf,
Sent for a token, and a Jewel followed,
But I acknowledge not the receipt of any,
How ever it is carried, believe me Sir,
Upon my reputation I received none.
What, neither Scarf nor Jewel?
It would be seen
Some where about me, you may well think that,
I have an arm for a Scarf, as others have,
And dare to hang a Jewel too, and that's more
Then some men have, my betters a great deal,
I must have restitution, where ever it lights.
And reason good.
For all these tokens, Sir,
Pass in my name.
It cannot otherwise be.
Sent to a worthy friend.
I, that's to thee.
I'm wronged under that title.
I dare swear thou art,
It is nothing but Sir Gregories circumvention,
His envious spite, when you're at Paddington,
He meets the gifts at Pancridge.
Ah false Knight?
False both to honour, and the Law of Arms?
What wilt thou say if I be revenged for thee?
Thou sit as witness?
I should laugh in state then.
Isle fob him, here's my hand.
I should be as glad as any man alive, to see him well fob'd, Sir; but now you talk of fobbing, I wonder the Lady sends not form according to promise? I have kept out a Town these two days, a purpose to be sent for; I am almost starved with walking.
Walking gets men a stomach.
It is most true, Sir, I may speak it by experience, for I have got a stomach six times, and lost it again, as often as a traveller from Chelsy shall lose the sight of Pals, and get it again.
Go to her, man.
Not for a Million, infringe my oath? there's a toy called a vow, has past between us, a poor trifle, Sir; Pray do me the part and office of a Gentleman, if you chance to meet a Footman by the way, in orange tawny ribbons, running before an empty Coach, with a Buzzard in the Poop on it, direct him and his horses toward the new River by Islington, there they shall have me looking upon the Pipes, and whistling. 
A very good note; this love makes us all Monkeys,
But to my work: Scarf first? and now a Diamond? these
Should be sure signs of her affections truth;
Yet Isle go forward with my surer proof. 
Is it possible?
Nay here's his Letter too, there's a fine Jewel in it,
Therefore I brought it to you.
You tedious Mongrel! Is it not enough
To grace thee, to receive this from thy hand,
A thing which makes me almost sick to do,
But you must talk too?
I have done
Fall back,
Yet backer, backer yet, you unmannerly puppy,
Do you not see I'm going about to read it?
Nay these are golden days, now I stay by it,
She was wont not to endure me in her sight at all,
The world mends, I see that.
What an ambiguous Superscription's here?
To the best of Nieces. Why that title may be mine,
And more then her's:
Sure I much wrong the neatnessed of his art;
It is certain sent to me, and to requite
My cunning in the carriage of my Tokens,
Used the same Fop for his.
She nodded now to me, twill come in time.
What's here? an entire Ruby, cut into a heart.
And this the word, Istud Amoris opus?
Yes, yes, I have heard him say that love is the best stone-cutter.
Why thou saucy issue of some travelling Sow-gelder,
What makes love? thy mouth? is it a thing
That ever will concern thee? I do wonder
How thou dare think ont? hast thou ever hope
To come in the same room where lovers are;
And scope unbrain'd with one of their velvet slippers?
Love tricks break out I see, and you talk of slippers once,
It is not far off to bed time.
Is it possible thou can laugh yet?
I would have undertook to have killed a spider
With less venom far, then I have spit at thee.
You must conceive,
A Knight's another manner a piece of flesh.
Back, Owls face.
Do, do.
It is my Uncles voice, that:
Why keep you so far off, Sir Gregory?
Are you afraid, Sir, to come near your Mistress?
Is the proud heart come down? I looked for this still.
He comes not this way yet: Away, you dog-whelp;
Would you offer to come near me, though I said so?
Isle make you understand my mind in time;
Your running greedily like a hound to his breakfast,
That chops in head and all to beguile his fellows;
I'm to be eaten, Sir, with Grace and leisure,
Behaviour and discourse, things that ne'er trouble you;
After I have pelted you sufficiently,
I trow you will learn more manners.
I'm wondering still when we two shall come together?
Tuesday's at hand, but I'm as far off, as I was at first,
I swear.
Now Cuningame, Isle be revenged at large:
Lady, what was but all this while suspicion,
Is truth, full blown now, my Niece wears your Scarf.
Ho?
Do but follow me, Isle place you instantly
Where you shall see her courted by Cuningame.
I go with greediness; we long for things
That break our hearts sometimes, there's pleasures misery,
Where are those gad-flies going? to some Junket now;
That some old humble-bee toles the yoūg one forth
To sweet meats after kind, let 'em look to it,
The thing you wot on, be not mist or gone,
I bring a Maiden-head, and I look for one. 
Yes, yes.
Too manifest now, the Scarf and all.
It cannot be, you're such a fearful soul.
Isle give her cause of fear ever I part from her.
Will you say so? Is it not your Aunts desire too?
What a dissembling groane's that? she'll for∣swear it now.
I see my project takes, yonder's the grace on it.
Who would put confidence in wit again,
I'm plagued for my ambition, to desire
A wise man for a husband, and I see
Fate will not have us go beyond our stint,
We are allowed but one dish, and that's Woodcock,
It keeps up wit to make us friends and fervants of,
And thinks any thing's good enough to make us husbands
Oh that whores hat a' thine, a' the riding block,
A shade for lecherous kisses.
Make you doubt on it?
Is not my love of force?
Yes, me it forces
To tear that sorceress strumpet from th'imbraces.
Lady?
Oh thou hast wronged the exquisit'st love—
What mean you Lady?
Mine, you'll answer for it.
Alas, what seek you?
Sir, mine own with loss.
You shall.
I never made so hard a bargain.
Sweet Lady?
Unjust man, let my wrath reach her,
As you owe virtue duty; your cause trips you,
Now Minion, you shall feel what loves rage is,
Before you taste the pleasure; smile you false, Sir?
How can I choose? to see what pains you take,
Upon a thing will never thank you for it?
How?
See what things you women be, Lady,
When clothes are taken for the best part of you?
This was to show you, when you think I love you not,
How you're deceived still, there the Moral lies,
It was a trap set to catch you, and the only bait
To take a Lady nibbling, is fine clothes;
Now I dare boldly thank you for your love,
I'm pretty well resolved in it by this fit,
For a jealous ague always ushers it.
Now blessings still maintain this wit of thine,
And I'm an excellent fortune coming in thee,
Bring nothing else I charge thee.
Not a great I warrant ye.
Thou shalt be worthily welcome, take my faith for it,
Next opportunity shall make us.
The old Gentlewoman has fooled her revenge sweetly.
Lass it is her part, she knows her place so well yonder;
Always when women jump upon three score,
Love shoves 'em from the chamber to the door.
Thou art a precious she-wit. 
FRiend, met in the harvest of our designs,
Not a thought butt's bustle.
I knew it man,
that made me provide these needful Reapers,
Hooks, Rakers, Gleaners; we'll sing it home
With a melodious Horne-pipe; this is the Bond,
That as we further in your great affair,
You'll suffer us to glean, pick up for crumbs,
And if we snatch a handful from the sheaf,
You will not look a churl on's.
Friend, we'll share
The sheaves of gold, only the Love Aker
Shall be peculiar.
Much good do you, Sir,
Away, you know your way, and your stay; get you
The Music ready, while we prepare the dancers.
We are a consort of our selves.
And can strike up lustily.
You must bring Sir Fop.
That's perfect enough.
Bring all the Fops you can, the more the better fare,
So the proverb runs backwards. 
Isle bring the Ladies. 
Do so first, and then the Fops will follow;
I must to my father, he must make one. 
While I dispatch a business with the Knight,
And I go with you. Well sed, I thank you,
This small Banquet will fusnish our few Guests
With taste and state enough; one reach my Gown,
The action craves it rather then the weather.
There's one stays to speak with you Sir.
What is he?
Faith I know not what, Sir, a fool I think,
That some Brokers shop has made half a Gentleman;
Has the name of a Worthy too..
Pompey? is it not?
That's he, Sir.
Alas poor fellow, prithee enter him, he will need too,
He shall serve for a Witness. Oh Gramercy:
If my friend Sir Gregory comes, you know him,
Entertain him kindly. Oh Master Pompey, how is it man?
Snails, I'm almost sstarv'd with love, and cold, and one thing or other;
Has not my Lady sent for me yet?
Not that I hear, sure some unfriendly Messenger Is employed betwixt you,
I was ne'er so cold in my life, in my conscience I have been seven mile in length, along the new River; I have seen a hundred stickle bags; I do not think but there's gudgeons too; twill ne'er be a true water.
Why think you so?
I warrant you, I told a thousand Millers thumbs in it,
Isle make a little bold with your Sweet-meats.
And welcome Pompey.
It is is a strange thing, I have no taste in any thing.
Oh, that's Love, that distastes any thing but it self.
It is worse then Cheese in that point, may not a man break his word with a Lady? I could find in my heart and my hose too.
By no means Sir, that breaks all the Laws of Love.
Well, isle ne'er pass my word without my deed to Lady, while I live again, I would fine recover my taste.
Well, I have news to tell you.
Good news, Sir?
Happy news, I help you away with a Rival your Master bestowed
Where for this plumbs sake—
Nay listen me.
I warrant you, Sir, I have two ears to one mouth,
I hear more then I eat, i'd ne'er row by Queen Hive
While lived else.
I have a wife for him, and that shall witness the Contract.
The old one I hope, it is not the Lady?
Choke him first, it is one which thou shalt see,
See him, see him deceived, see the deceit, only
The injunction is, you shall smile with modesty.
Isle simper in faith, as cold as I am yet, the old one I hope.
Sir, here's Sir Gregory.
Ud' so shelter, shelter, if you be seen
Ell's ravell'd out again; stand there private,
And you'll find the very opportunity
To call you forth, and place you at the Table.
You are welcome Sir, this Banquet will serve,
When it is crowned with such a dainty as you
Expect, and must have.
Tush, these sweet-meats are but sauce to that,
Well, if there be any honesty or true word in a dream,
She's mine own, nay, and changed extremely,
Not the same woman.
Who? not the Lady?
No, not to me, the edge of her tongue is taken off,
Gives me very good words, turned upside down to me,
And we live as quietly as two Tortusses, if she hold on
As she began in my dream. 
Nay, if Love send forth such Predictions,
You are bound to believe 'em, there's the watch-word
Of her coming, to your practised part now,
If you hit it, Aequus Cupido nobis.
I will warrant you Sir, I will give arms to
Your Gentry, look you forward to your business,
I am an eye behind you, place her in that Chair,
And let me alone to grope her out.
Silence, Lady, your sweet presence illustrates
This homely roof, and as course entertainment;
But where affections are both Host and Guest,
They cannot meet unkindly, please you fit,
Your something long stay made me unmannerly,
To place before you, you know this friend here,
He's my Guest, and more especially,
That this our meeting might not be too single,
Without a witness to it.
I came not unresolved, Sir,
And when our hands are clasped in that firm faith
Which I expect from you; fame shall be bold
To speak the loudest on it: oh, you grasp me.
Somewhat too hard friend.
That's Loves eager will,
Isle touch it gentlier. 
That's too low in you,
Less it be doubly recompensed in me. 
Puh, I must stop my mouth, I shall be choked else.
Come, we'll not play and trifle with delays,
We met to join these hands, and willingly
I cannot leave it till confirmation.
One word first, how does your friend, kind Sir Gregory?
Why do you mention him? you love him not?
I shall love you the less if you say so, Sir,
In troth I love him, but it is you deceive him,
This flattering hand of yours does rob him now,
Now you steal his right from him, and I know
I shall have hate for it, his hate extremely.
Why I thought you had not come so weakly armed,
Upon my life the Knight will love you for it,
Exceedingly love you, for ever love you.
I, you'll persuade me so.
Why he's my friend,
And wishes me a fortune equal with him,
I know, and dare speak it for him.
Oh, this hand betrays him, you might remem∣ber him in some curtsy yet at least.
I thank your help in it, here's to his health
Where ever he be.
Isle pledge it were it against my health.
Oh. oh, my heart hops after twelve mile a day, upon a good return, now could I walk three hundred mile a foot, and laugh forwards and backwards.
You'll take the Knights health Sir,
Yes, yes forsooth, oh my sides! such a Banquet once a week, would make me grow fat in a fortnight.
Well, now to close our meeting, with the close
Of mutual hands and hearts, thus I begin,
Here in Heavens eye, and all loves sacred powers,
(Which in my prayers stand propitious)
I knit this holy hand fast, and with this hand
The heart that owes this hand, ever binding
By force of this initiating Contract
Both heart and hand in love, faith, loyalty,
Estate, or what to them belongs, in all the dues;
Rights and honours of a faithful husband,
And this firm vow henceforth till death to stand
Irrevocable, sealed both with heart and hand.
Which thus I second, but oh, Sir Gregory.
Again? this interposition's ill, believe me.
Here in Heavens eye, and all Loves sacred powers
I knit this holy hand fast, and with this hand
The heart that owes this hand, ever binding
Both heart and hand in love, honour, loyalty,
Estate, or what to them belongs in all the dues,
Rights, and duties of a true faithful wife;
And this firm Vow henceforth till death to stand,
Irrevocable sealed both with heart and hand.
A full agreement on both parts.
I, here's witness of that.
Nay, I have over-reacht you Lady, and that's much,
For any Knight in England to over-reach a Lady.
I rejoice in my deceit, I am a Lady
Now, I thank you Sir.
Good morrow Lady Fop.
Snails, i'm gulled, made a worshipful ass, this is not my Lady.
But it is Sir, and true as your dream told you,
That your Lady was become another woman.
Isle have another Lady Sir, if there were no more Ladies in London, blinde-man buff is an unlawful Game.
Come, down on your knees first, and thank your stars.
A fire of my stars, I may thank you I think.
So you may pray for me, and honour me,
That have preserved you from a lasting torment,
For a perpetual comfort; did you call me friend?
I pray pardon me for that, l did miscall you, I confess.
And should I receiving such a thankful name
Abuse it in the act? should I see my friend
Bafful'd, disgraced, without any reverence
To your title to be called slave, rascal?
Nay cursed to your face, fooled, scorned, beaten down
With a women's peevish hate, yet I should stand
And suffer you to be lost, cast away?
I would have seen you buried quick first,
Your spurs of Knight-hood to have wanted rowels,
And to be kicked from your heals; slave, rascal?
Hear this tongue?
My dearest Love, sweet Knight, my Lord, my Husband.
So, this is not slave and rascal then.
What shall your eye command, but shall be done,
In all the duties of a loyal wife?
Good, good, are not curses fitter for you? were it not better
Your head were broke with the handle of a fan,
Or your nose bored with a silver bodkin?
Why, I will be a servant in your Lady.
Pox, but you shall not, she's too good for you,
This contract shall be a nullity, isle breake't off,
And see you better bestowed.
'Slid, but you shall not Sir, she's mine own, And I am hers, and we are one another lawfully, and let me see him that will take her away by the Civil Law, if you be my friend keep you so, if you have done me a good turn, do not hit me in the teeth with it, that's not the part of a friend.
If you be content —
Content? I was never in better contention in my life,
Isle not change her for both the Exchanges, New or the Old;
Come, kiss me boldly.
Give you joy, Sir.
Oh Sir, I thank you as much as though I did, you are beloved of Ladies, you see we are glad of un∣der women.
Ladies? let not Ladies be disgraced, you are as it were a married man, and have a Family, and for the parties sake that was unnamed before, being Pese-cod time, I am appeased, yet I would wish you make a ruler of your tongue.
Nay, no dissention here, I must bar that,
And this (friend) I entreat you, and be advised,
Let this private contract be yet concealed,
And still support a seeming face of love
Unto the Lady; mark how it avails you,
And quits all her scorns, her Uncle is now hot
In pursuit of the match, and will enforce her
Bend her proud stomach, that she shall proffer
Her self to you, which when you have flouted,
And laughed your fill at, you shall scorn her off
With all your disgraces trebled upon her,
For there the pride of all her heart will bow,
When you shall foot her from you, not she you.
Good in faith; isle continue it, i'd fine laugh at the old fellow too, for he has abused me as scurvily as his Niece, my Knight-hood's upon the spur, we'll go to Bed, and then to Church as fast as we can.
I do wonder I do not hear of the Lady yet.
The good minute may come sooner then you are aware of,
I do not think but twill ever night yet as near as it is.
Well, I will go walk by the new River in that meditation, I am o'er shoes I'm sure upon the dry bank, this gullery of my Master will keep me company this two hours too, if love were not an enemy to laughter I should drive away the time well enough; you know my walk Sir, if she sends, I shall be found angling, for I will try what I can catch for luck sake, I will fish fair for it.
Oh Knight that thou should be gulled so; ha, ha, it does me good at heart,
But oh Lady, thou take down my merry part. Exit
Friend.
Here friend.
Ell's afoot, and will go smooth away,
The woman has conquered the women, they are gone,
Which I have already complained to my Father,
Suggesting that Sir Gregory is fallen off
From his charge, for neglects and ill usage,
And that he is most violently bent
On Gentries wife (whom I have called a widow)
And that without most sudden prevention
He will be married to her.
Foot, all this is wrong,
This wings his pursuit, and will be before me; I am lost for ever.
No, stay, you shall not go
But with my Father, on my wit let it lye,
You shall appear a friendly assistant,
To help in all affairs, and in execution
Help your self only.
Would my belief
Were strong in this assurance.
You shall credit it,
And my wit shall be your slave if it deceive you.
My Father —
Oh Sir, you are well met, whore's the Knight your friend?
Sir, I think your Son has told you.
Shall I stand to tell't again? I tell you he loves,
But not my Kins-woman, her base usage,
And your slack performance which he accuses most
Indeed, has turned the Knights heart upside down.
Isle curb her for it, can he be but recovered,
He shall have her, and she shall be dutiful,
And love him as a wife too.
With that condition Sir,
I dare recall him were he entered the Church,
So much interest of love I assure in him.
Sir, it shall be no loss to you if you do.
I, but these are words still, will not the deeds Be wanting at the recovery, if it should be again?
Why here fool, I am provided, five hundred in earnest,
Of the thousands in her Dower, but were they married once,
I'd cut him short enough, that's my agreement.
I, now I perceive some purpose in you, Father.
But wherefore is she then stolen out of doors to him?
To him? oh fie upon your error, she has ano∣there object, believe it Sir.
I never could perceive it.
I did Sir, and to her shame I should speak it,
To my own sorrow I saw it, dalliance,
Nay dotage with a very Clown, a Fool.
Wit and wantons? nothing else? nothing else?
She love a Fool? she'll sooner mate a fool
Of a wise man.
I, my friend complains so,
Sir Gregory says flatly she makes a fool of him,
And these bold circumstances are approved;
Favours have been sent by him, yet he ignorant
Whither to carry 'em; they have been understood,
And taken from him, certain Sir, there is
An unsuspected fellow lies concealed,
What, or where ever he is, these slight neglects
Could not be of a Knight else.
Well Sir, you have promised (if we recover him Unmarried) to salve all these old bruises?
Isle do my best Sir.
I shall thank you, costly Sir, and kindly too.
Will you talk away the time here Sir, and come behirtde all your purposes?
Away good Sir.
Then stay a little good Sir, for my advise,
Why Father are you broke? your wit beggared,
Or are you at your wits end? or out of
Love with wit? no trick of Wit to surprise
Those designs, but with open Hue and Cry,
For all the world to talk on? this is strange,
You were not wont to slubber a project so.
Can you help at a pinch now? show your self
My son, go too, I leave this to your wit,
Because isle make a proof on it.
It is thus then,
I have had late intelligence, they are now
Buxsome as Bachus Froes, revelling, dancing,
Telling the Musics numbers with their feet,
Awaiting the meeting of premonisht friends,
That's questionless, little dreading you,
Now Sir, with a dexterous trick indeed, sudden
And sufficient were well, to enter on um
As something like the abstract of a Masque;
What though few persons? if best for our purpose
That commends the project.
This takes up time.
Not at all, I can presently furnish
With loose disguises that shall fit that Scene.
Why what wants then?
Nothing but charge of Music,
That must be paid you know.
That shall be my charges, isle pay the Music,
What ever it cost.
And that shall be all your charge,
Now on, I like it, there will be wit in it Father.
I will neither distrust his wit nor friendship,
Yet if his master brain should be o're-throwne
My resolution now shall seize mine own. 
Nay, let's have Music, let that sweet breath at least
Give us her airy welcome, twill be the best
I fear this ruined receptacle will yield,
But that most freely.
My welcome follows me,
Else I am ill come hither, you assure me
Still Mr. Cuningame will be here, and that it was
His kind entreaty that wished me meet him.
Else let me be that shame unto my Sex,
That all belief may fly um.
Continue still
The Knights name unto my Gardianesse,
She expects no other.
He will, he will assure you
Lady, Sir Gregory will be here, and suddenly
This Music fore-ran him, is it not so consorts?
Yes Lady, he stays on some device to bring along
Such a labour he was busy in, some witty device.
Twill be long ever he comes then, for wit's a great Labour to him.
Well, well, you'll agree better one day.
Scarce two I think.
Such a mock-begger suit of clothes as led me
Into the fools pair of Dice, with dowse ace,
He that would make me Mistress Cun, Cun, Cunnie,
He's quite out of my mind, but I shall ne'er
Forget him while I have a hole in my head,
Such a one I think would please you better,
Though he did not abuse you.
Fie, speak well of him now,
Your Niece has quited him.
I hope she has,
Else she looses me for ever; but for Sir Gregory,
Would he were come. I shall ill answer this
Unto your Uncle else.
You know it is his pleasure
I should keep him company.
I, and should be your own
If you did well too, Lord, I do wonder
At the niceness of you Ladies now a days,
They must have Husbands with so much wit forsooth.
Worship and wealth were both wont to be
In better request I'm sure, I cannot tell,
But they get ne'er the wiser children that I see.
La, la, la, la, Sol, this Music breathes in vain,
Me thinks it is dull to let it move alone,
Let's have a female motion, it is in private,
And we'll grace't our selves how ever it deserves.
What say you Gardianesse?
'Lasse i'm weary with the walk,
My jaunting days are done.
Come, come, we will fetch her in by course, or else,
She shall pay the Music.
Nay, isle have a little for my money then.
Hark? upon my life the Knight; it is your friend,
This was the warning-peece of his approach.
Ha? no words but mum? well then,
We shall need no counsell-keeping
Cuningame?
Yes, fear nothing.
Fear? why do you tell me of it?
Your Uncles here.
Aye me.
Peace.
We have caught 'em.
Thank my wit Father.
Which is the Knight think you?
I know not, he will be found when be speaks,
No Mask can disguise his tongue.
Are you charged?
Are you awake?
I'm answered in a question.
Next change we meet, we loose our hands no more.
Are you prepared to tie 'em?
Yes,
You must go with me.
Whether Sir? not from my charge believe me.
She goes a long.
Will you venture and my Uncle here?
His stay's prepared for. 
It is the Knight sure, isle follow.
How now, the Music tired before us?
Yes Sir, we must be paid now.
Oh, that's my charge Father.
But stay, where are our wanton Ladies gone?
Son, where are they?
Only changed the room in a change, that's all sure.
Isle make 'em all sure else, and then return to you.
You must pay for your Music first, Sir.
Must? are there musty Fiddlers? are Beggars choo∣sers now?
Ha? why Witty-pate, Son, where am I?
You were dancing even now, in good measure Sir,
Is your health miscarried since? what aisle you, Sir?
Death, I may be gulled to my face, whore's my Niece?
What are you?
None of your Niece, Sir.
How now? have you loud Instruments too? isle hear
No more I thank you, what have I done trow
To bring these fears about me? Son, where am I?
Not where you should be, Sir, you should be paying
For your Music, and you are in a maze.
Oh, is it so, put up, put up, I pray you,
Here's a crown for you.
Pish, a crown?
Ha, ha, ha, a crown?
Which way do you laugh? I have seen a crown
Has made a Consort laugh heartily.
Father,
To tell you truth, these are no ordinary
Musicians, they expect a bounty
Above their punctual desert.
A — on your Puncks, and their deserts too.
Am I not cheated all this while think you?
Is not your pate in this?
If you be cheated,
You are not to be Indicted for your own goods,
Here you trifle time to market your bounty
And make it base, when it must needs be free
For ought I can perceive.
Will you know the lowest price, Sir?
That I will Sir, with all my heart.
Unless I was discovered, and they now fled
Home again for fear, I am absolutely beguiled,
That's the best can be hoped for.
Faith it is somewhat too dear yet, Gentlemen.
There's not a Denier to be bated, Sir.
Now Sir, how dear is it?
Bate but the tother ten pound?
Not a Bawbee, Sir.
How? bate ten pound? what's the whole sum then?
Faith Sir, a hundred pound, with much a doe,
I got fifty bated, and faith Father, to say truth,
It is reasonable for men of their fashion.
La, la, la, down, a hundred pound? la, la, la,
You are a Consort of Thieves, are you not?
No Musicians Sir, I told you before.
Fiddle faddle, is it not a robbery? a plain robbery?
No, no, no, by no means Father, you have received
For your money, nay, and that you cannot give back,
It is somewhat dear I confess, but who can help it?
If they had been agreed with before hand,
It was ill forgotten.
And how many shares have you in this? I see my force,
Case up your Instruments, I yield, here, as robed and
Taken from me, I deliver it.
No Sir, you have performed your promise now, which was, to pay the charge of Music, that's all.
I have heard no Music, I have received none, Sir, There's none to be found in me, nor about me.
Why Sir, here's witness against you, you have danced,
And he that dances acknowledges a receipt
Of Music.
I deny that Sir, look you, I can dance without Music, do you see Sir? and I can sing without it too; you are a consort of Thieves, do you hear what I do?
Pray you take heed Sir, if you do move the Mu∣sick again, it may cost you as much more.
Hold, hold, isle depart quietly, I need not bid you farewell, I think now, so long as that hundred pound lasts with you.
Ha, ha, am I snapped in faith?
Oh, Sir, Perfidious.
I, I, some howling anotherwhile, Musick's too damnable dear.
Oh Sir, my heart-strings are broke, if I can but live to tell you the tale I care not, your Niece my charge is —
What, is she sick?
No, no Sir, she's lustity well married.
To whom?
Oh, to that cunning dissembler, Cuningame.
Isle hang the Priest, first, what was he?
Your Kinsman Sir, that has the Welch Benefice.
I saved him from the Gallows to that end, good, is there any more?
And Sir Gregory is married too.
To my Niece too, I hope, and then I may hang her.
No Sir, to my Niece, thank Cupped; and that's all that's likely to recover me, she's Lady Fop now, and I am One of her Aunts I thank my promotion.
I hate performed your behest Sir.
What have you performed Sir?
Faith Sir, I must excuse my Cousin in this act,
If you can excuse your self for making him
A Priest, there's the most difficult answer
I put this practise on him as from your desire,
A truth, a truth Father.
I protest Sir, he tells you truth, he moved me to it in your name.
I protest Sir, he told you a lye in my name, and were you so easy Mr. Credulous to believe him?
If a man should not believe his Cousin Sir, whom should he believe?
Gotten to you good Mr. Cousin Cuningame,
And your fair Bride, my Cousin Cuningame too,
And how do you, Sir Gregory, with your fair Lady?
A little better then you would have had me, I thank you Sir, the days of Puppy, and Slave, and Ras∣call are pretty well blown over now, I know Crabs from Verjuyce, I have tried both, and thoud'st give me thy Niece for nothing i'd not have her.
I think so Sir Gregory, for my sake you would not.
I wo'd thou had escaped her too, and then she had dyed of the greene sickness, know this, that I did marry in spite, and I will kiss my Lady in spite, and love her in spite, and beget children of her in spite, and when I dye they shall have my Lands in spite; this was my resolution, and now it is out.
How spiteful are you now, Sir Gregory?
Why look you, I can love my dearest Husband,
With all the honours, duties, sweet embraces,
That can be thrown upon a loving man.
— This is before your Uncles face, but be∣hind his back in private you'll show him another tale.
You see Sir, now the irrecoverable state of all these things before you, come out of your muse, they have been but wit weapons, they were wont to love the play.
Let me alone in my muse a little Sir, I will wake to you anon.
U'd so, your friend Pompey, how will you answer him?
Very well, if you'll but second it, and help me.
I do hear strange stories, are Ladies things obe∣noxious?
Oh, the dissembling falsest wretch is come.
How now Lady?
Let me come to him, and in stead of love
Let me have revenge.
Pray you now, will you first examine, whither he be guilty or no.
He cannot be excused,
How many Messengers (thou perjured man)
Hast thou returned with Vows and Oaths? that thou
Would follow, and never till this unhappy hour
Could I set eye of thee, since thy false dye
Drew my heart to it? oh I could tear thee now,
In stead of soft embraces, pray give me leave—
Faith this was ill done of you Sir, if you pro∣missed otherwise.
By this hand, never any Messenger came at me since the first time I came into her company; that a man should be wronged thus?
Did not I send thee Scarfs and Diamonds?
And thou returnd'st me letters, one with a faife heart in it.
On fie to receive favours, return false-hoods, and hold a Lady in hand —
Will you believe me Sir? if ever I received Dia∣monds, or Scarf, or sent any Letter to her, would this Sword might ne'er go through me.
Some bad Messengers have gone between you then.
Take him from my fight, if I shall see to more∣row.
Pray you forbear the place, this discontent may impair her health much.
Foot, if a man had been in any fault it would ne'er have grieved him, Sir, if you'll believe.
Nay, nay, protest no more, I do believe you,
But you see how the Lady is wronged by it;
She has cast away her self it is to be feared,
Against her Uncles will, nay, any consent,
But out of a mere neglect, and spite to her self,
Married suddenly without any advice.
Why who can help it? if she be cast away she may thank her self, she might have gone further and fared worse; I could do no more then I could do, it was her own pleasure to command me that I should not come till I was sent for, I had been with her every minute of an hour else.
Truly I believe you.
Night and day she might have commanded me, and that she knew well enough; I said as much to her between her and I, yet I protest she's as honest a Lady for my part, that i'd say if she would see me hanged, if she be cast away I cannot help it, she might have stayed to have spoke with a man.
Well, it was a hard miss on both parts.
So it was, I was within one of her, for all this cross luck, I was sure I was between the Knight and home.
Not gone yet? oh my heart! none regard my health?
Good Sir, forbear her sight a while, you hear how ill she brookes it.
Foolish woman, to over-throw her fortunes so; I shall think the worse of a Ladies wit while I live for it— I could almost cry for anger, if she should miscarry now, it would touch my conscience a little, and who knows what love and conceit may do? what would people say as I go along? there goes he that the Lady dyed for love on, lam sure to hear on it in the streets. I shall weep before hand; foolish woman, I do grieve more for thee now then I did love thee before; well, go thy ways, would thou spare thy Husbands head and break thine own heart? if thou had any wit, I would some other had been the cause of thy undoing, I shall be twitted in the teeth with it, i'm sure of that, foolish Lady. 
So, so, this trouble's well shook off, Uncle, how dee? there's a Dowry due, sir.
We have agreed it, sweetest,
And find your Uncle fully recovered, kind to both of us.
To all the rest I hope;
Never to thee, nor thee, easy cousin Credulous,
Was your wit so raw?
Faith yours Sir, so long seasoned
Has been faulty too, and very much to blame,
Speaking it with reverence, Uncle.
Yes faith, Sir, you have paid as dear for your time as any man here.
I Sir, and isle reckon it to him. Imprimis, The first preface cheat of a pair of pieces to the Beggars, you
remember that I was the example to your bounty there, I spake Greek, and Syriacke, Sir, you understand me now. Next, the Robbery put upon your indulgent Cousin, which indeed was no Robbery, no Constable, no Justice, no Thief, but all Cheaters; there was a hundred Mark, mark you that. Lastly, this memorable 100. pounds worth of Music, this was but cheats and wit too, and for the assistance, this Gentleman to my Cousin (for which I am to have a Fee) that was a little practice of my wit too, Fa∣there; will you come to composition yet, Father?
Yes faith Sir, do, two hundred a year will be easier then so much weekly, I do not think he's barren if he should be put to it again.
Why this was the day I looked for, thou shalt have it,
And the next cheat makes it up three hundred;
Live thou upon thy ten pound Vicarage,
Thou got not a penny more, here's thy full
Hire now.
I thank you Sir.
Why there was the sum of all my wit Father,
To shove him out of your favour, which I feared
Would have dis-inherited me.
Most certain it had,
Had not thy wit recovered it; is there any here
That had a hand with thee?
Yes, all these Sir.
Nephew, part a hundred pound amongst 'em,
Isle repay it; wealth, love me as I love wit;
When I dye,
Isle build an Almes-house for decayed wits.
Isle entertain one in my life time; Scholar, you shall be my Chaplain, I have the gift of twenty Been∣feces, simple as I am here.
Thanks my great Patron.
Sir, your Gentry and your name shall both be raised as high as my fortunes can reach 'em, for your friends sake.
Something will be in my present power, the future more,
You shall share with me.
Thanks worthy Gentlemen.
Sir, I would beg one thing of you?
You can beg nothing of me.
Oh Sir, if she begs, there's your power over her.
She has begged me for a fool already, but it is no matter,
I have begged her for a Lady that she might have been,
That's one for another.
Nay, but if she beg—
Let her beg again then.
That your man Pompeyes Coat may come over his ears back again, I would not he should be lost for my sake.
Well, it is granted, for mine own sake.
Isle entreat it Sir.
Why then it is granted for your sake.
Come, come, down with all weapons now, it is
Music time,
So it be purchased at an easy rate;
Some have received the knocks, some given the hits,
And all concludes in love, there's happy wits. 
WE need not tell you Gallants, that this night
The VVits have jumped, or that the Scenes hit right,
It would be but labour lost for to excuse
What Fletcher had to do in, his brisk Muse
Was so Mercurial, that if he but writ
An Act, or two, the whole Play rise up wit.
We'll not appeal unto those Gentlemen
Judge by their Clothes, if they sit right, nor when
The Ladies smile, and with their Fans delight
To whisk a climb aside, then all goes right:
It was well received before, and we dare say,
You now are welcome to no vulgar Play.

