Hail, CAIVS SILIVS.
TITIVS SA∣BINVS, Hail.
Yo'are rarely met in court!
There∣fore, well met.
It is true: Indeed, this place is not our sphere.
No, SILIVS, wee are no good in∣giners;
We want the fine arts, &amp; their thriving use,
Should make vs graced, or favoured of the times:
We have no shift of faces, no cleft tongues,
No soft, and glutinous bodies, that can stick,
Like snails, on painted walls; or, on our breasts,
Creep up, to fall, from that proud height, to which
We did by slavery, not by service, clime.
We are no guilty men, and then no great;
We have nor place in court, office in state,
That we can say, we owe unto our crimes:
We burn with no black secrets, which can make
Vs dear to the pale authors; or live feared
Of their still waking iealosies, to raise
Our selves a fortune, by subverting theirs.
We stand not in the lines, that doe advance
To that so courted point.
But yonder lean
A pair that doe.
SATRIVS SECVNDVS, and PINNARIVS NATTA,
The great SEIANVS clients: There be two,
Know more, then honest counsels: whose close breasts
Were they rip'd up to light, it would be found
A poor, and idle sin, to which their trunks
Had not been made fit organs. These can lye,
Flatter, and swear, forswear, deprave, inform,
Smile, and betray; make guilty men; then beg
The forfeit lives, to get the livings; cut
Men's throats with whisperings; sell to gaping suitors
The empty smoke, that flies about the Palace;
Laugh, when their patron laughs; sweat, when he sweates;
Be hot, and cold with him; change every mood,
Habit, and garb, as often as he varies;
Observe him, as his watch observes his clock;
And true, as turks in the dear lords ring,
Look well, or ill with him: ready to praise
His lordship, if he spit, or but peace fair,
Have an indifferent stool, or break wind well,
Nothing can scope their catch.
Alas! these things
Deserve no note, conferred with other vile,
And filthier flatteries, that corrupt the times:
When, not alone our gentries chief are fine
To make their safety from such sordide acts,
But all our Consuls, and no little part
Of such as have been Praetors, yea, the most
Of Senators (that else not use their voices)
Start up in public Senate, and there strive
Who shall propound most abject things, and base,
So much, as oft TIBERIVS hath been heard,
Leaving the court, to cry Ô race of men,
Prepared for servitude! which showed, that, he
Who least the public liberty could like,
As loathly brooked their flat servility.
Well, all is worthy of vs, were it more,
Who with our riots, pride, and civil hate,
Have so provoked the justice of the gods.
We, that (within these fourscore years) were borne
Free, equal lords of the triumphed world,
And knew no masters, but affections,
To which betraying first our liberties,
We since became the slaves to one mans lusts;
And now to many: every ministering spy
That will accuse, and swear, is lord of you,
Of me, of all, our fortunes, and our lives.
Our looks are called to question, and our words,
How innocent soever, are made crimes;
We shall not shortly dare to tell our dreams,
Or think, but twill be reason.
"Tyrannes arts
"Are to give flatterers, grace; accusers, power;
"That those may seem to kill whom they devour.
Now good CREMVTIVS CORDVS.
Hail, to your lordship.
Who's that salutes your cousin?
It is one CORDVS,
A gentleman of Rome: one, that has writ
Annal's of late, they say, and very well.
Annal's? of what times?
I think of POMPEI'S,
And CAIVS CAESARS; and so down to these.
How stands h'affected to the present state?
Is he or Drusian? or Germanican?
Or ours or neutral?
I know him not so far.
Those times are somewhat queasy to be touched.
Have you or seen or heard part of his work?
Not I, he means they shall be public shortly.
O. CORDVS do you cal him?
I.
But these our times
Are not the same, ARRVNTIVS.
Times? the men,
The men are not the same: it is we are base▪
Poor, and degenerate from th'exalted strain
Of our great fathers. Where is now the soul
Of god-like CATO? he, that durst be good,
When CAESAR durst be evil; and had power,
As not to live his slave, to dye his master.
Or where the constant BRVTVS, that (being proof
Against all charm of benefits) did strike
So brave a blow into the monsters heart
That sought unkindly to captive his country?
O, they are fled the light. Those mighty spirits
Lye raked up, with their ashes in their vrnes,
And not a spark of their eternal fire
Glowes in a present bosom. Ell's but blaze,
Flashes, and smoke, wherewith we labour so,
There's nothing Roman in vs; nothing good,
Gallant, or great: It is true, that CORDVS soy's,
Brave CASSIVS was the last of all that race.
Stand by, lord DRVSVS.
Th'Emp'rours son, give place.
I like the prince well.
A riotous youth,
There's little hope of him.
That fault his age
Will, as it grows, correct. Me thinks, he bears
Himself, each day, more nobly then other:
And wins no less on men's affections,
Then doth his father lose. Believe me, I love him;
And chiefly for opposing to SEIANVS.
And I, for gracing his young kinsmen so,
The sons of Prince GERMANICVS: It shows
A gallant clearness in him, a straight mind,
That envies not, in them, their fathers name.
His name was, while he lived, aboue all envy;
And being dead, without it. O, that man!
If there were seeds of the old virtue left,
They lived in him.
He had the fruits, ARRVNTIVS,
More then the seeds: SABINVS, and my self
Had means to know him, within; and can report him.
We were his followers, (he would call vs friends.)
He was a man most like to vertue'; In all,
And every action, nearer to the gods,
Then men, in nature; of a body' as fair
As was his mind; and no less reverend
In face, then fame: He could so use his state,
Temp'ring his greatness, with his gravity,
As it avoided all selfe-loue in him,
And spite in others. What his funerals lacked
In images, and pomp, they had supplied
With honourable sorrow, soldiers sadness,
A kind of silent mourning, such, as men
(Who know no tears, but from their captives) use
To show in so great losses.
I thought once,
Considering their forms, age, manner of deaths,
The nearness of the places, where they fell,
T'haue paralleled him with great ALEXANDER:
For both were of best feature, of high race,
Yeer'd but to thirty, and, in foreign lands,
By their own people, alike made away.
I know not, for his death, how you might wrest it:
But, for his life, it did as much disdain
Comparison, with that voluptuous, rash,
Giddy, and drunken Macedon's, as mine
Doth with my bond-mans. All the good, in him,
(His valour, and his fortune) he made his;
But he had other touches of late Romans,
That more did speak him: POMPEI'S dignity,
The innocence of CATO, CAESAR'S spirit,
Wise BRVTVS temp'rance, and every virtue,
Which, parted unto others, gave them name,
Flowed mixed in him. He was the soul of goodness:
And all our praises of him are like streams
Drawn from a spring, that still rise full, and leave
The part remaining greatest.
I am sure
He was too great for vs, and that they knew
Who did remove him hence.
When men grow fast
Honoured, and loved, there is a trick in state
(Which jealous princes never fail to use)
How to decline that growth, with fair pretext,
And honourable colours of employment,
Either by embassy, the war, or such,
To shift them forth into another air,
Where they may purge, and lessen; so was he:
And had his secon'ds there, sent by TIBERIVS,
And his more subtle damme, to discontent him;
To breed, and cherish mutinies; detract
His greatest actions; give audacious check
To his commands; and work to put him out
In open act of treason. All which snares
When his wise cares prevented, a fine poison
Was thought on, to mature their practices.
Here comes SEIANVS.
Now observe the stoups,
The bindings, and the falls.
Most creeping base!
I Note 'hem well: No more. Say you.
My lord,
There is a gentleman of Rome would buy—
How cal you him you talked with?
'Please your lordship,
It is EVDEMVS, the physician
To LIVIA, DRVSV'S wife.
On with your suit.
Would buy, you said—
A Tribune▪ place, my lord.
What will he give?
Fifty sestertia.
LEVEE'S physician, say you, is that fellow?
It is, my lord; your lordships answer?
To what?
The place, my lord. It is for a gentleman,
Your lordship will well like off, when you see him;
And one, you may make yours, by the grant.
Well, let him bring his money, and his name.
Thank your lordship. He shall, my lord.
Come hither.
Know you this same EVDEMVS? Is he learned?
Reputed so, my lord: and of deep practice.
Bring him in, to me, in the gallery;
And take you cause, to leave vs there, together:
I would confer with him, about a grief.—On.
So, yet! another? yet? Ô desperate state
Of grovelling honour! See thou this, Ô sun,
And doe wee see thee after? Me thinks, day
Should lose his light, when men doe lose their shames,
And, for the empty circumstance of life,
Betray their cause of living.
Nothing so.
SEIANVS can repair, if JOVE should ruin.
He is the now court-god; And well applied
With sacrifice of knees, of crookes, and cringe,
He will doe more then all the house of heaven
Can, for a thousand hecatombes. It is he
Makes vs our day, or night; Hell, and Elysium
Are in his look: We talk of RHADAMANTH,
Furies, and fire-brands; But it is his frown
That is all these, where, on the adverse part,
His smile is more, then ere (yet) Poets feigned
Of bliss, and shades, nectar—
A serving boy?
I knew him, at CAIVS trencher, when for hire,
He prostituted his abused body
To that great gourmond, fat APICIVS;
And was the noted pathick of the time.
And, now, the second face of the whole world.
The partner of the empire, hath his image
Reared equal with TIBERIVS, borne in ensigns,
Comment's, disposes every dignity,
Centurions, Tribunes, Heads of provinces,
Praetors, and Consuls, all that heretofore
Romes general suffrage gave, is now his sale.
The gain, or rather spoil, of all the earth,
One, and his house, receives.
He hath of late
Made him a strength too, strangely, by reducing
All the Praetorian bands into one camp,
Which he comment's: pretending, that the soldier
By living loose, and scattered, fell to riot;
And that if any sudden enterprise
Should be attempted, their united strength
Would be far more, then severed; and their life
More strict, if from the city more removed.
Where, now, he builds, what kind of fort's he please,
Is hard to court the soldier, by his name,
Woos, feasts the chiefest men of action,
Whose wants, not loves, compel them to be his.
And, though he ne'er were liberal by kind,
Yet, to his own dark ends, hoe's most profuse,
Lavish, and letting fly, he cares not what
To his ambition.
Yet, hath he ambition?
Is there that step in state can make him higher?
Or more? or any thing he is, but less?
Nothing, but Emp'rour.
The name TIBERIVS
I hope, will keep; how ere he hath fore-gone
The dignity, and power.
Sure, while he lives.
And dead, it comes to DRVSVS. Should he fail,
To the brave issue of GERMANICVS;
And they are three: Too many (ha?) for him
To have a plot upon?
I doe not know
The heart of his designs; but, sure, their face
Looks farther then the present.
By the gods,
If I could guess he had but such a thought,
My sword should cleave him down from head to heart,
But I would find it out: and with my hand
I'd hurl his panting brain about the ayre,
In mites, as small as atom, to'vndoe
The knotted bed —
You are observed, ARRVNTIVS.
Death! I dare tell him so; and all his spies:
You, sir, I would, doe you look? and you.
Forbear.
Here, he will instant be; Let's walk a turn.
Yo'are in a muse, EVDEMVS?
Not I, sir.
I wonder he should mark me out so! well,
JOVE, and APOLLO form it for the best.
Your fortune's made unto you now, EVDEMVS,
If you can but lay hold upon the means;
Doe but observe his humour, and — believe it —
He's the noblest Roman, where he takes —
Here comes his lordship.
Now, good SATRIVS.
This is the gentleman, my lord.
Is this?
Give me your hand, we must be more acquainted.
Report, sir, hath spoke out your art, and learning:
And I am glad I have so needful cause,
(How ever in it self painful, and hard)
To make me known to so great virtue. Look,
Who's that? SATRIVS — I have a grief, sir,
That will desire your help. Your name's EVDEMVS?
Yes.
Sir?
It is, my lord.
I hear, you are Physician to LIVIA, the princess?
I minister unto her, my good lord.
You minister to a royal lady, then.
She is, my lord, and fair.
That's understood
Of all their sex, who are, or would be so;
And those, that would be, physic soon can make 'hem▪
For those that are, their beauties fear no colours.
Your lordship is conceited.
Sir, you know it.
And can (if need be) read a learned lecture,
On this, and other secrets. Pray you tell me,
What more of ladies, besides LIVIA,
Have you your patients?
Many, my good lord.
The great AVGVSTA, VRGVLANIA.
MVTILIA PRISCA, and PLANCINA, divers —
And, all these tell you the particulars
Of every several grief? how first it grew,
And then increased, what action caused that;
What passion that: and answer to each point
That you will put 'hem.
Else, my lord, we know not
How to prescribe the remedies.
Go to,
Yo'are a subtle nation, you Physicians!
And grown the only cabinets, in court,
To ladies privacies. Faith which of these
Is the most pleasant lady, in her physic?
Come, you are modest now.
It is fit, my lord.
Why, sir, I doe not ask you of their urines,
Whose smel's most violet? or whose siege is best?
Or who makes hardest faces on her stool?
Which lady sleeps with her own face, a nights?
Which puts her teeth off, with her clothes, in court?
Or, which her hair? which her complexion?
And, in which box she puts it? These were questions
That might, perhaps, have put your gravity
To some defence of blush. But, I enquired,
Which was the wittiest? merriest? wantonnest?
Harmless intergatories, but conceits.
Me thinks, AVGVSTA should be most perverse,
And froward in her fit?
She's so, my lord.
I knew it. And MVTILIA the most jocund?
It is very true, my lord.
And why would you
Conceal this from me, now? Come, what's LIVIA?
I know, she's quick, and quaintly spirited,
And will have strange thoughts, when she's at leisure;
She tells 'hem all to you?
My noblest lord,
He breaths not in the empire, or on earth,
Whom I would be ambitious to serve
(In any act, that may preserve mine honour)
Before your lordship.
Sir, you can loose no honour,
By trusting ought to me. The coursest act
Done to my service, I can so requite,
As all the world shall stile it honourable:
"Your idle, virtuous definitions
"Keep honour poor, and are as scorned, as vain:
"Those deeds breathe honour, that do suck in gain.
But, good my lord, if I should thus betray
The counsels of my patient, and a ladies
Of her high place, and worth; what might your lordship,
(Who presently are to trust me with your own)
Judge of my faith?
Only the best, I swear.
Say now, that I should utter you my grief;
And with it, the true cause; that it were love;
And love to LIVIA: you should tell her this?
Should she suspect your faith? I would you could
Tell me as much, from her; see, if my brain
Could be turned jealous.
Happily, my lord,
I could, in time, tell you as much, and more;
So I might safely promise but the first,
To her, from you.
As safely, my EVDEMVS,
(I now dare call thee so) as I have put
The secret into thee.
My lord —
Protest not.
Thy looks are vows to me, use only speed,
And but affect her with SEIANVS love,
Thou art a man, made, to make Consuls. Go.
My lord, Isle promise you a private meeting
This day, together.
Can thou?
Yes.
The place?
My gardens, whither I shall fetch your lordship.
Let me adore my AESCVLAPIVS.
Why, this indeed is physic! and out-speakes
The knowledge of cheap drugs, or any use
Can be made out of it! more comforting
Then all your opiates, iulebes, apophthegms,
Magistrall syrrupes, or—Be gone, my friend,
Not barely stiled, but created so;
Expect things, greater then thy largest hopes,
To overtake thee: Fortune, shall be taught
To know how ill she hath deserved thus long,
To come behind thy wishes. Go, and speed.
"Ambition makes more trusty slaves, then need,
These fellows, by the favour of their art,
Have, still, the means to tempt, oft-times, the power.
If LIVIA will be now corrupted, then
Thou hast the way, SEIANVS, to work out
His secrets, who (thou know) endures thee not,
Her husband DRVSVS: and to work against them.
Prosper it, PALLAS, thou, that betterst wit;
For VENVS hath the smallest share in it.
WEe not endure these flatteries, let him stand;
Our empire, ensigns, axes, rods, and state
Take not away our humane nature from vs:
Look up, on vs, and fall before the gods.
How like a god, speaks CAESAR!
There, observe!
He can endure that second, that's no flattery.
O, what is it, proud slime will not believe
Of his own worth, to hear it equal praised
Thus with the gods?
He did not hear it, sir.
He did not? Tut, he must not, we think meanly.
It is your most courtly, known confederacy,
To have your private parasite redeem
What he, in public subtlety, will lose
To making him a name.
Right mighty lord —
We must make up our ears, against these assaults
Of charming tongues; we pray you use, no more
These contumelies to vs: stile not vs
Or lord, or mighty, who profess our self
The servant of the Senate, and are proud
T'enioy them our good, just, and favouring lords.
Rarely dissembled.
Prince-like, to the life.
"When power, that may command, so much descends,
"Their bondage, whom it stoups to, it intends.
Whence are these letters?
From the Senate.
So.
Whence these?
From thence too.
Are they sitting, now?
They stay thy answer, CAESAR.
If this man
Had but a mind allied unto his words,
How blessed a fate were it to vs, and Rome?
We could not think that state, for which to change,
Although the aim were our old liberty:
The ghosts of those that fell for that, would grieve
Their bodies lived not, now, again to serve.
"Men are deceived, who think there can be thrall
"Beneath a virtuous prince. Wished liberty
"Ne'er lovelier looks, then under such a crown.
But, when his grace is merely but lip-good,
And, that no longer, then he aires himself
Abroad in public, there, to seem to shun
The strokes, and stripes of flatterers, which within
Are lechery unto him, and so feed
His brutish sense with their afflicting sound,
As (dead to virtue) he permits himself
Be carried like a pitcher, by the ears,
To every act of vice: this is a case
Deserves our fear, and doth presage the nigh,
And close approach of blood and tyranny.
"Flattery is midwife unto princes rage:
"And nothing sooner, doth help forth a tyranne,
"Then that, and whisperers grace, who have the time,
"The place, the power, to make all men offenders.
He should be told this; and be bid dissemble
With fools, and blind men: We that know the evil,
Should hunt the Palace-rattes, or give them bane;
Fright hence these worse then ravens, that devour
The quick, where they but prey upon the dead:
He shall be told it.
Stay, ARRVNTIVS,
We must abide our opportunity:
And practise what is fit, as what is needful.
"It is not safe t'enforce a soueraigne's ear:
"Princes hear well, if they at all will hear.
Ha? Say you so? well. In the mean time, JOVE,
(Say not, but I doe call upon thee now.)
Of all wilde beasts, preserve me from a tyranne;
And of all tame, a flatterer.
It is well prayed.
Return the lords this voice, we are their creature:
And it is fit, a good, and honest prince,
Whom they, out of their bounty, have instructed
With so dilate, and absolute a power,
Should owe the office of it, to their service;
And good of all, and every citizen.
Nor shall it ever repent vs, to have wished
The Senate just, and fau'ring lords unto vs,
"Since their free loves doe yield no less defence
"To a princes state, then his own innocence.
Say then, there can be nothing in their thought
Shall want to please vs, that hath pleased them;
Our suffrage rather shall prevent, then stay
Behind their wills: it is empire, to obey
Where such, so great, so grave, so good determine.
Yet, for the suit of Spain, t'erect a temple
In honour of our mother, and our self,
We must (with pardon of the Senate) not
Assent thereto. Their lordships may object
Our not denying the same late request
Unto the Asian cities: We desire
That our defence, for suffering that, be known
In these brief reasons, with our after purpose.
Since deified AVGVSTVS hindered not
A temple to be built, at Pergamum,
In honour of himself, and sacred Rome,
We, that have all his deeds, and words observed
Ever, in place of laws, the rather followed
That pleasing precedent, because, with ours,
The Senates reverence also, there, was joined.
But, as, t'haue once received it, may deserve
The gain of pardon, so, to be adored
With the continued stile, and note of gods,
Through all the provinces, were wild ambition,
And no less pride: Yea, even AVGVSTVS name
Would early vanish, should it be profaned
With such promiscuous flatteries. For our part,
We here protest it, and are covetous
Posterity should know it, we are mortal;
And can but deeds of men: it were glory' enough,
Could we be truly a prince. And, they shall add
Abounding grace, unto our memory,
That shall report vs worthy our fore-fathers,
Careful of your affairs, constant in dangers,
And not afraid of any private frown
For public good. These things shall be to vs
Temples, and statues, reared in your minds,
The fairest, and most during imag'rie:
For those of stone, or bristle, if they become
Odious in judgment of posterity,
Are more contemned, as dying sepulchres,
Then tan for living monuments. We then
Make here our suite, alike to gods and men,
The one, until the period of our race,
T'inspire vs with a free, and quiet mind,
Discerning both divine, and humane laws;
The other, to vouchsafe vs after death,
An honourable mention, and fair praise,
T'accompanie our actions, and our name:
The rest of greatness princes may command,
And (therefore) may neglect, only, a long,
A lasting, high, and happy memory
They should, without being satisfied, pursue.
Contempt of fame begets contempt of virtue.
Rare!
Most divine!
The Oracles are ceased,
That only CAESAR, with their tongue, might speak.
Let me be gone, most felt, and open this!
Stay.
What? to hear more cunning, and fine words,
With their sound flattered, ere their sense be meant?
Their choice of Antium, thereto place the gift
Vowed to the goddess, for our mothers health,
We will the Senate know, we fairly like;
As also, of their grant to LEPIDVS,
For his repairing the Aemilian place,
And restoration of those monuments:
Their grace too in consining of SILANVS,
To the other Is'le Cithera, at the suit
Of his religious sister, much commends
Their policy, so temp'red with their mercy.
But, for the honours, which they have decreed
To our SEIANUS▪ to advance his statue
In POMPEI'S theatre (whose ruining fire
His vigilance, and labour kept restrained
In that one loss) they have, therein, out-gone
Their own great wisdoms, by their skilful choice,
And placing of their bounties, on a man,
Whose merit more adorns the dignity,
Then that can him: and gives a benefit,
In taking, greater, then it can receive.
Blush not, SEIANVS, thou great aide of Rome,
Associate of our labours our chief helper,
Let vs not force thy simple modesty
With offering at thy praise, for more we cannot,
Since there's no voice can take it. No man, here,
Receive our speeches, as hyperbole's;
For we are far from flattering our friend,
(Let envy know) as from the need to flatter.
Nor let them ask the causes of our praise;
Princes have still their grounds reared with themselves,
Aboue the poor low flats of common men,
And, who will search the reasons of their acts,
Must stand on equal bases. Lead, away.
Our loves unto the Senate.
Caesar.
Peace.
Great POMPEI'S theatre was never ruined
Till now, that proud SEIANVS hath a statue
Reared on his ashes.
Place the shame of soldiers,
Aboue the best of generals? crack the world!
And bruise the name of Romans into dust,
Ere we behold it!
Check your passion;
Lord DRVSVS tarries.
Is my father mad?
Weary of life, and rule, lords? thus to heave
An idol up with praise! make him his mate!
His rival in the empire!
O, good prince!
Allow him statues? titles? honours? such,
As he himself refuses?
Brave, brave DRVSVS!
The first ascents to sovereignty are hard
But, entered once, there never wants or means,
Or ministers, to help th'aspirer on.
True, gallant DRVSVS.
We must shortly pray
To Modesty, that he will rest contented—
I, where he is, and not write emp'rour.
THere is your bill, and yours; Bring you your man:
I have moved for you, too, LATIARIS.
What?
Is your vast greatness grown so blindly bold,
That you will over vs?
Why, then give way.
Give way, Colossus? Doe you lift? Advance you?
Take that.
Good! brave! excellent brave prince!
Nay, come, approach. What? stand you off? at gaze?
It looks too full of death, for thy cold spirits.
Avoid mine eye, dull camel, or my sword
Shall make thy bravery fitter for a grave,
Then for a triumph. I'll advance a statue,
O'your own bulk; but 't shall be on the cross:
Where I will nail your pride, at breadth, and length,
And crack those sinews, which are yet but stretched
With your swollen fortunes rage.
A noble prince!
A CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR, a CASTOR!
HE that, with such wrong moved, can bear it through
With patience, and an even mind, knows how
To turn it back. Wrath, covered, carries fate:
Revenge is lost, if I profess my hate.
What was my practice late, I'll now pursue
As my fell justice. This hath styled it new.
Physician, thou art worthy of a province,
For the great favours done unto our loves;
And, but that greatest LIVIA bears a part
In the requital of thy services,
I should alone, despair of ought, like means,
To give them worthy satisfaction.
EVDEMVS, (I will see it) shall receive
A fit, and full reward, for his large merit.
But for this potion, we intend to DRVSVS,
(No more our husband, now) whom shall we choose
As the most apt, and abled instrument,
To minister it to him?
I say, LYGDVS.
LYGDVS? what's he?
An Eunuch DRVSVS loves.
I, and his cup-bearer.
Name not a second.
If DRVSVS love him, and he have that place,
We cannot think a sitter.
True, my lord,
For free access, and trust, are two maine aides.
Skilful physician!
But he must be wrought
To th'vndertaking, with some laboured art.
Is he ambitious?
No.
Or covetous?
Neither.
Yet, gold is a good general charm.
What is he then?
Faith, only wanton, light.
How! Is he young? and fair?
A delicate youth.
Send him to me, I'll work him. Royal lady,
Though I have loved you long, and with that height
Of zeal, and duty, (like the fire, which more
It mounts, it trembles) thinking nought could add
Unto the fervor, which your eye had kindled;
Yet, now I see your wisdom, judgment, strength,
Quickness, and will, to apprehend the means
To your own good, and greatness, I protest
My self through rarefied, and turned all flame
In your affection: Such a spirit as yours,
Was not created for the idle second
To a poor flash, as DRVSVS; but to shine
Bright, as the Moon, among the lesser lights,
And share the sou'raigntie of all the world.
Then LIVIA triumphs in her proper sphere,
When she, and her SEIANVS shall divide
The name of CAESAR; and AVGVSTA'S star
Be dimmed with glory of a brighter beam:
When AGRIPPINA'S fires are quite extinct,
And the scarce-seene TIBERIVS borrows all
His little light from vs, whose folded arms
Shall make one perfect or be. Who's that? EVDEMVS,
Look, it is not DRVSVS? Lady, doe not fear.
Not I, my Lord. My fear, and love of him
Left me at once.
Illustrous lady! stay—
I'll tell his lordship.
Who is it, EVDEMVS?
One of your lordships servants, brings you word
The Emp'rour hath sent for you.
O! where is he?
With your fair leave, dear Princess. I'll but ask
A question, and return.
Fortunate Princess!
How are you blessed in the fruition
Of this vnequald man, this soul of Rome,
The empires life, and voice of CAESARS world!
So blessed, my EVDEMVS, as to know
The bliss I have, with what I ought to owe
The means that wrought it. How do'I look to day?
Excellent clear, believe it. This same fucus
Was well laid on.
Me thinks, it is here not white.
Lend me your scarlet, lady. It is the sun
Hath given some little taint unto the ceruse,
You should have used of the white oil I gave you.
SEIANVS, for your love! his very name
Commands aboue CUPID, or his shafts—
Nay, now yo'haue made it worse.
I'll help it straight.)
And, but pronounced, is a sufficient charm
Against all rumour; and of absolute power
To satisfy for any ladies honour.
What doe you now, EVDEMVS?
Make a light fucus,
To touch you ore withal.) Honoured SEIANVS!
What act (though ne'er so strange, and insolent)
But that addition will at least bear out,
If 't doe not expiate?
Here, good physician.
I like this study to preserve the love
Of such a man, that comes not every hour
To greet the world. (It is now well, lady, you should
Use of the dentisrice, I prescribed you, too,
To clear your teeth, and the prepared pomatum,
To smooth the skin:) A lady cannot be
Too curious of her form, that still would hold
The heart of such a person, made her captive,
As you have his: who, to endear him more
In your clear eye, hath put away his wife,
The trouble of his bed, and your delights,
Fair Apicata, and made spacious room
To your new pleasures.
Have not we returned
That, with our hate of DRVSVS, and discovery
Of all his councels?
Yes, and wisely, lady,
The ages that succeed, and stand far off
To gaze at your high prudence, shall admire
And reckon it an act, without your sex:
It hath that rare appearance. Some will think
Your fortune could not yield a deeper sound,
Then mixed with DRVSVS; But, when they shall hear
That, and the thunder of SEIANVS meet,
SEIANVS, whose high name doth strike the stars,
And rings about the concave, great SEIANVS,
Whose glories, stile, and titles are himself,
The often iterating of SEIANVS:
They then will lose their thoughts, and be ashamed
To take acquaintance of them.
I must make
A rude departure, lady. CAESAR sends
With all his haste both of command, and prayer.
Be resolute in our plot; you have my soul,
As certain yours, as it is my bodies.
And, wise physician, so prepare the poison
As you may lay the subtle operation
Upon some natural disease of his.
Your eunuch send to me. I kiss your hands,
Glory of ladies, and commend my love
To your best faith, and memory.
My lord,
I shall but change your words. Farewell. Yet, this
Remember for your heed, he loves you not;
You know, what I have told you: His designs
Are full of grudge, and danger: we must use
More then a common speed.
Excellent lady,
How you doe fire my blood!
Well, you must go?
The thoughts be best, are least set forth to show.
When will you take some physic, lady?
When
I shall, EVDEMVS: But let DRVSVS drug
Be first prepared.
Were LYGDVS made, that's done;
I have it ready. And to morrow-morning,
I'll send you a perfume, first to resolve,
And procure sweat, and then prepare a bath
To cleanse, and clear the cutis; against when,
I'll have an excellent new fucus made,
Resistiue against the sun, the rain, or wind,
Which you shall lay on with a breath, or oil,
As you best like, and last some fourteen hours.
This change came timely, lady, for your health;
And the restoring your complexion,
Which DRVSVS choler had almost burnt up:
Wherein your fortune hath prescribed you better
Then art could doe.
Thanks, good physician,
I'll use my fortune (you shall see) with reverence.
Is my coach ready?
It attends your highness.
IF this be not revenge, when I have done
And made it perfect, let Egyptian slaves,
Parthians, and bare-foot Hebrews brand my face,
And print my body full of injuries.
Thou lost thy self, child DRVSVS, when thou though
Thou coldest out-skip my vengeance: or out-stand
The power I had to crush thee into ayre.
Thy follies now shall taste what kind of man
They have provoked, and this thy fathers house
Crack in the flame of my incensed rage,
Whose fury shall admit no shame, or mean.
Adultery? it is the lightest ill,
I will commit. A race of wicked acts
Shall flow out of my anger, and overspread
The worlds wide face, which no posterity
Shall ever approve, nor yet keep silent: Things,
That for their cunning, close, and cruel mark,
Thy father would wish his; and shall (perhaps)
Carry the empty name, but we the prize.
On then, my soul, and start not in thy course;
Though heaven drop sulphur, and hell belch out fire,
Laugh at the idle terrors: Tell proud JOVE,
Between his power, and thine, there is no odds.
It was only fear, first, in the world made gods.
IS yet SEIANVS come?
He's here, dread CAESAR.
Let all depart that chamber, and the next:
Sit down, my comfort. When the master-prince
Of all the world, SEIANVS, saith, he fears;
Is it not fatal?
Yes, to those are feared.
And not to him?
Not, if he wisely turn
That part of fate he holds, first on them.
That nature, blood, and laws of kind forbid.
Doe policy, and state forbid it?
No.
The rest of poor respects, then, let go by:
State is enough to make you have just, them guilty.
Long hate pursues such acts.
Whom hatred frights,
Let him not dream on sou'raignty.
Are rites
Of faith, love, piety, to be trod down?
Forgotten? and made vain?
All for a crown.
The prince, who shames a tyrannes name to bear,
Shall never dare doe any thing, but fear;
All the command of scepters quite doth perish
If it begin religious thoughts to cherish:
Whole Empires fall, swayed by those nice respects.
It is the licence of dark deeds protects
Even states most hated: when no laws resist
The sword, but that it acts what it list.
Yet so, we may doe all things cruelly,
Not safely:
Yes, and doe them thoroughly.
Knows yet, SEIANVS, whom we point at?
I,
Or else my thought, my sense, or both doe err:
It is AGRIPPINA?
She; and her proud race.
Proud? dangerous,
For in them apace
The fathers spirit shoots up. GERMANICVS
Lives in their looks, their gate, their form, t'vpbraide vs
With his close death, if not revenge the same.
The act's not known.
Not proved. But whispring fame
Knowledge, and proof doth to the jealous give,
Who, then to fail, would their own thought believe.
It is not safe, the children draw long breath,
That are provoked by a parents death.
It is a dangerous, to make them hence,
If nothing but their birth be their offence.
Stay, till they strike at CAESAR: then their crime
Will be enough, but late, and out of time
For him to punish.
Doe they purpose it?
You know, sir, thunder speaks not till it hit.
Be not secure: none swiftlier are oppressed,
Then they, whom confidence betrays to rest.
Let not your daring make your danger such:
All power's to be feared, where it is too much.
The youth's are (of themselves) hot, violent,
Full of great thought; and that male-spirited dame,
Their mother, slackes no means to put them on,
By large allowance, popular presentings,
Increase of train, and state, suing for titles,
Hath them commended with like prayers, like vows,
To the same Gods, with CAESAR: days and nights
She spends in banquets, and ambitious feasts
For the Nobility; where CAIVS SILIVS,
TITIVS SABINVS, old ARRVNTIVS,
ASINIVS GALLVS, FVRNIVS, REGVLVS,
And others, of that discontented list,
Are the prime guests. There, and to these, she tells
Whose niece she was, whose daughter, and whose wife,
And then must they compare her with AVGVSTA,
I, and prefer her too, commend her form,
Extol her fruitfulness; at which a shower
False for the memory of GERMANICVS,
Which they blow over straight, with windy praise,
And puffing hopes of her aspiring sons:
Who, with these hourly ticklings, grow so pleased,
And wantonly conceited of themselves,
As now, they stick not to believe they're such,
As these doe give 'hem out: and would be thought
(More then competitors) immediate heirs.
Whilst to their thirst of rule they win the rout
(That's still the friend of novelty) with hope
Of future freedom, which on every change,
That greedily, though emptily, expects.
CAESAR, it is age in all things breeds neglects,
And princes that will keep old dignity,
Must not admit too youthful heirs stand by;
Not their own issue: but so darkly set
As shadows are in picture, to give height,
And lustre to themselves.
We will command
Their rank thoughts down, and with a stricter hand
Then we have yet put forth, their trains must bate,
Their titles, feasts and factions.
Or your state.
But how sir, will you work?
Confine 'hem,
No.
They are too great, and that too faint a blow,
To give them now: it would have served at first,
When, with the weakest touch, their knot had burst.
But, now, your care must be, not to detect
The smallest cord, or line of your suspect,
For such, who know the weight of princes fear,
Will, when they find themselves discovered, rear
Their forces, like seen snakes, that else would lye
Rolled in their circles, close: Nought is more high,
Daring, or desperate, then offenders found;
Where guilt is, rage, and courage doth abound.
The course must be, to let 'hem still swell up,
Riot, and surfeit on blind fortunes cup;
Give 'hem more place, more dignities, more stile,
Call 'hem to court, to senate: in the while,
Take from their strength some one or twain, or more
Of the maine Fautors; (It will fright the store)
And, by some by-occasion. Thus, with slight
You shall disarm first, and they (in night
Of their ambition) not perceive the train,
Till, in the engine, they are caught, and slain.
We would not kill, if we knew how to save;
Yet, then a throne, it is cheaper give a grave.
Is there no way to bind them by deserts?
Sir, wolves do change their hair, but not their harts.
While thus your thought unto a mean is tied,
You neither dare enough, nor doe provide.
All modesty is fond; and chiefly where
The subject is no less compelled to bear,
Then praise his sovereigns acts.
We can no longer
Keep on our masque to thee, our dear SEIANVS;
Thy thoughts are ours, in all, and we but proved
Their voice, in our designs, which by assenting
Hath more confirmed vs, then if heartening JOVE
Had, from his hundred statues, bid vs strike,
And at the stroke clickt all his marble thumb's.
But, who shall first be struck?
First, CAIVS SILIVS;
He is the most of mark, and most of danger:
In power, and reputation equal strong,
Having commanded an imperial army
Seven years together, vanquished SACROVIR
In Germanie, and thence obtained to wear
The ornaments triumphal. His steep fall,
By how much it doth give the weightier crack,
Will send more wounding terror to the rest,
Command them stand aloof, and give more way
To our surprising of the principal.
But what, SABINVS?
Let him grow awhile,
His fate is not yet ripe: we must not pluck
At all together, lest wee catch our selves.
And ther's ARRVNTIVS too, he only talks.
But SOSIA, SILIVS wife, would be wound in
Now, for she hath a fury in her breast
More, then hell ever knew; and would be sent
Thither in time. Then, is there one CREMVTIVS
CORDVS, a writing fellow, they have got
To gather notes of the precedent times,
And make them into Annal's; a most tart
And bitter spirit (I hear) who, under colour
Of praising those, doth tax the present state,
Censures the men, the actions, leaves no trick,
No practice vn-examin'd, paralels
The times, the governments, a professed champion,
For the old liberty—
A perishing wretch.
As if there were that chaos bred in things,
The laws, and liberty would not rather choose
To be quite broken, and tan hence by vs,
Then have the stain to be preserved by such.
Have we the means, to make these guilty, first?
Trust that to me: let CAESAR, by his power,
But cause a formal meeting of the Senate,
I will have matter, and accusers ready.
But how? let vs consult.
Wee shall mispend
The time of action. Counsels are unfit
In business, where all rest is more pernicious
Then rashness can be. Acts of this close kind
Thrive more by execution, then advice.
There is no lingering in that work begun,
Which cannot praised be, until through done.
Our edict shall, forthwith, command a court.
While I can live, I will prevent earths fury:
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉.
MY Lord SEIANVS—
IVLIVS POSTHVMVS,
Come with my wish! what news from AGRIPPINA'S?
Faith none. They all locke up themselves a'late;
Or talk in character: I have not seen
A company changed. Except they had
Intelligence by augury of our practice.
When were you there?
Last night.
And what ghosts found you?
SABINVS, SILIVS, (the old list,) ARRVNTIVS,
FVRNIVS, and GALLVS.
Would not these talk?
Little.
And yet we offered choice of argument.
SATRIVS was with me.
Well: it is guilt enough
Their often meeting. You forgot t'extoll
The hospitable lady?
No, that trick
Was well put home, and had succeeded too,
But that SABINVS caught a caution out;
For she began to swell:
And may she burst.
IVLIVS, I would have you go instantly,
Unto the palace of the great AVGVSTA,
And, (by your kindest friend,) get swift access;
Acquaint her, with these meetings: Tell the words
You brought me, (the other day) of SILIVS,
Add somewhat to 'hem. Make her understand
The danger of SABINVS, and the times,
Out of his closeness. Give ARRVNTIVS words
Of malice against CAESAR; so, to GALLVS:
But (aboue all) to AGRIPPINA. Say,
(As you may truly) that her infinite pride,
Propped with the hopes of her too fruitful womb,
With popular studies gapes for sovereignty;
And threatens CAESAR. Pray AVGVSTA then,
That for her own, great CAESARS, and the pub∣lique
safety, she be pleased to urge these dangers.
CAESAR is too secure (he must be told,
And best he will take it from a mothers tongue.)
Alas! what is 't for vs to sound, to explore,
To watch, oppose, plot, practise, or prevent,
If he, for whom it is so strongly laboured,
Shall, out of greatness, and free spirit, be
Supinely negligent? Our citi's now
Divided as in time o'th'ciuill war,
And men forbear not to declare themselves
Of AGRIPPINA'S party. Every day,
The faction multiplies; and will doe more
If not resisted: you can best enlarge it
As you find audience. Noble POSTHVMVS,
Commend me to your PRISCA: and pray her,
She will solicit this great business
To earnest, and most present execution,
With all her utmost credit with AVGVSTA.
I shall not fail in my instructions.
This second (from his mother) will well urge
Our late design, and spur on CAESARS rage:
Which else might grow remiss. The way, to put
A prince in blood, is to present the shapes
Of dangers, greater then they are (like late,
Or early shadows) and, sometimes, to fine
Where there are none, only, to make him fear;
His fear will make him cruel: And once entered,
He doth not easily learn to stop, or spare
Where he may doubt. This have I made my rule,
To thrust TIBERIVS into tyranny,
And make him toil, to turn aside those blocks,
Which I alone, could not remove with safety.
DRVSVS once gone, GERMANICVS three sons
Would clog my way; whose guards have too much faith
To be corrupted: and their mother known
Of too-too vnreproou'd a chastity,
To be attempted, as light LIVIA was.
Work then, my art, on CAESAR'S fears, as they
On those they fear, till all my betts be cleared:
And he in ruins of his house, and hate
Of all his subjects, bury his own state:
When, with my peace, and safety, I will rise,
By making him the public sacrifice.
THey'are grown exceeding circumspect, and wary.
They have vs in the wind: And yet, ARRVNTIVS
Cannot contain himself.
Tut, hoe's not yet
Looked after, there are others more desired,
That are more silent.
Here he comes. Away.
HOw is it, that these beagles haunt the house
Of AGRIPPINA?
O, they hunt, they hunt.
There is some game here lodged, which they must rouse,
To make the great-ones sport.
Did you observe
How they inveighed against CAESAR?
I, baits, baits,
For vs to bite at: would I have my flesh
Torn by the public hook, these qualified hang-men
Should be my company.
Here comes another.
I, there's a man, AFER the orator!
One, that hath phrases, figures, and fine flowers,
To strew his rhetoric with, and doth make haste
To get him note, or name, by any offer
Where blood, or gain be objects; steepes his words,
When he would kill, in artificial tears:
The Crocodile of Tyber! him I love,
That man is mine. He hath my heart, and voice,
When I would curse, he, he.
Contemn the slaves,
Their present lives will be their future graves.
May it please your highness not forget your self,
I dare not, with my manners, to attempt
Your trouble farther.
Farewell, noble SILIVS.
Most royal princess.
SOSIA stays with vs?
She is your servant, and doth owe your grace
An honest, but unprofitable love.
How can that be, when there's no gain, but virtuous?
You take the moral, not the politic sense.
I meant, as she is bold, and free of speech,
Earnest to utter what her zealous thought
Travails withal, in honour of your house;
Which act, as it is simply borne in her,
Partakes of love, and honesty, but may,
By th'ouer-often, and unseasoned use,
Turn to your loss, and danger: For your state
Is waited on by envies, as by eyes;
And every second guest your tables take,
Is a feed spy, t'obserue who goes, who comes,
What conference you have, with whom, where, when,
What the discourse is, what the looks, the thoughts
Of every person there, they doe extract,
And make into a substance.
Hear me, SILIVS,
Were all TIBERIVS body stuck with eyes,
And every wall, and hanging in my house
Transparent, as this lawn I wear, or ayre;
Yea, had SEIANVS both his ears as long
As to my in-most closet: I would hate
To whisper any thought, or change an act,
To be made IVNO'S rival. Virtues forces
Show ever noblest in conspicuous courses.
It is great, and bravely spoken, like the spirit
Of AGRIPPINA: yet, your highness knows,
There is nor loss, nor shame in providence:
Few can, what all should doe, beware enough.
You may perceive with what officious face,
SATRIVS, and NATTA, AFER, and the rest
Visit your house, of late, t'enquire the secrets;
And with what bold, and privileged art, they rail
Against AVGVSTA: yea, and at TIBERIVS,
Tell tricks of LIVIA, and SEIANVS, all
T'excite, and call your indignation on,
That they might hear it at more liberty.
Yo'are too suspicious, SILIVS.
Pray the gods,
I be so AGRIPPINA: But I fear
Some subtle practice. They, that durst to strike
At so examp-lesse, and vn-blam'd a life,
As, that of the renowned GERMANICVS,
Will not sit down, with that exploit alone:
"He threatens many, that hath injured one.
It were best rip forth their tongues, sear out their eyes,
When next they come.
A fit reward for spies.
Hear you the rumour?
What?
DRVSVS is dying.
Dying?
That's strange!
Yo'were with him, yesternight.
One met EVDEMVS, the Physician,
Sent for, but now: who thinks he cannot live.
Thinks? if it be arrived at that, he knows,
Or none.
This's quick! what should bee his disease?
Poison. Poison—
How, SILIVS!
What's that?
Nay, nothing. There was (late) a certain blow
Given of the face.
I, to SEIANVS?
True.
And, what of that?
I'am glad I gave it not.
But, there is somewhat else?
Yes, private meetings,
With a great lady, at a physicians,
And, a wife turned away—
Ha!
Toys, mere toys:
What wisdom's now in the streets? in the common mouth?
Fears, whisp'rings, tumults, noise, I know not what:
They say, the Senate sit.
I'll thither, straight;
And see what's in the forge.
Good SILIVS doe.
SOSIA, and I will in.
Haste you, my lords,
To visit the sick prince: tender your loves,
And sorrows to the people. This SEIANVS
(Trust my divining soul) hath plots on all:
No tree, that stops his prospect, but must fall.
Tic only you must urge against him, VARRO,
Nor I, nor CAESAR may appear therein,
Except in your defence, who are the Consul:
And, under colour of late en'mitie
Between your father, and his, may better doe it,
As free from all suspicion of a practice.
Here be your notes, what points to touch at; read:
Bee cunning in them. AFER he's them too.
But is he summoned?
No. It was debated
By CAESAR, and concluded as most fit
To him take unprepared.
And prosecute
All under name of treason.
I conceive.
DRVSVS being dead, CAESAR will not be here.
What should the business of this Senate bee?
That can my subtle whisperers tell you: We,
That are the good dull-noble lookers on,
Are only called to keep the marble warm.
What should we doe with those deep mysteries,
Proper to these fine heads? let them alone.
Our ignorance may, perchance, help vs be saved
From whips, and furies.
See, see, see, their action!
I, now their heads doe travail, now they work;
Their faces run like shittles▪ they are weaving
Some curious cobweb to catch flies.
Observe,
They take their places.
What so low?
O yes,
They must be seen to flatter CAESARS grief
Though but in sitting.
Bid vs silence.
Silence.
Fathers Conscript, may this our present meeting
Turn fair, and fortunate to the Common-wealth.
SEe, SILIVS enters.
Hail grave Fathers.
Stand.
SILIVS, forbear thy place.
How!
SILIVS stand forth,
The Consul hath to charge thee.
Room for CAESAR.
Is he come too? nay then expect a trick.
SILIVS accused? sure he will answer nobly.
WE stand amazed, Fathers, to behold
This general deiection. Wherefo•e sit
Romes Consuls thus dissolved, as they had lost
All the remembrance both of stile, and place?
It not becomes. No woes are of fit weight,
To make the honour of the empire stoop:
Though I, in my peculiar self, may meet
Just reprehension, that so suddenly,
And, in so fresh a grief, would greet the Senate,
When private tongues, of kinsmen, and allies,
(Inspired with comforts) lothly are endured,
The face of men not seen, and scarce the day,
To thousands, that communicate our loss.
Nor can I argue these of weakness; since
They take but natural ways: yet I must seek
For stronger aides, and those fair helps draw out
From warm embraces of the common-wealth.
Our mother, great AVGVSTA, 'is struck with time,
Our self impressed with aged characters,
DRVSVS is gone, his children young, and babes,
Our aims must now reflect on those, that may
Give timely succour to these present ills,
And are our only glad-suruiuing hopes,
The noble issue of GERMANICVS,
NARROW, and DRVSVS: might it please the Consul
Honour them in, (they both attend without.)
I would present them to the Senates care,
And raise those suns of joy, that should drink up
These floods of sorrow, in your drowned eyes.
By JOVE, I am not OEDIPVS enough,
To understand this SPHINX.
The princes come.
Approach you noble NARROW, noble DRVSVS,
These princes, Fathers, when their parent dyed,
I gave unto their uncle, with this prayer,
That, though h' had proper issue of his own,
He would no less bring up, and foster these,
Then that selfe-bloud; and by that act confirm
Their words to him, and to posterity.
D•VSVS tan hence, I turn my prayers to you,
And, before our country, and our gods, beseech
You take, and rule AVGVSTVS nephews sons,
Sprung of the noblest ancestors; and so
Accomplish both my duty, and your own.
NARROW, and DRVSVS, (these shall be to you
In place of parents, these your fathers, these,
And not vnfitly: For you are so borne,
As all your good, or ell's the commonwealths.
Receive them, you strong guardians; and blessed go`ds
Make all their actions answer to their bloods:
Let their great titles find increase by them,
Not they by titles. Set them, as in place,
So in example, aboue all the Romans:
And may they know no rivals, but themselves.
Let fortune give them nothing; but attend
Upon their virtue: and that still come forth
Greater then hope, and better then their fame.
Relieve me, Fathers, with your general voice.
May all the gods consent to CAESAR'S wish,
And add to any honours, that may crown
The hopeful issue of GERMANICVS.
We thank you, reverend Fathers, in their right.
If this were true now! but the space, the space
Between the breast, and lips—TIBERIVS heart
Lies a thought farther, then another mans.
My comforts are so flowing in my joys,
As, in them, all my streams of grief are lost,
No less then are land-waters in the sea,
Or showers in rivers; though their cause was such,
As might have sprinkled even the gods with tears:
Yet since the greater doth embrace the less,
We covetously obey.
Well acted, CAESAR.)
And, now I am the happy witness made
Of your so much desired affections,
To this great issue, I could wish, the fates
Would here set peaceful period to my days;
How ever, to my labours, I entreat
(And beg it of this Senate) some fit ease.
Laugh, Fathers, laugh: Have you no spleens about you?)
The burden is too heavy, I sustain
On my unwilling shoulders; and I pray
It may be taken off, and re-confer'd
Upon the Consuls, or some other Roman,
More able, and more worthy.
Laugh on, still.)
Why, this doth render all the rest suspected!
It poisons all.
O, do' you taste it then?
It takes away my faith to any thing
He shall hereafter speak.
I, to pray that,
Which would be to his head as hot as thunder,
(Gain'st which he wears that charm) should but the court
Receive him at his word
Hear.
For my self,
I know my weakness, and so little covet
(Like some gone past) the weight that will oppress me,
As my ambition is the counter-point.
Finely maintained; good still.)
But Rome, whose blood,
Whose nerues, whose life, whose very frame relies
On CAESAR'S strength, no less then heaven on ATLAS,
Cannot admit it but with general ruin.
Ah! are you there, to bring him of?)
Let CAESAR
No more then urge a point so contrary
To CAESARS greatness, the grieved Senates vows,
Or Romes necessity.
He comes about.
More nimbly then VERTVMNVS.)
For the public,
I may be drawn, to show, I can neglect
All private aims; though I affect my rest:
But, if the Senate still command me serve,
I must be glad to practise my obedience.
You must, and will, sir. We doe know it.)
CAESAR,
Live long, and happy, great, and royal CAESAR,
The gods preserve thee, and thy modesty,
Thy wisdom, and thy innocence.
Where is it?
The prayer's made before the subject.)
Guard
His meekness, JOVE, his piety, his care,
His bounty—
And his subtlety, I'll put in:
Yet he will keep that himself, without the gods.
All prayer's are vain for him.
We will not hold
Your patience, Fathers, with long answer; but
Shall still contend to be, what you desire,
And work to satisfy so great a hope:
Proceed to your affairs.
Now, SILIVS, guard thee;
The curtin's drawing.
advances.
Silence.
Cite CAIVS, SILIVS.
CAIVS SILIVS.
Here.
The triumph that thou had in Germanie
For thy late victory on SACROVIR,
Thou hast enjoyed so freely, CAIVS SILIVS,
As no man it envied thee; nor would CAESAR,
Or Rome admit, that thou were then defrauded
Of any honours, thy deserts could claim,
In the fair service of the common-wealth:
But now, if, after all their loves, and graces,
(Thy actions, and their courses being discovered)
It shall appear to CAESAR, and this Senate,
Thou hast defiled those glories, with thy crimes—
Crimes?
Patience, SILIVS.
Tell thy moil of pa∣tience,
I am a Roman. What are my crimes? Proclaim them.
Am I too rich? too honest for the times?
Have I or treasure, jewels, land, or houses
That some informer gapes for? Is my strength
Too much to be admitted? Or my knowledge?
These now are crimes.
Nay, SILIVS, if the name
Of crime so touch thee, with what impotence
Wilt thou endure the matter to be searched?
I tell thee, AFER, with more scorn, then fear:
Employ your mercenary tongue, and art.
Whore's my accuser?
Here.
VARRO? The Consul?
Is he thrust in?
It is I accuse thee, SILIVS.
Against the majesty of Rome, and CAESAR,
I doe pronounce thee here a guilty cause,
First, of beginning, and occasioning,
Next, drawing out the war in Galley,
For which thou late triumph'st; dissembling long
That SACROVIR to be an enemy,
Only to make thy entertainment more,
Whilst thou, and thy wife SOSIA poll'd the province;
Wherein, with sordide-base desire of gain,
Thou hast discredited thy actions worth
And been a traitor to the state.
Thou lie.
I thank thee, SILIVS, speak so still, and often.
If I not prove it, CAESAR, but unjustly
Have called him into trial, here I bind
My self to suffer, what I claim against him;
And yield, to have what I have spoke, confirmed
By judgment of the court, and all good men.
CAESAR, I crave to have my cause deferred,
Till this mans Consulship be out.
We cannot,
Nor may we grant it.
Why? shall he design
My day of trial? is he my accuser?
And must he be my judge?
It hath been usual,
And is a right, that custom hath allowed
The magistrate, to call forth private men;
And to appoint their day: Which privilege
We may not in the Consul see infringed,
By whose deep watches, and industrious care
It is so laboured, as the common-wealth
Receive no loss, by any oblique course.
CAESAR, thy fraud is worse then violence.
SILIVS, mistake vs not, we dare not use
The credit of the Consul, to thy wrong,
But only doe preserve his place, and power,
So far as it concerns the dignity,
And honour of the state.
Believe him, SILIVS.
Why, so he may, ARRVNTIVS.
I say so.
And he may choose too.
By the capitol,
And all our gods, but that the dear republic,
Our sacred laws, and just authority
Are interessed therein, I should be silent.
Please' CAESAR to give way unto his trial.
He shall have justice.
Nay, I shall have law;
Shall I not AFER? speak.
Would you have 〈◊〉
No, my well-spoken man, I would no more;
Nor less: might I enjoy it natural,
Not taught to speak unto your present ends,
Free from thine, his, and all your unkind handling,
Furious enforcing, most unjust presuming,
Malicious, and manifold applying,
Foul wresting, and impossible construction.
He raves, he raves.
Thou durst not tell me so,
Had thou not CAESARS warrant. I can see
Whose power condemns me.
This betrays his spirit.
This doth enough declare him what he is.
What am I? speak.
An enemy to the state.
Because I am an enemy to thee,
And such corrupted ministers of the state,
That here art made a present instrument
To gratify it with thine own disgrace.
This, to the Consul, is most insolent!
And impious!
I, take part. Reveal your selves.
Alas, I sent not your confed'racies?
Your plots, and combinations? I not know
Minion SEIANVS hates me; and that all
This boast of law, and law, is but a form,
A net of VULCANISE filing, a mere engine,
To take that life by a pretext of justice,
Which you pursue in malice? I want brain,
Or nostril to persuade me, that your ends,
And purposes are made to what they are,
Before my answer? O, you equal gods,
Whose justice not a world of wolfe-turn'd men
Shall make me to accuse (how ere provoke)
Have I for this so oft engaged my self?
Stood in the heate, and fervor of a fight,
When PHOEBVS sooner hath forsook the day
Then I the field? Against the blue-ey'd Gaules?
And crisped Germanes? when our Roman Eagles
Have fanned the fire, with their labouring wings,
And no blow dealt, that left not death behind it?
When I have charged, alone, into the troops
Of curled Sicambrians, routed them, and came
Not off, with backward ensigns of a slave,
But forward marks, wounds on my breast, and face,
Were meant to thee, Ô CAESAR, and thy Rome?
And have I this return? did I, for this,
Perform so noble, and so brave defeat,
On SACROVIR? (Ô JOVE, let it become me
To boast my deeds, when he, whom they concern,
Shall thus forget them.)
SILIVS, SILIVS,
These are the common customs of thy blood,
When it is high with wine, as now with rage:
This well agrees, with that intemperate vaunt,
Thou lately made at AGRIPPINA'S table,
That when all other of the troops were prone
To fall into rebellion, only yours
Remained in their obedience. You were he,
That saved the empire; which had then been lost,
Had but your legions, there, rebelled, or mutined.
Your virtue met, and fronted every peril.
You gave to CAESAR, and to Rome their surety.
Their name, their strength, their spirit, and their state,
Their being was a donatiue from you.
Well worded, and most like an Orator.
Is this true, SILIVS?
Save thy question, CAESAR.
Thy spy, of famous credit, hath affirmed it.
Excellent Roman!
He doth answer stoutly.
If this be so, there needs no farther cause
Of crime against him.
What can more impeach
The royal dignity, and state of CAESAR,
Then to be urged with a benefit
He cannot pay?
In this, all CAESARS fortune
Is made unequal to the curtsy.
His means are clean destroyed, that should requite.
Nothing is great enough for SILIVS merit.
GALLVS on that side to?
Come, doe not hunt,
And labour so about for circumstance,
To make him guilty, whom you have fore-doom'd:
Take shorter ways, I'll meet your purposes.
The words were mine, and more I now will say:
Since I have done thee that great service, CAESAR,
Thou still hast feared me; and, in place of grace,
Returned me hatred: so soon, all best turns,
With doubtful Princes, turn deep injuries
In estimation, when they greater rise,
Then can be answered. Benefits, with you,
Are of no longer pleasure, then you can
With ease restore them; that transcended once,
Your studies are not how to thank, but kill.
It is your nature, to have all men slaves
To you, but you acknowledging to none.
The means that makes your greatness, must not come
In mention of it; if it doe, it takes
So much away, you think: and that, which helped,
Shall soonest perish, if it stand in eye,
Where it may front, or but upbraid the high.
Suffer him speak no more.
Note but his spirit.
This shows him in the rest.
Let him be censured.
Have hath spoke enough to prove him CAESARS foe.
His thoughts look through his words.
A censure.
Stay,
Stay, most officious Senate, I shall straight
Delude thy fury. SILIVS hath not placed
His guards within him, against fortunes spite,
So weakly, but he can escape your gripe
That are but hands of fortune: She her self
When virtue doth oppose, must lose her threats.
All that can happen in humanity,
The frown of CAESAR, proud SEIANVS hatred,
Base VARRO'S spleen, and AFERS bloudying tongue,
The Senates servile flattery, and these
Mustered to kill, I'am fortified against;
And can look down upon: they are beneath me.
It is not life whereof I stand enamoured:
Nor shall my end make me accuse my fate.
The coward, and the valiant man must fall,
Only the cause, and manner how, discerns them:
Which then are gladdest, when they cost vs dearest.
Romans, if any here be in this Senate,
Would know to mock TIBERIVS tyranny,
Look upon SILIVS, and so learn to die.
O, desperate act!
An honourable hand!
Look, is he dead?
It was nobly struck, and home.
My thought did prompt him to it. Farewell, SILIVS.
Be famous ever for thy great example.
We are not pleased, in this sad accident,
That thus hath stalled, and abused our mercy,
Intended to preserve thee, noble Roman:
And to prevent thy hopes.
Excellent wolf!
Now he is full, he howls.
CAESAR doth wrong
His dignity, and safety, thus to morn
The deserved end of so professed a traitor,
And doth, by this his lenity, instruct
Others as factious, to the like offence.
The confiscation merely of his state
Had been enough.
O, that was gaped for then?
Remove the body.
Let citation
Go out for SOSIA.
Let her be proscribed.
And for the goods, I think it fit that half
Go to the treasure, half unto the children.
With leave of CAESAR, I would think, that fourth
Part, which the law doth cast on the informers,
Should be enough; the rest go to the children:
Wherein the Prince shall show humanity,
And bounty, not to force them by their want
(Which in their parents trespass they deserved)
To take ill courses.
It shall please vs.
I,
Out of necessity. This LEPIDVS
Is grave and honest, and I have observed
A moderation still in all his censures.
And bending to the better—Stay, who's this?
CREMVTIVS CORDVS? what? is he brought in?
More blood unto the banquet? Noble CORDVS,
I wish thee good: Be as thy writings, free,
And honest.
What is he?
For th'Annal's, CAESAR.
CREMVTIVS CORD{us}.
Here.
SATRIVS SECVND{us},
PINNARIVS NATTA, you are his accusers.
Two of SEIANVS bloud-hounds, whom he breeds
With humane flesh, to bay at citizens.
Stand forth before the Senate, and confront him.
I doe accuse thee here, CREMVTIVS CORDVS,
To be a man factious, and dangerous,
A sower of sedition in the state,
A turbulent, and discontented spirit,
Which I will prove from thine own writings, here,
The Annal's thou hast published; where thou bit'st
The present age, and with a vipers tooth,
Being a member of it, dare that ill
Which never yet degenerous bastard did
Upon his parent.
To this, I subscribe;
And, forth a world of more particulars,
Instance in only one: Comparing men,
And times, thou praise BRVTVS, and affirm'st
That CASSIVS was the last of all the Romans.
How! what are we then?
What is CAESAR? nothing?
My lords, this strikes at every Romans private,
In whom reigns gentry, and estate of spirit,
To have a BRVTVS brought in parallel,
A parricide, an enemy of his country,
Ranked, and preferred to any real worth
That Rome now holds. This is most strangely invective.
Most full of spite, and insolent upbraiding.
Nor is it the time alone is here dispris'd,
But the whole man of time, yea CAESAR'S self
Brought in disualew; and he aimed at most
By oblique glance of his licentious pen.
CAESAR, if CASSIVS were the last of Romans,
Thou hast no name.
Let's hear him answer. Silence.
So innocent I am of fact, my lords,
As but my words are argued; yet those words
Not reaching either prince, or princes parent:
The which your law of treason comprehends.
BRVTVS, and CASSIVS, I am charged, to have praised:
Whose deeds, when many more, besides my self,
Have writ, not one hath mentioned without honour.
Great TITVS LIVIVS, great for eloquence,
And faith, amongst vs, in his history,
With so great praises POMPEY did extol,
As oft AVGVSTVS called him a POMPEIAN:
Yet this not hurt their friendship. In his book
He often names SCIPIO, AFRANIVS,
Yea, the same CASSIVS, and this BRVTVS too,
As worthi'st men; not thieves, and parricides,
Which notes, upon their fems, are now imposed.
ASINIVS POLIO'S writings quite throughout
Give them a noble memory; SO MESSALLA
Renowned his general CASSIVS: yet both these
Lived with AVGVSTVS, full of wealth, and honours.
To CICERO'S book, where CATO was heaved up
Equal with heaven, what else did CAESAR answer,
Being then Dictator, but with a penned oration,
As if before the judges? Doe but see
ANTONIVS letters; read but BRVTVS pleadings:
What vile reproach they hold against AVGVSTVS,
False I confess, but with much bitterness.
The Epigram's of BIBACVLVS, and CATVLLVS,
Are read, full stuffed with spite of both the CAESARS;
Yet deified IVLIVS, and no less AVGVSTVS!
Both bore them, and contemned them: (I not know
Promptly to speak it, whether done with more
Temper, or wisdom) for such obloquies
If they despised bee, they dye suppressed,
But, if with rage acknowledged, they are confessed.
The Greeks I slip, whose licence not alone,
But also lust did scope unpunished:
Or where some one (by chance) exception took,
He words with words revenged. But, in my work,
What could be aimed more free, or farther of
From the times scandal, then to write of those,
Whom death from grace, or hatred had exempted?
Did I, with BRVTVS, and with CASSIVS,
Armed, and possessed of the PHILIPPE fields,
Incense the people in the civil cause,
With dangerous speeches? or doe they, being slain
Seventy years since, as by their images
(Which not the conqueror hath defaced) appears,
Retain that guilty memory with writers?
Posterie pays every man his honour.
Nor shall there want, though I condemned am,
That will not only CASSIVS well approve,
And of great BRVTVS honour mindful be,
But that will, also, mention make of me.
Freely, and nobly spoken.
With good temper,
I like him, that he is not moved with passion.
He puts 'hem to their whisper.
Take him hence,
We shall determine of him at next sitting.
Mean time, give order, that his books be burned,
To the Aediles.
You have well advised.
It fits not such licentious things should live
To upbraid the age.
If the age were good, they might.
Let'hem be burnt.
All sought, and burnt, to day.
The court is up, Lictors, resume the fasces.
LEt 'hem be burnt! Ô, how ridiculous
Appears the Senate's brainless diligence,
Who think they can, with present power, extinguish
The memory of all succeeding times!
It is true when (contrary) the punishment
Of wit, doth make the authority increase.
Nor doe they ought, that use this cruelty
Of interdiction, and this rage of burning;
But purchase to themselves rebuke, and shame,
And to the writers an eternal name.
It is an argument the times are sore,
When virtue cannot safely be advanced;
Nor vice reproved.
I, noble LEPIDVS,
AVGVSTVS well foresaw, what we should suffer,
Under TIBERIVS, when he did pronouuce
The Roman race most wretched, that should live
Between so slow jaws, and so long a bruising.
THis business hath succeeded well, SEIANVS:
And quite removed all jealousy of practice
Against AGRIPPINA, and our nephews. Now,
We must bethink vs how to plant our engines
For the other pair, SABINVS, and ARRVNTIVS,
And GALLVS too (how ere he flatter vs,)
His heart we know.
Give it some respite, CAESAR.
Time shall mature, and bring to perfect crown,
What we, with so good vultures, have begun:
SABINVS shall be next.
Rather ARRVNTIVS.
By any means, preserve him. His frank tongue
Being lent the reins, will take away all thought
Of malice, in your course against the rest.
We must keep him to stalk with.
Dearest head,
To thy most forunate design I yield it.
Sir— In have been so long trained up in grace,
First, with your father, great AVGVSTVS, since,
With your most happy bounties so familiar,
As I not sooner would commit my hopes
Or wishes to the gods, then to your ears.
Nor have I ever, yet, been covetous
Of ouer-bright, and dazzling honours: rather
To watch, and travail in great CAESAR'S safety,
With the most common soldier.
It is confessed.
The only gain, and which I count most fair
Of all my fortunes, is that mighty CAESAR
Hath thought me worthy his alliance. Hence
Begin my hopes.
H'mh?
I have heard, AVGVSTVS
In the bestowing of his daughter, thought
But even of gentlemen of Rome: If so,
(I know not how to hope so great a favour)
But if a husband should be sought for LIVIA,
And I be had in mind, as CAESARS friend,
I would but use the glory of the kindred.
It should not make me slothful, or less caring
For CAESARS state; it were enough to me
It did confirm, and strengthen my weak house,
Against the-now-vnequall opposition
Of AGRIPPINA; 'and for dear reguard
Unto my children, this I wish: my self
Have no ambition farther, then to end
My days in service of so dear a master.
We cannot but commend thy piety
Most-lou'd SEIANVS, in acknowledging
Those bounties; which we faintly, such, remember.
But to thy suit. The rest of mortal men,
In all their drifts, and counsels, pursue profit:
Princes, alone, are of a different sort,
Directing their maine actions still to fame.
We therefore will take time to think, and answer.
For LIVIA, she can best, her self, resolve
If she will marry after DRVSVS, or
Continue in the family; besides
She hath a mother, and a grandam yet,
Whose nearer counsels she may guide her by:
But I will simply deal. That enmity,
Thou fear in AGRIPPINA, would burn more,
If LIVIAS marriage should (as it were in parts)
Divide the imperial house; an emulation
Between the women might break forth; and discord
Ruin the sons, and nephues, on both hands.
What if it cause some present difference?
Thou art not safe, SEIANVS, if thou prove it.
Can thou believe, that LIVIA who was wife
To CAIVS CAESAR, then to DRVSVS, now
Will be contented to grow old with thee,
Borne but a private gentleman of Rome?
And raise thee with her loss, if not her shame?
Or say, that I should wish it, can thou think
The Senate, or the people (who have seen
Her brother, father, and our ancestors,
In highest place of empire) will endure it?
The state thou hold already, is in talk;
Men murmur at thy greatness; and the nobles
Stick not, in public, to upbraid thy climbing
Aboue our fathers favours, or thy scale:
And dare accuse me, from their hate to thee.
Be wise, dear friend. We would not hide these things
For friendships dear respect. Nor will we stand
Adverse to thine, or LEVEE'S designments.
What we had purposed to thee, in our thought,
And with what near degrees of love to bind thee,
And make thee equal to vs, for the present,
We will forbear to speak. Only thus much
Believe our loved SEIANVS, we not know
That height in blood, or honour, which thy virtue,
And mind to vs, may not aspire with merit;
And this we'll publish, on all watched occasion
The Senate, or the people shall present.
I am restored, and to my sense again,
Which I had lost in this so blinding suit.
CAESAR hath taught me better to refuse,
Then I knew how to ask. How pleases CAESAR
To embrace my late advice, for leaving Rome?
We are resolved.
Here are some motives more
Which I have thought on since, may more confirm.
Careful SEIANVS! we will straight peruse them:
Go forward in our maine design, and prosper.
IF those but take, I shall. Dull, heavy CAESAR!
Would thou tell me, thy favours were made crimes?
And that my fortunes were esteemed thy faults?
That thou, for me, were hated? and not think
I would with winged haste prevent that change,
When thou might win all to thy self again,
By forfeiture of me? Did those fond words
Fly swifter from thy lips, then this my brain,
This sparkling forge, created me an armour
To encounter chance, and thee? Well, read my charms,
And may they lay that hold upon thy senses,
As thou had snuffed up hemlock, or tan down
The juice of poppy, and of mandrakes. Sleep,
Voluptuous CAESAR, and security
Seize on thy stupid powers, and leave them dead
To public cares, awake but to thy lusts.
The strength of which makes thy libidinous soul
Itch to leave Rome; and I have thrust it on:
With blaming of the city business,
The multitude of suites, the confluence
Of suitors, then their importunacies,
The manifold distractions he must suffer,
Besides ill rumours, envies, and reproaches,
All which, a quiet and retired life,
(Larded with ease, and pleasure) did avoid;
And yet, for any weighty, 'and great affair,
The fittest place to give the soundest counsels.
By this, shall I remove him both from thought,
And knowledge of his own most dear affairs;
Draw all dispatches through my private hands;
Know his designments, and pursue mine own;
Make mine own strengths, by giving suites, and places;
Conferring dignities, and offices:
And these▪ that hate me now, wanting access
To him, will make their envy none, or less.
For when they see me arbiter of all,
They must observe: or else, with CAESAR fall.
TO marry LIVIA? will no less, SEIANVS,
Content thy aims? no lower object? well!
Thou know how thou art wrought into our trust;
Woven in our design; and think, we must
Now use thee, whatsoere thy proiects are:
It is true. But yet with caution, and fit care.
And, now we better think— who's there, within?
CAESAR?
To leave our journey off, were sin
Against our decreed delights; and would appear
Doubt: or (what less becomes a prince) low fear.
Yet, doubt hath law, and fears have their excuse,
Where princes states plead necessary use;
As ours doth now: more in SEIANVS pride,
Then all fell AGRIPPINA'S hates beside.
Those are the dreadful enemies, we raise
With favours, and make dangerous, with praise;
The injured by vs may have will alike,
But it is the favourite hath the power, to strike:
And fury ever boils more high, and strong,
Heat'with ambition, then revenge of wrong.
It is then a part of supreme skill, to grace
No man too much; but hold a certain space
Between the ascenders rise, and thine own flat,
Lest, when all rounds be reached, his aim be that.
It is thought— IS MACRO in the palace? See:
If not go, seek him, to come to vs— Hee
Must be the organ, we must work by now;
Though none less apt for trust: Need doth allow
What choice would not. In have heard, that aconite
Being timely taken, hath a healing might
Against the scorpions stroke; the proof we'll give:
That, while two poisons wrestle, we may live.
Hee hath a spirit too working, to be used
But to the encounter of his like; excused
Are wiser sovereigns then, that raise one ill
Against another, and both safely kill:
The prince, that •eeds great natures, they will sway him;
Who nourishes a lyon, must obey him.
MAcro, we sent for you.
I heard so, CAESAR.
(Leave vs awhile.) When you shall know, good MACRO,
The causes of our sending, and the ends;
You then will harken nearer: and be pleased
You stand so high, both in our choice, and trust.
The humblest place in CAESARS choice, or trust,
May make glad MACRO proud; without ambition:
Save to doe CAESAR service.
Leave our courtings.
We are in purpose, MACRO, to depart
The city for a time, and see Companion;
Not for our pleasures, but to dedicate
A pair of temples, one, to IVPITER
At Capua, the other at Nola, to AVGVSTVS:
In which great work, perhaps, our stay will be
Beyond our will produced. Now, since we are
Not ignorant what danger may be borne
Out of our shortest absence, in a state
So subject unto envy, and embroild
With hate, and faction; we have thought on thee,
(Amongst a field of Romans,) worthiest MACRO,
To be our eye, and ear, to keep strict watch
On AGRIPPINA, NARROW, DRVSVS, I,
And on SEIANVS: Not, that we distrust
His loyalty, or doe repent one grace,
Of all that heap, we have conferd on him.
(For that were to disparage our election,
And call that judgment now in doubt, which then
Seemed as unquestioned as an oracle,)
But, greatness hath his cankers. Worms, and moods
Breed out of too fit matter, in the things
Which after they consume, transferring quite
The substance of their makers, int'themselues.
MACRO is sharpe, and apprehends. Besides,
I know him subtle, close, wise, and wel-read
In man, and his large nature. He hath studied
Affections, passions, knows their springs, their ends,
Which way, and whether they will work: it is proof
Enough, of his great merit, that we trust him.
Then, to a point; (because our conference
Cannot be long without suspicion)
Here, MACRO, we assign thee, both to spy,
Inform, and chastise; think, and use thy means,
Thy ministers, what, where, on whom thou wilt;
Explore, plot, practise: All thou dost in this,
Shall be, as if the Senate, or the Laws
Had given it privilege, and thou thence styled
The sauier both of CAESAR, and of Rome.
We will not take thy answer, but in act:
Whereto, as thou proceed'st, we hope to hear
By trusted messengers. If it be enquired,
Wherefore we called you, say, you have in charge
To see our chariots ready, and our horse:
Be still our loved, and (shortly) honoured MACRO.
I Will not ask, why CAESAR bids doe this:
But joy, that he bids me. It is the bliss
Of courts, to be employed; no matter, how:
A princes power makes all his actions virtue.
We, whom he works by, are dumb instruments,
To doe, but not enquire: His great intents
Are to be served, not searched. Yet, as that bow
Is most in hand, whose owner best doth know
T'affect his aims, so let that states-man hope
Most use, most price, can hit his princes scope.
Nor must he look at what, or whom to strike,
But lose at all; each mark must be alike.
Were it to plot against the fame, the life
Of one, with whom I twined; remove a wife
From my warm side, as loved, as is the ayre;
Practise away each parent; draw mine heir
In compass, though but one; work all my kin
To swift perdition; leave no vntrain'd engine,
For friendship, or for innocence; nay, make
The gods all guilty: I would undertake
This, being imposed me, both with gain, and ease.
The way to rise, is to obey, and please.
He that will thrive in state, he must neglect
The trodden paths, that truth and right respect;
And prove new, wilder ways: for virtue, there,
Is not that narrow thing, she is else-where.
Men's fortune there is virtue; reason, their will:
Their licence, law; and their observance, skill.
Occasion, is their foil; conscience, their stain;
Profit, their lustre: and what else is, vain.
If then it be the lust of CAESARS power,
T'haue raised SEIANVS up, and in an hour
O're-turne him, tumbling, down, from height of all;
We are his ready engine: and his fall
May be our rise. It is no uncouth thing
To see fresh buildings from old ruins spring.
YOu must have patience, royal AGRIPPINA.
I must have vengeance, first: and that were nectar
Unto my famished spirits. O, my fortune,
Let it be sudden thou prepar'st against me;
Strike all my powers of understanding blind,
And ignorant of destiny to come:
Let me not fear, that cannot hope.
Dear Princess,
These tyrannies, on your self, are worse then CAESAR'S.
Is this the happiness of being borne great?
Still to be aimed at? still to be suspected?
To live the subject of all jealousies?
At least the colour made, if not the ground
To every painted danger? who would not
Choose once to fall, then thus to hang for ever?
You might be safe, if you would —
What, my GALLVS?
Be lewd SEIANVS strumpet? Or the baud
To CAESARS lusts, he now is gone to practise?
Not these are safe, where nothing is. Your self,
While thus you stand but by me, are not safe.
Was SILIVS safe? or the good SOSIA safe?
Or was my niece, dear CLAVDIA PVLCHRA safe?
Or innocent FVRNIVS? They, that latest have
(By being made guilty) added reputation
To AFERS eloquence? O, foolish friends,
Could not so fresh example warn your loves,
But you must buy my favours, with that loss
Unto your selves: and, when you might perceive
That CAESARS cause of raging must forsake him,
Before his will? Away, good GALLVS, leave me.
Here to be seen, is danger; to speak, treason:
To doe me least observance, is called faction.
You are unhappy in me, and I in all.
Where are my sons? NARROW? and DRVSVS? We
Are they, be shot at; Let vs fall apart:
Not, in our ruins, sepulchre our friends.
Or shall we doe some action, like offence,
To mock their studies, that would make vs faulty?
And frustrate practice, by preventing it?
The danger's like: for, what they can contrive,
They will make good. No innocence is safe,
When power contests. Nor can they trespass more,
Whose only being was all crime, before.
You hear, SEIANVS is come back from CAESAR?
No. How? Disgraced?
More graced now, then ever.
By what mischance?
A fortune, like enough
Once to be bad.
But turned too good, to both.
What was it?
TIBERIVS sitting at his meat,
In a farm house, they call Spelunca, sited
By the sea-side, among the Fundane hills,
Within a natural cave, part of the grot
(About the entry) fell, and overwhelmed
Some of the waiters; others ran away:
Only SEIANVS, with his knees, hands, face,
Ore-hanging CAESAR, did oppose himself
To the remaining ruins, and was found
In that so labouring posture, by the soldiers
That came to succour him. With which adventure,
He hath so sixth himself in CAESAR'S trust,
As thunder cannot move him, and is come
With all the height of CAESARS praise, to Rome.
And power, to turn those ruins all on vs;
And bury whole posterities beneath them.
NARROW, and DRVSVS, and CALIGVLA,
Your places are the next, and therefore most
In their offence. Think on your birth, and blood,
Awake your spirits, meet their violence,
It is princely, when a tyrant doth oppose;
And is a fortune sent to exercise
Your virtue, as the wind doth try strong trees:
Who by vexation grow more sound, and firm.
After your fathers fall, and uncles fate,
What can you hope, but all the change of stroke
That force, or slight can give? then stand upright;
And though you doe not act, yet suffer nobly:
Be worthy of my womb, and take strong cheer;
What we doe know will come, we should not fear.
Returned so soon? renewed in trust, and grace?
Is CAESAR then so weak? or hath the place
But wrought this alteration, with the air;
And he, on next remove, will all repair?
MACRO, thou art engaged: and what before
Was public; now, must be thy private, more.
The weal of CAESAR, fitness did imply;
But thine own fate confers necessity
On thy employment: and the thoughts borne nearest
Unto our selves, move swiftest still, and dearest.
If he recover, thou art lost: yea, all
The weight of preparation to his fall
Will turn on thee, and crush thee. Therefore, strike
Before he settle, to prevent the like
Upon thy self. He doth his vantage know,
That makes it home, and gives the foremost blow.
IT is a service, great SEIANVS will
See well requited, and accept of nobly.
Here place your selves, between the roof, and seeling,
And when I bring him to his words of danger,
Reveal your selves, and take him.
Is he come?
I'll now go fetch him.
With good speed. I long
To merit from the state, in such an action.
I hope, it will obtain the Consul-ship
For one of vs.
We cannot think of less,
To bring in one, so dangerous as SABINVS.
He was a follower of GERMANICVS,
And still is an observer of his wife,
And children, though they be declined in grace;
A daily visitant, keeps them company
In private, and in public; and is noted
To be the only client, of the house:
Pray JOVE, he will be free to LATIARIS.
H'is allied to him, and doth trust him well.
And he'll requite his trust?
To doe an office
So grateful to the state, I know no man
But would strain nearer bands, then kindred—
List,
I hear them come.
Shift to our holes, with silence.
IT is a noble constancy you show
To this afflicted house: that not like others,
(The friends of season) you doe follow fortune,
And in the winter of their fate, forsake
The place, whose glories warmed you. You are just,
And worthy such a princely patrones love,
As was the worlds-renown'd GERMANICVS:
Whose ample merit when I call to thought,
And see his wife and issue, objects made
To so much envy, jealousy, and hate,
It makes me ready to accuse the gods
Of negligence, as men of tyranny.
They must be patient, so must we.
O JOVE.
What will become of vs, or of the times,
When, to be high, or noble, are made crimes?
When land, and treasure are most dangerous faults?
Nay, when our table, yea our bed assaults
Our peace, and safety? when our writings are,
By any envious instruments (that dare
Apply them to the guilty) made to speak
What they will have, to fit their tyrannous wreak?
When ignorance is scarcely innocence:
And knowledge made a capital offence?
When not so much, but the bare empty shade
Of liberty, is reft vs? and we made,
The prey to greedy Vultures, and vile spies,
That first transfix vs with their murdering eyes?
Me thinks, the Genius of the Roman race
Should not be so extinct, but that bright flame
Of liberty might be revived again,
(Which no good man but with his life, should lose)
And we not sit like spent, and patient fools
Still puffing in the dark, at one poor coal,
Held on by hope, till the last spark is out.
The cause is public, and the honour, name,
The immortality of every soul
That is not bastard, or a slave in Rome,
Therein concerned: Whereto, if men would change
The wearied arm, and for the weighty shield
So long sustained, employ the facile sword,
We might have some assurance of our vows.
This asses fortitude doth tyre vs all.
It must be active valour must redeem
Our loss, or none. The rock, and our hard steel
Should meet, t'enforce those glorious fires again,
Whose splendour cheered the world, and heat gave life
No less then doth the sunne's.
It were better stay,
In lasting darkness, and despair of day.
No ill should force the subject undertake
Against the sovereign; more then hell should make
The gods doe wrong. A good man should, and must
Sit rather down with loss, then rise unjust.
Though, when the Romans first did yield themselves
To one mans power, they did not mean their lives,
Their fortunes, and their liberties, should be
His absolute spoil, as purchased by the sword.
Why we are worse, if to be slaves, and bond
To CAESARS slave, be such, the proud SEIANVS?
He that is all, do's all, gives CAESAR leave
To hide his ulcerous, and anointed face,
With his bald crown at Rhodes, while he here stalks
Upon the heads of Romans, and their Princes,
Familiarly to Empire.
Now you touch
A point indeed, wherein he shows his art,
As well as power.
And villainy in both.
Doe you observe where LIVIA lodges? How
DRVSVS came dead? What men have been cut off?
Yes, those are things removed: I nearer looked,
Into his later practice, where he stands
Declared a master in his mystery.
First, ere TIBERIVS went, he wrought his fear,
To think that AGRIPPINA sought his death.
Then put those doubts in her; sent her oft word,
Under the show of friendship, to beware
Of CAESAR, for he laid to poison her:
Drove them to frowns, to mutual jealousies,
Which, now, in visible hatred are burst out.
Since, he hath had his hired instruments
To work on NARROW, and to heave him up;
To tell him CAESAR'S old; That all the people,
Yea, all the army have their eyes on him;
That both doe long to have him undertake
Something of worth, to give the world a hope;
Bids him to court their grace; the easy youth,
Perhaps, gives ear, which straight he writes to CAESAR;
And with this comment: See yon'd dangerous boy,
Note but the practice of the mother, there,
Shoe's tying him, for purposes at hand,
With men of sword. Here's CAESAR put in fright
Against son, and mother. Yet, he leaves not thus.
The second brother DRVSVS (a fierce nature,
And fitter for his snares, because ambitious,
And full of envy) him he clasp's, and hugs,
Poisons with praise, tells him what hearts he wears,
How bright he stands in popular expectance;
That Rome doth suffer with him, in the wrong
His mother does him, by preferring NARROW:
Thus sets he them asunder, each against other,
Proiects the course, that serves him to condemn,
Keeps in opinion of a friend to all,
And all drives on to ruin.
CAESAR sleeps,
And nods at this?
Would he might ever sleep,
Bogged in his filthy lusts.
Treason to CAESAR.
Lay hands upon the traitor, LATIARIS,
Or take the name thy self.
I am for CAESAR.
Am I then caught?
How think you, sir? you are.
Spies of this head! so white! so full of years!
Well, my most reverend monsters, you may live
To see your selves thus snar'd.
Away with him.
Hale him away.
To be a spy for traitors,
Is honourable vigilance.
You doe well,
My most officious instruments of state;
Men of all uses: Drag me hence, away.
The year is well begun, and I fall fit,
To be an offering to SEIANVS. Go.
Cover him with his garments, hide his face.
It shall not need. Forbear your rude assault,
The fault's not shameful villainy makes a fault.
SIr, but observe how thick your dangers meet
In his clear drifts! Your mother, and your brothers,
Now cited to the Senate! Their friend, GALLVS,
Feasted to day by CAESAR, since committed!
SABINVS, here we met, hurried to fetters!
The Senators all struck with fear, and silence,
Save those, whose hopes depend not on good means,
But force their private prey, from public spoil!
And you must know, if here you stay, your state
Is sure to be the subject of his hate,
As now the object.
What would you advise me?
To go for Capreae presently: and there
Give up your self, entirely, to your uncle.
Tell CAESAR (since your mother is accused
To fly for succours to AVGVSTVS statue,
And to the army, with your brethren) you
Have rather chose, to place your aides in him,
Then live suspected; or in hourly fear
To be thrust out, by bold SEIANV'S plots:
Which, you shall confidently urge, to be
Most full of peril to the state, and CAESAR,
As being laid to his peculiar ends,
And not to be let run, with common safety.
All which (upon the second) I'll make plain,
So both shall love, and trust with CAESAR gain.
Away then, let's prepare vs for our journey.
STill, dost thou suffer heaven? will no flame,
No heate of sin make thy just wrath to boil
In thy distemp'red bosom, and ore-flow
The pitchy blazes of impiety,
Kindled beneath thy throne? Still can thou sleep,
Patient, while vice doth make an antique face
At thy dread power, and blow dust, and smoke
Into thy nostrils? JOVE, will nothing wake thee?
Must vile SEIANVS pull thee by the beard,
Ere thou wilt open thy black-lidded eye,
And look him dead? Well! Snore on, dreaming gods:
And let this last of that proud Giant-race,
Heave mountain upon mountain, against your state—
Be good unto me, fortune, and you powers,
Whom I, expostulating, have profaned;
I see (what's equal with a prodigy)
A great, a noble Roman, and an honest,
Live an old man! O, MARCVS LEPIDVS,
When is our turn to bleed? Thy self, and I
(Without our boast) are a'most all the few
Left, to be honest, in these impious times.
WHat we are left to be, we will be, LVCIVS,
Though tyranny did stare, as wide as death,
To fright vs from it.
'T hath so, on SABINVS.
I saw him now drawn from the Gemonies,
And (what increased the direness of the fact)
His faithful dog (upbraiding all vs Romans)
Never forsook the corp's, but, seeing it thrown
Into the stream, leaped in, and drowned with it.
O act! to be envied him, of vs men!
We are the next, the hook lays hold on, MARCVS▪
What are thy arts (good patriot, teach them me)
That have preserved thy hairs, to this white die,
And kept so reverend, and so dear a head,
Safe, on his comely shoulders?
Arts, ARRVNTIVS?
None, but the plain, and passive fortitude,
To suffer, and be silent; never stretch
These arms, against the torrent; live at home,
With my own thoughts, and innocence about me,
Not tempting the wolves jaws: these are my arts.
I would begin to study 'hem, if I thought
They would secure me. May I pray to JOVE,
In secret, and be safe? I, or aloud?
With open wishes? so I doe not mention
TIBERIVS, or SEIANVS? yes, I must,
If I speak out. It is hard, that. May I think,
And not be racked? What danger is it to dream?
Talk in ones sleep? or cough? who knows the law?
May I shake my head, without a comment? say
It rains, or it holds up, and not be thrown
Upon the Gemonies? These now are things,
Whereon men's fortune, yea their fate depends.
Nothing hath privilege against the violent ear.
No place, no day, no hour (we see) is free.
(Not our religious, and most sacred times)
From some one kind of cruelty: all matter,
Nay all occasion pleases. Mad-mens rage,
The idleness of drunkards, women's nothing,
Easters simplicity, all, all is good
That can be caught at. Nor is now th'euent
Of any person, or for any crime,
To be expected; for, it is always one:
Death, with some little difference of place,
Or time— what's this? Prince NARROW? guarded?
ON, Lictors, keep your way: My lords, forbear.
On pain of CAESARS wrath, no man attempt
Speech with the prisoner.
Noble friends, be safe:
To loose your selves for words, were as vain hazard,
As unto me small comfort: Fare you well.
Would all Rome's sufferings in my fate did dwell.
Lictors, away.
Where goes he, LOCO?
Sir,
His banished into Pontia, by the Senate.
Do' I see? and hear? and feel? May I trust sense?
Or doth my phant'sie form it?
Whore's his brother?
DRVSVS is prisoner in the palace.
Ha?
I smell it now: it is rank. Whore's AGRIPPINA?
The princess is confined, to Pandataria.
Bolts, VULCAN; bolts, for JOVE! PHOEBVS, thy bow;
Sterne MARS, thy sword; and blue-ey'd Maid, thy spear;
Thy club, ALCIDES: all the armoury
Of heaven is too little!—Ha? to guard
The gods, I meant. Fine, rare dispatch! This same
Was swiftly borne! confined? imprisoned? banished?
Most tripartite! The cause, sir?
Treason.
O?
The complement of all accusings? that
Will hit, when all else fails.
This turn is strange!
But yesterday, the people would not hear
Far less objected, but cried, CAESARS letters
Were false, and forged; that all these plots were malice:
And that the ruin of the Princes house
Was practised against his knowledge. Where are now
Their voices? now, that they behold his heirs
Locked up, disgraced, led into exile?
Hushed.
Drowned in their bellies. Wild SEIANVS breath
Hath, like a whirlwind, scattered that poor dust,
With this rude blast. We'll talk no treason, sir,
If that be it you stand for? Fare you well.
We have no need of horse-leeches. Good spy,
Now you are spied, be gone.
I fear, you wrong him.
He has the voice to be an honest Roman.
And trusted to this office? LEPIDVS,
I'd sooner trust Greeke-SINON, then a man
Our state employs. Hoe's gone: and being gone,
I dare tell you (whom I dare better trust)
That our night-ey'd TIBERIVS doth not see
His minions drifts; or, if he doe, h'is not
So errant subtle, as we fools doe take him:
To breed a mongrel up, in his own house,
With his own blood, and (if the good gods please)
At his own throat, flesh him, to take a leap.
I doe not beg it, heaven: but, if the fates
Grant it these eyes, they must not wink.
They must
Not see it, LVCIVS.
Who should let 'hem?
Zeal,
And duty; with the thought, he is our Prince.
He is our monster: forfeited to vice
So far, as no racked virtue can redeem him.
His loathed person fouler then all crimes:
An Emp'rour, only in his lusts. Retired
(From all regard of his own fame, or Rome's)
Into an obscure Island; where he lives
(Acting his tragedies with a comic face)
Amidst his rout of Chaldee's: spending hours,
Days, weeks, and months, in the unkind abuse
Of grave astrology, to the bane of men,
Casting the scope of men's nativities,
And having found ought worthy in their fortune,
Kill, or precipitate them in the sea,
And boast, he can mock fate. Nay, muse not: these
Are far from ends of evil, scarce degrees.
He hath his slaughter-house, at Capreae;
Where he doth study murder, as an art:
And they are dearest in his grace, that can
Devise the deepest tortures. Thither, too,
He hath his boys, and beauteous girls tan up,
Out of our noblest houses, the best formed,
Best nurtured, and most modest: what's their good
Serves to provoke his bad. Some are allured,
Some threatened; others (by their friends detained)
Are ravished hence, like captives, and, in sight
Of their most grieved parents, dealt away
Unto his spintries, salaries, and slaves,
Masters of strange, and new-commented lusts,
For which wise nature hath not left a name.
To this (what most strikes vs, and bleeding Rome,)
He is, with all his craft, become the ward
To his own vassal, a stale catamite:
Whom he (upon our low, and suffering necks)
Hath raised, from excrement, to side the gods,
And have his proper sacrifice in Rome:
Which JOVE beholds, and yet will sooner rive
A senseless ok with thunder, then his trunk.
THese letters make men doubtful what t'expect,
Whether his coming, or his death.
Troth, both:
And which comes soonest, thank the gods for.
List,
Their talk is CAESAR, I would hear all voices.)
One day, hoe's well; and will return to Rome:
The next day, sick; and knows not when to hope it.
True, and to day, one of SEIANVS friends
Honoured by special writ; and on the morrow
Another punished—
By more special writ.
This man receives his praises of SEIANVS,
A second, but slight mention; a third, none:
A fourth, rebukes. And thus he leaves the Senate
Divided, and suspended, all uncertain.
These forked tricks, I understand 'hem not,
Would he would tell vs whom he loves, or hates,
That we might follow, without fear, or doubt.
Good HELIOTROPE! Is this your honest man?
Let him be yours so still. He is my knave.)
I cannot tell, SEIANVS still goes on,
And mounts, we see: New statues are advanced,
Fresh leaves of titles, large inscriptions read,
His fortune sworn by, himself new gone out
CAESARS colleague, in the fifth Consulship,
More altars smoke to him, then all the gods:
What would wee more?
That the dear smoke would choke him,
That would I more.
Peace, good ARRVNTIVS.)
But there are letters come (they say) even now,
Which doe forbid that last.
Doe you hear so?
Yes.
By POLLVX, that's the worst.
By HERCVLES, best.)
I did not like the sign, when REGVLVS,
(Whom all we know no friend unto SEIANVS)
Did, by TIBERIVS so precise command,
Succeed a fellow in the Consulship:
It boded somewhat.
Not a mote. His partner,
FVLCINIVS TRIO, is his own, and sure.
Here comes TERENTIVS. He can give vs more.
I'll ne'er believe, but CAESAR hath some sent
Of bold SEIANVS footing. These cross points
Of varying letters, and opposing Consuls,
Mingling his honours, and his punishments,
Feigning now ill, now well, raising SEIANVS,
And then depressing him, (as now of late
In all reports we have it) cannot be
Empty of practice: It is TIBERIVS art.
For (having found his favourite grown too great,
And, with his greatness, strong; that all the soldiers
Are, with their leaders, made at his devotion;
That almost all the Senate are his creatures,
Or hold on him their maine dependences,
That want their matter to with-stand them: so,
It is our grief, and will be' our loss, to know
Our power shall want opposites; unless
The gods, by mixing in the cause, would bless
Our fortune, with their conquest. That were worth
SEIANVS strife: durst fates but bring it forth.
SAfety, to great SEIANVS.
Now, TERENTIVS?
Hears not my lord the wonder?
Speak it, no.
I meet it violent in the peoples mouths,
Who run, in routs, to POMPEY'S theatre,
To view your statue: which, they say, sends forth
A smoke, as from a fornace, black, and dreadful.
Some traitor hath put fire in: (you, go see.)
And let the head be taken off, to look
What it is— Some slave hath practised an imposture,
To stir the people. How now? why return you?
THe head, my lord, already is tan off,
I saw it: and, at opening, there leaped out
A great, and monstrous serpent!
Monstrous! why?
Had it a beard? and horns? no heart? a tongue
Forked as flattery? looked it of the hue,
To such as live in great men's bosoms? was
The spirit of it MACRO'S?
May it please
The most divine SEIANVS, in my days,
(And by his sacred fortune, I affirm it)
I have not seen a more extended, grown,
Foul, spotted, venomous, ugly—
O, the fates!
What a wild muster's here of attributes,
T'expresse a worm, a snake?
But how that should
Come there, my lord!
What! and you too, TERENTIVS?
I think you mean to make 't a prodigy
In your reporting?
Can the wise SEIANVS
Think heaven hath meant it less?
O, superstition!
Why, then the falling of our bed, that brake
This morning, burd'ned with the populous weight
Of our expecting clients, to salute vs;
Or running of the cat, betwixt our legs,
As we set forth unto the capitol,
Were prodigies.
I think them ominous!
And, would they had not happened. As, to day,
The fate of some your servants! who, declining
Their way, not able, for the throng, to follow,
Slip't down the Gemonies, and brake their necks!
Besides, in taking your last augury,
No prosperous bird appeared, but croaking ravens
Flagged up and down: and from the sacrifice
Flew to the prison, where they sate, all night,
Beating the air with their obstreperous beaks!
I dare not counsel, but I could entreat
That great SEIANVS would attempt the gods,
Once more, with sacrifice.
What excellent fools
Religion makes of men? Believes TERENTIVS,
(If these were dangers, as I shame to think them)
The gods could change the certain course of fate?
Or, if they could, they would (now, in a moment)
For a beef fat, or less, be bribed t'inuert
Those long decrees? Then think the gods, like flies,
Are to be taken with the steam of flesh,
Or blood, diffused about their altars: think
Their power as cheap, as I esteem it small.
Of all the throng, that fill th'Olympian hall,
And (without pity) lade poor ATLAS back,
I know not that one deity, but Fortune;
To whom, I would throw up, in begging smoke,
One gran of incense: or whose ear I'd buy
With thus much oil. Her, I, indeed, adore;
And keep her grateful image in my house,
Some-times belonging to a Roman king,
But, now called mine, as by the better stile:
To her, I care not, if (for satisfying
Your scrupulous phant'sies) I go offer. Bid
Our priest prepare vs honey, milk, and poppy,
His masculine odours, and night-vestments: say,
Our rites are instant, which performed, you'll see
How vain, and worthy laughter, your fears be.
POMPONIVS! whither in such speed?
I go
To give my lord SEIANVS notice—
What?
Of MACRO.
Is he come?
Entered but now
The house of REGVLVS.
The opposite Consul?
Some half hour since.
And, by night too! stay, sir;
I'll bear you company.
Along, then—
Tic CAESARS will, to have a frequent Senate.
And therefore must your edict lay deep mulct
On such, as shall be absent.
So it doth.
Bear it my fellow Consul to adscribe.
And tell him it must early be proclaimed;
The place, APOLLO'S temple.
That's remembered.
And at what hour?
Yes.
You doe forget
To send one for the Provost of the watch?
I have not: here he comes.
GRACINVS LOCO,
You'are a friend most welcome: by, and by,
I'll speak with you. (You must procure this list
Of the Praetorian cohorts, with the names
Of the Centurions, and their Tribunes.
I.)
I bring you letters, and a health from CAESAR—
Sir, both come well.
(And hear you, with your note,
Which are the eminent men, and most of action.
That shall be done you too.)
Most worthy LOCO,
CAESAR salutes you. (Consul! death, and furies!
Gone now?) the argument will please you, sir.
(Hough! REGVLVS? The anger of the gods
Follow his diligent legs, and ouer'take 'hem,
In likeness of the gout.) O, good my lord,
We lacked you present; I would pray you send
Another to FVLCINIVS TRIO, straight,
To tell him, you will come, and speak with him:
(The matter we'll devise) to stay him, there,
While I, with LOCO, doe survey the watch.
What are your strengths, GRACINVS?
Seven cohorts.
You see, what CAESAR writes: and (—gone again?
H'has sure a vein of mercury in his feet)
Knew you, what store of the praetorian soldiers
SEIANVS holds, about him, for his guard?
I cannot the just number: but, I think,
Three centuries.
Three? good.
At most, not four.
And who be those Centurions?
That the Consul
Can best deliver you.
(When h'is away:
Spite, on his nimble industry.) GRACINVS,
You find what place you hold, there, in the trust
Of royal CAESAR?
I, and I am—
Sir,
The honours, there proposed, are but beginnings
Of his great favours.
They are more—
I heard him
When he did study, what to add—
My life,
And all I hold—
You were his own first choice;
Which doth confirm as much, as you can speak:
And will (if we succeed) make more— Your guards
Are seven cohorts, you say?
Yes.
Those we must
Hold still in readiness, and undischarged.
I understand so much. But how it can—
Be done without suspicion, you'll object?
What's that?
The keeping of the watch in arms,
When morning comes.
The Senate shall be met, and set
So early, in the temple, as all mark
Of that will be avoided.
If we need,
We have commission, to possess the palace,
Enlarge prince DRVSVS, and make him our chief.
(That secret would have burned his reverend mouth,
Had he not spit it out, now:) by the gods,
You carry things too—let me borrow'a man,
Or two, to bear these— That of freeing DRVSVS,
CAESAR proiected as the last, and utmost;
Not else to be remembered.
Here are servants.
These to ARRVNTIVS, these to LEPIDVS,
This bear to COTTA, this to LATIARIS.
If they demand you'of me: say, I have tan
Fresh horse, and am departed. You (my lord)
To your colleague, and be you sure, to hold him
With long narration, of the new fresh favours,
Meant to SEIANVS, his great patron; I,
With trusted LOCO, here, are for the guards:
Then, to divide. For, night hath many eyes,
Whereof, though most doe sleep, yet some are spies.
BE all profane far hence; Fly, fly far off:
Be absent far. Far hence be all profane.
We have been faulty, but repent vs now,
And bring pure hands, pure vestments, and pure minds.
Pure vessels.
And pure offerings.
Garlands pure.
Bestow your garlands: and (with reverence) place
The veruin on the altar.
Favour your tongues.
Great mother FORTUNE, Queen of humane state,
Rectresse of action, Arbitresse of fate,
To whom all sway, all power, all empire bows,
Be present, and propitious to our vows.
Favour it with your tongues.
Be present, and propitious to our vows.
Accept our offering, and be pleased, great goddess.
See, see, the image stirs!
And turns away!
Fortune averts her face!
Avert, you gods,
The prodigy. Still! still! Some pious rite
We have neglected. Yet! heaven, be appeased.
And be all tokens false, or void, that speak
Thy present wrath.
Be thou dumb, scrupulous priest:
And gather up thy self, with these thy wares,
Which I, in spite of thy blind mistress, or
Thy juggling mystery, religion, throw
Thus, scorned on the earth. Nay, hold thy look
Averted, till I woo thee, turn again;
And thou shalt stand, to all posterity,
Th'eternall game, and laughter, with thy neck
Writhed to thy tail, like a ridiculous cat.
Avoid these fumes, these superstitious lights,
And all these coos'ning ceremonies: you,
Your pure, and spiced conscience. I, the slave,
And mock of fools, (scorn on my worthy head)
That have been titled, and adored a god,
Yea, sacrificed unto, my self, in Rome,
No less then JOVE: and I be brought, to doe
A peevish gigglot rites? Perhaps, the thought,
And shame of that made Fortune turn her face,
Knowing her self the lesser deity,
And but my servant. Bashful queen, if so,
SEIANVS thanks thy modesty. Who's that?
HIs fortune suffers, till he hears my news:
I have waited here too long. MACRO, my lord—
Speak lower, &amp; with-draw.
Are these things true?
Thousands are gazing at it, in the streets.
What's that?
MINVTIVS tells vs here, my lord,
That, a new head being set upon your statue,
A rope is since found wreathed about it! and,
But now, a fiery meteor, in the form
Of a great ball, was seen to roll along
The troubled ayre, where yet it hangs, imperfect,
The amazing wonder of the multitude!
No more. That MACRO'S come, is more then all!
Is MACRO come?
I saw him.
Where? with whom?
With REGVLVS.
TERENTIVS—
My lord?
Send for the Tribunes, we will straight have up
More of the soldiers, for our guard. MINVTIVS,
We pray you, go for COTTA, LATIARIS,
TRIO the Consul, or what Senators
You know are sure, and ours. You, my good NATTA,
For LOCO, Provost of the watch. Now, SATRIVS,
The time of proof comes on. Arm all our servants,
And without tumult. You, POMPONIVS,
Hold some good correspondence, with the Consul,
Attempt him, noble friend. These things begin
To look like dangers, now, worthy my fates.
Fortune, I see thy worst: Let doubtful states,
And things uncertain hang upon thy will:
Me surest death shall render certain still.
Yet, why is, now, my thought turned toward death,
Whom fates have let go on, so far, in breath,
Vncheck'd, or vnreprou'd? I, that did help
To fell the lofty Cedar of the world,
GERMANICVS; that, at one stroke, cut down
DRVSVS, that upright Elm; withered his vine;
Laid SILIVS, and SABINVS, two strong Oaks,
Flat on the earth; besides, those other shrubs,
CORDVS, and SOSIA, CLAVDIA PVLCHRA,
FVRNIVS, and GALLVS, which I have grub'd up;
And since, have set my axe so strong, and deep
Into the root of spreading AGRIPPINE;
Lopped off and scattered her proud branches, NARROW,
DRVSVS, and CAIVS too, although re-planted;
If you will, destinies, that, after all,
I faint, now, ere I touch my period;
You are but cruel: and I already have done
Things great enough. All Rome hath been my slave;
The Senate sate an idle looker on,
And witness of my power; when I have blushed,
More, to command, then it to suffer; all
The Fathers have sate ready, and prepared,
To give me empire, temples, or their throats,
When I would ask 'hem; and (what crowns the top)
Rome, Senate, people, all the world have seen
JOVE, but my equal: CAESAR, but my second.
It is then your malice, fates, who (but your own)
Envy, and fear, t'haue any power long known.
STay here: I'll give his lordship, you are come.
MARCVS, TERENTIVS, pray you tell my lord,
Here's COTTA, and LATIARIS.
Sir, I shall.
My letter is the very same with yours;
Only requires me to bee present there,
And give my voice, to strengthen his design.
Names he not what it is?
No, nor to you.
It is strange, and singular doubtful!
So it is?
It may bee all is left to lord SEIANVS.
GEntlemen, whore's my lord?
Wee wait him here.
The Provost LOCO? what's the news?
My lord—
NOw, my right dear, noble, and trusted friends;
How much I am a captive to your kindness!
Most worthy COTTA, LATIARIS; LOCO,
Your valiant hand; and gentlemen, your loves.
I wish I could divide my self unto you;
Or that it lay, within our narrow powers,
To satisfy for so enlarged bounty.
GRACINVS, we must pray you, hold your guards
Vnquit, when morning comes. Saw you the Consul?
TRIO will presently be here, my lord.
They are but giving order for the edict,
To warn the Senate.
How! the Senate?
Yes.
This morning, in APOLLO'S temple.
We
Are charged, by letter, to be there, my lord.
By letter? pray you let's see!
Knows not his lordship!
It seems so!
A Senate warned? without my knowledge?
And on this sudden? Senators by letters
Required to be there! who brought these?
MACRO.
Mine enemy! And when?
This mid-night.
Time,
With every other circumstance, doth give
It hath some strain of engine in it! How now?
MY lord, SERTORIVS MACRO is without,
Alone, and prays to have private conference
In business, of high nature, with your lordship,
(He soy's to me) and which reguards you much.
Let him come here.
Better, my lord, with-draw,
You will betray what store, and strength of friends
Are now about you; which he comes to spy.
Is he not armed?
We'll search him.
No, but take,
And lead him to some room, where you, concealed,
May keep a guard upon vs. Noble LOCO,
You are our trust: and, till our own cohorts
Can be brought up, your strengths must be our guard.
Now, good MINVTIVS, honoured LATIARIS,
Most worthy, and my most vnwearied friends:
I return instantly.
Most worthy lord!
His lordship is turned instant kind, me thinks,
In have not observed it in him, heretofore.
It is true, and it becomes him nobly.
I
Am raped withal.
By MARS, he has my lives,
(Were they a million) for this only grace.
I, and to name a man!
As he did me!
And me!
Who would not spend his life and fortunes,
To purchase but the look of such a lord?
He, that would nor be lords fool, nor the worlds.
MACRO! most welcome, as most coveted friend!
Let me enjoy my longings. When arrived you?
About the noon of night.
SATRIVS, give leave.
I have been, since I came, with both the Consuls,
On a particular design from CAESAR.
How fares it with our great, and royal master?
Right plentifully well; as, with a prince,
That still holds out the great proportion
Of his large favours, where his judgment hath
Made once divine election: like the god,
That wants not, nor is wearied to bestow
Where merit meets his bounty, as it doth
In you, already the most happy, and ere
The sun shall climb the south, most high SEIANVS.
Let not my lord be' amused. For, to this end
Was I by CAESAR sent for, to the isle,
With special caution to conceal my journey;
And, thence, had my dispatch as privately
Again to Rome; charged to come here by night;
And, only to the Consuls, make narration
Of his great purpose: that the benefit
Might come more full, and striking, by how much
It was less looked for, or aspired by you,
Or least informed to the common thought.
What may this be? part of my self, dear MACRO!
If good, speak out: and share with your SEIANVS.
If bad, I should for ever loathe my self,
To be the messenger to so good a lord.
I doe exceed my instructions, to acquaint
Your lordship with thus much; but it is my venture
On your retentive wisdom: and, because
I would no jealous scruple should molest
Or rack your peace of thought. For, I assure
My noble lord, no Senator yet knows
The business meant: though all, by several letters,
Are warned to be there, and give their voices,
Only to add unto the state, and grace
Of what is purposed.
You take pleasure, MACRO,
Like a coy wench, in torturing your lover.
What can be worth this suffering?
That which follows,
The tribuniciall dignity, and power:
Both which SEIANVS is to have this day
Conferred upon him, and by public Senate.
Fortune, be mine again; thou hast satisfied
For thy suspected loyalty.
My lord,
I have no longer time, the day approaches,
And I must back to CAESAR.
Whore's CALIGVLA?
That I forgot to tell your lordship. Why,
He lingers yonder, about Capreae,
Disgraced; TIBERIVS hath not seen him yet:
He needs would thrust himself to go with me,
Against my wish, or will, but I have quited
His forward trouble, with as tardy note
As my neglect, or silence could afford him.
Your lordship cannot now command me ought,
Because, I take no knowledge that I saw you,
But I shall boast to live to serve your lordship:
And so take leave.
Honest, and worthy MACRO,
Your love, and friendship. Who's there? SATRIVS,
Attend my honourable friend forth. O!
How vain, and vile a passion is this fear?
What base, uncomely things it makes men doe?
Suspect their noblest friends, (as I did this)
Flatter poor enemies, entreat their servants,
Stoup, court, and catch at the benevolence
Of creatures, unto whom (within this hour)
I would not have vouchsafed a quarter-looke,
Or piece of face? By you, that fools call gods,
Hang all the sky with your prodigious signs,
Fill earth with monsters, drop the scorpion down,
Out of the zodiac, or the fiercer lyon,
Shake off the loos'ned globe from her long hinge,
Roll all the world in darkness, and let loose
Th'inraged winds to turn up groves and towns;
When I doe fear again, let me be struck
With forked fire, and unpitied die:
Who fears, is worthy of calamity.
IS not my lord here?
Sir, he will be straight.
What news, FVLCINIVS TRIO?
Good, good tidings.
(But, keep it to your self) My lord SEIANVS
Is to receive this day, in open Senate,
The tribuniciall dignity.
Is it true?
No words; not to your thought: but, sir, believe it.
What says the Consul?
(Speak it not again,)
He tells me, that to day my lord SEIANVS —
I must entreat you COTTA, on your honour
Not to reveal it.
On my life, sir.)
Say.
Is to receive the tribuniciall power.
But, as you are an honourable man,
Let me conjure you, not to utter it:
For it is trusted to me, with that bond.
I am HARPOCRATES.
Can you assure it?
The Consul told it me, but keep it close.
Lord LATIARIS, what's the news?
I'll tell you,
But you must swear to keep it secret—
I Knew the sates had on their distaff left
More of our thread, then so.
Hail, great SEIANVS.
Hail, the most honoured.
Happy.
High SEEING{us}.
Doe you bring prodigies too?
May all presage
Turn to those fair effects, whereof we bring
Your lordship news.
May 't please my lord with-draw.
Yes (I will speak with you, anon.)
My lord,
What is your pleasure for the Tribunes?
Why,
Let 'hem be thanked, and sent away.
My lord—
Wilt please your lordship to command me—
No.
You are troublesome.
The mood is changed.
Not speak?
Nor look?
I. He is wise, will make him friends
Of such, who never love, but for their ends.
I, Go, make haste; take heed you be not last
To tender your All hail, in the wide hall
Of huge SEIANVS: run, a Lictors pace;
Stay not to put your robes on; but, away,
With the pale troubled ensigns of great friendship
Stamp't in your face! Now, MARCVS LEPIDVS,
You still believe your former augury?
SEIANVS must go downward? you perceive
His wane approaching fast?
Believe me, LVCIVS,
I wonder at this rising!
I, and that we
Must give our suffrage to it? you will say,
It is to make his fall more steep, and grievous?
It may be so. But think it, they that can
With idle wishes 'ssay to bring back time:
In cases desperate, all hope is crime.
See, see! what troops of his officious friends
Flock to salute my lord! and start before
My great, proud lord! to get a lord-like nod!
Attend my lord, unto the Senate-house!
Bring back my lord! like servile huishers, make
Way for my lord! proclaim his idol lord-ship,
More then ten criers, or six noise of trumpets!
Make legs, kiss hands, and take a scattered hair
From my lords eminent shoulder! See, SANQVINIVS!
With his slow belly, and his dropsy! look,
What toiling haste he makes! yet, here's another,
Retarded with the gout, will be before him!
Get thee liburnian porters, thou gross fool,
To bear thy obsequious fatness, like thy peers.
They are met! The gout returns, and his great carriage.
Give way, make place; room for the Consul.
Hail,
Hail, great SEIANVS.
Hail, my honoured lord.
We shall be marked anon, for our not-haile.
That is already done.
It is a note
Of upstart greatness, to observe, and watch
For these poor trisles, which the noble mind
Neglects, and scorns.
I, and they think themselves
Deeply dishonoured, where they are omitted,
As if they were necessities, that helped
To the perfection of their dignities:
And hate the men, that but refrain 'hem.
O!
There is a farther cause of hate. Their breasts
Are guilty, that we know their obscure springs,
And base beginnings: thence the anger grows. On. Follow.
WHen all are entered, shut the temple doors;
And bring your guards up to the gate.
I will.
If you shall hear commotion in the Senate,
Present your self: and charge on any man
Shall offer to come forth.
I am instructed.
HOw well his lordship looks to day!
As if
He had been borne, or made for this hours state.
Your fellow Consul's come about, me thinks?
I, he is wise.
SEIANVS trusts him well.
SEIANVS is a noble, bounteous lord.
He is so, and most valiant.
And most wise.
Hoe's every thing.
Worthy of all, and more
Then bounty can bestow.
This dignity
Will make him worthy.
Aboue CAESAR.
Tut,
CAESAR is but the rector of an I'sle,
He of the empire.
Now he will have power
More to reward, then ever.
Let vs look
We be not slack in giving him our voices.
Not I.
Nor I.
The readier we seem
To propagate his honours, will more bind
His thought, to ours.
I think right, with your lordship.
It is the way to have vs hold our places.
I, and get more.
More office, and more titles.
I will not lose the part, I hope to share
In these his fortunes, for my patrimony.
See, how ARRVNTIVS sits, and LEPIDVS.
Let 'hem alone, they will be marked anon.
I'll doe with others.
So will I.
And I.
Men grow not in the state, but as they are planted
Warm in his favours.
Noble SEIANVS!
Honoured SEIANVS!
Worthy, and great SEIANVS!
Gods! how the spunges open, and take in!
And shut again! look, look! is not he blessed
That gets a seat in eye-reach of him? more,
That comes in ear, or tongue-reach? Ô, but most,
Can claw his subtle elbow, or with a buzz
Fly-blow his ears.
Proclaim the Senates peace;
And give last summons by the edict.
Silence:
In name of CAESAR, and the SENATE. Silence.
MEMMIVS REGVLVS, and FVLCINIVS TRIO, consuls, these present kalends of June, with the first light, shall hold a senate, in the temple of APOLLO PALATINE, all that are Fathers, and are registered Fathers, that have right of entering the Senate, we warn, or command, you be frequently present, take knowledge the business is the commonwealths, whosoever is absent, his fine, or mulct, will be taken, his excuse will not be taken.
Note, who are absent, and record their names.
Fathers Conscript. May, what I am to utter.
Turn good, and happy, for the common-wealth.
And thou APOLLO, in whose holy house
We here are met, inspire vs all, with truth,
And liberty of censure, to our thought.
The majesty of great TIBERIVS CAESAR
Propounds to this grave Senate, the bestowing
Upon the man he loves, honoured SEIANVS,
The tribuniciall dignity, and power;
Here are his letters, signed with his signet:
What pleases now the Fathers to be done?
Read, read 'hem, open, publicly, read 'hem.
CAESAR hath honoured his own greatness much,
In thinking of this act.
It was a thought
Happy, and worthy CAESAR.
And the lord,
As worthy it, on whom it is directed!
Most worthy!
Rome did never boast the virtue
That could give envy bounds, but his: SEIANVS —
Honoured, and noble!
Good, and great SEIANVS!
O, most tame slavery, and fierce flattery!
Silence.
IF you, Conscript Fathers, with your children, bee in health, it is aboun∣dantly well: wee with our friends here, are so. The care of the common-wealth, howsoever we are removed in person, cannot be absent to our thought; although, oftentimes, even to princes most present, the truth of their own af∣fairs is hid: then which, nothing false out more miserable to a state, or makes the art of governing more difficult. But since it hath been our ease-full happiness to enjoy both the aides, and industry of so vigilant a Senate, wee profess to have been the more indulgent to our pleasures, not as being careless of our office, but rather secure of the necessity. Neither doe these common rumours of many, and infamous libels, published against our retirement, at all afflict vs; being born more out of men's ignorance, then their malice: and will, neglected, find their own grave quickly; whereas too sensibly acknowledged, it would make their obloquy ours. Nor doe we desire their authors (though found) bee censured, since in a free state (as ours) all men ought to enjoy both their minds, and tongues free.
The lapwing, the lapwing.)
Yet, in things, which shall worthily, and more near concern the majesty of a prince, we shall fear to be so unnaturally cruel to our own fame, as to neglect them. True it is, Conscript Fathers, that wee have raised SEIANVS, from obscure, and almost unknown gentry,
How! how!)
to the highest, and most conspicuous point of greatness, and (wee hope) deser∣uingly; yet, not without danger: it being a most bold hazard in that sovereign, who, by his particular love to one, dares adventure the hatred of all his other subjects.
This touches, the blood turns.)
But wee affy in your loves, and understandings, and doe no way suspect the merit of our SEIANVS to make our favours offensive to any.
O! good, good.)
Though we could have wished his zeal had run a calmer course against A∣GRIPPINA, and our Nephews, howsoever the openness of their actions, de∣claret them delinquents; and, that he would have remembered, no innocence is so safe, but it rejoices to stand in the sight of mercy: The use of which in vs, hee hath so quite taken away, toward them, by his loyal fury, as now our clemency would be thought but wearied cruelty, if we should offer to exercise it.
I thank him, there I looked for it. A good fox!)
Some there bee, that would interpret this his public severity to bee particu∣lar
ambition; and that, under a pretext of service to vs, hee doth but remove his own lets: alleging the strengths he hath made to himself, by the Praetorian soldiers, by his faction in Court, and Senate, by the offices hee holds himself, and confers on others, his popularity, and dependents, his urging (and almost driving) vs to this our unwilling retirement, and lastly his aspiring to be our son in-law.
This 's strange!
I shall anon believe your vultures, MARCVS.)
Your wisdoms, Conscript Fathers, are able to examine, and censure these suggestions. But, were they left to our absolving voice, we durst pronounce them, as we think them, most malicious.
O, he has restored all, list.)
Yet, are they offered to bee averred, and on the lives of the informers. What wee should say, or rather what we should not say, Lords of the Senate, if this bee true, our gods, and goddesses confound vs if we know! Only, we must think, we have placed our benefits ill: and conclude, that, in our choice, either we were wan∣ting to the gods, or the gods to vs.
The place grows hot, they shift.)
We have not been covetous, Honourable Fathers, to change; neither is it now, any new lust that alters our affection, or old loathing: but those needful jealousies of state, that warn wiser princes, hourly, to provide their safety; and doe teach them how learned a thing it is to beware of the humblest enemy; much more of those great ones, whom their own employed favours have made fit for their fears.
Away.
Sit farther.
Let's remove—
Gods! how the leaves drop off, this little wind!)
We therefore desire, that the offices he holds, bee first seized by the Senate; and himself suspended from all exercise of place, or power—
How!
By your leave.
Come, Porcpisce, (wher's HA∣TERIVS?
His gout keeps him most miserably constant.)
Your dancing shows a tempest.
Read no more.
Lords of the Senate, hold your seats: read on.
These letters, they are forged.
A guard, sit still.
There's change.
Bid silence, and read forward.
Silence— and himself suspended from all exercise of place, or power, but till due and mature trial be made of his innocence, which yet we can faintly apprehend the necessity, to doubt. If, Conscript Fathers, to your more searching wisdoms, there shall appear farther cause (or of farther pro∣ceeding, either to seizure of lands, goods, or more—) it is not our power that shall limit your authority, or our favour, that must corrupt your justice: either were dishonourable in you, and both uncharitable to our self. We would willing∣lie he present with your counsels in this business, but the danger of so potent a faction (if it should prove so) forbids our attempting it: except one of the Consuls would be entreated for our safety, to undertake the guard of vs home, then wee should most readily adventure. In the mean time, it shall not bee fit for vs to
importune so judicious a Senate, who know how much they hurt the innocent, that spare the guilty: and how grateful a sacrifice, to the gods, is the life of an ungrateful person. We reflect not, in this, on SEIANVS (notwithstanding, if you keep an eye upon him— and there is LATIARIS a Senator, and PINNA∣REVS NATTA, two of his most trusted ministers, and so professed, whom we de∣sire not to have apprênded) but as the necessity of the cause exacts it.
A guard on LATIARIS.
O, the spy!
The reverend spy is caught, who pities him?
Reward, sir, for your se•vice: now, you have done
Your property, you see what use is made?
Hang up the instrument.
Give leave.
Stand, stand,
He comes upon his death, that doth advance
An inch toward my point.
Have we no friends here?
Hushed. Where now are all the hails, and acclamations?
Hail, to the Consuls, and this noble Senate.
Is MACRO here? O, thou art lost, SEIANVS.
Sit still, and vn-affrighted, reverend Fathers.
MACRO, by CAESARS grace, the new-made Provost,
And now possessed of the praetorian bands,
An honour late belonged to that proud man,
Bids you, be safe: and to your constant doom
Of his deservings, offers you the surety
Of all the soldiers, tribunes, and centurions,
Received in our command.
SEIANVS, SEIANVS,
Stand forth, SEIANVS.
Am I called?
I, thou,
Thou insolent monster, art bid stand.
Why, MACRO,
It hath been otherwise, between you, and I?
This court, that knows vs both, hath seen a difference,
And can (if it be pleased to speak) confirm,
Whose insolence is most.
Come down Typhoeus,
If mine be most, lo, thus I make it more;
Kick up thy heals in ayre, tear off thy robe,
Play with thy beard, and nostrils. Thus it is fit,
(And no man take compassion of thy state)
To use th'ingratefull viper, tread his brains
Into the earth.
Forbear.
If I could lose
All my humanity now, it were well to torture
So meriting a traitor. Wherefore, Fathers,
Sit you amazed, and silent? and not censure
This wretch, who in the hour he first rebelled
Against CAESARS bounty, did condemn himself?
P'hlegra, the field, where all the sons of earth
Mustered against the gods, did ne'er acknowledge
So proud, and huge a monster.
Take him hence.
And all the gods guard CAESAR.
Take him hence.
Hence.
To the dungeon with him.
He deserves it.
Crown all our doors with baize.
And let an ox
With gilded horns, and garlands, straight be led
Unto the capitol.
And sacrificed
To JOVE, for CAESARS safety.
All our gods
Be present still to CAESAR.
PHOEBVS.
MARS.
DIANA.
PALLAS.
IVNO, MERCVRIE,
All guard him.
Forth, thou prodigy of men.
Let all the traitors titles be defaced.
His images, and statues be pulled down.
His chariot-wheeles be broken.
And the legs
Of the poor horses, that deserved nought,
Let them be broken too.
O, violent change,
And whirl of men's affections!
Like, as both
Their bulks and souls were bound on fortunes wheel,
And must act only with her motion!
WHo would depend upon the popular ayre,
Or voice of men, that have to day beheld
(That which if all the gods had fore-declar'd,
Would not have been believed) SEIANVS fall?
He, that this morn rose proudly, as the sun?
And, breaking through a mist of clients breath,
Came on as gazed at, and admired, as he
When superstitious Moors salute his light!
That had our servile nobles waiting him
As common grooms; and hanging on his look,
No less then humane life on destiny!
That had men's knees as frequent, as the gods;
And sacrifices, more, then Rome had altars:
And this man fall! fall? I, without a look,
That durst appear his friend; or lend so much
Of vain relief, to his changed state, as pity!
They, that before like gnats plaid in his beams,
And thronged to circumscribe him, now not seen!
Nor deign to hold a common seat with him!
Others, that waited him unto the Senate,
Now, inhumanely ravish him to prison!
Whom (but this morn) they followed as their lord,
Guard through the streets, bound like a fugitive!
In stead of wreaths, give fetters; strokes, for stoops:
Blind shame, for honours; and black taunts, for titles!
Who would trust slippery chance?
They, that would make
Themselves her spoil: and foolishly forget,
When she doth flatter, that she comes to prey.
Fortune, thou had no deity, if men
Had wisdom: we have placed thee so high,
By fond belief in thy felicity.
The gods guard CAESAR. All the gods guard CAESAR.
NOw great SEIANVS, you that awed the state,
And sought to bring the nobles to your whip,
That would be CAESARS tutor, and dispose
Of dignities, and offices! that had
The public head still bare to your designs,
And made the general voice to echo yours!
That looked for salutations, twelve score off,
And would have pyramid's, yea, temples reared
To your huge greatness! now, you lie as flat,
As was your pride advanced.
Thanks, to the gods.
And praise to MACRO, that hath saved Rome.
Liberty, liberty, liberty. Lead on,
And praise to MACRO, that hath saved Rome.
I Prophecy, out of this Senates flattery,
That this new fellow, MACRO, will become
A greater prodigy in Rome, then he
That now is fallen.
O you, whose minds are good,
And have not forced all mankind, from your breasts;
That yet have so much stock of virtue left,
To pity guilty states, when they are wretched:
Lend your soft ears to hear, and eyes to weep
Deeds done by men, beyond the acts of furies.
The eager multitude, (who never yet
Knew why to love, or hate, but only pleased
T'expresse their rage of power) no sooner heard
The murmur of SEIANVS in decline,
But with that speed, and heate of appetite,
With which they greedily devour the way
To some great sports, or a new theatre;
They filled the capitol, and POMPEI'S circke,
Where, like so many mastiues, biting stones,
As if his statues now were sensitive
Of their wild fury; first, they tear them down:
Then fastening ropes, drag them along the streets,
Crying in scorn, this, this was that rich head
Was crowned with garlands, and with odours, this
That was in Rome so reverenced. Now
The fornace, and the bellows shall too work
The great SEIANVS crack, and piece, by piece,
Drop in the founders pit.
O, popular rage!
The whilst, the Senate, at the temple of Concord,
Make haste to meet again, and thronging cry,
Let vs condemn him, tread him down in water,
While he doth lie upon the bank; away:
Where some, more tardy, cry unto their bearers,
He will be censured ere we come, run knaves,
And use that furious diligence, for fear
Their bond-men should inform against their slackness,
And bring their quaking flesh unto the hook:
The rout, they follow with confused voice,
Crying, they'are glad, say they could ne'er abide him;
Enquire, what man he was? what kind of face?
What beard he had? what nose? what lips? protest,
They ever did presage h' would come to this:
They never thought him wise, nor valiant: Ask
After his garments, when he dies? what death?
And not a beast of all the herd demands,
What was his crime? or, who were his accusers?
Under what roof, or testimony, he fell?
There came (says one) a huge, long, worded letter
From Capreae against him. Did there so?
O, they are satisfied, no more.
Alas!
They follow fortune, and hate men condemned,
Guilty, or not.
But, had SEIANVS thrived
In his design, and prosperously oppressed
The old TIBERIVS, then, in that same minute
These very raskals, that now rage like furies,
Would have proclaimed SEIANVS emperor.
But what hath followed?
Sentence, by the Senate;
To lose his head: which was no sooner off,
But that, and th'vnfortunate trunk were seized
By the rude multitude; who not content
With what the forward justice of the state,
Officiously had done, with violent rage
Have rent it limb, from limb. A thousand heads,
A thousand hands, ten thousand tongues, and voices,
Employed at once in several acts of malice!
Old men not staid with age, virgins with shame,
Late wives with loss of husbands, mothers of children,
Losing all grief in joy of his sad fall,
Run quite transported with their cruelty!
These mounting at his head, these at his face,
These digging out his eyes, those with his brain,
Sprinkling themselves, their houses, and their friends;
Others are met, have ravished thence an arm,
And deal small pieces of the flesh for favours;
These with a thigh; this hath cut off his hands;
And this his feet; these fingers, and these toes;
That hath his liver; he his heart: there wants
Nothing but room for wrath, and place for hatred!
What cannot oft be done, is now ore-done.
The whole, and all of what was great SEIANVS,
And next to CAESAR did possess the world,
Now torn, and scattered, as he needs no grave,
Each little dust covers a little part:
So lies he no where, and yet often buried!
MOre of SEIANVS?
Yes.
What can be added?
We know him dead.
Then, there begin your pity.
There is enough behind, to melt even Rome,
And CAESAR into tears: (since never slave
Could yet so highly offend, but tyranny,
In torturing him, would make him worth lamenting.)
A son, and daughter, to the dead SEIANVS,
(Of whom there is not now so much remaining
As would give fastening to the hang-mans hook)
Have they drawn forth for farther sacrifice;
Whose tenderness of knowledge, unripe years,
And childish silly innocence was such,
As scarce would lend them feeling of their danger:
The girl so simple, as she often asked,
Where they would lead her? for what cause they dragged her?
Cried, she would doe no more. That she could take
Warning with beating. And because our laws
Admit no virgin immature to die,
The wittily, and strangely-cruell MACRO,
Delivered her to be deflowered, and spoiled,
By the rude lust of the licentious hang-man,
Then, to be strangled with her harmless brother.
O, act, most worthy hell, and lasting night,
To hide it from the world!
Their bodies thrown
Into the Gemonies, (I know not how,
Or by what accident returned) the mother,
Th'expulsed APICATA, finds them there;
Whom when she saw lie spread on the degrees,
After a world of fury on her self,
Tearing her hair, defacing of her face,
Beating her breasts, and womb, kneeling amazed,
Crying to heaven, then to them; at last,
Her drowned voice gate up aboue her woes:
And with such black, and bitter execrations,
(As might affright the gods, and force the sun
Run back-ward to the east, nay, make the old
Deformed CITAOS rise again, to ore-whelme
Them, vs, and all the world) she fills the air;
Upbraids the heavens with their partial dooms,
Defies their tyrannous powers, and demands,
What she, and those poor innocents have transgressed,
That they must suffer such a share in vengeance,
Whilst LIVIA, LYGDVS, and EVDEMVS live,
Who, (as she soy's, and firmly vows, to prove it
To CAESAR, and the Senate) poisoned DRVSVS?
Confederates with her husband?
I.
Strange act!
And strangely opened: what soy's now my monster,
The multitude? they reel now? doe they not?
Their gall is gone, and now they 'gin to weep
The mischief they have done.
I thank 'hem, rogues!
Part are so stupid, or so flexible,
As they believe him innocent; all grieve:
And some, whose hands yet reeke with his warm blood,
And gripe the part which they did tear of him,
Wish him collected, and created new.
How fortune plies her sports, when she begins
To practise'hem! pursues, continues, adds!
Con•ounds, with varying her impassioned moods!
Dost thou hope fortune to redeem thy crimes?
To make amends, for thy ill placed favours,
With these strange punishments? Forbear, you things,
That stand upon the pinnacles of state,
To boast your slippery height; when you doe fall,
You posh your selves in pieces, ne'er to rise:
And he that lends you pity, is not wise.
Let this example move th'insolent man,
Not to grow proud, and careless of the gods:
It is an odious wisdom, to blaspheme,
Much more to slighten, or deny their powers.
For, whom the morning saw so great, and high,
Thus low, and little, before the 'euen doth lie.

FOr your own sakes, not his, he bad me say,
Would you were come to hear, not see a Play.
Though we his Actors must provide for those,
Who are our guests, here, in the way of shows,
The maker hath not so; he'd have you wise,
Much •ather by your ears, then by your eyes:
And prays you'll not preiudge his Play for ill,
Because you mark it not, and sit not still;
But have a longing to salute, or talk
With such a female, and from her to walk
With your discourse, to what is done, and where,
How, and by whom, in all the town; but here.
Alas! what is it to his Scene, to know
How many Coaches in Hide-parke did show
Last spring, what fare to day at Medleys was,
If Dunstan, or the Phoenix best wine has?
They are things—But yet, the Stage might stand as well,
If it did neither hear these things, nor tell.
Great noble wits, be good unto your selves,
And make a difference twixt Poetique elves,
And Poets: All that dable in the ink,
And defile quills, are not those few, can think,
Conceive, express, and steer the souls of men,
As with a rudder, round thus, with their pen.
He must be one that can instruct your youth,
And keep your Acme in the state of truth,
Must enterprise this work, mark but his ways,
What flight he makes, how new; And then he says,
If that not like you, that he sends to night,
It is you have left to judge, not hee to write▪
A Work not smelling of the Lamp, to night,
But fitted for your Majesties disport,
And writ to the Meridian of your Court,
VVee bring; and hope it may produce delight:
The rather, being offered, as a Rite
To Scholars, that can judge, and fair report
The sense they hear, aboue the vulgar sort
Of Nut-crackers, that only come for sight.
Wherein, although our Title, Sir, be News.
Wee yet adventure, here, to tell you none;
But show you common follies, and so known,
That though they are not truths, th'innocent Muse
Hath made so like, as Phant'sie could them state,
Or Poetry, without scandal, imitate.
Gramercy Letherleg: Get me the Spurrier,
And thou hast fitted me.
I'll do it presently.
Look to me, wit, and look to my wit, Land,
That is, look on me, and with all thine eyes,
Male, Female, yea, Hermaphroditicke eyes,
And those bring all your helps, and perspicills,
To see me at best advantage, and augment
My form as I come forth, for I doe feel
I will be one, worth looking after, shortly.
Now, by and by, that's shortly.  't strikes! One, two,
Three, four, five, six. Enough, enough, dear watch,
Thy pulse hath beat enough. Now sleep, and rest;
Would thou could make the time to doe so too:
I'll wind thee up no more. The hour is come
So long expected! There, there,  drop my wardship,
My pupil age, and vassalage together.
And Liberty, come throw thy self about me,
In a rich suite, cloak, hat, and band, for now
I'll sue out no mans Livery, but miny own,
I stand on my own feet, so much a year,
Right, round, and sound, the Lord of mine own ground,
And (to rhyme to it) threescore thousand Pound!
Not come? Not yet? Taylor thou art a vermin,
Worse then the same thou prosecut'st, and prick'st
In subtle seam— (Go too, I say no more)
Thus to retard my longings: on the day
I doe write man, to beat thee. One and twenty,
S•nce the clock struck, complete! and thou wilt feel it
Thou foolish Animal! I could pity him,
(And I were not heartily angry with him now)
For this one piece of folly he bears about him,
To dare to tempt the Fury of an heir,
To aboue two thousand a year; yet hope his custom!
Well, Mr. Fashioner, theres some must break—
A head, for this your breaking. Are you come, Sir,
GOd give your worship joy.
What? of your staying?
And leaving me to stalk here in my trowses,
Like a tame Her'n-sew for you?
I but waited
Below, till the clock struck.
Why, if you had come
Before a quarter, would it so have hurt you,
In reputation, to have waited here?
No, but your worship might have pleaded nonage,
If you had got 'hem on, ere I could make
Just Affidauit of the time.
That jest
Has gained thy pardon, thou had lived, condemned
To thine own hell else, never to have wrought
Stitch more for me, or any Peniboy,
I could have hindered thee: but now thou art mine.
For one and twenty years, or for three lives,
Choose which thou wilt, I'll make thee a Copy-holder,
And thy first Bill unquestioned. Help me on.
Presently, Sir, I am bound unto your worship.
Thou shalt be, when I have sealed thee a Lease of my Cu∣stome.
Your worps, Barber is without.
Who? Thom?
Come in Thom: set thy things upon the Board
And spread thy clothes, lay all forth in procinctu,
And tell's what news?
O Sir, a staple of news!
Or the New Staple, which you please.
What's that?
An Office, Sir, a brave young Office set up.
I had forgot to tell your worship.
For what?
To enter all the News, Sir, of the time,
And vent it as occasion serves! A place
Of huge commerce it will be!
Pray thee peace,
I cannot abide a talking Taylor: let Thom
(He's a Barber) by his place relate it,
What is it, an Office, Thom?
Newly erected
Here in the house, almost on the same floor,
Where all the news of all sorts shall be brought,
And there be examined, and then registered,
And so be issued under the Seal of the Office,
As Staple News; no other news be currant.
Before me, thou speak of a brave business, Thom.
Nay, if you knew the brain that hatched it Sr—
I know thee well enough: give him a loaf, Thom—
Quiet his mouth, that Oven will be venting else.
Proceed—
He tells you true Sr. Mr Cymbal,
Is Master of the Office, he proiected it,
Hee lies here in the house: and the great rooms
He has taken for the Office, and set up
His Deskes and Classes, Tables and his Shelves,
He's my Customer, and a Wit Sir, too.
But, h' has brave wits under him—
Yes, four Emissaries,
Emissaries? stay, there's a fine new word, Thom!
'Pray God it signify any thing, what are Emissaries?
Men employed outward, that are sent abroad
To fetch in the commodity.
From all regions
Where the best news are made.
Or vented forth.
By way of exchange, or trade.
Nay, thou wilt speak—
My share Sr. there's enough for both.
Go on then,
Speak all thou can: me thinks, the ordinaries
Should help them much.
Sir, they have ordinaries,
And extraordinaries, as many changes,
And variations, as there are points in the compass.
But the 4. Cardinal Quarters—
I, those Thom—
The Court, Sir, Pals, Exchange, and Westminster-hall.
Who is the Chief? which hath preceedencie?
The governor of the Staple, Master Cymbal.
He is the Chief; and after him the Emissaries:
First Emissary Court, one Master Fitton,
He's a Ieerer too.
What's that?
A Wit.
Or half a Wit, some of them are Halfe-wits,
Two to a Wit, there are a set of 'hem.
Then Master Ambler, Emissary Paules,
A fine paced gentleman, as you shall see, walk
The middle Isle: And then my Froy Hans Buzz,
A Dutch-man; he's Emissary Exhange.
I had thought Mr. Burst the Merchant had had it.
No,
He has a rupture, hee has sprung a leake,
Emissary Westminster's vndispos'd of yet;
Then the Examiner, Register, and two Clerks,
They manage all at home, and sort, and file,
And seal the news, and issue them.
Thom, dear Thom.
What may my means doe for thee, ask, and have it,
I'd fine be doing some good. It is my birth-day.
And I'd doe it betimes, I feel a grudging
Of bounty, and I would not long lye fallow.
I pray thee think, and speak, or wish for something.
I would I had but one of the Clerks places,
I'this News Office,.
Thou shalt have it, Thom,
If silver, or gold will fetch it; what's the rate?
At what is it set in the Market?
Fifty pound, Sir.
An't were a hundred, Thom, thou shalt not want it.
O Noble Master!
How now Aesops Ass!
Because I play with Thom, must I needs run
Into your rude embraces? stand you still, Sir;
Clowns fawnings, are a horses salutations.
How dost thou like my suite, Thom?
Mr Fashioner
Has hit your measures, Sir, h'has moulded you,
And made you, as they say.
No, no, not I,
I am an Ass, old Aesops Ass.
Nay, Fashioner,
I can doe thee a good turn too, be not musty,
Though thou hast moulded me, as little Thom says,
(I think thou hast put me in mouldy pockets.)
As good,
Right Spanish perfume, the Lady Estifania's,
They cost twelve pound a pair.
Thy bill will say so.
I pray thee tell me, Fashioner, what Authors
Thou read to help thy invention? Italian prints?
Or Arras hangings? They are Taylors Libraries.
I scorn such helps.
O, though thou art a silkworm!
And deal in satins and veluets, and rich plushes,
Thou can not spin all forms out of thy self;
They are quite other things: I think this suite
Has made me wittier, then I was.
Believe it Sir,
That clothes doe much upon the wit, as weather
Do's on the brain; and thence comes your proverb;
The Taylor makes the man: I speak by experience
Of my own Customers. I have had Gallants,
Both Court and Country, would have fooled you up
In a new suite, with the best wits, in being,
And kept their speed, as long as their clothes lasted
Han'some, and neat; but then as they grew out
At the elbows again, or had a stain, or spot,
They have sunk most wretchedly.
What thou report,
Is but the common calamity, and seen daily;
And therefore you 'haue another answering proverb:
A broken sleeve keeps the arm back,
It is true, Sir.
And thence wee say, that such a one plays at peepe-arme.
Doe you so? it is wittily said. I wonder, Gentlemen,
And men of means will not maintain themselves
Fresher in wit, I mean in clothes, to the highest.
For hee that's out of clothes, is out o'fashion,
And out of fashion, is out of countenance,
And out of countenance, is out of Wit.
Is not Rogue Haberdasher come?
Yes, here, Sir.
I have been without this half hour.
Give me my hat.
Put on my Girdle. Rascal, sits my Ruff well?
In print.
Slave.
See your self.
•s this same hat
Of the block peasant? Do not answer me,
I cannot stay for an answer. I doe feel
The powers of one and twenty, like a •id
Flow in upon me, and perceive an Heir,
Can Conjure up all spirits in all circles,
Rogue, Rascal, Slave▪ give tradesmen their true names,
And they appear to 'hem pr•sently.
For profit.
Come cast my cloak about me, I'll go see,
This Office Thom, and be trimmed afterwards.
I'll put thee in possession, my prime work!
Gods so▪ my Spurrier! put hem on boy, quickly,
〈…〉 lost my Spurs with too much speed.
Good morning to my Joy, My jolly Peni-boy!
The Lord, and the Prince of plenty!
I come to see what riches, Thou bear in thy breeches,
The first of thy one and twenty▪
What, doe thy pockets gingle? Or shall wee need to mingle
Our strength both of foot and horses!
These fellows look so eager, As if they would beleaguer
An Heir in the midst of his forces!
I hope they be no S•rieants! That hang upon thy margents.
This Rogue has the Ioule of a Jailer▪
O Founder, no such matter, My Spurrier, and my Hatter,
My Linen man, and my Taylor.
Thou should have been brought in too, Shoemaker,
If the time had been longer, and Thom Barber.
How dost thou like my company, old Canter?
Doe I not muster a brave troupe? all Bill-men?
Present your Arms, before my Founder here,
This is my Founder, this same learned Canter!
He brought me the first news of my fathers death,
I thank him, and ever since, I call him Founder▪
Worship him, boys, I'll read only the sums.
And pass 'hem straight.
Now Ale.
And strong Ale bless him.
Gods so, some Ale, and Sugar for my Founder!
Good Bills, sufficient Bills, these Bills may pass.
I do not like those paper-squibs, good Master.
They may undo your store, I mean, of Credit,
And fire your Arsenal, if case you doe not
In time make good those outerworkes, your pockets,
And take a Garrison in of some two hundred,
To beat these Pyoners off, that carry a Mine
Would blow you up, at last. Secure your Casamates,
Here Master Picklocke, Sir, your man of Law,
And learned Att•rney, has sent you a Bag of munition.
What is it?
Three hundred pieces.
I'll dispatch 'hem.
Do, I would have your strengths lined, and perfumed
With Gold, as well as Amber.
God a mercy,
Come, Ad soluendum, boys! there, there, and there, &amp;c.
I look on nothing but Totalis.
See!
The difference twixt the covetous, and the prodigal!
"The Covetous man never has money! and
"The Prodigal will have none shortly!
Ha,
What says my Founder? I thank you, I thank you Sirs.
God bless your worship, and your worships Chanter.
I say it is nobly done, to cherish Shop-keepers,
And pay their Bills, without examining thus.
Alas! they have had a pitiful hard time on it,
A long vacation, from their coozening.
Poor Rascals, I doe doe it out of charity.
I would advance their trade again, and have them
Haste to be rich, swear, and forswear wealthily,
What doe you stay for, Sirrah?
To my box Sir,
Your box, why, there's an angel, if my Spurs
Be not right Rippon.
Give me never a penny
If I strike not thorough your bounty with the Rowels.
Dost thou want any money Founder?
Who, Sr. I,
Did I not tell you I was bred in the Mines,
Under Sir Beuis Bullion.
That is true,
I quite forgot, you Myne-men want no money,
Your streets are paved with 't: there, the molten silver
Runs out like cream, on cakes of gold.
And Rubies
Doe grow like Strawberries.
It were brave being there!
Come Thom, we'll go to the Office now.
What Office?
News Office, the New Staple; thou shalt go too,
It is here in the house, on the same floor, Thom. says,
Come, Founder, let vs trade in Ale, and nutmegs.
WHat, are those Desks fit now? set forth the Table,
The Carpet and the Chair: where are the News
That were examined last? have you filed them up?
Not yet, I had no time.
Are those news registered,
That Emissary Buzz sent in last night?
Of Spinola, and his Eggs?
Yes Sir, and filed.
What are you now upon?
That our new Emissary
Westminster, gave vs, of the Golden Heir.
Dispatch, that's news indeed, and of importance.
What would you have good woman?
I would have Sir,
A groatsworth of any News, I care not what,
To carry down this Saturday, to our Vicar.
O! You are a Butterwoman, ask Nathaniel
The Clerk, there.
Sir, I tell her, she must stay
Till Emissary Exchange, or Pals send in,
And then I'll fit her.
Doe good woman, have patience,
It is not now, as when the Captain lived.
You'll blast the reputation of the Office,
Now in the Bud, if you dispatch these Groats,
So soon: let them attend in name of policy.
IN troth they are dainty rooms; what place is this?
This is the outer room, where my Clerks sit▪
And keep their sides, the Register in the midst,
The Examiner, he sits private there, within,
And here I have my several Rolls, and Files
Of News by the Alphabet, and all put up
Under their heads.
But those, too, subdiuided?
Into Authentical, and Apocryphal.
Or News of doubtful credit, as Barbers news.
And Taylors News, Porters, and Watermens news,
Whereto, beside the Corant•, and Gazette.
I have the News of the season.
As vacation news,
Terme-newes, and Christmas-newes.
And news of the faction.
As the Reformed news, Protestant news,
And Pontificiall news, o• all which several,
The Day-bookes, Characters, Precedents are kept.
Together with the names of special friends—
And men of Correspondence in the Country—
Yes, of all ranks, and all Religions.—
Factors, and Agents—
Liegers, that lie out
Through all the Shires of the kingdom.
This is fine!
And beats a brave relation! but what says
Mercurius Britannicus to this?
O Sir, he gains by it half in half.
Nay more
I'll stan• to it. For, where he was wont to get
In, hungry Captains▪ obscure Statesmen.
Fellows
To drink with him in a dark room in a Tavern,
And eat a Sausage.
We have seen't,
As fine,
To keep so many politic pens
Going, to feed the press.
And dish ou• news,
Were it true, or false.
Now all that charge is saved
The public Chronicler.
How, doe you call him there?
And gentle Reader.
He that has the maidenhead
Of all the books.
Yes, dedicated to him,
Or rather prostituted.
You are right, Sir.
No more shall be abused, nor countrey-Parsons
Of the Inquisition, nor busy Justices,
Trouble the peace, and both torment themselves,
And their poor ignorant Neighbours with enquiries
After the many, and most innocent Monsters,
That never came in the Counties they were charged with.
Why, me thinks Sir, if the honest common people
Will be abused, why should not they have their pleasure,
In the believing Lies, are made for them;
As you in the Office, making them your selves?
O Sir! it is the printing we oppose.
We not forbid that any News, be made,
But that 't be printed; for when News is printed,
It leaves Sir to be News. while it is but written —
Though it be ne'er so false, it runs News still.
See divers men's opinions! unto some,
The very printing of them, makes them News;
That have not the heart to believe any thing,
But what they see in print.
I, that's an Error
He's abused many; but we shall reform it,
As many things beside (we have a hope)
Are crept among the popular abuses.
Nor shall the Stationer cheat upon the Time,
By buttering over again—
once, in Seven Years,
As the age dotes—
And grows forgetful o'them,
•is antiquated Pamphlets, with new dates.
But all shall come from the Mint.
Fresh and new stamped,
With the Office-Seale, Staple Commodity.
And if a man will assure his News, he may:
Two-pence a Sheet he shall be warranted,
And have a policy for it.
Sir, I admire
The method of your place; all things within't
Are so digested, fitted, and composed,
As it shows Wit had married Order.
Sir.
The best wee could to inuit the Times.
It he's
Cost sweat, and freesing.
And some broken sleeps
Before it came to this.
I easily think it.
But now it he's the shape—
And is come forth.
A most polite neat thing! with all the limbs,
As sense can taste!
It is Sir, though I say it,
As well-begotten a business, and as fairly
Helped to the World.
You must be a Mid-wife Sir!
Or else the son of a Mid-wife! (pray you pardon me)
Have helped it forth so happily! what News have you?
News of this morning? I would fine hear some
Fresh, from the forge (as new as day, as they say.)
And such we have Sir.
Show him the last Roll,
Of Emissary West-minster's, The Heir.
Come nearer, Thom:
There is a brave young Heir
Is come of age this morning, Mr. Peny-boy.
That's I!
His Father died on this day seuenth-night.
True!
At six of the Clock in the morning, just a week
Ere he was One and Twenty.
I am here, Thom!
Proceed, I pray thee.
An old Canting Beggar
Brought him first News, whom he has entertained,
To follow him, since.
Why, you shall see him! Founder,
Come in; no Follower, but Companion,
I pray thee put him in, Friend. There's an Angel—
Thou dost not know, hoe's a wise old Fellow,
Though he seem patched thus, and made up of pieces,
Founder, we are in, here, in, in the Newes-Office!
In this days Roll, already! I doe muse
How you came by vs Sir's!
One Master Pick-locke
A Lawyer, that hath purchased here a place,
This morning, of an Emissary under me.
Emissary Westminster.
Gave it into th'Office,
For his Essay, his piece.
My man of Law!
Hoe's my Attorney, and Solicitor too!
A fine pragmatic! what's his place worth?
A Nemo-scit, Sir.
It is as News come, in,
And as they are issued. I have the just mcoytie
For my part: then the other mocytie
Is parted into seven. The four Emissaries;
Whereof my Cozen Fitton here's for Court,
Ambler for Pals, and Buzz for the Exchange,
Picklocke, for Westminster, with the Examiner,
And Register, they have full parts: and then one part
Is vnder-parted to a couple of Clarks;
And there's the just division of the profits!
Have you those Clerks Sir.
There is one Desk empty,
But it has many Suitors.
Sir, may I
Present one more and carry it, if his parts
Or Gifts, (which you will, call'hem)
Be sufficient Sir.
What are your present Clarks habilities?
How is he qualified?
A decayed Stationer
He was, but knows News well, can sort and rank 'hem.
And for a need can make 'hem.
True Paules bred,
In the Church-yard.
And this at the West-dore,
Of the other side, hoe's my Barber Thom,
A pretty Scholar, and a Master of Arts,
Was made, or went out Master of Arts in a throng,
At the University; as before, one Christmas,
He got into a Masque at Court, by his wit,
And the good means of his Cythern, holding up thus
For one of the Musique, Hoe's a nimble Fellow!
And alike skil'd in every liberal Science,
As having certain snaps of all, a neat,
Quick-vaine, in forging News too. I doe love him,
And promised him a good turn, and I would doe it.
Whats your price? the value?
Fifty pounds, Sr.
Get in Thom, take possession, I install thee;
Here, tell your money; give thee joy, good Thom;
And let me hear from thee every minute of News,
While the New Staple stands, or the Office lasts,
Which I doe wish, may ne'er be less for thy sake.
The Emissaries, Sir, would speak with you,
And Master Fitton, they have brought in News,
Three Bale together.
Sr, you are welcome, here.
So is your creature.
Business calls vs off, Sir,
That may concern the Office.
Keep me fair, Sir,
Still i'your Staple, I am here your friend,
On the same flooer.
We shall be your servants.
How dost thou like it, Founder?
All is well,
But that your man of law me thinks appears not
In his due time. O! Here comes Masters worship.
HOw do's the Heir, bright Master Peniboy?
Is hee awake yet in his One and Twenty?
Why, this is better far, then to wear Cypress,
Dull smutting gloves, or melancholy blacks,
And have a pair of twelue-peny broad ribbons
Laid out like Labells.
I should have made shift
To have laughed as heartily in my mourners hood,
As in this Suite, if it had pleased my father
To have been buried, with the Trumpeters:
The Heralds of Arms, you mean.
I mean,
All noise, that is superfluous!
All that idle pomp,
And vanity of a Tombe-stone, your wise father
Did, by his will, prevent. Your worship had—
A loving and obedient father of him,
I know it: a right, kinde-natur'd man,
To dye so opportunely.
And to settle
All things so well, compounded for your ward ship
The week before, and left your state entire
Without any charge upon it.
I must needs say,
I lost an Officer of him, a good Bailiff,
And I shall want him; but all peace be with him,
I will not wish him alive, again; not I,
For all my Fortune; give your worship joy
O'your new place, your Emissary-ship,
In the News Office.
Know you, why I bought it Sr?
Not I.
To work for you, and carry a mine
Against the Master of it, Master Cymbal;
Who hath a plot upon a Gentlewoman,
Was once designed for you, Sir.
Me?
Your father,
Old Master Peni-boy, of happy memory,
And wisdom too, as any in the County,
Careful to find out a fit match for you,
In his own life time (but hee was prevented)
Left it in writing in a Schedule here,
To be annexed to his Will; that you,
His only Son, upon his charge, and blessing,
Should take due notice of a Gentlewoman,
Sojourning with your uncle, Richer Peni-boy.
A Cornish Gentlewoman, I doe know her,
Mistress, Pecunia doe-all.
A great Lady,
Indeed she is, and not of mortal race,
Infant of the Mines; her Graces Grandfather,
Was Duke, and Cousin to the King of Ophyr,
The Subterranean, let that pass. Her name is,
Or rather, her three names are (for such she is)
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, A great Princess,
Of mighty power, though she live in private
With a contracted family! Her Secretary—
Who is her Gentleman-vsher too.
One Broker,
And then two Gentlewomen; Mistress Statute,
And Mistress Band, with Wax the Chambermaid,
And Mother Mortgage, the old Nurse, two Grooms,
Pawn, and his fellow; you have not many to bribe, Sir.
The work is feizible, and th'approches easy,
By your own kindred. Now, Sir, Cymbal thinks,
The Master here, and governor of the Staple,
By his fine arts, and pomp of his great place
To draw her! He concludes, she is a woman!
And that so soon as she hears of the New Office,
She'll come to visit it, as they all have longings
After new sights, and motions! But your bounty,
Person, and bravery must achieve her.
She is
The talk of the time▪ th'aduenture of the age!
You cannot put your self upon an action
Of more importance.
All the world are suitors to her.
All sorts of men, and all professions!
You shall have stall-fed Doctors, crammed Divines
Make love to her, and with those studied
And perfumed flatteries, as no rome can stink
More elegant, then where they are.
Well chanted
Old Canter thou sing true.
And (by your leave)
Good Masters worship, some of your velvet coat
Make corpulent curt'•ies to her, till they crack for it.
There's Doctor Almanac woos her, one of the Ieerers,
A fine Physician.
Your Sea-captaine, Shun field,
Gives out he will go upon the Cannon for her.
Though his loud mouthing get him little credit,
Young Master Pied mantle, the fine Herald
Professes to deriuer her through all ages,
From all the Kings, and Queens, that ever were.
And Master Madrigal, the crowned Poet
Of these our times, doth off•r at her praises
As fair as any, when it shall please Apollo,
That wit and rime may meet both in one subject.
And you to bear her from all these, it will be—
A work of fame.
Of honour.
Celebration.
Worthy your name.
The Peni-boyes to live in it,
It is an action you were built for, Sir,
And none but you can doe it.
I'll undertake it,
And carry it.
Fear me not, for since I came
Of mature age, I have had a certain itch
In my right eye, this corner, here, doe you see?
To doe some work, and worthy of a Chronicle.
How now Gossip! how doe's the Play please you?
Very scurvily, me thinks, and sufficiently nought.
As a body would wish: here's nothing but a young Prodigal, come of age, who makes much of the Barber, buys him a place in a new Office, in the ayre, I know not where, and his man o'Law to follow him, with the Beggar to boot, and they two help him to a wife.
I, she is a proper piece! that such creatures can broke for.
I cannot abide that nasty fellow, the Beggar, if hee had been a Court-Begger in good clothes; a Beggar in velvet, as they say, I could have endured him.
Or a begging scholar in black, or one of these beggarly Poets, gossip, that would hang upon a young heir like a horseleech.
Or a thred-bare Doctor of Physic, a poor Quackesaluer.
Or a Sea-captaine, half starved.
I, these were tolerable Beggars, Beggars of fashion! you shall see some such anon!
I would fine see the Fool, gossip, the Fool is the finest man t'the company, they say, and has all the wit: Hee is the very Justice of Peace of the Play, and can cemmit whom hee will, and what hee will, error, absurdity, as the toy takes him, and no man say, black is his eye, but laugh at him.
But they have no Fool in this Play, I am afraid, gossip.
It's a wise Play, then.
They are all fools, the rather, in that.
Like enough.
My husband, (Timothy Tatle, God rest his poor soul) was wont to say, there was no Play without a Fool, and a Devil in it; he was for the Devil still God bless him. The Devil for his money, would hee say, I would fine see the Devil. And why would you so fine see the Devil? would I say. Because hee has horns, wife, and may be a cuckold, as well as a Devil, hee would answer: You are even such another, husband, quoth I. Was the Devil ever married? where doe you read, the Di••ll was ever so honourable to commit Matrimony; The Play will tell vs, that, says hee, we'll go see it to morrow, the Devil is an Ass. Hee is an errant learned man, that made it, and can write, they say, and I am foully deceived, but hee can read too.
I remember it gossip, I went with you, by the same token, Mrs. Trouble Truth dissuaded vs, and told vs, hee was a profane Poet, and all his Plays had Devils in them. That he kept school vpo' the Stage, could conjure there, aboue the School of Westminster, and Doctor Lamb too: not a Play he made, but had a Devil in it. And that he would learn vs all to make our husbands Cuckolds at Plays: by another token, that a young married wife in the company, said, she could find in her heart to steal thither, and see a little of the vanity through her masque, and come practice at home.
O, it was, Mistress—
Nay, Gossip, I name no body. It may be it was my self.
But was the Devil a proper man, Gossip?
As fine a gentleman▪ of his inches, as ever I saw trusted to the Stage▪ or any where else: and loved the common wealth, as well as ere a Pa∣triot of 'hem all: hee would carry away the Vice on his back, quick to Hell, in every Play where he came, and reform abuses.
There was the Devil of Edmonton, no such man, I warrant you.
The Conjurer coosen'd him with a candles end, hee was an Ass.
But there was one Smug, a Smith, would have made a horse laugh, and broke his halter, as they say.
O, but the poor man had got a shrewd mischance, one day.
How, Gossip?
He had dressed a Rogue Jade in the morning, that had the Stag∣gers, and had got such a spice of 'hem himself, by noon, as they would not away all the Play time, doe what hee could, for his heart.
It was his part, Gossip, he was to be drunk, by his part.
Say you so, I understood not so much.
Would wee had such an other part, and such a man in this play, I fear twill be an excellent dull thing.
Expect, intend it.
YOur Grace is sad me thinks, and melancholy!
You doe not look upon me with that face,
As you were wont, my Goodness, bright Pecunia:
Although your Grace be fallen, of two in the hundred,
In vulgar estimation; yet am I,
You Graces servant still: and teach this body,
To bend, and these my aged knees to buckle,
In adoration, and just worship of you.
Indeed, I doe confess, I have no shape
To make a minion of, but I'm your Martyr,
Your Graces Martyr. I can hear the Rogues,
As I doe walk the streets, whisper, and point,
There goes old Peni-boy, the slave of money,
Rich Peni-boy, Lady Pecunia's drudge,
A sordid Rascal, one that never made
Good meal in his sleep, but sells the acates are sent him,
Fish, Foul, and venison, and preserves himself,
Like an old hoary Rat, with mouldy pye-crust.
This I doe hear, rejoicing, I can suffer
This, and much more, for your good Graces sake.
Why do you so my Guardian? I not bid you,
Cannot my Grace be gotten, and held too,
Without your selfe-tormentings, and your watches,
Your macerating of your body thus
With cares, and scantings of your diet, and rest?
O, no, your services, my Princely Lady,
Cannot with too much zeal of rites be done,
They are so sacred.
But my Reputation.
May suffer, and the worship of my family,
When by •o servile me•nes they both are sought.
You are a noble, young, free, gracious Lady,
And would be every bodies, in your bounty,
But you must not be so. They are a few
That know your merit, Lady, and can valew't.
Your self scarce vnderstan•s your proper powers.
They are all-mighty, and that wee your servants,
That have the honour here to stand so near you,
Know; and can use too. All this Nether-world
Is yours, you command it, and doe sway it,
The honour of it, and the honesty,
The reputation, I, and the religion,
(I was about to say, and had not erred)
Is Queen Pecunia's. For that stile is yours,
If mortals knew your Grace, or their own good.
Please your Grace to retire.
I fear your Grace
Hath taken too much of the sharpe ayre.
O no!
I could endure to take a great deal more
(And with my constitution, were it left)
Unto my choice, what think you of it, Statute?
A little now and then does well, and keeps
Your Grace in your complexion.
And true temper.
But too much Madame▪ may increase cold rheumes,
Now•each catarrhes, greene sicknesses, and agues,
And put you in consumption
Best to take
Advice of your grave women, Noble Madame,
They know the state o'your body, and ha'studied
Your Graces health.
And honour. Here'll be visitants,
Or Suitors by and by; and it is not fit
They find you here.
Twill make your Grace too cheap
To give them audience presently.
Leave your Secretary,
To answer them.
Waite you here. Broker.
I shall Madame.
And doe your Graces trusts with diligence.
WHat luck's this? I am come an inch too late,
Doe you hear Sir? Is your worship of the family
Unto the Lady Pecunia?
I serve her Grace, Sir,
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, the Infant.
Has she all those Titles, and her Grace besides,
I must correct that ignorance and ouer-sight,
Before I doe present. Sir, I have drawn
A Pedigree for her Grace, though yet a Novice
In that so noble study.
A Herald at Arms?
No Sir, a Pursuivant, my name is Pyed-mantle.
Good Master Pyed-mantle.
I have deduced her.—
From all the Spanish Mines in the West-Indi'es,
I hope: for she comes that way by her mother,
But, by her Grand-mother, she's Duchess of Mines.
From mans creation I have brought her.
No further?
Before Sr, long before, you have done nothing else,
Your Mines were before Adam, search your Office,
Roll five and twenty, you will find it so,
I see you are but a Novice, Master Pyed-mantle.
If you had not told me so.
Sir, an apprentice
In armoiry. I have read the Elements,
And Accidence, and all the leading books,
And I have, now, upon me a great ambition,
How to be brought to her Grace, to kiss her hands.
Why, if you have acquaintance with Mistress Statute,
Or Mistress Band, my Ladies Gentlewomen,
They can induce you. One is a Judges Daughter,
But somewhat stately; the other Mistress Band,
Her father's but a Scrivener, but she can
Almost as much with my Lady, as the other,
Especially, if Rose Wax the Chambermaid
Be willing. Doe you not know her, Sir, neither?
No in troth Sir.
She's a good pliant wench,
And easy to be wrought, Sir, but the Nurse
Old mother Mortgage, if you have a Tenement,
Or such a morsel? though she have no teeth,
She loves a sweet meat, any thing that melts
In her warm gummes, she could command it for you
On such a trifle, a toy. Sir, you may see,
How for your love, and this so pure complexion,
(A perfect Sanguine) I have ventured thus,
The straining of a ward, opening a door
Into the secrets of our family:
I pray you let me know, Sir, unto whom
I am so much beholden; but your name.
My name is Broker, I am Secretary,
And Usher, to her Grace.
Good Master Broker!
Good Mr. Pyed-mantle.
Why? you could do me,
If you would, now, this favour of your self.
Truly, I think I could: but if I would,
I hardly should, without, or Mistress Band,
Or Mistress Statute, please to appear in it.
Or the good Nurse I told you of, Mistress Mortgage▪
We know our places here, wee mingle not
One in another sphere, but all move orderly,
In our own orbs; yet wee are all Concentricks.
Well, Sir, I'll waite a better season.
Doe,
And study the right means, get Mistress Band
To urge on your behalf, or little Wax.
I have a hope, Sir, that I may, by chance,
Light on her Grace, as she's taking the ayre:
That ayre of hope, has blasted many an airy
Of Castrills like your self: Good Master Pyed-mantle,
Well said, Master Secretary, I stood behind
And h•art thee all. I honour thy dispatches.
If they be rude, vntrained it our method
And have not studied the rule, dismiss 'hem quickly,
Whore's Lickfinger my Cooke? that vnctuous rascal?
He will never keep his hour, that vessel of kitchinstuffe!
Here hee is come, Sir.
Pox upon him kidney,
Always too late!
To wish 'hem you, I confess,
That ha'them already.
What?
The pox!
The piles,
The plague, and all diseases light on him,
Knows not to keep his word. I'd keep my word sure!
I hate that man that will not keep his word,
When did I break my word?
Or I, till now?
And it is but half an hour.
Half a year:
To me that stands upon a minute of time.
I am a just man, I love still to be just.
Why? you think I can run like light-foot Ralph,
Or keep a wheele-barrow, with a sail in town here,
To whirl me to you: I have lost two stone
Of suet in the service posting hither,
You might have followed me like a watering pot,
And seen the knots I made along the street;
My face dropped like the skimmer in a fritter pan,
And my whole body, is yet (to say the truth)
A roasted pound of butter, with grated bread in 't!
Believe you, he that list. You stayed of purpose,
To have my venison stink, and my foul mortified,
That you might have 'hem—
A shilling or two cheaper,
That's your jealousy.
Perhaps it is.
Will you go in, and view, and value all?
Yonder is venison sent me! foul! and fish!
In such abundance! I am sick to see it!
I wonder what they mean! I ha told 'hem of it!
To burden a weak stomach! and provoke
A dying appetite! thrust a sin upon me
I ne'er was guilty of! nothing but gluttony!
Gross gluttony! that will undo this Land!
And bating two in the hundred.
I, that semi's
A crying sin, a fearful damned device,
Eats up the poor, devours 'hem—
Sir, take heed
What you give out.
Against your grave great Solons?
Numae Pompilij, they that made that Law?
To take away the poore's inheritance?
It was their portion: I will stand to it.
And they have robed 'hem of it, plainly robed 'hem,
I still am a just man, I tell the truth.
When moneies went at Ten in the hundred, I,
And such as I, the servants of Pecunia,
Could spare the poor two out of ten, and did it,
How say you, Broker?
Ask your Echo)
You did it.
I am for Justice, when did I leave Justice?
We knew it was theirs, they'had right and Title to it.
Now—
You can spare 'hem nothing.
Very little,
As good as nothing.
They have bound our hands
With their wise solemn act, shortened our arms.
Beware those worshipful ears, Sir, be not shortened,
And you play Crop in the fleet, if you use this licence.
What licence, Knave? Informer?
I am Lickfinger,
Your Cooke.
A saucy Jack you are, that's once;
What said I, Broker?
Nothing that I heard, Sir.
I know his gift, hee can be deaf when he list.
Have you provided me my bushel of eggs?
I did bespeak? I doe not care how stale,
Or stinking that they be; let 'hem be rotten:
For ammunition here to pelt the boys,
That break my windows?
Yes Sir, I have spared 'hem
Out of the custard politic for you, the Majors.
It is well, go in, take hence all that excess,
Make what you can of it, your best: and when
I have friends, that I inuit at home, provide me
Such, such, and such a dish, as I bespeak;
One at a time, no superfluity.
Or if you have it not, return me money;
You know my ways.
They are a little crooked.
How knave?
Because you do indent.
It is true, Sir,
I do indent you shall return me money.
Rather then meat, I know it: you are just still.
I love it still. And therefore if you spend
The red-Deere pies i'your house, or sell 'hem forth, Sir,
Cast so, that I may have their coffins all,
Returned here, and piled up: I would be thought
To keep some kind of house.
By the mouldy signs?
And then remember meat for my two dogs:
Fat flaps of mutton; kidneys; rumps of veale;
Good plenteous scraps; my maid shall eat the relics.
When you &amp; your dogs have dined. A sweet reversion.
VVho's here? my Courtier? and my little Doctor?
My Muster-Master? and what Plouer's that
They have brought to pull?
I know not, some green Plouer.
I'll find him out.
Doe, for I know the rest,
They are the Ieerers, mocking, flouting Jacks.
HOw now old Money-Bawd? w'are come—
To ieere me,
As you were wont, I know you.
No, to give thee
Some good security, and see Pecunia.
What is it?
Our selves.
We'll be one bound for another.
This noble Doctor here.
This worthy Courtier.
This Man of war, he was our Muster-Master.
But a Sea-Captaine now, brave Captain Shun-field.
You snuff the ayre now, as the scent displeased you?
Thou need not fear him man, his credit is sound,
And seasoned too, since he took salt at Sea.
I doe not love pickle•d security,
Would I had one good Fresh-man in for all;
For truth is, you three stink.
You are a Rogue,
I think I am, but I will lend no money
On that security, Captain.
Here's a Gentleman,
A Fresh-man in the world, one Master Madrigal.
Of an untainted credit; what say you to him?
Hoe's gone me thinks, where is he? Madrigal?
H' has an odd singing name, is he an Heir?
An Heir to a fair fortune,
And full hopes:
A dainty Scholar, and a pretty Poët!
You've said enough. I have no money, Gentlemen,
An• he go to it in rhyme once, not a penny
Why, hoe's of years, though he have little beard.
His beard has time to grow. I have no money:
Let him still dable in Poetry. No Pecunia
Is to be seen.
Come, thou love to be costive
Still in thy curtsy; but I have a pill,
A golden pill to purge away this melancholy.
Tic nothing but his keeping of the house here,
With his two drowsy dogs.
A drench of sack
At a good tavern, and a fine fresh pullet,
Would cure him.
Nothing but a young Hair in white-broth,
I know his diet better then the Doctor.
What Lick-finger? mine old host of Ram-Alley?
You have some mer•at here.
Some dosser of Fish
Or Foul to fetch of.
An odd bargain of Venison,
To drive.
Will you go in, knave?
I must needs,
You see who drives me, gentlemen.
Not the devil.
Hee may be in time, hee is his Agent, now.
You are all cogging Jacks, a Couy of wits,
The Ieerers, that still call together at meals:
Or rather an Airy, for you are birds of prey:
And fly at all, nothing's too big or high for you.
And are so truly feared, but not beloved
One of another: as no one dares break
Company from the rest, lest they should fall,
Upon him absent.
O! the only Oracle
That ever peeped, or spake out of a doublet.
How the rogue stinks, worse then a Fishmonger sleeves!
Or Curriers hands!
And such a parboiled visage!
His face looks like a Diers apron, just!
A sodden head, and his whole brain a posit curd!
I, now you ieere, ieere on; I have no money.
I wonder what religion hoe's of!
No certain species sure, A kind of mule!
That's half an Ethnic, half a Christian!
I have no money, gentlemen.
This stock.
He has no sense of any virtue, honour,
Gentry or merit.
You say very right,
My meritorious Captain, (as I take it!)
Merit will keep no house, nor pay no house rent.
Will Mistress Merit go to market, think you?
Set on the pot, or feed the family?
Will Gentry clear with the Butcher? or the Baker?
Fetch in a Pheasant, or a brace of Partridges,
From good-wife Poulter, for my Ladies supper.
See! this pure rogue!
This rogue has money though,
My worshipful brave Courtier has no money.
No, nor my valiant Captain.
Hang you rascal.
Nor you, my learned Doctor. I loved you
While you did hold your practice, and kill tripe wives.
And kept you to your urinal; but since your thumbs
Have greased the Ephemerids, casting figures,
And turning over for your Candle-rents,
And your twelve houses in the Zodiac:
With your Almutens, Alma cantaras,
Troth you shall cant alone for Peny-boy.
I told you what we should find him, a mere Bawd.
A rogue, a cheater.
What you please, gentlemen,
I am of that humble nature and condition,
Never to mind your worships, or take notice
Of what you throw away, thus. I keep house here
Like a lame Cobbler, never out of doors,
With my two dogs, my friends; and (as you say)
Drive a quick pretty trade, still. I get money:
And as for Titles, be they Rogue, or Rascal,
Or what your worships fancy, let 'hem pass
As transitory things; they're mine to day,
And yours to morrow.
Hang thee dog.
Thou cur.
You see how I doe blush, and am ashamed
Of these large attributes? yet you have no money.
Well wolf, Hyena, you old pocky rascal,
You will have the Hernia fall down again
Into your Scrotum, and I shall be sent for.
I will remember then, that; and your Fistula
In ano, I cured you of.
Thank your dog-leech craft.
They were wholesome piles, before you meddled with 'hem.
What an ungrateful wretch is this?
Hee minds
A courtesy no more, then London-bridge,
What Arch was mended last.
Hee never thinks.
More then a log, of any grace at Court,
A man may doe him: or that such a Lord
Reached him his hand.
O yes! if grace would strike
The brewers Tally, or my good Lords hand,
Would quit the scores. But Sir, they will not doe it,
Here's a piece, my good Lord piece, doth all.
Goes to the Butehers▪ fetches in a mutton,
Then to the Bakers, brings in bread, makes fires,
Gets wine, and does more real Courtesies,
Then all my Lords, I know: My sweet Lord piece!
You are my Lord, the rest are cogging Jacks,
Under the Rose.
Rogue, I could beat you now,
True Captain, if you durst beat any other.
I should believe you, but indeed you are hungry;
You are not angry Captain, if I know you
Aright; good Captain. No, Pecunia,
Is to be seen, though Mistress Band would speak,
Or little Blushet-Waxe, be ne'er so easy,
I'll stop mine ears with her, against the Sirens,
Court, and Philosophy. God be wi• you, Gentlemen,
Provide you better names. Pecunia is for you.
What a damned Harpy it is? whore's Madrigal?
Is he sneaked hence.
Here he comes with Broker,
Pecunia's Secretary.
He may doe some good
With him perhaps. Where have you been Madrigal?
Aboue with my Ladies women, reading verses.
That was a favour. Good morrow, Master Secretary.
Good morrow, Master Usher.
Sir, by both
Your worshipful Titles, and your name Mas Broker.
Good morrow.
I did ask him if hee were
Amphibion Broker.
Why?
A creature of two natures,
Because hee has two Offices.
You may ieere,
You have the wits, young Gentlemen. But your hope
Of Helicon, will never carry it, here,
With our fat family; we have the dullest,
Most unboar'd Ears for verse amongst our females.
I grieved you read so long, Sir, old Nurse Mortgage,
She snoar'd in the Chair, and Statute (if you marked her)
Fell fast a sleep, and Mistress Band, she nodded,
But not with any consent to what you read.
They must have somewhat else to chink, then rymes.
If you could make an Epitaph on your Land,
(Imagine it on departure) such a Poem
Would wake 'hem▪ and bring Wax to her true temper.
I faith Sir, and I will try.
It is but earth,
Fit to make brickes and tiles of.
Pocks upon it
It is but for pots, or pipkins at the best.
If it would keep vs in good tobacco pipes,
It were worth keeping.
Or in porc lane dishes
There were some hope.
But this is a hungry soil,
And must be helped.
Who would hold any Land
To have the trouble to marle it.
Not a gentleman.
Let clowns and hyndes affect it, that love ploughs,
And carts, and harrows, and are busy still,
In vexing the dull element.
Our sweet Songster
Shall rarifie't into ayre.
And you Mas. Broker
Shall have a feeling.
So it supple, Sir,
The nerues.
O! it shall be palpable,
Make thee run thorough a hoop, or a thombe-ring,
The nose of a tobacco pipe, and draw
Thy ductile bones out, like a knitting needle,
To serve my subtle turns.
I shall obey, Sir,
And run a thread, like an houre-glasse.
Where is Broker?
Are not these flies gone yet? pray quit my house,
I'll smoke you out else.
O! the Prodigal!
Will you be at so much charge with vs, and loss?
I have heard you have offered Sir, to lock up smoke,
And cauke your windores, spar up all your doors,
Thinking to keep it a close prisoner wi'you,
And wept, when it went out, Sir, at your chimney.
And yet his eyes were dryer then a pummise.
A wretched rascal, that will bind about
The nose of his bellows, lest the wind get out
When hoe's abroad.
Sweeps down no cobwebs here,
But sells 'hem for cut-fingers. And the spiders,
As creatures reared of dust, and cost him nothing,
To fat old Ladies monkeys.
Hee has offer•d
To gather up spilt water, and preserve
Each hair falls from him to stop balls with all.
A slave, and an Idolater to Pecunia!
You all have happy memories, Gentlemen,
In rocking my poor cradle. I remember too,
When you had lands, and credit, worship, friends,
I, and could give security: now, you have none,
Or will have none right shortly. This can time,
And the vicissitude of things. I have
All these. and money too, and doe possess 'hem,
And am right heartily glad of all our memories,
And both the changes.
Let vs leave the viper.
Hoe's glad he is rid of his torture, and so soon.
Broker, come hither, up, and tell your Lady,
She must be ready presently, and Statute,
Band, Mortgage, VVax. My prodigal young kinsman
Will straight be here to see her; 'top of our house,
The flourishing, and flaunting Peny-boy.
Wee were but three of vs in all the world,
My brother Francis, whom they called Frank Peny-boy,
Father to this: hoe's dead. This Peny-boy,
Is now the heir! I, Richer Peny-boy,
Not Richard, but old Harry Peny-boy,
And (to make rime) close, wary Peny-boy
I shall have all at last, my hopes doe tell me.
Go, see all ready; and where my dogs have felted,
Remove it with a broom, and sweeten all
With a slice of juniper, not too much, but sparing,
We may be faulty our selves else, and turn prodigal,
In entertaining of the Prodigal.
Here hee is! and with him—what! a Clapper Dudgeon!
That's a good sign; to have the beggar follow him,
So near at his first entry into fortune.
HOw now old Uncle? I am come to see thee.
And the brave Lady, here, the daughter of Ophir,
They say thou keepst.
Sweet Nephew, if she were
The daughter of the Sun, shoe's at your service,
And so am I, and the whole family,
Worshipful Nephew.
Sai'st thou so, dear Uncle?
Welcome my friends then: Here is, Domino Picklocke:
My man o'Law, solicits all my causes.
Follows my business, makes, and compounds my quarrels,
Between my tenants and me, sows all my strifes,
And reapes them too, troubles the country for me,
And vexes any neighbour, that I please.
But with commission?
Under my hand &amp; seal.
A worshipful place!
I thank his worship for it.
But what is this old Gentleman?
A Rogue,
A very Canter, I Sir, one that maunds
Upon the Pad, wee should be brothers though:
For you are near as wretched as my self,
You dare not use your money, and I have none.
Not use my money, cogging Jack, who uses it
At better rates? lets it for more in the hundred,
Then I doe, Sirrah?
Be not angry uncle.
What? to disgrace me, with my Queen? as if
I did not know her value.
Sir, I meant
You durst not to enjoy it.
Hold your peace,
You are a Jack.
Uncle, he shall be a Iohn,
And, you go to that, as good a man as you are.
And I can make him so, a better man,
Perhaps I will too. Come, let vs go.
Nay, kinsman,
My worshipful kinsman; and the top of our house;
Doe not your penitent uncle that affront,
For a rash word, to leave his joyful threshold,
Before you see the Lady that you long for.
The Venus of the time, and state, Pecunia!
I doe perceive, your bounty loves the man,
〈…〉 concealed virtue, that he hides
Under th•se •eggs.
I owe my happiness to him,
•qord• waiting on his worship, since I brought him
〈…〉, welcome to all young heirs.
Thou did indeed, for which I thank thee yet,
Your 〈◊〉 Princess, Uncle, is long a coming.
She is not rigged, Sir, setting forth some Lady,
•ill cost as much as furnishing a Fleet,
〈◊〉 she's come at last, and like a Galley
〈◊〉 in the prow.
Is this Pecunia?
Vouchsafe my toward kinsman, gracious Madame,
The savour of your hand.
Nay, of my lips, Sir,
To him.
She kisses like a mortal creature,
Almighty Mad••e, I have longed to see you.
And I have my desire, Sir, to behold
That youth, and shape, which in my dreams and wakes▪
I have so oft contemplated, and felt
Warm in my v•ynes, and native as my blood.
When I was told of your arrival here,
I felt my heart beat, as it would leap out,
In speech; and all my face it was a flame,
But how it came to pass I doe not know.
O! beauty loves to be more proud then nature,
That made you blush. I cannot satisfy
My curious eyes, by which alone I'am happy,
In my beholding you.
They pass the complement
Prettily well.
I, he does kiss her, I like him.
My passion was clear contrary, and doubtful,
I shook for fear, and yet I danced for joy,
I had such motions as the Sunne-beames make
Against a wall, or playing on a water,
Or trembling vapour of a boiling pot—
That's not so good, it should ha'bin a Crucible,
With molten mettle, she had understood it.
I cannot talk, but I can love you, Madame.
Are these your Gentlewomen? I love them too.
And which is mistress Statute? Mistress Band▪
They all kiss close, the last stuck to my lips.
It was my Ladies Chamber-maid, soft-Waxe.
Soft lips she has, I am sure on it. Mother Mortgage,
In lowe a kiss▪ till she be younger, Statute,
Sweet Mistress Band, and honey, little VVaxe,
We must be better acquainted.
We are but servants, Sir.
But whom her Grace is so content to grace,
We shall observe.
And with all fit respect.
In our poor places.
Being her Graces shadows.
A fine well-spoken family. What's thy name?
Broker.
Me thinks my uncle should not need thee,
Who is a crafty Knave, enough, believe it.
Art thou her Graces Steward?
No, her Usher, Sir.
What, of the Hall? thou hast a sweeping face,
Thy beard is like a broom.
No barren chin, Sir,
I am no Eunuch, though a Gentleman-Vsher.
Thou shalt go with vs. Uncle, I must have
My Princess forth to day.
Whither you please, Sir,
You shall command her.
I will doe all grace
To my new servant.
Thanks unto your bounty;
He is my Nephew, and my Chief, the Point,
Tip, Top, and Tuft of all our family!
But, Sir, conditioned always, you return
Statute, and Band home, with my sweet, soft Wax,
And my good Nurse, here, Mortgage.
O! what else?
By Broker.
Do not fear.
She shall go with you,
Whither you please, Sir, any where.
I see
A Money-Bawd, is lightly a Flesh-Bawd, too.
Are you advise•d? Now o'my faith, this Canter
Would make a good grave Burgess in some Barn.
Come, thou shalt go with vs, uncle.
By no means, Sir.
We'll have both Sack, and Fiddlers.
I'll not draw
That charge upon your worship.
He speaks modestly,
And like an Uncle,
But Mas Broker, here,
He shall attend you, Nephew; her Graces Usher,
And what you fancy to bestow on him,
Be not too lavish, use a temperate bounty,
I'll take it to my self.
I will be princely,
While I possess my Princess, my Pecunia.
Where is it you eat?
Hard by, at Picklocks lodging.
Old Lickfinger's the Cooke, here in Ram-Alley.
He has good cheer; perhaps I'll come and see you.
O, fie! an Alley, and a Cooks-shop, gross,
'T will savour, Sir, most rankly of 'hem both.
Let your meat rather follow you, to a tavern.
A tauern's as unfit too, for a Princess.
No, I have known a Princess, and a great one,
Come forth of a tavern.
Not go in, Sir, though.
She must go in, if she came forth: the blessed
Pokahontas (as the Historian calls her
And great Kings daughters of Virginia)
Hath bin in womb of a tavern; and besides,
Your nasty Uncle will spoil all your mirth,
And be as noisome.
That's true.
No faith,
Dine in Apollo with Pecunia,
At brave Duke Wadloos, have your friends about you,
And make a day on it.
Content in faith:
Our meat shall be brought thither. Simon the King,
Will bid vs welcome.
Patron, I have a suite.
What's that?
That you will carry the Infant,
To see the Staple', her Grace will be a grace,
To all the members of it.
I will doe it:
And have her Arms set up there, with her Titles,
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, the Infant.
And in Apollo. Come (sweet Princess) go.
Broker, be careful of your charge.
I warrant you.
Why, this is duller and duller! intolerable! scurvy! neither Devil nor Fool in this Play! pray God, some on vs be not a witch, Gossip, to forespeak the matter thus.
I fear we are all such, and we were old enough: But we are not all old enough to make one witch. How like you the Vice in the Play.
Which is he?
Three or four: old Covetousness, the sordid Peny-boy, the Money-bawd, who is a flesh-bawd too, they say.
But here is never a Fiend to carry him away. Besides, he has never a wooden dagger! I'd not give a rush for a Vice, that has not a wooden dagger to snap at every body he meets.
That was the old way, Gossip, when Iniquity came in like Hokos Pokos, in a Jugglers jerkin, with false skirts▪ like the Knave of Clubs! but now they are attired like men and women of the time, the Vices, male and female! Prodigality like a young heir, and his Mi∣stress Money (whose favours he scatters like counters) prank't up like a prime Lady, the Infant of the Mines.
I, therein they abuse an honourable Princess, it is thought.
By whom is it so thought? or where lies the abuse?
Plain in the stiling her Infant, and giving her three names.
Take heed, it lie not in the vice of your interpretation: what have Aurelia, Clara, Pecunia to do with any person? do they any more, but express the property of Money, which is the daughter of earth, and drawn out of the Mines? Is there nothing to be called Infant, but what is subject to exception? Why not the Infant of the Beggars? or Infant of the Gipsies? as well as King of Beggars, and King of Gipsies?
Well, and there were no wiser then I, I would sow him in a sack, and send him by sea to his Princess.
Faith, and hee heard you Censure, he would go near to stick the Asses ears to your high dressing, and perhaps to all ours for harkening to you.
By'r Lady but he should not to mine, I would harken, and harken, and censure, if I saw cause, for the other Princess sake Pokahon∣tas, surnam'd the blessed, whom hee has abused indeed (and I doe censure him, and will censure him) to say she came forth of a Tavern, was said like a paltry Poet.
That's but one Gossips opinion, and my Gossip Tatle's too! but what says Expectation, here, she sits sullen and silent.
Troth I expect their Office, their great Office! the Staple, what it will be! they have talked on it, but wee see it not open yet; would Butter would come in, and spread itself a little to vs.
Or the butter-box, Buzz, the Emissary.
When it is churned, and dished, we shall hear of it.
If it be fresh and sweet butter; but say it be sower and wheyish.
Then it is worth nothing, mere pot-butter, fit to be spent in suppositories, or greasing coach-wheeles, stale stinking butter, and such I fear it is, by the being barrelled up so long.
Or rank Irish butter.
Have patience Gossips, say that contrary to our expectations it prove right, seasonable, salt butter.
Or to the time of year, in Lent, delicate Almond butter! I have a sweet tooth yet, and I will hope the best; and sit down as quiet, and calm as butter; look as smooth, and soft as butter; be merry, and melt like but∣la; laugh and be fat like butter: so butter answer my expectation, and be not mad butter; If it be: It shall both July and December see. I say no more, But— Dixie.
YOu hunt upon a wrong scent still, and think
The ayre of things will carry 'hem, but it must
Be reason and proportion, not fine sounds,
My cousin Cymbal, must get you this Lady.
You have entertained a pettifogger here,
Picklocke, with trust of an Emissartes place,
And he is, all, for the young Prodigal,
You see he has left vs.
Come, you doe not know him,
That speak thus of him. He will have a trick,
To open vs a gap▪ by a trap-doore,
When they least dream on it. Here he comes. What news?
Where is my brother Buzz? my brother Ambler:
The Register, Examiner, and the Clerks?
Appear, and let vs muster all in pomp,
For here will be the rich Infant, presently,
To make her visit. Peny-boy the heir,
My Patron, has got leave for her to play
With all her train, of the old churl, her Guardian.
Now is your time to make all court unto her;
That she may first but know, then love the place,
And show it by her frequent visits here:
And afterwards, get her to sojourn with you.
She will be weary of the Prodigal, quickly.
Excellent news!
And counsel of an Oracle!
How say you cousin Fitton?
brother Picklock,
I shall adore thee, for this parcel of tidings,
It will cry up the credit of our Office,
Eternally, and make our Staple immortal!
Look your addresses, then, be fair and fit,
And entertain her, and her creatures, too,
With all the migniar dise, and quaint Caresses,
You can put on 'hem.
Thou seem, by thy language,
No less a Courtier, then a man of Law.
I must embrace thee.
Tut, I am Vertumnus,
On every change, or chance, upon occasion,
A true Chamaelion, I can colour for it.
I move upon my excel, like a turne-pike.
Fit my face to the parties, and become
Straight, one of them.
Sirs, up, into your Desks,
And spread the rolls upon the Table, so.
Is the Examiner set?
Yes, Sir.
Ambler, and Buzz,
Are both abroad, now.
We'll sustain their parts.
No matter, let them ply the affairs without,
Let vs alone within, I like that well.
On with the cloak, and you with the Staple gown,
And keep your state, stoup only to the Infant;
We'll have a flight at Mortgage, Statute, Band,
And hard, but we'll bring Wax unto the retriue:
Each know his several province, and discharge it.
I do admire this nimble engine, Picklock.
Cousin,
What did I say?
You have rectified my error!
BY your leave, Gentlemen, what news? good, good still?
I'your new Office? Princess, here's the Staple!
This is the Governor, kiss him, noble Princess,
For my sake. Thom, how is it honest Thom?
How does thy place, and thou? my Creature, Princess?
This is my Creature, give him your hand to kiss,
He was my Barber, now he writes Clericus!
I bought this place for him, and gave it him.
He should have spoke of that, Sir, and not you:
Two doe not doe one Office well.
It is true,
But I am loath to lose my courtesies.
So are all they, that doe them, to vain ends,
And yet you do lose, when you pay you selves.
No more of your sentences, Canter, they are stale,
We come for news, remember where you are.
I pray thee let my Princess hear some news,
Good Master Cymbal.
What news would she hear?
Or of what kind, Sir?
Any, any kind.
So it be news, the newest that thou hast,
Some news of State, for a Princess.
Read from Rome, there.
They write, the King of Spain is chosen Pope.
How?
And Emperor too, the thirtieth of February.
Is the Emperor dead?
No, but he has resigned,
And trails a pike now, under Telly.
For penance.
These will beget strange turns in Christendom!
And Spinola is made General of the Iesuits.
Stranger!
Sir, all are alike true, and certain.
All the pretence to the fifth Monarchy,
Was held but vain, until the ecclesiastique,
And secular powers, were united, thus,
Both in one person.
'T has bin long the aim
Of the house of Austria.
See but Maximilian,
His letters to the Baron of Bouttersheim,
Or Scheiter-huyssen.
No, of Liechtenstein,
Lord Paul, I think.
I have heard of some such thing.
Don Spinola made General of the Iesuits!
A Priest!
O, no, he is dispensed with all,
And the whole society, who doe now appear
The only Enginers of Christendom.
They have bin thought so long, and rightly too.
Witness the Engine, that they have presented him,
To wind himself with, up, into the Moon:
And thence make all his discoveries!
Read on.
And Vittellesco, he that was last General,
Being now turned Cooke to the society,
Has dressed his excellence, such a dish of eggs—
What potch'd?
No, powdered.
All the yolk is wilde fire,
As he shall need beleaguer no more towns,
But throw his Egg in.
It shall clear consume,
Palace, and place; demolish and bear down,
All strengths before it!
Never be extinguished!
Till all become one ruin!
And from Florence,
They write was found in Galileos study,
A burning Glass (which they have sent him too)
To fire any Fleet that's out at Sea—
By Mooneshine, is it not so?
Yes, Sir, in the water.
His strengths will be unresistable, if this hold!
Ha'you no News against him, on the contrary?
Yes, Sit, they write here, one Cornelius-〈◊〉,
Hath made the Hollanders an invisible Ecle,
To swim the haven at Dunk••ke, and sink all
The shipping there.
Why ha•not you this, Thom?
Because he keeps the Pontificiall side.
How, change sides, Thom. It was never in my thought
To put thee up against our selves. Come down,
Quickly.
Why, Sir?
I ventured not my money
Upon those terms: If he may change; why so.
I'll ha him keep his own side, sure.
Why, let him,
It is but writing so much over again.
For that I'll bear the charge: There's two Pieces,
Come, do not stick with the gentleman.
I'll take none Sir▪
And yet he shall hawed place.
They shall be 〈…〉,
Up, Thom: and th'Office shall take 'hem. Keep your side, Thom.
Know your own side, doe not forsake your side, Thom.
Read.
They write here one Cornelius-〈◊〉,
Hath made the Hollanders an invisible Ecle,
To swim the Haven at Dunkirk, and sink all
The shipping there.
But how is it done?
I'll show you Sir
It is an A•toma, runs under water,
With a s••g nose, and has a nimble tail
Made like an anger, with which tail she wrigles
Betwixt the coasts of a Ship, and sinks it straight.
Whence ha'you this news.
From a right hand I assure you,
The Ecle-boats here, that lye before Queen-Hyth,
Came out of Holland.
A most brave device,
To murder their flat bottoms.
I doe grant you▪
But what if Spinola have a new Project:
To bring an army over in corke-shooes,
And land them, here, at Harwich? all his horse
Are shod with cork, and fourscore pieces of ordinance,
Mounted upon cork-carriages, with bladders,
In stead of wheels to run the passage over
At a spring-tide.
Is it true?
As true as the rest▪
He'll never leave his engines: I would hear now
Some curious news.
As what?
Magic, or 〈◊〉
Or flying in the ayre, I care not what.
They write from Libtzig (reverence to your 〈◊〉)
The Art of drawing farts out of dead bodies,
Is by the Brotherhood of the Rosie Cross,
Produced unto perfection, in so sweet
And rich a tincture—
As there is no Princess,
But may perfume her chamber with th'extraction.
There's for you, Princess.
What, a fart for her?
I mean the spirit.
Beware how she r•scents it.
And what hast thou, Thom?
The perpetual Motion▪
Is here found out by an Alewife in Saint Katherines,
At the sign of the dancing Bears▪
What, from her tap?
I'll go see that, or else I'll send old Canter.
He can make that discovery.
Yes, in Ale.
Let me have all this News, made up, and sealed▪
The people press upon vs, please you, Sir,
Withdraw with your fair Princess. There's a room
Within, Sir, to retire too.
No, good Register,
We'll stand it out here, and observe your Office;
What News it issues.
It is the house of fame, Sir,
Where both the curious, and the negligent;
The scrupulous, and careless; wilde, and stayed;
The idle, and laborious; all doe meet,
To taste the Cornu copy of her rumours,
Which she, the mother of sport▪ pleases to scatter
Among the vulgar: Baits, Sir, for the people!
And they will bite like fishes.
Let's see it.
Ha'you in your profane Shop, any News
Of the Saints at Amsterdam?
Yes, how much would you?
Six penny worth.
Lay your money down, read, Thomas.
The Saints do write, they expect a Prophet, shortly,
The Prophet Baal, to be sent over to them,
To calculate a time, and half a time,
And the whole time, according to Naömetry.
What's that?
The measuring of the Temple: a Cabal
Found out but lately, and set out by Archie,
Or some such head, of whose long coat they have heard,
And being black, desire it.
Peace be with them!
So there had need, for they are still by the ears
One with another.
It is their zeal.
Most likely.
Have you no other of that species?
Yes,
But dearer, it will cost you a shilling.
Verily,
There is a nine-pence, I will shed no more.
Not, to the good of the Saints?
I am not sure,
That, man is good.
Read, from Constantinople,
Nine penny'orth.
They give out here, the grand Signior
Is certainly turned Christian, and to clear
The controuersie'twixt the Pope and him,
Which is the Antichrist; he means to visit
The Church at Amsterdam, this very Summer,
And quit all marks of the beast.
Now joyful tidings.
Who brought in this? Which Emissary?
Buzz.
Your countrey-man.
Now, blessed be the man,
And his whole Family, with the Nation.
Yes, for Amboyna, and the Justice there!
This is a Doper, a she Anabaptist!
Seal and deliver her her news, dispatch.
Ha'you any news from the Indies? any mires•
Done in Iapan, by the Iesuites? or in China?
No, but we hear of a Colony of cooks
To be set a shore of the coast of America,
For the conversion of the Cannibals,
And making them good, eating Christians.
Here comes the Colonel that undertakes it.
Who? captain Lickfinger?
News, news my boys!
I am to furnish a great feast to day,
And I would have what news the Office affords.
We were venting some of you, of your new project,
Before it was paid for, you were somewhat too hasty.
What Lickfinger! wilt thou convert the Cannibals,
With spit and pan Divinity?
Sir, for that
I will not urge, but for the fire and zeal
To the true cause; thus I have undertaken:
With two Lay-brethren, to my self, no more,
One of the broach, the other of the boiler,
In one six months, and by plain cookery,
No magic to it, but old Iap•ets physic,
The father of the Europaean Arts,
To make such sauces for the Savages,
And cooks their meats, with those enticing steams,
As it would make our Caniball-Christians,
Forbear the mutual eating one another,
Which they doe doe, more cunningly, then the wilde
Anthropophagi; that snatch only strangers,
Like my old Patrons dogs, there.
O, my Uncles!
Is dinner ready, Lickfinger?
When you please, Sir.
I was bespeaking but a parcel of news,
To strew out the long meal withal, but't seems
You are furnished here already.
O, not half!
What Court-newes is there? any Proclamations,
Or Edicts to come forth.
Yes, there is one.
That the Kings Barber has got, for aid of our trade:
Whereof there is a manifest decay.
A Precept for the wearing of long hair,
To run to seed, to sow bald pates withal,
And the preserving fruitful heads, and chins,
To help a mystery, almost antiquated.
Such as are bald and barren beyond hope,
Are to be separated, and set by
For Ushers, to old Countesses.
And Coachmen.
To mount their boxes, reverently, and drive,
Like Lapwings, with a shell vpo' their heads.
Thorough the streets. Ha'you no News o the St•ge?
They'll ask me about new Plays, at dinner time.
And I should be as dumb as a fish.
O! yes.
There is a Legacy left to the Kings Players,
Both for their various shifting of their Scene,
And dexterous change o'their persons to all shapes,
And all disguises: by the right reverend
Archbishop of Spalato.
He is dead,
That played him!
Then, h'has lost his share of the Legacy.
What news of Gundomar?
A second Fistula,
Or an excoriation (at the least)
For putting the poor English-play, was writ of him,
To such a sordid use, as (is said) he did,
Of cleansing his posterior's.
Justice! Justice!
Since when, he lives condemned to his share, at Bruxels.
And there sits filing certain politic hinges,
To hang the States on, h'has heaved off the hooks.
What must you have for these?
Thou shalt pay nothing,
But reckon 'hem in in the bill. There's twenty pieces,
Her Grace bestows upon the Office, Thom,
Write thou that down for News.
We may well do it,
We have not many such.
There's twenty more,
If you say so; my Prin•cesse is a Princess!
And put that too, under the Office Seal.
If it will please your Grace to sojourn here,
And take my roof for covert, you shall know
The rites belonging to your blood, and birth,
Which few can apprehend: these sordid servants,
Which rather are your keepers, then attendants,
Should not come near your presence. I would have
You waited on by Ladies, and your train
Borne up by persons of quality, and honour,
Your meat should be served in with curious dances,
And set upon the board, with virgin hands,
Tuned to their voices; not a dish removed,
But to the Music, nor a drop of wine,
Mixed, with his water, without Harmony,
You are a Courtier, Sir, or somewhat more;
That have this tempting language!
I'm your servant,
Exellent Princess, and would ha'you appear
That, which you are. Come forth State, and wonder,
Of these our times, dazzle the vulgar eyes.
And strike the people blind with admiration.
Why, that's the end of wealth! thrust riches outward,
And remain beggars within: contemplate nothing
But the vile sordid things of time, place, money,
And let the noble, and the precious go,
Virtue and honesty; hang 'hem; poor thin membranes
Of honour; who respects them? O, the Fates!
How hath all just, true reputation fallen,
Since money, this base money 'gan to have any!
Pity, the Gentleman is not immortal.
As he gives out, the place is, by description.
A very Paradise, if you saw all, Lady.
I am the Chamber-maid, Sir, you mistake,
My Lady may see all.
Sweet Mistress Statute, gentle Mistress Band,
And Mother Mortgage, doe but get her Grace
To sojourn here.—
I thank you gentle Wax,
If it were a Chattel, I would try my credit.
So it is, for term of life, we count it so.
She means, Inheritance to him, and his heirs▪
Or that he could assure a State, of years:
I'll be his Statute-Staple, Statute-Merchant,
Or what he please.
He can expect no more.
His cousin Alderman Security,
That he did talk of so, even now—
Who, is
The very brooch of the bench, gem of the City.
He and his Deputy, but assure his life
For one seven years.
And see what we'll doe for him,
Upon his scarlet motion.
And old Chain,
That draws the city-eares.
When he says nothing,
But twirls it thus.
A moving Oratory!
Dumb Rhetoric, and silent eloquence!
As the fine Poet says!
Come, they all scorn vs,
Doe you not see it? the family of scorn!
Doe not believe him! gentle Master Picklocke,
They understood you not: the Gentlewomen,
They thought you would ha'my Lady sojourn, with you,
And you desire but now and then, a visit?
Yes, if she pleased, Sir, it would much advance
Unto the Office, her continual residence!
(I speak but as a member)
It is enough.
I apprehend you. And it shall go hard,
But I'll so work, as some body shall work her!
'pray you change with our Master, but a word about it.
Well, Lickfinger, see that our meat be ready,
Thou hast News enough.
Something of Bedlam Gabor,
And then I'm gone.
We hear he has deuis'd
A Drum, to fill all Christendom with the sound:
But that he cannot draw his forces near it,
To march yet, for the violence of the noise.
And therefore he is fine by a design,
To carry 'hem in the ayre, and at some distance,
Till he be married, then they shall appear.
Or never; well, God b'wi'you (stay, who's here?)
A little of the Duke of Bauier, and then—
H•has taken a gray habit, and is turned
The Churches Millar, grinds the catholic grist
With every wind: and Telly takes the toll.
Ha'you any news of the Pageants to send down?
Into the several Counties. All the country
Expected from the city most brave speeches▪
Now, at the Coronation.
It expected
More then it understood: for, they stand mute,
Poor innocent dumb things; they are but wood.
As is the bench and blocks, they were wrought on, yet
If May-day come, and the Sun shine, perhaps,
They'll sing like Memnons Statue, and be vocal.
Ha'you any Forest-newes?
None very wild, Sir,
Some tame there is, out of the Forest of fools,
A new Park is a making there, to sever
Cuckolds of Antler, from the Rascals. Such,
Whose wives are dead, and have since cast their heads,
Shall remain Cuckolds-pollard.
I'll ha'that news.
1. And I. 2. And I. 3. And I. 4. And I. 5. And I.
Sir, I desire to be excused; and, Madame:
I cannot leave my Office, the first day.
My Cousin Fitton here, shall wait upon you.
And Emissary Picklocke.
And Thom: Clericus?
I cannot spare him yet, but he shall follow you,
When they have ordered the Rolls. Shut up th'Office,
When you ha'done, till two a clock.
BY your leave, Clerks,
Where shall we dine to day? doe you know? the Ieerers.
Whore's my fellow Fitton?
New gone forth.
Cannot your Office tell vs, what brave fellows
Doe eat together to day, in town, and where?
Yes, there's a Gentleman, the brave heir, young Peny-boy,
Dines in Apollo.
Come, let's thither then,
I have supped in Apollo!
With the Muses?
No,
But with two Gentlewomen, called, the Graces▪
They' were ever three in Poetry.
This was truth, Sir.
Sir, Master Fitton's there too!
All the better!
We may have a ieere, perhaps.
Yes, you'll drink, Doctor.
(If there be any good meat) as much good wine now,
As would lay up a Dutch Ambassador.
If he dine there, he's sure to have good meat,
For, Lickfinger provides the dinner.
Who?
The glory of the Kitchen? that holds Cookery,
A trade from Adam? quotes his broths▪ and salads?
And swears he's not dead yet, but translated
In some immortal crust, the past of Almonds?
The same. He holds no man can be a Poet,
That is not a good Cooke, to know the palats,
And several tastes of the time. He draws all Arts
Out of the Kitchen, but the Art of Poetry,
which he concludes the same with Cookery.
Tut, he maintains more heresies then that.
He'll draw the Magisterium from a minc'd-pye,
And prefer Iellies, to your Iulips, Doctor▪
I was at an Whole Podrida of his making,
Was a brave piece of cookery! at a funeral!
But opening the pot-lid, he made vs laugh,
who'had wept all day! and sent vs such a tickling
Into our nostrils, as the funeral feast
Had bin a wedding-dinner.
Gi'him allowance,
And that but moderate, he will make a Siren
Sing in the Kettle, send in an Orion,
In a brave broth, and of a watery greene,
Just the Sea-colour, mounted on the back
Of a grown Cunger, but, in such a posture,
As all the world would take him for a Dolphin.
Hoe's a rare fellow, without question! but
He holds some Paradoxes.
I, and Pseudodoxes.
Mary, for most, he's Orthodox in the Kitchen.
And knows the Clergies taste!
I, and the Layties!
You think not o'your time, we'll come too late,
If we go not presently.
Away then.
Sirs,
You must get o'this news, to store your Office,
Who dines and sups in the town? where, and with whom?
Twill be beneficial: when you are stored;
And as we like our fare, we shall reward you.
A hungry trade,twill be.
Much like D. Humphries,
But, now and then, as th'holesome proverb says,
Twill obsonare samem ambulando.
Shut up the Office: gentle brother Thomas.
Brother, Nathaniel, I hawed wine for you.
I hope to see vs, one day, Emissaries.
Why not? S'lid, I despair not to be Master!
HOw now? I think I was borne under Hercules star!
Nothing but trouble and tumult to oppress me?
Why come you back? where is your charge?
I ha'brought
A Gentleman to speak with you?
To speak with me?
You know it is death for me to speak with any man.
What is he? set me a chair.
He's the Master
Of the great Office.
What?
The Staple of News,
A mighty thing, they talk Six thousand a year.
Well bring your six in. Where have you left Pecunia?
Sir, in Apollo, they are scarce set.
Bring six.
Here is the Gentleman.
He must pardon me,
I cannot rise, a diseased man.
By no means, Sir,
Respect your health, and ease.
It is no pride in me!
But pain, pain; what's your errand, Sir, to me?
Broker, return to your charge, be Argus-eyed,
Awake, to the affair you have in hand,
Serve in Apollo, but take heed of Bacchus.
Go on, Sir.
I am come to speak with you.
It is pain for me to speak, a very death,
But I will hear you!
Sir, you have a Lady,
That soiournes with you.
Ha? I am somewhat short
In my sense too—
Pecunia.
Of that side,
Very imperfect, on—
Whom I would draw
Oftner to a poor Office, I am Master of—
My hearing is very dead, you must speak quicker.
Or, if it please you, Sir, to let her sojourn
In part with me; I have a moiety
We will divide, half of the profits.
Ha?
I hear you better now, how come they in?
Is it a certain business, or a casual?
For I am loath to seek out doubtful courses,
Run any hazardous paths, I love straight ways,
A just, and upright man! now all trade totters.
The trade of money, is fallen, two in the hundred.
That was a certain trade, while the age was thrifty,
And men good husbands, looked unto their stocks,
Had their minds bounded; now the public Riot
Prostitutes all, scatters away in coaches,
In foot-mens coats, and waiting women's gowns,
They must have velvet honchos (with a pox)
Now taken up, and yet not pay the use;
Bate of the use? I am mad with this times manners.
You said even now, it was death for you to speak.
I, but an anger, a just anger, (as this is)
Puts life in man. Who can endure to see
The fury of men's gullets, and their groins?
What fires, what cooks, what kitchens might be spared?
What Stews, Ponds, Parks, Coupes, Garners, Magazines?
What veluets, tissues, scarfs, embroideries?
And laces they might lack? They covet things—
Superfluous still; when it were much more honour
They could want necessary! What need hath Nature
Of silver dishes? or gold chamber-pots?
Of perfumed napkins? or a numerous family,
To see her eat? Poor, and wise she, requires
Meat only; Hunger is not ambitious:
Say, that you were the Emperor of pleasures,
The great Dictator of fashions, for all Europe,
And had the pomp of all the Courts, and Kingdoms,
Laid forth unto the show? to make your self
Gazed, and admired at? You must go to bed,
And take your natural rest: then, all this vanishes.
Your bravery was but shown; it was not possessed:
While it did boast it self, it was then perishing.
This man has healthful lungs.
All that ex∣cesse
Appeared as little yours, as the Spectators.
It scarce fills up the expectation
Of a few hours, that entertains men's lives.
He has the monopoly of sole-speaking.
Why, good Sir? you talk all.
Why should I not?
Is it not under mine own roof? my feeling?
But I came hete to talk with you.
Why, an'I will not
Talk with you, Sir? you are answered, who sent for you?
No body sent for me—
But you came, why then
Go, as you came, here is no man holds you, There,
There lies your way, you see the door.
This's strange!
It is my civility, when I doe not relish
The party, or his business. Pray you be gone, Sir.
I'll have no venture in your Ship, the Office
Your Bark of Six, if'twere sixteen, good, Sir,
You are a rogue.
I think I am Sir, truly.
A Rascal, and a money-bawd.
My surnames:
A wretched Rascal!
You will overflow—
And spill all.
Caterpillar, mouth,
Horse-leach, and dung-worme—
Still you lose your labour.
I am a broken vessel, all runs out:
A shrunk old Dryfat. Fare you well, good Six.
A notable tough Rascal! this old Peny-boy! right City-bred!
In Siluer-streete, the Region of money, a good seat for a Usurer.
He has rich ingredients in him, I warrant you, if they were ex∣tracted, a true receipt to make an Alderman, and he were well wrought upon, according to Art.
I would fine see an Alderman in chimia! that is a treatise of Aldermanity truly written.
To show how much it differs from Vrbanity.
I, or humanity. Either would appear in this Peny-boy, and hee were rightly distilled. But how like you the news? you are gone from that.
O, they are monstrous! scurvy! and stale! and too exotic! ill cooked! and ill dished!
They were as good, yet, as butter could make them!
In a word, they were beastly buttered! he shall never come of my bread more, nor my in mouth, if I can help it. I have had better news from the bake-house, by ten thousand parts, in a morning: or the conduicts in Westminster! all the news of Tutle-street, and both the Alm'ries! the two Sanctuaries▪ long, and round Wool-staple! with Kings-street, and Chanon-row to boot!
I, my Gossip Tatle knew what fine slips grew in Gardiners-lane; who kissed the Butchers wife with the Cowes-breath; what matches were made in the bowling-Alley, and what bettes won and lost; how much grieft went to the Mill and what besides: who conjured in Tutle-fields, and how many? when they never came there. And which Boy rode upon Doctor Lamb, in the likeness of a roaring Lyon, that run away with him in his teeth, and he's not devoured him yet.
Why, I had it from my maid Join Heare-say: and she had it from a limb of the school, she says, a little limb of nine year old; who told her, the Master left out his conjuring book one day, and hee found it, and so the Fable came about. But whether it were true, or no, we Gossips are bound to believe it, an't be once out, and a foot: how should wee entertain the time else, or find our selves in fashionable discourse, for all companies, if we do not credit all, and make more of it, in the reporting?
For my part, I believe it: and there were no wiser then I, I would have ne'er a cunning schoolmaster in England. I mean a Cun∣ning-Man, a schoolmaster; that is a Coniurour, or a Poet, or that had any acquaintance with a Poet. They make all their scholars Play-boyes! Is it not a fine sight, to see all our children made Enter∣luders? Doe wee pay our money for this? wee send them to learn their
Grammar, and their Terence, and they learn their play-books? well, they talk, we shall have no more Parliaments (God bless vs) but an'wee have, I hope, Zeale-of-the-land Busy, and my Gossip, Rabbi Trow∣ble-truth will start up, and see we shall have painful good Ministers to keep School, and Catechise our youth, and not teach 'hem to speak Plays, and Act Fables of false news, in this manner, to the super-uexa∣tion of Town and Country, with a wanion.
COme, Gentlemen, let's breath from healths a while.
This Lickfinger has made vs a good dinner,
For our Pecunia: what shal's doe with our selves,
While the women water? and the Fiddlers eat?
Let's ieere a little.
Ieere? what's that?
Ex∣pect, Sr.
We first begin with our selves, &amp; then at you,
A game we use.
We ieere all kind of persons
We meet withal, of any rank or quality,
And if we cannot ieere them, we ieere our selves.
A pretty sweet society! and a grateful!
'Pray let's see some.
Have at you, then Lawyer.
They say, there was one of your coat in Bet'lem, lately,
I wonder all his Clients were not there.
They were the madder sort.
Except, Sir, one
Like you, and he made verses.
Madrigal,
A ieere.
I know.
But what did you doe, Lawyer?
When you made love to Mistress Band, at dinner.
Why? of an Advocate, he grew the Client.
Well played, my Poet.
And showed the Law of nature
Was there aboue the Common-Law.
Quit, quit,
Call you this jeering? I can play at this,
It is like a Ball at Tennis.
Very like,
But we were not well in.
It is indeed, Sir.
When we doe speak at volley, all the ill
We can one of another.
As this morning,
(I would you had heard vs) of the Rogue your Uncle.
That Mony-bawd.
We called him a Coat-card
Of the last order.
What's that? a Knave?
Some readings have it so, my manuscript
Doth speak it, •arlet.
And your self a Fool
Of the first rank, and one shall have the leading
Of the right-hand file, under this brave Commander.
What say thou, Canter?
Sir, I say this is
A very wholesome exercise, and comely.
Like Lepers, showing one another their scabs.
Or flies feeding on ulcers.
What News Gentlemen?
Have you any news for after dinner? me thinks
We should not spend our time unprofitably.
They never lie, Sir, between meals, against supper
You may have a Bale or two brought in.
This Canter,
Is an old envious Knave!
A very Rascal!
I have marked him all this meal, he has done nothing
But mock, with scurvy faces, all wee said.
A supercilious Rogue! he looks as if
He were the Patrico—
Or Arch-priest o'Canters,
Hoe's some primate metropolitan Rascal,
Our shot-clog makes so much of him.
The Law,
And he does govern him
What say you, Gentlemen?
We say, we wonder not, your man of Law,
Should be so gracious wi'you; but how it comes,
This Rogue, this Canter!
O, good words.
A fellow
That speaks no language—
But what jingling Gipsies,
And Peddlers trade in—
And no honest Christian
Can understand—
Why? by that argument,
You all are Canters, you, and you, and you,
All the whole world are Canters, I will prove it
In your professions.
I would fine hear this,
But stay, my Princess comes, provide the while,
I'll call for it anon. How fares your Grace?
I hope the fare was good.
Yes, Lickfinger,
And we shall thank you for it and reward you.
Nay, I'll not lose my argument, Lickfinger;
Before these Gentlemen, I affirm,
The perfect, and true strain of poetry,
Is rather to be given the quick Cellar,
Then the fat Kitchen.
Heretic, I see
Thou art for the vain Oracle of the Bottle.
The hogshead, Trismegistus, is thy Pegasus.
Thence flows thy Muses spring, from that hard hoof:
Seduced Poet, I doe say to thee,
A Boiler, Range, and Dresser were the Fountains,
Of all the knowledge in the vniuerse.
And they 'are the Kitchens, where the Master-Cooke—
(Thou dost not know the man, nor can thou know him,
Till thou hast served some years in that deep school,
That's both the Nurse and Mother of the Arts,
And hear him read, interpret, and demonstrate!)
A Master-Cooke! Why, he's the man of men,
For a Professor! he designs, he draws,
He paints, he carves, he builds, he fortifies,
Makes Citadels of curious foul and fish,
Some he dri-dishes, some motes round with broths.
Mounts marrowbones, cuts fifty angled custards,
Reares bulwark pies, and for his outerworkes
He raises Ramparts of immortal crust;
And teaches all the Tacticks, at one dinner:
What Ranks, what Files, to put his dishes in;
The whole Art Military. Then he knows,
The influence of the Stars upon his meats,
And all their seasons, tempers, qualities,
And so to fit his relishes, and sauces,
He has Nature in a pot, above all the Chemists,
Or airy brethren of the Rosie-crosse.
He is an Architect, an Inginer,
A Soldier, a Physician, a Philosopher,
A general Mathematician.
It is granted.
And that you may not doubt him, for a Poet—
This fury shows, if there were nothing else!
And it is divine! I shall for ever hereafter,
Admire the wisdom of a Cooke!
And we, Sir!
O, how my Princess draws me, with her looks,
And hales me in, as eddies draw in boats,
Or strong Charybdis ships, that sail too near
The shelves of Love! The tides of your two eyes!
Wind of your breath, are such as suck in all,
That doe approach you!
Who hath changed my servant?
Your self, who drink my blood up with your beams;
As doth the Sun, the Sea! Pecunia shines
More in the world then he: and makes it Spring
Where ever she favours! 'please her but to show
Her melting wrests, or bare her ivory hands,
She catches still! her smiles they are Loue's fetters!
Her breasts his apples! her teats Stawberries!
Where Cupped (were he present now) would cry
Fare well my mothers milk, here's sweeter Nectar!
Help me to praise Pecunia, Gentlemen:
She's your Princess, lend your wits,
A Lady,
The Graces taught to move!
The Flowers did nurse!
Whose lips are the instructions of all Lovers!
Her eyes their lights, and rivals to the Stars!
A voice, as if that Harmony still spake!
And polished skin, whiter then Venus foot!
Young Hebes neck, or Iunoe's arms!
A hair,
Large as the Mornings, and her breath as sweet,
As meadows after rain, and but new mowne!
Laeda might yield unto her, for a face!
Hermione for breasts!
Flora, for cheeks!
And Helen for a mouth!
Kiss, kiss 'hem, Princess.
The pearl doth strive in whiteness, with her neck,
But loses by it: here the Snow thawes Snow;
One frost resolves another!
O, she has
A front too slippery to be looked upon!
And glances that beguile the seers eyes!
Kiss, kiss again, what says my man of war?
I say, she's more, then Fame can promise of her.
A Theme, that's overcome with her own matter!
Praise is struck blind, and deaf, and dumb with her!
She doth astonish Commendation!
Well pumped i'faith old Sailor: kiss him too:
Though he be a slugge. What says my Poet-sucker!
He's chewing his Muses cud, I doe see by him.
I have almost done, I want but even to finish.
That's the 'ill luck of all his works still.
What?
To begin many works, but finish none;
How does he do his Mistress work?
Imperfect.
I cannot think he finishes that.
Let's hear▪
It is a Madrigal, I affect that kind
Of Poem, much.
And thence you have the name.
It is his Rose. He can make nothing else
I made it to the tune the Fiddlers played,
That we all liked so well.
Good, read it, read it.
The Sun is father of all metals, you know,
Silver, and gold.
I, leave your Prologues, say!
As bright as is the Sun her Sire,
Or Earth her mother, in her best attire,
Or Mint, the Mid-wife, with her sire,
Comes forth her Grace!
The splendour of the wealthiest Mines!
The stamp, and strength of all imperial lines,
Both majesty and beauty shines,
In her sweet face!
Look how a Torch, of Taper light,
Or of that Torches flame, a Beacon bright;
That Mint the Midwife does well.
That's fairly said of Money.
Good!
Now there, I want a line to finish, Sir.
Or of that Beacons fire, Moone-light:
So takes she place!
It is good.
And then I 'haue a Saraband—
She makes good cheer, she keeps full boards,
She holds a Fair of Knights, and Lords,
A Market of all Offices,
And Shops of honour, more or less.
According to Pecunia's Grace,
The Bride hath beauty, blood, and place,
The Bridegroom virtue, valour, wit,
And wisdom, as he stands for it.
Call in the Fiddlers. Nick, the boy shall sing it,
Sweet Princess, kiss him, kiss 'hem all, dear Madame,
And at the close, vouchsafe to call them Cousins.
Sweet Cousin Madrigal, and Cousin Fitton,
My Cousin Shunfield, and my learned Cousin.
Al-manach, though they call him Almanac.
Why, here's the Prodigal prostitutes his Mistress!
And Picklocke, he must be a kinsman too.
My man of Law will teach vs all to win,
And keep our own. Old Founder.
Nothing, I Sir?
I am a wretch, a beggar. She the fortunate.
Can want no kindred, wee, the poor know none.
Nor none shall know, by my consent.
Nor mine,
Sing, boy, stand here.
Look, look, how all their eyes
Dance i'their heads (observe) scattered with lust!
At sight of their brave Idol! how they are tickled,
With a light ayre! the bawdy Saraband!
They are a kind of dancing engines all!
And set, by nature, thus, to run alone
To every sound! All things within, withou them,
Move, but their brain, and that stands still! mere monsters
Here, in a chamber, of most subtle feet!
And make their legs in tune, passing the streets!
These are the gallant spirits of the age!
The miracles of the time! that can cry up
And down men's wits! and set what rate on things
Their half-brain'd fancies please! Now pox vpon'hem.
See how solicitously he learns the Jig,
As if it were a mystery of his faith!
A dainty ditty!
O, hoe's a dainty Poet!
When he sets to it!
And a dainty Scholar!
No, no great scholar, he writes like a Gentleman.
Pox of your Scholar.
Pox o'your distinction!
As if a Scholar were no Gentleman.
With these, to write like a Gentleman, will in time
Become, all one, as to write like an Ass,
These Gentlemen? these Rascals! I am sick
Of indignation at 'hem.
How doe you liked, Sir?
It is excellent!
It was excellently sung!
A dainty Ayre!
What says my Lickfinger?
I am telling Mistress Band, and Mistress Statute,
What a brave Gentleman you are, and Wax, here!
How much it were better, that my Ladies Grace,
Would here take up Sir, and keep house with you.
What say they?
We could consent, Sr, willingly.
I, if we knew her Grace had the least liking.
We must obey her Graces will, and pleasure.
I thank you, Gentlewomen, ply 'hem, Lickfinger.
Give mother Mortgage, there—
Her doze of Sack.
I have it for her, and her distance of Hum.
Indeed therein, I must confess, dear Cousin,
I am a most unfortunate Princess.
And
You still will be so, when your Grace may help it.
Who'ld lie in a room, with a close-stoole, and garlic?
And kennel with his dogs? that had a Prince
Like this young Peny-boy, to sojourn with?
He'll let you have your liberty—
Go forth,
Whither you please, and to what company—
Scatter your self amongst vs—
Hope of Pernassus!
Thy Ivy shall not wither, nor thy Baize,
Thou shalt be had into her Graces Cellar,
And there know Sack, and Claret, all December,
Thy vein is rich, and we must cherish it.
Poets and Bees swarm now adays, but yet
There are not those good Taverns, for the one sort,
As there are Flowery fields to feed the other.
Though Bees be pleased with dew, ask little Wax
That brings the honey to her Ladies hive:
The Poet must have wine. And he shall have it.
BRoker? what Broker?
Who's that? my Uncle!
I am abused, where is my Knave? my Broker?
Your Broker is laid out upon a bench, yonder,
Sack hath seized on him, in the shape of sleep.
Hee hath been dead to vs almost this hour.
This hour?
Why sigh you Sr? because he's at rest?
It breeds my unrest.
Will you take a cup
And try if you can sleep?
No, cogging Jack,
Thou and thy cups too, perish.
O, the Sack!
The sack, the sack!
A Madrigal on Sack!
Or rather an Elegy, for the Sack is gone.
Why doe you this, Sir? spill the wine, and rave?
For Brokers sleeping?
What through sleep, and Sack,
My trust is wronged: but I am still awake,
To waite upon your Grace, please you to quit
This strange lewd company, they are not for you.
No Guardian, I doe like them very well.
Your Graces pleasure be observed, but you
Statute, and Band, and Wax, will go with me.
Truly we will not.
We will stay, and wait here
Upon her Grace, and this your Noble Kinsman.
Noble? how noble! who hath made him noble?
Why, my most noble money hath, or shall▪
My Princess, here. She that had you but kept,
And treated kindly, would have made you noble,
And wise, too: nay, perhaps have done that for you,
An Act of Parliament could not, made you honest.
The truth is, Uncle, that her Grace dislikes
Her entertainment: specially her lodging.
Nay, say her jail. Never unfortunate Princess,
Was used so by a Jailer. Ask my women,
Band, you can tell, and Statute, how he has used me,
Kept me close prisoner, under twenty bolts—
And forty padlocks—
All malicious engines
A wicked Smith could forge out of his iron:
As locks, and keys, shacles, and manacles,
To torture a great Lady.
H'has abused
Your Graces body.
No, he would have done,
That lay not in his power: he had the use
Of our bodies, Band, and Wax, and sometimes Statutes:
But once he would ha'smother'd me in a chest,
And strangled me in leather, but that you
Came to my rescue, then, and gave me ayre.
For which he cramb'd vs up in a close box,
All three together, where we saw no Sun
In one six months.
A cruel man he is!
H'has left my fellow Wax out, in the cold,
Till she was stiff, as any frost, and crumbled
Away to dust, and almost lost her form.
Much ado to recover me.
Women Ieerers!
Have you learned too, the subtle faculty?
Come, I'll show you the way home, if drink,
Or, too full diet have disguised you.
Troth,
We have not any mind, Sir, of return—
To be bound back to back.—
And have our legs
Turned in, or writhed about—
Or else displayed—
Be lodged with dust and fleas, as we were wont—
And dieted with dogs dung.
Why? you whores,
My bawds, my instruments, what should I call you,
Man may think base enough for you?
Hear you, uncle.
I must not hear this of my Princess servants,
And in Apollo, in Pecunia's room,
Go, get you down the stairs: Home, to your Kennel,
As swiftly as you can. Consult your dogs,
The Lares of your family; or believe it,
The fury of a foote-man, and a drawer
Hangs over you.
Cudgel, and pot doe threaten
A kind of vengeance.
Barbers are at hand.
Washing and shaving will ensue.
The Pump
Is not far off; If it were, the sink is near:
Or a good Iordan.
You have now no money,
But are a Rascal.
I am cheated, robbed
Ieer'd by confederacy.
No, you are kicked
And used kindly, as you should be.
Spurned,
From all commerce of men, who are a cur.
A stinking dog, in a doublet, with foul linen.
A snarling Rascal, hence.
Out.
Well, re∣member,
I am coozen'd by my Cousin, and his whore!
Bane o'these meetings in Apollo!
Go, Sir,
You will be tossed like Block, in a blanket else.
Down with him, Lickfinger.
Saucy Jack away,
Pecunia is a whore.
Play him down, Fiddlers,
And drown his noise. Who's this!
O Master Pyed-mantle!
BY your leave, Gentlemen.
Her Graces Herald,
No Herald yet, a Heraldet.
What's that?
A Canter.
O, thou said you would sprone vs all so!
Sir, here is one will prove himself so, straight,
So shall the rest, in time.
My Pedigree?
I tell you, friend, he must be a good Scholar,
Can my descent. I am of Princely race,
And as good blood, as any is in the mines,
Runs through my veins. I am, every limb, a Princess!
Duchess of mines, was my great Grandmother.
And by the Fathers side, I come from Sol.
My Grand-father was Duke of Or, and matched
In the blood-royall of Ophyr.
Here's his Coat.
I know it, if I hear the Blazon.
He bears
In a field Azure, a Sun proper, beamy,
Twelve of the second.
How fir's this from canting?
Her Grace doth understand ti.
She can cant, S•.
What be these? Besants?
Yes, an't please your Grace.
That is our Coat too, as we come from Or.
What line's this?
The rich mines of Potosi.
The Spanish mines in the West-Indies.
This?
The mines of Hungary, this of Barberry.
But this, this little branch.
The Welsh-myne that.
I ha'Welsh-blood in me too, blaze, Sir, that Coat.
She bears (an't please you) Argent, three leekes vert
In Canton Or, and tassel'd of the first.
Is not this canting? doe you understand him?
Not I, but it sounds well, and the whole thing
Is rarely painted, I will have such a scroll,
What ere it cost me.
Well, at better leisure,
We'll take a view of it, and so reward you.
Kiss him, sweet Princess, and stile him a Cousin.
I will, if you will have it. Cousin Pyed-mantle.
I love all men of virtue, from my Princess,
Unto my beggar, here, old Canter, on,
On to thy proof, whom prove you the next Canter?
The Doctor here, I will proceed with the learned.
When he discourses of dissection,
Or any point of Anatomy: that hee tells you,
Of Vena caua, and of vena port,
The Meseraicks, and the Mesenterium.
What does hee else but cant? Or if he run
To his Judicial Astrology,
And trowel the Trine, the Quartile and the Sextile,
Platicke aspect, and Partile, with his Hyleg
Or Alchochoden, Cusps, and Horoscope.
Does not he cant? Who here does understand him?
This is no Canter, tho!
Or when my Muster-Master
Talks of his Tacticks, and his Ranks, and Files;
His Bringers up, his Leaders on, and cries,
Faces about to the right hand, the left,
Now, as you were: then tells you of Redoubts,
Of Cats, and Cortines. Doth not he cant?
Yes, faith.
My Eg-chind Laureate, here, when he comes forth
With Dimeters, and Trimeters, Tetrameters,
Pentameters, Hexameters, Catalecticks,
His Hyper, and his Brachy-Catalecticks,
His Pyrrhichs, Epitrites, and Choriambicks.
What is all this, but canting?
A rare fellow!
Some begging Scholar!
A decayed Doctor at least!
Nay, I doe cherish virtue, though in rags.
And you, Mas Courtier.
Now he treats of you,
Stand forth to him, fair.
With all your fly-blowne proiects,
And looks out of the politics, your shut-faces,
And reserved Questions, and Answers that you game with, As
Is it a Clear business? will it manage well?
My name must not be used else. Here, twill dash.
Your business has received a taint, give off,
I may not prostitute my self. Tut, tut,
That little dust I can blow off, at pleasure.
Here's no such mountain, yet, in the whole work!
But a light purse may level. I will tide
This affair for you; give it freight, and passage.
And such mynt-phrase, as it is the worst of canting,
By how much it affects the sense, it has not.
This is some other then he seems!
How like you him?
This cannot be a Canter!
But he is, Sir,
And shall be still, and so shall you be too:
We'll all be Canters. Now, I think of it,
A noble Whimsie's come into my brain!
I'll build a College, I, and my Pecunia,
And call it Canters College, sounds it well?
Excellent!
And here stands my Father Rector,
And you Professors, you shall all profess
Something, and live there, with her Grace and me,
Your Founders: I'll endow't with lands, and means,
And Lickfinger shall be my Master-Cooke.
What? is he gone?
And a Professor.
Yes.
And read Apicius de reculinaria
To your brave Doxy, and you!
You, Cousin Fitton,
Shall (as a Courtier) read the politics;
Doctor Al-manack, hee shall read Astrology,
Shunfield shall read the Military Arts.
As carving, and assaulting the cold custard.
And Horace here, the Art of Poetry.
His Lyricks, and his Madrigals, fine Songs,
Which we will have at dinner, steeped in claret,
And against supper, sowc't in sack.
In troth
A divine Whimsy!
And a worthy work,
Fit for a Chronicle!
Is it not?
To all ages.
And Pyed-mantle, shall give vs all our Arms,
But Picklocke, what would thou be? Thou can cant too.
In all the languages in Westminster-Hall,
Fleas, Bench, or Chancery. Fee-Farme, Fee-Tayle,
Tenant in dower, At will, For Term of life,
By Copy of Court Roll, Knights service, Homage,
Fealty, Assuage, Soccage, or Frank almoigne,
Grand Sergeanty, or B•rgage.
Thou appear'st,
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 a Canter. Thou shalt read
All Littletons tenures to me, and indeed
All my Conveyances.
And make 'hem too, Sir?
Keep all your Courts, be Steward o'your lands,
Let all your Leases, keep your Evidences,
But first, I must procure, and pass your mort-maine
You must have licence from aboue, Sir.
Fear not,
Pecunia's friends shall doe it.
But I shall stop it.
Your worships loving, and obedient father,
Your painful Steward, and lost Officer!
Who have done this, to try how you would use
Pecunia, when you had her: which since I see,
I will take home the Lady, to my charge,
And these her servants, and leave you my Cloak,
To travel in to Beggars Bush! A Seat,
Is built already, furnished too, worth twenty
Of your imagined structures, Canters College.
It is his Father!
Hoe's alive, me thinks.
I knew he was no Rogue!
Thou, Prodigal,
Was I so careful for thee, to procure,
And plot with my learned Counsel, Master Picklocke,
This noble match for thee, and dost thou prostitute,
Scatter thy Mistress favours, throw away
Her bounties, as they were red-burning coals,
Too hot for thee to handle, on such rascals?
Who are the scum, and excrements of men?
If thou had sought out good, and virtuous persons
Of these professions: I'had loved thee, and them.
For these shall never have that plea against me,
Or colour of advantage, that I hate
Their callings, but their manners, and their vices.
A worthy Courtier, is the ornament
Of a Kings Palace, his great Masters honour.
This is a moth, a rascal, a Court-rat,
That gnaws the common-wealth with broking suits,
And eating grievances! So, a true Soldier,
He is his Countries strength, his Sovereigns safety,
And to secure his peace, he makes himself.
The heir of danger, nay the subject of it,
And runs those virtuous hazards, that this Scarre-crow
Cannot endure to hear of.
You are pleasant, Sir.
With you I dare be! Here is Pyed-mantle,
Because he's an Ass, doe not I love a Herald?
Who is the pure preserver of descents,
The keeper fair of all Nobility,
Without which all would run into confusion?
Were he a learned Herald, I would tell him
He can give Arms, and marks, he cannot honour,
No more then money can make Noble: It may
Give place, and rank, but it can give no Virtue.
And he would thank me, for this truth. This dog-Leach,
You stile him Doctor, because he can compile
An Almanac; perhaps erect a Scheme
For my great Madame monkey: when 't has taken
A glister, and betrayed the Ephemerids.
Doe I despise a learned Physician?
In calling him a Quack-Saluer? or blast
The euer-liuing ghirl•nd, always greene
Of a good Poet? when I say his wreath
Is pieced and patched of dirty witherd flowers?
Away, I am impatient of these ulcers,
(That I not call you worse) There is no sore,
Or Plague but you to infect the times. I abhor
Your very scent. Come, Lady, since my Prodigal
Knew not to entertain you to your worth,
I'll see if I have learned, how to receive you,
With more respect to you, and your fair train here.
Farewell my Beggar in velvet, for to day,
To morrow you may put on that grave Robe,
And enter your great work of Canters College,
Your work and worthy of a Chronicle,
Why? This was the worst of all! the Catastrophe!
The matter began to be good, but now: and he has spoiled it all, with his Beggar there!
A beggarly Jack it is, I warrant him, and a kin to the Poet.
Like enough, for hee had the chiefest part in his play, if you mark it.
Absurdity on him, for a huge overgrown Play-maker! why should he make him live again, when they, and we all thought him dead? If he had left him to his rags, there had been an end of him.
I, but set a beggar on horse-backe, he will never linne till hee be a gallop.
The young heir grew a fine Gentleman, in this last Act!
So he did, Gossip: and kept the best company.
And feasted 'hem, and his Mistress!
And showed her to 'hem all! was not jealous!
But very communicatiue, and liberal, and began to be magnificent, if the churl his father would have let him alone.
It was spitefully done of the Poet, to make the Chuff take him off in his height, when he was going to doe all his brave deeds!
To found an Academy!
Erect a College!
Plant his Professors, and water his Lectures.
With wine, gossips, as he meant to doe, and then to de∣fraud his purposes?
Kill the hopes of so many towardly young spirits?
As the Doctors?
And the Courtiers! I protest, I was in love with Master Fitton. He did wear all he had, from the hat-band, to the shooe-tye, so politically, and would stoop, and leer?
And lie so, in waite for a piece of wit, like a Mouse-trap?
Indeed Gossip, so would the little Doctor, all his behaviour was mere glister! Of my conscience, hee would make any parties physic in the world work, with his discourse.
I wonder they would suffer it, a foolish old fornicating Father, to ravish away his sons Mistress.
And all her women, at once, as hee did!
I would have flyen in his gypsies face i'faith.
It was a plain piece of political incest, and worthy to be brought before the high Commission of wit. Suppose we were to censure him, you are the youngest voice, Gossip Tatle, begin.
Mary, I would have the old conicatcher coozen'd of all he has, in the young heirs defence, by his learned Counsel, Mr Picklocke!
I would rather the Courtier had found out some trick to beg him, from his estate!
Or the Captain had courage enough to beat him.
Or the fine Madrigall-man, in rime, to have run him out of the Country, like an Irish rat.
No, I would have Master Pyed-mantle, her Graces He∣told, to pluck down his hatchments, reverse his coat-armour, and null∣life him for no Gentleman.
Nay, then let Master Doctor dissect him, have him opened, and his tripes translated to Lickfinger, to make a probation dish of.
Agreed! Agreed!
Faith I would have him flat disinherited, by a decree of Court, bound to make restitution of the Lady Pecunia, and the use of her body to his son.
And her train, to the Gentlemen.
And both the Poet, and himself, to ask them all forgiveness!
And vs too▪
In two large sheets of paper—
Or to stand in a skin of parchment, (which the Court please)
And those filled with news!
And dedicated to the sustaining of the Staple!
Which their Poet hath let fall, most abruptly?
Banckruptly, indeed!
You say wittily, Gossip, and therefore let a protest go out a∣against him.
A mourniuall of protests; or a gleek at least!
In all our names:
For a decayed wit—
Broken—
Non-soluent—
And, for ever, forfet—
To scorn, of Mirth?
Censure!
Expectation!
Subsign'd. Tatle, Stay, they come again.
NAy, they are fit, as they had been made for me,
And I am now a thing, worth looking at!
The same, I said I would be in the morning.
No Rogue, at a Comitia of the Canters,
Did ever there become his Parents Robes
Better, then I do these: great fool! and beggar!
Why doe not all that are of those societies,
Come forth, and gratulate me one of theirs?
Me thinks, I should be, on every side, saluted,
Dauphin of beggars! Prince of Prodigals!
That have so fallen under the ears, and eyes,
And tongues of all, the fable of the time,
Matter of scorn, and mark of reprehension!
I now begin to see my vanity,
Shine in this Glass, reflected by the foil!
Where is my Fashioner? my Feather-man?
My Linnener? Perfumer? Barber? all?
That tail of Riot, followed me this morning?
Not one! but a dark solitude about me,
Worthy my cloak, and patches; as I had
The epidemical disease upon me:
And I'll sit down with it.
My Master! Maker!
How doe you? Why doe you sit thus of the ground, Sir?
Hear you the news?
No, nor I care to hear none.
Would I could here sit still, and slip away
The other one and twenty, to have this
Forgotten, and the day raced out, expunged,
In every Ephemerids, or Almanac.
Or if it must be in, that Time and Nature
Have decreed; still, let it be a day
Of tickling Prodigals, about the gills;
Deluding gaping heirs, loosing their loves,
And their discretions; falling from the favours
Of their best friends, and parents; their own hopes;
And entering the society of Canters.
A doleful day it is, and dismal times
Are come upon vs: I am clear undone.
How, Thom?
Why? broke! broke! wretchedly broke!
Ha!
Our Staple is all to pieces, quite dissolved!
Ha!
Shivered, as in an earth-quake! heard you not
The crack and ruins? we are all blown up!
Soon as they heard the Infant was got from them,
Whom they had so devoured i'their hopes,
To be their Patronise, and sojourn with 'hem;
Our Emissaries, Register, Examiner,
Flew into vapor: our grave Governor
Into a subt'ler ayre; and is returned
(As we doe hear) grand-Captaine of the Ieerers.
I, and my fellow melted into butter,
And spoiled our Ink, and so the Office vanished.
The last hum that it made, was, that your Father,
And Picklocke are fallen out, the man of Law.
How? this awakes me from my lethargy.
And a great suite, is like to be between 'hem,
Picklocke denies the Feofement, and the Trust,
(Your Father says) he made of the whole estate,
Unto him, as respecting his mortality,
When he first laid this late device, to try you.
Has Picklock then a trust?
I cannot tell,
Here comes the worshipful—
What? my veluet-heyre,
Turned beggar in mind, as robes?
You see what case,
Your, and my Fathers plots have brought me to.
Your Fathers, you may say, indeed, not mine.
Hoe's a hard hearted Gentleman! I am sorry
To see his rigid resolution!
That any man should so put off affection,
And humane nature, to destroy his own!
And triumph in a victory so cruel!
He's fallen out with me, for being yours,
And calls me Knave, and Traitors to his Trust,
Says he will have me thrown over the Bar—
Ha'you deserved it?
O, good heaven knows
My conscience, and the silly latitude of it!
A narrow minded man! my thoughts doe dwell
All in a Lane, or line indeed; No turning,
Nor scarce obliquitie in them. I still look
Right forward to th'intent, and scope of that
Which he would go from now.
Had you a Trust, then?
Sir, I had somewhat, will keep you still Lord
Of all the estate, (if I be honest) as
I hope I shall. My tender scrupulous breast
Will not permit me see the heir defrauded,
And like an Alien, thrust out of the blood,
The Laws forbid that I should give consent,
To such a civil slaughter of a Son.
Where is the deed? hast thou it with thee?
No,
It is a thing of greater consequence,
Then to be borne about in a black box,
Like a Low-countrey vorloffe, or Welsh-briefe.
It is at Lickfingers, under locke and key.
O, fetch it hither.
I have bid him bring it,
That you might see it.
Knows he what brings?
No more then a Gardeners Ass, what roots he carries,
I was a sending my Father, like an Ass,
A penitent Epistle, but I am glad
I did not, now.
Hang him, an austere grape,
That has no juice, but what is veriuice in him.
I'll show you my letter!
Show me a defiance!
If I can now commit Father, and Son,
And make my profits out of both. Commence
A suite with the old man, for his whole state,
And go to Law with the Sons credit, undo
Both, both with their own money, it were a piece
Worthy my night-cap, and the Gown I wear,
A Picklockes name in Law. Where are you Sir?
What doe you doe so long?
I cannot find
Where I have laid it, but I have laid it safe.
No matter, Sir, trust you unto my Trust,
It is that that shall secure you, an absolute deed!
And I confess, it was in Trust, for you,
Lest any thing might have happened mortal to him:
But there must be a gratitude thought on,
And aid, Sir, for the charges of the suite,
Which will be great, against such a mighty man,
As is our Father, and a man possessed
Of so much Land, Pecunia and her friends.
I am not able to wage Law with him,
Yet must maintain the thing, as mine own right,
Still for your good, and therefore must be bold
To use your credit for monies.
What thou wilt,
So wee be safe, and the Trust bear it.
Fear not,
It is hee must pay arrerages in the end.
We'll milk him, and Pecunia, draw their cream down,
Before he get the deed into his hands.
My name is Picklocke, but hee•ll find me a Padlock.
HOw now? conferring wi'your learned Counsel,
Vpo' the Cheat? Are you of the plot to cousin me?
What plot?
Your Counsel knows there, Mr Picklock,
Will you restore the Trust yet?
Sir, take patience.
And memory unto you, and bethink you,
What Trust? where dost appear? I have your Deed,
Doth your Deed specify any Trust? Is it not
A perfect Act? and absolute in Law?
Sealed and delivered before witnesses?
The day and date, emergent.
But what conference?
What oaths, and vows preceded?
I will tell you, Sir,
Since I am urged of those, as I remember,
You told me you had got a grown estate,
By griping means, sinisterly.
How!)
And were
Even weary of it; if the parties lived,
From whom you had wrested it—
Ha!)
You could be glad,
To part with all, for satisfaction:
But since they'had yielded to humanity,
And that just heaven had sent you, for a punishment
(You did acknowledge it) this riotous heir,
That would bring all to beggary in the end,
And daily sowed consumption, where he went—
You'old cousin both, then? your Confederate, too?
After a long, mature deliberation,
You could not think, where, better, how to place it—
Then on you, Rascal?
What you please i'your passion,
But with your reason, you will come about
And think a faithful, and a frugal friend
To be preferred.
Before a Son?
A Prodigal,
A tubbe without a bottom, as you termed him;
For which, I might return you a vow, or two,
And seal it with an oath of thankfulness,
I not repent it, neither have I cause, Yet—
Fore-head of steel, and mouth of brass! hath impu∣dence
Polished so gross a lie, and dare thou vent it?
Engine, composed of all mixed metals! hence,
I will not change a syllable, with thee, more,
Till I may meet thee, at a Bar in Court,
Before thy Judges.
Thither it must come,
Before I part with it, to you, or you, Sir.
I will not hear thee.
Sir, your ear to me, though.
Not that I see through his perplexed plots,
And hidden ends, nor that my parts depend
Upon the vnwinding this so knotted skein,
Doe I beseech your patience. Unto me
He hath confessed the trust.
How? I confess it?
I thou, false man.
Stand up to him, &amp; confront him.
Where? when? to whom?
To me, even now, and here,
Can thou deny it?
Can I eat or drink?
Sleep, wake, or dream? arise, sit, go, or stand?
Doe any thing that's natural?
Yes, lye:
It seems thou can, and perjury: that is natural!
O me! what times are these! of frontlesse carriage▪
An Egg of the same nest! the Fathers Bird!
It runs in a blood, I see!
I'll stop your mouth.
With what?
With truth.
With noise, I must have witness.
Where is your witness? you can produce witness?
As if my testimony were not twenty,
Balanced with thine?
So say all Prodigals,
Sick of selfe-loue, but that's not Law, young Scatter-good.
I live by Law.
Why? if thou hast a conscience,
That is a thoussnd witnesses.
No, Court,
Grants out a Writ of Summons, for the Conscience,
That I know, nor Subpoena, nor Attachment.
I must have witness, and of your producing,
Ere this can come to hearing, and it must
Be heard on oath, and witness.
Come forth, Thom,
Speak what thou heard, the truth, and the whole truth,
And nothing but the truth. What said this varlet?
A rat behind the hangings!
Sir, he said
It was a Trust! an Act, the which your Father
Had will to alter: but his tender breast
Would not permit to see the heir defrauded;
And like an alien, thrust out of the blood.
The Laws forbid that he should give consent
To such a civil slaughter of a Son—
And talked of a gratuity to be given,
And aid unto the charges of the suite;
Which he was to maintain, in his own name,
But for my use, he said.
It is enough.
And he would milk Pecunia, and draw down
Her cream, before you got the Trust, again.
Your ears are in my pocket, Knave, go shake 'hem,
The little while you have them.
You doe trust
To your great purse.
I have you in a purse-net,
Good Master Picklocke, with your worming brain,
And wrigling ingine-head of maintenance,
Which I shall see you hole with, very shortly.
A fine round head, when those two lugs are off,
To trundle through a Pillory. You are sure
You heard him speak this?
I, and more.
Much more!
I'll prove yours maintenance, and combination,
And sue you all.
Doe, doe, my gowned Vulture,
Crop in Reversion: I shall see you coyted
Over the Bar, as Barge-men doe their billets.
This it is, when men repent of their good deeds,
And would ha'hem in again—They are almost mad!
But I forgive their Lucida Interualla.
O, Lickfinger? come hither. Whore's my writing?
I sent it you, together with your keys,
How?
By the Porter, that came for it, from you,
And by the token, you had given me the keys,
And bad me bring it.
And why did you not?
Why did you send a counter-mand?
Who, I?
You, or some other you, you put in trust.
In trust?
Your Trust's another self, you know,
And without Trust, and your Trust, how should he
Take notice of your keys, or of my charge.
Know you the man?
I know he was a Porter,
And a sealed Porter for he bore the badge
On breast, I am sure.
I am lost! a plot! I sent it!
Why! and I sent it by the man you sent
Whom else, I had not trusted.
Plague o'your trust.
I am trussed up among you.
Or you may be.
In mine own halter, I have made the Noose.
What was it, Lickfinger?
A writing, Sir,
He sent for it by a token, I was bringing it:
But that he sent a Porter, and hee seemed
A man of decent carriage.
It was good fortune!
To cheat the Cheater, was no cheat, but justice,
Put off your rags, and be your self again,
This Act of piety, and good affection,
Hath partly reconciled me to you.
Sir.
No vows, no promises: too much protestation
Makes that suspected oft, we would persuade.
Hear you the News?
The Office is down, how should we?
But of your uncle?
No.
He's run mad, Sir.
How, Lickfinger?
Stark staring mad, your brother,
H'has almost killed his maid.
Now, heaven forbid.
But that she's Cat-liu'd, and Squirrill-limb'd,
With throwing bed-staues at her: h'has set wide
His outer doors, and now keeps open house,
For all the posers by to see his justice:
First, he has apprehended his two dogs,
As being of the plot to cousin him:
And there hee sits like an old worm of the peace,
Wrapped up in furs at a square table, screwing,
Examining, and committing the poor cures,
To two old cases of close stools, as prisons;
The one of which, he calls his Lollard's tower,
The other his Blocke-house, because his two dogs names
Are Block, and Lollard.
This would be brave matter
Unto the Ieerers.
I, If so the subject
Were not so wretched.
Sure, I met them all,
I think, upon that quest.
Faith, like enough▪
The vicious still are swift to show their natures.
I'll thither too, but with another aim,
If all succeed well, and my simples take.
WHere are the prisoners?
They are forth-comming, Sr,
Or coming forth at least.
The Rogue is drunk,
Since I committed them to his charge. Come hither,
Near me, yet nearer; breath upon me. Wine!
Wine, o'my worship! sack! Canary sack!
Could not your Badge have bin drunk with fulsome Ale?
Or Beer? the Porters element? but sack!
I am not drunk, we had, Sir, but one pynt,
An honest carrier, and my self.
Who paid for it?
Sir, I did give it him.
What? and spend sixpence!
A Frock spend sixpence! sixpence!
Once in a year, Sir,
In seven years, varlet! Know thou what thou hast done?
What a consumption thou hast made of a State?
It might please heaven, (a lusty Knave and young)
To let thee live some seventy years longer.
Till thou art fourscore, and ten; perhaps, a hundred.
Say seventy years▪ how many times seven in seventy?
Why, seven times ten, is ten times seven, mark me,
I will demonstrate to thee on my fingers,
Six-pence in seven year (use upon use)
Grows in that first seven year, to be a twelue-pence.
That, in the next, two-shillings; the third foure-shillings;
The fourth seven year, eight-shillings; the fifth, sixteen:
The sixth, two and thirty; the seventh, three-pound four,
The eighth, six pound, and eight; the ninth, twelve pound sixteen;
And the tenth seven, five and twenty pound,
Twelve Shillings. This thou art fallen from, by thy riot!
Should thou live seventy years, by spending six-pence,
Once in the seven: but in a day to wast it!
There is a Sum that number cannot reach!
Out o'my house, thou pest of prodigality!
Seed of consumption! hence, a wicked keeper
Is oft worse then the prisoners. There's thy penny,
Four tokens for thee. Out, away. My dogs,
May yet be innocent, and honest. If not,
I have an entrapping question, or two more,
To put unto 'hem, a cross Intergatory,
And I shall catch 'hem; Lollard? Peace,
What whispring was that you had with Mortgage,
When you last licked her feet? The truth now. Ha?
Did you smell she was going? Put down that. And not,
Not to return? You are silent. good. And, when
Leaped you on Statute? As she went forth? Consent.
There was Consent, as she was going forth.
It would have been fitter at her coming home,
But you knew that she would not? To your Tower,
You are cunning, are you? I will meet your craft.
Block, show your face, leave your caresses, tell me,
And tell me truly, what affronts do you know
Were done Pecunia? that she left my house?
None, say you so? not that you know? or will know?
I fear me, I shall find you an obstinate Cur.
Why, did your fellow Lollard cry this morning?
Because Broker kicked him? why did Broker kick him?
Because he pissed against my Ladies Gown?
Why, that was no affront? no? no distaste?
You knew of none. Yo'are a dissembling Tyke,
To your hole, again, your Blocke-house. Lollard, arise,
Where did you lift your leg up, last? against what?
Are you struck Dummerer now? and whine for mercy?
Whose Kirtle was it, you gnawed too? Mistress Bands?
And Waxe's stockings? who did? Block bescumber
Statutes white suite? with the parchment lace there?
And Brokers Satin doublet? all will out.
They had offence, offence enough to quit me.
Appear Block, faugh, it is manifest. He shows it,
Should he for-sweare't, make all the Affadauits,
Against it, that he could before the Bench,
And twenty Juries; hee would be convinced.
He bears an ayre about him, doth confess it!
To prison again, close prison. Not you Lollard,
You may enjoy the liberty of the house,
And yet there is a quirk come in my head,
For which I must commit you too, and close,
Doe not rapine, it will be better for you.
THis is enough to make the dogs mad too,
Let's in upon him.
How now? what's the matter?
Come you to force the prisoners? make a rescue?
We come to bail your dogs.
They are not bail∣able,
They stand committed without bail, or mainprise,
Your bail cannot be taken.
Then the truth is,
We come to vex you.
Ieere you.
Bate you rather.
A bated usurer will be good flesh.
And tender, we are told.
Who is the Butcher,
Amongst you, that is come to cut my throat?
You would dye a calves death fine: but'tis an Oxes,
Is meant you.
To be fairly knocked of the head.
With a good Ieere or two.
And from your iaw∣bone,
Don Assinigo?
Shunfield, a Ieere, you have it.
I doe confess a washing blow? but Snarl,
You that might play the third dog, for your teeth,
You have no money now?
No, nor no Mortgage.
Nor Band.
Nor Statute.
No, nor blushet Wax.
Nor you no Office, as I take it.
Cymbal,
A mighty Ieere.
Pox o'these true jests, I say.
He will turn the better ieerer.
Let's upon him,
And if we cannot ieere him down in wit,
Let's do it in noise.
Content.
Charge, man of war.
Lay him, aboard.
We'll give him a broad side, first.
Wher's your venison, now?
Your red-Deer-pyes?
With your baked Turkeys?
and your Partridges?
Your Pheasants, &amp; fat Swans?
Like you, turned Geese.
But such as will not keep your Capitol?
You were wont to ha•your Brooms—
And Trouts sent in?
Fat Carps, and Salmons?
I, and now, and then,
An Emblem, o'your self, an o're-growne Pike?
You are a Jack, Sir.
You have made a shift
To swallow twenty such poor Jacks ere now.
If he should come to feed upon poore-Iohn?
Or turn pure Iack-a-Lent after all this?
Tut, he'll live like a Gras•hopper—
On dew.
Or like a Bear, with licking his own claws.
I, If his dogs were away.
He'll eat them, first,
While they are fat.
Faith, and when they are gone,
Here's nothing to be seen beyond.
Except
His kindred, Spiders, natiues of the soil.
Dust, he will have enough here, to breed fleas.
But, by that time, he'll have no blood to rear 'hem.
He will be as thin as a lantern, we shall see thorough him,
And his gut colon, tell his Intestine—
Rogues, Rascals (bow waw)
He calls his dogs to his aid.
O! they but rise at mention of his tripes.
Let them alone, they doe it not for him.
They bark, se defend•ndo.
Or for custom,
As commonly cures doe, one for another.
Arm, arm you, Gentlemen Ieerers, th'old Canter
Is coming in upon you, with his forces,
The Gentleman, that was the Canter.
Hence.
Away.
What is he?
stay not to ask questions.
Hoe's a flame.
A fornace.
A consumption,
Kills where hee goes.
See! the whole Couy is scattered,
'Ware, 'ware the Hawks. I love to see him fly.
YOu see by this amazement, and distraction,
What your companions were, a poor, affrighted,
And guilty race of men, that dare to stand
No breath of truth: but conscious to themselves
Of their no-wit, or honesty, ran routed
At every Panic terror themselves bred.
Where else, as confident as sounding brass,
Their tinkling Captain, Cymbal, and the rest,
Dare put on any visor, to deride
The wretched: or with buffo• licence, jest
At whatsoever is serious, if not sacred.
Who's this? my brother! and restored to life!
Yes, and sent hither to restore your wits:
If your short madness, be not more then anger,
Conceived for your loss! which I return you.
See here, your Mortgage, Statute, Band, and Wax,
Without your Broker, come to abide with you▪
And vindicate the Prodigal, from stealing
Away the Lady. Nay, Pecunia her self,
Is come to free him fairly, and discharge
All ties, but those of Love, unto her person,
To use her like a friend, not like a slave,
Or like an Idol. Superstition
Doth violate the Deity it worships:
No less then scorn doth. And believe it, brother
The use of things is all, and not the Store;
Surfeit, and fullness, have killed more then famine.
The Sparrow, with his little plumage, flies,
While the proud Peacock, ouer-charg•d with pens,
Is fine to sweep the ground, with his grown train,
And load of feathers.
Wise, and honoured brother!
None but a Brother, and sent from the dead,
As you are to me, could have altered me:
I thank my Destiny, that is so gracious.
Are there no pains, no Penalties decreed
From whence you come, to vs that smother money,
In chests, and strangle her in bags.
O, mighty,
Intolerable fines, and mulcts impo'sd!
(Of which I come to warn you) forfeitures
Of whole estates, if they be known, and taken!
I thank you Brother for the light you have given me,
I will prevent 'hem all. First free my dogs,
Lest what I have done to them (and against Law)
Be a Praemunire, for by Magna Charta
They could not be committed, as close prisoners,
My learned Counsel tells me here, my Cooke.
And yet he showed me, the way, first.
Who did? I?
I trench the liberty of the subjects?
Peace,
Picklocke, your Guest, that Stentor, hath infected you,
Whom I have safe enough in a wooden collar.
Next, I restore these servants to their Lady,
With freedom, heart of cheer, and countenance;
It is their year, and day of Jubilee.
We thank you, Sir.
And lastly, to my Nephew,
I give my house, goods, lands, all but my vices,
And those I go to cleanse; kissing this Lady
Whom I doe give him too, and join their bands.
If the Spectators will join theirs, wee thanke'hem.
And wish they may, as I, enjoy Pecunia.
And so Pecunia her self doth wish,
That she may still be aid unto their uses,
Not slave unto their pleasures, or a Tyrant
Oner their fair desires; but teach them all
The golden mean: the Prodigal, how to live,
The sordid, and the covetous, how to dye,
That with sound mind; this safe frugality.
THus have you seen the Makers double scope,
To profit, and delight; wherein our hope
Is, though the clout we doe not always hit,
It will not be imputed to his wit:
A Tree so tried, and bent, as'twill not start.
Nor doth he often crack a string of Art,
Though there may other accidents as strange
Happen, the weather of your looks may change,
Or some high wind of mis-conceit arise,
To cause an alteration in our Skies;
If so, we'are sorry that have so mis-spent
Our Time and Tackle, yet he'is confident,
And vow's the next fair day, he will have vs shoot
The same match o'er for him, if you'll come to it.

OUr Author for himself, this bad me say,
Although the Palsgraue be the name of the Play,
Tic not that Prince, which in this Kingdom late,
Married the Mayden-glory of our state:
What Pen dares be so bold in this strict age,
To bring him while he lives upon the Stage?
And though he would, Authorities sternebrow
Such a presumptuous deed will not allow:
And he must not offend Authority,
Tic of a Palsgraue generous and high,
Of an undaunted heart, an Hectors spirit,
For his great valour, worthy royal merit;
Whose fair achievements, and victorious glory,
Is the mayne subject of our warlike Story.
Mars governs here, his influence rules the day,
And should by right be Prologue to the Play:
But that besides the subject, Mercury
Sent me to excuse our insufficiency.
If you should ask vs, being men of Trade,
Wherefore the Players faculty we invade?
Our answer is, No ambition to compare
With any, in that quality held are;
Nor with a thought for any grace you give
To our weak action, by their course to live:
But as in Camps, and Nurseries of Art,
Learning and valour have assumed a part,
In a Cathurnall Scene their wits to try,
Such is our purpose in this History.
Emperors have played, and their Associates to,
Soldiers and Scholars; tic to speak and do.
If Citizens come short of their high fame,
Let Citizens bear with vs for the name.
And Gentlemen, we hope what is well meant,
Will grace the weak deed for the good intent.
Our best we promise with a dauntless cheek;
And so we gain your love, tic all we seek.
Sick at this instant now to be infirm,
When the English King hath his kind Letter sent:
For me to place this honourable prince,
The Duke of Sauoy in the Empires rule:
That Nation my great Grandfather did love.
And since I came to understand their valour,
I held them the Prime Soldiers of the world:
And think no Martial Tutor fits a prince,
But hee that is a true borne Englishman.
Ill comes this Letter, and your Grace at once,
A worser time then this you could not choose.
Though I am chief Elector of the seven,
And a mere Caesar now the Chair is void:
Sickness hath weakened all my powers so much,
I shall be slighted as a worthless thing.
Why should the Palsgraue so mistrust his Friends?
Sauoy, because I know them factious.
And though Bohemia love me as his life,
And Vmpeare-like, should pacify our iars,
What is his voice when Saxon draws his sword?
Mints of a Clergymen is stout and proud,
Trier his like, in nature and in vice.
And the bold Bastard, late expulst from Spain,
Has a blood-thirsty hart, a vengeful spleen.
Misfortune cannot daunt him though he fled
Out of his own Realm, and has lost his Crown.
His impudence yet aims at Caesars Throne,
Id freely part with mine inheritance,
If it could purchase health to tame his pride,
But in you only I repose my trust.
Reserve your voices for this Noble Duke,
Who were I well should bee an Emperor:
Sickness will be obeyed, I must decline,
For my speech fails me to urge more discourse,
Pray for me all, if that they chance to win,
And I recover Isle help all by War.
The strength of Germanie is sick in him,
And should hee die now in his prime of life,
Like Troy wee loose the Hector of our Age:
For hee alone, when he was strong and well,
Curbed all their pride, and kept the worst in awe.
We must expect war: &amp; prepare our selves
With expedition to resist their force:
For a more dangerous Foe for Treachery,
Then is the Bastastard, lives not in these parts.
I am sorry, that presuming on the health
Of the most valiant Palsgraue now fallen sick,
I came so ill provided for the Wars.
We are strong enough to meet them in the field
Prepare for War, the Bastard is in arms,
With him the fiery Saxon, Mints, and Trier:
And they'll besiege this Castle, to constrain
The Palsgraue, to elect him Emperor.
Shame to vs all, if we give aim to that.
Begyrt this Castle, and disturb the health
Of our dear friends, it is insufferable.
Let vs convey him lower down the river,
Unto a stronger Castle of his own:
And with such Forces as we have prepared,
Give battle to the Bastard and his crew.
You have a Caesar of your own Election,
To lead the Vangard, doe but follow me,
Isle guide you where the greatest danger dwells:
And like an Emperor fright it from the field:
The Bastards but a Coward; and a Spaniard,
Coward and Spaniard oft-times go together.
Their greatest valour does consist in Braves,
And once repulsed, theyl run away like Slanes.
This Land of Germanie yields valiant men,
Haughty in heart as they in stature are:
Ten thousand such had I been Leader of
When the Blacke-Prince, lately my greatest Foe,
Opposde me at Mazieres, and won the day,
I had been Lord of that most noble Field,
And where an Hermit now tells ore his Beads,
Had sat a Soldier and a Conqueror.
That Hermit is too bookish to reign long.
When th'Imperiall Sceptre fills my hand,
And I have Caesars wreath upon my brow,
As had my Grandsire, and his royal Father,
Isle make Iberia wreak with my foes blood,
And force the Dotard to his Hermitage.
Such thoughts becomes the Germaine Emperor,
Has courage to wage War with all the world.
Harry, a word in private in your ear,
When you are Emperor, as in time you shall,
I must rule all, although you wear the Crown:
The Edicts I propose you must enact,
And call them your own Laws, not being vexed
At what I doe, although I mince your honour.
How Saxon?
Harry, Darst' thou wreath thy brow,
In any contumelious form against me?
It is by my favour that thou art alive.
My greater greatness has repaird thy fame,
And being but my creature, it is fit
I should bee known to be the worthier man.
Between our selves in private.
Publicly, and in the view of all, you'll swear.
I must.
But being installed in the dignity,
Isle alter what I sue???e.
Come, Come, your O???h,
Being an Elector, I am bard the only Throne,
And therefore will rule by a Deputy.
This is the Castle, shall wee summon it?
Emperor elect, and princes of the State,
In vain you labour to begyrt this hold
With hostile Arms, for Sauoy is yth field,
The Bishop of Cullen, and stout Brandenburgh,
With the Bohemian King, are already pressed,
To give you battle ere you stir your foot.
Are they so brave, so hot, &amp; full of courage?
The Palsgraue has breathed spirit into them all.
Though sickness make him droop, weel meet the?? straight
Battles are governed by the will of Fate.
So moves the Sun in glory through the sky,
Having outpost the clouds that shadow him.
Now Spanish Henry, thou hast proved thy self
Worthy the Germane sceptre, by thy valour,
And hee that says not Aue Caesar, dyes.
Swell not too high thou bubble, least thou
Isle break thy heart first.
Ere my tongue pronounce
Aue to any that's my enemy;
Isle bare my breast to meet thy conquering sword,
And make it crimson with an Emperors blood.
There must be but one Emperor, thats our self,
Therefore to prison with the counterfeit,
Whence neither County Pallatine, nor King,
Shall with their Forces if they were co???joined,
Have power to set thee free.
For you my Lords, that are Electors like unto my self,
Give but your free consents that hee shall govern,
And that shall serve as ransom for you all.
Never while life lastes.
Or I breath this ayre.
Then let them share like fortune in his doom
As they have done this happy day ith field.
To prison with them all.
Not till you are Crowned.
That sight shall serve in steed of a Tormentor,
And I rejoice to vex mine enemy.
Give vs our rights.
Rex Romanorum, &amp; magnus Imperator Ger???Viue Caesar.
Viue Caesar.
Enough those Viues, take away my life,
In the delicious wrapture of my soul,
For theres no heaven me thinks like royal thoughts,
The Palsgraues Castles raste unto the ground,
And peace established, we mean once again
To try our Fortune for the Realm of Spain.
Since the decease of Englands royal Son,
That placed me lately in Spaynes government,
Those that did fear me for his valour sake,
Are by the trains and falsehood of my brother,
Revolted from me, and to save my life
I was constrained put on this disguise,
To go to England for a new supply
Of men and Soldiers would but weary them.
I have therefore been in France, and failing there,
Am come to Germanie, to implore the aid
Of the Eel???ctors, but by ill success,
Bohemia, Brandenburgh, and Sauoyes tan:
The Bastard has bewitched the other Peers.
So that my Foe is now an Emperor,
And all the hope I have to get mine own
Lies in the Palsgraue sick I hear to death,
Hear I expect his answer to my Letter.
Are you the Hermit that did bring this letter?
And personate him that sent it.
What Spaynes King?
Oh that I were as I was wont to bee,
Before this dangerous sickness was my Foe,
No Christian King that came to me for aid
But hee should speed.
In time you may recover.
Mean time be welcome, sit,&amp; take your rest,
And now my Lord of Cullen I me prepared,
To hear the woeful tidings you have brought.
Comes noble Sauoy, and Bohem???as King,
With the stout Marquess Brandenburgh in triumph
And is proud Saxon taken, with the Bastard,
Trier and Mints made subject to your sword?
Oh if they bee speak it, and make me well.
Alls lost, We are conquered, Sauoy is surprised,
And our best Friends in bondage to our Foes:
Heaven has forgot the Justice of our cause.
And only I escaped to tell the news.
This were enough to kill some man in health,
But in me the effect is contrary.
All lost, all conquered, Sauoy made a Slave:
My Friends in prison, and none escaped but you,
Hee that can hear such ill news and be sick,
Deserves ne'er to recover, in my blood,
I feel an inflammation of revenge:
Theres greater strength gathered into my nerues,
Then ere before, since that I grew infirm:
They will not rest thus, and stay only there,
But having conquered them, assume the Crown,
And make the Bastard Emperor.
Hee is Crowned.
More blood increases, &amp; some more ill news
Would make me cast my Night-cap on the ground,
And call my Groom to fetch me a Warre-horse,
That I may ride before an Army royal,
And pluck the Crown from off the Bastards head,
That is another right.
Tic thought my Lord,
Your Castle which you left to save your life
Is beaten to the ground, and your goods theirs:
And further, that they will pursue you hither,
As if you fled before their conquering swords.
Be sick who will, mine Ague does retire.
And Cullen thou hast cured me with ill news.
Come valiant Soldiers show your selves like men,
And be assured weal ???inn the victory.
Hark how they shout as they applauded me:
And see how bravely every Leader rides,
Plumed from the Beaver to the Saddle bow,
Whilst the bold Soldier makes his lofty pike
Stretch in the Ayre with tossing it aloft.
Bravely done fellow: that trick once again,
And there's gold for thy pains, hee fights like Hector.
Whilst at his seete the amazed Gracious fall,
And though Achilles would renew the Field,
Hee dares not do it, the enemies so strong,
Me thinks I hear a peal of Ordinance play,
They are the Bastards Cannons, planted high,
To overthrow my Castle to the ground.
Now they shoot off, Death, all my foes are come.
Marshall my Troops, and let Drum answer Drum.
My self in person will be general.
But I faint, and am not what I woul??? be.
My spirit is stronger then my feeble limbs,
Lead me once more with grief unto my bed,
Few know the sorrows of a troubled head.
How fine would valour sickness overcome?
But his infirmity denies such power.
And I am more grieved for his weak estate,
Then for our late great loss.
Palsgraue may help him.
And as I lived a fellow amongst Hermits,
I learnt some skill that has curd many a Prince.
See him safe guarded from his enemies.
And on my life I will recover him.
Wee are strong enough to waste him to his Fleet,
And when the Enemy shall miss him here,
Theyle turn their conquering Force another way,
And go for Spain.
My Kingdom.
To subdue it.
Let them proceed, but when hee has got his strength, theyle rue their boldness; Mean time trust to me. For next to Heaven Isle cure his malady.
Thou art his hand, the agent of his thoughts,
And only enginor, by which he works
Some dangerous plot to blow his Honour up:
Is it possible my Son should be from Court
So often, and the cause unknown to thee,
That art his bosome-friend, his Counsellor?
I know no cause except to take the ayre.
My wrath shall find another in thy breast.
Know that thou tread on thy last foot of earth,
From whence is no remove, but to the grave:
Fly me thou can not, and to make resistance,
Will draw upon thee for one Lyons rage,
All the whole den.
Hold, and Isle tell your Honour.
Know that his usual haunt is to the house
Of the Lord Clinton, whither he is gone
To see his Daughter, whom he does affect.
Dotes he on my betrothed, my Love, my wife?
Had he the lives of many hopeful sons
Incorporate with his own, my rate is such
I should destroy them all, ere lose my Love.
But how does she affect him?
As her life:
Alleging, that the Contract made to you,
Was by constraint to please her honoured Father:
But he was precontracted, first made sure.
And this I heard her speak, with pearled tears;
Then Love, no passion ought to be more free,
Nor any agreement like that sympathy.
I have put on Dianiras poisoned shirt
In the discourse, and every word cleaves to me
As deadly in the apprehension,
As that which killed the Iew-borne Hercules.
But wherefore doe I combat with my self,
That have a greater enemy to curb?
Oh, but he is my son! What is a son?
The effect of a sweet minute, he shall dye,
Being my pleasure to effect my pleasure:
Attend me where he is, I may destroy him.
I have a sweet Office, to be Gentleman Pore???la to a back door; but tic for a Lady, the best beauty in England: and if there be any Pandering in the bu???sinesse, though I am accessory in the fee, because I live by it, I have no knowledge in the fault. Ma???ny a Courtier would be glad of my place, yet I hold it not by patent, for term of life, nor for years: but as young Gentlemen get Venison upon sufferance or by stealth. If the Lord Clinton should have no???tice of this Key or evidence, by which the young Lord Fythwaters is conueyed to his Daughter against his will, though she be his Wife by a pre-contract, I might bee conueyed to the porters-lodge. But if all Court-secrets come to light, what will be???come of the Farthingales think you that cover them? No, since Ladies wear Whale-bones, ma???ny have been swallowed, and so may this. Here comes the Young Lord.
Always at hand, thy carefulness is great: Where is thy Lady?
Walking in the Garden.
So early, then I see loves the best lark;
For the Corn builder has not warbled yet
His mornings Carroll to the rising Sun.
There's for thy pains.
I thank your Lordship. And now like the Keeper of a prison, having my fee, tic fit I should turn the Key. You know the way to my Ladies chamber.
I doe.
Sure liberality was a lover, or he would ne'er be so bountiful: some think it a chargeable thing to keep a Woman of any eminent fashion, and so tic, but to keep them as I doe under locke and key, and suffer none to enter but such liberal Gentlemen, is the only way to make a rich Keeper. I must walk still to watch his coming forth.
You have been with the Lord Clinton?
And he promised to meet you in the Garden covertly.
Is this the place?
And this is the Ladies Page that lets him in.
Help, help.
If you bellow here, you breath your last; by ways,
Back doors, come sir along with me.
If that her father meet, as I desire,
Whats but a spark, will prove a mount of fire.
Locke the door after vs.
My Lord I will.
The delian Lute is not more Musical
Then thy swear voice, Oh my Apollo speak,
That with the wrapture of thy words, my soul
May be entranced, and wish no other joys:
That by the discord of two Broken harps,
(Old and unfit for Lovers harmony)
Our joys should suffer a distate of fear;
And in our most delights a qualm of grief
Run like a vain of Lead through a Gold-mine.
We grow too jealous of our prosperous days,
Making an evil, where no ill is meant:
Like hallowed ground, love sanctifies this place,
And will not suffer danger to intrude.
Here we are ringd in earthly Paradise,
And may have all the heaven to our selves:
Be then Mistrust an exile from my breast,
Where lives no jealousy, dwells present rest.
But we'll disturb it, &amp; your amorous joys.
Our Fathers present; Sweet, we are betrayed.
Betrayed to death: why doe you hold my Sword?
There's greater fury kindled in my breast,
Then can be quenched by any thing but blood:
I shall turn frantic if you brand the Sea
Of my displeasure in such narrow bounds,
And with a Deluge, equal to the first,
That ouer-spred the world, swell up so high,
Till not a Mountain ouer-looke the stream,
Nor heaven be seen for Rivers of the Land.
If I could fear the waving of a Sword,
Mine enemies had frighted me ere now;
But I'm invaluable, like my mind,
Not to be wounded but with darts of love;
And I as little estimate a Father
In these Pathaires, as he esteems my grief.
There's no priority in loves high Court
Granted unto the Fathers fore the Son;
But like the purest government of all,
Every mans mind is his own Monarchy:
Where reason ne'er set foot to make a law,
Shall common sense keep one, that were absurd.
Would fight with me?
Not if you will forbear me;
But in a war defensive I will stand
Against an Army of my Ancestors,
Did their enfranchised souls break op their tombs,
And reassumed their bodies as they lived,
In their full pride and youthful jollity.
Let Ravens perch upon these blossomd trees,
Night Owls their stations in this Garden keep,
And every ominons portents draw near:
For here Isle offer unto Hecare,
A hellish sacrifice in a sons blood.
I feel an Earth-quake in my trembling flesh,
And my well boding Gems bids me draw
A sword of vengeance on this hasty Lord,
Ere suffer him to be a parricide.
Will the Lord Clinton buckler out my foe?
No, but restrain you from a wilful murder.
And like the best oblation for your wrath,
Lo, I the subject of this variance fall
prostrate on my knee, to suffer death,
Ere such a rude act, most vnfather-like,
Be put in practice on so good a son.
Good to deceive me.
The deceit is yours.
Forswear him, and I shall rest satisfied.
Never.
Nor I.
Give way.
I need no buckler.
I stand not here to offend, but to defend
Your lives and honour against so vile and act
Would blur the Conquerors fame perpetually,
Making your swords the furies fire-brands,
Bathed so unnaturally in others blood.
Where neither Honour, nor Religion springs,
Tic better far such combats be unsought:
I know your pleas, her father has my grant,
You her affection got against my will:
The place whereon you stand is our own ground,
And here tic fit I abritrate the cause.
Amongst reasonable men peace is held good:
None love dissention, but they thirst for blood.
Counsel prevails, I am glad he is not slain.
I live with joy, that I'm no Father-killer.
Will you subscribe to what we shall enjoin?
We doe.
In brief tic this. You must forbear my house,
And never more be seen within my gates.
This is extreme.
I have a heavier doom,
Which on my curse I charge thee to observe:
Which is, That instantly thou leave the Land,
And trouble me no more to get her love.
How am I crossed!
How is my heart tormented!
Yet I have all the world to traffic in,
Except in England, and your Honoues house:
But as the dissolution of the soul
From such a body as desires to love,
Is burdensome and grievous to the man;
Such is my heart dissevered from my Love.
And such is mine to lose thy company.
You are cruel to impose a curse upon me,
That sentence is extreme, I feel it work.
More deadly on my grieved faculties,
Then to have dyed upon my fathers sword:
For now mine own woes must destroy my self.
And thats a murder worse then parricide.
My knife shall end me.
Hold thy desperate hand,
Would make our Nuptials prove a Tragedy?
I would, and be inhum'd within the ground,
Rather then measure out a hated bed.
Never regard the passions of a woman,
They are wily creatures, and have learnt this wit,
Where they love most, best to dissemble it.
If that prove so, my heart will be the lighter.
I have done an act will make me odious
To all succeeding times, betrayed my friend:
But here he comes, Isle stay and speak with him.
Careless of foes, of father, or his curse,
Come I again to challenge Floramell,
Which I suspect the Steward has betrayed.
Within my breast bathe a revengeful sword,
Lo, I oppose it to your greatest wrath:
Yet if you saw the counsels of my heart,
There you may read, it was not I but fear
That was the Author of your loves betraying;
Your angry father threatened me with death,
And I had no evasion but to tell it:
But if your Lordship please to pardon me,
Isle lay a plot to help you to your Love.
He that is once false, will be never true.
Then wherefore serves repentance?
Well, proecede.
Set down the place where I shall find your Honour,
And if I bring not thither Floramell,
At our next meeting take away my life.
Meet me at York house.
Isle be there ere long.
I have done amiss, and will amend the wrong.
The Bride not up, and the Archbishop come,
Some call her down.
Welcome my reverend Lord.
Doe not you Bishops use sometimes to dream?
We have the same incitements of the blood
That others have, and in our fantasies
We see strange shapes, and divers things to follow.
What was your dream to night?
As I remember,
Himen was turned into a Mercury,
And hoe's the Patron of all sly deceits.
But whats my dream to your affairs my Lord?
That such another dream I had last night:
And if I should be cheated of my Bride,
It were a strange premonition.
Fear it not, see where she comes.
March forward to the Church.
So, whilst he takes your place, we are for York???house.
I come Fythwaters flying.
Let's away.
The stay of my fair Mistress makes me wilde,
Sure I shall never more behold her face;
The Stewards false, and Floramell may change.
Isle therefore give a period to my grief,
And in despair finish what life denies:
Yet ere I dye, let all the World this know,
A Women's love procured my overthrow.
My Floramell, to Sea.
Oh my distracted soul, this is extreme,
Gulled with a Boy, dressed in your Daughters gown:
This is a cross that patience cannot bear.
Who was the cause of this, speak;
Wheres my Daughter?
Fled to your Son.
The Steward laid the plot; What I have done
Was for my Ladies sake.
That Steward is a Villain.
Lets go seek him.
Take several streets, but let your meeting be
At the Water-side, least they should flee to Sea.
To the water side; Lord Bishop keep the boy.
I will.
My Dream is fallen out right, Hymen is changed
Into a sly deceiving Mercury:
But tic most requisite, they that doe wrong
Should feel the penalty by suffering it.
I witness can the Young Lords pre-contract,
Bad Fathers that infringe a holy act.
This day I think I promised the Lord Clinton
To be his Guest.
It was my Liege this Day.
I have dismissed my Train to steal upon him,
But whats the season all things are so quiet?
A Lords house at so great a Ceremony
As is a Marriage, should be like a Court:
Multitudes thronging up and down like waives;
And the Gate kept with an Officious porter,
To give kind entertainment to all Comers;
Here is no such a matter.
Here Old Fitzwater: comes.
Some Pegasus has borne her from my sight
For ne'er a horse I keep can overtake them:
By all conjectures they are gone to Sea,
And Shipped by this.
His Bride.
Belike tic so.
Some whirlwind follow them;
And making the Ocean rougher then my brow,
Ye dancing Porpoises caper aloft,
And mud the white foam with your jetty backs;
A perfect sign a tempest is at hand.
Rise from the bottom of the deep ye Whales,
And overturn the Ship that carries them:
But let a Dolphin save my Floramell,
And back unto the haven guide her safe.
As for the boy, make him your watery pray,
Eat him alive, that he may hear his bones
Crash in the jaws of the Leuiathan:
But save his head for me to know him by,
Author of all my grief and misery.
Isle interrupt his passion.
Stay my Liege.
You shall hear more, here comes the other Father.
How now my Lord, have you surprised your Bride?
I think thy treachery conveyed her hence,
And by thy means another was attired
In her habilaments to vex me thus.
You highly wrong me.
I would right you better,
Were I assured of your close treachery.
Threaten me?
With no more then Isle perform.
Not in cold blood.
No, but in blood like fire.
In choler, passion and a crazed brain,
But when you have slept upon your menaces,
You will not then make good a noble challenge,
And enter single combat like a Lord.
There lie my gage I dare thee to the field,
And will aver without the advice of sleep,
That thou were privy to the Stewards blot.
Isle take your gage, and meet you when you dare.
But we will not suffer it, that love the lives
Of every subject, much more of our Peers:
And as for you Fitz-waters, that are grown
Hotter then I exspected from your age,
Except you can produce good witnesses,
That Clinton has deceived you of your Bride,
Isle stay the combat or imprison you.
I cannot prove it, but I think tic so.
Correct such thoughts, and give him back his gage.
Withal my heart.
Clinton I am satisfied.
How now, what news bring you?
Letters my Liege from the Count Palatine
Our noble friend Bauaria's valiant Duke.
From him my Liege.
Weal read them instantly.
Alls lost, our elected friend Sauoy taken prisoner, with him Bohemia, and Bran???enburgh; sickness would not suffer me to wear Armour, but by the help of the Royal Hermit, Peter the King of Spain your friend and Beadesman I am recovered. The Ba???stard is made Emperor, and has shipped himself for Spain, whither I purpose to sail to hinder
His intendements, If I survive the Battle, and be con???querour. Isle unfit you in England, except the Sea be my Sepulchre.
Ill news, not suddenly to be amended,
The Palsgraues sickness was the greatest loss.
The Bastard Crowned, vncrowne him if thou can,
Thou that art matchless for thy Chivalry.
Send but his head from Spain, to tread upon,
And I should count it an vnvalued gift.
As for good Sauoy, and his Germaine Friends,
Ere long Isle set them free, or make the soil
That holds them prisoners a Marsh-ground for blood,
Till I hear news from Spain of good success.
Each day I live will be a year of grief.
Pleases my Liege to lay aside your sorrow,
And with your Royal person grace my house,
Clinton will hold it an exceeding favour.
So will Fitzwaters gracious sovereign.
And though this day look black with my disgrace,
Your Royal presence whites an Aethyops face.
I accept your kindness, &amp; will be your Guest.
Next unto heaven to you, we give the praise,
Most zealous King for our recovery,
And now my Lord of Cullen show your self,
As good a Soldier as a Clergy man.
In stead of Beads now use a Martial sword.
For here in Spain where the Black Prince incampte,
And made the Bastard fly, our Tents are pitched,
And the proud Foe comes with a Spleen enraged,
To drive vs from Mazieres; Harry shall know,
As hee has Kingly blood within his veins,
And is a Caesar, hee shall meet with Caesars.
I hear their Drums.
And I rejoice to hear them,
The Palsgraue here, now wee shall have
Your voice to our Election, or for that your life.
You were sick in Germanie.
But now recovered.
And hither come to beat you out of Spain.
He bears himself, as he were sure to co??quer.
And looks more like a Jove then like a man.
I hold my thunder here, &amp; my right arm
Has vigour in it, when you feel my blows
To give you cause to call them Thunderbolts,
If there be any in this Martial Troop
That with a Soldiers face, has a bold heart,
And dares aver that this religious prince
Is not the lawful and true King of Spain,
I will make good his Title by the sword,
And against that proud combatant oppose
My self as challenger to fight for him.
I dare take up your gage, and answer you.
But that I should impair this days renown,
By giving desperate men such means to dye,
Who for you know your Army weak, and few
Would hazard that upon a single fight.
Which in the Battle you are sure to loose,
No Foxlike policy shall blind my sight,
But that Isle see the ruin of you all.
This day ith Field, thine Palsgraue and the rest,
He combats well rips up an Armies breast.
Isle answer his proud challenge.
We forbid it, that are your Emperor, both in stile
In stile, but not in power, that stre??gth is mine,
Except you'll be forsworn.
This for an Oath,
You are but the step by which I did ascend,
And being up, rest there till I descend.
You'll answer this anon.
Here, or else-where.
Did ever know a Caesar that could fear.
Isle stab the Bastard.
Worthy Duke desist.
No Combat then will be accepted of.
In general, with our powers in the op?? field,
But not betwixt the Generals privately.
Then you are Cowards al???.
Isle so proclaim you in my thundering Drums,
And by the glories that I hope to win,
Prove it this day to thy perpetual shame:
But to a hartlesse foe words are but vain.
Alarm Drum, that showers of blood may reign.
It shall be treason to my Fame to day,
If I encounter any Foe ith-field,
Till I have combated this drunken Saxon.
How Bastard, how?
Bastard!
What else?
Thou were twice misbegotten, once in Nature,
And secondly, in being any prides defiled,
By which thou art a Bastard Emperor.
Stand from about me, or Isle strike you dead
Reme??ber where you are amongst your foes
Who by your discord may destroy vs all.
And this advantage of your variance
Gives them the victory with easiness.
If not for your own Honours and your lives,
Forbear for ours.
They shall not combat here:
Isle make my Rotchet crimson like your Colours,
Ere I stand by and suffer such a wrong.
How these brave Churchmen talk.
Are you in your Pulpits?
Here's those will strike you.
What, the Palsgraue come?
Emperor be wise, &amp; join thy force to mine,
Till we have driven away the enemy,
And then return to our old variance.
I am Saxons till the Palsgraue dye or fly.
You should have fought still, twould have bin my glory,
To have given aim, &amp; then the conqueror conquered:
But what your variance leaves vnfinish here,
Isle end with the destruction of you both.
We fear you not.
Upon them valiant friends.
Saxon is fled, Caesar my captive is,
I must not lose him; guard the Emperor sure,
Whilst I pursue the Duke.
We will.
Am I your prisoner?
Not so good, my slave.
To trample on, or use as he likes best.
We are Brothers.
Now: but in your high estate,
No greater enemy then you had I.
Best that we guide him to the Palsgraues. Tent.
Although he be Ambitious, and my Foe,
Honour commands me that I reskew him.
That I may have the honour of his death.
When we ????????? Masteries in a single fight.
Tic Saxon, Guard him sure.
To our best power.
No further, if you mean to save your lives.
The Palsgraues slain, ???is blood wreakes on my sword,
And I advise you for your own discharge,
To give this valiant Emperor liberty.
Not whilst wee live.
Help to release your self.
Most willingly.
Thanks for your pains, but yet we will be Foes.
To horse, to horse, and talk of that elsewhere.
This was the most ill chance that ever happened.
He said he had slain the Palsgraue,
It was his cunning to astonish vs with fear, but
If he live, how shall we answer him for this mischance.
See where he comes, I would the storm were past.
I lost him in the press, his snowy steed
Was crimsond over with the blood of men,
And Lyon-like he fought with all his strength,
But since the Emperor is my prisoner,
I shall die less regard the Dukes escape.
Oh Noble Sir, we have deceived your trust,
And lost the Jewel you had vs keep.
Caesar by Saxon is rede???end and fleed,
And wee ????????? for his escape.
When fortune is disposed? ????????? a man.
Valour and foresight are of no effect:
Releast by Saxon, and his Keepers live;
You are not as I thought you, valiant men;
But worse then these that run away for fear.
He should have made passage through my heart,
Ere escaped from me by Saxon or his plots:
But now it is too late to follow him;
And the whole Field is made a liquid Sea,
Sink may they both into the crimson fen.
But why should they sink, you deserve it best:
From henceforth Isle ne'er take a Spaniards part,
Except he had a far more valiant heart,
Let my blood speak for me; fair words dis???please.
Well, since I think it was weakness and not will,
By which they are escaped, I calm my spleen,
And rest content that we have won the field.
After you are establish in your Throne,
Isle sail to England to regreete the King:
And then to Germany, where if we meet
Bauaria's, ayre shall be his winding sheet.
Retreat, retreat, and thank heaven for the day.
At your requests my Lords, I am contented
To receive this Emperor into grace and favour.
He floe??? me, would you have me suffer this?
At their requests they have requested me
To allay my spleen, and take thee into favour.
Theyle ne'er be friends.
Lets leave them both to fight.
Away.
Weal force you else.
We are a going.
So, now I will imagine that this ground
Is all the Empire that my greatness swayles???:
And that the heads of many rebel Subjects
Are placed on thee; that striking off thy head,
I cut off half a Nation at a blow.
And I the Emperors of a Nation.
Why dost not kill me, since tic in thy power?
Thou sau'dst my life, for that Isle set the free.
Caesar, thou art a Noble enemy;
Henceforth I vow to relinquish every ill
That may displease thee, and obey thy will.
Such be my conquests over those I love.
So, they are friends, they have fought away their anger.
Has conquered me with curtsy and valour.
Then now to counsel how we shall proceed
In this most dangerous war against the Palsgraue,
Who as I hear by firm intelligence.
Means with his Fleet to touch the English Shore,
And draw the valiant Edward to his part.
If such a day come, twill be black to vs:
For of all Nations in the world, I hate
To deal with Englishmen they conquer so.
Follow his example and lets get a King
To take our part, as well as they have done:
France has been wasted by their cruelty,
And cannot but in spleen desire revenge,
Were he solicited to be our friend,
We should with the more ease be conquerors.
Send thither.
Or fail thither.
Thats the best:
But shall we only build our hopes on strength;
I think it were good to piece the Lyons skin
Where it too short falls, with the Foxes skin,
A couple of Protean villains I have ???eddy,
For any dangerous attempt in peace,
And they can poison, stab, and lye in wait
Like Serpents, to entrap and cease their prey,
Mendoza and Vandome, those are the men:
Let them be called in.
They are hear, great Caesa???.
Most mighty Emperor, whats your Highness will?
That unto England presently you sail,
And there consort you with the Earl of Artoyes,
A Frenchman borne, but one that loves vs well;
Let him and you send vs intelligence
Of the proceedings of the English King,
With the haughty Palsgraue, give the Earl this Letter,
By which ye may win credit in his trust:
And er't be long I will devise a plot,
Which you shall manage, for the general good.
Be careful; as you doe respect our love,
And hope for gold in showers, mean time take this.
Your will shall be obeyed.
It shall be done.
Great Jove can say no more:
That State thrives best that has such Slaves in store.
See our Fleet ready: and ye swelling gales,
That blow the good hours, fill our empty sails.
My Lord of Poytieres, as you are informed,
Where means the Emperor and his ???ray???e to land?
Here at this ????????? of Bolleigne, &amp; the news
Is certain that his Mightiness is near.
How angry has the heavens as bin with the sea,
That it hath boiled so much, and cast the sands
Into such mountains that they ouer-looke
The bounds that held them in.
Well may our friends
Escape the danger of this heavy storm:
Small gusts at Land, sink a whole Fleet at sea;
And whilst our Cities keep vs from their rage,
The Rocks bea???e them, ???s Tennis-Courts doe balls.
Id have an Atheist travel through the deep,
And he shall see such wonders, that his soul
Would make him soon believe there is a God.
But what sayre Gemle woman have we here,
Which is a Shipwrecked creature, comes a shore?
All wet and weary with a boisterous storm,
At last I have set my foot upon the Land;
I tremble as a Fever shook my ???oynes,
But tic the Ocean that has frozen me:
Drop there thou moisture of a swelling Flood.
And let me see, no Fisher-man at hand,
To tell me in what Coast I am arrived:
Alas I see none, I shall dye with cold.
Speak to her, give the woman comfort.
How is it with pretty Gentlewoman?
Sir, I am very cold, and wee, and ???,
Would you could help me to a little fire
To dry my self, and I would pray for you.
Tic now no time to reason of your state:
Here take my Cloak.
Alas Sir, tic but thin,
And makes ????????? the more to ?????????
I would be shifted into warmer Roa???es,
If I could meet with some kind Gentlewoman.
Make use of me, you ??????all not want for help.
You seem to be of a Ma???e??????que state,
What should a poor distressed Gentlewoman,
Trouble a person of such eminence?
Thy state wants present pity, women take it
I have seen a King ere now,
And by your Diadem you should be one:
Pray, rather let me dye then trouble you.
Tic perfect charity to help the poor:
Yet by these Jewels, you should bear a place,
If not amongst the Royal, with the Noble.
Indeed I am but a poor Gentlewoman,
Punished for wearing Jewels in a storm:
But I have lost a husband whom I loved,
For marrying whom, I have endured this cross;
And now his friends, if they should find me out,
Would finish what the storm has left undone.
His name?
It was Infortunio, as mine is,
With the alteration of a letter only.
Good Infortuna go along with me,
Isle find some help for this thy misery.
May the Sea never use you of this fashion;
I take your curtsy, and will attend.
Young, sayre, and lovely, is she not Poytiers?
She is a comely, and a sweet Gentlewoman.
In my opinion shoe's the sayrest creature
Nature ere made.
In love my gracious Liege?
What and my Queen alive, that would seem strange.
Love does regard no person, nor the time.
Love is a power will ouer-rule a King.
Finding her honest, though of mean estate,
You may doe well to raise poor virtue up,
And marry her to some great Nobleman.
Isle think of that hereafter: now, the news?
The Emperor and the Electors are arrived.
Health to the Majesty and Seat of France.
As welcome hither is your Mightiness,
As if you were arrived in Germany.
I thank King Iohn.
Saxon, with Mints, and Trier.
We rest your loving friend for War.
For Counsel.
And Counsel is as great a friend as War.
It hath prevailed as much.
Thrice welcome all.
The storm has kept vs overlong at Sea:
But Mighty King of France, worse storms then these
Have and will shake vs, if you help vs not:
All things go Backwards, that should bode vs good;
And he that is Conqueror already,
The haughty palsgraue, is to England sailed,
To join with Edward in our overthrow.
We have felt the valour of the English King,
And of his son, the Black Prince now deceased:
Witness Poytiers and Cressey, where our blood
Royal, although it be saved to make clay
Moist with the showers, and temper the dry earth:
When I and all my sons were prisoners tan,
And had to England to be wondered at:
Ransomed although I was, it grieves me much
I cannot doe the like unto my foe.
Let your French Soldiers join themselves with ours,
And weal invade his Kingdom.
And constrain him &amp; the Palsgraue to the like disgrace.
Fortune was never steadfast unto any.
But like the Ocean that bounds in the Land,
Both ebbs and flows according to the Moon.
But if I might advise your Majesty,
By former losses you should be more wise,
Then hazard France again to the like snoyle:
Edward is fortunate in all his wars;
And wise men will not strive against the stream???
Therefore be circumspect, and keep your own.
This theme our counsel shall at large discuss,
Till when, to England weal Embassage send,
To advise King Edward not to be our foe,
Left it offend vs, that are friends to both:
If th?? Dove speed not, weal the Serpent prove.
And win by craft, what may not be by love.
Who shall have that employment?
Not your Honour, because your spirit is rough and turbulent.
No, if I might entreat these reverend Bishops,
By them I would direct this Embassy:
Since it concerns them, it behooves they stir,
Who know the sweets, will cause no war.
Weal undertake it, if the Emperor please.
When I send thither, it shall be in thunder:
Yet as the French King orders it proceed.
You know your charge, be mild, but yet not base,
Though we give ground, we will not lose our place.
Even now a bold conceit hath entered me,
And thats to visit England in disguise:
As well to further our conspiracy
Against the Palsgraue and King Edwards life,
As to surueigh the Country, and observe
What Havens best to entertain a Fleet:
The English Nation with my soul I hate,
And would doe any thing to win the State.
Not possible my Lords to find those men?
Are they so wily to deceive vs all?
Sure they are harboured by some near about,
That does affect the English Diadem:
He's worse then mad would aim at Englands Crown,
Though the Black Prince be dead, so many sons
I have left to govern, which mars their rule.
Edward himself has left a hopeful heir,
The Princely Richard to inherit it.
Plots yet, tricks yet, well we must hope the best.
I rather think the ill was aymd at me,
Because I came to move your Majesty.
For the deposing of the Emperor:
And it is known the Bastard is my foe,
Witness the Wars in Germany and Spain:
Treason by him is evermore in act,
His brain coins faster then the English Mynt;
Tretcherous proceedings, gold has many friends:
And he must be a man of excellent virtue
Whom it corrupts not. Howsoever, I am sorry
The Sailors did escape.
Here are their cases.
Under the which I think were better clothes,
And for their Steeds, thought could not be more quick,
Or we had took them.
They were swift indeed.
As swiftly with their flight vanish our fears.
And now most Noble Palsgraue of the Rheine,
Think your self welcome to the English Court:
And reverend Cullen.
I doe thank your Grace.
Your Father loved me well, and for his sake,
As well as for your own, Isle honour you:
And after feasting we will try your force
In friendly manner at a Tournament,
Which as I think, you have prepared my Lords.
We have my Liege, &amp; the most youthful blood
That the Court yields will show their Chiualdry,
In honour of Bauaria's Royal Duke.
Let him sit fast that shall contend with me,
Or I shall shake him, be he ne'er so Royal:
I show no favour when I am in Arms,
Nor look for any from my Opposites.
But Tournaments are revels made for sport,
And hee runs well, that gets a good report.
Weal try your valour, &amp; perchance run with you.
Lead on.
The discontented English like to me,
Hates all delight, I and the Court it self:
To lead a private life, where they may plot
Revenge on those that are their opposites;
Not many years past, who but I esteemed,
King Edward has upon my shoulder leand,
And thanked me in mine ear many a time,
For making France his, I betrayed Valoys
My sovereign King, in England to get grace:
And now I looked to be a Duke at least:
Artoise is slighted as a thing forgot,
But I have sent my Attendant to the Court,
And if he speed not, I shall prove as false
Edward to thee, as to my Native French.
The King is not at leisure
To listen to your suit; All his thoughts now
Are taken up to give the Palsgraue grace,
Who is come to Court, and means to Turney there
Treason run with them, or some d??ngerous plot,
Take life and being to destroy them both;
Must my affairs give place unto a Palgraue?
T'was I that quartered with the English Lyons,
The Arms of France, in opening Edwards Title,
Which but for me had in oblivion slept,
Then I was as the Palsgraue in his breast,
My sight his food, my saying his harts rest.
Who's that, that knock's look forth, &amp; bring vs word?
A couple of Gen???l???me?? would speak with you.
Let them com in, were they a pair of mischiefs,
They are welcome now. For I have thoughts like Held,
Black and confused.
These are the Gentlemen.
Our business is to you most noble Artoise,
The Emperor does salute you in this Letter,
And prays you by the Honour of an Earl,
You fail not to conjoin your aid with ours,
About some plot against his Enemies.
The Letter speaks the words, but names no plot.
Tic not devised as yet, but ere l??g great Caesar.
Will set it down, and send it to vs all.
Now as his Mightiness desires is this,
That you give shelter to vs while wee stay
For his Affairs in England, and your p??nsion
Which every year you have received from him,
Shall from henceforth be doubled with his love.
Caesar is gracious, and has my hart:
But were not you the Servants that attended
On the last Emperor that was made away,
And helped to send him to a timeless grave?
We were my Lord.
Let me embrace you in mine arms for that.
But that ill speed followed our hopes to day,
We had given a period to King Edwards life,
And to the Palsgraues.
Wee attempted it.
Habitat like Sailors, but our pistols failed,
And after long pursuit, our Robes thrown off,
We escaped with life.
And come to live with you.
Live here as safe as in a Fort of brass.
Such men I wished for to a sit my spleen,
Unto one mark all our affections tend.
And they both dye if that the Emperor send.
Did you ere see a better Tournament,
Or braver Runners then this day appeared
In the Tilt-yard?
The best that ere I saw.
What a brave Horse the Palsgraue rid upon,
And with what courage, nimbleness, and strength,
Did he unhorse his valiant opposites?
Spears flew in splinters, half the way to heaven,
And none that ran against him kept this saddle,
Except the King, and he demeand him well:
It joys my soul, that he has yet in store
Such manly vigour; and the peoples hearts
Were not a little glad.
Here they come all.
I fear you are ouer-wearied with our sports,
To speak the truth. I feel them troublesome,
Whether it be by discontinuancce or age, I know not,
But my breath grows short.
What Ok is ever strong? age makes Ioues tree,
The fairest King, and Emperor of the wood,
To bend it self, and bow his lofty arms
Downwards unto the earth that softred it.
No Caeder grows straight till his latest day:
As there's a weakness in their springing up,
So is there in their declination.
The middle age the luffy does express,
And there flows vigour, like a sea of strength,
Able to bear down what doth stand the stream:
Such is mine now, but as my years doe flow,
Like Oaks and Caeder??? they must straight bow low.
Sit by our side, and wear a Caesars wreath.
Victorious Edward keep it as your right,
And let it mingle with your Royal Crown,
That have deserved it in a field of war,
Not as tic mine, given for a Tournament.
It is our gift, and you shall wear it still,
Bring forth the other honour wee intend
Unto this thrice renowned Gentleman.
My gracious Liege here is the Garter ready.
Which to the Palsgraue we co??mand you bear,
Garter and Herald here presents your Honour
With the Order of the Garter, whence he takes
His Office and his Name, by our Decree:
This is a favour which no Foreign Prince
Ever enjoyed yet, but the time may come
When Kings in seeking it may be instald,
It was my Institution, and is worn
By none but the most Noble, and those few
Hereafter I will tell your Excellence
The Motive why the Order was deuisd':
Mean time his hand shall clasp it to your Leg,
For tic a custom which you must not break.
Your Highness honours me exceedingly.
You are now my Fellow-Knight, and you must swear,
To fight for Ladies,&amp; their Fems preserve,
But that wee leave to Deputation,
It shall suffice now, say on, paffe your word.
My Word and Oath, so please your Majesty,
The Motto, as I red it was in French,
Ho??????y, soit queen Mal y p???ns???:
Ill be his mead makes goodness an offence:
Or, Evil bee to him that evil thinks.
I have learnt the sense, the Order I will keep
Inviolate, by Hand and by my Sword;
And hope in time it shall as famous prove,
As that of Malta or Ierusalems.
The Bishops, Mints,&amp; Trier, sent fro?? France,
By the French King desire to be admitted.
With them associate comes the bold Poytiers,
But as I think hoe's no Ambassador.
Give them admittance.
We could not wish for a more brave assembly,
Then at this instant to give Audience.
Because the matter does concern our selves
Most mighty King of England, we have taken
This Embassy in hand, not sent by Caesar,
But from your Neighbour, the great King of France:
Who by vs first entreats, after enioynes
You take good heed how you the Palsgraue aide,
For that he says, and will maintain as much,
It were unjust now Caesar to depose,
Who by his valour, if all Titles fail,
Merits the honour of an Emperor.
And that he is peerless for his mind,
And haughty resolution through the world,
That none so well as hee deserves the stile,
And being invested in the dignity,
It were a dishonour great and Capital,
Now to constrain him to a lower place:
Which if you seek, heel shield from such disgrace.
Has France forgot our former victories,
That his Commission is so peremptory?
Or is it but the Stratagem of Caesar.
To blind vs with the Name of the French King?
And Iohn of France be ignorant of this,
Before we answer your proud Embassy,
Weel send Ambassadors to know the truth:
And if we be deceived by a trick,
Caesar shall know he has dishonourd vs.
I am a Frenchman, and a Peer of France,
My name Poyctiers,but no Ambassador.
Yet by the Honours that my sword hath won,
King Iohn of France delivered what they spake.
Being no Ambassador, why came you hither
To be a Spy, and to surueigh my Land?
A Spy, one of my blood without disguise,
Being the first Revealer of my self,
How can this hold King Edward to be true?
I use no Intelligence but with my sword:
Nor seek for other corners then deep wounds.
So if I come by any great mans hart
In honourable difference I surueigh it.
At whose hart aim you now, that you are come?
To justify an Embassage against me?
I say who wears the Germaine Diadem
Deserves it better then the best that's here;
Or any whom the English King, or thou
For private reasons would prefer to wear it,
And that it is not honour prompts you to it;
But secret pride, to have a person govern,
Which Palsgraue, thou might rule ambitiously.
Thou fowl-mouth'd sla??derer eat thy proud words up,
Wherewith thou hast asperst me; or my fury
Shall make thee curse this bold-faced impudence.
Come, Come, you cannot doe it.
Cannot.
Nor dare. Isle stand the fury of thy proudest shock,
Not fearing danger in so slight a Foe:
Should I put off these Masks,my wounds would fright,
And these wide mouths which I have got in war
Not half heald up, pronounce it in thy blood.
Thou art too weak to enter Arms with me.
Since mildness cannot temper your stern wrath,
But that your spline must vomit upon me.
Isle teach you Sir to have your tongue locked up.
By taking off your locke.
My hair torn off.
Who have we here? This is the haughty Saxon.
Grant me the co??bat Edward, of this Palsgraue.
He is a prince himself, &amp; knows his power.
Now by the honour of my Fathers house,
Saxon Isle meet thee in the Realm of France,
In the Kings Court, or place where thou were borne,
So I may have good Hostage, and fair play.
Now by my gage thou shalt.
This shall suffice.
I have your locke to me a better pledge.
I would I had thy head to counteruayle it.
A whirlwind be thy guide, and a rough Sea
Plague thee before thou come for my hairs loss,
Hell &amp; some Devil was author of this cross Exit Saxo??.
You have paid him soundly and deservedly.
But now to answer you in brief, tic thus,
The Palsgraue and our self will see the King
With expedition, where (if hee make good
The proud Injunction you have charged vs with,
We will lay wast his Country, and once more
Put France in hazard of a sound loss.
This Saxons brave, gives courage to vs all.
But Isle requite it with a Germaine brawl.
You are the cause next to disgrace the Palsgraue
For which I came. The Emperor greetes you well,
And would have noble Artoise lend his hand,
Both to cut off Bauaria and the King.
Where?
Here in England.
Or what place you will.
France is the safer for the Stratagem.
And Edward is determined to sail thither.
In France then give it birth.
Where if it sail Isle be the Palsgraues death.
The care of Kingdoms is a weighty charge
So is the care of children. But Loves care
Exceeds them all: That dries the blood of life
More then the Fever, though they burn like Fire:
And to submit it to the law of reason,
Makes reason folly, and discourse a Fool.
Then irresistible all ruling power
Revel in young men's hearts, and leave the old,
Or meddle with inferiors, not with Kings;
We should be privileged, because most high,
But what's a King unto a Deity?
Your Majesty called for a cup of wine.
I did fair creature,&amp; I thank your pains.
But when I view the colour of your lip.
And look on this, the wine me thinks looks pale:
You have a better luster in your eye,
Then any sparkel that can rise from hence:
The silver whiteness that adorns thy neck,
Sullies the plate, and makes the Napkin black.
Thy looking well, makes all things else look foul,
Being so fair in body, what's thy soul?
My soul and body are the gift of heave??,
And I will use them to my Makers praise:
If other service (great King)you require,
I am ready, attend your hearts desire.
I think sweet creature, what thy tongue has vtterd
Is distant many paces from thy heart.
My hearts desire, tic not in bending low,
After the officious custom of a Court:
Nor lies it in the use of common things,
To bring and take away; my hearts desire
Is to enjoy thee in another sort,
Which if thou yield unto, thou shalt be great,
Greatest in France, next, nay before my Queen:
For Isle find means to to take away her life,
So I may have thee as a second wife.
The Saint of France forbid it, &amp; all powers,
That have continued both so long together
In sacred rites of Marriage, heaven deny
I should be Author of her Tragedy:
Or give content where murder is opposed.
If I should yield, and your Queen made away,
Might you not use me so another day?
Tic fearful building upon any sin,
One mischief entered, brings another in:
The second pulls a third, the third draws more,
And they for all the rest set op the door:
Till custom take away the judging sense,
That to offend we think it no offence.
Wherefore my Lord, kill mischief while tic small,
So by degrees you may destroy it all.
Dive???e is thy discourse, like to thy beauty.
Does not Idolatrize, beauties a flower,
Which springs and withers almost in an hour:
Sickness impairs it, but death kills it quite,
It vades as fast as shadows in the night.
Why should your Grace call it Divinity?
There's nought divine, but that which cannot dye.
Least I offend by staying here too long,
Isle take my leave, and so curb in my tongue.
Speak still, Isle hear thee.
To our Sex tic bard,
We should be twice seen, ere we be once heard.
She'll never yield! why do I woo her then?
Because I cannot bridle my desires,
Nor sleep, nor cate, but as I dream of her:
Shoe's to me as my Genius, or my soul,
And more then they, because she governs them.
Some way Isle take, my freedom to recover:
That there's no physic made to cure a Lover!
My Lord.
My Love.
Yes.
Infortuna.
How! Infortuna?
I mistook thy name:
Yet now I think on it, I had busy thoughts
How I might raise that Virgin to some Honour,
And match her with some worthy Peer of France.
Your self my Lord in some Adulterate kind.
Nay then you wrong me, I meant virtuously;
Believe me Sweet I did, I love thee so,
No evil thought should make me wrong thy bed,
By this it shall not, this, and this, my Love.Kisses her.
You flatter me.
I love thee as I should:
What, we have lived together twenty years,
And never wronged each other, should I now
Be the first causer of the marriage breach?
Banish such thoughts, let all mistrust begone.
If she grow jealous, I am twice undone.
Isle have about with her, to find out all.
Within there.
Madame.
What Medea was it,
Of whom you learnt the Art of Sorcery,
To enchant a King, and draw him to your bed?
Think you, because you are my Maid of Honour,
Isle honour you so far, to have my Lord,
Thou shameless Callet? tic ingratitude,
Into my Husbands heart so to intrude.
I could have helped thee to a wealthy choice,
Had you spared mine; but now it cannot be,
For I must hate thee for thy treachery.
I am accused, that ought to be excused,
And blamed as one unchaste, for being chaste.
I Enchant the King, and use Medeas Art?
Witch-craft I have always hated with my heart:
And except Modesty a Circa be,
I know no other kind of Sorcery.
Your Highness sent me with a Cup of Wine
Unto the King, the occasion of his wooing;
Was it my fault to doe your Highness will?
Judge gracious Majesty but as you ought,
And doe not blame me for a Virgins trial:
His love was answered with a strong denial;
And so denied for ever shall he be,
That seeks by such means to dishonour me.
Before I wrong a Queen so truly kind,
Isle mar my face, and make my sad eyes blind.
In.
Weal consider farther of your tears:
Isle hau??? her watched, if she proves false, she dyes;
But if continue constant to the end,
Never had Lady a more Royal friend.
Since I was cast upon this fatal Rock,
And saw my Love dissevered by the waives,
And my kind Steward in the Ocean drowned,
Here I have lived, fed only with raw Fish,
Such as the Sea yields: and each Ship I see,
(As daily there are some furrow this way)
I call unto for aid, but ne'er the near.
Once asked me, What I was? I answered him,
An Englishman. Quoth he, Stay there and starve.
To the next that past, I said I was a French-borne.
Isle aid no French quoth he. Unto a third,
That I a Spaniard was. He bad me hang:
So that I know not what I ought to say,
Nor whom to speak to: but in happy time,
From this high Rock, I see a tall Ship come,
Furnished with all his Sails; and as it ploughs
The Ocean up, it raises hills of snow,
That fly on both sides as they did give way,
To make a valley for the Ship to pass.
Their Captain as I think looks upon me,
And has took notice of my waving hand.
Now the Ship turnesand this way ploughs amain,
As if it meant to run it self aground:
In happy time, now I shall be relieved.
It was here abouts the Gallant beckoned me,
He seems a person of some eminence,
By the glittering of his Suite against the Sun,
Cast Anchor here, and let vs question him.
Yonder he stands, mounted upon the rock.
The very same. What art thou, whats they name?
Thy place of birth, fortune, and parentage,
That thou art left upon this desolate shore?
And what require thou stranger at our hands?
As you are men, and therefore may be crossed,
Be favourable to a wretched man:
Know, that the Sea has cast me on this place,
Where I have led a discontented life,
Ere since the last storm, and no passenger
Has taken pity to remove me hence.
Though food I want not, cause the sea yields such,
I woul'd be shifted to a better place.
My name's Fitzwaters, by my birth a Lord:
My natural residence in England was,
Some of your company I have often seen,
Set me aland where dwell inhabitants,
And thankfully I will require your love.
Tic young Fytzw??????ers, pray f???r take him in.
You know my li????????? ????????? all Englishmen.
Since my disgrace, and shall I pity him?
But he's descended of a Noble house.
The more should I rejoice to see him dye.
Has valour.
Let him use it on the Rocks.
But every ????????? bears not your mind,
Some have been favourable to their foes.
And tic an honour in an enemy
To save where he may ???ill.
Your answer there?
You speak as you'd compel it.
In the honourable intercourse of men
I should doe so, and were you in my case,
You would enforce your own necessity.
What wold this Stranger be in prosperous state,
That bears so high a mind in his distress?
I would be as thou art, proud of nothing.
Is a Ship nothing?
As it anchors here
It bears a goodly show; but launched again,
And a stormerise, it may be cast aland
As I have been: nay worse, it may may be sunk,
And then what is it, but a fair something, nothing?
What is, and now is not; mans life, or a dream,
Now swimming, and then swallowed in the stream.
His words are piercing, some go take him in:
Come down, and be received into our Boat.
That shall be my charge.
Could wee draw this spirit
Into our plot, he would help to manage it
Unto the life, and I should take it better
Then yet I doe.
Persuasion may corrupt.
But be adjust'd how you persuade him to it.
And take his Oath at first for sacrifice,
We are no puny Politicians,
To be instructed in the rules of evil;
Here comes Fitzwaters.
Your hand.
And sword but that the Sea devoured it.
Know sir, we have business of import in hand,
Wherein our purpose is to crave your aid,
And as we sail to France weal open it.
I am yours in all things that are honourable.
Honourable be not, your shall do what we list.
Launch forth into the deep.
We did not think to have footed the French ground
A second time in such Hostility;
But when the conquered bears so proud a head,
Tic fit we make him stoop: yet least, the King
Be not himself, or be abused by any,
My Lord of Cullen, we entreat your pains
To enquire it out by our Ambassador,
as Mints and Trier his a say that our force
Might spoil his country, and make waste his land;
But that with French blood we have surfeited,
And therefore care not greatly to shed more.
Say, We will meet him at an interview,
There to discourse our griefs before we fight,
Where if he have wronged me, he shall doe me right.
I shall delat your Highness Embassy.
But say from me my sword ne'er drunk French
And therefore it is thirsty for their lives:
That are I leave the Continent of France,
Without good satisfaction from the King,
None of his Cavaliers shall were a locke,
Isle have them all cut off, and every year
Be paid in such a tribute for my wrongs.
As for proud Saxon, Say my word is kept,
And bid him warily respect his own:
The French Kings Palace shall not save his life,
Nor the best rampierd Bulwark in the Land,
Except he answer me as fits a Pee???e.
But to the Emperor, whats your will to him?
That as he run from Spain, he shall run hence,
Or I shall make him a poor Emperor.
His Bastard bravery tell him must go down,
And the legitimate wear Caesars Crown.
Fail not to utter every syllable
Both of the Palsgraues sending a???d our own.
I shall deliver both.
Tak't how they please,
If they fly hence, weal follow through the Seas.
I go.
High is this Embassy, like to your valour,
Which I admire, and love ardently;
That I could wish your presence all my days,
And think your company to me more sweet
Then mine own Kingdom, or my Crown besides.
Your love and Royal presence I desire.
and bold Fytzwaters, be it your charge,
Provided well of our best ships and Soldiers,
To sail to Germanie, and free our friends,
Kept as we hear there with a slender guard,
In a weak Castle.
Which weal soon beats down.
And bring them hither.
Or return no more.
March forwards to the place where weel en???camp
What should the reason be of this dissention
And why is young Fitz-waters froward thus?
His arguments are strong and forcible.
Single vs hither to the forest side,
Under pretense to plot more privately,
And now not only to mislike! our drifts,
But call vs punies, and unskilful men,
If shows a spleenful hatred to vs all.
Not unto all, but only to you two:
Why should the Earl and I borne a Lords son,
Join with a pair of base companions,
In such a weighty cause as a Kings death:
I know you'll say you have been physicians,
Sailor, and Soldiers, ??? and in such disguise,
Done some exploit that have deserved respect,
I grant as much, but yet your births are mean.
No gentry in your bloold was ever known
By natural Heraldry, your low descents
Disables vs, and we must seek to rise,
With others of our own condition.
Come Vandome, of our selves weal do the deed
That were the engrossing of the same from vs
And so you would have all the thanks your selves:
Neither comixed with vs, nor yet alone,
Shall it be acted, but as we are the best
In birth, and ablity to doe it,
Weal have the privilege of doing it:
And we should give it over.
To your betters.
Or having fit place, Artoise and my self,
Will kill you first, then cast you in the River.
Heespeakes what wee intend.
Intend your worse?
Caesar has promised him the Palsgraues place,
And I shall be the Marquess Brandenburgh:
Think you such Titles shall be lost by fear.
Our valour has been tried with worthy men,
And ere we loose the glory of the Act,
Vandome and I doe mean to use you so.
Theyle ne'er be honest.
Come Sir, are you ready?
Most resolute villains, how they would out???brave vs?
But noble Artoise, now the fire is give
The Cannon must go off.
Unto their deaths.
So they are dead, and now the Fame remains
Only to vs, that will accomplish it.
Only to me, that will perform't alone.
Thinks Artoise those were slain cause they are base?
Or that I wrought you to assist my plot,
Because you are of the Nobility?
No, I have still this Maxim in my thoughts,
That a Competitor, though ne'er so Noble,
Takes away half the same in every thing:
I could have opend this unto you all,
But that I thought my self too weak for three:
And therefore providently used thy strength,
To kill them first, that I might slay thee after.
Now they are dead, thy life must follow theirs,
And so I share the honour to my self:
I will be Palsgraue, Marquess Brandenburgh,
And the Bohemian King in me alone,
Caesar shall write himself three Friends in one.
I doe not think thou meanst to be a traitor.
Now you come near me, but that secrets mine,
And seeking i??? you must dig through my heart,
Or it will ne'er ???e found, it lies so close.
Isle know it, or a reason in your blood.
Wilt thou turn honest?
Doe not torture me,
With repetition of that Beggars name:
Whom none but Idiots, Innocents, or blocks
Will entertain.
I would change your mind
From this erroneous and ill boding thought,
Because of late you freed me from the rock,
But if it be so hurtful to your sight
Be your own death, Isle not reveal my mind.
If that I cannot force it with my sword,
Isle let it alone.
So lye together, three a pair Royal makes,
And here is a pair Royal of excellent Villains;
These have slain princes by their own confession,
These made a Nation swim in her own blood,
The stream is turned with you, it is now high flood:
But I must cast you all into the River.
Yea, swords and all, to clear me from suspect;
Suspect? by whom this place yields no such eye,
Tic well the worlds rid of their villainy.
His Highness here, then Floramell give back.
Tic she, a word; theres no retiring hence.
In vain you strive, my force opposde against yours,
Will easily subdue your women's strength,
But theres a power included in your eye
That conquers Kings, subdues a Deity.
And he that had the strength to rule those graces,
Might ne'er be caught, yet view the brightest faces:
One kiss, and Isle no more importune you.
On that condition, I will grant you one.
But you must give it me.
Dian forbid, that were immodesty.
It must be so.
Upon your Kingly Oath,
Never hereafter to renew your suit.
Now by my crown I swear.
Take it.
Tic done:
And with this kiss, a second Fire begun,
More ardent are my thoughts now then before:
Ilou'd thee well, but now I love thee more.
Thou shalt not leave me, but for ever dwell,
Where I abide, thy absence is my hell.
Think on your Oath.
At Lovers perjury, the Gods themselves doe wink.
A king say so, pardon me sir, your will Isle not obey.
But your oath broken mainly run a away.
So, so, so: This is the affection that you bear to me?
Thinks the French King Isle not revenge this wrong?
As I am Queen of France, Isle make her know,
What tic to be corival in my Love:
She dyes by Heaven.
If thou but spoil a hair,
Or shed one drop of her celestial blood
For any curtsy I have offered her,
My wrath shall: as a fury haunt the deed.
And Isle torment thee for such cruelty,
Worse then the damned in the world below.
I seeldome threaten, but I doe it straight,
Her death thy Hell, look too't, tic a shrewd fate.
Hee ever yet was sovereign of his word,
What shall I doe, brooke this corri???alship?
No, since I cannot in the Realm of France,
Have the revenge my longing heart desires,
Else-where Isle seek it, I of late behold
An English Lord in favour at the Court,
His Name Fitzwaters, and I love him well:
By his procurement I will lay a plot,
To yield King Iohn unto his enemies,
So to obtain my purpose, if it take
How ever Fools may think to project ill,
It likes me well, because I have my will.
What are you?
An Englishman &amp; a traveller; what are you?
A Frenchman, and no traveller.
Then give way; For I am the better man.
The better man?
I, the better man, by the porambulation of 2. or 3. thousand miles, I have seen the great Turk borrow Money, and never mind the repayment ont.
Peuh, is that all? we have a number of great Christians that will doe so, and when a man comes to demand his own somewhat holdly, hee shall be com???meted to prison, or made a Fool, to stand waiting at the foredore where the Coach stands, whiles the Lord steals out at the backe-dore by water.
First possible?
That our Tradesmen can tell, to their great hindrance, &amp; I my self know this, that being in pouert???ie, a Lord called me by my name thrice, but hee would not remember it once, when hee came to his Lands.
The reason is, least thou should beg some of his New-liuing.
Nay rather for fear of paying the old score.
Sure thou art some N???k???emans bastard, thou can tell their tricks so right.
And by some great woman: For I can tell you their tricks too.
As how?
Your only fine Lady is wantonness, &amp; new Fashions, your Citizens wife gallops after. But she is not so well horsed to overtake her.
Now wee are in the discourse of women, What Countrey-women doest thou love best?
I love none.
I love all, and to kiss them after the fashion of all Nations.
Why I pray sir, doe not all Nations kiss alike?
You are no Traveller, and therefore Isle bear with your ignorance: but know this, your Spaniard, as hee is proud, hee kisses proudly, as if hee scorned the touch of a Ladies lip; marry you Frenchmen draw it in, as if hee would swallow her alive: Now the Itali???an has soon done with the upper parts, to be tickling of the lower: and we Englishmen can never take enough at both ends.
Is not your name Moister doe much?
It is, and yours (I think should be Mon???sieur doe little.
Wee ere somewhat a kin in the first part of our names, and I pray heartily let vs be better acquainted together.
You must doe as I doe then, and since we were both appointed, to wait here for the French Queens coming, lets take her gold, and forswear our selves.
Here comes her Majesty.
Are you resolved to undergo this charge? Tic but an Oath, which I will guild with Crowns,
And bear you out against the Law.
I can doe little being so animated, if I should not forswear my self, for so fair a Queen.
And Isle doe as much as your Majesty will have me doe.
Take this in earnest, and when tic done, you shall have more.
Wee will.
And from this time forwards, let vs bee forsworn brothers.
Content. 
Isle instruct you: Here comes Fitzwaters.
According to your Majesties command,
I come to know your pleasure for the Letter
I should deliver to the English King,
With that base strumpet that has Injured you.
There is the Letter, which I charge you bear unto King Edward, and assure his Grace I will perform what I have promised in it, Isle send the strumpet to you instantly.
I know not by what influence I am fallen
Into the affection of this potent Queen:
But she has sworn she loves me as her soul:
And to enjoy me in her amorous Bed,
Would spend the revenues of the Crown of France
Were it her own: Isle temporise with her,
To effect some plot upon my Sovereigns foes,
But she shall know, Although she love me well,
My hearts desires were drowned with Floramell.
By all descriptions this should be the man,
To whom I am directed by the Queen;
But whom doe I behold the young Fytzwaters?
Tic she, Oh no, shees in the Ocean drowned,
No; She escaped it seems as well as I.
But I will take no acquaintance of my Love,
Till she has cleared her from the Queens suspect.
It is not meet I take acquaintance first,
Nor will I till I know a just cause why,
Of his Familiar dealings with the Queen,
Here is the key her Highness promised you.
And you the prisoner to be safe locked up,
For your incontinence and wanton life.
You doe me wrong, I hate incontinence,
Nor did I ever love a wanton life:
I am a desolate Lady, shipwrecked here,
And had a Husband once, too like thy looks,
But not of such a rude condition.
Oh were hee present, and should hear thee speak
Such boisterous terms against his honoured wife,
He would out of the virtue of his mind
Knowing my conversation to be good,
Write this base slander in thy villains blood.
So confident, her innocence is great,
That can doe this sincerely without tricks:
But if you be the same that you would seem,
How comes that your reputations grown,
Into such scandal, and your name the theme,
Of every idle fellow in the Court?
That Grooms report, fair Unfortunate is:
The French Kings love; Nay worse his concubine.
The voice of men is held the voice of God:
And where an evil is so far proclaimed,
The generality approves the guilt,
And shees unworthy to survive a minute,
To be the separation of two hearts,
Made one by Marriage.
Kill me, kill me then.
Having my sentence, wherefore am I spared?
Or doe you take delight to torture me?
Before you serve the Execution???
The Law requires no more but death for L???st.
The lingering is a no?????? of Tyranny.
It is sufficient that the wretch must die,
The sooner done, the lesser cruelty.
But if your conscience urge you to forbear,
I shall confute your worthless Arguments,
And tell you in the pureness of my soul,
Report's a liar, common talk a Fool.
Waiters &amp; Grooms, light-headed like their plumes,
And those that doe attend in Princes Courts,
Too active and quicke-witted to deprave
A Courting they proclaim for a consent,
A favour for the deed, believe them not:
It is too common, this they hourly doe,
And think none chaste, but her whom none did wo??????,
But you did kiss the King.
The Queen did see it,
Urged by constraint, and Kingly violence.
Upon condition hee should woo no more:
And for that kiss I am esteemed a whore:
If you believe I am, I pray proceed,
I kissed the King, doe you a murderous deed.
Rise, rise, hereafter the discourse Isle tell,
Mean time Fytzwaters welcomes Floramell.
So then I am honest by your own con???fession,
But ere I entertain you as a Husband,
Isle be resolved what Love has past between
The Queen and you, that you her Agent are,
In such a weighty cause as is my life.
Runs the stream this way, is the wind turned thus?
I must know all.
In sight of Heaven I vow
She is as chaste for any lust from me,
As unborn Infants, and I use her love,
But to acuance my soueraig???e and his Realm.
No other case by honour I p???o???e???t,
In sign whereof I oppose ???n innocent breast
Against the sword: if you believe not, kill,
But never man died for a lesser ill.
I am satisfied, rise love, and let vs go,
Theres no true joy without some taste of woe.
Prosperity I think was borne in France,
Tic so ????????????ipuious unto all our act???;
And like ??? subject waits upon our will:
To morrow is this happy interview,
In which Fitz-waters and the Earl of Art???ise,
Have promised to surprise the English King,
And the ambitious Palsgraue.
If it take,
We shall have cause to praise our happiness.
Take, out of all surmise: and in my thoughts
It is as good already as performed.
I think no less.
It is most probable.
Where is the Queen she promised vs a mask?
The ?????????.
Be Jovial Caesar: mitrth began the night:
And we will end it with the like delight.
We are beholding to you Gentlemen,
For this your Court-ship, pray discover now.
We will, and make you all die prisoners.
King Edward here?
The Palsgraue.
All our foes.
Whose plot was this?
Or is it not a Dream?
Tic such a Dream you'll never wake?? from?
To talk of this strange admiration,
Which like the night hovers on every eye:
Know that I have deluded you with hopes
Vain, like those villains, which my sword did kill,
And by a Letter to the King delivered,
Sent by your Queen, to be revenged for lust,
I caused his Majesty to enter thus.
I received them in at the back G???te.
Wheres the Lady that has wronged the Queen???
Here is my trow???h-plight wi???e,
Freer from that soul imputation,
Then is her Majesty from jealousy.
Is she then chaste?
Isle answer for the Virgin,
By my good Fortunes once, now by my beard,
She is as nobly virtuous of a stranger,
As ere I knew, and though I sought her love,
I ne'er obtained it.
No, where is my witness?
Son, c???ll them in.
What can you swear?
What must hee swear?
Isle swear that the Lady is a good Lady,
The Queen a good Queen??? th???rs an end of swearing.
Is this all?
And more then you should get of me, but that the Queen gave vs gold to say something: but who have we here s???rr???h?
Players, by this light players: Oh I love a play with all my heart.
Begin, begin, we are set.
Thats a brave King.
Thats a brave boy that plays the Queens part.
He shall be my Juggler.
And when the ploy's don, Isle be at charges
To bid them all to supper.
Away with them.
I am very sleepy.
Would I were a bed,
Isle lead you thither.
God a mercy good Chamberlain.
The ploy's done, and now we must go home. Farewell.
But shall the stream turn, this way is my plot
Become so weak? you will believe a Subject
Before a Queen? I have out-shot my self,
In seeking Justice at an enemies hand:
This is a cross beyond the strength of brain;
Sure I shall end my days in Lunacy,
Like one to whom due vengeance is denied,
Because of weakness, on my self Isle turn
The fury that should light upon my foe,
Scatter my hair, like chafe before the wind,
Hell in this world dwells in a jealous mind,
Our revelling has struck day out of night,
And bright Aurora ushers forth the Sun
To his diurnal course; yet neither night,
Day, nor the morning, with her flaring beams,
Can stir up valour in this Saxons breast:
What, is thy mind made captive with thy body?
Or think thou that I take advantages
Where honour should be showed, Ime still my self
Ready to give an answer to thy challenge
As at the first, and if thou conquerst me,
By my Achievements I will set thee free.
You show your self in this a Noble foe,
And I receive more honour then I hoped:
I thought, because I was your prisoner,
You had esteemed captive???e ??? cong??????st.
But since you have awa???ed ??????eeping valour,
And given your Captive such a privilege?
I am the same bold combatant to dare,
And doe as much as erst I did intend.
Choose your own Weapons, and Isle meet you straight.
My Armour there.
Clinton and bold Fits??????ters are arrived,
And bring with them releast from servitude
Brandenberg, Sa??????y, and Bohemia.
Guide them in.
Those with our selves, we humbly doe present unto your Majesty.
Such as our Swords by a glorious victory set free.
When Heaven is pleased to give prosperity, How it flows in ??? welcome my honoured Friends: I am glad your thraldomes prove your liberty.
The King of England has been always kind.
I have ever found it so.
And so have I.
Whom doe I fee? my Son that stole my Bride? As you respect my service (gracious King) Let me have Justice.
Clinton kneels with him.
To their great service, greater I oppose,
And doe beseech your Highness wrong me not.
Wrong thee?
I wrong me, may not King??? doe wrong? Or dare you think because you are my Father, Isle loose my wife.
Daughter come from him, least I force you hither.
Father I may not.
Fathers both she shall not.
Weal heate no???ie???e of these bold menaces
On pain of death I charge you both forbear:
And let my censure sway this difference.
In England as your house the Bishop told me
That Clintons Daughter by a pre-contract,
Was young Fytzwaters wife, and that some trick
Betwixt the Fathers to preserve their wealth,
Broke off the match, to have him wed the old.
This being true; I charge you on your lives
Urge him no further in his lawful choice,
But as it was wrong enough to hinder it,
Make him amends, by being reconcilde,
Which I entreat upon a du???ious knee.
And so doe I.
Rise, rise, I am friends with you both, and
When my Angers over you shall find me a kind Father.
So shall you.
All lets are now removed, I am truly happy.
The Combatants are ready.
Guide them in.
Idle are words where we must use our swords,
Yet that it may appear what minds we bear,
Now we are marched into this dreadful Lists,
Know that this day my Honour shall exceed.
Or I lye breathless where I set my foot.
Were thy breast Marble,&amp; thy ribs of brass,
Saxon will have the superiority,
Or in this dreadful place, his life expires.
Sound trumpets, &amp; the destinies guide all.
The Palsgraue is invincible I think.
Not to be overcome.
Nor to be ta???id by any.
Matchless, and far beyond the praise of words, are all thy actions, let me honour thee.
Our Friends returned in safety cheers more
Caesar resign your Title vntyo S?????????y, and Sa???uoy, fit you up, whilst the doctors hear join all their hands to make thee Emperor.
????????? as the first.
And to get your love,
We will disgrace our selves to honour him.
Receive the Crown, but as hee wear??? the same may it crush out his brains.
Long live and happily the ????????? Caesar.
As happily as your kinded loves have made me.
And long as please the Heauend.
Your fare????????? rights ????????? perf??????t ?????? with State in Germane???, whither I make the Majesty of England, and all our F???ie???ds.
Isle bear you company.
Fair winds and prosperous ?????? our several
Realms, wee wish and pray for, tic not our least good
To be the Favourites of the wa??????ng Flood.

OUR long time rumor'd Hog, so often crossed
By unexpected accidents, and tossed
From one house to another, still deceiving
Many men's expectations, and bequeathing
To some lost labour, is at length got loose,
Leaving his servile yoake-sticke to the goose,
Hath a Knights licence, and may rauage at pleasure,
Spite of all those that envy our Hogs treasure:
And thus much let me tell you, that our Swine
Is not as divers Crittickes did define,
Grunting at State affairs, or inuecting
Much, at our City vices; no, nor detecting
The pride, or fraud, in it, but were it now
He had his first birth, wit should teach him how
To tax these times abuses, and tell some
How ill they did in running oft from home,
For to prevent (O men more hard then flint)
A matter that shall laugh at them in print:
Once to proceed in this play we were mindless,
Thinking we lived amongst Jaws that loved no swines flesh:
But now that troubles past, if it deserve a hiss,
(As questionless i• will through our amiss,)
Let it be favoured by your gentle sufferance,
Wise-men are still endued with patience,
Wee are not half so skilled as strolling Players,
Who could not please here as at Country faiers,
We may be pelted off for ought we know,
With apples, eggs, or stones from thence below;
In which weal crave your friendship if we may,
And you shall have a dance worth all the play,
And if it prove so happy as to please,
Weal say tic fortunate like Pericles.
HOe, Whose within here?
Ha ye any money to pay you knock with such authority sir?
What if I have not, may not a man knock without money sir?
Seldom, women and Seriaunts they will not put it up so sir.
How say you by that sir, but I prithee is not this one At∣las his house a Porter?
I am the rent payer thereof.
In good time sir.
Not in good time, neither sir, for I am behind with my Land-lord a year and three quarters at least.
Now if a man would give but observance to this fell∣lowes prating, a would weary his ears sooner then a Barber, dee hear sir, lies there not one Haddit a gentleman at this house?
Here lies such a gentleman sir whose clothes (were they not greasy) would be speak him so.
Then I pray sir when your leisure shall permit, that you would vouchsafe to help me to the speech of him.
We must first crave your oath, sir that you come not with intent to molest, perturb, or endanger him, for he is a gent. whom it hath pleased fortune to make her tennis ball of, and therefore subject to be struck by every fool inro hazard.
In that I commend thy care of him, for which friendship here is a slight reward, tell him a Country man of his, one Light∣foot is here, and will not any way despair of his safety.
With all respect Sir, pray command my house.
So, now I shall have a sight of my Cousin gallant, he that hath consumed 800. pound a year, in as few years, as he hath cares on his head: He that was wont never to be found without 3, or 4, pair of red breeches, running before his horse, or coach. He that at a meal, hath had more several kinds, then I think the Arc contained: He that was admired by niters, for his robes of gallantry, and was indeed all that an elder brother might be, prodigal, yet he, whose unthriftiness kept many a house, is now glad to keep house in a house, that keeps him the poor tent of a porter, and see his appearance, Isle seem strange to him.
Cousin Lightfoote how dost, welcome to the City,
Who calls me Cousin, wheres my Cousin Haddit, hes surely putting on some rich apparel, for me to see him in. I ha bin thinking al the way I came up, how much his company will Credit me.
My name is Haddit Sir, and your kinesman, if parents may be trusted, and therefore you may please to know me bet∣la, when you see me next.
I prithee fellow stay, is it possible thou should be he, why he was the generous spark of men's admiration.
I am that spark Sir, though now raked up in ashes,
Yet when it pleases fortunes chops to blow
Some gentler gale upon me, I may then,
From forth of embers rise and shine again,
O by your versifying I know you now sir, how dost, I knew thee not at first, thart very much altered.
Faith and so I am, exceeding much since you saw me last, about eight hundred pound a year; but let it pass, for pas∣sage carried away the most part of it, a plague of fortune
That'st more need to pray to fortune then curse her, she may be kind to thee when thou art penitent, but that I fear will be never.
O no, if she be a woman, sheele ever love those that hate her, but cozen thou art thy fathers first-borne, help me but to some means, and Isle redeem my mortgaged lands with a wench to boot.
As how I pray thee?
Marry thus, Hog the Usurer hath one only daughter.
Is his name Hog, it fits him exceeding well, for as a hog in his life time is always denouring, and never common∣dious in aught till his death, even so is he whose goods at that time may be put to many good uses.
And so I hope they shall before his death, this daugh∣la of his, did, and I think doth loom, but I then thinking my self worthy of an Empress, gave but slight respect unto her favour, for that her parentage sem'd not to equal my high thoughts, puffed up,
With Tobacco surely,
No but with as bad a weed, vain glory.
And you could now be content, to put your lofty spirits into the lowest pit of her favour: Why what means will serve man, Sfoote if all I have will repair thy fortunes, it shall fly at thy command,
Thanks good Cos, the means shall not be great, on∣lie that I may first be clad in a generous outside, for that is the chief attraction, that draws female affection; good parts without any habiliments of gallantry, are no more set by in these times, then a good leg in a woollen stocking: No, tic a glistening presence and audacity brings women into fools felicity.
Yaue a good confidence Cos, but what deendien your brave outside shall effect.
That being had wele to the Usurer where you shall of∣fer some slight piece of land to mortgage, and if you doe it to bring our selves into cash, it shall be ne'er the farther from you, for here is a project will not be frustrate of this purpose.
That shall be shortly tried, He instantly go seek for a habit for thee and that of the richest too, that which shall not be subject to the scoff of any gallant, though to the accompli∣shing thereof all my means goes: Alas whats a man unless he wear good clothes.
Good speed attend my suite, here is a never seen No∣phewe kind in distress, this gives me more cause of admiration then the loss of xxxv. settings together at Passage. I when tic performed, but words and deeds are now more different then Puritans and Players.
Here is the Player would speak with you.
About the Jig, I promised him, my pen and ink, I prithee let him in, there may be some Cash rim'd out of him.
The Muses assist you sir, what at your study so early.
O chiefly now sir for) aurora musis amicat)
Indeed I understand not latin sir.
You must then pardon me, good M. Chaunge-coate, for I protest vntee it is so much my often converse, that if there be none but women in my company, yet cannot I forbear it.
That shows your more learning sir, but I pray you is that small matter done I entreated for.
A small matter, you'll find it worth Megge of West∣minster, althouh it be but a bare Jig.
O lord sir, I would it had but half the taste of garlic.
Garlic stinks to this, prove that you have not more whores to see this, then ere Garlic had. say I am a boaster of mine own works, disgrace me on the open stage, and bob me off with ne'er a penny.
O lord sir, far be it from vs, to debar any worthy writer of his merit; but I pray you sir, what is the title you be∣stow upon it?
Marry that which is full as forcibly as Garlic, the name of it is who buys my four ropes of hard Onions, by which four ropes is meant four several kind of livers, by the onions hangers on, as at some convenient time I will more par∣ticularly inform you in so rare a hidden and obscure a mystery.
I pray let me see the beginning of it, I hope you have made no dark sentence in it, for Isle assure our audience com∣monly very simple idle-headed people, and if they should hear what they understand not, they would quite forsake our house.
O ne'er fear it, for what I have writ is both witty to the wise, and pleasing to the ignorant; for you shall have these laugh at it far more heartily that understand it not, then those that doe.
Me think the end of this staff is a foot too long.
O no, sing it but in tune, and I dare warrant you.
Why hear ye,
And you that delight in truls and minions,
Come buy my four ropes of hard S. Thomas onions: Look you there S. Thomas might very well have been left out, besides, hard should have come next the onions,
Fie no, the dismembering of a rime to bring in reason shows the more efficacy in the writer.
Well as you please, I pray you sir what will the gratuity be, I would content you as near hand as I could.
So I believe,
Why M. Change-coate, I do not suppose we shall differ many pounds, pray make your offer, if you give me too much, I will most Doctor of Phicke like restore.
You say well, look you sir, theres a brace of angels, besides much drink of free cost if it be liked.
How M. Change-coate a brace of angels besides much drink of free cost if it be liked, I fear you have learned it by heart, if you have powdered up my plot in your sconce, you may home sir and instruct your Poet over a pot of ale, the whole me∣thode on it, but if you do so juggle, look too't Shrouetuseday is at hand, and I have some acquaintance with Bricklayers and Playsterers.
Nay, I pray sir be not angry, for as I am a true stage∣trotter,
I mean honestly and look ye, more for your love then otherwise, I give you a brace more.
Well, good words doe much, I cannot now be angry with you, but see henceforward, you doe like him that would please a new married wife, show your most at first, least some o∣there come between you and your desires, for I protest had you not suddenly shown your good nature, another should have had it though t'ad bin for nothing.
Troth I am sorry I gave you such cause of impatience, but you shall see hereafter if your invention take, I will not stand off for a brace more or less, desiring I may see your works before another.
Nay before al others, and shotly expect a notable piece of matter such a Jig whose tune with the natural whistle of a carman, shall be more ravishing to the ears of shopkeepers then a whole consort of barbors at midnight.
I am your man for it, I pray you command al the kind∣ness belongs to my function, as a box for your friend at a new play although I procure the hare of all my company.
No Isle pay for it rather, that may breed a mutiny in your whole house.
I care not, I ha plaid a Kings part any time these ten years, if I cannot command such a matter it were poor in faith.
Well Moister change coat you shall now leave me, for Isle to my study, the morning hours are precious and my muse meditates most upon an empty stomach.
I pray sir when this new invention is produced let not me be forgotten.
Isle sooner forget to be a Jig maker.
So here is four angels I little dreamt of Nay and there bee money to be gotten by foolery, I hope fortune will not see me want.
What was my country cos here since.
Why did he promise to come again seeing how the case stood wye.
Ye and to advance my down fallen fortunes Atlas.
But ye are not sure a meant it ye when he spake it.
No nor is it in man to conjecture rightly the thought by the tongue.
Why then isle believe it when I see it, if you had been in prosperity when a had promised you this kindness,
I had not needed it.
But being now you doe, I fear you must go without it.
If I doe Atlas be it so, Isle en go write this rime over my beds head.
Ʋndone by folly, fortune lend me more,
Can thou, and wilt not, pox on such a where,
And so isle set up my rest, but see Atlas here is a little of that that dambs Lawyers, take it in part of a further recompense.
No pray keep it, I am conceited of your better fortunes, and therefore will stay out that expectation.
Why if you will you may, but the surmounting of my fortunes is as much to be doubted, as he whose estate lies in the lottery, desperate.
But ne'er despair sfoote why should not you live as well as a thousand others, that were change of taffeta, whose means were never anything.
Yes cheating, theft, and pandarising, or may be flattery, I have maintained some of them my self, but come hast aught to breakfast.
Yes theres the fagg end of a leg of mutton,
There cānot be a sweeter dish, it has Cost money the dres∣sing.
At the barbours you mean.
This is the greene, and this the chamberwindow, and see appointed light stands in the casement, the ladder of ropes set orderly, yet he that should ascend, slow in his hast, is not at yet come hither.
Were any friend that lives but Carracus
I'd try the bliss which this fine time presents.
Appoint to carry hence so rare an heir,
And be so slack sfoote a doth move my patience,
Would any man that is not void of sense
Not have watched night by night for such a prise,
Her beauties so at tractiue, that by heaven,
My heart half grants to doe my friend a wrong,
Forgo these thoughts for Albert be not slave
To thy affection doe not falsify
Thy faith to him, whose only friendships worth
A world of women, hee is such a one,
Thou can not live without his good.
A is and was ever, as thine own harts blood,
Sfoot see she beckons me for Carracus,
Shall my base purity, cause me neglect,
This present happiness, I will obtain it,
Spite of my timorous Conscience, I am in person,
Habit and all so like to Carracus,
It may be acted, and near called in question.
Hist Carracus ascend.
All is as clear as in our hearts we wished.
Nay, if I go not now, I might be gelded in faith.
Albert ascends, and being on the top of the ladder, puts outs the candle.
O love why doe so.
I heard the steps of some coming this way,
Did you not hear Albert pass by as yet.
Nor any Creature pass this way this hour.
Then hee intends just at the break of day,
To lend his trusty help to our departure:
Tic yet two hours time thither, till when lets rest,
For that our speedy flight will not yield any.
But I fear we possessing of each others presence, shall overslip the time, will your friend call.
Just at the instant, fear not of his Care:
Come then dear Carracus, thou now shalt rest,
Upon that bed, where fancy oft hath thought thee;
Which kindness until now, I ne'er did grant thee,
Nor would I now, but that thy loyal faith
I have so often tried, even now,
Seeing thee come to that most honoured end,
Through all the dangers, which black night presents,
For to convey me hence and marry me.
If I doe not doe so, then hate me ever,
I doe believe thee, and will hate thee never.
How pleasing are the steps we lovers make,
When in the paths of our content wee pace,
To meet our longings: what happiness it is
Man to love. But oh, what greater bliss
To love, and be beloved: O what one virtue,
Ere raignd in me, that I should be enriched,
With all Earths good at once, I have a friend,
Selected by the heavens, as a gift,
To make me happy, whilst I live one earth,
A man so rare of goodness, firm of faith,
That Earths Content must vanish in his death.
Then for my love, and mistress of my soul,
A maid of rich endowments, beautified
With all the virtues nature could bestow
Upon mortality, who this happy night
Will make me gainer of her heavenly self,
And see how suddenly I have attained,
To the abode of my desired wishes;
This is the greene, how dark the night appears.
I cannot hear the tread of my true friend,
Albert, hist Albert, hes not come as yet,
Nor is thappointed light set in the window.
What if I call? Maria, it may be
She feared to set a light, and only harkeneth
To hear my steps, and yet I dare not call,
Least I betray my self, and that my voice,
Thinking to enter in the ears of her,
Be of some other heard: no I will stay
Until the coming of my dear friend Albert.
But now think Carracus, what the end will be
Of this thou dost determine, thou art come
Hither to Rob a father of that wealth,
That soly lengthens his now drooping years,
His virtuous daughter, and all of that sex left,
To make him happy in his aged days,
The loss of her, may cause him to despair,
Transport his ne'er decaying sense to frenzy,
Or to some such abhorred inconvenience,
Whereto frail age is subject, I do too il in this,
And must not think but that a fathers plaint,
Will move the Heavens, to power forth misery.
Upon the head of disobedience.
Yet reason tells vs, parents are oreseene,
When with two strict a reine they do hold in,
Their child's affections, and control that love,
Which the high powers divine inspires them with,
When in their shallowest judgements they may know
Affection crossed, brings misery and woe:
But whilst I run contemplating on this,
I softly pace to my desired bliss,
Isle go into the next field, where my friend,
Told me the horses were in readiness.
But do not stay, what if you find not Albert,
Isle then return alone to fetch you hence,
If you should now deceive me, having gained, what you men seek for.
Sooner isle deceive my soul, and so I fear I have.
At your first call I will descend.
Till when, this touch of lips be the true pledge, of Carracus constant true devoted love,
Be sure you stay not long, farewell,
I cannot lend an ear to hear you part,
But you did lend a hand unto my entrance.
How have I wronged my friend, my faith full friend,
Robbed him of whats more precious then his blood,
His earthly heaven th'unspotted honour,
Of his soule-ioying Mistress, the fruition of whose bed,
I yet am warm of, whilst dear Carracus,
Wanders this cold night, through th'unsheltering field,
Seeking me treacherous man, yet no man neither,
Though in an outward show of such appearance,
But am a Devil indeed, for so this deed.
Of wronged love and friendship rightly makes me,
I may compare my friend, to one that's sick,
Who lying on his death-bed, calls to him,
His dearest thought friend and bids him go,
To some rare gifted man that can restore,
His former health, this his friend sadly hears,
And vows with protestations to fulfil,
His wished desires, with his best performance,
But then no sooner seeing that the death,
Of his sick friend, would ad to him some gain.
Goes not to seek a remedy to save,
But like a wretch hides him to dig his grave,
As I have done for virtuous Carracus,
Yet Albert be not reasonless, to endanger,
What thou moist yet secure, who can detect,
The crime of thy licentious appetite,
There ones pace tic surely Carracus.
Not find my friend, sure some malignant planet,
Rules ore this night, and envying the content,
Which I in thought possess, debars me thus,
From what is more then happy, the loved presence of a dear friend and love,
Tic wronged Carracus by Alberts baseness,
I have no power now to reveal my self,
The horses stand at the appointed place,
And nights dark coverture, makes firm our safety,
My friend is surely fallen into a slumber,
On some bank hereabouts, I will call him,
Friend, Albert, Albert.
What ere you are that call, you know my name.
I, and thy heart dear friend:
O Carracus, you are a slow paced lover.
Your credit had been touched, had I not been:
As how I prithee Albert:
Why I excusd you to the fair Maria;
Who would have thought you else, a slack performer.
For coming first under her chamber window,
She heard me tread, and called upon your name,
To which I answered with a tongue like yours:
And told her, I would go to seek for Albert,
And straight return.
Whom I have found, thanks to thy faith, and heaven.
But had not she a light, when you came first?
Yes but hearing of some Company,
She at my warning, was fore't to put it out:
And had I bin so too, you and I too had still bin happy.
See we are now come to the chamber window.
Then you must call, for so I said I would,
Maria.
My Carracus, are you so soon retournd?
I see, you'll keep your promise.
Who would not doe so, having past it thee,
Cannot be framed of aught but treachery:
Fairest descend, that by our hence departing,
We may make firm the bliss of our content.
Is your friend Albert with you?
Yes, and your servant honoured Lady.
Hold me from falling Carracus.
I will do now so; but not at other times.
You are merry sir:
But what do ye intend with this your scaling ladder,
To leave it thus, or put it forth of sight?
Faithts no great matter which:
Yet we will take it hence, that it may breed
Many confused opinions in the house
Of your escape here: Albert you shall bear it:
It may bee you may chance to practise that way;
Which when you do, may your attempts so prove
As mine have done, most fortunate in love.
May you continue ever so:
But its time now to make some hast to horse:
Night soon will vanish: O that it had power
For ever to exclude day from oureies,
For my looks then will show my villainy:
Come fair Maria the troubles of this night,
Are as forerunners to ensuing pleasures,
And noble friend although now Carracus
Seems in the gaining of this beauteous prise,
To keep from you so much of his loved treasure,
Which ought not be mixted, yet his heart
Shall so far strive in your wished happiness,
That if the loss and ruin of it self can but avail your good
O friend, no more, come, you are slow in haste,
Friendship ought never be distrust in words,
Till all her deeds be finished, who looking in a book,
And reads but some part only, cannot judge
What pray so the whole deserves, because his knowledge
Is grounded but on part, as thine friend is
Ignorant of that black mischief I have done thee.
Carracus I am weary, are the horses far?
No fairest, we are now even at them:
Come, do you follow Albert?
Yes I do follow, would I had done so ever,
And ne'er had gone before.
What hath not my young lord Wealthy been here this morning?
No in very deed sir, is a towardly young gentleman, shall a have my young Mistress, your daughter, I pray you sir?
I that a shall Peter, she cannot be matched to greater honour and riches in all this Country; yet the peevish girl makes coy of it, she had rather affect a Prodigal, as there was Hadit, one that by this time cannot be otherwise then hanged, or in some worse estate, yet she would have had him, but I praise my stars she went without him though, I did not without 's lands it was a rare mortgage Peter?
As ere came in parchment, but see, here comes my young lord.
Morrow father Hog, I come to tel you strange news, my sister is stolen away to night, tic thought by Necromancy, what Necromancy is, I leave to the readers of the seven cham∣peons of chistendome.
But is it possible your sister should be stolen, sure some of the household servants were confederates in it.
Faith, I think they would have confessed then, for I am sure my lord and father hath put them all to the bastinado twice this morning already, not a wayting-woman but has been stowed in faith.
Trust me a says well for the most part.
Then my lord your father is far impatient.
Impatient, I ha seen the picture of Hector in a Haber∣dashers shop, not look half so furious, he apprares more la∣rible then wilde fire at a play. But father Hog, when is the time your daughter and I shall to this wedlock druggery.
Troth my lord when you please, shoe's at your dispo∣sure, and I rest much thankful that your Lordship will so high∣lie honour me, she shall have a good portion my lord, though no∣thing in respect of your large revenues; call her in Peter, tel her my most respected lord Welthies here, to whose presence I will now commit her, and I pray you my Lord, prosecute the gain of her affectation with the best affecting words you may, and so I bid good morrow to your lordship
Moreover, father Hog, to prosecute the gain of her affectation with the best affecting words, as I am a Lord, a most rare phrase: well I perceive age is not altogether ignorant, though many an old Justice is so.
How now Peter is thy young mistress up yet?
Yes indeed shoe's an early stirrer, and I doubt not here∣after, but that your lordship may say shoe's abroad before you can rise.
Faith and so she may, for tic long ere I can get up when I go soxt to bed; but Peter has she no other suitors besides my self.
No and it like your lordship, nor is fit she should.
Not fit she should, I tell thee Peter, I would give away as much as some Knights are worth, and that's not much, only to wipe the noses of some dozen or two of Gallants, and to see how pitifully those parcels of mans flesh would look when I had caught the bird, which they had beaten the bush for.
Indeed your lordships conquest would have seemed the greater.
Foot, as I am a Lo. it angers me to the guts, that no by∣die hath been about her.
For any thing I know, your lordship may go without her.
An I could have inioin'd her to some pale faced lovers distraction, or been envied for my happiness, it had been somewhat.
But see where she comes, I knew she had not power enough to stay another sending, for ô lords! what are we? our very names enforce beauty to fly, being sent for aside.
Morrow pretty Beck: how dost?
I rather should enquire your lordships health, seeing you up at such an early hour: was it the tooth-ake, or else fleas disturbed you?
Dee ye think I am subject to such common infirmities? nay, were I diseased I'd scorn but to be diseased like a lord isaith: but I can tell you news, your fellow virgin-hole play∣er, my sister is stolen away to night.
Intrude I am glad on it shoe's now free from the jealous eye of a father; do not ye suspect, my lord, who it should be that hath carried her away?
No, nor care nor, as she brews, so let her bake, so said the ancient proverb, but lady mine that shall be, your father hath wished me to appoint the day with you.
What day my lord?
Why of marriage, as the learned Historiographer writes hymens holidays, or nuptial Ceremonious rites.
Why, when would you appoint that my lord?
Why let me see, I think the Taylor may dispatch all our vestures in a week: therefore, it shall be directly this day seven-night.
God give you joy.
Of what I pray you impudence, this fellow will go near to take his oath that he hath seen vs plighted faiths together, my father keeps him for no other cause, then to outsweare the truth My lord not to hold you any longer in a sooles paradise, nor to blind you with the hopes I never intend to accomplish,
know I neither doe, can, or will love you.
How, not love a lord; ô indiscreet young woman! Indeed your father told me how unripe I should find you: but al's, one unripe fruit will ask more shaking before they fall, then those that are, and my conquest will see me the greater still.
Before god is a most vnanswerable lord, and holds her toot in faith.
Nay ye could not a pleased me better, then seeing you so invincible, and such a difficult attaining to, I would not give a pin for the society of a female that should seem willing, but give me a wench that hath disdainful looks:
For tic denial whets on appetite,
When proffered service doth allay delight.
The fools well read in vice, my lord, I hope you here∣after will no further insinuate in the course of your affections, and for the better withdrawing from them, you may please to know, I have irrevocably decreed never to marry.
Never to marry, Peter I pray bear witness of her words that when I have attained her, it may add to my fame and con∣quest.
Yes indeed an't like your lordship.
Nay, ye must think Beck I know how to woe, ye shall find no bashful university man of me.
Indeed I think y'ad ne'er that bringing up, did you e∣for study my lord?
Yes faith that I have, and the last week too, three days and a night together.
About what I pray?
Only to find out, why a woman going on the right side of her husband the day time, should lie on his left side at night; and as I am a lord, I never knew the meaning on it till yesterday, Malapert my fathers Butler being a witty I ask∣napes told me why it was.
Byr'lady, my lord, it was a shrewd study, and I fear hath altered the property of your good parts, for isle assure you I loved you a fortnight a go far better.
Nay, tic all one whether you doe or no, tic but a little
more trouble to bring ye about again, &amp; no question but a man may doot; I am he, tic true as your father said, the black Ox hath not trod upon that foot of yours.
No, but the white Calfe hath, and so I leave your lord∣ship.
Well go thy ways, you are as witty a marmalade eater, as ever I conversed with; now, as I am a lord, I love her better and better, isle home and Poetise upon her good parts presently, Pe∣la here is apreparatiue to my further applications, and Peter be circumspect in giving me diligent notice, what suitors seem to be pee-ping.
Isle warrant you my lord, shoe's your own, for isle give out to all that comes near her, that shees betrothed to you, and if the worst come to the worst, Isle swear it.
Why god-a-mercy, and if ever I do gain my request, Thou shalt in braver clothes be shortly dressed.
Have the fates then conspired, and quite bereft
My drooping years, of all the blessed content
That age partakes of, by the sweet aspect
Of their well nurtured issue; whose obedience,
Discreet and duteous haueour, only lengthens
The thread of age; when on the contrary,
By rude demeanour and their headstrong wills,
That thred's soon rauel'd out: O why Maria
Could thou abandon me now at this time,
When my gray head's declining to the grave!
Could any Masculine flatterer on earth
So far bewitch thee, to forget thy self,
As now to leave me? Did Nature soly give thee me,
As my chief inestimable treasure,
Whereby my age might pass in quiet to rest:
And art thou proved to be the only curse,
Which heaven could throw upon mortality:
Yet isle not curse thee, though I fear the fates
Will on thy head inflict some punishment,
Which I will daily pray they may with-hold;
Although thy disobedience deserves
Extremest rigour, yet I wish to thee
Content in love full of tranquillity.
But see where stands my shame, whose indiscretion
Doth seem to bury all the living honours,
Of all our ancestors but tic the fates decree,
That men might know their weak mortality.
Sir, I cannot find my sister,
I know thou can not, it were to rare to see
Wisdom found out by ignorance.
How father, is it not possible that wisdom should be found out by ignorance; I pray then how do many Magnificoes come by it?
Not buy it son, as you had need to doe,
Yet wealth without that, may live more content,
Then wits enioyers, can debarred of wealth,
All pray for wealth, but I ne'er hard yet,
Of any but one, that ere pried for wit,
Hes counted wife enough in these vain times,
That hath but means enough to we are gay clothes,
And be an outside of humanity, what matters it a pin,
How indiscreet so ere a nature all be,
So that his wealth be great, thats it doth cause
Wisdom in these days; so give fools applause,
And when gay folly speaks, how vain so ere,
Wisdom must silent sit, and speech forbear.
Then wisdom will sit as mure as learning among many Courtiers, but father I partly suspect that Carracus hath got my sister.
With Child, I fear ere this.
Byr'lady and that may be true, but whether a has or no, its al one, if you please, Isle take her from under his nose in spite once teeth, and ask him no leave.
That were to headstrong, son, weal rather leave them to the will of heaven.
To fall or prosper, and though young Carracus
Be but a gentleman of small revenues;
Yet lie deserves my daughter for his virtues,
And had I though she could not be withdrawn
From th'affecting of him, I had ere this
Made them both happy by my free consent
Which now I wish I had granted, and still pray
If any have her, it may be Carracus.
Troth and I wish so too, for in my mind hes a gent. of a good house, and speaks true latin,
To morrow son, you shall ride to his house
And there enquier of your sisters being,
But as you tender me, and your own good
Use no rough language savouring of distaste,
Or any uncivil terms.
Why doe ye take me for a mid-wife,
But tell young Carracus these words from me,
That if he hath with safeguard of her honour,
Espousd my daughter, that I then forgive
His rash offence, and will accept of him,
In all the fatherly love, I owe a child.
I am sure my sister will be glad to hear it, and I cannot blame her, for sheele then enjoy that with quietness, which ma∣ny a wench in these days does scratch for,
Come son, isle wright to Carracus, that my own hand may witness, how much I stand affected to his worth.
By this light Cos, this suite does rarely: the taylor that made it, may hap to be saved, ant be but for his good works, I think I shall be proud of em, and so I was never yet of any clothes.
How not of your Clothes, why then you were never proud of any thing, for therein chiefly consists pride: for you never saw pride pictured, but in gay attire.
True, but in my opinion, pride might as well be pore∣traied in any other shape, as to seem to be an affector of gal∣lantry, being the causes thereof are so several and divers, as some are proud of their strength, although that pride cost them the loss of a limb or two, by ouer-daring, likewise some are
proud of their humour, although in that humour, they be often knocked for being so, some are proud of their drink, although that liquid operation, cause them to wear a night cap 3. weeks after, some are proud of their good parts, although they never put them to better uses, then the enjoying of a common strum∣pets company, and are only made proud by the favour of a wai∣ting woman, others are proud —
Nay, I prithee Cos, enough of pride, but when do you entend to go yonder to Covetousness the Usurer, that we may see how near your plot will take, for the releasing of your mort∣gaged lands.
Why now presently, and if I do not accomplish my pro∣jests to a wished end, I wish my fortunes may be like some scra∣ping tradesman, that never embraces true pleasure, till he be threescore and ten.
But say Hogs daughter, on whom all your hopes depend by this be betrothed to some other.
Why say she were, nay more, married to another, I would be near the further of them effecting of my intents, no Cos, I partly know her inward disposition, and did I but only know her to be woman kind, I think it were sufficient.
Sufficient, for what.
Why to obtain a grant of the best thing she had, Chastity, Man tic not here, as tic with you in the Country, not to be had without fathers and mothers good will, no, the City is a place of more traffic, where each one learns by example of their elders, to make the most of their own, either for profit or pleasure.
Tic but your misbelieving thoughts, makes you surmise so, if women were so kind, how haps you had not by their fa∣ctors kept your self out of the claws of poverty.
O but Cos, Can a ship sail without water, had I had but such a suite as this, to set my self a float, I would not have ••ar'd sinking but come, no more of need, now to the Usurer, and though all hopes do fail, a man can want no living, So long as sweet desire reigns in women.
But then your self must able be in giving.
Conscience thou horror unto wicked men,
When wilt thou cease thy all afflicted wrath,
And set my soul free from the labyrinth
Of thy tormenting terror; O but it fits not,
Should I desire redress or wish for comfort,
That have committed an act so inhumane,
Able to fill shames spacious Chronicle.
Who but a damned one, could have done like me,
Robbed my dear friend, in a short moments time
Of his loves high pri'zd Gem of Chastity:
That which so many years himself hath staid for;
How often hath he as he lay in bed,
Sweetly discoursed to me of his Maria?
And with what pleasing passions a did suffer
Loves genle war-siege, then he would relate
How he first came unto her f•ire eyes view;
How long it was ere she could brooke affection,
And then how constant she did still abide:
I then at this would joy, as if my breast
Had simpathi'zd in equal happiness;
With my true friend: but now when joy should be,
Who but a damned one would have done like me:
He hath been married now at least a month:
In all which time I have not once behold him; This is his house:
Isle call to know his health, but will not see him,
My looks would then betray me for should he ask
My cause of seeming sadness, or the like;
I could not but reveal, and so port on
VVorse unto id, which breeds confusion.
To what intent dee knock sir.
Because I wold be heard sir, is the Mr. of this house within?
Yes marry is a sir, would you speak with him?
My business is not so troublesome:
Is a in health with his late espoused wife
Both are exceeding well sir.
I me truly glad ont, farewell good friend.
I pray you lets crave your name sir, I may else have anger.
You may say, one Albert riding by this way, only inquired their health.
I will acquaint so much.
How like a poisonous Doctor have I come,
To enquire their wel-fare, knowing that my self
Have given the portion of their ne'er recovery;
For which I will afflict my self with torture ever:
And since the earth yields not a remedy,
Able to salve the sores my lust hath made,
Isle now take fare-wel of society,
And th'aboade of men to entertain a life
Fitting my fellowship, in desert woods;
Where beasts like me consort, there may I live,
Far off from wronging virtuous Carracus;
Theres no Maria that shall satisfy
My hateful lust, the trees shall shelter
This wretched trunk of mine, upon whose back.
I will engrave the story of my sin,
And there this short breath of mortality,
Isle finish up in that repentant state;
Where not th'allurements of earths vanities
Can ere ore-take me, there's no baits for lust,
No friend to ruin, I shall then be free
From practising the art of treachery;
Thither then steps where such content abides,
Where penitence not disturbed may grieve,
Where on each tree and springing plant, Isle carve
This heavy motto of my misery.
Who but a dimbed one could have done like me?
Carracus farewell, if ere thou see me more,
Shalt find me curing of a sole-sicke sore.
Why thou base villain, was my dearest friend here, and could not make him stay?
Sfoote sir, I could not force him against his will, an a had been a woman.
Hence thou vntuter'd slave.
But could thou Albert come so ne'er my door, and not vouch∣safe the comfort of thy presence?
Hath my good fortune cause thee to rapine?
And seeing my state so full replete with good,
Can thou with-draw thy love to lessen it?
What could so move thee, was 't because I married?
Did thou imagine I infringed my faith,
For that a woman did participate
In equal share with thee? Cannot my friendship
Be firm to thee, because tic dear to her;
Yet no more dear to her then firm to thee:
Believe me Albert; thou dost little think,
How much thy absence gives cause of discontent,
But isle impute it only to neglect,
It is neglect indeed when friends neglect
The sight of friends, and say tic troublesome;
Only ask how they do, and so fare well:
Showing an outward kind of seeming duty,
Which in the rules of manhood is obsern'd
And think full well they have perform•d their task,
When of their friends health they do only ask,
Not caring how they are, or how distressed,
It is enough they have their loves expressed,
In bare enquiry, and in these times too
Friendships so cold that few so much will doe:
And am not I beholding then to Albert,
He after knowlede of our being well,
Said he was truly glad on it: ô rare friend!
If he be unkind how many more may mend;
But whether am I carried by unkindness?
Why should not I as well set light by friendship,
Since I have seen a man whom I late thought,
Had been composed of nothing but of faith,
Prove so regardless of his friends content.
Come Carracus I have sought you all about,
Your servant told me you were much disquieted
Prithee love be not so, come walk in,
Isle charm thee with my lute from forth disturbance.
I am not angry sweet, though if I were,
Thy bright aspect would soon allay my rage;
But my Maria, it doth something move me,
That our friend Albert so forgets himself.
It may be 'ts nothing else, &amp; theres no doubt
Heal soon remember his accustomed friendship
He thinks, as yet, peradventure that his presence
Will but offend, for that our marriage rites
Are but so newly past.
I will surmise so too, and only think,
Some serious business hinders Alberts presence:
But what ring's that Maria on your finger?
Tic one you lost love, when I did bestow
A jewel of sarre greater worth on you.
At what time fairest?
As if you knew not, why dee maked so strange••
Yare disposed to riddle, pray lets see it,
I partly know it, where wast you sound it?
Why in my chamber that most gladsome night
When you enriched your love by my escape.
How, in your Chamber?
Sure Carracus I will be angry with you
If you seem so forgetful, I took it up
Then when you left my lodge and went away,
Glad of your conquest for to seek your friend:
Why stand you so amazed, sir I hope that kindness
Which then you reaped, doth not prevail
So in your thoughts, as that you think me light.
O think thy self Maria what thou art:
This is the ring of Albert treacherous man,
Hee that enjoyed thy virgin chastity:
I never did ascend into thy chamber;
But all that cold night through the frozen field,
Went seeking of that wretch, who ne'er sought me;
But found what his lust sought, for dearest thee.
I have heard enough my Carracus to bereave me of this little breath, she sounds.
All breath be first extinguish, within there ho?
O Nurse see here, Maria says sheele die.
Marry, God forbid, oh Mris. Ms. Ms. she has breath yet, shees but in a trance, good sir take comfort sheele recover by and by.
No, no, sheele die Nurse, for she said she would, an she had not said so, tad been another matter, but you know Nurse she ne'er told a lie, I will believe her, for she speaks all truth.
His memory begins to fail him, come lets bear
This heavy spectacle from forth his presence,
The heauēs will lend a hand, I hope, of comfort, Exeūt Ca. manet.
See how they steal away my fair Maria,
But I will follow after her as far,
As Orpheus did to gain his souls delight,
And Plutoes self shall know, although I am not
Skilful in musique, yet I can be mad,
And force my loves enjoyment in despite
Of hells black fury; but stay, stay Carracus,
Where is thy knowledge, and that rational sense,
Which heaven; great Architect endued thee with?
All sunk beneath the weight of lumpish nature?
Are our diviner parts no nobler free,
Then to be tortured by the weak assailements
Of earth-sprung griefs? why is man then accounted
The head commander of this vniuerse,
Next the Creator, when a little storm
Of natures fury straight ore'whelmes his judgment,
But mines no little storm, tic a tempest
So full of raging selfe-consuming woe,
That nought but ruin follows expectation:
Oh my Maria, what unheard of sin
Have any of thine Ancestors enacted,
That all their shame should be powered thus on thee;
Or what incestuous spirit, cruel Albert
Left hells vast womb for to enter thee,
And do a mischief of such treachery.
Oh Nurse, how first with Maria?
If ere thy tongue did utter pleasing words,
Let it now do so, or hereafter ere be dumb in sorrow.
Good sir take comfort, I am forced to speak
What will not please, your chaste wise sir is dead.
Tic dead indeed, how did you know it was so Nurse?
What sir?
That my heart was dead, sure thou hast served
Dame natures self, and know the inward secrets
Of all our hidden powers, isle love thee for it;
And if thou wilt teach me that unknown skill,
Shalt see what wonder Carracus will do;
Isle dive into the breast of hateful Albert,
And see how his black soul is round encompassed
By fearful fiends, oh I would do strange things,
And know to whose cause Lawyers will incline,
When they had fees on both sides, view the thoughts
Of forlorn widows when their Knights have left them;
Search through the guts of grearnes, and behold
What several sin best pleased them, thence Id descend
Into the bowels of some pocky sit:
And tell to lechers all the pains he felt,
That they thereby might warned be from lust,
Troth twill be rare, isle study •• presently.
Alas! hoe's distracted, what a sin
Am I partaker of by telling him,
So cursed an untruth? But it was my Mistress will
Who is recovered, though her griefs never
Can be recovered, she hath vowed with tears
Her own perpetual banishment, therefore to him
Death was not more displeasing, then if I
Had told her lasting absence.
I find my brains too shallow far for study,
What need I care for being a Rethmetitian,
Let Citizens sons stand and they will for Ciphers;
Why should I teach them and go beat my brains,
To instruct unapt, and vnconceauing dolts,
And when ell's done, my art that should be sam'd,
Will by gross imitation be but shamed,
Your judgment Madam?
Good sir walk in, weal fend for learned men that may allay your frenzy.
But can Maria so forget her self,
As to debar vs thus of her attendance?
She is within sir, pray you will you walk to her.
Oh is she so, come then lets softly steal
Into her chamber, if she be a sleep
Isle laugh shalt see enough, and thou shalt weep,
Softly good long coat, softly.
Cease now thy steps Maria, and look back
Upon that place, where distressed Carracus
Hath his sad being, from whose virtuous hosome,
Shame hath constrained me fly ne'er to return:
I will go seek some unfrequented path,
Either in desert woods or wilderness,
There to bewail my innocent mishaps,
Which heaven hath justly powered down on me.
In punishing my disobedience.
Oh see my brother
Ho you, three foot and a half, why Page I say, sfoot is vanished as suddenly as a dumb show, if a lord had lost his way now so a had been served, but let me see; as I take it, this is the house of Carracus, a very fair building, but it looks as if it were dead, I can see no breath come out of the chimneys; but I shall know the state on it by and by, by the looks of some serving-man: What no within here?
Good sir, you have your arms at liberty, wilt please you to with-draw your action of battery.
Yes indeed, now you have made your appearance, is the liuing-giuer within sir?
You mean my Master sir?
You have hit it sir, praised bee your understanding, I am to have cōference with him, would you admit my presence.
Indeed sir he is at this time not in health, and may not be disturbed.
Sir, an a were in the pangs of childe-bed, I'd speak with him.
Upon what cause gay-man?
Sfoote I think a be disturbed indeed, a speaks more commanding then a Constable at midnight.
Sir, my lord and father, by me a lord, hath sent these lines in∣closed, which show his whole intent.
Let me peruse them, if they do portend
To the States good, your answer shall be sudden,
Your entertainment friendly; but if otherwise,
Our meanest subject shall divide thy greatness,
You'd best look too't Ambassador.
Is yous Mr. a Statesman friend?
Alas no sir, a understands not what a speaks.
I but when my father dies, I am to be called in for one my self, and I hope to bear the place as gravely as my success∣sors have done before me.
Ambassador, I find your Masters will
Treats to the good of somewhat, what it is
You have your answer, and may now depart.
I will relate as much sir, fare ye well.
But stay, I h••• forgotten quite our chief'st affairs,
Your Master further writes some three lines lower,
Of one Maria that is wife to me,
That she and I should travel now with you
Unto his presence.
Why now I understand you sir, that Maria is my sister, by whose conjunction you are created brother, to me a lord.
But brother lord we cannot go this journey.
Alas no sir, we mean to ride it, my sister shall ride upon my nag.
Come then weal in, and strive to woe your sister,
I ha not seen her sir, at least these three days,
They keep her in a Chamber, and tell me
Shoe's fast a sleep still, you and isle go see,
Content sir.
Mad-men and fools agree.
When you have got this prise, you mean to lose me.
Nay pree thee doe not think so, if I doe not marry thee this instant night, may I never enjoy breath a minute after; by heaven I respect not his pelf, thus much, but only that I may have wherewith to maintain thee.
O but to rob my father, though a be bad, the world will think ill of me.
Think ill of thee, can the world pity him, that ne'er pitied any, besides since their is no end of his goods, nor begin∣ning of his goodness; had not we as good share his dross in his life time, as let Controversy and Lawyers devour it ats death?
You have prevailed, at what hour first you entend to have entrance into his chamber?
Why just at mid-night, for then our apparition will will seem most fearful, you'll make away that we may ascend up like spirits?
I will, but how many have you made instruments herein?
Faith none, but my cousin Lightfoote and a plaier.
But may you trust the player?
Oh exceeding well, wele give him a speech a under∣stands not, but now I think out, whats to be done with your Fathers man Peter?
Why the least quantity of drink, will lay him dead a∣sleep; But hark, I hear my father coming, soon in the eve∣ning isle convey you in.
Till when, let this outward ceremony, be the true pledge of our inward affections.
So, this goes better forward then the Plantation in Virginia: but see here comes half the west Indies, whose rich mines this night I mean to be ransacking
Then you'll seal for this small Lordship you say, To morrow your money shall be rightly told up for you to a penny.
I pray let it, and that your man may set contents upon every bag.
Indeed by that wee may know what we steal without labour, for the telling ont ore; how now gent. are ye agreed v∣pone the price of this earth and clay.
Yes faith Mr. Haddit the gent, your friend here makes me paye sweetly for it but let it go, I hope to inherit hey∣uen
ant be but for doing gentlemen pleasure.
Peter.
Anon sir.
I wonder how Haddit came by that gay suite of clothes, all his means was consumed long since.
Why sir being undone himself; a lives by the undoing or by-lady, it may be by the doing of others, or peradventure both a decayed gallant may live by any thing, if a keep one thing safe.
Gentlemen, Isle to the Scriveners to cause these writings to be drawn.
Pray doe sir, weal now leave you till the morning.
Nay, you shall stay dinner, isle return presently; Peter some bear here for these worshipful gentlemen.
We shall be bold no doubt, and that old penny-father you'll confess by to morrow morning.
Then his daughter is certainly thine, and condescends to all thy wishes.
And yet you would not once believe it, as if a females favour could not be obtained by any, but he that wears the Cap of maintenance.
When 'ts nothing but acquaintance and a bold spirit,
That may the chiefest prize amongst all of them inherit,
Well thou hast got one deserves the bringing home with trumpets, and false to thee as miraculously as the 1000. pound did to the Tailor, thank your good fortune, but must Hogs man be made drunk,
By all means: and thus it shall be effected, when a comes in with beer, do you upon some slight occasion fall out with him, and if you doe give him a cuff or two, it will give him cause to knowy'are the more angry, then will I slip in and take up the matter, and striving to make you two friends, wele make him drunk.
Its done in conceit already, see where a comes.
Wilt please you to taste a cup of September bear gentiem.
Pray begin, wele pledge you sir.
Its out sir. Li. then my hand in sir.
Why goodman hobby horse, if we out of our gentility offered you to begin, must you out of your rascality needs take it.
Why how now sirs, whats the matter.
The gentleman here false out with me, upon nothing in the world but mere curtsy,
By this light but a shall not, why Cozen Lightfoote.
Is his name Lighfoote, a plague on him, a has a heavy hand.
Peace be here: for I came late enough from a madman.
My young Lord, God save you.
And you also: I could speak it in latin, but the phrase is common.
True my Lords, and whats common, ought not much to be dealt with all: but I must desire your help my Lord to end a Controversy here, between this gentleman my friend, and honest Peter, who I dare besworn is as ignorant as your Lord∣ship.
That I will, but my masters thus much isle say vntee, if so be this quarrel may be taken up peaceably, without the in∣dangering of my own person, well, and good, otherwise I will not meddle therewith, for I have been vexed late enough al∣ready.
Why then my Lord if it please you, let me, being your inferior, decree the cause between them.
I doe give leave, or permit.
Then thus I will propound a reasonable motion; how many cuffs Peter did this gent. out of his fury make thee parta∣kerr of?
Three at the least sir.
All which were bestowed upon you for beginning first Peter.
Yes indeed sir.
Why then here the sentence of your suffering, you shall both down into Master Hogs seller Peter, and whereas you began first to him, so shall he there to you, and as he gave you three cuffs, so shall you retort of in defiance of him, three
black Jacks, which if he deny to pledge; then the glory is thine, and he accounted by the wise discretion of my Lord here a flincher.
A very reasonable motion.
Why so, this is better then being among mad-men yet.
Were you so lately with any my Lord?
Yes faith, Isle tell you all in the Seller, how I was taken for an Ambassador, and being no sooner in the house, but the mad man carries me up into the garret for a spy, and very roundly bad me untruss, and had not a courteous serving man conveyed me away whilst he went to feteh whips I think in my conscience: not respecting my honour a would a breached me.
By Lady, and t'was to be feared; but come my Lord wele hear the rest in the seller.
And honest Peter thou that hast been grieved,
My Lord and I, will see thee well relieved.
How full of sweet content had this life been,
If it had been embraced but before
My burdenous conscience was so fraught with sin;
But now my griefs oresway that happiness:
O that some lecher or accursed betrayer:
Of sacred friendship, might but here arrive,
And read the lines repentant on each tree,
That I have carved t'expresse my misery:
My admonitions now, would sure eonuert,
The sinfulst creature; I could tell them now,
How idly vain those humanes spend their lives,
That daily grieve not for offences past,
But to enjoy some wantons company;
Which when obtained, what is it, but a blot,
Which their whole lives repentance scarce can clear:
I could now tell to friend betraying man,
How black sin is hateful treachery,
How heavy on their wretched souls t'will fit,
When fearful death doth plant his siege but ne'er them,
How heavy and frightful will their end
Seem to appeach them, as if then they knew,
The full beginning of their endless woe
Were then appointed; which astonishment
O blessed repentance keep me Albert from!
And suffer not despair to overwhelm,
And make a ship-wracke of my heavy soul.
Whose here, a Page: what black disastrous fate
Can be so cruel to his pleafing youth?
So now Maria, here thou must forgo
What nature lent thee to repay to death;
Famine I thank thee, I have found thee kindest,
Thou set a period to my misery.
It is Maria that fair innocent,
Whom my abhorred lust hath brought to this;
Isle go for sustenance: and O you powers!
If ever true repentance wan acceptance,
O show it Albert now, and let him save
His wronged beauty from untimely grave.
Sure some thing spake, or else my feebled sense
Hath lost the use of its due property;
Which is more likely, then that in this place,
The voice of humane creature should be heard;
This is far distant from the paths of men,
Nothing breaths here but wilde and ravening beasts,
With airy monsters, whose shaddowing wings doe seem
To taste a vale of death in wicked livers;
Which I live dreadlesse of, and every hour
Strive to meet death, who still unkind avoids me:
But that now gentle famine doth begin
For to give end to my calamities.
See, here is carved upon this trees smooth bark,
Lines knit in verse, a chance far unexpected;
Assist me breath a little to unfold, what they include.
I that have writ these lines, amone, whose sin
Is more then grievous; for know, that I have been
A breaker of my faith, with one whose breast
Was all composed of truth: but I digressed.
And fled, them brats of his dear friendships love,
Clasping to falsehood did a villainy prove,
As thus shall be expressed: my worthy friend
Loved a fair beauty, who did condescend
In dearest affection to his virtuous will
He then a night appointed to fulfil
Hymens blest-rites, and to convey away
His loves fair person, to which peerless pray
I was acquainted made, and when the hour
Of her escape drew on, then lust did power
Enraged appetite through all my veins.
And base desires in me let loose the reins
To my licentious will, and that black night
When my friend should have had his chaste delight,
I feigned his presence, and by her, thought him
Robed that fair virgin of her honours Gem:
For which most heinous, crime upon each tree
I write this story that men's eyes may see,
None but a damned one would have done like me.
Is Albert then become so penitent,
As in these deserts to deplore his facts,
Which his unfeigned repentance seems to clear:
How good man is, when he laments his ill?
Who would not pardon now that mans misdeeds,
Whose griefs bewail them thus, could I now live,
I'd remit thy fault with Carracus:
But death no longer will afford repreeue
Of my abundant woes: wronged Carracus farewell,
Live, and forgive thy wrongs, for the repentance
Of him that eased them, so deserves from thee;
And since my eyes do witness Alberts grief,
I pardon Albert in my wrongs the chief.
How pardon me, O sound Angelical,
But see! she faints, O heavens now show your power,
That these distilled waters made in grief,
May ad some comfort to affliction:
Look up fair youth, and see a remedy.
O who disturbs me, I was hand in hand,
Walking with death unto the house of rest.
Let death walk by himself, if a want company,
Theres many thousands boy, whose aged years
Have tan a surfeit of earths vanities,
They will go with him, when he please to call,
To drink my boy thy pleasing tender youth
Cannot deserve to dye, no, it is for vs,
Whose years are laden by our often sins,
Singing the last part of our blessed repentance,
Are fit for death, and none but such as we,
Death ought to claim; for when a snatches youth,
It shows him but a tyrant; but when age,
Then is a just, and not composed of rage.
How fares my lad?
Like one embracing death withal his parts,
Reaching at life but with one little finger;
His mind so firmly knit unto the first,
That unto him the latter seems to be
What may be pointed at, but not possessed.
O but thou shalt possess it.
If thou did fear thy death but as I doe,
Thou would take pity, though not of thy self,
Yet of my aged years; trust me my boy,
Tha'st struck such deep compassion in my breast,
That all the moisture which prolongs my life,
Will from my eyes gush forth, if now thou leave me.
But can we live here in this desert wood,
If not, isle die, for other places seem,
Like tortures to my griefs, may I live here?
I, thou shalt live with me, and I will I tell thee
Such strange occurrents of my fore-past life,
That all thy young sprung griefs shall seem but sparks
To the great fire of my calamities;
Then isle live only with you for to hear,
If any humane woes can be like mine;
Yet since my being in this darksome desert,
I have read on tree•• most lamentable stories.
Tic true indeed, theres one within these woods
Whose name is Albert, a man so full of sorrow,
That one each tree he passes by he earues,
Such doleful lines for his rash follies past,
That who so reads them, and not drowned in tears;
Must have a heart framed forth of Addamant.
And can you help to the sight of him?
I when thou wilt, bele often come to me,
And at my Cave sit a whole winters night,
Recounting of his stories, I tell thee boy
Had he offended more then did that man,
Who stole the fire from heaven, his contrition
Would appease all the gods, and quite revert
Their wrath to mercy; but come my pretty boy
VVele to my Cave, and after some repose,
Relate the sequel of each others woes.
What a way have I come, yet I know not whither,
The ayers so cold this winter season,
I'm sure a fool, would any but an ass
Leave a warm matted chamber and a bed,
To run thus in the cold, and which is more,
To seek a woman, a slight thing called woman,
Creatures, with curious nature framed as I suppose,
For rent receivers to her treasury;
And why I think so now, Isle give you instance;
Most men doe know that natures self hath made them,
Most profitable members, then if so.
By often trading in the common wealth
They needs must be enriched, why very good,
To whom ought beauty then repay this gain
Which she by natures gift hath profited;
But unto nature? why all this I grant,
Why then they shall no more be called woman,
For I will stile them thus, scorning their leave,
Those that for nature doe much rent receive.
This is a wood sure, and as I have read,
In woods are Eccho's which will answer men,
To every question which they do propound:
O are you there, have at ye then in faith,
Echo can tell me whether men or women
Are for the most part dimbed?
Of both indeed, how true this Echo speaks,
Echo, now tel me if amongst 1000. women,
There be one chaste, or none?
Why so I think, better and better still:
Now further Echo, in a world of men,
Is there one faithful to his friend, or no?
Thou speak most true, for I have found it so;
Who said thou wast a woman Echo lies,
Thou could not then answer so much of truth,
Once more good Echo,
Was my Maria false by her own desire,
Or wast against her will?
Troth't may be so, but can thou tell,
Whether she be dead or not?
Not dead.
Then without question she doth surely live: But I do trouble thee too much, therefore good speak truth, farewell.
How quick it answers, ô that Conncellors
Would thus refolue men's doubts without a fee.
How many country Clients then might rest
Free from undoing, no plodding pleader then
Would purchase great poffessions with his tongue;
Were I some demigod, or had that power,
I'd straight make this Echo here a judge;
He would spend his judgment in the open court,
As now to me, without being once solicited
In's private chamber, tic not bribes could win
Him to o're-sway men's right, nor could he be
Lead to damnation for a little pelf;
He would not harbour malice in his heart,
Or envious hatred, base despite or grudge,
But be an upright, just, and equal Judge;
But now imagine that I should confront
Treacherous Albert, who hath raised my front.
But I fear this idle prate hath
Made me quite forget my cinque pace. he dances.
I heard the Echo answer unto one,
That by his speech cannot be far remote
From of this ground, and see I have descried him:
Oh heavens! its Carracus, whose reasons seat
Is now usurped by madness, and distraction;
Which I the author of confusion
Have planted here, by my accursed deeds.
O are you come sir, I was sending the Tauerne-boy for ye, I have been practising here, and can do none of my lofty tricks.
Good sir, if any spark do yet remain
Of your consumed reason, let me strive.
To blow it out, troth I most kindly thank you,
Here is friendship to the life; but father whay-beard,
Why should you think me void of reasons fire,
My youthful days being in the height of knowledge?
I must confess your old years gains experience;
But that's so much orer-ul'd by dotage,
That what you think experience shall effect,
Short memory destroys, what say you now sir?
Am I mad now, that can answer thus
To all intergatories?
But though your words do savor sir of judgment,
Yet when they derogate from the due observance
Of fitting times, they ought not be respected,
No more, then if a man should tell a tale
Of fained mirth in midst of extreme sorrows.
How did you know my sorrows sir?
What though I have lost a wife,
Must I be therefore grieved; am I not happy
To be so freed of a continual trouble?
Had many a man such fortune as I,
In what a heaven would they think themselves?
Being releast of all those threatening clouds,
Which in the angry skies, called women's brows,
Sit ever menacing tempestuous storms:
But yet I needs must tell you, old December,
My wife was clear of this; within her brow,
Sh'ad not a wrinkle nor a storming frown;
But like a smooth well polish Inory.
It seemed so pleasant to the looker on,
She was so kind, of nature so gentle,
That if sh'ad done a fault she would straight go die for it:
Was not she then a rare one?
What weep thou aged Nestor?
Take comfort man, Troy was ordained by fate
To yield to vs, which we will ruinate.
Good sir walk with me, but where you see
The shaddowing Elms, within whose circling round
There is a holy spring about encompassed,
By dandling siccamores and viol•es,
Whose waters cure all homane maladies:
Few drops thereof being sprinkled on your temples,
Revives your fading memory, and restores
Your senses lost unto their perfect being.
Is it clear water sir, and very fresh?
For I am thirsty; gives it a better relish
Then a cup of dead wine with sties in it?
Most pleasant to the taste, pray will you go.
Faster then you I believe sir.
I am walked forth from my preferuers cave,
To search about these woods, only to see
The penitent Albert, whose repentant mind
Each tree expresses: ô that some power divine
Would hither send my virtuous Carracus;
Not for my own content, but that be might
See how his distressed friend repents the wrong,
Which his rash folly, most unfortunate
Acted against him and me, which I forgive
A hundred times a day, for that more often
My eyes are witness to his said complaints,
How the good Hermit seems to share his mons,
Which in the day time he deplores'mongst trees,
And in the night his Cave is filled with sighs;
No other bed doth his weak limbs support
Then the cold earth, no other harmony
To rock his cares asleep, but blustering winds,
Or some swift Current, headlong rushing down
From a high Mountains top, pouring his force
Into the Oceans gulf, where being swallowed,
Seems to be wail his fall with hideous words:
No other sustentation to suffice
What Nature claims, but raw unsavoury roots,
With troubled waters, where untamed beasts,
Do bathe themselves:
Ay me! what things are these?
What pretty harmless things they seem to be?
As if delight had no where made abode,
But in their nimble sport.
Yonders the courteous Hermit, and with him
Albert it seeemes, ô see tic Carracus,
Joy do not now confound me.
Thanks unto heavens &amp; thee thou holy man,
I have attained what doth adorn mans being,
That precious Gem of reason, by which soly,
We are discerned from rude and brutish beasts,
No other difference being twixt vs and them.
How to repay this more then earthly kindness,
Lies not within my power, but in his
That hath endued thee with celestial gifts,
To whom Isle pray, he may bestow on thee
What thou deserve, blessed immortality.
Which unto you befall, thereof most worthy:
But virtuous sir, what I will now request
From your true generous nature, is, that you would
Be pleased to pardon that repentant Wight
Whose sinful stories upon you trees bark,
Your self did read, for that you say, to you
Those wrongs were done.
Indeed they were, and to, a dear wife lost;
Yet I forgive him, as I wish the heavens
May pardon me.
So doth Maria to.
Lives my Maria then? what gracious planet
Gave thee safe conduct to these desert woods?
My late mishap (repented now by all,
And therefore pardoned) compelled me to fly,
Where I had perished for want of food,
Had not this courteous man awaked my sense,
In which, deaths self had partly interest.
Alas Maria! I am so far indebted
To him already, for the late recovery of
My own weakness, that tic impossible
For vs to attribute sufficient thanks,
For such abundant good.
I rather ought to thank the heavens Creator,
That he vouchsaf't me such especial grace,
In doing so small a good, which could I hourly
Bestow on all, yet could I not assuage
The swelling rancor of my fore-past crimes.
O sir, despair not for your course of life
(were your sins far more odious then they be)
Doth move compassion and pure clemency
In the al-ruling Judge, whose powerful mercy
Oreswayes his justice, and extends it self
To all repentant minds, hoe's happier far
That sins, and can repent him of his sin;
Then the self iustifier, who doth surmise
By his own works to gain salvation,
Seeming to reach at heaven and clasp damnation:
You then are happy, and our penitent friend,
To whose wished presence please you now to bring vs,
That in our gladsome arms we enfold
His much esteemed person, and forgive
The injuries of his rash follies past.
Then see false Albert prostrate at your feet,
Desiring Justice for his heinous ill.
Is it you Alberts self that hath preserved vs?
O blessed bewailer of thy misery!
And woefullest liver in calamity.
From which, right worthy friend, its now high time
You be releast, come then you shall with vs,
Our first and chiefest welcome my Maria,
We shall receive at your good fathers house;
Who, as I do remember, in my frenzy
Sent a kind letter which desired our presence.
So please you, virtuous pair, Albert will stay,
And spend the remnant of this weary some life
In these dark woods.
Then you neglect the comforts heaven doth send,
To your abode on earth, if you stay here
Your life may end in torture, by the cruelty
Of some wilde ravenous beasts, but if amongst men
When you depart, the faithful prayers of many
Will much avail, to crown your soul with bliss.
Loved Carracus, I have found in thy converse
Comfort so blessed, that nothing now but death,
Shall cause a separation in our being.
Which heaven confirm.
Thus by the breach of faith, our friendships knit
In stronger bonds of love.
Heaven so continue it.
So, have you laid the keys of the outward doors under my bolster?
Yes forsooth.
Go your way to bed then.
I wonder who did at the first invent
These beds, the breeders of disease and sloth,
A was no soldier sure, nor no scholar,
And yet a might be vety well a Courtier;
For no good husband would have bin so idle,
No Usurer neither; yet here the bed affords
Store of sweet golden slumbers unto him;
Here sleeps command in war, Caesar by this
Obtained his triumphs, this will fight mans cause,
When fathers, brethren, and the nearest of friends
Leaves to assist him, all content to this
Is merely vain, the lovers whose affections
Do sympathise together in full pleasure,
Debarred of this their summer sudden ends,
And care the winter to their former joys,
Breath's such a cold blast on their Turtles bills;
Having not this, to shrow'd him forth his storms,
They straight are forced to make a separation,
And so live under those that rule ore this.
The Gallant, whose illustrious out-side draws
The eyes of wantons to behold with wonder
His rare shaped parts, for so he thinks they be,
Decked in the robes of glistening gallantry:
Having not this, attendant on his person,
Walks with a cloudy brow, and seems to all
A great contemner of society;
Not for the hate he bears to company,
But for the want of this ability:
O silver! thou that art the basest captive
Kept in this prison: how many pale offenders
For thee have suffered ruin; but ô my gold
Thy sight's more pleasing, then the seemly locks
Of yellow haired Apollo, and thy touch
More smooth and dainty, then the downe-soft white
Of Ladies tempting breast, thy bright aspect
Dimm's the greatest luster of heavens Waggoner.
But why go I about to extol thy worth,
Knowing that Poets cannot compass it;
But now give place my gold for here is a power
Of greater glory and supremacy
Obscures thy being, here sits enthroniz'd
The sparkling diamond, whose bright reflection
Casts such a splendour on these other Iemmes,
Amongst which he so majestic appears,
As if— now my good angels guard me.
Melior vigilantia somno.
Stand not amazed good man, for what appears
shall add to thy content, be void of fears,
I am the shadow of rich Kingly Cressus,
Sent by his greatness from the lower world
To make thee mighty, and to sway on earth
By thy abundant store, as he himself doth
In Elizium; how he reigns there,
His shadow will unfold, give thou then ear.
In Vnder-ayre where fair Elizum stands
Beyond the river stiled Acharon,
He hath a Castle built of Adamant;
Not framed by vain enchantment, but there fixed,
By the all burning hands of warlike spirits,
Whose windows are composed of purest crystal,
And decked within with oriental pearls:
There the great spirit of Cressus royal self,
Keeps his abode in joyous happiness;
He is not tortured there as Poets feine
With molten gold and sulphrie flames of fire,
Or any such molesting perturbation;
But there reputed as a demigod,
Feasting with Pluto and his Proserpine,
Night after night with all delicious cates,
With greater glory then seven kingdoms states.
Now further know the cause of my appearance,
The kingly Cressus having by fems trump,
Heard that thy loved desires stand affected
To the obtaining of abundant wealth,
Sends me his shade, thus much to signify,
That if thou wilt become famous on earth,
Heel give to thee even more then infinite;
And after death with him thou shalt partake
The rare delights beyond the stigian lake.
Great Cressus shadow may dispose of me to what hee pleases.
So speaks obedience.
For which isle raise thy lowly thoughts as high,
As Cressus were in his mortality;
Stand then undaunted whilst I raise those spirits,
By whose laborious task and industry,
Thy treasure shall abound and multiply.
What would then Crocus list to fill
Some mortals confers up with gold,
Changing the silver it doth hold:
By that pure mettle left be so,
By the infernal gates I swear,
Where Radamanth doth dominere:
By Crocus name and by his castle,
Where winter nights he keeps wassell;
By Demogorgon and the fates,
And by all these low country states;
That after knowledge of thy mind,
Ascarion like the swift paced wind,
Will fly to finish thy command.
Take then this silver out of hand,
And bear it to the River Tagus,
Beyond th'aboade of Archi Magus;
Whose golden sands upon it cast,
Transform it into gold at last:
Which being effected straight return,
And sudden too, or I will spurn
This trunk of thine into the pit,
Where all the hellish furies sit,
Scratching their eyes out quick begone.
Swifter in course then doth the Sun.
How fairest thou mortal be? not terrified
At these infernal motions, know that shortly
Great Cressus ghost shall in the love he bears thee,
Give thee sufficient power by thy own worth,
To raise such spirits.
Cressus is much too liberal in his favour,
To one so far desertlesse as poor Hog.
Poor Hog, O speak not that word poor again,
Least the whole apsetree of Cressus bounty,
Cracked into shivers overthrow thy fortunes,
For he abhors the name of poverty,
And will grow sick to hear it spoke by those.
Whom he intends to raise; but see the twilight
Posts before the Chariot of the Sun,
Brings word of his approach:
We must be sudden, and with speed raise up
The spirit Basin: that can straight transform
Gold into pearl; be still and circumspect.
I am no Fencer, yet at length
From Plutoes presence and the Hall,
Where Proserpine keeps festival,
I'm hither come and now I see,
To what intent 'Ime rai'sd by thee;
It is to make that mortal rich,
That at his fame men's ears may itch;
When they doe hear but of his store.
He hath one daughter and no more;
Which all the lower powers decree,
She to one Wealthy wedded be;
By which conjunction there shall spring,
Young heirs to Hog whereon to fling:
His mass of treasure when a dies,
Thus Bazon truly prophesies:
But come my task I long to rear,
His fame aboue the Hemisphere.
Take then the gould which here doth lie.
And quick return it by and by;
All in choice pearl whither to go,
I need not tell you, for you know.
Indeed I doe, and Hog shall find it so.
Now mortal there is nothing doth remain,
Twixt thee and thine abundance, only this
Turn thy eyes westward, for from thence appears
Ascarion with thy gould, which having brought
And at thy foot surrendered, make obeisance;
Then turn about and fix thy tapers westward,
From whence great Bazon brings thy orient pearl;
VVho'le lay it at thy feet much like the former.
Then I must make to him obeisance thus.
Why so, in mean time Cressus shade will rest
Upon thy bed, but aboue all take heed,
You suffer not your eyes to stray aside,
From the direct point I have set thee at:
For though the spirit do delay the time,
And not return your treasure speedily.
Let the loss light on me, if I neglect
I overslip what Cressus suit command.
So now practise standing, though it be nothing agree∣ble to your hogs age, let me see among these writings is my no∣phew Haddits mortgage; but in taking that it may breed suss∣pect on vs, wherefore this box of Jewels will stand far better and let that alone, it is now break of day, and ne'er by this the marriage is confirmed betwixt my Cousin &amp; great Cressus friends daughter here, whom I would now leave to his most weighty cogitation
So gentle sir adieu, time not permits
To hear those passions and those frantic fits;
Your subject to when you shall find how true,
Great Cressus shade hath made an ass of you.
Let me now ruminate to my self why Cressus should be so great a fauorer to me, &amp; yet to what end should I desire to
know I think it is sufficient, it is so, and I would a had been so sooner, for he and his spirits would have saved me much la∣bore in the purchasing of wealth; but then indeed it would have been the confusion of 2. or 3. Scriveners, which by my means have been properly raised: but now imagine this only a trick whereby I may be gulled; but how can that be? are not my doors locked, have I not seen with my own eyes the ascending of the spirits? have I not heard with my own ears the invocations wherewith they were raised? could any but spirits appear through so firm a sloore as this is? tic impossible: But hark, I hear the spirit Ascarion coming with my gould, O bountiful Cressus; Isle build a temple to thy mightiness.
O Peter, how long have we slept upon the hogshead?
I think a dozen hours my Lord, and tic nothing, Isle undertake to sleep sixteen, upon the receipt of two cups of muskadine.
I marvel what's become of Haddit and Lighfoote?
Hang'em flinchers they sluncke away as soon as they had drunk as much as they were able to carry, which no ge∣nerous spirit would a done in deed.
Yet I believe Had. had his part, for to my thinking the seller went round with him when a left vs, but are we come to a bed yet? I must needs sleep.
Come softly by any means, for we are now upon the threshold of my masters chamber, through which isle bring you to Mistress Rebeckaes lodging, give me your hand and come very nicely.
Where art Peter.
Wheres this noise Peter can tell?
I hear the voice of my adopted son in law.
Why Peter wilt not answer me?
O my Lord aboue, stand still, I am fallen down at least 30. fathom deep, if you stand not still till I recover and have lighten a candle, you're but a dead man.
I am robed, I am undone, I am deluded, whose in my chamber?
Tic I, the Lord your son that shall be, upon my honour I came not to rob you.
I shall run mad, I shall run mad.
Why then tic my fortune to be terrifide with madmen.
Where are you my Lord?
Here my Lady? where are you rogue when thieves break into my house?
Breaking my neck in your service a plague ont.
But are you robed indeed father Hog, of how much I pray?
Of all, of all; see here, they have left me nothing but 2. or 3. roles of parchment, here they came up like spirits, &amp; took my silver, gold, and Jewels; wheres my daughter?
Shees not in the house sir? the street doors are wide open.
Nay tic no matter where she is now? shele scarce be worth a 1000. pound and thats but a taylors prise.
Then you'll not have her sir?
No as I hope to live in peace.
Why be it so, be it so, confusion cannot come in a more fitter time on all of vs: O bountiful Cressus, how fine thy shadow hath devoured my substance.
Good my Lord promise him to marry his daughter, or a will be mad presently, though you never intend to have her.
Well father Hog, though you are undone, your daughter shall not be, so long as a Lords can stand her in any stead: come you shall with me to my Lord and father, whose warrants wee will have for the apprehending of all suspicious lives, and though the labour be infinite, you must consider your loss is so.
Come, isle doe any thing to gain my gold.
Till which be had, my fare will be but cold.
Now Mr. Parson we will no further trouble you, and for the tying of our true love knot, here is a small amends.
Tic more then due sir, yet isle take it all,
Should kindness be despised, good will would fall.
Unto a lower ebb, should we detest
The grateful givers gift,
It's true indeed, good morrow honest Parson.
Yet if you please, sir Iohn will back surrender
The overplus of what you now did tender.
O by no means, I pree thee friend, good-morrow.
Why if you please Sir Iohn to me restore,
The overplus isle give it to the poor.
O pardon sir, for by our worships leave,
We ought to give from whence we doe receive.
Why then to me sir Iohn.
To all a kind good morrow.
A most fine Vicar, there was no other means to be rid of him: but why are you so sad Rebecka?
To think in what estate my father is?
When he beholds that he is merely gulled.
Nay be not grieved, for that which should rather give you cause of content, for twill be a means to make him aban∣don his avarice, and save a soul almost incurable: but now to our own affairs, this marriage of ours must not yet be known least it breed suspicion, we will bring you Rebeck a unto Atlas his house, whilst we two go unto the old Lord Welthies, having some acquaintance with his son in law Carracus, who I un∣derstand is there, where no question but we shall find your fa∣there proclaiming his loss, thither you shall come some what after vs, as it were to seek him, where I doubt not but so to or∣der the matter, that I will receive you as my wife, from his own hands.
May it so happy prove.
Amen say I, for should our last trick be known, great Cressus shade would have a conjured time ont.
Tic true, his Castle of Addamant would scarce hold him: but come this will be good cause for laughter hereafter.
Then wele relate how this great bird was pulled,
Of his rich feathers, and most finely gulled.
More welcome Carrucus, then friendly truce
To a besieged City all distressed;
How early this glad morning are you come
To make me happy, for pardon of your offence
I'ue given a blessing, which may heaven confirm,
In treble manner on your virtuous lives.
And may our lives and duty daily strive,
To be found worthy of that loving favour,
Which from your reverent age we now receive,
Without desert, or merit.
Room for a desirer of Justice, what my sister Maria;
Who thought to have met you here?
You may see brother, unlooked for guests proof of∣ten troublesome.
Well, but is your husband there any quieter then a was?
Sir, I must desire you to forget all injuries, if, in not be∣ing my self, I offered you any.
Isle see that peace concluded.
Which I agree to, for patience is a virtue father Hog.
Was it you son that cried so loud for justice?
Yes marry was it, and this the party to whom it appear∣taines.
O my most honoured lord I am undone, robed this black night of all the wealth and treasure, which these many years I have hourly laboured for.
And who are those have done this outrage to you?
Oh knew I that, I then my lord were happy.
Come you for Justice then, not knowing against whom the course of Justice should extend it self?
Nor yet suspect you none?
None but the devil.
I thought a was a Cheater, ere since I heard two or three Templers swear at dice the last Christmas, that the devil had got all.
My kind acquaintance. Joy to thy good success.
Noble, and free-borne Haddit, welcome.
Mr. Hog good-day.
For I have had a bad night on it
Sickness is incident to age, what be the writings ready
to be sealed, wee entreated last day.
Yes I think they are, would the Scrivener were paid for the making them.
A shall be so, though I doote my self, is the money put up as I appointed?
Yes tic put up, confusion cease the receivers.
Heaven bless vs all, what mean you sir?
O sir, I was robbed this night of all I had,
My daughter to is lost, and I undone.
Marry, God forbid, after what manner I pray.
O to recount sir will breed more ruth,
Then did the tale of that high Trojan Duke,
To the sad fated Carthaginian Queen.
What exclamations that?
What you will grieve at Cos,
Your worshipful friend M. Hog is robbed.
Robed, by whom or how?
O theres the grief, a knows not whom to suspect.
The fear of hell oretake them whatsoere they be: but wheres your daughter, I hope she is safe.
Thanks heaven, I see shoe's now so, where hast thou been my girl?
Alas sir, carried by amazemēt, I know not where, pursued by the robbers forced to fly as mad affright, through al the City streets to seek redress, but that lay fast asleep in all men's thou∣ses, nor would lend an ear to the distressed.
O heavy accident, but see you grieve too much,
Being your daughter's found, for the other loss;
Since tic the will of heaven to give and take,
Value it as nothing, you have yet sufficient
To live in blessed content, had you no more
But my small mortgage for your daughter here;
Whom I have ever loved in dearest affection,
If so you please so much to favour me,
I will accept her spite of poverty,
And make her jointure of some store of land,
Which by the loss of a good aged friend
Late fell to me, what first a match or no.
It is.
Then Isle have witness on it, my lord and gent.
Please you draw near, to be here witnesses
To a wished contract, twixt this maid and I.
We all are willing.
Then in the presence of you all, I give my daughter free∣lie to this gent. as wife, and to show how much I stand affected to him for dowry with her, I doe back restore his mortgaged lands, and for their loves I vow, ever hereafter to detest, re∣nounce, loath and abhor all slavish avarice:
Which doth ascend from hell, sent by the devil,
To be amongst men the actor of all evil.
A blessed conversion.
A good far unexpected, and now gentlemen,
I do enuite you all to feast with me
This happy day, that we may altogether
Applaud his good success, and let this day be spent,
In sports and shows with gladsome merriment:
Come blessed converted man wcele lead the way,
As unto heaven I hope we shall.
Heaven grant we may.
Come my Maria and repent•ned friend,
Wee three have tasted worst of misery,
Which now add joy to our felicity.
We three are happy wee have gained much wealth,
And though we have done it by a trick of stealth,
Yet all I trust are pleased, and will our ill acquit,
Since it hath saved a soul was hells by right.
To follow after then, our lot doth fall,
Now rime it Peter.
A good night to all.
NOW expectation hath at full received
What we late promised, if in ought we have pleased,
Tic all we sought to accomplish, and much more
Then our weak merit dares to attribute
Unto it self, till you vouchsafe to deign
In your kind censure, so to gratify
Our trivial labours: —
If it hath pleased the judicial ear,
Wee have our Authors wish, and void of fear
Dare ignorant men, to show their worst of hate.
It not detracts, but adds unto that state
Where desert flourished.
Weal rest applouded in their derogation,
Though with an hiss they crown that confirmation:
For this our Author saith, left prove distasteful,
He only grieves you spent two hours so wast-full:
But if it like, and you affect his pen,
You may command it when you please again.

YOU are wel-come to your Country (dear A•toni•)
You have bin long in France, and you return
A very formal French-man, in your habit.
How doe you like the French Court?
I admire it,
In seeking to reduce both State, and People
To a fixed Order, there iuditious King
Begins at home: Quits first his Royal Palace
Of flattering Sycophants of dissolute,
And infamous persons which he sweetly terms
His Masters Master-peece (the work of Heaven)
Considring duly, that a Princes Court
Is like a common Fountain, whence should flow,
Pure siluer-droppes ingenerall: But if 't chance
Some cursed example poyson't near the head,
"Death, and diseases through the whole land spread.
And what is it makes this blessed government,
But a most provident Council, who dare freely
Inform him, the corruption of the times?
Though some oth'Court hold it presumption▪
To instruct Princes what they ought to doe,
It is a noble duty to inform them
What they ought to fore-see: Here comes Bosola
The only Court-Gall: yet I observe his railing
Is not for simple love of Piety:
Indeed he rails at those things which he wants,
Would be as lecherous, covetous, or proud,
Bloody, or envious, as any man,
If he had means to be so: Here's the Cardinal.
I doe haunt you still.
So.
I have done you
Better service then to be slighted thus:
Miserable age, where only the reward
Of doing well, is the doing of it.
You enforce your merit to-much.
I fell into the Galli•s in your service,
Where, for two years together, I wore two Towels in stead of
A shirt, with a knot on the shoulder, after the fashion of a
Romaine Mantle: Slighted thus? I will thrive some way:
Black-birds fatten best in hard weather: why not I,
In these dog days?
Would you could become honest,
With all your divinity, do but direct me the way to it, I
Have known many travel far for it, and yet return as
Arrant knaves, as they went forth; because they carried
Themselves always a long with them; Are you gon?
Some fellows (they say) are possessed with the devil,
But this great fellow, were able to possess the greatest
Devil, and make him worse.
He hath denied thee some suit?
He, and his brother, are like Plum-trees (that grow crooked
Over standing-pooles) they are rich, and ore-laden with
Fruit, but none but Crows, Pies, and Catter-pillers feed
On them: Could I be one of their flattering Panders, I
Would hang on their ears like a horse-leach, till I were full, an
Then drop off: I pray leave me.
Who wold rely upon these miserable dependences, in expectation to
Be advanced to morrow? what creature, ever fed worse, then hoping
Tantalus? nor ever did any man more fearfully, then he that hoped
For a pleadon: There are rewards for hawks, and dogs, and
When they have done vs service; but for a Soldier, that hazards his
Limbs in a battle, nothing but a kind of Geometry, is his last Supportation.
Geometry?
I, to hang in a fair pair of slings, take his latter-swinge in the
World, upon an honourable pare of Crowtches, from hospital
To hospital, fare ye well Sir. And yet do not you scorn vs, for
Places in the Court, are but likes beds in the hospital, where this
Mans head lies at that mans foot, and so lower, and lower.
I knew this fellow (seven years) in the Galleys,
For a notorious murder, and it was thought
The Cardinal suborned it: he was released
By the French General (Gaston de Fox)
When he recovered Naples.
It is great pity
He should be thus neglected, I have heard
He's very valiant: This foul melancholy
Will poison all his goodness, for (i'll tell you)
If too immoderate sleep, be truly said
To be an inward rust unto the soul;
It then doth follow want of action
Breeds all black male-contents, and their close rearing
(Like moths in cloth) doe hurt for want of wearing.
The Presence gins to fill, you promised me
To make me the partaker of the natures
Of some of your great Courtiers.
The Lord Cardinals
And other strangers, that are now in Court,
I Shall: here comes the great Calabrian Duke.
Who took the Ring oftenest?
Antonio Bologna (my Lord)
Our Sister Duchess great Master of her household?
Give him the Jewel: when shall we leave this sportiue-action,
And fall to action indeed?
Me thinks (my Lord)
You should not desire to go to war, in person.
Now, for some gravity: why (my Lord?)
It is fitting a Soldier arise to be a Prince, but not necessary
A Prince descend to be a Captain?
No?
No, (my Lord)
He were far better do it by a Deputy.
Why should he not as well sleep, or eat, by a Deputy?
This might take idle, offensive, and base office from him,
Whereas the other deprives him of honour.
Believe my experience: that Realm is never long in quiet,
Where the Ruler, is a Soldier.
Thou toldst me
Thy wife could not endure fighting.
True (my Lord.)
And of a jest, she broke of a Captain;
She met, full of wounds: I have forgot it.
She told him (my Lord) he was a pitiful fellow, to lie,
Like the Children of Ismael all in Tents.
Why, there's a wit were able to undo
All the Surgeons of the City, for although
Gallants should quarrel, and had drawn their weapons,
And were ready to go to it; yet her persuasions would
Make them put up.
That she would (my Lord)
How doe you like my Spanish Gennit?
He is all fire.
I am of Plin•y's opinion, I think he was begot by the wind,
He runs, as if he were ballass'd with Quick-siluer.
True (my Lord) he to•les from the Tilt-often.
Ha, ha, ha.
Why do you laugh? Me thinks you that are Courtiers
Should be my touch-wood, take fire, when I give fire;
That is, laugh when I laugh, were the subject never so witty,
True (my Lord) I my self have heard a very good jest,
And have scorned to seem to have so silly a wit, as to understand it.
But I can laugh at your Fool (my Lord▪)
He cannot speak (you know) but he makes faces,
My Lady cannot abide him.
No?
Nor endure to be in merry Company: for she says
Too much laughing, and too much Company, fills her
Too full of the wrinkle.
I would then have a Mathematical Instrument made for
Her face, that she might not laugh out of compass: I shall shortly
Visit you at Millaine (Lord Siluio.)
Your Grace shall arrive most wel-come.
You are a good Horse-man (Antonio) you have excellent
Riders in France, what doe you think of good Horse-man-ship?
Noblely (my Lord) as out of the Grecian-horse, issued
Many famous Princes: So, out of brave Horse-man-ship,
Arise the first Sparks of growing resolution, that raise
The mind, to noble action.
You have be-spoake it worthily.
Your brother, the Lord Cardinal, and sister Duchess.
Are the Galleys come about?
They are (my Lord.)
Here's the Lord Siluio, is come to take his leave.
Now (Sir) your promise: what's that Cardinal?
I mean his Temper? they say he's a brave fellow,
Will play his five thousand crowns, at Tennis, Dance,
Court Ladies, and one that hath fought single Combats.
Some such flashes superficially hang on him, for form:
But observe his inward Character: he is a melancholy
Church-man: The Spring in his face, is nothing but the
Engendering of Toads: where he is jealous of any man.
He lays worse plots for them, then ever was imposed on
Hercules: for he strewes in his way Flatters, Panders,
Intelligencers, A theists,: and a thousand such political
Monsters: he should have been Pope: but in stead of
Coming to it, by the primatiue decency of the church,
He did bestow bribes, so largely, and so impudently, as if he would
Have carried it away without heavens knowledge. Some good he Hath done.
You have given too much of him: what's his brother?
The Duke there? a most perverse, and turbulent Nature,
What appears in him mirth, is merely outside,
If he laugh heartily, it is to laugh
All honesty out of fashion.
Twins?
In quality:
He speaks with others Tongues, and hears men's suites,
With others Ears: will seem to sleep of the bench
Only to entrap offenders, in their answers;
Doombes men to death, by information,
Rewards, by heare-say.
Then the Law to him
Is like a foul black cob-web, to a Spider,
He makes it his dwelling, and a prison
To entangle those shall feed him.
Most true:
He neu'r pays debts, unless they be showed turns,
And those he will confess, that he doth owe,
Last: for his brother, there, (the Cardinal)
They that doe flatter him most, say Oracles
Hang at his lips: and verily I believe them:
For the Devil speaks in them.
But for their sister, (the right noble Duchess)
You never fixed you eye, on three fair Metals,
Cast in one figure, of so different temper:
For her discourse, it is so full of Rapture,
You only will begin, then to be sorry
When she doth end her speech: and wish (in wonder)
She held it less vaine-glory, to talk much
Then your penance, to hear her: whilst she speaks,
She throws upon a man, so sweet a look,
That it were able raise one to a Galliard
That lay in a dead palsy; and to dote
On that sweet countenance: but in that look,
There speaks so divine a continence,
As cuts off all lascivious, and vain hope.
Her days are practised in such noble virtue,
That, sure her nights (nay more her very Sleeps)
Are more in Heaven, then other Ladies Shrifts.
Let all sweet Ladies, break their flattering Glasses,
And dress themselves in her.
Fie Antonio,
You play the wire-drawer with her commendations.
I'll case the picture up: only thus much,
All her particular worth, grows to this sum:
She staines the time past: lights the time to come,
You must attend my Lady, in the gallery,
Some half an hour hence.
I shall.
Sister, I have a suit to you:
To me, Sir?
A Gentleman here: Daniel de Bosola:
One, that was in the Galleys.
Yes, I know him:
A worthy fellow h'is: pray let me entreat for▪
The prouisorship of your horse.
Your knowledge of him,
Commends him, and prefers him.
Call him heither,
Wee now upon parting: Good Lord Siluio
Do vs commend to all our noble friends
At the Leagues.
Sir, I shall.
You are for Millaine?
I am:
Bring the Carroches: we'll bring you down to the Haven.
Be sure you entertain that Bosola
For your Intelligence: I would not be seeene in it.
And therefore many times I have slighted him,
When he did court our furtherance: as this Morning.
Antonio, the great Master of her household
Had been far fitter:
You are deceived in him,
His Nature is too honest for such business,
He comes: I'll leave you:
I was lured to you.
My brother here (the Cardinal) could never abide you.
Never since he was in my debt.
May be some oblique character in your face, made him suspect you?
Doth he study Physiognomy?
There's no more credit, to be given to th'face,
Then to a sick mans urine, which some call
The Physicians whore, because she cozens him:
He did suspect me wrongfully:
For that
You must give great men leave to take their times:
Distrust, doth cause vs seldom be deceived;
You see, the oft shaking of the Cedar-Tree
Fastens it more at root.
Yet take heed:
For to suspect a friend unworthily,
Instructs him the next way to suspect you,
And prompts him to deceive you.
There's gold.
So:
What follows? (Never raind such showers as these
Without thunderbolts in the tail of them;) whose throat must I cut?
Your inclination to shed blood, rides post
Before my occasion to use you: I give you that
To live in the Court, here: and observe the Duchess,
To note all the particulars of her hauiour:
What suitors doe solicit her for marriage
And whom she best affects: she's a young widow,
I would not have her marry again.
No, Sir?
Doe not you ask the reason: but be satisfied,
I say I would not.
It seems you would create me
One of your familiars.
Familiar? vvhat's that?
Why, a very quaint invisible Devil, in flesh:
An Intelligencer.
Such a kind of thriving thing
I would wish thee: and ere long, thou moist arrive
At a higher place by it.
Take your Devils
Which Hell calls Angels: these cursed gifts would make
You a corrupter, me an impudent traitor,
And should I take these they 'll'd take me Hell.
Sir, I'll take nothing from you, that I have given:
There is a place, that I procured for you
This morning: (the Prouisor-ship of the horse)
Have you heard out?
No.
It is yours, is it not worth thanks?
I would have you curse your self now, that your bounty
(Which makes men truly noble) ere should make
Me a villain: oh, that to avoid ingratitude
For the good deed you have done me, I must doe
All the ill man can invent: Thus the Devil
Candies all sins are: and what Heaven terms wild,
That names he complemental.
Be your self:
Keep your old garb of melancholy: twill express
You envy those that stand aboue your reach,
Yet strive not to come neere'em: This will gain
Access, to private lodgings, where your self
May (like a politic dormouse,
As I have seen some,
Feed in a Lords dish, half a sleep, not seeming
To listen to any talk: and yet these Rogues
Have cut his throat in a dream: whats my place?
The Prouisors-ship of the horse? say then my corruption
Grew out of horse-doong: I am your creature.
Away.
Let good men, for good deeds, covet good fame,
Since place, and riches oft are bribes of shame
Sometimes the Devil doth preach.
We are to part from you: and your own dis∣creation
Must now be your director.
You are a Widow:
You know already what man is: and therefore
Let not youth: high promotion, eloquence,
No, nor any thing without the addition, Honour,
Sway your high blood.
Marry? they are most luxurious,
Will wed twice.
O •ie:
Their livers are more spotted
Then Labans sheep.
Diamonds are of most value
They say; that have past through most Jewellers hands.
Whores, by that rule, are precious:
Will you hear me?
I'll never marry:
So most Widows say:
But commonly that motion lasts no longer
Then the turning of an houreglasse, the funeral Sermon,
And it, end both together.
Now hear me:
You live in a rank pasture here, in the Court,
There is a kind of honney-dew, that's deadly:
Twill poison your fame; look too't: be not cunning:
For they whose faces doe bolye their hearts,
Are Witches, ere they arrive at twenty years,
I: and give the devil suck.
This is terrible good council:
Hypocrisy is woven of a fine small thread,
(Subtler, then Vulcans Engine: yet (believe)
Your darkest actions: nay, your priuat'st thoughts,
Will come to light.
You may slatter your self,
And take your own choice: privately be married
Under the Eves of night.
Think it the best voyage
That ere you made; like the irregular Crab,
Which though't goes backward, thinks that it goes, right,
Because it goes its own way: but observe;
Such weddings, may more properly be said
To be executed, then celibrated.
The marriage night
Is the entrance into some prison.
And those joys,
Those lustful pleasures, are like heavy sleeps
Which doe fore-run mans mischief
Fare you well.
Wisdom begins at the end: remember it.
I think this speech between you both was studied,
It came so roundly off.
You are my sister,
This was my Fathers poniard: doe you see,
I'll'd be loath to see it look rusty, because it was his:
I would have you to give ore these chargeable Revels;
A Visor, and a Masque are whispering rooms
That were neu'r built for goodness: fare ye well:
And women, like that part, which (like the Lamprey)
Hath neu'r a bone in it.
Fie Sir:
Nay,
I mean the Tongue: variety of Courtship;
What cannot a neat knave with a smooth tale,
Make a woman believe? farewell, lusty Widow.
Shall this move me? if all my royal kindred
Lay in my way, unto this marriage:
I'll'd make them my low footsteps: And even now,
Even in this hate (as men in some great battles
By apprehending danger, have achieved
Almost impossible actions: I have heard Soldiers say so,
So I, through frights, and threatenings, will assay
This dangerous venture: Let old wives report
I wincked, and chose a husband: Cariola,
To thy known secrecy, I have given up
More then my life, my fame:
Both shall be safe:
For I'll conceal this secret from the world
As warily as those that trade in poison,
Keep poison from their children.
Thy protestation
Is ingenious, and hearty: I believe it.
Is Antonio come?
He attends you:
Good dear soul,
Leave me: but place thy self behind the Arras,
Where thou moist ouer-heare vs: wish me good speed
For I am going into a wilderness,
Where I shall find nor path, nor friendly clew
To be my guide, I sent for you, Sir down:
Take Pen and Ink, and write: are you ready?
Yes:
What did I say?
That I should write some-what.
Oh, I remember:
After this triumphs, and this large expense
It's fit (like thrifty husbands) we enquire
What's laid up for to morrow:
So please your beauteous Excellence.
Beauteous? Indeed I thank you: I look yo•g for your sake.
You have tan my cares upon you.
I'll fetch your Grace the
Particulars of your revenue, and expense.
Oh, you are an upright treasurer: but you mistook,
For when I said I meant to make enquiry,
VVhat's laid up for to morrow: I did mean
VVhat's laid up yonder for me.
Where?
In Heaven,
I am making my will, (as it is fit Princes should
In perfect memory) and I pray Sir, tell me
Were not one better make it smiling, thus?
Then in deep groans, and terrible ghastly looks,
As if the gifts we parted with, procured
That violent destruction?
Oh, much better.
If I had a husband now, this care were quit:
But I intend to make yon Ouer-seer;
What good deed, shall we first remember? say.
Begin with that first good deed, began i'th'world,
After mans creation, the Sacrament of marriage,
I'd have you first provide for a good husband,
Give him all.
All?
Yes, your excellent self.
In a winding sheet•?
In a cople.
St. Winfrid, that were a strange will.
It were strange if there were no will in you
To marry again.
What doe you think of marriage?
I take it, as those that deny Purgatory,
It locally contains, or heaven, or hell,
There's no third place in it.
How doe you affect it?
My banishment, feeding my melancholy,
Would often reason thus.
Pray let's hear it.
Say a man never marry, nor have children,
What takes that from him? only the bare name
Of being a father, or the weak delight
To see the little wanton, ride a cocke-horse
Upon a painted stick, or hear him chatter
Like a taught Starling.
Fie, fie, what's all this?
One of your eyes is blood-shot, use my Ring to it,
They say it is very sovereign, it was my wedding Ring,
And I did vow never to part with it,
But to my second husband.
You have parted with it now.
Yes, to help your eye-sight.
You have made me stark blind.
How?
There is a saucy, and ambitious devil
Is dancing in this circle.
Remove him.
How?
There needs small conjuration, when your finger
May doe it: thus, is it fit?
What said you?
Sir,
This goodly roose of yours, it too low built,
I cannot stand upright in it, nor discourse,
Without I raise it higher: raise your self,
Or if you please, my hand to help you: so.
Ambition (Madam) is a great mans madness,
That is not kept in chains, and close-pent-roomes,
But in fair lightsome lodgings, and is girt
With the wild noise of prattling visitans,
Which makes it lunatic, beyond all cure,
Conceive not, I am so stupid, but I aim
Whereto your favours tend: But he's a fool
That (being a cold) would thrust his hands i'th'fire
To warm them.
So, now the ground's broke,
You may discover what a wealthy Mine,
I make you Lord off.
Oh my unworthiness.
You were ill to sell your self,
This darkening of your worth, is not like that
Which trades-men use i'th'City, their false lights
Are to rid bad wares off: and I must tell you
If you will know where breathes a complete man,
(I speak it without flattery) turn your eyes,
And progress through your self.
Were there nor heaven, nor hell,
I should be honest: I have long served virtue,
And neu'r tan wages of her.
Now she pays it,
The misery of vs, that are borne great,
We are forced to woe, because none dare woe vs:
And as a Tyrant doubles with his words,
And fearfully equiuocates: so we
Are forced to express our violent passions
In riddles, and in dreams, and leave the path
Of simple virtue, which was never made
To seem the thing it is not: Go, go brag
You have left me heartless, mine is in your bosom,
I hope twill multiply love there: You doe tremble:
Make not your heart so dead a piece of flesh
To fear, more then to love me: Sir, be confident,
What is it distracts you? This is flesh, and blood, (Sir,)
It is not the figure cut in Alabaster
Kneels at my husbands tomb: Awake, awake (man)
I do here put of all vain ceremony,
And only doe appear to you, a young widow
That claims you for her husband, and like a widow,
I use but half a blush in it.
Truth speak for me,
I will remain the constant Sanctuary
Of your good name.
I thank you (gentle love)
And because you shall not come to me, in debt,
(Being now my Steward) here upon your lips
I sign your Quietus est: This you should have begged now,
I have seen children oft eat sweete-meates thus,
As fearful to devour them too soon.
But for your Brothers?
Do not think of them,
All discord, without this circumference,
Is only to be pitied, and not feared:
Yet, should they know it, time will easily
Scatter the tempest.
These words should be mine,
And i'll the parts you have spoke, if some part of it
Would not have savoured flattery.
Kneel.
Ho?
Be not amazed, this woman's of my Council,
I have heard Lawyers say, a contract in a Chamber,
(Per verb presenti) is absolute marriage:
Bless (Heaven) this sacred Gordian, which, let violence
Never untwine.
And may our sweet affections, (like the Spears)
Be still in motion.
Quickening, and make
The like soft Musique.
That we may imitate the loving Palms
(Best Emblem of a peaceful marriage)
That neu'r bore fruit divided.
What can the Church force more?
That Fortune may not know an accident
Either of joy, or sorrow, to divide
Our fixed wishes.
How can the Church build faster?
We now are man, and wife, and it is the Church
That must but echo this: Maid, stand a part,
I now am blind.
What's your conceit in this?
I would have you lead your Fortune by the hand.
Unto your marriage bed:
(You speak in me this, for we now are one)
We'll only lie, and talk together, and plot
T'appease my humorous kindred; and if you please
(Like the old tale, in Alexander and Lodewicke)
Lay a naked sword between vs, keep vs chaste:
Oh, let me shroud my blushes in your bosom,
Since it is the treasury of all my secrets.
Whether the spirit of greatness, or of woman
Reign most in her, I know not, but it shows
A fearful madness, I owe her much of pity.
You say you would fine be taken, for an eminent Courtice?
It is the very maine of my ambition.
Let me see, you have a reasonable good face for it already,
And your night-cap expresses your ears sufficient largely,
I would have you learn to twirl the strings of your band with a
Good grace; and in a set speech, (at th'end of every sentence,)
To hum, three, or four times, or blow your nose (till it smart again,)
To recover your memory, when you come to be a president in
Criminal causes, if you smile upon a prisoner, hang him, but if
You frown upon him, and threaten him, let him be sure to scope
The Gallows.
I would be a very merry president,
Do not sup a nights, twill beget you an admirable wit.
Rather it would make me have a good stomach to quarrel,
For they say, you roaring-boyes eat meat seldom,
And that makes them so valiant:
But how shall I know whether the people take me
For an eminent fellow.
I will teach a trick to know it,
Give out you lie a dying, and if you
Hear the common people curse you,
Be sure you are taken for one of the prime night-caps,
You come from painting now?
From what?
Why, from your scurvy face-physicke,
To behold thee not painted inclines somewhat near
A miracle: These in thy face here, were deep ruts,
And foul sloughs the last progress:
There was a Lady in France, that having had the small pockes,
Flayed the skin off her face, to make it more level;
And whereas before she looked like a Nutmeg-grater,
After she resembled an abortive hedge-hog.
Doe you call this painting?
No, no but you call careening of an old
Morphew'd Lady, to make her disembogue again,
There's rough-cast phrase to your plastique.
It seems you are well acquainted with my closet?
One would suspect it for a shop of witch-craft,
To find in it the fat of Serpents; s•awne of Snakes, Jaws spittle,
And their young children ordures, and all these for the face:
I would sooner eat a dead pigeon▪ taken from the soles of the feet
Of one sick of the plague, then kiss one of you fasting:
Here are two of you, whose sin of your youth, is the very
Patrimony of the Physician, makes him renew his
Foote-cloth with the Spring, and change his
High-priz'd courtesan with the fall of the leaf:
I do wonder you doe not loath your selves,
Observe my meditation now:
What thing is in this outward form of man
To be beloved? we account it ominous,
If Nature doe produce a Colt, or Lamb,
A Fawn, or Goat, in any limb resembling
A Man; and fly from it as a prodigy.
Man stands amazed to see his deformity,
In any other Creature but himself.
But in our own flesh, though we bear diseases
Which have their true names, only tan from beasts,
As the most ulcerous Woolfe, and swinish Meazeall;
Though we are eaten up of lice, and worms,
And though continually we bear about vs
A rotten and dead body, we delight
To hide it in rich tissew all our fear,
(Nay all our terror) is, least our Physician
Should put vs in the ground, to be made sweet.
Your wife's gone to Rome: you two cople, and get you
To the wels at Louse, to recover your aches.
I have other work on foot: I observe our Duchess
Is sick a days, she puykes, her stomach seethes,
The •ins of her eie-lids, look most teeming blew,
She wains i'th'cheeke, and waxes fat i'th'flanke;
And (contrary to our Italian fashion,)
Wears a loose-bodied Gown, there's somewhat in it,
I have a trick, may chance discover it
(A pretty one) I have bought some Apicocks,
The first our Spring yields.
And so long since married?
You amaze me.
Let me seal your lips for ever,
For did I think, that any thing but the air,
Could carry these words from you, I should wish
You had no breath at all: Now Sir, in your contemplation?
You are studying to become a great wise fellow?
Oh Sir, the opinion of wisdom, is a foul tettor,
That runs all over a mans body: if simplicity
Direct vs to have no evil, it directs vs to a happy
Being: For the subtlest folly proceeds from the
Subtlest wisdom: Let me be simply honest.
I do understand your in-side.
Do you so?
Because you would not seem to appear to th'world
Puffed up with your preferment: You continue
This out off shashion melancholy, leave it, leave it.
Give me leave to be honest in any phrase, in any
Complement whatsoever, shall I confess my self to you?
I look no higher then I can reach:
They are the gods, that must ride on winged horses,
A Lawyers mule of a slow pace, will both surt
My disposition, and business: For (mark me)
When a mans mind rides faster then his horse can gallop,
They quickly both tyre.
You would look up to Heaven, but I think
The Devil, that rules i'th'aire, stands in your light.
Oh (Sir) you are Lord of the ascendant,
Chief man with the Duchess, a Duke was your
Cousin German, removed: Say you were lineally
Descended from King Pippin, or he himself,
What of this? search the heads of the greatest rivers in
The World, you shall find them but bubles of water:
Some would think the souls of Princes were brought
Forth by some more weighty cause, then those of meaner persons,
They are deceived, there's the same hand to them:
The like passions sway them, the same reason, that makes
A Vicar go to Law for a tithe-pig,
And undo his neighbours, makes them spoil
A whole Province, and batter down goodly
Cities, with the Cannon.
Your arm Antonio, do I not grow fat?
I am exceeding short-winded: Bosola,
I would have you (Sir) provide for me a Litter,
Such a one, as the Duchess of Florence road in.
The Duchess used one, when she was great with child▪
I think she did: come hither, mend my ruff,
Here, when? thou art such a tedious Lady; and
Thy breath smells of Lymmon pills, would thou had done,
Shall I •and under thy fingers? I am
So troubled with the mother.
I fear to much.
I have heard you say, that the French Courries
Wear their hats on fore the King.
I have seen it.
In the Presence?
Yes:
Why should not we bring up that fashion?
It is ceremony more then duty, that consists
In the remoouing of a piece of felt:
Be you the example to the rest of the Court,
Put on your hat first.
You must pardon me:
I have seen, in colder countries, then in France,
Nobles stand bare to th'Prince; and the distinction
My thought showed reverently.
I have a present for your Grace.
For me sir?
Apricots (Madam.)
O sir, where are they?
I have heard of none to year.
Good, her colour rises.
Indeed I thank you: they are wondrous fair ones:
What an unskilful fellow is our Gardiner?
We shall have none this month.
Will not your Grace pare them?
No, they taste of musk (me thinks) indeed they doe:
I know not: yet I wish your Grace had parde'em:
Why?
I forgot to tell you the knave Gardne•,
(Only to raise his profit by them the sooner)
Did ripen them in horse-doung.
O you jest:
You shall judge: pray taste one.
Indeed Madam,
I doe not love the fruit.
Sir, you are loath
To rob vs of our dainties: it is a delicate fruit,
They say they are restorative?
It is a pretty
Art: this grafting.
It is so: a bettring of nature.
To make a pippin grow upon a crab,
A dampson on a black thorne: how greedily she eats them?
A whirlwind strike off these bawd-farthingalls,
For, but for that, and the loose-bodied gown,
I should have discovered apparently
The young spring-hall cutting a caper in her belly.
I thank you (Bosola:) they were right good ones,
If they doe not make me sick.
How now Madame?
This greene fruit: and may stomach are not friend•
How they swell me?
Nay, you are too much swelled already.
Oh, I am in an extreme cold sweat.
I am very sorry:
Lights to my chamber: O, good Antonio,
I fear I am undone.
Lights there, lights.
O my most trusty Delio, we are lost:
I fear she's fallen in labour: and ther's left
No time for her remove.
Have you prepared
Those Ladies to attend her? and procured
That politic safe conveyance for the Mid-wife
Your Duchess plotted.
I have:
Make use then of this forced occasion:
Give out that Bosola hath poisoned her,
With these Apricots: that will give some colour▪
For her keeping close.
Fie, fie, the Physicians
Will then flock to her.
For that you may pretend
She'll use some prepared Antidote of her own,
Least the Physicians should repoyson her.
I am lost in amazement: I know not what to think on it.
So, so: ther's no question but her teatchiues
And most vulterous eating of the Apricots, are apparent
Signs of breeding, now?
I am in hast (Sir.)
There was a young wayting-woman, had a monstrous de∣sire
To see the Glasse-house.
Nay, pray let me go:
And it was only to know what strange instrument it was,
Should swell up a glass to the fashion of a women's belly.
I will hear no more of the Glasse-house,
You are still abusing women?
Who I? no, only (by the way now and then) mention
Your fraileties. The Orange tree bear ripe and greene
Fruit▪ and blossoms altogether: And some of you give entertainment
For pure love: but more, for more precious reward. The lusty
Spring smells well: but drooping Autumn tastes well: If we
Have the same golden showers, that rained in the time of Iupiter
The Thunderer: you have the same Danes still, to hold up their
Laps to receive them: did thou never study the Mathematiques?
What's that (Sir.)
Why, to know the trick how to make a many lines meet
In one center: Go go; give your foster-daughters good council•
Tell them, that the Devil takes delight to hang a women's girdle;
Like a false rusty watch that she cannot discern how
The time passes.
Shht up the Court gates:
Why sir? what's the danger?
Shut up the Posternes presently: and call
All the Officers of the Court.
I shall instantly:
Who keeps the key of the Parke-gate?
Forobosco.
Let him bring presently.
Oh, Gentlemen, of the Court, the foulest treason.
If that these Apricots should be poisoned, now;
Without my knowledge.
There was taken even now a Switzer
In the Duchess Bed-chamber.
A Switzer?
With a Pistol in his great cod-piece.
Hh, ha, ha.
The cod-piece was the case for it.
There was a cunning traitor.
Who would have searched his cod-piece?
True, if he had kept out of the Ladies chambers:
And all the moulds of his buttons, were leaden bullets.
Oh wicked Caniball: a fire-lock in's cod-piece?
It was a French plot upon my life.
To see what the Devil can doe.
All the Offices here?
We are:
Gentlemen,
We have lost much Plate you know; and but this evening
Jewels, to the value of four thousand Ducats
Are missing in the Ducthesse Cabinet,
Are the Gates shut?
Yes.
It is the Duchess pleasure
Each Officer be locked into his chamber
Till the Sun-rysing: and to send the keys
Of all their chests, and of their outward doors
Into her bed-chamber: She is very sick.
At her pleasure.
She entreats you take it not ill: The Innocent
Shall be the more approved by it.
Gentleman of the Wood-yard, whore's your Swit∣zer now?
By this hand it was credibly reported by one of the Black-guard.
How fares it with the Duchess?
She's exposed
Unto the worst of torture, pain, and fear;
Speak to her all happy comfort.
How I do play the fool with mine own danger?
You are this night (dear friend) to post to Rome,
My life lies in your service.
Doe not doubt me,
Oh, It is far from me: and yet fear presents me
Somewhat that look like danger.
Believe it,
It is but the shadow of your fear, no more:
How superstitiously we mind our evils?
The throwing down salt, or crossing of a Hare;
Bleeding at nose, the stumbling of a horse:
Or singing of a Criket, are of power
To daunt whole man in vs: Sir, fare you well:
I wish you all the joys of a blessed Father;
And (for my faith) lay this unto your breast,
Old friends (like old swords) still are trusted best.
Sir, you are the happy father of a son,
Your wife commends him to you.
Blessed comfort:
For heauen-sake tend her well: I'll presently
Go set a figure for's Nativity.
Sure I did hear a woman shriek: list, ho?
And the sound came (if I received it right)
From the Duchess lodgings: ther's some stratagem,
In the con•yning all our Courtiers
To their several wards: I must have part of it,
My Intelligence will freize else: List again,
It may be it was the melancholy bird,
(Best friend of silence, and of solitariness)
The Oowle, that schream'd so: ho? Antonio?
I heard some noise: whose there? what art thou? speak.
Antonio? Put not your face; nor body
To such a forced expression of fear,
I am Bosola; your friend.
Bosola?
(This Moil do's undermine me) heard you no•
A noise even now?
From whence?
From the Duchess lodging.
Not I: did you?
I did: or else I dreamed.
Let's walk towards it.
No: It may be, it was
But the rising of the wind:
Very likely:
Me thinks it is very cold, and yet you sweat.
You look wildly.
I have bin s•••ing a figure
For the Duchess Jewels;
Ah: and how falls your question?
Doe you •end it radical?
What's that to you?
It is rather to be questioned what design
(When all men were commanded to their lodgings)
Makes you a night-walker.
In sooth I'll tell you:
Now all the Court's asleep, I thought the Devil
Had least to doe here; I came to say my prayers,
And if it doe offend you, I doe so,
You are a fine Courtier.
This fellow will undo me;
You gave the Duchess Apricots to day,
Pray heaven they were not poisoned?
Poisoned? a spanish fig
For the imputation.
Traitors are ever confident,
Till they are discovered: There were Jewels stolen too,
In my conceit, none are to be suspected
More then your self.
You are a false steward.
Sawey slave: I'll pull thee up by the roots;
May be the ruin will crush you to pieces.
You are an impudent snake indeed (sir)
Are you scarce warm, and doe you show your sting?
You Libel well (sir.)
No (sir,)
Copy it out: and I will set my hand to it.
My nose bleeds: One that were superstitious, would coun•
This ominous: when it merely comes by chance.
Two letters, that are wrought here, for my name
Are drowned in blood: mere accedent: for you (sir) I'll take order:
In the morn you shall be safe: it is that must colour
Her lying-in: sir, this door you pass not:
I doe not hold it fit, that you come near
The Duchess lodgings, till you have quite your self;
The Great are like the Base; nay, they are the same.
When they seek shameful ways, to avoid shame.
Antonio here about, did drop a Paper,
Some of your help (falce-friend) oh, here it is:
What's here? a childes Nativity calculated?
The Duchess was delivered of a Son, 'tweene the hours twelve, and one, in the night▪ Anno Doom: 1504. (that's this year) decimo nono December, (that's this night) taken according to the Meridian of Malfy (that's our Duchess: happy discovery) The Lord of the first house, being combust in the ascendant, signifies short life: and Mars being in a human •igne, joined to the tail of the Dra∣gon, in the eight house, doth threaten a violent death; Caeteta non scrutantur.
Why now it is most apparent: This precise fellow
Is the Duchess Bawd: I have it to my wish:
This is a parcel of Intelligence
Our Courtiers were caside-vp for? It needs must follow,
That I must be committed, on pretence
Of poisoning her: which I'll endure, and laugh at:
If one could find the father now: but that
Time will discover; Old Castruchio
In the morning posts to Rome; by him I'll send
A Letter, that shall make her brothers Galls
Ore-flowe their Liuours, this was a thrifty way.
Though Lust doe masque in ne'er so strange disguise,
She's oft found witty, but is never wise.
Sit: thou art my best of wishes, pre-thee tell me
What trick did thou invent to come to Rome,
Without thy husband.
Why, (my Lord) I told him
I came to visit an old Anchorite
Hear, for devotion
Thou art a witty false one:
I mean to him.
You have prevailed with me
Beyond my strongest thoughts: I would not now
Find you inconstant.
Doe not put thy self
To such a voluntary torture: which proceeds
Out of your own guilt.
How (my Lord?)
You fear my constancy, because you have ap∣proved
Those giddy and wild turning in your self.
Did you ere find them?
Sooth generally for women;
A man might strive to make glass male-able,
Ere he should make them fixed.
So, (my Lord)
We had need go borrow that fantastic glass
Invented by Galileo the Florentine,
To view an other spacious world in the Moon,
And look to find a constant woman there.
This is very well (my Lord.)
Why do you weep?
Are tears your justification? the selfsame tears
Will fall into your husbands bosom, (Lady)
With a loud protestation, that you love him
Aboue the world: Come, i'll love you wisely,
That's jealously, since I am very certain
You cannot me make cuckold.
I'll go home
To my husband.
You may thank me, (Lady)
I have taken you off your melancholy perch,
Boar you upon my fist, and showed you game,
And let you fly at it: I pray the kiss me,
When thou was it with thy husband, thou was it watched
Like a tame Elephant: (still you are to thank me)
Thou had only kisses from him, and high feeding,
But what delight was that? it was just like one
That hath a little lingering on the Lute,
Yet cannot tune it: (still you are to thank me.)
You told me of a piteous wound i'th'heart,
And a sick liuour, when you wood me first,
And spake like one in physic.
Who's that?
Rest firm, for my affection to thee,
Lightning moons •low to it.
(Madam) a Gentleman
That's come post from Malfy, desires to see you.
Let him enter, i'll with-draw.
He says,
Your husband▪ (old Castruchio) is come to Rome,
M•st pitifully tired with riding post.
Signior Delio? it is one of my old Suitors
I was bold to come and see you.
Sir, your are wel-come.
Do you lie here?
Sure, your own experience
Will satisfy you no, our Roman Prelates
Do not keep lodging, for Ladies.
Very well:
I have brought you no commendations from your husband▪
For I know none by him.
I hear he's come to Rome?
I never knew man, and beast, of a horse, and a knight,
So weary of each other, if he had had a good back,
He would have undertook to have borne his horse,
His breech was so pitifully sore.
Your laughter,
Is my pity.
Lady, I know not whether
You want money, but I have brought you some.
From my husband?
No, from mine own allowance.
I must hear the condition, ere I be bound to take it.
Look on it, it is gold, hath it not a fine colour?
I have a Bird more beautiful.
Try the sound on it.
A Lute-string far exceeds it,
It hath no smell, like Cassia, or Cyu•t,
Nor is it physical, though some fond Doctors
Persuade vs, seeth's in Cullisses, i'll tell you,
This is a Creature bred by—
Your husband's come,
Hath delivered a letter to the Duke of Calabria, that,
To my thinking hath put him out of his wits.
Sir, you hear,
'Pray let me know your business, and your suite,
As briefly as can be.
With good speed, I would wish you
(At such time, as you are non-resident
With your husband) my mistress.
Sir, i'll go ask my husband if I shall,
And straight return your answer.
Very fine,
Is this her wit, or honesty that speaks thus?
I heard one say the Duke was highly moved
With a letter sent from Malfy: I doe fear
Antonio is betrayed: how fearfully
Shows his ambition now, (unfortunate Fortune)
"They pass through whirlpools, and deep woes doe shun,
Who the event weigh, ere the action's done.
I have this night dug up a man-drake.
Say you?
And I am grown mad with it.
What's the progedy?
Read there, a si•la dampn'd, she's loose i'th'hilt•:
Grown a notorious Strumpet.
Speak lower.
Lower?
Rogues do not whisper't now, but seek to published,
(As servants do the bounty of their Lords)
Aloud; and with a covetous searching eye,
To mark who note them: Oh confusion seas her,
She hath had most cunning bawds to serve her turn,
And more secure conveyances for lust,
Then Towns of garrison, for Service.
Is it possible?
Can this be certain?
Rubarbe, oh, for rubarbe
To purge this choler, here's the cursed day
To prompt my memory, and here'it shall stick
Till of her bleeding heart, I make a sponge
To wipe it out.
Why doe you make your self
So wild a Tempest?
Would I could be one,
That I might toss her palace about her ears,
Root up her goodly forests, blast her meads,
And lay her general territory as wast,
As she hath done her honours.
Shall our blood?
(The royal blood of Arragon, and Castle)
Be thus attaincted?
Apply desperate physic,
We must not now use Balsamum, but fire,
The smarting cupping-glasse, for that's the mean
To purge infected blood, (such blood as hers:)
There is a kind of pity in mi•e eye,
I'll give it to my hand-kercher; and now it is here,
I'll bequeath this to her Bastard.
What to do?
Why, to make soft lint for his mother wounds,
When I have hewed her to pieces.
Cursed creature,
Unequal nature, to place women's hearts
So far upon the left-side.
Foolish men,
That ere will trust their honour in a Bark,
Made of so slight, weake-bull-rush, as is woman,
Apt every minn•t to sink it?
Thus
Ignorance, when it hath purchased honour,
It cannot wield it.
Me thinks I see her laughing,
Excellent Hyena, talk to me somewhat, quickly,
Or my imagination will carry me
To see her, in the shameful act of sin.
With whom?
Happily, with some strong thigh'd Bargeman;
Or one th'wood-yard, that can quoit the sledge,
Or toss the bar, or else some lovely Squire
That carries cole• up, to her privy lodgings.
You •lie beyond your reason.
Go to (Mistress.)
It is not your whores milk, that shall quench my wild-fire,
But your whore a blood.
How idly shows this rage?
Which carries you, as men conveyed by witches, through the ayre,
On violent whirle-windes, this intemperate noise,
Fitly resembles deafe-mens shrill discourse,
Who talk aloud, thinking all other men
To have their imperfection.
Have not you,
My palsy?
Yes, I can be angry
Without this rupture, there is not in nature
A thing, that makes man so deformed, so beastly,
As doth intemperate anger: chide your self,
You have divers men, who never yet expressed
Their strong desire of rest, but by unrest,
By vexing of themselves: Come, put your self
In tune.
So, I will only study to seem
The thing I am not: I could kill her now,
In you, or in my self, for I do think
It is some sin in vs, Heaven doth revenge
By her.
Are you stark mad?
I would have their bodies
Burned in a coale-pit, with the ventage stopped,
That their cursed smoke might not ascend to Heaven:
Or dip the sheets they lie in, in pitch or sulphur,
Wrap them in it, and then light them like a match:
Or else to boil their Bastard to a cullisse,
And giue't his lecherous father, to renew
The sin of his back.
I'll leave you.
Nay, I have done,
I am confident, had I bin damned in hell,
And should have heard of this, it would have put me
Into a cold sweat: In, in, i'll go sleep,
Till I know who leaps my sister, i'll not stir:
That known, i'll find Scorpions to string my whips,
And fix her in a general eclipse.
Our noble friend (my most beloved Delio)
Oh, you have bin a stranger long at Court,
Came you along with the Lord Ferdinand?
I did Sir, and how fairs your noble Duchess?
Right fortunately well: She's an excellent
Feeder of pedigrees: since you last saw her,
She hath had two children more, a son, and daughter.
Me thinks it was yesterday: Let me but wink,
And not behold your face, which to mine eye
Is somewhat leaner, verily I should dream
It were within this half hour.
You have not bin in Law, (friend Delio)
Nor in prison, nor a Suitor at the Court
Nor begged the reversion of some great mans place,
Nor troubled with an old wife, which doth make
Your time so inseucibly hasten.
'Pray Sir tell me,
Hath not this news arrived yet to •he ear;
Of the Lord Cardinal?
I fear it hath,
The Lord Ferdinand, (that's newly come to Court,)
Doth bear himself right dangerously.
Pray why?
He is so quiet, that he seems to sleep
The tempest out (as Dormice do in Winter,)
Those houses, that are haunted, are most still,
Till the devil be up.
What say the common people.
The common-rable, do directly say
She is a Strumpet.
And your graver heads,
(Which would he politic) what censure they?
They do observe, I grow to infinite purchase
The left-hand way, and all suppose the Duchess
Would amend it, if she could: For, say they
Great Princes, though they grudge their Officers
Should have such large, and vnconfined means
To get wealth under them, will not complain
Least thereby they should make them odious
Unto the people, for other obligation
Of love, or marriage, between her and me,
They never dream off.
The Lord Ferdinand
Is going to bed.
I'll instantly to bed,
For I am weary: I am to be be-speake
A husband for you.
For me (Sir?) 'pray who is it?
The great Count Malateste.
Fie upon him,
A Count? he's a mere stick of sugar-candy,
(You may look quite thorough him) when I choose
A husband, I will marry for your honour.
You shall do well in it: How is it (worthy Antonio?)
But (Sir) I am to have private conference with you,
About a scandalous report, is spread
Touching mine honour.
Let me be ever deaf to it:
One of Pasquils paper-bullets, court calumny,
A pestilent ayre, which Princes palaces
Are seldom purged off: Yet, say that it were true,
I power it in your bosom, my fixed love,
Would strongly excuse, extenuate, nay deny
Faults where they apparent in you: Go be safe
In your own innocence.
Oh blessed comfort,
This deadly air is purged.
Her guilt treads on
Hot burning cultures: Now Bosola,
How thrives our intelligence?
(Sir) uncertainly,
It is rumoured she hath had three bastards, but
By whom, we may go read in the Stars.
Why some
Hold opinion, all things are written there.
Yes, if we could find Spectacles to read them,
I do suspect, there hath bin some Sorcery
Used on the Duchess.
Sorcery, to what purpose?
To make her dote on some desertles fellow,
She shames to acknowledge.
Can your faith, give way
To think there's power in potions, or in Charms,
To make vs love, whether we will or no?
Most certainly.
A way, these are mere gullcries, horrid things
Invented by some cheating mounte-banckes
To abuse vs: Do you think that herbs, or charms
Can force the will? Some trials have bin made
In this foolish practise; but the ingredients
Were lenitive poisons, such as are of force
To make the patient mad; and straight the witch
Swears (by equivocation, they are in love.
The witch-craft lies in her rank boot: this night
I will force confession from her: You told me
You had got (within these two days) a false key
Into her Bed-chamber.
I have.
As I would wish.
What doe you intend to doe?
Can you guess?
No:
Doe not ask then:
He that can compass me, and know my drifts,
May say he hath put a girdle about the world,
And sounded all her quick-sands.
I doe not
Think so.
What doe you think then? pray?
That you are
Your own Chronicle too much: and grossly
Flatter your self.
Give me thy hand, I thank thee:
I never gave Pension but to flatterers,
Till I entertained thee: farewell,
That Friend a Great mans ruin strongely checks,
Who rails into his belief, all his defects.
Bring me the Casket hither, and the Glass;
You get no lodging here, to night (my Lord.)
Indeed, I must persuade one:
Very good:
I hope in time twill grow into a custom,
That Noble men shall come with cap, and knee,
To purchase a nights lodging, of their wives.
I must lye here.
Must? you are a Lord of Misse-rule.
Indeed, my Rule is only in the night.
To what use will you put me,
We'll sleep together:
•la•, what pleasure can two Lovers find in sleep?
My Lord, I lye with her often: and I know
She'll much disquiet you:
See, you are complained of.
For she's the sprawlingst bedfellow.
I shall like her the better for that.
Sir, shall I ask you a question?
I pray thee Cariola.
Wherefore still when you lie with my Lady
Doe you rise so early?
Labouring men,
Count the Clock oftenest Cariola,
Are glad when their task's ended.
I'll stop your mouth.
Nay, that's but one, Venus had two soft Doves
To draw her Chariot: I must have another:
When wilt thou marry, Cariola?
Never (my Lord.)
O sic upon this single life: forgo it:
We read how Daphne, for her peevish slight
Became a fruitless Bay-tree: Siriux turned
To the pale empty Reed: Anaxarate
Was frozen into Marble: whereas those
Which married, or proved kind unto their friends
Were, by a gracious influence, transhap'd
Into the Oliffe, Pomegranate, Mulberry:
Became Flowers, precious Stones, or eminent Stars.
This is a vain Poetry: but I pray you tell me,
If there were proposed me, Wisdom, Riches, and Beauty,
In three several young men, which should I choose?
It is a hard question: This was Paris case
And he was blind in it, and there was great cause:
For how was it possible he could judge right,
Having three amorous Goddesses in view,
And they starcke naked: it was a Motion
Were able to be-night the apprehention
Of the seueerest Counsellor of Europe.
Now I look on both your faces, so well formed
It puts me in mind of a question, I would ask.
What is it?
I doe wonder why hard-fauour'd Ladies
For the most part, keep worse-fauour'd waieting women,
To attend them, and cannot endure faire-ones.
Oh, that's soon answered.
Did you ever in your life know an ill Painter
Desire to have his dwelling next door to the shop
Of an excellent Picture-maker? it would disgrace
His face-making, and undo him: I pre-thee
When were we so merry? my hair tangles.
'Pray-thee (Cariola) let's steal forth the room,
And let her talk to her self: I have divers times
Served her the like, when she hath chafde extremely:
I love to see her angry: softly Cariola.
Doth not the colour of my hair 'gin to change?
When I wax gray, I shall have all the Court
Powder their hair, with Arras, to be like me:
You have cause to love me, I entered you into my heart
Before you would vouchsafe to call for the keys.
We shall one day have my brothers take you napping:
Me thinks his Presence (being now in Court)
Should make you keep your own Bed: but you'll say
Love mixed with fear, is sweetest: I'll assure you
You shall get no more children till my brothers
Consent to be your Ghossips: have you lost your tongue? it is well∣come:
For know whether I am doomb'd to live, or die,
I can doe both like a Prince.
Die then, quickly:
Virtue, where art thou hid? what hideous thing
Is it, that doth eclipse thee?
'Pray sir hear me:
Or is it true, thou art but a bare name,
And no essential thing?
Sir:
Doe not speak.
No sir:
I will plant my soul in mine cares, to hear you.
Oh most imperfect light of human reason,
That make so unhappy, to fore see
What we can least prevent: Pursue thy wishes:
And glory in them: there's in shame no comfort,
But to be past all bounds, and sense of shame.
I pray sir, hear me: I am married,
So:
Happily, not to your liking: but for that
Alas: your shears doe come untimely now
To clip the birds wings, that's already flown:
Will you see my Husband?
Yes, if I
Could change eyes with a Basilisk:
Sure, you came hither
By his confederacy.
The howling of a Wolf
Is music to the (schrech-Owle) prithee peace:
What ere thou art, that hast enjoyed my sister,
(For I am sure thou hearst me) for thine own sake
Let me not know thee: I came hither, prepared
To work thy discovery: yet am now persuaded
It would beget such violent effects
As would damp vs both: I would not for ten Millions
I had beheld thee: therefore use all means
I never may have knowledge of thy name;
Enjoy thy lust still, and a wretched life,
On that condition: And for thee (wild woman,)
If thou doe wish thy Lecher may grow old
In thy Embraces, I would have thee build
Such a room for him, as our Anchorites
To holier use inhabit: Let not the Sun
Shine on him, till he's dead: Let Dogs, and Monkeys
Only converse with him, and such dombe things
To whom Nature denies use, to sound his name.
Doe not keep a Paraqueto, least she learn it;
If thou doe love him, cut out thine own tongue
Least it bewray him.
Why might not I marry?
I have not gone about, in this, to create
Any new world, or custom.
Thou art undone:
And thou hast taken that massey sheet of lead
That hid thy husbands bones, and folded it
About my heart.
Mine bleeds for it.
Thine? thy heart?
What should I nam't, unless a hollow bullet
Filled with unquenchable wild-fire?
You are, in this
Too strict: and were you not my Princely brother
I would say to wilful: My reputation
Is safe.
Dost thou know what reputation is
I'll tell thee, to small purpose, since th'instruction
Comes now too late:
Upon a time Reputation, Love, and Death,
Would travel ore the world: and it was concluded
That they should part, and take three several ways:
Death told them, they should find him in great Battles:
Or Cities plagued with plagues: Love gives them council
To enquire for him amongst vnambitious shepherds,
Where dowries were not talked of: and sometimes
Amongst quiet kindred, that had nothing left
By their dead Parents: stay (quoth Reputation)
Doe not forsake me: for it is my nature
If once I part from any man I meet
I am never found again: And so, for you:
You have shook hands with Reputation,
And made him invisible: So fare you well.
I will never see you more.
Why should only I,
Of all the other Princes of the World
Be cas'de-vp, like a holy Relic? I have youth,
And a little beauty.
So you have some Virgins,
Th•• are W••ches: I will never see thee more.
You saw this apparition.
Yes: we are
Betrayed; how came he hither? I should turn
This, to thee, for that.
Pray sir doe: and when
That you have cl•ft my heart, you shall read there,
Mine innocence:
That Gallery gave him entrance.
I would this terrible thing would come again,
That (standing on my Guard) I might relate
My warrantable love: ha, what means this?
He left this with me:
And it seems, did wish
You would use it on your self?
His Action
Seemed to intend so much.
This hath a handle to it,
As well as a point, turn it towards him,
And so fasten the keen edge, in his rank gall:
How now? who knocks? more Earthquakes?
I stand
As if a Mine, beneath my feet, were ready
To be blown up.
It is Bosola:
Away,
Oh misery, me thinks unjust actions
Should wear these masques, and curtains; and not we:
You must instantly part hence: I have fashioned it already.
The Duke your brother is taken up in a whirl wind
Hath took horse, and's rid post to Rome.
So late?
He told me, (as he mounted into th'sadle,)
You were undone.
Indeed, I am very near it.
What's the matter?
Antonio, the master of our house-hold
Hath dealt so falsely with me, in's accounts:
My brother stood engaged with me for money
Taken up of certain Neopolitane Jaws,
And Antonio let's the Bonds be forfeit.
S•ange: this is cunning:
And hereupon
My brothers Bills at Naples are protested
Against: call up our Officers.
I shall.
The place that you must fly to, is Ancona,
Hire a house there. I'll send after you
My Treasure, and my Jew•ls: our weak safety
Runs upon ingenuous wheels: short syllables,
Must stand for periods: I must now accuse you
Of such a fained crime, as Tesco calls
Magnanima Mensogna: a Noble Lie,
Because it must shield our honours: hark they are coming.
Will your Grace hear me?
I have got well by you: you have yielded me
A million of loss; I am like to inherit
The peoples curse• for your Stewardship:
You had the trick, in Audit time to be sick,
Till I had signed your Quietus; and that cured you
Without help of a Doctor. Gentlemen,
I would have this man be an example to you all:
So shall you hold my favour: I pray let him;
For he has done that (alas) you would not think of,
And (because I intend to be rid of him)
I mean not to publish: use your fortune else-where.
I am strongely armed to brooke my ouer-throw,
As commonly men bear with a hard year:
I will not blame the cause on it; but doe think
The necessity of my malevolent star
Procures this, not her humour: O the inconstant,
And rotten ground of service, you may see:
It is even like him, that in a winter night
Takes a long slumber, ore a dying si•e;
A-loth to part from it: yet parts thence as cold,
As when he first sat down.
We doe confifcate
(Towards the satisfying of your accounts)
All that you have.
I am all yours: and it is very fit
All mine should be so.
So, sir; you have your Pass.
You may see (Gentlemen) what it is to serve
A Prince with body, and soul.
Heere's an example, for extortion; what moisture, is drawn out of the Sea, when foul weather comes, powers down, and runs into the Sea again.
I would know what are your opinions
Of this Antonio.
He could not abide to see a Pigs head gaping,
I thought your Grace would find him a Jew:
I would you had bin his Officer, for your own sake.
You would have had more money.
He stopped his ears with black wool: and to (those came a woman.
To him for money) said he was thick of hearing.
Some said he was an hermophrodite, for he could not abide
How scurvy proud he would look, when the Treasury was full:
Well, let him go:
Yes, and the chippings of the Buttrey fly after him,
To scour his gold Chain.
Leave vs: what doe you think of these?
That these are Rogues; that in's prosperity,
But to have waited on his fortune, could have wished
His duty Stirrup ri••ted through their noses:
And followed after's Mu•e, like a Bear in a Ring.
Would have prostituted their daughters, to his Lust:
Made their first-borne and Intelligencers: thought none happy
But such as were borne under his blessed Planet:
And vvore his Liuory: and doe these Lice drop off now?
Well, never look to have the like again;
He hath left a sort of slattring rogues, behind him,
Their doombe must follow: Princes pay flatterers,
In their own money: Flatterers dissemble their vices,
And they dissemble their lies, that's Justice:
Alas, poor gentlemen,
Poor? he hath amply filled his cos•s.
Sure he was too honest: Pluto the god of riches,
When he's sent (by Iupiter) to any man
He goes limping, to signify that wealth
That comes on god's name, comes slowly, but when he's sent
One the devils arrand, he rides post, and comes in by se•ttles▪
Let me show you, what a most un••lu'd jewel,
You have (in a wanton humour) thrown away,
To bless the man shall find him: He was an excellent
Courtier, and most faithful, a soldier, that thought it
As beastly to know his own value too little,
As devilish to acknowledge it too much,
Both his virtue, and form, deserved a far better fortune:
His discourse rather delighted to judge it self, then show it self.
His breast was filled with all perfection,
And yet it seemed a private whispring room.
It made so little noise of't.
But he was basely descended.
Will you make your self a mercenary herald,
Rather to examine men's pedigrees, then virtues?
You shall want him,
For know an honest states-man to a Prince,
Is like a Cedar, planted by a Spring,
The Spring bathes the trees root, the grateful tree,
Rewards it with his shadow: you have not done so,
I would sooner swim to the Bermoothes on two Politicians
Rotten bladders, tide together with an Intelligence• hart-string
Then depend on so changeable a Princes favour.
Fare-thee-well (Antonio) since the malice of the world
Would needs down with thee, it cannot be said yet
That any ill happened unto thee, considering thy •all,
Was accompanied with virtue.
Oh, you render me excellent Music.
Say you?
This good one that you speak of, is my husband.
Do I not dream? can this ambitious age
Have so much goodness in it, as to prefer
A man, merely for worth: without these shadows
Of wealth, and painted honours? possible?
I have had three children by him.
Fortunate Lady,
For you have made your private nuptial bed
The humble, and fair Seminary of peace,
No question but: many an vnbenific'd Scholar
Shall pray for you, for this deed, and rejoice
That some preferment in the world can yet
Arise from merit. The virgins of your land
(That have no dowries) shall hope, your example
Will raise them to rich husbands: Should you want
Soldiers it would make the very Turks and Moors
Turn Christians, and serve you for this act.
Last, the neglected Poets of your time,
(In honour of this trophy of a man,
Raised by that curious engine, (your white hand)
Shall thank you, in your grave for it; and make that
More reverend then all the Cabinets
Of living Princes: For Antonio
His fame, shall likewise flow, from many a pen,
When Heralds shall want coats, to sell to men.
As I taste comfort, in this friendly speech,
So would I find concealment.
O the secret of my Prince.
Which I will wear on th'in-side of my heart.
You shall take charge of all my coin, and jewels,
And follow him, for he retires himself
To Ancona.
So.
Whether, within few days,
I mean to follow thee.
Let me think:
I would wish your Grace, to feign a Pilgrimage
To our Lady of Loretto, (scarce seven leagues
From fair Ancona) so may you depart
Your Country, with more honour, and your flight
Will seem a Princely progress, retaining
Your usual train about you.
Sir, your direction
Shall lead me, by the hand.
In my opinion,
She were better progress to the bathes
At Louse, or go visit the Spew
In Germany, for (if you will believe me)
I do not like this jesting with religion,
This feigned Pilgrimage.
Thou 〈◊〉 superstitious fool,
Prepare vs instantly for our departure:
Past sorrows, let vs moderately lament them,
For those to come, seek wisely, to prevent them.
A Politician is the devils quilted anvil,
He fashions all sins on him, and the blows
Are never heard, he may work in a Ladies Chamber,
(As here for proof) what rests, but I reveal
All to my Lord? oh, this base quality
Of Intelligencer? why, every Quality i'th'world
Prefers but gain, or commendation:
Now for this act, I am certain to be raised,
"And men that paint weeds, (to the life) are praised.
Must we turn Soldier then?
The Emperor,
Hearing your worth that way, (ere you attained
This reverend garment,) joins you in commission
With the right fortunate soldier, the Marquis of Pescara,
And the famous Lanoy.
He that had the honour
Of taking the French King Prisoner?
The same,
Here's a plot drawn, for a new Fortification,
At Naples.
This great Count Malastete, I perceive
Hath got employment?
No employment (my Lord)
A marginal note in the muster-booke, that he is
A voluntary Lord.
He's no Soldier?
He he's worn gun-powder, in's hollow tooth, for the tooth-ache.
He comes to the leaguer, with a full intent,
To eat fresh beef, and garlic, means to stay
Till the sent begone, and straight return to Court.
He hath read all the late service,
As the City Chronicle relates it,
And keep two Pewterers going, only to express
Battles in model.
Then hell; fight by the book.
By the Almanac, I think
To choose good days, and shun the Critical▪
That's his mistress scarf.
Yes, he protests
He would do much for that taffeta,
I think he would run away from a battle
To save it from taking prisoner.
He is horribly afraid,
Gun-powder will spoil the perfume on it,
I saw a Duch-man break his pate once
For calling him pot-gun, he made his head
Have a boar in it, like a musket.
I would he had made a touch-hole to it.
He is indeed a guarded sumpter-cloath
Only for the remove of the Court.
Bosola arrived? what should be the business?
Some falling out amongst the Cardinals.
These factions amongst great men, they are like
Foxes, when their heads are divided
They carry fire in their tails, and all the Country
About them, goes to wrack for it.
What's that Bosola?
I knew him in Padua, a fantastical scholar,
Like such, who study to know how many knots was in
Hercules club, of what colour A•hills beard was,
Or whether Hector were not troubled with the tooth-ach,
He hath studied himself half bleare-ei'd, to know the
True semitry of Caesars nose by a shooing-horne, and this
He did to gain the name of a speculative man.
Mark Prince Ferdinand,
A very Salamander lives in's eye,
To mock the eager violence of fire.
That Cardinal hath made more bad faces with his oppression
Then ever Michael Angelo made good ones,
He lifts vp's nose, like a foul Por-pisse before a storm,
The Lord Ferdinand laughs.
Like a deadly Cannon,
That lightens ere it smokes.
These are your true pangs of death,
The pangs of life, that struggle with great states-men,
In such a deformed silence, witches whisper their charms.
Doth she make religion her riding hood
To keep her from the sun, and tempest?
That: that damnes her: Me thinks her fault, and
Beauty blended together, show like leprosy
The whiter, the fowler: I make it a question
Whether her beggarly brats were ever christened.
I will instantly solicit the state of Ancona
To have them banished.
You are for Lorett•?
I shall not be at your Ceremony: fare you well,
Write to the Duke of Malfy, my young Nephew,
She had by her first husband, and acquaint him,
Wed's mothers honesty.
I will.
Antonio?
A slave, that only smelled of ink, and coumptets,
And neu'r in's like, looked like a Gentleman,
But in the audit time, go, go presently,
Draw me out an hundredth and fifty of our horse,
And meet me at the fort-bridge.
I have not seen a goodlier Shrine then this,
Yet I have visited many.
The Cardinal of Arragon
Is, this day to resign his Cardinals hat,
His sister Duchess likewise is arrived
To pay her vow of Pilgrimage, I expect
A noble Ceremony.
No question: —They come.
Arms, and Honours, deck thy story,
To thy Fems eternal glory,
Adverse Fortune ever flie-thee,
No disastrous fate come nigh-thee.
I alone will sing thy praises,
Whom to honour, virtue raises;
And thy study, that diuine-is,
Bent to Marshiall discipline-is:
Lay aside all those robes lie by thee,
Crown thy arts, with arms: they'll beautify thee.
O worthy of worthiest name, adorned in this manner,
Lead bravely thy forces on, under wars warlike banner▪
O may thou prove fortunate, in all Marshiall courses:
Guide thou still, by skill, in arts, and forces:
Victory attend thee nigh whilst fame sings loud thy powers,
Triumphant conquest crown thy head, and blessings power down showers.
Here's a strange turn of state, who would have thought
So great a Lady, would have matched her self
Unto so mean a person? yet the Cardinal
Bears himself much too cruel.
They are banished.
But I would ask what power hath this state
Of Ancona to determine of a free Prince?
They are a free state sir, and her brother showed
How that the Pope fore-hearing of her looseness,
Hath seized into th'protection of the Church
The Dukedom, which she held as dowager.
But by what justice?
Sure I think by none,
Only her brothers instigation.
What was it, with such violence he took
Of from her finger?
It was her wedding ring,
Which he vowed shortly he would sacrifice
To his revenge.
Alas Antonio,
If that a man be thrust into a well,
No matter who sets hand to it, his own weight
Will bring him sooner to th'bottome: Come, let's hence.
Fortune makes this conclusion general,
"All things do help th'unhappy man to fall.
Banished Ancona?
Yes, you see what power
Lightens in great men's breath.
Is all our train
Shrunk to this poor remainder?
These poor men,
(Which have got little in your service) vow
To take your fortune: But your wiser buntings
Now they are sledged are gon.
They have done wisely,
This puts me in mind of death, Physicians thus,
With their hands full of money, use to give ore
Their Patients.
Right the fashion of the world,
From deceit fortunes, every flatterer shrinks,
Men cease to build, where the foundation sinks.
I had a very strange dream to night.
What was it?
Me thought I wore my Coronet of State▪
And on a sudden all the Diamonds
Were changed to Pearls.
My Interpretation
Is, you'll weep shortly, for to me, the pearls
Doe signify your tears:
The Birds, that live in the field
On the wilde benefit of Nature, live
Happier then we; for they may choose their Mates,
And carroll their sweet pleasures to the Spring:
You are happily ore-ta'ne.
From my brother?
Yes, from the Lord Ferdinand; your brother,
All love, and safety
Thou dost blanch mischief
Would make it white: See, see; like to calm weather
At Sea, before a tempest, false hearts speak fair
To those they intend most mischief.
A Letter. Send Antonio to me; I want his head in a business: (a poli∣tick equivocation)
He doth not want your council, but your head;
That is, he cannot sleep till you be dead.
And here's another Pitfall, that's strewed ore
With Roses: mark it, it is a cunning one.
I stand engaged for your husband, for several debts at Naples: let not
That trouble him, I had rather have his heart, then his money.
And I believe so too.
What doe you believe?
That he so much distrusts my husbands love,
He will by no means believe his heart is with him
Until he see it: The Devil is not cunning enough
To circumvent vs in Riddles.
Will you reject that noble, and free league
Of amity, and love which I present you?
Their league is like that of some politic Kings
Only to make themselves of strength, and power
To be our after-ruine: tell them so;
And what from you?
Thus tell him: I will not come.
And what of this.
My brothers have dispersed
Blood-hounds abroad; which till I hear are muzell'd
No truce, though hatched with ne'er such politic skill
Is safe, that hangs upon our enemies will.
I'll not come at them.
This proclaims your breeding.
Every small thing, draws a base mind to fear:
As the Adamant draws iron: fare you well sir,
You shall shortly hear from his.
I suspect some Ambush:
Therefore by all my love; I doe conjure you
To take your eldest son, and fly towards Millaine;
Let vs not venture all this poor remainder
In one unlucky bottom.
You council safely:
Best of my life, farewell: Since we must part
Heaven hath a hand in it: but no otherwise,
Then as some curious Artist, takes in sunder
A Clock, or Watch, when it is out of frame
To bring in better order.
I know not which is best,
To see you dead, or part with you: Farewell Boy.
Thou art happy, that thou hast not understanding
To know thy misery: For all our wit
And reading, brings vs to a truer sense
Of sorrow: In the eternal Church, Sir,
I doe hope we shall not part thus.
Oh, be of comfort,
Make Patience a noble fortitude:
And think not how unkindly we are used:
"Man (like to Cassia) is proved best, being bruised.
Must I like to a slaue-borne Russian,
Account it praise to suffer tyranny?
And yet (O Heaven) thy heavy hand is in it.
I have seen my little boy, oft scourge his top,
And compared my self to it: nought made me ere go right,
But Heavens scourge-sticke.
Doe not weep:
Heaven fashioned vs of nothing: and we strive,
To bring our selves to nothing: farewell Cariola,
And thy sweet armefull: if I doe never see thee more,
Be a good Mother to your little ones,
And save them from the Tiger: fare you well.
Let me look upon you once more: for that speech
Came from a dying father: your kiss is colder
Then that I have seen an holy Anchorite
Give to a dead mans skull.
My heart is turned to a heavy lump of lead,
With which I sound my danger: fare you well.
My Laurel is all withered.
Look (Madam) what a troop of armed men
Make toward vs.
O, they are very welcome:
When Fortunes wheel, is overcharged with Princes,
The weight makes it move swift. I would have my ruin
Be sudden: I am your adventure, am I not.
You are, you must see your husband no more,
What Devil art thou, that counterfeits heavens thunder?
Is that terrible? I would have you tell me
Whether is that note worse, that frights the silly birds
Out of the corn or that which doth allure them
To the nets? you have hearkened to the last too much.
O misery: like to a rusty ore-char'd Carnon,
Shall I never sly in pieces? come: to what Prison?
To •one▪
Whether then?
To your Palace.
I have heard that Charons boat, serves to convey
All ore the dismal Lake, but brings none back again.
Your brothers mean you, safety, and pity.
Pity? with such a pity men preserve alive
Pheasmes, and Quails, when they are not fat enough
To be eaten.
These are your children?
Yes:
Can they prattle?
No:
But I intend, since they were borne accur••d;
Curses shall be their first language.
Fie (Madam)
Forget this base, low-fellow.
Were I a man:
I'll'd beat that counterfeit face, into thy other
One of no Birth.
Say that he was borne mean.
Man is most happy, when's own actions
Be arguments, and examples of his Virtue.
A barren, beggarly virtue.
I pre-thee who is greatest, can you tell?
Sad tales befit my woe: I'll tell you one.
A Salmon, as she swam unto the Sea,
Met with a Dog-fish; who encounters her
With this rough language: why art thou so bold
To mix thy self with our high state of floods
Being no eminent Courtier, but one
That for the calmest, and fresh time of the year
Dost live in shallow Rivers, rank'st thy self
With silly Smylts, and Shrimps? and dare thou
Pass by our Dog-ship, without reverence?
O (Quoth the Salmon) sister, be at peace:
Thank Iupiter, we both have passed the Net,
Our value never can be truly known,
Till in the Fishers basket we be shown,
In the Market then my price may be the higher,
Even when I am nearest to the Cooke, and fire.
So, to Great men, the Moral may be stretched.
,,Men oft are valued high, when they are most wretched.
But come: whether you please: I am armed against misery:
Bent to all sways of the Oppressors will.
There's no deep Valley, but near some great Hill.
How doth our sister Duchess bear her self
In her imprisonment?
Nobly: I'll describe her:
She's sad, as one long used to it: and she seems
Rather to welcome the end of misery
Then shun it: a behaviour so noble,
As gives a majesty to adversity:
You may discern the shape of loveliness
More perfect, in her tears, then in her smiles;
She will muse four hours together: and her silence,
(Me thinks) expresses more, then if she spake.
Her melancholy seems to be fortifide
With a strange disdain.
It is so: and this restraint
(Like English Mastiffs, that grow fierce with tying)
Makes her too passionately apprehend
Those pleasures she's kept from.
Curse upon her:
I will no longer study in the book
Of another heart: inform her what I told you.
All comfort to your Grace;
I will have none:
'Pray-thee, why dost thou wrap thy poisoned Pills
In Gold, and Sugar?
Your elder brother the Lord Ferdinand
Is come to visit you: and sends you word
Because once he rashly made a solemn vow
Never to see you more; he comes in the night:
And prays you (gently) neither Torch, nor Taper
Shine in your Chamber: he will kiss your hand:
And reconcile himself: but, for his vow,
He dares not see you:
At his pleasure:
Take hence the lights: he's come.
Where are you?
Here sir:
This darkness suites you well.
I would ask you pardon:
You have it;
For I account it, the honorabl'st revenge
Where I may kill, to pardon: where are your Cubbs?
Whom?
Call them your children;
For though our national law, distinguish Bastards
From true legitimate issue: compassionate nature
Makes them all equal.
Doe you visit me for this?
You violate a Sacrament of the Church
Shall make you howl in hell for it.
It had bin well,
Could you have lived thus always: for indeed
You were too much in the light: But no more,
I come to seal my peace with you: here's a hand,
To which you have vowed much love: the Ring upon it
You gave.
I affectionately kiss it:
'Pray doe: and bury the print of it in your heart:
I will leave this Ring with you, for a Loue-token:
And the hand, as sure as the ring: and doe not doubt
But you shall have the heart too: when you need a friend
Send it to him, that owed it: you shall see
Whether he can aid you.
You are very cold.
I fear you are not well after your travel:
Ho? lights: oh horrible:
Let her have lights enough
What witch-craft doth he practise, that he hath left
A dead-mans hand here?
Look you: here's the piece, from which it was t•'•e;
He doth present you this sad spectacle,
That now you know directly they are dead,
Hereafter you may (wisely) cease to grieve
For that which cannot be recovered.
There is not between heaven, and earth one wish
I stay for after this: it wastes me more,
Then were it my picture, fashioned out of wax,
Stuck with a magical needle, and then buried
In some foul dung-hill: and yond's an excellent property
For a tyrant, which I would account mercy,
What's that?
If they would bind me to that liveless trunk,
And let me freeze to death.
Come, you must live.
That's the greatest torture souls feel in hell,
In hell: that they must live, and cannot die:
Portia, I'll new kindle thy Coals again,
And revive the rare, and almost dead example
Of a loving wife.
O sye: despair? remember
You are a Christian.
The Church enioynes fasting:
I'll starve my self to death.
Leave this vain sorrow;
Things being at the worst, begin to mend:
The Bee when he hath shot his sting into your hand
May then play with your eye-lyd.
Good comfortable fellow
Persuade a wretch that's broke upon the wheel
To have all his bones new set: entreat him live,
To be executed again: who must dispatch me?
I account this world a tedious Theatre,
For I doe play a part in it against my will.
Come, be of comfort, I will save your life.
Indeed I have not leisure to tend so small a busi∣nes.
Now, by my life, I pity you.
Thou art a fool then,
To wast thy pity on a thing so wretched
As cannot pity it: I am full of daggers:
Puff: let me blow these vipers from one.
What are you?
One that wishes you long life.
I would thou were hanged for the horrible curse
Thou hast given me: I shall shortly grow one
Of the miracles of pity: I'll go pray: No,
I'll go curse:
Oh fie:
I could curse the Stars.
Oh fearful:
And those three smiling seasons of the year
Into a Russian winter: nay the world
To its first Chaos.
Look you, the Stars shine still:
Oh, but you must remember, my curse hath a great way to go:
Plagues, (that make lanes through largest families)
Consume them:
Fie Lady:
Let them like tyrants
Never be remembered, but for the ill they have done:
Let all the zealous prayers of mortified
Church-men forget them,
O uncharitable:
Let heaven, a little while, cease crowning Martirs
To punish them: Go, howl them this: and say I long to bleed
,,It is some mercy, when men kill with speed.
Excellent; as I would wish: she's plagued in Art.
These presentations are but framed in wax.
By the curious Master in that Quality,
Vincentio Lauriola, and she takes them
For true substantial Bodies.
Why doe you doe this?
To bring her to despair.
Faith, end here:
And go no farther in your cruelty,
Send her a penitential garment, to put on,
Next to her delicate skin, and furnish her
With beads, and prayer books.
Damn her, that body of hers,
While that my blood ran pure in it, was more worth
Then, that which thou would comfort, (called a soul)
I will send her masques of common Courtesans,
Have her meat served up by bawds, and ruffians,
And (because she'll needs be mad) I am resolved
To remove forth the common Hospital,
All the mad-folke, and place them near her lodging:
There let them practise together, sing, and dance,
And act their gambols to the full o'th'moone:
If she can sleep the better for it, let her,
Your work is almost ended.
Must I see her again?
Yes.
Never.
You must.
Never in mine own shape,
That's forfeited, by my intelligence,
And this last cruel lie: when you send me next,
The business shall be comfort.
Very likely,
Thy pity is nothing of kin to thee: Antonio,
Lurks about Millaine, thou shalt shortly thither,
To feed a fire, as great as my revenge,
Which neu'r will slack, till it have spent his fuel,
"Intemperate agues, make Physicians cruel.
When• 〈…〉 •oyse was that?
〈1 line〉
Of Mad-men (Lady) which your Tyrant brother
Hath placed about your lodging: This tyranny,
I think was never practised till this hour.
Indeed I thank him: nothing but noise, and folly
Can keep me in my right wits, whereas reason
And silence, make me stark mad: Sit down,
Discourse to me some dismal Tragedy.
O twill increase your melancholy.
Thou art deceived,
To hear of greater grief, would lessen mine,
This is a prison?
Yes, but you shall live
To shake this durance off.
Thou art a fool,
The Robin red-brest, and the Nightingale,
Never live long in cages.
Pray dry your eyes.
What think you of Madam?
Of nothing▪
When I muse thus, I sleep.
Like a mad-man, with your eyes open?
Dost thou think we shall know one an other,
In the other world?
Yes, out of question.
O that it were possible we might
But hold some two days conference with the dead.
From them, I should learn somewhat I am sure
I never shall know here: I'll tell thee a miracle,
I am not mad yet, to my cause of sorrow.
Th'heauen ore my head, seems made of molton brass.
The earth of flaming sulphur, yet I am not mad:
I am acquainted with sad misery,
As the tanned galley-slaue, is with his Oar,
Necessity makes me suffer constantly,
And custom makes it easy, who do I look like now?
Like to your picture in the gallery,
A deal of life in show, but none in practise:
Or rather like some reverend monument
Whose ruins, are even pitied.
Very proper:
And Fortune seems only to have her eie-sight,
To behold my Tragedy: How now,
What noise is that?
I am come to tell you,
Your brother hath intended you some sport:
A great Physician, when the Pope was sick
Of a deep melancholy, presented him
With several sorts of mad-men, which wilde object
(Being full of change, and sport,) forced him to laugh,
And so th'impost-hume broke: the self same cure,
The Duke intends on you.
Let them come in.
There's a mad Lawyer, and a secular Priest,
A Doctor that hath forfeited his wits
By jealousy: an Astrologian,
That in his works, said such a day o'th'moneth,
Should be the day of doom; and failing of't,
Ran mad: an English Taylor, crais'd i'th'braine,
With the study of new fashion: a gentleman usher
Quite beside himself, with care to keep in mind,
The number of his Ladies salutations;
Or how do you, she employed him in each morning:
A Farmer too, (an excellent knave in grain)
Mad, because he was hindered transportation,
And let one Broker, (that's mad) loose to these,
Youl'd think the devil were among them.
Sit Cariola: let them loose when you please,
For I am chained to endure all your tyranny.
O let vs howl, some heavy note,
some deadly-dogged howl,
Sounding, as from the threatening throat,
of beasts, and fatal foul.
As Ravens, Schrich-owles, Bulls, and Bears,
We'll bill, and bawl our parts,
Till yerk some noise have cloyed your ears,
and co•asiu'd your hearts.
At last when as our quire wants breath,
our bodies being blessed,
We'll sing like Swans, to welcome death,
and die in love and rest.
Doomsday not come yet? I'll draw it nearer by a perspective, or make a glass, that shall set all the world on fire upon an instant: I cannot sleep, my pillow is stuff't with a littour of Porcupines.
Hell is a mere glasse-house, where the devils are continually blowing up women's souls, on hollow irons, and the fire never goes out.
I will lie with every woman in my parish the tenth night:
I will tithe them over like hay-cockes.
Shall my Apothecary out-go me, because I am a
Cuck-old? I have found out his roguery: he makes allom
Of his wives urine, and sells it to Puritaines, that have sore
Throats with ouer-strayning.
I have skill in Harroldry.
Hast?
You do give for your creast, a wood-cockes head, with the
Brains picked out on it, you are a very ancient Gentleman.
Greek is turned Turk, we are only to be saved by the
Heluetian translation.
Come on Sir, I will lay the law to you.
Oh, rather lay a corrosive, the law will eat to the bone.
He that drinks but to satisfy nature is damned.
If I had my glass here, I would show a sight should make
All the women here, call me mad Doctor.
What's he, a rope-maker?
No, no, no, a snufling knave, that while he shows the
Tombs, will have his hand in a wenches placket.
Woe, to the Carriage, that brought home my wife from
The Masque, at three a clock in the morning, it had a large
Feather-bed in it.
I have paired the devils nails forty times, roasted them
In Ravens eggs, and cured agues with them.
Get me three hundred milch bats, to make posits▪
To procure sleep.
All the College may throw their caps at me, I have made a
Soape-boyler costive, it was my master-peece:
Is he mad to?
'Pray question him: I'll leave you.
I am come to make thy tomb.
Ho, my tomb?
Thou speak, as if I lay upon my death bed,
Gasping for breath: dost thou perceive me sick?
Yes, and the more dangerously, since thy sickness is insensible.
Thou art not mad sure, dost know me?
Yes.
Who am I?
Thou art a box of worme-seede at best, but a saluatory
Of greene mummy: what's this flesh? a little cruded milk,
Fantastical puffe-paste: our bodies are weaker then those
Paper prisons boys use to keep flies in: more contemptible:
Since ours is to preserve earth-wormes: did thou ever see
A Lark in a cage? such is the soul in the body: this world
Is like her little turf of grass, and the Heaven ore our heads,
Like her looking glass, only gives vs a miserable knowledge
Of the small com••sse of our prison.
Am not I, thy Duchess?
Thou art some great woman sure, for riot begins to sit on thy
Fore-head (clad in gray hairs) twenty years sooner, then on a
Merry milk m•ydes. Thou sleep worse, then if a mouse
Should be forced to take up her lodging in a cats ear:
A little infant, that breeds it's teeth, should it lie with thee, would
Cry out, as if thou were the more unquiet bed-fellow.
I am Duchess of Malfy still.
That makes thy sleeps so broken:
"Glories (like glowe-wormes) a far off, shine bright,
But looked to near, have neither heate, nor light.
Thou art very plain.
My trade is to flatter the dead, not the living
I am a tombe-maker.
And thou come to make my tomb?
Yes.
Let me be a little merry,
Of what stuff wilt thou make it?
Nay, resolve me first, of what fashion?
Why, do we grow fantastical in our death-bed?
Do we affect fashion in the grave?
Most ambitiously: Princes images on their tombs,
Do not lie, as they were wont, seeming to pray,
Up to heaven: but with their hands under their cheeks,
(As if they died of the tooth-ache) they are not carved
With their eyes, fixed upon the stars; but as their
Minds were wholly bent upon the world,
The selfsame way they seem to turn their faces.
Let me know fully therefore the effect
Of this thy dismal preparation,
This talk, fit for a charnel?
Now, I shall,
Here is a present from your Princely brothers,
And may it arrive wel-come, for it brings
Last benefit, last sorrow.
Let me see it,
I have so much obedience, in my blood,
I wish it in there veins, to do them good.
This is your last presence Chamber.
O my sweet Lady.
Peace, it affrights not me.
I am the common Bell-man,
That usually is sent to condemned persons▪
The night before they suffer:
Even now thou said,
Thou wast a tombe-maker?
It was to bring you
By degree• to mortification: Listen.
Hark, now every thing is still,
The Schritch-Owle, and the whistler shrill,
Call upon our Dame, aloud,
And bid her quickly don her shroud:
Much you had of Land and rent,
Your length in clay's now competent.
A long war, disturbed your mind,
Here your perfect peace is signed,
Of what is it, fools make such vain keeping?
Sin their conception, their birth, weeping:
Their life, a general mist of error,
Their death, a hideous storm of terror,
Strew your hair, with powders sweet:
D'on clean linen, bath your feet,
And (the foul feend more to check)
A crucifix let bless your neck,
It is now full tide, 'tweene night, and day,
End your groan, and come away.
Hence villains, tyrants, murderers: alas!
What will you do with my Lady? call for help.
To whom, to our next neighbours? they are mad-folkes.
Remove that noise.
Farewell Cariola,
In my last will, I have not much to give
A many hungry guests, have fed upon me,
Thine will be a poor reversion.
I will die with her.
I pray-thee look thou giu'st my little boy
Some syrup, for his cold, and let the girl
Say her prayers, ere she sleep. Now what you please,
What death?
Strangling, here are your Executioners.
I forgive them:
The apoplexy, cedar, or cough o'th'loongs,
Would do as much as they do.
Doth not death fright you?
Who would be afraid on it?
Knowing to meet such excellent company
In the other world.
Yet, me thinks,
The manner of your death should much afflict you,
This cord should terrify you?
Not a whit,
What would it pleasure me, to have my throat cut
With diamonds? or to be smothered
With C•ssia? or to be shot to death, with pearls?
I know death hath ten thousand several doors
For men to take their Exits: and it is found
They go on such strange geometrical hinges,
You may open them both ways: any way, (for heaven sake)
So I were out of your whispering: Tell my b•others,
That I •erceiue death, (now I am well a wake)
Best gift is, they can give, or I can take,
I would fine put off my last womans-fault,
Il'd not be tedious to you.
We are ready.
Dispose my breath, how please you, but my body
Bestow upon my women, will you?
Yes.
Pull, and pull strongly, for your able strength,
Most pull down heaven upon me:
Yet stay, heaven gates are not so highly arched
As Princes palaces, they that enter there
Must go upon their knees: Come violent death,
Serve for Mandragora, to make me sleep;
Go tell my brothers, when I am laid out,
They then may feed in quiet.
Whore's the waiting woman?
Fetch her: Some other strangle the children:
Look you, there sleeps your mistress.
Oh you are damned
Perpetually for this: My turn is next,
Is it not so ordered?
Yes, and I am glad
You are so well prepared for it.
You are deceived Sir,
I am not prepared for it, I will not die,
I will first come to my answer; and know
How I have offended.
Come, dispatch her:
You kept her counsel, now you shall keep ours.
I will not die, I must not, I am contracted
To a young Gentle-man.
Here's your wedding Ring.
Let me but speak with the Duke: I'll discover
Treason to his person.
Delays: throttle-her.
She bites: and scratches:
If you kill me now
I am damned: I have not bin at Confession
This two years:
When.
I am quick with child.
Why then,
Your credit's saved: bear her in to the next room:
Let this lie still.
Is she dead?
She is what
You'll'd have her: But here begin your pity,
Alas, how have these offended?
The death
Of young Wolffes, is never to be pitied.
Fix your eye here:
Constantly.
Doe you not weep?
Other sins, only speak; Murder shrieks out:
The Element of water, moistens the Earth,
But blood flies upwards, and bedews the Heavens.
Cover her face: Mine eyes dazzle she died young.
I think not so: her infelicity
Seemed to have years too many.
She, and I were Twins:
And should I die this instant, I had lived
Her Time to a Minute.
It seems she was borne first:
You have bloodely approved the ancient truth,
That kindred commonly doe worse ag•ee
Then remote strangers.
Let me see her face again;
Why did not thou pity her: what an excellent
Honest man, might thou have bin
If thou had borne her to some Sa•ctuary?
Or (bold in a good cause) opposed thy self
With thy advanced sword aboue thy head,
Between her Innocence, and my Revenge?
I bad thee, when I was distracted of my wits▪
Go kill my dearest friend, and thou hast don't.
For let me but examine well the cause;
What was the meandness of her match to me▪
Only I must confess, I had a hope
(Had she continued widow) to have gained
An infinite mass of Treasure by her death:
And that was the mayne cause; her Marriage,
That drew a stream of gall, quite through my heart;
For thee, (as we observe in Tragedies
That a good Actor many times is cursed
For playing a villains part) I hate thee for it:
And (for my sake) say thou hast done much ill, well:
Let me quicken your memory: for I perceive
You are falling into ingratitude: I challenge
The reward due to my service.
I'll tell thee,
What I'll give thee,
Doe:
I'll give thee a pardon
For this murder:
H•h?
Yes: and it is
The largest bounty I can study to doe thee.
By what authority did thou execute
This bloody sentence?
By your•
Mine? was I her Judge?
Did any ceremonial form of Law,
Doombe her to not-Being? did a complete Jury
Deliver her conviction up in the Court?
Where shalt thou find this Judgment registerd
Unless in hell? See: like a bloody fool
Th'hast forfeited thy life, and thou shalt die for it.
The Office of Justice is perverted quite
When one Thief hangs another: who shall dare
To reveal this:
Oh, I'll tell thee:
The Wolf shall find her Grave, and scrape it up:
Not to devour the corpse, but to discover
The horrid murder.
You; not I shall quake for it.
Leave me:
I will first receive my Pension.
You are a villain:
When your Ingratitude
Is Judge, I am so;
O horror!
That not the fear of him, which binds the devils
Can prescribe man obedience.
Never look upon me more.
Why fare thee well▪
Your brother, and your self, are worthy men;
You have a pair of hearts, are hollow Graves,
Rotten, and rotting others: and your vengeance,
(Like two-chain'd bullets) still goes arm in arm,
You may be Brothers: for treason, like the plague,
Doth take much in a blood: I stand like one
That long hath taken a sweet, and golden dream.
I am angry with my self, now that I wake.
Get thee into some unknown part of the▪ world
That I may never see thee.
Let me know
Wherefore I should be thus neglected? sir,
I served your tyranny: and rather strove,
To satisfy your self, then all the world;
And though I loathed the evil, yet I loved
You that did council it: and rather sought
To appear a true servant, then an honest man.
I'll go hunt the Badger by Owle-light:
It is a deed of darkness.
He's much distracted: Off my painted honour,
While with vain hopes, our faculties we tyre,
We seem to sweat in ye, and freeze in fire;
What would I doe, we•e this to doe again?
I would not change my peace of conscience
For all the wealth of Europe: She stirs; here's life:
Return (fair soul) from darkness, and lead mine
Out of this sensible Hell: She's warm, she breathes:
Upon thy pale lips I will melt my heart
To store them with fresh colour: who's there?
Some cordial drink: Alas! I dare not call:
So pity, would destroy pity: her Eye ops,
And heaven in it, seems to op, (that late was shut)
To take me up to merry.
Antonio.
Yes (Madam) he is living,
The dead bodies you saw, were but feigned statues;
He's reconciled to your brothers: the Pope hath wrought
The atonement.
Mercy.
Oh, she's gone again: there the cords of life broke:
Oh sacred Innocence, that sweetly sleeps
On Turtles feathers: whilst a guilty conscience
Is a black Register, wherein is writ
All our good deeds, and bad: a Perspective
That shows vs hell; that we cannot be suffered
To doe good when we have a mind to it?
This is manly sorrow:
These tears, I am very certain, never grew
In my Mothers Milk. My estate is sunk
Below the degree of fear: where were
These penitent fountains, while she was living?
Oh, they were frozen up: here is a sight
As direful to my soul, as is the sword
Unto a wretch hath slain his father: Come, I'll bear thee hence.
And execute thy last will; that's deliver
Thy body to the reverend dispose
Of some good women: that the cruel tyrant
Shall not deny me: Then I'll post to Millaine,
Where some what I will speedily enact
Worth my deiection.
What think you of my hope of reconcilement
To the Aragonian brethren?
I misdoubt it
For though they have sent their letters of safe conduct
For your repair to Millaine, they appear
But Nets, to entrap you: The Marquis of Pescara,
Under whom you hold certain land in Cheit,
Much against his noble nature, hath bin moved
To ceize those lands, and some of his dependants
Are at this instant, making it their suit
To be invested in your Revenues.
I cannot think, they mean well to your life,
That doe deprive you of your means of life,
Your living.
You are still an heretic.
To any safety, I can shape my self.
Here comes the Marquis: I will make my self
Petitioner for some part of your land,
To know whether it is flying.
I pray doe.
Sir, I have a suit to you.
To me.
An easy one:
There is the Citadel of St. Bennet,
With some demesnes, of late in the possession
Of Antonio Bologna, please you bestow them on me?
You are my friend: But this is such a suit,
Nor fit for me to give, nor you to take.
No sir?
I will give you ample reason for it,
Soon in private: Here's the Cardinals Mistress.
My Lord, I am grown your poor Petitioner,
And should be an ill beggar, had I not
A Great mans letter, here (the Cardinals)
To Court you in my favour.
He entreats for you
The Citadel of Saint Bennet, that belonged
To the banished Bologna.
Yes:
I could not have thought of a friend, I could
Rather pleasure with it: it is yours:
Sir, I thank you:
And he shall know how doubly I am engaged
Both in your go••t, and speediness of giving,
Which makes your grant, the greater.
How they fortify
Themselves with my ruin?
Sir: I am
Little bound to you:
Why.
Because you denied this suit, to me, and gived
To such a creature.
Doe you know what it was?
It was Antonios land: not forfeited
By course of law; but ravished from his throat
By the Cardinals entreaty: it were not fit
I should bestow so maine a piece of wrong
Upon my friend: it is a gratification
Only due to a Strumpet: for it is injustice;
Shall I sprinckle the pure blood of Innocents
To make those followers, I call my friends
Look ruddier upon me? I am glad
This land, (taken from the owner by such wrong)
Returns again unto so foul an use,
As Salary for his Lust. Learn, (good Delio)
To ask noble things of me, and you shall find
I'll be a noble giver.
You instruct •e well:
Why, here's a man, now, would fright impudence
From sauciest Beggars.
Prince Ferdinand's come to Millaine
Sick (as they give out) of an Appoplexie:
But some say, it is a frenzy; I am going
To visit him.
It is a noble old fellow:
What course doe you mean to take, Antonio?
This night, I mean to venture all my fortune
(Which is no more, then a poor lingering life)
To the Cardinals worst of malice: I have got
Private access to his chamber: and intend
To visit him, about the mid of night.
(As once his brother did our noble Duchess.)
It may be that the sudden apprehension
Of danger (for I'll go in mine own shape)
When he shall see it freight with love, and duty,
May draw the poison out of him, and work
A friendly reconcilement; if it fail;
Yet, it shall rid me of this infamous calling,
For better fall once, then be ever falling.
I'll second you in all danger: and (how ere)
My life keeps rank with yours
You are still my loved, and best friend.
Now Doctor; may I visit your Patient?
If it please your Lordship: but he's instantly
To take the ayre here in the Gallery,
By my direction.
'Pray-thee, what's his disease?
A very pestilent disease (my Lord)
They call Licanthropia.
What's that?
I need a Dictionary to it.
I'll tell you:
In those that are possessed with it there ore-flowes
Such melancholy humour, they imagine
Themselves to be transformed into Wolves,
Steal forth to Church-yards in the dead of night,
And dig dead bodies up: as two nights since
One met the Duke, about midnight in a lane
Behind St. Marks Church, with the leg of a man
Upon his shoulder; and he howled fearfully:
Said he was a Woolffe: only the difference
Was, a Woolffes skin was hairy on the out-side,
His on the In-side: bad them take their swords,
Rip up his flesh, and try: straight I was sent for,
And having ministerd to him, found his Grace
Very well recovered.
I am glad on it,
Yet not without some fear
Of a relapse: if he grow to his fit again
I'll go a nearer way to work with him
Then ever Paraclesus dreamed of: If
They'll give me leave I'll buffet his madness out of him.
Stand aside: he comes.
Leave me.
Why doth your Lordship love this solitariness?
Eagles cōmonly fly alone: They are Crows, Daws, and
Starlings that flock together: Look, what's that,
Follows me?
Nothing (my Lord)
Yes:
It is your shadow.
Stay it, let it not haunt me.
Impossible; if you move, and the Sun shine:
I will throttle it.
Oh, my Lord: you are angry with nothing.
You are a fool:
How is it possible I should catch my shadow
Unless I fall upon it? When I go to Hell,
I mean to carry a bribe: for look you
Good gifts euer-more make away, for the worst persons
Rise good my Lord.
I am studying the Art of Patience.
It is a noble Virtue;
To drive six Snails before me, from this town
To Mosco; neither use Goad, nor Whip to them,
But let them take their own time: (the patientst mani'th' world
Match me for an experiment) and I'll crawl after
Like a sheepe-biter.
Force him up.
Use me well, you were best:
What I have don, I have don: I'll confess nothing▪
Now let me come to him: Are you mad
(My Lord?) are you out of your Princely wits?
What's he?
Your Doctor..
Let me have his beard sawed off, and his eye
Brows filed more civil.
I must do mad tricks with him,
For that's the only way on it. I have brought
Your grace a Salamanders skin, to keep you
For sun-burning.
I have cruel sore eyes.
The white of a Cockatrixes-egge is present remedy.
Let it be a new laid one, you were best:
Hide me from him: Physicians are like Kings,
They brooke no contradiction.
Now he begins to fear me,
Now let me alone with him.
How now, put off your gown?
Let me have some forty vrinalls filled with Rose-water:
He, and I'll go pelt one an other with them,
Now he begins to fear me: Can you fetch a frisk, sir?
Let him go, let him go upon my peril:
I find by his eye, he stands in awe of me,
I'll make him, as tame as a Dormouse.
Can you fetch your friskes, sir: I will stamp him into a Cullice:
Flea off his skin, to cover one of the Anotomies,
This rogue hath set i'th'cold yonder, in Barber-Chyrurgeons hall:
Hence, hence, you are all of you, like beasts for sacrifice,
There's nothing left of you, but tongue, and belly,
Flattery, and lechery.
Doctor, he did not fear you thoroughly.
True, I was somewhat to forward.
Mercy upon me, what a fatal judgment
Hath fallen upon this Ferdinand?
Knows your grace
What accident hath brought unto the Prince,
This strange distraction?
I must feign somewhat: Thus they say it grew.
You have heard it rumor'd for these many years,
None of our family dies, but there is seen
The shape of an old woman, which is given
By tradition, to vs, to have bin murdered
By her Nephews, for her riches: Such a figure
One night (as the Prince sat up late it's book)
Appeared to him, when crying out for help,
The gentlemen of's chamber, found his grace
All on a cold sweat, altered much in face
And language: Since which apparition,
He hath grown worse, and worse, and I much fear
He cannot live.
Sir, I would speak with you.
We'll leave your grace,
Wishing to the sick Prince, our noble Lord,
All health of mind, and body.
You are most welcome:
Are you come? so: this fellow must not know
By any means I had intelligence
In our Duchess death: For (though I counselled it,)
The full of all th'ingagement seemed to grow
From Ferdinand: Now sir, how fares our sister?
I do not think but sorrow makes her look
Like to an o•t-••'d garment: She shall now
Taste comfort from me: why do you look so wildely?
Oh, the fortune of your master here, the Prince
Deiects you, but be you of happy comfort:
If you'll do on thing for me, I'll entreat
Though he had a cold tombe-stone ore his bones,
I'll'd make you what you would be.
Any thing,
Give it me in a breath, and let me sly to it:
They that think long, small expedition win,
For mu••ng much o'th'end, cannot begin.
Sir, will you come in to Supper?
I am busy, leave me.
What an excellent shape hath that fellow?
It is thus: Antonio lurks here in Millaine,
Enquire him out, and kill him: while he lives,
Our sister cannot marry, and I have thought
Of an excellent match for her: do this, and stile me
Thy advancement.
But by what means shall I find him out?
There is a gentleman, called Delio
Here in the Camp, that hath bin long approved
His loyal friend: Set eye upon that fellow,
Follow him to Mass, may be Antonio,
Although he do account religion
But a Schoole-name, for fashion of the world,
May accompany him, or else go enquire out
Delio's Confessor, and see i• you can bribe
Him to reveal it: there are a thousand ways
A man might find to trace him: As to know,
What fellows haunt the Jaws, for taking up
Great sums of money, for sure he's in want,
Or else to go to th'Picture-makers, and learn
Who brought her Picture lately, some of these
Happily may take —
Well, I'll not freeze i'th'businesse,
I would see that wretched thing, Antonio
Aboue all sights i'th'world.
Do, and be happy.
This fellow doth breed Bazalisques in's eyes,
He's nothing else, but murder: yet he seems
Not to have notice of the Duchess death:
It is his cunning: I must follow his example,
There cannot be a surer way to trace,
Then that of an old Fox.
So, sir, you are well met.
How now?
Nay, the doors are fast enough:
Now Sir, I will make you confess your treachery.
Treachery?
Yes, confess to me
Which of my women it was you hired, to put
Loue-powder into my drink?
Love powder?
Yes, when I was at Malfy,
Why should I fall in love with such a face else?
I have already suffered for thee so much pain,
The only remedy to do me good,
Is to kill my longing.
Su•e your Pistol holds
Nothing but perfumes, or kissing comfits: excellent Lady,
You have a pretty way on it to discover
Your longing: Come, come, I'll disarm you,
And arm you thus, yet this is wondrous strange.
Compare thy form, and my eyes together,
You'll •end my love no such great miracle: Now you'll say,
I am wanton: This nice modesty, in Ladies
Is but a troublesome familiar,
That haunts them.
Know you me, I am a blunt soldier.
The better,
Sure, there wants fire, where there are no lively sparks
Of roughness.
And I want complement.
Why ignorance in court-ship cannot make you do amiss,
If you have a heart to do well.
You are very fair.
Nay, if you lay beauty to my charge,
I must plead unguilty.
Your bright eyes
Carry a Quiver of darts in them, sharper
Then Sun-beames.
You will mar me with commendation,
Put your self to the charge of courting me,
Whereas now I woe you.
I have it, I will work upon this Creature,
Let vs grow most amorously familiar:
If the great Cardinal now should see me thus,
Would he not count me a villain?
No, he might count me a wanton,
Not lay a scruple of offence on you:
For if I see, and steal a Diamond,
The fault is not i'th'stone, but in me the thief,
That purloins it: I am sudden with you,
We that are great women of pleasure, use to cut off
These uncertain wishes, and unquiet longings,
And in an instant join the sweet delight
And the p••tty excuse together: had you bin in'th'streete,
Under my chamber window, even there
I should have courted you.
Oh, you are an excellent Lady.
Bid me do somewhat for you presently,
To express I love you.
I will, and if you love me,
Fail not to effect it: The Cardinal is grown wondrous mel∣lancholly,
Demand the cause, let him not put you off,
With feigned excuse, discover the maine ground on it.
Why would you know this?
I have depended on him,
And I hear that he is fallen in some disgrace
With the Emperor, if he be, like the mice
That forsake falling houses, I would shift
To other dependence.
You shall not need follow the wars,
I'll be your maintenance.
And I your loyal servant,
But I cannot leave my calling.
Not leave an
Ungrateful General, for the love of a sweet Lady?
You are like some, cannot sleep in feather-beds,
But must have blocks for their pillows.
Will you do this?
Cunningly.
To morrow I'll expect th'intelligence.
To morrow? get you into my Cabinet,
You shall have it with you: do not delay me,
No more then I do you: I am like one
That is condemned: I have my pardon promised.
But I would see it sealed: Go, get you in,
You shall see me wind my tongue about his heart,
Like a skein of silk.
Where are you?
Here.
Let none upon your lives
Have conference with the Prince Ferdinand,
Unless I know it: In this distraction
He may reveal the murder:
Yond's my lingering consumption:
I am weary of her; and by any means
Would be queen• off.
How now, my Lord?
What ails you?
Nothing.
Oh, you are much altered:
Come, I must be your Secretary, and remove
This lead from off your bosom, what's the matter?
I may not tell you▪
Are you so far in love with sorrow,
You cannot part, with part of it? or think you
I cannot love your grace, when you are sad,
As well as merry? or do you suspect
I, that have bin a secret to your heart,
These many winters, cannot be the same
Unto your tongue?
Satis•ie thy longing,
The only way to make thee keep my council,
Is not to tell thee.
Tell your echo this,
Or flatterers, that (like echoes) still report
What they hear (though most imperfect) and not me:
For, if that you be true unto your self,
I'll know.
Will you rack me?
No, judgment shall
Draw it from you: It is an equal fault,
To tell ones secrets, unto all, or none.
The first argues folly.
But the last tyranny.
Very we•l, why imagine I have committed
Some secret deed, which I desire the world
May never hear of?
Therefore may not I know it?
You have concealed for me, as great a sin
As adultery: Sir, never was occasion
For perfect trial of my constancy
Till now: Sir, I beseech you.
You'll repent it.
Never.
It hurries thee to ruin: I'll not tell thee,
Be well advised, and think what danger it is
To receive a Princes secrets: they that do,
Had need have their breasts hooped with adamant
To contain them: I pray thee yet be satisfied,
Examine thine own frailety, it is more easy
To tie knots, then unloose them: it is a secret
That (like a lingering poison) may chance lie
Spread in thy veins, and kill thee seven year hence▪
Now you dally with me.
No more, thou shalt know it.
By my appointment, the great Duchess of Malfy,
And two of her young children, four nights since
Were strangled.
Oh heaven! (sir) what have you done?
How now? how setles this? think you your
Bosom will be a grave, dark and obscure enough
For such a secret?
You have undone your self (sir.)
Why?
It lies not in me to conceal it.
No? come, I will swear you to it upon this book▪
Most religiously.
Kiss it.
Now you shall never utter it, thy curiosity
Hath undone thee: you're poisoned with that book,
Because I knew thou could not keep my council,
I have bound the to it by death.
For pity sake, hold.
Ha, Bosola?
I forgive you,
This equal piece of Justice you have done:
For I betrayed your council to that fellow,
He over heard it; that was the cause I said
It lay not in me, to conceal it.
Oh foolish woman,
Could not thou have poisoned him?
It is weakness,
Too much to think what should have bin done,
I go, I know not whether.
Wherefore come thou hither?
That I might find a great man, (like your self,)
Not out of his wits (as the Lord Ferdinand)
To remember my service.
I'll have thee hewed in pieces.
Make not your self such a promise of that life
Which is not yours, to dispose of.
Who placed thee here.
Her lust, as she intended.
Very well, now you know me for your fellow murderer▪
And wherefore should you lay fair marble colours,
Upon your rotten purposes to me?
Unless you imitate some that do plot great Treasons,
And when they have done, go hide themselves in the graves,
Of those were Actors in it?
No more,
There is a fortune attends thee.
Shall I go sue to fortune any longer?
It is the fools Pilgrimage.
I have honours in store for thee.
There are a many ways that conduct to seeming
Honour, and some of them very dirty ones.
Throw to the devil
Thy melancholy, the fire burns well,
What need we keep a stirring of 〈◊〉 and make
A greater smoother? thou wilt kill Antonio?
Yes.
Take up that body.
I think I shall
Shortly grow the common Bear, for Church-yards?
I will allow thee some dozen of attendants,
To aide thee in the murder.
Oh, by no means,
Physicians that apply horse-leiches to any rank swelling,
Use to cut of their tails, that the blood may run through them
The faster: Let me have no train, when I go to shed blood,
Least it make me have a greater, when I ride to the Gallows.
Come to me after midnight, to help to remove that body
To her own Lodging: I'll give out she did of the Plague;
Twill breed the less enquiry after her death.
Whore's Castruchio, her husband?
He's rod to Naples to take possession
Of Antonio's Citadel.
Believe me, you have done a very happy turn.
Fail not to come: There is the Master-key
Of our Lodgings: and by that you may conceive
What trust I plant in you.
You shall find me ready.
Oh poor Antonio, though nothing be so needful
To thy estate, as pity, Yet I find
Nothing so dangerous: I must look to my footing;
In such slippery y•e-pauements, men had need
To be frost-nayld well: they may break their necks else.
The President's here before me: how this man
Bears up in blood? seems fearless? why, it is well:
Security some men call the Subut•s of Hell,
Only a dead wall between. Well (good Antonio)
I'll seek thee out; and all my care shall be
To put thee into safety from the reach
Of these most cruel biters, that have got
Some of thy blood already. It may be,
I'll join with thee, in a most just revenge.
The weakest Arm is strong enough, that strikes
With the sword of Justice: Still me thinks the Duchess
Haunts me: there, there▪ it is nothing but my melancholy.
O Penitence, let me truly taste thy Cup.
That throws men down, only to raise them up.
Yond's the Cardinal's window: This fortification
Grew from the ruins of an ancient Abbey:
And to yond fide of the river, lies a wall
(Peec• of a Cloister) which in my opinion
Gives the best Echo, that you ever heard;
So hollow, and so dismal, and withal
So plain in the distinction of our words,
That many have supposed it is a Spirit
That answers.
I doe love these ancient ruins▪
We never tread upon them, but we set
Our foot upon some reverend History▪
And questionless, here in this open Court
(Which now lies naked to the injuries
Of stormy weather) some men lye Enterr'd
Loved the Church so well, and gave so largely to it,
They thought it should have canopide their Bones
Till Doombes-day: But all things have their end:
Churches, and Cities (which have diseases like to men)
Must have like death that we have.
Like death that we have.
Now the Echo hath caught you:
It groaned (me thought) and gave
A very deadly Accent?
Deadly Accent.
I told you it was a pretty one: You may make it
A Huntsmen, or a Falconer, a Musician,
Or a Thing of Sorrow.
A Thing of Sorrow.
I sir•• that suites it best.
That suites it best.
It is very like my wives voice.
I, wifes-voyce.
Come: let's vs walk farther from it:
I Would not have you go to the Cardinals to night:
Doe not.
Doe not.
Wisdom doth not more moderate, wasting Sorrow
Then time: take time for it: be mindful of thy safety.
Be mindful of thy safety.
Necessity compels me:
Make scrutiny throughout the passes
Of your own life; you'll find it impossible
To fly your fate.
O fly your fate.
Hark: the dead stones seem to have pity on you
And give you good counsel.
Echo, I will not talk with thee;
For thou art a dead Thing.
Thou art a dead Thing.
My Duchess is asleep now,
And her litle-Ones, I hope sweetly: oh Heaven
Shall I never see her more?
Never see her more:
I marked not one repetition of the Echo
But that: and on the sudden, a clear light
Presented me a face folded in sorrow.
Your fancy; merely.
Come: I'll be out of this Ague;
For to live thus, is not indeed to live:
It is a mockery, and a•as of life,
I will not henceforth save my self by halues,
Loose all, or nothing.
Your own virtue save you:
I'll fetch your eldest son; and second you:
It may be that the sight of his own blood
Spread in so sweet a figure, may beget
The more compassion.
How ever, fare you well:
Though in our miseries, Fortune have a part,
Yet, in our noble sufferings, she hath none,
Contempt of pain, that we may call our own.
You shall not watch to night by the sick Prince,
His Grace is very well recovered.
Good my Lord suffer vs.
Oh, by no means:
The noise, and change of object in his eye,
Doth more distract him: I pray, all to bed,
And though you hear him in his violent fit▪
Do not rise, I entreat you.
So sir, we shall not,
Nay, I must have you promise
Upon your honours, for I was enjoined to it
By himself; and he seemed to urge it sensibly.
Let out honours bind this trifle.
Nor any of your followers.
Neither.
It may be to make trial of your promise
When he's a sleep, my self will rise, and feign
Some of his mad tricks, and cry out for help,
And feign my self in danger.
If your throat were cutting,
I'll'd not come at you, now I have protested against it.
Why, I thank you.
It was a forle storm to night.
The Lord Ferdinand's chamber, shook like an Osier.
It was nothing but pure kindness in the Devil,
To •ocke his own child.
The reason why I would not suffer these
About my brother, is, because at midnight
I may with better privacy, convey
Iulias body, to her own Lodging: O, my Conscience!
I would pray now: but the Devil takes away my heart
For having any confidence in Prayer.
About this hour, I appointed Bosola
To fetch the body: when he hath served my turn,
He dies.
Ho? it was the Cardinals voice: I heard him name,
Bosola, and my death: listen, I hear ones footing.
Strangling is a very quiein death.
Nay then I see, I must stand upon my Guard.
What say' to that? whisper, softly: doe you agree to it?
So it must be done in the dark: the Cardinal
Would not for a thousand pounds, the Doctor should see it.
My death is plotted; here's the consequence of murder.
"We value not desert, nor Christian breath,
When we know black deeds, must be cured with death.
Here stay Sir, and be confident, I pray:
I'll fetch you a dark Lantern.
Could I take him at his prayers,
There were hope of pardon.
Fall right my sword:
I'll not give thee so much leisure, as to pray.
Oh, I am gone: Thou hast ended a long suit,
In a minute.
What art thou?
A most wretched thing,
That only have thy benefit in death,
To appear my self.
Where are you Sir?
Very near my home: Bosola?
Oh misfortune.
Smother thy pity, thou art dead else: Antonio?
The man I would have sau'de above mine own life?
We are merely the Stars tennys-balls (struck, and banded
Which way please them) oh good Antonio,
I'll whisper one thing in thy dying ear,
Shall make thy heart break quickly: Thy fair Duchess
And two sweet Children.
Their very names
Kindle a little life in me.
Are murderd!
Some men have wished to die.
At the hearing of sad tidings: I am glad
That I shall do it in sadness: I would not now
Wish my wounds balm'de, nor healed: for I have no use
To put my life to: In all our Quest of Greatness;
(Like wanton Boys, whose pastime is their care)
We follow after bubbles, blown in the air.
Pleasure of life, what is it? only the good hours
Of an Ague: merely a preparative to rest,
To endure vexation: I doe not ask
The process of my death: only commend me
To Delio.
Break heart:
And let my Son, fly the Courts of Princes,
Thou seem to have loved Antonio?
I brought him hither,
To have reconciled him to the Cardinal.
I doe not ask thee that:
Take him up, if thou tender thine own life,
And bear him, where the Lady Iulia
Was wont to lodge: Oh, my fate moves swift.
I have this Cardinal, in the forge already,
Now I'll bring him to th'hammer▪ (O direful misprision:)
I will not Imitate things glorious,
No more then base: I'll be mine own example.
On, on: and look thou represent, for silence,
The thing thou bear.
I am puzzled in a question about hell:
He says, in hell, there's one material fire,
And yet it shall not burn all men alike.
Lay him by: How tedious is a guilty conscience?
When I look into the Fish-ponds, in my Garden,
Me thinks I see a thing, armed with a Rake
That seems to strike at me: Now? art thou come? thou look ghastly:
There sits in thy face, some great determination,
Mixed with some fear.
Thus it lightens into Action:
I am come to kill thee.
Ho? help: our Guard.
Thou art deceived:
They are out of thy howling.
Hold: and I will faithfully divide
Revenues with thee.
Thy prayers, and proffers
Are both unseasonable.
Raise the Watch: we are betrayed.
I have confined your flight:
I'll suffer your retreat to Iulias Chamber,
But no further.
Help: we are betrayed.
Listen:
My Dukedom, for rescew.
Fie upon his counterfeiting.
Why, it is nor the Cardinal.
Yes, yes, it is he:
But I'll see him hanged, ere I'll go down to him.
Here's a plot upon me, I am assaulted: I am lost▪
Unless some rescew.
He doth this pretty well:
But it will not serve; to laugh me out of mine honour.
The sword's at my throat:
You would not bawl so loud then.
Come, come: lets's go to bed: he told vs thus much before∣hand.
He wished you should not come at him: but believe,
The accent of the voice sounds not in jest.
I'll down to him, howsoever, and with engines
Force op the doors.
Let's follow him aloof,
And note how the Cardinal will laugh at him.
There's for you first: because you shall not vnbarracade the door
To let in rescew.
What cause hast thou to pursue my life?
Look there:
Antonio?
Slain by my hand unwittingly:
Pray, and be sudden: when thou kill'dst thy sister,
Thou took from Justice her most equal b•••••ce,
And left her nought but her sword.
O mercy.
Now it seems thy Greatness was only outward:
For thou fall faster of thy self, then calamity
Can drive thee: I'll not wast longer time: There
Thou hast hurt me:
Again:
Shall I die like a Le•orate
Without any resistance? help, help, help:
I am slain.
Th'allarum? give me a fresh horse:
Rally the vaunt-guard: or the day is lost:
Yield, yield: I give you the honour of Arms,
Shake my Sword over you, will you yield?
Help me, I am your brother.
The devil?
My brother fight upon the adverse party?
There flies your ransom.
Oh Justice:
I suffer now, for what hath former bin:
"Sorrow is held the eldest child of sin.
Now you're brave follows:
Caesars Fortune was harder then Pompeys:
Caesar died in the arms of prosperity,
Pompey at the feet of disgrace: you both died in the field,
The paine's nothing: pain many times, is taken away, with
The apprehension of greater, (as the tooth-ache with the •ight
Of a Barber, that comes to pull it out) there's Philosophy for you.
Now my revenge is perfect: sink (thou maine cause
Of my undoing) the last part of my life,
Hath done me best service.
Give me some wet hay, I am broken winded,
I do account this world but a dog-kennell:
I will vault credit, and affect high pleasures,
Beyond death.
He seems to come to himself, now he's so near the bottom▪
My sister, oh! my sister, there's the cause on it.
" Whether we fall by ambition, blood, or lust,
" Like Diamonds, we are cut with our own dust.
Thou hast thy payment too.
Yes, I hold my weary soul, in my teeth,
It is ready to part from me: I do glory
That thou, which stood'st like a huge Pyramid
Begun upon a large, and ample base,
Shalt end in a little point a kind of nothing.
How now (my Lord?)
Oh sad disastre.
How comes this?
Revenge, for the Duchess of Malfy, murdered
By th'Aragonian brethren: for Antonio,
Slain by his hand: for lustful Iulia,
Poisoned by this man: and lastly, for my self,
(That was an Actor in the maine of all,
Much against mine own good nature, yet i'th'end
Neglected.)
How now (my Lord?)
Look to my brother:
He gave vs these large wounds, as we were struggling
Here in the rushes: And now, I pray, let me
Be laid by, and never thought of.
How fatally (it seems) he did withstand,
His own rescew?
Thou wretched thing of blood,
How came Antonio by his death?
In a mist: I know not how,
Such a mistake, as I have often seen
In a play: Oh, I am gone,
We are only like dead walls, or vaulted graves,
That ruined, yields no echo: Fare you well,
It may be pain: but no harm to me to die,
In so good a quarrel: Oh this gloomy world,
In what a shadow, or deep pit of darkness,
Doth (womanish, and fearful) mankind live?
Let worthy minds, ne'er stag• in distrust
To suffer death, or shame for what is just,
Mine is an other voyage.
The noble Delio, as I came to th'Pallace,
Told me of Antonio's being here, and showed me
A pretty gentlemen his son and heir.
Oh Sir, you come to late.
I heard so, and
Was armed for it ere I came: Let vs make noble use
Of this great ruin; and join all our force
To establish this young hopeful Gentleman
In's mothers right. These wretched eminent things
Leave no more fame behind 'em, then should one
Fall in a frost, and leave his print in snow,
As soon as the sun shines, it ever melts,
Both form, and matter: I have ever thought
Nature doth nothing so great, for great men,
As when she's pleased, to make them Lords of truth:
"Integrity of life, is fems best friend,
Which noblely (beyond Death) shall crown the end.

TO greet this fair Assembly Harms comes,
The winged Herald twixt the gods and men,
And helps an Infant-Muse, who not admires
His own, nor envies others clearer fires:
Whose modest Venus every where forbears
To speak what may offend your Attic ears.
His chiefest aim and Art is for to fit
Unto this Place, (the Vatican of Wit)
His Lines, that this fair Confluence may allow,
What his Minerva hath contrived now.
He to no foreign parts for plot doth roam,
But speaks such Language as he learnt at home.
The Scene Parrhesia is, the chiefest State
Of great, but much disturbed Hermony:
Discourse fallen mad, and troubled Method fled;
Young Intellect surprised, Invention
Parts from Judicium; all that is amiss,
Is rectified by Analysis.
This, and what else we shall present to night
Unto this Round, we offer as a Rite:
For you can truly judge, and give report
Of what you hear above the Vulgar sort.
But here the Sophister, how to commence,
Or take's Degree, as yet is in suspense:
By keeping of his Acts, he now will try
To get your Placate by his Fallacy.
NOt yet begins the East-disturbing Morn
To draw aside Nights fable Canopy, (plays
Nor heavens great Spy, whose curious search dis-
The worlds close errors, yet o'relooks the earth,
When now long since lazy &amp; slow-pac't sleep
Hath posted by my scarce▪saluted eyes:
And let him pass; hoe's not that powerful God,
Whom ever-waking Fallacy adores.
Sacred Deocit, to thee be consecrate
My Temples, aid thou Goddess mine attempt,
I soon will free me. Here comes my servant Ambiguity.
I am in doubt, and I think cannot easily be recall∣ved, whether it were better living in Hell, where there is no day; or at my Masters, where there is no night: I cannot tell what any young Gentlewoman would answer to the blind Philosophers question. I am sure to me, Nulla videtur vo∣luptas nocturne: There cannot the least sleep harbour under my brows, but it is presently started with the loud cries of my Master. Melancholy keeps him always waking, and his envy will not suffer me to take any rest: Then my head hath scarce forgot my pillow, when his buzzing Suitors swarming about me, sting my ears like Hornets: like ghosts on this side Cocytus, they flock thither in infinite multitudes, to be wafted over to Hell: I would they were all once shipped thither, and dispatched; they are so importunate, that I could curse Nature who hath given me two ears to hear them, and but one tongue (though that indifferent double) to an∣swer them. But at length I bethought me, she hath given me two legs to convey me from them.
It were good she had given you more eyes to see your Master.
I would she had given me yours, you might not have seen your man.
Well sir, I hope she would have left me hands to have felt him. But hast thou brought what I bid thee?
I have Sir, and I have not. (not.
I was about to thank you Sir, but now I thank you
What hast thou done?
I have brought Sir, but not as you bid me.
Villain, go run again.
Nay Sir, I thought it better to bring two Viols at one going, than at twice going one Viol. There were two of water of the same colour, and I have brought them both.
Well, where are they?
Here sir.
So double diligence, It is no great matter: Indeed their colours are the same, and their effects not much unlike. This being tasted, causes drunkenness; this sudden mad∣ness: and this is the drink I have provided for my Fathers mornings draught. Sirrah take you that, you may chance to have use of it; you know the virtue?
Yes Sir.
And now what are these Suitors that so much trouble you?
Master, you have seen Deaths dance in Boccus, Mer∣chants, Vittulers, Vintners, Tobacco-men, Informers, Pro∣jectors, all those that mourned at Tigellius his Funeral; Ambubaiarum collegia, Pharmacapolae,
I am sure you know them.
And know my self unable to content them.
Riches and honour, all the worlds delights
Their hearts desire, I have given them,
And like the Farmer old Stercatius,
Still toiling in his dung-hill, or his field,
As with his grosser soul best sympathising,
Spending his spirits, sparing of his pelf,
Defrauded his own Genius, all to make
His Masters Son an upstart Gentleman
Of Innes of Court: so have I hitherto
On this still-craving brood freely bestowed
My choicest favours, to advance their states:
Whilst I my self in scorn and infamy,
Have basely lived, am basely like to dye.
And could I suffer this so vile contempt?
Yet am I hated too; who can endure
Contempt and hatred to go unrevenged?
Or were it else where, I might contaie my self
Dissemble this my grief, neglect my shame.
But here within the great Hermony,
In hatred and contempt to draw my breath,
A thousand times it is worse than cursed death,
But that which more torments my vexed soul,
Bold Demonstration, and quick Topicus,
Though better borne, yet both my younger brothers,
Are every where admired, and beloved.
Them old Discourse, our too much doting Father,
Kisses, embraces, seeks to magnify.
On them the Vulgar and Nobility
With no less joy doe fix their gazing eyes,
Than the neare-death escaping Mariners
Upon fair Ledaes Twins, if they appear
After a tempest, when the Heavens are clear.
To them which scarce my spite-swolne tongue can speak,
My heart abhors to think, are destined
The fair Scientia and Opinion
In happy Spousals to be married:
Now Fa••acy, it is thou must this prevent,
Or pine in grief, in shame, in discontent.
And see (o fairest Opportunity)
That ever favour'sts Fallacies attempts,
I'll kiss thy gracious hand, and with my heart
Embrace thy sweet-selfe-offering courtosie.
WEll hath the great Creator of the world
Framed it in that exact and perfect form,
That by it self unmovable might stand,
Supported only by his Providence.
Well hath his powerful Wisdom ordered
Th'in nature disagreeing Elements,
That all affecting their peculiar place,
Maintain the conservation of the whole.
Well hath he taught the swelling Ocean
To know his bounds, lest in luxurious pride
He should insult upon the conquered Land.
Well hath he placed those Torches in the Heavens,
To give light to our else all darkened eyes:
The Crystal windows thorough which our soul
Looking upon the worlds most beauteous face,
Is blessed with sight and knowledge of his works.
Well hath he all things done: for how alas
Could any strength or wit of feeble man
Sustained have that greater Universe,
Too weak an Atlas for one Common-wealth
How could he make the Earth, the Water, Air,
And Fire, in peace their duties to observe,
Or bridle up the head-strong Ocean,
That cannot rule the wits and tongues of Man,
And keep them in? it were impossible
To give light to the world, with all his Art,
And skill, that cannot well illuminate
One darkened understanding. Oh my sons,
Never admire the Seat of government,
Nor let the haughty and ambitious thoughts
Of an aspiring mind, inflame your hearts
To climb up to the false-supposed Heaven
Of high-authority.
Now I think I am prevented: is he not stark mad already?
The Chair of State,
Though glorious seeming, oft proves dangerous,
Is always troublesome, always envied.
J hear the Regent of this only Land
Not altogether unexperienced,
Having the assistance of grave Counsellors,
Ready to faint with burden of my cares,
Think happy great Tiphoeus, who, they say
Lies pressed down under large Sicily.
Your loving Son, if his purpose hold, will ease you; you shall not think Ae•na upon your shoulders, he will make your head light enough.
Let then your true affection so well placed
On well deserving, well requiting loves,
Doubly reflecting on your nearer selves,
Grow strong in fast united amity;
That what no single strength or wit can doe,
Virtue conjoined, may attain unto.
But Demonstration call young Intellect
To be instructed; he was hither sent
By that great Empress of the Isle of Man,
Renowned Enema his careful Mother,
And as his youth, this child-hood of the day
Will best admit the best impressions.
But who's that? Fallacy? and whence come you?
My gracious Father, carried on the wings
Of my ne'er sleeping Piety, I came
From my own house to doe my humble duty
Unto your Majesty. (you
Your earliness hath made some hast, but a report of
From far, before you, late hath been with me.
How comes it to pass thus, ô my son!
Unhappy son, borne to thy fathers shame,
Living unto his grief, thou cause me
In all the world to be ill spoken of
Through thy most lewd behaviour, I hear say
With Jugglers, Cony-catchers, Gypsies, Rogues,
Base gamesters, lying Mountebanks, wild bawds,
And most damned couzners, you keep company,
At blind Ale-houses, Innes, and Ordinaries,
Whore-houses, and Apothecary-shops,
With such like places, you doe still frequent,
Where you abuse the plain simplicity
Of honest men, that I may justly spend
That breath where-with I would have blessed thee,
Into deserved cursings; and I ought
Profusely power it forth in chiding thee.
But oh though wicked, yet I think my son,
I doe entreat thee, I will sue to thee
To leave these courses, and at length begin
Better to govern thy misguided self:
Look to thy brothers, and not scorn to learn;
To me they duly doe perform their duty
To men they doe approve their honesty.
Sir, will it please you to drink this morning?
Yes, I am dry with talking.
Then may it please your grace to give me leave
To speak in poor defence of my just cause.
Say what thou can, and oh I would thou could
Clear thee of these foul accusations?
First may I Sir, full worthily except
Against the oft-false-proved messenger,
Ever to be suspected, lying fame.
Then I appeal unto the Testimony
Of all the world, whether I have not
Always my self associated with
The best reputed sort: great Princes have
Accepted of my wished for company.
With most chief Statesmen I have been familiar,
Upon the Exchange not looked for, I have been
By many wealthy Merchants oft saluted.
The fairest streets of the most famous Cities,
Are almost worn out with my often steps.
Nay, what place is there of more special note,
Where I (though not apparent seen of all,
Iknow you hate that foolish vanity)
Have not been for the most part, resident?
But I hereafter, that your faithful eye
May give true witness to my carriage,
N•arer at home, here in your sight intend
To show my self, and my deserts approve
To your sure comfort, and my friends sound love.
Whore's your Napkin Topicus?
I have forgot it.
Fie, had you no odd place to put you in mind,
Go quickly and fetch one.
Let me embrace thee Fallacy, let me kiss thee my dearest son, the prop of my age, the sole heir of my love: My ears shall bee shut up hereafter to any complaints brought against thee; I will take it as against my self; if any henceforth accuse thee, I will fight with him, I will beat and baffle him; I will run upon him, spit upon him.
How lik'st thou this Ambiguity? is not his Style changed since?
Yes me thinks; before he spake in Verse, now hee scannes not his words.
Oh thou shalt hear him talk out of all measure.
I will now go walk into the Garden of the Muses, and gather the choicest flowers that grow about Helicon, to make a Garland for thy temples. I'll make the skilful The∣toricians to empty all their shops of the freshest colours to paint thy cheeks withal. Then the Grammarians I'll cause to shape fit and well-fashioned garments for thee of the purest Silk that ever was framed of true-woven words: Come go with me, come go with me.
NOw what strange passion hath befallen my father I
I wonder that he did so fawn upon
Unworthy Fallacy; yet that may be
Proceeded from a Fathers tender love.
But he looked ghastly, and his colour changed,
And seemed to grow forgetful what he did;
I pray this humour hold not.
How now Brother?
Met you your Father?
Not I; is he gone?
He bid me call up young Lord Intellect.
Marry beshrew you, I could wish you had let me a∣lone; you awaked me out of a most sweet sleep.
What is the matter?
Nay I swear I know not;
But I doe fear all is not well with him.
Not well, and stand we talking?
I protest I am amazed.
Come let us seek him out.
Young Lord you were best to stay; they go to seek one whom they know not where to find. Now I hope to make my Master dote as much on me, as his mad father doth on him, if I can convey away this purchase.
But when will Lord Discourse come? I desire to learn somewhat this morning.
My young Lord, if you will go with me, I will lead you to such a Library, as all Hermony yields not the like again.
But are there any Books for my use?
Of all sorts.
Any Logic or Philosophy?
The best Logic, Rhetoric, &amp; Philosophy that can be.
Whose I prithee?
Why you shall find there Piscators Logic, But∣lers Rhetoric.
Indeed, Faecundi calices quem non fecere disertum?
O sir, the only Rhetoric in price;
You shall have too Magirus Physics.
What Kitchin-Physick?
Bakers Arithmetic.
That will teach me to tell Thirteen to the dozen▪ what, you think I will prove Helluo librorum? Well, I will go with you for once.
And stay with me I hope, longer than you are will∣ling
But is it certain which Report affirms?
Young Topicus and Demonstration,
So shortly shall be married? Speak Iudicium,
What doe you hear?
I am for truth assured
Ever night their Nuptials will be finished:
This Morning from Verona come the Ladies,
Whose presence only is attended here.
And now the love, Invention, which you bear
To Topicus, may best conceive my joy,
For Demonstrations equal happiness.
My joy and love esteemed by your own
You well approve, and make me confident
Upon your judgment in a lesser thing:
My working thoughts to celebrate this day,
Have here brought forth a rude impollisht Rime
Where-with I dare trust your friendly censure.
You may be bold, on me, who cannot blame
What ever quick Invention hath composed.
Nay, flattery becomes you not; it is this.
What is it an Epigram?
I have mistaken.
Nay Sir, by your favour, I will presume upon your curtsy to read it.
Our Civil Law doth seem a royal thing,
It hath more Titles than the Spanish King▪
But yet the Common Law quite puts it down,
In getting, like the Pope, so many a Crown.
Nay, now I pray conceal not what you think,
You know Iudicium ought to be conformed
To Laws, and not to speak his mind of them.
I ask your censure of my Epigram,
Not of the Laws.
I think that it were fit
It had a gloss to show your meaning, what
You understand by Titles, and by Crowns;
Those words are doubtful: but Sir shall I see
The other?
Stay, her's Fallacy.
THese are the Dragons that so duly keep
The golden fruit which I so long to crop:
Oh that I could enchant them! well, Isle try:
Say, faithful followers of young Intellect,
Is your dear Lord come by? or whore's he gone?
How? our dear Lord come by; or whore's he gone?
What means Lord Fallacy? did not great Discourse
Send for him by your Brother?
We hither came, thinking to find him here.
I know not that, but this I doe assure you,
He is departed from the Court, and fled:
The cause my sorrow doth forbid to show;
Thus much my love hath made me let you know.
It were needless now for us to ask the cause,
Let's think upon some means to find him out.
Can you advise us Fallacy?
Not I;
You better both can find and judge what's sit.
I am amazed.
And so I swear am I.
Well, if my counsel may doe any good,
I wish that both of you pursue him straight;
You towards Rhemes, Invention, and you
Iudicium to Verona, nor return
Till you have found him: you may better seek
In any place than here, where oh alas,
Discourse distracted is enough to affright
Far stronger wits.
Discourse distracted? how?
O pardon me, I know not.
Come, let's go,
You vex him with your fruitless Questions.
Well may you speed, I would go on your way,
But that my piety here bids me stay:
What are you gone? ne'er may you meet again,
Or meeting, ne'er return. I cannot like
Such curious fellows in strange Commonwealths.
And now for young Lord Intellect, my hope
Stands resolute of quickly taking him,
I may go prosecute my chief designs.
I Would the number of things in the world had been less, or the names more, I might not have been thus troubled. There is nothing spoken or written but is sub∣jest to so many interpretations, that without Distinction▪ go∣veth occasion of an hundred evasions. An Obligation can∣not be made for ten Groats, but the Attorney will have half a Crown for Parchment: no less will hold the Addi∣tion of the parties names, of younger and elder, Butcher and Tanner of Witam and Wolvercoate; that if the unskilful Painter was fine to write under his well resembled Pi∣ctures, this is a Dog, this is an Hare, I had need to come after and tell what Dog, what Hare he means. But ye∣sterday an Herald was with me, who▪ as I loved to save blood-shed, entreated me to help him to pacify two incen∣sed Citizens, who since the year 1610, when all Artificers and Tradesmen became Gentlemen, fortunate to light both upon the same Coate-armour, and now were ready to fight, who should have it most proper, if I lent him not some dif∣ference to put betwixt them: I asking what the Coat was, he told me a Bulls head, whereupon I advised him to call his, that was the younger, an Oxe-head, and make the horns a little longer; and I hope by this they are contented. And indeed I cannot wonder that so often many things have but one name, when sometimes one thing engrosseth many names, like the Spanish Nobility, which require whole sheets for a Superscription. You may enquire for a Broker, meet with a Bawd, and fall into the hands of an Usurer, yet all but one Citizen. You may there see a School•r troub∣led with the Rheum, a Gentleman ill at ease, a Serving∣man stark drunk, all sick of one disease; I would some
would reduce these things to a parity, and relieve the nullity of some by the plurality of others; or some• good Cirrus would adventure a jerking, by taking away from short things those Titles which are too long for them, and giving to those who are too short, and so fit them both. If Division would come once, I would speak to him my self, to make a more e∣quall distribution; and I wonder hee stays so long; but now here hee comes with the rest.
Come, come, my Lord, it is time we were about this business.
Good my Lord Definition, you must pardon me, you know I am troubled with two shrewd impediments, Age and weakness; and besides Dichotomy hath let me blood, and charged me I should neither use Horse nor Coach, but trust to mine own two legs; nay hee will fearce permit me a staff to Ieane upon.
My Lord Division, it were best that you fate down if you are weary.
Distinction have you brought the rolls? they bee the Records which preserve things done from swallowing up in oblivion.
If you mean the rolls you bid me, I have; if any other, I have not.
Description give me my Spectacles, not without good cause hath our Sovereign sent unto us to draw out for him the pedigree, which is a true lineal descent of all the chiefest inhabitants within these provinces, and view their ancient possessions, which are be Dominions and Lands, conveyed them by
their Ancestors, least here it should come to pass, which is happened in all other Countries, that the dignity and jurisdiction depart from the noblest houses, which are families retaining in many generations, the impression of some heroical virtue, and pass to upstarts, who are such as Fortune, not Desert hath made gre∣tious.
Nay fear not that; while Opposition lives, there shall be always some to resist that confusion.
With which Province will you begin, with Substance, or with Quantity?
Best I think with Substance, right, and here is the roll: The first Duke that reigned here, and gave his name to the Country was Substance; I cannot well say what he was, his antiquity was so great.
Hee was the eldest son of Ens, was he not Opposition?
No, he was his eldest child, the rest were Daughters.
It should seem so, for accidents are of a feminine nature, they cannot exist alone by themselves.
Well, howsoever this Realm was equally divided amongst them; I have heard, Pythagoras was employed in assigneing them their portions.
It is not so, it was his Scholar Archetas Tarentinus, he measured out the Provinces by his Geometry.
Hence we may gather of what antiquity this King∣dome was, it is sure as ancient as the Roman Empire, for Architas and Numa were Schoole-fellowes.
Fie no, Pythagoras lived long before him.
This Country was then called Decaphylia, till after∣ward subdued by Mercury, was by him called Hermony.
Well, howsoever let us proceed: Substance match∣ing with the Lady Corporea, had by her a son called Corpus.
My Lord, there were two Dukes of that name, one in the Province of Substance, another in the Province of Quantity.
But we mean him of Substance.
Good Lord, what odds there is betwixt the men that were in those days, and the men that are now in this latter declining Age of the World. This Duke Substance was a monstrous, tall, huge, big man; hee had a head greater than any Horse, a neck like a Bull, larger sides than the Western Hog; Legs like Winde-mill posts, and feet proportionable: His son Corpus was very like unto him; the Aldermen of the Corporation, that are scarce able'to come in at our Colledge-gates, might have shown tricks like Tumblers in a hoop, through his Thumb-ring; King Are∣thurs tallest Knight would have scarce trust his points. The Bull-hide, that cut out in Thongs, compassed as much ground as the walls of Carthage, could not make him a Girdle.
I wonder how any man had so much leisure as to look about him, and draw his description.
O sir ex pede Herculem.
Him succeeded Corpus, surnamed Animatum; him Animal, who was named Rationale, and begat Homo.
He had two wives, the other was Irrational.
Sure that Irrational had many Husbands, I have known her married to above Twenty my self.
Why? had not all the rest so? Substance, Corpus, and Corpus animatum, my son Privation, if he were here, could tell their names.
Where is he?
He hath lain a long time bed-ridden, deaf, blind, and dumb.
I am sorry for him.
Who are next Definition?
Homo begat Socrates, Plato, and the rest.
Now thou see Description, Nature gives with two
hands; with one the gifts of the body, with the other the qualities of the mind; so to these men she hath now given more understanding than unto Substance, Corpus, and those in former time.
But may it not be doubted, whether Socrates and Plato were of this Country; I could never hear that they had much to doe with Substance.
It is true, if you mean Substance as the Vulgar doe, for wealth: But if you understand it as we doe, the Province, questionless they had.
I say they had not, and can prove it: They were Phi∣losophers, were they not?
Yes.
And Philosophers have no place here.
And why not Sir?
Because ignorant fellows have not, it holds from contraries.
So it pleases you to conclude Sir; but how prove you that Sir?
They are Transcendents over all the Provinces, and therefore cannot rightly be said to be in any.
Indeed they say, Homer had seven Cities strove for his Birth, but none ever gave him place of abiding: but I thought Philosophers had more certain abode than a wan∣dring Poet.
They are in Substance, for they love to stand by themselves, and depend on none: They are in Quantity, for ignorant men are in number many, in magnitude monstrous.
I think least of all in Quantity, for they are rather in number infinite; and I cannot tell whether they have Longitude and Latitude, I am sure they have no profound∣ness.
Profoundnesse either may be taken for deepness of judgement and understanding, and that they are far from, or for thick grossness, and that in them is most palpable.
They are in Quality: for who so fat, fair, strong, and lusty as they? out of Relation they cannot bee: You have ignorant Rulers, ignorant Subjects, ignorant Tutors, and ignorant Scholars: who more in Action? who more passionate in all places, at all times? who use more gestures? Who better apparelled?
For the particulars, you Description, take this our Li∣cence, by which we doe authorize you to go through the Country, and take notice of the names and Differences of them all: For us it is sufficient to set down these things in general.
Belike Sir, you mean I shall not dye in idle∣ness?
Shall we proceed to some other Province?
I must first have the assistance of Lord Demonstrate∣tion; I can doe nothing without him.
Why send you not Distinction for him?
Go tell him we expect his coming; entreat him to make haste.
Now my Lords, as you love your selves, or respect the State, employ your careful providence with all expo∣dition.
Why? what is the matter? good Proposition speak.
Oh, I shall speak too soon: Our Lord Discourse, is fallen stark mad.
Fallen mad? Oh fatal calamity!
What shall we doe?
Nay, worse than this.
Worse cannot bee.
Demonstration, Topicus, and Fallacy, are hot in con∣tention who must govern.
How comes Fallacy near him, lately he could no endure him?
I know not how: but now he seems exceedingly to affect him.
Have they no more care of their Father? this is too bad; it were good for to take some order with them pre∣sently.
Let us go visit him, hereafter we will go finish these businesses.
HE is not here: it is common to say, Hee is a true man that never deceives his Master: and I think it may properly be said, He is a rare Master that no∣ver deceives his man. This is not the first time my Master Fallacy hath sent me on such idle errands: He is right like the fellow that when hee had nothing to steal, filled his Pockets with Rushes: rather than he will deceive no by∣die, he will deceive me. But let him take heed he play not like the mad fellow Aiax, who when he had left nothing else to kill, slew himself: and so when he can no longer cozen others, he'll cozen himself: His golden Letters, written with an Angels quill, will doe him no good: But here I think he comes; no, it is Distinction: This Villain I can no more endure than Demosthenes could Phocion: he is the fatal Axe of all my Policies, the 〈◊〉 of all my subtle Devices.
My Lords, what are they gone? it had been solly for them to stay for Demonstration.
He must not be of our Council, if Opposition should chance to come.
There was ado indeed: Old Discourse talking nothing but of Quadratures, of Circles, of Lines running nearer and nearer, but never coming together: of Hexities, Ideas, Quintessences, Sublimations, Corporal Ubi∣quites, infinite Quantities, Consubstantiations, Tran∣substantiations; things beside impossible: I wonder what he means; surely he is besides himself.
Well, I must adventure on him, delay may prove dangerous. How now Distinction, what news is stir∣ring?
Oh Sir, I see that stirring head of yours is weary of our better state: you listen to hear of some new change?
What are there windows in my breast? this fellow knows my heart.
Not I Distinction.
No, you are Ambiguity.
You may mistake me.
Yes, if I take thee for any other than thou art.
What's that Sir?
An honest man.
Indeed you say true, hee doth mistake me that thinks me other than an honest man.
But you say false: I say hee doth mistake that takes thee for an honest man, otherwise than thou art.
Why Distinction? it is not you can find fault with my honesty.
No, Isle be sworn.
Why say you so then?
Because I can find no honesty with thy faults.
Come, come Distinction, if I have been faulty, you know no man is borne without faults.
Yes, and I think there are few faults borne without thee.
Come prithee, thou art always disposed to cross me, but I will not fall out with thee for a King∣dome.
You would for a lesser matter, if fear did not hold your hands.
Sir you shall know my hands be free.
Why, you will not draw Sir?
Yes, I will Sir.
What, not your Sword?
No, good Distinction, I love thee too well; Isle draw my Purse, with all my heart, to doe thee good.
I thank you good Amphoteros: but I fear you have two Purses, as hee had two Chests; one full of money, the o∣there of thanks.
That I have, my dear Oudeteros, and if thou wilt go with me, I will draw them both; the one to pay for the wine we will drink, the other to thank thee for thy Company.
Well, Isle go with thee.
I Cannot conjecture wherefore Fallacy is so desirous to speak with me, he requested I would meet him here sometime before wee fate, and yet he is not come. Now I doe wonder I was so much moved at his carriage in this business, I begin to pity his poor fortune: Alas, that he was base borne; but what of his base birth? Hercules
was base borne, so was Romulus, so many Worthies: He seems to have more wit than both his Brothers, and al∣though that be counted such a blot, yet who can condemn him? it was no fault of his; but what if there hath gone a bad report of him? why hee may mend in time. Was not Themistocles a dissolute young fellow, yet who proved a braver Soldier? Oh it is Magistracy shows the man; what hopes? what encouragements hath hee ever had? still kept under and disgraced; neither is his Title altogether nought: and now a days it is a small right a man would forgo for want of standing to it; I cannot blame him and a little thing more would make me favour him.
O wonderful operation, two or three drops of this Wine fuming into his head, turned his brains like the fans of a Winde-mill, and then his tongue like a clack began to talk on both sides; every thing was taken duplici∣la; he talked pure Scot, and Thomas Occham and Caietan might have learnt some new Schoole-learning from him: but this storm held not long, ever a still calm followed this vi∣olent tempest; and he fell fast asleep, and I think I was not long uncasing the Fox; he was so ready but now to give a double interpretation of every word I spake, and I think (to be quits with him) I shall make more than a single use of this Cloak: first by this shift I have left him to pay for the Wine, then by this disguise I may unsuspected come to deliver my Masters Letter at the Bench, if Opposition come not before: But I think mine eyes are dazzled; he is here, and I saw him not.
And I saw you, but I knew you not.
My Master Fallacy by me kindly greets you Sir, and would have met you here himself, but was detained with extraordinary business, and desirous more closely to impart
his mind unto you, by these his Letters doth express the same.
I doubt not but twill doe; oh there is great hope: some think the mediation of Angels may help in Heaven; I am sure Angels are the best intercessors in Earth: when they be∣come Orators, there is no doubt of propitious audience. There is no reading to the golden Legends: This Chryso∣stomes Style is most persuasive. Hath he done since? I think if it had been longer, it would not have seemed tedious.
You may tell your Master from me, I have perused his Letters, know his mind, and will give him my best assistance; bid him be confident.
I will Sir.
Well that's all; I never did hate this Fallacy, and of late I saw matter deserving pity in him; but now I see hee loves me, he is willing to rely upon me, he dares so far trust me, he doth promise to advance me, I cannot choose but love him, I must needs help him, I will doe my best to honour him: well, here they come.
GOod Reduction charge Conclusion to keep him fast, and if he chance to break from him, doe you assist him. Come young Lords, I would I could persuade you altogether to desist from these troublesome contentions; but if that may not be, this is a fitter place than your sick and distempered Fathers house; let us hear what you would have, what you can plead for your selves.
Then why doe not some dim &amp; purblind Stars,
Corrivals with the thrice most glorious Sun,
Sue at the Throne of Heavens Majesty
To rulethe the Day? it were less presumption
Than this of these competitors of mine:
For were not I by my Nobility,
And most apparent births prerogative,
In all men's sight, to be preferred, before
This Topicus, and bastard Fallacy:
Yet were my worth, great worth, beyond compare,
To prove my claim just, all-sufficient.
I from the State long since have banished
Gross ignorance, and that her cursed spawn,
Wild superstitious Admiration,
The Tyrant of the vulgar simple minds:
I the chief Shower to my Lord Discourse,
All the most strange and wonderful effects
Of closer working Nature have set forth,
The hidden cause locked from common eyes
In deep, scarce-searchable Obscurity,
I opened wide to his illustrious view.
I the renowned Champion of Truth,
Have her defended against her proudest foes,
And many combats for her honour fought,
Never returning conquered from the field,
And therefore now to any scorn to yield.
You may speak Topicus.
If any words of mine may find attention,
In your not yet fully possessed ears,
Nor shall it seem presumption to you
Judicious Lords, which seems so palpable
To prejudicious Demonstration,
That I my title dare maintain with him;
Your reverent wisdoms are not ignorant
That though he hath been honoured more of late,
Yet was I by•no before him; then if he
For birth-right claims ought, it is due to me:
Nor to his high prized worth inferior,
Are my deserts not not ervalued?
If he his foe in close and narrow lists
Have, as he bravely vaunts, encountered,
And that not often, for none-profiting
Only, selfe-pleasing, Contemplation,
The single combats oftner fought by me
In just defence of your impaired rights,
Are no less famous, no less known to you:
Besides, I always in the Champion field
Of Rhetoric well levied forces led,
Chief Muster-master to the Sovereign Liege,
Our high Commander and chief General,
Under Truths colours many skirmishes
I have endured, won many Victories:
Then let me for the King, for truth, for you,
In all your causes never wont to fail,
For mine own self in this mine own prevail.
If you have done, let's hear young Lord Fallacy.
If that my vows, or tears, my gracious Lords
Conjoined with yours, could move the angry Heavens,
This doubtful question should not trouble you:
Thou should great King enjoy thy right, and we—
(Oh admirable piety!)
Would rest as happy still enjoying thee:
But since that fate, (O hard and cruel fate)
Denies him his right mind, denies us him,
Envies us all this great felicity,
Who may more hope his regency t'attaine,
Than he in whom his virtues most remain
Nor let it any thing impeach my right,
That unadvised Demonstration
Objects to me, base birth, who doth not see
His Father he disgraces, and not me;
If ought he from his Mothers right doth claim,
Let him enjoy it, i'll him not deceive.
But if he at his Fathers rule doth aim,
He was my Father too, and by his leave,
Although I chance it not to have with him one mother
On the best side, I am his elder brother.
Nor are my virtues meaner than my birth,
Witness those many difficult attempts,
Which quite impossible for any else
To hope t'achieve, with expedition,
And not without success, I have performed.
Witness that most rare service to this Realm,
Which I with diligence have executed.
Discourse his chief controller in the state,
Truths sole solicitor, common Attorney
In all the causes which concern the Land:
And all this, though by far exceeding all,
Which my Competitors can promise you,
If to my first deserts you give due meed,
With future industry I vow to exceed.
If they which most they can, (and who can less?
Shall scarce defend, scarce defence asking right,
I will your weakest causes fortify,
And make appear most strong in most men's sight.
Who hates us, shall not think us overthrown;
Who favours us, shall swear the right our own.
Now all this that I might effect for you,
Let me receive at your hands what's my due.
My Lord speak what you think.
Did you as true Piety (which is a reverent and grateful respect of your Parents) commands you, strive who should have the greatest part in lamenting this his Ex∣tasie, (which is a Distraction of his brains, or a privation of those gifts of understanding, which of late hee happily
enjoyed) I should give you equal praise; (which is the de∣served testimony of a virtuous action) but seeing you carried by Ambition, (that violent passion, which desires nothing but honour) into these Civil Divisions: (which are Dis∣sentions, disquieting your friends, and delightful to your enemies) To say no more, I can commend none of you. But because Justice (which is a perpetual and constant will to give to every man his due) doth warrant me to de∣fine this present controversy, if you will stand to my Judgement, (which is the censure I shall give) Demonstrate∣on, the noblest son of Discourse, by the Lady Necessity, (who concludes all things which he undertakes so truly, so immediately, so surely) shall succeed in his fathers digni∣tie: (which is his kingdom and place in this realm) what thinks Division?
These three that sue for Discourse his dignity, are either true borne sons, or base borne: the true borne plead either in right of birth, or of desert; their birth they either commend from Priority, or Nobility; their deserts either they set out from their greatness, or from their good∣ness. Now because base borne sons never inherit, I think Fallacy hath no right at all. Again, because Primogeniture hath been always preferred before great birth, and often good works serving for use and action, are better than sell∣dome great effects, which tend to nothing but to Admirati∣on and Contemplation: I Judge Topicus, Discourse his eldest son, by meaner Parentaged Probability, in that, in all matters, at all times, wee shall have use of him to bee chosen before Demonstration, second son, though begotten on nobler descended Necessity, of whose virtue we have so seldom experience.
If you have spoken, you may give me leave: I there∣fore think neither Demonstration fit, nor Topicus worthy, and therefore choose Fallacy.
Why so?
Ask not my reason, I stand for him or none.
He is base borne, and base birth, is a vile condition, which to them that are unlawfully hegotten doth purchase infamy, and bereaves them of all hope of succession.
Now I think him as true borne as the best; for De∣monstration, I always suspected him to be thy son, because he was so like thee; but now I am persuaded so, seeing thee to stand so mainly for him.
Nay good Opposition, either speak more advisedly, or hold your peace.
What I have spoken I will stand to it; I will main∣taine it.
We must bear with you, it is your nature to bee crossing us perpetually.
Then Proposition it is you must end this controversy, •ray speak quickly, it is your voice must doe it.
If that three Dukedoms, all of equal worth,
To these three, all thrice-worthy, noble Lords
Should by our sentence be distributed,
I quickly would decide all doubt; but now
All having equal interest in my love,
All equally deserving in mine eyes,
I swear I know not whom I should prefer
Before the rest, lest I should doe the rest
More injury than right to him: therefore
Let me entreat you take some other course,
For the determining of this weighty strife.
Well then young Lords, you must needs rest a while con∣tented, till we can find some other means to compose these differences, wherein we will use the speediest means we can invent.
You see dear Brothers how this subtle States,
Defer this controversy to decide,
That keeping us from dignities, they may
Themselves be this Realmesonely Governors:
I therefore loving you, and this our State,
Hating such Machivillian Policy
Sit down unto you, as you can agree,
Let either of you rule the State for me.
And it would no less befit you Topicus
To know your self, and learn of Fallacy
To yield unto your betters.
You say true:
To know my self I well may learn of him,
For you are ignorant, and know me not,
Else I persuade my self, as he to both,
You would give place to me.
I doe confess
I know thee not, for Demonstration
Looks not so low, with his inquiring eye,
In greater matters only busied.
Oh somewhat it was you ne'er could know your self,
Your higher gazing thoughts could ne'er descend
To so wild abject a baseness.
Now brave spirits,
Why suffer you our State unmanaged,
Your selves dishonoured? You are slothful Lords.
Brave spirit, and can I endure
To be called base and abject?
Thou mistake,
Those words were only spoken unto me.
And Contradiction calls thee slothful Lord.
Now let your noble courage show it self,
If you neglect this so faire-offerd place,
You worthy are to live in dishonour.
Rather as the Lightning shall my courage pierce
Through any Clouds, that likely are to obscure
My brighter glory.
May the soulest mouths
Of the base vulgar spit upon the face
Of my unspotted credit, if for want
Of courage I abandon these my hopes.
Should I through mine own fault be hindered
In such attempts, oh I should kill my self,
And on my self I would take just revenge.
And shall my brother seek to thrust me down,
And I endure it▪ Oh the name of a King
Is better than the common vulgar name
Of Brother. Topicus, look to thy self,
He that my right and honour shall deny,
If I doe live and breath, shall surely dye.
Fond Demonstration, rather than I'll yield,
Appoint the place, I'll meet thee in the field.
What fitter place than this? where be the weapons?
Fie, fie, how dare you go so unprovided?
Go fetch thy weapons, I will not be long.
But I shall think so till I meet with thee.
I Think that Villain Ambiguity was borne to doe me harm, I never was so overtaken by any as by him: No sooner had I put the Cup to my lips, but my wits shook hands with my head, and left me to be arrested by dull Sergeant Sleep, so like a bankrupt Merchant, I was fine to lot down my Shop-windows, and I think yet had not opend them: but that which plagued me worse, up comes a Drawer, and delivering me from that prison, was like to have me waking to another, unless I would pay for the Wine, which that Rascal had promised to bestow upon me, which I had scarce done, when looking about me, I found the Villain which had left me witless and money less, lest me also cloakelesse, till I saw where the forke-tongued Snake had cast this his party-coloured skin. Now I could be angry with my self for my simplicity: but see the villain  hath sent Ignoratio Elener the fool, his fellow, to laugh at me; this would make Demotritus melancholy.
What Ambiguity, are you studying? My Master Fallacy bad me deliver you these Keys, and would you should locke up this Viol where you found it: 
Remember now you had them forsooth I may not be admit∣ted to his Closet, I am too honest; but if I be not deceived this fellow is not so worthy to be trusted. Now be shrew his heart, he is gone without part of my message: I should have told hem, hee was to contrive some accusations against the
Ladies of Verona, this wits I know would be working that way, and I must follow.
But say, where are our Brothers? oh I long
To understand how well your love succeeds.
Breathless and wounded both of them I left,
And ere my coming from them, they began
To faint with bleeding.
Bled they very much?
Exceedingly.
Well, so their streaming veins
Shall serve as Conduits dropping Claret wine,
To sollemnize my Coronation:
And now I cannot but applaud my wits,
And hug my happy Genius that hath thus
Inspight of selfe-conceited honesty,
Found forth this passage to my sweet desires.
But shall your old friends escape so? will you not re∣quite their kindness?
Let Definition and Division, both
Be banished the Court, for Proposition,
He ne'er opposed himself against me much,
We may procure his love, and use his help;
And therefore let him stay. But you
Lord Opposition, willingly I make
My sole or chiefest Counsellor of State,
By whom in all affairs I will be ruled.
You Contradiction. whereso ever I go,
I choose to bear my sword: to your fair trust
Committing both my fortunes and my self.
Ne'er may we thrive in this new policy
If we maintain not what we have begun.
I doe believe you, and rely on you;
And therefore know, that not an hour since
I by a sly devised subtlety,
Have luckily surprised the Lady Truth,
With her two famous Daughters; now in doubt
How I might best captive their constant thoughts,
I fine would hear your resolutions.
Were it my care I would enforce them straight.
They should not eat, nor drink, nor rest on minute.
Nay, I would torture, and torment them all,
Till they did yield submissely to my pleasure.
I think such means at first too violent,
I'll try how glossing words, and kind entreaties
Can work upon them: You know not the force
Of well conveyed dissimulation,
Therefore go you, and through Parrhesia,
Proclaim my lawful just succession.
I will my noble Lord.
And doe you hear?
To make my name more gracious, more beloved,
I will no longer be called Fallacy:
Stile me great Sophime. You Contradiction,
Let Definition and Division know
What is our pleasure to be done with them.
I ne'er did any thing more willingly.
I my self,
My proj•ct will pursue immediately;
Me thinks my hopes assure me. Now damned slaves,
Disloyal and unfaithful miscreants,
Think ye that I will trust your villainies?
No: these distempered, quarrelling, fighting fellow•.
Most not be conscious to our Policies,
They will rip open one auothers breast,
And prostitute their hearts to vulgar view:
Therefore the next thing that I will contrive,
Shall be their ruin: Dead dogs cannot bite:
That done, I fear not Fortunes envious spite.
IF I go any farther let me be frozen to death, like Sir Hugh Willowby, or be made Cuckoid with the tedious Traveller Ulysses: It were impossible to see all, yet I should see more than I should be able to relate, and like Munsier, or Sir Iohn Mandovill, relate more than any would believe. I care not how these women take it. The Tailor in Plutarch would as soon make a habit for the Moon, as any man a Description of them, and so long would it fit them. I think they consist of Materia pri∣ma, they are capable of all forms and impressions, but constant to none: And it is no great matter to describe them you see them curiously painted every where. And who would ever thought these Scholars should have so much troubled me: I supposing they had been so like in their humours, as they are agreeable in their formalities, thought first to have drawn the Characters of some of
them, but by what time I had observed some Captitious Critics, Fantastic Humorists, and malicious Satirists, I found it no less impossible than perilons to deal with that kind, and indeed am quite dismayed from going any farther in this enterprise. Well, I will deliver back to the Lords their Commission, and rather sue for a Protection. But who comes here, Distinction?
How now Description, did thou see our Sove reign Sophime?
Hath Distinction gotten Ambiguities Linsey woolsie Coat? or Ambiguity Distinctions party-colour'd Cloak? My cunning is quite staggered; I know not whether I should believe mine eyes or mine ears.
Doth your feeling serve you any better?
Oh, is it you? No wonder I mistook Ambiguity. They say a man may know the Devil by his cloven Foot; I am sure one may know thee by thy double hand.
Why double hand? I hope I have not four hands.
Nay, thou hast but one hand rather; thou art Ambo-dexter.
Is not that best? So Plato would have his Citizens.
But he would not have them double tongued, as you are.
Then bee like Scaliger and 〈◊〉, who had four and twenty tongues should have had no place in his Common-wealth.
There is great difference. They many ways could
speak one thing, thou one way speak many things.
That's a sign my words are most significant, which is no small commendation.
Right, if the signification be single and true.
Why not double and true?
That's impossible.
O gross! what truer than the Oracles, which de∣levered their minds even with my voice? and who more trusted, whose words cost more, than our common Lawyers, who for their facility in double dealing, and speaking on both sides, are called the Oracles of the City? But tell me, saw thou my new disguised Master Sophime?
I prithee, how came thou by this Cloak?
Thou answer not what I ask thee.
Nor doest thou ask what I intend to answer thee.
But see here comes mad Discourse, he will make us admirable sport.
Well, I will not come near him if he be mad.
Nor I, if he were in his wits.
Certain it is so; nay I will maintain it, as long as I have any breath; for I am neither in Delos, nor in the floating Islands of Scotland.
It were sitter you were in the Island of Anticyra.
Nor am I in a ship, that I should think the Earth moves.
If you be not, you deserve to be in the ship of fools.
No, no, it is even so; the Earth is turned about, his sphaericall form is apt for such a motion.
You are monstrously deceived, it is nothing but the house goes round with you.
Again, the Heavens are of a duller mettle, nothin•, but blew Marble.
I'll go talk with him. My Lord 〈◊〉, what Paradox is this, are the Heavens made of Marble.
Doest thou doubt of that? why, in a clear day thou may see it plain; and when it rains, those drops are no∣thing else, but such as fall from the sweating stone.
Somewhat it was, that in the time of 〈◊〉, and as Livy reports, in the 200. year of Rome, it rained.
Thou say true, very true. (stones
But what think you of the Sun?
Indeed hee is beholding to Nature for a better matter: he is made of bright burnished gold.
If the Sun be gold, I will the sooner believe Seh∣nus, that there are a people which see him not in half an year; I know some who see not Gold once in twelve Months. But what is the Moon Sir?
Why she is but silver.
I think scarce that Sir. Sure that mettle is not of her Nature; it is often at the wane, but never at the full in my purse.
The Stars begotten betwixt these two, are some bright Angels; others Sovereigns, some round shillings, some but silver groats.
They are happy, whose Nativity these stars favour.
Iupiter, when he came to Dane, descended in a Cloak bespangled with these falling Stars.
But how came you to learn all this?
Who I? I have often walked through all the Regi∣once of Heaven.
I believe you have been with Menippus, as far as the Moon: your talk favours of Lunacy.
I tell thee, I have been farther then ever the 〈◊〉 man could reach.
I have paced the uttermost extreme outside of the Primum mobile, from whence, many thousand miles below me, I be∣held great Iupiter, and all the minor gods.
A most strange Traveller; I fear you will come a∣non to the greatest depth in Hell: it is time for me to leave you.
I have been there already many a time,
Where never Hercules, nor Theseus durst approach:
Over Avernus, that most loathsome Lake,
Which never Bird as yet presumed to pass,
I with my Goose-quill wings have made a slight.
The dark, light, burning, black fiery flames of cold Phlegeton
With undazel'd eyes I have oft gazed upon.
Come good my Lord, you must needs return with me.
Bid Charon stay my leisure, Isle see first whether it be the same with the Flementall fire, then I'll come.
I came not sir from Charon, neither am I going to him.
Who, Reduction? I would thou were; what would thou with me?
Fie my Lord, you will be always in these mad moods, pray will you go with me?
O Heraclytus, well did thou say, the dry Ayre was the best soul: for had we not need to melt away into tears, to see the misery of wretched men. (will.
Nay weep not good my Lord, you shall have what you
Shall I? so then I will pull out both mine eyes like Democritus, that I may look thoroughly upon the follies of these times, and laugh my full at them.
So you were best Sir; but now pray come with me.
I come, I come, I come sir.
I know not how my presence may disgrace me,
That Lady hath a quick and piercing eye,
Able to search beyond the countenance;
The most reserved and concealed intents:
I'll keep my self aloose, and stand far off,
Till she hath swallowed down this gilded bait.
Then can I draw her wheresoever I list,
And if the common and divided humour
Of some self pleasing Poet be not in me,
I cannot choose but move affection;
This strain will win her.
Enough, I must be bold and confident:
Sirrha, go you, commend my dearest love
With these my letters, to Scientia;
Tell her I plead not my nobility,
Great births, or hopeful fortunes, powerful friends,
Down at her honours thrice most sacred feet,
I humbly lay these poor and mean respects,
But me in now•ht else known ambitious,
Though now high soaring purest thoughts of love,
Like Venus silver feathered Dove have drawn
Up towards this high Heaven.
Sir I fear,
Like some imperfect tempered Meteor,
Near approaching that high region,
You soon will vanish, and your blazing love
Be quite burnt out.
Say first, the glorious light,
That with kind heate doth cherish all the world,
Shall suffer in perpetual Eclipse.
Sir fear not, if far protestations
May doe you favour, I'll turn prodigal.
Well, take the chiefest opportunity,
If I doe in joy her, thouknow'st not what's thy share,
I go my Lord.
Mistake you not your errand;
This is a stupid and forgetful knive,
But yet my letters may dire•t 'em:
I have taught others many times to woe,
And compose easily their dearest loves,
Some with new fashioned and fantastic suites,
I taught to cloak their soul deformities:
The stale and stiff legged Courtier, I have framed
To make young congees, and unthaw'd his joints,
An old worme-eaten wainscot countenance,
With a fresh varnish I have made to smile,
To win the favour of some younger wench;
Poor sirs, with brokers suites, and borrowed Liveries.
I have commended to their dimme-ey'd Dames;
The greatest hate, and inequality
To love and reconcilement I have wrought,
And should my self despair? despair dull fools,
Fallacy cannot be but fortunate.
But here comes
One of my sworn supporters, it were full time
I were delivered of their tedious service;
I think I am able now to stand alone.
All happiness befall my mighty Sovereign.
Thanks trusty faithful Opposition.
We have proclaimed your Royal Majesty
Rightful successor to the empty Crown
Of great Hermony.
But with what success?
How stands the Commons to our Reign affected?
As if their fortunes were advanced with yours,
In volleys of fair acclamations
Through the spacious regions of the ayre,
They send that joy which in their narrow breasts
Seemed but imprisoned.
And it shall be my care
To recompense their loves with our deceit,
For I doe hate ingratitude as death:
I doe, Lord Opposition. I well weigh
How much I am obliged to any; and for you,
Dear Lord, I would I were the Monarch of the world.
Would that procure thy noble hearts content,
No force should bar thee: but we long to hear
How stand your hopes for fair Verona?
Why my hopes are clear,
But yet my thoughts are somewhat over-cast,
To think that I should hazard, with my self,
The yet unthanked loves of all my friends.
Were it to be tried out by our wit, or words,
I could be confident; but boisterous force is.
Yet though I doubt, I fear not, and my friends
With patience will attend the maine event.
What's this my Sovereign speaks to himself?
My Lord I understand not what you would,
But gathering from your unaccustomed phrase,
That somewhat much concerns you, I request
Better to be acquainted with your meaning.
Lord Opposition, there's not any man
Hath greater interest in me than you;
And therefore look into my deepest thoughts
Scientia but even now hath sent me word,
That notwithstanding all her promises
To Demonstration, she could be content,
To place her best affections upon me:
But first entreats me to remove one le•.
One let? now were there twenty thousand l••s,
We would remove them.
None but Iudicium's witness to her vows,
Were he dispatched, she were resolved for me.
Iudicium? now Isle send him down to hell;
He may prove witness before Rhadamant,
But never shall disturb our peace on earth.
Nay, but the matter must be well conceived,
He hath procured him for his noble friend,
To bid me combat: which I have accepted;
And though I cannot well fore-see the event,
I rest in this, my friends will rest content.
Now I have cause enough of discontent:
Was not I worthy to have kilt the slave?
Sir, you shall never undergo this action:
Or if you needs will fight, then fight with me;
For I doe vow, unless you yield in this,
You kindle that proud heate which cannot dye,
But wrapped up in your ashes, or mine own.
Why, good my Lord, what would you have me doe?
I prize your friendship at my kingdom rate,
Yet somewhat must esteem my reputation:
At least be pleased to meet in some disguise:
It was was his request to 'escape from conscious eyes,
If he survived, me conquered, he might take
Some mask upon him, which small liberty,
Presuming if I pleased on the like,
I granted him.
This it is, when men of judgement
Doe venture on such weighty actions:
They make all sure, they will prevent the Fates:
I care not how I kill the villain,
Or who have credit for it; but Isle kill him.
Then be persuaded to anoint thy blade
With this enchanted oil, it is strong in virtue.
When is the time? where is the place?
It is here,
Within this hour.
I will but try my sword,
And surely meet him.
Nay, but hear a word:
Let me entreat your faithful secrecy,
And above all things, see you keep it close
From Contradi••ion, lest he second you.
I ear not, we men of action use few words.
Well, I perceive that you have vowed to make
Hermenia's Lord your vassal. Is he gone?
Now I could break with laughter. What his hare-brain'd son?
Isle send to meet him, oh twill doe me good,
To see the villains tap each others blood.
Now will I blow up this fellow like a soap bubble. It is necessary for great men to keep some fools as well as many knavs,
They will never dispute their business. And must
I frame inditements.
Yes, tic that I should have told thee sooner.
Tic well I must play the Scrich-owle and proclaim misfortunes, whilst you become the Mercury of more pleasing messages, employed in tuning the strings of love.
Sir you must doe it, like it as you think fit.
Isle think upon it if it be but to sharpen my wits. And prithee noble Ignoratio Surnamed Elenchi; wilt thou prove Pan∣der and procurer to any man, thy person promises more grace, stain not thy worthiness with so base employments.
I never meant it.
So I think verily, and therefore thou did undertake it,
Thy brave spirits scorn such service.
Yes I doe scorn it.
Thou dost know thy self.
I think I doe, and admire my self as much as another.
Methinks thine own Idaea should be thy only Mistress.
I must confess I know not that shape that I could ever af∣fact so well.
Why then should not these parts raise thee, Nature and Fortune have conspired about thee. Take but this opportunity, and triumph over the world.
I doubt not that but I have a farther reach, tic here, tic here will doe it.
I warrant tic some admirable plot.
Isle to the cunning man for some enchantments.
Out upon it, work by witchcraft, twill never prosper.
Then I will use some other means.
Whats that.
Why any thou wilt council me.
Then be ruled by me. Thou know our master now is called the great Sophism.
Yes.
And thou art Ignoratio Elenchi.
I am so.
Now thou art employed upon an honourable message.
Well.
Proclaim thy self Ambassador.
You say true; turn Ambassador, but I am no good speaker.
We will help that too; Thou hast his letters, open them, learn to pronounce them, take his person, frame his posture, speak as if thou were the man thou seem, she will not choose but an∣swear expectation. Besure thou act this before good company, a contract is nothing worth without witness.
Would thou be there I should speed much the better.
I will not fail thee, go and make thy self most rich∣lie fine.
I warrant you, you seldom see a man of my wits want good clothes. Isle about it straight.
I care not if I cross my master in this project, we Cry∣tures of the lower region, never doe worse then when the higher bodies grow in conjunction. If the master once fry in a husband∣dish affection, the man may freeze and starve in expectation.
Dear Contradiction, use all secrecy,
And for my credit get thee some disguise,
Nor speak to him by any means, thy voice
May shame us.
If he understand my blows so tic,
He gets no word of me.
Here, take with thee this powder, rub therewith
The instruments of thy revengeful wrath;
And, as most virtuous, be victorious.
Can Aequipolency endure all this? Can all this be en∣dured by Aequipolency?
Who I Conversion? I can suffer any thing, faith ther's nothing that I cannot suffer. Prithee be ruled by me, stand to the present.
I am no Stoic.
So it seems, thou art rather a Pythagorian Peripate∣tick, thy very essence is mutability. Thy soul could walk through more Sects then some honest bodies have chan'd suits: methinks thou might do well at home by temporising.
Oh these Climats are too cunning, I must seek further.
Read Lipsius Constancy, let that consirme thee.
Faith he will lead the next way from Leyden to Doway,
That it may be I may make use of him,
Did not these troubles banish me: I would go voluntary:
Your finest wits are thought insipu'd till
They have past the salt water.
Our home-spun learning's of a courser thread,
It's stained and smoked in dressing.
The Germans vates drenched in a deeper grain,
Venice and Padua will return them richer;
And I begin to pity thy wilfulness. What course intend thou?
It were thy best, being skilled in tempering
Confections, to proclaim some Paracelsian
Oil, or Angelical pills.
Nay, I'll rather profess the making of Aurum potabile, and credit it with some two leaves of reasons, and ten of authority, for all diseases, griefs, and maladies. But which way art thou bent?
I will to Flushing, Midleborough, Amsterdam, peradven∣ture thence to Antwerp, and so to see Reams and Room.
Take heed you come not back by Quinborow there is a groom with a curry-comb will rub your sides. But if you may be persuaded, it is as easy to lay down your stomach at home, as feed your self abroad by making buttons; you may so∣ner be preferred to the Inquisition then to the Conclave.
Well, except the morrow Sun display more comfort, I am gone believe it.
You hope at your return to get a Doctership the chea∣per, or a benefice with less ado, but you may be deceived, I will expect your reconversion, adieu.
This fellow thinks himself as cunning as a tumbler that walks upon ropes, and with his level keeps himself upright, but his steps are dangerous, I had rather walk on the Alps, though sleeper, where I may have sure footing.
I, who my restless wits have daily tied,
In searching choicest objects of delight:
Though none more grateful, none more tedious
Then that most blessed content which they enjoy,
Who underneath the courteous Laurel shade,
In muses laps doe rest their weary heads;
But now alas, what proud ambition,
What jealous envy, greedy avarice,
Hath cast infection on those purer springs?
They whose kind steel was sometimes only proud
In giving waxen tablets, some cured wounds,
In their own ireful, and all hardened breasts,
Imprint the tragic characters of death
Hot in pursuit of lost lord Intellect;
I am informed by Definition,
My best esteemed loving Topicus
Lies desperate hurt by Demonstration.
So twixt my dear affection to him
And bounden duty to my absent Lord,
My hearts divided with convulsions,
But pardon me great Amina, thy son
Commands my service, this one duty done.
Well met Invention, what have you found young Lord Intellect?
No, and which adds to my misery, I hear I am like to loose my self, my dear friend Topicus.
Indeed he is hurt, but our fear was greater then their dan∣ger, and it is happened better then they deserved. There is good hope of recovery.
Thanks good Description for this happy news, but are you certain that the danger's past.
It is most certain, and I would wish the other miseries which have so unexpected befallen us, were likely to have so hope∣full an issue.
Theare by Lady Method and the banished lords,
How miserable you are all become,
By great Discourses strange Distraction.
Met you with Method? Oh she was too impatient and unkind to forsake our Sovereign in his extremity: her presence might have yielded him especial assistance.
Pardon and pity that distressed Queen,
Whose tender heart, oppressed with her grief,
Would break with any rough or unkind touch.
As towards Reams I did direct my pace,
I overtook a weary fainting voice,
Which I approaching nearer found was hers,
Alas, quoth she, I long since banished
From the disordered Regions of the world,
Have been contented in this only place,
With old Discourse, my till now loving lord,
Till now to live under his lovely roof:
I always lay twixt his well folded Sheets,
I ever have enclapst him in mine arms,
Lest he should want desighting ornaments,
Or for his plainness pass with less regard,
I all the day have wood the Sciences,
To make him rob the longest coldest nights,
I have sate reaving up the finest arts,
And put into his hand a curious thread
Wherewith he guided hath his certain steps
Through many crooked winding Labyrinths;
And now my Theseus, ah my kinder Theseus!
Unwillingly was forced to leave his love,
Cruel discourse doth rudely cast me off,
And threatens me if I come near to him.
Here I stepped in, and with the fairest means
My troubled thoughts could find, persuaded her
To change her resolution, and return;
Which having half effected, there came on
Old Definition with Division,
Who caring less their own then her estate,
Are minded closely to return with her.
My Love to Topicus hath caused me
To use more hast, although assured by you
Of his recovery; I have been content
To favour thus my self, and let you know
Of Prethods kind intention to return.
I thank you Sir, and will accompany you.
Thou shouldest have starcht thy beard, or got some Beare-skin on thy head; at least have powdered thy hair like an Ashwednesday penitent; one devise now would doe most ad∣mirable.
Impart it dear genius, if my wit can reach or wealth com∣pass it, I will have it immediately.
Nay tic soon done, tic not so much as a Majors feast or Citizens christening. Thou hast heard how Simon circumvented the Trojans.
Yes, with a great woodden-horse; Must I get such an one?
(Yes, a great leaden-Asse) No, but you must counterfeit your self a captive, stand with your hands fast bound and legs entangled, That will signify your inthraldome. The Lady pity∣ing your restraint, will untie your hands, and wrap you in her arms; then may you enclaspe her girdle and untie the true-love-knot of her virginity.
That will be most significant; But what do you think if (because Love is blind) I went on blindfold, sure I should speak the bolder.
It would do excellent, Nox &amp; Amor, Darkness and Drunknesse, Blindness and Love, are ever well mashed.
So then i'll wear this Scarf.
I'll help thee. Now, how can thou speak?
It must be louder, she will not endure a chamber voice, thou must yawn Like one that gapes for a Benefice: open like an Oyster, that she may gather the pearls of thy speech.
Oh that we had some Peble-stones, such as Demosthones used; but hold, it may be this will serve; Spare my fingers he gags him. but while I tell a hundred. I warrant thee this will make thee like a chirping Sparrow. Now will I leave the Coxcomb to adven∣ture, and tic full time. What black Herald comes here.
What, this is not the place where base Iudicium and I should meet, thinks he to prevent me, I will requite his diligence, but stay, he hath no weapons: now the Coward Rogue would yield my prisoner, but he shall not scope me so; i'll Baftinado him at least.
Is this Sientia's Chaplain? he's very still, now what ails him! i'll see for the blow I gave him.
Now Sir, with all my heart, if you will have my purse.
Is this to be an Ambassador, to have no law of Arms nor liberty of legs to protect me; now my only revenge is to hold my peace and be silent, which if I can do, I may prove counsel to the veriest Wittoll. I am at a stand whether I shall go on in sure, or give it over; I must be better counselled.
And can he no where here about be found.
No not by any inquisition.
And I by Fallacies advise him sought
Towards Verona, but alas in vain;
The troubles of that City as I was
Upon the way, by faithful grief informed,
Equal the stirs here in Parthesia:
Truth and her daughters being thence expelled,
And all the rule usurped by Fallaoy,
Those blessed civil laws are disanuled,
Which to so many glorious Emperors,
So many ages, in so many lands,
Have ever been so justly well approved;
There hath he planted rude and practique friends
Which grate the Commons, spoil Nobility.
Betwixt dear brothers and the nearest friends,
Endeavoured to sow vile dissentions.
There the most sacred ordinance of Heaven,
The divine Oracles they falsify,
And force upon the plain simplicity
Of easily deceived honest men,
Frail humane breath and bold traditions,
With singular fantastic vain conceits.
As brainsick Dreams, forged revelations:
That I rest well assured he is not there:
Although to seek him else I know not where.
Now we may pity our confederats,
But cannot as we ought, bewail their state.
Our nearer griefs do hugely overflow
The just proportion of all humane woe.
What else is befallen you since Discourse
Became distract?
Opposition and Contradiction contending for the rule,
Have wounded each the other wilfully.
Is Contradiction hurt? fond vanity
Under these ever sudden moving Spears
To look for rest or seek felicity
In earth, the well head of salt tears.
We think him mad, that thinks in the air,
To erect a castle or fair monument;
And through the Seas as passengers we fare,
Yet dare not dwell upon that element.
But on th'uncertaine, and short prosperous winds
of favour blooming Fortune we oft raise
High and huge hopes, to our now calm minds
Promise eternal Halcyonian days.
But the just heavens all well guiding care,
Least we forget them in our jollity
When we in greatest pomp triumphing are,
Humble our minds with some new misery;
For what else could our hearts content desire
But firm assurance of continuing?
When whilst with joy we others bliss admire,
Our self straight vex't with fortunes torturing
With sense doe fool how her fierce wrath extends
From our own selves unto our dearest friends.
But say, is his wound dangerous?
—But see
Iudicium, here Lord Intellect is come.
All happiness attend your welcome presence.
Thanks good Iudicium, but you are man Distinction whom I must acknowledge the author of my freedom.
Where hath your Lordship been? and whence is it Di∣stinctions honest care hath set you free.
I am indebted to Ambiguity, I was promised by him to be led to a fair library, but was conducted to a Vatican of all vile∣loins.
Say good Distinction, how fell this out?
How he fell in you have heard already, and for his deli∣variance this it was. I by reason of this coat (which how I got I list not now to tell) being taken of Fallacy for Ambiguity recei∣ved of him these keys, with direction to go to his closet, together with a certain viol he delivered me which my curiosity quickly apprehending, I went and found the young Lord Intellect in one room, the Lady Truth and her daughters in others, all which I have thence delivered.
O act Heroical!
And were you in his closet?
A closet doe you call it I will be sworn it is a spacious storehouse of all subtilties, a Burse of impostures, an Italy of poi∣sons, a Frankefurt of false Authors, there are infinite Iliads of Her∣meticall precepts, many barrels of white powder, bales of false dice, boxes of false weights, bags of counterfeit coin, golden fish∣hooks, iron rakes, vizards, and dark Lanterns for thieves, masks and painting for Gentlewomen; for all hee furnished them daily enough to load an Argosy, or a Spanish Citric.
And what was in the viol you named?
O, I thought to tell you: the rarest receipt that ever was composed, Pride nor Circa never made the Like.
What was it poison?
When he gave it me, I marked he said it wrought power∣fully, and so mistrusting the effect, tried the conclusion upon a dog I met, which no sooner had tasted a dram of it, but dragging his tail on the ground he grinned and snarled and presently ran mad, which effect I observing, thought I had now opportunity to re∣quite a kindness Ambiguity did me, and so tempering it in a cup of sweet wine, adventured amongst Fallacies followers, who brave∣lie carousing to their good fortunes, let my cup go round amongst them, and presently they all danced Frantic, so that nothing
grieved me, but that Ambiguity was not amongst them.
O strange! will any drug cause madness?
Easily. Quid bibit inde furit, I have both read and seen it, and I fear Discourse's madness might have such a cause.
But doe you hear Lord Proposition,
If he through artificial means lies mad,
As by these signs tic more then probable,
I know he may be helped again by Art;
Let him but purge and bleed in his head vein▪
I dare to warrant his recovery.
Happy Hermony, if again she see
Discourse recovered, and for ever bound
To your discreet good will and worthy love
Vouchsafed to us, in your friendly presence.
What cunning Surgeon hath Parthesia?
Here's one well practised skilful, fortunate
Analysis, who hath well nigh recurred
The life-despairing brothers, Topicus and Demonstration.
Let him straight
Take care of him.
Sir, would you go your fair direction might assist us much.
With all my heart, young Lord pray lead the way.
What Panic fury hath o'rerun the world,
Or universal madness reigns this day?
Are there nor fellows, those whose subtle brains
Would have spun forth the finest villainies?
Those whose sound heads so oft I have employed
In working deep designments; and see now
What wilde confusion hath tan hold of them?
Was it not enough that truth, and Intellect
With hated science and opinion,
Escaped by them, art set at liberty?
But they in this disordered fashion
Must make me odious, scorned, and despised?
Oh that I could convey me from this world,
Or know where to hide me, but my doors
Are locked against me, and my wicked walls
Late surfeiting with filthy luxury,
Doe seem surcharged clea•e to spew me out.
Is it possible that I should be thus crossed?
What is there any goodness in the world
Offorce enough to contervaile the wit
Of proud Fallacy? or is it some fiend,
Some devil not of his own confederacy,
That with his counterplots controls my skill?
Or was my self the cause, my cursed self,
Lulled asleep in fond security?
It was well you came so timely Aequipolency,
The memory of this foul imposture may survive
In that recovered couple.
Sir they added,
As they found ease amidst their vomiting,
Pouring forth curses against Falacie,
How for his sake they had thrust the worthy Brothers,
Topicus and Demonstration, into their desperate fury.
Now I doe verily believe Analysis,
That villain's cause of all, it will appear
He forced his fathers madness.
Aequipolency,
Leave the perfume behind you. Look you use fresh pigeons,
Until the venom of their wounds be quite exhaled,
There were no loss of them but at this time,
Their words may be produced, therefore pray be careful.
I will.
Now let him be brought hither, fear not stirring him,
I warrant he's secure. Invention
You shall doe well, if against his waking you provide some show,
And Music, which may welcome home his wandering senses.
Isle see what may be done for both.
Analysis lets Discourse blood.
Now see Iudicium, here's no blood but humours,
This black stuff is the excrement of Melancholy:
This sometimes makes him amongst the groves and rivers,
Pen Sonnets to the Nymphs and Goddesses;
In good assemblies to withdraw his thoughts,
And dictate to his Desk and Closet walls,
Dangers with which a wise man scarce would trust
His very bosom—this next
Is Choler, hast thou met with voices,
Breathing seditious discontent and malice,
This humour rules them, from this siery vapour,
It is not the Chair of State or Justice seat,
Can shield the Prince or public Magistrate,
Yea unto Heaven it self it oft aspires,
Against Religion and the sacred Arts,
Casting profaner and impurer darts:
This watery Phlegm, is that which putrefying.
His springs of breath, infects the neighbouring ayre
With blasts of slothful envy, whence destruction
Casts mists upon the best endeavours.
Now me thinks
The blood appears, it were best Analysis
You stop the Orifice.
Oh his blood
Is much corrupted. This doth feed that vein
From whence lascivious Songs, lewd Epigrams
And obscene Satyrs flow. This itching humour
Oft keeps him waking: watching, fills his brains
With giddy phantasms; yet we will not take too much.
Bring me the cupping Glass.
What, must he be martyred?
This is most needful, else that windy matter
Which often grieves him worser then the Cholick
Till it break forth, will still continue.
Now I wish
The Hypocausticall and brothel-writers were thus eased,
Which vent forth volumes faster then the Press
Can get in rags for Paper.
It is enough.
Light the Perfume: Methinkes he moves a little,
Sweet smells confirm the sense and ease the brain,
And though no vapour nourish, it conveys
The spirits to the purest root of life.
What stir yet? the Music is at hand,
Attended with a Mask.
It comes most seasonable.
I think it were best we conveyed him in again Analysis,
And let him rest a while upon his pallet.
It may doe well, I will not leave him now
Until these hopes grow stronger. Let us go.
My Lord, I have contrived the accusations.
Well, let me hear them: mine own wits doe fail,
It may be there is somewhat thought upon,
May help in extremity: let's hear.
My Lord,
Forgetful of her honour, mighty Truth,
In base and mean attire hath walked the streets,
Yea, which hath made my modesty to blush,
Stark naked hath she oftentimes appeared,
And flying better presence, usually
With children, and grosse-pated long-tongu'd fools,
And poor distracted persons hath been found,
On Tavern benches plunged all in Wine,
By senseless drunkards lovingly embraced.
She oft hath sucked impure and loathsome breath,
From their unclean and foul stinck-belching throats,
With most disgrac't-esteemed heretics
Conversing always: never was she seen
Amongst religious, far more glorious
And fair appearing holy Confessors.
And have her daughters so demeaned themselves.
The heavens, stars, the Regions of the air,
The land, the Sea, Scientia hath seen,
But is a stranger in what most concerns
The country, families, or private good.
She is become the only patronise
Of idleness, and self consuming sloth.
The quickest spirits, fit for action,
Being dul'd in fruitless speculation:
Yea many of her most admired strain,
Puffed with conceits of their all knowing skill,
Have run stark mad, or in a vilder vein,
To damned Atheism have been inclined.
Lady Opinion seeks to insinuate,
And win good liking with the vulgar sort
To them, since pleasing objects she propounds,
And with most curious art and industry,
Doth both invite, and entertain their loves.
Prudent and virtuous axioms she hath made
Distasteful seem, and Paradoxical.
She sometimes simple, most times subtle is,
But now deceitful, straight deceiveable,
And only constant in inconstancy.
This will doe well, for I must take some course
To satisfy this overcurious age.
But what news hear thou stirring?
Sir, I hear that Lord Opposition and Contradiction have hurt each other.
So! what dangerously?
Yes, so tic said.
I did think so much.
These fighting fellows will ne'er hold their hands▪
Till they have pulled some vengeance on their heads
But thank thou Heaven for it, if thou miscarry,
Assure thy self that thou art only left
To be the heir of my prosperity.
O Sir, the Heavens intend me no such happiness, the scurvy Apothecary Aequipolency hath with his curiosity drawn out the rancor of their wounds, and no question is made of their recovery.
Is it possible?
Nay, which is as strange, hee hath made them friends, and now they nothing but exclaim against you, except it bee sometimes when they rail against me for your sake.
Well, we with patience must rest content,
Thou know that innocence is still traduced.
Again Sir, as I was coming hither, I was told that Analysis had let mad Discourse blood, which I laughed at, thin∣king his head was light enough before.
Discourse let blood, and Opposition
Past danger, friends with Contradiction—
Tic time I look about me.
Now desperate misery inspire some trick,
I must doe somewhat: so, this may doe good,
I may escape so, but doe make a vow
I will take heed of their Parrhesians.
But now Ambiguity, say my mad father should recover his little wits, and call me to account for my ill government.
You must answer your self for me.
Answer for thee, why have you deserved so much think you, that you should be called in question.
Sir, I mean you must answer by your self, I have some skill in accusing, but none in defending.
I care not if I try what I could doe. Doe you examine like his gravity, Isle answer as I can.
At your command.
But here, take first my Gown, twill make me speak the more respectively: give me thy Cloak, now thou may bee the bolder.
Well, when will you begin?
Could I so easily be well assured
Of your great care to rule, as reads our state,
I should as gladly thank, as now most loath,
Condemn your forwardness, and would you knew
How I dislike these courses t'ane of you.
My gracious Lord, it is known I did refrain
The weighty glory of your government,
Till my more able brothers sorely hurt,
Could not themselves, much less the state sustain.
But I doe hear you banished have the realm
My trustiest and best known Counsellors.
Doubting my Lord amongst many working heads,
Least some inflamed with ambition,
By ruin of their Countries common good,
Might seek to raise themselves; I did remove them
From meddling with all matters of state.
If it be so, I thank thee Fallacy,
And doe commend thy wise bestowed care.
Now if I could leave him, this robe might serve as a safe conduct. Isle fine some present business, well stay thou here, I in this disguise will muffle my self and see what they doe, the E∣vining approaching will keep my counsel.
Shall I expect you here?
Yes, by all means let me know where to find you.
So, this makes me think what I shall be, careless what I am, and forgetful what I was, I seem half invested in my hopes already. Those sword and buckler fellows I hope will never get his favour more: and now the joys of Hermony, are not equal to those in my bosom. I would the proudest enemy I have would find me in this fashion, Oh I could look upon them most dis∣dainfully—will no body come.
Was it not told us that Fallacy was here?
And here is some body; he, or his shadow
It is Ambiguity.
Sirrah, where is your Master Fallacy?
Lord Fallacy, my master, is not here;
His leisure serves not ordinary comers;
But if you have some earnest suite to him,
My means may prove your chiefest furtherance.
We thank you Sir, but we must speak with him.
You thank me, what unmannerly and untaught grooms are these, how unacquainted with the phrase and method of the court, I looked they should have answered in a language better un∣derstood of great men's favourites. And must you speak with him? I know no business of men of your fashion, but I may have the the hearing of it, suffice it you, I will vouchsafe you answer.
Sir if you will needs know our business. Of Capital
Treason, we arrest you here,
As conscious of all those wild designs,
Which against our Sovereign and his worthy sons,
Against this state, and those distressed Ladies
Of poor Verona, late have been contrived
By Fallacy and you his damned creature.
What, mean you as you speak?
Yes, and ere we leave you, we will teach you to speak as you mean. Equivocating shall not serve your turn.
Hath Fallacy used me thus, and forsaken me in my extra∣mity.
Come, let us have him to our Sovereign. He shall exa∣mine him himself.
Stay, here comes his Majesty.
Now honourable friends, our realm and we
Rest much obliged to your happy loves,
And so may those ill fortunes prove the last
Instructions of your frail infirmity.
As we in service to you, and your state,
Intend to make some satisfaction.
Sir, our respect to you, our love to yours,
Makes all that can be found within our power
Seem but as tribute and deserved duty.
And you young Lord, whose wild imprisonment
Adds much unto the burden of my wrong,
I hope will not conceive amiss of us,
Who tenderly affect you, as our own.
May it please you, now I am returned again so safe,
I would not for any thing but have been shut up where
I was, I have seen more then ever I did before.
I easily believe it, what, Distinction, have you the Keys?
I have gracious Lord.
And cannot Fallacy as yet be found.
My Lord, we have surprised here
One of his chief and nearest followers,
But of himself, as yet we cannot learn.
And oh I pray he never may be found
Or heard of more within Hermony:
Let him be hated throughout all the world,
But ever banished from forth the coasts:
That wretched father, with the wicked son,
That sought to spoil me of my dearest pledge,
Have felt in part, the Heavens impartial doom,
For violating all the laws of love:
Yet let them when their health and strength shall serve,
Be both conveyed hence to the Antipodes:
And as for that tumultuous frantic crew,
Which revel it so loosely in our streets,
Dragging our subjects basely by the ears,
Let them be ship't away to Barberry,
And serve as gally slaves till they come there:
Our selves desiring to make recompense
For those injurious wrongs which harmless Truth
And her distressed daughters have sustained,
Int end sorthwith in joy to celebrate,
Betwixt my sons and those admired Nymphs,
On either side long wished for Nuptials.
We hope ere this, our Queen and banished friends
Are safe returned, and now courteous Lords,
Late patient partakers of our woe,
Let us request of you, that ye this night
Associate us in feasting and delight.
My gracious Lord, you have forgot Ambiguity, shall not he be rack't, I could stretch him exquisitely, I would fine be his Procrastes.
It were but folly to torture him,
We know too much already, too too much;
Yet let him strait be whipped out of these parts,
And if thou lik'st the office, thou thy self
May be his friendly executioner.
With all my heart.
What, come Lords, will you go?
We will attend your Majesty.
Oh Sir, you may remember how you used me, I thought I should have a time to deal with you, will you untrusse, come, I must unease you, as you did me.
Fallacy hath your cloak, I have it not,
Th•t is no matter, you shall have it so sure as the gown is on your back.
Nay, good Invention, since we meeting here
Have found all things so quietly composed,
Suiting with our first expectation,
I must remember you of what you promised
The verses which you proffered to my view,
Cannot but fit this opportunity.
I hope I have not lost them, these are they—
SHould this our Play on Common Stage appear,
Some of the ignorant multitude would swear
That we chopped Logic; for such strains of Wit
They still like worse, the better they are writ.
But you, that fill this Orb, whose ears have hung
Attentively upon each Actors tongue,
Who ken where the least string of Art is cracked,
Where the conceit is proper, and where racked,
From whence a work is spun, out of what Fleece,
And know the Woof and Warp of the whole Piece;
The SOPHISTER doth on your suffrage stand,
That for his grace, you would put to your Hand.

WHat lack you sir? fair stuffs, or veluets?
Good morrow Frank.
Good morrow master Balance.
Save you master Long-field.
And you sir, what business draws you toward this end of the town?
Faith no great serious affairs, only a stirring humour to walk, and partly to see the beauties of the Ci∣tie; but it may be you can instruct me: pray whose shop's this?
Why tic Will Rashes fathers, a man that you are well acquainted with.
As with your self; and is that his sister?
Marry is it sir.
Pray let vs walk, I would behold her better.
Buy some quaifes, handkerchers, or very good bone-lace Mistress.
None.
Will you buy any handkerchers, sir?
Yes, have you any fine ones?
Isle show you choice, please you look sir?
How now! what news?
Mistress Tickleman has sent you a Letter, and expects your company at night, and entreats you to send her an angel, whether you can come, or whether you can not.
Sweet rascal! if your love be as earnest as your protestation, you will meet me this night at Supper, you know the rendezvous, there will be good company, a noise of choice Fiddlers, a fine boy with an excellent voice, very good songs and bawdy; and which is more, I doe purpose my self to be exceeding merry: but if you come not, I shall pout my self sick, and not eat one bit tonight.
Your continual close friend, Nan Tickle-man.
I pray send me an angel by this bearer, when∣there ye can come, or whether ye cannot. What's the price of these two?
Half a crown in truth, sir.
Hold thee, there's an angel, and commend me to my delight, tell her I will not fail her, though I loose my freedom by it.
I thank you sir; buy any fine handkerchers?
You are taken sir extremely, what's the object?
Shoe's wondrous fair.
Nay, and your thoughts bee on winching Isle leave you.
You shall not be so unfriendly, pray assist me; We'll to the shop and cheapen stuffs or satins.
What lack you Gentlemen? fine stuffs, vel∣uets, or satins? pray come near.
Let me see a good satin.
You shall sir, what colour?
Faith I am indifferent, what colour most affects you Lady?
Sir!
Without offence (fair creature) I demand it.
Sir, I believe it, but I never did
Tie my affection unto any colour.
But my affection (fairest) is fast tied
Unto the crimson colour of your cheek.
You relish too much Courtier, sir.
What's the price of this?
Fifteen indeed sir.
You set a high rate on it, it had need be good.
Good! if you find a better in the town, Isle give you mine for nothing: if you were my own brother, I'd put it in∣to your hands, look upon it, it is close wrought, and has an excellent glass.
I, I see it.
Pray sir come into the next room; I'll show you that of a lower price shall (perhaps) better please you.
This fellow has an excellent tongue, sure hee was brought up in the Exchange.
Will you come in sir?
No, it is no matter, for I mean to buy none.
Pre thee walk in, what you bargain for, Isle dis∣charge.
Say so; fall to your work, Isle be your chapman.
Why doe you say I flatter?
Why? you doe;
And so doe all men when they women woo.
Who looks on heaven, and not admires the work?
Who views a well cut Diamond, does not praise
The beauty of the Stone? if these deserve
The name of Excellent, I lack a word
For thee which meritst more,
More then the tongue of man can attribute.
This is pretty Poetry, good fiction this: Sir, I must leave you.
Leave with me first some comfort.
What would you crave?
That which I fear you will not let me have.
You doe not know my bounty; Say what it is.
No more (fair creature) then a modest kiss.
If I should give you one, would you refrain, on that condition, ne'er to beg again.
I dare not grant to that.
Then't seems you have,
Though you get nothing, a delight to crave,
One will not hurt my lip, which you may take,
Not for your love, but for your absence sake. So farewell sir.
O fare thee well (fair regent of my soul)
Never let ill sit near thee, unless it come
To purge it self; be as thou ever seem,
An Angel of thy Sex, borne to make happy
The man that shall possess thee for his Bride.
Will you have it for thirteen shillings and six pence? Isle fall to as lowe a price as I can, because Isle buy your cu∣stome.
How now man! what! entranced?
Good sir, ha you done?
Yes faith, I think as much as you, and it is just no∣thing: whore's the wench?
Shoe's here sir, here.
Vds pity! vnbutton man, thou'lt stifle her else.
Nay good sir, will you go?
With all my heart, I stay but for you.
Doe you hear sir?
What say?
Will you take it for thirteen?
Not a penny more then I bid.
Why then say you might have had a good bargain; Whore's this boy to make up the wares? heere's some ten pieces opened, and all to no purpose.
O Frank▪ shut up shop, shut up shop.
Shut up shop, boy, why?
My Master is come from the Court knighted, and bid
vs, for he says he will have the first year of the reign of his Knighthood kept holiday; here he comes.
God give your worship joy, sir.
O Frank▪ I have the worship now in the right kind, the sword of Knighthood sticks still upon my shoulders, and I feel the blow in my purse, it has cut two leather bags asunder; but ell's one, honour must be purchased: I will give over my City coat, and betake my self to the Court jacket; as for trade, I will deal in it no longer, I will seat thee in my shop, and it shall be thy care to ask men what they lack, my stock shall be summed up, and I will call thee to an account for it.
My service sir, never deserved so much,
Nor could I ever hope so large a bounty
Could spring out of your love.
That's all one,
I do love to do things beyond men's hopes,
To morrow I remove into the Strand,
There for this quarter dwell, the next at Fulham:
He that hath choice, may shift, the whilst shalt thou
Be moister of this house, and rent it free.
I thank you sir.
To day Isle go dine with my Lord Mayor: to more∣row with the Sheriffs, and next day with the Aldermen, I will spread the Ensign of my knighthood over the face of the Cit∣tie, which shall strike as great a terror to my enemies, as ever Tamberlaine to the Turks.
Come Frank, come in with me, and see the meat,
Upon the which my knighthood first shall eat.
There is a devil has haunted me these three years, in likeness of an Usurer, a fellow that in all his life never •at three great loaves out of his own purse, nor never warmed him but at other men's fires, never saw a joint of mutton in his own house these four and twenty years, but always coso∣ned the poor prisoners, for he always bought his victuals
out of the almes-basket, and yet this rogue now feeds upon capons which my tenants sent him out of the Country; he is Landlord forsooth over all my possessions: well, I am spent, and this rogue has consumed me; I dare not walk abroad to see my friends, for fear the Sergeants should take acquain∣tance of me: my refuge is Ireland, or Virginia; necessity cries out, and I will presently to Westchester.
How now! Bubble hast thou packed up all thy things? our par∣ting time is come: nay pre thee doe not weep.
Affection sir will burst out.
Thou hast been a faithful servant to me, go to thy uncle, he will give thee entertainment, tell him upon the sto∣no rock of his merciless hart my fortunes suffer shipwreck.
I will tell him he is an vsuring rascal, and one that would do the Common-wealth good, if he were hanged.
Which thou hast cause to wish for, thou art his heir, my affectionate Bubble.
But Master, wherefore should we be parted?
Because my fortunes are desperate, thine are hope∣full.
Why but whither doe you mean to go Moister?
Why to Sea.
To sea! Lord bless vs, me thinks I hear of a tempest already, but what will you doe at Sea?
Why as other Gallants doe that are spent, turn pirate.
O Moister! have the grace of Wapping before your eyes, remember a high tide, give not your friends cause to wet their handkerchers: nay Moister, Isle tell you a better course then so, you and I will go and rob mine uncle; if we scope, we'll domineer together, if we be taken, we'll be hanged together at Tyburne, that's the warmer gallows of the two.
By your leave sir, whereabouts dwells one M. Bubble?
Doe you hear, my friend, doe you know M. Bubble if you doe see him?
No in truth doe I not.
What is your business with Moister Bubble?
Marry sir, I come with welcome news to him.
Tell it, my friend, I am the man.
May I be assured sir, that your name is master Bubble?
I tell thee, honest friend, my name is master Bubble, Master Bartholomew Bubble.
Why then sir, you are heir to a million, for your un∣cle the rich usurer is dead.
Pray thee honest friend, go to the next Haberdash∣ers, and bid him send me a new melancholy hat, and take thou that for thy labour.
I will sir.
Vmh, vmh, vmh.
I would the news were true; see how my little Bubble is blown up with it!
Doe you hear, my friend, for what doe you knock there?
Marry sir, I would speak with the worshipful Master Bubble.
The worshipful! and what would you doe with the worshipful Master Bubble? I am the man.
I cry your worship mercy then, Master Thong the Belt-maker sent me to your worship, to give you notice, that your uncle is dead, and that you are his only heir.
Thy news is good, and I have looked for it long,
Thanks unto thee, my friend, and goodman Thong.
Certainly, this news is true: for see another, by this light his Scrivener! now M. Blank, whither away so fast?
Moister Staines, God save you, where is your man?
Why look you sir, do you not see him?
God save the right worshipful master Bubble; I bring you heavy news with a light heart.
What are you?
I am your worships poor Scrivener.
He is an honest man it seems, for he has both his ears.
I am one that your worships uncle committed some
trust in for the putting out of his money, and I hope I shall have the putting out of yours.
The putting out of mine! would you have the putting out of money?
Yea sir.
No sir, I am old enough to put out my own money.
I have writings of your worships.
As thou love thy profit, hold thy tongue, thou and I will confer.
Do you hear, my friend, can you tell me when, and how my uncle died?
Yes sir, he died this morning, and hee was killed by a Butcher?
How! by a Butcher?
Yes indeed sir, for going this morning into the Mar∣ket, to cheapen meat, hee fell down stark dead, because a Butcher asked him four shillings for a shoulder of Mutton.
How stark dead! &amp; could not aqua vitae fetch him again?
No sir, nor Rosa solis neither, and yet there was trial made of both.
I shall love aqua vitae &amp; rosa solis the better while I live.
Will it please your worship to accept of my poor ser∣vice, you know my case is desperate, I beseech you that I may feed upon your bread, tho it be of the brownest, and drink of your drink tho it be of the smallest, for I am humble in body, and dejected in mind, and will do your worship as good ser¦vice for forty shillings a year, as another shall for 3. pounds.
I will not stand with you for such a matter, because you have been my master, but otherwise, I will entertain no man without some Knights or Ladies Letter for their behaviour, Geruase I take it is your christen name.
Yes if it please your worship.
Well Geruase, be a good servant, and you shall find me a dutiful master: and because you have been a Gentle∣man, I will entertain you for my Tutor in behaviour; Con∣duct me to my palace.
As little children love to play with fire▪
And will not leave till they themselves doe burn,
So did I fondly dally with Desire:
Until Loves flames grew hot, I could not turn,
Nor well avoid; but sigh and sob, and morn
As children doe, when as they feel the pain,
Till tender mother kiss them whole again.
Fie, what unsavoury stuff is this? but she,
Whose mature judgment can distinguish things,
Will thus conceit; tales that are harshest told,
Have smoothest meanings, and to speak are bold:
It is the first-borne Sonnet of my brain,
We sucked a white leaf from my blacke-lipp'd pen
So sad employment,
Yet the dry paper drinks it up as deep,
As if it flowed from Petrarkes cunning Quill.
How now! what have we here, a Sonnet and a Satire coupled together like my Ladies Dog and her Munkie; As little children &amp;c.
Pre thee away, by the deepest oath that can be sworn, thou shalt not read it, by our friendship I conjure thee, pre thee let go.
Now in the name of Cupped, what want thou, a pi∣geon, a dove, a mate, a turtle, dost love foul, ha?
O no, shoe's fairer thrice then is the Queen,
Whom beauteous Venus called is by name, pre thee let me know what she is thou love, that I may shunae her, if I should chance to meet her.
Why Isle tell you sir what she is, if you do not know.
No not I, I protest.
Why it is your sister.
How! my sister?
Yes, your eldest sister.
Now God bless the man, he had better choose a wench that has been borne and bred in an alley, her tongue is a perpe∣tuall motion, Thought is not so swift as it is; and for pride, the woman that had her Ruff poked by the devil, is but a Puri∣tan to her, thou coldest never have fastened thy affection on a worse subject, she'll flowt faster then a court-waiting woman
in progress, any man that comes in the way of honesty does she set her mark upon, that is, a villainous least; for she is a kind of Poetesse, and will make Ballads upon the calves of your legs: I pre thee let her alone, she'll never make a good wife for any man unless it be a Leather dresser; for perhaps he, in time, may turn her.
Thou hast a Privilege to utter this,
But by my life my own blood could not scope
A chastisement for thus profaning her,
Whose virtues sits aboue men's calumnies,
Had mine own brother spoke thus liberally,
My fury should have taught him better manners.
No more words as you fear a challenge.
I may tell thee in thine ear, I am glad to hear what I do; I pray God send her no worse husband, nor he no worse wife: do you hear love, will you take your Cloak and Rapier, and walk abroad into some wholesome air? I do much fear thy infection, good council I see will do no good on thee, but pursue the end, and to thy thoughts, Isle prove a faithful friend.
Here's a spacious room to walk in, sir set down the candle, and fetch vs up a quart of Ipocras, and so we'll part.
Nay faith Son, we'll have a pottle, let's ne'er be covetous in our young days.
A pottle sir, doe you hear?
Yes sir, you shall.
How now Wench! how dost?
Faith I am somewhat sick, yet I should be well e∣nough if I had a new gown.
Why heere's my hand, within these three days thou shalt have one.
And will you (son) remember me for a new fore-part, by my troth, my old one is worn so bare, I am ashamed any body should see it.
Why, did I ever fail of my promise?
No in sincerity did thou not.
Heere's a cup of rich Ipocras.
Here sister, mother, and master Pursnet; nay good sir, be not so dejected, for by this wine, to morrow I will send you stuff for a new suite, and as much as shall line you a cloak clean through.
I thank you, and shall study to deserve.
Here boy, fill, and hang that eurmogin that's good for no body but himself.
Heroickly spoken by this Candle, it is pity thou were not made a Lord.
A Lord! by this Light I doe not think but to bee Lord Mayor of London before I die, and have three Pageants carried before me, besides a Ship and an Unicorn; print∣ces may pray for that time, for whenever it happens, I will make another Shrouetuesday for them.
Young master Rash has sent you a quart of Maligoe.
M: Rash! zownds how does he know I am here?
Nay, I know not sir.
Know not! it comes through you and your rascally glib-tongu'd companions, it is my Masters son, a fine gentle∣man he is, &amp; a boon companion, I must go so him.
Boy, fill vs a cup of your maligo, we'll drink to M. Sp•ndall in his absence, there's not a finer spirit of a Citizen within the walls, here master Pursnet you shall pledge him.
Isle not refuse it were it puddle: by Styx hs is a boun∣tifull Gentleman, and I shall report him so: here M Tickle∣man, shall I charge you?
Doe your worst Sergeant, Isle pledge my young Sp•ndall a whole sea, as they say, fa la la la la, would the Mu∣sick were here again, I doe begin to be wanton, Ipocras sir, and a dry biscuit; here bawd, a carouse.
Bawd! I faith you begin to grow light ith head, I pray, no more such words, for if you doe, I shall grow into di∣stempers.
Distempers! hang your distempers, be angry with
me and thou d•r'st, I pray, who feeds you, but I? who keeps the feather-beddes from the Brokers, but I? tic not your saw∣sege face, thick clouted cream rampallion at home, that snuffles in the nose like a decayed Bagge-pipe.
Nay, sweet Mistress Tickle-man, be concordant, re∣uerence Antiquity.
Save you, sweet creatures of beauty, save you: How now old Beelzebub, how dost thou?
Beelzebub! Beelzebub in thy face.
Nay, good words Mistress Swearman, hoe's a young Gallant, you must not weigh what he says.
I would my lamentable complaining Lover had been here, here had been a Supersede as for his melan∣choly, and in faith Frank I am glad my father has turned over his shop to thee, I hope I, or any friend of mine, shall have so much credit with thee, as to stand in thy books for a suite of Satin.
For a whole piece, if you please, any friend of yours shall command me to the last remnant.
Why God a mercy Frank, what, shall's to dice?
Dice or drink, heere's forty crowns, as long as that will last, any thing.
Why there spoke a jingling Boy.
A pox of money, it is but rubbish, and he that hoord's it up, it but a Scauenger: if there be cards ith house, let's go to Primero.
Primero! why I thought thou had not been so much gamester as to play at it.
Gamester (to say truth) I am none, but what is it I will not be in good company? I will •it my self to all humours, I will game with a Gamester, drink with a drunkard, be civil with a citizen, fight with a swaggerer, and drab with a whoore-master.
An excellent humour in faith.
Zownds what have we here?
A land Porpoise, I think.
This is no angry, nor no roaring boy, but a blustering boy; now Eolus defend vs, what puffs are these?
I doe smell a whore.
O Gentlemen, give him good words, hoe's one of the roaring boys.
Rogue.
Here sir.
Take my cloak, I must unbuckle, my pickled oy∣sters work; puff, puff.
Puff, puff.
Dost thou retort, in opposition stand.
Out you swaggering Rogue, Zownds Isle kick him out of the room.
Out alas! their naked tools are out,
Fear not (sweet heart;) come along with me.
Thrice happy days they were, and too soon gone,
When as the heart was coupled with the tongue,
And no deceitful flattery or guile:
Hung on the Lovers teare-commixed smile:
Could women learn but that imperiousness,
By which men use to stint our happiness,
When they have purchased vs for to be theirs,
By customary sighs and forced tears,
To give vs bittes of kindness lest we faint,
But no abundance, that we ever want,
And still are begging; which too well they know
Endears affection, and doth make it grow:
Had we these sleights, how happy were we then,
That we might glory over loue-sicke men?
But Arts we know not; nor have any skill,
To fine a sour look to a pleasing will,
Nor couch a secret love in show of hate:
But if we like, must be compassionate;
Yet I will strive to bridle and conceal,
The hid affection which my heart doth feel.
Now the boy with the Bird-bolt be praised: nay faith sister forward, t'was an excellent passion, come let's hear, what is hee? if hee be a proper man, and have a black eye, a smooth chin, and a curled pare, take him wench, if my father will not consent, run away with him, I'll help to convey you.
You talk strangely sister.
Sister, sister, dissemble not with me, though you doe mean to dissemble with your lover, though you have pro∣tested to conceal your affection; by this tongue you shall not, for I'll discover all as soon as I know the Gentleman.
Discover, what will you discover?
Mary, enough Isle warrant thee, first and foremost, Isle tell him thou readst loue-passions in print, and speak every morning without book to thy looking-glasse; next, that thou never sleep, till an hour after the Bell man; that as soon as thou art asleep, thou art in a dream, and in a dream thou art the kindest and comfortablest bed-fellow for kissings and embracings; by this hand, I can not rest for thee, but our fa∣there. —
How now! what are you two consulting on, on husbands? you think you loose time I am sure, but hold your own a little Girls, it shall not be long ere I'll provide for you: and for you Gartred, I have bethought my self alrea∣die,
Whirle-pit the usurer is late deceased,
A man of unknown wealth, which he has left
Unto a provident kinsman as I hear,
That was once servant to that unthrift Staines.
A prudent Gentleman they say he is,
And (as I take it) called moister Bubble.
Bubble!
Yes nimble-chappes, what say you to that?
Nothing, but that I wish his Christen name were Wa•er.
Sir, I'm at your disposing, but my mind
Stands not as yet towards marriage,
Were you so pleased I would a little longer
Enjoy the quiet of a single bed.
Heere's the right trick of them all, let a man
Be motioned to um, they could be content
To lead a single life forsooth, when the harlotries
Doe pine and run into diseases,
Eat chalk and oate-meale, cry and creep in corners,
Which are manifest tokens of their longings,
And yet they will dissemble. But Gartred,
As you doe owe me reverence, and will pay it,
Prepare your self to like this Gentleman,
Who can maintain thee in thy choice of Gowns,
Of tyres, of servants, and of costly Jewels;
Nay for a need, out of his easy nature,
Mai'st draw him to the keeping of a Coach
For Country; and Carriage for London,
Indeed what might thou not.
Sir, here's one come from Master Bubble, to inuit you to the funeral of his uncle.
Thank the Messenger, and make him drink,
Tell him I will not fail to wait the coarse,
Yet stay, I will go talk with him my self:
Gartred, think upon what I have told you,
And let me er't be long receive your answer.
Sister, sister.
What say you sister?
Shall I provide a Cord?
A Cord! what to doe?
Why to let thee out at the window; doe not I know that thou wilt run away with the Gentleman, for whom you
made the passion, rather then endure this same Bubble, that my father talks of, it were good you would let me bee of your council, lest I break the neck of your plot.
Sister, know I love thee,
And I'll not think a thought thou shalt not know;
I love a Gentleman that answers me,
In all the rites of love as faithfully,
Has wooed me oft with Sonnets, and with tears,
Yet I seem still to slight him. Experience tells,
The Jewel that's enjoyed is not esteemed,
Things hardly got, are always highest deemed.
You say well sister, but it is not good to linger out too long, continuance of time will take away any mans stomach in the world; I hope the next time that he comes to you, I shall see him.
You shall.
Why go to then, you shall have my opinion of him, if he deserve thee, thou shalt delay him no longer; for if you can not find in your heart to tell him you love him, I'll sigh it out for you; come, we little creatures must help one another.
How cheerfully things look in this place,
Tic always Spring-time here, such is the grace
And potency of her who has the bliss,
To make it still Elizeum where she is:
Nor doth the King of flames in's golden fires,
After a tempest answer men's desires,
When as he casts his comfortable beams,
Over the flowery fields and silver streams,
As her illustrate Beauty strikes in me,
And wrappes my soul up to felicity.
Doe you hear sir?
Why sister, what will you doe?
By my mayden-head, an oath which I ne'er took in vain, either go down and comfort him, or I'll call him up,
and disclose all: What, will you have no mercy? but let a pro∣per man, that might spend the spirit of his youth upon your self, fall into a consumption, for shame sister.
You're the strangest creature, what would you have me doe?
Marry, I would have you go to him, take him by the hand, and grype him, say you're welcome, I love you with all my heart, you are the man must doe the feat, and take him about the neck, and kiss upon the bargain.
Fie how you talk, it is mere immodesty,
The commonest strumpet would not doe so much.
Mary the better, for such as are honest,
Should still doe what the common strumpet will no•:
Speak, will you doe it?
Isle loose his company for ever first.
Doe you hear sir? heere's a Gentlewoman would speak with you.
Why sister, pray sister.
One that loves you with all her heart, yet is ashamed to confess it.
Good sister hold your tongue, I will go down to him.
Doe not jest with me, for by this hand I'll either get him up, or go down my self, and read the whole Hi∣story of your love to him.
If you'll forbear to call, I will go down.
Let me see your back then, and hear you? doe not use him scurvily you were best; vnset all your tyrannical looks, and bid him lovingly welcome, or as I live, I'll stretch out my voice again; vds foot, I must take some pains I see, or wee shall never have this gear cotton: but to say truth, the fault is in my melancholy Monsieur, for if hee had but half so much spirit, as he has flesh, hee might ha boarded her by this. But see, yonder she marches; now a passion of his side of half an hour long, his hat is off already, as if he were begging one poor penny-worth of kindness.
Shall I presume (fair Mistress) on your hand to lay my unworthy lip?
Fie upon him, I am ashamed to hear him, you shall have a Country fellow at a Maie-pole, go better to his work: he had need to be constant, for hee is able to spoil as many Maids as he shall fall in love withal.
Sir, you profess love unto me, let me entreat you it may appear but in some small request.
Let me know it (Lady) and I shall soon effect it.
But for this present to forbear this place,
Because my father is expected here.
I am gone Lady.
Doe you hear sir?
Did you call?
Look up to the window.
What say you Gentlewoman?
Nay pray sir go, it is my sister call's to hasten you.
I call to speak with you, pray stay a little.
The Gentlewoman has something to say to me.
She has nothing, I doe conjure you, as you love me, stay not.
The power of Magic can not fasten me, I am gone.
Good sir, look back no more, what voice ere call you,
Imagine, going from me, you were coming,
And use the same speed, as you love my safety.
Wilde wetted sister, I have prevented you,
I will not have my love yet opened to him,
By how much longer'tis ere it be known,
By so much dearer twill be when'tis purchased:
But I must use my strength to stop her journey,
For she will after him: and see, she comes;
Nay sister, you are at furdest.
Let me go you were best, for if you wrestle with me I shall throw you, passion, come back, fool, lover, turn a∣gain, and kiss your belly full;
For here she is will stand you, doe your worst:
Will you let me go?
Yes, if you'll stay.
If I stir a foot, hang me, you shall come together of your selves, and be nought, doe what you will, for if here I trouble my self again, let me want help In such a case when I need.
Nay but pre thee sister be not angry.
I will be angry, vdsfoot, I cannot endue•e such fool∣rye, I, two bashful fools that would couple together, and yet ha not the faces.
Nay pre thee sweet sister.
Come, come, let me go, birds that want the use of reason and speech, can couple together in one day, and yet you that have both, cannot conclude in twenty.
Why what good would it doe you to tell him?
Doe not talk to me, for I am deaf to any thing you say, go weep and cry.
Nay but sister.
Drawer, bid them make haste at home,
Tell them they are coming from church.
I will sir.
That I should live to be a serving-man, a fellow which scalds his mouth with another mans porridge, brings up meat for other men's bellies, and carries away the bones for his own, changes his clean trenchor for a foul one, and is glad of it, and yet did I never live so merry a life, when I was my masters master, as now I doe, being man to my man, and I will stand too't for all my former speeches, a serving-man lives a better life then his Master, and thus I prove it; the saying is, The nearer the bone the sweeter the flesh: then must the serving-man needs eat the sweeter flesh, for hee always pickes the bones. And again the Proverb says, The deeper the sweeter: There has the serving-man the vantage again, for he drinks still in the bottom of the pot, hee filles his belly, and never
asks what's to pay? wears broad-cloth, and yet dares walk Wa••ing-stre•te, without any fear of his Drap•r: and for his c•lore•, they are according to the season, in the Summer hee is apparelled (for the most part) like the heavens, in blew, in the winter, like the earth, in freeze.
But see, I am preu•nted in my Encomium,
I could have maintained this theme these two hours.
Well, God rest his soul, hoe's gone, and we must all follow him
I, I, hoe's gone sir Lionel, hoe's gone.
Why tho he be gone, what then? it is not you that can fetch him again, with all your cunning, it must bee your comfort, that he died well.
Truly and so it is, I would to God I had even another uncle that would die no worse; surely I shall weep again, if I should find my handkercher.
How now! what, are these onions?
I, I, sir Lionel, they are my onions, I thought to have had them roasted this morning for my cold: Geruase you have not wept to day, pray take your onions Gentlemen, the re∣membrance of death is sharpe, therefore there is a banquet within to sweeten your conceits: I pray walk in Gentlemen, walk you in, you know I must needs be melancholy, and keep my Chamber, Geruase, usher them into the banquet.
I shall sir, please you sir Lionel.
Well Master Bubble, we'll go in and taste of your bounty.
In the mean time, you must be of good cheer.
If grief take not away my stomach,
I will have good cheer I warrant you Sprinckle.
Sir.
Had the women puddings to their dole?
Yes sir.
And how did they take them?
Why wi•h their hands, how should they take um?
O thou Hercules of ignorance! I mean, how were they sati•fied?
By my throth sir, but so so, and yet some of them had two.
O insatiable women! whom two puddings would not sati•fie, but vanish Sp•inckl•; bid your fellow Geruase come hither:
And off my mourning robes, grief to the grave,
For I have gold, and therefore will be brave:
In silks I'll rattle it of every colour,
And when I go by water, scorn a Sculler,
In black carnation velvet I will cloak me,
And when men bid God save me, Cry Tu quoque:
It is needful a Gentleman should speak Latin sometimes, is it not Geruase?
O very graceful sir, your most accomplished Gentle∣men are known by it.
Why then will I make use of that little I have,
Upon times and occasions, here Geruase, take this bag,
And run presently to the Mercers, buy me seven ell, of horse flesh coloured taffeta, nine yards of yellow satin, and eight yards of orange tawny velvet; then run to the Tailers, the Haberdashers, the Sempsters, the Cutlers, the Persumers, and to all trades whatsoever that belong to the m•king up of a Gen∣tleman; and amongst the rest, let not the Barber bee forgot∣ten: and look that hee be an excellent fellow, and one that can snacke his fingers with dexterity.
I shall fit you sir.
Doe so good Geruase, it is time my beard were cor∣rected, for it is grown so saucy, as it begins to play with my nose.
Your nose sir must endure it: for it is in part the fa∣shion.
Is it in fashion? why then my nose shall endure it, let it tickle his worst.
Why now you're ith right sir, if you will be a true Gal∣lant, you must bear things resolute, as this sir, if you be at an Ordinary, and chance to loose your money at play, you must not fret and fume, tear cards, and fling away dice, as your ignorant gamester, or country-Gentleman does, but you must put on a calm temperate action, with a kind of careless smile, in contempt of Fortune, as not being able with all her engines to batter down one piece of your estate, that your means may be thought invincible, never tell your money, nor what you have won, nor what you have lost: if a question be made: your answer must be, what I have lost, I have lost, what I have won, I have won, a close heart and free hand, makes a man admired, a testerne or a shilling to a servant that brings you a glass of beer, binds his hands to his lips, you shall have more service of him, then his Master, hee will be more humble to you, then a Cheater before a Magistrate.
Geruase, give me thy hand, I think thou hast more wit then I that am thy Master, and for this Speech only, I doe here create thee my steward: I do long me thinks to be at an Ordinary, to smile at Fortune, and to be bountiful: Geruase a∣bout your business good Geruase, while•t I go and meditate upon a Gentleman-like behaviour, I have an excellent gate already Geruase, have I not?
Hercules himself sir, had never a better gate.
But dispatch Geruase, the satin and the velvet must be thought upon, and the Tu quoque must not bee forgotten: for whenever I give Arms, that shall be my Motto.
What a fortune had I thrown upon me, when I pre∣ferred my self into this fellows service! indeed I serve my self, and not him, for this Gold here is mine own truly purchased: he has credit, and shall run ith books for it, I'll carry things so cunningly, that he shall not be able to look in∣to my actions, my mortgage I have already got into my hands: the rent hee shall enjoy a while, till his riot constrain him to sell it, which I will purchase with his own money, I must cheat a little, I have been cheated upon, therefore I hope
the world will a little the better excuse me, what his uncle craftily got from me, I will knavishly recover of him, to come by it, I must vary shapes, and my first shift shall be in satin:
Proteus propitious be to my disguise,
And I shall prosper in my enterprise.
A Rubber sir.
You shall sir.
And bid those two men you said would speak with me, come in.
I will sir.
Did I not play this Set will?
Excellent well by Phaeton, by Erebus, it went as if it had cut the Line.
God bless you sir.
Master Blank! welcome.
Here's the Gentleman's man sir has brought the money.
Wilt please you tell sir?
Have you the Bond ready master Blank?
Yes sir.
Tic well, Pursenet, help to tell — 10.11.22. What time have you given?
The thirteenth of the next Month.
Tic well, here's light gold.
T'will be the less troublesome to carry.
You say well sir, how much hast thou told?
In gold and silver here is twenty pounds.
Tic right M. Spendall, I'll warrant you.
I'll take your warrant sir, and tell no further, come let me see the Condition of this Obligation.
A man may win from him that cares not for it,
This royal Caesar doth regard no Cash,
Has thrown away as much in Ducks and Drakes,
As would have bought some 50000 Capons.
Tic very well; so, lend me your pen.
This is the Captain of brave Citizens,
The Agamemnon of all merry Greeks,
A Stukely or a Shirley for his spirit,
Bounty and Royalty to men at arms.
You give this as your deed.
Ma•y do I sir.
Pleases this Gentleman to be a witness.
Yes Mary shall he, Pursenet, your hand.
My hand is at thy service, Noble Brutus.
There's for your kindness master Blank.
I thank you sir.
For your pains.
I'll take my leave of you.
What, must you be gone too, moister Blank?
Yes indeed sir, I must to the Exchange.
Farewell to both, Pursenet,
Take that twenty pounds, and give it mistress Sweatma••▪
Bid her pay her Landlord and Apothecary,
And let her Butcher and her Baker stay,
They're honest men, and I'll take order with them.
The Butcher and the Baker then shall stay.
They must till I am somewhat stronger pursed.
If this be all, I have my errand perfect.
Here sir, heere's for balls, there's for your self.
I thank your worship.
Commend me to your mistress.
I will sir; in good faith it is the liberall'st Gentleman that comes into our Court, why he cares no more for a shilling then I doe for a box of the ear, God bless him.
Sir, what a clock i'st?
Past ten sir.
Here will not be a Gallant seen this hour.
Within this quarter sir, and less, they meet here as soon as at any Ordinary in the town.
Hast any Tobacco?
Yes sir.
Fill.
Why thou report miracles, things not to be belee∣ued: I protest to thee, had thou not vnrip't thy self to me, I should never have known thee.
I tell you true sir, I was so far gone, that desperate∣on knocked at mine elbow, and whispered news to me out of Barbary.
Well, I'm glad so good an occasion staid thee at home,
And mai'st thou prosper in thy project, and go on,
With best success of thy invention.
False dice say Amen, for that's my induction,
I do mean to cheat to day without respect of persons:
When saw thou Will Rash?
This morning at his Chamber, hell be here.
Why then doe thou give him my name and character, for my aim is wholly at my worshipful Master.
Nay thou shalt take another into him, one that laughs out his life in this Ordinary, thanks any man that wins his money; all the while his money is loosing, he swears by the cross of this silver, and when it is gone, hee changes it to the hilts of his sword.
He will be an excellent coach-horse for my captain.
Save you Gallants, save you.
How think ye now? have I not carved him out to you?
You have lighted me into his heart, I see him thoroughly.
Ninni-hammer.
Sir.
Take my cloak and rapier also: I think it be early Gentlemen, what time doe you take it to be?
Inclining to eleven sir.
Inclining! a good word; I would it were inclining to twelve, for by my stomach it should be high Noon: but what shall we doe Gallants? shall we to cards, till our Com∣pany come?
Please you sir.
Harry. fetch sir Cards, me thinks it is an vnseeme∣lie fight to see Gentlemen stand idle, please you to impart your smoke.
Very willingly sir.
In good faith a pipe of excellent vapour.
The best the house yields.
Had you it in the house? I had thought it had been your own: it is not so good now as I took it to be: Come Gentlemen, what's your game?
Why Gleek, that's your only game.
Gleek let it be, for I am persuaded I shall gleek some of you; cut sir.
What play we, twelve pence gleek.
Twelve pence, a crown; vds foot I will not spoil my memory for twelve pence.
With all my heart.
Honour.
What first, Harts?
The King, what say you?
You must speak sir.
Why I bid thirteen.
Fourteen.
Fifteen.
Sixteen.
Sixteen, seventeen.
You shall have it for me.
Eighteen.
Take it to you sir.
V•slid I'll not be out-brau'd.
I vie it.
I'll none of it.
Nor I.
Give me a mournauall of aces, and a gleek of queens.
And me a gleek of knaves.
V•slid, I am gleek't this time.
Play.
Equal fortunes befall you Gallants.
Will Rash, well, I pray see what a vile game I have
What's your game, Gleek?
Yes faith, Gleek, and I have not one Court card, but the knave of Clubs.
Thou hast a wilde hand indeed: thy small cards show like a troupe of rebels, and the knave of Clubs their chief Leader.
And so they doe as God save me, by the cross of this silver he says true.
Pray, play sir:
Honour.
How go the stocks Gentlemen, what's won or lost?
This is the first game.
Yes this is the first game, but by the cross of this sell∣for heere's all of five pounds.
Good day to you Gentlemen.
Frank, welcome by this hand, how dost lad?
And how does thy wench in faith.
Why fat and plump
Like thy geldings: thou giu'st them both good provender
It seems, go to, thou art one of the midst wags,
Of a Citizen 'ith town•, the whole company talks of thee already.
Talk, why let um talk, vdsfoot I pay scot and lot, and all manner of duties else, as well as the best of um: it may be they understand I keep a whore, a horse, and a kennel of hounds, what's that to them? no mans purse opens for it but mine own; and so long, my hounds shall eat flesh, my horse bread, and my who ore wear velvet.
Why there spoke a courageous Boy.
Vdsfoote, shall I be confined all the days of my life to walk under a pent-house? no, I'll take my pleasure whiles my youth affords it.
By the cross of these hilts, I'll never play at Gleek again, whilst I have a nose on my face,
I smell the knavery of the game.
Why what's the matter? who has lost?
Mary that have I, by the hilts of my sword, I have lost forty crowns, in as small time almost, as while a man might tell it.
Change your Game for dice,
We are a full number for Nouum.
With all my heart, whore's M. Ambush the Broker Ninni-hammer?
Sir.
Go to M. Ambush, and bid him send me twenty marks upon this Diamond.
I will sir.
Look you (to make vs the merrier) who comes here.
A fresh Gamester, M. Bubble, God save you.
Tu quoque sir.
God save you Moister Bubble.
Tu quoque.
Save you sir.
Et tu quoque.
Good moister Bubleb
Et tu quoque.
Is your name Master Bubble?
Moister Bubble is my name, sir.
God save you sir.
Et tu quoque.
I would be better acquainted with you.
And I with you.
Pray let vs salute again.
With all my heart sir.
Behold yonder the ok and the Ivy how they embrace.
Excellent acquaintance, they shall be the Gemini.
Shall I desire your name sir?
Moister Scattergood.
Of the Scattergoods of London?
No indeed sir, of the Scattergoods of Hampshire.
Good Moister Scattergood.
Come Gentlemen, heere's dice.
Please you advance to the Table?
No indeed sir.
Pray will you go?
I will go sir over the whole world for your sake, But in cur•easy I will not budge a foot.
Here is the Cash you sent me for, and master Rash,
Here is a Letter from one of your sisters▪
I have the dice, set Gentlemen.
From which sister?
From the mad-cap, I know by the hand.
For me, six.
And six that.
Nine; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8: eighteen shillings.
What's yours sir?
Mine's a Bakers dozen: master Bubble tel your money.
In good faith I am but a simple Gamester, and doe not know what to doe.
Why you must tell your money, and he will pay you.
My money! I do know how much my money is, but he shall not pay me, I have a better conscience then so: what for throwing the dice twice, in faith he should have but a hard bar∣gain of it.
Witty rascal, I must needs away.
Why what's the matter?
Why the lovers can not agree, thou shalt along with me, and know all.
But first let me instruct thee in the condition of this Gentleman, whom dost thou take him to be?
Nay, hoe's a stranger, I know him not.
By this light but you doe, if his beard were off, it is St•ended•.
The devil it is as soon: and what's his purpose in this disguise?
Why cheating, doe you not see how he plays upon his worshipful Moister, and the rest.
By my faith he draws apace.
A pox upon these dice, giue's a fresh bale.
Ha ha, the dice are not to be blamed, a man may per∣ceiue
this is no Gentlemanly gamester, by his chasing: do you hear, my friend, fill me a glass of beer, and ther's a shilling for your pains.
Your worship shall sir.
Why how now Frank, what hast lost?
Fifteen pounds and upwards: is there never an ho∣nest fellow.
What doe you lack money sir?
Yes, can furnish me?
Upon a sufficient pawn sir.
You know my shop, bid my man deliver you a piece of three pile velvet, and let me have as much money as you dare adventure upon it.
You shall sir.
A pox of this luck, it will not last ever:
Play sir, I'll set you.
Frank, better fortune befa'l thee: and Gentlemen, I must take my leave, for I must leave you.
Must you needs be gone?
Indeed I must.
Et tu quoque?
Yes truly.
At your discretions Gentlemen.
Farewell.
Cry you mercy sir, I am chanced with you all Gentle∣men: here I have 7, here 7, and here 10.
It is right sir, and ten that.
And nine that.
Two fiues at all.
One and five that.
V•nh, and can a suite of Satin cheat so grossly? By this light there's nought on one die but fiues and sixes, I must not be thus gulled.
Come Moister Spendall, set.
No sir, I have done.
Why then let vs all leave, for I think dinner's no••e ready.
Your meat's upon the Table.
On the Table! come Gentlemen, we do our stomachs wrong: M. Bubble, what have you lost?
That's no matter, what I have lost, I have lost; nor can I choose but smile at the foolishness of the dice.
I am but your steward Gentlemen, for after dinner I may restore it again.
M. Scatter-good, will you walk in?
I'll wait upon you sir, come Gentlemen, will you follow?
Yes sir, I'll follow you.
Hear you sir, a word.
Ten if you please.
I have lost fifteen pounds.
And I have found it.
You say right, found it you have indeed,
But never won it: doe you know this die?
Not I sir.
You seem a Gentleman, and you may perceive.
I have some respect unto your credit,
To take you thus aside, will you restore
What you ha drawn from me unlawfully?
Sir, by your out-side you seem a citizen,
Whose Cockes-comb, I were apt enough to break,
But for the Law; go y' are a prating Jack,
Nor 'ist your hopes, of crying out for clubs,
Can save you from my chastisement, if once
You shall but dare to utter this again.
You lie, you dare pot.
Lie! nay villain, now thou tempest me to thy death.
So 't, you must buy it dearer,
The b•st blood flows within you is the price.
Dare thou resist, thou art no Citizen.
I am a Citizen.
Say thou art a Gentleman, and I am satisfied,
For then I know thou'lt answer me in field.
Isle say directly what I am, a Citizen,
And I will meet thee in the field as fairly
As the best Gentleman that wears a sword.
I accept it, the meeting place.
Beyond the Maze in Tuttle.
What weapon?
Single rapier.
The time.
To morrow.
The hour.
Twixt nine and ten.
Tic good, I shall expect you, farewell.
Farewell sir.
Why I commend thee Girl, thou speak as thou think, thy tongue and thy heart are Relatives, and thou were not my sister, I should at this time fall in love with thee.
You should not need, for and you were not my bro∣there, I should fall in love with you, for I love a proper man with my heart, and so does all the Sex of vs, let my sister dissem∣ble never so much, I am out of charity with these nice and sque∣mesh tricks, we were borne for men, and men for vs, and wee must together.
This same plain dealing is a Jewel in thee.
And let me enjoy that Jewel, for I love plain dea∣ling with my heart.
Tha'rt a good wench in faith, I should never be asha∣med to call thee sister, though thou should marry a Broom∣man: but your lover me thinks is over tedious.
No, look ye sir, could you wish a man to come better upon his q, let vs withdraw.
Close, close, for the prosecution of the plot, wench,
See he prepares.
Silence.
The Sun is yet wrapped in Aurora•s arms,
And lulled with her delight, forgets his creatures:
Awake thou god of heate,
I call thee up, and task thee for thy slowness;
Point all thy beams through yonder flaring glass,
And raise a beauty brighter then thy s••fe;
Musicians, give to each Instrument a tongue,
To breathe sweet music in the ears of her
To whom I send it as a messenger.
Sir, your music is so good, that I must say I like it; but the Bringer so ill welcome, that I could be content to loose it: if you plaid for money, there it is; if for love, heere's none; if for goodwill, I thank you, and when you will you may be gone,
Leave me not entranced: sing not my death,
Thy voice is able to make Satires tame,
And call rough winds to her obedience.
Sir, sir, our ears itch not for flattery, here you be∣siege my window, that I dare not put forth my self to take the gentle Ayre, but you are in the fields, and volley out your woes, your plaints, your loves, your injuries.
Since you have heard, and know them, give redress, True beauty never yet was merciless.
Sir, rest thus satisfied, my mind was never woman, never altered, nor shall it now begin: So fare you well.
Sfoot, she plays the terrible tyrannising Tamberlaine over him, this it is to turn Turk, from a most absolute com∣pleate Gentleman, to a most absurd ridiculous and fond lo∣for.
Oh, when a woman knows the power and authori∣tie of her eye.
Fie upon her, shoe's good for nothing then, no more then a jade that knows his own strength: The window is clasped, now brother, pursue your project, and deliver your friend from the tyranny of my domineering sister.
Doe you hear, you drunkard in love, come in to
•s and be ruled, you would little think•, that the wench that talked so souruily out of the window there, is more inamo∣red on thee then thou on her: nay, look you now, see if hee turn not away slighting our good council: I am no Chri∣stian if she doe not sigh, whine, and grow sick for thee: look you sir, I will bring you in good witness against her.
Sir, you're my brothers friend, and I'll be plain with you, you doe not take the course to win my sister, but indi∣rectly go about the bush: you come and fiddle here, and keep a coil in verse: hold off your hat, and beg to kiss her hand, which makes her proud. But to bee short, in two lines thus it is:
Who most doth love, must seem most to neglect it,
For those that show most love, are least respected.
A good observation by my faith.
Well this instruction comes too late now,
Stand you close, and let me prosecute my invention,
Sister, O sister, wake, arise sister.
How now brother, why call you with such terror?
How can you sleep so sound, and hear such groans,
So horrid and so tedious to the ear,
That I was frighted hither by the sound?
O sister, here lies a Gentleman that loved you too dearly,
And himself too ill, as by his death appears,
I can report no further without tears;
Assist me now.
When he came first, death startled in his eyes,
His hand had not forsook the dagger hilt,
But still he gave it strength, as if he feared
He had not sent it home unto his heart.
Enough, enough,
If you will have me live, give him no name,
Suspicion tells me it is my Geraldine:
But be it whom it will, I'll come to him,
To suffer death as resolute as he.
Did not I tell you it would take, down sir down.
I guess what y'ould have me doe.
O for a little blood to besprinckle him.
No matter for blood, I'll not suffer her to come near him, till the plot have tan his full height.
A scarf ore my face, left I betray my self.
Here, here, lie still, she comes,
Now Mereurie, be propitious.
Where lies this spectacle of blood?
This tragic Scene.
Yonder lies Geraldine.
O let me see him with his face of death!
Why doe you stay me from my Geraldine?
Because, unworthy as thou art, thou shalt not see
The man now dead, whom living thou did scorn,
The worst part that he had, deserved thy best,
But yet contemned, deluded, mocked, despised by you,
Unfit for aught but for the general mark
Which you were made for, mans creation.
Burst not my heart before I see my Love,
Brother, upon my knees I beg your leave,
That I may see the wound of Geraldine,
I will embalm his body with my tears,
And carry him unto his sepulchre,
From whence I'll never rise, but be interred
In the same dust he shall be buried in.
I doe protest she draws sad tears from me,
I pre thee let her see her Geraldine.
Brother, if ever you loved me as a sister,
Deprive me not the sight of Geraldine.
Well, I am contented you shall touch his lips,
But neither see his face nor yet his wound,
Not see his face?
Nay, I have sworn it to the contrary:
Nay, hark you further yet.
What now?
But one kiss, no more.
Why then no more.
Marry this liberty I'll give you,
If you intend to make my speech of repentance
Over him, I am content, so it be short.
What you command is Law, and I obey.
Peace, give ear to the passion.
Before I touch thy body, I implore
Thy discontented ghost to be appeasde:
Send not unto me till I come my self:
Then shalt thou know how much I honoured thee.
O see the colour of his coral lip!
Which in despite of death lives full and fresh,
As when he was the beauty of his Sex:
It were sin worthy the worst of plagues to leave thee:
Not all the strength and policy of man
Shall snatch me from thy bosom.
Look, look, I think she'll ravish him.
Why how now sister?
Shall we have both one grave? here I am chained,
Thunder nor Earthquakes shall shake me off.
No? I'll try that, come dead man, awake, up with your bag and baggage, and let's have no more fooling.
And liue's my Geraldine?
Live? faith I,
Why should he not? he was never dead,
That I know on.
It is no wonder Geraldine should live,
Tho he had emptied all his vital spirits,
The Lute of Orpheus spake not half so sweet,
When he descended to th'mfernall vaults,
To fetch again his fair Euridice,
As did thy sweet voice to Geraldine.
I'll exercise that voice, since it doth please
My better self, my constant Geraldine.
Why so la, heere's an end of an old Song,
Why could not this have been done before
I pray?
O you're a goodly sister, this is your plot:
Well, I shall live one day to requite you.
Spare me not, for wheresoever I set my affection, al∣though it be upon a Collier, if I fall back, unless it bee in the right kind, bind me to a stake, and let me be burned to death with char-coale.
Well, thou art a mad wench, and there's no more to be done at this time, but as wee brought you together, so to part you, you must not lie at rack and manger: there be those within, that will forbid the banes, Time must shake good For∣tune by the hand, before you two must be great, specially you sister; come leave swearing.
Must we then part?
Must you part? why how think you? vdsfoote, I do think we shall have as much to do to get her from him, as we had to bring her to him: this love of women is of a strange quality, and has more tricks then a Juggler.
But this, and then farewell.
Thy company is heaven, thy absence hell.
Lord who'ld think it?
Come wench.
This ground is firm and even, I'll go no further.
This be the place then, and prepare you sir,
You shall have fair play for your life of me,
For look sir, I'll be open breasted to you.
Shame light on him that thinks his safety lies in a
French doublet.
Nay I would strip my self, would comeliness
Give sufferance to the deed, and fight with thee,
As naked as a Mauritanian Moore.
Give me thy hand, by my heart I love thee,
Thou art the highest spirited Citizen,
That ever Guild-hall took notice of.
Talk not what I am, until you have tried me.
Come on sir.
Now sir, your life is mine.
Why then take it, for I'll not beg it of thee.
Nobly resolved, I love thee for those words,
Here take thy arms again, and if thy malice
Have spent it self like mine, then let vs part
More friendly then we met at first encounter.
Sir, I accept this gift of you, but not your friendship,
Until I shall recouer't with my honour.
Will you fight again then?
Yes.
Faith thou dost well then, justly to whip my folly.
But come sir.
Hold, you're hurt I take it.
Hurt! where? zownds I feel it not.
You bleed I am sure.
Sblood, I think you wear a cattes claw upon your
Rapiers point,
I am scratched indeed, but small as it is,
I must have blood for blood.
You're bent to kill I see.
No by my hopes, if I can seape that sin,
And keep my good name, I'll never offer't.
Well sir, your worst.
We both bleed now I take it,
And if the motion may be equal thought,
To part with clasped hands: I shall first subscribe.
It were vnmanlinesse in me to refuse
The safety of vs both, my hand shall never fall
From such a charitable motion.
Then join we both, and here our malice ends,
Tho foes we came to•h field, we'll depart friends.
Come, come, follow me knave, follow me, I have the best nose 'ith house, I think, either wee shall have rainy wea∣there, or the vaults vnstop'd: sir, go see, I would not have my guess smell out any such inconvenience: Doe you hear sir Symon?
Sir.
Bid the Kitchin-maide skowre the sink, and make clean her backside, for the wind lies just upon it.
I will sir.
And bid Anthony put on his white fustian doublet, for hee must wait to day: It doth me so much good to stir and talk, to place this, and displace that, that I shall need no Apothecaries prescriptions, I have sent my daughter this more∣ning as far as Pimliko to fetch a draught of Derby ale, that it may fetch a colour in her cheeks, the puling harlotry looks so pale, and it is all for want of a man, for so their mother would say, God rest her soul, before she died.
Sir, the Gentlemen are come already.
How knave, the Gentlemen!
Yes sir, yonder they are.
Gods precious, we are too tardy, let one be sent presently to meet the girls, and hasten their coming home quickly: how dost thou stand dreaming? Gentlemen, I see you love me, you are careful of your hour; you may be de∣ceiued in your cheer, but not in your welcome.
Thanks, and Tu quoque is a word for all.
A pretty concise room: sir Lionel, where are your danghters?
They are at your service sir, and forth coming.
Gods will Geruase! how shall I behave my self to the Gentlewomen?
Why advance your self toward them, with a comely steppe, and in your salute, be careful you strike not too high, nor too lowe, and afterword for your discourse, your Tu quo∣que will bear you out.
Nay, and that be all, I care not, for I'll set a good face on it, that's flat: and for my nether parts, let them speak for themselves: here's a leg, and ever a Baker in England show me a better, I'll give him mine for nothing.
O that's a special thing that I must caution you of.
What sweet Geruase?
Why for commending your self; never whilst you line commend your self: and then you shall have the Ladies themselves commend you.
I would they would else.
Why they will I'll assure you sir, and the more vilely you speak of your self, the more will they strive to collaud you.
Let me alone to dispraise my self,
I'll make my self the arrantest Cockes-combe within a whole
Country.
Here come the Gipsies, the Sunne-burn'd girls,
Whose beauties will not utter them alone,
They must have bags although my credit crack for it.
Is this the eldest sir?
Yes marry is she sir.
I'll kiss the youngest first, because she likes me best.
Marry sir, and whilst you are there, I'll be here:
O delicious touch! I think in conscience
Her lips are lined quite through with Orange Tawny vel∣uet.
They kiss exceeding well, I doe not think but they have been brought up too't, I will begin to her like a Gen∣tleman in a set speech: Fair Lady, shall I speak a word with you?
With me sir?
With you Lady,—this way,—a little more,—
So now tic well, vmh—
Even as a Drummer,—or a Pewterer.
Which of the two no matter,
For one beats on a Drum, tother a Platter.
In good faith sweet Lady you say true▪
But pray mark me further, I will begin again.
I pray Sir doe.
Even as a Drummer, as I said before,—
Or as a Pewterer.
Very good Sir.
Doo—doo—doo.
What doe they doo?
By my troth Lady, I doe not know: for to say truth, I am a kind of an Ass.
How Sir, an Ass?
Yes indeed Lady.
Nay that you are not.
So God ha me, I am Lady: you never saw an arranter Ass in your life.
Why heir's a Gentleman your friend, will not say so.
Y faith but he shall: How say you sir,
Am not I an Ass?
Yes by my troth Lady is he: Why Isle say any thing my brother Bubble says.
Is this the man my Father choose for me, to make a Husband of? O God, how blind are parents in our loves: so they have weath, they care not to what things they marry vs.
Pray look upon me Lady.
So I doe sir.
I but look upon me well, and tell me if you ever saw any man look so scurvily, as I doe?
The fellow sure is frantic.
You doe not mark me?
Yes indeed sir.
I, but look upon me well:
Did you ever see a worse timberd Leg?
By my faith tic a pretty four square Leg.
I but your four square Legs are none of the best.
Oh! Iaruis, Iaruis.
Excellent well sir.
What say you now to me Lady, can you find ere a good inch about me?
Yes that I can sir.
Find it, and take it sweet Lady:
There I think I bobbed her, Iaruis?
Well sir, disparadge not your self so: for if you were
The man you'd make your self; yet out of your
Behaviour and discourse, I could find cause enough
To love you.
Yew! now she comes to me: My behaviour? alas, alas, tic clownicall; and my discourse is very bald, bald: You shall not hear me break a good Jest in a twelve month.
No sir? why now you break a good Jest.
No, I want the Boon Jour, and the Tu quoques,
Which yonder Gentleman has: Ther's a bob for him too:
There's a Gentleman, and you talk of a Gentleman?
Who hee? hoe's a Coxcomb indeed.
We are sworn Brothers in good faith Lady.
Yes in truth wee are sworn Brothers, and do mean to go both alike, and to have Horses alike.
And they shall be sworn Brothers too?
If it please them, Lady.
M. Balance, the Gold smith desires to speak with you.
Bid him come, knave.
I wonder (Sir Lionel) your son Will Rash is not here?
Is hee of your acquaintance, sir?
O very familiar; hee struck me a box on the ear
once, and from thence grew my love to him.
It was a sign of virtue in you sir; but heel be here at dinner. Moister Balance, what makes you so strange?
Come, you're welcome: what's the News?
Why sir, the old News: your man Francis royots still,
And little hope of thrift there is in him▪
Therefore I come to advise your Worship,
To take some order whilst there's something left,
The better part of his best Ware's consumed.
Speak softly Moister Balance.
But is there no hope of his recovery?
None at all sir; for hes already laid to be arrested by some that I know.
Well, I doe suffer for him, and am loath
Indeed to doe, what I am constrained to doe:
Well sir, I mean to cease on what is left.
And hark you one wo•d more.
What heinous sin has yonder man committed,
To have so great a punishment, as waite
upon the humours of an idle Fool:
A very proper Fellow, good Leg, good Face,
A Body well proportiond: but his mind
Betrays he never came of Generous kind.
Go to, no more of this at this time.
What sir, are you come?
Yes sir, and have made bold to bring a Guest along.
Moister Geraldines son of Essex?
The same sir.
Ye're welcome sir, when will your Father be in town?
T'will not be long, sir.
I shall be glad to see him when he coms.
I thank you sir.
In the mean time you're welcome; pray be not strange,
Isle leave my Son amongst you Gentlemen,
I have some business: hark you M. Balance,
Dinner will soon be ready; one word more.
And how does my little Asinus and his Tu quoque here? Oh you pretty sweet-fac'd rogues, that for your countenances might be Alexander and Lodwicke: What says the old man to you? will it be a match? shall wee call Brothers?
I
faith with all my heart; if Mistress Gartred will, wee will be married to morrow.
S'fott, if Mistress Joyce will, we'll be married to night.
Why you courageous Boys, and worthy Wenches, made out of Wax. But what shall's doe when wee have dined, shall's go see a Play?
Yes faith Brother: if it please you, let's go see a Play at the Gloabe.
I care not; any whither, so the Clown have a part: For In faith I am no body without a Fool.
Why then we'll go to the Red Bull; they say Green's
a good Clown.
Greene? Greene's an Ass.
Where•ore doe you say so?
Indeed I ha no reason: for they say, hee is as like me as ever hee can look.
Well then, to the Bull.
A good resolution, continue it: nay on?
Not before the Gentlewomen; not I never.
O while you live, men before women:
Custom hath placed it so.
Why then Custom is not so mannerly, as I would be.
Farewell M. Scatter-good: Come Lover, you're too busy here, I must tutor ye: Cast not your eye at the table on each other, my Father will spy you without Spectacles,
Hee is a shrewd observer: doe you hear me?
Very well sir.
Come then go wee together, let the Wenches alone.
Doe you see yonder fellow?
Yes: prithee what is hee?
Isle give you him within, he must not now be thought on: but you shall know him.
I have observed my sister, and her eye
Is much inquisitive after yond fellow;
She has examined him from head to foot:
Isle stay and see the issue.
To wrestle against the stream of our Affection,
Is to strike Ayre, or buffet with the Wind,
That plays upon vs: I have strived to cast
This fellow from my thoughts, but still he grows
More comely in my sight; yet a slave
Unto one worse conditioned then a Slave:
They are all gone, heir's none but hee, and I,
Now I will speak to him: and yet I will not.
Oh! I wrong my self, I will suppress
That insurrection Love hath trained in me,
And leave him as he is: once m• bold spirits
Had vowed to utter all my thoughts to him
On whom I settled my affection:
And why r•tyres it now?
Fight Love on both sides; for on me thou strik'st
Strokes that hath beat my heart into a flame:
She hath sent amorous glances from her eye:
Which I have back returned as faithfully.
I would make to her, but these servile Robes,
Curbs that suggestion, till some fitter time
Shall bring me more perswadingly unto her.
I wonder why he stays; I fear hee notes me,
For I have publicly betrayed my self,
By too much gazing on him: I will leave him.
But you shall not; Isle make you speak to him
Before you go. Doe you hear sir?
What mean you sister?
To fit you in your kind, sister: doe you remember
How you once tyranizd over me?
Nay prithee leave this jesting,
I am out of the vain.
I, but I am in: go speak to your Lover.
Isle first be buried quick.
How, ashamed? S'•ott Itro, if I had set my affection on a Collier, Id ne'er fall back, unless it were in the right kind: if I did, let me be tied to a Stake, and burnt to death with Charcoal.
Nay then wee shall hate.
Yes marry shall you. Sister, will you speak to him:
No.
Doe you hear sir? heir's a Gentlewoman would speak with you.
Why Sister, I pray Sister.
One that loves you with all her heart,
Yet is ashamed to confess it.
Did you call, Ladies?
No sir, heir's no one called.
Yes sir it was I, I called to speak with you.
My Sister's somewhat frantic; there's no regard to be had unto her clamours: Will you yet leave?
In faith you'll anger me.
Passion: Come back fool lover, turn again and kiss your belly full, heir's one will stand ye.
What does this mean trow•▪
Yes, is your humour spent?
Come let me go, Birds that want the use of
Reason and of Speech, ca• couple together in one day;
And yet you that have both, cannot conclude in twenty:
now Sister I am even with you, my venom is spit,
As much happiness may you enjoy with your lover as I with mine:
And droop not wench, not never be ashamed of him,
The man will serve the turn, though he be wrapped
In a blew Coat, lle warrant him, come.
You're merely disposed, Sister.
I needs must prosper, Fortune &amp; Love work for me.
Be moderate my Joys; for as you grow to your full height,
So Bubbles waxes low.
Will my sweet Spendall be gone then?
I must upon promise; but Isle be here at supper:
Therefore Mistress Sweatman, provide vs some good cheer.
The best the Market will yield.
Heir's twenty shillings; I protest I have left my self but a Crown, for my spending money: for indeed I intend to be frugal, and turn good husband.
I marry will you, you'll to play again, &amp; loose your Money and fall to fighting; my very heart trembles to think on it: how if you had been kilt in the quarrel, of my faith I had been but a dead woman.
Come, come, no more of this; thou dost but dissemble.
Dissemble▪ do not you say so; for if you doe,
Gods my judge lle give my self a gash.
Away, away, prithee no more: farewell.
Nay bus first: Well,
There's no adversity in the world shall part vs.
Thou art a loving Rascal; farewell.
You will not fail supper?
You have my word; farewell.
Sir, wee arrest you.
Arrest me, at whose suite?
Marry there's suites enough against you,
Isle warrant you.
Come, away with him.
Stay, hear me a word.
What doe you say?
How now Pursuit, why come in such haste?
Shut up your doors, and bar young Spendall out,
And let him be cashiered your company,
He is turned Banquerout, his wares are ceased on,
And his shop shut up.
How, his wares ceased on? thou dost but jest, I hope.
What this tongue doth report, these eyes have seen,
It is no Aesops fable that I tell,
But it is true, as I am faithful Pander.
Nay I did ever think the prodigal would prove
A Banquerout; but hang him, let him rot
In prison, he comes no more within these doors
I warrant him.
Come hither, I would he would but offer it,
Weal fire him out with a pox to him.
Will you doe it;
To carry me to prison, but undoes me?
What say you fellow Gripe, shall we take his 40. shil∣lings.
Yes faith, we shall have him again within this week.
Well Sir, your 40 shillings? and weal have some com∣passion on you.
Will you but walk with me unto that house,
And there you shall receive it.
What, where the women are?
Yes sir.
Look yonder, if the ungracious rascal be not com∣ming hither,
Betwixt two Sargiantes: he thinks belike,
That weal relieve him; let vs go in,
And clap the doors against him.
It is the best course Mistress Tickleman?
But I say no, you shall not stir a foot,
For I will talk with him,
Nan, I am come
Even in the Minute that thou did profess
Kindness unto me, to make trial of it,
Adversity thou Sees lays hands upon me,
But Fortie-shillings will deliver me,
Why you Impudent Rogue, do you come to me for Money?
Or do I know you? what acquaintance pray,
Hath ever past betwixt your self and me?
Zounds do you mock vs, to bring vs to these women that do not know you?
Yes in good Sooth, (Officers I take it you're)
Hoe's a mere stranger here: only in charity,
Sometimes we have relived him with a meal.
This is not earnest in you? Come, I know
My guests and bounty cannot be soon buried:
Go prithee fetch Forty shillings?
Talk not to me (you slave) of Forty shillings;
For by this light that shines, ask it again,
Isle send my Knife of an earrand in your Guts:
A shameless Rog to come to me for Money?
Is he your Prisoner, Gentlemen?
Yes marry is hee.
Pray carry him then to Prison, let him smart for it,
Perhaps twill tame the wildness of his youth,
And teach him how to lead a better life:
Hee had good counsel here, I can assure you,
And if a would a took it.
I told him still my self, what would insew.
Furies break loose in me: Sergeants, let me go, Isle give you all I have, to purchase freedom but for a lightning while, to tear yond Whore. Baud, Pander; and in them, the Devil: for there's his Hell, his habitation; nor has hee any other local place.
No sir, weal take no Bribes.
Honest Sergeants, give me leave to unlade
A heart ore-chargd with grief; as I have a soul,
Isle not break from you.
Thou Strumpet, that were borne to ruin men,
My fame, and fortune: be subject to my Curse,
And hear me speak it: May thou in thy youth,
Feel the sharpe Whip; and in thy Beldam age,
The Cart: when thou art grown to bee
An old Upholster unto Venery,
(A Bawd I mean, to live by Fether-beds,)
Mayst-thou be driven to sell all thou hast
Unto thy Aqua vite Bottle; that's the last
A Bawd will part withal; and line so poor,
That being turned forth thy house, may die at door.
Come sir, ha you done?
A little further give me leave, I pray,
I have a charitable Prayer to end with.
May the French Cannibal eat into thy flesh,
And pick thy bones so clean, that the report
Of thy Calamity, may draw resort
Of all the common Sinners in the town,
To see thy mangled Carcass: and that then,
They may upon it, turn honest; Bawd, say Amen.
Out upon him wicked villain, how he blspheames;
Hee will be damned for turning Heretic.
Hang him Banquerout rascal, let him talk in Prison,
The whilst weal spend his Goods: for I did never
Hear, that men took example by each other.
Well, if men did rightly consider't, they should find,
That Whores and Bawds are profitable members
In a Common-wealth: for indeed, tho wee somewhat
Impair their Bodies, yet wee doe good to their Souls;
For I am sure, wee still bring them to Repentance.
By Dis, and so wee doe.
Come, come, will you Dis before: thou art one of them, that I warrant thee wilt be hanged, before thou wilt repent.
Well, this Love is a troublesome thing, Iupiter bless me out of his fingers: ther's no estate can rest for him: Hee runs through all Countries, will travel through the Isle of Man in a minute; but never is quiet till hee come into Middle-sex, and there keeps his Christmas:
Tic his habitation, his mention, from whence,
Heel never out, till hee be feared.
Well, do not tyrannize too much, least one day he make you know his Deity, by sending a shaft out of a sparkling eye, shall strike so deep into your heart, that it shall make you fetch your breath short again.
And make me cry, O eyes no eyes, but two celesti∣all Stars! A pox ont, Id as leiue hear a fellow sing throngh the nose. How now Wench•
Keep your station; you stand as well for the incoun∣la as may be: she is coming on; but as melancholy, as a Base-vyollin Consort.
Which makes thee as Sprightly as the Treble.
Now dost thou play thy prize: heir's the honourable Sciense one against another: Doe you hear Lover, the thing is done you wot off; you shall have your Wench alone without any disturbance: now if you can doe any good, why so, the Silver Game be yours, weal stand by and give aim, and hallow if you hit the Clout.
Tic all the assistance I request of you,
Bring me but opportunatly to her presence,
And I desire no more: and If I cannot win her,
Let me loose her.
Well sir, let me tell you, perhaps you undertake
A harder task then yet you doe imagine.
A task, what to win a Woman, &amp; have opportunity? I would that were a task in faith, for any man that wears his wits about him: give me but half an hours
Conference with the coldest creature of them all,
And if I bring her not into a fools Paradise,
Isle pull out my tongue, &amp; hang it at her door for a draw-latch.
Vds•oot, I'd ne'er stand thrumming of Caps for the matter,
Isle quickly make trial of her if she love:
To have her Beauty praised, Isle praise it: if her Wit,
Isle commend it: if her good parts, Isle exalt them.
No course shall scope me; for to what soever I saw her inclined too, to that would I fit her.
But you must not doe thus to her, for shoe's a subtle flouting rogue, that will laugh you out of countenance, if you solicit her ceriously: No, talk me to her wantonly, flightly &amp; carelessly, and perhaps so you may prevail as much with her, as wind does with a Sail, carry her whither thou wilt, Bully.
Well sir, Isle follow your instruction.
Do so. And see she appears; fall you two off from vs,
Let vs two walk together.
Why did my enquiring eye take in this fellow,
And let him down so easy to my heart;
Where like a Conqueror he ceases on it,
And beats all other men out of my Bosom▪
Sister, you're well met,
Heir's a Gentleman desires to be acquainted with you.
See, the Serving-man is turned a Gentleman,
That villainous Wench my Sister, has no mercy,
She and my Brother has conspired together to play upon me;
But Isle prevent their sport: for rather then my tongue shall have scope to speak matter to give them mirth, my heart shall break.
You have your desire sir, Isle leave you;
Grapple with her as you can.
Lady, God save you. She turns back upon the motiō,
Ther's no good to be done by braying for her, I see that;
I must plunge into a passion: now for a piece of Hero and Lender: it were excellent; and praise be to my memory,
It has reached half a dozen lines for the purpose:
Well, she shall have them.
One is no Number; Maids are nothing then
Without the sweet society of Men.
Wilt thou live single still? one shalt thou bee,
Though never singling Hymen couple thee.
Wild Savages that drink of running Springs,
Thinks Water far excels all other thing.
They that daily taste neat Wine, despise it.
Virginity albeit some highly prize it,
Compared with Marriage; had you tried them both,
Differs as much, as Wine and Water doth. No?
Why then have at you in another kind.
By the faith of a Soldier (Lady) I doe reverence the ground that you walk upon: I will fight with him that darts, say you are not fair: Stab him that will not pledge your health; and with a Dagger pierce a Vain, to drink a full health to you; but it shall be on this condition, that you shall speak first.
Vds-foot, if I could but get her to talk once, half my labour were over: but Isle try her in an other vain.
What an excellent creature is a Woman without a tongue?
But what a more excellent creature is a Woman that has a tongue, and can hold her peace? But how much more ex∣cellent and fortunate a creature is that man, that has that Woman to his wife? This cannot choose but mad her;
And if any thing make a Woman talk, tic this. It will not doe
tho yet I pray God they have not gulled me:
But Isle try once again.
When will that tongue take liberty to talk?
Speak but one word, and I am satisfied:
Or doe but say but Mum, and I am answered?
No sound? no accent? Is there no noise in Woman?
Nay then without direction I ha don.
I must go call for help.
How, not speak?
Not a s•llable, night nor sleep, is not more silent:
Shoe's as dumb as Westminster Hall, in the long vacation.
Well, and what would you have me doe?
Why, make her speak.
And what then?
Why, let me alone with her.
I, so you said before, Give you but opportunity,
And let you alone, you'd desire no more: but come,
Isle try my cunning for you: See what I can doe.
How doe you Sister, I am sorry to hear you are not well,
This Gent. tells me you have lost your tongue, I pray lels see?
If you can but make signs whereabout you lost it,
Weal go &amp; look fort': in good faith Sister, you look very pale,
In my conscience tic for grief: will you have
Any comfortable Drinks sent for, this is not the way;
Come walk, seem earnest in discourse, cast not an eye
Towards her, and you shall see weakness work it self.
My heart is swollen so big, that it must vent,
Or it will burst: Are you a Brother?
Look to your self Sir,
The Brazen head has spoke, and I must leave you.
Has shame that power in him, to make him fly:
And dare you be so impudent to stand
Just in the face of my incensed anger?
What are you? why doe you stay? who sent for you?
You were in Garments yesterday, befitting
A fellow of your fashion; has a Crown
Purchased that shining Satin of the Brokers?
Or first a cast Suite of your goodly Masters.
A Cast suite, Lady?
You think it does become you: faith it does not,
A Blew Coat with a Badge, does better with you.
Go untruss your Masters Points, and doe not dare
To stop your Nose when as his Worship stinks:
T•a's been your breeding.
Vds'life, this is excellent: now she talks.
Nay, were you a Gentleman: and which is more;
Well Landed, I should hardly love you:
For, for your Face, I never saw a worse,
It looks as if it were drawn with yellow Oacker
Upon black Buckram: and that Hair
Thats on your Chin, looks not like Beard,
But as left had been smeard with Shoemakers Wax.
Vdsfoot, sheele make me out of love with my self.
How dares your Baseness once aspire unto
So high a fortune, as to reach at me:
Because you have heard, that some have run away
With Butlers, Horskeepers, and their fathers Clerks;
You forsooth, cockerd with your own suggestion,
Take heart upon it, and think me, (that am meat,
And set up for your Moister) fit for you.
I would I could get her now to hold her tongue.
Or cause, some times as I have past along,
And have returned a Curtsy for your Hat;
You (as the common tricks is) straight suppose,
Tic Love, (sirreuerence, which makes the word more beastly.)
Why, tic worse then silence.
But wee are fools, and in our reputations
We find the smart on it:
Kindness, is termed Lightness, in our sex:
And when we give a Favour, or a Kiss,
VVee give our Good names too.
Will you be dumb again.
Men you are called, but you're a viperous brood,
Whom we in charity take into our bosoms,
And cherish with our heart: for which, you sting vs.
Vds'foot, Isle fetch him that waked your tongue,
To lay it down again.
Why how now man?
O relive me, or I shall loose my hearing,
You have raised a Fury up into her tongue
A Parliament of women could not make
Such a Confused noise as that she utters.
Well, what would you have me do?
Why make her hold her tongue.
And what then?
Why then let me alone again.
This is very good I faith, first give thee but oppertu∣night, and let thee alone: then make her but Speak, and let
Thee alone: now make her hold her tongue, and then
Let her alone: By my torth I think I were best to let
Thee alone indeed: but come, follow me,
The Wild-cat shall not carry it so away,
Walk, walk, as we did.
What, have you fetched your Champion? what can he do?
Not have you, nor himself from out the storm
Of my incensed rage; I will thunder into your ears,
The wrongs that you have done an innocent Maid:
Oh you're a couple of sweet: What shall I call you?
Men you are not; for if you were,
You would not offer this unto a Maid.
Wherein have I deserved it at your hands? Have I not been, always a kind Sister to you; &amp; in signs &amp; tokens showed it? Did I not send Money to you at Cambridge when you were but a Freshman, wrought you Purses and Bands; and since you came toth'Inn's a Court, a fair pair of Hangers? Have you not taken Rings from me, which I have been fine to say I have lost, when you had paund them: and yet was never be∣holding to you for a pair of Gloves?
A Women's tongue I see, is like a Bell,
That once being set a going, goes it self.
And yet you to join with my sister against me,
Send one here to play upon me, whilst you laugh and leer,
And make a pastime on me: is this Brotherly done?
No it is Barbarous, &amp; a Turk would blush to offer it to a Chri∣stian: but I will think on it, and have it written in my heart, when it hath slipped your memories.
When will your tongue be weary?
Never.
How never? Come talk, and Isle talk with you,
Isle try the ninble footmanship of your tongue;
And if you can out-talke me, yours be the victory.
Vds'foot, dost thou stand by, and doe nothing?
Come talk, and drown her clamours.
Alas, shees spent in faith: now the storms over.
Vds'foot, Isle follow her as long as I have any breath.
Nay no more now Brother, you have no compassion,
You see she cries.
If I do not wonder she could talk so long, I am a vile∣lain,
She eats no Nuts I warrant her: sfoot, I am almost out of breath
With that little I talked: well Gent. Brothers I might say;
For she and I must clap hands upon it: a match for all this.
Pray go in; and Sister, salve the matter, cologne with her
Again, and all shall be well: I have a little business
That must be thought upon, and tic partly for your mirth;
Therefore let me not (tho absent) be forgotten:
Fare well.
We will be mindful of you sir, fare you well.
How now man, what tyerd, tyerd?
Zounds, and you had talked as much as I did, you would be tired I warrant: What, is she gone in? Isle to her a∣gain whilst my tongue is warm: and if I thought I should be used to this exercise I would eat every morning an ounce of Lickorish.
Have you sumd up those Reckonings?
Yes Sir.
And what is owing me?
Thirtie-seuen pound odd money,
How much owes the Frenchman?
A fortnights Commons.
Has Spendall any money?
Not any sir: and he has sold all his Clothes.
That fellow would wast Millions, if he had them;
Whilst he has Money, no man spends a penny:
Ask him money, and if he say he has none,
Be plain with him, and turn him out of the Ward.
I will sir. Moister Spendall,
My Moister has sent to you for money.
Money, why does he send to me? does he think
I have the Philosophers Stones, or I can clip or coin?
How does he think I can come by money?
Faith sir, his occasions are so great, that hee must have money, or else he can buy no Victuals.
Then we must starve, belike: Vdsfoot thou see
I have nothing left, that will yield me two shillings.
If you have no money,
You're best remove into some cheaper Ward.
What Ward should I remove in?
Why to the Two-pennie Ward, is likliest to hold out with your means: or if you will, you may go into the Hole, and there you may feed for nothing.
I, out of the Almes-basket, where Charity appears
In likeness of a piece of stinking Fish:
Such as they beat Bawds with when they are Carted.
Why sir, doe not scorn it, as good men as your self,
Have been glad to eat Scraps out of the Almsbasket.
And yet slave, thou in pride wilt stop thy nose,
Scrue and make faces, talk contemptibly of it, and of the feeders; surely groom.
Well sir, your mallapertnes will get you nothing.
Fox.
H•ere.
A prisoner to the Hole, •ache charge of him, and use him as scurvily as thou can you shall be taught your duty sir, I warrant you.
Hence slavish tyrants, instruments of torture,
There is more kindness yet in Whores, then you,
For when a man hath spent all, hee may go
And seek his way, theyle kick him out of doors;
Not keep him in as you doe, and enforce him
To be the subject of their cruelty.
You have no mercy; but be this your comfort▪
The punishment and torturs which you doe
Iuflict on men, the Devils shall on you.
Well sir, you may talk, but you shall see the end,
And who shall have the worst of it.
Why villain, I shall have the worst, I know it,
And am prepared to suffer like a Stoic,
Or else (to speak more properly) like a Stock;
For I have no sense left: dost thou think I have?
Zounds, I think hoe's mad?
Why, thou art in the right; for I am mad indeed,
And have been mad this two year. Dost thou think
I could have spent so much as I have done
In wares and credit, had I not been mad?
Why thou must know, I had a fair estate,
Which through my riot, I have torn in pieces,
And scattered amongst Bawds, Buffoons, and Whores,
That fawnd on me, and by their flatteries,
Rocked all my understanding faculties
Into a pleasant slumber; where I dreamt
Of nought but joy and pleasure: never felt
How I was luld in sensuality,
Until at last, Affliction waked me:
And lighting up the Taper of my soul,
Led me unto my self; where I might see
A mind and body rent with Misery.
Harry Fox, Harry Eox.
Who calls?
Heir's the Bread and Meate-man come.
Well, the Bread and Meate-man may stay a little.
Yes indeed Harry, the Bread and Meat-man, may stay:
But you know our stomachs cannot stay.
Indeed your Stomach is always first up.
And therefore by right, should be fire served: I have a stomach like Aqua fortis, it will eat any thing:
O Father Gatherscrap, here are excellent bits in the Basket.
Will you hold your Chops further; by and by you'll drivel into the Basket?
Perhaps it may doe some good; for there may be a piece of powderd Beef that wants watering.
Here sir, heir's your share.
Heir's a bit indeed: whats this to a Gargantua stomach?
Thou art ever grumbling.
Zounds, it would make a Dog grumble, to want his Victuals: I pray give Spendall none, hee came into'th Hole but yesternight.
What, doe you refuse it?
I cannot eat, I thank you.
No, no, give it me; hoe's not yet second for our company.
Divide it then amongst you.
To such a one as these are, must I come,
Hunger will draw me into their fellowship,
To fight and scramble for unsavoury Scraps,
That come from unknown hands, perhaps vnwasht:
And would that were the worst; for I have noted,
That nought goes to the Prisoners, but such food
As either by the weather has been tainted,
Or Children, nay sometimes full paunched Dogs,
Have overlickt, as if men had determind
That the worst Sustenance, which is Gods Creatures,
How ever they're abused, are good enough
For such wild Creatures as abuse themselves.
O what a Slave was I unto my Pleasures?
How drowned in Sin, and ouerwhelmd in Lust?
That I could write my repentance to the world,
And force th'impression of it in the hearts
Of you, and my acquaintance, I might teach them
By my example, to look home to Thrift,
And not to range abroad to seek out Ruin:
Experience shows, his Purse shall soon grow light,
Whom Dice wastes in the day, Drabs in the night:
Let all avoid false Strumpets, Dice, and Drink;
For hee that leaps in Mud, shall quickly sink.
Yonder's the man.
I thank you.
How is it with you, sir? What on the ground▪
Look up, there's comfort towards you.
Belike some charitable Friend has sent a Shilling,
What is your Business?
Liberty.
There's virtue in that word; Isle rise up to you.
Pray let me hear that cheerful word again.
The able, and wel-minded Widow Ra•sby,
Whose hand is still upon the poor mans Box,
Hath in her Charity remembered you:
And being by your Moister seconded,
Hath taken order with your Creditors
For day, and payment; and freely from her Purse,
By me her Deputy, she hath discharged
All Duties in the House: Besides, to your necessities,
This is bequeathd, to furnish you with Clothes.
Speak you this seriously?
Tic not my practise to mock Misery.
Be ever praised that Divinity,
That has to my oppressed state raised Friends:
still be his blessings powered upon their heads:
Your hand, I pray,
That have so faithfully performed their wills:
If ere my industry, joined with their loves,
Shall raise me to a competent estate,
Your name shall ever be to me a friend.
In your good wishes, you requite me amply.
All Fees, you say, are paid? there's for your love.
I thank you sir, and glad you are releast.
How Apparel makes a man respected; the very i will∣drone in the street do adore me: for if a Boy that is throwing at his lacke-alent chance to hit me on the shins: Why I say nothing but, Tu quoque, smile, and forgive the Child with a beck of my hand, or some such like token: so by that means, I do seldom go without broken shins.
The blessings of your Mistress fall upon you,
And may the heat and spirit of Hee-lip,
Endue her with matter aboue her understanding,
That she may only live to admire you, or as the Italian says;
Que que dell fogo Ginni Coxcomb.
I doe wonder what language he speaks.
Doe you hear my friend, are not you a Conjurer?
I am sir, a perfect Traveller, that have trampled over
The face of this vneuerss. and can speak Greek and
Latin as promptly, as my own natural Language:
I have composed a Book, wherein I have set down
All the Wonders of the world that I have seen,
And the whole scope of my Iornies, together with the
Miseries and lousy fortunes I have endured therein.
O Lord Sir, are you the man; give me your hand:
How doe ye: in good faith I think I have heard of you.
No sir, you never heard of me, I set this day footing
Upon the Wharffe, I came in with the last peal of Ordinance,
And dind this day in the Exchange amongst the Merchants.
But this is frivolous and from the matter: you doe seem
To be one of our Genteel spirits that doe affect Genorositie:
Pleases you to be instituted in the nature, Garb. and habit,
Of the most exactest Nation in the world, the Italian:
Whose Language is sweetest, Clothes nearest, and hauiour
Most accomplished: I am one that have spent much money,
And time; which to me is more dear then money, in the
Observation of these things: and now I am come,
I will sit me down and rest, and make no doubt,
But by quality, to purchase and build, by professing this Art,
Or humane Science (as I may term it,) to such Honourable
And Worshipful personages as mean to be peculiar.
This fellow has his tongue at his fingers ends:
But hark you sir, is your Italian the finest Gentleman?
In the world Signeor, your Spaniard is a mere Bombard to him: hee will bounce indeed; but hee will burst: But your Italian is smooth and lofty, and his language is, Cozen germane to the Latin.
Why then hee has his Tu quoque in his salute?
Yes sir, for it is an Italian word as well as a Latin,
And enfolds a double sense: for one way spoken,
It includes a fine Gentleman like your self;
And another way, it imports an Ass, like whom you will.
I would my man Iaruis were here, for hee under∣stands these things better then I. You will not serve?
Serve, no sir, I have talked with the great Sophie.
I pary sir, whats the lowest price of being Italianated?
Sir, if it please you, I will stand to your bounty:
And mark me, I will set your face like a Grand signeors,
And you shall march a whole day, until you come opounctly to your Misters,
And not disrancke one hair of your physiognomy.
I would you would doe it Sir, if you will stand to my
Bounty, I will pay you, as I am an Italian tu quoque.
Then sir, I will first disburden you of your Cloak,
You will be the nimbler to practise: Now sir, observe me,
Go you directly to the Lady to whom you devote your self.
Yes sir.
You shall set a good stayed face upon the matter then.
Your Band is not to your Shirt, is it?
No sir, tic loose.
It is the fitter for my purpose.
I will first remove your Hat, it has been the fashion (as I have heard) in England, to wear your Hat thus in your eyes; But it is gross, nought, inconvenient, and proclaims with a loud voice; that hee that brought it up first, stood in fear of Sergeants. Your Italian is contrary, hee doth advance his Hat, and sets it thus.
Excellent well: I would you would set on my head so.
Soft, I will first remove your Band, and set it out of the reach of your eye; it must lie altogether backward: So, your Band is well.
Is it as you would have it!
It is as I would wish; only sir, this I must condition you off; in your affront or salute, never to move your Hat: But here, here is your courtesy.
Nay I warrant you, let me alone; if I perceive a thing once, Isle carry it away: Now pray sir, reach my Cloak.
Never whilst you live, sir.
No, what doe your Italians wear no Cloaks?
Your Signeors never: you see I am vnfurnisht my self.
Sa'y so'prethee keep it then. See, yonder's the com∣panie that I look for; therefore if you will set my face of any fashion, pray doe it quickly?
You carry your face as well as ear an Italian in the world, only enrich it with a Smile, and tic incomparable: and thus much more, at your first apparace, you shall perhaps
strike your acquaintance into an ecstasy, or perhaps a laugh∣la: but tic ignorance in them, which will soon be overcome, if you persevere.
I will persevere, I warrant thee; only doe thou stand aloof and be not seen, because I would have them think I fetched it out of my own practise.
Do not you fear, Isle not be seen, I warrant you.
Now Widow, you are welcome to my house,
And to your own house too; so you may call it:
For what is mine, is yours: you may command here,
As at home, and be as soon obeyed.
May I deserve this kindness of you, sir?
Save you Gent. I salute you after the Italian fashion.
How, the Italian fashion? Zounds, he has dressed him rarely
My son Bubble, I take it?
The nether part of him I think is hee,
But what the upper part is, I know not.
By my troth hoe's a rare fellow, he said true:
They are all in an ecstasy.
I think hoe's mad?
Nay that can not bee▪ for they •ay, they that are mad, loose their wits: and I am sure he had none to loose.
How now son Bubble, how come you thus attyrder
What, do you mean to make your self a laughing stock, ha?
Um; Ignorance, ignorance.
For the love of laughter, look yo•der,
Another Hearing in the same pickle.
The tother Hobby-horse I perceive is not forgotten.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Who has made him such a Coxcomb trow?
An Italian tu quoque.
I salute you according to the Italian fashion.
Puh, the Italian fashion? the tatterd-de-malian fashion hee means.
Save you sweet bloods, save you.
Why but what lig is this?
Nay if I know father, would I were hanged,
I am even as Innocent as the Child new borne.
I but son Bubble, where did you two buy your Felts?
Felts? By this light, mine is a good Beaver:
It cost me three pound this morning upon trust.
Nay, I think you had it upon trust: for no man that has any shame in him, would take money for it: behold Sir.
Ha, ha, ha.
Nay never doe you laugh, for you're in the same block.
Is this the Italian fashion?
No, it is the Fools fashion:
And we two are the first that follow it.
Et tu qu•que, are we both consent:
Then lets show our selves brothers in adversity, and embrace.
What was hee that cheated you?
Marry sir, he was a Knave that cheated me.
And I think he was no honest man, that cheated me,
Doe you know him again, if you see him?
Yes I know him again, if I see him:
But I doe not know how I should come to see him.
O Iaruis, Iaruis, doe you see vs two, Iaruis?
Yes sir, very well.
No, you doe not see vs very well;
For we have been horribly abused:
Never were Englishmen so gulled in Italian, as we have been.
Why sir, you have not lost your Cloak and Hat.
Iaruis you lie, I have lost my Cloak and Hat:
And therefore you must use your credit for another.
I think my old Cloak and Hat, must be glad to serve me till next quarter day.
Come, take no ca•• for Cloaks, Isle furnish you;
To night you lodge with me, to morrow morn
Before the Sun be up, prepare for Church,
The Widow and I have so concluded on it:
The Wenches understand not yet so much,
Nor shall not, until bedtime: then will they,
Not sleep a wink all night, for very joy.
And Isle promise the next night,
They shall not sleep for joy neither.
O Moister Geraldine, I saw you not before:
Your Father now is come to town, I hear?
Yes Sir.
Were not my business earnest, I would see him▪
But pray entreat him break an hours sleep
To morrow morn, t'accompanie me to Church;
And come your self I pray along with him.
Sir, I thank you.
But look, here comes one,
That has but lately shook off his Shackles.
How now firra, wherefore come you?
I come to crave a pardon sir, of you,
And with hearty and zealous thanks
Unto this worthy Lady, that hath given me
More then I ere could hope for: Liberty.
Be thankful unto Heaven, and your Moister:
Nor let your heart grow bigger then your Purse,
But live within a limit, least you burst out
To Riot, and to Misery again:
For then t'would loose the benefit I mean it.
O you doe graciously, tic good advice:
Let it take root firra, let it take root.
But come Widow come, and see your Chamber;
Nay your company too, for I must speak with you.
Tic bound unto you Sir.
And I have to talk with you too, Mistress Joyce:
Pray a word.
What would you, Sir?
Pray let me see your hand: the line of your Maiden∣head is out. Now for your Finger; upon which Finger will you wear your wedding Ring?
Upon no Finger.
Then I perceive you mean to wear it on your thumb.
Well, the time is come sweet Joyce, the time is come.
What to doe, sir?
For me to tickle thy Tuquoque; to doe the act of our forefathers: therefore prepare, provide,
To morrow morn to meet me as my Brde.
Isle meet thee like a Ghost first.
How now, what matter have you fished out of that fool?
Matter as poysning as Corruption,
That will without some Antidote strike home
Like blew Infection to the very heart.
As how, for Gods sake?
To morrow is the appointed Wedding day.
The day of doom it is?
T'would be a dismal day indeed to some of vs.
Sir, I doe know you love me; and the time
Will not be dallied with: bee what you seem,
Or not the same: I am your Wife, your Mistress,
Or your Servant; indeed what you will make me:
Let vs no longer wrangle with our Wits,
Or dally with our Fortunes; lead me hence,
And carry me into a Wilderness:
Isle fast with you, rather then feast with him.
What can be welcommer unto these arms?
Not my estate recovered, is more sweet,
Nor strikes more joy in me, then does your love.
Will you both kiss then upon the bargain,
Heir's two couple on you; God give you joy,
I wish well to you, and I see tic all the good that I can doe you:
And so to your shifts I leave you.
Nay Brother, you will not leave vs thus, I hope.
Why what would you have me do, you mean to run away together, would you ha me run with you, and so loose my Inheritance: no, trudge, trudge with your backs to me, and your bellies to them: away.
Nay I prithee be not thus unseasonable:
Without thee wee are nothing.
By my troth, and I think so too: you love one ano∣there in the way of Matrimony, doe you not?
What else man?
What else man? why tic a question to be asked;
For I can assure you, there is an other kind of love:
But come follow me, I must be your good Angel still:
Tic in this brain how to prevent my Father, and his brace
Of Beagles: you shall none of you be bid to night:
Follow but my direction, if I bring you not,
To have and to hold, for better for worse, let me be held an
Eunuch in wit, and one that was never Father to a good Feast.
We'll be instructed by you.
Well, if you bee, it will be your own• another day.
Come follow me.
How ruthless men are to adversity,
My acquaintance scarce will know me, when wee meet
They cannot stay to talk, they must be gone;
And shake me by the hand as if I burnt them:
A man must trust unto himself, I see;
For if hee once but halt in his estate,
Friendship will prove but broken Crutches to him:
Well, I will lean to none of them, but stand
Free of my self: and if I had a spirit
Daring to act what I am prompted too,
I must thrust out into the world again,
Full blossomd with a sweet and golden Spring:
It was an argument of love in her
To fetch me out of Prison, and this night,
She clasped my hand in hers, as who should say,
Thou art my Purchase, and I hold thee thus:
The worst is but repulse, if I attempt it:
I am resolved, my Genius whispers to me
Go on and win her, thou art young and active;
Which she is apt to catch at, for there's nought
That's more vnsteadfast, then a women's thought.
Heere's ill lodging Widow: but you must know,
If wee had better, wee could afford it you.
The lodging Sir, might serve better Guests.
Not better, Widow, nor yet welcommer:
But wee will leave you to it; and the rest.
Phillis, pray let your Mistress want not any thing,
Once more Good night, Isle leave a kiss with you,
As earnest of a better Gift to morrow.
Sirrah, a Light.
Good rest to all.
Et tu quoque, forsooth.
God give you good-night, forsooth,
And send you an early resurrection.
God-might to both.
Come, come away, each Bird unto his nest,
To morrow night's a time of little rest.
Here untie: soft, let it alone,
I have no deposition to sleep yet:
G•ue me a Book, and leave me for a while,
Some half hour hence, look into me.
I shall forsooth.
How now, what makes this bold intrusion?
Pardon m•e Lady, I have business to you.
Business, from whom, is it of such importance
That it craves present hearing?
It does.
Then speak it, and be brief.
Nay gentle Widow, be more pliant to me.
My suite is soft and courteous: full of love.
Of love?
Of love.
Why sure the man is mad? bethink thy self,
Thou hast forgot thy errand?
I have indeed, fair Lady; for my errand
Should first have been delivered on your lips.
Why thou impudent fellow, unthrift of shame,
As well as of thy purse; What has moved thee
To prosecute thy ruin? hath my bounty,
For which thy Moister was an orator,
Importune thee to pay me with abuse?
Sir retire, or I will to your shame,
With clamours raise the house, and make your Moister
For this attempt, return you to the Dungeon,
From whence you came.
Nay then I must be desperate:
Widow, hold your Clapdish, fasten your Tongue
Unto your Roof, and do not dare to call,
But give me audience, with fear and silence:
Come kiss me: No?
This Dagger has a point, doe you see it?
And be unto my suite obedient,
Or you shall feel it too:
For I will rather totter, hang in clean Linen,
Then live to scrub it out in lousy Linings.
Go too, kiss: You will? why so: Again: the third time?
Good, tic a sufficient Charm: Now hear me,
You are rich in Money, Lands, and Lordships,
Manors, and fair Possessions, and I have not so much
As one poor Coppy-hold to thrust my head in.
Why should you not then have compassion
upon a reasonable handsome fellow,
That has both youth and livelihood upon him;
And can at midnight quicken and refresh
Pleasures decayed in you? You want Children,
And I am strong, lusty, and have a back
Like Hercules, able to get them
Without the help of Muscadine and Eggs:
And will you then, that have enough,
Take to your Bed a bundle of diseases,
Wrapped up in threescore years, to lie a hawking,
Spitting, and coffing backwards and forwards
That you shall not sleep; but thrusting forth
Your face out of the Bed, be glad to draw
The Curtains, such a steam shall reeke
Out of this dunghill. Now what say you•
Shall we without further wrangling clap it up,
And go to Bed together?
Will you hear me?
Yes with all my heart,
So the first word may bee, Untruss your Points.
Zounds one knocks: do not stir I charge you,
Nor speak, but what I bid you:
For by these Lips, which now in love I kiss,
If you but struggle, or but raise your voice,
My arm shall rise with it, and strike you dead.
Go too, come on with me, and ask who's there?
It is my Maid.
No matter, doe as I bid you: say, Who's there?
Who's there?
Tic I, forsooth.
If it be you, forsooth, then pray stay.
Till I shall call upon you.
If it be you forsooth, then pray you stay,
Till shall call upon you.
Very well, why now I see
Thou'lt prove an obedient wise, come, let's undress.
Will you put up your naked weapon sir?
You shall pardon me (Widow) I must have you grant first.
You will not put it up.
Not till I have some token of your love.
If this may be a testimony take it.
By all my hopes I love thee, thou are worthy
Of the best widow living, thou t•k'st the course;
And those that will win widows must doe thus.
Nay, I knew what I did, when I came with my naked weapon in my hand; but come, unlace.
Nay my dear love, know that I will not yield
My body unto lust, until the Priest
Shall ioynevs in Hymens sacred nuptial rites.
Then set your hand to this, nay it is a contract
Strong and sufficient, and will hold in Law,
Here, heere's pen and ••cke, you see I come provided.
Give me the pen.
Why here's some comfort,
Yet write your name fair I pray,
And at large; why now it is very well,
Now widow you may admit your Maid,
For in the next room I'll go fetch a nap.
Thou shalt not leave me so, come pre thee sit,
We'll talk a while, for thou hast made my heart
Dance in my bosom I receive such joy.
Thou art a good wench in faith, come kiss upon it.
But will you be a loving husband to me,
Avoid all naughty company, and be true
To me, and to my bed?
As true to thee, as Steel to Adamant.
I'll bind you to your word, see that you be,
Or I'll conceal my bags, I have kins folks,
To whom I'll maked over, you shall not ba•e• penny.
Push, pre thee doe not doubt me,
How now, what means this?
It means my vengeance; nay sir, you are fast,
Nor doe not dare to struggle, I have liberty,
Both of my tongue and feet, I'll call my maid:
Phillis come in, and help to triumph,
Over this bold Intruder, wonder not wench,
But go unto him, and rinse•cke all his pockets,
And take from thence a Contract which he forced
From my unwilling fingers:
Is this according to your oath.
Come sir, I must search you.
I pre thee do.
And when thou take that from me, take my life too.
Hast thou it girl?
I have a paper here.
It is the same, give it me, look you sir,
Thus your new fancied hopes I tear asunder:
Poor wretched man, t'hast had a golden dream,
Which gilded o'er thy calamity:
But being awake thou findst it ill laid on,
For with one finger I have wiped it off:
Go fetch me hither the Casket that contains
My choicest Jewels, and spread them here before him;
Look you sit:
Heere's gold, pearl, rubies, sapphires, diamonds;
These would be goodly things for you to pawn,
Or revel with amongst your Courtesans,
Whilst I and mine did starve• why dost not curse,
And utter all the mischiefs of thy heart,
Which I know swells within thee, power it our,
And let me hear thy fury.
Never, never:
When ere my tongue shall speak but well of thee,
It proves no faithful servant to my heart.
False traitor to thy moister, and to me,
Thou least, there's no such thing within thee.
May I be burned to ugliness, to that
Which you and all men hate, but I speak truth.
May I be turned a monster, and the shame
Of all my Sex,—and if I not believe thee,
Take me unto thee, these, and all that's mine,
Were it thrice trebled, thou were worthy all:
And doe not blame this trial, cause it shows
I give my •elf unto thee, am not forced,
And with it alone, that ne'er shall be divorced.
I am glad it is come to this yet, by this light
Thou put me into a horrible fear:
But this is my excuse: know that my thoughts
Were not so desperate as my actions seemed,
For fore my dagger should ha drawn one drop
Of thy chaste blood, it should have sluc'd out mine:
And the cold point struck deep into my heart:
Nor better be my fate, if I shall move
To any other pleasure but thy love.
It shall be in my Creed: but let's away,
For night with her black Steeds draws up the day.
Softly Boy, softly, you think you are upon firm ground, but it is dangerous; you'll never make a good thief, you rogue, till you learn to creep upon all four: if I do not swear with going this pace: every thing I see, me thinks, should be my father in his white beard.
It is the property of that passion, for fear
Still shapes all things we see to that we fear.
Well said Logic, sister, I pray lay hold of him, For the man I see is able to give the Watch an answer, if they
should come upon him with Interrogatories: zownds wee are discovered, boy, come up close, and use the property of your Lantern: what dumb show should this be?
They take their way directly, intend nothing against vs.
Can you not discern who they are?
One is Spendall.
The other is the Widow as I take it.
It is true, and that's her maid before her.
What a night of conspiracy is here, more villainy▪ there's another goodly mutton going, my father i• fleeced of all, grief will give him a box in faith, but it is no great matter, I shall inherit the sooner, nay soft sir, you shall not pas•e so cur∣rant with the matter, I'll shake you a little: who goes there?
Out with the Candle, who's that asks the question?
One that has some reason for it.
It should be, by the voice, young Rash.
Why we are honest folks.
Pray where do you dwell? not in town I hope.
Why we dwell, zownds where doe we dwell?
I know not where.
And you'll be married you know not when, zownds it were a Christian deed to stop thee in thy journey: hast thou no more spirit in thee, but to let thy tongue betray thee. Sup∣pose I had been a Constable, you had been in a fine taking, had you not!
But my still worthy friend,
Is there no worse face of ill bent towards me,
Then that thou merrily put on.
Yes, heere's four or five faces more, but ne'er an ill one, though never an excellent good one, Boy, up wish your lantern of light, and show him his associates, all running a∣way with the flesh as thou art, go yoke together, you may be oxen one day, and draw all together in a plough, go march
together, the Parson stays for you, pay him royally, come, give me the Lantern, for you have light sufficient, for night has put off his black Cap, and salut•s the morn, now fare∣well my little children of Cupped, that walk by two and two as if you went a feasting: let me hear no more words, but be gone.
Farewell.
Farewell brother.
I, you may cry farewell, but if my father should know of my villainy, how should I fare then? but ell's one, I ha done my sisters good, my friends good, and my self good, and a ge∣nerall good is always to be respected before a particular, ther's eight score pounds a year saved, by the conveyance of this widow, I hear footsteps, now darkness take me into thy arms, and deliver me from discovery.
Lord, lord, what a careless world is this, neither Bride nor Bridegroom ready, time to go to Church, and not a man vnroosted, this age has not seen a young Gallant rise with a candle, we live drowned in feather-beds, and dream of no other felicity: this was not the life when I was a young man, what makes vs so weak as wee are now? a feather-bed: what so unapt for exercise? a feather-bed: what breed• such pains and aches in our bones? why a feather-bed or a wench, or at least a wench in a feather-bed: is it not a shame, that an old man as I am should be up first, and in a wedding day, I think in my conscience there's more mettle in lads of three score, then in boys of one and twenty.
Why Basket hilt.
Here sir.
Shall I not be trussed to day?
Yes sir, but I went for water.
Is Will Rash up yet?
I think not sir, for I heard no body stirring in the house.
Knock sir at his chamber,
The house might be plucked down and builded again
Before he would wa•e with the noise.
Who's that keeps such a knocking, are you mad?
Rather thou art drunk, thou lazy slouch,
That make thy bed thy grave, and in it bury
All thy youth and vigour; up for shame.
Why it is not two a clock yet.
Out sluggish knave it is nearer unto five,
The whole house has out-slept themselves, as if they had drunk wilde poppy: Sir, go you and raise the maids, and let them call upon their mistresses.
Well sir, I shall.
Did I eat any Lattice to supper last night, that I am so sleepy, I think it be day light, brother Bubble.
What sai'st thou brother? heigh ho!
Fie, fie, not ready yet? what sluggishness
Hath seized upon you? why thine eyes are close still.
As fast as a Kentish oyster, surely I was begotten in a Plumb-tree,
I ha such a deal of gum about mine eyes.
Lord how you stand! I am ashamed to se•
The Sun should be a witness of your sloth,
Now sir, your haste.
Marry sir, there are go•sts coming to accompany you to church.
Why this is excellent, men whom it not concerns
Are more respective then we that are maine Actors.
Father Rash, be not so outrageous, we will go in and buckle our selves, all in good time, how now! what's this a∣bout my shins?
Me thought our shanks were not fellows, we have metamorphosed our stockings for want of splendour.
Pray what's that Splendour?
Why it is the Latin word for a Christmas candle
O Gentlemen, you love, you honour me, welcome,
welcome good Master Geraldine, you have taken pains
To accompany an undeserving friend.
You put vs to a needless labour sir,
To run and wind about for circumstance,
When the plain word, I thank you, would have served.
How now wench, are the females ready yet?
The time comes on upon vs, and we run backward:
We are so untoward in our business,
We think not what we have to doe, nor what we doe.
I know not sir whether they know what to doe, but I am sure they have been at Church well-nigh an hour, they were afraid you had got the start of them, which made them make such has•e.
I'st possible, what think you Gentlemen?
Are not these wenches forward? is there not virtue in a man can make young Virgins leave their beds so soon.
But is the widow gone along with them?
Yes sir; why she was the ring-leader.
I thought as much, for she knows what belong's to it,
Come Gentlemen, me thinks it is sport to see
Young wenches run to church before their husbands:
Faith we shall make them blush for this •re night:
A sir, are you come? why that's well said;
I marl'd indeed that all things were so quiet,
Which made me think th'ad not unwrapped their sheet•:
And then were they at Church I hold my life:
Maids think it long until each be made a wi•e.
Hast thou my cloak knave? well said, put it on,
We'll after them; let me go hasten both,
Both the Bridegrooms forward, we'll walk a little
Softly on before: but see, see, if they be not come
To fetch vs now, we come. we come,
Bid them return, and save themselves this labour.
Now have I a quartain ague upon me.
Why how now! why come you from Church to kneel thus publicly, what's the matter?
We kneel sir for your blessing.
How, my blessing! Master Geraldine, is not that your son?
Yes sir, and that I take it is your daughter.
I suspect knavery, what are you?
Why doe you kneel hand in hand with her?
For a fatherly blessing too sir.
Hoy day! it is palpable, I am gulled, and my son
Scatter-good and Bubble fooled, you are married?
Yes sir, we are married.
More villainy! every thing goes the wrong way.
We shall go the right way anon, I hope.
Yes marry shall you, you shall even to the Counter again, and that's the right way for you.
O you are wrong,
The prison that shall hold him are these arms.
I doe fear that I shall turn stinckard, I do smell such a matter: you are married then?
Ecee signum, heere's the wedding Ring t'affirme it.
I believe the knave has drunk Ipocras,
He is so pleasant.
God morrow Gentlemen.
Tu quoque to all: what, shall we go to Church?
Come, I long to be about this gear.
Doe you hear me, will you two go sleep again? take out the tother nap, for you are both made Cockescombes, and so am I.
How, Cockes-combes!
Yea Cockes-combes.
Father, that word Cockes-comb goes against my sto∣macke.
And against mine, a man might ha digested a Wood∣cock better.
You two come now to go to church to be married,
And they two come from Church, and are married.
How, married! I would see that man durst ma•rye her.
Why sir, what would you doe?
Why •ir I would forbid the banes.
And so would I.
Doe you know that youth in Satin, hoe's the penner that belongs to that Inkhorn.
How, let me see, are not you my man Ger•as?
Yes sir.
And have you married her?
Yes sir.
And doe you think you have used me well?
Yes sir.
O intolerable rascal! I will presently be made a In∣stice of Peace, and have thee whipped, go fetch a Constable.
Come, you're a flourishing Ass; Sergeant take him to thee, he has had a long time of his pageantry.
Sir let him go, I'll be his bail, for all debts which come ag•inst him.
Reverend sir, to whom I owe the duty of a son,
Which I shall ever pay in my obedience:
Know that which made him gracious in your eyes,
And gilded over his imperfect•ns,
Is wasted and consumed eve• like ice,
Which by the vehemence of heate dissolves,
And glides to many rivers, so his wealth,
That felt a prodigal hand, hot in expense,
Melted within his gripe, and from his coffers,
Ran like a violent stream to other men's,
What was my own, I caught at.
Have you your mortgage in?
Yes sir.
Stand up, the matter is well amended,
Master Geraldine, you give sufferance to this match.
Yes marry doe I sir, for since they love,
I'll not have the crime lie on my head,
To •iuide man and wife.
Why you say well, my blessing fall upon you,
An• upon vs that love sir Lionel.
By my •roth since thou hast •an the young kna•e,
God give the• •oy of him, and may •e prove▪
A wiser man then his Master.
Sergeant, why dost not carry him to prison?
Sir Lionel Rash will bail him.
I bail him knave! wherefore should I bail him?
No, carry him away, I'll relieve no prodigals.
Good sir Lionel, I beseech you sir, Gentlemen, I pray make a purse for me.
Come sir, come, are you begging?
Why that does you no harm Ger••se, master I should say; some compassion.
Sergeants, come back with him, look sir, here is your livery,
If you can put off all your former pride,
And put on this with that humility
That you first wore it, I will pay your debts,
Free you of all incomb•ances,
And take you again into my service.
Tenter-hooke let ••e go, I will take his worships offer without wages, rather then come into your clu•ches a∣gain; a man in a blew coat may have some colour for his knavery, •n the Counter he can have none.
But now M. Scatter-good, what say you to this?
Marry I say it is scarce honest dealing for any man to Conny-catch another mans wife, I protest we'll not put it up.
No, which we?
Why Gartred and I.
Gartred, why she'll put it up.
Will she?
I that she will, and so must you.
Must I?
Yes that you must.
Well, if I must, I must▪ but I protest I would not:
But that I must: So vale, vale: Et tu quoque.
Why that's well said,
Then I perceive we shall wind up all wrong:
Come Gentlemen, and all our other guests:
Let our well-temper'd bloods taste B•cchus feasts,
But let vs know fi•st how these sports delight,
And to these Gentlemen each bid good night.
Gentles, I hope, that well my labour ends,
All that I did was but to please my friends.
A kind enamouret I did strive so prove,
But now I leave that, and pursue your love.
My part I have performed with the rest,
And though I have not, yet I would doe best.
That I have cheated through the Play, it is true,
But yet I hope, I have not cheated you.
If with my clamours I have done you wrong,
Ever hereafter I will hold my tongue.
If through my riot I have offensive been,
Henceforth Isle play the civil Citizen.
Faith all that I say, is, how ere it hap,
Widows like M•ids sometimes may catch a clap.
To mirth and laughter henceforth I'll provoke ye,
If you but please to like of Greenes Tu quoque.

