VFFE, where art thou?
Here at hand.
Where is this Cuff?
Almost at your Elbow.
OH Band, art thou there? I thought thou had∣dest been worn out of date by this time, or shrunk in the wetting at least.
What? doe you think I am afraid of your great words? no, you shall know that there be men of fashion in place, as well as your self.
Good Band, doe not fret so.
A scurvy shag-ragge Gentleman, new come out of the North, a Puny, a Freshman, come up hither to learn fashions and seek to expel me?
Nay: if you bee so broad with him, Band, we shall have a fray presently.
Sir, Isle pull down your Choler from you.
It was fit time for me to stay you up, for I am sure you were a falling Band.
Well, Band, for all you are so stiff, Isle make you limber enough before I have done with you.
No, Hodge Peak, its more then you can doe.
Sfoot, let me come to him: well, Band, let me catch you in another place, and I will make cut-worke of you.
Ther's ne'er a Spanish Ruff of you all can doe it.
Sfoot, if these two should go together by the cares and hurt one another, Ruff would be in a fine plight: would he not?
Well, Band, look to thy self, for if I meet thee, I will lace thee roundly.
Lace me? thou would bee laced thy self, Ruff, for this is the very truth, thou art a plain Knave.
If they talk of lacing, I were best look about my self.
Dare thou meet me in the field?
In the field? why? thou art but an of∣feminate fellow, Ruff; for all thou art so well set: but at what weapon?
Nay, I will give thee that advantage, bring thou what weapons thou wilt, I scorn to make any thing of thee, Band, but needle work.
Sfoot, thou shalt know, a Gentleman and a Soldier scorns thy proffer.
A Soldier?
Did you not hear of the great Bands went over of late?
Where did you serve? in the Lowe Countries?
It may be so; for I am sure he is a Hole∣land Band.
Where I have served, it is no matter, but I am sure I have been pressed oft.
Truly, his Laundress will bear him witness thereof.
Press me no pressings, Isle make you know that Ruff is steeled to the back, if I had my stick here, you should feel it.
Nay bragger, it is not your great words can carry it away so; give Band but a hem, and he will bee for you at any time, name the place, the time and hour of our meeting.
The place, the Paper mills, where I will tear thee into rags, before I have done with thee: the time, to morrow in the afternoon about one: but doe you hear? wee will fight single, you shall not be double, Band.
Now I perceive, the Spaniard and the Hollander will to it roundly.
But doe you hear? once more doe not say at our next meeting you forgot the time.
No, I dare warrant you, there is no man more careful of the time then he: for I am sure hee hath always at the least a dozen Clocks about him.
Farewell then.
Then farewell.
Nay, you shall not part so, you will go into the fields, and know not what fighting means: a couple of white liuered fellows, your Laundress will make you both as white as a clout it she list; If you lack beating, she'll beat you Isle warrant you, she'll so clap your sides toge∣there, that they shall bee beaten out in once or
twice hādling; why? I have known her leave her mark behind her a whole week after, sheell quickly beat you Black and Blew, for I am sure she'll scarce wash white before she starch.
Well, remember the time and place, Ruff.
Well, remember your sclues and Mi∣steris Stichwell, one to whom you have been both beholding in your days.
Who? Mistress Stichwell, by this light I know her not.
No, nor you neither.
Nor I, I swear by all the Gum and Blew-starch in Christendom.
I thought so, why its the Semster, one that both you had been undone had it not been for her, but what talk you of undoing? I say Mister is Stichwell the Semster was the very maker of you both, yet thus little doe you re∣guard her, but it is the common custom of you all, when you come to bee so great as you are, you forget from what house you come.
Sfoote Ruff cares not a pin for her.
Nor Band a button.
Well Band and Ruff, you were best both of you to take heed of her, you know she set you both in the Stocks once before, and if she catch you again, it is a hundredth to
one, if she hang you not both up, for she hath got strings already.
Meet me, if thou dare?
The place the Paper-mils, the hour to morrow at one.
Since you will go, go; but hear me, if you go, look at me well; as little a fellow as I am, I will come and Cuff you both out of the fields; if I doe not, say, Cuff is no man of his hands.
Alas poor shrimp, thou art nothing in my hands.
If you go, you shall never say that Cuff came of a sleeveless errand, Isle bind your hands (I warrant you) for striking.
Say and hold.
Remember the Paper-mils.
And you bee so choleric, Isle even pin you both in, as soon as I come home: can you not decide the quarrel between your selves without a field? I had thought you had been a little more mild, Ruff. You were a horrible Puritan the other day, a very precise Ruff.
Hang him, base Rascal: would hee not make any man mad, to see such a—I durst not scarce peep out before Collar came to Town, now to swagger thus.
Come, you shall be friends, Band.
Friends with him? such a base Rascal? he is a very threed-bare fellow, I scorn, but my man Collar should go as well as hee every day in the week, and be friends with him.
Thy man Collar? thy Master, thou would have said, I am sure hee is thy vp-hol∣der.
Nay, surely he is his Master, at least his Maker: for Bands, make rags; Rags make Paper; Paper makes Past-board; and Past-board makes Collar; and I think that this is a stiff argument that he is his Master.
Well, be he what he will, if I catch his Collar, Isle cut him in iags, let me but clasp him, and Isle make him for stirring.
But you shall not fight: have you not Friends &amp; Neighbours enough to end this con∣trouersie, but you must go into the fields, and there cut the thread of your lives? we'll have none of that, come choose you an Umpire, Band, for it shall be so.
Since you will force me to it, if Ruff be content, I am willing.
Ruff, you shall be content.
If I shall then, I must, let him name him.
If I may choose, Isle have Master Hand∣kerchief.
Nay, stay there, he is a most filthy Sni∣veling
fellow, and he will wipe your Nose of all, if you put the case to him, but what say you to Shirt?
He is a shifting knave, and one, to whom Band, a little before hath been much beholding, they were joined a long time together in friend∣ship.
Why, then go to Master Cap, the head∣man of the Town.
No, I deny that, he is a very bad Justice, you may have him wrought on any side for mo∣nic.
Isle tell you what, then wee will go to my Lord Corpus himself.
He is not in Town.
He is, for I saw Sock, his chief Foot∣man in Town.
Heir's a doe with you, and my Lord Corpus, indeed I would you were both hanged about his neck for me, but I see, this strife will no∣for be ended, till I bee Arbitrator my self, you know, I am equally allied to you both: shall I be Moderator between you?
Content.
Well then, Ruff shall bee most accoun∣ted of amongst the Clergy, for he is the grave Fellow (although I know, the Puritans will not greatly care for him, he hath such a deal of set∣ting, and they love standing very well.) As for
you, Band, you shall bee most made of amongst the young Gal ants, although sometimes they shall use Ruff, for a fashion, but not otherwise; how ever, you need not regard the get die hey∣ded multitude, let them doe as they list, some∣times respecting one, sometimes the other: but when you come to the Counsailor, and men of Law, which know right from wrong, acknow∣lodging Master Words to bee equal, they shall prefer neither, but use the kindness of you both, wearing both a Band and a Ruff; how say you, are you both content?
We are.
Then go before me to the next town, and Isle follow after with a Band of your friend∣ship drawn, which I hope, these Gentlemen will seal with their hands.
Claw me, and Isle claw thee, the proverb goes, Let it be true in that our Muse here shoes, Cuff graces hand, Cuffs debtors hands remain, Let hands clap me, and Isle Cuff them again.

THe brightness of so great and fair a presence,
They say, strikes cold amazement. But I feel
Contrary effects. For from the gracious center
Of the Honourable assembly, some secret power
Inflames my courage; and, me thinks, I am grown
Taller by th'vertue of this Audience.
And yet thus raised, I fear there's no retiring.
Ladies, whose beauties glad the whole Assembly,
Upon your favours I impose my business.
If it be a fault to speak this foreign language,
(For Latin is our mother tongue) I must entreat you
To frame excuses for vs; for whose sake
Wee now speak English. All the rest, we hope,
Come purposely to grace our poor endeavours;
As we to please. In whose fair courtesy
We trust; not in our weak ability.
COme brave Mercurials sublimed in cheating,
My dear companions, fellow-souldiers
In the watchful exercise of Thievery:
Shame not at your so large profession,
No more then I at deep Astrology.
For in the days of old, Good morrow Theife,
As welcome was received, as now Your Worship.
The Spartans held it lawful, and th'Arabians,
So grew Arabia, Foelix; Sparta valiant.
Read on this lecture, wise ALBVMAZAR.
Your patron Mercury in his mysterious character,
Holds all the marks of the other wanderers,
And with his subtle influence works in all,
Filling their stories full of robberies.
Most Trades and Callings much participate
Of yours; though smoothly gilt with th'honest title
Of Merchant, Lawyer, or such like: the learned
Only excepted; and hoe's therefore poor.
And yet he steals one author from another.
This Poet is that Poets Plagiary,
And he a third's, till they end all in Homer.
And Homer filtch't all from an Egyptian Priestess.
The world's a Theater of theft. Great rivers
Rob smaller brookes; and them the Ocean.
And in this world of ours, this Microcosm:
Guts from the stomach steal, and what they spare,
The meseraicks filch, and lay it in the liver:
Where (least it should be found) turned to red Nectar,
Tic by a thousand thievish veins conveyed
And hid in flesh, nerues, bones, muscles and sinews,
In tendons, skin and hair, so that the property
Thus altered, the theft can never be discovered.
Now all these pilfries couched and composed in order,
Frame thee and me. Man's a quick mass of the every.
Most Philosophical ALBVMAZAR!
I thought these parts had lent and borrowed mutual.
Say they doe so: it is done with full intention
Ne'er to restore, and that's flat robbery.
Therefore go on: follow your vertu's laws
Your cardinal virtue, great Necessity,
Wait on her close, with all occasions.
Be watchful, have as many eyes as heaven,
And ears as harvest: be resolved and impudent,
Believe none, trust none: for in this City
(As in a fought field Crows and Carcasses)
No dwellers are but Cheaters and Cheateez.
If all the houses in the town were prisons,
The chambers cages, all the settles stocks,
The broad gates gallowses, and the whole people
Justices, Juries, Constables, Keepers and Hangmen,
I'd practise spite of all, and leave behind me
A fruitful seminary of our profession,
And call them by thy name Albumazarians.
And I no less, were all the City thieves
As cunning as thy self.
Why bravely spoken,
Fitting such generous spirits: Isle make way
To your great virtue with a deep resemblance.
Of high Astrology. Harpax and Ronca
List to our profit: I have new lodged a pray
Hard by, that taken is so fat and rich
Twill make vs leave off trading, and fall to purchase.
Who is it? speak quickly.
Where good Albumazar?
It is a rich gentleman, as old as foolish.
Th'poore remnant of whose brain that age had left him
The doting love of a young girl hath dried:
And which concerne's vs most, he gives firm credit
To Necromancy and Astrology,
Sending to me, as one that promise both.
Pandolfo is the man.
What old Pandolfo?
The same: but stay, yon's Furbo whose smoothest brow
Shines with good news, and's visage promises
Triumphs and Trophies to's.
My life he has learnt out all, I know it by's music;
Bear up thy learned brow ALBVMAZAR,
Live long of all the world admired,
For Art profound, and skill retired
To cheating by the height of stars.
Hence, Gypsies, hence, hence rogues of baser strain,
That hazard life for little gain:
Stand off and wonder, gape and gaze a far
At the rare skill of great ALBVMAZAR.
Albumazar,
Spread out thy nets at large, here's foul abundance:
Pandolfo's ours, I understand his business
Which I filch't closely from him, while he revealed
T'his man, his purposes and proiects.
Excellent!
Thanks to this instrument: for in pretence
Of teaching young Sulpitia, th'old mans daughter,
I got access to th'house, and while I waited
Till she was ready, ouer-heard Pandolfo
Open his secrets to his servant: thus it is.
Antonio, Pandolfo's friend, and neighbour,
Before he went to Barberry, agreed
To give in marriage.
Furbo, this no place
Fit to consider curious points of business.
Come let's away, I'll hear't at large aboue.
Ronca stay you below, and entertain him
With a loud noise of my deep skill in Art.
Thou know my Rosy modesty cannot do it.
Harpax up you, and from my bed-chamber,
Where all things for our purposes are ready,
Second each beck, and nod, and word of ours.
You know my meaning.
Yes, yes.
Yes sir.
THere's old Pandolfo, amorous as youthful May,
And gray as January. I'll attend him here.
Cricca, I seek thy aide, not thy cross counsel,
I am mad in love with Flauia, and must have her:
Thou spend thy reasons to the contrary,
Like arrows against an Anvil: I love Flauia,
And must have Flauia.
Sir you have no reason,
Shoe's a young girl of sixteen, you of sixty.
I have no reason, nor spare room for any,
Loue's harbinger hath chalk't upon my heart,
And with a coal writ on my brain, for Flauia;
This house is wholly taken up for Flauia.
Let reason get a lodging with her wit:
Vex me no more, I must have Flauia.
But sir, her brother Lelio, under whose charge
Shoe's now, after her father's death, swear boldly
Pandolfo never shall have Flauia.
His father, ere hee went to Barberry,
Promised her me: who be he live or dead,
Spite of a Last of Lelio's??? Pandolfo
Shall enjoy Flauia.
Sir you're too old.
I must confess in years about three score,
But in tuffe strength of body, four and twenty,
Or two months less. Love of young Flauia,
More powerful then Medea's drugs, renew's
All decayed parts of man: my Arteries
Blown full with youthful spirits, move the blood
To a new business: my withered Neru's grow plump
And strong, longing for action. Hence thou poor prop
Of feebleness and age: walk with such sires
As with cold palsies shake away their strength,
And loose their legs with cureless gouts. Pandolfo
New moulded is for Revels, Masks, and Music. Cricca,
String my neglected Lute, and from my Armoury
Skowre my best sword, companion of my youth,
Without which I seem naked.
Your love, sir, like strong water
To a deplored sick man, quick's your feeble limbs
For a poor moment. But after one night's lodging
You'll fall so dull and cold, that Flauia
Will shrike and leap from bed as from a Sepulchre.
Shall I speak plainer, sir? She'll Cuckold you:
Alas she'll Cuckold you.
What me? a man of known discretion,
Of riches, years, and this gray gravity?
I'll satisfy'r with gold, rich clothes and jewels.
Were not far fitter urge your son Eugenio
To woo her for himself?
Cricca bee gone,
Touch no more there: I will and must have Flauia.
Tell Lelio, if hee grant m'his sister Flauia,
I'll give my daughter to him in exchange.
Be gone, and find me here within this half hour.
Tic well that servant's gone: I shall the easier
Wind up his master to my purposes.
Sure this some novice of th'Artillery,
That winke's and shoots: sir, prime your piece anew
The powder's wet: tick. took. tick. took.
A good ascendant bless me: sir are you frantic?
Why frantic? are not knocks the lawful courses
T'open doors and ears?
Of vulgar men and houses.
Whose lodging's this? is it not th'Astrologers?
His lodging? no: it is the learned Phrontisterion
Of most divine Albumazar.
Good sir,
If the door break, a better shall redeem it.
How! all your land sold at a hundredth years purchase
Cannot repair th'dammage of one poor rap,
To thunder at the Phrontisterion
Of great Albumazar?
Why man? what harm:
Sir, you must know my master's heavenly brain
Pregnant with mysteries of Metaphisickes,
Grows to an Embryo of rare contemplation,
Which at full time brought forth, excel's by far
The armed fruit of Vulcan's Midwifery
That leapt from Iupiter's mighty Cranium.
What of all this?
Thus one of your bold thunders may abortive
And cause that birth miscarry, that might have proved
An instrument of wonders greater and rarer
Then Apollonius the Magician wrought.
Are you your Masters Countrey-man?
Yes: why ask you?
Then must I get an Interpreter for your language.
You need not??? with a wind instrument my master made,
In five days you may breath ten languages
As perfect as the Devil, or himself.
When may I speak with him?
When't please the stars.
He pul's you not a hair, nor pare's a nail,
Nor stirre's a foot without due figuring
The Horoscope: sit down a while and't please you,
I see the heavens incline to his approach.
What's this I pray you?
An engine to catch stars,
A maze t'arrest such Planets as have lurk't
Four thousand years under protection
Of Iupiter and Sol.
Pray you speak English.
Sir, it is a perspicill, th'best under heaven:
With this Isle read a leaf of that small Iliade
That in a wall-nut shell was decked, as plainly
Twelve long miles off, as you see Pals from Highgate.
Wonderful workman of so rare an Instrument!
Twill draw the Moon so near that you would swear
The bush of thorns in it prick your eyes: the Crystal
Of a large Arch multiplie's millions,
Worke's more then by point blank: and by refractions
Optic and strange, searches like the eye of truth,
All closets that have windows. Have at Rome,
I see the Pope, his Card'nals and his mule,
The English College and the Iesuits,
And what they write and doe.
Let me see too.
So far you can not: for this glass is framed
For eyes of thirty: you are nigh threescore.
But for some fifty miles twill serve you,
With help of a refractiue glass that's yonder.
For trial sir: where are you now?
In London.
Ha you found the glass within that chamber?
Yes.
What see you?
Wonders, wonders: I see as in a Land-shappe
An honourable throng of noble persons,
As clear as I were under the same roof.
Seems by their gracious brows, and courteous looks
Something they see, which if t b'indifferent
They'll fau'rably accept: if otherwise
They'll pardon, who, or what they be, I know not.
Why that's the cor ??? at Cambridge forty miles hence, what else?
A Hall thrust full of bare-heads, some bald, some bushed,
Some bravely branch't.
That's th'Vniversity
Larded with Townsmen. Look you there: what now?
Who? I see Dover Peer, a man now landing
Attended by two Porters that seem to groan
Under the burden of two loads of paper.
That's Coriatus Persicus, and's observations
Of Asia and Africa.
The price.
I dare not sel't.
But here's another of a stranger virtue:
The great Albumazar by wondrous Art,
In imitation of this Perspicill,
Hath framed an Instrument that multiplies
Objects of hearing, as this doth of seeing,
That you may know each whisper from Proctor Iohn
Against the wind, as fresh as it were delivered
Through a trunk, or Glosters listening wall.
And may I see it sir? bless me once more.
It is something ceremonious; but you shall try't.
Stand thus. What hear you?
Nothing
Set your hands thus
That th'vertex of the Organ may perpendicularly
Point out our Zenith. What hear you now? ha, ha, ha.
A humming noise of laughter.
Why that's the Court
And University, that now are merry
With an old gentleman in a Comaedy. What now?
Celestial music, but it seems far off.
List, list, tic nearer now.
It is music twixt the Acts. What now?
Nothing.
And now?
Music again, and strangely delicate.
O most Angelical! they sing!
And now?
Sing sweetly, that our notes may cause
The heavenly Orbs themselves to pause:
And at our music stand as still
As at Ioue's amorous will.
So now release them as before,
Th'haue waited long enough, no more.
It is gone, give mee't again.??? O do not so.
What hear you now?
No more then a dead Oyster.
O let me see this wondrous instrument.
Sir, this is called an Otacousticon.
A Cousticon?
Why it is a pair of Asses ears, and large ones.
True: for in such a form the great Albumazar
Hath framed it purposely, as fit'st receivers
Of sounds, as spectacles like eyes for sight.
What gold will buy't?
Il'e selt you when it is finished:
As yet the Epiglottis is imperfect.
'Soone as you can, and here's ten crowns in earnest.
For when it is done, and I have purchased it,
I mean t'intail't on my heirs male for ever,
Spite of the ruptures of the common law.
Nay rather gived to Flauia for her ioncture:
For she that marries you, deserves it richly.
SIr, I have spoke with Lelio, and he answer's.
Hang Lelio, and his answer's. Come hither Cricca,
Wonder for me, admire, and be astonished,
Marvel thy self to Marble at these engines,
These strange Gorgonian instruments.
At what?
At this rare Perspicill and Otacousticon.
For with these two Il'e hear and see all secrets,
Undo intelligencers. Pray let my man see
What's done in Rome; his eyes are just as yours are.
Pandolfo, are you mad? be wise and secret:
See you th'steepe danger you are tumbling in?
Know you not that these instruments have power
T'vnlocke the hidden'st closets of whole states?
And you reveal such mysteries to a servant?
Sir be advised, or else you learn no more
Of our unknown Philosophy.
Enough.
What news from Lelio? shall I have his sister?
He swears and vows he never will consent.
She shall not play with worn antiquities,
Nor lye with snow, and statues; and such replies
That I omit for reverence of your worship.
Not have his sister? Cricca I will have Flauia,
Maugre his head??? by means of this Astrologer
I'll enjoy Flauia. Are the stars yet inclined
To his divine approach?
One minute brings him.
What Strologer?
The learned man I told thee,
Th high Almanac of Germany, an Indian
Far beyond Trebesond and Tripoli,
Close by the worlds end: a rare Conjurer,
And great Astrologer. His name, pray sir?
Albumazarro Meteoroscopico.
A name of force to hang him without trial.
As hee excels in Science, so in Title.
Hee tells of lost plate, horses, and strayd cattle
Directly, as hee had stolen them all himself.
Or hee, or some of his confederates.
As thou respects thy life, look to thy tongue,
Albumazar has an Otacousticon.
Bee silent, reverent, and admire his skill,
See what a promising countenance appears:
Stand still and wonder, wonder and stand still.
Ronca, the bunch of planets new found out
Hanging at th'end of my best Perspicill,
Send them to Galilaeo at Padua;
Let him bestow them where hee please. But th'starres
Lately discovered twixt the horns of Aries,
Are as a present for Pandolfo's marriage,
And henceforth styled Sidera Pandolfaea.
My marriage Cricca! hee foresee's my marriage:
O most Celestial Albumazar!
And sends y'a present from the head of Aries.
My Almanac made for th'meridian
And herght of Iapan, gived th'East Inti company:
There may they smell the price of Cloves and Pepper,
Munkies and China-dishes five years ensuing;
And know th'successe of the voyage of Magores.
For in the volume of the Firmament
Wee children of the stars read things to come,
As clearly as poor mortals stories past
In Speed or Hollingshead.
The perpetual motion
With a true larum in it to run twelve hours
Before Mahomets return.
Deliver it safe
T'a Turkie Factor, bid him with care present it
From me to th'house of Ottoman.
I will sir.
Pray you stand here, and wonder now for me,
Be astonished at his Gorgon, for I cannot.
Upon my life he proves a mere Impostor.
Peace, not a word, be silent and admire.
As for the Issue of th'nezt Summers wars,
Reueal't to none, keep't to thy self in secret,
As touch-stone of my skill in Prophecy. Be gone.
I go sir.
Signior Pandolfo, I pray you pardon me,
Exoticall dispatches of great consequence
Staid me; and casting the Nativity
Of the Cham of Tartary, and a private conference
With a Mercurial intelligence.
You're welcome in a good hour, better minute,
Best second, happiest third, fourth, fifth, and scruple.
Let the twelve houses of the Horoscope
Be lodged with fortitudes, and fortunates,
To make you blessed in your designs Pandolfo.
Were it not much trouble to your starry employments,
I a poor mortal would entreat your furtherance
In a terrestrial business.
My Ephemeris lies,
Or I fore-see your errant: thus it is, thus.
You had a neighbour called Antonio,
A widower like your self, whose only daughter
Flauia, you love, and hee as much admired
Your child Sulpitia. Is not this right?
Yes sir: O strange! Cricca admire in silence.
You two decreed a counter-match betwixt you,
And purposed to truck daughters. Is it not so?
Just as you say it. Cricca admire and wonder.
This no such secret: look to your self, he will cheat you.
Antonio after this match concluded,
Having great sums of gold in Barberry,
Desires of you before he consummate
The rites of matrimony, hee might go thither,
For three months; but as now it is three and three
Since he imbark't, and is not yet returned.
Now sir your business is to me, to know
Whether Antonio be dead or living.
I'll tell you instantly.
Hast thou revealed it?
I told it none but thee.
Not I.
Why stare you?
Are you not well?
I wander twixt the Poles
And heavenly hinges, amongst excentricals,
Centers, concentrickes, circles, and epicycles,
To hunt out an aspect fit for your business.
Mean ostentation! for shame awake your self.
And since the lamp of heaven is newly entered
To Cancer, old Antonio is stark dead,
Drowned in the sea stone dead: for radius directorius
In the sixth house; and th'waning moon by Capricorn,
Hoe's dead, hoe's dead.
It is an ill time to marry.
The Moon grows fork't, and walks with Capricorn.
Peace fool: these words are full of mysteries.
What ominous face, and dismal countenance
Marked for disasters, hated of all the heavens,
Is this that follows you?
He is my servant,
A plain and honest speaker, but no harm in him.
What see you in my face?
Horror and darkness, death and gallowses,
I de swear th'wert hanged, stood'st thou but two foot higher,
But now thy stars threaten a nearer death.
Sir, send to toale his knell.
What is he dead?
He shall be by the dint of many stabs:
Only I spy a little hope of scoping
Thorough the clouds, and foul aspects of death,
Sir, pray give no credit to this cheater,
Or with his words of Art he will make you dote
As much on his feigned skill, as on fair Flauia.
STay Villain, stay, though safety't self defends thee
Thou die.
Come do thy worst, thrust sure, or die.
For heaven sake Gentlemen stay your hands, help, help.
Help Albumazar.
Thus to the hinderer
Of my revenge.
Save me Albumazar.
And thus, and thus, and thus.
Moister I die, I dye.
Fliest thou base coward? it is not thy heals can save thee.
Ooh!
What ails thee Cricca?
I am dead, I am dead,
Trouble your self no more.
What dead &amp; speak?
Only there's left a little breath to tell you.
Why, where art hurt?
Stabbed with a thousand daggers,
My heart, my lights, my liver, and my skin,
Appears like a sieve.
Here's not a wound, stand up,
It is but thy fear.
It is but one wound all over.
Softly, ?? softly: you've lost the truest servant; Farewell I die.
Live by my courtesy, stand up and breath.
The dangerous and malignant influence is past:
But thank my charity that put by the blows,
The least of which threatened a dozen graves.
Now learn to scoff divine Astrology,
And slight her servants.
A Surgeon, good sir, a Surgeon.
Stand up man, th'hast no harm, my life for thine.
You are well, you are well.
Now I perceive I am:
I pray you pardon me Divine Astrologer.
I do, but hence-forth laugh at Astrology
And call her servants Cheaters.
Now to our business: on good Albumazar.
Now since the Moon passes from Capricorn,
Through Aquarius to the watery Sign of Pisces,
Antonio's drowned, and is devoured by fishes.
Is it certain?
Certain.
Then let my earnestness
Entreat your skill a favour.
It shall, but first
I'll tell you what you mean to ask me.
Strange!
Antonio dead that promised you his daughter,
Your business is t'entreate me raise his ghost,
And force it stay at home til't have performed
The promise past, and so return to rest.
That, that, you've hit it most divine Albumazar.
It is a hard thing; for de privation ad habitu?? non datur regressus.
O what a business what a moister piece
It is to raise up his Ghost, whose bodie's eaten
By fish. This work desires a Planetary intelligence
Of Iupiter and Sol, and these great Spirits,
Are proud, fantastical: It ask's much charges,
T'entice them from the guiding of their Spheres
To waite on mortals.
So I may have my purpose, spare for no cost.
Sir, spare your purse, we'll do it an easier way.
The work shall cost you nothing.
We have an Art is called Prastigiatory,
That deals with spirits, and intelligences
Of meaner office and condition,
Whose service craue's small charges: with one of these
I'll change some servant, or good friend of yours
To th'perfect shape of this Antonio:
So like in face, behaviour, speech, and action,
That all the Town shall swear Antonio lives.
Most Necromanticall Astrologer,
Do this, and take me for your servant ever.
And for your pains, after the transformation
This chain is yours, it cost two hundred pound
Beside the jewel.
After the work is finished, then???how now?
What lines are these that look sanguineous?
As if the Stars conjured to do you mischief?
How? mean you me?
They are dusky marks of Saturn.
It seems some stone shall fall upon your head,
Threatening a fracture of the Pericrantum.
Cricca come hither, fetch me my staff again,
Three-score and ten's returned: A general Palsy
Shakes out the love of Flauia with a fear.
Is there no remedy?
Nothing but patience.
The Planet threatens so, whose prey you are.
The Stars and Planets daily war together.
For should they stand at truce but one half hour
This wondrous Machine of the world would ruin.
Who can withstand their powerful influence?
You with your wisdom, good Albumazar.
Indeed th'Aegyptian Ptolamee the wise,
Pronounced it as an Oracle of truth; Sapience dominabitur astris.
Who's aboue there? Ronca bring down the cap
Made in the point of Mercury being ascendant:
Here put it on, and in your hand this Image,
Framed on a Tuesday when the fierce God of war
Mounted th'horizon in the sign of Aries.
With these walk as unwounded as Achilles,
Dip't by his mother Thetis.
You bind me to your service.
Next get the man you purpose to transform
And meet me here.
I will not fail to find you.
Mean while with Sciofericall instrument,
By way of Azimuth and Almicantarath
I'll seek some happy point in heaven for you.
I rest your servant, sir.
Let all the Stars
Guide you with most propitious influence.
HEere's a strange man indeed, of skill profound:
How right hee knew my business, before hee saw me,
And how thou skoft's him when we talked in private.
Tic a brave instrument his Otacousticon.
In earnest sir I took him for a Cheater;
As many, under name of cunning men
With promise of Astrology, much abuse
The gaping vulgar, wronging that sacred skill,
That in the Stars reads all our actions.
Is there no arches o'er our heads, look Cricca.
None but the Arch of heaven, that cannot fall.
Is not that made of Marble? I have read
A stone dropped from the Moon: And much I fear
The fit should take her now, and void an other.
Fear nothing sir, this charmed Mercurial cap
Shields from the fall of Mountains: it is not a stone
Can check his Art, walk boldly.
I do, let's in.
HEE that saith I am not in love, hee lies De cap ?? pe; For I am idle, choicely neat in my clothes, valiant, and extreme witty: My meditations are loded with metaphors, and my songs sonnets: Not a one shakes his tail, but I sigh out a passion: thus do I to my Mistress; but alas I kiss the dog, and she kicks me. I never see a young wanton Filly, but, say I, there goo's Armellina; nor a lusty strong Ass, but I remember my self, and sit down to consider what a goodly race of Mules would inherit, if she were willing: only I want utterance, and that's a maine mark of love too.
Trincalo. Trincalo.
O it is Armellina: now if she ????????? the wit to begin, as I mean she should, then will I confound her with complements
drawn from the Plays I see at the Fortune, and Red Bull, where I learn all the words I speak and understand not.
Trincalo, what price beare's wheat, and Saffron, that your band's so stiff and yellow? not a word? why Trincalo! what busi???ness in Town? how do's all at Totnam? grown mute? What do you bring from the Country?
There it is. Now are my floud-gates drawn, and I'll sir???round her. What have I brought sweet bit of beauty? a hundredth thousand salutations of the elder house to your most illustrious Ho???nor and Worship.
To me these Titles? is your basket full of nothing else?
Full of the fruits of love, most resplendent Lady; a pre???sent to your worthiness from your worship's poor vassal Trincalo.
My life on it, hee scrap't these complements from his Cart, the last Load hee carried for the Progress. What ha you read that make you grow so eloquent?
Sweet Madame, I read nothing but the lines of your La???diships countenance, and desire only to kiss the skirts of your garment, if you vouchsafe me not the happiness of your white hands.
Come, giue's your basket and take it.
O sweet! now will I never wash my mouth after, nor breath but at my nostrils, least I loose the taste of her fingers. Are???mellina, I must tell you a secret if you'll make much on it.
As it deseru's: what is it?
I love you, dear morsel of modesty, I love: and so truly, that I'll make you Mistress of my thoughts, Lady of my revenues, and commit all my movables into your hands, that is, I give you an earnest kiss in the high way of Matrimony.
Is this the end of all this business?
This is the end of all business, most beautiful, and most worthy to be most beautiful Lady.
Hence fool, hence.
Why now she knows my meaning, let it work: She put up the fruit in her lap, and threw away the basket: It is a plain sign, she abhorr's the words, and embraces the mea???ning: O lips, no lips, but leaves besmeared with mel-dew!
?? dew no dew, but drops of Honey combs! ?? combs no combs, but fountains full of tears! ?? tears no tears, but???
CRicca denie's me; no persuasions,
Proffers, rewards, can work him to transform.
Yonder's my Country Farmer Trincalo.
Never in sitter time good Trincalo.
Like a lean horse t'a fresh and lusty Pasture.
What rent dost pay me for thy Farm at Totnam?
Ten pound; and find't too dear a peny-worth.
My hand here: take it rent-free for three lives,
To serve me in a business I'll employ thee.
Serve you? I'll serve, reserve, conserve, preserve,
Deserve you for th'one half: ?? Armellina,
A Ioincture, hai a Ioincture! what's your employment?
Here's an Astrologer has a wondrous secret
To transform men to other shapes, and persons.
How? transform things to men? I'll bring nine Taylors
Refused last Muster, shall give five Marks a piece
To shape three men of service out of all,
And grant him th'remnant shreds aboue the bargain.
Now if thou'lt let him change thee, take this Lease;
Drawn ready; put what lives thou please.
Stay, Sir.
Say I am transformed; who shall enjoy the Lease?
I? or the person I must turn to.
Thou,
Thou. The resemblance list's but one whole day:
Then home true Farmer, as thou were it before.
Where shall poor Trincalo be? how's this? transformed?
Transmuted? how? not I; I love my self
Better then so: there's your Lease. I'd not venture
For th'whole Fee-simple.
Tell me the difference
Betwixt a fool and wise man.
Faith as much
As twixt your Worship and my self.
A wise man
Accept's all fair occasions of advancement,
Flye's no commodity for fears of danger,
Venter's and gains, lives easily, drinks good wine,
Fare's neatly, 's richly clothed, in worthiest company;
While your poor fool and Clown, for fear of peril,
Sweat's hourly for a dry browne crust to bed-ward,
And wake's all night for want of moisture.
Well, sir,
I'd rather starve in this my loved Image,
Then hazard thus my life, for others looks.
Change is a kind of death, I dare not try it.
It is not so dangerous as thou take it; we'll only
Alter thy countenance for a day. Imagine
Thy face masked only: or that thou dream all night
Thou were it apparelled in Antonio's form,
And waking find thy self true Trincalo.
T'Antonio's form? was not Antonio a Gentleman?
Yes, and my neighbour, that's his house.
O ho!
Now do I smell th'Astrologer's trick: he will steep me
In soldiers blood; or boyle me in a Chaldron
Of Barbarous Law French: Or anoint me over
With supple oil of great men's services.
For these three means raise Yeomen to the Gentry.
Pardon me sir: I hate these medcines. Fie!
All my posterity will smell and taste on it
Belong as the house of Trincalo endures.
Ther's no such business, thou shall it only seem so
And thus deceive Antonio's family.
Are you assured? it would grieve me to be brayed
In a huge Mortar, wrought to paste, and moulded
To this Antonio's mould: Grant I be turned: what then?
Enter his house, be reverenced by his servants,
And give his daughter Flauia to me in marriage.
The circumstances I'll instruct thee after.
Pray give me leave: this side says do it, this do not.
Before I leave you Tom Trincalo take my counsel.
Thy Mistress Armellina is Antonios Maid,
And thou in his shape moist possess her. Turn.
But if I be Antonio, then Antonio
Enjoys that happiness, not Trincalo.
A pretty trick to make my self a Cuckold.
No, no; there, take your Lease. I'll hang first. Soft,
Be not so choleric Thomas: If I become Antonio,
Then all his riches follow. This fair occasion
Once vanished, hope not the like; of a stark Clown
I shall appear speck and span Gentleman.
A pox of Ploughs, and Carts, and Whips, and Horses.
Then Armellina shall be given to Trincalo,
Three hundred Crowns her portion: we'll get a boy
And call him Transformation Trincalo.
I'll do it sir.
Art resolved?
Resolved? it is done???
With this condition: after I have given your Worship
My daughter Flauia, you shall then move my Worship
And much entreat me, to bestow my Maid
Upon my self, I should say Trincalo.
Content, and for thy sake will make her portion
Two hundred Crowns.
Now are you much deceived???
I never meant it.
How?
I did but jest.
And yet my hand, I'll do it. For I am mutable
And therefore apt to change. Come, come sir, quickly,
Let's to th'Astrologer, and there transform,
Reform, conform, deform me at your pleasure.
I loath this Country countnance; dispatch: my skin
Itch's like Snakes in April, to be strip't off.
, ?? quickly, as you love Flauia, quickly.
SIgnior Pandolfo, y'arriue in happiest hour.
If the seven Planets were your nearest kindred,
And all the Constellations your Allies:
Were the twelve houses, and the Innes of the Zodiac
Your own fee-simple; they could ne'er have chosen
A fitter place to favour your designs.
For the great Luminaries look from Hilech,
And midst of heaven in angles, coniunctions,
And fortunate aspects of Trine and Sextile,
Ready to power propitious influences.
Thank's to your power and curtsy that so placed them.
This is the man that's ready for the business.
Of a most happy countenance, and timber fit
To square to th'gentry: his looks as apt for changing,
As he were cou'red with Camaelions skins.
Except my hands; and twill be troublesome
To fit these fingers to Antonio's gloves.
Pray let's about the work as soon as may be.
First choose a large low room, whose doore's full East,
Or near inclining: for th'Orientall quarter's
Most bountiful of favours.
I have a parlour
Of a great square and height, as you desire it.
Southward must look a wide and spacious window:
For howsoever Omar, Alchabitius,
Hali, Abenezra, seem something to dissent;
Yet Zoroastres, son of Oromasus,
Hiarcha, Brahmin, Thespion Gymnesophist,
Gebir, and Budda Babylonicus,
With all the subtle Cabalists and Childes,
Swear the best influence: for our metamorphosis
Stoops from the South, or as some say, South-east.
This roome's as fit as you had made't of purpose.
Now doe I feel the calfe of my right leg
Tingle, and dwindle to th'smalnesse of a bed-staffe.
Such a speech more turns my high shoes strait boots.
Ne'er were those Authors cited to better purpose.
For through that window all Pandolfo's treasures
Must take their flight and fall upon my shoulders.
Now if this light meridionall had a large casement
That overlooked some unfrequented alley,
It were much more proper: for th'Intelligences
Are nice and coy, scorning to mix their essence
With thronged disturbance of cross multitudes.
Spoken by Art??? Albumazar: a provident setter:
For so shall we receive what thou hand'st out
Free from discovery. But in my conscience
All windows point full South for such a business.
Go to my house, satisfy your curious choice,
But credit me, this parler's fit, it neighbours
To a blind Alley, that in busiest tearme-time
Feels not the footing of one passenger.
Now then declining from Theourgia,
Artenosoria, Pharmacia, rejecting
Necro-puro-geo-hydro-cheiro-coscinomancy,
With other vain and superstitious sciences,
We'll encore at the Art Prestigiatorie,
That represents one figure for another,
With smooth deceit abusing th'eyes of mortals.
O my right arm! it is altered, and me thinks
Longs for a sword: these words have slain a Ploughmen.
And since the Moone's the only Planet changing:
For from the Neomenia in seven days
To the Dicotima, in seven more to th'Pauselinum,
And in as much from Plenilunium
Thorough Dicotima to Neomenia,
It is she must help vs in this operation.
What towns are these? the strangeness of these names,
Hath scaled the marks of many a painful harvest,
And made my new-pil'd fingers itch for dice.
Deeply considred wondrous Albumazar:
O let me kiss those lips that flow with science.
For by her various looks she intimates
To understanding souls, that only she
Hath power t'effect a true formation.
Cause then your parlour to be swept carefully,
Washed, rubbed, perfumed, hanged round from top to bottom
With pure white lunary Tapestry, or needle-worke;
But if'twere cloth of silver, it were much better.
Good, good! a rich beginning: good! what's next?
Spread all the floor with finest Holland sheets,
And over them fair damask Table-cloathes,
Aboue all these draw me chaste virgins aprons:
The room, the work, and workman must be pure.
With virgins aprons? th'whole compass of this City
Can not afford a dozen.
So, there's shirts
And bands to furnish all on's for a twelue-month.
An Altar in the midst, loaded with plate
Of silver, Basins, Yours, Cups, Candlesticks,
Flagons and Beakers, Salts, Chargers, Casting-bottles.
It were not amiss to mix some Bowls of gold,
So they be massy; the better to resemble
The lovely brother-hood of Sol and Luna.
Also some Diamonds for Iupiter.
For by the whiteness and bright sparkling lustres
We allure th'Intelligences to descend.
Furbo and I are those Intelligences
That must attend upon the Magistery.
Now for the ceremonious sacrifice,
Provide such creatures as the Moon delights in,
Two sucking lambs, white as the Alpine snow:
Yet if they have a mole or two, twill pass.
The Moon her sefe wants not her spots.
It is true.
Were they hell-black, weed make a shift to eat them.
White Capons, Pheasants, Pigeons: one little Blacke-bird
Would stain and spoil the work. Get several Wines
To quench the holy embers: Rhenish, Greek wine,
White Muskadell, Sheery, and rich Canary,
So't be not grown too yellow: for the quicker,
Brisker, and older, the better for these ceremonies.
The more abundance, sooner shall wee finish.
For it is our rule in such like businesses,
Who spares most, spends most: either this day must do it,
Or th'reuolution of five hundred years
Cannot: so fit are all the heavens to help vs.
A thousand thanks, thou'lt make a complete cheat.
Thus loaded with this treasure, cheered with wine,
Strengthened with meat: we'll carry thee in triumph,
As the great General of our achievement.
Sir, for rich plate and jewels I have store,
But know not how to furnish you with hangings.
Cannot you borrow from the shops? four hours
Shall render all as fair as you received it.
That can I easily doe.
And hear you sir:
If you chance meet with boxes of white Comfites,
Marchpane, dry sucket, Macarouns and diet-bread,
Twill help on well.
To furnish out our banquet.
I had clean forgot, we must have Amber Greece,
The greyest can be found, some dozen ounces,
I'll use but half a dram: but it is our fashion
T'offer a little from a greater lump.
All shall be done with expedition.
And when your man's transformed, the chain you promised.
My hand: my deeds shall wait upon my promise.
Lead then with happy foot to view the chamber.
I go sir. Trincalo attend vs here,
And not a word on peril of thy life.
Sir, if they kill me Il'e not stir a foot,
And if my tongue's pulled out, not speak a word.
O what a business it is to be transformed!
My master talks of four and twenty hours,
But if I mu these Flags of Yeomanry,
Guild in the sear, and shine in bloom of gentry,
It is not their Strology, nor Sacrifice,
Shall force me cast that coat. I'll never part with it
Till I be Shriefe of th'Countie, and in commission
Of Peace and Quorum. Then will I get m'a Clarke,
A practised fellow, wiser then my Worship.
And dominere amongst my fearful neighbours,
And feast them bountifully with their own bribes.
Trincalo!
Wear a gold chain at every quarter Sessions,
Look big, and grave, and speak not one wise word.
Trincalo!
Examine wenches got with child, and curiously
Search all the circumstances: have blank Mittimusses
Printed in readiness; breathe nought but Sir,
Rogue, ha? how? hum? Constable look to your charge.
Then vouch a Statute and a Latin Sentence,
Wide from the matter.
Trincalo.
License all Alehouses,
Match my son Transformation t'a knights daughter,
And buy a bouncing Pedigree of a welsh Heralt: and then???
What in such serious meditations?
Faith no; but building Castles in the air.
While th'weather's fit: O Cricca, such a business!
What is it?
Nay soft, they are secrets of my master.
Locked in my breast: he has the key it's purse-strings.
My masters secret? keep it good Farmer, keep it,
I would not lend an ear to it if you would hire me. Fare-well.
O how it boils and swells: if I keep't longer,
Twill grow t'impostume in my breast, and choke me, Cricca.
Adieu good Trincalo, the secrets of our betters
Are dangerous, I dare not know it.
But hear thou,
Say I should tell, can keep't as close as I doe?
Yes: but I had rather want it. Adieu.
Albumazar.
Farewell.
Albumazar.
Prithee.
Albumazar
Th'Astrologer hath vnder-tooke to change me
T'Antonio's shape: this done, must I give Flauia
To my old master, and his maid to Trincalo.
But whore's Pandolfo and Albumazar?
Gone newly home to choose a chamber fitting
For transmutation: So now my heart's at ease.
I fear the skill and cunning of Albumazar
With his black Art, by whom Pandolfo seeks
To compass Flauia, spite of her brother Lelio,
And his own son Eugenio that loves her dearly.
I'll loose no time, but find them and reveal
The plot and work to cross this accident.
But Trincalo, art thou so rash and venturous
To be transformed with hazard of thy life?
What care I for a life, that have a lease
For three? But I am certain there's no danger in it.
No danger? cut thy finger and that pains thee;
Then what will it do to shred and mince thy carcass,
Bury't in horse-dung, mould it new, and turn it
T'Antonio? and when you are changed, if Lelio
Smell out your plot, what worlds of punishment
Thou must endure, poor Trincalo! The desire
Of gains abuses thee: be not transformed.
Cricca thou vnderstandst not: for Antonio
Whom I resemble, suffers all: not I.
Yonder they come, I'll hence and hast to Lelio.
THe chamber's fit: provide the plate and hangings,
And other necessaries: give strict order
The room be cleansed, perfumed, and hanged, mean while,
With Astralobe, and Meteoroscope,
Il'e find the Cusp and Alfriduria,
And know what Planet is in Cazimi.
All shall be ready sir, as you command it.
Doctor Albumazar, I have a vein of drinking,
And artery of lechery??? runs through my body:
Pray when you turn me gentleman, preserve
Those two, if t may be done with reputation.
Fear not, I'll only call the first, good fellowship,
And the other, civil recreation.
And when you come to th'hart, spoil not the love of Armellina.
And in my brain leave as much discretion
As may spy falsehood in a Tavern reckoning;
And let me alone for bounty to wink and pay't.
And if you change me perfectly,
I'll bring y'a dozen knights for customers.
I warrant thee: sir are you well instructed
In all these necessaries?
They are in my table-booke.
Forget not clothes for th'new transformed, and robes
For me to sacrifice: you know the fashion.
I'll rather change five, then apparel one:
For men have living souls, clothes are vnanimate.
Here take this ring, deliver it to my brother,
An officer in the Wardrobe, he will furnish you
With robes and clothes of any stuff, or fashion.
Almuten Alchochoden of the stars attend you.
I kiss your hands divine Astrologer.
UP quickly Trincalo to my child Sulpitia,
Bid her lay out my fairest Damask Table-cloathes.
The fairest Holland sheets, all th'siluer plate,
Two gossips cups of gold: my greatest Diamonds:
Make hast.
As fast as Alchochoden and Almuten
Can carry me: for sure these two are Devils.
This is that blessed day I so much longed for:
Four hours attendance till my man be changed,
Fast lockes me in the lovely arms of Flauia. Away Trincalo.
How slow the day slides on! When we desire
Times hast, it seems to loose a match with Lobsters,
And when we wish him stay, he imp's his wings
With feathers plumed with thought. Why Trincalo!
Here sir.
Come let's away for cloth of silver,
Wine and materials for the Sacrifice.
Eugenio, these are wonders past belief.
Is your old father of so poor a judgment
To think it in the power of man to turn
One person to another?
Lelio, his desire
T'inioy your sister Flauia, begets hope,
Which like a waking dream, makes false appearance
Lively as truth it self.
But who's the man
That works these miracles?
An Astrologer.
How deals Astrology with transmutation?
Under the veil and colour of Astrology,
He clouds his hellish skill in Necromancy.
Believe it, by some Art, or false imposture,
He will much disturb your love, and yours, Eugenio.
Eugenio, it is high time for vs t'awake.
And as you love our Flauia, and I
Your sister fair Sulpitia; let's doe something
Worthy their beauties. Who falls into a sea,
Swollen big with tempest, but he boldly beats
The waives with arms and legs, to save his life?
So let vs strive against troublous storms of love,
With our best power, least after we ascribe
The loss to our dull negligence, not Fortune.
Lelio, had I no interest in your sister,
The holy league of friendship should command me,
Besides the seconding Sulpitia's love,
Who to your nobleness commends her life.
She cannot out-loue me, nor you out-friend me,
For th'sacred name whereof, I have rejected
Your fathers offers, importunities,
Letters, Conditions, Servants, Friends, and lastly
His tender of Sulpitia in exchange
For Flauia??? But though I love your sister
Like mine own soul; yet did the laws of friendship
Master that strong affection; and denied him.
Thanks ever, and as long shall my best service
Waite on your will. Cricca our hope's in thee,
Thou must instruct vs:
You must trust in Fortune
That mike's or mar's the wisest purposes.
What sai'st? What think?
Here's no great need of thinking
Not speech; the oil of scorpions cure's their poison.
The thing it self that's bent to hurt and hinder you
Offer's a remedy: it is no sooner known
But th'worst on it is prevented.
How good Cricca?
Soon as you see this false Antonio
Come near your doors with speeches made of purpose,
Full of humility and compassion:
With long narrations how he escaped from ship-wrack
And other feigned inventions of his dangers:
Bid him be gone; and if he press to enter,
Fear not the reverence of your father's looks,
Cudgel him thence.
But were it not better Cricca
Keep him fast locked, till his own shape return,
And so by open course of Law correct him?
No. For my moister would conceive that counsel
Sprung from my brains: and so should I repent it.
Advise no more, but home and charge your people,
That if Antonio come, they drive him thence
With threatening words, and blows if need be.
It is done.
I kiss your hands Eugenio.
Your servant, sir.
CRicca commend my service to my Mistress.
Commend it t'her your self. Marked you not, while
We talked??? how through the window she attended,
And fed her eyes on you? there shoe's.
It is true.
And as from nights of Storms the glorious Sun
Breake's from the East, and chase thence the Clouds
That choak't the Air with horror; so her beauty
Dispels sad darkness from my troubled thoughts,
And cleare's my heart.
Life of my soul well met.
How is it my dearest Flauia?
Eugenio,
As best becomes a woman, most unfortunate.
That having loved so long, and been persuaded
Her chaste affection was by yours requited,
Have by delays been famished. Had I concealed
Those flames your virtue kindled, then you'd sued,
Entreated, sworn, and vowed, and long ever this
Wrought all means possible to effect our marriage.
But now.
Sweet soul despair not, weep not thus,
Unless you wish my heart should life-bloud drop,
Fast as your eyes do tears. What is it you fear?
First that you love me not.
Not love my Flauia?
Wrong not your judgment: rip up this amorous breast
And in that Temple see a heart that burne's
In the vestal sacrifice of chastest love,
Before your beauties Deity.
If so,
Whence grows this coldness in soliciting
My brother to the match?
Consider sweetest,
I have a father rival in my love;
And though no duty, reverence, nor respect
Have power to change my thoughts: yet it is not comely
With open violence to withstand his will;
But by fair courses try to divert his mind
From disproportioned affections.
And if I cannot, then nor fear of anger,
Nor life, nor lands, shall cross our purposes.
Comfort your self sweet Flauia: for your brother
Second's our hopes with his best services.
But other fears oppress me: me thinks I see
Aontonio my old father, new returned,
Whom all intelligence gave drowned this three months,
Enforcing me to marry th'foole Pandolfo,
Thus to obtain Sulpitia for himself.
And so last night I dreamed, and ever since
Have been so scared, that if you hast not
Expect my death.
Dreams flow from thoughts of things we most desire,
Or fear, and seldom prove true Prophets, would they did.
Then were I now in full possession
Of my best Flauia: as I hope I shall be.
Sir, pray take your leave, this to no end,
'T will but increase your grief and hers.
Farewell
Sweet Flauia, rest contented with assurance
Of my best love and service.
Farewell Eugenio.
FLauia I kiss your hands.
Sulpitia I pray you pardon me, I saw you not.
I faith you have some fixed thoughts draw your eyes inward when you see not your friends before you.
True, and I think the same that trouble you.
Then it is the love of a young Gentleman, and bitter hatred of an old Dotard.
It is so, witness your brother Eugenio, and the rotten Kerr???case of Pandolfo. Had I a hundred hearts, I should want room to entertain his love, and the other's hate.
I could say as much, were it not sin to slander the dead. Miserable wenches, how have we offended our fathers, that they should make vs the price of their dotage, the medcine of their griefs, that have more need of Physic our selves? I must bee frost-bitten with the cold of your Dads winter, that mine may thaw his old ice with the Spring of your sixteen. I thank my dead mother that left me a women's will in her last Testament: That's all the weapons we poor girls can use, and with that will I fight against father, friends, and kindred, and either enjoy Lelio, or dye in the field in's quarrel.
Sulpitia, you are happy that can withstand your fortune with so merry a resolution.
Why? should I twine mine arms to cables, and sigh my soul to Air? Sit up all night like a Watching Candle, and distill my brains through my eye-lids? your brother loves me, and I love your brother; and where these two consent, I would fine see a third could hinder vs.
Alas, our Sex is most wretched, nursed up from infancy in continual slavery. No sooner able to pray for our selves, but they broil and hudde vs so with sour awe of parents, that wee dare not offer to bate at our own desires. And whereas it becomes men to vent their amorous passions at their pleasure; wee poor souls must rake up our affections in the ashes of a burnt heart, not daring to sigh, without excuse of the Spleen, or fit of the mother.
I plainly will profess my love of Lelio, it is honest, chaste, and staines not modesty. Shall I be married to Antonio, that hath been a soust Sea-fish, this three months? and if hee bee alive comes home with as many impairs, as a Hunting Gelding fallen Pack-horse. No, no, I'll see him freeze to Crystal first. In other things, good father, I am your most obedient daughter, but in this a pure wo???man. It is your part to offer, mine to refuse if I like not. Lelio's a handsome Gentleman, young, fresh, rich, and well-fashioned, and him will Sulpitia have, or dye a maid: And in faith the temper of my blood teal's me I was never borne to so cold a misfortune. Fie Flauia, fie wench, no more with tears and sighs, cheer up, Eugenio to my knowledge loves you, and you shall have him: I say you shall have him.
I doubt not of his love, but know no means, how hee dares work against so great a Rival: your father in a spleen may disin???hereto him.
And giue't to whom? has none but him and me: What though he dote a while upon your beauty; hee will not prove vnna???turall to his son. Go to your chamber: my Genius whispers in my ear, and swears this night we shall enjoy our loves, and with that hope fare-well.
Fare-well Sulpitia.
WHile the Astrologer haw's out Trincalo,
Squaring and framing him t'Antonio,
Cricca I'll make thee partner of a thought
That some thing troubles me.
Say, sir, what first?
I have no heart to give Albumazar
The chain I promised him.
Deliver it me
And I'll present it to him in your name.
'Thas been an Aireloome to our house four hundredth years,
And should I leave it now, I fear good fortune
Would sly from vs, and follow it.
Then give him
The price in gold.
It comes to a hundred pounds.
And how would that well husbanded grow in time?
I was a fool to promise, I confess it,
I was too hot and forward in the business.
Indeed I wondered that your wary thriftiness
Not wont to drop one penny in a quarter
Idly, would part with such a sum so easily.
My covetous thrift aims at no other mark
Then in fit time and place to show my bounty.
Who gives continually, may want at length
Wherewith to feed his liberality.
But for the love of my dear Flauia
I would not spare my life, much less my treasure.
Yet if with honour I can win her cheaper,
Why should I cast away so great sum?
True: I have a trick now hatching in my brain
How you may handsomely preserve your credit,
And save the chain.
I would gladly do it,
But fear hee understands vs what wee say.
What can you loose to try't, if it take
There's so much saved, if otherwise, nothing lost.
What is it good Cricca?
Soon as Albumazar coma's, loded with news
Of th'transmutation of your servant Trincalo,
I'll entertain him here: mean while steal you
Closely into the room, and quickly hide
Some special piece of Plate: Then run out amazed,
Roaring, that all the Street may know you're robed.
Next threaten-to attach him and accuse him
Before a Justice, and in th'end agree,
If hee restore the Plate, you'll give the Chain,
Otherwise not.
But if wee bee discou'red!
For by his instruments and familiars
He can do much.
Lay all the fault on Trincalo.
But here's the maine point. If you can dissemble
Cunningly, and frame your countnance to express
Pity and anger, that so learned a man
Should use his friend so basely: If you can call
An out-cry well, roar high, and terrible???
I'll fetch a cry from th'bottome of my heals
But I'll roar loud enough; and thou must second me
With wonder at the sudden accident.
But yours is the maine part, for as you play't
You win or loose the chain.
No more, no more, hee comes.
SIgnior Pandolfo, three quarters of an hour
Render's your servant perfectly transformed.
Is he not wholly changed? what parts are wanting?
Antonio's shape hath clothed his bulk and visage,
Only his hands and feet, so large and callous,
Require more time to supple.
Pray you sir
How long shall he retain this metamorphosis?
The complete circle of a natural day.
A natural day? Are any days unnatural?
I mean the revolution o'th'first mover,
Just twice twelve hours, in which period the rapt motion thieves, thieves!
Rolls all the Orbs from East to Occident.
Help, help, thieves, thieves, neighbours I am robed,
What a noise make you sir?
Have I not reason
That thus am robed, thieves, thieves, call Constables,
The Watch, and Sergeants. Friends and Constables,
Neighbours I am undone.
This well begun
So hee hold out still with a higher strain.
What ails you sir?
Cricca my chamber's spoiled
Of all my hangings, clothes, and silver plate.
Why this is bravely feigned; continue sir.
Lay all the Gold-smithes, Keepers, Marshals, Bayliues.
Fie sir, your passion fall's, cry louder, roar
That all the Street may hear.
Thieves, thieves, thieves!
All that I had is gone, and more then all.
Ha, ha, ha: hold out, hold out; lay out a Lyons throat,
A little louder.
I can cry no longer,
My throate's sore, I am robed, I am robed, al's gone.
Both my own treasure, and the things I borrowed.
Make thou an out-cry, I have lost my voice:
Cry fire, and then they'll hear thee.
good, good, thieves,
What ha you lost?
Wine, Jewels, Table-cloathes,
A cupboard of rich plate.
Fie, you'll spoil all.
Now you out-do it. Say but a bowl or two.
Villain, I say al's gone; The room's as clean
As a wiped Looking-glasse: ??j me, ??j me.
What, in good earnest?
Fool in accursed earnest.
You gull me sure.
The window towards the South stand's op, from whence
Went all my treasure. Whore's th'Astrologer?
Here sir: and hardly can abstain from laughing
To see you vex your self in vain.
In vain Albumazar?
I left my plate with you, and it is all vanished,
And you shall answer it.
O! were it possible
By power of Art, to check what Art hath done,
Your man should ne'er be changed: To wrong me thus
With foul suspicion of flat felony?
Your Plate, your cloth of silver, wine, and jewels,
Linen, and all the rest, I gave to Trincalo,
And for more safety, locked them in the lobby.
He will keep them carefully. But as you love your Mistress
Disturb him not this half hour, least you'll have him
Like to a Centaur, half Clown, half Gentleman.
Suffer his foot and hand that's yet vntouch't,
To be ennobled like his other members.
Albumazar, I pray you pardon me,
Th'vnlook'd-for bareness of the room amazed me.
How? think you me so negligent to commit
So rich a mass of treasure to th'open danger
Of a large casement, and suspicious Alley?
No sir, my sacrifice no sooner done
But I wrapped all up safe, and gave it Trincalo.
I could be angry, but that your sudden fear
Excuses you. Fie, such a noise as this
Half an hour past, had skar'd th'intelligences,
And spoiled the work, but no harm done: go walk
Westward, directly Westward, one half hour:
Then turn back, and take your servant turned t'Antonio.
And as you like my skill perform your promise.
I mean the Chain.
Content. Let's still go Westward,
Westward good Cricca, still directly Westward.
HArpax. Furbo, and Ronca, come out, al's clear,
Why here's a noble prize worth venturing for.
Is not this braver then sneak all night in danger,
Picking of lockes, or hooking clothes at windoes?
Here's plate, and gold, and cloth, and meat and wine,
All rich: and easily got. Ronca stay here about,
And waite till Trincalo come forth: Then call him
With a low reverence Antonio,
Give him this gold with thanks, tell him he lent it
Before hee went to Barberry.
How loose ten pieces?
There's a necessity in it, devise some course
To get't again: if not; our gaine's sufficient
To bear that loss. Furbo find out Bavilona
The Courtesan, let her fine her self a Gentlewoman
Enamoured of Antonio, bid her inuit him
To banquet with her, and by all means possible
Force him stay there two hours.
Why two hours?
That in that time thou moist convey
Our treasure to the Inn, and speak a boat
Ready for Grauesend, and provide a supper:
Where, with those precious liquors, and good meates,
We'll cheer our selves; and thus well fed, and merry,
Take Boat by night.
And what will you do?
First in and usher out our changeling Trincalo:
Then finish up a business of great profit,
Begun with a rich Merchant, that admires
My skill in Alchemy. I must not loose it.
Harpax bestow the plate, Furbo our beards,
Black patches for our eyes, and other properties,
And at the time and place meet all at Supper.
STand forth transformed Antonio fully mued
From browne soar feathers of dull yeomanry
To th'glorious bloom of gentry; prune your self slick,
Swear boldly you're the man you represent
To all that dare deny it.
I find my thoughts
Most strangely altered??? but me thinks my face
Feels still like Trincalo.
You imagine so.
Senses are oft deceived. As an attentive Angler
Fixing his steady eyes on the swift streams
Of a steep tumbling torrent, no sooner turns
His sight to land, but giddy, thinks the firm banks
And constant trees, move like the running waters:
So you that thirty years have lived in Trincalo,
Changed suddenly, think you're so still; but instantly
These thoughts will vanish.
Give me a looking-glasse???
To read your skill in these new lineaments.
I'd rather give you poison: for a glass
By secret power of cross reflections,
And optic virtue, spoils the wondrous work
Of transformation, and in a moment turns you???
Spite of my skill, to Trincalo, as before.
We read that Apuleius by a rose
Changed from an Ass to Man: so by a mirror,
You'll loose this noble lustre, and turn Ass.
I humbly take my leave; but still remember
T'auoyd the Devil and a looking glass.
New-borne Antonio, I kiss your hands.
Divine Albumazar I kiss your hands.
NOw am I grown a gentleman, and a fine one,
I know it by th'kissing of my hands so courtly,
My courteous knees bend in so true a distance,
As if my foot walked in a frame of purpose.
Thus I accost you: or thus, sweet sir, your servant:
Nay more, your servants servant: that's your grand-seruant.
I could descend from th'top of Pals to th'bottome,
And on each step strew parting complements,
Strive for a door while a good Carpenter
Might make a new one. I am your shadow sir,
And bound to wait upon you. I'faith I will not: pray sir, &amp;c.
O brave Albumazar!
Just Aesop's Crow, prink't up in borrowed feathers.
My veins are filled with newness: ?? for a Surgeon
To op this Arm, and view my gentle blood,
To try if it run two thousand pounds a year.
I feel my understanding is enlarged
With the rare knowledge of this latter age.
A sacred fury ouer-swayes me. Prime!
Deal quickly??? play, discard, I set ten shillings six pence.
You see it? my rest, five and fifty. Boy, more cards;
And as thou go, lay out some roaring oaths
For me; I'll pay thee again with interest.
O brave Albumazar!
How his imagination boils, and works in all things
He ever saw or heard!
At gleek? content.
A morneuall of Ases, gleek of Knaves,
Just nine apiece. Sir my gray Barbary
Against your dun cow, three train scents and th'course,
For fifty pound: as I am a gentleman
I'll meet next Cocking, and bring a haggard with me
That stoops as free as lightning, strikes like thunder.
I lye? my reputation you shall hear on it.
O brave Albumazar!
He will grow stark mad I fear me.
Now I know
I am perfectly transformed, my mind incites me
To challenge some brave fellow for my credit,
And for more safety, get some friend in private
To take the business up in peace and quiet.
Signior Antonio?
There's not a crum of Trincalo.
In all this frame, but th'loue of Armellina:
Were it not for thee I'd travail, and home again
As wise as I went over.
Signior Antonio? welcome ten thousand times:
Blessed be the Heavens and seas for your return.
I thank you sir: Antonio is your servant,
I am glad to see you well. Fie, I kiss your hands: and thus accost you.
This three months all your kindred, friends and children,
Mourned for your death.
And so they well might do,
For five days I was under water; and at length
Got up and spread my self upon a chest,
Rowing with arms, and steering with my feet;
And thus in five days more got land: believe it
I made a most incredible escape,
And safe return from Barbary: at your service.
Welcome ten thousand times from Barbary.
No friend more glad to see Antonio
Then I: nor am I thus for hope of gain;
But that I find occasion to be grateful
By your return. Do you remember sir,
Before you went, as I was once arrested,
And could not put in bail; you passing by,
Lent me ten pound, and so discharged the debt?
Yes, yes, as well as it were but yesterday.
Oft have I waited at your house with money,
And many thanks: but you were still beyond seas.
Now am I happy of this fair occasion
To testify my honest care to pay you:
For you may need it.
Sir, I doe indeed,
Witness my treasure cast away by shipwreck.
Here sir.
Is the gold good, for mine was good I lent you.
It was, and so is this. Signior Antonio, for this courtesy
Call me your servant.
Farewell good servant, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. I know not so much as his name! ten pound? this change is better then my birth: for in all the years of my yeomanry I could never yoke two crowns, and now I have hearded ten fair twenty shil???ling pieces. Now will I go to this Astrologer, and hire him turn my Cart to a Caroch, my four Jade to two pair of Dutch mares, my mistress Armellina to a Lady, my Plow-boy Dick to two guar???ded foot-men: then will I hurry my self to the Mercers books, wear rich clothes, be called Tony by a great man, sell my lands, pay no debts, hate Citizens, and beat Sergeants: and when all fails, sneak out of Antonio with a two-peny looking-glasse, and turn as true Trincalo as ever.
SIgnior Antonio, welcome.
My life here's ten pound more. I thank you heartily.
Never in fitter season could I find you.
If you remember sir, before you went
To Barberry, I lent you ten pound in gold.
Faith I remember no such thing excuse me.
What may I call your name?
My name is Harpax,
Your friend and neighbour, of your old acquaintance,
What Harpax! I am your servant, I kiss your hands:
You must excuse me, you never lent me money.
Sir, as I live, ten twenty-shilling pieces.
Dangers at Sea, I find, have hurt my memory.
Why here's your own hand-writing sealed and signed,
In presence of your Cousin Iulio.
It is true, it is true; but I sustained great losses
By reason of the shipwreck. Here's five pieces,
Will that content you? and to morrow morning
Come to my house and take the rest.
Well sir,
Though my necessity would importune you
For all, yet on your worships word, the rest
I'll call for in the morning. Farewell Antonio.
I see we gentlemen can sometime borrow
As well as lend, and are as loath to pay
As meaner men. I'll home, lest other creditors
Call for the rest.
SIgnior Antonio? I saw you as you landed,
And in great hast followed to congratulate
Your safe return, with these most wished embraces.
And I accept your joy with like affection.
How do you call your self?
Have you forgot
Your dear friend Ronca, whom you loved so well?
O I remember now my dear friend Ronca.
Thanks to the fortune of the seas that saved you.
I fear I owe him money: how shall I shift him?
How do's your body Ronca?
My dear Antonio,
Never so well as now I have the power
Thus to embrace my friend, whom all th'Exchange
Gave drowned for three whole months. My dear Antonio.
I thank you sir.
I thank you.
While my dear Ronca
Clipped me, my purse shook dangerously; yet both his arms
And hands embraced my neck: here's none behind me,
How can this be?
Most dear Antonio,
Was not your passage dangerous from Barbary?
We had great winds and tempests; and I fear me,
You felt the force at sea.
Yes dearest Ronca.
How's this? I see his hands, and yet my purse is gone.
Signior Antonio, I see your mind's much troubled
About affairs of worth; I take my leave,
And kiss your hands of liberality.
And kiss my hands of liberality?
I gave him nothing: O my purse, my purse!
Dear master Ronca.
What's your pleasure sir?
Show me your hand.
Here it is.
But wheres the other?
Why here.
But I mean whore's your other hand?
Think you me the Giant with a hundred hands?
Give me your right.
My right?
Your left.
My left?
Now both.
There's both my dear Antonio???
Keep your self dark, eat broth; your fearful passage,
And want of natural rest hath made you frantic.
Villain, rogue, cut-purse, thief, dear Ronca stay: hoe's gone
In the Devils name, how could this fellow do it?
I felt his hands fast locked about my neck;
And still he spoke, it could not be his ?????????
For that was full of dear Antonio.
My life he stol't wed's feet: such a trick more
Will work worse with me then a looking-glasse.
To loose five pound in curtsy, and the rest
In salutation!
Signior Antonio,
What ails you?
Ronca a rogue, a cut-purse,
Hath robed me of five twenty-shilling pieces.
What kind of man was he? something like me?
Had such a thievish countenance as your own,
But that he wore a black patch ore his eye.
Met you with Ronca? it is the cunningest nimmer
Of the whole company of cut-purse hall???
I am sorry I was not here to warn you of him.
FVrbo no more, unless thy words were charms
Of power to revive him: Antonio's dead.
Hoe's dead, and in his death hath buried
All my delights: my ears are deaf to music
That sounds of pleasure: sing then the doleful'st notes
That ever were set by melancholy: O Antonio!
Flow streams of liquid salt from my sad eyes,
To celebrate his mournful exequies.
Antonio's dead, hoe's dead, and I remain
To draw my poor life in continual pain,
Till it have paid to his sad memory
Duty of love: ?? then most willingly
Drowned with my tears, as hee with waives, I dye.
Break thy sad strings, and instrument: O strange! hoe's here.
Signior Antonio! my heart's sweet content!
My life and better portion of my soul!
Are you returned? and safe? for whose sad death
I spent such streams of tears, and gusts of sighs?
Or is it my love, that to my longing fancy
Frames your desired shape, and mocks my senses?
Whom do you talk withal fair gentlewoman?
With my best friend, commander of my life,
My most beloved Antonio.
With me?
What's your desire with me sweet Lady?
Sir to command me, as you have done ever,
To what you please: for all my liberty
Lies in your service.
Now I smell the business???
This is some gentlewoman enamoured
With him whose shape I bear: Fie, what an Ass
Was I to strange my self, and loose th'occasion
Of a good banquet, and her company?
Il'e mend it as I can. Madame I did but jest
To try if absence cause you to forget
A friend that loved you ever.
Forget Antonio,
Wbose dear remembrance doth inform the soul
Of your poor servant Beuilona? no,
No, had you died, it had not quenched one spark
Of th'sweet affection which your love hath kindled
In this warm breast.
Madam, the waives had drowned me.
But that your love held up my chin.
Will it please you
Enter, and rest your self, refresh the weariness
Of your hard travel: I have good wine and fruits,
My husband's out of town: you shall command
My house, &amp; all that's in it.
Why are you married?
Have you forgot my husband? an angry roarer?
O I remember him: but if he come?
Whence grows this fear? how come you so respectful?
You were not wont be numbed with such a coldness.
Go in sweet life, go in.
O! I remember while I lived in Barberry
A pretty song the Moors sing to a gridiron:
Sweet Madame by your favour I'll sing't to this.
Alcoch Dolash, &amp;c. Thus it is in English.
My heart in flames doth fry
Of thy beauty,
While I
Die.
Fie?
And why
Should thou deny
Me thy sweet company?
My brains to tears do flow
While all below
Doth glow.
O!
Foe
If so,
How can thou go
About to say me no?
This the Moors call two wings upon a Gridiron.
But it goes sweeter far of the iron Instrument.
There's one within my Kitchen ready strung: go in.
Sweet Lady pardon me, I'll follow you.
Happy Antonio in so rare a Mistress!
But happier I, that in his place enjoy her:
I say still, there's no pleasure like Transforming.
NOw is the Ass expecting of a banquet,
Ready to court, embrace, and kiss his Mistress.
But I'll soon staue him. Tick, took, what ho!
Who's that so boldly knocks? I am not within;
Or busy: Why so importunate? who is it?
It is I.
Your name?
Thomas up William, up Morgan, up Day, up Roger, &amp;c.
???pinola's Campe's broke loose: a troupe of Soldiers!
Oj me! my Husband! Oj me wretch, it is my Husband.
One man, and wear so many names!
O sir,
'Has more outrageous devils in his rage,
Then names. As you respect your life, avoid him.
Down at that window.
It is as high as Paules.
Open the Garden door.
He 'has the keys.
Down at some window, as you love your life,
Tender my honour, and your safety.
Beuilona?
Down, or I'll break the doors, and with the splinters
Beat all thy bones to pieces: Down you whore!
Be patient but a little; I come instantly.
Ha'you no trunk nor chest to hide me?
None sir.
Alas I am clean undone, it is my Husband.
Doubtless, this whore hath some of her companions
That wrong me thus. But if I catch the villain,
Il'e bath my hungry sword, and sharpe revenge,
In his heart-bloud. Come down.
I cannot stay.
There stands an empty Hogshead with a false bottom
To op and shut at pleasure: come hither, in,
In, as you love your life.
But hear you Madam,
Is there no looking-glasse within't, for I hate glasses
As naturally, as some do Cats, or Cheese.
In, in, there's none.
Who now? Is the Ass past?
I tuned him up, ha, ha, ha, I fear he will fall a working.
Second me handsomely, we'll entertain him
An hour or two, and laugh and get his cloath's
To make our sport up. Wife, whore's the empty hogshead
That wont to stand under the stairs?
There still.
Out with it quickly: I must have it filed.
Not to day, good sir, to morrow will serve as well.
I must have it now.
It is more then I can cary.
I'll help thee: so, so. Foh! this vessel's musty.
Fetch out some water.
Fetched your self.
Pox of all Transmutation, I am smothered.
Lady, as you love me, give the Hogshead vent.
The beer that's in it will work and break the vessel.
Signior Antonio, as you love your life
Lie still and close, for if you stir you die.
So, so, now shake it, so, so.
Oh I am drowned, I drown!
Whence coma's this hollow sound?
I drown, I smother!
My life it is Trincalo, For I have heard that Coxcomb,
That Ass, that Clown, seeks to corrupt my wife,
Sending his fruit and dainties from the Country.
O that it were he. How would I use the villain!
First crop his ears, then slit his nose, and gueld him,
And with a red hot Iron sear his raw wounds;
Then barrel him again, and send the Eunuch
To the great Turk to keep his Concubines. Tick, took, who's with???in here?
One that you dare not touch.
One that I dare not?
Out villain, out. Signior Antonio!
Had it been any but your self, hee had died.
But as you saved my life before you went,
So now command mine in your services???
I would have sworn y'ad drowned in Barberry.
It was a hard passage: but not so dangerous
As was this Vessel. Pray you conceive no ill,
I meant no harm, but called at your wife to know
How my son Lelio did, and daughter Flauia.
Sir I believe you.
But I must tell you one thing,
You must not be so jealous, on my honour
Shoe's very honest.
For you I make no question.
But there's a rogue called Trincalo, whom if I catch.
I'll teach him.
Who? you mean Pandolfo's Farmer.
Alas poor fool, hoe's a stark Ass, but harmless.
And though she talk with him, it is but to laugh,
As all the world do's at him: Come be friends
At my entreaty.
Sir, for your sake.
I thank you.
Let's have a fire; and while I dry my self,
Provide good wine and meat. I'll dine with you.
I must not home thus wet. I am something bold with you.
My house and self are at your service.
Lead in.
Alas poor, Trincalo had thou been taken,
Thou had been tuned for Turkey. Ha; ha, ha; fair fall Antonio's shape.
What a notorious Wittall's this! Ha, ha, ha.
Thus by great favour of propitious Stars,
From fearful storms, ship-wrack, and raging billows,
Merciless jaws of death, am I returned
To th'safe and quiet bosom of my Country,
And wished embraces of my friends and kindred.
The memory of these misfortunes past,
Season's the welcome, and augment's the pleasure
I shall receive of my son Lelio???
And daughter Flauia. So doth alloy
Make gold, that else were useless, serviceable.
So th'rugged fore-head of a threatening Mountain,
Threateus the smoothness of a smiling Valley.
WHat do I see? Is not this Trincalo
Transformed t'Antonio? it is: and so perfectly
That did the right Antonio now confront him,
I'd swear they both were true, or both were false.
This man admires the unexpectedness
Of my return.
O wondrous power of Stars,
And skill of Art t'apply't. You that are married
May justly fear, least this Astrologer
Cloth your wives servants in your shape, and use you
As Iupiter did Amphitrio: You that are rich,
In your own form may loose your gold.
It is Cricca.
Hee seeme's so just the man hee represent's,
That I dare hardly use him as I purposed.
Cricca, well met, how fares my friend Pandolfo?
Your friend Pandolfo? How are your means improu'd;
To stile familiarly your Moister friend?
What say thou?
That I rejoice your Worship's safe returned
From your late drowning. Th'Exchange hath given you lost.
And all your friends worn mourning three months past.
The danger of the Shipwreck I escaped
So desperate was, that I may truly say
I am new borne, not saved.
Ha, ha, ha, through what a grace
And goodly countenance, the Rascal speaks?
What a grave portance? Could Antonio
Himself out-do him? ?? you notorious villain!
Who would have thought thou could have thus dissembled?
How now? a servant thus familiar? Sirrah
Use your companions so: more reverence
Become's you better.
As though I understood not,
The end of all this plot and goodly business?
Come I know all, see! this vntil'd clod of earth
Conceits his mind transformed, as well as body.
Hee wrings and bites his lips for fear of laughing. Ha, ha, ha!
Why laugh you sir?
Sir, to see thee changed
So strangely, that I can not spy one inch
Of thy old Clownish Carcass. Ha, ha.
Laughter proceeds
From absurd actions that are harmless.
Ha, ha, ha.
Sententious Block-head!
And you're ill advised
To jest in steed of pity. Alas! my miseries,
Dangers of death, slau'ry of cruel Moors,
And tedious journeys, might have easly altered
A stronger body; much more this decayed vessel,
Out-worne with age, and broken by misfortunes.
Leave your set speeches. Go to Antonio's house,
Effect your business. For upon my credit
You are so well turned, they dare not but accept thee.
Where should I hope for welcome, if not there;
From my own house, children, and family?
Is it possible this. Coxcomb should conceive
His mind transformed? How gravely he continues
The countnance hee began? Ha, ha. Why block-head?
Think to deceive me too? Why Trincalo?
I understand you not. Hands off.
Art not thou Trincalo,
Pandolfo's man?
I not so much as know him.
Dare thou denie't to me?
I dare, and must
To all the world, belong as Antonio lives.
You arrant Ass, have not I known thee serve
My Moister in his Farm this thirteen years?
By all the oaths that bind men's consciences
To truth, I am Antonio; and no other.
WHat means this noise? ?? Cricca! what's the matter?
Sir heare's your Farmer Trincalo, transformed
So just, as he were melted, and new cast
In the true mould of old Antonio.
Th'right eye's no liker to the left, then hee
To my good neighbour. Divine Albumazar!
How I admire thy skill! just so hee looked,
And thus hee walked; this is his face, his hair,
His eyes, and countnance; If his voice be like
Then is th'Astrologer a wonder-worker.
Signior Pandolfo, I thank the heavens as much
To find you well, as for my own return.
How do's your daughter, and my love, Sulpitia?
Well, well, sir.
This is a good beginning,
How naturally the rogue dissembles it?
With what a gentle garb, and civil grace
He speake's and looks: How cunningly Albumazar
Hath for our purpose suited him in Barberry clothes. I'll try him fur???there: Sir,
We heard you were drowned, pray you, how escaped you ship-wrack?
No sooner was I ship't for Barberry,
But fair wind followed, and fair weather led vs.
When entered in the Straits of Gibraltar,
The heavens, and seas, and earth, conspired against vs,
The tempest tore our helm, and rent our tackels,
Broke the maine Mast, while all the sea about vs
Stood up in watery Mountains to overwhelm vs.
And struck's against a Rock, splitting the vessel
T'a thousand splinters. I, with two Mariners
Swam to the Coast, where by the barbarous Moors
We were surprised, fettered, and sold for slaves.
This tale th'Astrologer penned, and he hath cond it.
But by a Gentleman of Italy
Whom I had known before.
No more, this taste
Proue's thou can play the rest. For this fair story
My hand I make thy ten pound, twenty Marks.
Thou look and speak so like Antonio.
Whom should I look, and speak like, but my self?
Good still???
But now my honest Trincalo,
Tell me, whore's all the Plate, the gold, and Jewels,
That the Astrologer, when hee had transformed thee
Committed to thy charge? are they safe locked?
I understand you not.
The jewels man,
The Plate and gold th'Astrologer that changed thee
Bad thee lay up?
What plate? what gold? what Jewels.
What transformation? what Astrologer?
Leave of Antonio now, and speak like Trincalo.
Leave of your jesting; it neither fits your place
Nor age, Pandoflo, to scoff your ancient friend.
I know not what you mean by gold and jewels,
Nor by th'Astrologer, nor Trincalo.
Better and better still. Believe me sir,
Hee thinke's himself Antonio, and ever shall bee,
And so possess your Plate. Art not thou Trincalo
My Masters Farmer?
I am Antonio
Your Master's friend, if hee teach you more manners.
Humour of wiuing's gone: farewell good Flauia,
Three thousand pound must not bee lost so slightly.
Come sir, we'll drag you to th'Astrologer,
And turn you to your ragged bark of Yeomanry.
To me these terms!
Come I'll not loose my Plate.
Stay, sir, and take my counsel. Let him still
Firmly conceit himself the man hee seeme's:
Thus hee himself deceived, will far more earnestly
Effect your business, and deceive the rest.
There's a maine difference twixt a selfe-bred action
And a for'st carriage. Suffer him then to enter
Antonio's house: and waite th'euent: for him
He cannot scope: What you entend to do,
Do it when 'has served your turn. I see the Maid,
Let's hence least they suspect our consultations.
Thy counsel's good: Away.
Look Trincalo
Yonder's your beauteous Mistress Armellina,
And daughter Flauia. Courage, I warrant thee.
Blessed be the heavens, that rid me of this trouble.
For with their Farmer and Astrologer,
Plate, and gold, the'aue almost matted me.
ARmellina?
Mistress.
Is the door fast?
Yes, as an Usurers purse.
Come hither wench.
Look here, there's Trincalo, Pandolfo's Farmer
Wrapped in my father's shape: prithee come quickly,
And help me to abuse him.
Notorious Clown!
These are my gates, and that's the Cabinet
That keeps my Jewels, Lelio, and his sister.
Never was villainy so personate
In seemly properties of gravity.
Tick, took.
Who's hee that knock's so boldly?
What want you, sir?
O my fair daughter Flauia! Let all the Stars
Power down full blessings on thee. Op the doors.
Mark! his fair daughter Flauia ha, ha, ha.
Most shameless villain how hee counterfeits!
Know not thy father, old Antonio?
Is all the world grown frantic?
What Antonio?
Thy loving father, Flauia.
My father!
Would thou were in his place. Antonio's dead,
Dead, under water drowned.
That dead and drowned
Am I.
I love not to converse with dead men.
Open the door sweet Flauia.
Sir I am afeared:
Horror encloses me, my hairs stand up,
I sweat to hear a dead man speak, you smell
Of putrefaction: Fie I feel it hither.
You are much abused, I live: come down, and know me.
Mistress let me have some sport too. Who's there?
Let me come in.
Soft, soft sir, You're too hasty.
Quickly, or else ???
Good words, good words, I pray sir,
In strangers houses! were the doors your own,
You might bee bolder.
I'll beat the doors and windowe's
About your ears.
Are you so hot? we'll cool you.
Since your late drowning, your gray and reverent head
Is smeared with Os, and stuck with Cockle-shels,
This is to wash it.
Impudent whore!
Out Carter.
Hence dirty whipstocke, hence you foul clown: be gone,
Or all the water I can make, or borrow,
Shall once more drown you.
ARmellina? who?? do you draw your tongue upon so sharply?
Sir, it is your fathers ghost, that strives by force
To break the doors and enter.
This his grave looks!
In every lineament himself no liker.
Had I not happily been advertised,
What could have forced me think it were Trincalo?
Doubtless, th'Astrologer hath raised a ghost
That walks in th'reverend ghost of my dead father.
These ghosts, these Trincalo's, and Astrologers,
Strike me beside my self. Who will receive me
When mine own son refuses? ?? Antonio!
Infinite power of Art! who would believe
The planets influence could transform a man
To several shapes! I could now beat him soundly
But that he wears the awful countenance
Of my dead father, whose memory I reverence.
If I be changed beyond thy knowledge, son,
Consider that th'excesse of heate in Barbary,
The fear of shipwreck, and long tedious journeys,
Have tanned my skin, and shrunk my eyes and cheeks;
Yet still this face, though altered, may be known.
This scar bears witness, it was the wound thou cur'dst
With thine own hands.
He that changed Trincalo
To Antonio's figure, omitted not the scar
As a maine character.
I have no other marks
Or reasons to persuade thee; me thinks, this word
I am thy father, were argument sufficient
To bend my knees, and creep to my embraces.
A sudden coldness strikes me, my tender heart
Beats with compassion of I know not what.
Sir be gone, truss up your goodly speeches,
Sad shipwrecks, and strange transformations.
Your plot's discovered, twill not take: thy impudence
For once I pardon. The pious reverence.
I owe to th'graue resemblance of my father
Holds back my angry hands. Hence, if I catch you
Haunting my doors again, I'll bastonado you
Out of Antonio's skin. Away.
I go sir,
And yield to such cross fortune as thus drives me.
When this transformed substance of my carcass
Did live imprisoned in a wanton hogshead,
My name was Don Antonio, and that title
Preserved my life, and changed my suit of clothes.
How kindly the good Gentlewoman used me! with what respect and careful tenderness! Your worship sit had ever a sickly consti???tution, and I fear much more now since your long travail??? as you love me, off with these wet things, and put on the suit you left with me before you went to Barberry. Good sir neglect not your health: for upon my experience there's nothing worse for the rheum, then to bee drench't in a musty hogshead. Pretty soul??? such another speech would have drawn off my legs and arms, as easily as hose and doublet. Had I been Trincalo I'd have sworn th'had cheated. But fie! it is base and clownish to suspect, and a gentlewoman's free???ness to part with a cast suit. Now to the business. I'll in to my own house, and first bestow Armellina upon Trincalo, then try what can bee done for Pandolfo: for it is a rule I wont t'obserue. First doe your own affairs, and next your masters. This word master makes me doubt I am not changed as I should be. But al's one, I'll venture, and doe something worthy Antonio's name while I have it.
WRetched Antonio, hast been preserved so strangely
From foreign miseries to be wronged at home?
Bared from thy house by th'scornes of thine own children?
Tick, took.
But stay, there's on knocks boldly, may be somefriend.
Tick, took.
Dwell you here gentleman?
Hee calls me gentleman.
See th'vertue of good clothes: all men salute,
Honour, respect and reverence vs.
Young gentleman,
Let me without offence entreat your name,
And why you knock.
How sir Sawce-boxe, my name?
Or thou some stranger art, or grossly ignorant
That know not me. Ha! what art thou that ask it?
Bee not in choler sir.
Befits it me,
A gentleman of public reputation,
To stoop so low as satisfy the questions
Of base and earthly pieces like thy self? What art thou? ha?
Th'vnfortunate possessor of this house.
Thou lie base Sycophant, my worship owes it.
May be my son hath sold it in my absence,
Thinking me dead. How long has't called you master?
Belong as Antonio possessed it.
Which Antonio?
Antonio Anastasio.
That Anastasio
That drowned in Barbary?
That Anastasio,
That self same man am I: I escaped by swimming,
And now return to keep my former promise
Of Flauia to Pandolfo; and in exchange,
To take Sulpitia to my wife.
All this
I intended'fore I went; but sir, if I
Can be noother then my self, and you
Are that Antonio, you and I are one.
How? one with thee? speak such another syllable,
And by the terror of this deadly steel,
That ne'er saw light, but sent to endless darkness
All that durst stand before't: thou die.
Alas
My weakness grown by age, and pains of travel,
Disarms my courage to defend my self;
I have no strength but patience.
What art now?
Peter, and Thomas, William, what you please.
What boldness matted thee to steal my name?
Sir, heat of wine.
And sir when you're drunk,
Is there no person to put on, but mine,
To cover your intended villainies?
But good sir, if I be not I, who am I?
An Ox, an Ass, a dog.
Strange negligence
To loose my self! me thinks I live and move,
Remember. Could the fearful apprehension
Of th'vgly fear of drowning so transform me?
Or did I dye, and by Pythagoras rule,
My solo's provided of another lodging?
Be what thou wilt, except Antonio,
It is death to touch that name.
Dangers at sea
Are pleasures, weighed with these home-iniuries.
Was ever man thus skar'd beside himself?
O most unfortunate Antonio!
At sea thou suffredst shipwreck of thy goods,
At land of thine own self. Antonio?
Or what name else they please? fly, fly to Barbary,
And rather there endure the foreign cruelty
Of fetters, whips, and Moors, then here at home
Be wronged and baffled by thy friends and children.
How? prating still? why Timothy, be gone,
Or draw, and lay Antonio down betwixt vs,
Let fortune of the fight decide the question.
Here's a brave rogue, that in the Kings high-way
Offers to rob me of my good name. Draw.
These wrongs recall my strength??? I am resolved.
Better dye once, then suffer always. Draw.
Stay. Understand thou well nice points of duel?
Art borne of gentle blood, and pure descent?
Was none of all thy linage hanged, or cuckold?
Bastard, or bastinadoed? is thy pedigree
As long and wide as mine? For otherwise
Thou were most unworthy; and it were loss of honour
In me to fight. More, I have drawn five teeth:
If thine stand sound, the terms are much unequal.
And by strict laws of duel, I am excused
To fight on disadvantage.
This some Ass!
If we concur in all, write a formal challenge,
And bring thy second: mean while I'll make provision
Of Calais sand to fight upon securely. Ha!
AM I awake? or do deceitful dreams
Present to my wild fancy things I see not?
Sir, what amazement's this? why wonder you?
See thou not Trincalo and Antonio?
O strange! they are both here.
Did not thou inform me,
That Trincalo was turned t'Antonio?
Which I believing, like a cursed son,
With most reproachful threats, drove mine old father
From his own doors; and yet rest doubtful, whether
This be the true Antonio: may be th'Astrologer
Hath changed some other, and not Trincalo.
No, feareit not: it is plain: Albumazar
Hath cheated my old master of his plate.
For here's the Farmer, as like himself as ever;
Only his clothes excepted. Trincalo!
Cricca, whore's Trincalo? dost see him here?
Yes, and as rank an Ass as ever he was.
You're much deceived, thou neither see nor know me.
I am transformed, transformed.
You are still thy self.
Lelio, this Farmer's half a fool, half knave.
And as Pandolfo did with much entreaty
Persuade him to transform; so as much labour
Will hardly bring the Coxcomb to himself,
That ne'er was out on it. Who art, if not hee?
My name is Don Antonio, I am now going
To my own house, to give Pandolfo Flauia,
And Armellina to his Farmer Trincalo.
How dare thou Cricca, but a meaner servant,
Resemble me, a man of worth and worship,
To such a clown as Trincalo, a branded fool,
An Ass, a laughing-stock to Town and Country?
Art not ashamed to name him with Antonio?
Do not thy actions, with thy rude behaviour,
Proclaim thee what thou art?
Notorious clown!
Villain, th'hast broke my shoulders.
O did feel him?
I with a pox.
Then you are still Trincalo.
For had thou been Antonio, he had smarted.
I feel it as I am Antonio.
Fool! who loves Armellina?
It is I, it is I.
Antonio never loved his kitchin-maid.
Well, I was taken for Antonio,
And in his name received ten pound in gold,
Was by his mistress entertained; but thou
Enuy'st my happiness: if th'hast th'ambition
To rise as I have done: Go to Albumazar,
And let him change thee to a Knight, or Lord.
Note the strange power of strong imagination.
A world of engines cannot wrest my thoughts,
From being a Gentleman: I am one, and will be:
And though I bee not, yet will think my self so:
And scorn thee Cricca, as a slave and servant.
Tic but lost labour to dissuade his dullness,
Believe me that's your father.
When I drove him thence,
Spite of my blood his reverent countenance
Struck me t'a deep compassion. To clear all,
I'll ask one question. Signior Antonio,
What money took you when you went your voyage?
As I remember, fourscore and fifteen pound
In Barbary gold. Had Lucio kept his word
I had carried just a hundred.
Pardon me, father;
It was my blind ignorance, not want of duty,
That wronged you: all was intended for a Farmer,
Whom an Astrologer, they said, transformed.
How an Astrologer?
When you parted hence
It seems you promise d Flauia to Pandolfo.
News of your death arriving, th'old Gentleman
Importunes me to second what you purposed.
Consulting therefore with my friends and kindred,
Loath my young sister should be buried quick
In the grave of threescore years: by their advice
I fully did deny him. He chafes and storms,
And finds at length a cunning man, that promised
To turn his Farmer to your shape: and thus
Possess your house, and give him Flauia.
Whereof I warned, wronged you in stead of Trincalo.
Then hence it came they called me Trincalo,
And talked of an Astrologer; which names
Almost enraged me past my self and senses.
It is true I promised, but have oft repented it.
And much more since he goes about to cheat me.
He must not have her, sir.
I am glad you're so resolved.
And since, with vs, you find that match unequal,
Let's all entreat you to bestow your daughter
Upon his son Eugenio.
Son, at your pleasure
Dispose of Flauia, with my full consent.
And as you judge him worthy your daughter Flauia,
Think me no less of his Sulpitia.
I do; and ever had desire to match
Into that family; and now I find my self
Old, weak, unfit for marriage, you shall enjoy her,
If I can work Pandolfo by entreaty:
To deal with him with reason and entreaties,
Is to persuade a mad-man: for his love
Makes him no less. All speeches opposite
T'his fixed desire, and loue-corrupted judgment,
Seem extreme fooleries. Will hee consent
To give his daughter to your son, and you
Deny him Flauia? Shall Eugenio
Expect or land or love from old Pandolfo,
Being his open rival? it is impossible.
He sought to cousin you; therefore resolve
To pay him in's own money. Be but advised
By my poor counsel, and one stroke shall cut
The root of his designs, and with his arrows
Strike his own plot so dead, that Albumazar
With all his stars and instruments, shall never
Give it fresh motion.
Cricca, to thy direction
We yield our selves, manage vs at thy pleasure.
Speak quickly Cricca.
The ground of all this business,
Is to catch Trincalo, and locke him fast
Till I release him: next, that no man whisper
Th'least word of your return. Then will I home,
And with a cheerful look tell my old master,
That Trincalo??? but stay, look where he comes,
Let's in, and there at leisure I'll inform you
From point to point. Lelio, detain him here,
Till I send Armellina down to second you.
Cross him in nothing, call him Antonio,
And good enough.
Fear not, let me alone.
THis rascal Cricca with his arguments
Of malice, so disturbs my gentle thoughts,
That I half doubt I am not what I seem:
But that will soon bee cleared; if they receive me
In at Antonio's house, I am Antonio.
Signior Antonio my most loving father?
Blessed be the day and hour of your return.
Son Lelio? a blessing on my child, I pray thee tell me,
How fares my servant Armellina? well?
Have you forgot my sister Flauia?
What my dear daughter Flauia? no, but first
Call Armellina: for this day we'll celebrate
A gleek of Marriages: Pandolfo and Flauia,
Sulpitia and my self, and Trincalo
With Armellina. Call her, good Lelio, quickly.
I will sir.
So: this is well that Lelio
Confesses me his father. Now I am perfect,
Perfect Antonio.
SIgnior Antonio!
My long expected Moister!
O Armellina!
Come let me kiss thy brow like my own daughter.
Sir it is too great a favour. I kiss your foot.
What fallen? Alas! how feeble you are grown,
With your long travel?
True; and being drowned,
Nothing so grieved me as to loose thy company.
But since I am safe returned, for thy good service
I'll help thee to a husband.
A husband, sir?
Some young and lusty youth, or else I'll none.
To one that loue's thee dearly, dearly wench.
A goodly man, like me in limbs and fashion.
Fie, an old man? how? cast my self away,
And bee no nurse but his?
Hoe's not like me
In years and gravity, but fair proportion.
A handsome well-set man as I.
His name?
It is Tom Trin???calo of Totnam,
Signior Pandolfo's lusty Farmer?
That's hee.
Most unexpected happiness! it is the man,
I more esteem then my own life: sweet Moister
Procure that match, and think me satisfied
For all my former service without wages.
But aj I fear you jest. My poor unworthiness
Hopes not so great a fortune as sweet Trincalo.
No, wretched Armellina, in and despair:
Back to thy mournful Dresser; there lament
Thy flesh to Kitchen stuff, and bones to ashes,
For love of thy sweet Farmer.
Alas poor soul,
How prettily she weeps for me! Wilt see him?
My soul waits in my eyes, and leaves my body
Senseless.
Then swear to keep my counsel.
I swear
By th'beauteous eyes of Trincalo.
Why I am Trincalo.
Your worship sir! why do you flout your servant,
Right worshipful Antonio, my reverend Moister?
Pox of Antonio, I am Tom Trincalo.
Why laugh thou?
It is desire and joy,
To see my sweetest.
Look upon me and see him.
I say I see Antonio, and none other.
I am within, thy love; without, thy Moister.
Th'Astrologer transformed me for a day.
Mock not your poor Maid, pray you sir.
I doe not.
Now would I break this head against the stones,
To be unchanged; fie on this Gentry, it stick's
Like Bird-lime, or the Pox. I can not part with it.
Within, I am still thy Farmer Trincalo.
Then must I waite, till old Antonio
Bee brought to bed of a fair Trincalo;
Or flea you, and strip you to yourself again.
Carry me to your chamber. Try me there.
O sir by no means: but with my lovely Farmer
I'd stay all night and thank him.
Cross misfortune!
Accursed Albumazar! and mad Pandolfo!
To change me thus, that when I most desire
To bee my self, I cannot. Armellina!
Fetch me a looking-glasse.
To what end?
Fetch one.
Let my old masters business sink or swim,
This sweet occasion must not be neglected.
Now shall I know th'Astrologers skill: ?? wonderful!
Admired Albumazar in two transmutations:
Here's my old Farmers face. How in an instant
I am unchanged that was so long a changing. Here's my flat nose again, &amp;c.
Now Armellina take thy loved Trincalo
To thy desired embraces, use thy pleasure,
Kiss him thy belly-full.
Not here in public.
T'enioy too soon what pleases is unpleasant:
The world would envy that my happiness.
Go in, I'll follow you, and in my bed-chamber
We'll consummate the match in privacy.
Was not the face I wore, far worse then this?
But for thy comfort, Wench, Albumazar
Hath died my thoughts so deep in the grain of Gentry,
It is not a glass can rob me of my good fashion,
And Gentlemanly garb. Follow, my dear.
I'll follow you. So, now you're fast enough.
Help Armellina, help! I am fallen in the cellar:
Bring a fresh Plantane leaf, I have broke my shin.
Thus have I caught m'a husband in a trap,
And in good earnest mean to marry him.
It is a tough Clown and lusty: he works day &amp; night;
And rich enough for me, that have no portion
But my poor service. Well: hoe's something foolish;
The better can I dominere, and rule him
At pleasure. That's the mark, and utmost height
Wee women aim at. I am resolved; I'll have him.
IN, Armellina, lock up Trincalo.
I will, sir.
Cricca, for this thy counsel, if it succeed,
Fear not thy masters anger: I'll prefer thee
And count thee as my Genius, or good fortune.
It can not choose but take. I know his humour;
And can at pleasure feather him with hopes,
Making him fly what pitch I wish, and stoop
When I show foul.
But for the suit of clothes?
I'll throw them o'er your garden wall. Away.
Hast to Eugenio, and Sulpitia,
Acquaint them with the business.
I go.
THe hopeful issue of thy counsel, Cricca,
Brightens this evening, and makes it more excel
The clearest day, then a gray morning doth
The blindest midnight: raising my amorous thoughts
To such a pitch of joy, that riches, honour,
And other pleasures, to Sulpitia's love,
Appear like Mole-hils to the Moon.
Lelio?
O there's the voice that in one note contains
All cords of Music: How gladly she'll embrace
The news I give her, and the messenger!
Soft, soft, you're much mistaken: for in earnest,
I am angry Lelio; and with you.
Sweetest, those flames
Rise from the sire of love, and soon will quench
In the welcome news I bring you.
Stand still I charge you
By th'vertue of my lips; speak not a syllable
As you expect a kiss should close my choler.
For I must chide you.
O my Sulpitia,
Were every speech a Pistol charged with death,
I'd stand them all in hope of that condition.
First, sir, I hear, you teach Eugenio
Too grave a wariness in your sisters love,
And kill his honest forwardness of affection
With your farre-fet respects, suspicions, fears.
You have your may-bee's; this is dangerous:
That course were better: for if so: and yet:
Who know's? th'euent is doubtful: bee advised:
It is a young rashness: your father is your father:
Take leisure to consider. Thus you've considered
Poor Flauia almost to her grave. Fie Lelio,
Had this my smallness undertook the business,
And done no more in four short winter days
Then you in four months, I'd have vowed my maidenhead
To th'liuing Tomb of a sad Nunnery.
Which for your sake I loath.
Sweet by your favour
Peace! peace! Now you're so wise as if you'd eaten
Nothing but brains, and marrow of Machiauell.
You tip your speeches with Italian Mote,
Spanish Refranes, and English Quoth Hoe's. Believe me
There's not a Proverb salt's your tongue, but plants
Whole colonies of white hairs. O what a business
These hands must have when you have married me,
To pick out sentences that ouer-yeare you.
Give me but leave.
Have I a lip? and you
Made Sonnets on it? it is your fault, for otherwise,
Your sister and Eugenio had been sure
Long time ever this.
But???
Stay, your Qu's not come yet.
I hate as perfectly this gray-greene of yours,
As old Antonio's greene-gray. Fie! Wise lovers,
Are most absurd. Were not I full resolved,
I should begin to cool mine own affection.
For shame consider well your sister's temper.
Her melancholy may much hurt her. Respect her,
Or spite of mine own love, I'll make you stay
Six months, before you marry me.
This your so happy news? returned? and safe?
Antonio yet alive?
And then?
Well. All your business must bee compassed
With winding plots, and cunning stratagems.
Look to it: For if we be not married ever next morning,
By the great love that's hid in this small compass,
Flauia and my self will steal you both away
To your eternal shame and foul discredit.
How prettily this lovely littleness,
In one breath plead's her own cause, and my sister's;
Chides me, and loves. This is that pleasing temper
I more admire, then a continued sweetness
That ouer-satisfie's: It is salt I love; not sugar.
HOw? not a single share of this great prize,
That have deserved the whole? was it not my plot,
And pains, and you mere instruments and porters?
Shall I have nothing?
No, not a silver spoon.
Nor cover of a Trencher-salt.
Nor Table-napkin???
Friends; we have kept an honest trust and faith
Belong time amongst vs??? Break not that sacred league,
By raising civil theft??? turn not your fury
Against your own bowels. Rob your careful Moister!
Are you not ashamed?
It is our profession,
As yours Astrology. And in th'daies of old,
Good morrow Thief, as welcome was received,
As now your Worship. It is your own instruction.
The Spartans held it lawful, and th'Arabians,
So grew Arabia, Happy: Sparta, Valiant.
The world's a Theater of Theft: great Rivers
Rob smaller Brookes; and them the Ocean.
Have not I weaned you up from peti-larceny,
Dangerous and poor? and nursed you to full strength
Of safe and gainful theft? By rules of Art
And principles of cheating, made you as free
From taking, as you went invisible?
And do ye thus requite me? this the reward
For all my watchful care?
We are your scholars,
Made by your help, and our own aptness, able
To instruct others. It is the Trade wee live by.
You that are servant to Divine Astrology,
Do something worth her livery. Cast Figures,
Make Almanacs for all Meridians.
Sell Perspicils, and Instruments of hearing,
Turn Clowns to Gentlemen, Buzzards to Falcons,
Cur-dogs to Grey-hounds, Kitchin-maids to Ladies.
Discover more new Stars, and unknown Planets:
Vent them by dozens, stile them by the names
Of men that buy such ware. Take lawful courses,
Rather then beg.
Not keep your honest promise?
Believe none, credit none: for in this City
No dwellers are, but Cheaters, and Cheateez.
You promised me the greatest share.
Our promise!
If honest men by Obligations,
And instruments of Law, are hardly constrained
T'obserue their word; Can wee, that make profession
Of lawless courses, do it?
Amongst our selves.
Falcons that tyrannise o'er weaker foul,
Hold peace with their own feathers.
But when they counter
Upon one quarrey, break that league as wee do.
At least restoreth'ten pound in gold I lent you.
It was lent in an ill Second, worser Third,
And luckless Fourth: it is lost, Albumazar.
Saturn was in Ascension. Mercury
Was then Combust when you delivered it.
Twill never be restored.
Hali, Abenezra,
Hiarcha, Brahmin, Budda Babylonicus,
And all the Chaldes and the Cabalists,
Affirm that sad Aspect threat's loss of debts.
Frame by your Azimut and Almicantarat,
An engine like a Mace, whose quality
Of strange retractiue virtue may recall
Desperate debts, and with that undo Sergeants.
Was ever man thus baited by's own whelps?
Give me a slender portion for a stock
To begin Trade again.
It is an ill course
And full of fears. This treasure hath enriched vs,
And given vs means to purchase, and live quiet
Of th'fruite of dangers past. When I used robbing,
All blocks before me looked like Constables,
And posts appeared in shape of Gallowses.
Therefore good Tutor take your pupils counsel:
It is better beg then steal: Live in poor clothes,
Then hang in Satin.
Villains, I'll be revenged,
And reveal all the business to a Justice.
Do, if thou long to see thy own Anatomy.
This treachery perswade's me to turn honest.
Search your Nativity: see if the Fortunates
And Luminaries bee in a good Aspect.
And thank vs for thy life. Had wee done well,
We had cut thy throat ever this.
Albumazar,
Trust not these Rogues; hence and revenge.
Fellows away, nere's company. Let's hence.
NOw Cricca, mask thy countenance in joy,
Speak welcome language of good news, and move
Thy Moister, whose desires are credulous,
To believe what thou giu'st him. If thy design
Land at the Haven it is bound for; then Lelio,
Eugenio, and their Mistresses, are obliged
By oath, t'assure a state of forty pounds
Upon thee for thy life.
I long to know
How my good Farmer speeds; how Trincalo
Hath been received by Lelio.
Where shall I find him?
What wee most seek, still flies vs; what's avoided,
Follows, or meets vs full. I am embossed
With trotting all the streets to find Pandolfo,
And bless him with good news.
This haft of Cricca
Abodes some good; doubtless my Trincalo,
Received for Antonio, hath given me Flauia.
Cricca?
Neither in Pals, at home, nor in th'Exchange?
Nor where he uses to converse? hoe's lost:
And must be cried.
Turn hither, Cricca: Cricca,
See me not?
Sir, the news, and hast to tell it,
Had almost blinded me. It is so fortunate,
I dare not power it all at once upon you,
Least you should faint and swooned away with joy.
Your transformed Trincalo-
What news of him?
Entered as owner in Antonio's house-
On.
Is acknowledged by his daughter Flauia,
And Lelio, for their father.
Quickly good Cricca!
And hath sent me in hast to bid you-
What?
Come with your son Eugenio.-
And then?
That he may be a witness of your marriage.
But sir, I see no signs of so large gladness
As I expected, and this news deserved.
It is here, it is here, within. All outward symptoms
And characters of joy, are poor expressions
Of my great inward happiness: my heart's full,
And cannot vent the passions. Run Cricca, run,
Run, as thou love me, call Eugenio,
And work him to my purpose thou can do it.
Haste, call him instantly.
I fly sir.
HOw shall I recompense this Astrologer?
This great Albumazar? through whose learned hands,
Fortune hath powered th'effect of my best wishes,
And crowned my hopes. Give him this chain? alas!
It is a poor thanks, short by a thousand links
Of his large merit. No, he must live with me,
And my sweet Flauia, at his ease and pleasure,
Wanting for nothing. And this very night
I'll get a boy, and he erect a figure
To calculate his fortunes. So there's Trincalo
Antoniated, or Antonio Intrinculate.
SIgnior Pandolfo! welcome.
Your servant sir.
Well met Antonio, my prayers and wishes
Have waited on you ever.
Thanks, dearest friend.
To speak my dangers past, were to discourse
Of dead men at a feast. Such sad relations
Become not marriages. Sir, I am here
Returned to doe you service: whore's your son?
He will wait upon you presently.
Signior Antonio!
Happily welcome.
Thanks Eugenio.
How think you gentlemen? were it amiss
To call down Flauia and Sulpitia,
That what we do, may with a full consent
Be entertained by all?
It is well remembered.
Eugenio, call your sister.
Lelio, call my daughter.
WIsely considered Trincalo: it is a fair prologue
To the Comoedy ensuing. Now I confess
Albumazar had equal power to change,
And mend thy understanding with thy body.
Let me embrace and hug thee for this service.
It is a brave on-set: ah my sweet Trincalo!
How like you the beginning?
It is of the further side
All expectation.
Was it not right? and spoken
Like old Antonio?
It is most admirable:
Were it he himself that spake, he could not better't.
And for thy sake, I wish Antonio's shape
May ever be thy house, and's wit thy Inne-mate.
But wheres my plate, and cloth of silver?
Safe.
They come: keep state, keep state, or al's discovered.
EVgenio, Flauia, Lelio, and Sulpitia???
Marriages once confirmed, and consummate,
Admit of no repentance. Therefore it is fitting
All parties with full freedom speak their pleasure,
Before it be too late.
Good! excellent!
Speak boldly therefore: do you willingly
Give full authority, that what I decree
Touching these businesses, you'll all perform?
I rest at your dispose: what you determine,
With my best power I ratify; and Sulpitia,
I dare be bold to promise, says no less.
What ever my father, brother, and your self
Shall think convenient pleases me.
In this,
As in all other service, I commit my self
To your commands; and so I hope, my sister.
With all obedience: sir dispose of me
As of a child, that judges nothing good
But what you shall approve.
And you Pandolfo?
I most of all. And, for I know the minds
Of youth are apt to promise, and as prone
To repent after; it is my advice they swear
T'obserue, without exception, your decree.
Content.
Content
By all the powers that hear
Oaths, and rain vengeance upon broken faith,
I promise to confirm and ratify
Your sentence.
Sir, I swear no less.
Nor I.
The selfsame oath binds me.
And me the same.
Now dear Antonio, all our expectation
Hangs at your mouth: None of vs can appeal
From you to higher Courts.
First for preparative,
Or slight Praeludium to the greater matches;
I must entreat you that my Armellina
Be matched with Trincalo. Two hundred crowns
I give her for her portion.
It is done. Some relics
Of his old Clownery, and dregs of the Country,
Dwell in him still: how careful he provides
For himself first! Content. And more, I grant him
A lease of twenty pounds a year.
I thank you.
Gentlemen, since I feel my self much broken
With age, and my late miseries, and too cold
To entertain new heate; I freely yield
Sulpitia, whom I loved, to my son Lelio.
How cunningly the Farmer hath provided
T'obserue the semblance of Antonio's person,
And keep himself still free for Armellina!
Signior Pandolfo, you're wise, and understand
How ill hot appetites of unbridled youth
Become gray hairs. How grave and honourable
Were it for your age to be enamoured
With the fair shape of virtue, and the glory
Of your fore-fathers! Then would you blush to think
How by this dotage, and unequal love,
You stain their honour, and your own. Awake,
Banish those wild affections; and by my example
Turn t'your reposed self.
To what purpose, pray yo
Serves this long proaeme? on to th'sentence.
Sir,
Conformity of years, likeness of manners,
Are Gordian knots that bind up matrimony.
Now betwixt seventy Winters, and sixteen,
There's no proportion, nor least hope of love.
Fie, that a gentleman of your discretion,
Crowned with such reputation in your youth,
Should in your Western days, loose th'good opinion
Of all your friends; and run to th'open danger
Of closing the weak remnant of your days
With discontentment unrecoverable.
Wrack me no more: pray you let's hear the sentence.
Note how the Ass would fright me, and indeere
His service; intimating, that his power
May ouer-throw my hopes. Proceed to th'sentence.
These things considered, I bestow my daughter
Upon your son Eugenio; whose constant love
With his so modest carriage, hath deserved her.
And, that you freeze not for a bed-fellow,
I marry you with Patience.
Treacherous villain!
Accursed Trincalo! Isle??? But this no place,
Hoe's too well backed. But shortly when the date
Of his Antonioship's expired, revenge
Shall sweeten this disgrace.
Signior Pandolfo,
When you recover your self, lost desperately
In disproportioned dotage, then you'll thank me
For this great favour: be not obstinate:
Disquiet not your self.
I thank you sir.
ANd that you freeze not for a bed-fellow,
I marry you with Patience. Traitorous villain!
Is it not enough to wrong me, and betray me,
But 't must be done with scoffs? accursed Trincalo!
And me most miserable! that when I thought
To embrace young Flauia, see her before my face
Bestowed upon my son! my son my rival!
This is Eugenio's plot, and his friend Lelio's;
Who, with my servant Cricca, have conspired,
And suborned Trincalo to betray his master.
Why doe I rage against any but my self,
That have committed such a serious business
To th'hands of a base clown, and ignorant?
I see mine error, but no means to help it.
Only the sweetness of revenge is left me,
Which I must execute: th'houres of's gentry
Are now clean spent. I'll home, and there attend him.
WElcome old trusty Trincalo, good Farmer welcome! give me thy hand, wee must not part hereafter. Fie, what a trow???ble it is to be out of a mans self! If gentlemen have no pleasure but what I felt to day; a team of horses shall not drag me out of my profession. There's nothing amongst them but borrowing, com???pounding for half their debts, and have their purse cut for the rest, cosned by whores, frighted with husbands, washed in wet hogges-heads, cheated of their clothes, and falling in cellars for conclusion.
O Precious piece of villainy! are you unchanged?
How confident the rogue dares walk the streets!
And then such quarrelling: never a suit I wore to day, but hath been soundly basted. Only this faithful Country case escaped fist-free; and bee it spoken in a good hour, was never beaten yet since it came from fulling!
Tiff. toff. Base treacherous villain! toff. toff. toff.
Is this the recompense of my days work?
You marry me to patience? there's patience.
And that you freeze not, there's warm patience,
Shoe's a good bed-fellow; have patience.
You'll beat me out on it sir: how have I wronged you?
So, as deserves th'expression of my fury
With th'cruelst tortures I can execute.
You kill me sir.
Have patience.
Pray you sir!
Seek not by humble penitence t'appease me.
Nothing can satisfy.
Fare-well humility.
Now am I beaten sober.
Shall age and weakness master my youth and strength?
Now speak your pleasure: what's my fault?
Dare deny
Thy own act done before so many witnesses?
Suborned by others, and betray my confidence
With such a stony impudence?
I have bin faithful
In all you trusted me.
To them; not me.
O what a Proaeme stuffed with grave advice,
And learned counsel, you could shower upon me
Before the thunder of your deadly sentence!
And give away my Mistress with a scoff!
I give your Mistress?
Did not thou decree
Contrary t'our compact, against my marriage?
Why when was I your judge?
Just now, here.
See your error!
Then was I fast locked in Antonio's Cellar:
Where making virtue of necessity,
I drunk stark drunk; and waking, found my self
Clothed in this Farmers suit, as in the morning.
Did not thou swear t'enter Antonio's house,
And give me Flauia for my wife? and after,
Before my own face, gau'st her to my son?
Ha, ha, ha!
Can thou deny it?
Ha, ha, ha!
Have you got mistress Patience? ha, ha, ha!
Is not this true?
Ha, ha!
Answer me.
Ha, ha, ha wan!
Was it not thus?
I answer. First, I never was transformed,
But gul'd, as you were, by th'Astrologer
And those that called m'Antonio. To prove this true,
The gentleman you spoke with, was Antonio,
The right Antonio, safely returned from Barbary.
O me! what's this?
Truth it self.
Was it not thou
That gau'st the sentence?
Believe me no such matter:
I ne'er was gentleman, nor otherwise
Then what I am, unless it were when I was drunk.
How have I been deceived! good Trincalo
Pardon me. I have wronged thee.
Pardon you?
When you have beaten me to paste, good Trincalo
Pardon me?
I am sorry for it; excuse me.
I am sorry I must excuse you. But I pardon you.
Now tell me whore's the plate and cloth of silver,
The gold and jewels that th'Astrologer
Committed to thy keeping?
What Plate, what jewels?
Hee gave me none. But when he went to change me,
After a thousand circles and ceremonies,
Hee binds me fast upon a form, and blinds me
With a thick Table-napkin. Not long after
Vnbinds my head and feet, and gives me light:
And then I plainly saw, that I saw nothing;
The Parlour was clean swep't of all was in it.
Ojh me? ojh me!
What ails you? Sir, what ails you?
I am undone, I have lost my Love, my plate,
My whole estate, and with the rest my self.
Loose not your patience too. Leave this lamenting,
And lay the Town; you may recover it.
It is to small purpose. In, and hold thy peace.
WHere shall I find my Moister to content him
With welcome news? Hoe's here; news! news!
News of good fortune, joy and happiness!
Cricca, my sadness is incapable
Of better tidings: I am undone most miserable!
Offend not your good luck, you're now more fortunate
Then when you rose this morning: Bee merry, sir,
Cheer up your self, you've what you wished, fear nothing.
May bee Antonio newly repents himself,
With purpose to restore my Flauia.
Cricca, what is it? whore's all this happiness?
Locked in Antonio's Closet.
All alone?
Sure that's my Flauia. Is not Eugenio
Suffered to enter?
Antonio keeps the key:
No creature enter's but himself. Al's safe
And shall be so restored.
O my sweet Cricca!
And they that wronged you, most extremely sorry,
Ready to yield you any satisfaction.
Is it possible they should so soon repent them?
That injured me so lately? tell me the manner
That cause them see their error.
I'll tell you, sir.
Being just now at old Antonio's house,
One thunder's at th'back door, enters, and presses
To speak in private with young Lelio;
Was instantly admitted: And think you who?
It was your Astrologer Albumazar.
When hee had spoke a while; Lelio and Antonio
In hast command' me fetch a Constable.
How can this Story touch my happiness?
I up and down throw slimy Ale-houses,
Cloudy Tobacco-shops, and vapouring Taverns:
My mouth full of enquiry; At last found one???
What of all this? is it possible a Constable
Concerns my good?
And following my directions,
Went to a Tippling-house, where wee took drinking
Three handsome fellows with a great Chest; Attach't them,
And brought all to Antonio.
Well, what then?
These were th'Astrologers intelligences.
That robed you through th'South window.
I thought th'hadst spoken
Of Flauia's restoring.
I mean your plate
And treasure; pray you, sir, is it not great happiness
To re-obtaine three thousand pounds in value,
Desperately lost? and you still dote and dream
Of Flauia, who by your own consent
And oath is promised to your son Eugene?
Forward.
Within this Chest Antonio found your Plate,
Gold, Jewels, cloth of silver, nothing perished,
But all safe locked till you acknowledge it.
And since Albumazar of his own accord
Freely confessed, and safe restored your treasure:
Since it is a day of Jubilee and marriage;
Antonio would entreat you to release
And pardon the Astrologer: Thanking your fortune
That hath restored you to your wealth, and self.
Both which were lost i'th'foolish love of Flauia.
Reason hath cleared my sight, and drawn the veil
Of dotage that so dark't my understanding.
I clearly see the slau'ry of affections;
And how unsuitable my declining years
Are for the dawning youth of Flauia.
Let the best joys of Hymen compass her,
And her young husband, my Eugenio,
With full content. And since Albumazar
By accident, cause all this happiness;
I freely pardon him, and his companions:
And hast t'assist the marriages and feasts.
Why now you show your self a worthy Gentleman.
CRicca I ouer-heard your news: all parts are pleased???
Except my self. Is there no news for Trincalo?
Know it not? In, and see: Antonio
Hath given thee Armellina with a portion,
Two hundredth Crowns: and old Pandolfo bound
By oath t'assure thee twenty pounds a year,
For three lives.
Haj!
Come in.
I'll follow.
TWo hundred Crowns? and twenty pound a year
For three good lives? Cargo! Hai Trincalo!
My wife's extremely busy, dressing the supper
For these great marriages; and I not idle,
So that I cannot entertain you here
As I would else-where. But if you come to Totnam
Some four days hence, and ask for Trincalo
At th'signe of the Hogshead; I'll mortgage all my lives
To bid you welcome. You that love Trincalo,
And mean to meet, clap hands and maked a bargain.

IN this disguise and Pastoral attire,
Without my saffron robe, without my torch,
Or other ensigns of my duty:
I Hymen am come hither secretly,
To make Arcadia see a work of glory,
That shall deserve an everlasting story.
Here, shall I bring you two the most entire
And constant lovers that were ever seen,
From out the greatest sufferings of annoy
That fortune could inflict, to their full joy:
Wherein no wilde, no rude, no antique sport,
But tender passions, motions soft, and grave,
The still spectators mast expect to have.
For, these are only Cynthias recreatiues
Made unto Phoebus, and are feminine;
And therefore must be gentle like to her,
Whose sweet affections mildly move and stir.
And here, with this white wand, will I effect
As much, as with my flaming torch of Love:
And with the power thereof, affections move
In these fair nymphs, and shepherds round about.
Stay Hymen, stay;
you shall not have the day
Of this great glory, as you make account:
We will herein, as we were ever wont,
Oppose you in the matches you address,
And undermine them with disturbances.
Now, doe thy worst, base Envy, thou can doe,
Thou shalt not disappoint my purposes.
Then will I, Hymen, in despite of thee,
I will make Parents cross desires of love,
With those respects of wealth, as shall dissolve
The strongest knots of kindest faithfulness.
Hence, greedy Avarice; I know thou art
A hag, that dost bewitch the minds of men:
Yet shalt thou have no power at all herein.
Then will I, Hymen, doe thou what thou can;
I will steal closely into linked hearts;
And shake their veins with cold distrustfulnesse;
And ever keep them waking in their fears,
With spirits, which their imagination reares.
Disquiet Jealousy, vile fury, thou
That art the ugly monster of the mind,
Avaunt, be gone, thou shalt have nought to doe
In this fair work of ours, nor evermore
Can enter there, where honour keeps the door.
And therefore hideous furies, get you hence,
This place is sacred to integrity,
And clean desires: your sight most loathsome is
Unto sowell disposed a company.
Therefore be gone, I charge you by my power,
We must have nothing in Arcadia, sour.
Hymen, thou can not chase vs so away,
For, look how long as thou make marriages,
So long will we produce encumbrances.
And we will in the same disguise, as thou,
Mix vs among these shepherds, that we may
Effect our work the better, being unknown;
For, ills show other faces then their own.
SO to be reft of all the joys of life,
How is it possible Palaemon, I
Should ever more a thought retain
Of the least comfort upon earth again?
No, I would hate this heart, that hath received
So deep a wound, if it should ever come
To be recurred, or would permit a room
To let in any other thing then grief.
But Thirsis you must tel me what is the cause?
Think but what cause I have; whē having passed
The heats, the colds, the trem bling agonies
Of fears, and hopes, and all the strange assaults
Of passion, that a tender heart could feel
In the attempt, and pursuit of his love.
And then to be undone, when all was done,
To perish in the haven, after all
Those Ocean sufferings, and even then to have
My hopeful Nuptial bed, turned to a grave.
Good Thirsis by what means, I pray thee tell
Tell thee? alas Palaemon, how can I tell
And live? doest thou not see these fields have lost
Their glory, since that time Siluia was lost?
Siluia, that only decked, that only made
Arcadia shine; Siluia who was (ah woe the while)
So miserablierent from off the world.
So rapt away, as that no sign of her,
No piece was left to tell vs by what means:
Safe only this poor remnant of her veil,
Alltorne, and this dear locke of her rent hair;
Which holy relics here I keep with me,
The sad memorials of her dismal fate.
Who sure devoured was upon the shore
By ravenous beasts, as she was walking there
Alone, it seems; perhaps in seeking me
Or else retired to meditate apart
The story of our loves, and heavy smart.
This is no news, you tell, of Siluias death.
That was long since: why should you wail her now?
Long since Palaemon? think you any length
Of time can ever have a power to make
A heart of flesh not morn, not grieve, not pine?
That knows, that feels, that thinks as much as mine
But Thirsis, you know how her father meant
To match her with Alexis, and a day
To celebrate the nuptials was prefixed.
True, he had such a purpose, but in vain,
As oh it was best known unto vs twain.
And hence it grew that gave vs both our fears,
That made our meeting stealth, our parting tears.
Hence was it, that with many a secret wile,
Wee robed our looks th'onlookers to beguile
This was the cause, oh miserable cause,
That made her by her self to stray alone,
Which else God knows, she never should have done.
For had our liberty as open been,
As was our loves, Siluia had not been seen
Without her Thirsis, never had we gone
But hand in hand, nor ever had mischance
Took vs asunder; she had always had
My body interposed betwixt all harms
And her. But ah we had our liberty
Laid fast in prison when our loves were free.
But how know thou her love was such to thee?
How do I know the Sun, the day from night?
Women's affections doe like flashes prove,
They oft show passion when they feel small love.
Ah do not so profane that precious sex,
Which I must ever reverence for her sake,
Who was the glory of her kind; whose heart
In all her actions so transparent was
As I might see it clear and wholly mine,
Always observing truth in one right line.
How oft hath she been urged by fathers threats,
By friends persuasions, and Alexis sighs,
And tears and prayers, to admit his love,
Yet never could be won? how oft have I
Beheld the bravest heardsmen of these plains,
(As what brave herdsman was there in the plains
Of all Arcadia, that had not his heart
VVarm'd with her beams) to seek to win her love.
Ah I remember well (and how can I
But ever more remember well) when first
Our flame began, when scarce we knew what was
The flame we felt, when as we sate and sighed
And lookd'vpon each other, and conceived
Not what we ailed, yet something we did aisle.
And yet were well, and yet we were not well,
And what was our disease we could not tell.
Then would we kiss, then sigh, then look: &amp; thus
In that first garden of our simpleness
Wee spent our childhood: but when years began
To reap the fruit of knowledge; ah how then
Wold she with graver looks, with sweet stern brow,
Check my presumption and my forwardness,
Yet still would give me flowers, stillwould me show
What she would have me, yet not have me know.
Alas with what poor Coin are lovers paid,
And taken with the smallest bait is laid?
And when in sports with other company,
Of Nymphs and shepherds we have met abroad
How would she steal a look: and watch mine eye
Which way it went? and when at Barley break
It came unto my turn to rescue her,
With what an earnest, swift, and nimble pace
Would her affection make her feet to run
And farther run then to my hand? her race
Had no stop but my bosom where to end.
And when we were to break again, how late
And loath her trēbling hand wold part with mine,
And with how slow a pace would she set forth
To meet the'ncountring party, who contends
T'attaine her, scarce affording him her fingers ends?
Fie Thirsis, with what fond remembrances
Doest thou these idle passions entertain?
For shame leave off to waste your youth in vain,
And feed on shadows: make your choice anew.
You other Nymphs shall find, no doubt will be
As lovely, and as fair: and sweet as she.
As fair and sweet as she? Palaemon peace:
Ah what can pictures be unto the life,
What sweetness can be found in Images?
Which all Nymphs else besides her seems to me.
She only was a real creature, she,
Whose memory must take up all of me.
Should I another love, then must I have,
Another heart, for this is full of her,
And evermore shall be: here is she drawn
At length, and whole, and more, this table is
A story, and is all of her; and all
Wrought in the liveliest colours of my blood;
And can there be a room for others here?
Should I disfigure such a piece, and blot
The perfectst workmanship love ever wrought.
Palaemon no, ah no, it cost too dear,
It must remain entire whilst life remains,
The monument of her and of my pains.
Thou majesty be such a fond I dolater
To die for love; though that were very strange.
Love hath few Saints, but many confessors.
And time no doubt will raze out all these notes,
And leave a room at length for other thoughts.
Yes when there is no spring, no tree, no grove
In all Arcadia to record our love:
And tell me where we were (the time we were)
How we did meet together, what we said;
Where we did joy, and where we sate dismayed.
And then I may forget her, not before.
Till then I must remember one so dear,
When every thing I see tells me of her.
And you dear Relics of that martred Saint,
My heart adores, you the perpetual books
Whereon when tears permit, mine eye still looks:
Ah you were with her last, and till my last
You must remain with me; you were reserved
To tell me she was lost, but yet alas,
You cannot tell me how: I wold you could.
White spotless veil, clean, like her woman∣hood,
Which meanwhile covredst the most lovely face
That ever eye beheld. Was there no message sent
From her by thee? Ah yes, there seems it was;
Here is a T made with her blood, as if
She would have written, Thirsis, I am slain
In seeking thee; sure so it should have been,
And so I read it, and shall ever so.
And thou sweet remnant of the fairest hair,
That ever wau'd with wind. Ah thee I found
When her I hoped to find, wrapped in a round,
Like to an O, the character of woe;
As if to say, O Thirsis, I die thine.
This much you tell me yet, dumb messengers,
Of her last mind; and what you cannot tell
That I must think, which is the most extreme
Of woefulness, that any heart can think.
There is no dealing with this man, I see,
This humour must be let to spend it self
Unto a lesser substance, ere that we
Can any way apply a remedy.
But I lament his case, and so I know
Do all that see him in this woeful plight:
And therefore will I leave him to himself,
For sorrow that is full, hates others sight.
Come boy, whilst I contemplate these re∣mains
Of my lost love, under this myrtle tree,
Record the dolefull'st song, the sighingst notes,
That music hath to entertain bad thoughts.
Let it be all at flats my boy, all grave,
The tone that best befits the grief I have.
Had sorrow ever fitter place
To act his part,
Then is my heart,
Where it takes up all the space?
Where is no vein
To entertain
A thought that wears another face.
Nor will I sorrow ever have,
Therein to be,
But only thee,
To whom I full possession gave:
Thou in thy name
Must hold the same,
Until thou bring it to the grave.
So boy, now leave me to my self, that I
May be alone to grief, entire to misery.
NOw gentle boy Clarindo, hast thou brought
My flocks into the field?
Mistress I have.
And hast thou told them?
Yes.
And are there all?
All.
And hast thou left them safe my boy?
Safe.
Then whilst they feed, Clarindo, I must use
Thy service in a serious business.
But thou must do it well my boy.
The best I can.
Dost thou know Thirsis?
Yes.
But know him well?
I have good reason to know Thirsis well.
What reason boy?
I oft have seen the man.
Why then he knows thee too?
Yes I suppose, unless he hath forgotten me of late.
But hath he heard thee sing my boy?
He hath.
Then doubtless he doth well remember thee.
Well, unto him thou must a message do
From thy sad mistress Cloris; but thou must
Doeit exactly well, with thy best grace,
Best choice of language, and best countenance.
I know thou can doe well, and hast a speech
And fashion pleasing to perform the same.
Nor can I have a fitter messenger
In this employment then thy self my boy.
For sure me thinks, noting thy form and grace,
That thou hast much of Siluia in thy face:
Which if he shall perceive as well as I,
Sure, he will give thee audience willingly.
And for her sake, if not for mine, hear out
Thy message; for he still (though she be dead)
Holds sparkles of her vnextinguished.
And that is death to me: for though sometimes
Siluta and I most dear companions were,
Yet when I saw he did so much prefer
Her before me, I deadly hated her;
And was not sorry for her death, and yet
Was sorry she should come to such a death.
But to the purpose, go to Thirsis, boy:
Say, thou art Cloris servant, sent to be
The messenger of her distressed tears:
Who languishes for him and never shall
Have comfort more, unless he give it her.
I will.
Nay but stay boy, ther's something else.
Tell him, his cruelty makes me undo
My modesty, and to put on that part
Which appertains to him, that is to woo:
And to disgrace my Sex, to show my heart,
Which no man else could have had power to doe.
And that unless he doe restore me back
Unto my self, by his like love to me,
I cannot live.
All this I'll tell him too.
Nay but stay boy, there is yet more:
Tell him, it will no honour be to him,
When ever it shall come to be made known,
That he hath been her death that was his own.
And how his love hath fatal been to two
Distressed nymphs.
This will I tell him too.
Nay but stay boy, wilt thou say nothing else,
As of thy self, to waken up his love?
Thou may say something which I may not say,
And tell him how thou holdst me full as fair,
Yea and more fair, more lovely, more complete
Then ever Siluia was. More wise, more stayed,
How she was but a light and wavering maid.
Nay there I leave you, that I cannot say.
What say thou boy?
Nothing, but that I will
Endeavour all I can to work his love.
Doe good my boy: but thou must yet add more,
As from thy self, &amp; say, what an unkind
And barbarous part it is to suffer thus
So beauteous and so rare a nymph to pine
And perish for his love; and such a one,
As if she would have stooped to others flame,
Hath had the gallantst heardsmen of these fields
Fall at her feet: all which she hath despised,
Having her heart before by thee surprised.
And now doth nothing else, but sit and morn:
Speak Thirsis, weep Thirsis, sigh Thirsis, and
Sleep Thirsis when she sleeps, which is but rare
Besides, good boy thou must not stick to swear,
Thou oft hast seen me sown, &amp; sink to ground
In these deep passions, wherein I abound.
For something thou moist say beyond the truth,
By reason of my love, and of thy youth.
Doe, good Clarindo swear, and vow thus much.
But dost thou now remember all I say,
Dost thou forget no parcel of my speech,
Shall I repeat the same again to thee?
Or else wilt thou rehearse it unto me?
That I may know thou hast it perfect, boy.
It shall not need: be sure I will report,
What you enjoin me, in most earnest sort.
Ah doe good boy. Although I fear it will,
Avail me little: for I doubt his heart
Is repossessed with another love.
Another love? Who may that be, I pray?
With Amarillis, I have heard: for they
Are thought, will in the end make up a match.
With Amarillis? Well, yet will I go,
And try his humour whether it be so?
Go good Clarindo, but thou must not fail
To work effectually for my avail.
And doe not stay, return with speed good boy,
My passions are to great t'indure delay.
THirsis in love with Amarillis? then
In what a case am I? what doth avail,
This altered habit, that belies my Sex?
What boots it t'haue escaped from pirats hands
And with such wiles to have deceived their wills,
If I return to fall on worser ills?
In love with Amarillis? is that so?
Is Siluia then forgot? that hath endured
So much for him? doe all these miseries
(Cause by his means) deserve no better hire?
Was it the greatest comfort of my life,
To have returned that I might comfort him?
And am I welcomed thus? ah did mine eyes
Take never rest, after I was arrived
Till I had seen him, though unknown to him?
Being hidden thus, and covered with disguise
And masculine attire, to temporise
Until Alexis marriage day be past,
Which shortly as I hear will be: and which
Would free me wholly from my fathers fear:
Who if he knew I were returned, would yet
Undo I doubt that match, to match me there.
Which would be more then all my sufferings were.
Indeed me thought when I beheld the face
Of my dear Thirsis, I beheld a face
Confounded all with passion, which did much
Afflict my hart: but yet I little thought
It could have been for any others love.
I did suppose the memory of me,
And of my rapture, had possessed him so,
As made him show that countenance of woe.
And much ado had I then to forbear
From casting me into his arms, and yield
What comfort my poor self could yield, but that
I thought our joys would not have bin complete,
But might have yielded vs anoyes as great,
Unless I could come wholly his, and cleared
From all those former dangers which we feared:
Which now a little stay (though any stay
Be death to me) would wholly take away.
And therefore I resolved my self to bear
This burden of our sufferings yet a while,
And to become a servant in this guise,
To her I would have scorned otherwise:
And be at all commands, to go, and come,
To trudge into the fields, early, and late.
Which though I know, it misbecomes my state:
Yet it becomes my fortune, which is that,
Not Phillis whom I serve: but since I serve,
I will doe what I doe most faithfully.
But Thirsis, is it possible that thou
Should so forget me, and forgo thy vow;
Or is it but a flying vain report,
That slanders thine affection in this sort?
It may be so, and God grant it may be so:
I shall soon find if thou be false or no:
But ah here comes my Fury, I must fly.
Ah cruel youth, whither away so fast?
Good Phillis do not stay me, I have haste.
What haste should thou have but to comfort me,
Who hath no other comfort but in thee?
Alas thou dost but trouble mean vain,
I cannot help thee: it is not in my power.
Not in thy power Clarindo? ah ifthou
Had any thing of manliness, thou would.
But if I have not, what doth it avail
In this sort to torment thy self and me?
And therefore pre thee Phillis let me go.
Ah whither can thou go, where thou shalt be
More dearly loved and cherished then with me?
But that my purpose cannot satisfy,
I must be gone, there is no remedy.
O cruel youth, will thy hart nothing move?
Show me yet pity, if thou show not love.
Believe me Phillis I do pity thee;
And more, lament thy error, so farewell.
And art thou gone hard-hearted youth? hast thou
Thus disappointed my desires, and Ieft
My shame t'afflict me worser then my love?
Now in what case am I, that neither can
Recall my modesty, nor thee again?
Ah were it now to do again, my passions should
Have smothered me to death, before I would
Have showed the smallest sparkle of my flame.
But it is done, and I am now undone.
Ah had thou been a man, and had that part
Of understanding of a women's hart,
My words had been unborn, only mine eyes
Had been a tongue enough to one were wise.
But this it is, to love a boy, whose years
Conceives not his own good, nor weighs my tears:
But this disgrace I justly have deserved
SO Phillis have you, and you're rightly served.
Have you disdained the gallanst Foresters,
And bravest heardsmen all Arcadia hath,
And now in love with one is not a man?
Assure your self this is a just revenge
Love takes, for your misprision of his power.
I told you often there would come a time,
When you would sure be plagued for such a crime:
But you would laugh at me, as one you thought
Conceived not of what mettle you were wrought.
Is this you, who would wonder any nymphs
Could ever be so foolish as to love?
Who is so foolish now?
Peace Lidia, peace,
Add not more grief t'a hart that hath too much,
Do not insult upon her misery,
Whose flame, God wot, needs water, and not oil.
Thou see I am undone, caught in the Toil
Of an entangling mischief: tell me how
I may recover, and unwind me now.
That doth require more time, we will apart
Consult thereof, be you but ruled by me,
And you shall find, I, yet, will set you free.
Love is a sickness full of woes,
All remedies refusing:
A plant that with most cutting grows,
Most barren with best using.
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dyes,
If not enjoyed, it sighing cries,
Hey ho.
Love is a torment of the mind,
A tempest everlasting;
And Jove hath made it of a kind,
Not well, nor full nor fasting.
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies,
If not enjoyed, it sighing cries,
Hey ho.
IN what a mean regard are we now held,
We active and laborious foresters?
Who though our living rural be and rough,
Yet heretofore were we for valour prized,
And well esteemed in all good companies:
Nor would the daintiest nymphs that valleys haunt
Or fields inhabit, ever have despised
Our sylvan songs, nor yet our plain discourse;
But gracefully accepted of our skill,
And often of our loves, when they have seen
How faithful and how constant we have been.
It's true Siluanus, but you see the times
Are altered now, and they so dainty grown,
By being adored, and wooed, and followed so
Of those vnsinowed amorous heardsmen, who
By reason of their rich and mighty flocks,
Supply their pleasures with that plenteousnesse,
As they disdain our plainness, and do scorn
Our company, as men rude and ill borne.
Well, so they doe; but Dorcas if you mark
How oft they doe miscarry in their love,
And how disloyal these fine heardsmen prove;
You shall perceive how their aboundaut store
Pays not their expectation, nor desires.
Witness these groves wherein they oft deplore
The miserable passions they sustain:
And how perfidious, wayward, and unkind,
They find their loves to be; which we, who are
The eyes, and ears of woods, oft see and hear.
For hither to these groves they much resort,
And here one wails apart the usage hard
Of her disordered, wilde, and wilful mate:
There mourns another her unhappy state,
Held ever in restraint, and in suspect:
Another to her trusty confident,
Laments how she is matched to such a one
As cannot give a woman her content.
Another grieves how she hath got a fool,
Whose bed although she loath, she must endure.
And thus they all unhappy by that means
Which they account would bring all happiness;
Most wealthely are plagued, with rich distress.
And so they are, but yet this was not wont
To be the fashion here; there was a time
Before Arcadia came to be diseased
With these corrupted humours reigning now,
That choice was made of virtue and desert,
Without respect of any other ends:
When love was only master of their hearts,
And ruled alone: when simple thoughts produced
Plain honest deeds, and every one contends
To have his fame to follow his deserts,
And not his shows; to be the same he was,
Not seemed to be: and then were no such parts
Of false deceiuings plaid, as now wesee.
But after that accursed greediness
Of wealth began to enter and possess
The hearts of men, integrity was lost,
And with it they themselves, for never more;
Came they to be in their own power again.
That Tyrant vanquished them, made them all slaves,
That brought base servitude into the world,
Which else had never bin; that only made
Them to endure all whatsoever weights
Power could devise to lay upon their neck.
For rather thē they would not have, they would not be
But miserable. So that no device
Needs else to keep them under, they themselves
Will bear far more then they are made, thēselues
Will add unto their fetters, rather then
They would not be, or held to be great men.
Then Dorcas, how much more are we to prize
Our mean estate, which they so much despise?
Considering that we doe enjoy thereby,
The dearest thing in nature, Liberty.
And are not tortured with those hopes and fears,
Th'afflction laid on superfluities,
Which make them to obscure, and serve the times:
But are content with what the earth, the woods
And rivers near doe readily afford
And therewithal furnish our homly board.
Those vnbought cates please our unlearned throats
That understand not dainties, even as well
As all their delicates, which doe but stuff
And not sustain the stomach: and indeed
A well observing belly doth make much
For liberty; for he that can but live,
Although with roots, and have no hopes, is free
Without the verge of any sou'raintie.
And is a Lord at home, commands the day
As his till night, and then reposes him
At his own hours. thinks on no stratagem
But how to take his game, hath no deseigne
To cross next day: no plots to undermine.
But why Montanus doe you look so sad?
What is the cause your mind is not as free
As your estate? what, have you had oflate
Some coy repulse of your disdainful nymph,
To whom love hath subdued you? who indeed
Our only master is, and no Lord else
But he, hath any power to vex vs here;
Which had he not, we too too happy were.
In troth I must confess, when now you two
Found me in yonder thicket, I had lost
My self, by having seen that which I would
I had not had these eyes to see; and judge
If I great reason have not to complain:
You see I am a man, though not so gay
And delicately clad, as are your fine
And amorous dainty heardsmen; yet a man,
And that not base, not vn-allyde to Pan;
And of a spirit doth not degenerate
From my robustious manly ancestors,
Being never foiled in any wrestling game,
But still have borne away the chiefest prize
In every brave and active exercise.
Yet notwithstanding that disdainful maid,
Proud Phillis, doth despise me and my love,
And will not deign so much as here me speak,
But doth abjure, forsooth, the thought of love.
Yet shall I tell you (yet ashamed to tell;)
This coy unloving soul, I saw ere while
Soliciting a youth, a smooth faced boy,
Whom in her arms she held (as seemed to me,
Being closely bushed a pretty distance off,)
Against his will; and with strange passion urged
His stay, who seemed, struggled to get away,
And yet she staid him, yet entreats his stay.
At which strange sight, imagine I that stood
Spectator, how confoundedly I stood,
And hardly could forbear from running in
To claim for mine, if ever love had right,
Those her embraces cast away in sight:
But staying to behold the end, I staid
Too long; the boy gets loose, her self retires,
And you came in; but if I live, that boy
Shall dearly pay for his misfortune, that
He was beloved of her, of whom I would
Have none on earth beloved, but my self.
That were to bite the stone, a thing unjust,
To punish him for her conceived lust.
Tush, many in this world we see are caught,
And suffer for misforrnne, not their fault.
But that would not become your manliness,
Montanus, it were shame for valiant men
To doe unworthily.
Speak not of that, Siluanus, if my rage
Irregular be made, it must work like effects.
These are but billows, tumbling after storms,
They last not long, come let some exercise
Divert that humour, and convert your thoughts
To know your self; scorn her who scorns you;
Idolatrize not so that Sex, but hold
A man of straw, more then a wife of gold.
YOu must not, Phillis, be so sensible
Of these small touches which your passion makes.
Small touches Lidia, do you count the small?
Can there unto a woman worse befall
Then hath to me? what? have not I lost all
That is most dear to vs, love and my fame?
Is there a third thing Lidia you can name
That is so precious as to match with these?
Now fily girl, how fondly doe you talk?
How have you lost your fame; what for a few
Ill-favoured loving words, uttered in jest
Unto a foolish youth? Cannot you say
You did but to make trial how you could,
If such a peevish qualm of passion should
(As never shall) oppress your tender heart,
Frame your conceit to speak, to look, to sigh
Like to a heart-strooke lover; and that you
Perceiving him to be a bashful youth,
Thought to put spirit in him, and make you sport.
Ah Lidia, but he saw I did not sport,
He saw my tears, and more, what shall I say?
He saw too much, and that which never man
Shall ever see again whilst I have breath.
Are you so simple as you make your self?
What did he see? a counterfeited show
Of passion, which you may, if you were wise,
Make him as easily to vnbeleeue,
As what he never saw; and think his eyes
Conspired his understanding to deceive.
How many women, think you, being espied
In neerer-touching cases by mischance,
Have yet not only faced their lovers down
For what they saw, but brought them to believe
They had not seen the thing which they had seen,
Yea and to swear it too; and to condemn
Themselves? such means can wit devise
To make men's minds vncredit their own eyes.
And therefore let not such a toy as this
Disease your thoughts: and for your loss of love,
It is as much as nothing. I would turn
A passion upon that should overturn
It clean, and that is wrath; one heate
Expels another. I would make my thoughts of scorn
To be in height so much aboue my love,
As they should ease and please me more by far.
I would disdain to cast a look that way
Where he should stand, unless it were in scorn,
Or think a thought of him, but how to work
Him all disgrace that possibly I could.
That Lidia can I never doe, let him
Do what he will to me: report my shame,
And vaunt his fortune, and my weakness blame.
Nay as for that he shall be so well charmed
Ere I have done, as you shall fear no tales.
Ah Lidia, could that he without his harm,
How blessed should I be? But see where comes
My great tormentor, hat rude Forester.
Good Lidia let vs fly, I hate his sight
Next to the ill I suffer: let vs fly,
We shall be troubled with him woefully.
Content you Phillis, stay &amp; hear him speak:
We may make use of him more then you think.
What use can of so gross a piece be made?
The better use be sure, for being gross,
Your subtler spirits full of their finesses,
Serve their own turns in others businesses.
What pleasure can I take to chase wild beasts,
When I my self am chased more eagerly
By mine own passions, and can find no rest?
Let them who have their heart at liberty,
Attend those sports. I cannot be from hence,
Where I received my hurt, here must I tread
The maze of my perplexed misery.
And here see where she is the cause of all?
And now, what shall I doe? what shall I say?
How shall I look? how stand? which utter first?
My love or wrath? Alas I know not which.
Now were it not as good have been away,
As thus to come, and not tell what to say?
See Lidia see, how savagely hee looks,
Good let vs go, I never shall endure
To hear him bellow.
Prithee Phillis stay
And give him yet the hearing, in respect
Hee loves you, otherwise you show your self
A savage more then hee.
Well, it I hear,
I will not answer him a word, you shall reply,
And prithee Lidia doe, reply for me.
For that wee shall, Phillis, doe well enough
When he begins, who seems is very long
To give the onset, sure the man is much
Perplexed, or he studies what to say.
Good Lidia see how he hath tricked himself,
Now sure this gay fresh suite as seems to me
Hangs like green Ivy on a rotten tree.
Some beasts doe wear gray beards beside your goats:
And bear with him, this suit bewrays young thoughts
Ah was it not enough to be oppressed
With that confounding passion of my love
And her disdain, but that I must be torn
With wrath and envy too, and have no vein
Free from the rack of sufferings, that I can
Nor speak nor think but most distractedly?
How shall I now begin, that have no way
To let out any passion by it self,
But that they all will thrust together so
As none will be expressed as they ought?
But something I must say now I am here.
And be it what it will, love, envy wrath,
Or all together in a comberment,
My words must be like me, perplexed and rent,
And so I'll to her. Phi. Lidia, see he comes.
He comes indeed, and as me thinks doth
More trouble in his face by far, then love.
Fair Phillis, and too fair for such a one, show
Unless you kinder were, or better then
I know you are: how much I have endured
For you, although you scorn to know, I feel,
And did imagine, that in being a man
Who might deserve regard, I should have bin
Preferred before a boy. But well, I see
Your seeming and your being disagree.
What Lidia, doth he brawl? what means he thus
To speak and look in this strange sort on me?
Well modest Phillis, never look so coy,
These eyes beheld you dallying with a boy.
Me with a boy, Montanus? when? where? how?
To day, here, in most lascivious sort.
Ah, ha, belike he saw you Phillis, when
This morning you did strive with Cloris boy
To have your garland, which he snatched away,
And kept it from you by strong force and might:
And you again laid hold upon the same,
And held it fast until with much ado
He wrung it from your hands, and got away.
And this is that great matter which he saw.
Now fie Montanus fie, are you so gross,
T'imagine such a worthy nymph as she
Would be inloue with such a youth as he?
Why now you hauc undone your credit quite,
You never can make her amends for this
So impious a surmise, nor ever can
She, as she reason hath, but must despise
your grossenesse; who should rather have come in
And righted her, then suffer such a one
To offer an indignity so vile,
And you stand prying in a bush the while.
What do I hear? what, am I not my self?
How? have mine eyes double undone me then?
First seeing Phillis face, and now her fact,
Or else the fact I saw, I did not see?
And since thou hast my understanding wronged,
And traytour-like given false intelligence,
Whereby my judgment comes to pass amiss.
And yet I think my sense was in the right:
And yet in this amaze I cannot tell,
But howsoever, I in an error am,
In loving, or believing, or in both.
And therefore Phillis, at thy feet I fall,
And pardon crave for this my gross surmise.
But this, Montanus, will not now suffice.
You quite have lost her, and your hopes and all.
Good Lidia yet entreat her to relent,
And let her but command me any thing
That is within the power of man to do,
And you shall find Montanus will perform
More then a Giant, and will stead her more
Then all the heardsmen in Arcadia can.
She will command you nothing; but I wish
You would a little terrify that boy
As he may never dare to use her name
But in all reverence as is fit for her.
But doe not you examine him a word;
For that were neither for your dignity,
Nor hers, that such a boy as he should stand
And justify himself in such a case,
Who would but fine untruths unto your face.
And herein you some service shall perform,
As may perhaps make her to think on you.
Alas, this is a work so far, so low
Beneath my worth, as I account it none,
Were it t'incounter some fierce mountain beast
Or monster, it were something fitting me.
But yet this will I doe, and doe it home,
Assure you Lidia: as I live I will.
But yet I would not have you hurt the youth,
For that were neither grace for you nor me.
That as my rage will tolerate must be.
Here comes my long expected messenger,
God grant the news hee brings may make amends
For his long stay; and sure, I hope it will.
Me thinks his face bewrays more jollity
In his returning then in going hence.
Well, all is well; no Amarillis hath
Supplanted Siluias louein Thirsis heart,
Nor any shall: but see where Cloris looks
For what I shall not bring her at this time.
Clarindo though my longing would be fine
Dispatched at once, &amp; hear my doom pronounced
All in a word of either life or death,
Yet doe not tell it but by circumstance.
Tell me the manner where, and how thou foundst
My Thirsis, what he said, how looked, how fared,
How he received my message, used thee;
And all in brief, but yet be sure tell all.
All will I tell as near as I can tell.
First after tedious searching up and down,
I found him all alone, like a hurt Dear,
Got under cover in a shady grove,
Hard by a little crystal purling spring,
Which but one sullen note of murmur held;
And where no sun could see him, where no eye
Might overlook his lovely primacy.
There in a path of his own making, trod
Bare as a common way, yet led no way
Beyond the turns he made (which were but short)
With arms across, his hat down on his eyes
(As if those shades yielded not shade enough,
To darken them) he walks with often stops,
Uneven pace, like motions to his thoughts.
And when he heard me coming, for his ears
Were quicker watches then his eyes, it seemed;
He suddenly looks up, stays suddenly,
And with a brow that told how much the sight
Of any interrupter troubled him,
Beheld me, without speaking any word,
As if expecting what I had to say.
I finding him in this confused dismay,
(Who heretofore had seen him otherwise:
I must confess, (for tell you all I must,)
A trembling passion ouerwhelmd my breast,
So that I likewise stood confused and dumb,
And only looked on him, as he on me.
In this strange posture like two statues we
Remained a while; but with this difference set:
He blushed, and I looked pale; my face did show
Joy to see him, his trouble to be seen.
At length bethinking me for what I came,
What part I had to act, I rowzd my spirits,
And set my self to speak; although I wished
He would have first begun; and yet before
A word would issue, twice I bowd my knee,
Twice kissed my hand; my action so much was
More ready then my tongue: at last I told
Whose messenger I was, and how I came
To intimate the sad distressed case
Of an afflicted nymph, whose only help
Remained in him: he when he heard the name
of Cloris, turns away his head, and shrinks,
As if he grieved that you should grieve for him.
No, no, it troubled him to hear my name,
Which he despises, is he so perverse
And way ward still? ah then I see no hope.
Clarindo, would to God thou had not gone,
I could be, but as now, I am undone.
Have patience Mistress, &amp; but hear the rest.
When I perceived his suffering, with the touch
And sudden stop it gauc him, presently
I laid on all the weights that motion might
Procure, and him besought, adiur'd, invoked,
By all the rights of Nature, piety,
And manliness, to hear my message out.
Told him how much the matter did import
Your safety and his fame. How hee was bound
In all humanity to right the same.
That was well done my boy, what said he then?
Hee turns about, and fixed his eyes on me,
Content to give his ears a quiet leave,
To hear me. when I failed not to relate
All what I had in charge, and all he hears,
And looks directly on me all the while.
I doubt he noted thee more then thy words,
But now Clarindo, what was his reply?
Thus. Tel fair Cloris, my good boy, how that
I am not so disnatured a man,
Or so ill borne, to disesteem her love,
Or not to grieve, (as I protest I doe)
That she should so afflict her self for me.
But.
Ah now comes that bitter word of But
Which makes all nothing, that was said before.
That smoothes &amp; wounds, that strokes and dashes more
Then flat denials, or a plain disgrace.
But tell me yet what followed on that But?
Tell her (said hee) that I desire she would
Redeem her self at any price she could,
And never let her think on me, who am
But even the bark, and outside of a man,
That trades not with the living, neither can
Nor ever will keep other company.
Then with the dead. My Siluias memory
Is all that I must ever live withal.
With that his tears, which likewise forced mine,
Set me again upon another rack
Of passion so, that of my self I sought
To comfort him the best I could devise.
And I besought him that he would not be
Transported thus. But know that with the dead
He should no more converse: and how his love
Was living, that would give him all content,
And was all his entire, and pure, and wished
To live no longer then she should be so.
When more I would have said, he shook his head
And wild me speak no further at that time,
But leave him to himself, and to return
Again anon, and he would tell me more;
Commending me for having done the part
Both of a true and moving messenger.
And so I took my leave, and came my way.
Return again? no, to what end,
If hee be so conceited, and so fond
To entertain a shadow; I have done,
And wish, that I had never done so much.
Shall I descend below my self, to send
To one is not himself? Let him alone
With his dead image: you shall go no more
Have I here framed with all the art I could
This garland decked with all the various flowers,
Arcadia yields, in hope he would send back
Some comfort, that I might therewith have crowned
His love, and witnessed mine, in thendles round
Of this fair ring, the Character of faith?
But now he shall have none of it, I rather will
Rend it in pieces, and dishatter all
Into a Chaos, like his formals thoughts.
But yet thou foist he wild thee to return,
And he would tell thee more.
Yes so he said.
Perhaps thy words might yet so work with him
As that hee takes this time to think on them,
And then I should doe wrong to keep thee back.
Well thou shalt go, and carry him from me
This garland, work it what effect it will.
But yet I know it will doe nothing. Stay
Thou shalt not go, for sure hee said but that
To put thee off, that he might be alone
At his idolatry, in worshipping
A nothing, but his self made images.
But yet he may be wearied with those thoughts
As having worn them long, and end they must:
And this my message coming in fit time,
And moouingly delivered, may take hold:
He said thou were a mooing messenger
Clarindo, did he not?
Yes so he said.
Well, thou shalt go; and yet if any thought
Of me should move him, he knows well my mind
(if not too well) and where he may me find.
Thou shalt not go Clarindo, nor will I
Disgrace me more with importunity:
And yet if such a motion should take fire,
And find no matter ready, it would out,
And opportunities must not be slackt
Clarindo, thou shalt go, and as thou goosed,
Look to my flock, and so God speed thee well.
WEll, this employment makes for my avail,
For hereby have I means to see my love;
Who likewise sees me, though he sees me not;
Nor doe I see him as I would I did.
But I must by some means or other make
Him know I live; and yet not so as he
May know that I am I, for fear we might
Miscarry in our joys by over haste.
But it is more then time his sufferings were
Relieved in some close sort; and that can I devise
No way to doe, but by relating how
I heard of an escape a nymph did make
From pirats lately, and was safe returned.
And so to tell some story that contains
Our fortunes and our loves, in other names;
And wish him to expect the like event;
For I perceive him very well content
To hear me speak; and sure he hath some note,
Although so darkly drawn, as that his eyes
Cannot expressly read it; yet it shows
Him something, which he rather feels, then knows.
Desire that is of things vngot,
See what travail it procures,
And how much the mind endures,
To gain what yet it gains not:
For never was it paid,
The charge defraide,
According to the price of thought.
PAlaemon, you me thinks might something work
With Thirsis my aggrieved son, and sound
His humour what it is: and why he thus
Afflicts himself in solitariness.
You two were wont to be most inward friends,
And glad I was to see it; knowing you
To be a man well tempered, fit to sort
With his raw youth; can you doe nothing now,
To win him from this vile captivity
Of passion, that withholds him from the world?
In troth, Charinus, I have oftentimes,
As one that suffered for his grievances,
Assayed to find a way into the cause
Of his so strange dismay; and by all means
Advised him make redemption of himself,
And come to life again, and be a man
With men: but all serves not, I find him locked
Fast to his will, allege I what I can.
But will he not impart to you the cause?
The cause is love; but it is such a love,
As is not to be had.
Not to be had?
Palaemon, if his love beregular,
Is there in all Arcadia any she,
Whom his ability, his shape, and worth
May not attain, he being my only son?
She is not in Arcadia whom he loves,
Nor in the world, and yet he dearly loves.
How may that be, Palaemon? tell me plain.
Thus plainly; he's in love with a dead woman,
And that so far, as with the thought of her
Which hath shut out all other, he alone
Lives, and abhors to be, or seen, or known.
What was this creature could possess him so?
Fair Siluia, old Medorus daughter, who
Was two years past reported to be slain
By savage beasts upon our country shore.
Is that his grief? alas, I rather thought
It appertained unto another part
To whale her death: Alexis should doe that
To whom her father had disposed her,
And she esteemed only to be his.
Why should my son afflict him more for her,
Then doth Alexis, who this day doth wed
Fair Galatea, and forgets the dead?
And here the shepherds come to celebrate
His joyful nuptials with all merriment,
Which doth increase my cares, considering
The comforts other parents doe receive:
And therefore good Palaemon work all means
You can to win him from his peevish will,
And draw him to these shows, to companies,
That others pleasures may enkindle his.
And tell him what a sin he doth commit,
To waste his youth in solitariness,
And take a course to end vs all in him.
Assure your self Charinus, as I have
So will I still employ my utmost power,
To save him; for me thinks it pity were,
So rare a piece of worth should so be lost,
That ought to be preserved at any cost.
MEdorus come, we two must sit, and morn
Whilst others revel. We are not for sports,
Or nuptial shows, which will but show vs more
Our miseries, in being both deprived,
The comforts of our issue, which might have
(And was as like to have) made our hearts
As joyful now, as others are in theirs.
In deed Charinus, I for my part have
Just cause to grieve amidst these festivals,
For they should have been mine. This day I should
Have seen my daughter Siluia how she would
Have womand it; these rites had been her grace,
And she had sat in Galateas place.
And now had warmed my heart to see my blood
Preserved in her; had she not been so rapt
And rent from off the living as she was.
But your case is not pararell with mine,
You have a son, Charinus, that doth live,
And may one day to you like comforts give.
Indeed I have a son; but yet to say he lives,
I cannot; for who lives not to the world,
Nor to himself, cannot be said to live:
For ever since that you your daughter lost,
I lost my son: for from that day he hath
Imbrak d in shades and solitariness,
Shut himself up from sight or company
Of any living: and as now I heard,
By good Palaemon, vows still so to doe.
And did your son, my daughter love so dear?
Now good Charinus, I must grieve the more,
If more my heart could suffer then it doth;
For now I feel the horror of my deed,
In having crossed the worthiest match on earth.
Now I perceive why Siluia did refuse
To marry with Alexis, having made
A worthier choice; which oh had I had grace
To have foreseen, perhaps this dismal chance
Never had been, and now they both had had
Joy of their loves, and we the like of them.
But ah my greedy eye, viewing the large
And spacious sheep-walkes joining unto mine,
Whereof Alexis was possessed, made me,
As worldlings doe, desire to marry grounds,
And not affections, which have other bounds.
How oft have I with threats, with promises,
With all persuasions, sought to win her mind
To fancy him, yet all would not prevail?
How oft hath she again upon her knees
With tears besought me; Oh dear father mine
Doe not enforce me to accept a man
I cannot fancy: rather take from me,
The life you gave me, then afflict it so.
Yet all this would not alter mine intent,
This was the man she must affect or none.
But ah what sin was this to torture so
A hart forevow'd unto a better choice,
Where goodness met in one the self same point,
And virtues answered in an equal joint?
Sure, sure, Charinus, for this sin of mine
The gods bereast me of my child, and would
Not have her be, to be without her heart,
Nor me take joy where I did none impart.
Medorus, thus wee see mans wretchedness
That learns his errors but by their success,
And when there is no remedy; and now
Wee can but wish it had been otherwise.
And in that wish Charinus we are racked;
But I remember now I often have
Had shadowesin my sleep that figures bare
Of some such liking twixt your child and mine.
And this last night a pleasing dream I had
(Though dreams of joy makes wakers minds more sad)
Me thought my daughter Siluia was returned
In most strange fashion, and upon her knees
Craves my good will for Thirsis, otherwise
She would be gone again and seen no more.
I at the sight of my dear child, was rapt
With that excess of joy, as gave no time
Either for me to answer her request,
Or leave for sleep to figure out the rest.
Alas Medorus, dreams are vapours, which
Engendered with day thoughts, fall in the night
And vanish with the morning; are but made
Afflictions unto man, to the end he might
Not rest in rest, but toil both day and night.
But see here comes my solitary son:
Let vs stand close Medorus out of sight,
And note how he behaves hlmselfe in this
Affliction, and distressed case of his.
THis is the day, the day, the lamentable day
Of my destruction, which the Sun hath twice
Returned unto my grief, which keep one course
Continually with it in motion like.
But that they never set: this day doth claim
Th'especiall tribute of my sighs and tears,
Though every day I duly pay my tears
Unto that soul which this day left the world.
And yet I know not why? me thoughts the Sun
Arose this day with far more cheerful rays
With brighter beams, then usually it did
As if it would bring something of release
Unto my cares, or else my spirit hath had
Some manner of intelligence with hope
Wherewith my heart is unacquainted yet:
And that might cause mine eye with quicker sense,
To note th'appearing of the eye of heaven;
But something sure I feel which doth bear up
The weight of sorrow easier then before.
what Thirsis still in passion? still one man?
For shame show not your self so weakly set,
So feebly jointed that you cannot bear
The fortunes of the world like other men.
Believe me Thirsis you much wrong your worth:
This is to be no man, to have no powers.
Passions are women's parts, actions ours.
I was in hopet'haue found you otherwise.
How? otherwise Palaemon? doe not you
Hold it to be a most heroic thing
To act one man, and doe that part exact?
Can there be in the world more worthiness change?
Then to be constant? is there any thing
Shows more a man? What, would you have me
That were to have me base, that were indeed
To show a feeble heart, and weakly set.
No no Palaemon, I should think my self
The most unworthy man of men, should I
But let a thought into this heart of mine
That might disturb or shake my constancy.
And think Palaemon I have combats too,
To be the man I am, being built of flesh,
And having round about me traitors too
That seek to undermine my powers, and steal
Into my weaknesses, but that I keep
Continual watch and ward upon my self,
Least I should be surprised at unawares
And taken from my vows with other snares.
And even now at this instant I confess,
Palaemon, I doe feel a certain touch
Of comfort, which I fear to entertain,
Least it should be some spy, sent as a train
To make discovery of what strength I am.
Ah worthy Thirsis, entertain that spirit
What ever else thou doe: set all the doors
Of thine affections open thereunto.
Palaemon no. Comfort and I have been
So long time strangers, as that now I fear
To let it in. I know not how t'acquaint
My self therewith, being used to converse
With other humours, that affect me best.
Nor doe I love to have mixed company
Whereto I must of force my self apply.
But Thirsis think that this must have an end,
And more it would approve your worth to make
The same your work, then time should make it his.
End sure it must Palaeman, but with me:
For so I by the Oracle was told
That very day wherein I lost the day
And light of comfort that can never rise
Again to me: when I the faddest man
That ever breathed before those Altars fell,
And there besought to know what was become
Of my dear Siluta, whether dead, or how
Reast from the world: but that I could not learn.
Yet thus much did that voice divine return:
Go youth, reserve thy self, the day will come
Thou shalt be happy, and return again.
But when shall be that day demanded I,
The day thou die, replied the Oracle.
So that you see, it will not be in these
But in th'Elizian fields, where I shall joy,
The day of death must bring me happiness.
You may mistake the meaning of those words
Which is not known before it be fulfilled.
Yield you to what the gods command, if not
Unto your friends desires: reserve your self
For better days, and think the Oracle
Is not untrue, although not understood.
But howsoever, let it not be said
That Thirsis being a man of so rare parts,
So understanding and discreet, should pine in love
And languish for a silly woman thus:
To be the fable of the vulgar, made
Ascorne, and laughed at, by inferior wits.
In love Palaemon? know you what you say?
Doe you esteem it light to be in love?
How have I been mistaken in the choice
Of such a friend, as I held you to be,
That seems not, or else doth not understand
The noblest portion of humanity,
The worthiest piece of nature set in man?
Ah know that when you mention love, you name
A sacred mystery, a Deity,
Not understood of creatures built of mud,
But of the purest and refined clay
Whereto th'eternall fires their spirits convey.
And for a woman, which you prize so low,
Like men that doe forget whence they are men;
Know her to be th'especiall creature, made
By the Creator of the complement
Of this great Architect the world; to hold
The same together, which would otherwise
Fall all asunder: and is natures chief
Vicegerent upon earth, supplies her state.
And doe you hold it weakness then to love?
And love so excellent a miracle
As is a worthy woman, ah then let me
Still be so weak, still let me love and pine
In contemplation of that clean, clear soul,
That made mine see that nothing in the world
Is so supremely beautiful as it.
Think not it was those colours white and red
Laid but on flesh, that could affect me so.
But something else, which thought holds under locke
And hath no key of words to open it.
They are the smallest pieces of the mind
That pass this narrow organ of the voice.
The great remain behind in that vast orb
Ofth apprehension, and are never borne.
And therefore if your judge cannot reach
Unto the understanding of my Case,
You doe not well to put your self into
My Jury, to condemn me as you doe.
Let th'ignorant out of their dullness laugh
At these my sufferings, I will pity them
To have been so ill borne, so miscompos'd
As not to know what thing it is to love.
And I to great Apollo here appeal
The sovereign of the Muses, and of all
Well tuned affections, and to Cynthia bright,
And glorious Lady of clear faithfulness;
Who from aboue look down with blissful beams
Upon our humble groves, and joy the hearts
Of all the world, to see their mutual loves;
They can judge what worthiness there is
In worthy love. Therefore Palaemon peace,
Unless you did know better what it were.
And this be sure, when as that fire goes out
In man, he is the miserablest thing
On earth, his day-light sets, and is all dark
And dull within; no motions of delight,
But all oppressed, lies struggling with the weight
Of worldly cares: and this old Demon says,
Who well had felt what love was in his days.
Well Thirsis, well, how ever you doe guilde
Your passions, to indeere them to your self,
You never shall induce me to believe,
That sicknesses can be of such effect.
And so farewell, until you shall be well.
O Gods, Charinus, what a man is this?
Who ever heard of such a constancy?
Had I but known him in enjoying him,
As now I doe, too late, in losing him,
How blessed had been mine age? but ah I was
Unworthy of so great a blessedness.
You see, Medorus, how no counsel can
Prevail to turn the current of his will,
To make it run in any other course
Then what it doth; so that I see I must
Esteem him irrevocably lost.
But hark, the shepherds festivals begin,
Let vs from hence, where sadness were a sin.
Here was presented a rural marriage, con∣dusted with this Song.
From the Temple to the Board,
From the Board unto the Bed,
We conduct your maidenhead:
Wishing Hymen to afford
All the pleasures that he can,
Twixt a woman and a man.
I Thought these simple woods, these gentle trees
Would, in regard I am their daily guest,
And harbour underneath their shady roofs,
Not have consented to delude my griefs;
And mock my miseries with false reports:
But now I see they will afflict me too.
For as I came by yonder spreading Beech
Which often hath the Secretary been
To my sad thoughts, while I have rested me
(if love had ever rest) under his gentle shade,
I found incaru'd, and fair incaru'd, these words:
Thy Siluia, Thirsis, lives; and is returned.
Ah me, that any hand would thus add scorn
Unto affliction; and a hand so fair
As this may seem to be; which were more fit,
Me thinks, for good, then to doe injury;
For sure no virtue should be ill employed.
And which is more; the name of Siluia was
Carved in the self same kind of character
Which she alive did use, and where with all
Subscribed her vows to me, who knows it best;
Which shows the fraud the more, &amp; more the wrōg.
Therefore you stars of that high court of heaven,
Which do reveal deceits, and punish them,
Let not this crime, to feit a hand
To couzin my desires, escape your doom.
Nor let these riots of intrusion, made
Upon my louenesse, by strange company
Afflict me thus, but let me have some rest.
Come then, refresher of all living things,
Soft sleep, come gently, and take truce with these
Oppressors, but come simple and alone,
Without these images of fantasy,
Which hurt me more then thou can do me good:
Let me not sleep, unless I could sleep all.
ALas, he here hath laid him down to rest,
It were now sin his quiet to molest;
And God forbid I should; I will retire
And leave him, for I know his griefs require
This poor releeuement of a little sleep.
What spirit here haunts me? what no time free?
Ah, is it you Palaemon? would to God
You would forbear me but a little while:
You show your care of me too much in this:
Unseasonable love, scarce kindness is.
Good Thirsis, I am sorry I should give
The least occasion of disease to you;
I will be gone and leave you to your rest.
Doe good Palaemon, go your way, farewell;
And yet Palaemon stay, perhaps you may
By charms you have, cause sleep to close mine eyes;
For you were wont, I doe remember well,
To sing me Sonnets, which in passion I
Composed in my happier days, when as
Her beams inflamed my spirits, which now are set.
And if you can remember it, I pray
Sing me the song, which thus begins: Eyes hide my love,
Which I did write upon the earnest charge
She gave unto me, to conceal our love.
Eyes hide my love, and doe not show
To any but to her my notes,
Who only doth that cipher know,
Wherewith we pass our secret thoughts:
Belie your looks in others sight;
And wrong your selves to doe her right.
So now he sleeps, or else doth seem to sleep;
But howsoever, I will not trouble him.
SEe where he lies, whom I so long to see;
Ah my dear Thirsis, take thy quiet rest,
I know thou need it, sleep thy fill, sweet love
Let nothing trouble thee: be calm oh winds,
Be still you herds, chirp not so loud sweet birds,
Lest you should wake my love: thou gentle bank
That thus art blessed to bear so dear a weight,
Be soft unto those dainty limbs of his,
Ply tender grass, and render sweet refresh
Unto his weary senses, whilst he rests.
Oh could I now but put off this disguise,
With those respects that fetter my des••••:
How closely could I neighbour that sweet side?
But stay, he stirs; I fear my heart hath brought
My feet too near, and I have wakened him.
It will not be, sleep is no friend of mine,
Or such a friend, as leaves a man, when most
He needs him. See a new assault: who now?
Ah tic the boy that was with me erewhiles,
That gentle boy; I am content to speak
With him, he speaks so prettily, so sweet,
And with so good respective modesty:
And much resembles one I knew once well:
Come hither gentle boy, what hast thou there?
A token sent you from the nymph I serve.
Keep it my boy, and wear it on thy head.
The gods forbid, rat I, a servant, should
Wear on my head, that which my mistress hath
Prepared for yours: Sir, I beseech you urge
No more a thing so ill becoming me.
Nay sure I think, it better will become
Thy head then mine; and therefore boy, thou must
Needs put it on.
I trust you lo•enesse hath not so
Vnciuil'd you, to force a messenger
To doe against good manners, and his will.
No, good my boy, but I entreat thee now
Let me but put it on, hold still thy head,
It shall not be thy act, but only mine:
Let it alone good boy, for if thou saw
How well it did become thee, sure thou would.
Now, can thou sing my boy some gentle song?
I cannot sing, but I could weep.
Weep, why?
Because I am not as I wish to be.
Why so are none; be not dipleas'd for this;
And if you cannot sing, tell me some tale
To pass the time.
That can I doe, did I but know what kind
Of tale you liked.
No merry tale my boy, nor yet too sad,
But mixed, like the tragic Comedies.
Then such a tale I have, and a true tale,
Believe me Sir, although not written yet
In any book, but sure it will, I know
Some gentle shepherd, moved with passion, must
Record it to the world, and well it will
Become the world to understand the same.
And this it is: There was sometimes a nymph,
Isulia named, and an Arcadian borne;
Fair can I not avouch she was, but chaste,
And honest sure, as the event will prove;
Whose mother dying, left her very young
Unto her fathers charge, who carefully
Did breed her up, until she came to years
Of womanhood, and then provides a match
Both rich, and young, and fit enough for her.
But she, who to another shepherd had
Called Sirthis, vowed her love, as unto one
Her heart esteemed more worthy of her love,
Could not by all her fathers means be wrought
To leave her choice; and to forgo her vow.
No more could my dear Siluia be from me.
Which caused much affliction to the both,
And so the self same cause did unto vs.
This nymph one day, surcharged with love &amp; grief,
Which commonly (the more the pity) dwell
As Inmates both together, walking forth
With other maids, to fish upon the shore;
Estrayes apart, and leaves her company,
To entertain her self with her own thoughts:
And wanders on so far, and out of sight,
As she at length was suddenly surprised
By Pirates, who lay lurking underneath
Those hollow rocks, expecting there some prize.
And notwithstanding all her piteous cries,
Entreaty, tears, and prays, those fierce men
Rent hair, and veil, and carried her by force
Into their ship, which in a little Creek
Hard by, at Anckor lay, and presently hoised sail,
And so away. Thy. Rent hair and veil? and so
Both hair and veil of Siluia, I found rent,
Which here I keep with me. But now alas
What did she? what became of her my boy?
When she was thus in shipped, and woefully
Had cast her eyes about to view that hell
Ofhorrour, whereinto she was so suddenly
Implung'd, she spies a women sitting with a child
Sucking her breast, which was the captains wife.
To her she creeps, down at her feet she lies;
O woman, if that name of woman may
Move you to pity, pity a poor maid,
The most distressed soul that ever breathed.
And save me from the hands of these fierce men,
Let me not be defiled, and made unclean,
Dear woman now: and I will be to you
The faithfull'st slave that ever mistress served;
Never poor soul shall be more dutiful,
To doe what ever you command, then I.
No toil will I refuse; so that I may
Keep this poor body clean and vndeflowr'd,
Which is all I will ever seek. For know
It is not fear of death lays me thus low,
But of that stain will make my death to blue sh.
What, would not all this move the women's hart?
Al this would nothing move the women's hart,
Whom yet she would not leave, but still besought;
Oh woman, by that infant at your breast,
And by the pains it cost you in the birth,
Save me, as ever you desire to have
Your babe to joy and prosper in the world.
Which will the better prosper sure, if you
Shall mercy show, which is with mercy paid.
Then kisses she her feet, then kisses too
The infants feet, and oh sweet babe (said she)
Coldest thou but to thy mother speak for me,
And crave her to have pity on my case;
Thou might perhaps prevail with her so much
Although I cannot; child, ah coldest thou speak.
The infant, whether by her touching it
Or by instinct of nature, seeing her weep,
Looks earnestly upon her, and then looks
Upon the mother, then on her again,
And then it cries, and then on either looks:
Which she perceiving, blessed child, said she,
Although thou can not speak, yet dost thou cry
Unto thy mother for me. Hear thy child
Dear mother, it's for me it cries,
It's all the speech it hath: accept those cries,
Save me at his request from being defiled;
Let pity move thee, that thus moos thy child.
The woman, though by birth and custom rude.
Yet having veins of nature, could not bee
But peircible, did feel at length the point
Of pity, enter so, as out gushed tears
(Not usual to sterne eyes) and she besought
Her husband, to bestow on her that prize.
With safeguard of her body, at her will.
The captain seeing his wife, the child, the nymph,
All crying to him in this piteous sort;
Felt his rough nature shaken too, and grants
His wives request, and seals his grant with tears;
And so they wept all four for company,
And some beholders stood not with dry eyes;
Such passion wrought the passion of their prize.
In troth my boy, and even thy telling it
Moves me likewise, thou dost so feelingly
Report the same, as if thou had been by.
But I imagine now how this poor nymph
When she received that doom, was comforted?
Sir, never was there pardon, that did take
Condemned from the block, more joyful then
This grant to her. For all her misery
Seemed nothing to the comfort she received.
By being thus saved from impurity:
And from the women's feet she would not part,
Nor trust her hand to be without some hold
Of her, or of the child, so long as she remained
Within the ship, which in few days arrives
At Alexandria, whence these pirats were;
And there this woeful maid for two years space
Did serve, and truly serve this captains wife,
Who would not lose the benefit of her
Attendance for •ll her profit otherwise.
But daring not in such a place as that
To trust her self in women's habit, craved
That she might be appareled like a boy,
And so she was, and as a boy she served.
And two years tic, since I my Siluia lost.
At two years end, her mistress sends her forth
Unto the Port for some commodities,
Which whilst she sought for, going up and down
She heard some merchant men of Corinth talk,
Who spake that language the Arcadians did,
And were next neighbours of one continent.
To them all rapt with passion, down she kneels,
Tells them she was a poor distressed boy,
Borne in Arcadia, and by Pirats took
And made a slave in Egypt, and besought
Them, as they fathers were of children, or
Did hold their native country dear, they would
Take pity on her, and relieve her youth
From that sad servitude wherein she lived:
For which she hoped that she had friends alive
Would thank them one day, &amp; reward them too;
If not, yet that, she knew the heavens would doe.
The merchants moved with pity of her case,
Being ready to depart, took her with them,
And landed her upon her country coast,
Where when she found her self, she prostrate false,
Kisses the ground, thanks gives unto the Gods,
Thanks them who had been her deliverers.
And on she trudges through the desert woods,
Climes over craggy rocks, and mountains steep,
VVades thorough rivers, struggles thorough bogs,
Sustained only by the force of love;
Until she came unto the native plains,
Unto the fields, where first she drew her breath.
There lifts she up her eyes, salutes the ayre,
Salutes the trees, the bushes, flowers, and all:
And oh dear Sirthis, here I am, said she,
Here, notwithstanding all my miseries.
I am the same I was to thee; a pure,
A chaste, and spotless maid: oh that I may
Find thee the man, thou did profess to be.
Or else no man; for boy who truly loves,
Must ever so; that dye will never out:
And who but would love truly such a soul?
But now, the better to have notice how
The state of things then stood, and not in haste
To cast her self on new encumbrances,
She kept her habit still, and put her self
To serve a nymph, of whom she had made choice
Till time were fitting to reveal her self.
This may be Siluias case; this may be she;
But it is not: let me consider well:
The teller, and the circumstance agree.
AH sirrha, have I found you? are you here
You princock boy? and with your garland on?
Doth this attire become your peevish head?
Come, I must teach you better manners, boy.
So Phillis, I have done my task, and here
I bring the Trophy to confirm the same.
Ah monster man, vile wretch, what hast thou done?
Alas, in what a strait am I engaged here?
If I pursue revenge, l leave to save.
Help, help, you gentle swains, if any now be near, beast
Help, help: ah hark cuē Echo helps me cry
What means this outcry? sure some savage
Disturbs our herds, or else some wolf hath seized
Upon a Lamb. Thy. A worse thing then a wolf,
More bloody then a beast, hath murdered here
A gentler creature then a lamb: therefore
Good swains pursue, pursue the homicide.
That ugly wretch, Montanus, who hath stabbed
This sly creature here, at unawares.
Montanus? why, we met him but even now,
Decked with a garland, grumbling to himself;
We will attach that villain presently:
Come sirs, make haste, and let vs after him.
ALas, what accident is here fallen out?
My dear friend Thirsis, how comes this to pass?
That monster man Montanus, here hath stabbed
A harmless youth, in message sent to me.
Now good Palaemon help me hold him up,
And see if that we can recover him.
It may be Thirsis, more his fear then hurt:
Stay him a while, and I will haste and send
For Lamia, who with ointments, oil and herbs
If any help remain, will help him sure.
Do good Palaemon, make what haste you may
Seek out for help, and be not long away.
Alas sweet boy, that thou should ever have
So hard misfortune, coming unto me,
And end thy tale with this sad tragedy;
That tale which well resembled Siluias case,
Which thou resembles; for such brows had she.
Such a proportioned face, and such a neck.
What have we here, the mole of Siluia too?
What and her breasts? what? and her hair? what all?
All Siluia? yes, all Siluia, and all dead.
And art thou thus returned again to me?
Art thou thy self, that strange delivered nymph?
And did thou come to tell me thine escape
From death to die before me? had I not
Enough to doe, to whale reported harms
But thou must come to bleed within my arms?
Was not one death sufficient for my griefs
But that thou must die twice? why thou were dead
To me before. Why? must thou dye again?
Ah, better had it been still to be lost
Then thus to have been found; yet better found
Though thus, then so lost as was thought before.
For howsoever, now I have thee yet
Though in the saddest fashion that may be.
Yet Siluia now I have thee, and will I
No more for ever part with thee again:
And we this benefit shall have thereby
Though fate would not permit vs both to have
Onebed, yet Siluia we shall have one grave.
And that is something, and much more then I
Expected ever could have come to pass.
And sure the gods but only sent thee thus
To fetch me; and to take me hence with thee;
And Siluia so thou shalt. I ready am
T'accompany thy soul, and that with speed.
The strings I feel, are all dissolved, that hold
This woeful heart, reserved it seems for this:
And well reserved, for this so dear an end.
SO, we have took the villain, and him bound
Fast to an Oak, as rugged as himself.
And there he stares and gapes in the air, and raves
Like a wilde beast, that's taken in the toil:
And so he shall remain, till time we see
What will become of this his savage act.
Cheer Thirsis, Lamia will come presently
And bring the best preseruatiues she hath.
What now? Who lies discovered here? Ay me,
A woman dead? Is this that boy transformed?
Why, this is Siluia, O good Thirsis how
Comes this to pass? Friend Thirsis, Thirsis speak.
Good Thirsis tell me. Out alas he sownes,
As well as she, and both seem gone alike.
Come gentle herds men, come and carry them
To yonder sheep-cote quickly, that we may
(If possible) recover them again.
If not perform those rites that appertain
Unto so rare a couple. Come my friends, make hast.
Qu. Were ever chaste and honest hearts
Exposed unto so great distresses?
Ans. Yes: they that act the worthiest parts,
Most commonly have worst successes.
Great fortunes follow not the best,
It's virtue that is most distressed.
Then fortune why doe we admire
The glory of thy great excesses?
Since by thee what men acquire
Thy work and not their words expresses.
Nor dost thou raise them for their good:
But t'haue their ills more understood.
DId ever yet Arcadia hear before
Of two so worthy lovers, as we find
Thirsis and Siluia were? or ever had
Clear truth, and simple constant honesty,
So lamentable an event as this?
But here comes forth Palaemon, we shall now
Learn all of him, what hath been done within.
Go Polio, summon all the Arcadia youth
Here, round about, and will them to prepare
To celebrate with all delights they can
This joyful hour, that hath restored to vs
The worthiest pair of hearts that ever were,
Will them to show the height of musiques art,
And all the strains of cunning they can show:
That we may make these rocks and hills about,
Ring with the Echo of redoubled notes.
And will Charinus and Medorus too,
The aged parents of this worthy pair,
To come with speed, whose joy, good souls, will be
More then their speed; and yet their speed I know,
Will be beyond th'allowance of their years,
When they shall understand this happy news.
And summon likewise all the train of nymphs
That glorify our plains, and all that can
Give honour to this day.
Go Polio hast away, and as you go
Unbind Montanus that rude savage swain:
And though he be unworthy to be here,
Yet let him come. He hath been in his days
Held a good fellow, howsoever now
His rage and love transported him in this.
Poloemon, we are glad to see you thus
Delightful, now we hope there is good news.
Good news my friends, and I will tell it you,
Siluia and Thirsis being to my cottage brought,
The skilful Lamia comes and searched the wound
Which Siluia had received of this rude swain,
And finding it not deadly she applied
Those remedies she knew of best effect.
And binds it up, and powers into her mouth
Such cordial waters as revive the spirits:
And so much wrought, as she at length perceived
Life was not quite gone out, but lay oppressed.
With like endeavours we on Thirsis work,
And ministered like Cordials unto him:
At length we might hear Siluia fetch a groan,
And there withal Thirsis perceived to move,
Then Thirsis fet a groan, and Siluia moved
As if their lives were made both of one piece.
Whereat we joyed, and then remoud' and set
Each before other, &amp; held up their heads,
And chafed their temples, rubbed and stroked their cheeks:
Wherewith first Siluia casts up her dim eyes,
And presently did Thirsis lift up his.
And then again they both together sighed,
And each on other fixed an vnseeing eye:
For yet t'was scarce the twilight of their new
Returning day, out of the night of death.
And though they saw, they did not yet perceive
Each other, and yet both turned to one point
As touched alike, and held their looks direct.
At length we might perceive, as life began
T'appeare; and make the morning in their eyes,
Their beams were clearer, &amp; their opener looks
Did show as if they took some little note
Of each the other: yet not so as they
Could thoroughly discern who themselves were.
And then we took and joined their hands in one,
And held them so a while, until we fealt
How even each others touch, the motion gave
Unto their feeling, and they trembling wrung
Their hands together, and so held them locked,
Looked still upon each other, but no words at all.
Then we called out to Thirsis Thirsis look,
It is thy Siluia thou here holdst, she is
Returned revived, and safe. Siluia, behold thou hast
Thy Thirsis, and shalt ever have him thine.
Then did we set them both upon their feet
And there they stood in act, even as before
Looking upon each other hand in hand:
At last we saw a blushing red appear
In both their cheeks, which sense sent as a Iampe
To light their understanding. And forthwith
The tears gushed forth their eyes, which hindered thē
A while from seeing each other, till they had
Cleared them again. And then as if new waked
From out a fearful dream, they stand and doubt
Whether they were awake indeed, or else
Still in a dream, distrusting their own eyes.
Their long endured miseries, would not
Let them believe their sudden happiness,
Although they saw it: till with much ado
They had confirmed their credit, and had kissed
Each other and embraced, and kissed again,
And yet still dumb: their joy now seemed to be
Too busy with their thoughts, t'allow them words.
And then they walked a little, then stood still,
Then walked again, and still held other fast
As if they feared, they should be lost again.
And when at last they spake, it was but thus,
O Siluia, and O Thirsis, and there stopped.
We, lest our sight and presence
So many) hinder might the passage of being there
Their modest, simple, and vnpractis'd love,
Came all our way, and only Lamia left
Whose spirit, and that sufficient skill she hath
Will serve no doubt, to see they shall doe well.
Well may they do dear couple, who have thus
Graced our Arcadia with their faithfulness.
what shall we now do Lidia? now am I
Utterly shamed: this youth turned woman is,
Clarindo, Siluia is become; how now?
Can I for ever look on her again?
Or come in any company for shame?
Now must I needs be made a common jest
And laughing stock to every one that shall
But hear how grossly I behau'd my self.
Faith Phillis asset is fallen out, your case
Is very crazie, and to make it whole
There is no way but even to laugh it out,
And set as good a face, as you can doe
Upon the matter, and say thus: How you
Knew well enough it was no man whom you
Affected so, who never could love man,
Nor ever would, and that by mere instinct
And sympathy of Sex, you fancied him.
So put •t off, and turn it to a jest,
That shall I never doe but ever blush
At her, to think what she will think of me,
Who did bewray my self so foolishly.
Are you here Cloris, you are blessed to day
For being mistress unto such a boy:
You may rejoice that ever this fell out.
Rejoice? ah Lidia, never was there nymph
Had more occasion to be sad then I,
For I am quite undone and shamed hereby.
For I employed this my supposed boy
In message unto Thirsis, whom I loved
I must confess, more dearly then my life:
And told him all the secrets of my heart.
And therefore with what face can ever I
Look upon them that know thus much by me?
No Lidia, I will now take Thirsis course:
Hide me for ever in these desert woods,
And never come in company again;
They shall not laugh at me in their great joys.
But Cloris, I would laugh with them, were I as you,
And how soever felt my self within,
Yet would I seem be otherwise without.
Cannot you say, that you knew well enough
How it was Siluia that you entertained,
Although you would not seem to take such note;
And thereupon employed her in that sort
To Thirsis, knowing who it was would give
To him the greatest comfort upon earth.
And thus fair Nymphs you fitly may excuse
These simple slips, and know that they shall still
Have crosses with their piles, who thus doe play
Their fortunes with their loves, as you two did:
But you must frame your countenance thereto
And look with other faces then their own.
As many else doe here, who in their parts
Set shining looks upon their cloudy hearts,
And let vs mix vs with this company
That here appears with mirth and jollity.
Who ever saw so fair a sight,
Love and virtue met aright:
And that wonder Constancy,
Like a Comet to the eye
Seldom ever seen so bright?
Sound out aloud so rare a thing,
That all the Hills and Vales may ring.
Look, Lovers look, with passion see,
If that any such there bee:
As there cannot but be such
Who doe feel that noble touch
In this glorious company,
Sound out aloud, &amp;c.

TO be chaste, is Women's glory,
It is her fame and honours story.
Here sits she in Funeral weeds▪
Only bright in virtuous deeds.
Come and read her life and praise,
That singing weeps, and sighing plays.
WElcome Souls Music: I have
been listening here
To melancholy strains from
the Duchess lodgings.
That strange great Widow,
that has vowed so stiffly
Never to know loves heat in a second Husband:
And she has kept the Fort most valiantly
(To the wonder of her Sex) this seven years day;
And that's no sorry trial. A months constancy
Is held a virtue in a City-widow,
And are they excelled by so much more i'ch' Court?
'My faith a rare example for our Wives.
Heavens blessing of her heart for it poor Soul,
Sh'ad need have somewhat to comfort her.
What would thou do? Faith now
If I were dead, suppose I wear thy Husband,
(As shortly I will be, and that's as good)
Speak freely, and thou love me.
Alas Sir,
I should not have the leisure to make Vows,
For dying presently, I should be dead
Before you were laid out.
Now fie upon thee for a hasty dier,
Would thou not see me buried?
Talk not on it Sir,
These many years, unless you take delight
To see me swoon, or make a ghost of me.
Alas poor Soul, i'll kiss thee into colour,
Can thou paint pale so quickly, I perceive then
You would go beyond the Duchess in her vow,
You would die indeed: What's he?
Be settled Sir,
Spend neither doubt, nor fear upon that fellow,
Health cannot be more trusty to mans life,
Then he to my necessities in love.
I take him of thy word, and praise his face,
Though he look scurvily, I will think hereafter
That honesty may walk with fire in's Nose,
As well as brave desert in broken clothes:
But for thy further safety, I've provided
A shape, that at first sight will start thy modesty,
And make thee blush perhaps; but twill away
After a qualm or two. Virginity
Has been put often to those shifts before thee
Upon extremities; a little boldness
Cannot be called immodesty, especially
When there's no means without it, for our safeties;
Thou know my Uncle the Lord Cardinal
Wears so severe an eye, so strict and holy,
It not endures the sight of Woman-kinde
About his Lodgings;
Hardly a Matron of Four-score's admitted,
Though she be worn to gums, she comes not there,
To mumble Matins, all his admiration
Is placed upon the Duchess; he likes her,
Because she keeps her vow, and likes not any;
So do's he love that man, above his Book,
That loves no woman, for my Fortunes sake then,
For I am like to be his only Heir.
I must dissemble and appear as fair
To his opinion, as the brow of Piety;
As void of all impureness as an Altar,
Thine ear—that, and we are safe.
You make me blush Sir.
It is but a star shot from a beauteous cheek,
It blazes Beauties bounty, and hurts nothing.
The power of Love commands me.
I shall wither in comforts, till I see thee.
My Lords, I have work for you, when you have hours
Free from the cares of State, bestow your eyes
Upon those abstracts of the Duchess virtues,
My studies ornaments. I make her Constancy
The holy Mistress of my contemplation,
Whole volumes have I writ in zealous praise
Of her eternal vow: I have no power
To suffer Virtue to go thinly clad,
I that have ever been in youth, an old man
To pleasures and to women, and could never love, but pity 'em,
And all their momentary frantic follies.
Here I stand up in admiration,
And bow to the chaste health of our great Duchess,
Kissing her constant name, O my fair Lords,
When we find grace confirmed, especially
In a creature that's so doubtful as a woman,
We'are spirit ravished, men of our probation
Feel the Spears, Music playing in their Souls
So long, unto the eternizing of her sex.
Sh'as kept her vow so strictly, and as chaste
As everlasting life is kept for Virtue.
Even from the sight of men, to make her oath
As incorrupt as th'honor of a Virgin
That must be strict in thought, or else that title,
Like one of Frailties ruins, shrinks to dust.
No longer she's a Virgin, then she's just.
Chaste Sir, the Truth and Justice of her Vow
To her deceased Lord's able to make poor
Mans treasury of praises. But methinks
She that has no temptation set before her,
Her Virtue has no conquest; then would her con∣stance
Shine in the brightest goodness of her glory▪
If she would give admittance, see, and be seen;
And yet resist, and conquer. There were argument
For Angels, 't would out-reach the life of praise,
Set in Mortalities shortness. I speak this
Not for Religion, but for love of her,
Whom I wish less religious, and more loving:
But I fear she's too constant, that's her fault,
But it is so rare, few of her sex are took with it,
And that makes some amends.
You have put my zeal into a way, my Lord.
I shall not be at peace, till I make perfect;
I'll make her victory harder, it is my crown
When I bring grace to greatest perfection;
And I dare trust that daughter with a world,
None but her vow and she. I know she wea•s
A constancy, will not deceive my praises,
A Faith so noble; she that once knows Heaven,
Need put in no security for her truth;
I dare believe her face, use all the art,
Temptation, witcheries, sleights, and subtleties,
You Temporal Lords, and all your means can pra∣ctise.
My Lord, not any we▪
Her resolute goodness
Shall as a Rock stand firm, and send the sin
That beat against it, into the bosom of the owners, weeping.
We with her virtues so.
O give me pardon,
I have lost my self in her, upon my friends.
Your charitable censures I beseech,
So dear her white fame is to my souls love▪
It is an affliction; but to hear it questioned,
She's my religious triumph.
If you desire a belief rightly to her,
Think she can never waver then you're sure.
She has a fixed heart, it cannot err;
He kills my hopes of woman, that doubts her.
No more, my Lord, it is fixed.
Believe my Judgment,
I never praise in vain, nor ever spent
Opinion idly, or lost hopes of any,
Where I once placed it; welcome as my joys.
Now you all part believers of her Virtue.
We are the same most firmly▪
Good opinion
In others reward you, and all your actions.
Who's near us?
My Lord▪
Call our Nephew: There's a work too
That for bloods sake I labour to make perfect,
And it comes on with joy; he's but a youth
To speak of years, yet I dare venture him
To old men's goodnesses and gravities,
For his strict manners, and win glory by him;
And for the chastness of his continence
(Which is a rare grace in the spring of man)
He do's excel the youth of all our time,
Which gift of his more then affinity,
Draws my affection in great plenty to him.
The company of a woman is as fearful to him,
As death to guilty men: I'have seen him blush,
When but a Maid was named; I'm proud of him,
Heaven be not angry for it: He's near of kin
In disposition to me. I shall do much for him
In life time, but in death I shall do all;
There he will find my love. He's yet too young
In years to rise in state, but his good parts
Will bring him in the sooner: Here he comes.
What at thy Meditation? half in Heaven.
The better half my Lord, my minde's there still.
And when the heart's above, the body walks here
But like an idle Serving-man below,
Gaping and waiting for his Masters coming.
What man in age, could bring forth graver thoughts?
He that lives Fourscore years, is but like one
That stays here for a Friend; when death comes, then
Away he goes, and is ne'er seen again.
I wonder at the young man of our days,
That they can dote on pleasure, or what it is
They give that title too, unless in mockage.
There's nothing I can find upon the Earth,
Worthy the name of pleasure, unless 't be
To laugh at folly; which indeed good Charity
Should rather pity: But of all the frenzies
That follow flesh and blood (O reverend Uncle)
The most ridiculous is to fawn on women;
There's no excuse for that, it is such a madness,
There is no cure set down for it, no Physician
Ever spent hour about it, for they guest
It was all in vain, when they first loved themselves,
And never since durst practise, cry Heu mihi,
That's all the help they have for it. I had rather meet
A Witch far North, then a fine Fool in love,
The sight would less afflict me, but for modesty;
And your grave presence, that learns men respect,
I should fall foul in words upon fond man
That can forget his excellence and honour,
His serious Meditations being the end
Of his Creation, to learn well to die,
And live a prisoner to a women's eye.
Can there be greater thraldom, greater folly?
In making him my heir, I make good works,
And they give wealth a blessing, where on the con∣trary,
What curses does he heap upon his soul
That leaves his riches to a riotous young man,
To be consumed on Surfeits, Pride, and Harlots,
Peace be upon that spirit, whose life provides
A quiet rest for mine.
How now, the news?
A Letter Sir, brought by a Gentleman
That lately came from Rome.
That's she, she's come:
I fear not to admit her in his presence;
There is the like already. I'm writ chaste
In my grave Uncles thoughts, and honest meanings
Think all men's like their own—Thou look so pale,
What ail'st thou here a' late.
I doubt I have cause Sir.
Why, what's the news?
I fear Sir I'm with child:
With child; peace, peace, speak low:
Twill prove I fear so.
Beshrew my heart for that—Desire the Gentleman
To walk a turn or two.
What Gentleman?
One lately come from Rome, my Lord, in credit,
With L. Vincentio; so the Letter speaks him.
Admit him, my kind Boy; the pretty∣est Servant
That ever man was blessed with; it is so meek,
So good and gentle, it was the best almsdeed
That ere you did, to keep him. I have oft took him
Weeping alone (poor Boy) at the remembrance
Of his lost friends; which as he says, the Sea
Swallowed with all their substance.
It is a truth Sir,
Has cost the poor Boy many a feeling tear,
And me some too, for company. In such pity,
I always spend my part: Here comes the Gentleman.
Welcome to Milan Sir, how is the health
Of L. Vincentio.
May it please your Grace,
I left it well and happy, and I hope
The same: Blessed Fortune keeps it:
I hear your near him.
One of his Chamber, my Lord.
I'd near wish one of her condition nearer,
Then to be one of mine.
Your news is pleasing;
Whilst you remain in Milan, I request you,
To know the welcome of no house but ours.
Thanks to your Grace.
I'll leave you to confer;
I'll to the Duchess, and labour her perfection.
Then thus begins our conference, I arrest thee
In Cupids name, deliver up your weapon,
It is not for your wearing, Venus knows it.
Here's a fit thing indeed, nay, Hangers and all,
Away with 'em, out upon 'em, things of trouble,
And out of use with you: Now you're my prisoner,
And till you swear you love me, all, and only
You, part not from mine arms.
I swear it willingly.
And that you do renounce the Generals love
That heretofore laid claim to you.
My heart bids me
You need not teach me, that my eye ne'er knew
A perfect choice, till it stood blessed with you.
There's yet a rival, whom you little dream of,
Tax me with him, and I'll swear too, I hate him.
I'll thrust 'em both together in one Oath,
And send'em to some pair of waiting-women,
To solder up their credits.
Prithee what's he
Another yet, for laughter sake discover him.
The Governor of the Fort:
That old dri'd Net's tongue.
A Gentleman after my Fathers relish.
By your kind favours Gentlemen:
O my Father,
We are both betrayed.
Peace, you may prove too fearful.
To whom your business Sir.
To the Lord Cardinal,
If it would please your self, or that young Gentle∣man,
To grace me with admittance.
I will see Sir,
The Gentleman's a stranger, new come o'er.
He understands you not—Loff trow vein, Tantum∣bro, Hoff Tufftee
Locumber shaw.
Quisquimken, sapadlaman, Fool-urchin old Astrata.
Nay, and that be the Language, we can speak't too: Strumpettikin,
Bold Harlottum Queaninisma, Whoremongeria.
Shame to thy Sex, and sorrow to thy Father.
Is this a shape for reputation?
And modesty to mask in? Thou too cunning
For credulous goodness.
Did not a reverent respect and honour
That's due unto the Sanctimonious peace
Of this Lords house, restrain my voice and anger,
And teach it soft Humility: I would lift
Both your disgraces to the height of grief
That you have raised in me; but to shame you
I will not cast a blemish upon Virtue.
Call that your happiness, and the dearest too.
That such a bold attempt could ever boast off.
We'll see if a strong Fort can hold you now,
Take her Sir to you.
How have I deserved
The strangeness of this hour?
Talk not so tamely,
For you Sir, thank the reverence of this place,
Or your Hypocrisy I had put out of grace,
I had in faith, if ever I can fit you,
Expect to hear from me.
I thank you Sir,
The Cough of the Lungs requite you: I could curse him
Into diseases by whole dozens now.
But one's enough to beggar him, if he light
Upon a wise Physician. It is a labour
To keep those little wits I have about me.
Still did I dream that Villain would betray her.
I'll never trust slave with a parboiled nose again.
I must devise some trick to excuse her absence
Now to my Uncle too; there is no mischief
But brings one Villain or other still
Even close at heels on it. I'm pained at heart:
If ever there were hope of me to die
For love, it is now, I never felt such gripings▪
If I can scope this Climacterical year,
Women ne'er trust me, though you hear me swear.
Kept with him in the Fort, why there's no hope
Of ever meeting now; my ways not thither,
Love bless us with some means to get together,
And I'll pay all the old rock'nings.
What a contented rest rewards my mind
For faithfulness; I give it Constancy,
And it returns me Peace: How happily
Might woman live, methinks, confined within
The knowledge of one Husband?
What comes of more, rather proclaims Desire
Prince of affections, then religious love;
Brings frailty and our weakness into question;
Amongst our Male enemies▪ makes Widows tears,
Rather the cup of laughter then of pity?
What credit can our sorrows have with men,
When in some months space, they turn light again;
Feast, dance, and go in colours? If my vow
Were yet to make, I would not sleep without it,
Or make a Faith as perfect to my self
In resolution, as a vow would come to;
And do as much right so to Constancy,
As strictness could require: For it is our goodness,
And not our strength that do's it. I am armed now
Against all deserts in man, be it Valour, Wisdom,
Courtesy, Comeliness, nay, Truth it self,
Which seldom keeps him company. I commend
The Virtues highly, as I do an Instrument
When the Case hangs by th'Wall; but man himself
Never comes near my heart.
The blessing of Perfection to your thoughts, Lady,
For I'm resolved they are good ones,
Honour of greatness,
Friend to my vow, and Father to my fame,
Welcome, as Peace to Temples.
I bring War.
How Sir?
A harder fight: If now you con∣quer,
You crown my praises double.
What's your aim Sir?
To astonish sin, and all her tempting evils,
And make your goodness shine more glorious,
When your fair noble vow showed you the way
To excellence in virtue, to keep back
The fears that might discourage you at first,
Pitying your strength, it showed you not the worst.
It is not enough for Tapers to burn bright,
But to be seen, so to lend others light,
Yet not impair themselves, their flame as pure,
As when it shined in secret, so t'abide
Temptations, is the Souls flame truly tried.
I have an ambition, but a virtuous one,
I would have nothing want to your Perfection.
Is there a doubt found yet, is it so hard
For woman to recover, with all diligence,
And a true fasting faith from sensual pleasure,
What many of her sex has so long lost:
Can you believe that any sight of man,
Held he the worth of Millions in one spirit,
Had power to alter me
No, there's my bop,
My credit, and my triumph.
I'll no more,
Keep strictly private, since the glory on it
Is but a virtue questioned; I'll come forth
And show my self to all, the world shall witness,
That like the Sun, my Constancy can look
On Earth's corruptions, and shine clear it self.
Hold conquest now, and I have all my wishes.
The meaning of that sudden shout, my Lord.
Seignior Andrugio, General of the Field;
Successful in his Fortunes, is arrived,
And met by all the gallant hopes of Milan.
Welcomed with Laurel wreaths, and Hymns of praises.
Vouchsafe but you, to give him the first grace Ma∣dam,
Of your so long hid presence, he has then
All honours that can bless victorious man.
You shall prevail grave Sir.
LAurel is a Victors due,
I give it you,
I give it you.
Thy name with praise,
Thy brow with bays;
We circle round.
All men rejoice
With cheerful voice,
To see thee like a Conqueror crowned.
A Cupped descending, sings this.
I am a little Conqueror too
For wreaths of bay•,
There's Arms of cross,
And that's my due.
I give the flaming heart,
It is my crest.
And by the Mothers side,
The weeping eye,
The sighing breast.
It is not power in you, fair beauties,
If I command Love, it is your duties.
During these Songs, Andrugio peruses a Letter delivered him by a Lord, and then closes with this Song below.
Welcome, Welcome, Son of Fame,
Honour triumphs in thy Name.
Alas poor Gentleman! I brought him news
That like a Cloud spread over all his glories,
When he mist her, whom his eye greedily sought for;
His welcome seemed so poor, he took no joy in it:
But when he found her, by her Father forced
To the old Governors love, and kept so strictly,
A coldness struck his heart; there is no State
So firmly happy, but feels Envies might.
I know Lactantio, Nephew to the Cardinal,
Hates him as deeply as a Richman death;
And yet his welcome showed as fair and friendly,
As his that wore the truest love to him.
When in his wishes he could drink his blood,
And make his heart the sweetness of his food.
Madam, Madam.
Beshrew thy heart, dost thou not see me busy:
You show your manners.
In the name of Goodness,
What ails my Lady?
I confess I'm mortal,
There's no defending on it, it is cruel flattery
To make a Lady believe otherways.
Is not this flesh? Can you drive heat from fire?
So may you love from this; for Love and Death
Are Brothers in this Kingdom, only Death
Comes by the Mothers side, and that's the surest.
That General is wondrous fortunate,
Has won another field since, and a victory
That credits all the rest: He may more boast on it,
Then of a thousand conquests. I am lost,
Utterly lost, where are my Women now,
Alas what help's in them, what strength have they?
I call to a weak guard, when I call them,
In rescuing me, they'ld be themselves overcome,
When I that professed war, am overthrown.
What hope's in them then, that nev'r stirred from home?
My Faith is gone for ever, my Reputation with the Cardinal,
My Fame, my Praise, my Liberty, my Peace,
Changed for a restless Passion: Oh hard spite
To lose my seven years victory at one sight.
I prithee Dondolo, take this shirt, and air it a little against my Master rises, I'had rather do any thing then do it y'faith.
O monstrous, horrible, terrible, intolerable! Are not you big enough to air a shirt; were it a smock now, you liquorish Page, you'd be hanged, ere
you'd part from it. If thou dost not prove as arrant a smell-smock, as any the Town affords, in a Term time, I'll lose my judgment in Winching.
Pish; here Dondolo, prithee take it.
It's no more but up and ride with you then? All my generation were Beatles and Officers: and do you think I'm so easily entreated? you shall find a harder piece of work (Boy) then you ima∣gin, to get any thing from my hands; I will not disgenerate so much from the nature of my kindred; you must bribe me one way or other, if you look to have any thing done, or else you may do it your self. It was just my Fathers humour when he bore office: you know my mind Page, The Song, the Song; I must either have the Song, you sung to my Master last night, when he went to Bed, or I'll not do a stitch of service for you, from one weeks end to the other. As I am a Gentleman, you shall brush Cloaks, make clean Spurs, nay, pull of strait Boots, although in the tugging, you chance to fall and hazard the breaking of your little Buttocks: I'll take no more pity of your Maribones, then a Butchers Dog of a Rump of Beef; nay, call me, call thee, If you will ease the Melancholy of my mind with singing, I will deliver you from the calamity of Boots∣haling.
Alas you know I cannot sing.
Take heed, you may speak at such an hour, that your voice may be clean taken away from you: I have known many a good Gentlewoman say so much as you say now, and have presently gone to Bed, and lay speechless: It is not good to jest, as old Chaser was wont to say, that broad famous Eng∣lish Poet. Cannot you sing say you? Oh that a Boy should so keep cut with his Mother, and be given to dissembling.
Faith to your knowledge in it, ill may seem well;
But as I hope in comforts, I've no skill.
A pox of skill, give me plain simple cun∣ning: Why should not singing be as well got with∣out skill, as the getting of children; you shall have the arrant'st Fool do as much there, as the wisest Coxcomb of 'em all, let 'em have all the help of Doctors put to 'em; both the directions of Physicians, and the erections of Apothecaries; you shall have a plain Hobnailed Countrey-Fellow, marrying some Dairy-wench, tumble out two of a year, and some∣times three, By'rlady, as the crop falls out; and your nice paling Physicking-Gentlefolks, some one in nine years, and hardly then a whole one, as it should be; the wanting of so me Apricot, or something, looses a member on him, or quite spoils it. Come will you sing, that I may warm the shirt; by this light, he shall put it on cold for me else.
A Song or two I learnt, with hearing Gen∣tlewomen practise themselves.
Come, you are so modest now, it is pity that thou was it ever bred to be thrust through a pair of Canions; thou would have made a pretty foolish Waiting-woman, but for one thing. Wil't' sing?
As well as I can Dondolo.
Give me the shirt then, I'll warm't as well I can too.
Why look you Whoreson Cockscomb, this is a smock.
No it is my Masters shirt.
Why that's true too,
Who knows not that; why it is the fashion Fool,
All your young Gallants here of late wear smocks;
Those without Beards especially.
Why what's the reason Sir.
Marry very great reason in it: A young gal∣lant lying a Bed with his Wench, if the Constable should chance to come up and search, being both in smocks, they'd be taken for Sisters; and I hope a Constable dare go no further: And as for the know∣ing of their Heads, that's well enough too; for I know many young Gentlemen, wear longer hair then their Mistresses.
It is a hot world the whilst:
Nay, that's most certain,
And a most witty age of a bald one; for all Lan∣guages you've many daughters so well brought up, they speak French naturally at fifteen, and they are turned to the Spanish and Italian half a year after.
That's like learning the Grammar first, and the Accidence after;
They go backward so.
The fitter for the Italian; thou'st no wit Boy,
Had had a Tutor, he'd have taught thee that.
Come, come, that I may be gone Boy?
Cupped is Venus only joy,
But he's a wanton Boy:
A very, very wanton Boy.
He shoots at Ladies naked Breasts;
He is the cause of most men's Crests;
I mean upon the Forehead,
Invisible, but horrid.
Of the short Velvet Mask, he was deviser,
That wives may kiss, the husband's ne'er the wiser.
It was he first thought upon the way,
To keep a Ladies Lips in play.
Oh rich, ravishing, rare, and enticing: Well, go thy ways, for as sweet a Breasted Page, as ever lay at his Masters feet in a Truckle-bed.
You'll hie you in straight Dondolo?
I'll not miss you.
This smockified shirt, or shirted smock,
I will go toste; let me see what's a clock,
I must to th'Castle straight to see his love,
Either by hook or crook: My Master storming
Sent me last night, but I'll be gone this morning.
SEek out the lightest colours can be got;
The youthful'st dressings; Tawny is too sad.
I am not thirty yet, I have wronged my time,
To go so long in black, like a Petitioner.
See that the Powder that I use about me,
Be rich in Cassia.
Here's a sudden change.
Oh I'm undone in Faith: Stay, art thou certain
Lactantio, Nephew to the Cardinal,
Was present in the late entertainment of the Gene∣ral?
Upon my reputation with your Excellence,
These eyes beheld him: He came foremost, Madam,
It was he in black and yellow.
Nay, it is no matter, either for himself
Or for the affectation of his colours,
So you be sure he was there.
As sure as sight
Can discern man from man, Madam.
It suffices.
Oh an ill cause had need of many helps,
Much art, and many friends, I, and those mighty,
Or else it sets in shame. A Faith once lost,
Requires great cunning, er't be entertained
Into the Breast of a belief again.
There's no condition so unfortunate,
Poor, miserable, to any Creature given,
As hers that breaks in vow, she breaks with Heaven:
Increase of health, and a redoubled courage
To Chasteties great Soldier: what so sad Madam?
The memory of her seven years deceased Lord
Springs yet into her eyes, as fresh and full
As at the seventh hour after his departure:
What a perpetual Fountain is her virtue?
Too much to afflict your self with ancient sorrow
Is not so strictly for your strength required:
Your vow is charge enough, believe me it is Madam,
You need no weightier task.
Religious Sir,
You heard the last words of my dying Lord.
Which I shall nev'r forget.
May I entreat
Your goodness but to speake'em over to me
As near as memory can be friend your utterance,
That I may think a while I stand in presence
Of my departing Husband.
What's your meaning?
In this most virtuous Madam?
It is a courtesy
I stand in need of Sir, at this time specially,
Urge it no further yet; as it proves to me,
You shall hear from me, only I desire it
Effectually from you Sir, that's my request.
I wonder, yet I'll spare to question far∣there.
You shall have your desire.
I thank you Sir.
A blessing come along with it.
You see my Lords, what all Earths glo∣rye is
Rightly defined in me, uncertain breath;
A dream of threescore years to the long sleeper,
To most not half the time. Beware Ambition,
Heaven is not reached with Pride, but with submiss∣on.
And you Lord Gardinal labour to perfect
Good purposes begun, be what you seem,
Steadfast, and incorrupt, your actions noble,
Your goodness simple, without gain or art,
And not in vesture holier then in heart.
But it is a pain, more then the pangs of death,
To think that we must part, Fellows of life,
Thou richness of my joys, kind and deer Princess.
Death had no sting, but for our separation,
T'would come more calm then an ev'nings peace,
That brings on rest to labours: Thou art so precious,
I should depart in everlasting envy
Unto the man, that ever should enjoy thee:
Oh a new torment strikes his force into me,
When I but think on it, I am racked and torn,
Pity me in thy virtues.
My loved Lord,
Let you confirmed opinion of my life,
My love, my faithful love, seal an assurance
Of quiet to your spirit, that no forgetfulness
Can cast a sleep so deadly on my Senses,
To draw my affections to a second liking.
'Tas ever been the promise, and the spring
Of my great love to thee. For once to marry
Is honourable in woman, and her ignorance
Stands for a virtue, coming new and fresh;
But second marriage shows desires in flesh:
Thence lust, and heat, and common custom grows,
But she's part Virgin, who but one man knows.
I here expect a work of thy great Faith,
At my last parting, I can crave no more,
And with thy vow, I rest my self for ever,
My soul and it shall fly to Heaven together:
Seal to my spirit, that quiet satisfaction,
And I go hence in Peace.
Then here I vow, never.
Why Madam?
I can go no further.
What have you forgot your vow?
I have, too certainly.
Your vow? that cannot be; it follows now,
Just where I left.
My frailty gets before it,
Nothing prevails but ill.
What ail you Madam?
Sir, I'm in love.
Oh all you powers of Chastity,
Look to this woman, let her not faint now
For honour of your selves: If she be lost,
I know not where to seek my hope in woman.
Madam, Oh Madam.
My desires are sickened
Beyond recovery of good counsel Sir.
What mischief owed a malice to the Sex,
To work this spiteful ill; better the man
Had never known Creation, then to live
Th'unlucky ruin of so fair a Temple;
Yet think upon your vow, revive in Faith,
Those are eternal things. What are all pleasures,
Flatteries of men, and Follies upon Earth
To your most excellent goodness? Oh she's dead,
Stark cold to any virtuous claim within her.
What now is heat, is sins. Have I approved
Your constancy for this, called your Faith noble,
Writ volumes of your victories and virtues?
I have undone my judgment, lost my praises,
Blemished the truth of my opinion.
Give me the man, that I may pour him out
To all contempt and curses.
The mans innocent,
Full of desert and grace, his name Lactantio.
How?
Your Nephew.
My Nephew!
Beshrew the sight of him; he lives not Sir,
That could have conquered me, himself excepted.
He that I loved so dearly, does he wear
Such killing poison in his eye to sanctity?
He has undone himself for ever by it,
Has lost a friend of me, and a more sure one.
Farewell all natural pity, though my affection
Could hardly spare him from my sight an hour,
I'll lose him now eternally, and strive
To live without him; he shall straight to Rome.
Not if you love my health, or life, my Lord.
This day he shall set forth:
Dispatch me rather.
I'll send him far enough.
Send me to death first.
No Basilic that strikes dead pure af∣fection
With venomous eye, lives under my protection.
Now my conditions worse then ev'r it was yet,
My cunning takes not with him: Has broke through
The Net, that with all art was set for him,
And left the snorer here herself entangled
With her own toils. Oh what are we poor souls,
When our dissembling fails us? Surely Creatures
As full of want, as any Nation can be
That scarce have food to keep bare life about 'em:
Had this but took effect, what a fair way
Had I made for my love to the General,
And cut of all suspect, all reprehension?
My hopes are killed in the blossom.
Let me think upon it,
Set holy anger by a while, there's time
Allowed for natural argument: It is she
That loves my Nephew, she that loves, loves first;
What cause have I to lay a blame on him then?
He's in no fault in this; say it was his fortune
At the free entertainment of the General,
Amongst others the deserts and hopes of Milan,
To come into her sight, whore's the offence yet?
What sin was that in him? man's sight and pre∣sense
Are free to public view: She might as well
Have fixed her hearts love then upon some other,
I would it had lighted any where but there,
Yet I may err to wished, since it appears
The hand of Heaven, that only picked him out
To reward virtue in him by this Fortune,
And through affection I'm half conquered now,
I love his good, as dearly as her vow,
Yet there my credit lives in works and praises:
I never found a harder fight within me,
Since zeal first taught me war, say I should labour
To quench this love, and so quench life and all;
As by all likelihood it would prove her death:
For it must needs be granted, she affects him
As dearly, as the power of love can force,
Since her vow aws her not, that was her Saint.
What right could that be to Religion
To be her end, and disposes my Kinsman;
No I will bear in pity to her heart,
The rest commend to Fortune, and my Art.
I like him passing well:
He's a tall fellow.
A couple of tall wits: I have seen some service Sir.
Nay so it seems by thy discourse good∣fellow.
Good-fellow, calls me thief familiarly:
I could show many marks of resolution,
But modesty could wish'em rather hidden:
I fetched home three and twenty wounds together
In one set battle, where I was defeated
At the same time of the third part of my Nose,
But meeting with a skilful Surgeon;
Took order for my snuffling.
And a Nose
Well healed, is counted a good cure in these days,
It saves many a mans honesty, which else
Is quickly drawn into suspicion.
This night shall bring you acquainted with your charge;
In the mean time you and your valors welcome.
Would we had more store of you, although they come
With fewer marks about 'em.
So wish I Sir.
I was about to call her; and she stays
Of her own gift, as if she knew my mind;
Certain she knows me not, not possible.
What if I left my token, and my Letter
With this strange fellow, so to be conveyed
Without suspicion to Lactantio's servant:
Not so, I'll trust no fresh-man with such secrets;
His ignorance may mistake, and gived to one
That may belong to th'General; for I know
He sets some spies about me, but all he gets
Shall not be worth his pains. I would Lactantio
Would seek some means to free me from this place,
It is prisonment enough to be a Maid;
But to be mewed up too, that case is hard,
As if a Toy were kept, by a double guard.
Away she steals again, not minding me.
It was not at me she offered: Hark you Gentletwo∣man.
With me Sir?
I could call you by your name;
But Gentle's the best attribute to woman.
Andrugio, Oh as welcome to my Lips,
As morning Dew to Roses: My first love.
Why have you more then?
What a word was there?
More then thy self, what woman could desire
If reason had a part of her Creation?
For loving you, you see Sir I'm a prisoner;
There's all the cause they have against me Sir.
A happy persecution, I so count on it.
If any thing be done to me for your sake,
It is pleasing to me.
Are you not abused,
Either through force, or by your own consent;
Hold you your honour perfect and unstained;
Are you the same still, that at my departure,
My honest thoughts maintained you to my heart?
The same most just.
Swear 't.
By my hope of fruitfulness,
Love, and agreement, the three joys of marriage:
I am confirmed, and in requital on it,
Ere long expect your freedom.
Oh you flatter me,
It is a wrong to make a wretch too happy,
So suddenly upon affliction.
Beshrew me, if I be not sick upon it;
It is like a surfeit after a great feast.
My freedom said you?
Dost o'rcome you so?
Temptation never overcame a sinner
More pleasingly, then this sweet news my heart.
Here's secret joy can witness, I am proud on it.
Violence I will not use, I come a friend,
It were madness to force that, which wit can end:
Most virtuously delivered:
Thou art in raptures:
My love, my love.
Most virtuously delivered,
Spoke like the sister of a Puritan Midwife:
Will you embrace the means that I have thought on,
With all the speed you can?
Sir any thing.
You cannot name't too dangerous, or too homely.
Fie, you over-act your happiness,
You drive slight things to wonders.
Blame me not Sir,
You know not my affection:
Will you hear me,
There are a sect of pilfring juggling people,
The vulgar tongue call Gipseys.
True, the same Sir.
I saw the like this morning: Say no more Sir;
I apprehend you fully:
What, you do not?
No: Hark you Sir.
Now by this light it is true:
Sure if you prove as quick as your conceit,
You'll be an exc'lent breeder.
I should do reason by the Mothers side Sir,
If Fortune do her part, in a good Getter.
That's not to do now (sweet) the man stands near thee.
Long may he stand most fortunately Sir,
Whom her kind goodness has appointed for me
A while I'll take my leave to avoid suspicion:
I do commend your course; good Sir for∣get me not.
All comforts sooner.
Liberty is sweet, Sir.
I know there's nothing sweeter, next to love,
But health it self, which is the Prince of life.
Your knowledge raise you Sir.
Farewell till evening.
And after that, farewell sweet Sir for ever.
A good kind Gentleman to serve our turn with,
But not for lasting: I have chose a Stuff
Will wear out two of him, and one finer too:
I like not him that has two Mistresses;
War, and his sweet-heart, he can ne'er please both:
And War's a soaker, she's no friend to us,
Turns a man home sometimes to his Mistress,
Some forty ounces poorer then he went.
All his discourse out of the Book of Surgery,
Seer-cloth, and Salve, and lies you, all in Tents,
Like your Camp-Victlers: Out upon it, I smile
To think how I have fitted him with an office;
His love takes pains to bring our loves together,
Much like your man that labours to get treasure,
To keep his wife high for another pleasure.
THink of your shame and mine.
I prithee peace,
Thou art th'unfortunat'st piece of taking business,
That ever man repented, when day peeped;
I'll ne'er keep such a piece of Touch-wood again,
And I we re rid of thee once. Welfare those
That never shamed their Master, I have had such,
And I may live to see the time again;
I do not doubt on it:
If my too much kindness
Receive your anger only for reward,
The harder is my fortune, I must tell you Sir,
To stir your care up to prevention,
(Misfortunes must be told as well as blessings)
When I left all my friends in Mantua,
For your loves sake alone, then with strange oaths
You promised present marriage.
With strange oaths quoth' a,
They're not so strange to me, I have sworn the same things,
I am sure forty times over; not so little.
I may be perfect in 'em, for my standing.
You see it is high time now Sir.
Yes, yes, yes,
Marriage is nothing with you; a toy till death.
If I should marry all those I have promised,
It would make one Vicar hoarse, ere he could dis∣patch us:
I must devise some shift, when she grows big,
Those Masculine Hose will shortly prove too little:
What if she were conveyed to Nurses house;
A good sure old Wench; and she'd love the child well,
Because she suckled the Father: No ill course
By my Mortality, I may hit worse.
Now Dondolo, the news.
The news:
How do's she.
Soft, soft Sir, you think it is nothing to get news out of the Castle;
I was there.
Well Sir.
As you know a merry fellow may pass any where.
So Sir.
Never in better fooling in my life.
What's this to the purpose?
Nay it was nothing to the purpose, that's certain.
How Wretched this slave makes me! Did not see her?
I saw her.
Well, what said she then?
Not a word Sir.
How, not a word?
Proves her the better Maid;
For Virgins should be seen more then they are heard.
Exceeding good Sir; you are no sweet villain.
No Faith Sir; for you keep me in foul Linen.
Turned scurvy rimer are you?
Not scurvy neither,
Though I be somewhat itchy in the profession;
If you could hear me out with patience, I know her mind
As well as if I were in her belly:
Thou said even now, she never spake a word:
But she gave certain signs, and that's as good.
Can thou conceive by signs?
Oh passing well Sir,
Even from an Infant; did you nev'r know that?
I was the happiest child in all our Country,
I was born of a dumb woman.
How?
Stark dumb Sir: My Father had a rare bargain of her, a rich peniworth; there would have been but too much money given for her. A Justice
of Peace was about her, but my Father being then Constable, carried her before him.
Well since we are entered into these dumb shows,
What were the signs she gave you?
Many and good, Sir.
Imprimis, she first gaped, but that I guessed
Was done for want of air, cause she's kept close;
But had she been abroad, and gaped as much,
It had been another case; then cast she up
Her pretty eye, and wink't; the word me thought was then
Come not till twitter light: Next, thus her fingers went,
As who should say, I'd fain have a hole broke to escape away.
Then looked upon her watch, and twice she nodded,
As who should say, The hour will come Sweet-heart
That I shall make two Noddies of my Keepers.
A third of thee. Is this your Mother tongue?
My hopes are much the wiser for this Language,
There is no such curse in love to an arrant Ass.
O yes, Sir, yes, an arrant whore's far worse▪ You nev'r lin railing on me, from one weeks end to another: But you can keep a little Tit-mouse Page there, that's good for nothing, but to carry Tooth∣picks, put up your Pipe or so, that's all he's good for: he cannot make him ready as he should do, I am fain to truss his points every morning. Yet the proud scornful Ape, when all the lodgings were taken up with strangers the other night, he would not suffer me to come to Bed to him, but kicked and pricked, and pinched me, like an Urchin; there's no good quality in him. Oh my Conscience▪ I think he scarce knows how to stride a Horse; I saw him with a little hunting Nag, but thus high t'other day, and he
was fain to lead him to a high rail, and get up like a Butter-wench; there's no good Fellowship in this Dandiprat, this Dive-dapper, as is in other Pages; they'd go a swimming with no familiarly in the heat of Summer, and clap what you call 'ems: But I could no∣ver get that little Monkey yet to put off his Breeches. A tender, puling, nice, chitty faced Squall 'cis.
Is this the good you do me? his love's wretched,
And most distressed, that must make use of Fools.
Fool to my face still! that's unreasonable;
I will be a knave one day for this trick,
Or it shall cost me a fall, though it be from a Gibbet,
It has been many a proper mans last leap.
Nay sure I'll be quite out of the precincts of a Fool, if I live but two days to an end: I will turn Gypsy presently, and that's the high-way to the dantiest knave that ever Mothers Son took journey too. Oh those dear Gipseys, they live the merriest lives, eat sweet stolen Hens, plucked over Pales or Hedges by a twitch; they are nev'r without a plump and lovely Goose, or beautiful Sow-pig; those things I saw with mine own eyes to day; they call those vanities, and triffing pilfries: But if a privy search were made amongst 'em, they should find other manner of ware about 'em; Cups, Rings, and Silver Spoons, by'r Lady, Bracelets, Pearl Neck-laces, and Chains of Gold sometimes; they are the wittiest thieves: I'll stay no longer, but even go look what I can steal, now presently, and so begin to bring my self ac∣quainted with 'em.
Nothing I fear so much, as in this time
Of my dull absence, her first love, the General
Will wind himself into her affection,
By secret gifts and Letters; there's the mischief;
I have no enemy like him, though my policy
Dissembled him a welcome, no mans hate
Can stick more close unto a loathed disease,
Then mine to him.
What ails this pretty Boy to weep so often?
Tell me the cause child; how his eyes stand full!
Beshrew you Nephew, you're too bitter to him;
He is so soft, th'unkindness of a word
Melts him into a woman; 'lass poor Boy,
Thou shalt not serve him longer; it were great pity
That thou should wait upon an angry Master.
I have promised thee to one will make much of thee,
And hold thy weak youth in most deer respect.
Oh I beseech your Grace, that I may serve
No Master else.
Thou shalt not: Mine's a Mistress,
The greatest Mistress in all Milan, Boy;
The Duchess self.
Nor her, nor any:
Cease Boy,
Thou know not thine own happiness, through fondness,
And therefore must be learned; go dry thine eyes.
This rather is the way to make 'em moister.
Now Nephew, Nephew.
Oh you've snatched my spirit Sir▪
From the divinest Meditation
That ever made Soul happy.
I am afraid
I shall have as much toil to bring him on now,
As I had pains to keep her off from him▪
I have thought it fit Nephew, considering
The present barrenness of our name and house,
(The only Famine of succeeding honour)
To move the ripeness of your time to marriage.
How Sir, to marriage?
Yes, to a fruitful life;
We must not all be strict so generation
Would lose her right; you're young, it is my desire
To see thee bestowed happily in my life time.
Does your Grace well remember who I am,
When you speak this?
Yes, very perfectly;
You're a young man, full in the grace of life,
And made to do love credit; proper, handsome,
And for affection, pregnant.
I beseech you Sir,
Take off your praises, rather then bestow 'em
Upon so frail a use, alas you know Sir,
I know not what love is, or what you speak of;
If woman be amongst it, I shall swoon; take her away
For contemplation's sake; most serious Uncle,
Name no such thing to me.
Come, come you're fond:
Prove but so strict and obstinate in age,
And you are well to pass. There's honest love
Allowed you now for recreation;
The years will come when all delights must leave you.
Stick close to Virtue then; in the mean time
There's honourable joys to keep youth company;
And if death take you there, dying no adulterer,
You're out of his eternal reach, defy him.
List hither, come to me, and with great thankful∣nos,
Welcome thy Fortunes; it is the Duchess loves thee.
The Duchess!
Dotes on thee: Will die for thee,
Unless she may enjoy thee.
She must die then.
How?
Alas, do you think she ever means to do it Sir?
I'll sooner believe all a woman speaks,
Then that she'll die for love: She has a vow my Lord,
That will keep life in her.
Believe me then,
That should have bounteous interest in thy Faith,
She's thine, and not her vows, the more my sor∣row,
My toil, and my destruction.
My blood dances.
And though that bashful Maiden virtue in thee,
That never held familiar league with woman,
Binds fast all pity to her heart that loves thee.
Let me prevail, my counsel stands up to thee;
Embrace it as the fullness of thy Fortunes,
As if all blessings upon Earth were closed
Within one happiness; for such an other
Whole life could never meet with; go and pre∣sent
Your service, and your love, but on your hopes
Do it religiously: What need I doubt him,
Whom Chastity locks up?
Oh Envy, had thou no other means to come by virtue,
But by such treachery! The Duchess love!
Thou would be sure to aim it high enough,
Thou knew full well it was no prevailing else.
Sir, what your will commands, mine shall fulfil:
I'll teach my heart in all to obey your will.
A thing you shall not lose by. Here come the Lords,
Go follow you the course that I advised you;
The comfort of thy presence is expected;
Away with speed to Court, she languishes
For one deer sight of thee. For life's sake haste,
You lose my favour if you let her perish.
And art thou come brave Fortune, the re∣ward
Of neat hypocrisy, that ever book't it,
Or turned up transitory white of the eye
After the Feminine rapture: Duchess and I
Were a fit match, can be denied of no man;
The best dissembler lights on the best woman;
It were sin to part us.
You Lights of State, Truths Friends, much honoured Lords,
Faithful admirers of our Duchess virtues,
And firm Believers; it appears as plain
As knowledge to the eyes of industry,
That neither private motion, which holds counsel
Often with women's frailty, and her blood,
Nor public sight, the lightning of temptations,
Which from the eye strikes sparks into the bosom,
And sets whole hearts on fire, hath power to raise
A heat in her 'bove that which feeds chaste life,
And gives that cherishing means; she's the same still,
And seems so seriously employed in soul,
As if she could not tend to cast an eye
Upon deserts so low as those in man.
It merits famous memory I confess;
Yet many times when I behold her youth,
And think upon the lost hopes of posterity,
Succession, and the royal fruits of Beauty,
All by the rashness of one vow made desperate,
It goes so near my heart, I feel it painful,
And wakes me into pity oftentimes,
When others sleep unmoved.
I speak it faithfully,
For it is poor fame to boast of a disease,
Your Grace has not endue ed that pain alone;
T'has been a grief of mine, but whore's the remedy?
True, there your Lordship spake enough in little;
There's nothing to be hoped for but repulses;
She's not to seek for armour against love,
That has bid battle to his powers so long;
He that should try her now, had need come strong,
And with more force then his own Arguments,
Or he may part disgraced, being put to flight;
That Soldier's tough, has been in seven •…ars fight,
Her vow's invincible; for you must grant this,
If those desires trained up in flesh and blood
To war continually against good intents,
Prove all too weak for her, having advantage
Both of her sex, and her unskilfulness
At a Spiritual weapon, wanting knowledge
To manage resolution, and yet win;
What force can a poor Argument bring in?
The Books that I have published in her praise,
Commend her constancy, and that's Fame-worthy;
But if you read me o'er with eyes of enemies,
You cannot justly, and with honour tax me,
That I dissuade her life from marriage there:
Now Heaven, and fruitfulness forbid, not I:
She may be constant there, and the hard war
Of Chastity, is held a virtuous strife,
As rare in marriage, as in single life;
Nay, by some writers rarer: hear their reasons,
And you'll approve 'em fairly. She that's single,
Either in Maid or Widow, oftentimes
The fear of shame, more then the fear of Heaven,
Keeps chaste, and constant; when the tempest comes
She knows she has no shelter for her sin,
It must endure the weathers of all censure:
Nothing but Sea and Air, that poor Bark feels,
When she in wedlock is like a safe vessel
That lies at anchor; come what weathers can,
She has her Harbour: At her great unloading▪
Much may be stolen, and little waste; the Master
Thinks himself rich enough with what he has,
And holds content by that. How think you now Lords▪
If she that might offend safe, does not err,
What's chaste in others, is most rare in her.
What wisdom but approves it?
But my Lord,
This should be told to her it concerns most;
Pity such good things should be spoke and lost.
That were the way to lose 'em utterly,
You quite forget her vow; yet now I think on it,
What is that vow? It was but a thing enforced,
Was it not Lords?
Merely compelled indeed.
Only to please the Duke, and forced virtue
Fails in her merit, there's no crown prepared for it:
What have we done, my Lords? I fear we have sinned
In too much strictness to uphold her in it,
In cherishing her will; for women's goodness
Takes counsel of that first, and then determines.
She cannot truly be called constant now,
If she persevere; rather obstinate,
The Vow appearing forced, as it proves,
Tried by our purer thoughts: The grace and triumph
Of all her victories, are but idle glories;
She wilful, and we enemies to succession.
I will not take rest, till I tell her soul
As freely as I talk to those I keep.
And we'll all second you, my Lord.
Agreed.
We'll knit such knots of Arguments so fast,
All wit in her shall not undo in hast.
Nay sure, I think all we shall be too hard for her,
Else she's a huge wilde Creature.
If we win,
And she yield marriage, then will I strike in.
Thou tell me happy things, if they be certain,
To bring my wishes about wondrous strangely.
Lactantio Nephew to the Cardinal,
The Generals secret enemy?
Most true Madam,
I had it from a Gentleman, my Kinsman,
That knows the best part of Lactantio's bosom.
It happens passing fortunately, to save
Employment in another; he will 'come now
A necessary property; he may thank
The need and use we have of him for his welcome.
Now who's that knocks?
Madam, it is he, with speed.
I thought he had brought his horse to the Chamber door,
He made such haste and noise.
Admit him prithee,
And have a care your heart be true and secret:
Take life away from it, when it fails you Ma∣dam.
Enough; I know thee wise.
He comes with haste indeed: Are you come now Sir?
You should have staid yet longer, and have found me
Dead, to requite your haste.
Love bless you better Madam.
Must I bid welcome to the man undoes me,
The cause of my vows breach, my honor's enemy;
One that does all the mischief to my fame,
And mocks my seven years conquest with his name?
This is a force of Love was never felt;
But I'll not grudge at Fortune, I will take
Captivity cheerfully: Here, seize upon me,
And if thy heart can be so pitiless
To chain me up for ever in those arms,
I'll take it mildly, I, and thank my Stars,
For w'are all subject to the chance of wars.
We are so, yet take comfort vanquished Duchess,
I'll use you like an honourable prisoner,
You shall be entreated; day shall be
Free for all sports to you, the night for me;
That's all I challenge, all the rest is thine;
And for your fare 't' shall be no worse then mine.
Nay then I'm heartily pleasant, and as merry
As one that owes no malice, and that's well Sir;
You cannot say so much for your part, can you?
Faith all that I ow, is to one man, Madam,
And so can few men say: Marry that malice
Wears no dead flesh about it, it is a stinger.
What is he that shall dare to be your enemy,
Having our friendship, if he be a servant
And subject to our Law?
Yes, trust me Madam,
Of a wild fellow, I hold him a true subject;
There's many arrant knaves, that are good subjects,
Some for their livings sakes, some for their lives,
That will unseen, eat men, and drink their wives.
They are as much in fault that know such people,
And yet conceal 'em from the whips of Justice.
For love's sake give me in your foe betimes,
Before he vex you further; I will order him
To your hearts wishes, load him with disgraces,
That your revenge shall rather pity him,
Then wish more weight upon him.
Say you so Madam!
Here's a blessed hour, that feeds both love and hate;
Then take thy time brave malice: Virtuous Prin∣cess,
The only enemy that my veng'ance points to,
Lives in Andrugio.
What the General?
That's the man, Madam.
Are you serious Sir?
As at my prayers.
We meet happily then
In both our wishes; he's the only man
My will has had a longing to disgrace,
For divers capital contempts; my memory
Shall call 'em all together now; nay Sir,
I'll bring his faith in War, now into question,
And his late conference with th'enemy.
By'r Lady a shrewd business, and a danger∣os.
Seignior, your neck's a cracking.
Stay, stay Sir, take Pen and Ink.
Here's both, and Paper, Madam.
I'll take him in a fine trap.
That were exc'llent.
A Letter so writ, would abuse him strangely.
Good Madam, let me understand your mind,
And then take you no care for his abusing,
I serve for nothing else. I can write fast and fair
Most true Orthography, and observe my stops.
Stay, stay a while,
You do not know his hand.
A bastard Roman,
Much like mine own I could go near it Madam.
Marry and shall.
We were once great together,
And writ Spanish Epistles one to another,
To exercise the Language.
Did you so?
It shall be a bold Letter of temptation
With his name to it, as writ, and sent to me.
Can be no better Lady; stick there Madam,
Ank never seek further.
Begin thus: Fair Duchess, say:
We must use flattery, if we imitate man,
Twill nev'r be thought his Pen else.
Most fair Duchess.
What need you have put in most, yet since it is in,
Let 't even go on, few women would find fault with it;
We all love to be best, but seldom mend:
Go on Sir.
Most fair Duchess! Here's an admiration point.
The report of your vow shall not fear me.
Fear me: Two stops at fear me.
I know you're but a woman.
But a woman; a comma at woman.
And what a woman is, a wiseman knows.
Wise-man knows: A Full-prick there.
Perhaps my condition may seem blunt to you.
Blunt to you: A comma here again.
But no mans love can be more sharp set.
Sharp set, there a colon; for colon is sharp set oftentimes.
And I know desires in both sexes have skill at that weapon.
Skill at that weapon: A Full-prick here, at weapon.
So, that will be enough: Subscribe it thus now.
One that vows service to your affections: Seignior such a one.
Seignior Andrugio: G. that stands for General.
And you shall stand for Goose cap: Give me that,
Betake you to your business; speedily Sir,
We give you full authority from our person,
In right of Reputation, Truth, and Honour,
To take a strong Guard, and attach his body.
That done, to bring him presently before us,
Then we know what to do.
My hate finds wings,
Mans spirit flies swift to all revengeful things.
Why here's the happiness of my desires,
The means safe, unsuspected, far from thought;
His state is like the world's condition right,
Greedy of gain, either by fraud or stealth;
And whilst one toils, another gets the wealth.
NOw Fortune show thy self the Friend of Love,
Make her way plain, and safe; cast all their eyes
That guard the Castle, into a thicker blindness then thine own,
Darker then Ignorance or Idolatry,
That in that shape, my love may pass unknown,
And by her freedom, set my comforts free.
This is the place appointed for our meeting,
Yet comes she, I am coveteous of her sight;
That Gypsy habit alters her so far
From knowledge that our purpose cannot err;
She might have been here now, by this time largely
And much to spare: I would not miss her now
In this plight, for the loss of a years joy.
She's ignorant of this house, nor knows she where,
Or which way to bestow her self through fear.
Close with him Gentlemen. In the Dutch∣ess name
We do attach your body.
How, my body!
What means this rudeness?
You add to your offences,
Calling that rudeness, that is fair command,
Immaculate Justice, and the Duchess pleasure.▪
Seignior Lactantio, Oh are you the Speak∣er?
I am what I am made.
Show me my crime.
I fear you'll have too many shown you Sir.
The Father of untruths possesses thy spy∣rit,
As he commands thy tongue: I defy fear,
But in my love, it only settles there.
Bring him along.
Let Laws severest brow
Bend at my deeds, my innocence shall rise
A shame to thee, and all my enemies:
You're much the happier man.
Oh my hard crosses;
Grant me the third part of one hours stay.
Sir, not a minute.
Oh she's lost.
Away.
I'm happily escaped, not one pursues me,
This shape's too cunning for 'em; all the sport was
The Porter would needs know his fortune of me
As I past by him: It was such a plunge to me,
I knew not how to bear my self; at last
I did resolve of somewhat, looked in's hand,
Then shook my head, bad him make much on's eyes,
He would lose his sight clean, long before he dies,
And so away went I, he lost the sight of me quickly.
I told him his fortune truer for nothing, then some
Of my Complexion, that would have cozened him of his money.
This is the place of meeting; whore's this man now,
That has took all this care and pains for nothing?
The use of him is at the last cast now,
Shall only bring me to my former face again,
And see me somewhat cleanlier at his cost,
And then farewell Andrugio; when I am handsome
I'm for another straight: I wonder troth
That he would miss me thus, I could have took
Many occasions besides this, to have left him,
I'm not in want, he need not give me any;
A women's will has still enough to spare
To help her friends, and need be: What, not yet?
What will become of me in this shape then?
If I know where to go, I'm no dissembler;
And I'll not lose my part in one woman so,
For such a trifle, to forswear my self▪
But comes he not indeed?
Oh ex'lent, by this light here's one of them. I thank my Stars: I learnt that phrase in the Half-Moon Tavern. By your leave good Gypsy, I pray how far off is your company?
Oh happiness! This is the merry Fellow
My love Seignior Lactantio takes delight in;
I'll send him away speedily, with the news
Of my so strange and fortunate escape,
And he'll provide my safety at an instant.
My friend, thou serve Seignior Lactantio.
Who I serve? Gypsy, I scorn your mote∣on; and if the rest of your company give me no better words, I will hinder 'em the stealing of more Pulley then fifty Poulterers were ever worth, and prove a heavier enemy to all their Pig-booties; they shall travel like Jews, that hate Swines flesh, and never get a Sow by th'ear all their life time. I serve Lactantio? I scorn to serve any Body, I am more Gipsey-minded then so; though my face look of a Christian colour, if my belly were ripped up, you shall find my heart as black as any patch about you. The truth is, I am as arrant a thief, as the proudest of your company, I'll except none: I am run away from my Master in the state of a Fool, and till I be a perfect knave, I never mean to return again.
I'm nev'r the happier for this Fortune now,
It did but mock me.
Here they come: Here they come.
Come my dainty Doxes,
My Dells, my Dells most deer.
We have neither House nor Land,
Yet never want good cheer.
We never want good cheer▪
We take no care for Candle, Rents,
2: We lie.
3. We snort.
We sport in Tents.
Then rouse betimes, and steal our dinners.
Our store is never taken
Without Pigs, Hens, or Bacon,
And that's good meat for sinners▪
At Wakes and Fairs we cozen,
Poor Country folks by dozen▪
If one have money, be disburses,
Whilst some tell fortunes, some pick purses▪
Rather then be out of use
We'll steal Garters, Hose, or Shoes,
Boots, or Spurs with jingling Rowels,
Shirts or Napkins, Smocks or Towels.
Come live with us, come live with us,
All you that love your eases;
He that's a Gypsy,
May be drunk or tipsy,
At what hour he pleases.
We laugh, we quaff, we roar, we scuffle.
We cheat, we drab, we filtch, we shuffle.
Oh sweet! they deserve to be hanged for ravishing of me.
What will become of me, if I seem fearful now,
Or offer sudden flight? then I betray my self;
I must do neither.
Ousabel, camcheteroon, puscatelion, hows-drows.
2. Rumbos stragadelion
Alla piskitch in Sows-clows.
Oh, Oh!
Piskitch in howse-clout.
I shall nev'r keep a good tongue in my head, till I get this Language.
Umbra fill kevolliden, magro-pye.
He calls her Magot of pie.
I love your Language well, but understand it not.
Ho.
I am but lately turned to your profession,
Yet from my youth, I ever loved it dearly,
But never could attain to it: Steal I can;
It was a thing I ever was brought up to,
My Father was a Miller, and my Mother
A Taylors widow.
She's a thief on both sides.
Give me thy hand, thou art no Bastard born,
We have not a more true bred thief amongst us.
Not any Captain.
I pray take me into some grace amongst you too, for though I claim no goodness from my parents to help me forward into your Society, I had two Uncles that were both hanged for robberies, if that will serve your turn, and a brave cut-purse to my Cozen-german: If kindred will be taken, I am as near a kin to a thief as any of you that had Fathers and Mothers.
What is it thou require, noble Cozen?
Cozen! nay, and we be so near a kin al∣ready, now we are sober, we shall be sworn Brothers when we are drunk: The naked truth is Sir, I would be made a Gypsy as fast as you could devise.
A Gypsy!
I with all the speed you can Sir; the very sight of those stolen Hens, eggs me forward whore∣bly
Here's dainty Ducks too Boy.
I see 'em but too well; I would they were all rotten roasted, and stuffed with Onions.
Love thou the common food of Egypt, Onions?
I, and Garlic too: I have smelt out many a Knave by it; but I could never smell mine own breath yet, and that's many a mans fault; he can smell out a Knave in another sometimes three yards off, yet his Nose standing so nigh his mouth, he can never smell out himself.
A pregnant Gypsy.
A most witty sinner.
Stretch forth thy hand Cos; art thou for∣tunate?
How? fortunate! nay, I cannot tell that my self; wherefore do I come to you but to learn that? I have sometimes found money in old shoes, but if I had not stolen more then I have found, I had had but a scurvy thin-cheek'd fortune on it.
Here's a fair Table.
I, so has many a man, that has given over house-keeping, a fair Table, when there's neither cloth, nor meat upon it.
What a brave line of life's here, look you Gipseys.
I have known as brave a live end in a halter.
But thou art born to precious fortune.
The Devil I am.
Bett, Bucketto.
How, to beat Bucks?
Stealee Bacono.
Oh, to steal Bacon, that's the better fortune of the two indeed.
Thou wilt be shortly Captain of the Gip∣seys.
I would you'd make me Corporal in the mean time;
Or Standard-bearer to the Women's Regiment.
Much may be done for love.
Nay here's some money: I know an Of∣fice comes not all for love; a Pox of your Lime∣twigs, you hav't all already.
It lies but here in cash for thine own use Boy.
Nay an't lie there once, I shall hardly come to the fingering on it in haste; yet make me an apt Scholar, and I care not: Teach me but so much Gypsy, to steal as much more from another, and the Devil do you good of that.
Thou shalt have all thy heart requires:
First, here's a Girl for thy desires,
This Doxey fresh, this new come Dell
Shall lie by thy sweet side and swell:
Get me Gipseys brave and tawny;
With Cheek full plump, and Hip full brauny.
Look you prove industrious dealers
To serve the Commonwealth with stealers,
That th'unhous'd race of Fortune-tellers
May never fail to cheat Town-dwellers;
Or to our universal grief,
Leave Country Fairs without a Thief.
This is all you have to do,
Save every hour a filch or two,
Be it money, cloth or pullen,
When the ev'nings brow looks sullen.
Loose no time, for then it is precious,
Let your sleights be fine, facetious;
Which hoping you'll observe, to try thee
With rusty Bacon, thus I Gipsifie thee.
Do you use to do it with Bacon.
Evermore:
By this light, the Rats will take me now for some Hogs Cheek, and eat up my face when I am asleep; I shall have nev'r a bit left by to morrow morning; and lying open mouthed as I use to do, I shall look for all the world like a Mouse-trap baited with Bacon.
Why here's a face like thine, so done,
Only grained in by the Sun, and this, and these.
Faith, then there's a company of Bacon faces of you, and I am one now to make up the number: We are a kind of conscionable people, and it were well thought upon for to steal Bacon, and black our faces with it; Tic like one that commits sin, and writes his faults in his forehead.
Wit whether wilt thou?
Marry to the next pocket I can come at; and if it be a Gentleman's, I wish a whole quarters rent in it: Is this my in dock, out nettle. What's Gypsy for her?
Your doxey she.
Oh right, are you my doxey sir.
I'll be thy doxey, and thy dell.
With thee I'll live, for thee I'll steal:
From Fair to Fair, from Wake to Wake,
I'll ramble still for thy sweet sake.
Oh dainty fine doxey; she speaks the Lan∣gauge as familiarly already, as if sh'ad been begot of a Canter. I pray Captain, what's gypsy for the hind quarter of a Woman?
Nosario.
Nosario: Why what's gypsy for my Nose then?
Why Arsinio.
Arsinio? Faith 'me thinks you might have devised a sweeter word for it.
Stop, stop, fresh booties, Gentle folks, Seignioroes,
Calavario, Fulkadelio.
La gnambrol a tumbrel.
How: Give me one word amongst you, that I may be doing too.
Yonder they are again, Oh guiltiness,
Thou put more trembling fear into a Maid
Then the first wedding night. Take courage wench
Thy face cannot betray thee with a blush now.
Which way she took her flight Sir, none can guess,
Or how she escaped:
Out at some Window certainly.
Oh it is a bold daring Baggage.
See good fortune Sir,
The Gipseys, they're the cunningest people living.
They cunning? what a confidence have you Sir,
No wiseman's faith was ever set in fortunes.
You are the wilfulst man against all learn∣ing still:
I will be hanged now, if I hear not news of her a∣amongst this company.
You are a Gentleman of the flatt'ring'st hopes
That ev'r lost woman yet.
Come hither Gypsy.
Luck now, or I'm undone,—What says my Master,
Bless me with a silver cross,
And I will tell you all your loss.
Lo you there Sir, all my loss, at first word too,
There is no cunning in these Gipseys now.
Sure I'll hear more of this.
Here's silver for you.
Now attend your fortunes story,
You loved a Maid.
Right.
She never loved you.
You shall find my words are true.
'Mass I am afraid so.
You were about
To keep her in, but could not do it.
Alas the while she would not stay
The cough of the Lungs blew her away;
And which is worse, you'll be so crossed,
You'll never find the thing that's lost;
Yet oftentimes your sight will fear her,
She'll be near you, and yet you nev'r the nearer.
Let her go, and be the gladder;
She'd but shame you, if you had her.
Ten Counsellors could never school her,
She'is so wilde, you could not rule her.
In troth I am of thy mind, yet Il'ld fain find her.
Soonest then, when you least mind her;
But if you mean to take her tripping,
Make but haste, she's now a shipping.
I ever dreamed so much.
Hie to the Key,
We'll mar your voyage, you shall brook no Sea.
Cheteroon: High Gulleroon▪
Filcheroon, pursse-fulleroon: I can say some∣what too.
Excellent Gypsy, witty rare Doxey:
I would not change my Dell for a dozen of black Bell-weathers.
Our wealth swells high my Boys.
Our wealth swells high my Boys.
Let every Gypsy
Dance with his Doxey,
And then drink, drink for joy.
Let every Gypsy
Dance with his Doxey,
And then drink, drink for joy:
And then drink, drink for joy.
That which is merely called a will in wo∣man,
I cannot always title it with a virtue.
Oh good Sir spare me.
Spare your self, good Madam.
Extremest Justice is not so severe
To great offenders, as your own forced strictness
To beauty, youth and time; you'll answer for it.
Sir settle your own peace, let me make mine.
But here's a heart must pity it, when it thinks on it,
I find compassion, though the smart be yours.
None here but do's the like.
Believe it Madam,
You have much wronged your time.
Nay, let your Grace
But think upon the barrenness of succession.
Nay more, a Vow enforced.
What do you all
Forsake me then, and take part with you man;
Not one friend have I left I do they all fight
Under th'inglorious banner of his censure,
Serve under his opinion?
So will all Madam,
Whose judgments can but taste a rightful cause,
I look for more force yet; nay, your own women
Will shortly rise against you, when they know
The war to be so just and honourable
As marriage is: You cannot name that woman,
Will not come ready armed for such a cause:
Can Chastity be any whit impaired
By that which makes it perfect? Answer Madam,
Do you profess constancy, and yet live alone?
How can that hold! you're constant then to none.
That's a dead virtue, goodness must have practice,
Or else it ceases; then is woman said
To be love chaste, knowing but one mans bed:
A mighty virtue; beside, fruitfulness
Is part of the salvation of your sex;
And the true use of Wedlocks time and space,
Is women's exercise for Faith and Grace.
Oh what have you done my Lord?
Laid the way plain
To knowledge of your self and your Creation,
Unbound a forced Vow, that was but knit
By the strange jealousy of your dying Lord,
Sinful in the fastening.
All the powers of Constancy
Will curse you for this deed.
You speak in pain Madam,
And so I take your words, like one in sickness
That rails at his best friend: I know a change
Of disposition has a violent working
In all of us; it is fit it should have time
And council with it self: May you be fruitful Ma∣dam
In all the blessings of an honoured love.
In all your wishes fortunate, and I
The chief of 'em my self.
Peace be at your heart Lady.
And love, say I.
We'll leave good thoughts now, to bring in themselves.
O there's no art like a religious cunning,
It carries away all things smooth before it.
How subtly has his wit dealt with the Lords
To fetch in their persuasions, to a business
That stands in need of none, yields of it self
As most we women do, when we seem farthest?
But little thinks the Cardinal he's requited
After the same proportion of deceit
As he sets down for others.
Oh here's the pretty Boy, he preferred to me,
I never saw a meeker, gentler youth
Yet made for mans beginning: How unfit
Was that poor fool, to be Lactantio's Page,
He would have spoiled him quite, in one year utterly,
There had been no hope of him. Come hither child,
I have forgot thy name.
Antonio, Madam.
Antonio! so thou toldst me; I must chide thee,
Why did thou weep, when thou came first to serve me?
At the distrust of mine own merits Ma∣dam,
Knowing I was not born to those deserts
To please so great a Mistress.
Alas poor Boy,
That's nothing in thee, but thy modest fear
Which makes amends faster then thou can err:
It shall be my care to have him well brought up
As a youth apt for good things. Celia—
Madam.
Has he bestowed his hour to day for Mu∣sick?
Yes, he has Madam.
How do you find his voice?
A pretty womanish faint sprawling voice Madam,
But twill grow strong in time, if he take care
To keep it when he has it from fond exercises.
Give order to the dancing School-master,
Observe an hour with him:
It shall be done Lady;
He is well made for dancing, thick in the Chest Madam,
He will turn long and strongly.
He shall not be behind a quality,
That aptness in him or our cost can purchase,
And see he lose no time.
I'll take that order Madam.
Singing and dancing! alas my case is worse,
I rather need a Midwife, and a Nurse.
Lactantio, my procurer not returned yet?
His malice, I have fitted with an office,
Which he takes pleasure to discharge with rigour:
He comes, and with him, my hearts Conqueror,
My pleasing thraldom's near.
Not know the cause?
Yes, you shall soon do that now, to the ruin
Of your neck-part, or some nine years imprison∣meant,
You meet with mercy, and you scope with that;
Beside your Lands all begged and seized upon;
That's admirable favour. Here's the Duchess.
Oh Sir you're welcome.
Marry bless me still
From such a welcome.
You are hard to come by,
It seems Sir by the guilt of your long stay.
My guilt good Madam.
Sure you'd much a do
To take him, had you not? speak truth Lactantio,
And leave all favour, were you not in danger?
Faith something near it Madam: He grew head-strong,
Furious and fierce; but it is not my condition
To speak the worst things of mine enemy Madam,
Therein I hold mine honour: But had fury
Burst into all the violent storms that ever
Plaid over anger in tempestuous man.
I would have brought him to your Graces presence,
Dead or alive.
You would not Sir?
What pride
Of pampered blood has mounted up to this puckfoist?
If any way uncounsel'd of my judgment,
My ignorance has stepped into some error,
(Which I could heart'ly curse) and so brought on me
Your great displeasure, let me feel my sin
In the full weight of Justice, virtuous Madam,
And let it wake me thoroughly. But chaste Lady,
Out of the bounty of your Grace, permit not
This perfumed parcel of curled powdered hair
To cast me in the poor relish of his censure.
It shall not need good Sir; we are our self
Of power sufficient to judge you, nev'r doubt it Sir.
Withdraw Lactantio; carefully place your Guard
In the next Room.
You'll but fare the worse;
You see your niceness spoils you; you'll go nigh now
To feel your sin indeed.
Hell-mouth be with thee.
Was ever malice seen yet to gape wider
For mans misfortunes?
First Sir, I should think
You could not be so impudent to deny,
What your own knowledge proves to you.
That were a sin Madam,
More gross then flattery spent upon a villain.
Your own confession dooms you Sir.
Why Madam.
Do not you know I made a serious vow
At my Lords death, never to marry more?
That's a truth Madam, I'm a witness to.
Is it so Sir? you'll be taken presently,
This man needs no accuser. Knowing so much,
How durst you then attempt so bold a business
As to solicit me (so strictly settled)
With tempting Letters, and loose lines of love?
Who I do it Madam?
Sure the man will shortly
Deny he lives, although he walks and breath.
Better destruction snatch me quick from sight
Of humane eyes, then I should sin so boldly.
It was well I kept it then from rage or fire,
For my truths credit: Look you Sir, read out,
You know the hand and name:
Andrugio!
And if such things be fit, the world shall judge!
Madam.
Pish; that's not so; it begins otherwise
Pray look again Sir; how you'd slight your know∣ledge.
By all the reputation I late won.
Nay, and you dare not read Sir, I am gone.
Read? most fair Duchess.
Oh, have you found it now?
There's a sweet flattering phrase for a beginning,
You thought belike, that would o'rcome me.
I Madam?
Nay on Sir, you are slothful▪
The report of your Vow shall not fear me.
No? are you so resolute? It is well for you Sir:
I know you're but a woman.
Well, what then Sir?
And what a woman is, a wiseman knows.
Let him know what he can, he's glad to get us.
Perhaps my condition may seem blunt to you.
Well; we find no fault with your blunt∣nos.
But no mans love can be more sharp set.
I there's good stuff now.
And I know desires in both sexes have skill at that weapon.
Weapon! You begin like a Flatterer, and end like a Fencer.
Are these fit lines now to be sent to us?
Now by the honour of a man, his truth Madam,
My name's abused.
Fie, fie, deny your hand!
I will not deny mine; here take it freely Sir,
And with it my true constant heart for ever.
I never disgraced man that sought my favour.
What mean you Madam?
To requite you Sir
By courtesy, I hold my reputation,
And you shall taste it: Sir, in as plain truth
As the old time walked in, when love was simple
And knew no art, nor guile, I affect you;
My heart has made her choice. I love you Sir
Above my vow; the frown that met you first,
Wore not the livery of anger Sir,
But of deep policy: I made your enemy
The Instrument for all; there you may praise me,
And twill not be ill given.
Here's a strange Language!
The constancy of love bless me from learning on it,
Although ambition would soon teach it others.
Madam, the service of whole life is yours. But—
Enough; you're mine for ever. Within there.
Madam.
Lay hands upon him, bear him hence,
See he be kept close prisoner in our Palace,
The time's not yet ripe for our Nuptial Solace.
This you could clear your self.
There's a voice that wearies me
More then mine own distractions.
You are innocent?
I have not a time idle enough from passion,
To give this Devil an answer: Oh she's lost!
Cursed be that love, by which a better's crossed.
There my heart's settled.
How is he disgraced,
And I advanced in love? Faith he that can
Wish more to his enemy, is a spiteful man,
And worthy to be punished.
SIr I'm of that opinion, being kept hard to it, In troth I think he'll take his prick-song well.
G, sol, re ut; you guess not right y'saith.
Mistress, you'll find you're in an error straight:
Come on Sir, lay the Books down; you shall see now.
Would I'd an honest Caudle next my heart,
Let whose would Sol Fa, I'd give them my part.
In troth methinks I have a great longing in me
To bite a piece of the Musicians Nose off;
But I'll rather lose my longing, then spoil the poor mans
Singing; the very tip will serve my turn, methinks if I
Could get it, that he might well spare; his Nose is of
The longest—Oh my back.
You shall hear that; rehearse your Ga∣mot Boy:
Who'ld be thus toild for love, and want the joy?
Why when? begin Sir: I must stay your leisure.
Gamot, a re, b me, &amp;c.
Ee la: Aloft, above the clouds my Boy.
It must be a better note then Ela Sir,
That brings Musicians thither; they're too hasty,
The most part of 'em, to take such a journey,
And must needs fall by the way.
How many Cliffs be there?
One Cliff Sir.
Oh intolerable heretic
To voice and music! Do you know but one Cliff?
No more; indeed I Sir, and at this time,
I know too much of that.
How many Notes be there?
Eight Sir, I fear me I shall find nine short∣lie,
To my great shame and sorrow:—Oh my stomach!
Will you repeat your notes then? I must Sol Fa you, why when Sir?
A large, a long, a brief, a semibrief, a mi∣nom, a crotchet,
A quaver, a semiquaver:
Oh, have you found the way?
Never trust me
If I have not lost my wind with naming of 'em.
Come Boy, your minds upon some other thing now:
Set to your Song.
Was ever Wench so punished?
Ut. Come begin.
Ut me re fa sol la.
Keep time you foolish Boy—(Here they sing Pricksong)
How like you this Madova?
Pretty,
He will do well in time being kept under.
I'll make his ears sore, and his knuckles ache else.
And that's the way to bring a Boy to good∣nos Sir.
There's many now waxed proper Gentle∣men.
Whom I have nipped i'ch' ear Wench, that's my com∣fort.
Come sing me over the last song I taught you:
You're perfect in that sure, look you keep time well,
Or here I'll notch your faults up. Sol, Sol, begin Boy.
So you've done well Sir.
Here comes the dancing Master now, you're dis∣charged.
Oh Seignior Crotchet, Oh.
A minom rest, two cliffs, and a semibrief. In the name
Of Alamire, what's the matter Sir?
The horriblest disaster that ever disgraced the lofty cunning of a dancer.
Be fa beam: Heaven forbid man.
Oh—oo—the most cruel Fortune!
That smiquaver is no friend to you,
That I must tell you; it is not for a Dancer
To put his voice so hard to it, every workman
Must use his own tools Sir, de fa sol man, dilate
The matter to me.
Faith riding upon my Foot-cloth, as I use to do, coming through a crowd by chance, I let fall my Fiddle.
De sol re. Your Fiddle Sir?
Oh that such an instrument should be made to betray a poor Gentleman! nay, which is more lamentable, whose luck should it be to take up this unfortunate Fiddle, but a Barbers Prentice, who cried out presently, according to his nature; You trim Gentleman on Horseback, you've lost your Fid∣dl, your worships Fiddle; seeing me upon my Foot∣cloth, the mannerly Cockscomb could say no less. But away rid I Sir, put my horse to a caranto pace, and left my Fiddle behind me:
De la sol re.
I, was it not a strange fortune, an excellent Treble-vial, by my Troth it was my Masters, when I was but a pumper, that is a puller on of Gentlemen's Pumps.
C, c, sol fa: I knew you then Sir.
But I make no question, but I shall hear on it shortly at one Brokers or another, for I know the Barber will scourse it away for some old Citron.
Ela me, my life for yours on that Sir; I must to my other
Scholars, my hour calls me away: I leave you to your
Practise, Fa sol la. Fare you well Sir:
The Lavolto's of a merry heart be with you Sir; and a merry heart makes a good singing man; a man may love to hear himself talk, when he carries pith in's mouth—Metereza Celia.
Seignior Sinquapace, the welcom'st Gentle∣man alive of
A Dancer. This is the youth, he can do little yet;
It is Pricksong very poorly; he is one
Must have it put into him; somewhat dull Sir.
As you are all at first. You know it was long
Ere you could learn your doubles▪
I that's true Sir,
But I can tickl't now. Fa, la, la, &amp;c.
Lo you, how like you me now Sir?
Marry pray for the Founder, here he stands; long may he live to receive quartridges, go brave, and pay his Mercer wondrous duly, I, and his jea∣lous Laundress, that for the love she bears him starches yellow, poor Soul; my own flesh knows I wrong her not. Come Metereza, once more shake your great hips, and your little heels, since you begin to fall in of your self, and dance over the end of the caranto I taught you last night.
The tune's clear out of my head Sir.
A Pox of my little Usher, how long he stays too with the second part of the former Fiddle! Come, I'll Sol fa it, in the mean time, Fa, la, la, la, &amp;c. perfectly excellent. I will make you fit to dance with the best Christian Gentleman in Europe, and keep time with him for his heart, ere I give you over.
Nay, I know I shall do well Sir, and I am somewhat proud on it,
But it was my Mothers fault, when she danced with the Duke of Florence.
Why you'll never dance well, while you live, if you be not proud. I know that by my self; I may teach my heart out, if you have not the grace to follow me.
I warrant you for that Sir:
Gentlewomen that are good Scholars Will come as near their Masters, as they can; I have known some lye with 'em for their better un∣derstanding,
I speak not this to draw you on for∣sooth; use your pleasure, if you come you're well∣come, you shall see a fine lodging, a dish of Com∣fits, Music, and sweet Linen.
And trust me Sir, no woman can wish more in this world,
Unless it be ten pound in the Chamber window,
Laid ready in good gold against she rises.
Those things are got in a morning Wench with me.
Indeed, I hold the morning the best time of getting;
So says my Sister; she's a Lawyers wife Sir,
And should know what belongs to cases best:
A fitter time for this; I must not talk
Too long of women's matters before Boys.
He's very raw, you must take pains with him,
It is the Duchess mind it should be so; she loves him
Well I tell you—
How, love him? he's too little for any wo∣mans love in the Town, by three handfuls: I wonder of a great woman, she as no more wit y'faith; one of my pitch were somewhat tolerable.
Oh are you come! who would be thus plagued with a Dandiprat Usher! how many kicks do you deserve in conscience?
Your Horse is safe Sir.
Now I talked of kicking, it was well remem∣bred, is not the Footcloth stolen yet?
More by good hap then any cunning Sir: Would any Gentleman but you, get a Tailors son to walk his Horse, in this dear time of black Velvet?
Troth thou say true; thy care has got thy pardon; I'll venture so no more. Come my young Scholar, I am ready for you now.
Alas twill kill me,
I'm even as full of qualms as heart can bear:
How shall I do to hold up? Alas Sir
I can dance nothing but ill-favor'dly,
A strain or two of Passa-Measures Galliard.
Marry you're forwarder then I conceived you,
A toward Stripling; enter him Nicholao,
For the fool's bashful, as they are all at first
Till they be once well entered.
Passa-Measures Sir?
I Sir, I hope you hear me; mark him now Boy. (Dance.)
Ha well done, exc'llent Boys—Dainty fine Sprin∣gals;
The glory of Dancers Hall, if they had any;
And of all Professions, they had most need of one
For room to practise in, yet they have none.
O times! O manners! you have very little.
Why should the leaden heeled Plumber have his Hall,
And the light-footed Dancer none at all?
But Fortune de la guardo, things must be:
W're born to teach in Back-houses and Nooks,
Garrets sometimes, where't rains upon our Books.
Come on Sir, are you ready? first your honour.
I'll wish no foe, a greater cross upon her:
Curtsy, heiday! Run to him Nicholao, by this light he will shame me; he makes curtsy like a Chamber-maid.
Why what do you mean Page! are you mad? did you ever see a Boy begin a Dance, and make curtsy like a Wench before?
Troth I was thinking of another thing; And quite forgot my self, I pray forgive me Sir.
Come make amends then now with a good leg, and dance it sprightly: What a beastly leg has he made there now, it would vex ones heart out: Now begin Boy, Oh, oh, oh, oh, &amp;c. open thy Knees, wider, wider, wider, wider; did you ever see a Boy dance clencht up, he needs a pick-lock; out upon thee for an arrant Ass, an arrant Ass, I shall lose my credit by thee, a pest'lence on thee. Here Boy hold the Vial, let me come to him, I shall get more disgrace by this little Monkey now, then by all the Ladies that ever I taught. Come on Sir now; cast thy leg out from thee, lift it up aloft Boy; a Pox, his knees are soader'd together, they're sowed together; can not stride? Oh I could eat thee up, I could eat thee up, and begin upon thy hinder quar∣la, thy hinder quarter: I shall never teach this Boy without a screw, his knees must be opened with a Vice, or there's no good to be done upon him—Who taught you to dance Boy?
It is but little Sir that I can do.
No; I'll be sworn for you.
And that Seignior Laurentio taught me Sir:
Seignior Laurentio was an arrant Cocks∣comb,
And fit to teach none but White-bakers children
To knead their knees together. You can turn above ground Boy?
Not I Sir; my turns rather under-ground.
We'll see what you can do, I love to try
What's in my Scholars, the first hour I teach them:
Show him a close trick now Nicholao.
Ha, dainty Stripling! come Boy.
'Lass not I Sir,
I am not for losty tricks, indeed I am not Sir:
How; such another word, down goes your Hose Boy.
Alas it is time for me to do any thing then.
Heyday he's down; is this your lofty trick Boy?
O Master, the Boy swoons; he's dead I fear me.
Dead! I nev'r knew one die with a lofty trick before.
Up Sirrah, up.
A Midwife, run for a Midwife.
A Midwife! By this light the Boy's with child.
A miracle! Some Woman is the Father.
The World's turned upside down, sure if Men breed,
Women must get, one never could do both yet.
No marv'l you danced close-knee'd the Sinquapace:
Put up my Fiddle, here's a stranger case—
That it is I'll swear; twill make the Dutch∣ess wonder.
I fear me twill bring dancing out of request,
And hinder our profession for a time:
Your Women that are closely got with child,
Will put themselves clean out of exercise,
And will not venture now for fear of meeting
Their shames in a Caranto, specially
If they be near their time: Well in my knowledge,
If that should happen, we are sure to lose
Many a good Waiting-woman, that's now over shoes.
Alas the while—
Thou tell me things are enemies to rea∣son,
I cannot get my Faith to entertain 'em,
And I hope nev'r shall.
It is too true Madam.
I say it is false: It were better th'hadst been dumb,
Then spoke a truth s'unpleasing; thou shalt get
But little praise by it: He whom we affect
To place his love upon so base a Creature!
Nay ugliness it self, you'd say so Madam,
If you but saw her once, a strolling Gypsy,
No Christian that is born a Hind could love her,
She's the Suns Master-peece for tawniness;
Yet have I seen Andrugio's arms about her,
Perceived his hollow whisperings in her ear,
His joys at meeting her.
What joy could that be?
Such Madam, I have seldom seen it equalled;
He kissed her with that greediness of affection,
As if his lips had been as red as yours.
I looked still when he would be black in mouth,
Like Boys with eating Hedg-berries: Nay, more Madam,
He bribed one of his Keepers with ten Ducats
To find her out amongst a flight of Gipseys.
I'll have that Keeper hanged, and you for malice,
She cannot be so bad as you report,
Whom he so firmly loves, you're false in much,
And I will have you tried; go fetch her to us: 
He cannot be himself, and appear guilty
Of such gross folly, has an eye of judgment,
And that will overlook him: This Wench fails
In understanding service; she must home,
Live at her house in the Country, she decays
In beauty and discretion: Who has't brought there?
This is she Madam.
Youth and whiteness bless me,
It is not possible: He talked sensibly
Within this hour, this cannot be: How does he?
I fear me my restraint has made him mad.
His health is perfect, Madam.
You are perfect
In falsehood still, he's certainly distracted:
Though I'd be loath to foul my words upon her,
She looks so beastly, yet I'll ask the question,
Are you beloved (sweet face) of Andrugio?
Yes showr'ly Mistress, he done love me
'Bove all the Girls that shine above me.
Full often has he sweetly kissed me,
And wept as often when he mist me:
Swore he was to marry none,
But me alone.
Out on thee; marry thee? away with her.
Clear mine eyes of her: 
A Curate that has got his place by Simony,
Is not half black enough to marry thee.
Surely the man's far spent, how ere he carries it,
He's without question mad; but I nev'r knew
Man bear it better before company.
The love of Woman wears so thick a blindness,
It sees no fault, but only mans unkindness;
And that's so gross, it may be felt: Here Celia
Take this; with speed command Andrugio to us,
And his guard from him.
It shall strait be done Madam.
I'll look into his carriage more judici∣ously,
When I next get him. A wrong done to Beauty,
Is greater then an injury done to Love,
And we'll less pardon it; for had it been
A creature whose perfection had out-shin'd me,
It had been honourable judgment in him,
And to my peace a noble satisfaction:
But as it is, it is monstrous above folly!
Look he be mad indeed, and thoroughly gone,
Or he pays dearly for it: It is not
The ordinary madness of a Gentleman,
That shall excuse him here; 'had better lose
His wits eternally, then lose my Grace:
So strange is the condition of his fall,
He's safe in nothing, but in loss of all.
He comes: Now by the Fruits of all my hopes,
A man that has his wits, cannot look better;
It likes me well enough, there's life in's eye,
And civil health in's Cheek; he stands with judge∣meant,
And bears his body well: What ails this man?
Sure I durst venture him amongst a thousand Ladies.
Let 'em shoot all their scoffs, which makes none laugh
But their own Waiting-women, and they dare do no otherwise.
Come nearer Sir: I pray keep further off,
Now I remember you.
What new trick's in this now?
How long have you been mad Sir?
Mad! a great time Lady;
Since I first knew I should not sin▪ yet sinned;
That's now some thirty years; By'r Lady upwards.
This man speaks reason, wondrous feel∣ingly,
Enough to teach the rudest Soul good manners.
You cannot be excused with lightness now,
Or frantic fits; y're able to instruct Sir,
And be a light to men. If you have errors,
They be not ignorant in you, but wilful,
And in that state I seize on 'em. Did I
Bring thee acquainted lately with my heart!
And when thou though a storm of anger took thee,
It in a moment cleared up all to love,
To the abusing of thy spiteful enemy
That sought to fix his malice upon thee,
And could thou so requite me?
How! good Madam.
To wrong all worth in man, to deal so basely
Upon contempt it self, disdain and loathsomeness;
A thing whose face through ugliness frights children;
A straggling Gypsy!
See how you may err, Madam,
Through wrongful information; by my hopes
Of truth and mercy, there is no such love
Bestowed upon a creature so unworthy.
No, then you cannot fly me; fetch her back:
And though the sight of her displease mine eye
Worse then th'offensiv'st object, Earth and Nature
Can present to us; yet for truths probation,
We will endured contentfully: What now
Art thou returned without her?
No Madam: This is she my peace dwells in,
If here be either baseness of descent,
Rudeness of manners or deformity
In face or fashion, I have lost, I'll yield it;
Tax me severely Madam.
How thou standst,
As dumb as the Salt-pillar; whore's this Gypsy?
What no? I cannot blame thee then for silence.
Now I'm confounded too, and take part with thee.
Your pardon, and your pity, virtuous Madam.
Cruel restraint joined with the power of love,
Taught me that art, in that disguise I'scap'd
The hardness of my Fortunes; you that see
What loves force is, good Madam pity me.
Your Grace has ever been the friend of truth;
And here it is set before you.
I confess
I have no wrong at all; she's younger, fairer.
He has not now dishonoured me in choice,
I much commend his noble care and judgment.
It was a just cross led in by a temptation,
For offering but to part from my dear Vow,
And I'll embrace it cheerfully: Rise both,
The joys of faithful marriage bless your souls,
I will not part you.
Virtues crown be yours Madam.
Oh there appears the life of all my wishes;
Is your Grace pleased out of your bounteous good∣nos
To a poor Virgins comforts, I shall freely
Enjoy whom my heart loves.
Our word is past,
Enjoy without disturbance.
There Lactantio
Spread thy arms open wide, to welcome her
That has wrought all this means to rest in thee.
Death of my joys; how's this?
Prithee away fond Fool, hast' no shame in thee,
You are bold and ignorant, what ere thou art.
What ere I am, do not you know me then?
Yes for some Waiting-vessel, but the times
Are changed with me, if you'd the grace to know 'em.
I looked for more respect, I am not spoke withal
After this rate I tell you; learn hereafter
To know what belongs to me, you shall see
All the Court teach you shortly. Farewell Manners.
I'll mark the event of this.
I'have undone my self two ways at once; lost a great deal of time,
And now I am like to lose more. O my fortune!
I was nineteen yesterday, and partly vowed
To have a child by twenty, if not twain:
To see how Maids are crossed! but I'm plagued justly:
And she that makes a fool of her first love,
Let her ne'er look to prosper, Sir.
Oh falsehood!
Have you forgiveness in you? There's more hope of me
Then of a Maid that never yet offended.
Make me your property?
I'll promise you,
I'll never make you worse: And Sir you know
There are worse things for women to make men.
But by my hope of children, (and all lawful)
I'll be as true for ever to your Bed
As she, in thought or deed, that never erred:
I'll once believe a woman, be it but to strengthen
Weak faith in other men: I have a love
That covers all thy faults.
Nephew, prepare thy self
With meekness and thanksgiving to receive
Thy reverend fortune: Amongst all the Lords,
Her close affection now makes choice of thee:
Alas I'm not to learn to know that now.
Where could she make choice here, if I were missing?
It would trouble the whole State, and puzzle 'em all
To find out such another.
It is high time Madam,
If your Grace please, to make election now.
Behold, they are all assembled!
What election?
You speak things strange to me Sir.
How! good Madam.
Give me your meaning plainly like a Fa∣there.
You are too religious Sir to deal in Riddles.
Is there a plainer way then leads to mar∣riage, Madam,
And the man set before you?
O Blasphemy
To Sanctimonious Faith! comes it from you Sir!
An ill example; know you what you speak,
Or who you are? Is not my Vow in place?
How dare you be so bold Sir? Say a woman
Were tempt with a temptation, must you presently
Take all th'advantage on it?
Is this in earnest, Madam?
Heaven pardon you; if you do not think so Sir,
You've much to answer for: But I will leave you;
Return I humbly now from whence I fell.
All you blessed powers that Register the Vows
Of Virgins and chaste Matrons, look on me
With eyes of mercy; seal forgiveness to me
By signs of inward peace; and to be surer,
That I will never fail your good hopes of me,
I bind my self more strictly. All my riches
I'll speedily commend to holy uses;
This Temple unto some religious Sanctuary,
Where all my time to come I will allow
For fruitful thoughts; so knit I up my Vow.
This is to hawk at Eagles: Pox of pride,
It lays a man in the mire still, like a Jade
That has too many tricks, and ne'er a good one.
I must gape high, I'm in a sweet case now,
I was sure of one, and now I have lost her too.
I know, my Lord, all that great studious care
Is for your Kinsman; he's provided for
According to his merits.
How's that! good Madam?
Upon the firmness of my Faith it's true Sir;
See here's the Gentlewoman; the match was made
Near forty weeks ago: He knows the time Sir,
Better then I can tell him, and the poor Gentlewo∣man
Better then he: But being Religious Sir, and fearing you,
He durst not own her for his wife till now,
Only contracted with her in mans apparel,
For the more modesty, because he was bashful,
And never could endure the sight of woman,
For fear that you should see her: This was he
Chose for my love; this Page preferred to me.
I'm paid with mine own money.
Dare hypocrisy,
For fear of vengeance, sit so close to Virtue.
Steal thou a holy vestment from Religion,
To cloth forbidden Lust with? th'open villainy
Goes before thee to mercy, and his Penitence
Is blessed with a more sweet and quick return.
I utterly disclaim all blood in thee.
I'll sooner make a Parricide my heir,
Then such a monster. O forgive me Madam!
Th'apprehension of the wrong to you
Has a sins wait at it. I forget all Charity,
When I but think upon him.
Nay, my Lord,
At our request, since we are pleased to pardon,
And send remission to all former errors,
Which conscionable Justice now sets right,
From you we expect patience; he has had punish∣meant
Enough in his false hopes; trust me he has Sir;
They have requited his dissembling largely.
And to erect your falling-goodness to him,
We'll begin first our self: Ten thousand Ducats
The Gentlewoman shall bring out of our Treasure,
To make her dowry.
None has the true way
Of over-coming anger with meek virtue,
Like your compassionate Grace.
Curse of this fortune▪
This it is to meddle with taking stuff, whose Belly
cannot be confined in a Waste-band: Pray what have
you done with the Breeches, we shall have need of
'em shortly; and we get children so fast, they are too
good to be cast away. My Son and Heir need not
scorn to wear what his Mother has left off: I had
my fortune told me by a Gypsy seven years ago, she
said then I should be the spoil of many a Maid, and
at seven years end marry a Queen for my labour;
which falls out wicked and true.
We all have faults; look not so much on his.
Who lives in the world that never did amiss?
For you Aurelia, I commend your choice,
You've one after our heart: And though your Fa∣there
Be not in presence, we'll assure his voice;
Doubt not his liking, his o'er▪ joying rather:
You Sir embrace your own, it is your full due;
No Page serves me more, that once dwells with you.
Oh they that search out mans intents, shall find
There's more Dissemblers then of Women kind.

